A PREPARATION For Martyrdom, A DISCOURSE about the Cause, the Temper, the
Assistances and Rewards OF A MARTYR of JESUS CHRIST* IN A DIALOGUE Betwixt a
Minister, and a Gentleman his Parishioner.

Matt. 5. 11, Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake: for
theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. 1 Pet. 4. 14. If ye be reproached for the Name
of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of God and of Glory, rests upon you.
LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside,
near Mercers-Chapel. 1681*

A Preparation FOR Martyrdom, IN A DIALOGUE Betwixt a Minister, and a Gentleman
his Parishioner.
Parish. SIR, though I justly esteem my self, who am so great a sinner,
unworthy of the honor to suffer for the Name of Christ, yet I know it is my
Duty to be prepared in Spirit for it, if God vouchsafe to call me to it. I
request therefore your Pastoral assistance herein, that whether I live, I may
live unto the Lord; or whether I die, I may die unto the Lord.


Min. I bless God (Dear Sir) who inclines your heart to seek after such holy
dispositions as are required in those whom Christ will honor in calling them
to suffer for his Name. But, I pray, tell me, Why you are at this time so
sollicitous to gather up your Spirit into that frame?


Parish. There need no account be given of that, betwixt you and I, who have
been fellow sufferers in the late times, for adhering to the cause of our
Sovereign, and of the Protestant Church of England; and whose Persons and
Fortunes do yet wear the Scars of their Loyalty: and we are not secure, that we
may not be called to suffer on the same account again.

And though neither of us have at any time (blessed be God) made any unkind
returns to those who then Persecuted us, nor have since gained any thing by our
Loyalty but our losses; yet if the like times should return again, we are like
to be in the first rank of Sufferers.

But I confess, that though the Cause we then undertook and suffered for, was
as just a Cause as any could fall out in a Christian Nation, yet I then both
acted and suffered in another manner of Spirit, than I now see reason to desire
to be acted by. I did indeed think then, and do so still, that I was bound in
conscience to do my utmost to secure the Person and Honor of my Sovereign, and
to maintain the Laws both Civil and Ecclesiastical then in being, till they
should be orderly changed by the Consent and Authority of my Sovereign in
Parliament; yet I did (as I fear too many of our side did) espouse an humor of
Profaneness, in opposition to that Profession of Godliness, which I
ununcharitably thought, that all on the other side did make only to drive on
Rebellious Designs: which probably the great Artificers of our troubles did do.
And certainly we Royalists, by the overspreading of profaneness amongst us,
ruined the best Cause that ever Loyal Subjects undertook to bear up upon the
points of their Swords. But it is another manner of Spirit I desire now to be
baptized into; namely, that whereinto our suffering Lord and Savior, and his
Holy Apostles and Martyrs were baptized.

And to deal plainly, I do not think the next Tempest that will Assault us will
come from that Quarter.

My chief fears therefore are, from the success of Popish Arms abroad,
(especially under the Conduct of that Great Monarch who seems to have sworn the
utter extirpation of the Protestant Name) and the prevailing of Popish Arts at
home to the breaking of us, with Division upon Division. These, I say, with the
loud crying sins done and countenanced amongst us, makes me expect a Storm, and
I desire to be prepared for it.


Min. I hope God will bless the unwearied endeavors of our Gracious Sovereign,
and his most Honorable Privy Council at present, and of the English
Parliament, (when one shall by his Sacred Majesty be called) to frustrate the
Attempts of the Popish Adversaries both at home and abroad.


Parish. I thankfully acknowledge, that by the blessing of God on the Prudent
Conduct of public Affairs by his Sacred Majesty, we yet enjoy Peace, when many
of the neighboring Nations round about us feel the sad miseries of War: so
that if our sins stood neuter, and did not strike in with our Enemies, I would
not fear either their Forces or Consults: but alas! there can be no Fencing or
Walling betwixt us and Heaven, to which our sins cry aloud for vengeance.


Min. It is very true, we are great sinners, but not greater than other Nations
whom God is pleased yet to respit; what sins therefore of this Nation seem to
you so ripe for vengeance.


Parish. Truly there are many of them, and some of them seem especially to call
for Popery, as the only scammony strong enough to purge them out: Such are the
frequent and avowed Sinonaical Contracts betwixt some Patrons and their
unworthy Clerks. Such also are the most unchristian practices of many of our
Planters abroad, not only in the inhumane cruelties they exercise upon the poor
Negroes, See Mr. Morgan Godwin's Negro's* Advocate.
and other Heathen their Slaves, but especially in their discouraging and
opposing all endeavors for the Conversion of those poor Infidels to
Christianity.

For have not the Mahumetan Priests traveled to the vast Plain of Tartary, and
Mountains of Africa, to propagate their Superstition? Yea, have not the
Jesuits, and other Romish Missionaries gone to the furthest Indies to spread
that sort of Christianity which they profess? and probably they taught for the
substance of it, the Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, though they
built Hay, Straw and Stubble on that Foundation. And their Converts in Japan
and other where, suffering for the owning one God and one Mediator 'twixt God
and Man (Christ Jesus) are justly numbered in the Catalogue of Christian
Martyrs. Shall not these Romanists therefore rise up in Judgment against us and
other Protestants, who oppose the Conversion of our own Slaves? Nay, may not
God justly say to them concerning us as he did once to Nebuchadnezzar, Ezekiel.
29. 20. That he gave him the Land of Egypt as his hire for his labor
wherewith he served against Tire. So may God say, He will give unto the Popish
Emissaries those Protestant Churches, (who are negligent in propagating the
Faith) as their hire for that service they have served against Heathenisme in
the new found world.

And did not those excellent Persons who preached before the Lords and Commons
on the Fast Day Dec. 22. 1681. proclaim it in the Name of the Lord, That the
vine bringing forth sour grapes, would cause God to pluck up the hedge and
fence, and let in both the Wild-Beasts and the Wild-Boars into his Vineyard?

This the Learned and pious Dr. Burnett with much integrity and freedom told
the Honorable House of Commons (as of other sins of the Nation) so of the
Drunkenness and Debauchery: Which, says he, has not only corrupted our common
conversation, but vitiated the very vitals of our Government, by the Ascendent
it has on so ^special a Part of our security as are the Elections of this so
great and honorable Assembly, (of Knights and Burgesses) in Parliament.

I remember to this day the sharp and just reprehension, which the present most
Pious, learned and right Reverend Father in God Dr John Pierson Lord Bishop of
Chester gave to us debauched Cavaliers in his Sermon to General Gorings Army in
the West.

If, said he, one Achan was enough to trouble a whole Army of Israelites, what
trouble will an Army of Achans create to themselves, and those imbacked with
them?

If therefore there should by the miscariages of some inferior Corporations
(whose meaner Burghers are ready to sell their Consciences, their Religion, and
their Souls for drink, and whose Richer Burghers are as ready to do the same
for the custom of a great House) but two or three Achans (debauched Atheistical
Hobbists) be shuffled with our House of Commons, though consisting mostly of
faithful wise and Religious Patriots, is it not enough to cause God to blast
the Sessions wherein such are mingled?

Nor can any good be expected from such, though, as is pretended, their Estates
chiefly consisting of Abbey Lands, Impropriations, etc. they are high Zealots
against Popery, for such will compound underhand to save their own stakes. But
besides, as God declares, he has no fellowship with Mammon, nor Christ with
E^lial: so neither will he vouchsafe to use the help of either in the cause of
his truth and Church.

Has not also the most Pious, Learned, and Reverend Prelate (the best of
Collegiate Governors) Dr. Fell, Lord Bishop of Oxford, in his Sermon then
before the Lords, set it out with the Zeal of a Prophet, how Lust, and
Uncleanness are Rampant amongst us? For indeed Adultery has not only taken the
place, but Usurps also the Title of Marriage. And Whoredom claims to be
Honorable amongst all Men.

So that he is esteemed mean both in Purse and Spirit, who keeps not his Brace
of Misses, and has also the repeated Marks of the Stews upon his Body.

Add to these, the loud crying Sin of Murder (Unrevenged Murder) committed in
Duels, and Drunken Assassinating of Peaceable Men, without a Quarrel: Add the
general prevailing of a Spirit of Profaneness amongst us, (just as it did before
the late Wars:) For I remember how then every man who was serious and orderly
in his Conversation, and every Minister who was Diligent and Laborious in his
Ministry, though they conformed as high as any (and many of them were
afterward as early and deep Sufferers for the King, as any of the Royal Party)
yet were called Puritans* and used as such, not only by us the Profane Rabble,
but even by some great Churchmen and others; and is it not so in a great
measure at this day? The Conforming Ministers who are most Holy in their Lives,
and Diligent in their Labors; and their most orderly Parishioners are
Reproached as Phanaticks, for that very Reason, because they are not Profane.
Yea, though those Ministers are as Regular Conformists as any, and have Writ
and Disputed for the Diocesan, Episcopacy, and Conformity to the Legal
Ecclesiastical Settlement, than any of their Neighbors:

So that if we estimate the Present Quarrel by the Practice of many, both of
the loosest Layety and Clergy, who yet confidently call themselves Sons of the
Church; it is not Conformity and Episcopacy, but Profaness which seems to be
the great Paliadium those Men strive to secure; and shall not God again Visit
for these things?

Add to these, the Common and Unrelented Perjuries of most Officers as
Constables, Churchwardens, etc. Besides the Horrid Blasphemies of the Wretched
Dammees: With many other Sins.

So that I fear the removing of our Candlestick from before the Lord and*
Redeemer of the Church, who purchased it, and every part of it, to be Holy unto
himself.


Minist. I pray you (Sir) let us not make such Desperate Conclusions against
our selves.
We have (Blessed be God) more than Fifty Righteous in every City, both
Conformists and Nonconformists, who cry Night and Day for the Averting of Gods
Wrath; the Reforming our Manners, the Healing our Divisions, and the
Continuance of the Public Profession of his truth amongst us. And I hope he
will in Mercy hear them.


Parish. Amen! The Lord Merciful and Gracious, hear them and us! But I fear our
Sins are more Vocal than our Prayers.

Minst. Besides, I have not such dreadful Apprehensions of the Cruelty of the
English Papists as you seem to have. For both you and I know some of that
Profession, who are as kind and obliging Neighbors as most about us.


Parish. I do readily grant it, but then they are those who have not known the
depths of Satan, as they speak, Rev. 2. 24. They acting therefore according to
the Benevolent Principles of our Common Christianity, and the sweet Candor of
their own Natural Temper, are very lovely, and I use to bless God when I
observe any Papist to be such an Heteroclyt, and to differ from the generally
prevailing Frame of Fierceness, that most of them (their Regulars at least) do
evidence: And oh! What a Triumphant Day will it be both in Heaven and Earth,
when all such Holy, Meek, and Humble Papists shall flee out of Babylon! But
alas, these very Persons themselves know not what they shall be, when Power is
in their hand; at least, when the Priest and Confessor shall get astride their
Consciences, and spur them on both sides with the sharp Rowels of these Popish
Maxims. [No Faith to be kept with Heretics.] And [He that Conceals an
Heretic, is liable to the Inquisition, as an Heretic.]

Queen Mary her self, is reported, to have been a Princess of an excellent
Temper, had not Gardener, Bonner, etc. pressed her to those Cruelties exercised
under her, as the only Evidence she could give her Holy Father the Pope, and
her Holy Mother, the Romish Church; That she was a Defender of the Catholic
Roman Faith. And so in Ireland, the poor Protestants found, that their Popish
Neighbors formerly obliged and obliging, by receiving and giving all
Reciprocal Kindnesses, were either forced by their Priests, or willing to be
bitterly cruel to their Protestant Friends; and so I believe the poor French
Protestants find it at this day. -- But if any good natured Papist, either in
Piedmont, Ireland, France, or otherwhere, have ever showed any tenderness
toward suffering Protestants in a day of Persecution, I pray the God of all
Mercies and Consolation, to return that Mercy sevenfold into the Bosom of them
and theirs, in the time of their need. But still I fear: Be pleased therefore
to lend me your direction and assistance how I may bear up against the Storm,
if it come: The Prophet Isaiah bids us hearken and hear for the time to come.
Isa. 42. 23.
And Jeremiah taught the Jews whilst they were in Judea, what they should do
and say when they came into Babylon.


Min. I shall readily (as far as I am able) comply to your Pious desire, not
because my fears keep equal pace with yours, for to me still there is hope in
Israel, as to this thing, but because the considerations which such a Subject
will lead us to, will be a great advantage to us Living and Dying.

The Method I will observe in my Discourse shall be this:

I. I will endeavor to show you what sort of Cause it is that will make a
Martyr; Mat. 5. 10.
namely, To suffer for Christ's Name, and for Righteousness sake. 1 Pet. 3. 14.


II. I will show how a Martyr must be qualified as to his Temper and Practice.

III. What promises God has made both of Consolations, and Supports here, and
of rewards hereafter, to his Suffering Saints.


Parish. Sir, I am glad we are come to this sweet Theme, and shall attend
diligently, praying to God to guide your Tongue for my Direction and
Consolation in the ways of the Gospel.


Min. Amen. -- He therefore suffers for Christ's Name, and for Righteousness sake,


I. Who suffers, for refusing to strengthen the hands of Wicked Men in their
Wickedness, by his Consent or Example.

II. Who suffers, for Promoting the Churches Peace.

III. Who suffers, for the Exercise of warranted Religious Worship, or refusal
of Communion in Idolatrous and Sinful Worship.

IV. Who suffers, for contending for the Faith and Truth once delivered to the
Saints.

First, He Suffers as a Martyr, who Suffers, because he will have no Fellowship
in the unfruitful Works of Darkness, nor run to the same excess of Riot with
others; who Suffers, because he is ready when Sinners entice him, to answer
with David, Psalm. 119. 115.
Depart from me ye Evil doers; for I will keep the Commandments of my God; is
Gods Martyr. For certainly if we Suffer on this account, because we will by our
professed obedience to God's Law, give testimony to his Sovereignty, and to the
Equity and Excellency of that Rule he has appointed to his Rational Creatures,
we may justly be styled God's Martyrs. And in particular, if we Suffer, for
Fearing God and the King, and not meddling with those who are given to change,
but that in Conscience toward God we retain our Loyalty to our Sovereign, it
is a Suffering for Righteousness sake.

Parish. But will the Suffering in the Cause of strict Moralities, in title
Christians to Martyrdom?


Min. Yes; For Morality or Conformity to the Moral Law in our Duty to God and
Men (for God's sake) is so great a part of the obedience of Faith given to the
Rule or the New Creature, that he who Suffers, rather than he will offend
against the Moral Law, In Conscience that God who made him, and Christ who
Redeemed him, requires that he should live by that Rule, in order to God's
Glory, his own and others good, is God's and Christ's Martyr. And be assured of
it, Good Men shall not want occasion of Suffering on that account, especially
in such days and places, wherein almost every thing is countenanced, but Piety
and Virtue.

Next, If you Suffer for promoting the Peace of the Church, and opposing
Schisms and Divisions amongst Brethren, you Suffer for the Name of Christ: and
you cannot want occasion of Suffering if than be your design, so long as the
Zeal for or against our English Littleismes, flames out at the top of every
Chimney.


Parish. Indeed it is easily observable, that those good and moderate Men, who
have endeavored to remove the Fuel of our present Contentions, are as
violently assaulted by the fierce Men (the Bigotts on both sides) as if they
were the declared Enemies of both the Contending Parties: however I resolve,
through the Grace of God, to follow your Example and Doctrine herein, both to
pray and strive for the Peace of Jerusalem, by all lawful means. For I believe,
if I should dye at the Stake for the Profession of the most precious Truths of
the Gospel, and yet be a divider of Christ's Church, I should be condemned to
be a Firebrand in Hell by the Prince of Peace.


Min. But when I press you to contend for the Peace of the Church, I mean not
only the Peace of the particular Society of Christians amongst whom your
Residence and Cohabitation calls you to communicate in Public Worship; But
also to promote the Catholic Unity of the Catholic Church, by virtue of which
it is, That every Baptized Christian, Professing Repentance toward God, and
Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, and bringing sufficient Evidence or
Credentials of his Christianity, may, as a Member of that one Body, under
Christ the Head, Challenge the Privilege of Communion in all the Ordinances of
Christ with any Society of Christianst or partionlar Church) where ever he
happens to live, or occasionally to come, For if any Society of Christians
shall impale themselves by mutual Compacts, or by setting up other new and
unnecessary Terms of Communion with them, so as to exclude from their Communion
other Christians cohabiting with them, or coming to them, they are therein
Schismatical; especially if those Terms be such as the Neighbor or
Stranger-Christian cannot comply to without wrong to his own Conscience.

I do indeed judge, that if the Terms of Communion required, though new and
narrower then Christ has required to make us Members of his Catholic Church,
be such as I can comply to wihout Sin, I ought not to disturb the Peace of the
particular Church where I am, by a stiff opposing of them, especially if I have
sufficiently protested my Right and Privilege as a Member of the Catholic
Church, to have Communion allowed me without such Imposals: For my Christian
Liberty gives me a Latitude to become all things (not sinful) to all men: And
though a particular Church may be Schismatical in imposing such new and narrow
Terms of Communion with her, as Christ never imposed, to make us Members of his
Catholic Church, yet if I separate causlesly, (that is; where I can
Communicate without Sin) I am Schismatical also; so that at the same time a
Church may be Schismatical in imposing unecessary Terms of Communion, and a
particular Christian may be Schismatical in refusing Compliance to those Terms,
if he can comply to them without Sin.


Parish. Sir, I thank you; for by this Information you have contributed not
only to make easy to me my Compliance to just Ecclesiastical Laws, (which I
did something scruple, on conceit that my yielding betrayed my Christian
Liberty) but also to enlarge my special Brotherly Love to all Christians as
Members of the same Body with me under Christ our Head: and you have given my
Conscience a latitude, and my Heart a readiness to join in worship with any
Christian, where ever I come, and may be admitted; and to receive readily, as
much as in me lies, any Christian to Communion with me, and with that Society
of Christians amongst whom I Cohabit and Communicate.


Min. Next, if you suffer for not complying to sinful Worship, such as is
forbidden by God, as unworthy to be offered up to his Glorious Majesty, you
suffer for Righteousness sake, and the Commands of God, with the examples of
the Saints in all Ages will justify you herein. Nay further, if you suffer for
exercising the true Worship of God, either singly, (as Daniel) or socially with
other Devout Persons fearing God (as the Primitive Christians) did daily and
weekly, Dan. 6. 10.
not forsaking the assembling themselves together, Heb. 10. 25. You suffer for
Righteousness sake: For God is God, and is to be worshipped, whether man will
allow it or no.

I speak not this, as if I thought it unlawful for the Civil Governor, when any
of his Subjects shall Assemble in a considerable Number, to require security of
them, that they will not under pretense of Divine Worship (like the Galileans,
whose blood Pilate mingled with their Sacrifice) complot the Disturbance of the
Public Peace.

Next, if you suffer for holding fast, and contending for the Faith and Truth
once, and at once, delivered to the Saints, you suffer for Righteousness sake.

And this has been, and will be the most general cause of Suffering to the
Saints of God: For they are Children of the Light, and of the Truth; and by
Publishing and Professing of the Truth, they not only turn others from darkness
to light, but also from the power of Satan unto God; which makes him and his
Instruments rage against it.

First therefore, He suffers for Righteousness, who suffers from Athiests, for
owning the belief of a God; that is, for professing to believe, That there is a
Glorious and Incomprehensible Being eternally existing, unmade and distinct
from all things that are made unmeasurable in his Infinite Presence,
Infinitely, Powerful, Wise, Good, and All-knowing who made, preserves, and
Governs all things, and is to be Feared, Loved, Trusted in, and to be Submited
to, Obeyed and Worshipped by all Men and Angels, and to be desired and chosen by
them as their Portion and Happiness.

Next, He Suffers on the same good account, who Suffers from Heathen and
Polytheists, for professing to believe there is One only God; and thus some
amongst the Jews, yea, and amongst the Heathen (as Socrates) and thousands of
the Primitive Christians Suffered, and are Martyrs of God; yet they were by
the Polytheists reputed Atheists, because they denied their false Gods.

Next, He Suffers for Righteousness Sake, who Suffers from Materialists or
Hobbists, for professing that God is a Glorious Spritual Being, free and
unconstrained by any natural or fatal necessity, who is every where entire, and
not divided into parts, Working all Things according to his own Will. And
indeed Hobbism (or Hylexism) is but a blanched and disguised Atheism, and is
the Pander to all sensual Lusts, and the Canker of Loyalty, and incourager of
Rebellion.

Next, He is God's and Christ's Martyr, who Suffers for the Arrian or Socinian,
for professing to believe, according to the Revelation of God concerning
himself, that the glorious Godhead, through its Infinite Perfection, subsists
in Three, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; owning that Unity, and undividing
Communion of Essence, do each of them imply Perfection, and are a way of
Subsistence proper to the Godhead, and as incommunicable and unparalled in
the Creatures, as his Eternity of duration, or the immensity of his spiritual
Presence are.

And Thousands of Christians thus Suffered of Old under the Arrians.

Next, He is a Martyr of Jesus, who Suffers from Jew, Mohammedan, Heathen, or
any other Insidel, for professing to believe, That Jesus conceived by the Holy
Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary at Bethlehem, in the time of Augustus Caesar
the Roman Emperor, Genesis 3. 15.
brought up at Nazareth, and Crucified under Pontius Pilate the Roman Governor
in Judea at Jerusalem, Genesis 4. 1.
was the Promised Seed of the Woman, Genesis 5. 29.
the Man from the Lord, Genesis 22. 18.
the same that should comfort Mankind against the Curse, Genesis 49. 10.
the Seed of Abraham, the Shiloh of Juduh, the Rod and Branch of the Root of
Jesse, the Son of David, and he of whom the Tradition was to the Fathers of
Old, that he should Break the Serpents Head, and overthrow the design of Satan
for man's destruction, and of whom the Prophets prophesied, That in him all
Nations should be Blessed, and he should be a Covenant to all People, and bear
our Sins, and have the Chastisements of our Peace laid on him; that is, that he
should, as a Mediator betwixt God and Man, Seal a new Covenant for us in his
Blood, wherein God promises pardon to the Penitent Believer, and grace to the
humble Suppliant, and peace to the Contrito, and glory to the persevering in
Faith and Holiness, and that his Death is the only Propitiation for our Sins,
and that he accordingly dyed for our Sins, and confirmed thereby the Covenant,
and rose again the third day, and ascended into Heaven, and sits on the
right hand of God, being exalted even in his Humane Nature above the highest
Angels, and that he is God, the Word and Wisdom of the Father Incarnate, and is
appointed to be the Judge of the quick and the Dead; and that there neither is,
nor was, nor shall be any other Name under Heaven by which Sinners may be
saved, but the Name of Jesus Christ.

A Christian may meet with Sufferings also from other Sects, but the main Sect
and Heresy against which I perceive you desire to be fortified, is that of the
Papists, from whom ten thousand times ten thousand of the Saints of God have
suffered, for owning the Faith once delivered to the Saints; and that Whore
sitting on the Scarlet Beast, has made her self drunk with the Blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus; Rev. 17. 6.
though (as I said before) I belive many of our English Papists to be of a more
debonaire temper at present.


Par. It is indeed my chief desire to be fortified in suffering in opposition
to Popish Errors, though your accounts about other Sects redound also to my
Advantage.


Min. You suffer therefore as a Martyr of Jesus, if you suffer because you own
that God since the writing of the Scriptures has appointed them to those who
have them as an entire rule of Faith in all things, which God has by
Revelation made known concerning the way in which he will carry on Sinner; to
Salvation, and that it is the Code or Body of all the Laws and Institutions of
Christ to his Church: But if you please, I will speak of this a little more
largely.


Parish. Yea Sir, I desire you would, because I find that it is pleaded, that
once the Faith of the Patriarchs, and so also of the first Christians was built
upon Oral Tradision and Catechetical Institution. The Patriarchal Sabbath was
our Sunday changed to Saturday to the Jews, on occasion of the sending Quails
and Manna.



Min. You say right, the Patriarchs Doctrine of Faith, about the Creation of
the World, about the Fall of Man, about the promised Seed, and about Sacrifices
Tithes, the Patriarchal Sabbath, and Marriage, was at first delivered by Oral
Tradition, and derived by Catechizing from Father to Son: But after that the
Nations had corrupted the true Doctrine, and Adulterated the Tradition, it
pleased God to inspire Moses to write all that Tradition Doctrine common to all
Mankind, and also what was peculiar to Abreham's Posterity, so that no part of
the Traditional Doctrine necessary to Salvation was left unwritten: And the
Prophet afterward having more particular Revelations about the time, place,
and other circumstances of the Conception, Birth, Preaching, Miracles, Death,
Resurrection, and Ascension of the promised Seed penned them likewise: So that
the great Tradition that the Jewish Church was to derive down from Generation
to Generation, was the writings of Moses and the other divinely inspired Penmen
as the entire Rule of their Faith in the Messiah to come. So also what was
necessary to be believed of what our Lord Jesus Christ (come in the Flesh)
Taught and ordained, did and suffered, is intively collected in the Scriptures
of the New Testament, and no Doctrine of Christ necessary to be believed, nor
Institution of Christ necessary to be obeyed, is left out of the said Holy
Writings to be derived down by Oral Tradition, and therefore it is an
intolerable injury done to Christians; to deny them the liberty of Reading the
Scriptures in their own Tongue.

And an abominable Cheat is put upon the Christian world, in pretending that
Part of the Rule of Faith, is left to be derived down by the Churches
Tradition; yea so, that what Doctrine was not defined by the Church (that is,
the Pope or Council or both) to be de side, and part of the Tradition to day,
may yet be so to morrow, and so be made then necessary to Salvation, which was
not necessary before.


Parish. I apprehend now the good warrant we have to stick to the Scriptures as
the only and entire Rule of Faith, and I hope, by the grace of God, I shall not
forsake that sure Word: But (Sir) still if we yield (what the Romanists claim)
that there is appointed by God an Infallible Judge of the sense of the
Scriptures, to whose definitions all are bound to consent, our Rule would be no
Rule to us, without the concurrent judgment of such an Authentic Interpreter.


Min. But it can never be proved, that Christ has appointed such an Authentic
Interpreter of Scripture, and infallible Judge of Controversies: And besides,
the ridiculous perverting of Scripture by Popes, to bolster up this and their
other pretensions is sufficient evidence to any man that will use his eyes and
his reason, that the Pope is no such Judge.

And indeed if Gods Spirit cannot speak plain in his Word but he must need an
Interpreter, how can the Pope or Church speak so, but they must also need an
Interpreter, and that Inpreter must need another Interpreter, and so on in
Insinitum.

Therefore we believe the infinitely Gracious God has so made known his mind
about Man's Salvation, in his word, that no man who prays to God, earnestly and
humbly for the assistance of his Spirit, and uses serious attention and
pondering of the Scripture, comparing Scripture with Scripture, and applies
himself to the help of learned and pious Men and Ministers, when he needs the
same, can dangerously err in necessary points of Faith, and yet learned Men and
Ministers convince him of the sense of Scripture who seeks their assistance not
in the strength of their Authority and Infallibility, but in strength of that
Light in which they are enabled. by God to represent the Truth. But I must not
enlarge upon this Head, I refer you, if you need farther satisfaction, to what
the Reverend and Learned Dr. Stillingsleet, Dr. Tillotson, or Mr. Poole, in his
Nullity of the Roman Faith, Mr. Baxter and others have writ upon this Subject.


Parish. I am well satisfied, I pray you proceed.

Minist. Next, you are warranted to bear Testimony, even unto Blood, against
the Popes Supremacy, challenged over the whole Church: nay, in a manner over
the whole World. And that you may be satisfied that so you ought to do,
consider that the Pope claims no less than these Prerogatives following.

First, That he, as Saint Peter's Successor and Christ's Vicar, is the Head of
the Catholic Church on Earth, and the first Subject of all Ecclesiastical
power: So that whatsoever Power of Order or Jurisdiction any Bishop, Presbyter,
Lay-Chancellour; or other Official does exercise, is derived (say the
Romanists) from the Pope. That he can dispense with Vows and Oaths, grant
Pardons and Indulgences: yea, if he decree Virtue to be Vice, or contrarily,
none are to question it, nor does any Appeal lie from him. Nor can any Prince
or State, or Church, constitute any Order, or reform any abuse in matters
Ecclesiastical, but by delegation from the Pope.

That he as Christ's Vicar (who is King of Kings) may depose Kings for Heresy,
or for favoring Heretics, or for any Maladministration or other pretended
unfitness of the Person to Govern. That he can absolve Subjects from their
Oaths of Allegiance, and give to whom he will the Empires and Kingdoms of the
Earth, and the Glory of them, as the Devil, Matthew. 4. said he could do. For
thus Popes have practiced in this part of the old world often, and in the new
also, Pope Alexander 6th, Giving Peru and Mexico to the Kings of Spain and
Portugal.


Parish. If this be his claim, then every one is warranted to oppose it unto
death; it being such an abominable usurpation of an Authority that Christ never
gave, and a most unsufferable inchroachment on both the Civil and Religious
Rights, both of Princes and private men, both Christians and Heathen; And he is
a Traitor to Christ, and a betrayer of his own and others Rights who yields to
it; and methinks there is nothing in Popery of more dangerous consequence to be
yielded, and yet nothing more groundlesly challenged; nor that can more
prejudice unconverted Heathen Princes against Christianity than this Doctrine,
That they who before were Supreme, must be Subordinate to the Pope when they
turn Christians. For first, It can never be proved that Christ gave any such
power to St. Peter, or if he had, it cannot be proved that St. Peter's personal
privileges are derivative to his Successors; nor yet that the Pope of Roma is
his Successor, rather than the Bishop of Antioch or Jerusalem; no, nor yet can
it be proved that the present Pope is the rightful Bishop of Rome by
uninterrupted Success, when from St. Peter, as they claim, there having been so
many Heretical, wicked, Schismatical, and Simonaical Persons who have possessed
that Seat.

This and more I remember you told me was said against it by the very humble,
learned and pious Dr. Barrow, late Master of Trinity College in Cambridg; in
his absolute and incomparable discourse on this Subject. But I pray you give me
a reason why all the Kings of the Earth do not rise up against the Pope in
defense of their own and their Subjects Right.


Minist. The Scripture tells us, Rev. 17. 2. They are made drunk with the Wine
of the fornications of the great Whore, and intoxicated with the pompousness of
her superstitious Worship, and the looseness of the Doctrines that indulge both
their Lusts, Ambition, and Cruelties. But besides, the Popish Princes make use
of the Popes Authority, sometimes for quelling their Rebellious Popish
Subjects, sometimes to palliate their incestuous Marriages, sometimes for
fleecing of their Clergy whom they have suffered first to sleece their People;
sometimes for confiscating the Estates of whole Orders (as of the Knights
Templers) and seizing the Revenues of Monasteries and Abbeys; wherein the Pope
always is a sharer, and sometimes to countenance by his Bulls, their Invading
and Usurping others Kingdoms. But I will proceed, there are abundance of other
Popish errors, for opposal of which a Christian may warrantably suffer; such
is that Schismatical Doctrine, that there is no Salvation but to those that are
of the Romish Communion; such also is their praying to Saints and Angels, and
worshipping Images; such also is their Doctrine of Merit, Purgatory, Pardons,
and Indulgencies: But no one Doctrine is fuller of errors and absurdities than
their Doctrine of Transubstantiation; for denial of which many thousand
precious Servants of God here in England, and other where, have suffered death:
And how can any assent to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, as the Doctrine
of the Gospel, who understand the meaning of it? Which is, that the substance
of the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, is turned into the very substance of
the Body and Blood of our Blessed Savior, which then the Priest offers up to
God, as a propitiation for the sins of the Quick and Dead.

Which absurd Doctrine, First, is contrary to our Senses of both Seeing,
Feeling, Smelling and Tasting, (and consequently takes away the credit of all
Gods true Miracles) for still we see and feel, and taste, and smell Bread and
Wine; nay, If my Senses may be deceived, What security have I that I read in
the Scriptures these words, This is my Body; next, it contradicts our Reason,
that our Saviors Body should be in so many hundred places at once, as there
are Masses Celebrated at the same time in all parts of the world; Nay, and as
many Bodies of Christ in the same Church, Chancel, or Parlor, as there are
Minute and small separated Pieces and Particles of the Species of Bread and
Wine; for so the litter Romanists teach, that every piece broken off is an
entire Body of Christ: Though the first Inventers of Transubstantiation in the
9th Century, and so onward, for almost three hundred Years, taught, that the
whole Loaf Consecrated was turned into one Body of Christ, part of which Holy
Body was broken off, when part of the appearances of the Consecrated Elements
was broken off from the rest, as the Learned Doctor Burnet well observes in his
Fast Sermon, December. 22. 1680. page 22.

And it is a Doctrine contrary to Scripture also, which affirms, Christ's Body
to be in Heaven, and is also opposite to the very design of Christ's
Institution of that Sacrament, as the Scriptures give us an account of it.

For Christ's declared intention of that institution, was to bring his Death to
our remembrance thereby, and to show the Lords Death till he came; and by that
remembrance of it, to stir up in us the same Affections and Resolutions, and
the Exercise of the same Graces which would have been sit for a pious believing
Penitent to have taken up and exercised; If he had stood by Christ's Cross when
he suffered, and seen the wounds made in his most precious body, to redeem us
from the curse due to our sins; namely, Sorrow and Humiliation for sin, Faith
in Gods Mercy in Jesus Christ, devout love and thankfulness to him that
redeemed us with his Death, with solemn renewal of our Baptismal vow to live to
him and his Glory, who bought us with the price of his Sons Blood; and by
receiving of that Symbol of the Unity of Christ's mystical Body, (for we being
many are one Bread and one Body) we protest our Unity and Love to and with all
the members of Christ.

Now, How contrary the Doctrine of Transubstantiation and its appendages are,
to this institution of Christ, and the design of it, will easily appear to any
that considers it. Besides, what reason have we to think that God would put it
into the power of an ignorant or wicked Priest to work with four words Hoc est
corpus meum.
, speaking such a Miracle as the like is not Recorded in Scripture; Namely, to
turn a multitude of little Wafers into so many Bodies of Christ, and at the
same time to deceive four of our Senses, which no true Miracle ever did. Nay,
observe there never was a Miracle mentioned in Scripture to be wrought to bring
a matter of Fact to remembrance, (as the design of the Sacrament is
remembrance) except we will call a Lot a Miracle. But observe yet further; what
an horrid thing the Papists suppose of our Savior himself; namely, that he at
his last Supper did Crucify and Break his own Body; nay, break it into twelve
several Bodies, (supposing the Communicants were so many) and that many hours
before, his Crucifiers did nail it to the Cross.


Parish. You have sufficently convinced me, that I ought to bear Testimony,
even unto the Death, against the errors and Idolatry of the Mass, and
Transubstantiation therein pretended; and I hope if it should be my Lot in a
Popish Country to meet in the Streets their Breaden Idol, I should by the
Grace of God, not fall down and Worship it, though I knew the Idolatrous Rabble
would beat out my Brains. Indeed I think I ought, if I have the warning of
their Sacred Tingtang, to turn out of the way of their unbloody Sacrifice,
their Holy Host, (as they call it) not out of fear, but because I will not
Provoke the Idolaters to make a Bloody Sacrifice of me, and so draw the Guilt
of innocent Blood upon their own Heads.


Minist. You say well, for we are not to provoke Persecutors to sin, though we
must courageously suffer, rather than comply to their sin and Idolatry.

There is one other Popish Principle that we ought to bear testimony against,
even unto sufferings, and it is this, That the Church has a power to impose
upon men's Consciences what she pleases, and her Children are bound to obey
her; not from the Evidence of the expediency, or necessity of the thing
commanded, but from the Authority forsooth of the Church commanding, which is a
Usurping upon the Prerogative of God himself, to whom alone it belongs to
command indisputable obedience. I may indeed, for peace sake, or for fear of
wrath comply to the commands, which to me bona side, seem neither necessary nor
expedient; provided they do not appear sinful. But for the Church to command
obedience (blind obedience) merely pro imperio, is to seat it self in the place
of God.

And indeed, this is the master vein of Popery, running through not only the
main Body of Papists; but also every religious Order and Society amongst them;
To whom it is as sacred to obey what their Church or Superior commands without
disputing, as to obey God and Christ in what he commands. This therefore is
another piece of their Idolatry, setting up their Church or Superiors in the
place of God.


Parish. Sir, I shall not call you to more instances, being assured that in
every suffering of the Martyrs of Jesus under the Whore of Babylon; one of
these, or all these are the Ingredients in their Accusation, that they deny the
Churches Traditions, and Infallibility, and Authority, and the Popes Supremacy,
and Transubstantiation, which they call the real presence ignorantly, and
slanderously imputing to us that we deny the real presence of the Body and
Blood of Christ, because we deny their senseless fiction of Transubstantiation.

But I long to hear you discourse of those other two excellent Heads; Namely,
of the qualifications of a Martyr, and of the supports and rewards he may
expect.


Minist. Indeed (Sir) I longed to come to them my self, as knowing they are
speculation, yiedling ten times more sweetness than the controversal part of
the discourse: because we could not treat on that without reflection on others
wickedness or error; which is no pleasing prospect to humble and charitable
Persons: But the rest of our way will be all beset with the fragrant Graces of
Gods Spirit, and the Fruit-bearing Trees of his rich and precious promises; I
shall proceed therefore,

1. He is very ignorant of the nature of God, who thinks God stands in need of
a vile and profligate wretch (living yet in the practice of known sins) to
assert the cause of his holy truth, for his praise is in the Congregation of
his holy ones, and dear in his sight is the death only of his Saints. But he
puts away the wicked of the Earth like dross.

First, Psalm. 149. 1.
Therefore none are fitted to be Martyrs but sincere Mourners for their former
sins. When thunders and Storms are without, Psalm. 116. 15.
and swelling Winds are in the Bowels of the Earth, there must needs be a
terrible Earthquake; So he, that is called to suffer for the truth, Psalm. 119.
119.
and has the Enemies of truth raging and menacing without him, and conscience
accusing him within; that he is not only an high transgressor, but a careless
neglecter of seeking his peace with God, can never confidently dye in the best
Cause. When the Philistines were coming upon Saul, 1 Samuel 13. the careless man
then is awakened by his own terrors, and cries out verse 12. the Philistines
will now come down upon me to Gilgal, and I have not made Supplication to the
Lord; so will Conscience say to the impenitently careless; how dare thou
venture thy Life in the cause of that truth thou have neglected to obey, never
seriously searching thy heart and ways, never sincerely mourning for thy sins,
never applying thy self by earnest prayer to the mercy of God in Christ. I do
not deny, that a man who is under great fears and doubts, having for some
considerable time been earnestly seeking Gods favor in Christ, prizing his
loving kindness more than life, may make a courageous Martyr; for such an ones
thoughts will work at this rate, Lord thou know how I have longed for thy
Salvation; though therefore I yet walk in darkness and see no light (only a
little dawning of hope appears) I will not set my Comforts at a greater
distance from me by a cowardly betraying of thy Cause, whether therefore thou
please to lift up the light of thy countenance upon me or no, yet will I trust
in thee, and live and dye to thy to thy Glory, knowing that duty is my work and
must be my care, and comfort is thy free gift, and it coming at any time or in
any degree, is both more and sooner than I deserve, as said the three Children,
Dan. 3. 17. we know our God can deliver us, but if he will not, be it known
unto thee we will not serve thy Gods, nor worship the Golden Image which thou
have set up, so says the humble penitent; God can make the bones which he has
broken to rejoice, but however I will not depart from him, nor betray that
truth he calls me to own. This is one of the Greaves or Boots mentioned,
Ephesians. 6. 14, 15, 16, etc.
Ephesians. 6. 15. For amongst other parts of the Spiritual Armor, the Apostle
exhorts to have their feet shod with the prepraration of the Gospel of peace,
Is chiefly referred to in collection of the qualifications of a Mar(...)
the preparation of it according to the Doctrine of Saint John Baptist, Christ's
forerunner, is Repentance, Matthew. 3. 2. Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at
hand: But he that is yet a careless impenitent, has no Boots or Greaves on,
but his naked Feet are subject to be wounded with the Gall-traps of his
Enemies: when Conscience tells him, that according to the Tenor of the Gospel,
he is in no capacity for peace or for pardon, and his Enemies without (suppose
Heathen) tell him he shall perish here and hereafter as an Enemy to the gods,
or Popish persecutors curse him solemnly with Bell, Book, and Candle, to the
Fire of Hell, as well as to the Flames here, and forbid the people to pray for
them, (as they did in Queen Marys days prohibit all to assist the Martyrs so
much as by a prayer for them) how can such a one dye courageously? But still I
must take heed of discouraging any sincere, though late penitent; for I do not
question, but as our Savior received the penitent Thief upon the Cross, so
some have entered profane wretches into Prison, who yet have had such conviction
of the preciousness of the truth they were urged to renounce, that they durst
not deny it, and have come out to Execution sincere penitents; nay, it may be,
rejoicing through hope, and have died happily; yea, comfortably in the Lord:
But serious repentance, and sorrow founded in serious search of our ways and
heart, sooner or later, is a necessary qualification for a Martyr of Jesus.

Secondly, So also is mortification necessary, that is, that the Martyr has
endeavored faithfully to subdue every lust in himself, and to cleanse himself
from all defilements of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear and
love of God; for God will not receive a polluted Sacrifice, though offered with
the Fire of his own Altar; nor can such expect the assistances of Gods Spirit,
who have grieved that good Spirit, by wilful allowance of themselves in known
sins, not denying their lusts.

One living lust is like a potent opposite party in a Garrison that will weaken
the hands of the Defenders, the Conscience of being under the power of one
ruling Sin, will cut the Sinews of our courage, and God will say to such, as
Psalm. 50. Why take thou my Law into thy Mouth, seeing thou hate to be
reformed? Why offerest thou to fight my battles against the adversaries of my
truth, seeing thou fightest against my fear, obeying the adversaries of my
honor, thy lusts?

This is the other Boot or Greave of the preparation of the Gospel of Peace,
which according to St. John Bapists Doctrine is prepared for by reformation of
our hearts and lives. Luke 3. 5. Let every valley be silled, and every mountain
be brought low, and the crooked be made straight, and the rough ways be made
smooth; let the low grovelling, worldling, and filthy sensual fill up the
Valley, setting his affections on things above, and every Proud and Ambitious
person bring his thoughts low, minding Gods glory not his own, and every
crooked cunning deceiver get a strait Spirit in simplicity and godly sincerity,
and every angry and revengful person make the rough ways smooth by endeavoring
to obtain a Spirit of meeltness and kindness; and then both feet are shod with
the preparation of the Gospel of peace, and God will both receive and assist
such in the conflict for his truth and glory: And as Romans 12. 1. They can
confidently present their bodles a living holy Sacrifice acceptable to God,
which is their reasonable (rational) service; whereas an unmortified person in
whom brutish lusts do yet reign, if he dyed in a good cause, yet offered up a
brutish unreasonable Sacrifice, no way acceptable unto God.

Thirdly, The Christian must take the shield of Faith, that is confidence in
Gods promises of assistance and supports in the day of his Trial, Ephesians. 6. 16.
He must be assured that Gods goodness and faithfulness will never suffer him to
fail who flies for refuge to his grace and mercy. Psalm. 41. 12.
Thus says David, By this I know that thou favorest my righteous cause, seeing
mine enemy does not Triumph over me, and as for me thou preservest me in mine
integrity. Thus says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 1 8, 9. Christ will confirm you unto the
end, and keep you blameless to the day of our Lord Jesus Christ, or in the day
of Christ, that is emphatically the day of suffering for Christ, and will
confirm you unto the end. The Christian Matron falling in Travel of Childbirth
in the Prison, cried out in her strong pains, and was thus assaulted by the
Jailer: If, says he, you cannot bear those pains without such outcrys, how
will you be able to bear the torments provided for you? She answered, These
pains I suffer as the burden laid upon our Sex for the sin of our first
Mother; but in that conflict I shall have the assistance of his grace, which is
able to preserve me through faith against every evil work, and his grace shall
be sufficient for me. Thus the Victory by which we overcome the world is our
faith.

Fourthly, Who ever will be a courageous Martyr must have full assurance of the
goodness of his Cause, that it is the truth and way of God and Christ, (for
which he suffers) and worthy of all his suffering for it. This is that girdle
of Truth, Ephesians. 6. 14. As a girdle or belt not only strengthens the loins, but
by compacting and compressing the Muscles of the back, gives an advantage and
tightness to the cords or sinews of even the hands and feet also; so the
assurance that it is the cause of God for which we stand, will make us
confident that we shall not be confounded: whereas but to doubt of our cause,
looseneth all our powers of spirit and courage. Thus the Apostle prays for his
Colossians: Col. 2. 2, 3, 4.
Col. 2. 2, 3, 4. That their hearts might be comforted, being knit together in
love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the
acknowledgment of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ; in whom
are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.

The great cause maintained by the Apostolical Christians against the Jews, was
the Mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ; that is, that the
infinite goodness and wisdom of God of old had carried on the Salvation of the
Ancient Fathers of the world, in the same way of Repentance and Faith in his
mercy, through the mediation of the promised Seed, that ours is now carried on
since Christ's coming in the Flesh.

Now had any doubted whether this way of Salvation Preached by the Apostles,
and received by the Churches, was the truth of God, or questioned whether it
was all of a piece with the old method of bringing Sinners to glory, how could
they have suffered confidently in the cause? For staggering betwixt two
opinions, whether the Mosaical Law, or Repentance toward God and Faith toward
our Lord Jesus Christ, was the way to justification, they would have been
unstable in all their ways. But being assured that there was but one name and
way of life, Jesus Christ the same to day, yesterday, and for ever; they had a
full assurance of understanding, which is the Girdle of Truth, necessary to
gird up the loins of the Martyrs mind.

I do not say a Christian must be able to answer all the subtle Fallacies and
Sophisms of the Adversaries of the Truth, but he must be assured that
notwithstanding all their Cavils, it is the truth of God for which he appears:
And that he is assured of, because he finds it works effectually in him
believing it, purifying his heart by the faith of it, encouraging his hope and
increasing his love to God and Christ and all good Men (yea to all Men) for
Christ's sake; and what works so, cannot, he is assured, be other than the Truth
of God.

A mean-bred man who should hear a Sceptick dispute whether the snow was white,
arguing that the water from whence it comes is black, and therefore the effect
must be as is the cause, yet would not however be brought to disbelieve his
eyes: but would continue confident the snow was white, as his sight represented
it, for he found the effect of that whiteness in dispersing his visual Rays
and Spirits. Such an assurance must every suffering Christian have of the Truth
for which he suffers, and that it is the true grace of God wherein he stands,
and for which he stands, and therefore an ignorant unstudied Christian can
hardly make a Martyr.

Fifthly, Whoever will be a Martyr must have his heart engaged in a sincere
design to promote Gods glory both by doing and suffering. This is that
Breast Plate of Righteousness and Sincerity, Ephesians. 6. 14. which gives courage
to a suffering Saint: For if there be any Hypocritical design of seeking
Reputation to our selves, or bringing credit to an espoused Faction or Party,
it flats our courage: but the single eye makes the body full of light and heat
also.

On this account it was that the Primitive Christians in times of Persecution
received the Eucharist so frequently, (in St. Cyprians time, in the Decian
Perfecution, they took it daily) thereby renewing their Baptismal vow to live
and die to Gods glory, if called to it; As when some great Battle was expected,
the Roman Generals used to renew the Sacramentum Militare, the Soldiers. Oath,
That they would not disobey, nor forsake their General, their Imperator: So
that who ever has not frequently and seriously Consecrated himself to God, to
live and die to him, will hardly make a Martyr; that being an engagement he
never devoted himself unto.

Sixthly, A Martyr must have right apprehensions of the Wisdom, Goodness,
Justice, and mercy of God, in suffering the rod of the wicked to light upon the
Lot of the Righteous, there being some Chaff to be winnowed away; some
miscarriages even amongst the Professors of the Truth, that stand in need of
reforming. And therefore judgment begins at the House of God, 1 Pet. 4. 17. He
that would be a courageous sufferer, must be thoroughly persuaded that God does
all things wisely and graciously, that therefore there is some scandalous sin
or some divisions which is to be pruged out.

Thus when the Sheep are apt to run into low and miry places, or to straggle at
a distance from one another, or to push and smite one another, the Shepherd
sends in the Dog, and rectifies all presently. So when Christians stray into
ways of sensuality, or causelessly separate from one another, or persecute and
vex one another for little differences, it is both Justice and Mercy in God to
let in a common Enemy upon them, to teach them to live better and love one
another; and when this purifying is accomplished by Gods refining fire, the
Martyr is confident that God will give their cause (the Righteous cause of
Truth) to have dominion in the morning: He therefore who questions either the
wisdom or Justice or goodness of God in permitting persecution, or that can
think that God remits of his care of the Church, so as to let the gates of Hell
prevail against it, will not be a courageous Martyr. Thus the excellent Bishop
Jewel said in Queen Mary's days, It is but a storm it may wet our Coats
through, but it will wash them also and will soon be over.

King Edward the sixth's Reformation of the Doctrine and Worship of the Church
of England is just matter of praise and Thanks giving to God even to this day:
But still the Primitive* Church Discipline, under the management of the
Diocesan Bishops with their Assistant Colleges of Presbyters, in the presence
of the Christian People (the Brethren) to remove scandals out of the Church,
was not restored, as our Church complains in the preface to the Commination. So
that God did not mistake the state of his Church, in sending Queen Mary's
persecutions to refine the Spirit of the English Protestants. And that the same
may stand yet in need of further winnowing by Gods fan will hardly be denied by
any pious and considerate Person; though still I hope God will not let us fall
into the hands of the Men of his indignation, but stir up the Spirit of our
Governors to take effectual course for the Reformation of our Lives and
Manners.

Seventhly, A Martyr must be one enabled to prefer the glory of God, and the
cause of his Truth before all Concernment for Friends and Relations.

Many a Man can more easily die to himself, than to his dear Wife, and
Children, and Friends.

Our Savior therefore protests, Matthew. 10. 37. He that loves Father and
Mother more then me, is not worthy of me: Nay he asserts, Luke 14. 26. that if
he do not hate Father and Mother, etc. he cannot be his Disciple. Not that
Religion makes us unnatural but as the Sun puts out the shining of the Stars by
its overpowering light, so the fervent love of God in (...) Christian prevails
so entirely over natural affections, that the same seem in comparison to be
quite extinguished. Thus that resolute Christian of old expressed himself: If
my Father (said he) who begot me, Per calcatam irem Patrem, per calcatam Matrem.
and my Mother who bare me, lay prosrate on the threshold of the Prison, to
beseeeh me to deny Christ, rather than leave them in their old Age, to an
unkind and churlish World; I would tread on the Loins that begot (...), and the
Womb that bare me, and go out unto Christ bearing his reproach, Heb. 13. 13.
The Devil and wicked Men know that natural affection is a tender part, and they
will pinch us there, and if our hearts be not fortified with the Breast Plate
of Faith and Love, they will prevail against us. But when we can trust God with
our Friends, and love God above them, then we are fitted to be Christ's
Soldiers.

An Heroic example of this we have in the Mother, and seven Brothers suffering
under Antiochus, 2 Mac: 7. 29. What a courageous expression is that of the
Mother to her youngest Son, Fear not the Tormentors, but being worthy of thy
Brethren, take thy death, that I may receive thee again in mercy with thy
Brethren.

Eighthly, A Martyr must be one who has not himself been a Persecutor of any
of the servants of God; or if he have so been, he must be a serious Penitent,
and profess his Repentance for it before the Church and the World. Now a M^^^
may be a Persecutor of the Saints out of ignorance, and mistaken zeal, thinking
therein to do God good service, reckoning the Religion of the Persecuted to be
Heresy; and thus did St. Paul, and this I Charitably believe do some ignorant
and zealous Papists. But then observe such Persecutor are very regular in other
regards, and can profess as St. Paul did, Acts 23. 1. I have lived in all good
Conscience before God until this day. And such Persecutors have found mercy,
and been converted, and owned their Repentance for that furio^ zeal, so
contrary to the Spirit of Christ, who came to save not to destroy Men's lives;
yea some of them have been honored by God, to be called to suffer for the
Truth which once they persecuted.

But all Persecutors are not acted by that principle, some directly out of a
spirit of profaneness have persecuted goo^ Men: And such Persecutors are all
Vicious, Dehauched Drunken Dammee's, who seldom pretend to any thing of ze^^
for God (for he is not in all their thoughts, nor in the mouths, further than
their Oaths and Curses come to) but zeal for the Law of the Land, or the
Constitutions of the Church forsooth; when really they regard no Law of the
Land, or Constitution of the Church, but only pretend the same, in order to the
Vailing the bitterness; and Malignity (...) their spirits against all serious
Piety.

Others there are who, persecute goodmen, out of a worldly, and covetous
humor, that they may gain by Informations, Plunder, etc.

Now I dare not limit the Essicacy of the grace of God, but I have not to my
rememberance, either heard or read of any such Persecutors of a profane, or
Worldly Temper, who have been converted, and honored with the Crown of
Martyrdom.

But as I said before, if ever you have persecuted good Men, though out of a
mistaken zeal for God, be sure you repent and own your Repentance, or expect
not an assistance in your own day of Trial. The story is remarkable about the
Controversy, in King Edward the sixths days, about Bishops and Priests
garments, Holy Bishop Hooper and Holy Mr. Rogers scrupled conformity therein,
the secret Popish Bishops inflame the Contest, and Holy and Learned Bishop
Ridly is engaged hotly to dispute the matter against Hooper; and Hooper is
imprisoned, as a wilful and obstinate Person, who would not receive
Information. But when Ridly and Hooper were both imprisoned for Religion in
Queen Mary's days, with what lowliness of Spirit did Holy Ridly confess his too
zealous efforts in that Controversy. The Letter is extant in Mr. Fox's Acts and
Monuments.

My dear Brother (says he) I understand we thoroughly agree, Bp. Ridleys
Letter, to Bp. Hooper
and wholly consent together, in the substantial points of our Religion,
against which the World now so furiously rages; however in time past in
certain circumstances of Religion, your wisdom, and my simplicity have a little
jarred. Now be assured that even with my whole heart, (God is my witness) in
the bowels of Christ I love you in the Truth, etc.


O, what a beauteous luster and loveliness has this profound humility and
fervent Brotherly love, above all the sharpness of wit and closeness of
arguing, that any can show in these Petit Controversies! If therefore you have
harmed your Brother, who holds the Foundation with your self, for such mean
superstructures, kiss the wounds you have made, own your Repentance to your
injured Brother and to the Church of God, as ever you expect support in the day
of your sufferings.

Ninthly, Therefore it is necessary that the Martyr be rooted, and grounded in
love and charity, which implies love to God and to his Church, and to the
Martyrs very Enemies.

Observe that I do not make love and charity, any part of the Spiritual Armor,
for it is indeed the very life and spirit of the new Man: So that as the best
Armor in the World put upon a Coward, would not enable him to attempt a Combat,
or overcome therein, so if it was possible that a man should be assured of the
Truth and Goodness of his cause, and thereby had his loins girt with Truth, and
was expert and nimble at the weilding the Sword of the Spirit, (the word of
God) yet if he had not love and charity to fill all the Nerves of the inward
man, and to give Spiritual strength and vigor, he could never make a Martyr.
Therefore, 1 Cor, 13. it is made so necessary, that giving our body to be
burned without it, is reckoned nothing.

First, Therefore the Martyr must love God with all his Soul, for this love
only is stronger than Death, and neither Persecution nor distress nor Sword can
overcome it. This I have spoken of before, and unquestionably if Gods Spirit
(who alone knows Men's hearts) should write the Universal History of all the
Martyrs, from the Righteous Abel to this present, there would not one be
mentioned as such, but would have this Testimony, that the Love of God and
concernment for his glory, was the ruling affection in his Soul.

The second branch of Charity, is love to Gods Church, or an affectionate
concernment for the establishment of our Brethren in the Faith. Thus, Phil. 1.
14. St. Paul rejoiced that his bonds and imprisonment at Rome gave confidence
to the Saints there, so that they were much more bold to speak the word without
fear. On the same account he says, Col. 1. 24. I rejoice in my sufferings for
the Brethren, and fill up that which is behind, of the afflictions of Christ in
my flesh, for his bodies sake which is the Church; the [Husteramata] that which
is behind, signifies the empty spaces of a Seal, which the wax filling up
receives the impression; so that the Praise of filling up, what is behind of
the afflictions of Christ, is far from signifying any merits of the sufferings
of the Martyrs added to the merits of Christ's sufferings for his Church; and
imports no more then Paul's being conformed to the sufferings of Christ, as a
Copy is conformed to the Original, or the impress of the Wax to the carving of
the Seal. A Martyr therefore goes forth as David against Goliath, to strengthen
the hands of the Armies of Israel, the Armies of the living God; And though a
Christian be Murdered secretly in a Prison, or a Dungeon (as undoubtedly many
are in the Covents of the Italian, and Spanish Monks, and other-where) yet they
designed the strengthening of others, (If God had permitted the Example of
their Courage, and Faith, and Patience to have been showed openly) their death
is Precious, and their purpose acceptable in the sight of God.

The third branch of the Martyrs Charity, extends to all men, even their
Persecutors, whose Conversion they pray for, and that their blood may be the
seed of Gods Truth; and therefore he is not a Disciple and Martyr of Christ,
who hinders the Conversion of his Adversaries by his Railing, and Reviling, and
rendering evil for evil: so that to suffer in the best cause in the World, and
not to be Baptized into the Spirit of meekness and kindness, so as to pray for
Enemies, and bless them that curse us, and strive to overcome their evil with
good, is not to suffer as a Disciple and Martyr of Christ; who reviled not
again, and was dumb as a Sheep before the Shearers, save when he prayed for his
Crucifiers, [Father forgive them] and so also did Saint Steven; saying, Lord
lay not this Sin to their Charge: By this patience and meekness of the Saints,
Christianity prevailed to the ejection of Heathen Idolatry out of the Roman
Empire, and Popish Superstitions and Errors out of England and other reformed
Churches.

10. The next qualification of a Martyr is, he must be one very conversant in
the Scriptures, nimble at weilding the Sword of the Spirit, which is the word
of God, Ephesians. 6. 17. For thence is he to fetch his directions, even from the
Patterns and Precepts there, and his supports from the Promises there recorded,
and thence must he be furnished with Arguments to put to silence his
Adversaries; Our Savior himself by this, foiled the Tempter thrice: so that a
stranger to the Scriptures, (to the reading and meditating of them) is very
unfit for a Martyr, both because he knows not whence to fetch directions or
supports for himself, nor how to confute and silence gainsayers; But he that is
mighty in the Scriptures (as it is reported of Apollos, Acts 18. verse 24. 28.)
will both mightily confute and confound his Adversaries, and will through
Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures be strengthened in hope Romans 15. 4.

11. Next, The Martyr must put on the Helmet of Salvation, Ephesians. 6. 17. or, as
Saint Paul Phraseth it, 1 These. 5. for an Helmet the hope of Salvation; that
is, he must be begotten by the Gospel to a lively hope of an Inheritance
incorruptible, undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in the Heavens For us,
1 Pet. 1. 4. He that has not his Treasure out of his Enemies reach, will be
afraid to provoke him; and besides, no enjoyment on Earth can compensate or
equal the sufferings that the persecuted Saints may be subjected to, they may
endure cruel Mockings, Scourgings, Imprisonments in loathsome Dungeons, they
may be sawn asunder, torn Limb from Limb, Roasted on Gridirons, Tympanized,
forced to take in stinking water till their Belly and Skin is ready to burst,
and what other ways of Torment the Devil and his wicked Instruments can invent,
and nothing but Heaven can surmount such Sufferings and Death, (painful Death)
by them; But Faith, which is the substance and subsistence of things hoped for,
the Evidence of things not seen, (giving as full and firm assurance to the Soul
of those Rich and Precious Promises, as Light does to the Eye of the Color or
Figure of the things it sees) can overcome all the Terrors and Torments
levelled against it; for what would not a Christian suffer that hoped after a
few hours of suffering, to come to the vision and enjoyment of the Glorious
God, and our Savior the Lord Jesus Christ, and to the Communion of the Church
of the first born of God, the Spirits of just men made perfect, and to an
innumerable Company of Angels, and thereby to be above all sin and misery, and
fear of losing or loathing what they enjoy? Indeed the sufferings of this life
are not worthy to be compared with the Glory that shall he revealed.

12. Lastly, The Martyr must be abundant in Prayer, he must have the Spirit of
Prayer and Supplication poured out upon him, Praying always with all Prayer and
Supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance and
supplication for all Saints, Ephesians. 6. 18. For Prayer is the Christian
Artillery-Yard, wherein he exercises his Arms, and puts all his Graces of
godly sorrow, resolutions for holiness, devotedness to Gods Glory, love to God,
and love to Men, in practice, till he is active and nimble in the use of them.


Parish. Oh, (dear Sir) My Ear has been so chained to your Tongue, that it
tied up my Mouth, I could not interrupt you in the current of your Discourse
about the qualifications of the Martyr; For you have first presented your
Martyr as a Man of Courage, going forth in his great strength, whose every
Vein, and Sinew, and Artery, is filled with the love of God and of his Church;
Yea, of his very Enemies. Next, you have Armed him Cap-a-pe; First, with the
Greaves and Boots of sorrow for Sin past, and mortification of reigning Lusts,
which is the preparation of the Gospel of Peace in his own Soul, and with his
Loins Girt with the Girdle of Truth, and full assurance that his Cause is the
Cause of God, and that Truth is great and will prevail by the Power of God;
giving it Victory over the Gates of Hell; And then with the Breast Plate of
Righteousness, and Sincerity, and Love, aiming at the Glory of God his Savior,
and preferring that before all concernments for his dearest Relations, and
singly designing to promote Gods Service in the confirmation of his Brethren,
and the conversion of his Enemies, and holding before him the Shield of Faith,
and full assurance that God will preserve him to his Heavenly Kingdom, against
all the Powers of Darkness, by the sufficiency of his Grace, and having on the
Helmet of the Hope of everlasting Salvation, and expert in the use of all his
Arms, by the Exercise of all his Graces in Prayer and Supplication: And sure
such such a Champion is a Spectacle worthy the sight of Men and Angels in his
conflict. I pray you therefore proceed to the performance of the third Part of
your promise, in informing me what assistances and comforts in my sufferings,
and what rewards after them I may warrantably expect.


Minist. I shall do it to the best of my Ability, and in this Method; First, I
shall show what assistances a Christian may expect to enable him to give a
reason of the Faith and Hope that is in him.

Secondly, I shall show what sweet Comforts the very Graces that a Christian
does then Exercise, will bring into his Soul.

Thirdly, I shall show what warrant a Christian has to expect more immediate
Illapses and Communications of the comforts of Gods Spirit, and of joy in the
Holy Ghost, in his sufferings, then ever before.

Fourthly, I shall show what rewards a suffering Saint may expect hereafter.

The first expectation, namely of Assistances to give a reason of his Faith and
Hope, I think is sufficiently warranted from Matt. 10. 19. When they deliver
you up, take no thought how or what you shall speak, for it shall be given you
in that same hour what you shall speak, for it is not you that speak, but the
Spirit of your Father that speaks in you; First, It is plain this promise
has no relation at all to the public administrations in Worship, to warrant
inconsiderate effusions of words then, where Men have not got an Oratorical
habit of expressing themselves aptly, so as to stir up and lead the affections
of those to whom they Administer in Holy Worship; which habit is got by
studying and reading the Scriptures, and frequent exercise of our gifts in Holy
Worship, in private or in fellowship with others; all which endeavors God
usually blesses to those that are sincere for his Glory and the Service of his
Church; so that according to the foundation of natural parts, on which they
build, they may attain a competent gift, who will set themselves about it, as
every public Minister of the Church certainly ought to do. But though as to
this gift, for administration of public Worship, we warrantably expect the
blessing of God upon our Meditation, reading, and stirring up the natural
Abilities and Gifts that are in us, so that we may attain to this habit of
Sacred Oratory, yet it is observable that there are differences of this habit
in several pious Persons, according to the difference of their natural
quickness of Fancy and Invention, and volubility of tongue, and complexional
heat and fervor, wherein there may be at some times something like an
Enthusiastical Energy, but yet under the manage and conduct of Christian
Prudence; and withal, he that most reads the Scriptures, and meditates of them,
and exercises himself in Religious Worship, Praying to God for his Blessing
upon himself; such a one shall grow more ready as to the languaging of what he
is to speak before the people, than another who wants the advantage of those
natural endowments before mentioned, or does not use the means of reading,
meditation and exercise, with humble dependence on God for his Blessing on
them: and hence it comes to pass that the greatest Scholars are not always the
best Preachers, nor the readiest in Prayer, because their natural partslye not
so right for this sacred Oratory: but many times a natural coldness and
bashfulness and hesitancy of tongue, and ungratefulness of voice and accent,
and slowness of fancy hinders them: And besides too many great Scholars
neglect the stirring up of their gifts by exercise, and so their Delphian Sword
rusts in the Scabbard.

But I only speak this by the by, to show you that the promise to the Martyr
for supply of abilities to justisie his Faith and Hope, does not extend to
warrant sudden extempore venturing on expressions in holy Worship, where men
have not got an habit of expressing themselves decently and affectively.


Paris. However I thank you (Sir) For you have herein prevented a mistake I was
apt to have fallen into.


Minis. The promise therefore of (Is shall be given you in that hour) relates
to the Saints assistances in a time of being questioned about their Faith and
Hope by their Persecutors; and a Christian may then warrantably expect that he
shall be enabled to set forth the reasonableness of his Belief, the
preciousness of his Faith, the excellency of his Hope, and the purity of the
commands his Religion obliges him to observe, so that his adversaries shall
not be able to resist the wisdom by which he speaks: Of the promise thus made
good we have Scripture examples in Saint Peter and Saint John Acts 4. 43. So
that the Jewish Rulers marvelled at the (...) the freedom of speech which God
had given to those unlearned Persons. Saint Stephen is another example, Acts 6.
10. whose adversaries were not able to resist the wisdom and spirit by which he
spoke: And a further evidence of his enlargements in this gift we have in his
discourse before the Rulers, Acts 7. And the Church-Martyrology gives abundance
of instances of this, not only in the learned Philosophical persons of the
first ages, the Persecutions under Rome-Heathen, such as Justin Martyr, etc.
but even in the common Christians: and so afterward under Rome-Papal, not only
Cranmer, Ridley, Philpot; but common persons, yea, women, as Mrs. Jane Askew,
etc. have been enabled to give such clear accounts of the truth of the Doctrine
for which they suffered, as has put their learned Adversaries to silence, and
driven them to use rage and threatenings where they wanted Arguments. But
observe, first, I will not hence warrant any unlearned Person to expect Ability
to answer all the Sophisms and Fallacious ways of Arguing, which their
adversaries may by the advantage of Art cast before them, though they shall be
secured not to be shaken by such windy Doctrine. Nay further, In points
disputable amongst good men, (who have nothing of the Seed of the Serpent, of
the persecuting humor in them) and which may be held either way without danger
of Damnation, if the Disputants do (...) speak what they think to be the truth
in love, such Assistances to judge and discourse is not promised, because the
fixing the assent either way is without danger to the Soul.

Secondly, I will not from hence warrant unlearned, weakparted Persons
suffering for the truth, to speak so clearly, so convindingly as the learned
Christians; because, though both speak by the same Spirit, the Spirit of God
uses to modifie his own gifts according to the natural or acquired Abilities
of the Subject he imploys, as we see in the different styles of the different
Pelimen of Holy Scriptures, which though all were dictated by the energy of the
same Spirit, yet did they receive a Tincture from the Channel of the Prophets
natural Parts, or acquired, through which they passed.

But this in the name of Christ I dare promise, that a suffering Saint
disposed, as I have before described, shall without previous meditation and
study be assisted by Gods Spirit, with an ability to justify the Truth and
Excellency of the necessary and fundamental Doctrines of Christianity, for
which he suffers, and so put to silence foolish and ungodly, (though learned)
men.


Parish. That is enough, thanks be to God for his glorifying himself in his
Saints, Psalm. 8. 2.
who out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings has ordained strength, and
perfected praise because of his Enemies, that he might still the Enemy and the
Avenger. I pray you proceed.


Minist. I shall endeavor to show you next, what sweet comforts the Graces
which a suffering Christian exercises in his sufferings does then assord him.

Every Grace carries a pleasure and comfort in the exercise of it, but some
more than others, and some of them at some time more than at other times. Now
as it is in sweet Herbs and Trees, the very Leaves and Roots of them have a
refreshing smell, but the Flowers and Fruits when they are in their ripeness
and perfection, have a far greater fragrancy, so the time of suffering for
Christ is the time of the Harvest and full ripeness of the Christians Graces,
and like the Sheep in the Canticles coming up from the washing, Cant. 4.2^^
every one of them bear twins of comfort and consolations. The Graces I shall
instance in, are. 1. Simplicity or plainness of Spirit, 2. Love to God. 3. Love
to his Church. 4. Compassion to Enemies. 5. Faith in Gods promises. 6. Heavenly
mindedness.

The first is simplicity and plainness of Spirit, this is so clean and savory a
Grace, that it always yields comfort to the Christian in the exercise of it; as
Saint Paul witnesses, Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience,
that in simplicity and godly sincerity we have had our conversation in the
world; 2 Cor. 1. 12
when therefore a Christian suffers in plainness and fredom, without double
dealing and dissimulation, aiming at Gods Glory, and not gratifying a vain
glorious humor in himself, or designing to credit a party and faction, how
well pleased is he that God gives him without fear or a worldly mind, to
approve himself to God, and to be made manifest even to the consciences of both
Friends and Enemies: 2 Cor. 5. 11.
This was the frame our Lord and Savior suffered in, there was no guile found
in his mouth, thus a Christian, as Job 2. 1 5. Holds fast his Integrity, 1
Pet. 2. 22.
and will not let it go till he dye; this is that Grace that gives Serenity and
Clearness, even to the Christians countenance, as it is said of Saint Stephen,
that theybeheld his Face as it had been the Face of an Angel, Acts 6. 15. This
wisdom from above, that is without Hypocrisy, makes his Face to shine, and
the boldness of his Face shall be changed; Eccles. 8. 1.
And if there be such a luster in the Circumference, what exceeding comfort and
glory must there be in the Center of his sincere and upright heart, out of
which that virtue goes that adorneth his countenance? Thus holy and plain Mr.
Latimer, who before was seemingly of a despicable presence, when he was stripped
for burning in Q. M. days, appeared one of the comliest Persons of his age that
the company had beheld.

The second Grace then exercised is love to God, this at all times carries
comfort in it, but especially in a day of suffering for God and Jesus Christ,
for then it goes forth like the Sun in its strength; so that we may suppose
the three Children, Dan. 3. as they had the Furnace heated seven times hotter
than it used to be, to terrify them, so had they then their love heated seven
times more than at other times, to strenthen them; and as the Beams of the Sun
will put out a Fire, so the frevent love of God in them morally extinguished
the painful burnings of the Furnace, and bound the Flames to the Peace, even
before Gods Power did the same miraculously: Thus the Apostles went away
rejoicing, that they were counted worthy to suffer for the name of Christ,
their love then burst out into transports of joy and thankfulness that God
would vouchsafe to use them to bring Glory to his Name. The Apostle says, If
there be any consolation in love, Phil. 2. Intimating that there is no
consolation without it; and by how much more excellent the person loved is for
whom we suffer, so much larger breasts of consolations has our love; so that
if to suffer for the love of a desired Spouse (as when Jacob served an hard
Service for Raehel) carry a joy and delight to the Party loving, or if to die
for a Friend, a good Man, or a good Prince, whom we love, be so satisfactory to
the sufferer, (as men declare that it is) how much more to suffer for God and
Christ! It as far excels all other sufferings on the motives of the sensual
Love, yea or Friendship, or Loyalty, as the benevolent warmth of the Sun beams
in the Spring is more invigorating and comforting to Plants, and living
Creatures, than the chokey heat of a Stove or Furnance; nay it is indeed a
glory the Saints have above the Angels, that they are called to suffer for God,
which the others impassibility denies them to do.

So that the love of God in suffering Saints gives that exceeding comfort and
satisfaction that is at no other time felt, because there never was that full
exercise of it before; it is that breaking the box of Spicknard, that finelleth
more sweet by its diffusion.

The third Grace is Love to the Church; which yields exceeding; satisfaction
when it carries us to act for the good of our Brethren, that we can willingly
spend and be spent for them; but the ^ower and top of it, is, to fill up in our
bodies what is behind of the sufferings of Christ for his Churches sake.

When a suffering Christian thinks thus, these sufferings of mine may be a
strengthening of the Faith of all the Christians that hear of them, and see
them, nay it may be an establishment to some Christian an hundred years hence,
what a sweet and comforting reflection must it needs be* What delight may we
imagine have some Gallant Heathens taken to die devotedly for their Country, as
did Coarus the Athenian, and Deoius and Curtius the Romans? but how much
sweeter is it to the Martyr, to think that by his sufferings the Church of
Christ, the Household of Faith, those who shall hereafter be fellow Citizens
with the Angels, shall be confirmed and strengthened?

The fourth Grace is love to Enemies and Persecutors; at any time to forgive an
Enemy, is both more glorious and more comfortable than to overcome him. David
had more honor when he dismissed Saul alive, than when he brought away the
Head of Goliath in his hand, and undoubtedly he had more inward comfort and
satisfaction also; for the Victory of Goliath was justly attributed to the
Providence of God directing the stone to the mark, but the dismissing and
Pardoning his Enemy, was the Fruit of the Grace of God in his Heart^ but to
suffer with the designing the good of our Enemies (even of their Conversion and
Eternal welfare) is much more sweet and affecting.

If St. Steven had (as in all likelihood he had) an hope that his sufferings
might Convert some of his Persecutors, what joy did that thought bring into his
holy Soul! if there be joy in Heaven amongst the Angels for the Conversion of a
sinner, when yet they contribute nothing to it, what joys must be to Martyrs,
that die in hope and desires for the Conversion of Christ's Enemies, and theirs?
For a Martyr tied to the Stake to think with himself, Some of the ring of this
gazing Multitude that look on me, nay some of the Officers that is humanely
butcher me, may come to have their hearts melted by my flames, and of Lions
become Lambs, and followers of the Lord Jesus; what a sweet and comfortable
thought must that be to the suffering Saint and Martyr of Jesus?

A fifth Grace that then yields its Fragrancy is our Faith it the promises of
sufficient Grace and Support; this is our Victory whereby we overcome the
world, Joh. 5. 4.
even our Faith; and who is it that overcomes the world; but he that believer
that Jesus is the Christ, of whose fullness we are to receive Grace, and Grace
for Grace? We have now the comfort of Faith in the assurance from Gods Word
that he will never fail us nor forsake us; but in a time of suffering, Faith
girls up its Loins, and makes his boast in the name of the Lord, crying, The
Lord is our Refuge and Strength, Psalm. 46. ^, 2.
a very present help in trouble, therefore will not we fear though the Earth be
removed: and so Psalm. 21. 1. The Lord is my strength and my Salvation, whom
shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life, of whom then shall I be
afraid? And also Psalm. 144. 12. He expresses his confidence in abundance of
words, The Lord is my strength, my goodness, my fortress, my high Tower, and
deliverer, my shield, and he in whom I trust; Thus Paul, 1 Timothy 1 12. I know
whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he is able to keep that committed
to him against that day: This Faith in Gods assistance triumphs in the name of
the Lord, and despises all the power of the Adversary.

The next Grace yielding its sweetness to a suffering Saint, is his hope and
heavenly mindedness; it must needs be a pleasant prospect to go up to the top
of Pisgah, and view the Promised Land by Holy Meditation: to think, (as far as
our dark Glass will give us leave to see) what is the Peace and Joy, and what
is the Purity and Holiness of the Glorified Saints; but when we come to suffer
for the Hope of Israel, then our Hope grows more lively, more strong, and
vigorous, and fixed upon that Glory that shall be revealed. Thus St. Steven
Act. 7. (when his enemies, verse 45. gnashed upon him with their teeth) being
full of the Holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly into Heaven, and saw the Glory of
God, and Jesus standing on the Right Hand of God: thus our hope, by how much
the nearer it comes to enjoyment, grows the stronger, and makes the dying
Christian say as it were to himself, Egredere anima mea, egredere, quid times?
Go forth my Soul, go forth, reach forward to lay hold on that Crown of
Righteousness, which now thou art not far from, think with thy self what it is
to have all Tears wiped away, all Graces perfected, and to be filled with the
Love and Communion of God and Christ, at whose Right Hand is fullness of Joy,
and Pleasures for evermore. Thus these consolatory Graces, of sincere Love to
God, to his Church, and our Eenemies, with firm Faith and Heavenly Hope,
yielding their strength in the hour of suffering, more than ever before, do
abundantly recompense the sufferings of the Martyrs. But besides these
Comforts, which the exercise of these Graces then yields (giving their
influence chiefly by way of Reasoning or Discourse in our selves) the Martyr
may expect immediate Illapses and Incomes of Comfort, God sealing then to his
Soul the assurance of his unchangeable Love in Christ: For it is suitable to
the Fatherly Goodness of God than to unvail his Love and Mercy, and lift up the
Light of his Countenance on his suffering Servant, that as St. Paul said 2 Cor.
1. 4. As the sufferings of Christ do abound in them, so their Consolations also
do abound by Christ: This Joy has it that toned the Song of Paul and Silas in
the Dungeon, and has enabled many a Martyr to sing in the Plains: Thus the
Consolations of the Martyrs are looked upon by the Ancients, as being of a
larger size than any other Saints enjoyed on Earth, like the Portion of the
Heir, or First Born, which is double to his Brethren, like Eliah's double Meal
that must strenghthen him for traveling over an howling Wilderness. 1 King.
19. 8.


Such are the joys and ecstasies of the suffering Saints, even like the confines
of Heaven it self: as there is a greater and pleasanter light in the dawning of
the Day, than the Moon and Stars could give; thus it is to the dying Martyr,
his soul is just entering upon that Eternal day of Glory that shall never decay:
So that we may apply to their state that of the Prophet Isaiah, The light of
the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun shall be
seven fold, as the light of seven days, in the day that the Lord binds up the
breach of his people, and heals the stroke of their wound.

Next, Isa. 30. 26.
God then Communicates to a suffering Christian, Patience and Strength, far
surmounting all the Courage and Fortitude that ever was given to any other of
the Sons of men, for as a Christian then wrestles not with flesh and blood
only, but also with Devils and damned Spirits, who possess and enrage their
Persecutors, so may they warrantably expect a supply of strength, coming near
to the impassibility of the Angels, that what they feel shall not afflict them;
thus how composedly, and in a manner unconcernedly have the Saints born their
Torments, and so by Patience have Triumphed over the Devil and his Instruments;
Tantum poena in membris tanta tranquillitas in verbit tanquam alius
tarquereretur alius loqueretur.
and thus it has been to many Saints of old, I will instance but in one; St.
Austine reports of Vincentius the Martyr, that when he was Tormented, he spoke
with that Meekness and Composedness, that a Stander by would have thought it
was one man that suffered, and another that spoke. The Tyrants raged and
roared, and stamped, and gnashed their Teeth for indignation that they could
not break the courage of the Holy Martyr, they tear and rend his Body and
Members with a rage above that of Wild Beasts, while the Martyr in meekness was
still composed, and himself in Patience possessing his own soul: so that indeed
the Tormenters were Tormented, and the Tortured did Conquer and Triumph over
Satan and evil Angels in the Cross of Christ, and made a show of them openly:
Oh what a glorious sight is this! a spectaclo worthy of the Theater of Heaven
and Earth! who would not clap their hands, and lift up their shouts in
applauding the Grace of God Conquering in his Saints! Such strength may an
humble Christian warrantably promise himself to be Communicated to him from
God, when he is called to suffer for him.


Parish. Oh Sir! How have you filled me with an Holy Emulation and desire to be
also partaker of the sufferings of Christ! But I will not interrupt you, I pray
you proceed.


Minis. The last thing I propounded for your support, was the consideration of
the Reward to come, the Glory that shall be revealed.

It is very true that sometimes that promise of Christ, Mark 10. 29, 30. is
literally expressed, He that forsakes houses, or parents, or wife or brethren,
or children for Christ's sake and the Gospels, receives an hundred fold; now in
this time Houses, and Brethren, and Mothers, and Sisters, and Children, and
Lands, with Persecutions, because God makes all the Saints near him, to serve
him with their Persons and Estates, so that he has an hundred Brethren, and
Sisters, and Nurses, and Houses for one that he forsook.

Thus David's Cross led him to a Temporal Crown: and the Faithful Christians in
Constantius Clorus's Court, who forsook their Offices and Preferments, rather
than they would forsake their Religion, were received back to greater Favor
and Higher Places; the Emperor wisely concluding that they would be most
faithful to their Emperor, who were most true to their God and Savior.

But this is a small part of that promise which Christ has made unto his
Martyrs, for Matthew. 5. 10, 12. he not only promises them Heaven, but a great
reward in Heaven, even greater than to other Saints, who did not pass through
that Red Sea of blood to the Promised Land. Some Pious and Learned men suppose
that the Resurrection of the Martyrs in their bodies before other Saints, being
the first Resurrection, and their Reign with Christ a thousand years, is
warrantably expected from Rev. 20. 4, 5, 6. This opinion is far from the
Pestilent and Seditious persuasion of the Fifth Monarchy men; but whether this
shall be so or no, we must leave to God to make evident (for events (...) the
surest Interpreters of Prophecies) but this we are (...) sured of, that those
who come out of great Tribulation (...) and have washed their Robes, and made
them White (...) the blood of the Lamb, Rev. 7. 14. that is in suffering (...)
Christ, and after his example, shall have Crowns of Rig(...)teouss of the
brightest luster: for if God has provided (...) the beauty and qualities of
all Creatures to gratify (...) senses of our bodies, sure he has provided
some (...) things for our immortal souls. Those Saints who (...) souls God does
as it were suck by a Kiss out of (...) bodies, (as the Jews say of Moses) dying
quietly in (...) Beds, enter into Joys unspeakable and full of Glory (...) how
much more abundant shall be the Portion of (...) Martyrs? To be sure to them
that overcome shall (...) given to Eat of the Tree Life, which is in the midst
(...) the Paradise of God, the Heart and Center of Joy: (...) to Feast with
hidden Manna, Rev. 2. 7. 17. 28.
and to have a White (...) (a Symbal of Gods Approbation and special Love) and
(...) it a new name Written, Rev. 3. 12. 21.
which none can Read but (...) that has it, and to receive the Morning Star
(the (...) Fruits of Glory) and to be Clothed in White Rayme(...) and follow
the Lamb as his Favorite-Courtiers, and to (...) made Pillars of the Temple of
God, (the principla (...) of it) on whom Christ will write his own Name, and
(...) Fathers Name, and the Name of the City of God, (...) New Jerusalem, (as
those who have done special (...) to, and therefore receive special Favor from
God a Christ, and his Church) and to sit with Christ on (...) Throne, and to be
Kings and Priests to God for ever and (...)

To him that loved us and washed us from our sins in (...) own Blood, and
Consecrates us by our sufferings with h(...) to Reign with him in Glory. To him
with the Father, a (...) the blessed Spirit, be Hononr, and Glory, and Dominic
(...) for ever and ever: Amen. Parish. Amen, and Amen.


FINIS.
ERRATA. Page 6. line 24. read Embarked, p. 7. l. 30. put in more, l. 32. r.
looser, p. (...) l. 241 r. Christiant, p. 14. l. 3, ^ from, p. 16. l. 11. r.
entirely, p. r 8 l. 29, r. succession (...) l. 30. blot out when, p. 25. l. 15.
r. sensualist. The Reader is desired to Correct the last (...) Sheets, (if any
faults have escaped) the Author not having the perusal of them at the Pres(...)


