Malice Defeated: Or a Brief Relation of the Accusation and Deliverance of
Elizabeth Cellier, Wherein her Proceedings both before and during her
Confinement, are particularly Related, and the Mystery of the Meal-Tub fully
discovered. Together with an Abstract of her Arraignment and Trial, written by
her self, for the satisfaction of all Lovers of undisguised Truth.



Psalm. 35.11.12. False witnesses did rise up against me, they laid to my charge
things that I knew not.

They rewarded me Evil for Good, to the spoiling of my Soul.

Psalm. 7.14, 16. Behold he Travelleth with Iniquity, and conceived Mischief,
and brought forth Falsehood.

His Mischief shall return upon his own Head, and his violent Dealing shall
come down upon his own Pate.

LONDON, Printed for Elizabeth Cellier, and are to be sold at her House in
Arundel-street near St. Clements Church, 1680.

Malice Defeated: Or a Brief Relation of the Accusation and Deliverance OF
Elizabeth Cellier.
I Hope it will not seem strange to any Honest and Loyal Person, of what way or
Religion soever, that I being born and bred up under Protestant Parents, should
now openly profess my self of another Church.

For my Education being in those times, when my own Parents and Relations, for
their Constant and Faithful Affection to the King and Royal Family, were
persecuted, the King himself Murdered, the Bishops and Church destroyed, the
whole Loyal Party merely for being so, oppressed and ruined; and all as was
pretended by the Authors of these Villainies, for their being Papists and
Idolaters, the constant Character given by them to the King and his Friends to
make them odious, they assuming to themselves only the Name of Protestants,
making that the Glorious Title by which they pretended Right to all things.

These sort of Proceedings, as I grew in understanding, produced in me more and
more horror of the Party that committed them, and put me on Inquiry into that
Religion, to which they pretended the greatest Antipathy, wherein I thank God,
I found my Innate Loyalty, not only confirmed, but encouraged; and let Calumny
say what it will, I never heard from any Papist, as they call them, Priest nor
Layman, but that they and I, and all true Catholics, owe our Lives to the
defense of our Lawful King, which our present Sovereign Charles the Second is,
whom God long and happily preserve so.

These sorts of Doctrines agreeing to my Public Morals, and no way as ever I
was taught, contradicting my Private ones, commending at the same time to me,
Charity and Devotion, I without any scruple, have hitherto followed, glorying
to my self to be in Communion with those who were the humble Instruments of His
Majesty's happy Preservation, from the fatal Battle at Worcester, and whom
though poor, no Temptation could envite, to betray him to those, who, by a
pretended Protestant Principle, sought his Innocent Blood.

These Truths I hope, may satisfy any indifferent person in my first Change,
nor can they wonder at my continuance therein, notwithstanding the Horrid
Crimes of Treason and Murder laid to the Charge of some persons considerable,
for their Quality and Fortunes in that Party.

For when I reflected who were the Witnesses, and what unlikely things they
deposed and observed, that many of the chiefest Sticklers for the Plot, were
those, or the Sons of those, that acted the principal parts in the last
Tragedy, which History told me too, had the Prologue of a pretended Popish Plot.

I say, these things made me doubtful of the whole; and the more I searched for
Truth, the more I doubted that the old Enemies of the Crown were again at work
for its destruction.

I being fully confirmed in this, thought it my duty through all sorts of
hazards to relieve the poor imprisoned Catholics, who in great numbers were
locked up in Goals, starving for want of Bread; and this I did some Months
before I ever saw the Countess of Powis, or any of those Honorable persons
that were accused, or receiving one penny of their money directly or
indirectly, till about the latter end of January (78.) the Prisoners increasing
very much, and being in great wants, I went at the request of Captain Pugh then
in prison, with his Letter to her Ladyship, to make known their condition, and
also to show her a Letter written by Titus Oats his own hand, being

A Narrative
Of Oats and Beddo's Acquaintance in Spain, and how Beddo under the Name of
the Lord Gerrard, robbed Oats of ten pieces of Eight, which he said was all he
had, and had quite undone him. And also, how Beddo cheated Master Francklyn the
Merchant at Bilbo, of three hundred Doubloons, at 18 s. per Doubloon, and in
his way to Bruges, robbed a poor Priest of four Royals, which he says, is about
Eight pence English, and cruelly beat him because he had no more money, and
after that, the same day, robbed a poor Franciscan Friar of his Bread and
Cheese, and that there were Writs out in the nature of an Hue and Cry to take
him; and that the said Oats, though quite ruined by the loss of his money, yet
was not half so much grieved at it, as for the dishonor that was thereby done
to the whole English Nation.

This Letter was read before the King and Council the last time Master Medborn
was brought thither, and by him delivered to his Grace the Duke of Lautherdale,
in whose hand it still remains.

I also gave her Ladyship an account, that the most part of the foregoing year,
Beddo lay prisoner in the Common side in the Marshalseas, and was fed out of
the Alms-basket, having sold his Linen and other necessaries to the Sutler for
Bread and Drink.

After this her Ladyship taking the distressed condition of the Prisoners into
her Consideration, through her pious and charitable Endeavors, there was a
weakly Charity collected, of which I had the disposing, but was so far from the
diverting any part thereof, that I still went out of Purse, of which truth,
both the Prisoners and others have been very sensible since my Imprisonment.

About this time I went daily to the Prisons, to perform those Offices of
Charity I was obliged to. And on Thursday, January the 9 th (78.) I Dined in
Newgate, in the Room called the Castle on the Masters Side Debtors, and about
four in the Afternoon, I came down into the Lodge with five Women, of which,
three were Protestants, and we all heard Terrible Groans and Squeeks which came
out of the Dungeon, called the Condemned hole. I asked Harris the Turnkey, what
doleful Cry it was, he said, it was a Woman in Labor. I bid him put us into
the Room to her, and we would help her, but he drove us away very rudely, both
out of the Lodge, and from the Door; we went behind the Gate, and there
lissened, and soon found that it was the voice of a strong man in Torture, and
heard, as we thought, between his Groans, the winding up of some Engine: these
Cries, stopped the Passengers under the Gate, and we six went to the Turners
Shop without the Gate, and stood there amazed with the Horror and Dread of what
we heard; when one of the Officers of the Prison came out in great haste,
seeming to run from the Noise,

One of us caught hold of him, saying, Oh! What are they doing in the Prison.

Officer. I dare not tell you.


Mistress. It Is a Man upon the Rack, I Will lay my Life on it.


Officer. It is something like it.


Cellier. Who is it Prance?


Officer. Pray Madam do not ask me, for I dare not tell ye, but it is that I am
not able to hear any longer: Pray let me go, with that he run away toward
Holborn as fast as he could.


We heard these Groans perfectly to the end of the Old-Baley; they continued
till near seven of the Clock, and then a person in the Habit of a Minister, of
middle Stature, gray hair'd, accompanied with two other men, went into the
Lodge, the Prisoners were locked up, and the outward door of the Lodge also, at
which I set a person to stand, and observe what she could; and a Prisoner
loaded with Irons, was brought into the Lodge, and examined a long time, and
the Prisoners that came down as low as they could, heard the person examined
with great Vehemence, say often, I know nothing of it, I Am Innocent: he forced
me to belie my self, What would you have me say? Will you murder me because I
will not belie my self and others?

Several other such like Expressions they heard spoken as by one in great
Agoney. About four of the Clock the next morning, the Prisoners that lay in a
place above the Hole, heard the same Cry again two hours, and on Saturday
Morning again, and about eight a Clock that morning a person I employed to spy
but the Truth of that Affair, did see the Turn-keys carrying a Bed into the
Hole, she asked who it was for, they told her it was for Prance, who was gone
Mad, and had tore his bed in pieces. That Night the Examiners came again, and
after an hours Conference, Prance was led away to the Press-yard: This* and
many things of the like Nature* made me very Inquisitive to know what passed in
the Prison.

Soon after this, Francis Corral a Coachman, that had been put into Newgate,
upon Suspicion of carrying away Sir Edmund-bury-Godfrey's body and lay there 13
weeks and three days in great Misery, got out, I went to see him, and found him
a sad Spectacle, having the Flesh worn away, and great Hole in both his Legs,
by the weight of his Irons. And having been Chained so long double, that he
could not stand upright; he told me much of his hard and cruel Usage, as that
he had been squeezed and hasped into a thing like a Trough in a Dungeon under
ground; which put him to inexpressible Torment, insomuch that he soonded, and
that a person in the Habit of a Minister, stood by all the while. That a Duke
beat him, pulled him by the Hair, and set his drawn Sword to his Breast three
times, and swore he would run him through; and another great Lord, laid down a
heap of Gold, and told him it was five hundred pounds, and that he should have
it all, and be taken into the aforesaid Duke's House, if he would confess what
they would have him; and one F. a Vinter, that lives at the Sign of the
half moon in Ch-si, by whose Comtrivance he was accused, took him aside, and
bid him name some Person, and say, they employed him to take up the dead body
in Somerset-yard, and gave him money for so doing; that if he would do this,
both F. and he, should have money enough. He also told me, that he was kept
from Thursday till Sunday without Victuals or Drink, having his hands every
Night chained behind him, and being all this time locked to a Staple which was
driven into the Floor, with a Chain not above a Yard long, that in this great
Extremity, was forced to drink his own Water; and that the Jailer beat his
Wife, because she brought Victuals, and prayed that he might have it, and threw
Milk on the Ground, and bid her be gone, and not look at him, etc. For the
Readers further Satisfaction of his great and cruel Sufferings, I refer to the
Party himself now living in Gunpowder-alley in Shoe-lane, and well known by his
Misfortunes.

After this, hearing that Mary White had been much abused, and though big with
Child, several ways tortured in the Prison, and lay only for want of her Fees,
I paid them, hoping to find out the Truth by that means, she told me of many
Cruelties that were daily used in the Goal, and that there was a person there
that by Misfortune had been caught in the Company of Coyners, and though
wholly innocent, had been cruelly used, because, as she said, he was a
Catholic, and for a week together had worn a pair of Sheers that weighed forty
pound, because he would not go up to the Chapel. That this person had made it
his Business to inspect the Usage of the Prisoners, and had drawn up Articles
against the Keepers.

About the tenth of April (79) I went to the Grate at Newgate, to speak with
him, he was in Irons and Rags, and said his name was Willoughby, and that he
was Nephew to a person of Quality I knew of that name; And with great
bemoanings told me that being just come from Flanders, he was lodged by Chance
in a house where Coiners lodged; he was taken among them on Suspicion, and
though acquitted at the Sessions, yet the Disgrace had so displeased his Uncle,
that he would do nothing for him, and he having no Parents nor Friends, was in
great Danger of perishing there, and in very humble and religious words begged
my Charity, and gave me the following

A Brief Account of the Tyrannical Barbarism inflicted on the Kings Prisoners
in His Majesty's Goal of Newgate.
THe detaining of Prisoners for Fees without limitation, Mary Middleton. Susan
Wallice. T. Willoughby.
and may till Death yield more favor than a stupefied Jailer, and all this
after they have taken the benefit of his Majesty's Most Gracious Free Pardon.

The taking 3 s. 6 d. per week for Lodging when the Statute allows but 2 d. per
night or thereabouts, which if not paid, Mary White. Mary Middleton. John
Whiteband. Robert Ball. James Douglas. T. Willoughby.
the persons indebted must immediately to the Common-side, and there be
detained (as many have been) till they are starved, notwithstanding their being
acquitted by Proclamation in open Court.

The shackling and lading of all persons committed with Irons, John Whiteband.
Mary White. John Player. Tho. Willoughby.
whose weight is without pity (from the Jailer) to the intent they should give
Sums of Money to purchase particular ease, which all persons cannot do, and
those (of all) are most miserable.

The mercenary Intrigues of the Jailer, which are beyond the thoughts of
Christians, are thus, when any Prosecutor comes to view a prisoner in custody,
William Leigh. Anne Sutton. Tho. Willoughby.
and knows him to be the person for whom he sought, the prisoner is by the
Jailer forthwith sent for, who questions his ability, and if he finds
sufficient to satisfy his Avarice, he promises to secure him with Life against
Justice, by virtue of his Interest in the Recorder, but if poor, joins with the
Prosecuter to the same intent, either to the hazard of the Prisoners life, or
at least a tedious Confinement.

The unlegal deteining of another sort of persons which have pleaded His
Majesty's Pardon of Transportation, Judeth Collingson. Elizabeth Evans. Mary
Porter. Tho. Willoughby.
and according to the form thereof have given in Bail to Transport themselves
in 8 months, which is the time limited in the said Pardon, which persons,
notwithstanding their being bailed, are still detained, and often till the time
be expired, which makes the Jaylors Market with the Merchant, and inslaves the
persons, Mary White, and others.
or at least creates Vice instead of Reformation, and converts the Money to his
own Use.

The debarring Prisoners liberty of Conscience, Jane Middleton. Mary White.
Charles Parker. T. W.
and compelling them to go 3 or 4 pair of Stairs to Chapel, (as the Jailer
calls it) but as it will otherwise appear to be seen by Strangers, (through
Grates like the Lions at the Tower) who give money to the Jailer for the same,
which persons are so severely tortured, that it is not to be thought, and that
with such Irons as (in Jaylors language) are called Shears, To this part T. W.
only.
which are in weight 40 or 50 l. and a yard in length, with one Leg fixed at
one end, and the other at the other end, which barbarous Engine produces such
Torture, that the persons on smooth ground can move but 3 or 4 inches at a
time, this is his pretense to secure his Prisoners.

The putting of persons which are Debtors to the Crown, Jane Middleton.
Magdalen Clench. Jos. Mallorey. T. W.
in the place he used to secure Condemned Prisoners, and that for not writing
this following Superscription on a Letter ( To the Worshipful William
Richardson Esquire) there to be laden with Bolts, and continued without food or
sustenance during the worshipful Jaylors pleasure.

John Whitehand. Mrs. Whitehand. Elizab. Golding. T. W.
The separating a Wife from her Husband, and all manner of Friends and
Relations, as well from sick persons as others, which they do to compel such
persons as are desirous to see their Friends, to give money before they be
admitted.

That all persons whatsoever are carefully searched, as they come in, lest they
should bring in such goods or provisions, as are by his Worship prohibited.
T.W. only to this.
And that he takes care with his Subbs, to be very diligent in such search, for
the better creating a Vend for his own Goods, which are so bad, that it
oftentimes breeds Distempers, and so small a quantity for money, that unless
Prisoners are more than well stored with money, poverty strikes in, to their
great detriment.

Mary White. Jane Middleton. Joseph Mallorey. John Whitehand. T. W.
That about the 8 th. of March last, a person whose name was Robert Thompson
died, and is to be apparently made out, that it was for want of Food, as his
Corpse also signifies, which was an absolute Skeleton, and that within the space
of 24 hours Contr. for. Stat. the Jailer disposes of him as he thought most
fit, and that without any Coroner to enquire of his Death, and to give an
account of the said Subject to our Sovereign Lord the King, etc.

Dorothy Ramsey.
That the Jailer ordered his Subbs to Punish or privately Torture with
Thumb-scrues, the person of Dorothy Ramsey, to the intent she should discover
the manner of Owen Hursts escape, who was her Husband.

William Leigh. Jane Middleton. John Zeal. T. W.
The Jaylors Extortion on the Kings Prisoners, after his Majesty has of his
Bounty and Goodness extended his gracious free Pardon, comes to the Prisoners
inserted therein (the said Pardon Signed and Sealed) and tells, if they, or as
many as can, will raise such a certain Sum, he will assure them a Pardon,
others which cannot, are by his base juggling left only as Convicts for
Transportation, and that for want of Money; thus are the Laws of the Realm, and
his Majesty's pleasure to his poor Subjects, violated, and to make the Jaylors
Market, which is as usual with him, as with our most Clement Prince to extend
his Mercy.

The close Confinement of Prisoners without Relief or Sustenance, as
particularly one Mary White, Mary White the Midwife.

Several Prisoners. and others.


who for the space of seven weeks, was close confined from all Conversation, as
well of Husband, as other near Relations; and not only burdened with excessive
Irons on both Legs, but for two days together, kept from any Victuals or other
Sustenance; and after this, was by the Jaylors order, removed to a Room called
the Condemned Room, and there for six weeks more kept with the Irons on her
Legs, and though big with Child to the Jaylors certain knowledge, yet did he
cause her to be put in the Bilboes, and bolted her hands down to the Ground
with Staples of a great bigness; by which inhumane and immoderate torments, she
was so afflicted, that her Child died soon after it was born, occasioned, as
Oath will be made by the usage aforesaid; and this done merely to enforce her
to accuse her self and others of Crimes they imagined her and them guilty of.

That about a year since was in custody, as a Convict for Transportation, one
Elizabeth Evans, who had given in Bail to the Recorder to Transport her self,
according to the form of the Pardon, but was so indebted to the Gaol, as he
pretended, that she could not raise moneys for the same, whereupon Richardson
sends for the said Evans and often requested her to refer her self to him, (to
the end he might make good his Market with the Merchant) which she did, but
when he brought a Master of a Vessel to take the said Evans away, she refused
to go, and told the Jailer, he promised to give her the Fees and turn her out;
but that now she did perceive 'twas only to expose her to Sale, which she would
not consent to, upon which refusal, the Jailer forthwith ordered her to the
Condemned Room, there to be double Iron'd, and kept without sustenance, or any
converse, till his farther Order, which came not in two days, then he himself
examined her again, whether she would consent, but she refused, and then the
Jailer thought fit to employ some other Engines of his Tyranny, amongst which,
was a certain thing (by him called a Cap of Maintenance,) which was fixed to
her head with a thing like the Rowel of a Spur, being put into her Mouth,
cleaves to the Roof with such extreme Torture, that is not to be expressed; this
the Woman endured several times, till at last, by making her Address to some
good people, and telling the manner of her usage, they did contribute to the
Gaolers demands, and so she with great difficulty obtained her Liberty.

That the Jailer has suffered persons after a Commitment, Jane Voss. The
Jaylors own Entries in his Book of Commitments for the 7 th Month in the year
1667.
to go forth with a Keeper and Steal, to the intent of satisfying his Avarice:
upon which the said Prisoner was taken, and the second time committed without
any discharge from the first Commitment.

The Persons whose Names are on the Margent, either are or have been Sufferers
in this, or some part of this kind, which may be easily produced to give
Testimony according to the Truth, and no more.

These Articles were put into Parliament that April, and they with the
Prisoners Case, were referred to the Judges, where they still remain; and the
poor Prisoners are yet in hopes, that their Honors will find a time to Examine
both, some there affirming, there have been many more cruel things acted in
that Mansion of Horror, as the Story they tell of one Captain Clarke, who being
Prisoner only for Debt, was locked up in a little dark hole two days and two
Nights, having no other company but the Quarters of two Executed persons, the
extreme stench of which had perhaps killed him, had he not took the miserable
relief of holding a foul Chamber Pot to his Nose.

Upon my receipt of the Articles, I gave Willoughby two shillings six pence,
for which he was very thankful, saying, He had eaten nothing in two days; and
upon his frequent solicitations for Relief, I did send him at several times,
whilst he was in Newgate, sixteen shillings, and no more, till the day he went
out, and then I sent him money to pay his Fees by my Maid Margaret Jenkins, and
did pay sixteen shillings by her hand to fetch his Coat out of Pawn.

And about that time, having been told by Mr. Kemish, then Prisoner in the
King's Bench, that William Stroud there Prisoner, pretended to know much of the
Plot, and had Papers in his Custody, that would proved Beddo's actions to be
Villainy, and a Letter of Beddo's own handwriting, expressing he knew no more
of the Plot, but what he had from his old acquaintance Mr. Oats; nor did he
ever see Sir Edmundbury Godfrey alive or dead, and that it was very easy for
him the said Stroud, to be instructed, and become the Kings Evidence, if he
were willing.

A Copy of this Letter Stroud gave to Mr. Keymish, and I received it from him,
he saying moreover, That Stroud told him, that the Earl of S. was instructing
of him, and setting him up for a new Evidence, and in order to it, did daily
send one Johnson a Servant of his Lordships, to meet him in the Lodge, as many
persons are ready to testify upon Oath; and that the said Johnson frequently
brought him money, with promises of Pardon for the Murder he was then
Condemned for, and promised him Great Preferments if he would swear stoutly
what he should be instructed in; but that the said Stroud said, he would not
Forswear himself for all the world, but when he was Sworn for a Witness, he
would tell the Truth, and discover all Beddo's Villainy.

I believing this to be mere Roguery, invented to ensnare Mr. Keymish and Mr.
Anderson, did pay Willoughbys alias Dangerfields Fees in Newgate, intending to
set him upon the discovery of it, and he being at that Instant arrested, I
removed him by Habeas-Corpus to the Kings Bench, and sent my Maid Margaret to
him to bid him get acquainted with Stroud, and use his utmost Endeavor to
obtain a sight of the Papers, and find out the truth of the transactions
between the Earl of S -- and Stroud. Willoughby then acknowledged that he had
been a Criminal, but expressed much sorrow for his past Crimes, and made great
protestations of future Amendment, saying, that Stroud and he had been long
acquainted, and that they often had been a Robbing together, and he doubted not
to Effect what I desired. And in order to it, would keep him company, and every
day set down what he could get out of him.

On the 12 th of May he was carried to the Bench, and on the 20 th sent me this
following account of that affair by Magaret Jenkins.

May the 13 th, Stroud did acquaint me, that about 15 years since he knew
Bedlow, who was then servant to Alderman Blackwel of Bristol, and was so Poor,
he had scarce Shoes and Stockings to his Feet; but Strode denies he ever see
Bedlow since, till he and Oats came to the King's Bench to view the Prisoners,
and once since that Mr. Bedlow came with his Brother, who was the night after
wounded. He denies the holding of any correspondence with Mr. Bedlow either by
Letter or otherwise, but says that one Philip Marsh (who is either a friend or
a Servant to Mr. Bedlow (is his friend) that is to say, Strodes friend) and
that they said Phillip Marsh has often sent Letters to Strode, in which Letters
it has been desired that the answers thereto should be left at Bedlows lodging;
but the Contents of the said Letters either were not worth while to repeat, or
he was unwilling so to do.

May the 14. 1679. Strode told me this day, that Bedlows occasion of giving him
Money was to the intent he should conceal something he knew of Bedlow, which if
discovered, would be of consequence enough to hang him, if prosecuted on the
same; and the sums which Bedlow sent him were the greater, for that Strode
should take particular notice of the behavior of the Priests which are here,
and who they did correspond with; which Strode has done, and has sent some to
follow diverse persons which have come to Mr. Anderson, which persons and their
abodes, are as Strode says, well enough known, and hereupon swore Damn his
soul, if they should not be better known if ever he could obtain his liberty.

May the 15. Strode acquainted me, that either his business was either past, or
in great probability so to be; and when he could get his enlargement, there
were some in the world should soon feel the effects of his fury: But amongst
the rest, Mr. Anderson, who as Strode said, was very uncertain of ever being so
near his liberty; but if there be ever any probability for Andersons liberty,
Strode makes no doubt but to prevent the same. By this I find Strodes thoughts
to be laden with venom (as having been thwarted in his temper by some of the
Catholics) and to his power he designs a Revenge on them, but for what I know
not.

May the 16. Strode did this day acquaint me, that his wife had in a Cabinet at
home in the Country, the original papers which concerned Mr. Bedlow, and when
he can be at liberty to go home, he will be very brisk in exposing the said
matters contained in the said papers to a public view; but whilst he remains
in custody, he will not impart the said matters to any person whatsoever, for
that he will not bring himself under Mr. Bedlows Lash.

May the 17. Strode did tell me, that one Mr. Johnson (a Servant to the Right
Honorable Earl of Shaftsbury) did often come to visit him, and bring him
Guinneyes, in order to the prevailing with him for to join Evidence with
Bedlow: but Strodes answer was (as he informed me) that he would not perjure
himself for Ten thousand worlds.

May the 18. Jones (Strodes Bedfellow) did inform me, that he had this day seen
in Strodes hands some papers which did contain the whole matter of the Popish
Plott, in a more plain manner than either Oats or Bedlow could make out.

And that the Earl of Shaftsbury's servant (whose Name was Mr. Johnson) came
often to Strode, to Court him to give his Testimony against the Lords in the
Tower, and had offered Strode most considerable sums of money if he would do
the same.

May the 19. Jones did tell me, Strode had in some discourse informed him, that
Bedlow in the time of his Padding was entertained at Strodes house, and
particularly when there had been a Robbery committed but a day before, and at
the same time a Hue and Cry was all over the Country to apprehend him: And that
it is not long since that Strode sent to his wife at Shepton Mallet in the
County of Somerset, for the Copies of some Writings which were in her Custody,
which said writings are the original of those he showed Jones.

May the 20. Jones says, Strode has often prayed his advice what to do in a
matter of such weighty Consqeuence as was to be made out from the aforesaid
papers: Jones answered him, that in regard he was in Reversion of a good
Estate, and had diverse good and honorable Relations to support him, it would
perhaps be much more both for his Credit and advantage to be silent in things
of such a nature than to stir, unless he could make every particular thereof
visible by a lively Testimony. Upon which Advice Strode did promise to let it
fall, rather than run the hazard of disobliging his Relations and Friends, and
become altogether obnoxious.

The foregoing informations, written by Willoughby's own hand, were found
between the Pewter in my Kitchen by Sir William Waller, when he searched my
House, and by him Carried before the Lords of the Council; and as the Father of
Lies did once tell truth, so he has inserted this one truth in his lying
Narative. But since it is the reward of Liars, not to be believed when they do
tell truth: That he may be Credited this once, I Print the Copies of the four
following Depositions, which with many more I have to the same purpose, do all
confirm it.

Thomas Hill Gentleman makes Oath, That William Stroud, Confederate with
Thomas Dangerfield, did about June or July (79) very much Importune this
Deponent to Join with him, the said Stroud, Oats and Bedlow, to be the Kings
Evidence, and to swear that the Queen and their Royal Highnesses, the Duke and
Duchess of York, and the Lords in the Tower, were Traitors, and Guilty of the
Plot; and the said Stroud told this Deponent, that it should be worth two or
three Thousand Pound to him, and his Liberty for so doing; and the said Stroud
told this Deponent and several others, that the Earl of Shaftsbury sent him
what money he would spend for the Carrying on of the Plot against the Duke and
Lords in the Tower: And that his Lordship sent a servant of his, called Mr.
Johnson, to the said Stroud very often to Encourage and Drink with the said
Stroud in the Lodge, and gave him money, as the said Stroud told me. There also
came a Steward of his Lordships, called Mr. Stringer and Mr. Edward Stroud, to
hear what the said Stroud would swear against the Duke and the Lords in the
Tower before his Lordship would procure the said Strouds Pardon: Since then,
the said Stroud has made Affidavit to the same purpose, where he names his
Royal Highness and the Duchess; and his Confederate Dangerfield got an order
to bring this Deponent before Stephen Harvy and Thomas Poster Esquire his Majesty's
Justices of the Peace, about the 9th of December (79) to come and take an
Affidavit of this Deponent, saying, the same would much corroborate the
Evidence the said Dangerfield had given corncerning the Plot, and what the said
Stroud had Deposed also, and that the said Dangerfield in pursuance thereof,
did urge and persuade this Deponent to swear to the said Strouds Affidavit, and
would not let this Deponent read the said Strouds Affidavit; but the said
Dangerfield did both read the said Strouds Affidavit, and also write what this
Deponent said, but he omitted reading that which concerned the Duke and
Duchess of York, and so thought to put a trick upon this Deponent, and bring
him in as an Evidence against them, but that Justice Foster did epsy it, and
asked this Deponent concerning the particulars relating to the Duke and
Duchess, and then this Deponent truly swore he never heard their Names so much
as mentioned concerning the Plot. Since that, the said Dangerfield has set out
a Narrative where he mentions this Deponents Name in several particulars, which
is very false; he has also sworn against Mr. Anderson in his trial, where he
mentions this Deponents Name to that which is very false. The 30 th of January
or thereabouts, William Stroud came to the King's Bench and told this Deponent
before another Gentleman, that if he had joined with him, Dangerfield, Oats
and Bedlow, in giving in his Evidence against the Queen, Duke and Duchess, and
Lords in the Tower, he had been free from all his Troubles, and His Debts paid;
but since he did not do it, he should suffer Imprisonment all his life, and in
a worse Place; and that very night this Deponent was locked up in a little hole
under Ground, and has ever since been much oppressed; and further this Deponent
says, he has been very much persuaded not to appear at Mrs. Celliers trial,
and several have used means to the contrary, but this Deponent being Subpoena'd
thereunto, is obliged to satisfy the truth therein, and will swear this
Affidavit before a Judge, and carry it into Court, it being a Brief of what he
has already sworn before Sir George Jeffreys.

Signed by Tho. Hill.

June the 10th (80)
The above named Thomas Hill further Deposes, that upon a Sunday in the
Afternoon, a Steward of the Earl of Shaftsburys, who did then live in
Aldersgate Street (as William Stroud told me) and one Mr. Edward Stroud an
Attorney in Lincoln's Inn, came to the King's Bench to take the examination of
Mr. William Stroud then a Prisoner, and after they had been locked in a Chamber
about two hours, they sent for me, to ask me some Questions relating to what
the Prisoner had been Examined to, but I not answering their expectation, we
parted.

And after my Lords Steward and Mr. Edward Stroud was gone, I asked the
Prisoner Mr. William Stroud, how he could carry it so fairly with Mr. Anderson,
when I knew he had given in Articles against him; he told me, he durst do no
otherwise than what he did, because if he did not do it, the Earl of Shaftsbury
would not get him his Pardon out, he being under a Reprieve for Murder at that
time.

Tho. Hill.

The 14th of July (79)
I Ann Moseley do testify, that I have heard William Stroud often say, that he
could hang Bedlow if he would, and that he was maintained by my Lord
Shaftsbury, to come and Evidence against the Lords in the Tower: That Johnson
my Lord Shaftsburys Man, threatened him from my Lord Shaftsbury, that his Pardon
should be obstructed, if he did not join evidence with Bedlow against the
Lords, although he said, if he were subpoena'd in, as infallibly he should, he
would then declare my Lord Shaftsburys proceedings with him.

Other times I have heard him swear, that being so importuned from my Lord
Shaftsbury, by his man Johnson, he was now resolved to stick at nothing, nay
for an hundred Pound, he would sacrifice his own Father and Mother. As for Mr.
Anderson, I do believe that what he alleges against him, as offering him five
hundred Guinneys, is false, for to my knowledge, he always shunned him as a
Devil, knowing him from his first Imprisonment to be a great Rogue; but Mr.
Anderson being an abstimious melancholy man, drank nothing but small Beer,
which Strode after a Debauch always Coveted, threatening, that he would hang him
if he denied him; this I have often heard Strode swear: I have often seen
Johnson, and been in his Company with Strode, as also seen monys which Johnson
and Bedlow gave him, to all this I am ready to swear, which I gave Mr. Bedlow
notice of six or seven Months since by letter, though perhaps he never received
it by being out of Town, the Copy of the Letter which I have by me will
Evidence this that I affirm to be true.

Ann Moseley.

I John Adderley do testify, That Mr. Anderson was never much concerned in Mr.
Strodes acquaintance, and the more reason I have to believe it, is, for that as
he from the beginning of his Imprisonment had notice of Strodes being a great
Rogue; so was he not backward of advising me and all he had a kindness for, to
shun Strouds Company; so that I look upon that story of Mr. Andersons, offering
him 500 Guinneys to take off Bedlows Evidence, to be a mere fiction and revenge
for dispossessing him of his Chamber, and indeed, Stroud is so great an
abstract of Debauchery and Villainy, and hard always been reputed for such, that
no Man of any tolerable reputation ever valued his word or his oath, and that
this is the truth, I willingly subscribe, being ready to attest the same upon
Oath.

John Adderley.

January 14. 1679.
I being often in the company of William Strode, amongst other Discourses,
happening to talk of the rise of some men, he the said William Strode did often
say, that they were beholden to their own Industry, and that if he were out of
Prison, he would not make any scruple for an hundred Pounds to Sacrifice any
Person, nay his Father for a considerable Reward; and that he was kept here for
a Spy, as he said himself; and has showed me Silver and Gold, which he said
he received from one Mr. Johnson the Earl of Shaftsbury's man, and of one Mr.
Bedloe, for such Service. Likewise the Marshal finding it fit to remove Strode
out of his Chamber, and place Mr. Anderson in it, he was so transported with
Rage, that he came into the Gallery to me, and swore that he would be Revenged:
Nay, that he would ruin Mr. Anderson with the first opportunity. And this I
took the more notice of, because he has swore to me, that nothing Sacred
should tie him to Truth or Lie, farther than to gratify his Gain or Revenge,
and gloried in other Murders he said he had Committed besides that he had his
Pardon for, which is the averment of a Person of unspotted Reputation, that is
not willing to be exposed in Print, but is ready to make Oath of it when
thereto required.

These Testimonies I hope may satisfy an indifferent person, that Dangerfield
once writ Truth.

After this, he frequently by Margaret and others, sent his humble Request to
beg the Charity of his Enlargement, protesting that he never would attempt an
ill thing again, but would get a Service, and take any pains for an honest
Livelihood: and upon his reiterated Entreaties, I collected some monys for him,
and did pay five Pounds to buy off the Debts he lay under, and not a Penny
more, as appears by the General Releases from his Creditors, which were taken
among his Papers, and carried before the Council.

And the day he came out of Prison, I did give him, not five Pounds as he says,
but 10 shillings, that he might not steal for want of bread, and at the Jesuits
Trial, did employ him as a Messenger to go up and down to fetch Victuals and
Drink for the Witnesses, to wait on them, and to help them into Court, call
Coaches, and other such like Services, which he performed so well, that several
persons asked me, whose diligent Footman he was, for indeed, being in an old
Frize-Coat lined with Blew, Blew Stockings and Breeches, and a Gray Hat tuckt
up, to prevent flapping about his Ears, he could not well be taken for any
other than an ill clad Footman, though now he be Dubbed Knight of the Post, and
wear a Pearl in his Ear, to show that the Executioners were kind to him, and
did not Nail his Ears to the Pillory, neither at Salubury, Wilton, Winborne,
nor any of the other places where he was Mounted upon the Wooden Engine, and
peeped through it like Don Quicksot through his Helmet, when he was mounted
upon Rosinant, and going to encounter with the Windmil.

About that time I sent for him to Powis House, and there told him in the
presence of Mr. Henry Nevil alias Pain, that now I would put it into his power
to be an honest man, if he had a will to be so; and would get him either an
Ensigns place under the Duke of Monmouth, who was then preparing to go to
Scotland, or else an Employment to go to Sea: he made choice of the later,
which while they would enquire; for my Husband having some Thousands of Pounds
due to him, which was so desperate, that I could never make any thing of them;
he told me he understood such business, and doubted not to get in many of them
if he had but a Suit of Clothes, a Hat, and some few necessaries, that he might
be in a condition to follow them, which he promised to do very diligently. I
considering he could not wrong me, for that no person would pay money without my
Husbands discharge: And that he having no other business but to pursue the
Debtors, it was possible he might get in some of them; I agreed with him, that
he should have six shillings in the Pound for what he received, and did give
him a Stuff Suit, a Hat, Shoes and Stockings, and a little Linen, all which
cost about 3 l. 10 s. and accordingly he proceeded, and did get in some money,
and Bailed out several Prisoners, and very often would bring me News of the
great Designs of the Factious, and that they talked Treason publicly in the
Coffee-houses. I encouraged him to keep them company, and learn what he could
of their Practices, in order to discover them to His Majesty; and I having
heard by some very Eminent among them, that heided with them, only to break
their Measures, that they had drawn Forces into the City whilst His Majesty was
sick at Windsor, with intention to subvert the Government; and that if His
Majesty had died, which at that time was the fears of the Loyal, and hopes of
the Factious, they would have knocked the Lord Mayor of the head, with such
Aldermen as would not Conform; and that by the help of their Partisans in those
places, they doubted not but to have been Masters of the Tower, Portsmouth,
Dover and Hull, and most places of strength within the Kingdom, and that the
Scots would advance to their help, with much more to the same effect, which I
gave in my Depositions before the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council*

And having been informed by persons to whom they had been preffer'd, that
Mansel and Waller, did both offer Commissions to disbanded Officers, with
promises that they should enter into present Pay, and advised them, and all
honest fellows, to linger about the Town, for there would soon be hot service;
and having also heard that Sir William Waller said Publicly in Southwark,
before persons of considerable quality, That there would be a Rebellion before
Michaelmas.

These discourses being then almost General, made me the easier Credit him in
particulars, as that in order to this design, many of the Old Rump Officers
were new rigged, and had Pensions paid them by the Gentlemen of the Kings head
Club, and that Commissions were given out by the Relicts of the Rump, under the
names of the Keepers of the Liberties of England; and that he was promised one
among them, and had seen several, and that they were made of Parchment with
thirteen Label Seals: I encouraged him to go on, and gave him money to defray
his Charge, and bid him observe their Actions and Designs, and write down his
observations, that they might be made known to His Majesty; and be sure to
write nothing but the Truth, for one Lie would discredit all the Truths he told.

After that, he writ down at several times, that which was afterward found by
Sir William Wallet in my Meal-tub, and as what I did was truly in Zeal for His
Majesty's Service, so that very night he came to Town from Windsor, I went to
the Earl of Peterborough, and acquainted him with it, and he presently handed
us to his Royal Highness, to whom Willoughby delivered the foresaid Paper, to
be given to His Majesty, and His Majesty was pleased to give it to Mr.
Secretary Coventry, and commanded Willoughby to attend upon Colonel Halsal
with what further discoveries he could make, and ordered him forty Pounds, the
better to enable him to proceed therein.

About this time the transactions concerning Sir Robert Peyton happened, and I
believing then, as I still hope, that Sir Robert abhorring the disloyal
Practices of those he called Friends, was willing to come into the Kings
Interest, and help the Government against those that so subtly sought to
destroy it: I then made the meeting between the Earl of Peterborough and Sir
Robert Peyton at Mr. Gadburies house, and did afterward go with Sir Robert to
the Duke, and his Royal Highness received him kindly, and Sir Robert made
Protestations to serve His Majesty faithfully for the future, as I hope he will.

For my part it was no motive but my Loyalty and Duty to His Majesty, and Love
to Truth and Justice, that engaged me in this affair, believing I should do His
Majesty good service, by bringing back as many as I could of the Incensed or
Misled, to their Duty; and I cannot yet think I erred in so doing. About the
later end of September, Dangerfield daily brought me Stories of the great
preparations of the Factious, and that they publicly owned their Treasonable
designs, and that the Parsons, Goodwin and Alsop, and the rest of that Gang,
made great Collections amongst the Brethren, in order to the carrying on their
Rebellions Designs; and that Sir William Waller had three hundred Horsemen
privately* quartered in Town, that would be ready for Action in an hours
warning; and was the Party that should lead up the Rabble of Westminster to
seize White Hall: That the City was ready to Rise, and expected only the word
from the Confederate Lords. About this time Willoughby got drunk, and picked a
quarrel at the Rainbow-Coffee-house with one Keyniston, about Sir Thomas
Player, and thereby made himself obnoxious to the Republicans; and having lost
the hopes of obtaining a Commission for himself, he then sought to get one by
means of other persons, and then swore, God Dam him, now the Papists will give
him no money, he would go to the Presbyterians, and they would give him enough;
but of this I then knew nothing, and he strictly charged those he treated with
in this affair, not to tell me any thing of their Proceedings, as appears by
the Oath of Thomas Curtis, taken before Justice Warcup, vide, the said
Affidavit in Dangerfields first Narrative, Page 72, 73.

In the beginning of October, he pretended, that by Information from a Person
that by his order haunted Sir William Wallers Club at Westminster Marketplace,
he understood that several Treasonable Papers importing the whole design of the
Factious, were kept in a house at Westminster, and that if he could get a
Warrant, and search that House, he doubted not but that he should lay open the
whole Conspiracy, and in order to it, he went to his Majesty to pray a Warrant,
and was by his Majesty referred to Mr. Secretary Coventry, but Mr. Secretaries
great wisdom made him suspect him and his Shallow contrivance, insomuch that he
would not give him a Warrant, but I, as I said before, being induced to Credit
him in those things which related to the same ends, others not inconsiderable
among them had discoursed with me, and being zealous to have the danger plainly
Discovered, that it might be prevented, did upon his complaining that he was
denied a Warrant, advise him to go by the Custom-house way, which he did, and
the seized the Papers, which I suppose were easy to be found, being in all
likelihood put there by himself, in order to his being dignified with the
Magnificent Title of the Kings Evidence.

Upon Wednesday the 22 of October (79) Willoughby was taken Examined, and went
upon Bail till October the 24, which day I having been abroad, and heard much
talk of him and his Plot, came home and found him at my House, he came to me,
and prayed to speak with me, for that he was going before the Council after
Dinner; and did believe he should be Committed. I then going into the next
Room, the following discourse passed between us.

Cellier. In the Name of God, what is it you have done, that here is such a
Busle in the Town about you?


Willoughby. Pray Madam do not ask me, for it is best for you to be Ignorant of
it: I hope your Innocence will defend you, and your ignorance will be your best
Plea, and therefore I will not do you so much wrong, as to tell you any thing
of it: I have done something I should not have done, but I hope God will bring
me off, and that I may be the better able to make my Defense, pray do me the
favor to lay up this Paper safely for me; and by the help of this and Truth, I
hope to defend my self.


Cellier. Is it nothing that will bring me in danger?


Willoughby. If it were, I would not be such a Villain to give it you; it is
the same Paper that lay before Mr. Secretary Coventry, and he returned it to me
the last week. I opened it, and finding it the same, gave it to my Maid Anne
Blake, and she put it into the MEAL-TVB, where Sir William Waller found it.


Monday October the 27. he was committed to Newgate with the following
Commitment.

THese are in His Majesty's Name, to require you to take into Custody the
Person of Thomas Willoughby herewith sent you, for forgeing of Letters
Importing High Treason, and fixing the same privately at Mr. Mansels Chamber,
to render him guilty thereof without Cause: And you are to keep him safe till
he shall be delivered by due course of Law; for which, this shall be your
Warrant.

Councel-Chamber, White Hall October the 27 th (79) Worcester. Bridgwater.
Faulconbridge. Francis North. Henry Coventry. Henry Capel. Henry Powel. John
Nicholas.


To the Keeper of Newgate, or his Deputy.
That Night I was not at home, but the next Morning hearing Sir William Waller
intended to be at my House, I made have home to meet him, and about Noon he
came and made a diligent search among my Papers, and told me, I must go along
with him to the Earl of Shaftsbury, I replied,

Cellier. I have no business with the Earl of Shaftsbury, and if his Lordship
have any with me, he might have sent one of his Servants to tell me so, and I
would have waited on him, as I am still ready to do, without being had before a
Justice of Peace. -- But what Authority have you to carry me thither?


Sir William Waller. His Majesty's Commission of the Peace.


Cellier. Though that does empower you to send me to Prison, if I be accused of
any Crime, yet it does not give you power to carry me any whither else.


Sir William Waller. You are a dangerous Woman, and keep correspondence with
Traitors, and harbored the St. Omers Youths -- I took them out of your House.


Cellier. What if I did? they came over at His Majesty's command and therefore
I presume it was no Crime to Lodge them. -- And none can be properly called
Traitors, but those that are Convict of Treason; And do you know any such I
keep correspondence with? I am sure I know none.


Sir Will. Waller. Will you take the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance?


Cellier. Have you any Authority to offer them to me? I suppose you have none
except here were another Justice present; but if there were, I am a Foreign
Merchants Wife, and my Husband, both by the General Law of Nations, and those
of this Kingdom, ought to remain unmolested both in his Liberty and Property,
till a breach happen between the two Crowns, and the King has declared as much
in his Royal Proclamation, and if you violate the Privileges my Husband ought
to have as a Merchant-stranger, the King of France, whose Subject my Husband
is, has an Ambassador here, by whom we will complain to His Majesty, and I hope
we shall obtain Redress.

If your Husband and any other person will pass their word for your
forthcoming, I Will leave you here till I come back from my Lord Shaftsbury.

They passed their words for me, and he went away and left me, presently after
Willoughby sent for Susan Edwards my Servant to the Prison, and he Howled and
Lamented to her, and sent me a long Epistle; I have forgot the words now, but
the Effect was, that he had been Tortured that Night, yet would be Torn in
pieces rather than belly me, or any other Innocent Person, and desired to know
what I was accused of, or by whom, and what Waller said to me: Then I sent her
to him again with the following Note.

I have said you were taken into my house to get in desperate Debts. They bring
me to L. S. They will ask me who encouraged me to go to him, I will say it was
you, it cannot worst you.

This I said, because it was Truth, which I always thought the best way to
defend my Life and Fame. Upon the Receipt of this Note he made great
Lamentations to her, expressing his fears of being Hanged or Starved there, but
told her, though he had been proffered great Advantages, yet he would Perish
rather than do any ill thing; and prayed her to speak to me, that he might have
Victuals sent him from my House daily, And that I would send him a promise of
it by her of my own writing.

By this I perceived he was already a Rogue, and endeavoring to get something
of my writing, to make ill use of, I then Considered, that if I refused to
promise him Victuals, I gave him an occasion to commit Villainy for want of
Bread; and therefore bid her tell him, that I would take order at my house that
he should have Victuals sent him every day, as he had when he was under the
Messengers hands. And to assure him of it, sent him the following words under
my hand. It being a Motto my Parents had used, and I my self also, I Never
Change. Knowing that if he were honest, that was enough to satisfy him: If a
Rogue, not enough to do me any mischief.

About nine a Clock at Night Sir William came again, and found me at Supper
with some Friends, but was very Civil, and would not disturb us; and about Ten
he sent me to the Gate House, with a Note to Church to Lodge me in his own
house; the Cause expressed in my Commitment, being for Harboring and
Corresponding with Traitors; though he could not tell me who they were, nor
when Convicted of Treason; and for refusing the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance, which were never tendered me. All that night he and his Crew kept
their Rendevouz in my house, tearing and pulling down the Goods, and filling
his own and his Footmans Pockets and Breeches with Papers of Private concern,
which he never carried before the Council, nor as yet restored, though some of
them be of Considerable value.

Next morning his Worship sent to know how I did, and to tell me, if I thought
he could do me any service, he would come and visit me. I replied, if he could,
I knew he would not, and therefore desired him to spare his pains and my
trouble.

Friday the last of October, I brought my self to the King's Bench Bar, in hope
to be Bailed; but then at the Bar, Church opposed it, saying, His Worship had
sent in an accusation of high Treason against me, though I had as yet no
Accuser; And by the Law, no person ought to be committed for Treason, till
accused by two honest, sufficient, lawful, and credible Witnesses, witnessing
one and the same Individual Fact.

November the first, I was examined before His Majesty and the Lords of the
Council, where the Fable of the Husbandman, and the starved Snake, was proved
a Truth; for Willoughby accused me of all the Forged Stories he tells in his
Lying Narrative; and I unfeignedly told the Truth, and the whole Truth, and
nothing but the Truth. But the Lord Chancellor told me, no body would believe a
word I said, and that I would Dye. -- To which I replied, I know that my Lord,
for I never saw an Immortal woman in my life: And then kneeling down, said,


Cellier. I beseech your Majesty that I may not be Tortured.


The King. The Law will not suffer it.


Cellier. Such things are frequently done in Newgate; and I have more reason to
fear it than any other person, because of what I have done against the Keeper,
and therefore I beseech your Majesty, If at any time I should say any thing
contrary to what I have now said, that you will not believe me, for it will be
nothing but lies forced from me by barbarous usage, what I have now told you,
being the truth, and the whole truth, to the utmost of my knowledge.

Then I was sent away to Newgate, and the next day was brought again before the
Council, and then a Lord said, Turn up your hoods Mrs. Cellier, I did so; The
Lord Chancellor asked me, if I had not been at the Tower to tell of
Willoughby's Commitment, and bring instructions for him.


Cellier. I protest I have not been at the Tower Since. -- Then the Lord
Chancellor Interrupted me, saying, She cannot speak three words of Truth.


Cellier. Pray my Lord be pleased to hear me out, and do not Judge me till
then, -- I have not been at the Tower since Thursday was seven-night.


Lord Chan. That was the Time, what did you there?


Cellier. I Dined there.


Lord Chan. Had you no talk concerning Willoughby? tell us the Truth, for the
Countess of Powis has told us all.


Cellier. My Lord, nothing of Truth can do me any harm, and I am sure her
Ladyship will tell nothing else: I told her that Justice Warcup and Mansel had
been at my House to demand him, and my Husband had past his word for his
forthcoming. Then I was commanded to withdraw.

And understanding, soon after, that I should be Close Confined, the dread of
being locked up on the top of Newgate, and attended on by Fellons, as Mrs.
Prescick had been, though big with Child, and so troubled with Fits, that they
came upon her every hour, which caused Captain Richardson to Pity her, and
take her into his own House; but some had been Locked up there a full year, and
kept in Irons above Six months of the time, the fear of this, or worse usage,
did so oppress my spirits, that though I be not the most timorous of my Sex,
and never had any kind of Fit before, I fell into such Convulsions, that I had
like to have died at White Hall Gate. Then I was carried to the Keepers House,
and laid upon a Couch, and being a little come to my strength and senses, I
told Captain Richardson, that if I should die in that desolate place, as it was
like I might that very Night, most persons would believe that he had caused me
to be Murdered, in revenge of the Articles I put into Parliament against him;
whereupon he bid me be of good Comfort, for I should not be carried to the top
of the Goal, but lie in his own House, which promise so revived me, that within
an hour, I was able to go up into the Garret, where I had a very Good Bed, and
a Maid ordered to lie in the Room by me; she tended me very diligently, and
seemed very much to Commiserate my Condition, being, I suppose, set on to do
so, that she might the more easily betray me: I had brought Pen, Ink, and Paper
from the Gate House, and easily prevailed with her for money, to carry a Note
home to my House, in a Bottom of Thread, she carried and recarried three or
four, showing them first to the Jaylors Wife and Sister, and they took Copies
of them, and sent them to the Council, persuading themselves they should make
strange Discoveries, but I had Committed no Crime, and therefore nothing but
Innocence could be found in my Letters.

When they saw this share would not take; then they laid another for my Life,
and brought Willoughby to a Window over against mine, to talk with me, having
(as I then thought, and now know) set another Rogue behind me, to hear what I
said.


Dangerfield. Madam, Madam, Madam, Pray Madam speak to me, and tell me how you
do.


Cellier. I am Sick, very Sick of the Bloody Barbarous Villain.


Dangerfield. Pray Madam speak low, and do not discompose your self.


Cellier. Nothing you do, can discompose me: I despise you so much, I am not
Angry.


Dangerfield. I am very glad of it, for then I hope you will have patience to
hear me speak. Pray how do they use you.


Cellier. Well, much better than I expected.


Dangerfield. Is any body suffered to come to you.


Cellier. No body.


Dangerfield. I am very sorry for your Confinement, but I could not possibly
help what I have done.


Cellier. Bloody Villain, I am not confined, for Stone Walls and Iron Bars, do
not make a Prison, but a Guilty Conscience: I am Innocent, and gain that here,
which my Enemies did not intend me for; I have now nothing to do but to serve
God, but you are Confined, and one of the Devils Slaves. Ah Villain; for which
of my Good deeds do you seek my Life?


Dangerfield Crying, -- you shall not dye, nor receive any other hurt.


Cellier. Wicked Wretch! I do not fear, but desire to dye.


Dangerfield still Crying, -- but you shall not; look here how I have been
used, and then showed his Arms, and Howled, saying, he had been so miserably
Tormented, that he was not able to bear it, but was forced to accuse me and
others, to save his own life.


Cellier. Ah Villain, will you belly the Innocent, to save an Infamous Life?


Dangerfield. I have told the King more than I could make out, and was forced
to join with the Confederates to get my Pardon, for I have lived so ill, I am
not fit to dye yet.


Cellier. Do you think to wipe off your other sins, by committing Perjuries and
Murders?


Dangerfield. No, but God is merciful, and if I live, I may repent; I was
disserted by every Body, and if I had not been Hanged, I should have been
Starved -- It is a sad thing to depend upon an ungrateful and disunited People
-- If any care had been taken of me, to remove me to the Bench, they could only
have Pillored Me, and I would never done this, nor any other Villainy; But since
no body took any care of me, I had reason to take some of my self, which I will
do. Those I belong to now are very kind to me, and send me great
Encouragements, I shall have a Pardon within two or three days, and be set at
Liberty, but before I go, I should be very glad you would consider your own
Condition, and not ruin your Family, your Maid Susan will Swear against you,
and there are two Persons found, that will lay worser things to your Charge,
than I have done.


Cellier. Villain, you know it is all Lies, Did I ever do any of those things?


Dangerfield. Though you did not, they will be Sworn against you, therefore
come in now whilst it is time, and join with the most powerful, you may make
your own Conditions; then he showed me Gold, and told me what great Advantages
were to be made by becoming the Kings Evidence. That the King was Bought and
Sold, and here would be a Republic, and the Duke would be destroyed in
Scotland: And that if I would say His Royal Highness gave me the Original of
those Papers that were found in my Meal Tub, and bid me cause him to put them
into Mansels Chamber, and Kill the Earl of Shaftsbury, then I should have a
Pardon, and more Money than all the Witnesses had had together, for the Earl of
Shaftsbury and the rest of the Confederate Lords would raise Ten Thousand
Pounds among them, which I should pass over by Bills of Exchange whither I
would, as soon as I had Signed and Sworn the Depositions; And I should have
Twenty Pounds per Week settled on me by Act of Parliament as long as I lived:
And if I would do it, some Persons of Honor should come and treat with me; for
though I were confined, there was Lords that were Privy to all, that would come
on pretense to Examine me, and settle things to my satisfaction.

But I laughed at all this, and received his proffers as they deserved, and
said, Cowardly Wretch, you are worse than your Elder Brother Judas, for he
having betray done Innocent, left those that hired him, to seek false Witnesses
for themselves, and repented, and brought again the Thirty pieces of Silver,
and had Courage enough to hang himself: But you have betrayed and belyed many
Innocents, and yet are such a Coward to wait for the Hangman, for hanged you
will be. He that digs a Pit for another, shall fall therein himself: Therefore
Repent you Rogue, and tell the King who set you on, for you will certainly be
Damned if you do not. And then by the fit Application of other places of
Scripture, I shook him so, that he Howled like a Dog that had the Toothache.
And again showed his Arms, where the Irons or Cords had worn off the Skin,
telling me, he had been Rackt, and otherwise cruelly used to force him to
accuse me.


Cellier. Ah Cowardly wretch! would you shed the blood of so many Innocents, to
save your life? I had rather dye ten thousand deaths, than belie my self or
others: And can there be any Rogues besides your self so wicked, as to endeavor
to suborn Witnesses to belie the best of Men? Look there, do you see the Devil
stand at your Elbow, assure your self he will tear you to pieces alive; Then he
howled again, and wrung his hands, pretending Repentance, and told me, that
against to morrow he would write down all the Intrigue, with the Names of those
Lords and others, that set him on, and give it me, if I would give him any
hopes of a Pardon for my self and others he had wronged.


Cellier. It is not possible for you, nor any other Devil Incarnate, to wrong
me more than I can forgive, if you Repent and leave your Villainy; but do not
dissemble, for dissembled Piety is double Iniquity.


Dangerfield. Do you think other Persons I have accused will forgive me?


Cellier. Yes, if you truly Repent, I doubt not but their Charity and Prudence
will oblige them to that.

Then he told me a long Story, how kind the Earl of Shaftsbury and some greater
men were to him, and what great things they had promised to do for him; yet he
said he would Repent, and tell the Truth, and hoped God would have Mercy on
him. Then I went from the Window --

Next Morning he was waiting at his Window by Daybreak, and throwing little
Coals at mine -- About Nine or Ten a Clock I went to the Window, hoping to
persuade him to tell the Truth, But like the Dog, was returned to his Vomit,
and proposed to me, if I would not belie the Duke, to say the Earl of
Peterborough gave me those Papers, and that I had received a Thousand pounds in
Gold of Sir Allen Apsley to pay him for the Murdering the Earl of Shaftsbury,
and to raise Soldiers against the King: But I received this Proposition like
the former, and Answered:


Cellier. No* I plainly see you are possessed with the Devil, he speaks through
your Mouth -- You worst of Rogues, how dare you talk thus to me?


Dangerfield. Pray Madam speak low, and do not discompose your self, whatsoever
happens, there shall no harm come to you.


Cellier. Wretched Villain! Innocence fears nothing; I have done no Evil, nor I
fear none. -- And shut to the Window, and would speak no more to him. All that
day at times he hancred about the Window, shedding Crokadils tears, holding up
his hands, and making beseeching signs to me to come to my Window. About four
in the Afternoon I went, saying, Blood-thirsty ungrateful Villain, what have
you to say to me? Then he wrung his hands and Lamented, saying, Now he was
fully resolved to tell the Truth, and if I would promise he should be Pardoned,
would show me how to turn the Devices of the Malicious upon their own Heads,
and had writ it all out for me, and would tie a Coal to it and throw it in; but
he would first try if he could fling in an Apple he had in his hand, he tried,
but the Apple fell down -- He said there is something in it, and Ran down in
great have to fetch it -- But I suppose those that set him on, had more fears I
should Convert him, than hopes he should Pervert me, and would not let him
appear any more at the Window, but presently I heard a great Noise in the Goal,
and it was pretended, the Jailer had discovered our interview, and Sir John
Nicholas came that Night to search and examine me, I told him the Truth, but
concealed that part which related to the Duke, the Earl of Peterborough, and
Sir Allen Apsley, and would not own that I understood for what reason he showed
me Gold, as not thinking that a fitting time to tell such Truths, I having too
many Enemies already.

Then the Window shutters were nailed up on that side of the Chamber, and the
Casement on the other side, and from that time I had not a breath of Air: I did
but take out a Pain of Glass, and they put in another, and unfolded and
searched all my Linen, and cut my very Bread in pieces; and searched every
thing with all imaginable strictness; yet Captain Richardson let me go when I
would into a Room that looked toward the Doctors Garden, where the Window was
open, but there was such a noysom smell in the Room, that I rather chose to be
locked up in my own alone, than in that with a great deal of bold Company; for
the Rats and Weezles played at Barly-break, and boldly Robbed me before my face,
and did not Dance without Music, squeeking as they ran up and down: And the
worthy Gentleman Sir William Waller, came likewise to visit me and asked if he
could do me any Service, and fawning on me, with many flattering Expressions,
which I valued much like the Music of my other Visitants: He pretended a great
deal of pity that such a Woman as I should be engaged among such a wicked and
ungrateful people that Railed at me, saying, I was the worst of Women, but if I
would confess, as he would have me, and come to them, I should be received
according to my Merits.


Cellier. I know nothing to confess, -- At which he shook his head.

You know enough to save the whole Kingdom, if you would tell it.


Cellier. So I do, and would be glad to tell it, if Truth could be believed,
but I have been already told in Presence of His Majesty and His Council, that
nothing I said should be believed: And therefore I am resolved to tell nothing.


Sir William. Mrs. Cellier, if you will make any discovery to me, I Will engage
you shall be believed. -- Then he began to ask me Questions.


Cellier. Sir, Spair your pains in Pumping, for I am neither Slave nor Coward,
and, will not be Examined in Confinement, enlarge me, and two days after I will
tell you what I know.


Sir William. That I cannot do.


Cellier. Then let me speak with my Husband before a Keeper twice or thrice.


Sir W. Waller. I cannot do that.


Cel. What do you come hither for then, troubling me with your proffered
Service, if you be able to do nothing that I ask you?


Sir W. Waller. If you will make any Discoveries, then I will help you.


Cel. Sir William, When I make Discoveries, I am sure you will not like them,
Yet it is very like I may make some in time, and new ones too, for my Heart is
too high to be zany to a fellow that went on my Errands.

Much such like dark discourse we had, he still flattering me, and telling me
what high esteem he had for my Wit and Courage. I told him I took his Ironical
Speech as it was meant, and did as much admire him for another cause; and then
plucked Englands Bloody Tribunal out of my Pocket, and showed him the Murderers
of his Majesty's Royal Father, and many of his Loyal Peers and Gentlemen; and
told him, that was the Game he would fain be at; he denied it after such a
manner, as made it visible even to the meanest capacity, That he did not think
it a Crime, and then went away.

We had only such reflecting Speeches all the time of his stay, for Mr. Copper,
the Deputy Jailer came up with him, and I would not let him go away, for indeed
I durst not trust my self with such a Doughty Knight as Sir William was, lest
he should make Romances of me, as he had done of others; But I prayed him at
parting to speak to his Majesty, I might be Tried, for I was resolved I would
not lie there idle, but bring my self upon my Trial as fast as I could.

The Friday after this, I was brought before the Council.


A Lord. Turn up your Hoods Mrs. Cellier, -- I obeyed.


L. Chan. Come Mrs. Cellier have you writ home; since you were sent to Newgate?


Cel. Pray my Lord, what Crime is it to write home?


L. Chan. It is none.


Cel. My Lord, self-Preservation is natural to all Creatures.


L. Chan. How often have you written home since your Confinement?


Cel. Truly my Lord I know not whether it was 3 or 4 times.


L. Chan. How did you send it?


Cel. Once in a little Box, and other times in Bottoms of Thread.


L. C. What made you so earnest to have your Husband go into the Country?


Cel. Because he is a man in Trouble, and I thought That the best place for
him.


L. C. Was Margaret in trouble too, that you sent to her to go out of Town?


Cel. I did not, nor had any cause so to do.


L. C. You did.


Cel. I did not.


L. Chan. You did, we have it under your hand.


Cellier. If I did, I desire to see my hand, -- Then a Letter was produced,
being a Copy of one of mine. -- Sir Tho. Doleman read it, (and by Head and
Shoulders thrust in these Words, Send Margaret into the Country) I desired to
see the Letter, but they refused it. Then I owned I did write such a Letter as
that was without those words -- but that I had neither seen, sent to, nor heard
from Margaret since Midsummer.


L. Chan. This is very strange you can remember every word of a Letter, but
what you should remember.


Cel. My Lord, my Lord, I can remember any thing I did, but not what I never
did,


Lord President. You writ it when you were asleep.


Cel. No, my Lord, I am no Noct-ambler.


L. Chan. Did you write to no body else?


Cel. Yes, to my Son and Daughter.


L. Chan. To no body else?


Cel. Yes, to Mr. Gadbury.


L. Chan. What did you write to him?


Cel. Am I obliged to remember every Word I write?


L. Chan. No, but the sense of it.


Cel. I called him friend, and told him his last Visit would make me always
esteem him so. I know I am the talk of the Town; but what do the Judicious say
of me, for it is that I value, and not the prate of the Rabble? Are all my
Summer friends flown? Is my Knight against me too? When will Jupiter come into
Gemini?


L Chan. What do you expect from Jupiters coming into Gemini? do you think that
Catholic Religion shall be restored!


Cel. No, my Lord, I have no reason to think so, But the Planets are now in
Bestial reptal Signs, and produce semblable effects, but when that benign Star
comes into Gemini, which is a Humane Sign, I hope the Nation will return to
their Wits, for I think they are all mad now.


A Lord. Mrs. Cellier, how long has Mr. Gadbury been a Catholic?


Cel. He is not one I think, I Am sure I never took him for one, nor ever heard
he was.


L. Chan. What Religion is he of, can you tell?


Cel. My Lord, I always thought him to be a Church of England man.


L. Chan. Come Mr. Gadbury, you said you did not speak in Astrological terms to
Women, But Mrs. Celier has told you all.


Gadbury. My Lord, She can say no harm of me, if she tell Truth.


Cel. Mr. Gadbury, I neither said, nor know any evil of you, I only said you
feared the Kingdom would never be quiet till Jupiter came into Gemini.


Then he was commanded to withdraw.

Gadbury kneeling down said, I beseech you let my close Confinement be taken
off.

A Lord. No, you denied the Truth to us.


Gadbury. I hope your Lordship will not call such a thing as this is the denial
of the Truth.


Withdraw, withdraw Mr. Gadbury.

A Lord. Are you with Child Mrs. Cellier?


Cel. Truly, my Lord, I know not certainly.


Same Lord. You say so in your Letter, and that it will keep you from any
stricter examination.


Cel. No my Lord, I have no reason to think so, this is a time in which no
Compassion is shown to Sex, Age, nor Condition.


Then the Lord Chancellor waved the Discourse.

Same Lord. Do you know one Mr. Phillips, Mrs Cellier, that you writ of, and
desired to go out of Town?


Cel. I know one Mrs. Phillips an Upholsterer, but I know no reason I have to
desire her to go out of Town.


Ld. But you did write to her to go out of Town.


Cel. Did I not write for every one to go out of Town, I refer my self to the
Letter, and desire it may be read?


L. Chan. No, no. And so put off the Discourse.


Same Lord. Do you know my Lord Shaftsbury, Mrs. Cellier? Or have you seen him
lately?


Cel. My Lord, I have been with him lately; and (if you please) I will tell you
the occasion. In April last Sir W. Waller was very busy about my House,
insomuch as I was forced to leave it, and I (having a desire to be quiet at
home) writ the state of my Case to my Lord Shaftsbury, and prayed his Favor;
He bid the person that carried the Letter, send Sir W. Waller to him; and from
that time I had no further trouble, till about ten or twelve days before
Dangerfield was taken. He told me that my Name was entered into Sir W. Waller's
Black Bill, and he would search my House that Week, and therefore he advised me
to write again to the Earl of Shaftsbury, I told him I durst not presume to do
that, but I would go to his Lordship, and thank him for the former favor, and
pray a continuance of it, and desired him to go with me, because being known in
the House, as he said, and might the easier bring me to speak with his Lordship.


Dangerfield. Madam, I cannot at all advantage your Cause, but injure it, for I
have told my Lord Lies, and have been caught in them; but if you please to let
the Coach drive close to the Gate, and ask for Mr. Shepard, and desire him to
bring you to the Figure of one, he will bring you to his Lordship.

I did so that very night, and after I had thanked his Lordship for his former
Favor, and entreated him that I might not be troubled with Sir W. Waller, he
answered me,

Madam, I am for the propagation of the Protestant Faith; yet, because I think
you an excellent Woman, though of another Religion, I promise you I will do you
all the good I can.

I thanked his Lordship, and took my leave.

Upon this I was commanded to withdraw.

Three or four days after I was brought before their Lordships again.


L. -- Turn up your Hoods Mrs. Cellier.


L. Chan. Come Mrs. Cellier, we have found Margaret, and she has told us all,
the Truth comes out for all your cunning.


Cel. She can say no Evil of me, unless she belly me: Besides, she is no lawful
Witness, for she was my Servant, and turned away in Disgrace, and if she accuse
me of any thing, it is the effect of her Malice.


Then Margaret was called in.

L. Chan. Come Margaret, this is strange, that whilst you lived with Mrs.
Cellier you could see nothing but Virtue and Goodness by her, and she can tell
so much Thieving, and other ill things of you.


Margaret. She may say what she pleases of me, but I will not wrong her.


Cellier. Margaret you know we did lose a Spoon, and some other things.


Margaret. Yes, but then you thought another had them.


Cel. Yes, and I think so still, but being told you accuse me, I must defend my
self as well as I can.


L. Chan. Nay Margaret, we like you never the worse for her speaking against
you, and if you will tell us any thing of her, we will believe you.


Margaret. I know nothing but what I have told you.


L. Chan. Go Margaret, consider of it, and remember what you can against you
come again.


Cellier. Margaret have a care what you do, lest you foul your hands with
innocent Blood.


L. Chan. Hark, She tutors her before us.


Cellier. Truth may be spoken at all times and places.

Soon after this, Sir W. Waller came to the Prison again, wheedling, and
proffered his Service to help me to make a Discovery; I answered him after the
former rate.


Sir. Will. I wonder how you, that have such a fine curious House to Live in,
can endure to stay here, and may so easily go out, and be repaired all your
Losses with advantage.


Cellier. Sir Will. I value not my Losses nor my Life, I Will stay here this
twenty Years, rather than Lie my self to Liberty. I am Prisoner for Truth sake,
and that Cause, and the joy I have to suffer for it, makes this Dirty, Smoaky
Hole to me a Palace, adorned with all the Ornaments Imagination can think
upon; and I assure you, This is the most pleasant Time of my whole Life, for I
have thrown off all care of Earthly things, and have nothing to do but to serve
God.


Sir Will. But for all your obstinance, you will be weary of staying here ever
long, and perhaps put into a more rigorous Confinement.


Cel. Have you ever a place to put me in, where God is not?


Sir Will. No, he is every where.


Cel. Is he so, then do your worst, I defy you all, and him that sets you on.


Sir Will. Why are you so angry Mrs. Cellier? I came hither to serve you.


Cel. I desire none of your Service, and I cannot be angry with such a Man as
you are.


Sir Will. I protest I have as much respect for you, as if you were my Sister,
and had rather take your counsel, than any Woman's I know.


Cel. I Will assure you Sir William I will never take yours. Pray speak to His
Majesty I may be tried.


Sir Will. You had better stay, for if you be tried, you will certainly be put to
death.


Cel. Thanks be to God, you must neither be Judge nor Jury-man, but I Will
venture that, and bring my self to the Bar the first day of the next Term.


Sir Will. You must not be tried there, you must be tried at the Old Bailey.


Cel. If his Majesty bring me upon my Trial, He may try me where He pleases;
but if I bring my self to it, it must be at the King's Bench Bar.


Sir Will. You are deceived, you cannot.


Cel. But I can, and will to.


Sir Will. I Will tell his Majesty what you say.


Cel. Pray do, for I desire it.


Sir Will. Well, I see you are an obstinate woman, and do not understand your
own good, I Will come no more to you.


Cel. I care not for your Company, therefore pray stay away; and tell Truth
Once in your life.

As he was upon the Stairs going down, I called to the Maid to bring me some
Beer, and he was willing to believe I called him, and ran up in great haste,
asking through the Door if I had bethought my self of any thing he could do to
serve me.


Cel. No Sir Will. I am not such a Distressed Damosel to use your Service. For
as the Devil can do harm, but not good; so, though you have put me in, yet it
is not in your power to fetch me out of this enchanted Castle, but I shall come
out ever long to a Glorious Death, or an Honorable Life, both which are
indifferent to me, blessed be God.

After this I was no more troubled with him.

That night the Duke of Monmouth came to Town from Holland I was fetched before
the Council in great haste, having now learned to turn up my Hoods without
bidding.


L. Chan. Come Mrs. Cellier, we hear of your zeal.


Cel. It is a Virtue to be zealous My Lord.


L. Chan. The Truth comes out by little and little, we shall know all.


Cel. My Lord I wish all the truth were known, and then I should go home to my
own House.


L. Chan. When were you in Flanders?


Cel. Never.


L. Chan. You were.


Cel. I never was out of England.


L. Chan. Do you know one Mr. Adams?


Cel. What Mr. Adams does your Lordship mean?


L. Chan. Mr. Adams, a Commissioner of the Statute of Bankrupt.


Cel. Yes, I know him well, he sent John-a-Nokes to Prison, and thereupon was
put out of Commission.


L. Chan. Has he done you any personal injury?


Cel. Only helped to cheat me of five Hundred Pounds.


L. Chan. Nothing else?


Cel. No my Lord, but I Will assure you he did that.


L. Chan. You were at the Devil-Tavern with him and Dangerfield the 24 th of
September, and said there was no Plot but a Presbyterian Plot and that it would
appear so in a Month, you timed it well, for just then your Intrigue was found
out.


Cel. My Lord I was at the Devil-Tavern, but not within three weeks of the time
you mention.


L. Chan. You were there at that time, and said you were just come from
Flanders and drank the Duke of York's Health in a Beer-glass of Claret, and
would not let Mr. Adams drink, unless he named the Health.


Cel. Indeed my Lord that was ill done, for there was not a drop of Claret.


L. C. But you drank the Duke 's Health.


Cel. Pray my Lord what crime is it?


L. C. It is none.


Cel. Then I hope there is no Punishment.


L. C. Here is nothing to be done with her, call Mr. Adams.


He was called in, and his Wise Depositions read.

Cel. My Lord, of all this fine Story there is nothing true, but that I was at
the Tavern, but it was three weeks before the time he mentioned, and I did
Pledge the D 's Health, and, say, I believed there was a Plot among the
Presbyterians, to play their old Game over again, but I hoped God would bless
the King and his Royal Brother, and that their Affairs would go well, and God
would destroy their Enemies, and send quiet Times.


Adams. She did say she had been beyond Sea, and Mr. Petly will swear she said
she had been in Flanders.


Cel. If I did say so, I lied.


L. Presid. If you Lied then, how shall we know you tell Truth now?


Cel. My Lord, there is a great deal of difference between what I say at a
Tavern, to a Man of his Understanding, and what I say here, where every Word
ought to be equal to an Oath.


Adams. Your bawdy Story I left out of the Depositions, I was ashamed to speak
it.


King. What, can she speak Bawdy too?


Adams. Yes, indeed she did.


L. C. I, she is fit for any thing.


Cel. My Lord, I never spoke an immodest word in my Life. Mr. Adams though you
strive to take away my Life, do not take away my Honor; What did I say?


King. What did she say? come tell us the Story.


Adams. She said -- She said -- that -- She said -- That if she did not lose
her Hands, she could get Money as long as --


King. As long as what? out with it.


Adams made as if he were ashamed, and could not speak such a word.

Cel. I said, if I did not lose my Hands, I should get Money as long as, Men
kissed their Wives.


Adams. By the Oath I have taken she said their Mistresses too.


Cel. Did I so, pray what else do they keep them for?


L. Chan. That was but witty.


King. 'Twas but natural to her Practice.


Cel. Mr. Adams I am sorry for your Ignorance, -- I beseech your Majesty let me
be enlarged.


L. Chan. You are an obstinate Woman, and will tell us nothing we ask you.


Cel. My Lord, I tell Truth to all you ask.


L. C. Here Is no body believes you, you will trifle away your Life.


Cel. My Lord, I will not belie my self nor others to save it, but I will
assure your Lordships, never man that came before you, feared Death, nor valued
Life less than I do.


L. C. I, she is fit for them, Withdraw, Withdraw.

After that I was fetched up once or twice again, but do not remember for what;
-- Then they let me alone till the 9 th of January, and then Captain Richardson
went up with me, and by the way told me, That if now I would make an ingenious
Confession I might be enlarged, and the Truth found out: I answered, I knew
nothing of all they asked me, nor ever answered any thing but the Truth, they
do not look for Treason in the right place, but when they do, they may find
enough.


Capt. Richardson. But if you know any thing you are bound to tell it.


Cel. I am only obliged to answer Truth to such questions as I am asked, and
the Lord Chancellor told me he would not believe a word I said, and I do not
believe a word of the whole Plot further than that the Presbyterians are
playing over their old Game again.


Capt. Richardson. Well I see it is impossible to persuade you to Reason.


Cel. I never yet could see a Reason for lying.

When I came before the Council they spoke not a word of the old matter, but
questioned me concerning Sir Robert Peyton then present; I told the Truth, as I
would have done long before if they asked it; and desired Pen, Ink and Paper to
recollect my Memory, and to see my Husband before a Keeper, which the King said
was but reasonable, and bid make an Order for it, which was done, yet the
Keeper would never let me see him in 11 or 12 weeks that I was confined after
that, but one quarter of an hour; Yet to give him his due, he was as civil (to
me, as the strictness of my confinement would admit of,) and his Wife also, all
the time I was in their own House.

January 11 th. I sent in my Depositions, being all I then could remember, but
they would not let me have Paper to take a Copy of them, but Truth can never be
forgotten.

January 15, 16, or 17 th. I was brought before a Committee of Lords, and they
asked me many Trepanning Questions to ensnare me.

Then Mr. Gadbury was called in, and his Depositions read, to which I only
answered.


Cel. Mr. Gadbury I remember nothing of all this, but I confess I am the
unfortunate cause of your Trouble, and if by ruining me you can ease your self,
I give you free leave.

Then a Lord told me there was Treason sworn against me, but I might yet save
my self if I would, for they did not Thirst for my Blood.


Cel. I am glad to hear your Lordship say so, for I am so simple I judge by
appearances, which are quite otherwise.

Then Dangerfield was called in, and asked if I did not set him on to make a
Mutiny at the Rainbow Coffee-House.


Dangerfield. My Lord, I cannot say she set me on.


Cel. Was not I angry with you for it, and bid you be gone out of my House? and
caused you to be removed up into the Garret.


Dangerfield. No, that was afterward.


Cel. But it was for that Cause.


A Lord. Do you know any thing of a walk that was upon Tower-Wharf? tell us the
Truth for you are upon your Oath.


Cel. I have often walked upon it, for I lived there by,


A Lord. We mean a walk with the Lord Chief Justice, and offering Ten Thousand
Pounds concerning Sir George Wakeman, tell us the Truth, for the Countess of
Powis has told us all.


Cel. Yes, my Lord, I read it in a Pamphlet.


Dangerfield. I do believe it was in a Pamphlet.


Cel. There was two, and you brought them both to me.


A Lord. Do you remember any more concerning Sir Robert Peyton?


Cel. Nothing that is fit to tell at this time.


A Lord. She will not tell the Kings Privy Council what she knows.


Cel. Not at this time, -- at which Answer they were very angry, and asked me
some snaring Questions concerning my self, but I have forgot what it was; yet
remember that I answered thus.


Cel. My Lord, I am not obliged to Answer that Question; your Lordships are
none of my Judges, I appeal to my equal Judges, Twelve Commons of England in a
Court of Judicature, let them that desire my life, assault it there, and though
I cannot defend it like a man, yet I will not part with it in complement to
your Lordships, and I desire to be tried as soon as may be.


A Lord. Your Trial will come soon enough, you will be put to death.


Cel. Blessed be God, then I hope the Play is near an end, for Tragedies
whether real or fictious, seldom end before the Women die.


A Lord. What do you make a Play of it?


Cel. If there be no more Truth in the whole Story, than there is in what
relates to me, every Play that is Acted has more Truth in it.


A Lord. You talk very peremptorily.


Cel. My Lord, I thank God Death is no terror to me, and she that fears not to
die, cannot fear to speak Truth.


A Lord. Withdraw, withdraw, Mrs. Cellier.


Cel. Before I go, I will tell you something of Sir Robert Peyton; he told me,
that though the Earl of Shaftsbury was out of the Council, yet his power was as
great as ever, for he had a strong Party there, and he knew all Transactions as
soon as the Council rose, for he had a Nephew there, and there was a person
always ready at his House, to run away with Intelligence of what passed at
Council to the Earl of Shaftsbury.

A Lord said that was very like, how else should the Examinations taken there
come to the Press so soon? some of Mr. Gadburies that were taken but a day or
two before, lying there in Print upon the Table.

Then one of the Lords seeming to wonder his Lordships Nephew was not there,
commanded me to withdraw.

Both in January and February, I sent in the following Petition, but could not
possibly get it read, though I sent 5 or 6, and in the whole time of my
Confinement, my Husband carried near 20, but they were still suppressed.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the Right Honorable the Lords of his
Majesty's Privy Counsel.
The Humble Petition of Elizabeth Cellier close Prisoner in Newgate,
Shows,

THAT Your Petitioner has been thirteen Weeks close confined, and she having
had the management of her Husband's Estate, with that of two Fatherless
Children; The most considerable Estate of which depends upon Process at Law,
and is to be tried this next Term, and they are wholly Ignorant of their
Affairs.

Wherefore your Petitioner does most humbly Pray and Beseech your Majesty and
the Honorable the Lords of the Counsel, that she may be Enlarged, or permitted
to speak to her Husband and Children before a Keeper, to advise them how to
proceed in their Suit, and thereby prevent their ruin.

And your Petitioner shall pray.

My Husband put in several Petitions to the same effect, but could get no
Answer, insomuch that he was forced to release Seven Hundred and odd Pounds for
Sixty one; A good Part of which Money lay in Court of Chancery, and the Master
of the Rolls had made A decretal Order for us, but the Defendant petitioning
for another hearing, my Husband and Children not being permitted to speak with
me, knew not which way to defend themselves.

There I lay close confined, till the first of April, though my Husband daily
solicited for my enlargement. But about that time, (being dangerously sick) I
was allowed the Liberty of the Press-Yard.

Sometime in February, I was brought again before a Committee of Council.


A Lord. Mrs. Cellier, do you know one Mr. Pen, a Quaker?


Cel. I never see him but once.


Lord. Did you not write to him, and give him thanks for making so good use of
the Paper you sent him?


Cel. Yes, My Lord, I did so.


Lord Do you use to write to Men you know not?


Cel. If your Lordships please to have Patience, I will tell you the occasion
of it.

About the beginning of May last, 6 Copies of a Paper called the Danby
Reflections were left at my House, by an unknown Person, with a Note, desiring
me to put them into understanding men's hands.

I went to Fox Hall, and made a strict Inquisition into the matter, and found
by the affirmation of many Persons, that that part of the Story was very true,
and I thought I had no other reason to doubt the Truth of the rest, and having
heard Mr. Pen plead in the Cause of New Jersey, at Sir John Churchil's chamber,
before the Duke's Commissioners, and observed that he was a man of a great deal
of Reason, I thought I could not better comply with the desire of the Author,
than to send him one.


Lord. What made you so earnest to speak with him?


Cel. I heard it abroad by the name of Pen's Paper, and found it spread much.


Lord. What had you to say to him?


Cel. Something relating to the same matter, I suppose, but I have forgot what,
for it is 9 or 10 months ago.


Lord. What did you with the rest?


Cel. I gave one to my Lady Powis, another to Mr. Henry Nevil. I sent one into
France, another into Flanders, and got the other coppied, and sent as many as I
could get to my Friends and Acquaintance.


Lord. You have been very zealous for the Cause.


Cel. My Lord, It is good to be diligent in all that one undertakes.

Which answer was the last I had opportunity to make to any in Authority until
my Arraignment, which (in confidence of my own Innocence) I continually pressed
for.

Not but that I knew the danger, as to this Life, of encountering the Devil in
the worst of his Instruments, which are PERJVRERS INCOVRAGED to that degree as
that profligated Wretch was, and has been since his being exposed to the World
in his true colors both at mine, and at another Trial.

But the Sense that all I had done, or endeavored to do, was prompted by a
Disinterested Loyalty to the King, and Charity to Innocence oppressed, without
the least mixture of Malice to any Creature breathing, Made me with hopes
expect the worst those Devils incarnate could do unto me.

And if any thing in the World could give a probable Light where the true Plot
is managed, mine, and my accusers Cases would do it.

For Singly and Alene, without the Advice or Assistance of any Catholic
breathing, Man or Woman, I was left to study, manage, and to support my self in
all my troubles to my Expense and Loss much above a thousand Pounds, never
receiving one penny toward it, directly or indirectly, but ten pounds given me
by the hands of a condemned Priest, five days before my Trial; nor have I since
received any thing toward my Losses, or the least civility from any of them.

Whilst Dangerfield (when made a Prisoner for apparent Recorded Rogueries) was
visited by and from Persons of considerable Quality, with great Sums of Gold
and Silver, to encourage him in the new Villainies he had undertaken, not
against Me alone, but Persons in whose Safety all good Men ( as well
Protestants as others) in the three Kingdoms are concerned.

For I hope no reasonable man can believe me so vain, as to think my Life or
Fame worth the consideration of an Industrious Faction.

Thus have I laid open the Truth of my Case, to be believed or not believed, as
Reason, Sense, and Probability shall guide Men.

And as to my own Sex, I hope they will pardon the Errors of my Story, as well
as those bold Attempts of mine that occasioned it, since in what I meddled
with, as to Sir Robert Peyton and others (that are yet among them undiscovered
like Hushai, and I hope will have as good success to confound the crafty
Contrivances of all the old Achitophels, and the Headstrong Ambitious Practices
of young Absalom) though it may be thought too Masculine, yet was it the
effects of my Loyal (more than Religious) Zeal to gain Proselites to his
Service.

And in all my defense, none can truly say but that I preserved the Modesty,
though not the Timorousness common to my Sex. And I believe there is none, but
had they been in my Station, would, to their power, have acted like me; for it
is more our business than men's to fear, and consequently to prevent the Tumults
and Troubles Factions tend to, since we by nature are hindered from sharing any
part but the Frights and Disturbances of them. Which that God will long
preserve these three Kingdoms from, is the daily Prayers of


Elizabeth Cellier.

AN Abstract of the TRIAL OF Elizabeth Cellier.
UPon the 30th of April (80.) I was Arraigned at the King's Bench Bar, before
the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, for High Treason.

Cl. of the Crown. What say thou Eliz. Cellier, art thou Guilty, or not
Guilty?


Cel. Not Guilty.


C. C. Culprit. how will Thou be Tried?


Cel. By God and my Country,


C. C. God send thee a good Deliverance.


Cel. My Lord, I am safe in my own Innocence (as far as Innocence can make any
person safe,) but since the most Innocent may be sworn out of their lives, I
desire time to send for my Witnesses, some of which live very far off.


L. C. Just. How long time will you have? till next Term?


Cel. No my Lord, I desire but a fortnight; which was Granted, and I remanded
back to Prison, that day I sent the following Petition to the Attorney General.

To the Honorable Sir Creswell Levins, his Majesty's Attorney General
The Humble Petition of Elizabeth Cellier.
Shows,

THAT your Petitioner is to have her Trial at the Bar of His Majesty's Court of
King's Bench, for High Treason, the 14 of this Instant May.

Your Petitioner Humbly beseeches, that you will please to let her know, or
otherwise to order the Clerk of the Crown to give her to understand, whether
she is Indicted at Common Law, or upon any Statute, and what Statute, and that
she may likewise have a Copy of Mr. Dangerfields last Pardon from his Majesty;
as also Subpoena's for her Witnesses, That she may be somwayes enabled to make
her Defense.

And your Petitioner shall Pray, Eliz. Cellier.

Mr. Attorney answered, that I was Indicted upon the Statute of the 25 of
Edward III. and might have as many Subpoena's as I would at the Crown-Office;
but he knew nothing of Dangerfield 's Pardon.

Then I petitioned the Lord Chancellor for a Copy of the Pardon, and his
Lordship was pleased to Grant it.

May the 14. I was again brought to the Bar in Order to my Trial, but Mr.
Gadbury being Sick, (of which Oath was made by a learned Physician that had
Visited him) the Kings Council desired to put off the Trial, but I prayed to be
Tried then, or some day that Term; And said, That I would bring my self
thither, the last day of the Term, and hoped that according to the Law, I
should be Tried or Discharged.


L C. J. That will do you little good, for there is a Proviso in the Act, if
the Kings Witnesses be not sick.


Cel. My Lord what if they will never be well?


L C. J. You shall be Tried the next Term, it is but a little while to it.


Cel. My Lord, my Husband will think it a great while; at which the Court
laughed.


Cel. My Lord, he has a great cause to think it long for he is already a
Thousand pounds the worse for my Imprisonment; I have lain two and twenty weeks
close confined, During which time my Husband put in near 20 Petitions before
the Lords of the Council, to speak with me before a Keeper; but they were all
rejected: and he had then a suit in Chancery to a considerable value, which had
been heard before the Master of the Rolls, and he had made a Decretal Order for
us, and a good part of the Money lay in the Court of Chancery, but my Adversary
taking Advantage of my confinement, Petitioned for another Hearing; and my
Husband not knowing how to defend the Cause, was forced to discharge seven
hundred and odd pounds, for sixty one, because he could not be permitted to
speak with me.


L. C. J. You arraign the Council.


Cel. No, my Lord it is not to Arraign them, but to make it known how I have
been used, and pray redress.


Serj Maynard. Why could not your Husband follow his Lawsuit without you?


Cel. Because he is a Stranger, and does not understand the Law.


Serj. Maynard. Then you do Gentlewoman.


Cel. No Sir, but I have got enough to make a Country Justice, and pray that I
may be tried, And if I be Guilty, punished; and if Innocent, acquitted. And
that my Husband and Children may not suffer as they do by my Imprisonment.


L. C. J. You shall be tried the first day of the next Term, and it is in
compassion to you that we appoint that day.


Cel. My Lord shall I be discharged, if I be not Tried then?


L. C. J. You shall.


Cel. My Lord, the Laws I am to be Tried by, have sufficiently compensated
their denying me other Council, by allowing me you my Lords that are my Judges,
for Counselors, and I will depend upon your Faithful advice with confidence,
and humbly pray fair play for my life.


Judges. You shall have fair play.


Cel. I thank your Lordships.


L. C. J. Keeper of Newgate, take her back, and use her with respect.

June the 11th. (80.) I was again brought to the Bar, and the Indictment read,
and the e^^^ct of it was for consulting, and expending Money for carrying on
the Plot to kill the King, raise War in the Realm, and introduce Popery, and
for endeavoring to cast the Plot upon others, and for employing Dangerfield to
kill the King, and upbraiding him for losing an Opportunity, etc.


Cel. My Lord, for saving the time of the Court, I pray that no Gentleman that
has been on any of the former Juries, and found the Indictment against any of
them that lately had the like accusation, may be sworn against me (And in
regard a great part of my Charge is for endeavoring to throw the Popish Plot
upon the Presbyterians) therefore I except against all those that had not
lately taken the Sacrament, as Persons that cannot be indifferent.


L. C. J. Mrs. Cellier, this cannot be allowed, you must make your exceptions.


Cel. My Lord, the Jury ought to be chose out of the unconcerned Neighborhood,
and every Dissenter from the Church of England is a party against whom the Fact
is said to be committed, therefore none but Church of England men ought to be
of my Jury.


L. C. J. Mrs. Cellier, make your exceptions. Which I did, and excepted against
several that had been on the former Juries, yet admitted of Sir Philip
Matthews, and others, telling them they looked like honest men, and I believed
they would do me no wrong.


The Jury are as follows.

Sir Philip Matthews, Baronet. Sir John Munster. Thomas Harriot, Esquire John
Foster, Esquire Richard Cheney, Esquire Edward Draper, Esquire Edward Wilford, Esquire John
Roberts, Esquire Hugh Squire, Esquire Thomas Eaglefield, Esquire George Read, Esquire Richard
Parrot, Esquire
The Jury being sworn, the Kings Council called the Witnesses, and first Mr.
Gadbury, who attested that he knew not a tittle of the Plot one way or other,
except what he heard by Common Report, and read in the Prints, nor of any
design I had against the Life of the King; but acknowledges that he was Privy
to, and active in bringing over Sir Robert Peyton to the Kings interest, (at
the said Sir Robert's request) and to bring Sir Robert to kiss his
Royal-Highness's hand by my means; and said, That I did always express my self
with all Duty and Loyalty; and that I told him I had carried the names of four
Gentlemen, Sir Roberts Friends to the Duke, in hopes that if they were put into
Commission of the Peace, it might conduce much to the breaking the measures of
the Factious. And Mr. Gadbury further Declared that one Smith formerly a School
master at Islington, and another Gentleman with him came to him, and desired
his Advice about going to the Lords in the Tower, pretending he could declare
strange things against Mr. Oats, which might prove advantageous to them.

In order to Indicting him for Perjury, which he said I was forward to promote,
and said, that I did not care if I were at Ten Pounds Charge to have it
effected, but he said he refused to advise Mr. Smith to concern him himself
either with Mr. Oats, or the Lords.

He further aver'd, that I told him I heard Dangerfield talk of a
Nonconformist Plot, and how he frequented their Clubs* and had so far
insinuated into the favor of some of them, that he was promised a Commission
among them, and that several Commissions were given out already. After that,
Mr. Gadbury being interrogated by the Attorney General, to several passages
signified in an Attestation which he himself had drawn up for the Privy
Council, which seemed more to affect me than any thing he had hitherto said,
showing the same unto him, which when he had perused, he did own to be his
handwriting; and said, That what was contained therein was true, but when he
wrote the same, he confessed that he raked up all that ever he could against
me, aggravating every Circumstance to the utmost, and that by that reason when
he was in Prison, some person or persons whom he did not name to avoid
reflections, Threatened him with Hanging, etc. And that they told him two
Witnesses had sworn Treason positively against him, and that I now accused him,
and made a third; and he knowing I must swear false, as the rest had done, and
being Menaced as before, Drew up the said Accusation against me, aggravating
the several expressions therein, in hopes thereby to lessen my Evidence against
him, and thereby to save himself.

Then he was again interrogated, whether I did not tell him I hoped to see
Westminster Abbey full of Benedictine Monks, and the Temple with Friars: he
answered, That his sufferings had very much weakened his Memory, but as far as
he remembered, I did not speak of any hope, but believes it was thus, What if
you should see Westminster Abbey filled with Monks again? and that this was in
ordinary Discourse as they passed through the Abbey together; And that he looked
upon those Words to be no way maliciously spoken, nor regarded it further than
common Discourse.

Sergeant Maynard. What Religion are you of?


Gadbury. A Protestant according to the Church of England.


Serj. Maynard. Such Protestants do more harm than Papists.


Gad. Sir, I am neither Papist nor Presbyterian, nor was I any of the Tribe of
Forty One.


Then he went on with his Evidence, saying, That when the King was Sick at
Windsor, I asked him whether he thought his Majesty would live or dye,
supposing as he thought that he might have taken some notice of the effect by
observing the beginning of the Distemper; but says, That I did not desire him
to erect a Scheme for that purpose, nor to Calculate the Kings Nativity, and
that he believes I had talked at this rate five or six times, always expressing
great fears of his Majesty's Death, and the Troubles that may thereupon arise
through the restless Malice of the turbulent Factious Party, and that he with
as great Trouble told me, he durst not presume to Judge of such and so weighty
an Affair as that was.

But that he remembers he Calculated a persons Nativity for me, to know whether
he would be just to me in gathering in such Debts as were due to my Husband who
was a French Merchant; And that from thence he cautioned me to beware of him,
but that he knew not the said person was Dangerfield, till he came before the
Counsel, bringing only the time and Place of his Birth, without making any
mention of his Name, but that the said Dangerfield thence took occasion to
swear him into the acquaintance of the Countess of Powis, and several
Honorable Lords, whose Faces he never saw.

This was the substance of Mr. Gadbury's Evidence.

L. C. J. Brother you are mistaken in your Evidence.


At. Genesis We are in this, but I hope we shall not be mistaken in others;


Then Dangerfield was called in.

Cel. My Lord, I except against his Evidence, as a person that has not the
Qualifications the Law requires in Witnesses of Treason, and I pray that I may
be heard to prove it, and that the Court will protect my Witnesses from his
Insolence, for the last time I stood here in order to my Trial, he struck one
of them here in presence of His Majesty, in the Face of the Court, and
threatened to kill others; if they appeared again.


L. C. J. Have you Witnesses of this?


Cel. Yes my Lord, I will offer nothing to the Court, but what I will prove by
Witnesses and Records. And to do this, I have taken of a few of the Records of
his many Crimes, and but a few, because I would not be chargeable to my
Husband, or troublesome to the Court. I have but Thirteen.


Judge. A pretty Company.


L. C. J. Go on then.


Cel. Call Mr. Pearson. He appeared. I prayed he might be sworn.


L. C. J. That may not be against the King.


Cel. My Lord it is not against the King, for the King is as much concerned to
preserve me if I be Innocent, as to punish me if I am Guilty.

And by the Statute of the Fourth of King James, it is ordered that persons
accused shall have Witnesses produced upon Oath, for his better Clearing and
Justification. And the Lord Cook says, That he never read in any Act of
Parliament, Author, Book, Case, nor ancient Record, that in criminal Cases, the
Party accused should not have sworn Witnesses: And therefore there is not a
spark of Law against it. And the Lord Cook dyed but lately; and if there was no
Law against it then, I desire to know by what Law it is now denied me; for the
common Law cannot be altered. And I pray your Lordships, being of Counsel for
me, that you will not suffer any thing to be urged against me contrary to Law,
but that my Witnesses may be sworn, or Counsel assigned me; to that Point of
Law.


A Judge. What would you have Counsel for? This does not affect you yet. Go on.


Cel. Mr. Pearson, pray tell the Court how Dangerfield used you the last time I
was here.


Pearson. I stood in the Hall, and he came and asked me how I durst Subpoena
any man and not tell him for what, and struck me on the Arm.


Judge. Did he so?


Cel. Call Mr. Barrard:


He appeared, and testified the same.

Cel. My Lord, Witnesses for Treason ought to be Honest, Sufficient, Lawful,
and Credible; And I will prove that he has been Burnt in the Hand, Whipped,
Transported, Pillorie'd, Out-lawed for Felony, Fined for Cheating, and suffered
public Infamy for many other notorious Crimes.

Mr. Clements, bring the London Record. He produced it.


Judge. Can you swear this is a true Copy.


Clem. Yes my Lord, I examined it. Then he was sworn, and the Clark read the
Record, which showed, That in the 25 th. Year of his Majesty's Reign he was
Convict of Felony at the Old Bailey, for stealing a Tortoice-shell Cabinet, and
ten pieces of old Gold, out of the House of Robert Blagrave, and being asked
what he had to say for himself, that Judgment should not pass upon him,
according to Law? He said he was a Clark, and desired the benefit of the Book,
which was granted; and he read, and was (according to Law) Burnt in the Hand.


A Judge. Can you prove he is the man?


Cel. Call Mr. Ralph Briscow. He appeared, and testified that he was the Man,
and he saw him Burnt in the Hand.


Cel. Call Captain Richarson. He appeared, and testified the same. Then
Dangerfield offered to go away. One of the Judges called to him, and asked him
whither he went? a Lawyer answered, to fetch his Pardon, for he was come
without it.


L C J. Make have then.

Then there arose a Question among the Judges, whether Felony was sufficient to
take away his Evidence, his Clergy having restored him? And an excellent
Discourse passed amongst them upon that Subject, but I cannot remember the
particulars so well as to insert it here. One of the King's Counsel alleged
that he was made a good Witness by his Pardon.


Cel. My Lord, He is not Pardoned Fellonies, Burglaries, nor Forgeries; And I
will prove him convict of all these; and the King cannot give An Act of Grace
to one Subject, to the prejudice of another, as this Pardon will be to me, if
this prodigious Villain be thereby made a good Witness to take away my Life;
Nor does his Pardon include his Crimes. Then I produced a Copy of his Pardon,
but remembering I was not obliged to believe that he had a Pardon, till he
himself had produced it, I called for it back again, then the Court went off
the Cause, and heard motions; but Dangerfield staying long, they began to
examine Witnesses on his behalf.

First, Thomas Williamson was called. Who said he knew nothing of my treating
with Dangerfield, nor ever saw us together, but that he was employed in
businesses of Charity by me, to get Prisoners out, and Dangerfield among the
rest.

Mr. Scarlet was called, and said he turned him over to the Bench, and I paid
for his Habeas Corpus.

Bennet Duddle was called.

He attested, that he had often seen Dangerfield and I together in the Gallery
at Powis-House, and had seen us write, but he knew not what.

William Woodman was called.

And said, he had carried Letters for me to the Tower and elsewhere, but none
for Dangerfield.

An Blake was called.

Who attested, that I sent her to Dangerfield, in Newgate, and that he cried
and prayed her to speak to me to send him six Pounds, and that she returned to
him and told him I would send him none. Then Dangerfield told her he had been
racked, and expected worse usage that night, and that she should be forced to
turn Rogue, and ruin us all.

And that if he did not turn Rogue he should be hanged, And that I bid her hide
the Papers, saying they were Dangerfields, and might do him good, and she put
them into the MEAL-TUB.

Then Margaret Jenkins was called.

And said, she saw Dangerfield in Newgate, in Irons, very poor, that he told
her he had eaten nothing in two days, that she carried him half a Crown, and
another time five Shillings, and after that, Money to pay his Fees; and that she
saw him in the Bench.


At. Genesis Did you not carry Letters between them?


Margaret. Yes, but knew not what was in them.


At. Genesis Did you not carry two Vials of Opium to him?


Mar. I carried 2 Vials which he sent for, but I know not what was in them.


L.C.J. Who sent for them?


Mar. Dangerfield sent a Note for them to Mr. Blasedal, and when I brought them
to him he tasted of them, and set them up in his room.


Judge. Who tasted of them?


Mar. Dangerfield did.


At. Genesis Did you ever see Mrs. Cellier in the Bench with him?


Mar. No, I never did.


At. Genesis Did you ever see them together at Powis-House?


Mar. Yes, once at Dinner, and once at Supper.


L.C.J. Was any body with them?


Mar. Yes, once her Husband, and the other time three Gentlewomen.


At. Genesis What do you know concerning Stroud?


Mar. She bid me tell Dangerfield that he must get acquainted with Stroud; I
told him so, and he replied, that was done already, for he had been acquainted
with Stroud a long time, and they used to go a robbing together. And he told me
that he feared neither Fire, Sword, nor Hell, and he cared not what he said,
nor swore, for he had studied to be a Rogue ever since he was Ten Years old.


L.C.J. You will make a special Witness of him by and by.


Then the Attorney General would not let her speak any more, but called Susan
Edwards.

At. Genesis What do you know against the Prisoner at the Bar?


Edwards. I carried two Notes from her to Mr. Dangerfield in Newgate, and two
Books of Accounts, and a Guiney, and 20 s. in Silver, and she bid me tell him,
now was the time that her Life lay in his hands.


Serj. Maynard. Did not you carry her a Letter from him?


Susan. Yes.


At. Genesis What was in it?


Susan. I know not, for I cannot read written-hand; but he told me he must turn
Rogue and ruin all the Sect.


Judge. What Sect?


Susan. I know not what Sect, but he said, if he did not turn Rogue, he should
be Hanged.


Ser. Main. But she bid you tell him her Life lay in his hands.


Cel. And yours too Sir, if he turn Rogue, and be believed as others have been
of late. But she is no Witness, for she robbed me, and the very Heathens would
not allow false Servants to swear against their Masters.


Cel. By the Oath you have taken, Where had you the Clothes you wear?


Susan. Of my Father, they are none of yours, I never see you have but two
Suits at a time.


Cel. Did you ever see any thing Dishonorable by me?


Susan. Yes, He went into your Chamber one Sunday Morning.


L.C.J. Was her Husband there?


Sus. No, He was gone to Church.


L.C.J. He were best take care how he goes to Church.


Cel. My Lord, I appeal to your Conscience, as you sit there, whether you think
any thing but Innocence durst ask that Question; And to prove it is so, there
is a Women has served me 26 Years, be pleased to examine her.

A Lawyer within the Bar, said, To me it is a plain proof of her Innocence as
to that point. Serj. Maynard then made some malicious reflections thereupon.


Cel. Pray Sir, is that Treason by the Statute of the 25. of Edward III. It is
not in this Innocent Age.


Susan. She said she doubted not, but the Plot would turn to a Presbyterian
one; and I heard Dangerfield say so too; and that he would make it his Interest
to find it out; And she said, if he did, she should see him keep his Coach and
Six Horses, and then he should marry her Daughter.


L.C.J. What would he have Mother and Daughter too?


Susan, then prated very impertinently.

Judge. Will that Impudent Wench never have done prating? Turn her out.

Then she went and stood among the Clerks, Prating, and behaving her self
impudently, till they scoft at her, and thrust her out of Court.

Then the Lord Chief Justice made an excellent Speech, of what sad Consequence
it would be to admit such profligated Wretches to give Evidence; and that the
three Kingdoms might have cause to rue such a days work, and that it would be
an inlet to the greatest Villainies, to destroy our Lives, Liberties and
Estates, with much more to the like purpose.


Judge. This Fellow will come no more.


L.C.J. Call him, shall we stay all day?


Crier. Dangerfield, Dangerfield, Dangerfield etc.

After he had been called five or six times, the Lord Chief Justice commanded a
Tip-staff to go into the Hall and look for him: Which he did; and after a long
time Dangerfield came with a Black-Box, at which the Court laughed, saying here
comes the Black-Box, here comes the Black-Box.


L.C.J. You have been long in going to the Temple.


Dang. I went to the Exchange; Here is my Pardon.

It was observed that his Hands did so shake and tremble, that he could not
open the BOX.


Cel. My Lord, he is not Pardoned Felony, Burglary, Perjury, nor Forgery: And
I will prove him notoriously Guilty of all these.


The Clerk read his Pardon, and all these Crimes were omitted.

Cel. My Lord, he is Convict of Felony, and Outlawed thereupon; Mr. Lane
bring the Chelmsford Record: he produced and proved it.


The Clerk read it, which said he was Convict of Felony and Burglary, for
breaking the House of Robert Tetterson, Shoemaker of Windsmore-Hill, and
taking thence a linen bag worth a Penny, and Four Pounds Ten Shillings in
Money; he broke Prison, and was Out-lawed thereupon.

Kings Counsel. How do you know this is the Man?


Cel. He is the Man, and I will prove it by the party that was Robbed, and the
Constable out of whose hands he broke.


Call Robert Tetterson, and James Eaton.

The Crier called, but they came not.

Cel. My Lord, I fear he has Murdered them, for Tetterson was here yesterday,
and told me, that Dangerfield threatened to kill him, if he appeared any more,
and said, That he went in danger of his Life.


L.C.J. Call them again, look about the Hall for them, which they did.


Clements. My Lord, I see Tetterson in Court this day.


Then the Crier called them again, and a person was sent to the Houses
adjacent, to call them, but in vain.

Then the Kings Council would not admit him to be the Man mentioned in the
Indictment, because it was there Tho. Dangerfield, Labourer, and the Pardon was
Tho. Dangerfield Gentlemen.

Cel. My Lord, if he be the person Pardoned, he is the person Out-lawed, for
both are Thomas Dangerfield of Waltham Abbey.


Judge. Is there any more Thomas Dangerfields there?


Dangerf. Yes, my Father and a Cousin of mine, which uses to come there
sometimes.


Kings Council. Said I must prove him the man.


Lawyer within the Bar. Brother trouble not the Court, for he is the Man.


L. C. J. Come, I will not admit it could be your Father. Mrs. Celliers, have
you a Record of Perjury.


Cel. My Lord, I have of Forgery.


Judge. Have you one of his being Pillory'd?


Cel. I have four, bring the Salisbury Records.

They were produced and proved, and one of them read, which said that in the
Thirtieth year of the King, he was Indicted at Sarum, for putting off a Gilt
Shilling for a Guinney, to which Indictment he Pleaded Guilty, and was
Condemned to stand in the Pillory three hours next Market day, with a Paper on
his forehead, signifying his Crime, and after that to pay five Pounds to the
King, and that he stood in the Pillory according to Sentence.


Cel. My Lord, I have 3 Records more to the same effect, to all which he
Pleaded Guilty.


Judge. No, it is enough.

After all this Serj. Maynard and the At. General would had him allowed a good
witness, saying all these Crimes are Pardoned under the Title of Offenses and
Transgressions.


Cel. A Pardon cannot make him an honest Man, as all ought to be that are
Witnesses in Treason, Nor can the King give him an Act of Grace to my
prejudice, as this Pardon will be, if it make him a good Witness to take away
my Life. Mr Langhorn desired that Mr Reading might be examined, and the Lord
Chief Justice North denied it, saying he had been in the Pillory, and had his
Testimony been allowed, I doubt not but Mr. Langhorn had been alive. And shall
this prodigous Wretch that has been burned in the Hand, Whipped, Pillory'd,
Convict of all manner of Crimes, and stands out-lawed for Felony, be allowed a
good Witness to take away my Life, and such a Gentleman as Mr. Reading be
denied to give Evidence to save, because he had been on the Pillory for
endeavering to do that which if he had done, it had not amounted to one of
those many Crimes this Villain Pleaded Guilty to. And I beseech the Court to
consider, That if such Witnesses be allowed, Liberty and Property are destroyed.


Attor. General. Mr. Reading was not Pardoned.


Cel. He is not Pardoned neither, for he is Outlawed for Felony, which is not
incerted in his Pardon, and is otherwise notoriously infamous.


K. Council. None but Villains are fit to be employed in such Designs.


L. C. J. They are fit to be employed, but not fit to be believed, and we ought
not to hood-wink Justice for such a Stigmatized, Whipped, Pillory'd, Burnt in the
hand Fellow as he notoriously appears to be.

Then Dangerfield submissively bowing; said My Lord, this is enough to
discourage any one hereafter, from entering into good and honest Principles.


L. C. J. It will discourage Rogues from daring to appear before a Court of
Justice.


Then his Lordship told him his own in very apt words, with a recapitulation of
his Crimes; saying, he did not, nor would not, fear nor spare such as he was.

Then Judge Dolben stood up, and said, That no man that had any spark of Grace
or Civility, would dare to appear before a Court of Justice, being guilty of
such Crimes, and that no man of common sense, would take away the life of a
Worm upon such Evidence.

Then the Lord Chief Justice gave short directions to the Jury, telling them he
knew nothing they had to do, for that nothing material appeared against me.

And they unanimously cried out, Not Guilty.

Clerk Crown. Kneel down.


Cel. Kneeling, said God preserve the King and his Royal Highness, and bless
this Honorable Court.


L. C. J. Dang. have you any security for your Good behavior to answer the
Felony.


But Dangerfield having none, the Lord Chief Justice said, Take him away, take
him away, and secure him. Then was Dangerfield presently disarmed, who
trembling, and looking as if he had been just going to be Hanged, Cried out,
Whither must I go? whither will you carry me? Then he shed Tears in the Court,
and was by the Officers presently conveyed to the King's Bench Prison with a
numerous Train of Attendance, where the Gentlemen Prisoners received him
according to his Merit. But he not liking his entertainment, desired to be
locked up till the Marshal came home and then for his better security was sent
to the Common-Side, where the Prisoners had like to have Pumped him.

But his Phanatick friends bringing him good store of Money, both Gold and
Silver, he spent it very freely among them, so by that means escaped that
Storm, and there remained in the custody of the Marshal, till he was brought to
the Bar by order of Court, and pleaded a general Newgate Pardon, in which his
name was inserted, and so was discharged, with good advice to leave off his
former wicked courses, and take up some employment to live honestly, for his
thread of Life was so fine spun, that he could expect no more favor from any
Court.

The trial being over, the Gentlemen of the Jury sent for me up into the Room
where they Dined, and told me, there was a Guiny a Man due to them, I Answered,
I had cost my Husband a great deal of Money alerady, much more than my Person
was worth, and was not willing to put him to any Charge I could avoid; And I
hoped they would consider my condition, and not expect Money from me. They
replied if I had been cast, the King must have paid them a Guiny a Man, upon
which I promised if it were a due Debt I would send it to Sir Philip Matthews
on Monday, but finding it was not, I sent him this following Letter.

Honored Sir.
I Have considered upon your demand of a Guiny apeice to each Gentleman of the
Jury, and find that it is in no sort due. How great soever the ruin is I lie
under by the villainy of my accuser, I would have made hard shift but I would
have paid what was justly due. But upon your second thoughts, I am assured you
will not forfeit your Spurs by oppressing the Distressed she, Your selves and
the Laws have preserved from a raging Dragon. Pray Sir accept of, and give my
most humble Service to your self, and all the Worthy Gentlemen of your Panel,
and Yours and their several Ladies. And if you and They please, I will with no
less fidelity serve them in their Deliveries, then You have done me with
Justice in mine, and thereby preserved Liberty and Property, as much as,
Honored. Sir.

Your most Humble Servant, Elizabeth Cellier.


Monday the 14 th of June the Jury sent one Mr. Squire, a very civil and
understanding Gentleman, to demand the Guinies of me, we argued the Case a
while, and he went away very well satisfied.

On Tuesday morning another came, that was as rough and inconsiderable; and
among other things he told me, that the D. of B. gave them two Guinies a Man. I
replied, If I had been a Duchess, I would have given them five; But I was a
poor Woman, and had been much wronged, and to prevent further inconvenience, I
would not injure my Innocence, not their Justice, so much as to give them any
thing but my humble Thanks, which I prayed him to accept of, and give to them
all. He went away in a great heat, expressing his resentment in such Language
as I will not spoil Paper with.

This is all I can call to mind, of what past at my seveeal Examinations, and
Trial, and I hope the judicious Reader will pardon what is either forgot, or
not well expressed, in consideration that I was forced to defend my Life, both
against the Knights and the Dragon, for in this unequal Combat there was no
St. George to defend me against him, but Sir C -- Sir J -- Sir R -- and Sir
George also stood by my accuser, to manage his Malice against me.

Yet I could not but pity those learned Gentlemen, (one of which would have
been infinitely too hard for all these together,) which have been accused in
this accursed Plot, that so many of them should come armed and arrayed against
me, and be forced to blush at the weakness of their Combatant.

But God, the Protector of Innocence, has for this time delivered me from the
rage of that wicked Enemy, and his Fellow-plotters.

But how long either my self, or any other Loyal Subjects, shall be secure from
the like Conspiracy, God only knows.

He sent from above, he drew me out of many Waters.

He delivered me from my strong Enemy, and from them which hated me, for they
were too strong for me.

They prevented me in the day of my Calamity, but the Lord is my stay, Ps.
18.16, 17, 18.

Finished, Friday, July the 2 d. By Elizabeth Cellier.

A Postscript to the Impartial Readers.
ON Monday the 16 th. of this Instant, the Sheet F was taken in the Press, and
my Self and the Printer brought by Messengers before Mr. Secretary Jenkins, and
he caused us to give Bonds and Security to appear before the Lords of the
Council, and in the mean time not to print any further.

On Wednesday the 18 th. I appeared before their Lordships, and testified the
truth of what I had written, saying, I published it because I would come again
before their Lordships; and did then accuse Sir William Waller, Mansel,
Dangerfield, and their Confederates, of High Treason, for endeavoring to raise
a Rebellion, and for conspiring against the life of his Royal Highness. And
proffered to make good my Charge, by the Testimony of persons of Honors,
Persons of middle Quality, and unspotted Reputation, and by some of their own
Companions. And their Lordships were pleased to promise that we should be heard.

Thursday the 19 th. According to their Lordships order, I came to Mr. Guin,
the Clerk then in waiting, to give security for my good Behavior, and to
appear at the Kings Bench-Bar the first day of the next Term, and though
several good Hous-keepers proffered themselves, he would accept of none but
such as himself knew; which, though it was very difficult for me to obtain, I
was forced to do it. After Security given, he would not let me depart, till I
had paid 3 l. 2 s. 6. d. And though I told him that two Justices of the Peace
expected me at that hour, to go with them to take the Examination of a Person
that then lay Sick, and desired him to let me go, and I would send the Money to
him, as soon as I came home. Yet he commanded Otterbury the Messenger to take
me into custody till I paid it; and I was forced to stay till I sent home for
Money, and by these delays lost the Opportunity of meeting the Gentlemen, and
could not examine the party that day; and the next he was taken Speechless, as
he still continues. By this means I lost a most material Witness; Yet doubt not
but to make good my Charge, if the rest may be heard.

I hope the Readers have not forgotten, that after it had been proved before
the Lords of the Council, that Dangerfield stood in the Pillory at Salisbury,
Yet, upon his single Evidence, the Countess of Powis, the Earl of Castlemain,
and other persons of considerable Quality, were Committed, and I was close
Confined two and twenty weeks, and after that, Tried for my Life, June the 11
th.

But though Treasonable Practices have been sworn against Dangerfield, by
Justice Foster, Justice Harvey, Mr. Thomas Hill, and my self; Yet the Gentleman
walks abroad undisturbed, and daily consults with his Confederates, how to act
new Villainies.

These things make me very sensible of the great Difficulties and
Discouragements I am like to meet with; But I hope the God of Truth and Justice
will protect me, and bring me through them all, and pluck off the vails, and
discover both Truth and Frauds barefaced.

And whenever his Majesty pleases, to make it as Safe and Honorable to speak
Truth, as it is apparent it has been Gainful and Meritorious to do the
contrary, there will not want Witnesses to testify the truth of more than I
have written, and Persons that are above being made The Hangman's Hounds for
weekly Pentions, or any other Considerations whatsoever.

And though I have been two and twenty Weeks confined, and two and thirty Weeks
a Prisoner, and my Charge and Losses much exceed a Thousand Pounds, I do not
yet so much fear the smell of Newgate, as to be frighted for telling the
Truth; nor is Death so great a Terror to me, but that I am still ready to seal
the same with my Blood.

August the 21 st. 1680. Elizabeth Cellier.

THE MATCHLESS PICARO; OR, A short Essay of the Fortune and Virtues of Seignior
Don Tomaso Ganderfieldo, alias Francisco De COROMBONA.
Bray a Fool in a Mortar, yet he will not depart from his Folly.

Prove.
BEing importuned by some friends to write a Narrative of the Famous
Achievements of the Virtuoso who accused Me, I have endeavored their
satisfaction; But upon a diligent Search, I find the Records of his Worth so
many, and so chargable to take off, that neither my Pen nor my Purse are able
to perform their Request. But because their Expectation should not wholly be
frustrated, I have reviewed his half-witted Narrative, between which, and that
of the worthy Gentleman Mr. Roderick Mansel, But what! do I seem to grant Mr
Mansel to write a Book? he can more easily convert Guinies into Spanish Cobs,
and it will be a less Miracle* I know not how good a Swords-Man he is, but yet
have heard of his Active and Passive Valor ^^th in Ireland, and elsewhere,
before I saw the Title of Colonel added to his Name in a Narrative; But I must
confess, I never did, or ever shall take him for a man of the Pen, no, not so
much as upon suspicion; Let him therefore thank Mr. A. for the mischief of that
Imposition.
I find so great an agreement, as satisfies me they had accorded their Stories
before the Papers were lodged in Ax-yard Westminster: And also, that both
Naratives were dictated by the same Spirit, (one being a true Transcript of the
other;) but chiefly, that Don Roderigo, and Seignior Thomazo, are both right
Romantic Heroes, and have added much to the small adventures of others, and
related many imaginary ones of me, which never entered into my thoughts, I
having from my Childhood abominated such Practices.

But they have been very silent in their own most Stupendous Acts and
Endeavors. But all their Squires being absent, it would much have derogated
from their Worth to have blown the Trumpets of their own fame; And because I am
informed that a Person of great Understanding in the Worthy Colonels Affairs,
is writing a large Narrative of his Projects in IRELAND, and HERE also;
Therefore I will say no more, but leave him to that Fate which usually attends
Men of his Spirit and Loyalty, both in this World, and in the next; And give
you an Abstract of Seignior Don Thomazo Ganderfieldo, Francisco de Corombona,
etc. his Recorded Virtues, and what himself has told to many Persons that are
ready to attest it upon Oath, together with the great Character I have received
of him from the Inhabitants of Waltham Abbey, the place of his Nativity, where
they affirm, that before he was Seven years of age, his Fingers were such
Lime-twigs, that he could not enter into any House but something would stick to
them; and being corrected by his Father, (for the many Thefts he committed,) he
ran away; and wandering up to London, was received into St. Bartholomew's
Hospital, where at 10 years old his Father found him: But (as he has done
since,) he stoutly disowned his Father, and would not go with him; However, his
Father took him home, and (if himself may be credited,) from that time he
studied to be a Rogue, and before eleven years of age he agreed with one Jemmy
a Scotch-Man, and robbed his Father, and run away into Scotland, where, (as
young as he was) he committed some Crime which he said would have cost him his
Life, had not the Lord of -- (before whom Jemmy's Father and his Prosecutor
brought him) taken pity on his Youth, and dismissed him with a small sum of
Money to bring him to Edenborough; where the young Don being arrived, and
finding Scotland no place for his purpose, he projected how to change
Countries: And some Gentlemen being then at Edenbrough ready to Imbarque for
Spain, they entertained him for a Lacquey, and transported him into a warmer
Climate, but soon turned him out for his Margaret Jenkins, and others, to whom
he told it, with more of his Virtues, and strange attempts then can be
contained in one sheet of Paper; with Proofs that he also is a Slave to Truth,
Faithfulness, and Impartiality, as the worthy Colonel professes to be in the
Eloquent Harangue before his Famous Narrative.
old Tricks; then (as he says) he turned Mendicant from Door to Door for about
a Month; after which he became a Soldiers Boy, and not being able to live on
Three Halfpence a Day, he then resolved to fall to the practice of the Roguery
he had so long studied, and attained to a great perfection in the Thieving
Trade; And amongst other Virtues, he also learned to Guild Copper Cobs, and
made them pass for Gold, and played such Pranks, that (being too young to be put
to Death) he was marked by the Ezecutioner of Port Ferara with an N and a G in
large Gunpowder Letters on the Back of his Right Hand, and then lasht out of
the Town. And being almost starved, a Master of an English Vessel in Charity
brought him back for England, being now about 14 or 15 years of age. Then the
wandering Don returned to the Father he formerly denied to own; But he refused
to receive him, yet had Compassion on his miserable condition, and put him as
an Apprentice to a Barber, from whom he ran, and fell so close to the Thieving
Trade, that by his own Confession, and the Testimony of others, he was
condemned to be hanged before he was 17, but obtained a Pardon of
Transportation, and went into Flanders; But though he changed Countries,
Qualities he changed not, for in a few years he became so great a proficient,
that he counterfeited the Prince of Orange's Hand and Seal, and was committed
to the Castle of Antwerp, where he lay long, and had been starved, (as himself
says,) but for the Charity of the English Nuns, who every day sent him Meat and
Drink. About 12 Weeks after his Commitment, he was tried and condemned to be
Hanged; But Father Worsly, an English Priest, (after the charitable example of
the English Nuns at Antwerp, who not only fed this starved Snake, but also
saved and supported Captain Spurn-Cow in the like Danger) by earnest
solicitations procured his Pardon, and brought it at the critical Minute, when
one end of the Halter was about his Neck, and the other tied to the Gallows,
and the Ladder ready to be taken away. This charitable Person also collected 30
odd Pounds, and gave it him, to bring him over into England, and to put him
into an honest way to live, and so dismissed him, with much good Counsel, which
he never had Grace to follow.

Some Months after, he was 18 years old, he arrived in England, and fell close
to his old Trade, and had such success therein, that in the 19 th. year of his
age, and,

London ss. In the 25 th. Year of His now Majesty's Reign, he was indicted at
the Old Baily, for stealing a Tortoice-shell Cabinet, and ten pieces of old
Gold out of the House of Robert Blagrave, the Vintner that now keeps the
Crown-Tavern behind the Old Exchange. The Jury found the Bill, and he was
afterward tried thereupon, and found Guilty, and being brought to receive
Sentence, and ask't what he had to say for himself that Judgment should not
pass upon him according to Law? he said, he was a Clark, and prayed the benefit
of the Book; which was granted, and he read, and was burned in the left Hand.

Essex. ss. At Chelmsford, in the said County, the first day of March, in the
27 th. Year of His now Majesty's Reign, at the Assizes held there before Sir
Thomas Twisden Knight. and Baronet, John Howel Serjant at Law, and their
Associates, etc.

The Grand Jury being sworn, did find the Bill, wherein Thomas Dangerfield,
late of Walcham Abbey, Labourer, the 29 th. of January, in the 26 th. Year of
His now Majesty's Reign, was indicted for Feloniously stealing and taking away
the goods of one Robert Tetterson Shoemaker, of Windsmore-Hill, a Linnen-bag
worth a penny, and 4 l. 10 s. in money. And the said Dangerfield before he came
to his Trial, broke the Prison, and so got away, and thereupon was out law'd
for the Felony, as by the Record appears.

Wilts. ss. At the Assizes held for the County of Wilts, the 4 th. of August in
the 29 year of his new Majesty, before Sir Thomas Jones, Knight; Thomas Burton,
Sergeant at Law, and other Associates, etc.

The Jury being sworn, and upon their Oaths did find the Bill, wherein Thomas
Willoughby alias Field, late of Wilton, Labourer; did stand Indicted for
uttering false Guineys to one John Penny.

To which Indictment he Pleaded Guilty, and was adjudged to stand in the
Pillory next Market day in the open Marketplace for three hours, from 9 till
12 with a Paper on his forehead, signifying his Crime, and afterward to pay 5
l. to the King, and to lie in Prison till he paid it.

Wilts. ss. At the same Assizes he was indicted of the like Fact, for uttering
a false Guiny at Broad-Chalk, he pleaded Guilty, and was fined five Pounds, and
to stand on the Pillory three hours at New-Sarum another Market day, with a
Paper; on his Forehead, as before.

Wilts. ss. At the same Assizes he was indicted for the like Fact, he Pleaded
Guilty, and was fined five Pounds, and to stand on the Pillory at Wilton three
hours, with an Inscription on his Forehead.

He stood on the Pillory twice at Sarum, and broke the Goal before he was to
stand the third time.

Midlesex. ss. In the 30 th. year of his now Majesty's Reign, he was indicted
at Hicks's Hall, before Sir Reginald Foster, Sir Philip Matthews, Thomas
Harriot Esquire and Associates, by the name of Thomas Dangerfield, alias
Willoughby, alias Moor, Labourer, for uttering 20 false Guinnies in the Parish
of St. Leonard Shoreditch. The Bill was found against him.

That Sessions he was tried and convict at the Old Bailey, and was fined fifty
Pounds, and to lie in Prison till he paid it.

Whilst he lay in Prison for his Fine, he there Practiced Forgery, as Captain
Richardson testified upon Oath, October the (...) 1679. before the Lords of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel; as also, that he never had in his
Custody a more Notorious Rogue.

About November or December following, he broke a hole through the Prison with
the help of his fellows, pretending he would teach them how to make an escape;
but by a Letter to Captain Richardson, gave him notice of their Intentions, and
they were surpised going forth, and rewarded according to their merit; But the
Don escaped Scot-free, and in reward of this Service, Captain Richardson, in
the January following, got him into a general Newgate Pardon, for which he
has since rewarded him with the same gratitude wherewith he has ever repaid
his Benefactors; proving the old Proverb true, Save a Thief from the Gallows,
and he will hang thee if he can.

There he lay till the May following, for want of Money to pay his Fees, at
which time I paid them, and what else I did for him, and upon what inducements
you may read Page the 12. and 13. How he has required me I need not relate, His
Gratitude is Publicly Notorious like his other virtues; in pursuit of which, I
searched till I found his Name Recorded in 28 places, having been Transported,
Burnt in the Hand, five times Adjudged to the Pillory, seven times Fined, twice
Out-lawed for Felony, and broke the Goal in several places eight times; but
the great Charge forced me to desist, though I have been credibly informed that
his Acts were Recorded in many places more, both in England, Wales, Cornwall,
and Ireland, but to give him his due, not one of these Records that I know of,
is for Robbing on the Highway. He is too tender of his own safety, and has too
great a Veneration for the memory of his Murdered Mother, to expose her Son to
any such audacious enterprise; all his Achievements are House-breaking,
Picking of Pockets, Cheats, Forgeries, and Petty Larcenies, etc.

But to return to the Gentleman's Narrative, wherein he says Page 24 on the top
of the leaf, that his pretended Confessor Mr. Sharp, enjoined him for his
Penance, that twice a night, for five nights following, he should walk
barefooted from Powis House in Lincoln's Inn Fields, to Lincoln's Inn back gate,
and back again, which he says he did accordingly, and that every morning for
five mornings he should Discipline his naked shoulders with some Franciscan
Cords which he gave him, and bid him be sure to follow his Advice, if he would
escape Damnation.

Surely the Gentleman's Wits were gone a Wool-gathering, else he would have told
his Confessor, that if lashing could secure him from Damnation, he had enough
of that both in England, Cornwall, Spain and Flanders, having performed many
memorable Penances of that kind; and particularly that of Reading, where he
marched barefooted, and bare-headed before the Beadle to the Towns-end,
attended by all the Youth of the Place, being scourged all the way, and at the
end of the Town, had 20 lashes given him extraordinary, because he had not
money to pay the Jailer.

And having thus exercised his Passive Valor to the satisfaction of all the
Spectators, he was with great shoutings and acclamations, turned off to seek
his Fortune; in pursuit of which he went to the next Town, where a Company of
Soldiers was then quartered, and with great Lamentation told them he had been
set upon by Foot-Pads, and by them robbed of a considerable sum of money, and
most cruelly beaten. These honest Soldiers received him with much humanity,
fed and clothed him as well as they could, promising him to prevail with their
Captain to receive him into the Company; But the next day the fraud was
discovered, for some Persons coming from Reading, made known his good
qualities, with the exemplary Reward he had so lately received: The Soldiers
were so offended at their misplaced Charity, that they beat and kicked him up
and down like a Football, resolving to lash him severely with their Matches;
and in order to it, plucked off his venerable Coat, and the bloody Rag he called
his Shirt, but when they saw his back so pitifully mortified, they (to use his
own words) scorned to fling water upon a drowned Mouse, but let him go whither
he would, and he directed his course toward London, where he arrived in great
state, riding upon his Fathers two legged Colt, having been entertained on the
way by the Charity of well-disposed Persons, etc.

Certainly, had he told Mr. Sharp his Story, he could not have been so severe
to him; especially, if he had produced that undeniable proof he always carries
about him, as plainly appeared to some Gentlemen that went into the Water with
him last Summer, and are ready to depose that the Marks of the Lashes which
have been so freely laid on are still visible on his back in long blue
Stigma's; Yea, as visible as the Letters on his right hand, and much more then
that in the brawn of his left Thumb. This Hero is too well marked to be
forgotten, though his modesty has made him so silent in his own praise, that he
has omitted most of his strange and unparalleled Adventures in England,
Scotland, Ireland, France, Spain, Flanders, and Holland, and elsewhere on the
Coast of Guiny and Barbados, etc. Together with the Just and Generous
Entertainments he found in the Enchanted Castles of Chelmsford, Newgate,
Antwerp, York, Callice, Salisbury, Winbourn, West-chester, Reading, Abbington,
the Gate House, Dublin, the Counter, the King's Bench, with many more, too long
to be related, and too Chargeable for me to take off the Records.

But as the skilful Statuary could guess at Hercules's height by the length of
his foot, so I doubt not but the judicious Reader by the sight of the Records I
have produced, will easily be persuaded to believe the rest, and think his life
so remarkable, that it exceeds all the Worthies of his quality that have gone
before him, and is unmatchable, Even in this Age, That produces such Monstrous
Gigantick Masters of the Diabolical Arts, as himself, Captain Spurn-Cow the
Horse-stealer; Parson lack Latin; Don Cappadocia, Squire of the Plow-tail;
Horse Proud, The Narrative Colonel, Merry Tom of St. Anns Lane, Westminster To
understand the just value of Merry Tom, let them talk with his Father Brother
or Sister, and they will tell you much of his Integrity; for he has other rare
qualities besides Blubbering, and it is not for, nothing that he is called the
Parliament-teazer, and the Council Eves-dropper.
; And the rest, whose Histories when they appear to future Ages, will much out
do the Spanish Guzman, the English Rogue, and the Italian Bandetto mengone,
that is made famous to Posterity, by being adjudged to end his days in an Iron
Cage on the top of a Tower, where he lived Twenty odd years, a great example of
Gods Justice, and at the end thereof, beat out his Brains against the Bars of
the Cage, as Bajazet had done before him, this being within Man's memory, and
some persons as I am credibly informed, yet living in London that have seen
him; And if these Worthies of our Age have Justice done them according to their
Merit, the same perhaps may live to see them as well provided for at the
Public Charge.

Psalm. 121.1, 3. The Fool has said in his Heart there is no God, they are
corrupt, they have done abominable Works, there is none that does good. They
are all gone aside, they are altogether filthy, there is none that does good,
no not one.

Psalm. 50.22. Now consider this ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces,
and there be none to deliver.

I understand that the Gentleman is going to Publish his life at large, by the
name of Don Francisco de Corombona, in attestation of the Truth of which, this
short Epistle of his Fortunes and Virtues is Published by

Elizabeth Cellier.


