To Dr. -- An Answer to his Queries, concerning the COLLEGE of MIDWIVES.
TO answer your Query, Doctor, Whether ever there were a College of Midwives in
any part of the World? According to my Promise made the 12 th Instant, I will
now prove, there was some Hundreds, if not Thousands of Years before you can
prove one of Physicians: As appears both by Sacred and Profane Histories. I
will begin with the first; and desire you to read the first Chapter of Exodus.

Verse. 15. And the King of Egypt spoke to the Hebrew Midwives, of which the
Name of the one was Shiprah, and the other Puah.

Verse. 16. And he said unto them, When ye do the Office of a Midwife to the
Hebrew Women, and see them upon the Stools; if it be a Son, you shall kill
him: but if it be a Daughter, then she shall live.

Verse. 17. But the Midwives feared God, and did not as the King of Egypt
commanded them, but saved the Men Children alive.

Verse. 20. Wherefore God dealt well with the Midwives: and the People
multiplied, and waxed very mighty.

Verse. 21. And it came to pass, because the Midwives feared God, that he made
them Houses.

I believe no Rational Person will think that these two Women could in their
own Persons act as Midwives to all the Women of that mighty People, who about
100 Years after went up out of Egypt 600000 Fighting Men, besides Women and
Children, and a great mixed Multitude, but rather that they were the Governesses
and Teachers of other Midwives, which could not be a few; and as I am informed
by a Learned Rabbi, now in Town, their Names signify the same.

And the Apostle says, That God built them Houses, and blessed them.

Now if it were, as some think, that these were not Israelites but Egyptians,
appointed Governesses over such as should assist the Hebrew Women, who by
Conversation among them learned the knowledge of the only true God, and fearing
him, did not impose those bloody Orders of destroying the Males.

Then it was plain that the Government of that Art was regular, under
Superiors, as the Magi and Priesthood of that Nation was, and must have some
certain place for consulting in, from whence they might issue their Directions.
Which, by your leave, Doctor, without Absurdity in the Language of these Times,
might well be called a College.

But for the Piety of the Ruling Midwives God built them Houses: that is, they
were Incorporated into the Body of the Jews, and reckoned Honorable Families
among them: As Rahab and others for their singular Service to that Nation
afterward were. Which Families of the Faithful Midwives, some Hebrews say,
continue in Honor among them at Thessalonica to this Day.

And such a favor from God of building Houses for them, we do not read the
Physicians ever received; nor was Physic then a regular Study, nor brought
under Government in that Learned Nation of Egypt, in Herodotus his time, which
put together, proves the Antiquity of the Midwives Government so much antienter
than that of the Doctors.

For your further Satisfaction be pleased to read Origin his 11 th Homily upon
Exodus, which will inform you, that Shiprah and Puah were not only the
Governesses of the Midwives, but also Women of Great Learning, and excellently
skilled in Physic, which was then practiced by Women to Women.

And you cannot deny at our last Conference, but that Hippocrates swears by
Apollo and Escalapius, and by Hygea and Panacea the Gods and Goddesses of
Physic: And pray, Doctor, who were the Gods and Goddesses of Antiquity, but
Men and Women, who first found out and taught Arts and Mysteries so beneficial
to Mankind, as made them think they could not but be guided by a Divine Spirit
to the knowledge of things so useful and so far above the Vulgar Capacities
This? Hippocrates is so ingenuous as to confess, and does not part the Gods and
Goddesses, but had them in equal Veneration, as appears by his Oath, to which I
refer you, because I perceive you have forgot it; For he swears he will not cut
those that have the Stone, but will leave it to the skilful in that Practice.
But you, tho you understand nothing of it, pretend to teach us an Art much more
difficult (And which ought to be kept as a Secret amongst Women as much as is
possible.)

It Is true among the subtle Athenians, some Physicians being gotten into the
Government, and Miscarriages happening to some Noble Women about that time,
they obtained a Law, that for the future no Woman should study or practice any
part of Physic on pain of Death. This Law continued some time, during which
many Women perished both in Child bearing, and by private Diseases; their
Modesty not permitting them to admit of Men either to Deliver or Cure them.

Till God stirred up the Spirit of Agnodicea, a Noble Maid, to pity the
miserable condition of her own Sex, and hazard her Life to help them, which to
enable her self to do, she cut off her Hair, Apparelled her self like a Man,
and became the Scholar of Hyrophilus the most Famous Physician of that Time,
and having learned the Art, she found out a Woman that had long languish'd
under private Diseases, and made proffer of her Service to cure her, which the
sick Person refused, thinking her to be a Man; but when Agnodicea had
discovered that she was a Maid, the Woman committed her self into her Hands,
who cured her perfectly: And after her many others with the like Skill and
Industry. So that in a short time she became the Successful and Beloved
Physician of the whole Sex, none but she being called to assist them.

This so incensed the Physicians that they conspired her Ruin, saying she
shaved off her Beard to abuse the Women, who feigned themselves Sick to enjoy
her Company; and there being Witnesses to be found then (as of late Years, that
would swear any thing for Money) she was upon their Testimony, condemned to
Death for committing Adultery with Agisilea one of the Areopagites Wives; it
being easy to make Old Men, who had beautiful Wives, believe any thing of so
young and handsome a Doctor.

This forced Agnodicea to discover her Sex to save her Life; and then the
enraged Physicians accused her of transgressing the Law, which forbid Women to
Study or Practice Physic. And for this Crime she was like to be condemned to
Death; which coming to the Ears of the Noble Women, they ran before the
Areopagites, which were the Chief Magistrates, and the House being encompassed
by most Women of the City, the Ladies entered before the Judges, and told them
they would no longer account them for Husbands or Friends, but for cruel
Enemies, that condemned her to Death, who restored them to their Healths;
protesting they would all die with her if she were put to Death.

This caused the Magistrates to disanul that Law, and make another, which gave
Gentlewomen leave to Study and Practice all parts of Physic to their own Sex,
giving large Stipends to those that did it well and carefully, and imposing
severe Penalties upon the unskilful and negligent: And there were many Noble
Women who studied that Practice, and taught it publicly in their Schools as
long as Athens flourished in Learning.

But Phanarota the Mother of wise Socrates, who was a Woman of great Learning
and Skill, deserves a particular remembrance, both for her own, and her Son's
sake; who, as it is believed by many, was a Martyr, being put to Death for
professing there was but one God, which Wisdom himself says he learned of his
Mother. Thus, Doctor, it appears, even that Learned Idolatrous City had in it a
Midwife that knew and feared the true God: Tho, as the Apostle says, there was
an Altar therein dedicated to the unknown God, etc.

This Ambrose Perre, Counselor and Chyrurgion to the King of France, and his
Ingenuous Disciple Gulielmus, prove fully: and that is as far as my small
Learning and weak Capacity goes. But you, Doctor, may prove it more at large
when you please, by the Hebrew, Greek, Latin and Arabic Books, which treat on
these Subjects; in which times the three parts of Physic, Midwifery,
Surgery, and the making up and administering of Medicines, were all one, tho
the last, which was then the servile part, has now usurped upon the other two;
but we pretend only to the First, as being the most Ancient, Honorable and
Useful Part: Wherein we desire you not to concern your selves, until we desire
your Company, which we will certainly do as often as we have occasion for your
Advice in any thing we do not understand, or which does not appertain to our
Practice.

But to come into our own Country, it is not hard to prove by ancient British
Books and Writings, that before the Romans came hither here were Colleges of
Women practicing Physic, dedicated to some of the Female Deities; but whether
so ancient as the Bards I cannot tell, tho some old British Songs written in
praise of the Goddess Trawth, seem to prove it: but they were in the time of
the Druides, as appears both by British and French Books, and the Name of Wise
Women, by which Midwives are still called in France, and most of the Western
Parts, as they are by that of Wise Mother in the Low Countries, Germany, and
most of the Northern Parts of the World.

And here in London were Colleges of Women about the Temple of Diana, who was
Goddess of Midwives here, as well as at Ephesus. From whence the Grecians say,
she was absent at Q. Olympia's Labor, who was that Night delivered of
Alexander the Great; where she was so fully employed, that she could not defend
her Stately Temple, which was burned down by Herostrateus the Shoemaker, to
perpetuate his Name.

Nor did the Bishops pretend to License Midwives till Bp. Bonner's time, who
drew up the Form of the first License, which continued in full force till 1642,
and then the Physicians and Chirurgions contending about it, it was adjudged a
Chyrurgical Operation, and the Midwives were Licensed at Chirurgions-Hall, but
not till they had passed three Examinations, before six skilful Midwives, and
as many Chirurgions expert in the Art of Midwifery. Thus it continued until the
Act of Uniformity passed, which sent the Midwives back to Doctors Commons,
where they pay their Money, (take an Oath which is impossible for them to keep)
and return home as skilful as they went thither.

I make no Reflections on those learned Gentlemen the Licensers, but refer the
curious for their further satisfaction, to the Yearly Bills of Mortality, from
42 to 62: Collections of which they may find at Clerks-Hall: Which if they
please to compare with these of late Years, they will find there did not then
happen the eight part of the Casualties, either to Women or Children, as do now.

I hope, Doctor, these Considerations will deter any of you from pretending to
teach us Midwifery, especially such as confess they never delivered Women in
their Lives, and being asked What they would do in such a Case? reply they have
not yet studied it, but will when occasion serves; This is something to the
purpose I must confess, Doctor: But I doubt it will not satisfy the Women of
this Age, who are so sensible and impatient of their Pain, that few of them
will be prevailed with to bear it, in Complement to the Doctor, while he
fetches his Book, studies the Case, and teaches the Midwife to perform her
work, which she hopes may be done before he comes.

I protest, Doctor, I have not Power enough with the Women to hope to prevail
with them to be patient in this case, and I think if the Learned of you all
should propose it whilst the Pains are on, he would come off with the same
Applause which Phormio had, who having never seen a Battle in his Life, read a
Military Lecture to Hannibal the Great.

But let this pass, Doctor, as I do the Discourses you have often made to me on
this Subject, and I will tell you something worthy of your most serious
Consideration: Which is,

That in September last, our Gracious Sovereign was pleased to promise to unite
the Midwives into a Corporation, by His Royal Charter, and also to found a
Cradle-Hospital, to breed up exposed Children, to prevent the many Murders, and
the Executions which attend them; which pious Design will never want a suitable
Return from God, who no doubt will fully reward his Care for preserving so many
Innocents as would otherwise be lost.

And I doubt not but one way will be by giving him a Prince by his Royal
Consort, who like another Moses may become a Mighty Captain for the Nation; and
lead to Battle the Soldiers which the Hospital will preserve for him.

And now, Doctor, let me put you in mind, that tho you have often Laughed at
me, and some Doctors have accounted me a Mad Woman these last four Years, for
saying Her Majesty was full of Children, and that the Bath would assist her
Breeding: It Is now proved so true, that I have cause to hope my self may live
to praise God, not only for a Prince of Wales, and a Duke of York, but for many
other Royal Babes by Her; and if the over Officious will but be pleased to let
them live, I hope in a few Years to see them Muster their little Soldiers:
Which Joyful Sight, I believe, is the hearty Desire of all Loyal Subjects, of
what Persuasion soever, as it is the daily and fervent Prayer of,

Your Servant, ELIZABETH CELLEOR.
From my House in Arundel-street, near St. Clement's Church in the Strand. Jan.
16. 1687/8. Where the Word of a King is, there is Power: and who shall say unto
him, What do thou? Eccles. 8. verse. 4.
FINIS.
Let this be Printed,

SUNDERLAND. P.


