CERTAIN CONSIDERATIONS Tending to promote PEACE AND GOOD WILL Amongst
PROTESTANTS: Very useful for the present Times.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns at the
lower end of Cheapside near Mercers-Chappel, 1674.

Considerations tending to promote Peace.
1 Cons. THat some of the most considerable ranks and orders of men, from the
Reformation of Religion amongst us, have manifested a desire to have some
Favor and Indulgence showed to Dissenters in point of Ceremonies, etc. 2. That
Dissenters or Non-conformists have often been misrepresented to the World. 3.
The late Civil Wars in England were not begun for the extirpation of Episcopacy
and Liturgy, or to settle the Presbyterian Government here. 4. That the Modern
English Presbyterians as they are called, cannot be charged with diverse of the
Principles imputed to those called Presbyterians in England in the days of
Queen Elizabeth, or to the Presbyterians in Scotland. 5. That there have been
since the first Reformation in England, men of Parts, Piety, and Learning, and
of good esteem in the Church of God, who have boggled or scrupled at something
in Subscription, or the Conformity enjoined or practiced. 6. That diverse
Dissenters in former times have found favor with the Bishops. 7. That the
Parliamentarians in the beginning of our Troubles declare to abhor and detest
all designs of Deposing or Murdering His late Sacred Majesty. 8. That the
Nonconforming Presbyterians had both their hearts and hands in the
Restoration of His present Majesty to His Royal Throne. 9. Many Bishops,
Clergymen, and Scholars, though Non-conformists to the late times, then
enjoyed Places of Profit notwithstanding. 10. That it is the declared Doctrine
of the Church of England, in her 34th Article of Religion. That every
Particular or National Church has Authority to ordain, change, and abolish
Ceremonies or Rites of the Church, ordained only by man's Authority, so that all
things be done to Edification. 11. That if the New Impositions and the
Ceremonies should happen to be legally taken away, many Thousands who now stand
aloof off would Join with our Church Assemblies. 12. That the use of force or
violent coursos for by Matters in Religion, ought by all lawful ways and means
to be shunned and avoided.
Certain Considerations tending to promote Peace and Good will amongst
Protestants, useful for the present Times.
INstead of Preface, and to prepare the minds of men for such Considerations as
follow, I desire the Reader to read certain excellent sayings of the Reverend
Dean of the Chapel, now Primate and Metropolitan of all England, in a Sermon
of his Preached before the King June 28th. 1660. and after Printed, viz. I
hat's the best the most Christian Memory, which as Caesar, forgets nothing but
Injuries. -- Again, Let Us all seriously and sadly look back, consider and
bemoan one another for what we have mutually done and suffered from each other,
let us all be sorry for it, and all mend, perfectly forgiving what is past, and
returning to as great a kindness as ever, and a greater then ever, that so by
all mutual good Offices, we may make amends for former animosities. Shall God,
says he, so great, so glorious, after so high, so many Provocations, descend
to be at peace with us, and shall we poor worms be at enmity among our selves
for tristes, and that to the hazard of all the comforts of this life, and hopes
of a better? And further, shall we retain the memory of former unkindnesses,
and make a public Act of Oblivion, which we expect, a Public Lie? without
either fear of God or shame of the world. This is not to have peace or enjoy
it, but with great ingratitude to throw it at him again; it is but to change
one War into another, the open into secret, hostility into treachery; and by
pretending peace and kindness, to smooth the way to supplantation, and injury,
the most base Serpentine, and unmanly thing in the world.

These Golden sayings premised, I humbly offer these Considerations,

1 Consid. That some of the most considerable Ranks and Orders of men, since
the Reformation of Religion amongst us have manifested a desire to have some
favor, or Indulgence showed to Dissenters in point of Ceremonies, etc.
King Edward the 6th. wrote a Letter to Archbishop Cranmer in behalf of Mr.
Hooper elected Bishop of Gleucester.

RIght Reverend Father, and Right trusty and Well-beloved,
Whereas We by the advice of our Council, have called and chosen Our right
Well-beloved, and well worthy Mr. John Hooper, to be Our Bishop of Gloucester;
as well for his great Learning, due Judgment, and long study both in the
Scriptures and other profound Learning; as also for his good discretion, ready
utterance, and honest life, for that kind of Vocation, etc. from Consecrating
of whom We understand you do stay, because he would have you omit certain Rites
and Ceremonies offensive to his Conscience, whereby ye think you should fall in
Praemunire of Laws: We have thought good by advice aforesaid, to dispense and
discharge you of all manner of dangers, penalties, and forfeitures you should
run into, and be in any manner of way, by omitting any of the same. And these
Our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and Discharge therefore.

Aug. 5th. Given under Our Signet at Our Castle of Windsor the fourth year of
Our Reign.

King James also wrote two Letters to Queen Elizabeth in favor of
Non-conformists, one whereof you may read in D. Fuller's History of the Church;
Book the 9th. Page 203.

After these, King Charles the First, of blessed Memory, in His Answer to the
Remonstrance of the House of Commons presented to Him at Hampton Court,
December the first, 1641. says as follows, In differences amongst Our selves,
for matters indifferent in their own Nature, concerning Religion, we shall in
tenderness to any number of our Loving Subjects, very willingly comply with the
Advice of Our Parliament, that some Law may be made for the exemption of tender
Consciences from punishment, or prosecution for such Ceremonies, and in such
Cases, which, by the judgment of most men, are held to be matters indifferent,
and of some to be absolutely unlawful. And again in his Message of the 20th. of
Jan. 1641. His Majesty proposes to both Houses of Parliament, the security of
the true Religion now professed in the Church of England, and the settling of
Ceremonies in such a manner as may take away all just offense. In His Message
of the 14th. of February following, His Majesty more fully expresses himself,
viz in these words. Because His Majesty observes great and difficult troubles
to arise in the hearts of his People concerning the Government and Liturgy of
the Church, His Majesty is willing to declare, that he will refer that whole
Consideration to the Wisdom of His Parliament, which he desires them to enter
into speedily, that the present Distempers about the same may be composed --
Since, His most Gracious Majesty that now is, and long and long may he continue
our Sovereign Lord and King, has often declared his willingness to Indulge
tender Consciences, witness his Declaration from Breda. His Declaration
afterward October 8th. 1660. in which His Majesty says, Our present
consideration and work is to gratify the private Consciences of those who are
grieved with the use of some Ceremonies, by indulging to, and dispensing with
the omitting of those Ceremonies. Which Indulg nt Declaration so ravished the
hearts of all Your Loving Subjects (says a Member of the House of Commons, in
an Epistle to His Majesty) that Your whole House of Commons, their
Representatives, then Assembled in Parliament, immediately after the
Publication, October the 9th. 1660. repaired in a Body to White Hall, and there
by their Speakers Oration in the Banqueting House, expressed their
extraordinary great joy, and presented their general thanks to Your Majesty,
for this Your Majesty's most Gracious Declaration and Dispensation, and with
their Consciences, in matters not being of the substance or essence of
Religion; which gave abundant satisfaction to all peaceable sober-minded men,
and such as are truly Religious, in which return of their thanks they were all
unanimous, Nemine Contradicente. Then ordering a Bill in pursuance of Your
Majesty's Declaration. Note; That this was that House of Commons, which
together with the House of Lords, brought His Majesty to His Throne. And hence
we may infer that those who are for indulgence to tender Consciences, may be
Good and Loyal Subjects to His Majesty. I read, that in the days of King
James, namely, in the Tenth year of His Reign, the Members of the House of
Commons thus Petitioned His Majesty. Whereas diverse painful and Learned Pastors
that have long time travailed in the work of the Ministry, with good fruit and
blessing of their Labors, have been removed from their Ecclesiastical Livings,
being their Freehold, and debarred from all means of maintenance, to the great
grief of sundry Your Majesty's well-affected Subjects; We therefore humbly
beseech Your Majesty would be graciously pleased, that such deprived and
silenced Ministers, living quietly and peaceably, may be restored, etc. See
Beams of former light, page 103. And in the Thirtieth year of the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, the House of Commons presented to the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal a Petition containing diverse particulars, for the redress whereof they
desire, That no Oath or Subscription might be tendered to any at their entrance
into the Ministry, but such as is expressly prescribed by the Statutes of this
Realm, except the Oath against corrupt entering, That they may not be troubled
for the Omission of some Rites or portions prescribed in the Book of Common
Prayer; That such as had been suspended or deprived for no other offense, but
only for not subscribing, might be restored, etc.

In the next place I shall set before you to consider of the moderation of some
of the Nobility. In the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, the great Duke of
Northumberland wrote to the Archbishop of Canterbury for favor to Mr. Hooper
then Lord Bishop Elect of Gloucester. The Letter we have recorded by Dr. Fuller
to his Church History, in these words.

AFter my most hearty Commendations to your Grace, these may be to desire the
same that in such necessary things wherein this Bearer my Lord Elect of
Gloucester craveth to be born withal at your hands, you would vouchsafe to
show him your Graces favor, the rather at this my Instance, which thing partly
I have taken in hand by the Kings Majesty's own motion. The matter is weighed
by his Highness, none other, but that your Grace may facilely condescend
thereunto. The Principal cause is, that you would not charge this said Bearer
with an Oath burthensom to his Conscience. And so for lack of time, I commit
your Grace to the tuition of Almighty God,

July 23. 1550. Your Graces most assured Loving Friend John Warwick.


It Is thought by the Historian that the Oath scrupled at, was the Oath of
Canonical Obedience to the Archbishop, which consequentially commanded such
Ceremonies, which Hooper was willing to decline.

In the 26th year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth (if our Historian time it
right) eight of the Privy Council wrote a large Letter to the Bishops of
Canterbury and London; toward the close whereof there are these words.

Now therefore we, for the discharge of our duties, being by our Vocation,
under Her Majesty bound to be careful that the Universal Realm may be well
Governed, to the Honor and Glory of God, and to the discharge of Her Majesty,
being the Principal Governor over all Her Subjects under Almighty God, do most
earnestly desire your Lordships to take some charitable consideration of these
causes, that the People of this Realm may not be deprived of their Pastors,
being diligent, Learned and zealous, though in some points Ceremonial, they may
seem doubtful only in Conscience, and not of wilfulness, etc.

Your Lordships loving Friends Will. Burghley. George Shrewsbury. A. Warwick.
R. Leicester. C. Howard. J. Croft. Cbr. Hatton. Frae. Walsingham.



It Is thought by Dr. Fuller, that Sir Francis Ruowles, Treasurer of the Queens
Household, and Knight of the Garter, Father in Law to the Earl of Leicester, was
casually absent from the Council Board at this time, and that is the Reason he
is missed here amongst the Privy Counselors; for he was, says he, a great
Patron of the Non-conformists. Hereunto I shall add a passage at the Council
Table concerning Mr. Paul Baines, a noted Nonconformist, he was called by
Bishop Harsnet to the Council Table, and accused for keeping of Conventicles
and when he was accused hereof before the Privy Council, one of the Noble men
said, Speak, speak for your self, whereupon he made such an Excellent Speech,
that in the midst thereof a Nobleman stood up and said, He speaks more like an
Angel than a Man, and I dare not stay here to have a hand in any Sentence
against him; upon which Speech they dismissed him, and he never heard more from
them.

And now after Kings, the Commons in Parliament, and Lords of the Privy Council
have appeared in this matter, give me leave to add the testimony of a Bishop in
the next place. It was the Bishop of St. David's, and I think Bishop Rudd. Hear
him speaking for Moderation and Condescension in his Speech to the rest of the
Bishops in Convocation, May 23. 1604. and being dead, he yet speaks. I put
great difference, says he, between quod liceat and quod expediat, and likewise
between them that are Schismatical, or open disturbers of the State
Ecclesiastical established, and them that are scrupulous only upon some
Ceremonies, and other Circumstances, being otherwise Learned, Studious, Grave
and Honest men, whose pains have been both painful in the Church, and
profitable to their several Congregations; concerning these Preachers last
mentioned, I suppose that if upon urging them to the use of Ceremonies and
attire prescribed, they should stand out stiffly and choose rather to forego
their Livings and the exercise of their Ministry. And though I do not justify
their doings therein, yet surely their Service would be missed at such time us
need shall require them, to give the right hand of fellowship one to another,
and go arm in arm against the Common Adversary, that so there might be vis
Unita fortior, in which case, want of their joint labors with ours, there
might arise cause of some such doleful complaint as fell out upon an accident
of another nature in the Book of Judges Chapter the 5.15, where it is said that
for the divisions of Reuben, there were great thoughts of heart. Also remember
that the Benjamites, though for their desert, in maintaining a bad cause, were
all destroyed saving Six hundred, and the men of Israel swear in their fury
that none of them would give his Daughter to Wife to the Benjamites, yet when
their hot blood was over, they lamented, and said, there is one Tribe cut off
from Israel this day; and they used all their wits to the uttermost of their
policy to restore that Tribe again; In like sort if those our Brethren
aforesaid should be deprived of their places, for the matters premised, I think
we should find cause to bend our wits to the uttermost extent of our Skill, to
provide some Cure of Souls for them where they may exercise their Talents.
Besides this, forasmuch as in the lifetime of the late Archbishop of
Canterbury, these things were not so extremely urged, but that many Learned
Preachers enjoyed their Liberty herein, conditionally that they did not by word
or deed openly disturb, or disgrace the State established, I would know a
Reason why it should now be so general and exceeding strictly called upon,
especially seeing that these men are now the men necessary by so much we see
the greater increase of Papists to be of late then were before. To conclude, I
wish I wish, that if by Petition made to the Kings Majesty there cannot be
obtained a juite removal of the Premises, which seem so grievous to diverse;
nor yet a toleration for them which be of the more stayed and temperate
carriage; yet at least there might be procured a mitigation of the penalty, if
they cannot be drawn by other Reasons to a conformity with us. See B. of F. L.
p. 205. And now to this Bishops excellent Speech, let me subjoyn what I find in
Print, by a Son of the Church, I may say by a great Champion and Pillar of the
Protestant Church, in his Preface to the Reader before his Irenicum, What
Charter (says he) has Christ given the Church to bind men up to more then
himself has done? or to exclude those from Society, who may be admitted into
Heaven? It is not whether the things commanded and required be lawful or no; it
is not how Christians are bound to submit to a restraint of their Christian
Liberty which I now inquire after (of these things in the Treatise it self) but
whether they do consult for the Churches peace, and unity, who suspend it upon
such things; how far either the example of our Savior or his Apostles do
warrant such rigorous Impositions. We never read of the Apostles making Laws,
but of things supposed necessary -- It was not enough with them, that the
things would be necessary when they had required them, but they looked on an
Antecedent necessity, either absolute or for the presint State, which was the
only ground of imposing those commands upon the Gentile Christians -- would
there ever be the less unity in a Church, if a diversity was allowed as to
practices supposed Indifferent; yea, there would be so much the more, as there
was a mutual forbearance and condescension as to such things. And a little
after speaking of the Primitive Church; he adds, It was never thought worth the
while to make any standing Law for Rites and Customs, that had no other
Original but Tradition. Much less to suspend men her Communion for not
observing them. -- The first who broke this Order in the Church, were the
Arrians, Donatists, and Circumcellians, whilst the true Church was still known
by its pristine Moderation and sweetness of deportment toward all its Members.
The same we hope may remain, and the most infallible evidence of the Conformity
of our Church of England to the Primitive, not so much in using the same Rites
as were in use then, as in not imposing them, but leaving men to be won, by the
observing the true decency and order of Churches, whereby those who act upon a
Principle of Christian Ingenuity, may be sooner drawn to a compliance in all
lawful things, than by force and rigorous Impositions, which made men suspect
the weight of the thing it self when such force is used to make it enter. In
the mean time, what cause have we to rejoice that Almighty God has been
pleased to restore us a Prince of that Excellent Prudence and Moderation, who
has so lately given assurance to the world of his great Indulgence toward
all, that have any pretense from Conscience to differ from their brethren. From
the Premises it appears abundantly that Dissenters and Scruplers in by-matters
have had some Friends as well as many Enemies, and the Reason they have had no
more Friends, has certainly been a Mis-representation of them to the world as
Seditious and Turbulent persons, Enemies to Caesar and all good Government and
Order in Church and State.

And this ushers in our second Consideration; namely, That Dissenters or
Non-conformists have been frequently falsely represented to the world. Of old
the Jews not worshipping the same Gods that the Egyptians and other Nations
did, were accused to worship an Asses head, and once a year to Sacrifice a
Grecian according to their Rites and Ceremonies, and to taste and cat of his
entrails, and in the Sacrificing of the Grecian, to Swear to be Enemies to the
Greeks. v. losephus in his Second Book against Apion. Our blessed Savior
himself was accused to be an Enemy to Caesar, the Holy Apostles were charged to
turn the world upside down. The Primitive Christians were Judged to be Atheists
because they would not worship the Gods of the Heathens, on them was laid the
blame of all the Plagues, and Droughts, and Famines, and Wars, and what ever
else was hurtful to Mankind, as you may read in Arnobius his first Book
adversus Gentes. Of later times the Papists have charged the Protestants as the
Authors of Rebellion and Sedition.

Mr. Gattaker had a Book which was given a Neighbor of his (when taken and
carried to Dunkirk, to make him a good Catholic) the Title was Monarcho
Machia, or Jerusalem and Babel; wherein the Author labors to maintain that the
Protestant Religion, and the Presbyterian Discipline, were in all parts
introduced and upheld by Sedition and Rebellion: To make this good, he charge
Calvin with such Seditious Doctrine, as the Protestant Leaders built their
Rebellion upon. To prove that Calvin by his Doctrine discharges men of Oaths
made to their Sovereigns, he alleges his Fourth Book, Chap. 13. Paragraph the
21, saying, a man illuminate with the truth, Simul vinculis omnibus obediendi
legibus and Ecclesiae solutus est. He that once has perfect knowledge of the
Gospel, is absolved from Oaths, and all such Snares. Now turn to the place in
Calvin's Institutions, and you shall soon descry palpable Knavery. For Calvin
in all that whole Chapter has not one word of such Oaths of Allegiance as
Subjects take to their Sovereigns. He treats only of Monastical or Monkish
Vows, of these, not of those; his words are only these, Nunc postquam veritatis
notitia sunt illuminati, simul Christi gratia liberos esse dico. That is, Now
they, to wit, who formerly had made such unwarrantable Vows, and out of Error
and Ignorance held themselves obliged therewith, after they are enlightened with
notice of the truth, are, I say, free by the grace of God. To this, as Mr.
Gattaker observes, the same Author adds another as gross and palpable as the
former. These seditious and popular Consistories, says he, the Presbyteries,
he means, are condemned by their half-brethren the Zuinglians. Hear, says he,
the voice of Gualterus a Minister of Zurich, how bitter a Sentence he
pronounces against them in his Commentary on 1 Corinthians. Cap. 5th. Galli habent
sua Seniorum Consistoria penes quos est omnis potestas and Jurisdictio
Ecclesiastica; and in quibus omnium Bellorum contra Regem, and consilia acta,
and subsidia collecta sunt. That is, The French- Ministers have their
Consistories of Elders, in whom rests the Supremacy of Jurisdiction in all
causes Ecclesiastical; and by these all Counsels and Resolutions are taken, and
all Impositions appointed to maintain the Wars against the King. Thus the
aforesaid nameless Author, but says Mr. Gattaker, let any man sedulously
peruse, as my self have done, the whole Commentary of Gualter upon that Chapter
consisting of, and concluded in four Sermons, and he shall find not one title
there, either of the French King, or of the French Consistory, or of ought
consulted or enacted, or acted in the one against the other. He speaks indeed
in the second Sermon on that Chapter, of the Popes Excommunications, wherewith,
says he, they cruelly vexed Kings and Emperors, and were Authors of Civil Wars
and Seditions; deemeth the Presbyteriall Government, not so needfvl under a
Christian Magistrate; but leaves every Church free, to that course of
Discipline that they shall find to be for themselves most commodious, without
censuring of others, who therein differ from them; And this is all he has
there of this Argument. But this obscure Fellow, for the further confirmation
of these his fictions and falsehoods, sends us to Musculus his Common Places,
Chap. 10. Title de Officiis Ministrorum; but Mr. Gattaker says, that Musculus
in his Common Places. Loc. 22. Title the 2d. De Officiis Ministrorum, has much
indeed of the pride formality, either no Preaching, or unprofitable Discourse
of the Popish Prelates and Priests. Of the Presbytery not a word good or bad.
See Mr. Gattaker his Vindication of the Annotations on Jeremiah the Tenth, 2d.
v. page 15, 16. I cannot tell whether ever Dr. P. H. did meet with this Popish
Author, or no; and whether he did Plough with his Heifer in the History of the
Presbyterians; yet surely he may very well be yoaked with him, for he charge
the Churches reformed and modeled after the Calvinian Mode of Government in the
Low Countries, France and Scotland with Rebellion and Treason. But as good hap
is, a most Learned Bishop of our own Church in his Treatise of Christian
Subjection, page 521. excuses the Germans, Flemings, and Scots from Rebellion.
Why should the Germans, says he, submitting themselves to the Emperor at his
Election but on condition, not enjoy the same liberties and securities of their
public State, which their Fathers did before them? Why should they be
accounted Rebels for preserving their Polity, more than the Italians, who cut
themselves utterly from the Empire, by no consent or allowance, but only force
and disturbance. The same we say for the Flemings what Reason the King of Spain
should alter their State, and avert their ancient Laws, his Style declaring
him not to be King, but Earl of Flanders, and being admitted for a Protector,
if he will needs become an Oppressor, why should they not defend the Freedom
of their Country? The Scots, what have they done, besides placing the right
Heir, and he an own Son, when the Mother fled and forsook the Realm? Be these
those Furious Attempts and Rebellions you talk of? So Bishop Bilson against his
Romish Adversary. And now that Bishop Bilson has spoken. Let the Priest or
Presbyter Dr. P. H. hold his tongue. And let one of his own Order be heard
speak in the like case. It Is Doctor Peter Du Moulin, Canon of Christ-Church in
Canterbury, and one of His Majesty's Chaplains. He vindicates the City of
Geneva, and the Introduction of Reformation into that State from the Crime of
Rebellion. It is utterly false, says he in his Answer to Philanax Anglicus,
page 28. that Calvin was one of the Planters of the Reformed Religion at
Geneva; false also, that He, or the Reformers of Geneva turned their Bishop out
of doors; and false also that the Bishop went away upon the quarrel of
Religion. Farell, Fromont, and Viret, were they that wrought under God the
Conversion of the City, by their Sermons, and by a public Conference with the
Friars and Clergy of Geneva, there being then no Bishop in that Town, he was
fled eight Months before, seeing his Conspiracy discovered to oppress the
Liberties of the City, by the help of the Duke of Savoy, for which his
Secretary was Hanged, after the Bishop was gone; the said Bishop being hated
before for the Rape of a Virgin, and many Adulteries with Citizens Wives: And
it is most to be noted, that they who after his flight reformed the civil
Government, were strong Papists, and mainly opposed the Reformation of
Religion. How the aforesaid Dr. Moulin vindicates the French Protestants from
Treason and Rebellion may be seen at large in the Treatise before cited, p. 30
31, 32, etc. I shall here insert as to the French Protestants Loyalty the
Testimony of King James, who was a great Monarch, Jealous of the Royal
Authority, cited by the aforesaid Author. Inever yet knew, says King James,
That the French Protestants took Arms against their King; In the first troubles
they stood only upon their defense, before they took Arms, they were burnt and
massacred every where; and the quarrel did not begin for Religion, but because
when King Francis the Second was under Age, they had been the Refuge of the
Princes of the blood expelled from Court, even of the Grandfather of this King
now Reigning, and of that of the Prince of Conde, who knew not where to take
Sanctuary: for which the present King has reason to wish them well: It shall
not be found that they made any other War. Nay, is it not true that King Henry
the Third sent Armies against them to destroy them, and yet they came to his
help as soon as they saw him in danger. Is it not true that they saved his life
at Tours, and delivered him from an extreme peril? Is it not true that they
never forsook him nor his Successors in the midst of the revolt and Rebellion,
of most part of the Kingdom raised by the Pope, and the greatest part of the
Clergy? Is it not true that they have assisted him in all his Battles, and
helped much to raise the Crown again, which was ready to fall? Is it not true
that they which persecuted the late King Henry the Fourth, enjoy this day the
Fruits of the Services done by the Protestants? Such a Judgment, says Dr. Du
Moulin is of good weight, coming from a wise King, who was truly informed of
the business of his Neighbors. And if so, then Dr. P. H. surely was
misinformed himself, and has misrepresented the Case of the French
Protestants to the world in his late History of the Presbyterians, as he has
also done of the Netherland and Scots. For the Reformed Religion, says Dr. P.
Du Moulin was spread in the Netherlands over the Seventeen Provinces many years
before there was any thought of making an Union against the Spaniards, and
neither was that Union made upon the score of Religion; but of State for
maintaining their Franchises, against the oppression of Spain: As it was
sufficiently justified by their choosing Francis Duke of Alenson a Roman
Catholic for their Prince. So here, for a farther clearing of the Netherlands
from Rebellion. Mr. Cambden tells us, that after Reasons had been urged before
Queen Elizabeth to prove them Rebels; Her Majesty resolved, that it was both
Christian Piety to relieve the afflicted Netherlanders, embracers of the same
Religion She professed, and Wisdom to provide for the safety of Her People. And
again he tells us, that Anno 1587. the States in Parliament, (where were the
Bishops also) congratulated Queen Elizabeth, as for good Laws, so for the
French King and the Netherlands relieved. It Is worth the observation that Queen
Elizabeth, and the Parliament of England looked on the Presbyterians in
Holland, as of the same Religion with themselves, notwithstanding the
difference in Church Government and Ceremonies. Mr. Gattaker observes out of
John Bodin an Ingenuous and Judicious Writer, and a Papist himself, an Author
of good note amongst Papists and Protestants both, a notable commendation of
Geneva. See Method. Histor. cap. 6. page 245 That of the Genevians, says
Bodin, is landable if ought in any Nation, and that which makes a Commonwealth
to flourish, if not in Riches and Majestical Empire, yet sure in Piety and
Virtue, to wit the Pontificial Censure, (so he calls the Ecclesiastical or
Presbyterial Discipline) -- In that City therefore no Harlotry, no Drunkenness,
no Dancings, no Beggars, no idle persons, are found. The aforesaid Mr. Gattaker
to clear those of the Genevian way from Sedition, tells us a Story of Bishop
Elmor, Bishop of London in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, viz. that when one Preaching
at Paul's Cross had inveighed bitterly against the Puritans, as a crew of
seditious and turbulent persons, and had affirmed the Puritans to be worse than
the Papists; No, quoth the Bishop, he said not therein aright, for the Puritans
if they had me amongst them would cut my Rochet only, but the Papists would cut
my Throat. The same Author Mr. Gattaker tells us, that his Successor Bishop
Vaughan, when another in the same place, was no less eager in the same
Argument, the Bishop said to a Gentleman of his inward Acquaintance who Dined
that day with him (as the Gentleman himself told Mr. Gattaker) I wish I could
have had the Preachers Tongue to day for some space of time in my Pocket, The
way is not to convert or convince that party by Invectives and untruths. It is
true they affect not the present form of Government, they are for another; but
they seek it by Petition, not by Insurrection or Sedition. And further to
balance Dr. P. H's testimony against the Calvinians and Presbyterians, and to
undeceive well-minded persons who read his History of Presbyterians, and
believe him on that subject as much as they do his Comment on the Creed it
self; It will not be amiss to cite here some passages out of Mr. Bedel,
afterward Bishop Bedel, in his Answer to Wadsworth, who objected against the
Reformed Religion, what Dr. P. H. does against the Calvinian Reformers, viz.
That they were the cause of Sedition and Rebellion. You have wronged, says Mr.
Bedel, those you have named, and either lightly believed or unjustly surmised
your self touching Luther, Calvin, Knox, the French and the Hollanders: when
you make them the raisers of Rebellion, and shedders of blood, whose blood has
been shed like water in all parts of those Countries, against all Laws of God
and Man, against the Edicts, and public Faith, till necessity enforced them to
stand for their lives. Page 136. As for the War in Germany, says the same
Author, it began not till after Luthers death; neither was it a Rebellion of
the Protestants; the truth is, they stood for their Lives. The Emperor with the
help of the Popes both Money and Arms, intended to root them out, and although
at the first the Emperor did not avow his raising Arms against them to be for
Religion; yet the Pope in his Jubilee published upon this occasion, did not let
to declare to the world, that himself and Caesar had concluded a League, to
reduce the Heretics by force of Arms to the obedience of the Church, and
therefore all should pray for the good success of the War. So the same Author
page 124. As for Calvin, he says, he did not by his unquietness and Ambition
revolve the State of Geneva, unjustly expelling, and depriving the Bishop of
Geneva, and other Temporal Lords of their due obedience, and ancient
inheritance, for he came to Geneva 1536. but Bodin in his Second Book de Repub.
Chap. 6. affirmed, and that in the same year Geneva was established a State
Aristocratical, which was he says 1528. Geneva changed from a Monarchy
Pontifical, into an estate Popular, governed Aristocratically; although that
long before the Town pretended to be free against the Earl and against the
Bishop, etc. Further, whereas Mr. Wadsworth lays to the Hugonots and Ghenses
of France and Holland, the raising of Civil Wars, shedding of Blood,
occasioning Rebellions, Rapines, Desolations, principally for their new
Religion, Mr. Bedel, afterward Bishop Bedel, Answers, page 132. These poor
people having endured such barbarous Cruelties, Massacres, and Martyrdoms, as
scarce the like can be showed in all Stories, are now accused by you as the
Authors of all they suffered. No, no, Mr. Wadsworth, they be the Laws of the
Roman Religion that are written in blood; It is the bloody Inquisition, and the
perfidious violating of the Edicts of Pacification, that have set France and
Flanders in combustion. An evident Argument may be for Flanders, that those
Ghenses which you mention were no Calvinists, as you are misinformed, the
chief of them were Roman Catholics, as namely, Count Egmont and Horn, who both
lost their Heads, for standing, and yet only by Petition, against the new
Impositions, and the Inquisition, which was sought to be brought in upon those
Countries. And after page 134. you would know, quo Juri, the Protestants Wars
in France and Holland, are justified. First, says Mr. Bedel, the Law of
Nature, which not only allows, but inforceth every living thing to defend it
self from violence. Secondly, that of Nations, which permits those that are
in the Protection of others, to whom they owe no more than an Honorable
acknowledgment, in case they go about to make themselves absolute Sovereigns,
and usurp their Liberty to stand for the same. And if a lawful Prince, which
(says he) is not yet Lord of his Subjects lives and goods) shall attempt to
despoil them of the same, under color of reducing them to his own Religion,
after all humble Remonstrances, they may stand upon their own guard, and being
assailed, may repel force with force, as did the Machabees under Antiochus. In
which case notwithstanding the person of the Prince himself ought always to be
sacred and inviolable, as was Saul's to David. And lastly, if the enraged
Minister of a lawful Prince will abuse his Authority against the Fundamental
Laws of the Country, it is no Rebellion to defend themselves against reserving
still their obedience to their Sovereign inviolate. These are the rules of
which the Protestants that have born Arms in France and Flanders; and the
Papists also both there and elsewhere as in Naples, that have stood for the
defense of their Liberties, have served themselves, how truly, I esteem it hard
for you and me to determine, unless we were more thoroughly acquainted with the
Laws and Customs of those Countries, then I for my part am. Once for the Low
Countries, the world knows that the Dukes of Burgundy, were not Kings or
absolute Lords of them, which are holden partly of the Crown of France, and
partly of the Empire, and of Holland in particular, they were but Earls. And
whether that title carries with it such a Sovereignty, as to be able to give
new Laws without their consents, to impose Tributes, to bring in Garrisons of
Strangers, to build Forts assubject their Honors and Lives to the dangerous
trial of a new Court, proceeding without form or figure of Justice, any
reasonable man may well doubt; themselves do utterly deny it. So far Mr. Bedel,
afterward Bishop Bedel, Yea, Doctor Heylin speaking of the Seventeen Provinces
in his History of the Presbyterians, page 96. Grants that all of them were
Privileged so far, as to secure them all without a manifest violation of their
Rights and Liberties from the fear of Bondage. But none so amply privileged,
says he, as the Province of Brabant, to which it had been granted by some
well-meaning, but weak Prince amongst them, that if their Prince or Duke (by
which name they called him) should by strong hand attempt the violation of
their ancient Privileges, the Peers and People might proceed to a new
Election, and put themselves under the Clientele or Patronage of some juster
Governor. D. P. H. Hist. of the Presb. p. 96.

As for the Stirs, Broils, Seditions and Murders in Scotland, which Mr.
Wadsworth imputes to Knox, and the Geneva Gospellers, as he calls them, Mr.
Bedel before cited, p. 128, 129. Answers, They might be occasioned perhaps by
the Reformers there, as the broils which our Lord Jesus Christ, says he, came
to set in the world by the Gospel. Possible also, that good men out of
inconsiderate Zeal should do something rashly. And like enough the multitude
which followed them, as being fore-prepared with a just hatred of the Tyranny
of their Prelates, and provoked by the opposition of the adverse Faction, and
emboldened by success, ran a great deal farther, then either wisemen could
foresee or tell how to restrain them; of all which distempers there is no
reason to lay the blame upon the seekers of Reformation, more than upon the
Physicians of such Accidents, as happen to the corrupted bodies which they have
in Cure -- as for the pursuing our King even before his birth, that which His
Majesty speaks of some Puritans, is over boldly by you referred to Mr. Knox and
the Ministers that were Authors of Reformation in Scotland. And Bishop Bilson,
to his Antagonist says thus, The Scots what have they done? Besides, placing
the right Heir on the Throne, and he an own Son, when the Mother fled and
forsook the Realm. Be these those furious Attempts and Rebellions you talk of?
Dr. Rivet as he is quoted by Dr. Peter Du Moulin in his Answer to Philanax
Anglicus, imputes not the troubles in Scotland, in the days of the Queen
Regent, and her Daughter Mary to the Reformed Religion, but to the hot and
audacious brains, or to the bold and stirring nature of the Scottish Nation,
yea, it shall be found, as de Rivet observes; and we find it now says Dr. Du
Moulin, that the light of Evangelical truth did very much mitigate the
fierceness of that Nation, and that those disorders as turbulent as they were,
are not comparable to those that were in former times in Scotland. And lastly,
as to this particular, hear what Mr. Cambden says, namely, that the
Confederacy of the Nobility of Scotland was not to be branded with the note of
Rebellion which was made to no other purpose than to preserve the Kingdom, as
in Duty they ought, to the Queen and her lawful Successors, which they could
not without injury to themselves and theirs, suffer to be undermined by the
practices of the Guises, or so to be transferred to the French.

3. Consid. The late Civil Wars in England were not begun for the Extirpation
of Episcopacy and Liturgy, or the settlement of the Presbyterian Government.
The House of Commons in the year 1640. had but few, I have heard not five
Presbyterians in it. Besides Mr. Richard Watson cited by the Author of the
Friendly Debate, In the Appendix to the 3d. Part.
and no Friend I^le assure you to Presbytery, he says in his History, That
when the English Commissioners came into Scotland, after the War had been near
a year in England; and brought a Letter to the Assembly there, from the
Parliament of England; they received no other Answer but this, Gentlemen, we
are sorry for your Case, but whereas your Letter says you fight for the
defense of the Protestant Religion, you must needs think us blind that we see
not your fighting to be for Civil disputes of the Law, which we are not
acquainted withal; Go home and reconcile with the King, he is a Gracious
Prince, and will receive you to his favor, etc. It seems by this passage that
the War was not begun on the Account of Church Government or Liturgy. Again,
Judge Jenkins in his Remonstrance tells the world the only quarrel was, and is,
the Militia, for which so much blood has been spent and treasure. It Is
observable that the two Houses just before the breaking out of the War, viz.
April 9th. 1642. published a Declaration, wherein are these words. The Lords
and Commons do declare that they intend a due and Necessary Reformation, of the
Government and Liturgy of the Church, and to take away nothing in the one or
the other, but what shall be civil or justly offensive, or at least unnecessary
and burdensome -- This Declaration of the Lords and Commons was Printed and
Ordered to be published by the Sheriffs in several Counties in all the Market
Towns within the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales.

Moreover in the 8th. of the 19 Propositions sent by the Parliament to His
Majesty, June 2. 1642. The Lords and Commons desire, that His Majesty would be
pleased that such a Reformation be made of the Church Government, and Liturgy
as both Houses of Parliament shall advise, wherein they intend to have
Consultation with Divines. And His Majesty in his Answer to the 19 Propositions
takes special notice, that they seem in their 8th. Proposition to desire but a
Reformation, and not a destruction of the present Discipline and Liturgy.
Hitherto then, viz. June 2. 1642. the two Houses of Parliament were for a
Reformation only, and not for the abolition of Episcopacy and Liturgy. It Is
acknowledged that afterward there was a League and Covenant for the
extirpation of Prelacy. But yet they who took the Covenant were bound only to
endeavor it in their places and Callings, and so far as lawfully they might,
and men were told in those days from the Press and Pulpit, that they might
take the Covenant in a sense not exclusive of, or destructive to a Primitive
Episcopacy. After this when the four Bills were sent to His Majesty to the Isle
of Wight upon signing whereof, the Parliament offered to treat for all the rest
in difference. The Bill for the Abolition of Archbishops and Bishops was none
of the four. In the year 1648. the House of Commons voted His Majesty's
Concessions a Ground of Peace notwithstanding His Majesty had not consented to
the extirpation of Episcopacy, only it was, it is said, agreed betwixt the King
and the Commissioners, that Bishops should be laid aside for three years till
the King and the Parliament should agree upon some settled Order for the Church,
and upon a free debate had with the Assembly of Divines then sitting, and
twenty more of His Majesty's nomination, they might it is said, have admitted of
Episcopacy, if they found that Government most agreeable to the Word of God,
and best Reformed Churches. Lastly, as to this Consideration His Majesty that
now is, and long, and long may he continue to Reign over us, has declared,
that the Presbyterian Ministers he had discoursed withal, could submit to a
Primitive Episcopacy and a Reformed Liturgy.

4. Consid. That the Modern English Presbytcrians as they are called, cannot be
charged with diverse of the Principles imputed to those called Presbyterians in
England, in the days of Q Elizabeth. And that the Presbytery, where it was
voted by the Houses of Parliament to be settled, was far different from the
Scottish Presbytery.
Doctor P. Heylin tells us that Mr. T. C. and others, formerly renounced the
Orders they had from the hands of the Bishops, and look a new Vocation from the
Presbyters beyond Seas; that the Presbyterians in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
crected their Discipline in England, without Authority from the Civil
Magistrate; that they held the calling of Bishops unlawful, that it is not
lawful to be ordained by them; that it is not lawful to appear in a Bishops
Court, but with a Protestation of their unlawfulness. -- These are not the
Principles and Practices of the present Presbyterian Non-conformists amongst
us, they do not renounce their Episcopal Orders. Some of them have been
ordained by Bishops since 1660. Yea, are willing to submit to the Government of
the Church by Bishops, and to use the Liturgy. Only they bumbly desire that the
new Impositions by the Act of Uniformity 1662. may be taken away, and some of
them that they may be dispensed withal for the three Ceremonies which are of
their own Nature Indifferent even in the Judgment of the Imposers; And which we
are told were offered to have been abated in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, if
that would have given satisfaction.

And as for the late Presbiterian Assembly at Westminster, if you will have it
called so, they differed much from the Assemblies of the Church of Scotland.
They at Westminster attribute power says Dr. P. Heylin to the civil
Magistrate, not only of calling Synods and Church Assemblies, but also of being
present at them, and to provide that whatsoever is therein concluded be done
agreeably to the mind and will of God. As to the matter of Church Government,
the divine right of their Presbyteries, the setting up of Christ upon his
Throne, the Parity or Imparity of Ministers in the Church of Christ not a word
delivered. And a little after he adds: It is to be observed that in the settling
of the Presbyterian Government in England, as the Presbyteries were to be
subordinate to the Classical Provincial and National Assemblies of the Church,
so were they all, to be subordinate to the power of the Parliament, as appears
plainly by the Ordinance of the 14th of March, which makes it quite another
thing from the Scottish Presbiteries, and other Assemblies of that Kirk, which
hold themselves to be Supreme and unaccountable in their actings, without
respect to the King, the Parliament and the Courts of Justice: So the Historian
page 475. of his History of the Presbyterians. And as for those of the
Congregational way here, they do not pretend to exemption from all judgment or
censure, from the civil Magistrate, or neighboring Churches, if we may believe
the Apologists in their Apologitical narration, p. 21. where they tell us that
at a time when they had least dependency on this Kingdom, or so much as hopes
ever to abide therein in peace, it was openly and publicly professed, That it
was the most to be abhorred Maxim, that any Religion has ever made profession
of, and therefore of all other the most contradictory, and dishonorable to
that of Christianity; that a singular and particular society of men, professing
the name of Christ, and pretending to be endued with a power from Christ, to
Judge them who are of the same body and society within themselves, should
further arrogate unto themselves an exemption from giving an account, or being
censurable by any other, either Christian Magistrate above them, or neighbor
Churches about them.

5. Consid. That there have been since the first Reformation, men of parts,
Piety, Learning, and of good esteem in the Church of God, who have yet boggled
or scrupled at something in subscription, or the conformity injoined or
practiced.
In King Edward the 6th his Reign, there were Bishop Hooper, Rogers, Philpot,
and others, who disgusted the Ceremonies.

In Queen Elizabeth's Reign, Coverdale, as Dr. Heylin tells us, waved the
acceptance of the Bishopric of Oxon, or any other vacant, out of a
disaffection to the Habit of that Order. He says further, That Alexander Nowel
Dean of St. Paul's, spoke irreverently of the Sign of the Cross. Moreover he
makes Mr. John Fox the the Martyrologist; Sampson Dean of Christ-Church in
Oxfod; Hardiman a Prebendary of Westminster, both the Professors of Divinity in
the Universities; and Whittington Dean of Durham, all Non-Conformists, and
relates that one Whitehead who had been Chaplain to Ann Bullen the Queens
Mother, was offered the Amh-Bishoprick of Canterbury, but refused it, because
he was more inclined to the Presbyterians than the Episcopal form of
Government. Besides, we are told that Peter Martyr never could be got to wear
the Surplice all the time that he was in Christ-Church in Oxford, and Divinity
Reader in that University. Dr. Heylin also tells us that Archbishop Usher
dreaded bowing at the name of Jesus; and as we are informed, opposed the
introduction of the English Ceremonies into the Church of Ireland. Not long
before the Wars, Mr. Dod, Mr. Cleaver, Mr. Lancaster, and others of eminent
worth, were silenced for Nonconformity, on which occasion, a Conformist of
good note, in the life of Dr. Harris, thus expresses himself, Now was there a
fearful Eclipse upon the Church, a Constellation of Ministers even at once
darkened; amongst the rest, those three shining Stars, Mr. Dod, Mr. Cleaver, Mr.
Lancaster. Mr. Dod was a very eloquent man, he says, in English and Latin, so
facetious and pithy, that Mr. Harris would often say, that if his Apothegms
were collected, they would exceed all that Plutarch in Greek, and other in
Latin, since have published. Mr. Cleaver was asolid Textman. Mr. Lancaster a
most humble and self denying man; for whereas he was by birth a good Gentleman,
and had been Fellow of Kings College in Cambridge, where being called to
sundry Lectures, and Speeches, he delivered himself in as pure Latin, to use
the words of that Master of Speech Dr. Collins, as ever Tully himself uttered,
having no Notes before him, but what he wrote on the Nail of his Fiugers: Yet
this man thus accomplished contented himself with a Living under forty pounds
per annum, and made no noise of any Learning at all. To these I might add, Mr.
Hildersham, Mr. Baines, Mr. Perkins, Dr. Ames, Mr. Cotton and others, men
famous in their generation, and yet in some things, some more some less
dissatisfied.

6. Consid. That diverse dissenters in former times have notwithstanding found
favor with the Bishops.
Some of those before named were never deprived of their Benefices, for
Nonconformity, as Peter Martyr, Mr. Fox the Martyrologist, and Mr. Perkins.
Others were for a long time by connivance continued in their places and
Employments although but half Conformists. Conformity was not rigorously
pressed by Archbishop Grindall; nor were all Nonconformists thrust out of all
employment in the days of Arch Bishop Whitgift, though himself a Champion for
Conformity. When Mr. Cartwright himself, who had written against Conformity,
and brandished pens with the Archbishop in the cause, yet was by him quietly
suffered to enjoy an Hospital at Warwick. Mr. Brown, said to be the Father of
the Brownists, did notwithstanding enjoy his Living of a Church in Northampton
Shire (a Parsonage of good value) to his dying day. And Doctor Fuller informs
us that Bishop Williams when he was Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England
procured a License from King James under the Great Seal of England for Mr.
Cotton to Preach, notwithstanding his Inconformity as to some Ceremonies. And
Bishop Rudd Bishop of St. David's, declares in his Speech to the Convocation,
that those things, meaning Conformity to the Ceremonies, were not so extremely
urged, but that many learned Preachers enjoyed their liberty herein in the
days of the late Archbishop of Canterbury (which was Archbishop Whitgift)
conditionally that they did not by word or deed openly disgrace or disturb the
State established. Concerning Mr. Hildersham, I find in the History of his
life, that he was frequently silenced, and yet frequenly by the favor or
connivance of the Bishops, permitted to Preach publicly: He was silenced in
June, 1590. and restored again in January 1591. Again he was deprived and
silenced by Bishop Chaderton Bishop of Lincoln, April 24. 1605. for refusal of
Subscription and Conformity: yet after some time by the connivance and favor
of Bishop Overton, Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, he Preached sometimes in
that Diocefs, and was the main upholder of two famous Exercises, at Burton in
Staffordshire, and at Repton in Derby-Shire, for livers years. In January
1608. by the favor of Bishop Barlow Bishop of Lincoln, he was allowed to
Preach again at Ashby, where he was formerly, and so continued from January 31,
1608. to November the 12th 1611. In November. 1611. He was silenced by Bishop
Neales means, then Bishop of Coventry and Litehsield, who complained to the
King of him, infomuch that the King commanded the Archbishop to write to the
Bishop of Lincoln to send for Mr. Hildersham, and to silence him, which was
done accordingly. April the 22. 1613. he was judicially admonished and injoined
in and by the High Commission, that saving the Catechizing of his own family
only, he should not any time hereafter, Preach, Catechize, or use any of the
Offices or Function of a Minister publicly or privately, until he should be
lawfully rostored and released of his said suspension. June 20. 1625. he was
Licenced by Doctor Ridley then Vicar General to the Archbishop of Canterbury,
to Preach in the Diocefs of Lincoln, London, and Coventry and Lichfield, under
the Seal of that Office.

March 25. 1630. he was silenced again, and so continued till August, 2. 1631.
when he began to preach again, and continued till December 27. 1631. which was
the last time he preached, soon after he sell sick and died.

Concerning Mr. Dod. I find in his life, that he was suspended from his
Ministry at Hanwill by Doctor Bridges Bishop of Oxford; that after he preached
at Fenny Compton in Warwickshire, from thence he removed to Canons Ashby in
Northamptonshire, where he lived quietly diverse years, preached over the whole
Prophecy of Douitl, afterward he was silenced from Preaching at Ashby upon a
complain made against him by Bishop Neal to King James, who commanded
Archbishop Abbot to silence him. After the death of King James, his liberty
was procured for preaching again publicly by Mr. Knightly, and then he was
settled at Fausley, where he preached twice every Lords day. By these two last
instances it appears, that every stroke of the Crosier formerly did not cause a
perfect Apoplexy, and prove mortal, though it made Ministers speech less for a
time, yet by the Keys of the Church, their Mouths were often times opened
again, and they were able to speak and preach as formerly. And here I could
name, if it were fit to do so, a great man of our own Church, who was one also
of great Moderation toward diffenters, and who when he came to dye, never,
that I heard of, repented the great Latitude or comprehenfiveness of his
Charity. May the Mantle of that Elijah fall on Elisha his Successor, as I hope
it will, and on all the Fathers and Brethren of the Church of England, as I
pray it may, that so there may be no complaining in our Streets, that so peace
may be within our Walls, and Prosperity within our Palaces, that there may be
glory to God in the Highest, and on earth peace to men and good will.

7. Consid. That the Parliament in the beginning of the late War declared for
the defense and safety of his Majesty's person, and their abhorreney to be
thought to design either the deposition or death of his sacred Majesty:
Or else it had been impossible for them to have gained the people as they did.
Presently after the Battle at Edgehill, in a declaration by them published,
they express their congratulation for the safety of his Majesty's Person and
his Children, and their sorrow that they had been in any danger there. In which
Battle, it is credibly reported, that when Sir William Balfore who commanded a
Brigade of Horse in that Battle, was ready to charge part of the Royal Army
with his Horse, perceiving his Majesty to be amongst them in that Squadron, and
fearing least his Royal Person might have been otherwise endangered, wheeled
off, without attempting to make any impression there; whereupon by some he was
complained of, but acquitted from censure or blame by the Parliament. And I my
self knew some since, Nonconformist Ministers, who made it their business to
stir up some of the Commanders of the old Army to join with some of his
Majesty's Commanders, and to have endeavored the rescue of his Majesty's
Person after he was scized on in the Isle of Wight. Sure it was the fear the
Army had, that the Parliament would agree with his Majesty, which made them so
garble the Parliament in December 1648. The London Presbyterian Ministers
labored to save his Majesty's Crown and Life. And the Ministers of some
Lectures in the Country, framed and presented to the General and his Council of
Officers, their humble advice, with all zeal and earnestness dissuading them
with Scripture Reason, and the Conscience of Oaths, from deposing his Majesty,
or embrewing their hands in his blood: It was no Protestant Minister, or
Presbyter, but a Roman Priest and Confessor, we are told, that when he saw the
fatal stroke given, flourished with his Sword, and said, Now the greatest Enemy
we have in the world is gone. And how Dr. Peter Du Moulin, and upon what
grounds, laid the Murder of his late Majesty on the Jesuits, the Reader may
see in his Answer to Philanax Anglicus, page 58, 59. etc. And if the Testimony
of the French may be accepted and why not, for Standers by often see more than
Gamesters, we have the Letters of Monsieur Daille, of Monsieur Gache, and of
the Marchioness of Turin, to clear the Presbyterians from this horrid Act. And
some there are at home, who are so noble, though themselves fought under the
Royal Standard, as yet acknowledge that the Presbyterians hated this Murder as
much as themselves,

8. Consid. That the Nou-conforming Presbyterians had both their hearts and
hands in the Restoration of His Majesty to His Royal Throne.
First, the English Presbyterians did concur with and assist the Scots; some in
person, others with their Purses, most with their Prayers, in bringing His
Majesty to His ancient Kingdom of Scotland in the year 1650. for which
endeavors, Mr. Love and Mr. Gibbous lost their Heads by the Axe, and for which
Zeal for His Majesty, many more were imprisoned and condemned, though not
executed. Mr. Cawton was Indicted of High Treason for Praying for His Majesty
that now is, as King of England in those days. Mr. George Firmin in Print
tells us, that he and some others in those times Prayed even in their
Congregations for the afflicted Royal Family: Mr. Kirby a Yorkshire Minister
was brought up to London and imprisoned for Praying publicly for His Majesty
by Name. Yea, so great and public was the London Ministers Zeal and Loyalty,
that there was a Pamphlet Printed, entitled, A Mourning Lecture for our
Morning Lecturers, calling them the cloudy Clergy, and Beadsmen for the King of
Scotland. Most certain it is also, that our French Neighbors the Protestants
there, looked on the Presbyterians of England, a little before His Majesty's
Restoration, as possessed of the power, and sitting at the Hem in England.
That illustrious Assembly, i. e. the Parliament says Monsieur Drelincourt, in
his Letter from Paris, April 3. 1660. afterward Printed; who would have
preserved to the King his life, and his Royalty, was without doubt very far
from designing to rob his Children of that right which is conveyed to them by a
continued Succession in their Royal Family for many Ages. And again in the same
Letter he thus expresses himself. God intrusts at this day you Presbyterians,
the Gentlemen now in Power, with the honor and Reputation of our Church; for
if without the intervening of any Foreign Power they recall this Prince and
seat Him in His Throne, they acquire to themselves and their posterity immortal
Glory, and stop their Mouths for ever, who charge us falsely as enemies of
Royalty, make appear that the Maxim of No Bishop, No King, is injuriously
imputed to us. Now what was desired by this Letter, was done within a short
time, and by the Power, Interests, and Endeavors of those here called
Presbyterians. The Royalists at that time, not for want of Zeal or Loyalty, but
through Policy and Prudence not appearing so publicly, least thereby upon that
account or occassion, the desigh should miscarry.

9. Consid. Many Bishops, Clergymen and Scholars, though Nonconformists to the
late times; yet enjoyed Places or Profit notwithstanding.
The Bishops by Ordinance of Parliament were to have for their Lives 200 l per
ann. each of them. Bishop Morton, that Learned Bishop of Durham, received a
Thousand pound, which was given him by the Parliament, and with which he
purchased (if I mistake not) an Annuity of 200 l per ann. for his life. The
Archbishop of Armagh, Bishop Brownrig, Bishop Skinner, had places of
Employment and Profit in those times. Dr. Saunderson afterward Bishop of
Lincoln, kept Boothby Pagnel Parsonage during the Troubles. Many in several
Colleges in Cambridge kept their Places without ever taking the Covenant. Dr.
Collins was suffered to keep his Place of Regius Professor without ever taking
the Covenant. So did all the Fellows of Emmanuel College, except Dr. Soreby
(who was Ejected on another account) continue in their Fellowships without
taking the Covenant. Some Fellows were put into Trinity College by Ordinance
of Parliament without having the Covenant imposed on them, as I have heard.
Further in the Visitation of the University of Oxford; the Masters and Fellows
there were not Ejected for the Refusal of the Covenant, but upon another score,
namely Non-submission to the Visitation. Let me add to the Premises on this
Consideration, that the two Houses by Ordinance of Parliament granted a fifth
part for the maintenance of Ministers Wives and Children. Yea, that the Junto,
after the Parliament was Garbled, made an Act as they called it, April 5th.
1660. inabling, and requiring their Trullees for Bishops, Deans and Chapters
Lands, to dispose thereof for and toward the relief, maintenance and support
of such Bishops, Deans, Prebendaries, Singing men, Choristers, and other
Members, Officers, and persons destitute of Maintenance, distributing and
apportioning the same adcording to the wants and necessities of such persons to
whom the said disposition shall be made as aforesaid, and according to further
ditections as they shall receive from the Parllament or Authority derived from
it. And further may it be considered, that in King Josiah his Reformation,
although the Priests of the High places were put from the Service, yet they
were still permitted to eat of the portion belonging to the Priests, viz of the
Unleavened bread amongst their Brethren, 2 Kings 23 9. they had some provision
for their maintenance. As also what we read in our own Story viz. That in the
days of King Henry the 8th. liberal Pensions were allowed by the King to
Abbots, Priors, and Monks, etc. at the dissolution of Abbeys and Monasteries.

10. Consid. It is declared to be the Doctrine of the Church of England in the
34 Article of our Religion. That every particular or National Church has
Authority to ordain, change and abolish Ceremonies, or Rites of the Church;
ordained only by man's Authority, so that all things be done to Edification.
It Is the observation of a Learned Gentleman deceafect, late a Member of the
Present Parliament, in an Epistle Dedi^^^^ry to His Majesty, That the Popes of
Rome, alb it they hold themselves infallible in their Chair, and their Counsels
inerrable. Yet they all accord that their public Missals and Liturgies, though
made and confirmed by their Join advice, with greatest care and diligence, are
amendable, alterable, upon just occasions -- He instanceth in several
amendments and alterations by Pope Pins the 5th. And he observes that the same
Pope, did think fit to reform several things in the new Missal as to the
Kingdom of Spain, and to alter and dispense with it in no less than 21
particulars, notwithstanding his former Bulls and Prohibitions, And after that,
Pope Gregory the 13th. his Imthediate Successor, granted several other
Dispensations and Amendments of this Missal in sundry particulars comprised in
his Bull. -- And that which ought to be of more Authority with us in England,
is (what I shall subjoyn to our Doctrine declared in a branch of the 34th.
Article of Religion formerly cited (the agreement of our Bishops and Doctors
convened at the Dean of Westminsters Lodgings in the beginning of the
Parliament 1640. the Persons were the Bishops of Lincoln, Armagh, Durham,
Exeter, Doctor Samuel Ward, Dr. Prideaux, Dr. Twisse, Dr. Siunderson, Dr.
Featly, Dr. Brownrig, Dr. Holdsworth, Dr. Hacket, and others. The advice they
gave, amongst many other things, was, that the Vestments required by the first
Liturgy of King Edward the 6th should not be required, and the Rubric in that
case to be altered. That the Cross in Baptism be either explained or quite
disused. That a Rubric be inserted to declare that kneeling at the Communion
is required only in Relation to the Prayer of distribution, Preserve thy Body
and Soul unto everlastling life. See Dr. Heylin his Cyp. Angl. p. 444, 445. And
now my hearty desire is, that the Prudence, Moderation, and Condescension of
these great Scholars and good Men for the Peace of the Church, might turn the
hearts of all in Place and Power, to incline them to Moderation and Indulgence
at such a time as this.

11. Consid. That if the new Impositions were removed, and that partition wall
of Ceremonies pulled down, and this veil rent away by Legal Authority from the
face of the Church, or reserved only for the case of the Mother Churches, I
mean the Cathedrals. Many Thousands who now separate from our public
Assemblies, would with one heart and voice join with us.
We Protestants justly blame the Bishop of Rome, for that having the Keys of
Purgatory at his Girdle, notwithstanding suffers so many Thousand Souls to lie
in Flames some Hundreds of years, where he can so easily grant a Jail-delivery,
and set them at liberty. And if Sin, and particularly the Sin of Schism, be
worse than Hell it self, as indeed all Sin is, then I would humbly recommend to
the Father of our Country, to the Fathers of our Church, and to our worthy
Patriots in the Parliament, the removal of those By-matters; that so they may
thereby prevent so many Thousands from incurring either the fault, the blot, or
the punishment of Schismatics.

12. Consid. That the use of force or violent courses for By-matters in
Religion ought by all lawful ways and means to be shunned and avoided.
Dr. Heywood in his Answer to Doleman the personated Papist, Chap. 9.
concerning violent courses in matters of Religion, writes thus, hereupon such
cruel Calamities have ensued in most parts of Europe, and especially in Germany
and France, with so little furtherance to that cause for whose supportance
force was offered, that all the chief Writers of our Age, are now reduced to
the former opinion, affirming with Arnobius, that Religion is of Power
sufficient for it self, with Tertullian also, Lactantius, Cassiodorus,
Josephus, St. Bernard, and others; that it must be persuaded, and not enforced.
See Mr. Joh. Good. Answ. to the Antapol. p. 233, and 234. Conformable to which
Doctrine was the Practice of Bishop Bramhal in Ireland. See his Replication to
the Bishop of Chalcedon, p. 152, 153. where he says, That the Earl of
Strafford Lord Lieutenant of Ireland did commit much to my hands, the Political
Regiment of that Church for the space of eight years. In all that time; let him
name but one Roman Catholic, that suffered either Death or Imprisonment, or so
much as a Pecuniary Mulct of Twelvepence for his Religion, upon any penal
Statute, if he cannot, as I am sure he cannot, etc.

I read that when the Spaniards drove the Indians to Baptism, as we do Sheep to
washing, when the white Linen they gave them to be Baptized in, was foul, the
Baptized Indians would straight renounce their Christianity, except they might
have new white Garments given them. This instance may mind us, that Methods of
force and compulsion are not the way to make good Christians, but Time-servers
and Hypocrites, rather than real Converts.

The Premises considered, and that by our Breaches, way be not made for Popery
to enter. It Is heartily desired of Dissenters, that they would be earnest in
their Prayers to God, and their Petitions to men that there may a healing of
our breaches. And to this end, that none of them do any thing, or leave any
thing undone, through humor, crosseness, or peevishness; that none of them
this matter or in reference to the Church, be like the Lawyers, in reference to
the Kingdom of Heaven, of whom it is said, that they would not enter in
themselves, and hindered those that were ready to enter, Luke 11.52.

Of the Fathers of the Church, it is humbly begged, that they would in relation
to Dissenters imitate the Father of the Prodigal, who when his Son was yet afar
off, ran to meet him, fell on his neck, and kissed him.

Of His most excellent Majesty and the Two Houses of Parliament, it is most
humbly Prayed, that they would please to remember, That there is as much Power
exercised or exerted in abrogating a Law at the Humble desires of Subjects, as
in making a Law at their Requests.

A POSTSCRIPT to Conformist and Nonconformist Ministers.
LEt all things be done with Charity: And often think of the Answer of pious
Mr. Greenham to Secretary Cecil, when he asked him on which side the blame lay
in the great Rent 'twixt the Bishops and Non-Conformists. The Fault, said Mr.
Greenham, is on both sides, and on neither side; for, said he, the Godly wise
on both sides, bear with each other, and concenter in the Main; but then there
be selsish, peevish Spirits on both sides some, and these make the quarrel.

FINIS.

