CERTAIN Considerations proposed by the CITY to the SOLDIERY in and about
LONDON, touching the Peace and Welfare of the NATION.
GENTLEMEN,
WE conceive you to be persons no less reasonable and conscientions then stout
and courageous; and therefore propose these weighty particulars to your prudent
and pious consideration.

First, that your poor native Country is now brought into a languishing and
expiring condition, by the almost-monthly Mutation of arbitrary and Tyrannical
forms of Government, contrived and set up by a sort of Rural, and Mechanical
Mashromes, Sons of earth and yesterday, to promote and accomplish their own
ambitious and coveteous designs.

Second, That these usurping Tyrannes obtained not supremacy by their own
personal power and policy: but it was the hands that lifted them up, and your
shoulders that supported them.

Third, That it was with expense of your blood, hazard of your lives, and the
solary due to your service, that several Grandees of the Army, Rump, and City,
have purchased such goodly parcels of the Crowns, the Churches, and Delinquents
Lands.

Fourth, That if you desert these Cormorants and leave them to the justice of a
free Parliament, they may be constrained to disgorge those sweet Morsels (which
have made them swell with fatness, and render them up for discharge of the
Arrears of the Land and Sea-souldiery, and other public uses and benefits.

Fifth, That it is by your strength that Tyrans are enabled to profane our
Religion, violate our Laws, infringe our Liberties, invade our proprieties. It
is with their feet that they tread on our necks, and with the sword that they
wound and kill us.

Sixth, That as your ill-placed (and not Well rewarded) valor, has been
isntrumental in plunging your afflicted Conntrey in a Gulf of Miseries and
calamities; so it has now pleased Providence to put into your hands the power
of putting her up, and restoring her to her former flourishing condition.

Seventh, That the blessed work may be effected without any the least effusion
of blood; if you but please to draw out, and unanimously declare for a free
Parliament.

Eighth, That if you shall thus declare, the Nation in general, and the City
more particularly will stand by you with their lives and fortunes; and bless,
praise, and reward you, as the principal Authors, under Heaven, of all the
content and happiness they shall reap thereby.

Ninth, That if you persist in adherence to the Excrement of a Rump, which now
Rules, you will enable them to raise and Modall a new Army, and then you cannot
but expect the reward of your former desertion, which, at least, will amount to
an unrewarded and ignominious Cashiering, which will expose you to the scorn
and hate of the whole Nation, which now desires cause to love and honor you.

Gentlemen,

Consider, we beseech you, these things, and the Lord give you a right
understanding.

Detemb: 1639

