A CALM ANSWER To a Bitter INVECTIVE, CALLED, A LETTER to the late Author of
The Preparation for Martyrdom.

By that Author.

2 Cor. 6.8. In all things approving your selves as the ministers of God, by
honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report: as deceivers, and yet
true.

1 Pet. 3.9. Render not evil for evil, nor railing for railing: but
contrariwise blessing, knowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye should
inherit a blessing.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Pool, 1683.

A Calm ANSWER to a Bitter INVECTIVE, etc.
SIR,
I Lately met with your Invective, styled A Letter, which was published by you
for some Weeks, if not Months, through the Nation, before it came to my
knowledge: I suppose you designed it should do me all the mischief it could,
before I heard of it.

I have attempted a calm and general Reply, by a just and true Representation
of my self and that Discourse, without entering upon Particulars in your
Invective, lest I should raise my own Spirit in any degree, to that ferment of
Rage, under which it appears that you was when you penned it.

I have also speeded this away, before I know what Person it is who has thus
studiously exposed me to the Rage and Scorn of common Persons; and as far as he
can influence, has stirred up the Magistrate to take away my Life; lest
knowing you, I should have been tempted to answer you in your kind: which I
shall avoid, for I have not so learned Christ.

Sir, In the late times of Rebellion, I being Fellow of a College in one of
the Universities, was active to serve my Sovereign, the glorious Martyr, King
Charles the First, and afterward our present gracious Sovereign, in the
University, in the Royal Garrisons, and otherwhere, to the best of my power. I
refused, with detestation, and never took either Covenant, Engagement, or other
Oath imposed by the Usurpers: For this I suffered ejection out of my
University-preferments, and after out of my Benefice in the Country; being
sequestered, and all my Goods, my Money, my Books, yea Wearing-apparel (save
what was on my Back) being seized.

Upon the happy Return of his Sacred Majesty, I had, amongst other Sufferers,
liberty to return to my Benefice, to which my Generous and Loyal Patron had
freely, and without my seeking, presented me, to which also the Lord Bishop of
the Diocese had granted me legal Institution and Induction: but within less
than six Months after Induction, before I had received any Profits, I was
sequestered.

I never in my whole Life, solicited any person for any Ecclesiastical
Preferment, either Dignity or Benefice. I have indeed had several Benefices
offered me, much better than that I have: but I refused them, being well
contented with the Rectory I have; which yet is scarce one of the Third-rate
Benefices in the Kingdom, at least as I make of it, who live peaceably with my
Neighbors.

When I returned to my Living, I found several Dissenters in my Parish, I
endeavored to bring them to conform, and did prevail with many.

With those few who yet dissent (for, Sir, there are but few, whatsoever you
suggest to the contrary) who demeaned themselves peaceably and modestly, I
declined not the Exchange of any friendly and neighbourly Kindness: yet still I
declared publicly, and to them privately, my readiness to give them the best
Satisfaction I could, to bring them in to the Church. I have both by oral
Discourses and Letters, maintained the lawfulness of Conformity, in all the
Parts of it, against such eminent Dissenters in the Country, as my Neighbors
thought b^st able to defend the Cause of Nonconformity. I still persist, from
time to time, to declare my readiness to give all the Satisfaction I can to
their Scruples; but in the mean time, I leave them to stand and fall to the
Law, and I my self conform to the utmost injoined by Law: Nor can you or any
other prove, that I abate so much as a Ceremony; and I thank God, I conform
with a well-satisfied Conscience, not condemning my self in that which I allow.
But still I judge, There are (...) amongst the Non-Con's, both loyal, humble
and conscientious persons; nor do either your Arguments against my Charity, or
your Taunts, persuade me to abate of it.

As for my Fellow Sufferers, the old Cavaliers, I do believe, that as we
engaged and suffered for the best of Kings (whose most horrid Murder, like a
prodigious Eclipse of the Sun, astonished the World) So most of the Nobility,
Gentry and Clergy, and many of the Commonalty, were of eminent Virtues, and
sincere Piety. Nor can you, without gross abusing Truth and Me, instance in an
Expression that is of other importance: But that many of us (alas! too many of
us) were not so regular as we should have been, is too sad a Truth to he
denied. And I pray you (Sir) instruct me if you can, which way I might bring
more Glory to God, and vindicate the Honor of our blessed Sovereign the Royal
Martyr, and the Credit of a good Cause, than by owning, That it was for our
Sins (the Sins of us Subject,) that we suffered from a righteous GOD, and lost
a gracious Sovereign, the good Josiah, and for which we were given over to the
will of our Enemies. I am confident, no pious Royalist will be angry with me
for charging it there. I further declare, That I judge those who have
Abby-Lands, are as rightfully possessed of them, as of any part of their Estates.
And I know many, who have part of their Estates of that Tenure, to be as Pious,
Loyal and Generous Persons, as any the Nation knows: and to some of them, I
thankfully own my self personally obliged for their Respects, and I do
reciprocally love and honor them; and I am confident they think so,
notwithstanding your perverting my words (Page 6. as your manner is) which were
levelled only against drunken Atheists and Hobbists.

As I formerly acted and suffered for my Sovereign, so I still bear him all
Faith and Allegiance. I constantly and heartily pray for his Sacred Majesty,
for his Royal Consort our gracious Queen, for the Illustrious Prince, his Royal
Highness the Duke of York, and for all the Royal Family. I have often, with
abhorrence, declared against it, as a traitorous Position, and rank Popery,
That a Subject may, on the account of Religion, oppose the Rights of Princes:
And I make it the first warranted Cause of Martyrdom, To suffer for persisting
to fear God and the King, and not to meddle with those who are given to change;
and that if we suffer, because in conscience toward God we retain our Loyalty
toward our Sovereign, we suffer for righteousness sake, Page 10

I do honor the most Reverend the Archbishop^ and Bishops (and amongst them,
my own most pious and learned Diocesan) as the Fathers and Governors of the
Church: and have been instrumental to convince some who were otherwise minded,
That in all the Primitive Churches, the Bishop was over the Presbyters; and in
all my Writings about that subject, I assert it.

For the rest of the pious and learned Clergy of this Church (which are more, I
believe, than any Christian Church in the World can show) I reverence them, and
bless God for them.

So that you might, with as much show of Truth, have charged me with the
Rebellion of Wat Tyler, or the composing the Alchoran, as with any one of the
Anti-Monarchical or Anti-Episcopal Positions or Practices you have suggested
against me: and I am confident (be you who you will) I have suffered as much,
or more, from the men of those Principles, as you have.

All your arguing therefore is only to this purpose, That I say one thing, but
mean the contrary. I assert and prove, That Men may not resist Authority, in
case of the danger of Religion. O but say you, he means, They may, and must
resist. Might you not as justly and truly have said, He says and proves, That
Jesus is the Christ: but he means, Jesus is not the Christ? Sir, Was either
Truth or Charity consulted by you when you wrote at this rate? Making my
Discourse to speak direct Contradictions to it self, that you might put upon it
the appearance of Sedition?

If you had thought, that those who read your Invective, would ever consult the
Discourse you pretended to write against, there would certainly have been some
restraint upon you to keep within the bounds of Truth, at least of the
appearance of Truth.

For, first, Let it but be supposed, that the Parliament declared Truth in
their Vote, printed with the Form of Prayer to be used on Friday the 11th of
April, 1679. appointed by the King's Proclamation, and his Majesty's special
Command, which is interpretatively a Royal Attestation to that Vote: Which is
as follows.

Die Martis, 25. Martii, 1679.
Resolved, nemine contradicente, by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons in Parliament assembled, That they do declare, that they are fully
satisfied, by the Proofs they have heard, That there now is, and for diverse
years last past has been an horrid and treasonable Plot and Conspiracy,
contrived and carried on by those of the Popish Religion, for the murdering of
His Majesty's Sacred Person, and for subverting the Protestant Religion, and
the ancient and established Government of this Kingdom.

Jo. Brown, Cler. Parliament.


This therefore being supposed to be Truth, let it next be supposed, That his
Sacred Majesty, in further Attestation to, and tender Concernment for, the
removal of the just fears of his Liege-People, did most wisely and graciously
propose, by the right Honorable the Lord Chancellor in Parliament (as appears
by his printed Speech) those most prudent and excellent Securities for the
preserving the Protestant Religion under a Popish Successor, whi^^ (...) ^^ed
by his Lordship.

Let it next be supposed (which I know you are ready enough to suppose) That it
was to be suspected, that some factious Persons, taking the advantage of these
general Fears of Popery, might attempt to stir up the People to fight through
their Fears (as your Phrase is) in defense of their Religion.

Now then, I dare appeal to any unprejudiced Person, Whether an honest,
well-meaning Man, concerned for the Peace of his Country, could more
effectually contribute to the quiet of the same, than by persuading his
Countrymen, first, That the great and only true ground of their Fears, of the
subverting Religion, and of other Judgments, were their sins, without the
prevailing of which, their Enemies could do them no harm; and hereby he
endeavors to stir up Men to timely Repentance.

Next, by convincing them, That under God's Mercy and Favor, they had all
possible Security for their Religion at home, and Peace from abroad in his
Majesty's most happy Conduct of Public Affairs; and this is done without the
least insinuation, so much as in a syllable, of any jealousy of his Majesty's
Royal Successor, (...).

And then however to keep their Fears (whether well-grounded, or groundless)
from raising any Distempers or Disorders, I endeavor to instill into my
Reader, a love of, and endeavor after that spirit of Loyalty, Humility,
Meekness, Charity and Heavenly-mindedness, under the power of which the
Primitive Christians lived and died.

And that these are the total Contents of that Discourse, and the unfeigned
Design of it, will appear to any confiderate Reader, and has been attested to,
by the Letter of Thanks which several pious, and loyal, and learned Divines and
others, have sent to me on that occasion.

So that what I intended, and others received, as an Antidote against Sedition,
you have used all your Art to mis-represent it as Poison; and have served both
me and my Discourse, as the bloody Inquisitors in Spain use the suffering
Martyrs, the Protestants, there; you have sowed me up in a Sambenito, a Coat
painted all over with ugly Devils.

And (...), this short Narrative and Analysis is a sufficient Vindication of me
and my Discourse against your Invective; which is indeed nothing else but one
continued Calumny, mixed with the most palpable Falsehood, and highest Contempt
and Scorn imaginable.

I shall therefore, committing my Cause to a righteous God, endeavor to
possess my soul in patience, waiting for your other scouring Dose with which
you threaten me; tho I think (and you seem to glory in it) there cannot be a
Dose compounded of more sublimated Mischievousness than this is. When your
second Invective shall come forth, I will answer both this and that, in all the
Particulars which shall concern me; if I judge, that to do so, may redound to
the Glory of GOD, and the Service of the Church, and my Country: otherwise, I
shall be as one that hears not, and in whose mouth are no reproofs.

In the mean time, I shall continue to pray for you, and the Men of your
Combination (if there be any) That God would forgive my enemies, persecutors
and slanderers, and turn their hearts.

Adding also that of the Psalmist, for my self and other Sons of Peace, Psalm.
123.4, 5. Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us; for we are
exceedingly filled with contempt, our soul is exceedingly filled with the
scorning of those that are at ease, and with the con^^^^^^ of the proud.

FINIS.

