A DISCOURSE Concerning the UNITY OF THE CATHOLIC CHURCH Maintained in the
Church of ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed for B. Took at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, and F.
Gardner at the White-Horse in Ludgate street. 1684.

THE CONTENTS.
THe divisions of Christendom are much to be lamented; the effects of them
being exceeding evil Page 1. Christ made all needful provisions against such
Dissentions amongst Christians p. 2. To this end he established a Spiritual
Society or Church on Earth p. 3. This Church, with the Unity of it, the
Romish-Church appropriateth to it self p. 3. This Controversy betwixt that
Church and Ours may be stated and decided by the consideration of the following
Heads of discourse. I. There are certain Principles in which the Romanists and
we agree, p. 4. As 1. Christ always bad, and always will have a Church on
Earth, 'till the world ends; p. 4. 2. This Church is a distinct Society in it
self, p. 4. 3. This Church must be visible, p. 5. 4. Within the bounds of this
Church we have the only hope of safety here and hereafter, whilst our hope is
grounded on Gods ordinary Evangelical Methods, p. 5. 5. This Church is but one,
p. 6. II. In this one Christian Church there are certain bands of
Catholick-Unity: As 1. Unity iu Belief and Profession, p. 6. 2. In Charity, p.
7. 3. In Worship, p. 7. 4. In Discipline, p. 8. 5. In Set-forms (in some sort)
of Public Worship, p. 10. III, The Romanists have unjustly made, Subjection to
the Sea of Rome, and to the pretended Vicar of Christ in it, the Pope, as the
Universal Head and Monarch of the Christian Church, the Principal Band of
Catholick-Unity, p. 11, 12. For first, for this Papal-Power there is no
Evidence in Scripture, but there are strong intimations of the contrary, p. 12.
Secondly, There is silence, concerning it, amongst the most ancient and best
Fathers of the Church p. 13. Thirdly, History shows us by what evil steps the
Romish Church arrived at this greatness: As 1. by usurpation on the Rights of
other Churches, p. 13. 2. By weakening the Power of Temporal Princes, p. 16. 3.
By abusing their ill-gotten Power iu making it instrumental to the introducing,
and promoting of certain strange and erroneous Doctrines, p. 17. IV. There was
a necessity of a Reformation in the Romish-Church; and our Church was reformed
regularly, and with maintenance of the bounds of Catholick-Unity, p. 19. For 1.
our Reformation was managed with the concurrence and encouragement of the
Supreme Power, p. 19. 2. With the Advice and deliberation of the Clergy
Assembled in Convocation, p. 20. 3. With just respect to the Ancient Christian
Church, p. 21. Both as to 1. Doctrine, p. 21. 2. Government, p. 22. 3. Worship,
p. 23. 4. Rites, p. 25. In such sort that Our Reformed Church is a sound part
of the Catholic Church, p. 27. V. The Objectiens of the Romanists against our
Church and the Reformation of it, are not valid. Object. 1. Concerning our
rejecting Doctrines of the Church determined by Councils. Answered, p. 31, etc.
Object. 2. Concerning Reformation by means of a general Council. Answered, p.
35. Object. 3. Concerning the personal miscarriages of some engaged in the
Reformation. Answered, p. 39. Object. 4. Concerning our want of due Discipline.
Answered, p. 39. Object. 5. Concerning the Heresies and Schisms which have
sprung up since the Reformation, and, as they pretend, out of it, p. 43.
Answered, p. 44. VI. From the Premises a Conclusion is drawn, showing the
Obligation which the People of England are under to embrace and continue in the
Communion of our Church, p. 49, etc.
THE UNITY OF THE CATHOLIC CHURCH Maintained in the Church of ENGLAND.
WHosoever with an impartial eye, and a truly religious concern for the Honor
of God, the Credit of the Gospel, and the Salvation of men, looks into the
estate of Christendom; he will scarce find any greater cause of sorrowful
Reflections than from the many Divisions, and Animosities, which have
distracted, and separated its parts.

These have opened the mouths, and whet the tongues of professed enemies to
reviling Invectives and profane Scoffs against our Blessed Lord himself, and
his holy Religion, and stifled the first thoughts of admitting the most
convincing Truths to a debate among Jews, Turks, or Pagans, and stopped their
ears against the wisest Charms.

To no one cause can we more reasonably impute the small progress which
Christianity has made in the World for a thousand years past. The same
contests have as pernicious influence at home upon the Faith or manners of
those within the Pale of the Church.

Men are hereby too soon tempted into some degrees of Skepticism about very
material Points of Christian Doctrine, in which they observe so many to differ
among themselves. Others are the more easily seduced to seek and make much of
all Arguments, whereby to bafle or weaken the clearest evidences for their
conviction: and they seldom continue long in the same persuasion with those,
with whom they will not maintain the same Communion. Thus Schisms have
generally ended in Heresies.

As mischievous are the effects of these Distractions upon the manners of
Christians. There are many vicious, and disorderly passions; such as Anger,
Wrath, Hatred, Revenge, Pride, Censoriousness, etc. which take Sanctuary
therein, and under that shelter put in their claim for the height of Christian
Graces, and the most holy zeal for God and his Cause. Every where they break,
or loosen the Discipline of the Church, which should guard its children from
doing amiss, or restore them after it, when the last and most capital
punishment of being thrust out of its Communion is like to be little dreaded,
where many voluntarily desert it with the highest pretenses of better advantage
elsewhere.

Now though this matter of fact, confirmed by woeful experience, be a subject
too sad for a long meditation, or passionate enlargement, yet is it no more
than what might have been foreseen, without a Spirit of Prophecy, to follow
from the corrupt nature, and depraved estate of mankind not otherwise
rectified. Wherefore we must suppose that our ever blessed Savior, in the
Foundations of his holy Institution, made all needful provision to prevent
these fatal miscariages.

By the sufficient Revelation of all Fundamental Articles of Belief. By the as
full Declaration of all the necessary precepts of good life. By inculcating
frequently, and pressing most emphatically those commands concerning Love,
Peace, Unity, Good Order, Humility, Meekness, Patience, etc. directly opposed
to those contentions, in every Page of the New Testament: These it may suffice
but to name.

It will soon be granted, after the best provision of Rules, and most
convincing Arguments and Motives to strengthen them, that there will be need of
some Government to encourage all in their performance, to restrain some from
offering violence to them, and to provide for many emergencies.

Our Blessed Lord and Master, therefore, for the better security of his Truth,
and the safer conduct of those which adhere to it, established a Society or
Church in the World, which he purchased with the most inestimable price,
dignified with the highest Privileges, encouraged with the largest Promises,
backed with the most ample Authority, and will always defend with the strongest
Guard, against all Power, or Policy on Earth or under the Earth; so that, as he
has told us, the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.

But now where this Church is to be found, and what are the measures of our
Obligation to it, has been a long and great debate, especially between us and
the Romanists. In most of their late Controversial Books they have seemed ready
to wave disputes about particular points, in hopes of greater advantage, which
they promise themselves from this venerable name, and that bold, though most
false and presumptuous claim which they lay to the thing it self, even
exclusive to all others; which will appear from the true, but short and plain
state of the case between us, the chief design of this attempt.

Now that we may not charge them, nor they us falsely or rashly;

I. It may be convenient first, to lay down some Principles concerning this
Church in which they and we seem mostly agreed, though all our Writers express
not themselves alike clearly herein. II. To propound the chief Bands of Unity
within this Church. III. To mark out the most obvious Defections from them by
the Romanists. IV. To show the Reformation in the Church of England proceeded,
and was framed with all due regard to the preservation of them. V. To clear it
of the most common Objections. VI. To consider the strong obligations from
hence upon all sorts of Dissenters among us to embrace, and continue in its
Communion. I. The former will soon be dispatched, which I reduce to the
following particulars.
1. That our Blessed Savior always had, and always will have a Church in the
World, in which his Doctrine has been, and shall be so far professed, and his
Sacraments so effectually administered, that they who rightly improve them may
not want necessary supplies for their present spiritual life, or future hopes
of Salvation: though the extent of the Church as to its boundaries, and the
perfection of it in degrees may be vastly different at one time, and in one
place from another. This many Prophesies in the Old Testament, and Promises
from our Savior in the New give abundant ground for our Faith to rely upon,
and the experience of all Ages hitherto has confirmed.

2. That this Chruch is a distinct Society within it self, furnished with
sufficient Authority in some to Govern, and Obligation in others to be Subject,
necessary to every Society; which the power of the Keys given by our Lord to
receive in, or shut out, and the exercise of Discipline from Divine Precept,
and Scripture Examples evince beyond all exception. But then this
Ecclesiastical Power, in whomsoever placed, or strained to what height soever,
can never extend to vacate, or change the express Institutions of Christ, or
take away our Obligation to his revealed Truth, and direct Commands. In case of
any competition the Apostles defense may be ours, We must obey God rather than
men. And St. Paul's profession, We can do nothing against the Truth, but for the
Truth. And again. If we or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel, etc.
let him be accursed, Gal. 1. 8,

3. This Church must be visible, as every Society is more or less, whose parts
are so, and whose Profession must be so. Our entrance into it is in a visible
manner by Baptismal Initiation. Our obliged Communion with it is in diverse
outward sensible Acts, which the representation of it by a Body or Building
might prove. More clearly it is likened to a City on a Hill, which cannot be
hid, Mat. 5. 14. Set up as the Light of the world, an Ensign to the Gentiles,
which all Nations should flee unto, or else it would witness against them;
wherein its Followers should take Sanctuary, and find a Refuge.

4. Within these Boundaries we have the only hopes of safety here and happiness
hereafter. What God may do by his supereminent unaccountable power in an
extraordinary case is presumption for us but to inquire into. Out of this Ark
there is no prospect given to us of any escape from the Universal Deluge. S.
Cyprian Ep. 60. p. 143. Ed. Ox. Si aliquis ex talibus fuerit apprehensus, non
est quod sibi quasi in confessione Nominis blandiatur, cum constet si occisi
ejusmodi extra Ecclesiam fuerint, Fidei coronam non esse, sed poenam potius
esse perfidia. Nec in Domo Dei inter unanimes habitaturos esse, quos videmus de
pacifiea and Divina Domo furore discordiae recessisse. S. August. and Caeteri
in Conc. Cirtinst adv. Donatistas. Ep. 152. T. 2. p. 696. Edit. Frob. 556.
Quisquis ergo ab hac Ecclesia Catholica fuerit separatus, quantumlibet
laudabillter se vivere existimet, hoc solo scelere quod a Christi unitate
disjunctus est, non habebit vitam. Sed ira Dei mamet super eum. Quisquis autem
in hac Ecclesia been vixerit, nihil ei praejudicant aliena peccata. Idem Ep.
204. ad Donatum Presbyterum Donatist. T. 2. p. 834. Foris autem ab Ecclesia
constitutus, and separatus a compage unitatis, and vinculo Charitatis, aeterno
supplicio punireris, etiamsi pro Christi nomine vivus incendereris.
All the spiritual Promises concerning this life or a better are made to this
Church, the Members of his Body who is the Head. Therefore the Apostles preach
to Jews and Gentiles the necessity of receiving this Character. Seeing there is
no other name under Heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved, as St.
Peter attests, Acts 4. 12.

5. This Church is but one. It is an Article of our Faith, expressed in our Creed
to believe it so. For there be many members, yet but one body. One Spirit
quickening all; One Lord, and Head over all; One God and Father of all; one
Faith; one Baptism; one Hope of our Calling in all, as the Apostle argues, Ephesians.
4. 4, 5, 6, 7, etc.

II. Now we are to enquire what are the chief Bands of Unity in the Church
which make, keep, and evidence it to be one; How we may secure our selves
within this Garden enclosed, this Spring shut up, this Fountain sealed, as the
Ancients usually apply that Cant. 4. 12, to this one Enclosure of the Church.

1. This appears in the Unity of Belief, not only inwardly, but in the outward
profession of the same Faith which was once delivered to the Saints, and has
been generally preserved, and continued down throughout all Ages of the Church.
In testimony whereof the most eminent Bishops upon their first Consecration
sent to their Brethren Confessions of their Faith.

2. In the Unity of Tertullan de praescript. Haeret. c. 20. p. 209. Sic omnes
primae, and Apostolicae dum una omnes probant unitatem. Dum est communicatio
Pacis, and appellatio Fraternitatis, contesseratio Hospitalitatis, quae jura
non alia ratio regit, quam ejusdem Sacramenti una traditio. S. August. adv.
liter as Petiliani, T. 7. p. 132. Charitas Christiana nisi in unitate Ecclesiae
non potest custodiri, and Ibid. p. 473. de bapt. adv. Donatist. l. 6. Etiamsi
Christi Baptismum usque ad Sacramenti celebrationem perceperunt, tamen vitam
aeternam nisi per Charitatis unitatem non consequuntur. Et Ibid. de unltate
Ecclesiae, c. 2. p. 510. Ecclesia Corpus Christi est, unde utique manifestum
est eum, qui non est in membris Christi, Christianam salutem habere non posse,
membra autem Christi per Unitatis Charitatem sibi copulantur, and per eandem
Capiti suo cohaerent, quod est Christus.
Charity, and Affection as Fellow members one of another as well as of the same
Head; that if one suffer, all the rest suffer with it, and if one rejoice. all
rejoice with it. Having an intimate Fellow-feeling of all the Good, or Evil,
which befalls any joined in so near a Relation, beyond the compassion of
ordinary Humanity; whereby we are bound not only to pray for, but by all
offices of kindness, and most intimate Affection especially to assist, and
relieve each other in the same Household of Faith. So that by our Personal
Consecration all our Labors, and Estates are in some measure devoted to the
Honor of God, the Service of his Church, and the Necessities of any of its
Members.

3. In the Unity of Worship, whereby we are obliged not only to offer up the
same Worship for substance, but also in the outward Act to join, and
communicate with each other therein, to present the same Prayers, and Praises,
to celebrate together the same Sacraments, to hear the same Instructions, to
frequent the same Religious Assemblies, as much as possible; that we may with
one mind, and with one mouth glorify God even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, Romans 15. 6. For as the Command of God, the Honor of his Religion, the
Edification of his Church, the Propagation of his Truth, and the peculiar
Promise of his Presence, and Blessing require a solemn public exercise of all
Religious Worship in united Congregations; so hereby we most sensibly prove,
and secure our unity therein S. Austin. adv. literas Petiliani. T. 7. p. 124.
Huic Ecclesiae, quae per totam terram diffunditur, quisquis non communicate,
vides cui non communicate.

Idem Ep. 52. ad Bonifacium. T. 2. p. 230. Ecclesia Catholica sola est Corpus
Christi, cujus ille caput est Salvator Corporis sui. Extra hoc Corpus neminem
vivificat Spiritue Sanctus, quia sicut ipse dicit Apostolus Charitas Dei
diffusa est in Cordibus nostris per Spiritum Sanctum qui datus est nobis, non
est autem particeps Divinae Charitatis qui hostis est Unitatis. Et de Bapt.
adv. Donatist. l. 3. c. 16. T. 7. p. 409. Ipsa esi enim Charitas quam non
habent, qui ab Ecclesiae Catholicae Communione praecisi sunt, etc. Non habet
Dei Charit tem, qui non diligit Ecclesiae Unitatem.

S. Cyprian. de Unirate Ecclesiae, p. 113. Inexpiabllis, and gravis culpa
discordiae nec passione pargatur. Esse Martyr non potest qui in Ecclesia non
est: ad regnum pervenire non potest, qui tam que regnatura est, derelinquit.


Whoever then needlessly separates himself from this Church, or refuses to join
in Communion with its Members, so far as it is in his power, where he may,
without violence to any Doctrine or Precept of Christ, such a one divides
himself from his Body, and so from all the Promises that we know of the Sacred
and comfortable Influences of that one Head and one Spirit.

4. In the Unity of Discipline, Tertullian. Apolog. c. 39. Corpus sumus de
conscientia religionis and disciplinae unitate and spei foedere. Clerus ad D.
Cyprian. Ep. 30. Ox. Ed p. 56. Idem enim omnes credimur operati, in quo
deprehendimur eadem omnes censurae, and disciplinae consensiare sociati.

It a etiam argumentatur idem Clerus Romans adv. Marcionem excommunicatum a Patre
suo, and ab iis non receptum, in S. Epiphanio, Haer. 42. l 1. T 2. p. 303. Par.
Edit. (...), etc.

Synesius Epist. 50. p. 203. de cersura in Andronicum, I hoantem and eorum
consortes, (...).


whereby every Act of any particular Church conformable to the Institutions of
our Savior, and the universally received practice of his Church stands
confirmed as an Act of the whole Church. Particularly whoever is admitted into
it accordingly by Baptism in one place is to be accounted a member of the
Church Catholic, and received into its Communion wherever he comes, it no
evidence appear of his exclusion by any after regular Censure. Likewise into
whatever Office, or Ministration any are orderly admitted in one part thereof,
in the same are they to be acknowledged in all others, though without that
particular Jurisdiction which they had in their own. But whosoever lies under
any Censure in one Church, he is to be supposed under the same in all others,
and not to be received into Communion till the Sentence be reversed by the same
Power, or a still higher, and greater Authority; according to the Fifth Canon
of the Council of Nice, and the design of their formed, and communicatory
Letters, without which none were to pass from one Church to another. Thus every
Church is accountable to its Neighbor Churches, and so to the whole Church for
its Actions, that one may not do, what the other undoes, without any regard to
this Unity, which would lead to the confusion and distraction of all. Wherefore
to put an end to such differences when risen, or obviate any growing mischief
thereby, and to receive Appeals from persons who think themselves aggrieved, or
injured by their own Bishop or Church, a Council of all Bishops in each
Province is appointed twice in the year by the same Canon, and in many others.
But there was no mention then of any farther, or higher Appeal. S. Cyprian. ad
Antonianum, p. 112. Ox. Ed. Cum sit a Christo una Ecclesia per totum mundum in
multa membra divisa, item Episcopatus unus Episcoporum multorum concordi
numerositate diffusus. Et Ep. 3^. p. 71. Omnes enim nos decet pro Corpore
totius Ecclesiae, cujus per varias quasque provincias membra digella sunt
excubare.

S. August. de unitate Ecclesiae, c. 12. T. 7. p. 534. Neque enim quia and in
orb terrarum plerumque Regne dividuntur, ideo Christiana unitas dividitur, cum
in utraque part Catholica inveniatur Ecclesia.


Thus an amicable correspondence, and intimate communication was maintained
between the Neighbor Churches, and their Governors, and by them with others
removed at a greater distance throughout the world.

These need no long proof, but may be taken as generally granted; the main
dispute will lie in the particular application of the two last.

Now to prevent as much as may be all difficulties about them, it may be added
to the third of Unity of Worship, that it will be very convenient, if not
absolutely necessary in any settled established Church, that there be some set
Forms of public Ministrations, without which it is hard for any to know before
hand what they join with, especially for strangers.

But then these Forms should be as plain, and simple as possible, with as
little pretense as can be of any danger to the known Will, and Word of God. For
no Obligation whatsoever can tie me to communicate with another in that which
he forbids; and it will be a great temptation to more than suspect this danger,
when men's private opinions, or fanciful transports are mingled with them, which
have little show of Scripture, or the general practice of the Church in all
Ages to justify them.

The readiest way I know of to prevent that hazard, after all other care about
the matters contained, is to endeavor that these Offices be as near alike in
all places as can well be, yet every difference in Judgment, when no violence
is offered to the Foundation of Catholic Faith and Unity, must not break this
Communion, according to that profession of St. Cyprian P. 229. Ox Ed. in
Council. Carthaginensi at baptizandis Haereticis. Neminem judicantes aut a jure
communionis, si diversum senserit amoventes.
Judging no man, nor excluding him from the right of Communion if he think
otherwise; where the dispute was thought of no mean concern, especially in this
cause. Which De Bapt. adv. Donat. l. 2. T. 7. p. 391. and sape ibid.
St. Augustine often alleges against the Donatists, that boasted so much of St.
Cyprians judgment against his declared practice. To the same purpose may be
applied the treatment of Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 26.
St. Polycarp in Rome by Anicetus the Bishop, though they differed about the
time of the celebration of Easter, and in other points, which could not be
agreed between them; yet this last not only invited the former to Communion
with him, but also-to celebrate the sacred Eucharist in this Church, as the
words are generally interpreted; which St. Irenaeus not long after urges
strongly against Victor, who was hastening to excommunicate the Asian Churches
for the same difference, contrary to his Predecessors practice.

As to the Fourth of Unity of Discipline, if Unity of Government in all parts
be not indispensably necessary to it, yet it will be so far, as not to
abrogate, or invade the positive Institutions of our Savior himself herein,
and be more than convenient, that it be as conformable, as it is in our power
to make it in one place, to what it is in another. It seems horribly
presumptuous, violently to thrust out of the Church that Government under the
influence of which Christianity has been conveyed, and preserved from the Age
of the Apostles in the most distant places, upon pretense of erecting a new
better Scheme or model of our own, or because of the intricate use of one or
two terms in Scripture, when the Church was in its first formation, though
against the plain current of it in other places, and the uninterrupted
tradition of the whole Church. A Church indeed must be more or less perfect
according to its Government, for suitable will be the Exercise and Authority of
its Discipline. What allowance may be made for those, who desire to come as
near as they can to the Primitive Pattern, though it be not in their power to
reach it in many considerable points, I am not now to dispute. But most
inexcusable, and highly obnoxious are they, that by extreme violence, and
usurpation endeavor to destroy what they found regularly established to their
hands.

III. But we are here most concerned with the bold claims of the Romanists
amidst their most obvious Defections, who have made it the principal Band of
Unity in the Catholic Church to be subject to the Sea of Rome, and the
pretended Vicar of Christ therein, as the Universal Head, and Monarch of the
Church: this they have determined as de fide, and put into their very Creed,
and excluded all that do not expressly own it.

But against this as a great breach of Christian Unity we have many just
exceptions, and been always ready to prove them so Bishop Carleton of threefold
jurisdiction.


1. Dr. Barrow's Treatise of the Popes Supremacy.
In that no evidence from Scripture appears of any such Authority conferred
upon him, or them: But many strong intimations of the contrary. The places
usually alleged to make good their Claim are so far fetched, and so little to
their purpose, that they contain alone a strong presumption against them, and
their own Authors sometimes speak of them with great distrust. Here if any
where sure we may safely argue without daring to prescribe Rules to the most
High, that in a matter of so great moment, had it been designed, it would have
been most explicitly delivered, and solemnly inculcated.

2. But that it was not, we have farther evidence from the silence of the most
Ancient, and best Fathers of the Church herein, when they have occasion to
explain the places insisted on: S. Cyprian. de ^unitate Ecclesiae post Ioca
communiter allegata. p. 107. quamvis Apostolis omnibus parem potestatem
tribuat, etc. paulo post. Hoc erant utique caeteri Apostoli, quod fuit Petrus
pari consortio praediti honoris and potestatis.

Idem and alii in Council. Car^haginensi. p. 229. Neque enim quisquam nostrum
Episcopum si Episcoporum constituit, aut Tyrannico terrore ad obsequendi
necessitatem collegas suos adigit.

S. Hieron. in Epist. ad Euagrium T 2. p. 329. Si authoritas quaeritur, orbis
major est urbe Uhicunque fuerit Episcopus sive Romae, sive Eugubii, sive
Constantinopoli, sive Rhegii, sive Alexandriae, sive Tanis, ejusdem meriti,
ejusdem est and Sacerdotii. Potentia divitiarum, and paupertatis humilitas vel
sublimiorem, vel inferiorem Episcopum non facit. Caeterum omnes Apostolorum
successores sunt.


nay expressly expounding them to a quite different Sense, and disowning any
such Authority of one Church, or Bishop over others. And when the Roman Bishop
began any thing tending toward this, and grounded his claim upon a falsely
alleged Canon of the Council of Nice, not on any Divine Charter, after
examination, and proof of the Forgery, other Bishops wholly disclaim it, and
declare against it, it, and warn him for the future not to disturb their
Regular proceedings by such unwarrantable practices. Vide Epist. Concilii
Africani ad Bonifacium, T. 2. p. 1670. 1674. Concilult. Ed.
As the African Bishops, and the great St. Austin among them in the case of
Appeals. It will be hard for them to find any thing like an Argument, or
Example of it within the first five Ceturies, at least which was not disowned,
and condemned by the rest of the Church, unless from such forged Writings,
which they themselves will scarce now defend.

3. In the following Ages we have as good Testimony from History as almost in
any other matter of fact, by what steps, and in what manner this still growing
power of the Church and Bishop of Rome advanced it self to the height which it
now claims. See D. Caves dissertation of ancient Church Government, and Dr.
Parker of the Government of the Church for the first 600 years.


1. By Usurpation upon the Rights of other Churches, every degree of exaltation
gained being the depression and diminution of them, till all power was in a
manner swallowed up by the Papal ambition, and none left to any other, which
was not dependant hereupon in its original, and altogether precarious in its
administration. So that here alone it must be immediately derived from Christ,
but to all others by Commission from him. Thus in the choice of the chief
Governors of the Church all must await his consent, and confirmation, where he
does not alone forcibly obtrude them, and must pay for it a round sum for an
acknowledgment at their entrance, and an after tributary Pension out of their
income, and take a formal Oath of subjection at their admittance, and own their
own Authority from his delegation, and be liable to have their Sentences
reversed at his pleasure, and flee as far as his Judicatory and stand to the
trial of it, when he is pleased to call any cause to himself. Nay, if a
Controversy arise between him and any Prince, or State, the whole Kingdom or
Nation shalllie at once under his Interdict, the Clergy be withheld from the
exercise of their Function, and the People from the benefit of Public Divine
Worship and Sacraments. Of these and such like effects of the plenitude of
Apostolic Power so much talked of lately, they would do well to show us any
thing like a Plea from Scripture or Antiquity within the bounds forementioned,
or for some Ages after in the greater part: certainly so great a change could
not be effected without some notice and complaints, struglings and contentions,
of which Church History is full.

Their early Faith spoken of throughout the world in St. Paul's time. The
eminent Zeal of the first Bishops of that Church, most of whom, if we may
credit the account generally received of them, sealed to the former with their
blood. Their continued constancy in the Orthodox Profession thereof amidst the
corruptions or defections of so many others, particularly in the time of the
Arrian Persecution. The concurrent opinion of the Foundation of their Church
being laid by the two chief Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul; and the honor of
the Imperial Seat wherein they were placed, etc. gave them great repute, and
advantageous recommendation in those first Ages. None will much contend with
them about priority of Order or Precedence. But when the pre-eminence of the
first Bishop came to be improved into a Patriarchate, and that swelled into the
Title of the Universal Bishop, which S. Greg. lib. 4, Regist. Ep. 32. Absit a
cordibus Christianorum nomen istud blasphe^^e in quod omnium Sacerdotum honor
adimitur, dum ab uno sibi dementer arrogatur, etc. Et alibi in Epist. passim.
St. Gregory so severely condemned in the Bishop of Constantinople, and that at
last grew into the style of the sole Vicar of Christ, and Sovereign Monarch of
the whole Church: when the interposition of a Friendly, and Brotherly
Arbitration, which all persons in distress, or under the apprehensions of
injury are apt to flee unto, and amplify, made way by degrees for the
challenge of an ordinary Jurisdiction, and that at first from the pretense of
Canonical privilege to that Divine Right and Sanction, and then to prevent all
scruple about its determinations these must be backed with the vindication of
an infallible conduct: When instead of that charitable support they at first
readily bestowed on other Churches in their distress, they now made use of this
power to rob them of what was left, taking the advantage of the poverty, and
oppression of some under the Common Enemy, or the confusion of others through
Domestic distractions, to raise themselves out of their spoils; then no wonder
if other Churches complain, and struggle under that yoke, which they could not
presently, or easily throw off.

Indeed, had not this claim of the Church and Bishop of Rome risen to such an
extravagant height in the arrogance of its pretended Title, and been streined
to that excess in the exercise of its assumed Authority; so as not to leave it
in the power of other Churches to take all due and necessary care of their own
members, or provide for them all needful supplies, these might more easily have
born their usurpation of more power than ever they could prove belonged to
them. They that have learnt the Humility of Christ's School, and who are more
concerned to perform their Duty than vindicate their Privilege, and know how
much safer it is to obey than command, and easier to be Governed than to
Govern, will not be much moved at what others fondly assume, knowing still that
the more difficult account awaits them. But then this Power became most
intolerable when it was made use of to purposes so much worse than it self,
which were beside the former;

2. The weakening of the power of Temporal Princes, and disturbing the Civil
Rights of men. Cracanthorp's defense of Constantine, and against the Popes
temporal Monarchy.
Although our blessed Savior assured Pilate his Kingdom was not of this world,
yet his pretended Vicar here on earth can hardly say so: for beside the
Temporal Dominions unto which he has entitled himself a Sovereign Prince,
there are few other Kingdoms, or States on this side of the world in which he
has not, or had not almost as great a share of the Government, as their
immediate Princes; at least so far as to prescribe bounds to their
Administrations, and subject in great measure all Laws, and persons to his
Foreign Courts, Jurisdiction, and Decrees, yea, their Purses to his Exactions;
and upon the least dispute has withdrawn so great a number of his immediate
dependants, who scarce own any other Governors, and raised so many
disturbances, that great Princes and States have been forced at last to yield.
Not to mention the Arrogance it at length grew up unto in dethroning Princes,
giving their Kingdoms to others, authorizing their Subjects to rebel against
them, or all ways to oppose them, and what often follows, if not expressed, to
murder them: as in their late Sentence against some of our Neighbor Princes.

But before, much of this may be seen in the long contentions between some of
the Western Emperors, particularly Henry the Third, and Fourth, and the Popes,
as we have them described in their own Authors Sigonius de regno Italiae, and
all other Historians of that time.
Also to go no father, their various Contests with several of our Kings,
especially Henry the Second and the almost continual complaints in all our
Parliaments before the Reformation of the encroachments made by them upon the
Civil Rights of Prince and Subject by vexatious and chargeable Suits and
Appeals as far as Rome; by Insolences and diverse Rapines committed under the
shelter of their protection, and defended from due punishment, and by their
extravagant Extortions, etc. abundantly prove.

Now though these Usurpations grew by degrees, and were practiced in a
different manner according to the condition of those they had to do with, or
the temper of him that managed them; yet they must needs seem more or less
grievous to all, when power sufficient was not left to the greatest Monarchs to
defend themselves, or protect their Subjects, preserve the peace, or promote
the welfare, and provide for the security of their own Countries. Then no
marvel if some of them grow weary of so insupportable oppressions, and at last
take courage to grapple with, and extricate themselves from such manifest
encroachments upon their own, and the Peoples Civil Rights, as well as the
Ecclesiastical of the Church in their Dominions, and be forced to some harsh
and almost violent methods, when the more gentle and benign could prevail
nothing.

3. But beside these more public Invasions upon Church and State, that which
made the Usurpation more odious and insufferable was the farther abuse of the
same extravagant power to bring in strange and dangerous Doctrines, corrupt,
and unlawful practices into the Church, and impose them upon all in their
Communion, exactly fitted to feed their Ambition, enrich their Coffers, secure
their Authority, and promote their ease and Luxury. Such of the first sort are
their Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and Purgatory, of Merit, and
Supererogation, the multiplicity of Vows, and delusions in the Principles of
Repentance, and ministration of Penance. Of the latter sort are the Invocation
of Saints and Angels, Adoration of Relics and Images, their half Communion,
the Scripture locked up, and Divine Service performed in an unknown tongue, etc.

These and diverse like them have proved great Scandals abroad, and stumbling
blocks at home, and whatever varnish they may put upon them by the fairest
pretenses, or however they may cast a mist before the eyes of their Disciples
by nice distinctions, yet they have so disfigured the face of Christianity,
that he who compares the late appearances of it in the world with the model of
it laid down in Scripture, or the Records of the Primitive Church, can hardly
believe it the same thing.

But the particulars are not here to be disputed, they have sufficiently been
confuted. and exposed by Protestant Writers, and were by several before
excepted against, and disclaimed, though some suffered severely for so doing,
and many more we may suppose waited an opportunity to free themselves from
their pressure. That which I am now most to insist upon is this, that if the
charge we draw up against these of falsehood in judgment, gross Superstition or
Idolatry in Worship, and immorality in manners, be true and impartial, as we
have been ever ready to make good, and shall do against all the Artifices of
the Defendants; Then no Authority whatever, however regularly founded, or
unexceptionably conveyed, can oblige us to these, against the revealed Will, or
Word of God, the Dictates of our Consciences, as we hope carefully, and rightly
informed; the sense and reason of mankind, and the Belief and practice of the
Church in the first and purest Ages.

Greater cause was there to endeavor by all lawful means to throw off such an
usurped Power, that made so ill use of what it had unjustly gotten, and to
restore Religion to its primitive beauty in Doctrine, Worship, and Precepts of
Life.

But alas many difficulties lay in the way of its accomplishment, and all
possible struglings, and contentions by force and policy were used by the
adverse Party to prevent its beginning, or obstruct it Progress. Great was
their Interest in overy place; Strong was the influence they had upon persons
in Authority; Numerous were their Assistants and Dependants at home and abroad;
Weighty was their concern which lay at stake, and many were the advantages
which they had of any that opposed them: So that no wonder if a Reformation so
long wished for, and much wanted were so slowly effected. It is rather more
strange that in so many places it did master these and such like encumbrances,
and in so short a time made so considerable a progress. If in some places it
proceeded with less Order, Uniformity, and Calmness than could have been wished
for in a Religious Reformation, Necessity in part, with many perplexed
difficulties and encumbrances, may in some measure excuse what no Law
beforehand fully warrants.

IV. But leaving others to answer for themselves, in my next particular I am to
consider how regularly, and sedately it proceeded in the Church of Engiand
within the bounds of Catholic Unity.

1. With the concurrence, and encouragement all along of the Supreme Power to
free it from any but suspicion of Rebellion. So it began at first with the
breaking of the Papal yoke of Supremacy, the Translation of the Bible, and some
like preparatives to Reformation under Henry the Eighth, and the united
Suffrages of his Parliaments, and the Bishops themselves therein. It proceeded
suitably to a further emprovement in most particulars under his Son Edward the
Sixth. And at last it came to its full settlement and establishment under Queen
Elizabeth. The beginning and carrying on of the Reformation here was by such
loyalty of Principles, and Practices that we challenge any Church in the World
to a Comparison therein. Indeed this was so notorious, that her Roman
Adversaries have turned her Glory into a Reproach by upbraiding her, though
most invidiously, with the name of a Parliamentary Religion; because it
received all along so much countenance and assistance from those great
Assemblies of all the three Estates of the Kingdom under their Head and
Sovereign.

2. But farther to clear her of all just imputation from hence, it must be
added that the whole work was carried on with the advice, and mature
deliberation of the Clergy assembled in Convocation, representing the entire
body of them, and therein a National Council. That they from their Education,
and presumed Knowledge, as well as from their Office, and Ecclesiastical
Anthority are ordinarily fittest to judge, debate, and determine of Religious
matters, will be soon granted: But that the Civil Power may, and ought
sometimes to remind them of their Duty, and restrain them from gross Defections
from it, may be proved by several Scripture Examples in the Old Testament, and
the Supereminence of their place. But happy is that Order and Unity in which
both Powers are joined together for the service of God, the security of his
Church, and promotion of his true Religion, as it was here: though it could not
be expected but the first attempts would meet with several difficulties, fierce
Debates, and Controversies, yet still the entire establishment was ratified by
the regular determination of the Clergy so assembled as before, as well as was
after confirmed by the Royal Assent.

3. Yet farther to justify themselves from any affected innovation in such a
change, all was done with the greatest Reverence, Respect, and Deference to the
Ancient Church to clear their continued Unity therewith.

1. In Doctrine. The ancient Creeds were taken for the foundation of its
Confession, the four first General Councils are received with great Veneration,
and a particular In libro Canonum in Synodo Londinensi, an. 1571. titulo de
Concionatoribus. Imprimis videbunt ne quid unquam doceant pro conciont, quod a
populo religiose teneri, and credi velint, nisi quod consentaneum sit doctrinae
Veteris and Novi testamenti, quodque ex illa ipsa doctrina Catholici Patres,
and veteres Episcopi collegerint.
Injunction was laid upon its Ministers to press upon none the necessary belief
of any Doctrine, but what may be proved from Scripture, and the general current
of the Expositions of the Fathers thereupon. So careful it has been in all
points to keep within the bounds of Catholic Principles, in those first
instilled into its young Disciples in the Catechism, and in those delivered in
its Articles to be subscribed by such to whom it entrusts any Office, that the
positive part of them will hardly be disowned by our very Adversaries, and can
scarce appear otherwise to any, than the common Faith of all Christians of
Orthodox repute in all Ages. And for other determinations in the Negative she
only declares thereby how little concerned she is to receive or own the false
or corrupt additions to the first unalterable Rule. No Church has professed
and evidenced a more awful and tender regard to Antiquity next to the express
Word of God. Both which she often appeals to, desires to be ruled by; and where
their footsteps are not sufficiently clear, chooses not to impose upon her own
Children, nor censure her Neighbors; keeps within the most safe, and modest
boundaries; is not forward in determining nice and intricate disputes, which
have perplexed and confounded many in their hasty and bold Positions,
particularly about the Divine Decrees, and such like sublime Points, In which
few understand where the main stress of the Controversy lies; It may be non
can comprehend the depth of the matters upon which the Decision ought to be
grounded. But alas how many have been forward to lay down, and fiercely contend
for, on each side, their private opinions herein as the first Rudiments of
Theology, to be placed in their very Creeds or Catechisms, and so a foundation
must be laid for endless Contests and Divisions? But most cautious has our
Church been in not laying such occasions to fall in the way of any: So that
both sorts of Adversaries have made their complaints against her for not being
more positive, and particularly in such Declarations, though none can charge
her justly with defect in any point of Faith so owned in the best Ages of the
Church.

2. As clear, and unexceptionable has been her proceeding in Church
Government, preserving that form, which from all Testimonies of Antiquity has
continued in the Church from the very Apostles, under the conduct, and happy
Influence of which Christianity has been propagated, and continued throughout
the world, whatever different measures some other Reformed Churches have taken,
whether forced by necessity, or swayed by particular inclination, or prejudice.
The Church of England kept up the universally received distinct prime Orders of
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons: not desiring to censure others, who can best
answer for themselves, but endeavoring to confine her self to what was most
Canonical, and Regular, and to show how little affected she was to alteration
from any establishment, except in notorious corruptions and abuses: And how
necessary she thought due Order and Subordination in the Church to prevent
Schisms and Heresies, and to give the greater Authority and advantage to her
Ministrations; and finally to free her self from all suspicion of irregularity
in her Succession, derived down from Christ and his Apostles, which she, as
much as any Church in the World, may pretend unto. And though some intermediate
Ages have been blemished with much degeneracy, yet she was concerned only to
separate this, but retain, and convey down to others whatsoever good and
wholesome provision she received from those before.

Farther, to evince this, particular care was taken by express Law (a) to
confirm the Rules of Government, * See the Statute 25 of Henry the Eighth, cap.
19. Sect. 7. expressly revived 1 Eliz, c. 1. sect. 6.
or Canon Law before received in the Church till some better provision could be
made so far as it contradicts not the Law of the Land, or the Word of God;
making as few changes in the outward face of the Church as was possible, and
sensibly proving it her design properly not to destroy, but build, nor yet
therein to erect a new, but reform an old Church.

3. Alike Canonical, and orderly has been her Constitution in matters of
Worship. Her Forms of Prayer and Praise with the whole order of her Liturgy are
composed with the greatest temper, and expressed in the most plain and
comprehensive terms to help forward uniform Devotion, pious Affection, the most
Orthodox Profession, and Catholic Communion. So that I think it may be
universally affirmed, that there is not any thing required in her public
Service necessary to those who communicate with her, which any that own the
name of Christians, or are owned for such by the general body of them, can
almost scruple: unless because it is a Form, by one sort, and because it is
ours by another sort. But how unreasonable herein are both? So careful she has
been to lay the ground of most Catholic Unity, and to remove whatever might
obstruct it.

This our Adversaries the Romanists confirmed by their own practice, when for
several years, as we have been told Camdeni Eliz. an. 1570.
in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, they frequented our Churches,
joined in our Prayers and Praises, attended on our Sermons and other
Instructions, and received (as some add) our Sacraments, according to the order
for substance the same as now, and had it is like done so still, having nothing
to object against them but from the after-prohibition of the Pope, who had
reason to fear they who were so well provided of all needful, supply, and
defense at home might thus by degrees be withdrawn from subjection to his
Authority abroad; that darling point never to be dispensed, or parted with,
whatever else might have been yielded Camdeni Eliz. an. 1560.


Our Reformers who composed our Liturgy carefully collected the remainders of
true Primitive Devotion then in use, and separated from them all those corrupt
additions, which ignorance, superstition, and crafty policy had mixed
therewith. Therefore it is so far from being an objection, that any part of our
Liturgy was translated from the Roman Offices, that while nothing is retained
contrary to wholesome Doctrine, and sound Piety, it is a convincing argument of
her impartial Sincerity, and desire to preserve Uniformity, as much as
possible, with all Christians abroad, as well as at home in her own Members:
securing all the Substantials of Worship according to the plain sense of
Scripture, and the pattern of the Primitive Church.

And as to Circumstantials and Ceremonies, she is sensible when they are too
numerous how apt they are to darken the inward, and more essential luster of
Religion, and prove a Burden instead of a Relief to its Worship, which she
takes notice Preface to the Common Prayer concerning Ceremonies why some are
abolished.
St. Augustine complained of in his time: But have since so increased in the
Eastern, as well as Western Churches, that it must argue a great aw to make the
Service look like any thing serious and Sacred. However this number alone,
where the particulars are not otherwise obnoxious, tempts some to spend all
their zeal therein, and diverts them from things more necessary, or gives too
much occasion to others to quarrel about them. Yet withal being apprehensive
how needful it would be to maintain Order, and Decency, She has kept some,
though very few, and those most plain, and unexceptionable in their nature,
most significative of the end for which they were appointed, and most ancient,
and universal in their Institution, and practice, hinted in the title of our
Liturgy as it is changed from the former. And to prevent all differences
hereabout, she has expressed her sense of them so clearly, and explicitly,
that one would think no peevish obstinacy had room to interpose a scruple
however the event has proved.

Thus abundantly has the Church of England vindicated her Reformation from all
pretense of Apostasy from the True, Ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic Church,
and showed in all instances how careful she has been to preserve the Unity of
the Spirit in the bond of peace with all the Members thereof. Nor has she been
wanting in any respect or reverence due thereunto. No Church being more
cautious, and sparing in its determinations, more Canonical in its Impositions,
more Regular in its Succession, and more charitable in its Censures: making all
necessary provision for her own Children so within the bounds of Catholic
Unity, that had other Churches observed the like method, or measures, way had
been made for an universal consent; (...) S. B^sil. Ep. 193. T. 3. p. 409.
and every true Christian where ever he came would have found his own Church
wherewith to communicate without hesitancy in all Religious Offices. And as St.
August. adv. Epist. Manich. T. 6. p. 118. A.
St. Augustine observed in his time, he would have needed but to enquire for the
Catholic Church, and no Schismatic would have dared to divert him to their
Conventicles.

But if after the confusions, and disorders of so many Centuries, amidst such a
depraved state by corrupt manners, diversities of opinion, and perplexed
Interests, so great a happiness be not to be hoped for now: that private
person, or particular Church will clear themselves before God, and all good
men, that do what is in their power toward it, and pray to Him to amend what
they cannot change, and in the mean time make the best use of what means they
enjoy.

Upon which Premises an easy Solution is given to the old cavilling question,
Where was your Church before the Reformation, or that time?

We answer, Just where it is: Thereby no new Church was set up; no new Articles
of Faith brought in; no new Sacraments; no new order of Priesthood to minister
in holy things: all which would have indeed required new Miracles, and a new
immediate Authority from Heaven so attested: only the old were purged from
impurities in Doctrine, Worship, and Practice, which, in passing through so
many degenerate Ages, they had contracted, and that an ordinary Power might
suffice to do. If we were in the Catholic Church before, we are so still, and
hope, to better purpose. We are not therefore out of it, because their rash
Censures have excluded us and then they unreasonably take advantage to argue
against us from their own act: We never formally shut them out what ever they
have done to us.

What degrees of corruption in Faith or Manners may be consistent with the bare
being of a Church, or the possibility of salvation therein, is needless and
dangerous for us nicely to enquire: it may be impossible for us to know. I am
sure it is most safe for us to reform what we know to be amiss, and to leave
those who do not, to stand or fall by their own Master. It is a very ill
requital of our Charity if it be turned into a weapon of offense to wound, or
slay us, by that by which we showed our desire of their Cure. But they and we
must stand another trial, and await a final infallible Sentence, which ours
here cannot change. The best security that we know to meet it with comfort will
be to use the most strict impartiality with our selves, and the greatest
Charity to others.

Yet our Adversaries glory in nothing more than in the name of the Catholic
Church, and boast in no Title so much as that of Catholics, which has had
deservedly so great veneration in all Antiquity.

But their claim here truly examined will prove as fallacious and arrogant as
in any other instance. For the term Catholic if we respect the notation of the
word, or the most constant use of it, is the same as Universal, and so joined
to the Church signifies the general Body of all Christians dispersed thoughout
the World, opposed to any distinct Party, or separate Communion.

Thus we find it constantly applied by St. Augustine in all his Tracts against
the Donatists, S August. de Unitate Ecclisiae, c 2. T. 7. p. 5 10. Qu^stio
certe inter nos versatur ubi sit Ecclesia, utrum apud nos, an apud illos, quae
utique una est, quam majores nost^i Catholicam nominarunt, ut ex eo ipso romine
ostenderent, quia per totum est. Ibid. c. 3 p 514. Chbristi Etclesia
Canonicarum Scripturarum Divinis and certissim^s testimoniis in omnib is
Gentibus de signata est. Et c. 4. ab ej^s corpore quod est Ecclesia ita
diss^ntiu^t, ut eorum communio non sit cum toto, q^^cunq^^ ^^issuaditur, sed in
aliqua part separata inveniatur, manisestum est eos non esse in Ecclesia
Catholica. Et c. 12. p. 533. aliud Evangelizat qui periisse dicit de caetero
mundo Ecclesiam, and in part Donati, in sora Africa remansisse. Idem de fide
and symbolo, in eam partem de Ecclesia Catholica, T. 3. p. 149. Haeretici de
Deo falsa sentiendo ipsam fi em violant, Schisonatici autem discissionibus
iniquis a fraterna Caritate dissiliunt, quapropter nec Haereticus pertinet ad
Ecclesiam Catholicam, quae diligit Deum, nec Schismaticus quoniam diligit
proximum.
and so opposed to them who went about to shut it up within their own Party,
and streitned Communion; therein too closely imitated by our Adversaries, who,
in spite of name or thing, make the same enclosures about the Catholic as
about the Roman Church, and are as free in their severest censures of all
others, and as haughty in what they assume to themselves alone as they were,
though not proceeding upon the same grounds. But what that holy Father every
where presses upon them reaches as nearly our Antagonists; the indispensable
necessity of Charity, that great bond of Unity in the Church, and principal
evidence of the Divine Spirit, which animates the whole, without which the
highest gifts, and most Sacred Ministrations are rendered ineffectual. This is
one of the prime Characteristick notes of the true Catholic Church, and every
living Member thereof, and nothing is more opposite to their Principles and
Practices, who have formally excluded all other Christians and Churches from
any share therein, not only those in the West, that have deservedly cast off
that power, which they had unjustly arrogated, and tyrannically exercised, but
also the Greeks, and others in the East, that never owned any subjection to
them.

But most securely may the Church of England glory in true Catholicism, which
to all her other privileges, and advantages that she may boast of above almost
any other Church, still maintains, and evidences the greatest charity to others
of any that I know in the world; makes no other enclosures than those which God
himself has made, not assuming any Authority to command, yea, or to pass hasty
judgment upon any, but only to provide for her own the best she can, and with
such tender regard to common Christianity, and the Rights of all other
Churches, that she seems designedly to have chalkt out the way of restoring the
most desirable fruits of Christian Unity throughout the whole Church; and we
should have been sensible of considerable effects by it, had other Churches
pursued like methods.

That Church sure is most Catholic that makes provision for the most Catholic
Communion, Peace, and Unity, and which imposes no other terms or conditions of
it but those most universally received throughout all Ages, in all places, and
by almost all Christians; which may soon decide the competition, whether the
Church of England more truly vindicates to her self a part of the Catholic
Church, or they of Rome arrogate to themselves the whole? Or which are the
Schismatics from it, they which exclude none, whom they own no power over, but
invite all to them, and join with any in what is good, and agreeable to the
Institutions of our common Lord; or they who shut out all but those who will
subject themselves to their usurpt Authority, and most unjustifiable
Impositions. Firmilianus de Stephano Episcopo Romans ad Cyprianum, Ep. 75. p.
228. Ox. Ed. Siquidem ille vere Schismaticus, qui se a Communione
Ecclesiasticae unitatis Apostatam fecerit; dum enim putas omnes a te abstineri
posse, solum te ab omnibus abstinuisti.


Father the term Catholic is sometimes taken for Orthodox, and so the
Catholic Church interpreted for that which holds the Catholic Faith opposed
to heretical Opinions and Doctrines as well as to Schismatical Separations. S.
Cyril. Hieros. Cat 18 p 220. (...). Hist. l. 7. c 4.
In this sense the Church of England has as good a claim in the Catholic
Church as any whatever; Receiving all the Artiticles of Christian Faith
delivered in Scripture, and received in the Primitive Ages for more than five
hundred years. No Principles having been so formally declared then, and for
some time after, as the Catholic Faith of all Christians, and as such
necessary to be owned, which she rejects: whatever private opinions there might
be then among some eminent Doctors of the Church in which they often differed one
from the other, or although there might be some observances then generally
received which she thinks her self not bound to retain.

But ill will this Character agree to the Romanists, who have added so many new
dangerous Articles to the common Faith of Christians, not only beside the
original Rule, which they cannot but own with us, but too often against it, and
the professed belief of the first, and best Ages of the Church. Wherefore we
reject not these innovations merely from negative arguments, because not
sufficiently proved; (and yet that way of arguing has been always allowed in
the Fundamentals of Faith, which must be grounded upon express Divine Authority
and Testimony.) But we lay the greatest stress of our aversations to them upon
that direct opposition, which we undertake to prove most of them have to the
common Faith, and revealed Will of God which they and we both own. And surely
that Church in this acceptaion is most Catholic, that relies on such Catholic
Principles, and refers all others to be examined by this touchstone.

V. But in the fifth place some Objections lie in our way fit to be answered.

Object. 1. They urge against us that we reject several Doctrines since
formally determined in the Church by the known and received Authority thereof
in Councils more general, or particular, which they pretend were believed
through all Ages, but then established when they came first to be called in
question.

Answ. We are not much concerned in the first part of the objection, though
very many exceptions might come in especially as to the formality, and
regularity of those Councils: but as to the latter part in which the main
stress lies here, we never refused a fair trial thereof.

1. From Scripture against which no Authority Civil, or Ecclesiastical, in
single persons, or the greatest Assemblies, no time, or custom of whatever
date can prescribe. Tertullian de velandis virginibus, c. 1. p. 172. hoc
exigere veritatem cui nemo prascribere potest, non spatium temporum, non
patrocinia personarum, non privilegium regionum

S. Cyprian, Ep. 63. p. 155. Quare si solus Christus audiendus est, non debtmus
attendere, quid alius ante nos faciendum putaverit, sed quid qui ante omnes est
Christus prior fecit, neque enim hominis consuetudinem sequi opertet; sed Dei
veritatem.

S. Basil, de judicio Dei, T. 2. p. 392. and ejus moral. T. 2. p. 423.

S. Hieron. adv. Joh. Hieros. T. 2. p. 185. and in eodem T. ex Ep. Aug. ad
Hierom. p. 353, 359. etc.


This has been ever received till of late as the perfect, and entire Rule of
all necessary doctrines of Faith, and practice; of which abundant Testimonies
may be seen in most Protestant Writers.

2. We appeal also to the Primitive, and best Ages of Christianity which either
knew nothing of these Additions that we can find, or sometimes give as express
declarations against them, as could be expected at this distance. But to take
off much of the strangeness of so harsh an imputation at first sight, wherewith
we charge a great part of the Church for a considerable time, and that they and
we may be less scandalized at the first mention of these defections,

3. We may consider the various Cautions in the New Testament against corrupt
Doctrines, and Manners, which at the least in general are foretold would creep
into the Church, if some of them we now charge be not particularly described
therein.

4. We may compare matter of fact with the experience of the like degeneracy of
the Jewish Church in various instances so nearly resembling these as nothing
more, and from the same plea of Oral Tradition, yet against as clear evidence,
and as emphatical promises to preserve them from Apostasy as any particular
Church at least can now pretend to.

5. We may consult the tendency of lapst mankind, In the best how weak it is,
and apt to be imposed on; In others how prone to corrupt, and distort the best
Institutions, cast a mist before the cleare^t discoveries, and offer violence
unto the strongest convictions to shelter their vices, and promote their
unwarrantable interests, especially in times of ease, plenty, and outward
prosperity. In which we may compare common experience in lesser Societies,
which however wisely directed at first, regularly founded, and strongly guarded
on all sides, without a very careful Inspection, and sometimes vigorus
opposition, so many corruptions will creep in as to need frequent reformations
to reduce them back to their primitive Constitution. And although an especial
providence be concerned for the guard and conduct of Gods Church, yet neither
Scripture, or experience warrant us to expect its happy Influence by miracles
now, for the effecting of that which may be accomplished by the use of ordinary
and regular means of his own appointment.

6. We may reflect upon the particular Ages of the Church, which we charge
especially with these desections from about the eighth Century to the
Reformation, wherein if all or most of them did not come in, yet they grew to
that extravagant height, as to gain establishment for Principles of
Christianity. These Ages are charged by their own Authors, as well as ours, and
stand most sensibly convict of the grossest Barbarism, Stupidity, Ignorance,
depraved Manners, and all such corrupt Inclinations in all Orders and Degrees,
especially the ruling part, as were most likely to make way for such Changes,
and Innovations.

7. We have some farther sensible proof of a design in many within that time to
impose upon the credulity of others, and bring in strange Doctrines, and
unwarrantable Practices, by the many Fabulous Stories, feigned Apparitions, and
Revelations, several of which they themselves will hardly now defend, then
brought into the Church to confirm these points in difference, and which almost
only the people then received for their Instructions, to entice them first into
an awful opinion of, and then a confident reliance upon these things.

Nay farther, among the many spurious Writings which then crept into the world
under the most venerable names of the renowned Fathers of the Church, now
mostly discarded by themselves, when their shameless Impudence has been so
fully exposed, yet few of them there are in which this contrivance is not
legible throughout to advance these Opinions, and Practices. So that we are
indebted to the Reformation, those great men which labored in it, and some of
the most moderate and learned of their own side, with the Art of Printing then
but newly found out, that almost all ancient Authors, and Records have not lost
their Authority, which would have been much endangered among such gross
depravers of Antiquity, whose constant business it was to mar good Authors by
their Interpolations, Additions, or Substractions: or vent new ones under
counterfeit old names to serve their corrupt ends. But we are somewhat beholden
to their ignorance, and stupidity, for doing it so grossly that there was need
of little skill or observation to discover their Impostures.

8. To which may be added in the last place against the supposed presumption in
private persons, or particular Churches to judge of public Establishments by a
seeming Superior Authority: that without some judgment of discretion in the
former there is no room for a proper Moral Act, much less are they capable of a
truly Religious Obligation, which an absolute implicit faith perfectly
destroys. But whilst every man is bound to prove his own work, and must bear
his own burden, he must examine the grounds of his assent according to his
capacity, and determine himself by the best motives he can procure, and is
concerned at his utmost peril to do it with all due respect to the Authority
and Judgment of his Superiors, as well as the evidence of the things
themselves, which are no where in any Government beside thought inconsistent.

These Considerations duly weighed may obviate those first prejudices which
usually lie in the way to intercept all thoughts of farther trial, and
examination of particular Points in controversy, and may silence or shame the
late idle vaunts of such who pretend to reason us out of our senses, and
undertake to demonstrate it a priori impossible that ever any false opinion
should get into the Church, or prevail therein. I wish these men would try
their pains, and subtilty to prove it impossible there could be any such thing
as wilful sin in the world. I presume they might have as good Topics to
pretend to it from all convictions of Reason or Interest. But after the most
artificial composures herein they would hardly believe themselves, or be
credited by others against their experience. It were well if they might prevail
to make that less frequent which all must own so unreasonable in it self, and
destructive to us.

Object. 2. But our Adversaries will yet urge upon us, that supposing, not
granting such a degeneracy in the Church, and need of Reformation: yet this
should have been done in order to preserve Catholic Unity by common consent in
a general Council, and with most mature deliberation, and consultation.

Answ. 1. This was most earnestly desired, and insisted on by the first
Reformers, witness the great Importunities of Charles the Fifth with the Pope
upon their instance.

2. When this seemingly prevailed, and a pretended Council was called, it was
far from being free or general. The Italian, and mere titular Bishops
outnumbred all the rest, and both one and the other were overawed by the Popes
immediate Dependants or Delegates, and all things carried by such stratagems of
Policy, or partiality of Interest that the only care taken was to fix the
disease, and not provide for the cure by the best account we have of those
transactions: So that some Princes of their own Communion entered their
Protestations against its proceedings, disowning any Obligation to be tied up
to their determinations.

3. As the divided state of Christendom now stands, it is rather to be wished
for, than supposed almost possible.

From the different Interests and inclinations of Princes, who will hardly
agree together in the Summons, place, or time of meeting, or about the persons
who are to resort to it from their several Dominions. While the Roman Empire
was entire, the Emperors Edict alone was Summons sufficient to almost the
whole Christian Church. But now who shall take upon him to call or invite so
many from so distant places no way under his Authority? And that the Pope ever
pretended to this power till of late can scarce be pleaded against such clear
Evidences, and Examples; and where he is so much concerned, it will be judged
more unreasonable for him to demand it. If this difficulty were overcome by any
consent, or condescension: yet so many jealousies, and cross interests are
behind, that will be, and have been laid in the way of their first meeting
together with a requisite peaceable disposition, as are not easily foreseen,
and less readily governed; not to interpose the difficulties of the journeys
from such distant places, and of the discontinuance so long from home of the
chief Governors of the Church: many doubts and controversies of the number,
and quality of persons having right to vote therein by themselves, or
Representatives will not soon be adjusted, and without these and such like
determined there is no preparation made for so venerable an Assembly.

After all, when never so duly met, we have neither Reason, Ecclesia non number
rus Episcoporum. Tertullian. de pudi^itia, c. 22.
Promise, or Example to suppose them now infallibly guided in their
determinations, but that they or the greater part may be mistaken themselves,
or mislead others, through passion, and false interest, or be carried away in
the noise or torrent of a multitude, or be imposed on by the crafty He that
considers matter of fact, more than the finest Schemes, and most subtle
Reasonings of his own brain, how things are often strangely and unaccountably
carried in public meetings of men of extraordinary Fame: yea, in some Councils
themselves, and some of very sacred Repute in the Church, Greg. Naz. Epist. 55.
will think this no hard supposal: though their orderly Sentence carries the
most venerable Authority below Heaven. p. 814. and Ep. 72. p. 829. and Ep. 135.
It seems to argue the height of Blasphemy to arreign God himself of
indiscretion, if it be possible for any man, p. 864. ejusd.
or number of men to err from their Duty: Orat. 25. init.
And very presumptuous it is to charge the Supreme Providence of defect in the
provision for the continuance of his Church if they be capable to fall away: p
451. Theod. Ep. 112. Vol. 3. p. 982, 983.
yea, let God be true but every man a liar when brought in competition. He will
not be tied up by our most plausible Methods in the way of securing his own
Truth, which shall at last prevail though condemned: whose wisdom is
unsearchable, and his ways often past our finding out. He will bring to pass his
own holy designs, though by means to us most unlikely, or it may be seemingly
opposite.

Whoever seriously reflects upon these things will have little reason to
quarrel at the Reformation for want of this formal establishment in Council.

No Christian, or Church is chargeable with the lack of that which it is not in
their power to procure. Men may please themselves with remote Speculations, and
the fairest hopes, and wishes of such an Authoritative Decision of the disputes
in controversy; but if it be not to be had, we must rest content with, and
make the best use we can of that provision which God in mercy has indulged us
for our sufficient satisfaction, and safety.

Every particular National Church directly subject to no other may, and ought
to reform it self from known Abuses: keeping within the Rule of Gods Word,
avoiding as much as possible giving just offense to any beside, and being ready
to give an account of its proceedings therein to all, and to alter any thing
that shall be found amiss, or add whatever may be proved wanting, to receive
others into its Communion, and to communicate with them so far as may be
consistent with common Christianity owned by all, endeavoring to preserve
Peace, and Unity with all that call upon the same Lord, praying to God to
increase, and improve them more and more; such has been the continued aim, and
proceeding of the Church of England.

We believe no true Member of this would have refused the general Communion of
the truly Catholic Church in St. Augustine's Age, or for some time after,
though possibly every opinion, or practice then current be not suited to their
present judgment, or wish. Neither can we think after so strange alteration of
Circumstances through so many degenerate Ages, that holy Father in his eminent
zeal for the most S. Aug. adv. crescon. Grammat l. 3. T. 7. p. 263. Ego in
Ecclesia sum cujus membra sunt illae omnis Ecclesia, quas ex laboribus
Apostolorum notas, atque firmatas simul in literis Canonitis novimus. Earum
Communionem sive in Africa sive (...) non desera^^.
Catholic Communion therein would now have been much moved by our present
Adversaries arrogant claims of it to themselves alone, though against the Rules
and Principles of it with all others. No Foundation is laid for it here but by
the absolute submission of all others to their usurped Authority, and rash, or
impious determinations; Now who can hope for an universal Peace and Unity from
such terms of accommodation, only fit for an insulting Conqueror to impose,
like those which Nabash the Ammonnite propounded to the men of Jabesh Gilead to
thrust out all their right eyes, and lay it for a reproach upon all Israel, 1 Samuel 11. 2.

Object. 3. Sometimes they object to us the personal miscarriages of some
engaged in the Reformation.

Answ. If any did what they ought not, or with unjustifiable designs what they
ought, the Church is no way accountable; if what they did in the Reformation,
as such, were good, and they had sufficient Authority for doing it, which we
are ready to maintain, that is all she is responsible for, were other
imputations really true, which they often are not: However it will be an endless
dispute, and if determined would add little to the cause. I may add, few great
and public Changes are brought about, where so many interests are concerned
either way to promote, or hinder them in which all things are carried with that
clearness and evenness that were to be desired. Private Persons are not
chargeable, with the supposed defects of public Administrations, of which they
have not the management if nothing be required of them against their express
Duty, and they be provided of all necessary means of their Salvation, though
they may be inclined to wish some things had been ordered otherwise.

Object. 4. Our Enemies on both sides are apt to object to us the want of due
Discipline, if not absolutely necessary to the being of the Church, yet so far
useful to the well being, and perfection of it, that it ought to have great
weight in determining our choice to one Communion before another, and is one of
the most sensible bands of Unity in the Church.

Answ. 1. The restoration of the Primitive Vigor of this has been always
wished for by our Church, as in the Preface to the Commination, but the
accomplishment is very difficult.

From the degeneracy of the Age, which would hardly bear it. He that Governs in
a less Sphere will find how often he must bear with things, which he does not
approve: and much easier it is to find fault with, than to amend what sometimes
we know to be amiss.

From the multiplicity of Divisions, which weaken all endeavors toward it,
and then froward men unworthily charge the Church with what they themselves
make almost unavoidable: whereas, if executed, it would reach themselves as
nearly as any who are now so clamorous against the most tender, and charitable
endeavors toward it as cruel and inhumane.

2. The Pretenses, to it in the Church of Rome according to general practice,
so far as it can appear to us; and we can judge by nothing else, are more
dangerous than any of these Omissions, when turned into a constant circle of
sinning, private Confession, and Priestly Absolution upon the imposition of
very insignificant Penance, and so over again. For hereby men have the
Authority of their Church to confirm in them the dangerous presumption that
they have thus readily cleared themselves before God, and so soon perfected
their Repentance for such Sins, which we find them not so watchful against
afterward, as that ought to suppose, or make them.

Whereas the Church of England commends private Confession for our clearer
satisfaction, and direction in difficult cases as most needful: but cannot
truly say that it is an indispensable condition of our pardon, which was never
so believed, or practiced in the Church for many Centuries. If people will not
be persuaded to their Privilege, unless they be forced to it by false
denunciations, they must look to that; if they miscarry it lies at their own
door, while they have no hopes here given them of pardon, but upon such an
entire Repentance as destroys the habit of sin, and plants the contrary Grace;
and what need they may have of the Assistance of a Spiritual Guide, and other
helps in many Cases in order to this effect, they may best consider.

3. However the due administration of Discipline is to be placed among
conveniences, and advantages to be wished for, rather than necessaries we
cannot be without; and it has been, and will be in all Ages of the Church more
or less perfect according to a great many contingencies not to be stated before
hand. The Church has ever judged it the best measure of using it so as may
most serve the ends of Religion, and the general benefit of the Community, and
not that she is bound always up to the strict merit of the persons falling
under it; and yet after all the strictest care, and impartiality there will be
room for the final Separation, when our Lord shall send his Angels to gather
out of his own Kingdom all offenses, and them which do iniquity. If we will
shun all communication with these, though only in what is good, we must flee
out of any Church that ever yet was, or will be, so far as we know, in this
World, and so from any hopes in that to come: yet scarce any considerable
Schism has appeared in the Church, which did not shelter it self under this
pretense.

4. Farther it may be alleged that several restraints may be upon the Church
from the Civil Power. When this had suffered so much by former Encroachments,
and Usurpations no wonder if it still retain some jealousy of that Yoke which
with so much difficulty it cast off, and provide as securely as it can for its
future preservation, though by suspending some of that outward assistance very
conduceable to the due effect of Church Censures, and sometimes by putting a
stop to their sensible progress, in some cases where no such danger or
necessity required it. Men by mistakes, or prejudice may strein each power too
far. Better experience of the Regular management of the Ecclesiastical, may in
due time encourage the Secular farther to enlarge their Liberty, and encourage
their orderly proceedings so as may be most subservient to the ends of true
Religion, and the advancement of the common security of Church and State. All
the power which the Church pretends to as such is spiritual, and that can make
no alteration in the Civil Rights of men.

5. Yet after all, the Church amongst us has not only sufficient Authority
committed to her by Christ; but reserved, and countenanced by the Laws of the
Land to testify her Abhorrence of all notorious Scandals, to the shame, and
confusion of gross Offenders, and as a direful earnest of a worse doom that
awaits them hereafter, not here prevented by a satisfactory Repentance. I need
not refer to particular instances when we have frequent examples thereof. If
this be not always exercised by those with whom it is entrusted with all due
vigor, and sincerity, after just abatement for necessity, and a favorable
allowance for such perplexed difficulties, of which scarce any private person
can make a fair and competent judgment, the fault will lie only at their doors
whose is the neglect, and private Christians shall not fare the worse in the
performance of their duty, nor fail of the salutary effects of the ordinary
means of Grace by Gods own appointment, because every public ministration is
not performed with that Religious care which becomes such concerns.

6. Little pretense can they have from this Objection that desert the
Established National Church, and that most advantageous outward Bond of Unity
therein, in pursuit of private Assemblies, and select Congregations, where all
Acts of Discipline must needs be supposed Arbitrary on one side, and precarious
on the other. When he or they who inflict them own no power over them to aw, or
direct their proceedings, or upon just occasion to reverse their Sentence; nor
he who falls under them has any other engagement to submission than his own
free Act, nor can suffer any farther prejudice without it, than to be forced it
may be to change his Company, or place of meeting. What ever grave, and solemn
appearance this may carry at the first setting up of such a new Government, it
will soon degenerate into Mockery, or Confusion. Whatsoever destroys the Unity
of the Church overturns the main strength, and Foundation of all Discipline;
the defects hereof we may hope to see repaired with the preservation of that,
but without that no prospect appears of any overtures toward it.

7. To which may be added in the last place, whatever want of Discipline any
may lay to the charge of the Church of England, none can complain of her breach
of that Unity therein, which all Christian Churches ought to maintain. She
neither invades the Rights, nor pretends to reverse the just and regular
Censures, nor countenances the Schismatics, nor disallows the ministrations of
any other Church so far as consistent with the express Institutions of our
blessed Savior, and the universally received practice of his Church, though
otherwise mixed with several corruptions which she wishes removed.

Object. 5. Lastly, our Roman Adversaries object to us the many obstinate
Schisms, and gross Heresies, which have sprung up since the Reformation, and as
they pretend out of it, from the forsaking of that bond of Unity in the
Catholic Church, only to be hoped for in their Communion, where alone they say
these are prevented, or soon cured.

Answ. The first part of matter of fact is too notorious to be denied, and too
scandalous to be defended: but against the latter part of the original of these
Schisms, and Heresies many just exceptions may be interposed.

1. The Reformation gives no countenance to them, but severely condemns them,
and provides sufficient means to prevent or remove them; if notwithstanding
wicked men of corrupt Principles, and depraved manners flee hither for shelter
to hide their enormities, and abuse or pervert the most wholesome Institutions,
and advantageous opportunities for their spiritual proficiency to the most
contrary purposes; The guilt and ill consequence will lie only at their own
doors. Christians must not be debarred of the ordinary means of Grace, because
some turn this Grace into wantonness. St. Peter tells us of some who wrest the
Scriptures unto their own destruction; but neither he nor any other then, or
for many Ages after thought this motive sufficient to deprive the People of the
use of them, made it rather an argument of consulting them with greater caution
and diligence, lest being led away with the error of the wicked they fall from
their own stedfastness.

2. There were many Schisms and Heresies sprung up in the first and best Ages
of the Church, even in the times of the Apostles themselves, as appears by
several intimations in their Writings, and in the immediately succeeding, while
many Apostolical men were living, and if we compare the account we have of them
in the most ancient Authors, particularly in Irenaeus, they were as wild, and
extravagant as any of the later date: yet the Apologists for true Christianity
thought themselves very injuriously charged with those blasphemous Principles,
or flagitious Practices which they wholly renounced, or disowned. The evil one
is always most busy to sow his Tares amongst the best Wheat. But that which is
most to our purpose here to observe, is that the same method which the Orthodox
Christians then made use of for the Confutation, and Conviction of Heretics
and Schismatics, we still appeal to, by bringing them to the touchstone of
Scripture, and next to that the most Orthodox, and Catholic Tradition. Whereas
how short and easy a decision to all debates might have been fetched hence, had
they had the same apprehension of the Authority and Esficacy thereof by
referring all Controversies depending to the determination of the Roman Church,
the Mother, and Mistress of all, and to that infallible conduct settled therein:
but not one word of that, only when they make their appeals to her after the
express Word of God, it is in common with many other Churches, especially those
of Apostolical foundation, as in Tertullian, Irenoeus, St. Augustine, etc. where
they have to deal with such persons. Tertullian. adv. Marcion. l. 4. c. 5. p.
415.

Videamus quod lac e Paulo Corinthli hauserint; ad quam regulam Galatae sunt
recorrecti; quid legant Philippenses, Thessalonicenses, Ephesii, quid etiam
Romani de proximo sonent, quibus Evangelium and Petrus, and Paulus sanguine
quoque suo signatam rellquerunt; habemus and Johannis alumn as Ecclesias.

Idem de prascript. adv. Har. c. 36. p. 215. Percurre Ecclesias Apostolicas and
proxima est tibi Achala, habes Corinthum, si non long es a Macedonia, habes
Philippos, habes Thessalonicenses; sipotes in Asiam tendere habes Ephesum; si
autem Itali^e adjaces habes Roman. Et ibid. c. 32. p. 213. de aliis. Qu^
denique instituantur tamen in eadem fide conspirantes non minus Apestolicae
deputantur pro consanguinstate doctrinae.

S. Irenaeus adv. Haer. l. 3. c. 3. p. 232.

S. Augustine. de Unitate Ecclesiae. c. 10. T. 7. p. 531. ad Corinthios, ad
Ephosios, ad Thessalonicenses, ad Colossenses. Vos solas Apostoli Epislolas in
lectione, nos autem Epislolas in Lectione, as side, and ipsas Ecclesias in
Communione retinemus. Ibid. c. 16. p 546. utrum ipsi Ecclesiam teneant non nisi
Divinarum Scripturarum Cononicis libris oftendant: quia nec dos propterea
dicimus nobis credere oportere quod in Ecclesia Christi sumus, quia ipsam quam
tenemus commendavit Milevitanus Optatus, vel Mediolanensis Ambrosius, vel alii
innumer abiles no^irae Communionis Episcapi, aut quia nostrorum Collegarum
Conci^iis ipsa praedicata est; aut quia per totum orhem in locis sanctis tante
mirabilia vel exauditionum, vel sanitatum siunt, etc. quaecunque talia in
Catholica fiunt, ideo sunt approbanda quia in Catholica siunt, non ideo ipsa
manisestatur Catholica, quia haec in ea fiunt.




3. The pretense of the most absolute Authority in the one part, and the
extortion of the most implicit Belief, and blind Obedience in the other among
them have not been able to secure themselves from considerable dissentions, and
Divisions in opinion, and practice. If these have not broke out ordinarily into
the most open Schisms, and Heresies, the stop is more due to the craft and
policy whereby they often compromise the matter between both parties, or to that
outward force and violence which restrains them, rather than to any opinion
which they themselves have of this ready means of ending all disputes. We find
in the fiercest debates among them how little heed is given to this infallible
cure farther than interest or necessity inclines them. There may be a way of
preventing controversies, which destroys all Religion, and makes way for
Atheism; in such a case I need not enquire where the advantage lies.

4. We may answer, most of those mischiefs had their rise from the ruins of
the Church of England, when that was violently assaulted and broken, its
Authority despised, its Constitutions vilified, its Order defaced, its faithful
Adherents persecuted, then Faction, and Disorder, strange Doctrines, Phrensical
Opinions, and all manner of looseness in Principles, and Practices came in like
a torrent, and overspread the Land, which before skulkt in corners, and were
little taken notice of. The Restitution of the Church has in great measure put
a stop to their progress; I knwo not of any Sect, which has started up since
that time: But almost every year before brought forth several. If her pains and
care have not yet been so successfully prevalent as to recover, and restore all
that have gone astray, she has not been wanting in her endeavors toward it,
which have reduced many; and it is no little time, nor easy task to repair the
Ruins of such long Confusions, and Desolations.

5. We owe a great part of these Calamities to the same persons, who now charge
them upon us; for beside the influence which their Agents, Principles, and
Examples had in contriving and promoting those unnatural Commotions, and
Rebellions in the State which I am not now concerned to examine; let matter of
fact determine that as it has been found more or less plain: Thus far we have
abundant evidence that several of their Emissaries have herded with the chief
of our Dissenters, and if some of the grossest Sects were not framed among them
first, as seems very probable, yet most of them have been much fomented, and
strengthened by them, and they have been often found acting their parts under
that disguise, and have employed on all occasions their interest to shelter,
and protect them, according to the known maxim of their Policy, that the
readiest way of effecting our ruin was by increasing, and fomenting our
Divisions; here they have found their greatest harvest. For when men's minds are
unsettled, and they grown giddy with being long turned about by every new wind
of Doctrine, and are weary of tumbling and tossing from one Party to another,
they will easily catch hold of any fancied support, and be sooner betrayed to
yield themselves Captives to the delusory hopes of rest and settlement amongst
them.

6. To all which may be added, much of that irreverence, and contempt of
Persons, and things Sacred, which have made way for the forementioned sad
Calamities amongst us are mostly due to their Oppressions, Insolences, or
Delusions. When the People had so long groaned under their tyrannical yoke, and
intolerable burdens, and found themselves so often cheated by their manifest
impostures, no marvel if they be over-fearful of what they had suffered so much
from, and afterward too suspicious of being deluded again, and be soon tempted
to transgress due measure in the use of their liberty, being just recovered
from extreme slavery, though so many years have passed since, as will hardly
admit of a tolerable excuse: Yet better experience, and longer consideration we
hope in time may teach them to distinguish between the certain Interests of
true Religion, and the hypocritical wiles of worldly Crast and Policy, and so
to think a due respect, and Obsequiousness to those who sincerely manage the
former, necessary to preserve them from being imposed on by the latter, and
prevent their falling into the like miscarriages which they observe in others;
And that Apostolical Government, good Order, wholesome Discipline, sound
Doctrine, and Uniform Devotion may no longer suffer under the false, but most
odious charge of Popery, and that they who have under God been most
instrumental in reforming, and defending the Church from the real, and gross
Corruptions thereof, may not still be oppressed with the unreasonable clamor
of a mere invidious name, which they that use most know very little what they
mean by it, only that it denotes somewhat favored by them of whom they have
deservedly an ill opinion. The case has been too like exemplified in another
Instance, especially of late years, in which many Hypocrites have so
scandalously abused the most solemn pretenses to Sanctity and Devotion for a
covering or continuance to the most horrid Oppressions, Schisms, and
Rebellions, that they have emboldened profane men to scorn, and send out open
Defiances against the very appearance of Religion, and possibly tempted others
serious, and hearty lovers of i^s cause to be too modest, and shamefaced in its
defense: yet we hope unfeigned Piety will be always justified of its Children.
Sutably truly Catholic Principles, and Observances may vindicate themselves,
though gross Errors, and Impos^ures have long passed under that disguise:
Notwithstanding ordinary People, not always the best distinguishers, and who
are often hurried from one extreme to another, do not redily discern one from
the other, but having found themselves once cheated; be a long time
over-jealous of a like design upon them.

VI. From the Premises duly considered will, I hope, in the close be inferred
the strongest motive, and Obligation upon all among us heartily to embrace, and
steadily to persevere in the Communion of our Church: to share in those happy
Advantages and Blessings, which all who rightly improve it may promise
themselves therein. She desires by all means possible to convince their
Consciences, and incline their Affections to a willing compliance with their
indispensable Duty, and highest Privilege, rather than over aw their persons
by severe Censures, or the following condign punishments. Nay, if necessity
force upon any the execution of the last, when they will not hearken to the
former, she pleads the same Charity for the Principle of both, not only to
prevent others from being seduced by the same Errors: But also thus to deter
them from more dismal Ruin here, and hereafter, which hangs over them
persisting still in the same obstinacy. S. Augustine adv. Epist. Petiliani, l.
2. T. 7. p. 101. Non vos occidimus, sed ipsi vosmet vera morte occiditis, cum
vos ab unitatis viva radice praeciditis.
Of all she has the tenderest compassion, though making a difference, but
without partiality. Some must be saved with Fear, and almost violently pulled
out of the Fire.

Men may make a noise with the odious name of Persecution; yet our Adversaries
of both extremes have little reason to object that, of which they themselves
stand so deeply chargeable when in their power. But we rely not on that Plea,
which however it offend them, would not clear us. No settled Government, Civil,
or Sacred, was ever, or is more gentle, and compassionate in its inflictions
than ours: If when this Tenderness was requited with new and greater Insolence,
and more obstinate Contempt, Authority begin to put on a more harsh, and severe
Countenance, and make use of the rod of its power to correct the peevishness of
some, or restrain the extravagancies of others, it is to be hoped they will in
the end find it for their edification, and not for their destruction, and may
see cause to bless God, and thank their Governors for those benign Penalties,
which almost forceably opened their eyes to discern that evidence which
pertinacious obstinacy had shut them against in all other Persuasives, as S.
Aug. Epist. 48 ad Vincentium. T. 2. p. 167. 174.
St. Augustine declares several of the Donatists had professed to him, and
therefore saw great reason to recall, and recant the many clamours they had
raised on this occasion. I hope we are not without many sensible Instances of
the good effect hereof among our selves, though it be very different in some
from what it is in others; but the tendency of it is certainly to what is good
in all.

Experience, and farther consideration may have made all prudent and sober
Friends to true Piety, Virtue, and good Order ashamed of the popular Plea of
Liberty, or that men ought to be left free from any restraint, or Impositions
in matters of Religion, and Conscience; which must needs confound all peace,
and overturn all Government in every Society, and so destroy the being of the
Church as such, and expose private persons to all manner of strange delusions,
and extravagant enterprises without the least guard or defense; beside the ill
aspect it has on the Civil Peace; I may add, It never was, and I doubt never
will be practiced by any Party of men, when they can do otherwise, who flee to
it only for Sanctuary when they can find shelter no where beside. Would men but
impartially look abroad, or consult former times, or but really consider what
were like to be their state under any other settled Constitution by whatever
favorable Character it may have been represented, they might find little
temptation to querulous uneasiness in their present condition, and small
encouragement to seek, and improve every occasion to quarrel at those few, and
mild restraints laid on them, especially if withal they would faithfully
reflect upon the ill use which has been made of more remissness.

Indeed Christianity, which is the Gospel of Love, and Peace, and is almost
wholly made up of Charity, inclines us first, and most, to the mildest methods,
as most grateful, most likely to win upon other men's good affections, and to
testify our own. But then this mildness may be turned into the greatest
cruelty to the guilty as well as to the innocent, yea, to the whole Community.
Our great wisdom will be so to pursue the former as we may avoid the latter,
and I know not where it is done more cautiously than here.

If we were to examine the strange and stiff Aversations in many to the
Communion of our Church, we shall find them mostly owing to blind Prejudice,
and gross Ignorance of what is required of them, more than to any other
Principles. They have been brought up in a very ill opinion of our Service
merely by odious names, sly and invidious Characters given to it from persons
whose sincerity and judgment they rely on, and so are before resolved against
any farther enquiry, and industriously shun all opportunities of better
information either by personal Conference, or reading our Books. They think
themselves sufficiently satisfied, and go on to hate and revile, but they often
know not what, nor why. If we could bring them to make their own trial, who are
always jealous of any attempts from us, matter of fact would be their best
confutation, and their own Eyes and Ears prove their most effectual conviction,
so as to wonder at their former obstinacy, which some of them have confessed
upon this experience. I believe were some fierce Dissenters asked, they can
scarce say, that they ever seriously read, or attentively heard the Liturgy,
and know very little what it is therein which offends them; I am sure they will
hardly tell us. Sometimes mere novelty startles them, and they are afraid only
for not being used to it.

These, and many such little Objections, that we can scarce guess at would soon
be removed by this sensible proof reached down to all capacities; and a sober,
steady temper of mind, with a firm, and well-grounded belief in most of the
material Points of Christian Doctrine, variously inculcated in the several
Offices of our Liturgy, would grow up more and more in them; for want of this
we find in several Zealots very little knowledge of the first Principles of
Christian Religion, and indeed very little to be learnt from those manner of
discourses and Phrases to which they have been hitherto used. But more
particularly may these Reflections be applied to invite the Romanists amongst
us unto the free, sincere, and cordial Communion with the Church of England,
which once, though only to outward appearance, they generally observed, and
have almost nothing to object against it but the rash, and Schismatical
Interdict of a foreign usurped Power. That the terms of our Communion are most
truly Catholic has been the chief design of this small Tract to prove, and
thereby to prevent the common prejudice from the name of the Catholic, and
Apostolic Church, in which, whatever they assume to themselves, we have as
good a title to our share as any Church in the world. And no sensible evidence
have we of our Communion with that Catholic Church, but by communicating with
the more particular. Church in which Divine Providence has placed us, where
nothing is required of us repugnant to the Bond of Unity in the whole.

Many of our Church, yea, our Constitution it self have been often charged, and
reviled, though most unjustly, with too favorable an inclination to them of
Rome: because whatever of good Order, and decent Solemnity, as well as sound
Doctrine, and wholesome Instruction was found among them, is still retained and
cherished by us. And that we are not so hasty and peremptory in unchurching
them all together, or damning presently all that have been, or are still of
their Communion, as some would have us: which is in effect for being more
tender in preserving the Principles of true Catholic Unity than in pleasing
some private humors or prejudices.

Still we must be aware that no pretended Charity to them, nor yet compliance
with those who pretend the greatest opposition to them must tempt us to betray
the Truth of God, or violate our Obligation to his Commands on either side; and
within those bounds to consult, as much as possible, the Peace and Unity of his
Church, and continue therein. If the former retort our kindness upon us in new
Oppositions: If the latter load our religions care and modest caution with all
those dreadful imputations due to others: If we suffer from both sides, whilst
it is only for speaking the Truth, and doing our Duty, which we have no power
to alter; we may justify our selves before God, and our own Consciences, and
in due time with all good reasonable, and considerative men, and then it is no,
matter what the clamours, and captious cavils of others lay upon us.

But yet our Adversaries of the Roman Persuasion must take notice, that while
we are so wary, and sparing in our Censures of them, we are not the less
apprehensive of the extreme danger which attends those gross Errors and
Superstitions, where with we charge them, which have a direct tendency to their
ruin, and very much undermine the foundations of Faith, and good Life, which
they own in common with us. What may be their influence upon any particular
persons is more than we dare determine, and think always more safe to incline
to the favorable side, where it may be without prejudice to what is certainly
true and good. Notwithstanding whatever our opinion be, that will not alter the
case at last, and thus far we are most determinate that the corruptions among
them are such which every Church is bound to reform, and every true Christian
to keep at a distance from, as much as is in his power.

Whatsoever were the condition of those who lived in that Communion before the
Reformation, many of them groaned under those Oppressions from which we are
happily freed; nay, whatever charitable allowance may still be made for them,
who now live within those Boundaries where they have little opportunity of
knowing better, and are under vast prejudices by contrary Education, and the
severest aw over them: How far, I say, these cases may be pleadable, must be
left to God and their own Consciences.

As for those born, and bred among us, who have been treacherously deluded into
Apostasy from us, or will persist in their hereditary obstinate averseness to
us against the clearest conviction, which they may receive, and in opposition
to the express Laws of God, and of the Land, to the perpetual disturbance of
the State, and confusion of the Church; there appears no room for any excuse to
lessen their Crime, or alleviate their doom, which will be mightily increased,
when all manner of hidden and crafty Artifices, or open violences against the
common Rights of Humane Society, and moral Honesty, as well as the Faith, and
Charity of Christ's Church are employed, and consecrated into a religious but
blind Zeal for the destruction of both.

No marvel if the Nation awakened with the effects hereof, which it has
sometimes felt, and oftener had reason to fear, have provided some servere Laws
for an aw over them, and to stop the first beginnings of such exorbitant
attempts, ready to break through all ordinary enclosures, and which will hardly
be restrained by the usual methods of Government. No temper is more difficultly
mastered, or more mischievous, if let loose, than such a false firery zeal,
which neglected burns all before it.

But whatever may have been their Treatment of us formerly, or we may justly
apprehend would be still, had they any opportunity, which God prevent: we ought
not, and hope shall not ever desist from wishing, and endeavoring, as much as
is in our power, their real welfare, and so of all our implacable Enemies, and
therein their hearty Union with us in the holy Offices of Religion. and
Fellowship of Gods Church where they live, with the sincere renunciation of
those dangerous Errors, and Practices that hitherto keep them at a distance
from us.

In Conclusion, instead of querulous expostulations' or catching occasions to
find fault, we have great reason to admire and adore that gracious Providence,
which amidst so many Confusions, Disorders, and Corruptions that prevail too
much in most places round about, has placed our Lot in so happy a soil, and
provided for us so goodly a Heritage, and safe Retreat in the Bosom of that
Church, whose Charity is as eminent as its Faith, and its Order as signal as
its Purity; whose Arms are always open to receive its returning Enemies with
the most tender Compassions, as well as to cherish its faithful Friends with
the most wholesome and indulgent provisions; where nothing is wanting to ensure
our safety, and encourage our proficiency in every thing that is good and
excellent: which upon former trial of both the opposite extremes, the whole
kingdom has seen necessary to flee back into, to repair the Confusions and
Devastations they had brought: and in its most dangerous Convulsions here has
found the readiest Cure, and under whose name her very Enemies desire to
shelter themselves: which finally ingages us to express our gratitude for so
peculiar Privileges by a ready and impartial Obedience to the holy Doctrine we
are taught, and a fruitful improvement of all those happy Advantages which we
enjoy therein. That our Lives may be answerable to our Profession, and our
pious, virtuous, peaceable, and charitable Conversation may be in some
proportion as defensible, and remarkable as the Principles we proceed upon, or
the benefits we lay claim to.

This would most effectually silence the captious Cavils of our Enemies on
every side, and more powerfully invite them to our Communion than all other the
most demonstrative Arguments: when their very senses would bear witness that
God is in us of a truth. I hope we are not destitute of some such eminent
Examples of unfeigned Piety, true Holiness, and universal Probity. God Almighty
increase their number more, and more: Yet whatsoever may be the effect thereof
upon other men, this method would most unquestionably ensure our own firmest
Peace here, and everlasting Salvation hereafter. Here we keep certainly within
our own bounds, and may most safely, and profitably spend all our Zeal, while
other men please themselves in diverting it abroad to what they have no power
over. It seems horribly nauseous to hear men quarrel fiercely about the best
Church, who live in the most open defiance to all Religion, and I doubt there
are too many of all denominations chargeable herewith. Yet whatever the case of
others prove, it will be most safe, and pious to bring it home, and close to
our selves. Be our Church, or our Profession never so much better than any
other, if we be not also suitably better than other men, they will rise up in
judgment against us at the last.

But by a careful and diligent observance of its sacred Prescriptions we shall
justify our Reformation throughout, put a stop to the Reproaches, and shame
the Calumnies of our Adversaries, and which is the Summary of all good
intentions, and endeavors, bring honor to our great Lord and Master, the
Author and Finisher of our Faith.

FINIS.

