ENGLANDS WANTS: OR SEVERAL PROPOSALS Probably beneficial for ENGLAND, Humbly
offered to the Consideration of all Good Patriots IN BOTH Houses of Parliament.

By a true lover of his Country.

LONDON, Printed for Jo. Martyn, 1667.

ENGLANDS WANTS: OR, Several Proposals probably beneficial for England, humbly
offered to the Consideration of all good Patriots in both Houses of Parliament.
ALthough the Kingdom of England does abound with many blessings, which other
Nations want, yet does it want many which others enjoy.

It is recorded, That an eminent foreign Ambassador, after a long Residence in
England, sailing homeward, did cast his eye back upon this Land, and said in
his own language, O Isola felicissima, etc. The happyest Country upon the face
of the Earth, did it not want public Spirits amongst them.

The want of public Spirits has occasioned the want of many Public works of
Peity and Charity, works necessary or commodious for the people, or of ornament
for the Kingdom.

I. To supply this want, That (by such easy ways and means as are hereafter
mentioned) there may be raised a public Stock to be put into the hands of
Commissioners nominated by both Houses of Parliament, approved by the King, and
accountable to them for the same.

II. For raising such public Stock, it is proposed first, That, according to
the practice of neighbor Nations, upon all such Commodities as occasion either
Excess or Luxury, Wantonness, Idleness, Pride, or Corruption of Manners, there
may be laid a large Impost: as upon all Wines, all strong Drinks, Tobacco,
Coffee, Chocolatte, Sugars, Spices, Plums, all sorts of Sweetmeats, Oranges,
etc. Upon all Silks, Laces, Ribbons, Jewels, Feathers, Perruques, Fringes, etc.
Upon all fine Linnens, Camolets; upon Cards, Dice, Tables, Bouls, etc. upon all
Coaches, Chariots, Litters, Sedans* upon all Pictures, Perfumes, Paints for the
Face, etc. Moreover a third part of all the gettings of Comedians, Ropedancers,
Mountebanks, Lotteryes, Shows, etc.

III. That (according to the practice of the Primitive Christians, whose
Devotion was such that they thought no Testament well made, unless some
considerable portion was thereby added to Christ's Patrimony) that no Testament
henceforth should be valid unless a 20th part of the Legacies were given to
these afternamed public and pious uses.

IV. That for these uses there may be reserved (as was anciently practiced in
the Roman State) a tenth part of the profit of all Lands given by the Husband
to the Wife, or coming from the Wife to the Husband, there being no Issue
between them alive.

V. That a 40th part of all things recovered by Law may be (as once among the
Romans) assigned for public usses.

VI. That there be paid out of all marriage Portions Six pence in the Pound,
and something proportionably paid at the death and birth of every person not
living on Alms.

VII. That every one to be made free of a Trade, or licenced to practice in Law
or Physic may pay proportionably to these public uses.

VIII. That all Contracts in Writing, all Decrees, Judgments, etc. may have a
small Seal on the top (as is practiced in diverse other Countries) for which a
small Tax to be paid, etc.

IX. That in all Churches (as in Holland) at every solemn Assembly, the
Churchwardens with a long Staff, Bag and Bell during the Sermon, receive the
charitable benevolence of the whole Congregation, where every person that
desires to honor God (not only with his Soul and Body, but) with his
Substance (as God commands, and the primitive Christians punctually observed at
their Church-meetings) throwing in but his Mite, it is incredible (by this
constant course at every Assembly) to what a sum it will amount in one year.

Now the Moneys of this public stock may be employed in these public uses
following;

X. For building Workhouses in all convenient parts of this Kingdom, for
making Rivers navigable, for building or repairing Bridges, Highways,
Sea-banks, Havens, Moles, Landmarks, Aquaeducts for setting up poor Youths
after an Apprentiship served; for marrying poor Maids, for relief of aged,
impotent, decayed People; for maintenance of sick and maimed Soldiers; for
redemption and relief of Captives and Slaves in Turkey; for building and
repairing of Churches, whereof there is great want in this Kingdom, more
especially in the Suburbs of London, where not a fourth part of the
Parishioners can at once enter into their Parish Church, at least not well hear
Divine Service, to the great shame of the Protestant professors, who since the
Reformation have (as our Adversaries observe) erected scarce one considerable
solid Structure for the worship of God.

For repairing the Mother Church of the Mother-City of this Kingdom, to the
Glory of God and Honor of this Nation; for the speedy promoting whereof, both
King and Parliament, City and Country, Clergy and Laity, High and Low stand all
engaged to lend their helping hands.

For erecting in London and other great Cities banks or mounts or Piety, (as
have been long used in Italy, in Flanders and other Countries,) whereby the
intolerable oppression of public and private Brokers and Pawn-takes (that
grind the faces of the poor, scruing out of them 40 or 50 per Cent.) may be
utterly abolisht.

For erecting Hospitals in London and other Citys (as there is at Paris and
Rome) for to receive all little Infants exposed or found; whereby many poor
Innocents destroyed in the womb, or at the Birth, might be preserved from
Murder, as well as the unnatural Mothers from hanging.

For building of Hospitals to accommodate therein all poor Women (as is done at
Paris) near the time of their Travel, to enter and there to be carefully
delivered, and remain afterward till they are in a condition to return home
and follow their work.

For providing stipends for Physicians, Surgeons and Apothecaries (as at Rome)
to give gratis their Advice, Pains, Medicines and Salves to poor sick or
wounded people, allowed in forma pauperis to require their assistance, who
otherwise perish for want of timely and due helps.

For erecting Colleges in London (as is done in Holland) where old men
deprived of Wife and Children may for a reasonable sum of Money be neatly
accomodated during life, with Diet and Lodging, and pass the rest of their days
without care or trouble in a comfortable society with men of like condition and
age. And the like for old Women.

For erecting Colleges wherein Virgins and Widows of the Protestant Religion,
resolving not to marry (as the Begains in Holland, Brabant, Flanders, etc.) may
for a certain sum of money deposed, be maintained, and live in a retired
virtuous and religious Society; their Teaching and Educating in Virtue and
Piety the Female youth of this Nation (whereof there is now more need then
ever) and such young Virgin-Scholars may there remain constantly till their
marriage day, before which time very many by too much liberty are now corrupted
and debauched: and that the said Virgins and Widows of the Society, may (with
the forfeiture of the said Money deposed, and leave of their Visitor) be free
to alter their resolutions, and quit the Society.

For erecting in London a College de propaganda Fide (as our Adversaries have
done at Rome) for propagating the Christian Reformed Religion amongst the
Americans bordering on the English Plantations, (where it is shame to this
Nation, that so few in the space of so many years have been converted to
Christianity) and for that end to send from time to time persons fitly Gifted
for a work so transcendently Pious: And because many excelling in the gift of
Preaching, being now for their Nonconformity laid aside, do secretly occasion
unlawful Conventicles, foment Schisms, and hold up the Faction, and thereby
hazard the disturbance of this Church and State, that all they (not dissenting
from the Doctrine of the English Church) may be encouraged by competent
allowances out of the said public Stock, or commanded to Transport themselves
thither within the space of one or two years.

For buying in of Impropriations (a work not only worthy of a Parliament, but
to the doing whereof, all the Parliaments since 27. H. 8. stand obnoxious
(says the learned Bacon) and bound in conscience to God) whereby the Church
might enjoy her own again, the Kings Revenue much increased by Tenths and
First Fruits, and the Cures of all those great and populous Parishes hitherto
starved for want of Spiritual food be duly served, and the foul guilt of that
abominable sin of Sacrilege taken off this Nation, and off the Protestant
Religion. Provided, that no Impropriator shall take above 10 or 12 years
Purchase for any Impropriated Tithes, as the Custom usually has been.

For making some competent Provision (according to the practice of other
Reformed Churches) for the poor Widows and Orphans of Clergymen, of whom God
took special care in the Jewish Commonwealth, the Sons there being to inherit
their Fathers places, and the Daughters to be matched as well as their Mothers:
or else, as in other Christian Churches, utterly to forbid Marriage to all that
shall be in Orders.

Some other chargeable Proposals probably beneficial to this Nation, might be
hereunto added by such as have made it their business to observe this and other
civil Governments beyond the Seas; also some other ways and means of raising
moneys without grieving the People, which is the quintescence of all
State Policy; but let those be reserved for another occasion. Hereafter follow
diverse unchargeable Proposals that will require no cost or charges, but only
the Humble petition of the two Houses of Parliament, and his Majesty's Royal
Assent.

XI. It is an ancient Maxim: Interest Reip. ut resua quisque been utatur; It
is the Interest of the Commonwealth, that every Subject should make a right
use of his own Estate: wherefore amongst the Fundamental Laws of the Romans,
those Laws of the twelve Tables, (observed by them almost as Sacredly as the
Two Tables or Ten Commandments by the Jews) it is especially provided, That a
Guardian should be set over the Person and Estate, not only of Madmen, but of
all prodigal Persons: This Law has been derived from them to all our
neighbour-Nations, and enjoyed by them ever since they enjoyed Civility, even
to this very day. To England only this Law is wanting, not that England is
without such unreasonable Creatures; for it has been observed that the English
Nation is naturally as much addicted to prodigality as any Nation in Europe;
the sad effects whereof are every day before our eyes; Wives that have brought
great Estates, left poor needy Widows; Children of Noble and illustrious
Families, brought to a morsel of bread, and to do base ignominious things,
unworthy of their Noble Ancestors, and dishonorable to the very degrees of
Honor which their Fathers purchased by their Merit, and maintained by their
laudable Frugality. Where this forementioned Law is in use, the prodigal
person is thus defined [Is qui neque modum neque finem habet in Expensis]. Any
man being proved to be such is declared incapable of managing his own Estate,
or of making a Will, or of entering into Bond, or of being a Witness, etc. And
thereupon a Guardian is put over him and his Estate, to allow him necessaries
out of his own Estate, and to preserve the rest to his next Kindred. Now the
King of England has his Breve de Inquirendo de Idiota, and his Breve de
Inquirendo de Furioso; and can any solid reason be produced why his Majesty
should not have also his Breve de Inquirendo de Prodigo directed in like manner
to the Escheater of the County to be tried by a Jury of twelve men? that so a
general stop may be put to the wild expenses and extravagant profuseness of all
English men, and more especially (as in Spain, because the Nobility is esteemed
the chief and main support of Monarchy) that no Noble man shall have power to
waste or alienate so much of his Ancestors Lands as may render him incapable of
serving his Prince and Country, or to bear the Port of a Noble man.

XII. There is another Maxim [Interest Reipub. ut suprema hominum Testamenta
rata habeantur secundum veram Testatoris Intentionem] It concerns the
Commonwealth, that men's last Wills and Testaments should be ratified and
executed according to the true meaning of the Testator; For this purpose was
made the Statute of Charitable uses 43 of Q El. to provide against the
imbezilling and mis-imployment of Moneys and Lands given to Charitable Uses, by
giving power to the Bishop and his Chancellor, and to some other considerable
persons, to issue out Commissions for inquiring and ordering the same.

Nevertheless, by the neglect of some, and want of zeal in others, such
Commissions are seldom desired, though perhaps not hardly obtained.

Wherefore that by another Statute it may be provided, that every Bishop and
his Chancellor (together with some other considerable persons, as is intimated
in the fore-quoted Statute) within one year after each Bishops Instalment,
shall upon a high penalty purchase and execute such Commission throughout his
Diocese.

XIII. That according to the Institution of King Edward the First, our English
Justinian, once every three year Justices de Trail Baston may be commissionated
to make Inquisition through the Realm, by the verdict of substantial Juries,
upon all Officers, Sheriffs, Mayors, Justices of Peace, Coroners, Escheators,
Bailiffs, Constables, Jaylors, etc. touching their Oppressions, Extortions,
Briberies, Cheatings; touching their Malegovernment and neglect of executing
the good Laws respectively.

XIV. That the Statutes of 12 Rich. 2. and 5 Ed. 6. against the sale of
Offices, may be revived, that so Virtue and Wisdom, long experience and
honesty, faithfulness and loyalty, may no longer be baffled and discouraged, by
seeing it self vilified, and money preponderate all worth, and thereby Justice
very often sold, with diverse other Inconveniences.

XV. That provision by a Statute be made against that Unchristian, and more
then barbarous custom and privilege of Wreccum Maris, never allowed by the
Imperial Laws, or any neighbor Nation, and once banished out of England by an
Act made 2 R. 1. that in case of Shipwreck, though all persons perished, yet
that all the goods which escaped should be carefully preserved for the owners,
or next of kin, if they come within a year and a day; only allowing something
to those that helped to save the goods, and preserved them afterward.

XVI. That by a Law the Fees of Lawyers may be regulated according to the
moderation of other well policed Countries, where usually is given but a third
or fourth part of what is expected in England. And that if any Lawyer presume
to take more then the Fees by Law allowed, he may be rendered incapable to
practice any more, and forfeit fourfold of what he has so taken, as is
provided by the Civil Laws.

XVII. That as in the reign of Edward the Second, the number of Attorneys was
regulated and 140 declared to be sufficient to serve this whole Kingdom; so now
that the number of Lawyers and Attorneys may be regulated, and some things in
their Pleadings reformed. What a shame to our Nation is it, that so many evil
and rapacious Lawyers should be permitted to plead in behalf of vicious
persons, and of manifest oppressors, and in causes notoriously unjust; should
be permitted to make a trade not to minister Justice, but to heap up riches,
and devour all the fat of the Land.

XVIII. That provision may be made to mitigate all such Laws which by the
change of things and times are now become over severe and rigorous, much beyond
the intent of the Lawmakers. As that stealing to the value of 12 d. should
still be Felony, whereas when that Law was first made, what was then sold for
12 d. (which (when the ounce of Silver was but 20 d.) was as much as 3 s. now)
is now sold for above 40 s; for in 51 of K. H. 3. eight Bushels of wheat was
then sold but for 12 d; so that the man that stole but seven Bushels committed
but petty Larceny, whereas now he that steals but a Peck may be found guilty of
Felony (unless the Jury will forswear themselves, as commonly they do, and
bring in Eleven pence stolen when sometimes it is Eleven shillings) as if the
life of Man in our days were of a smaller and viler price then in those days.
So in the time of H. 2. the stealing of Oxen and Horses were counted inter
minuta furta, which Lawyers call Parvum Latrocinium, or Petty Larceny. Now why
should the body of Man, that Divinae imaginis vehiculum be destroyed for
trifles? why should Christians now be more cruel then the Jews, or then
Christians in former ages? for in the middle ages of Christianity Paenarum
ratio in multis potius quam in sanguine and necesita fuit. They them allowed a
compensation even for killing of a man called Wergeld, quasi viri moneta sive
praetium, which was with great justice paid partly to the King for the loss of
his Subject, and partly to the Lord whose Vassal the slain party was, but
especially to the next Kindred of the person slain; and this custom seemed to
derive it self from Moses Law. Exodus 21. 30. Our Ancestors in this Kingdom
before they were Christians had this Custom, then thinking it against reason,
that when one man was killed, and the King thereby had lost a subject, that
another should be put to death, and so the King lose another subject, and the
Kindred of the slain no way recompensed for their loss, as now is used: And
after they were converted to Christianity, and did believe that penitent
Christians went to Heaven, they thought it more against reason, when a man was
slain, to send the penitent manslayer forthwith from this miserable world to a
place of everlasting bliss, but rather that he should by a corporal or
pecuniary mulct be made miserable in this life, it being much more suitable to
the ends of Government, that a criminal should live in perpetual ignominy,
slavery or misery, rather then be taken quite away, because a living condemned
wretched Criminal will be a spectacle in others eyes, will in time be convinced
of his Crime, will justify his Judge, and continually repent his own folly. And
therefore, even since the Norman Conquest for Treason, or foul Felonies, the
guilty were often condemned to have their eyes pulled forth, or their Testicles
cut out, that there might be no more of the breed, or else that their hands or
feet should be chopped off, that so each foul Felon might remain truncus vivus as
a living monument of his Felonious fact, for deterring others, and have time to
bewail his own sins and misery: But because in England too much severity is
used against Theft, and yet not enough to restrain it sufficiently; and because
the wisdom of Prevention is better then the wisdom of remedy;

XIX. That to prevent Thievery, the like course may be taken in England which
is used in Holland, especially in that most populous City of Amsterdam, where
(as God commanded the Jews Deuteronomy. 15. 4.) Non est Indigens, nec Mendicus inter
illos, and benedicit illis Dominus: There is not a Beggar amongst so many
hundred thousand: To effect which they do three things, they take especial
Order that all Youth be bred up, not only in the knowledge of God, but of some
Trade or Profession: They provide work for all sorts of People; and Thirdly,
they compel all such as are not willing to work. By this policy, in Holland it
is rate to see an Execution for Robbery; and yet if a man could but see at once
all the Criminals, Young and Old, Male and Female that have been hanged in
England in one year only for stealing; what Horror and Amazement it would
strike, and how would a Hollander justly blame the policy of this State, for
Non minus turpia sunt Principi multa supplicia, quam Medico multa funera.

XX. That for redressing those high Crimes (so accounted by all Gods people
heretofore, though now in England little conscience is made thereof) of
wilfully robbing God or the King; the one in his Tithes, and the other in his
Tributes, Customs or Revenues; it may be made absolute Felony for the future,
and very severe punishment inflicted, as it is now in other Countries, and was
anciently in this Kingdom.

To cozen the King but of Treasure Trove was anciently (as affirms Glanvile
and Bracton) an offense punished with death. And 31 of Eliz. it was judged meet
by the whole Parliament to make it Felony for any man to embezil but the worth
of Twenty shillings of the Ammunition or Victuals provided by the Queen for her
Soldiers.

XXI. That, according to the Law of God, according to Christian Clemency,
Gentleness and Mercy, according to the Laws of other Christian States, and
according to the ancient Laws and Customs of this State; no person hereafter
may for any new Debt be cast in prison, but rather that his Estate may be
seized, and the person left at liberty to work himself out of Debt by his
Industry, Trade or Profession: to which end, if Creditors did proceed only by
Summons, after which legally served at the Debtors House, and no appearance
made, then presently proceed to have a Judgment against the Debtor, as if he
had appeared, and then to Execution; and thereupon, to seize not his person but
Estate; and in case he has no Estate, yet to forbear, till by his industry he
has gotten somewhat: for imprisonment is not only too severe a punishment of
the Body, a torment of the Mind, a dying daily, a loss of Reputation, and
alienation of Friends, a separation from Wife and Children* and a great
occasion of being ever after debaucht and dishonest; but it is also clearly
against the Creditors profit and advantage; for the Debtor being cast in
prison, must there lie at much more charges then at home, and yet find less
opportunity to work or earn any thing, which makes him commonly hold faster
what is in his hands, which else he would have parted with toward the
satisfaction of his Debts, and endeavored by his Work or Trade to have
maintained himself and Family. Besides, by imprisoning the body of a Debtor,
the State loses a Member, which at liberty, or compelled to work, might be of
some use.

XXII. That some Provision be made (according as is excellently provided by the
Civil Law) against that Unchristian Custom of arresting the body of a deceased
Debtor, or of any his Relations, whilst they accompany the body to the Grave.
Also against that vexatious and superstitious custom of stopping any dead body
in its passage through any Town or Lordship, and demanding some Fee or Toll for
the same, before the body pass further on.

XXIII. That the Admiralty, and all Ecclesiastical and Civil Law Courts may
enjoy their due Jurisdictions, That those Jurisdictions may be declared and
known, that so no man (when he has brought his suit almost to a Trial) may by
a Prohibition be constrained to begin all again in a new Court, to his horrible
vexation, expenses and charges.

XXIV. That according to the ancient Custom of this and all other Christiain
States, all Ecclesiastical Judges may have a power to proceed Ex Officio; That
way of Enquiry being exceeding necessary for correcting of vice and sin which
otherwise will daily go unpunished: Insomuch that by the Civil Law it is called
Nobile Judicis Officium, and was never opposed but by the Factious Puritanical
part of England, out of design to disturb the English Church Government; such
enquiry and proceeding Ex Officio without an Accuser, but only upon public
fame, strong Presumption, etc. being approved by sundry examples of Scripture,
as well as by all Canon, Civil, and Common Laws.

It is true, that by the Constitutions at Common Law it has not been held fit
that any person should be examined upon Oath against himself touching a Crime,
whereby his Life, or any of his Limbs may be endangered; and the reason is, for
fear of occasioning Perjury, because most men probably would rather hazard an
untrue Oath, (although no good Christian ought so to do) then either their
Lives or their Limbs. But yet in Criminal matters, not Capital, handled in
Chancery, the Oath of the party is required against himself: only there is an
Accuser, and an Accusation of Bill of Complaint, and not a mere insinuation of
fame, as in the proceeding ex Officio sometimes. But then it is to be
considered that the Complainant, to find out the truth, may stuff his Bill full
of Lies, because he is not sworn to the Truth of the Bill, as the Defendant is
to the Truth of his Answer; And what is this less then the proceeding Ex
Officio, when the Defendant is forced in his Answer (which is always upon
Oath) to accuse himself. Besides, in dangerous Crimes against the Person of the
King, or Peace of the Kingdom, it has always been held necessary and lawful
Policy, to torture such persons against whom good probabilities and strong
presumptions lie, to make them confess, although it be capital against
themselves and others in the highest degree: And is it not of as great equity
in high Crimes against the King of Heaven and Earth, and in Crimes of no less
secrecy, as Atheism, Apostasy, Adultery, Incest, etc. to use the means of the
Parties Oath, especially where no Capital, no Corporal punishment is intended,
but only a fatherly and spiritual correcting and reforming of the Party for
his souls health? Moreover the proceeding Ex Officio, is not (as many vainly
imagine) only the ministering of an Oath to the suspected party against himself
in a Cause Criminal; for there may be proceeding Ex Officio Judicis, though,
the Oath be not at all urged; nay, sometimes it may not be urged, as in case of
Life or Limb endangered thereby.

Now if there should be in England no means for an Ecclesiastical Judge to take
cognizance, nor to proceed but upon the voluntary prosecution and accusation of
some party, how many execrable offenses most displeasing to God Almighty,
scandalous to the Godly, dangerous to men's Inheritances, and to the souls
health of the offenders; yea, some that are the very bane of all Religion and
Christianity, would through want of discovery, and by impunity, in a few years
spread themselves over this whole Church and State before any Accusers will be
found? As Atheism, Apostasy from Christianity, Heresy, Schism, Errors in
matters of Religion, Sacrilege, Perjury, Blasphemy, Subornation of Perjury,
Swearing, Polygamy, Adultery, Incest, and other Uncleanness, Drunkenness,
excessive Usury, Symony, Forgery, Usurpation of the Holy Ministry,
Conventicles, ungodly Libelling, and many other abuses: For who commonly are
privy to such sins, but men of like humor and affection, who can never be
presumed to be likely to accuse, but rather to conceal such horrid offenders;
and therefore since that power of thus proceeding was by that most pernicious
overruling Faction in the Long Parliament extorted from the Church; How have
all those formentioned Impieties, like a general Deluge, overwhelmed the
Manners of English men?

XXV. That it may by a Law be provided (according to the practice of other
well-policed States) that an obstinate debaucht Son may be punished by the
Magistrate as the Father shall reasonably require, and that in some certain
Cases, (as is ordained by the Imperial Laws) Liberi a potestate patria liberati
in potestatem redigantur, ut si fuerint ingrati vel insigniter injuriosi in
parents suos, etc.

XXVI. That no man, til he attain to the age of 25, (according to the Custom of
our Southern Neighbors where men are sooner ripe) may be enabled to sell or
alienate his Lands, considering that in England very many Estates have been
most foolishly spent and sold, after the age of 21. which by the same persons,
arriving to their Wits before 25. would have been preserved.

XXVII. That (according to the Policy of William the Conqueror for assuring of
Peace and Concord) no man of any considerable Estate, who was in actual
Rebellion against the former or present King, may be permitted to match their
Sons and Daughters (as they now do) to those of their own Tribe and Faction,
thereby entailing Nonconformity and Faction, and perpetuating an impious
hatred against the present Government of Church and State.

XXVIII. That to take off the present continual charge of Foot and Horse in
constant pay, and yet assure peace amongst us, that most excellent and
politic Law may be revived called Visus Franci Plegii whereby all men under
the degree of Gentry and Clergy, may stand obliged to find Suretyes for their
Loyalty toward the King; and those Suretyes to be bound to find each man of
their Pledge to be forth coming within 31 days, or else to satisfy for his
offense; and that all persons who cannot find such Suretyes, may be imprisoned
or banished. This Custom was by our Ancestors so highly approved, that by
Bracton it is called Res quasi Sacra quia solam personam Regis respicit and
introductus fuit pro pace and communi utilitate Regni. And in case this should
not be assented unto; then considering that the King must necessarily be at the
continual charge of armed men to bridle the proud disloyal humor of all those
sons of Belial, who obstinately refuse Conformity to the Government established,
that they all, in all Taxes may be obliged to pay double, if not to defray the
whole charges, which they themselves occasion.

XXIX. That Repeal may be made of that unnatural Law of punishing the Innocent
in case he fly: for if a man be accused of a capital Crime and perceiving the
power and malice of his Enemy, and the often, and corruption, and partiality of
some Judge, should run away for fear of the event, and afterward be taken and
brought to a legal Trial, and there making it sufficiently appear that he was
not guilty of the Crime, is thereof acquitted; yet shall he be by our Law
condemned to loose his Goods. It is true, that a written Law may forbid
Innocents to fly, but that flying, for fear of injury should (after a man is
absolved of a Crime iudicially) be taken for presumption of Guilt, is contrary
to the nature of a presumption, which ought to have no place after Judgment
given.

XXX. That for the poor who are ashamed to discover their Poverty, and to
declare their wants, there may be yearly appointed Commissioners or Overseers
(according to that Excellent custom in Holland) to go to their Houses, and
there privately to inform themselves of their necessities and condition of
life, and to take care for a private Relief before they are constrained to beg
or do worse.

XXXI. That for the great use and benefit of the Poor, and the more convenient
distribution of the Charity of the Rich, there may be (according to the present
custom of all other civilized Countries) coined by the King (and not by
Victualers and Retailers) a sufficient quantity of Farthings and half
Farthings, and those made of such Metal that it may be no loss to the King, no
profit for others to counterfeit them; and that they may be made of such a
bigness, that they may not be apt to be lost, nor yet burdensome to carry; all
which is done in diverse other Countries.

XXXII. That according to the wisdom of our Ancestors, and the custom of the
most civilized Nations, some sumptuary Laws may be made, whereby the great
Excess, especially in the inferior sort of English, may be restrained, and most
Degrees and Orders may be discerned by their Habit or Port, as now in the
Universities and amongst the Clergy is partly done.

XXXIII. That as in the Courts at Westminster, so much more in the highest
Court of England; all Parliament men whilst they attend on the Parliament may
be obliged upon high penalties to wear a Robe or Vestment becoming their
respective Persons, and the Gravity and Authority of the English Parliament of
Great Counsel of England (as all the Nobility and Gentry both young and old who
have right to sit in the Great Counsel at Venice, and all the Roman Senators
did anciently and do at this day) that so they may every where be discerned and
receive their due respect, and be ashamed to be seen frequently in Play Houses,
Dicing-houses, Cockpits, Taverns or Houses of worse repute; or to be
Night-walkers, etc. And during their attendance on Parliament if they be found
in such places and ways out of their Robe or Vestment, then to loose their
wonted Protection from Arrests according to that saying [God gives his Angels
charge over us to keep us, whilst we are in our ways] but out of our way; no
protection of this Angels to be expected.] Let no man here object that
Parliament men ought rather to wear their swords, which suit not with Robes or
Gowns, because the Writ to the Sheriff runs for to choose duos Milites gladiis
cinctos, for the meaning thereof is two Knights dubbed, which in those days was
done by girding on a sword: but it was ever expected, and sometimes especially
commanded that they should attend on Parliament a Counsel of Peace gladiis
discincti, and their Robes then will be sufficient Guard for their persons as
well in England, as it is now in other Countries.

XXXIV. That as the Coins, so the Weights and Measures both wet and dry may be
(according to Magna Charta and 14. Edw. 3.) exactly alike all over England, as
it is carefully provided in other Countries.

XXXV. That most, if not all eatable things exposed to sale in the Market as
well as in Shops, may be sold by weight, (as is done in Spain) and also may
weekly or monthly be Rated (as Bread in Cities) by the Magistrates or Officers
sworn so to do.

XXXVI. That, (according to the good Policy of Italy) all Taverns, Innes,
Alehouses, Victualling-houses, may be obliged to have a printed Table hang
publicly of the Prices of all such things as they are wont or allowed to sell
to Guests.

XXXVII. That no Vintner, Innkeeper, Ale-seller, Victualer or Malster, may in
any Corporation be entrusted with the Execution of those Laws which may any
ways prejudice their profit.

XXXVIII. That to reduce servants to their pristine and due humility,
diligence, frugality, faithfulness and obedience, a Law be made that no Servant
shall be henceforth received into any other service without a Testimonial under
the Hands and Seals of their former Master or Mistress, that they are
competently endowed with all those qualities forementioned.

XXXIX. That (according to the excellent policy of the Romans) there may be
appointed some persons of the best Rank and Quality, both in City and Country
to Censores Morum, for reforming of Manners, to be furnished with a power to
enquire into men's lives, to take notice if any man neglect his Farm, Trade or
Profession; and how he otherwise maintains himself.

XL. That special Provision be made for executing all our good Laws enacted for
the increase of Tillage, where more people may be set on work, and they rendered
more strong and stout for service of their Country against an Enemy. And
likewise the Laws made for increase of Fishing, whereby more people may be
fitted for Sea-service, whereof this Kingdom surrounded almost with the Sea
will ever have special occasion.

XLI. That according to the good Policy of our Ancestors, all the married
Nobility and Gentry of England (without special leave of his Majesty to do
otherwise) may be obliged to keep house in the Country, every one at his own
Manerium, so named, a Manendo of abiding there, Vt semper presto essent ad
Servitia Regis and Patriae per implenda, to be ready there to serve his King
and Country, and by a laudable Hospitality to gain the affections and
dependances of the Peasantry.

XLII. That according to ancient Canons of the Church, and according to diverse
other Reformed Churches, and according to the custom of the Primitive
Christians, no dead body may be hereafter interred in any Church, especially in
London, or the Suburbs thereof, but either in some Vault or else in the
Churchyard, or rather in some decent enclosed place without the City. To bury
in Churches is to the dead but a superstitious custom first brought in by the
Franciscan and Dominican Friars about the year One thousand one hundred, when
Superstition was almost at the height, invented to get Money, persuading the
people that to be buried within the Church, or near the High Altar was more
availeable to their souls: and to the Living it is not only chargeable but
most unwholesome, that so many putrified Carcasses should be so near under
their Noses all the time of their Devotion.

XLIII. That as all Clergymen are by Common Law exempted from all inferior
Offices, as Bailiff, Bedel, Constable, etc. to serve neither per se nec per
alium, to the end that they may attend their function; so that they may
(according to mere reason, and according to a Statute 8. H. 4 number. 12. in the
unprinted Parliament Rolls) be exempted from arraying and mustring of Men or
Horse for the War: For their Glebe Lands, and Spiritual Revenues being held in
Pura and perpetua Eleemosyna. i. e. in Frank Almoyne, ought by Magna Charta to
be exempted from all such burdens. And as for their persons, they serve their
Country otherwise, and for that service ought to be counted worthy (as well,
if not better then the Levites of old) of their Spiritual Profits and Revenues,
and also worthy of the Kings Protection, not only for their Service, but also
in that they pay to the King the first years Profits, and every year the Tenth
of all Spiritual Benefices. Besides the Clergy being by their Function
prohibited to wear swords, may neither serve in person, nor can be capable of
any Honor, as Knighthood usually conferred on Warriors.

XLIV. That as nullum tempus occurrit Regi, no Custom nor prescription may be
pleaded to the prejudice of the King; so also with much more reason, that no
Custom nor Prescription may be pleaded to the prejudice of the King of kings:
That all Compositions or Customs of paying a little money for a great Tithe may
be every where abrogated, and all Tithes taken again in kind, or a new
Composition according to the present value, which is but justice and more
concerns this Parliament to do for the Church then it concerned the Parliament
18 of Eliz. to do for Colleges by obliging their Tenants to pay onethird part
of their old Rent in Corn.

XLV. That all Lands anciently belonging to the Knights, Templars,
Hospitallers, of St. John of Jerusalem, or to the Order of Cistercian Monks,
which by Popish dispensation were anciently exempted from paying Tithes, may de
novo be obliged as all other Lands in England to pay Tithes; at least all those
Lands given to those Orders since the time they were so exempted, as by all Law
and Justice they ought to do.

XLVI. That our Ecclesiastical Officers, as Chancellours, Commissaries,
Officials, etc. may be in Holy Orders as the Canonists and modern Legists in
the Romish Church, are for the most part; that so neither the Romanists on one
hand, nor Presbiterians on the other, may have so much reason to except against
them in the matter of Excommunication, as executed by Lay Hands: Vtcunque illi
non assumunt clavium potestatem sed tantummodo poenam Canonis declarant and
infligunt ob contumaciam.

XLVII. That Registers may be settled in every Hundred, or in every County at
least, and all Lands and Houses may be entered into that Book, and therein all
Alienations to be set down in Alphabetical Order, and none to be authentic if
not there entered, that so no man hereafter may be cheated by a Premorgage or
any other way, but that all men may be satisfied in what they possess, and what
they may call their own.

XLVIII. That as among the Jews whereby immediate Divine appointment, the chief
Clergy man Aaron was Brother to the Supreme Magistrate Moses and the Priests,
and the Levites were all of Noble stock: and as amongst Christians even here in
England anciently, and at this day in foreign Christian States, the chief
Clergy have been often of Noble and sometimes Royal blood, and the ordinary
Priests usually sons of the Gentry, whereby they come to be more highly
Honored, and their just Authority better obeyed; so now in England, that the
two Archbishops may be (if possible) of the Highest, Noble (if not Royal) blood
of England, and all the Bishops of Noble blood, and the inferior Priests, sons
of the Gentry, and not (after the example of that wicked Rebel Jeroboam, and
our late Republicans) to make Priests of the lowest of the People, whilst
Physic and Law, Professions inferior to Divinity, are generally embraced by
Gentlemen, and sometimes by persons Nobly descended, and preferred much above
the Divines Profession.

XLIX. That as in the Universities, all Heads of Colleges (if their Founders
intentions were rightly observed) and all Fellows of Colleges are obliged
communi jure so long as they hold those places to abstain from Marriage and the
carnal knowledge of Women, so in the Church, that not only Archbishops and
Bishops, but all others that take any Ecclesiastical Benefice, may by a Statute
be obliged so long as they hold those Benefices to abstain in like manner; and
as without a Dispensation no man can hold two Benefices with Cure of Souls, so
no beneficed man should take a wife without either Dispensation (in some few
cases to be allowed) or resigning his Benefice. To say they cannot abstain, or
shall be occasioned for want of Wives to do worse; all Fellows of Colleges,
who commonly there pass the very heat of their Youth, might with much more
reason plead the same, and yet would be derided for their pains. By which
abstinance the Clergy would be enabled to be much more hospitable and
charitable, and so better beloved, they would live with more gravity and
decency, and so more feared, they might then far better attend their Studies
and Cure of Souls, and so be able to give up a better account at last.

L. That, according to the good Policy of Q. Elizabeth, the Chancellours or
Vice-Chancellours of both our Universities may be obliged to deliver the King
every fourth of fifth year a just, true and impartial List of all the eminent
and hopeful Students, especially those of the Civil Law, to set down punctually
their Names, Colleges, Standings and Faculty, wherein they did or were likely
to excel; that so when any occasion should be to send an Ambassador abroad,
the King might nominate him an Associate, a Secrecary or Chaplain; and when any
preferment fit for persons of an Accademical Education should fall, the King
might make choice of the person.

LI. That all Advousons of England, not now in the Crown, may be all bought in
at reasonable values, and settled for ever upon the Crown, that so all Rectors
of Parishes (as well as Bishops, Deans and Prebends) may have their dependence
on the Kings bounty only, (as all the Clergy in some Reformed Churches now
have) and not on any mean, covetous, illiterate, factious, heterodox,
symoniacal or sacrilegious Patron; by which one means all the English Clergy
would soon become Loyal and Orthodox, of one mind, and of one Lip; the whole
English Church would flourish in a perfect Unity, and a beautiful Uniformity,
and God would then delight to dwell amongst us,

LII. That (since diverse known Jews are by His Majesty's Princely Clemency
permitted again to inhabit in this Kingdom) some good Laws (according to the
wisdom of His Majesty's Predecessors, and the present practice of other
well-policed Christian Dominions) may be enacted in order both to the
Christians safety, and the Jews Salvation. It was the ancient Law of England,
as appears in Fleta, that a Christian, whether man or woman, that married with
a Jew, should be burnt alive.

In Italy, by express Law of all Jews (even in those places where they are
freely permitted to dwell) are made incapable to bear any office or dignity in
the State, nor to take any degree in the University, or to be seen in public
without a distinct mark to be discerned from all Christians, nor erect any new
Synagogues, nor circumcise any not born of a Jew, nor take to wife a Christian,
nor impugn the Christian Doctrine, nor to take into their Family a Christian
to serve as a Servant, or as a Nurse, nor to be admitted a witness against any
Christian, nor be seen abroad on the day of our Saviors Passion, nor to take
any Usury of Christians. Also that every Saturday Afternoon, they shall be
obliged to send one out of each Family of the Jews to a Christian Sermon
appointed for them only, to the end that they may be converted to the
Christian Faith, or at least be convinced of the Truth informed of the
reasonableness thereof, above and beyond all other Religions in the world.

LIII. That by an Act of Parliament, or by a Canon of the Convocation, the
computation of the Church of England, at present erroneous and defective, may
for the future be rendered more regular and perfect. For in the Julian or
English Account, (by reason of the no allowance made for almost eleven minutes
every year since the year of Christ 532.) the year with all its Festivals has
been brought back about ten days, and thereby caused a notable absurdity, more
especially in the observation of the Feast of Easter, (which for Antiquity and
Authority yields not (as Learned Christians affirm) to our Sunday or Lords day)
for whereas by the Primitive institution, after a long and hot contention
between the Eastern and Western Churches; about the time only of observing
Easter, that Feast was at length by Decree of a general Council ordered to be
observed for ever on the Sunday following, the First Full Moon after the Vernal
Equinox, (and not on the day of the said Full Moon, as the Jews ever have
observed their Passover) now according to the Church of England, there falls
sometimes two Full Moons between the Vernal Equinox and Easter Day: Nay, (which
is too great an absurdity to be suffered in any Christian Church) two Easters
will sometimes be observed in one year, and none in the next. As in this very
year of 1667. one Easter has already been observed on the 7th of April last
past, and before our Church begins to write 1668. that is to say before the 25
of March next, there will happen another Easter, viz. upon the 22 of March
next; and then from the 25th of March 1668. to the 25th of March 1669. there
will not any Easter at all be observed in England, according to the present
Rule, whereby is guided the English Computation.

FINIS.

