THE Present State OF ENGLAND.

PART III. and PART IV.

CONTAINING; I. An Account of the Riches, Strength, Magnificence, Natural
Production, Manufactures of this Island, with an exact Catalogue of the
Nobility, and their Seats, etc. II. The Trade and Commerce within it self, and
with all Countries traded to by the English, as at this day established, and
all other Matters relating to Inland and Marine Affairs.


Supplying what is omitted in the two former Parts, useful for Natives and
Foreiners.

London, Printed for William Whitwood, near the George Inn in Little Britain,
1683.

THE THIRD PART OF THE Present State OF ENGLAND.

WHEREIN Is set forth the Riches, Strength, Magnificence, Natural Production,
Manufactures, Wonders and Rarities, Progress of Learning, Arts and Ingenuities,
etc.

WITH A more perfect and Methodical Catalogue of the Nobility, with their
Seats, than any hitherto extant.

LONDON, Printed for William Whitwood, next the George Inn, in Little Britain.
1683.

THE PREFACE.
IT is commonly said among Gamesters, that the Standers by oft-times see more
than the persons themselves that play.

The like may be said, as to the Writing of Books: That the Critical Reader
soon discovers the Errors and Defects of the Writer.

Withal, it is a common Observation, even of the Vulgar and Inferior sort of
the People of France; that when any Stranger chances to trip or falter, either
in the Pronunciation, or Idiom of their Language, they, instead of laughing at
their failings, are still ready to help them out, and inform them better.

In our present Affair therefore, there is no more to do, than to wish the good
fortune of falling into the hands of the most courteous and best natured of
Readers; and indeed, there is a kind of necessity for it: for, in treating of
the Productions, Manufactures, Inventions, and other things herein contained,
there is (if not more) at least, as much need of Converse, as of Books; of
consulting the Living, as the Dead.

Whatever then, through haste, Inadvertency, or want of convenient Assistance;
either of Mistake, or Omission of what is most Curious or Remarkable (I say,
most Curious or Remarkable; since a too particular, and Minute Account would
swell each Head into a distinct Volume) may have escaped in this present Work;
those Gentlemen who shall think it worth their while, and will give themselves
the trouble, are humbly desired, against the next Impression, if the Work
shall be thought worthy of it, to impart their Advice and Informations.

Small Beginnings often times grow up to considerable Improvements: and a little
Cottage may be enlarged to a Commodious, if not stately Habitation.

ERRATA and OMISSA.
PAge 13. line II. after King, read Edward the Fourth. ibid. after to r.
Alphonso. p. 19. l. 6. after from r. Bamba. l. 7. after from, r. Guinea. p. 21.
l. 25. In the Blank, after in, r. Herefordshire. p. 22. l. 10. r. Vulpanser.

What other Mistakes, or Omissions have escaped the Press, by reason some
Sheets were wrought off before the Author's Perusal, are submitted to the
Courteous and Judicious Reader's Emendation.

THE Present State OF ENGLAND. PART III.
THE Island of Great Britain, the largest of the European Islands, and to very
few Islands of the World inferior in bigness, to none in Fertility, Power,
Good Government and the Glory of its great Actions, lies between 52 and 58
degrees of Northern Latitude. England the noblest and largest part thereof, and
a distinct Kingdom of it self, though at present united under one Monarch, has
undergone four several grand Revolutions. Not to mention the Samotheans,
Albionists, and Brutus his Trojan Dynastie, whose credit depends rather upon
fabulous Tradition than real History, the ancient Inhabitants of this Island
are scarce taken notice of by any Author of account but by the name of
Britains; and the first certainly known Attaque that ever was made upon them,
was by the Romans, under Julius Caesar; and after that several others by the
Lieutenants of several succeeding Emperors, not without a World of Bloodshed:
The Natives no less stoutly resisting, than the Romans furious assaulting, till
at length they gained a no less quiet than perhaps advantageous Possession
among us; I mean, advantageous to this Island; so that the Losers may be said
to have been the greatest Gainers, the Conquered the greatest Triumphers: For
if we consider, from the several Descriptions that have been written thereof,
what barbarous and absurd Customs the Ancient Britains had among them; we may
conclude that Civility and Arts were so much the earlier introduced by the
coming in of the Romans; who also by their long Habitation here, and Familiar
Converse with the Old Inhabitants, were of Foreigners become as it were
Natives, of Enemies Protectors, insomuch that when they were called away for
the Defense of their Provinces Abroad, their Departure was no less regretted,
than their Arrival was opposed.

The next Attempters upon this part of the Island were the Saxons, who being at
first Invited in for their Assistance against the Invading Picts and other
Borderers, became at length themselves the greatest Invaders; and playing upon
the Easy and Luxurious Temper of the Prince that first Encouraged their coming
over, they got a Footing, which by continued fresh Supplies sent over from time
to time, they made so sure, that all the Force the Britains were able to make
against them for several Ages, was not able to unfix it. For notwithstanding
this great Opposition, in which several of the British Kings Signalized
themselves, even to the Fame of Heroes, especially the Great King Arthur, whose
Glory nothing has so much Eclipsed, as that his Actions (great enough in their
Truth) are blown up into Storys, so Romantic and and Surpassing all Credit,
maugre I say all the Force could be Mustered against them: They still Increased
in Number and Strength, till in the end the Britains quite tired out, were glad
to retire into the Mountainous and remote parts of the Land, (by which they
kept themselves for many Ages a people entirely distinct, and their Language to
this very day unmixt; the Root of ours being evidently the Saxon, so that the
other must needs be the Ancient British) and leave all the rest to be shared
among the new Possessors, who, there being so many Proprietors in the Conquest,
dealt out the British Monarchy into seven Parcels; which sevenfold Partition it
may well be wondered how it could keep up so long, considering the Confusions,
and as it were Civil Wars, that arose (as how could they but arise) among so
many Petty Monarchs upon one Continent (that is, as to the bounds of each
Kingdom) till at length one swallowing up the other, the stronger the weaker,
this Seven-headed Hydra of Government came to a Period, and one bright face of
Monarchy shot up again, and spread its Luster over all this better part of
Britain, which has ever since been called the Kingdom of England, and has so
continued, with little or no Interruption, from the Reign of the Great Egbert.
He it was who first reduced this Heptarchy into a Perfect Monarchy, though it
was tending toward it sometime before, even to this day; and from him the Era
of our English Monarchies by Historians and Chronologers are reputed to
commence: So that from the said Egbert, his present Majesty that now Happily
Reigns, is reckoned the forty sixth sole Monarch of England.

But scarce was this Government well settled, when the expected Tranquillity
thereof was disturbed by a new Generation of Invaders, more Barbarous and
Mischievous, than ever any either before or since; Committers of far greater
Outrages and Cruelties: Yet so often either driven out, or totally extirpated;
so often bravely Conquered in the Field by the high Valor and Conduct of
several of our English Saxon Monarchs (whose Fame stands great in History to
this day for their Virtue and Gallantry, both in Peace and War) that it may
well be wondered, how any one Country could spare such Multitudes of People, as
continually poured in upon us for several Ages together; and how such numerous
Forces could make such frequent Landings with so little Opposition: But then it
must be considered, that we had no Summer Guards Abroad, no Squadrons of First,
Second and Third Rate Frigates to Cruise about and Guard the English Coasts;
what kind of Ships there were in those either for War or Trade, cannot be
collected from any Account or Description we find recorded or published; but
thus much may well be concluded, that the best Man of War of those times was
far Inferior to the meanest Merchant-Man now adays. For the space of about 174
years, viz. from 833, to 1017. was this poor Kingdom harrass'd by the continual
Invasions of these Northern Pirates; yet could they not in all this space catch
hold of the Crown of England, till the said year 1017. and then they held it no
longer than during the Reign of three Kings; after which it reverted again to
the Saxon Line.

The Fourth and last Invasion was that of the Normans, if he can properly be
called an Invader, who seems to have come in with the Consent, at least if not
Invitation of several of the Nobility and Prelacy; for else doubtless his claim
could not have been so easily decided by the dint of one Battle, and he so
readily have had the Crown put on his Head by Aldred Archbishop of York, who
with several other Bishops and Noblemen, met him upon the way, and paid him
their Allegiance; and from this Norman Conqueror the Monarchy of England has
been kept up in a continued, though not Lineal Succession to this day. Among
the Prae-eminences which this Kingdom has above all the other Kingdoms of
Europe, the chiefest and which most redounds to its Glory, is, that it was
first Enlightened with the Knowledge of True Religion; so that whatsoever place
it may claim in Europe, it deserves at least to be esteemed the first Kingdom
of Christendom: And admit that Joseph of Arimathea were not the first that
Preached the Gospel here, though there are not wanting Testimonies, to make it
out, not altogether contemptible: However, it is most certain, that the
Christian Religion here, is of a much elder date, than the coming over of
Austin the Monk; that is, even in the very Apostles time, by the Testimony of
Gildas; and as it appears by the mention of a Noble British Lady, Claudia
Rufina, in one of St. Paul's Epistles; and it was not much above 100 years
after e're it was owned by public Authority: For the first Christian King
mentioned in History, is our British King Lucius, who was Contemporary with the
Emperor Commodus, also the first Christian Emperor, at least the first that
publicly Professed, Protected and Maintained the Christian Faith, (for before
him Philippus Arabs is said to have been a a Christian, and Baptized) was
Constantine Surnamed the Great, a Britain Born, the Son of Constantius Chlorus
(who also was a Favourer of the Christians, and died at York) by the Daughter
of King Coilus Helena (a Princess most renowned for her Christian Piety, and
for being the Inventress of the Cross. And as this Nation boasts Antiquity
equal with Rome it self, for the Dawning of the Gospel's Light among us, so it
claims a Prerogative of Lighting the first Lamp of Reformation to the Christian
World; and highly glories in this, that there is no where to be found so
excellent and moderate an Establishment of Church Government among all the
Reformed Churches.

The Riches of the English Nation.
And first of the Arable Pasture and Fruitage.
THe Riches of any Nation, I mean the Native and Inland Riches, (for by
Imported Commodities, the Barrenest Nation in the World may be Rich,) consist
chiefly in the Arable, the Pasturage, the Fruits, and other Plants of peculiar
Use and Advantage. The Rich Veins of Earth for Metals and other sorts of
Minerals, and the Plenty of Fish and Fowl; all which things are both profitable
in themselves, and for the Manufactures they produce; and though common to this
Nation, with the greatest part of the Earth in general, yet it will not be from
the purpose to discover how far the English Nation excels in each of them, and
what parts of the Nation are most peculiarly famed and commended for this or
that Production. As to the Arable, it would be in vain to particularize any one
part of England more than another, since so great Plenty of all sorts of Corn
and Grain is produced in all parts of this Nation. Nevertheless, it is worth
the observing, how some Counties are more peculiarly celebrated for this or
that Grain: I have heard it affirmed, that the very best Wheat in England is
from a Vale near Hessen in Middlesex, lying Southward of Harrow on the Hill;
however among the four W's of Herefordshire, Wheat is one, the other three
being Wool, Wood and Water. Moreover for Oats, if there be any where one sort
better than another, the best Oats are said to be in Lancashire, and in greater
abundance than any other County; and for Barley and Malt, Bedfordshire has
among some a particular mention. Moreover, for what is said in general of some
places above others: It is sufficiently considerable which is reported of the
Town of Godmanchester in Huntingtonshire, in reference to the great Name that
Town has for Tillage, and its Prae-eminence above all the Towns of England;
besides for number of Stout and Able Husbandmen, namely that the Inhabitans of
this Place used in former times to meet the Kings of England as they passed
this way in their Progress, in a kind of Rural Pomp and Pageantry of show, with
no fewer than 180 Ploughs; and in this manner King James at his first coming to
the Crown of England was received in his Journey from Scotland, with 70 Team of
Horses, fitted with all their Furniture to as many New Ploughs; the King
expressing much Delight and Satisfaction at so Brave and Happy a Sight, and
highly applauded the Industry and well deserved Prosperity of the people of
that Place. Remarkable also is the Vale of Evesham in Worcestershire, so called
of one Eoves a Swinheard to Egwin Bishop of Worcester, so Renowned for its
Fertility and excellent kind of Corn it yields, that it is called the Granary
of those parts. The Vale of Alisbury in Buckinghamshire, is also particularly
taken notice of for its Pleasant Meadows and Rich Pastures. Nor are the
Sheep-Pastures near Knetworth in Hartfordshire, which is called the Garden of
England, to be forgotten. Portholm Meadow also in Huntingtonshire is reckoned
among the Notabilia of that County. The like may be said in a great measure of
the Pasturage: However there are some places so peculiarly remarked either for
the Largeness or Richness of their Pastures, that the mention of them cannot
well be omitted. The Isle of Shepey in Kent being about 21 Miles in compass, is
without question so denominated from the numerous Flocks of Sheep which it
feeds. No less celebrated is Rumny-Marsh, heretofore a part of the Sea, under
the Name of Romanum Mare, which by common Speech is easily corrupted into
Rumnense Marshium: Of this Marsh, Twine in his Commentary, De rebus Anglicis,
making a particular mention, thus concludes, Denique unde tot pingues peeudes,
etc. Lastly, says he, Whence so many Fat Cattle come to the Shambles, that not
only all Kent is largely supplied from this place, but even the City of London
also, in some measure fares the better. In the Marsh-Country of Norfolk
commonly called Marsh-Land; the Soil is so very Mellow and Fruitful, that in a
certain large Mead called Tilneysmeth, there are said generally to feed no less
than 30000 Sheep at a time. Wormleighton in Warwickshire, breeds Sheep of so
large a size, that there are scarce the like to be seen elsewhere. Lemster upon
the River Lug in Herefordshire, feeds a Breed of Sheep which yields so Fine and
Delicate a Wool, that our Noble Poet Draiton in his Polyolbion, compares it to
the Wool of Apulia and Tarentum, which has been always accounted the Finest
Wool of Europe. The Bread also of Lemster is no less noted by reason of the
Fineness of its Flower, insomuch that Lemster Bread and Weably Ale are united
into a Proverb, as Leigh observes in his Description of England. Likewise the
Sheep of Cotswold (i. e. a place of Sheep-Cotes or Folds upon a Hill) in
Glocestershire, yield so Fine a Wool, that nothing but the Spanish Wool can
outvy it, and this advantage it owes to a Present that was made by King (...)
to (...) King of Spain, very much to the prejudice of England, as it has since
proved. Somerton once the chief Town, as some say, of Somersetshire, and gave
the denomination to the Shire, consists almost wholly, with the Country
thereabout, of Grasiers and Breeders of Cattle. After the Wool of Lemster and
Cotswold, that of the Isle of Wight comes next in estimation. Besides those
places abovementioned, there is one more, which for its largeness and
Fruitfulness alike, is worthy to be mentioned, viz. The Vale of the Whitehorse,
which is partly in Wiltshire, and partly in Barkshire. For Fruit, there is
scarce any County in England that is not tolerably well stored in one sort or
other; but above all for Cherries, and now of late for Pippins, Kent bears the
Name; and particularly Tenham, which is commonly styled the Parent of Fruit
Gardens: But the first Pippins brought over, that is about 100 years since,
were Planted in that part of Lincolnshire called Holland; and about Kirton in
the same Shire: Nor are our Cherries of much longer date, being first brought
over from Flanders in the Reign of King Henry the Eight, and Planted in Kent,
with that Success, that one only Orchard of but 32 Acnes, is said to have
produced in one year, as much as yielded 1000 l. For all sorts of Apples and
Pears, and for great quantity of excellent Syder, which furnish London and many
other parts, Worcestershire, Glocestershire and Herefordshire, are the
principal Counties.

Vines we have very frequent among us of several sorts, producing for the most
part a very Sweet and Pleasant Grape, and good quantities of Wine, I have heard
say, have been formerly made. At this day there are two places principally
Eminent for making of Wine, viz. Claverton in Somersetshire, a Seat of Sir
William Bassets, where there are said to have been made some years, no less
than 40 Hogsheads of a very pleasant and palatable Wine, and in Kent belonging
to Colonel Blunt. At Hatfield-House in Hertfordshire, belonging to the Earl of
Salisbury, there is a parcel ground called the Vineyard, no doubt from the
Plenty and goodness of the Vines there Planted. And in Glocestershire there are
several places called Vineyards, out of which in former times, they yearly
paid Rent-Wines, from the Plenty of Vines no doubt here growing. Moreover it
is found in Ancient Records, that several Towns of this Shire paid Rent-Wines,
as Dr. Fuller in his Worthys particularly observes.

Of other Productions.
BEsides those Beasts and Cattle which are of advantage for Food and Clothing,
and which no Country of Europe, perhaps of the World, bring forth more fair and
large than England: There are some Beasts of service, which being common to
England with other parts of Europe, are generally commended to be of a more
excellent Kind than any, especially that which is the most serviceable of all
others, viz. the Horse, with all manner of respects considered, is doubtless
the most noble and useful of all four-footed Beasts; for though the Elephant,
Camel, and Dromedary, with which most places of Asia, and many of Africa,
abound, are more remarkable for vast bulk of body, especially the Elephant, and
consequently more capable of carriage and bearing of great burdens; yet the
same greatness of bulk renders them on the other side more unfit for
expedition: and for the Ass and Mule, which indeed are fairer, larger, and more
numerous in Spain and other Countries of Europe, than in this Kingdom, they are
not certainly to be compared either for shape, service, or expedition with the
forementioned Animal; nor was ever any Grandee of Spain journying on his Mule
with the Grand Pa and Spanish gravity so comely a sight, as a well accoutred
Cavalier on horseback: and of all parts of England, Montgomeryshire is
commended for excellent Horses: The Truth is, the Spanish Jenet, that of
Barbary Race commonly, therefore called the Barbary: The Count of Oldenburgh's
Breed in Germany, have the Name before all others for Swiftness, delicacy of
Shape and Neatness, of Mark or Color; but for Courage, Ability of Body, either
for Travel, Draught or Carriage, sufficient Swiftness and Agility,
Tractableness for the Great Saddle and Management in War; the Horses of English
Breed, are reputed hardly matchable by those of any other Country: And our Dogs
much less, by the Testimony of diverse Eminent Authors; Ortelius in his Theatrum
Orbis Terrarum, affirms, that there is no part of the Earth, where there are
better and larger Dogs to be seen, especially Hounds, he might also have added
Mastives: To the same effect Cambden writes of our Dogs in general in his
Hantshire and Middlesex: Burton also in his Commentaries on Antoninus his
Itinerary, prefers the British Hounds and Mastives before those of any other
Country whatsoever. And of our Mastives a Spanish Geographer of good Account,
Lucas de Linda, in his Descriptio Orbis, says, That they are the Bravest, the
Largest and the Fiercest of any in the World beside: Moreover, that they were
in great Request Anciently among the Romans, and made use of in their public
Games and Baitings, exhibited in their Amphitheaters, appears by this Verse of
the Poet Claudian: Magnaque Taurorum fracturi Colla Britani.

There are likewise some other sorts of Dogs of English Breed, which though not
so much taken notice of by Authors, I am apt to imagine, are no less excellent
and supereminent in their kind, than those above mentioned, as namely,
Water-Spaniels, Greyhounds, Setting-Dogs, and such like of Sport and Game.
Lastly, that sort of Dogs that serve only for Show and the slightest of
Divertisement; I really believe that for Neatness of Mark and Delicacy of
Shape, there are scarce to be found elsewhere the like to our Beagles and
little Spaniels; and this will appear the more evident to those that shall
observe this one thing: namely, that whereas it is a general Curiosity (not to
say Vanity) among our English Gentry, to admire and delight in Birds, Beasts,
and other things, brought over from France and other Foreign Parts, as Parots
from (...) Monkeys from (...) we find few or none of these abovementioned
Creatures, but what are English, at least none so curiously Marked and Limbed
as ours. There is said to be bred about Portsmouth, a race of very little Dogs,
which by their shape seem to be of the Species of Beagles.

As for the Cats of England, it is observable, that the number of Fine
Tabby-Cats that are finely Spotted, and as it were Marbled, has very much
increased of late years, whereby it may be probably conjectured, that some
kinds of those so Curiously Clothed Cats, have been brought hither from other
parts, and particularly those of Cyprus, have been accounted for their Marbled
Coats, the choicest of all others; but setting aside the consideration of the
Curious Mark or Color, to show how far ours have the Preeminence in the
exercise of that faculty which nature has implanted in this sort of Creature,
that is, the Catching of Mice and other such Vermin; there needs no other
instance, than the History of a very Rich Lord Mayor of London, some few Ages
ago, who first raised his Fortune from the Venture of an English Cat. As for
the Eatable Cattle, and several Beasts of Game, some places we find there are,
which claim a special Propriety to this or that particular kind. The best Oxen
in England are said to be in Lancashire: In the New-Forrest in Hantshire, there
is very great store of Red-Deer. A late Park near New Market in Cambridgeshire,
was called Hare-Park, by reason of the multitude of Hares, Rabbetts; the best
and most are said to be in Norfolk; yet I cannot think they much exceed those
of Auburn-Chace (belonging to my Lord of Pembroke) in Wiltshire. The best Hogs
in Hantshire. Of Birds there are few (if any) sorts wanting here, which are
frequent in other parts of England, whether the most Curious of Singing Birds,
the choicest Fowl both Wild and Tame for the Table, or Birds of Game and
Delight: But of some it is observed, that what are bred in this Country, are
peculiarly commendable above others, especially the Gallinaceous kind. Pliny
observes of the Cock, that it is a Bold and Stout Bird, and crows in sign of
Triumph immediately after Victory, and doubtless scarce any Country affords so
Courageous and Martial a Race of Game-Cocks as England; a right Cock of the
Game seldom or never ceasing on this side Death or Victory. Nor do I remember
to have read or heard Report of any Country where the Sport of Cock-Fighting,
of which our Countryman Ascham has written a Learned Treatise, is so much used
as here: Thus the Dog among Beasts, and the Cock among Birds, seem proper
Emblems of true English Valor: However let us not repose our chiefest glory in
this Virtue alone, but strive to excel in others of a higher nature, which are
proper to man alone, since Valor, we see, is a Virtue common to Man with
Brute. In the Rocks of Pembrokeshire are Hawks of an extraordinary kind, but
chiefly of the Species of the Faulcon: In the Forest of Shirwood in
Nottinghamshire, and in the Forest of Dean in Glocestershire, the Hawk called
the Lanar, whose Female is the Laneret, is very frequent: Near Kinsland in
(...) is often seen the Hawk called Lanius, the Butcher or Murdering Bird.
Along the Seacoasts of England, from the West as far as Dover; but chiefly
upon the Seacoasts of Cornwall, there frequents a sort of Chough or Jack-daw,
which is thence commonly called the Cornish Chough, supposed the same with the
(...) of Aristotle. In New-Forrest in Hantshire chiefly breeds the Vpupa or
Hoop. In the Fens of Lincolnshire the Attagen or Godwitt. On Newmarket-Heath
and Salisbury-Plains, the Bistarda or Bustard. In the Isle of Thanet a sort of
Wild-Goose, commonly called a Birgander, in Latin Vulpancer. In several parts
of Cornwall, two sorts of Birds, rarely seen elsewhere, viz. the Puffin and the
Ganet. Also in Lincolnshire the Foolish Bird called the Dottrel, is so
frequent, that the people of those parts have very good Sport in the Catching
of it, as Cambden relates.

The places of England most eminenly Famous for several sorts of Fish, are
New Castle upon Tine for Salmon; as also Bywell in Northumberland, and the
River Wye in Herefordshire, also the River Lune near Cockerfand-Abbey in
Lancashire. The Coast of Cornwall for Herrings; there being there so great a
Trade of Herring-Fishing, that there is scarce the like again in any place of
Europe; at Limmouth also in Dorcetshire there is taken great quantity of
Herrings; at Yarmouth in Norfolk, the Herrings are very large and good, and are
therefore called Yarmouth Capons. Shrewsbury and some other places thereabout
upon the Severn, for a Fish called a Mort, which in Taste has very much of the
Salmon in it; Sussex in general for Carps: For Lobsters Chichester, the chief
Town of Sussex, and Selsey (so called, qu. Isle of Seals or Sea-Calves) in the
same County; the first for small ones, but very Sweet and well Tasted; the
second for those esteemed, not only because of their Goodness, but also their
Fullness and Largeness; for Cockles* the same Selsey. For Oysters Colchester,
the chief Town of Essex, and several places of Kent, especially Whitstaple and
Reculver, which for Oysters of savoury saltness, exceed all other parts of that
County, especially Reculver. There is a sort of small Fish called a Pilchard,
commonly about the bigness of a Herring (though I have heard say, that in some
parts of Cornwall there have been taken Pilchards an Ell long) and not much
differing in shape in several places on the Seacoasts of Cornwall. At a place
called Foreditch in Kent, there are Trouts of a treble remark: First, That they
equal Salmon in Largeness. Secondly, That they remain nine Months in the Sea,
and three in Fresh Water. Thirdly, That contrary to the nature of all other
Trouts, they have been known but once to have been taken in that place with an
Angle, so much more cunning they are than all the rest of their kind. In the
River Kennet near Hungerford in Barkshire, there is great plenty of Trouts,
remarkably large and good; also the Town of Hungerford it self, Marlborough,
and some other Places thereabout, are noted for plenty and goodness of
Cray-Fish. The River Stowr in Dorcetshire has a particular commendation for
Tenches, as some parts of Cambridgeshire for the best Eels, and Lincolnshire
for plenty of Pikes: But there is also another Stowr in Kent, which runs
through Canterbury, and is said to breed the best Trouts in the South-East of
England: Yet those of Cashalton in Surry are accounted excellent Trouts. In
Miander-Meer in Lancashire, there breeds a sort of Fish called a Chare, which
they say is no where else to be found. Much more might be said, (but that it is
not our business to dwell upon any particular, but to take a general Survey of
several things) of the Animals which our Country excels in above others; but to
speak of the Minerals and Vegetables which this Island produces, would require
each a large Volume; and though we have no Mines of Gold, yet the many Mines we
have of other Mettalls, as Iron, Lead, Tin, Copper, etc. (and it is said some
discoveries have been also made of Silver, besides Mines of Alum* Coal and
other Minerals, would, if utmost Improvement were made of our Trade and
Manufacture, make a considerable compensation. The Stanneries or Tin-Mines of
Cornwall and Devonshire have been famous from all Antiquity: And whereas it
has been formerly taken for granted, that the Britains were unknown to the
rest of the World before the Arrival of the Romans; there are not wanting who
are of Opinion, and have confirmed their Opinion with probable Evidences, that
the Ancient Inhabitants of this Island, long before the Romans Arrival, had
Commerce with the Greeks and Phaenicians; and that because they would not admit
of Strangers into their Country, therefore they made the Isles of Scilly the
Mart for the vending of their Tin; whereupon some suppose them to be those
Islands which the Ancients called the Cassiterides, which imports as much as
Tin-Isles; not as having any Tin-Mines in them, but as being the Mart, as we
said before, for the Vending of that Commodity. And of all parts in Cornwall,
Godolphin-Hill is particularly taken notice of for its Rich and Plentiful Veins
of Tin. Nor do the Mines of Cornwall abound in Tin only, but it is said there
have been quantities of Metallic Oar that have contained a mixture of Gold and
Silver; and very memorable is the tradition of a quantity of Silver Oar, dig'd
out of a place in the Parish of Comb-Martin in Devonshire, out of which William
Wimondham coined 270 weight of Silver for Elionor Duchess of Bar. A place
called Newlands in Cumberland, is rich in Copper Mines, and has some store of
Black-Lead; especially about Keswick. In this County also, the Stone called
Lapis Calaminaris, is said to have been here first found: But much of this
Lapis Calaminaris is dug out of Mendiphills in Somersetshire. At Wenlock in
Shropshire, in the Reign of King Richard the second, there was found a Rich
Copper Mine. The Rich Mines of Iron in the Forest of Dean in Glocestershire,
have been an occasion of making those Woods very thin, in respect of what they
have been formerly. Kent has several Iron Mines, and also Veins of Marl.
Darbyshire abounds much in Minerals, and several kinds of Stones; particularly
in the Peak of Darby, there are Mines that afford plenty of Lead, likewise
Stibium or Antimony, also store of Millstones and Whet-stones; nor less noted
are the Lead-Mines on Mendip-hills in Staffordshire: As also those on the Hills
of Richmondshire, where there are likewise Copper-Mines; near Moinglath in
Denbyshire, is a plentiful Vein of Lead: So likewise in the Abbey of Fountains
in Yorkshire, not far from whence in the same Shire is store of Iron: Other
Mines also there are, which though not so Rich, are no less useful than those
of Metal; as Alom, Coal, Freestone, Fullers-earth, Marl, with all which, take
one with another, there is surely no Nation better stored; and indeed our
Salt Pits are no other than a kind of Liquid-Mines. It is no less wonderful to
observe what abundant Supplies of Fuel are yearly sent up from the Coal-Mines
of Newcastle to this Vast City of London, and other parts of the Nation,
besides what is Exported into Foraign parts; then it may seem hard to
conjecture how this City could subsist before the discovery of this great Mine,
which was not till the year 1305. Since we find by experience, upon any
occasion of the obstructing of this Newcastle Fleet, and the raising of the
Price of Coals, into what great distress and inconveniency the City is
thereupon reduced; but then it must be considered that the City then was
nothing near so large as now, and the Country far better stored with Wood; the
want whereof for Firing, is not the only prejudice the Nation has sustained by
the vast quantity of Timber that has been felled of late Ages; the number of
Alehouses is also increased ten to one, at least within these 100 years, and
proportionably, as may well be imagined, the number of Brewhouses to supply
them with Drink; which Houses cannot be maintained and carry on their Trade,
without a wonderful quantity of Fuel: Nor need it be wondered how other great
Cities are able to subsist without the like convenience (as doubtless there is
scarce any City of the World that has the like advantage for Fuel)
considering the difference of Climate, of Customs, of manner of Living, and of
Diet. There are who speak of Blackheath, as a place no less sufficiently
abounding with Pit-Coal to serve the City of London and parts adjacent, than
Newcastle it self, but are willing to believe that the grand security of these
Coal-pits, lies in the great prejudice to Navigation, which the breaking of
them up would occasion, in regard this Colliers Trade between Newcastle and
London is the greatest Nursery of Seamen we have; which objection would easily
cease, could the Fishing Trade be once promoted, till when the Coal Mines of
Blackheath must of necessity be laid aside. There is also Sea-Coal, like that
of Newcastle at Wedsborough in the East Riding in Yorkshire: Likewise up and
down in many of the Inland parts of England, there is abundance of Pit-Coal of
another nature, that is too say, not Caking or Clinging together (a quantity of
small Particles) into one great lump or mass, like that of Newcastle; but as it
is laid on in great pieces, burning sheer away into Ashes, each piece like
Wood. Up and down in several parts of Darbyshire and Staffordshire, there is a
sort of Pit-Coal, which is commonly called Cannel-Coal, perhaps as it were
Candle-Coal, because it burns clear like a Candle; this Coal is of a bright
shining gloss, and withal of so tough and solid a substance, that they
frequently make thereof Standishes, Salt-Sellers, Candlesticks and other such
like Utensils, which appear as it were of a courser sort of Jett. In
Staffordshire, Pensneth-Chace is particularly made mention of for plenty of
Pit-Coal. In Leicestershire, Coal-Overton in the Hundred of West-Goscot, and
other parts of the North of this County, where there is store of Pit-Coal of a
Bituminous nature, very hard and fast: In Warwickshire, Bedworth: In
Somersetshire, Mendip-hill, and several places on the shore of the River From:
In Richmondshire, the tops of certain Hills. In the Isle of Anglesey there is
said to be great store of an Aluminous Matter, out of which it is thought might
be made very good Alum and Copperass, but nothing of this nature has been
brought to that perfection, as the Alum-works in Yorkshire, through the great
Industry of Sir John Bourchier, who in the Reign of King James made away with a
considerable Estate for the carrying on of this great work, in lieu whereof he
obtained the grant of a Patent from the King, whereby he was Invested with the
whole benefit of the said Alumwork, which was valued at a Thousand Pound a
year; but however matters were carried, his Grandchild Mr. Richard Bourchier,
is now reduced to utmost necessity, receiving no relief by virtue of the Patent
for the loss of the Paternal Estate: But Gesborough in this Shire is most
particularly noted for an Alum-Mine, which some say was first found out by Sir
Thomas Chaloner Tutor to Prince Henry. As for the Stone-Quarries of England,
they must indeed be confessed inferior to those of Italy, Greece, and other
parts, for all Curious kinds of Marble, Alabaster and Porphyrie* (of Marble the
Parian was Anciently accounted the best:) However we have many Structures both
public and private to show, which being built of our own native Freestone,
want not their State and Elegance. The principal Magazine of this Commodity, is
the Isle of Portland in Dorcetshire, which has supplied many of the grand
Buildings of England. Likewise the Isle of Purbeck in the same Shire, has
Veins of Marble, which though not continued, but scatteringly here and there,
as Cambden observes, yet run a great way under ground. At Edgcomb House near
Plymouth in Cornwall, there is dug good quantity of a Stone, which is of
great use and Ornament in Building; also on the Moors of the said County, there
is found a sort of Stone, which is thence called the Moor-stone, of which there
are frequently made Chimney-Pieces and Ornaments of Windows and Doors; besides
another sort of the color of Marble. In Nottinghamshire there is dug a soft
Stone, at least much softer than Alabaster, with which being burnt and made
into a Plaster, they generally floor their Upper-Rooms, this Plaster being well
laid, as soon as it comes to be dry, proves harder than any Plaster of Paris,
and is wonderful durable. In Herefordshire, hard by Snodhill-Castle, is a
Quarry, from whence they say there is dug forth very good Marble. At a place
called Peter's- post in Yorkshire, is a famous Quarry of Stone; also near
Shirburn in the same Shire: Nor is that near Manchester in Laneashire
inconsiderable; besides a Quarry of a fine Reddish-stone on the Banks of the
River Irwell in the same Shire: Moreover, what we want in Alabaster, Porphyrie
Marble, etc. is more than compensated to us by Stones of a greater value,
particularly in Cornwall, there are found in great quantities Stones of a
natural Smoothness, formed into Angles, and considerably large, some of the
bigness of a Walnut, or thereabout, and of such a luster, that many scruple not
to call them Diamonds, and probably they might pass for such, did not the
cunning Lapidary know how to distinguish the true Orient Diamond from others by
its Adamantine hardness and solidity: Likewise St. Vincents Rock at Bristol
affords plenty of these English Diamonds, commonly called Bristol Stones: At
Shugbury in Warwickshire is a sort of precious Stone, at least by some so
accounted, called Astroites, from a mark it has upon it resembling a Star. And
on the Rocks of Guarnsey, there is a hard Stone called an Emeril. Nor are we
wholly destitute of Marble and Alabaster, though doubtless short for Beauty and
Fineness to those of Italy and Greece; in some parts of Staffordshire there is
dug a sort of Alabaster, thought to be the best in England. Fullers-Earth,
Potters-Earth, Marl, Lime, Slate, Tobacco-Pipe-Clay, etc. There are large Veins
in several parts, particularly Woburn in Bedfordshire abounds in Fullers-Earth;
as also Rigate in Surry: In some parts of Wiltshire the store of Marl that is
found there, gives Appellation to one of the chief Towns of that Shire, viz.
Marlborough, and in diverse parts of Lancashire, is found a Marl, which very
much enriches the Land. Near Nonsuch in Surry is a large Vein of Potters-Earth.
Near Walsal in Sussex, are store of Lime-Pits: And not many Miles from Pomfret
in Yorkshire, it being averred by some that no less than 2000 l. a year usually
made of the Lime thereabouts.

In some parts of Cornwall there is Slate of three sorts and colors, viz. The
Blew, the Gray, and the Sage-colour; particularly at a place called
Walling-slate in Cornwall, is dug up great store of Slate: As also at
Collyweston in Northamptonshire, at Pool in Dorcetshire, and in the Isle of
Wight the best Tobacco-Pipe-Clay. And to the Millstones of the Peak before
mentioned, we may add those dug up at Mowcup in Cheshire. There is a sort of
Earth called Talcum, used by Painters and Colourers, of which store is dig'd up
in several parts of Sussex: And the best of Saltpeter, is said to be found in
Northamptonshire. Out of the Salt Pits of England is extracted so white and
fine a sort of Salt, that the most refined Sugar looks not more white and fine;
it is also commonly made up into Masses, in the form of Sugar-Loaves: Most of
these Wiches, the most noted, are in Cheshire, all denominated accordingly,
viz. Nantwich, Middlewich and Northwich; Nantwich, besides the consideration of
its Salt-pit, which is generally called the Whitewich, is next to the City of
Chester it self, the most Eminent Town of all Cheshire: Middlewich has two
Pits, between which there runs a small Brook and parts them: The Pit in
Northwich is called the Black-wich; I suppose because the Salt drawn hence is
Blacker and Courser than any of the rest. In Worcestershire, there is also a
place of principal note for these Wiches or Salt Pits, viz. Droit-Wich, or
Dirt-Wich, where there are three Wells, whose water from Christmas till
Midsummer is of so Brackish a nature, that all that time they boil great
quantities of Salt out of it in Furnaces, which for that end are erected near
the Wells; whereas all the rest of the year the water is so fresh, that no Salt
can be extracted out of it.

As for those Plants and Shrubs which are most peculiarly of the growth of
England, it would be too particular a Subject for this so general a Work, to
assign each its several place, as there are very many places where this or that
Herb, Tree or Shrub, has as it were its peculiar nativity and education: All
the whole County of Buckingham is denominated from the great number of
Beech-Trees there growing: The Isle of Scalny in Pembrokeshire, is almost all
over grown with Wild-Time; But there are some Plants, which being of themselves
not ordinary or common, or of a more than common Virtue or Efficacy, do so much
the more signalize the places where they grow, especially being the only noted
places of their production. The Saffron about Walden in Essex, is so eminently
reputed above the Saffron of any other parts, that that Town is never mentioned
but by the name of Saffron-Walden. Pomfret (in Yorkshire) so called, quasi
Pontfract or Broken-Bridge; besides its strong and stately Castle, is noted for
the great quantity of Liquorice that grows thereabout, (as also a sort of Plant
called Skirworts, whose Root is much esteemed and Eaten by the Curious for a
great delicacy, by reason of its Richness and high Nourishment:) Nor is Worksop
in Nottinghamshire less eminent for Liquorice. Hallifax in the West Riding of
Yorkshire, is noted for several things which we shall have occasion to make
mention of elsewhere: But among other things the Nuts growing thereabout, are
by way of eminency called Hallifax Nuts. At Barklow in Essex, there grows in
great abundance an Herb, bearing Red-Berries, called Danewort, from a Tradition
that it sprang first from the Blood of the Danes: On the Cliffs between Deal
and Dover, great plenty of Samphire grows; Westward from Dengeness in Kent,
Pease spring up naturally in Clusters like Grapes, and differ not much in Taste
from common-field Pease. Between Sandwich and the Isle of Thanet, a kind of
Hops is observed to grow naturally among the Beach and Pebbles; Garlic is no
where better nor more plentiful, than at Stratton in Cornwall: Several parts of
Devonshire, and Porbery most peculiarly in Somersetshire, produce wild
Strawberies in abundance; no less noted is Axminster in Devonshire for
Hurtleberries. At Summervil near Chapel, two Mile from Blanford in
Dorcetshire, on on the hither side of the River at Sturpain, there is a most
plentiful production of Madder; how long this Plant has been in England is
uncertain, but it is above 50 years since a considerable quantity of it was
produced at Barn-Elms in Surry; and Sir Nicholas Crisp sowed several sorts of
it, as Crop-Madder, Umber Ow, and Pipe or flat Madder at Deptford in Kent,
which County affords plenty of Flax; but the best Hemp is said to grow between
Bemister and Birdport in Dorcetshire. St. Foin or Holy-Hay, was first brought
out of France from about Paris, and first sowed at Copt-Hall in Kent. Tamarisk
was first brought over from Switzerland by Bishop Tindal in the days of Queen
Mary (from whose displeasure he fled) and planted in his Garden at Fullham. On
the top of Pendle-hill in Lancashire, there grows a Plant peculiar to that
place called Cloudesberry, probably for that it seems as it were to come out of
the Clouds. In the Fens of Cambridgeshire, there is commonly gathered an Herb
called Water-Germander; in Latin Scordium, which being the chief Ingredient,
consequently gives name to that great Alexipharmacon, so much known and used
among us called Diascordium. About Glastenbury in Somersetshire, there is
plenty of Woad; and at Cashalton in Surry of excellent Walnuts.

Of the Wonders and Rarities of England.
THe Wonders of England consist chiefly in Stones, Caves, Lakes, Fountains,
Ditches, and several prodigious Tumuli or Hillocks cast up by Art and Labor;
there was never doubtless heard of in any part of the World, so miraculous a
Monument of Stones, for so it is generally supposed to be, as that on
Salisbury-Plain, within six or seven Miles of Salisbury, commonly called
Stone-henge; it appears to have been a treble row of Stones, circularly placed
one within another, and reared straight up on end, notwithstanding they are of
a prodigious bigness, that is to say, 28 Foot long for the most part, and 7
Foot broad, besides others of a vast bulk (though not so big as the upright
ones) which lie overthwart from one to another, and are fastened with Tenent
and Mortis; but the form of this wonderful Structure is very much defaced, some
of the greater Stones being either fallen, or reclining toward the ground, and
many of the overthwart Stones being fallen; how such huge Stones could be
brought thither, by whom, and upon what occasion, is disputed by Writers; the
most that has been said on this Subject is written by Mr. Inigo Jones Surveyor
General to King James, and his late Majesty King Charles the first, and Dr.
Charleton, both various, and often times contrary in their Opinions, and possibly
neither of them altogether in the right: About half a dozen Mile further on the
Plain toward Hungerford, I have observed (nor do I remember it to have been
taken notice of by any one else) a Stone of a great bulk, but not above a Foot
and a half in height from the ground, which though of the same hardness and
solidity with those above mentioned, has the top of it driven all over full of
Nails of the largest size. There is also a part of the Plain between
Marleborough and Caun, which being strewn all over with Stones of a Gray
color, is therefore called the Gray Weathers; the least of these Stones being
of a considerable bigness, and some very large; those of the ordinary size
seeming to be of about half a dozen or half a score Pound weight, one with
another; and here and there in some odd nooks, a little out of the Road, a
large Stone reared up on end, like those at Stone-henge, and sometimes not much
inferior in bulk. In Staffordshire there is a Market Town called Stone, from a
large heap of Stones cast up there, as a Monumental mark of Infamy upon Wulpher
the Mercian, who in this very place sacrificed to his Heathenish fury his two
Sons, Wulfald and Rufinus, for no other cause than their embracing the
Christian Faith. Near Burrowbridge, a little Town in Yorkshire, there are four
Stones of a very vast bulk, and Pyramidally shaped, supposed to be erected by
the Romans, in memory of some great Victory thereabouts obtained. Upon the
Hills near North-Tine in Northumberland, though Boggy and full of water, there
are great heaps of Stones, which some take for a Memorial of some great Battle
there fought. Near Enisham in the South part of Oxfordshire, there are Stones
called Roll-rich-stones, erected in manner of those at Stone-henge; which
certain fabulous Traditions have rendered to have been men so transformed; but
more certain History delivers them the Monument of a great Battle there fought
by Rollo the Dane. At Bosken in Cornwall there is another of 18 large Stones
erected, and placed in a circular figure 12 Foot distant each from the other; a
Trophy of some Roman or Saxon Victory. In the same County are other Monumental
Stones called the Hurlers, which fabulous Tradition will have to be the Stony
Metamorphosis of certain Humane Creatures, but common reason gives the same
conjecture of them as of the forementioned. The like may be said of two other
large Stones erected in St. Clares Parish, in one whereof there is an
Inscription in strange and intelligible Characters; other Remarks there are in
the same County formed by Nature only, as that Pile of Rocks one upon the
other, called Wring-Cheese, near the lowest of them, having the resemblance of
a Cheese hard pressed, by the accumulation of Rocks upon it; the other is a
very wonderful Rock called Main-Amber, near Pensans; this Rock lies upon lesser
Rocks, in such an exact equilibrium, that what the push of a Finger, can stir
and cause as it were to totter, not the greatest force imaginable is able to
displace. Likewise by Helford, is a vast Rock lying on the ground, the top
whereof being hollow, contains water which ebbeth and flows like the Sea.
Three Miles from Tunbridge, on the edge of Sussex, there lie scattered up and
down in a dry Sandy-ground, diverse Craggy-stones of a considerable magnitude;
the two biggest whereof standing close together, seem by the crease which
divides them in a straight line, as if they were but just sawed asunder. In the
same County, near Tenderden-Steeple, is a Stone, which by the falling of the
Rain, palpably gathers increase of bulk. At Exmore in Devonshire, are great
Stones erected, some in a Circular, some in a Triangular form, in memory
doubtless of some Roman, Saxon or Danish Victory. In Westmorland, near the
River Loder, there are Pyramidal Stones pitched for a Mile together, some 9,
some 14 Foot thick. At Salcelds upon the River Eden in Cumberland, is a
Monumental Trophy, consisting of 77 Stones, called by the Inhabitants Long-Meg
and her Daughters; one of which Stones alone, called the Long-Meg, being 15
Foot high from the ground, all the rest but 10. On the Hill called
Mindgate-Morgan in Glamorganshire, there is a Monument superscrib'd with a very
fatal Character; for it has been received from those that live thereabout,
that whoever reads it shall die soon after, if there be not a fallacy herein,
viz. That the Character is so strange and uncouth that no man is able to read
it.

Some places are noted for Stones of another kind, that is to say, whose Rarity
consists in the unusualness of their Figure. At Alderly in Glocestershire, upon
the top of certain Hills are found Oysters, Cockles and Periwinkles of solid
Stone; and at Puckle-Church in the same Shire, there is a Vein of Blew-stone,
consisting of several Stones, Smooth, Square, and about half a Foot thick, as
it were Artificial and ready cut out fit for work; they lie about seven or
eight one upon another, as it were in beds very near, contiguous to each other
for about the length of a Perch. And at Lassington in Glocestershire, there is
plenty of that which we call the Star-stone, being of the figure of a Mullet,
or what we commonly picture for a Star, of a Gray color, and of the
circumference of a single Penny, but the thickness of half a Crown; they stick
together in Columns of about three or four Inches long, and being singly put
into Vinegar, they naturally move and tend toward a Unition. Near Sayworth in
Wiltshire, are Stones that have a very near resemblance of Cockles. In a Town
called Cainsham, in the Road-way between Bath and Bristol, and in the Highway
thereabout, there are Stones frequently to be seen wreathing in a Spiral form
like Snails; this Town is commonly Nick-nam'd Smoaky-Cainsham upon this
occasion: Some years since one of the Townsmen standing at his door with Tears
in his Eyes, and being asked by one of his Neighbors that observed him as he
passed by, what the cause of his Grief was, answered, That there was so great a
Smoke in his house that he was not able to endure to stay within doors; When in
truth he had been newly beaten by his Wife: Whereupon Travelers now and then
to make themselves Sport, will ask, Whether that Town be called
Smoaky-Cainsham: But the wiser sort of those that ask this question, prepare at
the same instant to put on to a more than ordinary speed, for fear of some
Hostility from the good Women of the place. At Whitbay in Yorkshire, are Stones
of a Serpentine Figure: Also in the Stone-Quarry at Kingham in Somersetshire.
On Rosemary-Topping a Hill in Yorkshire, are Stones found in the shape of
Sea-winkles and Cockles: At Huntly-Nab in the same County, at the roots of the
Rocks, are Stones as perfectly round as any Ball, in which broken, are the
shapes of Stony-Serpents, all but the head. Of the Caves of England, those of
principal remark are, First, Ochy-hole near Wells in Somersetshire; it is a
Cave of large extent into the earth, and in which, those that have made the
farthest Incursions, are said to have discerned many Rivulets and Caverns, or
hollow Recesses. Secondly, A Cave very much talked of, under an Old Castle in
the Peak of Darby, commonly called the Devils Arse in Peak; there is a strange
story told by one Gervasius, of a Swinherd belonging to one William de Penerel,
sometime Lord of the Place. This Swinherd having lost a Sow great with Pig, is
said to have entered in earnest quest thereof into the mouth of this Cave, and
passing through several obscure Nooks and windings, to have come at length into
a spacious Field, where among a company of Reapers he found his Masters Sow
which had newly Pig'd; and making his Case known to the chief person in Office
there, brought back his Sow, together with her Pigs, returning the same way he
came. Thirdly, In the same County another Cave, called Eldenhole in the Peak
Forest, which shoots directly down into the Earth, and as far as 60 yards of
depth is to be seen into the mouth or entrance, on the top is about 30 yards in
length, and 15 in breadth, but downwards it straightens into a much narrower
space. Fourthly, Certain Caves called the Giants Caves, between great Badmin
and Lockington, on the border of Wiltshire. At a place called Oxenhall, not far
from Darlington in the Bishopric of Durham, there are three Pits of an
extraordinary depth, commonly called Hell-Kettles, supposed to be produced by
an Earthquake, which happened in the year 1179. And near Tilbury in Essex, there
are several Pits in a Chalky ground, which are judged to be no less than 12
Fathom deep. Also near Feversham in Kent, there are many Pits, which being
somewhat narrow at the top, and widening toward the bottom, are distinguished
into several Rooms or Apartments, and supported as it were with Pillars of
Chalk. At a House of the Marquess of Worcester's at Emsbury, I have been told,
that at the pulling down of an old Wall, the Laborers discovered a Cavity,
which upon search led to a large Cave, where there was found a Monument of
great Antiquity and Riches, which by the Character, and some other
circumstances, appears to have been the Tomb of Queen Guinever, Wife to King
Arthur: Near Kirby-Longdale in Westmorland, are many deep places like Caves.
Fifthly, At Aberbarry in Glamorganshire, there is a Cave at the bottom of a
Hill, the mouth whereof is a gaping Clift or Chink, into which, when the Wind
enters, there is heard a kind of harmonious noice, as it were of Cymbals: There
has been also heard from a Clift on the Seaside, near the Island Barry, a
sound as it were of Smiths at work, and this by the Testimony of Lilius
Giraldus. Lakes and Fountains there are very many among us, which have
something strange and extraordinary in them: Near Brereton in Cheshire, which
belongs to an Eminent Family of the same Name, there is a Pool, wherein the
bodies of Trees swimming are said to presage the Death of some of the Family.
There are two Lakes very near to each other, hard by St. Agnes-Hill in
Cornwall, of which it is credibly reported, that in the one of them Fish will
live and thrive, in the other not. In Lancashire near Furness-Fells, there is a
standing water, accounted the greatest in England, commonly called
Miander-Meer, being no less than 10 Miles in length, and all along paved with
stone at the bottom: It is said moreover, that a Fish called a Ohare, breeds
here only, and no where else. In Huntingtonshire there are several Lakes, (and
among the rest one called Wittlesmeer-Lake) which in fairest weather grow
tempestuous, and rage with violent surges like the Sea. In Staffordshire there
are two remarkable Lakes; of one, Necham delivers, That by its Roaring it
foretells things to come, the other is called Mahal, of which the Tradition
goes, That Horses when tired, drinking of the water thereof, becomes fresh as
ever: Of this Gervase of Tilbury makes particular mention. On the high Hills of
Carnarvonshire, there are two Meers of a strange nature (if report be true) for
one is said to produce a sort of Fish that has but one Eye; the other to have
a floatable Island, whereon no sooner any one sets foot, but it drives farther
off from the shore. There is also at Bala in Merionethshire, a Pool which never
fills by Land-floods, though rising never so high, but in tempestuous weather,
swells above its Banks. At Lynsavathan in Brecknockshire, is a Mere which is
said to have swallowed up a City, that once stood in the room thereof; through
this Mere runs the River Levenny, keeping its own stream entire and unmixed. At
Kilken in Flintshire, is a little Well which has a constant ebbing and flowing
like the Sea. At Gigglesworth in Yorkshire there are three small Springs, of
two whereof there is nothing of observable, but the middlemost has a constant
course of ebbing and flowing four times an hour; the difference between its
highest rise and lowest fall, being about eight Inches. Likewise in Derbyshire,
in the Forest of the Peak, is such another Spring ebbing and flowing 4 times
an hour, observing a constant and due revolution of its tides. On the River
Ogmore in Glamorganshire, there is a Well which every full tide in Summer time
is almost destitute of water, but at ebb is replenished, many times very near,
but never totally to an overflowing. Another there is at Carry-Castle in
Caermardenshire, which ebbs and flows. Another in Westmorland, near the River
Loder, which ebbs and flows several times a day. At Lemington in Warwickshire,
a Salt Spring arises at a great distance from the Sea. Near Kenet in
Wiltshire, the water breaking but of certain stones, is accounted a sign of
Dearth. The River Can in Westmorland has Cataracts, which by their fall
foretell either Rain or fair Weather. The rising of a Bourn near Croiden in
Surry, is said to presage Mortality. Near St. Albans in Hertfordshire, there is
a Brook called, which when it breaks out, presageth Dearth, or some other
Calamity. In a private man's Yard at Pitchford in Shropshire, is a Well whose
waters cast up a Skum of liquid Bitumen. In the Northriding of Yorkshire, are
Wells called Tingtong Wells, three Miles within the earth. The Petrifying Wells
and Springs of England are very many, nor is it worth the while to mention all
of them, the chief are in these particular Places; at Newenham or Menham-Reges
in Warwickshire: Three which are also of a Medicinal quality, as being strained
through Alum, at Lutterworth in Leicestershire. Near Knarisborough in
Yorkshire, the Well-Drepa, whose Waters distill from the Rocks that hang over
it. At Hodington-Hill near Oxford, upon the descent of the Hill. At Boxly Abbey
near Maidston in Kent; at Egerton in the same County. Nor are those Wells and
Springs to be forgotten, among the Memorabilia of Nature, whose Waters are of a
Medicinal virtue; the chief of this nature, not only of England, but even of
all Europe, for the virtue of the Waters, the Magnificence of the Structures
about the Wells, and the vast resort to them; are those famous Bathing Wells,
which give denomination to the City Bath, and which were first found out by one
Bladud, who is reckoned in the Catalogue of our Ancient British Kings, and
renowned in History (if it may be called History, and not rather Historical
Tradition) as well for Philosopher as King. Others there are, whose Waters
esteemed for their Purging quality, are generally carous'd, as Ebsham or
Epsone-Wells in Surry, those of Tunbridge in Kent, of Barnet in Hertfordshire,
and now of late of North-hall in the same Shire. Now I cannot but fancy that
there must needs be a very great advantage in this way of Physic, since those
who Evacuate so merrily with so much divertisement, so many as it were together
for good Companies sake, no doubt find a more effectual Operation, than those
who cooped up in a Melancholy Chamber, sup up a mixture of Nauseous and
uncouth Ingredients out of an Apothecaries Shop: Other places there are, not
altogether of no note for their Medicinal Wells, as Luckington in Wiltshire,
where there is a Well called Handcocks-Well, whose greatest Virtue consists in
the Cure of sore Eyes; having also this property, that its Water is cold in
Summer and hot in Winter: Eckington in Worcestershire, where there is lately
discovered a Medicinal Well, accounted of great Virtue for several Distempers.
Wallingborough in Northamptonshire, where upon the account of the Waters, Queen
Mary lay for several weeks. Lenisham in Kent, six Miles from London, where in
the year 1651. a Medicinal Water was found, which has been since much
frequented. Dulwich Wells within three Miles of London: And within the City
several, but the most noted, that at the Postern-gate by Tower Hill, and that
called Crowders-Well hard by Cripple-gate. Aleyceston in Huntingtonshire, where
there are two small Springs, one whereof being fresh, is accounted good for the
Eyes; the other a little Brackish, for Scabs and Leprosy. Buxton in Derbyshire,
where within the compass of 24 Foot, there arise out of a Rock from under a
Square Structure of Freestone 9 Springs, whereof one only is cold, all the
rest very warm: But among all these, it would be an unpardonable oversight to
pass by unmention'd, that famous Well of St. Winifrid, commonly called the
Holy-Well in Flintshire, formerly much frequented, partly by way of Pilgrimage,
partly for the great Virtue it was reputed to have in the Cure of many
Maladies, through the easy Faith, no doubt, and fond Credulity of the deluded
Vulgar who are always apt to pay high Adoration and ascribe miraculous Cures to
the Bodies; ^elicks, or any Memorials of persons recommended to them for
Saints; for here the Tradition goes, that the Virgin Saint Vinifrid being here
Beheaded, a Fountain immediately sprung up, as if the Earth bewailing her
Martyrdom, burst forth into a ^ood of Tears; and the Pebble-stones at the
bottom of the said Fountain being observed to be of a Reddish color, we are to
suppose that they retain to this day, the tincture of the Virgins Blood: Those
Springs and Waters that are on the top of high Hills, must be allowed to have
something of Rarity in them, in regard to those that are not sufficiently
versed in the knowledge of natural Causes and Productions, it may seem
wonderful, that the Water should rise so high above the common Surface of the
Earth: Particularly on the high Hills of Carnarvanshire, are two Meers: Also a
Spring on the top of MoilenlyHills in Denbyshire. Likewise among the Wonders or
Rarities of England, may be reckoned those Ditches, which stand yet as
Monuments of the Art and Industry of our Forefathers. First, That on
Newmarket-heath, which is commonly called the Devils-Ditch. Secondly, Wansdike
in Wiltshire, a work of many Miles extent, cast up in memory of a Battle
between the Mercians and West Saxons. Thirdly, Clough d'Offa, or Offa's- ditch,
a work not inferior to the former mentioned, and much upon the same occasion
made.

Of the Populacy of the English Nation.
THe Populacy of a Nation is best estimated from the number of its Towns and
Cities: The Kingdom of England proportionably to its circumference is scarce
inferior to any Kingdom or Country of Europe (which is also accounted the the
most Populous of all the four parts of the World) except France and the
Low Countries; which last being accounted no bigger in compass than Yorkshire,
is judged to contain as many Towns and Inhabited places, as ten times the
Circuit thereof in most other Countries, and to some much superior,
particularly Spain, late esteemed the most considerable Monarchy of
Christendom, and that it continues not so to this day, we may in a great
measure im^^te to the paucity of people in that kingdom; for doubtless there is
nothing that conduces more to the Strength, Grandeur, Prosperity and Riches of
a Nation, than the Populousness thereof, especially where Industry is in the
least encouraged, and Idleness discountenanced. Wherefore that Nation that will
ever hope to flourish, ought to use all means and endeavors possible for the
increasing of its People, and to avoid as much as may be all occasions of
Depopulation. The principal causes of the Dispeopleing of Spain, which
according to the Testimony of several Creditable Authors, has been Anciently
much better Peopled than at present; have been first the multitude of
Monasteries and Religious Prisons, those Receptacles of forced Chastity, and as
they are ordered Impediments of the Worlds Lawful Increase: Next the Violent
Expulsion of the Moors out of Spain, after that by a long established
settlement, and being habituated to the same Customs, Manners and Religion,
they were become as it were one Body with the rest of the People. Lastly, Those
vast Colonies sent out of Spain to maintain and possess the ample Conquests, or
rather Ambitious and Bloody Invasions and Depopulations made by the the
Spaniards there. The Cities and Market Towns of England, are in number 607. to
which the rest of the Borough Towns, that is, such as send Burgesses to
Parliament, and all the Inhabited Villages (whereof some are conderable) being
added, make above 10 times the number, so that all the Parishes of England and
Wales, are reckoned 9285. and doubtless within the said circumference, which is
generally computed to be about 1352 Miles, might be very well comprehended five
times as many Towns or Places of Habitation, if all the Forests, Chaces, and
unimproved vast Heaths and Commons, were taken in and improved to the best
advantage.

It is not to be wondered at, that next to being born under a Happy Climate, the
living under a Happy Government, the greatest advantage and Strength of a
People, is to be numerous, proportionably to the extent of Territory they
possess. Since in the first place it is apparent enough, that in a well
Inhabited City, the People must needs be so much the better able to defend
themselves from any Force or Opposition. Next, if it be a place of any Trade,
take any particular number of what Trade soever, and it is not to be imagined
that they should be e're a whit the poorer, but rather the richer, than if the
Inhabitants had been fewer: For admit them of the same Trade or Employment, a
profitable and corresponsible Trade is the more lively and vigorously carried
on by many hands; and suppose them of several Occupations, the circulation of
Money from the one to other, helps all in general. Though it is true, that in a
straggling Town or City, whose parts lie disjoined and far asunder; the people
however considerable in number, cannot be so assistant to each other in mutual
Aid, Society or Commerce, as in a regular and well compacted City: So likewise
in a Kingdom, that Prince who has never so large an Empire, yet if thinly
Peopled, or divided into several parts remotely distant, and interrupted from
mutual intercourse by long Voyages of Land and Sea, cannot be looked upon as so
powerful a Prince, as he that has the like number of People in one entire and
united Dominion. Certainly no Monarch of the World, much less of Christendom,
(whoever he be that has added most to his Empire by never so many new made
Conquests) can pretend to so large a share or portion of the Earth, as the King
of Spain, who nevertheless (as the transactions of a few late past years have
made appear,) has born but his fourth part with other Princes and States, in
opposition to a Prince far inferior to him in Jurisdiction; and what should be
the reason of this, but that his Dominions lie so remote from each other, and
his Kingdom of Spain, which his Residence there chiefly enables, is the least
Peopled of all the rest, and his Viceroys of Peru and Mexico (the possession
whereof has been main occasion of Impoverishing Spain of its people) are in
effect, setting aside the Title, as great Kings as himself; nor much less are
those of Naples, Sicily, Millain, and what remains of Flanders, so that he
seems in reality King of Spain alone, and of the rest of his Dominions, but in
Title only: And to come a little nearer the matter, if all the Kings Subjects
in New England, Virginia, Maryland, etc. were planted in those unpeopled
Regions of this Island (their Native Soil) which are more than large enough to
receive them, there is no doubt to be made, but that they would be more capable
of serving their King, than they can possibly be at such a distance, thus
transplanted to the other end of the World: To be short, no Rational man will
deny, but that that Prince, who from a Territory no larger than the County of
Kent, is able to bring 100000 men into the field, is no less Potent than he who
from a Territory 20 times as large is able to raise a not much greater number;
and so much the more, by how much he levies them with less Trouble and Charge.
That Sovereign Conquers best, who wins the hearts of his people by Moderation,
Justice, good Government, and wholesome Laws. He best plants Colonies, who
maintains a flourishing Trade to Foreign parts; he best inlarges his
Territory, who husbands his People to the best advantage, and consults best for
their Preservation and Increase; hereby approving himself all this while a true
Christian Prince, not in Name only, but in reality no less; and upon this
score, let the World judge, whether our Defensor Fidei have not a just Title to
that of Christianissimus also. When as for any Potentate or Grandee of the
World, Pontifical or otherwise, to grasp at Power and Empire by War, Bloodshed
and Rapine, though under never so spacious a pretense, even propogating the
Faith it self, and at the same time to take upon him the Name of Christian,
must needs be the highest affront to Heaven, and shame to Religion imaginable.
The Style of Christian Cutthroat, (for that must necessarily follow) implying
a cnntradiction not to be reconciled by all the art of Sopistry and Jesuitism;
since he that has but heard of the Christian Religion, cannot be ignorant that
Peace and Charity are the very root and foundation of Christianity, and that
Religion under what Title soever, which is otherwise grounded, is to be
abhorred by all sober men. The Creator said to the Earth at the beginning,
Increase and be Replenished: The Destroyer has been saying to the same Earth
from the beginning, from Age to Age; be ruined, laid wast and Dispeopled by
humane Slaughter. Now how far the parallel will hold between the greater, and
Man the lesser World, as to the necessity of Purging and Bleeding; and whether
it be so wholesome, as some would have us think, that the superfluous blood of
the World should be let out by the Phlebotomy of War, we shall wave the inquiry
at this present; only I am of opinion, that it would be better to leave the
Physicking of the World to the great Physician thereof, than that man upon man
should so often practice his Fatal Chyrurgery. There is sufficient reason to
believe that those frequent Inundations of People, those numerous swarms of
Cimbrians, Teutones, Longobards, Huns, Goths and Vandals, which Scythia in
former times poured out into the milder Regions of Europe, were not so much the
Luxuriance and offscouring of an over-peopled Nation, (since not any one
denomination of Country besides, takes up so large a part of the earth, or has
so many vast unhabited Vacancies) but a kind of agreement among certain numbers
of men to carve themselves out better Commons than their own Country afforded;
and throw off the Scythian Frost and roughness, by the Warm Sunshine of
Gallia, Spain and Italy. Now to come closer to the design of our Discourse:
Three things are to be considered. First, Whether this Nation have not been in
former Ages more Populous than at present. Next, what the occasion of this
Dispopulation has been. Lastly, The means of restoration to pristine Populacy,
or at least of Replenishment in some degree. The first consideration is
answered by the second: There is no question to be made, but that the
complicated Invasions of Romans, Saxons and Danes (especially the last so
dreadfully Barbarous) was the Destruction of a World of People, and the
Demolishment of many Towns and Cities; and after the Norman Conquest, the
Bloody Civil Wars amongst us; first of the Barons, next of the two Roses: As
for the Norman Invasion it self, it occasioned indeed no great matter of
Devastation, since except a few inconsiderable Insurrections that happened
afterward, the business was decided by the dint of one Battle, and happily the
Conqueror had not been sorry, had more of the English fallen in that quarrel;
since, like a true Stepfather and Foraign Invader, more than like a Native
Father of the Country, he could find in his heart to lay waste 28 Towns and
Villages, to make a large habitation for wild Beasts. The last and main
consideration, is how to repair this loss of People; shall we call the English
of America back to their Native Soil? or shall we invite the Industrious, or
the Distressed of other Nations to come over and live among us? or shall we
endeavor to People the Nation better with those People, if I may so call them,
we have already; that is, turn Drones into Bees, and two Legged Cattle into
Men? The first I take altogether to be Impracticable and Irrational to go
about; for it would be an endless thing for such multitudes of People to unfix
themselves from their settled Imploys and Habitations, and to be put to remove
their Effects back to a Country now grown as strange and uncouth to them, as
any other Foraign Nation. The second, according to my poor judgment, cannot be
disadvantageous to this Kingdom, could it be well compas'd and well managed, so
as to give no distaste to the present Inhabitants; for it has been a general
and frequent Complaint, in my hearing, among some Tradesmen of London, that
Foraigners (especially these French Dogs, as they style them) come over, settle
themselves among us, and eat the Bread out of our Mouths. Nevertheless it is
certain, that in many Towns of England, as Canterbury, Norwich, etc. many
Families of Foraigners are well settled, exercise the Epidemick Trade of those
Places peaceably and prosperously enough, and without envy or disturbance.
Hospitality is a certain evidence of a good Nature and Generous Inclination;
and it has been formerly, and doubtless still is in a great measure, the
particular Credit of the English Gentry, to keep Plentiful Houses, on purpose
to Entertain Strangers, give Shelter to benighted Travelers, and Succor all
persons in Distress: And as among particular persons, no man but an Indigent
Wretch, or Ill-natured Churl, will deny Relief to a person, that through real
and remediless want makes application to him. So likewise among Nations, that
People that refuses the Accommodation of their Country to their supplicant
Neighbors, who unjustly Banished their own Native Land, or driven, out by
Persecution and Tyranny, fly to them for Refuge, must needs be the Inhabitants
of a Beggarly and Unhospitable Soil, or be themselves a sort of Inhumane and
Savage-Bores. Our Kingdom, God be thanked, is sufficiently Fertile; our Natives
not accounted Ill-natured, and for Room we have not only to spare, but within
the whole Circuit of England enough, as we have said before, to contain a far
greater power of People twice, if not thrice the number: So that an accession
of peaceable Strangers can be no injury, may be a considerable benefit to us;
so that in being Charitable to others, we shall be no losers our selves; and
never was there so important and seasonable an occasion offered as now, for the
receiving of Foraigners among us; since never did any persecuted people so want
our Entertainmen and Succor, as at this time, these our Protestant Neighbors,
who in their own Native Country, and among the Professors of Christianity, are
denied that Protection, which living peaceably, they could not doubt of among
the severest of Turks or Ethnicks; and all this for no other reason, then
denying to fall down before the obtruded Idol, as the Israelites were dealt
with in the days of the Tyrant Nebuchadnezzar: But by Divine Providence it
falls out happily to be at a time that England is governed by the most Just and
Benevolent of Princes; who out of his Concernment for the Protestant Religion,
and that innate Generosity and Clemency wherewith he delights to oblige all
mankind, has by an Order of Council of the (...) of September this present
year 1681. promised all those that shall come over, such ample Privileges and
Immunities, as will much soften and allay their present Afflictions, and in a
great measure compensate for their being forced to abandon their Native
habitations. The last cannot be reasonably judged unfeasible, and is certainly
the most absolutely necessary, since those many thousands of Unimployed
persons, burdens of the earth, who presume they were only born to Eat and
Drink, are no better than so many Ciphers, being perfectly lost to their
Country: Nay which is worse, they may justly be reckoned as so many Vermin and
Noxious Animals; for Idleness it self cannot always subsist in its own station,
but oftentimes is forced upon Action, but it is the worst part of Action,
Mischief. As admit a Nation never so thinly Inhabited, and yet a Million of
those Inhabitants prove utterly useless and unprofitable, that Nation may well
be said to be too Populous by that Million: Insomuch as Cutpurse, Pick-pocket,
House-breaker, Highway-man, and whatever besides can be imagined mischievous,
are but the several Metamorphoses of an Idle Liver; and thus Idleness tends to
a more fatal kind of Depopulation: The unworking person indeed, who in some
sense may be said to be no person, but dead to the service of his Country, yet
is capable of being quickened and inspired with the life of Action; but the
worker of Iniquity, who is commonly the result of the unworking Person, takes
courses which tend to an irrevivable Destruction. The first is but that
Malefactor in Posse, which the Thief and Robber is in Esse; and doubtless were
the Potential Maleficence, which is Idleness, severely inquired into, and
regulated by the Discipline of Law and Government, so many of the Kings
Subjects would not yearly at every Session and Assize, as Essential
Malefactors, be made sad Examples of Justice, and cut off from the Land of the
Living, to which in this World there is no return. But what has been said all
this while of the unworking Person, (whom to compel to work, that he may be
kept from Starving, and restrain from Stealing, that he may be restrained from
the Gallows, is no Injurious, but Charitable part of a Magistrate) it is to be
understood only of those narrow Soul'd Loiterers, who being not worth a Groat
in the World, choose rather to go squandring up and down Beg, Filch and be
Lowsy, than Honestly to get their Bread by cleanly Industry and wholesome
Labor: Whereas for him that has enough to Live on, who shall hinder him, if
he please and have the Conscience, to be Idle and good for nothing at his own
Charges: As for those who are great in Money, Lands, or High Offices, great
also are their Privileges; for the World has generally a very great favor
and respect for such as flourish and are prosperous in it, (as well as contempt
for the Poor and Unfortunate) and except they shall unfortunately happen to
become Envy'd-Favourites, will be apt to have a favorable excuse for
whatsoever is either omitted or committed by them. However, there is a real
merit that cannot be denied them, which is, that they have wherewithal to be
serviceable to their King and Country: A Rich man, merely as a Rich man, must
needs be acknowledged a useful person in his Generation, especially if his
Heart be answerable to his Purse, or however where something is to be had,
there is a possibility of obtaining: On the other side, though it be just and
rational to give Law to those who will not give Law to themselves, to compel
men to their own as well as the public good, to work that they may not Starve,
to do well, that they may not suffer for doing ill. It is not yet so consonant
to reason, that any one should be forced to performance, though of things never
so just, above Ability, or to make satisfactions out of nothing. That the Idle
and Industrious alike, to satisfy the rigorous Justice of a Self-loving
Creditor, should for being Idle or Unfortunate, be condemned to perpetual
Idleness and Misfortune, and for no other cause, than not working
Impossibilities, be constrained to lie starving and stinking to death in a
loathsome Gaol, is a piece of Judiciality. I do not understand, and I verily
believe, that it is no less unjust, for any one to be Cruel and Rigorous in the
exacting of his Own from him that Has not, than for him that Has, to forbear
the payment of what he Owes; who also, if not willing of himself, may and ought
to be made so by force and rigor: Which may be inflicted otherwise than by
Confinement, for a Prison is least a punishment to those that most deserve it.
To conclude, a too rigorous procedure either to Death or Imprisonment, seems an
over-acting in Justice, and as it were tending much alike toward a kind of
Depopulation; there being no great difference between not to be at all, and not
to be at Liberty; the first totally, the second after a manner, depriving the
World of those whose Lives and Liberties might happily have been usefully
enough, spared for the Commonwealth.

Of the Manufactures of England.
MAnufacture is to the Body Politic, what Exercise is to the Body Natural,
viz. Prosperity to the one, Health and Soundness to the other; Ildleness being
alike pernicious to both, and causing to both alike Debauchery of Manners,
Distemper and Beggary. There are few Nations in Europe, as well a mother parts
of the World, wherein some particular Towns are not particularly Eminent for
some or other Manufacture, as in Andalusia a Province of Spain, Corduba for the
curious Dressing of Leather, which is thence called Cordovan-Leather; in
Biscaia Bilboa for the making of excellent Tempered Blades, Faenza in Italy for
fine Earthen Ware, Venice for that rare sort of Drinking Glasses, which are
thence called Venice-Glasses; which Art of Glass-making, is by a late Discovery
from thence, Improved to a very great height in England, though we cannot bring
Glasses to that perfection, for want of those Materials which are only to be
had in those, viz. two sorts of Plants called Gazul and Subit, out of whose
Liquified Ashes the right Venice-Glasses are blown. The most general
Manufacture of England, is that which of all others is certainly the most
useful and profitable, and which from Ancient time has in a measure conduced
to the Wealth and flourishing Estate of the Nation; that is to say, the Woollen
Manufacture, or the making of Woollen Cloths or Stuffs, which being encouraged
and rightly managed, is the chief prop of our Trade and Commerce, and (till the
Fishery be set up, according to the Proposals of several Worthy Persons) the
chief Support and Honest Maintenance of the Poor, whom could there be work
enough found out universally to employ, it would be a happy means to take off
that Lewd and Sordid course of Vagabond Begging, which introduces all those
Thievish and unlawful practices, that bring so many daily to shameful and
untimely ends. The first Broadcloth (so called, because of the Broad-Looms
wherein it was wrought) made in England, is said to have been wrought by Jack
of Newbury, in the Reign of King Edward the Third. The first famous Clothiers
were the Webscloths and Clutterbucks in Glocestershire. For this Ingenious and
profitable Art or Mystery of Lanifice or Woollen-work, there is no place in
England more famed than the City of Norwich, which has for a long time
flourished by the making of Worsted-Stuffs, which being wrought here more
Curiously than elsewhere, are thence called Nerwich-Stuffs; which Work has
been brought to the greater perfection, by the Industry of several Dutch and
French Families, who have been here planted for several years. No Nation ever
loses, but gets by the Transplantation of Industrious Foraigners, who by
Interest and Converse, soon become one with the People among whom they Inhabit.
The Stuffs here vended (the chief Trade whereof, as also of Stockings, is to
London) are esteemed at 100000 l. per annum, which Stuffs are under the
Government of two Companies, the Worsted Company, and the Russel Company. The
Stockings at 60000 l. per annum. But there is another Town in this County,
which being called Worsted, seems to have been the first noted place wherein
these Stuffs were substantially made, in regard they thence took their
denomination. Kidderminster in Worcestershire drives a very Trade in the making
of certain Stuffs, which are thence called Kidderminster-Stuffs; and in the
same Shire the City of Worcester it self: And also Malmsbury for Woollen-Cloth.
In Warwickshire, Coventry; In Lancashire, Manchester is much Enriched by the
Industry of the Inhabitants, in making Cloth of Linen and Woollen. Taunton in
Somersetshire drives so great a Trade in Mixed and White-Serges, that there are
said to be sent up Weekly to London and other places, no less than 700 pieces,
a sort of them, besides a sort of course Bays; in the making whereof, there are
Weekly employed no less than 8500 persons. No less does Wakefield in the
West Riding of Yorkshire; Leeds also in the same County is accounted a
Wealthy. Town, by reason of its Clothing. Exeter by the quantity of Serges
there made, returns to London a 10000 l. a Week. Stroud in Gloucestershire, is
a Town not only full of Rich Clothiers, but is also particularly Eminent for
the Dying of Cloths, by reason of the peculiar quality of the Water for that
purpose: Teuxbury also in the same County, is very Rich in Clothing: Likewise
Sudbury or Southbourg in Suffolk; Hadly in the same County. Reading in
Bark-shire, which through the greatness of its Trade, is a very Wealthy Town;
and Newbury in the same County. So likewise Shirburn in Dorcetshire, upon the
same account: And also in Essex, Colchester, Dedham, Coxal, and other places,
abound in Bays, Says, and other new Drapery. Appleby in Cumberland is no less
Eminent for its strong Castle, and for being the place where the Assizes for
the County are held, than for its great Cloth Manufacture; the like is Kendal
in the same County.

Among the woollen Manufacture of England, may be reckoned the weaving and
knitting of Stockings, the use of which woven and knit Stockings has not been
in this Nation longer than about the beginning of K. James's Reign: It being
very memorable what Dr Fuller relates of one William Rider, an Apprentice at
the foot of London Bridge, over against St Magnes-Church, who seeing in the
House of an Italian Merchant a pair of knit worsted Stockings, which he brought
from Mantua, and taking special observation of them, made a pair exactly like
them, which he presented to William Earl of Pembroke, and they are said to be
the first of that sort worn in England, and thence-forward they became more and
more in use; so that for many years they have been very much, and are now
altogether worn, and are a great part of the Trade in most Places where there
is any thing of woollen Manufacture, especially at Norwich; yet Jersie
Stockings have for a long time had a particular name. The Next Place may
properly be allowed to our making of Bone-lace, which is the chief of the
Ornamentals worn in this Nation, though not so totally as before the
Needle-works came in fashion, which though brought to great perfection, yet
have obtained so much the less esteem, by how much those of Flanders, and the
Points de Venice in Italy, and Larron in France, came more in fashion, as all
foreign Artifices usually (especially the French) have ever the chiefest vogue
among our Gallants. So general is this Manufacture in many Parts of England,
that the Poor of whole Towns are almost totally employed, and in a great
measure maintained thereby: Particularly, Honiton in Devonshire is a noted Town
for his sort of Workmanship; as likewise Salisbury and Marlborough in
Wiltshire, Ouldny in Buckinghamshire, Amersham and Chesham in the same Shire,
Blandford in Dorcetshire; which last Place has been famous also for making of
Band-strings, and now Point-^aces, it is said, are much made there. It is
observed, that the only Thread made in England, till within a few years, was at
Maidstone in Kent.

Besides the Cottons of Manchester, the Tickin, Pins, Points and Laces of that
Place, have been thought not unworthy to be mentioned by several of England's
Topographers; so likewise the Gloves, Purses and leathern Points of Congleton,
a Market Town of Cheshire; the Pins of Aberford in Yorkshire. The making of
Ropes and Cables for Ships was heretofore not only especially eminent at
Birtport in Dorsetshire above all other places, but also so highly approved for
the goodness and curiosity of the Workmanship, that a Statute is said to have
been made for a time, ordaining that no Ropes or Cables for the King's Ships
should be made any where else; but that Act appears to have been long since out
of date, for there are great Rope-yards belonging to all the Ship-docks of
England, particularly at Deptford there are very famous and large ones.

Smiths-work, whatever it is at present, has been heretofore peculiarly
attributed to the Artists of Salisbury in Wiltshire, Bremicham in Warwickshire,
Chedder in Somersetshire, Sheffield in Yorkshire, Malton in the same Shire, and
Walsal in Staffordshire; particularly Salisbury is commended for Razors;
Bremicham and Sheffield for Blades of Knives; Chedder for Teasels or
Instruments used in the dressing of Cloth; Malton for Instruments used in
Husbandry; and Walsal for Bits and Snaffles for Horses; moreover this last Town
is noted as well for Pewterers as Smiths. But by the way, the mention of Knives
has brought to mind a just occasion of admiration, that is, since the English
have been observed, and not without just cause, to be a good stout eating
People, there being more substantial Joints of Beef and Mutton, etc. consumed
among us, than perhaps in any part of the World besides, how it should come to
pass, that we should be so tardy in the Art of Knife-making; or what Invention
we had in former days, to avoid those Indecencies at the Table, which the want
of Knives must in all likelihood be the cause of: For it is credibly reported,
that one Thomas Matthews living on Fleet-bridge, was the first that made Knives
in England, which was in the 5th year of the Reign of Q. Elizabeth.

The best Tobacco-pipes, for neatness of shape and form, and for a curious
shining gloss, are made at Ambresbury, vulgarly called Emsbury in Wiltshire,
about a mile or two from Stonehenge; they are commonly called Gantlet-Pipes
(having the mark of a Gantlet impressed on the flat bottom of the Bowl) from
Mr. Hugh Gantlet, who was the first that brought them to this perfection.

There are also several edible and potable Works of Art, which may in my
opinion properly enough come under the Head of English Manufactures. The
Coagulation of Milk into the Consistence of Cheese, is said to have been the
first Invention of the Osci, an ancient People of Italy; but whence or from
whomsoever proceeding, this sort of artificial Food is the most common and
universal, in all Parts of the World where the most rational and civil way of
Eating is in use. Of all the Shires of England, Cheshire for this kind of
Edible, may, I judge, be allowed the Bays, above all other Parts, at least of
this Kingdom; and for ought I know, a true Cheshire Cheese, if rightly valued,
may stand in competition with the Parmesan of Italy, the Angelot of France, and
the Full-moon of Holland, only with this pre-eminence reserved to the last,
that but for the bigness, it might serve as well for the Bowling-green as the
Table. Suffolk in this particular challenges the next place, but doubtless in
respect rather of quantity than quality; for this County furnishes with Cheeses
not only several other Parts of England, but also Spain, France and Italy; a
lean Traveller may possibly be thought able to endure a long Journey better
than one that is plump and fat. These are the two principal Cheese-Counties of
England; but in other Counties, this Pretension is fixed to particular Places,
as in Somersetshire to Chedder beforementioned, the Cheeses whereof are of
that repute, as to be frequently, preferred even before those of Cheshire;
Opinion and Imagination are two great things.

In Warwickshire, Banbury has a Name both for Cheeses and Cakes, the
justification of which Name is best left to the experienced taster of both. For
Sugar'd-Cakes, Shrewsbury is without controversy allowed to bear away the Bell
from all other Places. But to save the Reputation of the Cake-makers of other
Parts, this Super-excellence is attributed to the nature of the Severn-water in
that Place. Other Places there are that challenge their Peculiars of this
nature, but the most proverbially eminent are the Whitepot of Devonshire, and
Dumpling of Norfolk.

Nor must the Potables of England be altogether forgotten. For Ale, Derbyshire,
and particularly Derby-Town; also Hull, Northdown, and Sandbitch, and Weably
afore-mentioned, are most especially famed; for Sider, all Gloucestershire,
Worcestershire and Herefordshire; for Metheglin, Shropshire, Herefordshire, and
some Parts of Wales.

To the Manufactury of England, may not unfitly be added an account of those
curious Arts and Inventions, which are now flourishing in this Nation, whether
newly, or for some Ages last past. And among these, the first and principal is
the excellent, and by some highly applauded, and by others most condemned, Art
of Printting. This noble Invention, in many respects useful, and no way so
pernicious as some would have it thought, was first exercised by William Caxton
Mercer, who in the Reign of K. Edw. the IV. kept his Printing House in
Westminster-Abbey, by the permission of Simon Islip Abbot of Westminster; and
the first Book set forth, some say, was Tully's Offices; others say, a Book
treating of the way of playing the Game at Chess.

The next Invention appearing here among us, must be allowed little less
ingenious than the former, but wonderfully more capable of doing mischief, I
mean, the truly black Art of Gunpowder, the swarthy Invention of a swarthy
Monk, and possibly by the Inspiration of the Prince of Darkness. Yet one thing
is worthy to be observed, viz. that since the discovery of this gloomy Drug,
whatever destruction has been committed by wholesale, something of amends
has been made by retail: For whereas in former Times, when the Bow, Lance and
Javelin were in use, History makes nothing of 40 or 50000 slain in the Field;
now that the Musket, Dragoon and Pistol came in fashion (even with the Cannon
to boot) it is a great matter to hear of the fall of 10 or 20000. besides, as a
Member sometimes is not ill lost to save a Man, so in greater Bodies, a House
may be better spared than a whole Street or Town, which deliverance nothing but
Gunpowder can effect. But then against this benefit may be opposed the
springing of Mines, to blow up Castles, Forts and Cittadels, merely for
destructions sake.

It is not to be doubted, and it appears from Histories, that the Chariot has
been known in England as well as in other Parts of the World time out of mind;
but the use of those portable Houses called Coaches, which at this day being
increased to a vast multitude, make such a clutter in the Streets of London, to
the great disturbance of the poor Foot-Passenger, is said to have first
commenced about the year 1556. till when, it is to be presumed, that great
Persons seldom stirred out but in fair weather, whereas now all Seasons for
Visits are alike; otherwise the Cavalcade of Princes and Nobles on Horseback,
may doubtless afford the Beholder as comely a Spectacle as a long train of
Coaches. Together with the Coach, or not long after, I guess, came in the
Coaches Epitome, the Sedan, more elegantly styled a Chair, a much more easy
sort of passage, as performed not by draught but carriage, and that by the more
rational sort of Animal. But there is another kind of moving Domicil of much
later date, called a Calesh, which seems like a Coach cut off in the middle,
wherein commonly the Driver and the Driven is one and the self-same person.

Watches, and other horary Motions of that nature, it is certain, came out of
Germany, and according to the best conjecture, somewhat more than a 100 years
since. The principal Artists of this kind mentioned are Janus Torrianellus, and
Cornelius van Drebble; but since all kind of automatous Motions by Clock-work
have been wonderfully improved by those of our own Nation, particularly Mr
Davie Mell, besides his excellent judgment and fancy in Musical Compositions,
and his great performance on the Violin, above all others of his Time, (for
within these 20 years, the very quintessence of that Instruments Music has
been extracted, as being chiefly in fashion) was so prodigious an Artist in all
Mechanic Motions by Clock-work, that if any one since has equaled him in
Art, he has at least fallen short in Fame.

But of all Inventions of this kind, the Pendulum of latest date, is also of
greatest curiosity and use, being generally acknowledged the Design of Mr Hook,
Fellow of the Royal Society, a Person of much Esteem among the Learned and
Virtuous, for his Mathematical and Mechanic Improvements, however Mr
Oldenburg, late Secretary to the said Society, made some Dispute in this
Matter, as asserting it of German Original.

All sorts of Optic Glasses and Tubes, as the Telescope, the Invention of the
noble Galileo, the Microscope, etc. have been of late years wonderfully
improved, especially by the Directions of the forementioned Mr Hook, Mr
Flamstead, and others of this most renowned Fellowship. But the first famous
Artificer of these Tubes and Glasses, was Mr Reeves in Long-acre, after whom Mr
Cock has continued the Employment with prosperous success and approbation. The
Barometer, Thermometer, Hydroscope, and such like Contrivances, for the
discovery of the Change of Weather, have certainly been the result of those
unwearied Endeavors and Enquiries, that have been made into the depth of
Natural Knowledge, since the foundation of this Noble Society. And among the
sagacious Enquirers into Meteorological Philosophy, Dr Goad, late Master of
Merchant-Taylors-School, must be allowed a principal place.

But for the Air-Pump, the rarest Invention ever found out for the proof of a
Vacuum in rerum Natura, it particularly owns the Honorable Robert Boil its
Inventor, who by his many Writings and Inventions, has been a Worthy
Contributor to the Advancement of Experimental Philosophy.

The Art of Torning, as it appears to have been not much less ancient in the
World than Sculpture it self, so doubtless it is not very Modern in this
Nation. But that curious Improvement of Torning, called the Rose-work,
doubtless claims here but an Ages Antiquity. The first celebrated Person for
Work of this nature, was Mr Reeve, the Brother of the abovementioned Artist in
Optic Glasses. And though this sort of Work has since been very frequent
among us, yet I cannot omit the mention of a Person, who from his own natural
Fancy and Ingenuity, has arrived to that perfection, as well in this as all
manner of Torning else, that he is judged by knowing Persons not to be
exceeded, if equaled, by any that have been bred up to the Art, Mr John
Gearie, living in St Anns-Lane in Westminster.

Our Sculpture in Stone appears plainly not to be of Modern Invention or
Discovery in this Nation, by the delicate Workmanship in several of our
Cathedrals and other Churches, and in the Schools at Oxford; and at this
present time it is not any way diminished, but rather improved by the Art and
Industry of several eminent Men, Mr Pierce, Mr Latham, Mr Pennel, etc.

But for Carving in Wood, never was any thing in England seen more curious and
exquisite, than the Workmanship of Mr Gibbons, his Majesty's Carver, and a
great Contributer to the Ornaments of the Royal Palace at Windsor.

Graving in Copper seems not to have been brought to any perfection in England
till this present Age. The first Person very eminent among us in this Art was
Mr William Faithorn, now living in Blackfriars; and since there have sprung up
several other ingenuous Artists in this kind, viz. Mr Loggan, Mr White, Mr
Sherwin, and others.

The best for Etching, not only in England, but perhaps in any other Parts, was
Mr Wenceslaus Hollar, who died here not many years since.

But that rough sort of Graving, or rather pecking upon Copper, called Mezzo
Tinto, has been used but lately, being either the Design or Encouragement of
his late Highness Prince Rupert.

There is also a peculiar Art in the graving of written Letters from the Copies
of the most exact writing-Masters. The first eminent in this way was Mr Cocker,
who was also himself a writing-Master, to whom, others that have succeeded,
have not been inferior; as Mr Sturt, who engraved the Copies of Mr Aires; and Mr
Elder, who engraved an ingenious Piece, entitled, Brachyarithmia, of Mr Edw.
Noon, Teacher of Writing and Accounts, at the Hand and Pen in Maiden-lane in
Covent Garden.

For Graving in Steel, never was any Man so famous in England as Mr Thomas
Rawlins, last Graver of the Mint both to his late and to his present Majesty;
the grand Excellency of whose Art was, his graving the Effigies of any one,
true and exact upon a small Letter-Seal.

As for Painting, our Nation can boast nothing like the Works of the great Sir
Anthony Vandike, who though born a Foreigner, died an Englishman. Nor has he
wanted several famous Successors; as Dobson, Fuller, Walker, Lilly, Greenhill,
etc.

The first Person famous among us for Painting in Miniature, was Mr Oliver;
after whom, Francis Clein and his Brother John had been the Prodigies of the
Age, had they lived. Mr Cooper's loss comes next to be lamented; the Persons
living are Mr Gibson, Mr. Flattman, etc. For Crayons or dry Colors, Mr.
Ashfield, lately deceased.

Scene-Paintings and Machines have not been known in England till within these
20 years; and the only eminent Men in this kind have been Mr. Streeter, and Mr.
Stevenson, some years since deceased.

In Music, it would be too tedious to determine, whether the Improvement or
Alteration has been greater. Certain it is, that several old English
Instruments are laid aside; as the Orpharian, the Polyphone, an Instrument
surely not to be despised, considering its rare Structure, and the Esteem had
of it by learned and therefore most judiciously Musical Persons of this Age,
viz. Sir Francis Prujean, and Dr. Rugely. The Stump, whereon about, an Age ago
Andrew Mark was famous for his rare performance. The Bandore, the Ghittern,
Cittern, etc. The treble Viol also is much out of doors, since the Violin came
so much in request. The Base and Lyra Viol, in the making whereof, Wroth was
without dispute the best Workman that ever wrought, keep pretty well in repute,
especially the first, in regard it cannot well be wanted in Consort. Nor did
ever any Age produce such wonderful Performers upon this Instrument as this
present Age; particularly, Pol-wheel, Theodore Stephkins deceased, his Son
Frederick, Mr. Young, Sir John Bolls of Scampton in Lincolnshire, Mr. Roger
l'Estrange, Mr. Smith, Mr. Gregory, etc. The Lute is not wholly laid aside, but
within these 20 or 30 years much neglected to what it was formerly,
notwithstanding the great Improvement of this Instrument among us within a 100
years, by reason of the diversity of Tunings received from France, some of
whose best Lute-Masters brought over not only these Harp-tunings, but
themselves also, and by their active Hands and airy Fancies, obliged the
Musick-lovers of our Nation with transcendant Harmony, viz. Goutier, Penel,
Merceur, Mesanges, Du Faulx, etc. after whom of our own Nation came Mr. John
Rogers, Goutier's Scholar, Captain Hill, Dr. No, Mr. John Hubbard, and Mr. John
Wootton now living. And no less famous in their kind, that is, for Workmanship,
were old Allaby, and Walter Johnson. But the fine easy Ghittar, whose
performance is soon gained, at least after the brushing way, has at this
present over-topt the nobler Lute. Nor is it to be denied, but that after the
pinching way, some good Work may be made of the Ghittar by such as Sir
Francesco Corbetto, Mr. Janvier, Signor Pedro, Mr. Wootton aforementioned, and
the like. Nevertheless the Theorbo, which is no other than an Arch-Lute,
keeping to the old Tuning, is still generally made use of in Consorts. And
there are yet among the judicious, who think it the most agreeable and becoming
Associate to vocal Music, remembering how nobly it sounded in the Hands of Dr.
Wilson, Mr. Henry Ferabosco, Mr. Edward Coleman, Mr. Alphonso Marsh lately
deceased, etc. Played on alone, never did it speak such harmonious things in
our English Climate, as when touched by the famous Dr. Walgrave, Physician at
present to his Royal Highness, to whom Mr. Shadwell comes nearest for an
excellent Hand. For Consort, our chief Theorbo-men at this day are Mr.
Brockwell, and Mr. Flower. The Organ cannot well be laid aside, as being an
Instrument of highest perfection, and the most proper of all others for
Cathedral Service. What Antiquity it challenges in our Nation is uncertain; but
as no Nation can boast of greater Masters than old Bull, Tomkins, Jeffreys, Dr.
Gibbons, Dr. Child, Mr. Matthew Lock, and at present Dr. Bleau, Organist to his
Majesty, Mr. Henry, Pursel, Organist to the Abbey, Mr. Michael Wise, Mr.
Francis Forcer, etc. so it has been wonderfully advanced of late years, by the
addition of several melodious Stops, the greatest Artist at present, not to
mention Pease, Burral, and others of late years, being Mr. Smith, living in the
So-ho. The Harpsicon is of late wonderfully improved by the Invention of the
Pedal, which brings it so much nearer to the Organ, that it only seems to come
short of it in Lungs. The greatest Master on it now living in our Region,
especially since the decease of Mr. Thatcher, is Mr. Disnier, and the greatest
Fabricator Mr. Howard. And here also may not unfitly be mentioned, that pretty
Fancy of a Musical Automaton, being a kind of Harpsicon, which by a
Clock-work-motion discharcheth a certain set number of Tunes, according as it
is wound up to this or that Tune. Of this sort of Automata, there is to be seen
a very neat piece of Art of Reedwork, at a House at St Mary-overs-Dock; the
Artificer thereof, Mr. Thomas Hill of Westminster, being a Person of remarkable
Ingenuity, as well Musical in respect of his performance, as Mechanical for
making of several other Instruments. His Pitch-Pipe, for the tuning of Musical
Instruments to consort; Pitch is particularly worthy note for exactness,
variety and curious Work, above any thing that is to be seen elsewhere of this
nature. The Harp is rather increased than diminished in repute; and though the
Welsh Gut-string formerly gave place to the Irish, Wire-string, by reason of
the masterly Hands of Mr. John Cob, and Mr. Lewis Williams, now the Spanish
Gut-string comes up with it, through the excellent Mastery of Mr. Maurice, Mr.
Evans, Mr. Bedhurst, Mr. Webster, Mr. Robert Grant, living with my Lord
Mountague, and for the Outlandish way of Playing, Mr. Arn. The Violin is now of
all others generally of highest esteem, and is indeed a very useful Instrument
in Consort, and now arrived to that perfection of performance, that it were
endless to enumerate all that have been of late accounted great Violin-Masters.
Wherefore let the mention of Farmer, Twiss, Ailworth, Ayrs, Claiton, Tomlins,
serve for all. The best Workmen for the making of this Instrument have been
accounted Comer, Raimund, Florence Barnet. Of Wind-Instruments, the Flageolet
within this 20 years, and since that the Flute, have been highest in vogue and
frequentest in use: The chiefest Performers on it being Mr. Banister, Mr.
Sutton, Mr. Young, Mr. Car, the chiefest Artisans, Mr. Scottny in
Lincolns-Inn-fields. But for all sorts of Musical Instruments in general, the
Violin, the Base and Lyra Viol, the Harp, the Ghittar, the Lute, (even the
Flageolet and Flute not altogether excepted) Mr. John Shaw, living near the
May Pole in the Strand, is acknowledged by the most skilful in Music of all
sorts, to be a Workman in a great measure superior to any that have been in
this Nation. Nor have the Cremona Violins or Loxmollar Lutes been lately of
such excessive prices as formerly. For Pegs for Lutes, Viols, etc. Mr. Bland is
reported the only Man at present that serves all the Instrument-makers in Town.

It is not very many years since the several sorts of fine Varnish have come
into knowledge and use among us, which give so beautiful a gloss to Musical
Instruments, Cabinets, Tables, Picture-frames, and the like; so that many of
our varnished Cabinets may vye even with those of Japan and China themselves,
their ways of Varnish being now not altogether unknown unto us, whereof the
rarest of all is accounted that of Ceo. The first Persons eminent for
Varnishing were Mr. Lilly, and Mr. Racket, since whom it is grown very common.
But that noble Lacka-varnish which imitates the Gold-colour, and has saved
much cost that was formerly bestowed in the guilding of Coaches, was brought
into England about 30 years since, by the learned Advancer of Learning and all
Noble Arts, and my best of Friends, Mr. Evelin, of Says-Court by Deptford.

The Bow-dy about 40 years since was brought into England by Kephler.

Our Tapistry-work, now equal to whatever the Attalick-Court could anciently
boast, was brought in hither by Sir Francis Crane, toward the latter end of K.
James his Reign, by the Encouragement of that learned Prince, who gave 2000 l.
toward the building of a House at Moreclack, where Mr. Francis Clein was the
first Designer.

Our Vasa Fictilia, or Potters-Ware, by the Art and Industry of Mr. Doight at
Fullam, are brought to that height of Curiosity, that our common Vessels may
easily outvye the Dutch, and the finest* come not much short of China it self.

The making of Glasses is said to have been begun in England, anno 1557. about
which time there lived at Chiddingsfold, a Person very famous for this Art,
which as it grew improved, the finer sort were first made at Crotchet-friers;
but the making of the Flint-Glass, which is the finest and clearest ever made
here, and very near, if not altogether equal to those of Venice, was first
begun by Mr. Bishop, and since carried on with good success by Mr. Ravenscroft.
There is now a Company of 12 Men of the Potters Trade, who are Directors of
this sort of Workmanship, chiefly exercised at present at the Savoy-House in
the Strand. But the first Glass-plates for Looking-glasses, Coach-windows, etc.
in England, were made at Lambeth, now about 10 years since, by the
Encouragement of his Grace the Duke of Buckingham, and the Direction of Mr.
Reeves afore-mentioned.

The first in England who cast brass Guns, viz. Cannons, Culverines, etc. is
said to have been one John Oaven; after him Peter Band a Frenchman, in the
first year of the Reign of K. Edw. the VI. cast iron Falcons, Falconets,
Minions, etc. but was exceeded by his Servant Thomas Johnson, who lived till
the year 1600.

In Gunsmiths-work there has been of late years discovered a very large
increase of Art and Ingenuity, as to the Locks and Barrels of Muskets,
Carbines, Pistols, and the like. In which sort of Artifice there have been many
excellent Workmen; whereof at this day, Mr. Shaw, and Giffard, Gunsmiths to his
Majesty, and Mr. Sharp, living in Exeter-street, are esteemed the chiefest
Artists of London, and by consequence, in all probability, of England.

Another principal branch of Smiths-work, is the making of Locks and Keys, in
which nothing, was ever seen so curious and ingenuous, as what is done at this
day by Mr. Wilkins.

Mathematical Instruments, as Compasses, Quadrants, Rulers, are most certainly
now more exquisitely made than ever. Herein Mr. Foster in Hosier-lane, and Mr.
Hays in Moor-fields, were lately the most celebrated Workmen; now Mr. Markham
in the Strand, and Mr. Win in Chancerylane.

The Projection of Globes, Spheres and Maps, is without controversy now more
exactly understood than formerly, through the Ingenuity first of Mr. Moxon, now
of Mr. Berry near Charing Cross, and Mr. Mordant in Cornhil. Nor is there
without all doubt in all things of this nature, a better Graver than Mr. Lamb.

And here may not unfitly be mentioned the new Invention of an Iron Pen, which
besides its lastingness, is equally fit for use with the best Goose-Quill
whatsoever: By Mr. Smith, Writing-Master to Christ-Church-Hospital.

Having spoken of Printing, it will not be unseasonable to intimate how much
Letter-founding has been advanced of late. S. Henry Savil's silver Character
for the printing of his Chrysostom, was much admired at that time; but of late
we have had many Books printed in very delicate Characters, both small and
great, especially the fine small Greek Character, in which several Greek Poets
have been printed at the Theater at Oxford, is so curious, that nothing can be
more, not excepting the fine small Prints of Amsterdam or Leyden.

It would be endless to reckon up all the new Allamodes of Cloths, Stuffs,
Silks, Ribbands, and the like.

But of the many curious Pieces in Wax-work, Straw-work, Acupiction in Silks
and Sattins, cutting of Paper, Cloth, or fine Leather, into exquisite Figures,
folding of Napkins into the shapes of Birds, Beasts, or Fishes, tho Ingenuity
of former Ages (as to most of these Artifices) has perhaps not received much
addition. Though in Wax there are to be seen very curious things of late
Workmanship, which possibly have arrived to utmost Improvement: For Imbossment
in Wax, Mr. Houseman was certainly the best Artist that has been known in
these Parts.

The rich Embroidery of former Times, as will appear to those, who visiting the
Houses of the old Nobility and Gentry, behold the pompous Furniture left by the
Ancestry of those Families, is, as I conjecture, not easily outdone, if
equaled, by any thing this Age can produce.

The Art of making fine white Thread, is said to have been brought into England
about the year 1670. by Mr. Joseph Allen, Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of
London, keeping a Thread-shop in Bishopgate-street, at the Golden Anchor near
Bethlehem, even to the value of 3 l. the pound, and vying with the Nuns Thread
of Flanders.

The Glassen Bee-hive is mentioned by my Ingenious Friend Mr. John Worlidge of
Petersfield, to have been the Contrivance of Mr. William Mew, Minister of
Easlington in Gloucestershire. He also mentions a wooden Hive of an Octangle
form, with a glass Window in one of the sides. This glassen Bee-hive, I
remember, about 30 years ago, was much talked of as a great Rarity, when the
late Bishop of Chester, Dr. Wilkins, had of them in his Garden at
Wadham-Colledg, whereof he was then Warden; both sorts are now sufficiently
common, but they are no where to be seen better ordered and more curious than
at Mr. Evelin's Paradise of a Garden by Deptford.

The Plow, though as ancient as Tillage it self; the Improvements are but of
late years: The chief whereof mentioned by Mr. Blithe and Mr. Worlidge, are the
single wheeled Plow and the double wheeled Plow, and the double Plow, which is
in the nature of two Plows joined together. Mr. John Houghton also (worthily
for his great Ingenuity and Industry) a Fellow of the Royal Society, in that
most useful Design of his, called, A Collection of Letters for the Improvement
of Husbandry, inserts an Invention of Thomas Llewellin, at the George in
Cateaten-street, for plowing with one Man and two Horses or Oxen, a greater
quantity of Land than can be performed at the same time with double the number
of Men and Cattle. He also in the same Sheet gives a large description of a
Malt-kill at Nottingham.

Engines of grand bulk, force and performance, are doubtless near as ancient as
whatever Art or Invention have produced, being of too great necessity to be
unthought of by any thinking or inventing People.

Cranes and Engines for the drawing up of Goods of great bulk and weight, such
as we have at the Custom-house, and such like Places, are mentioned in ancient
Authors.

Also in War, the Arcubalistae, and the Arietes or Battering-Rams, which
against the Walls of besieged Towns did more than multitudes of Men.

What the Antiquity is of Corn Wind-mills, is hard to determine whether in this
or any other Nation.

The Paper-Mill is certainly of no modern Invention, and it may be wondered
that in all this time Paper-making has not been brought to a greater height in
this Nation, it being judged very possible, that as good Paper might be made in
England, as any is brought over from France, Holland, or any other foreign Part.

The Powder-Mill cannot be of very long standing, since it is scarce 200 years
that Gunpowder it self has bounc'd and made a smoke in the World.

Moreover, of these grand performing Engines, there is a very great number even
of late Invention, of which I shall endeavor to call to mind at least the most
noted.

For the grubbing up of Stumps of Oak, there is an Engine called the German
Devil, which Mr. Evelin in his incomparable Treatise of Forest-trees, affirms
to have been made use of by a Noble Person of this Nation with that success,
that by the help thereof one Man was able to do more than could otherwise have
been done by 12 Oxen. He also in the same Treatise, p. 22. gives a description
of another Engine for the transplanting of Trees.

The silk-Stocking Frame is surely one of the most curious Contrivances of this
Age. It is said to have been first used at Nottingham, and was, as I have been
told, the seasonable Fancy of a poor Oxford Scholar, who to inch out the
slender pittance of a small Living he had thereabouts, was glad to make use of
his Wives manual Assistance; but that not sufficing neither to satisfy the
importunate Stomachs of an increasing Family, he prompted by Necessity, which
is the Mother of Art, as ancient Authors affirm, joined his Head to her Hands,
his Ingenuity to her Industry, and thence brought forth this rare Device, to
shorten the labor, and increase the profit of her Work.

The Saw-Mill or Engine for sawing of Timber is of Dutch Original, and about 25
or 30 years ago first brought in use among us, for so long it is since that on
the Thames over against Durham-yard was first erected. The Wire-Mill of Mr.
Mumma, a Dutchman, was first set up at Sheen within these 20 years.

All the Money coined in the Tower of London, almost ever since his Majesty's
Restoration, has been by an Engine or Coining-Mill, brought in by the Rotiers,
who thereupon became and so continue to this present, his Majesty's chief
Moneyers.

The Weavers Loom-Engine has not been in use many years in England, especially
the highest Improvement thereof called the Dutch Loom, brought in about 5 or 6
years since by Mr. Crouch, a Weaver in Bishopsgate-street.

A very useful Invention was that Engine called the Persian Wheel, for the
watring of Meadows, which lie uncapably of being overflowed. The first of these
Engines brought to any considerable perfection, was erected at the end of
Wilton-Garden, by the Direction of the abovementioned Mr. Worlidge,
Wood-Steward to the Earl of Pembroke, in the year 1665. who in his Systema
Agriculturae, takes notice of another Engine to the same purpose, called the
Horizontal Windmil. And in his Treatise of Sider, he describes the Ingenio or
rare Sider-Engine, a Contrivance doubtless very profitable for those that drive
a Trade in the making of this Liquor.

There is also very lately found out the admirable Water-Engine, for raising of
Ballas and towing of Ships. Yet as excellent as these Inventions are, and as
useful to the Public, by dispatching at one instant the tedious drudgery of
many Hands, yet there are not wanting high Clamours against them, as robbing
poor men of their Employments, and consequently of their Livelihoods; so hard
it is to find any Convenience totally exempted from Cavil and Exception. Even
the Quench-fire Engine, that most excellent and salutiferous Invention of Sir
Samuel Moreland, it is possible may be an Eyesore to such Neronian Tempers, as
love to see Towns and Cities on fire. However the World is obliged to this
learned Mechanic, as well for this as several other useful and ingenuous
Contrivances, particularly his Arithmetical Instrument, and his Stenterophonick
or Speaking Trumpet, the chief use whereof is to treat or parley with an Enemy
at a distance.

There is to be seen by all Lovers of Art, a rare Invention of Mr. Edgebury,
called the Horizontal Corn-mill, upon a piece of Land at Deptford, belonging to
my most Honored Friend Mr. Evelin junior.

It is now about 7 or 8 years, since a Printing-Press for the printing of
Callcoes, was set on foot by Mr. Mellish; but he soon desisting, the Design was
taken up by Mr. William Sherwin, living in Little-Britain, and ever since
carried on with great vigor and success.

To conclude: There remains yet to be spoken of one rare Engine, and in some
sense above all that have been yet mentioned, since it brings back Old Age to
Youth, and makes threescore and ten appear as fine and gay as five and twenty.
I do not mean simply the Perruke, or Frame of Artificial formerly worn, for
that may possibly be as ancient as the Emperor Carolus Calvus his Time, who
wanting Hair of his own, is reported to have called a Council of French
Barbers, to contrive an artificial Supplement of Natures Defect: But I mean,
that lofty towering Structure or Machine of Hair, so heightened and ornamented,
as it has been by Tonsorian Art and Industry, within these last 20 years, so
frounc'd, so curled in a 1000 amorous Annulets, so plump'd up, so streaming in
the Air like a Ships Top-gallant, that certainly never any Cincinnatus or
Capillatus whatsoever, could boast a natural Head of Hair comparable to this
artificial; much more may it be judged easily to outvye the ancient Median
Cidaris, the Persian Tiara, or the now Ottoman Turbant; and doubtless had it
been devised in Homer's Time, it would quickly have put out of countenance the
best of his (...).

THE MAGNIFICENCE OF ENGLAND.
THE Magnificence of England consists in the principal Towns and Cities,
Palaces Royal, and belonging* to several of the Nobility, Cathedrals, and other
Churches, Castles, Bridges, and erected Monuments.

The 3 principal Cities of England are London, York and Bristol. Besides which,
there are many other Cities and Towns of sufficient Note for pleasantness of
Situation and neatness of Building: As the Cities of Canterbury, Rochester,
Exeter, Salisbury, Gloucester, Worcester, Oxford, Bath, Durham, Lincoln,
Winchester and Coventry. The Towns of Ipswich, St Edmundbury, Maidston,
Feversham, Kingston upon Thames, Guilford, Lewis, Colchester, Buckingham,
Ailsbury, Reading, Cambridge, Southampton, Marlborough, Warwick, Shirburn,
Northampton, Leicester, Nottingham, Newark, Manchester, Wakefield, Boston,
Stamford, Barstable, Tavistoke, Taunton, Shrewsbury, Bridgenorth, Tewksbury and
Cirencester; besides several others which are to be mentioned among those
Places signalized by their several Remarks and Transactions.

London being at large described by Stow, Howel, and others, it will be
sufficient to name the Magnificences thereof, viz. The Cathedral of St Paul's,
destroyed by the late Fire, and now upon rebuilding; the stately Bridge over
the Thames; the Royal Exchange, splendid before, but now rebuilt far more
splendid; the New Bethlehem, or Bedlam in Moor-fields; Gresham-Colledge;
Sion-Colledge; the College of Physicians, now a very graceful Edifice; with
the Theater for Anatomy-Lectures, at the upper end of Warwick Lane; the Halls
belonging to the several Companies, most of them built much more to advantage
than formerly; Doctors Commons; and over against it, the Office of Armory,
toward Pauls-Wharf, near which, before the Fire, stood Baynards-Castle, an
ancient and noble House, sometime belonging to the Earls of Pembroke; the
several Inns of Court and Chancery, many of them wonderfully improved both as
to Structure and pleasant Permenades; the two Inns of Sergeants in
Chancery Lane and Fleetstreet, the latter whereof is amplifi'd into a larger
extent of Ground, and number of fair Houses; the Canal by the Fleet, cut
straight along from Holborn-bridge down to the Thames at Puddle-Wharf, with the
new built Bridge over it; the Hospitals of Sutton, called the Charterhouse; of
Christ-Church near Newgate; of St Bartholomews near Smithfield; Bridewel, once
a King's Palace, now a House of Correction; the Earl of Bridgewater's House in
Barbican; the Earl of Thanet's and the Bishop of London's Palace, commonly
called Peterhouse in Aldersgate Street; then between Temple Bar and
Westminster, a Street so full of Noblemen's Palaces, that there is scarce the
like in any one City of Europe, especially some years since, before several of
them were pulled down, out of whose Ruins nevertheless there have sprung up so
many little Towns as it were, pleasantly situate upon the Thames-side; those
pulled down are Essex-house, Exeter-house, out of part whereof there is built a
neat Exchange; part of Salisbury-house, Durham-house, and York-house, belonging
to the Duke of Buckingham; and now very lately Woreester-house; those standing
are Somerset House, which belongs to the Queen, and where she ofttimes has her
residence; the Savoy, once a Palace, but of late years made use of for an
Hospital of lame Soldiers; Bedford-house, part of Salisbury and Suffolk-house,
belonging to the Northumberland Family; near Westminster is the principal
Seat-Royal of England, his Majesty's most usual Place of residence, Whitehal,
built by Cardinal Woolfie, a Palace more of Convenience than State, excepting
the Banqueting House, a piece of Architecture, accounted parallel to the best
in Italy; and not to omit the Magnificences of Westminster, being so near; the
Cathedral and the Old Palace, which contains Westminster Hall, the largest Room
in Europe, the Parliament House, and other Courts of Judicature; from Whitehal
a pleasant Park leads to St James's, the Palace and usual residence of his
Royal Highness the Duke of York; on the other side of the Park, a neat House of
the Earl of Arlington, Lord Chamberlain of the King's Household; and near it
Tarthall, belonging to the late Lord Stafford; over against St James's, on the
Road toward Kensington, a noble House of the Duke of Albemarl, built by the
late Lord Chancellor, Earl of Clarendon; and near it Barkley-house,
Newport-house, and others.

Among the Buildings of later years, several noble Piazza's or Squares, some
not inferior to that of Piazza Navona at Rome. The first Covent Garden Square,
graced on two sides with lofty Portico's, on the other with the Prospect of
Bedford-Garden, on the fourth with the Front of a goodly Church. Next,
Lincoln's Inn Square, the largest of all. 3. Bloomsbury Square, opening to a
fair Prospect of Southampton-house, not far from which is an elegant new built
House of the Honorable Henry Mountague, late Ambassador to the Court of
France. 4. Leicester Square, on the one side whereof is the Prospect of
Leicester-house, adjoining to which is also Newport-house. 5. St James's
Square, whose each side is a Pile of most splendid Edifices. Lastly, That in
So-ho-Buildings, a very pleasant Square, having a large square Garden-plot, in
the midst adorned with Fountains, Statues, etc. This is commonly called
Kings-Square, for the Magnificence thereof.

York, the first City of Yorkshire, and the second of England, is a large,
stately, pleasant, rich, populous and well fortified City. The chief
Magnificences whereof, besides several beautiful Structures both public and
private, are the Cathedral, the Great Gate, the Stone Bridge over the Ouse,
having one only but very huge Arch, the Princes House, called the Manor, and
a famous Library.

Bristow or Bristol, qu. Brightstol or Brightstow i. e. a splendid or
illustrious Place; in the British, Caer Oder Nant Badon, i. e. the City Oder in
the Valley of Badon; a large, cleanly, pleasant and well traded City, situate
some part in Glocestershire, but most in Somersetshire, and yet in a manner
distinct from both, being a County of it self incorporate. It has large
Streets, and diverse fair Buildings both public and private; besides its
Churches, a strong Castle, the Bishop's Palace, the Tolbooth for Merchants, a
fair large Key, affording a most pleasant Prospect of Ships, coming up to the
very Town, and the Goutes or Sinks that carry the Water under ground, render
the Streets exceeding neat and clean.

Canterbury, the chief City of Kent, and the Metropolitan See of all England,
pleasant both for Situation and Buildings, and of principal esteem for its
Cathedral, which is accounted among the chief of the Cathedrals of England;
besides which it has several fair Chuches. Its other public Buildings are the
Houses of the Dean and Prebends, a noble Free School, called the Kings-School,
two Hospitals, the Watch-houses or Cittadels upon the Wall, which is broad
enough for two Coaches to go abrest upon it; it had also a noble Castle, but
that has been long since demolished.

Rochester is not only preferrable as a City, to all the Places in Kent next to
Canterbury, for its fair Building and pleasant Situation upon the River Medway.
But the chief Grandeur of this City consists in its Cathedral and stately
Bridge: Of which more in its due place.

Exeter is particularly taken notice of by William of Malmsbury, for the beauty
of its Buildings, the richness of its Inhabitants, the flourishing state of its
Trade and Commerce, and the confluence of Strangers thither, the greatness of
its Trade and Riches, by a daily Commerce both with this City and other Parts
of the Nation. The most eminent of its Structures, are the Wall giving entrance
by six Gates, and adorned with diverse Watch-Towers, a strong and stately
Castle, and a vary noble and sumptuous Cathedral.

Salisbury Cathedral is accounted in some respects the noblest in England, at
least there are very few equal to it. The City is pleasantly watered with clear
Rivulets, running through the length of each Street, and the Marketplace very
large and handsome.

Gloucester is pleasantly situated upon the River Severn. It has been anciently
much celebrated for its Monastery of Nuns, built by Keneburgh, Eadburgh and
Eve, and is at present for its stately Minster.

Worcester has a Wall about it, one thousand six hundred and fifty paces in
circuit, with a sevenfold entrance of Gates, and five Watch-Towers, for
ornament and security: Nor is its Minster the least considerable among the
Cathedrals of England for Structure, besides the Monuments of Antiquity
therein, elsewhere mentioned.

Bath, besides the Magnificence of its public Bagno's, is sufficiently
recommendable for its private Buildings; the Streets thereof, when the season
of the year renders them least frequented, seem to represent a kind of solemn
and majestic Solitude, as may be fancied in several of those Towns and Cities
of Italy, which consist of splendid Buildings, but thinly inhabited.

Durham consists of good handsome old fashioned Buildings; but for public
Structures besides its Church, it chiefly boasts the Castle, built there by K.
William the Conqueror, which advances its Head loftily upon a high Hill.

Lincoln is also one of the noblest Cities of England. It has at this day 15
Parish-Churches besides the Great Church, yet seems it but the Epitome of what
it was anciently; for it is delivered to have had no less than 50
Parish-Churches, was wonderful populous and well traded, and has been adorned
with many fair and ample Buildings, as well Monasteries as others, as appears
by the Ruins, in which something of Magnificence is to be observed.

Winchester is a City pleasantly situated in a Valley, and walled about with a
strong Wall, one thousand eight hundred and eighty paces in circuit, and entered
by six Gates; on the East Side runs the River, and on the West Side stands a
strong Castle. It has seven Parish-Churches, and a good old large Minster,
besides the Ruins of certain Monasteries and other public Buildings; moreover
the College and School may be reckoned among the Ornaments of this Place,
though not standing in the City, but about half a mile out of the Town.

Coventry is a City particularly noted by Speed for statelyness of Building,
and was encompassed with a strong and stately Wall, which with the Walls of
several other Towns was pulled down, since his Majesty's Restoration. The Walls
had 13 Gates for Entrance, and 18 Towers for Ornament; but that which was
heretofore the greatest Ornament of this City, was that stately Structure of a
Cross, which was among the number of those erected to the memory of Queen
Elianor, and the most magnificent of all next to that of Cheapfide in London,
with which it underwent the same Fate, that is, to be demolished by the zealous
multitude, the most lewd reformers of Lewdness, and the most superstitious
haters of Superstition.

Ipswich, besides that it is the Shire-Town of Suffolk, is also generally
accounted the principal Town of England, and were it dignified with the title
of City, would be equal to many, inferior to few of the Cities of this Nation.
It has 12 Parish-Churches yet standing, besides 6 fallen to decay, and several
fair Streets full of goodly and substantial Buildings, and a very commodious
Haven.

St Edmondsbury in the same County, excepting what it wants in ampleness of
Circuit, comes very near in other respects, especially if we reckon the
Grandeur of its once famous Monastery, of which there yet remains something of
it very great and stately. But to sum up the Glory of this Place, it will be
sufficient to repeat what Speed quotes from Leyland, viz. The Sun has not seen
a City (so he calls it) more finely and delicately seated upon an ascent of a
Hill, having a River running on the East Side, nor was there ever a more noble
Abbey, either for Revenues or incomparable Magnificence, in whose Circuit
appears rather a City than a Monastery; so many Gates for Entrance, and some
of Brass; so many Towers, and a most glorious Church, upon which attend three
others, standing all in the same Churchyard, all of them passing fine, and of
a curious Workmanship.

Maidston is pleasantly seated upon the River Medway, and for a mere Town, is
reputed the handsomest and most flourishing of all Kent.

Feversham is also to be noted, not only for its Antiquities, but likewise for
its pleasant and commodious Situation.

Kingston upon Thames, so called, to distinguish it from the other Kingston
upon Hull, stands very pleasantly, and makes a fine Prospect upon the River
Thames. It has a very fair and spacious Marketplace, and has been in former
Ages a Place of no mean Repute, (at least springs from such a one) as will
appear by what we shall have occasion to speak of it elsewhere.

Guilford comes here to be mentioned, only as a pleasant and well built Town;
to which may be added, that for the bigness, there is scarce any other Place to
compare with it for number of fair and large Inns; so that this Town and
Kingston, (Southwark being annexed to London) may pass for the two chief Towns
of Surry.

Lewis is esteemed worthily to stand in competition with the City Chichester it
self, for largeness, populousness and fair Building, at least it is far
surpassing all the other Towns of Sussex.

Colchester, which Speed honors with the title of City, is pleasantly situated
upon the River Coln, has a Wall of 1980 paces in compass, raised upon a high
Trench, and entered by 6 Gates and 3 Posterns Westward, and being also adorned
with 9 Watch-Towers, within the circuit of which Walls there are 8
Parish-Churches, besides 2 without* Eastward, an old strong Castle stands upon
a strong Trench, and upon another Trench hard by are to be discerned the Ruins
of an ancienter Castle; and though there are some other noted Towns in this
Shire, as Maldon, Chelmsford, etc. yet this Colchester, however no City, may
well enough be allowed to merit the Character it has, viz. of Shire-Town of
Essex.

Buckingham is pleasantly seated upon the River Ouse, with which it is
altogether surrounded, except on the North-side; 3 fair Stone-Bridges, giving
entrance over the River, and though but a Town, has the credit to be both the
denominating and principal Town of the Shire.

Ailesbury, of the same County, is a Town well enough for Building, and the
handsomness of its Marketplace; but that which makes it most perspicuous, is,
that it stands in the midst of most delightful Meads and Pastures, and the
whole Vale, which being one of the pleasantest and fertilest of England, is
perhaps one of the pleasantest and fertilest of Europe, is thence denominated
the Vale of Ailesbury.

Reading, a very ancient Town, and as Leland and others observe, excelling all
other Towns in Barkshire, as well for fair Streets and sightly Buildings, as
the Wealth of the Townsmen.

Cambridge, a Town not despicable for its own proper Buildings, were the
Situation as little liable to exception, but borrowing its chief Magnificence
from the luster of those 16 Colleges and Halls, which shine like so many Gems
about it, yet far more illustrious by those bright Lamps of Learning, which
from this Place have shot their Lights into the World. The most eminent
Structure of all the rest in Cambridge is Kings-Colledge-Chappel; but there is
now a Library building in this University, which, it is thought, will be able
to compare with any of the best Buildings of this Age; but notwithstanding all,
it is but the chief Town of Cambridgeshire, and not a City, though there be an
Episcopal See in the same County.

Southampton, a Town, says Speed, beautiful, rich and populous, and walled
about with a strong Wall of square Stone, entered by 7 Gates, and adorned and
fortified with 29 Towers; within the Walls there are 5 fair Parish-Churches,
besides an Hospital called Gods-House; and without the Walls are to be seen the
Ruins of another goodly Church called St Mary's. On the West End of the Town,
a well built Castle of a circular form, mounted upon a high Hill so steep, as
not to be ascended but by Stairs, gives a fair Prospect both by Land and Sea;
and lastly, Two commodious Keys for Ships, give a great ornament to the Place.
This Town, though Winchester predominates as a City, was doubtless, as by the
Name appears, the ancient Metropolis of Hantshire, and is still accounted the
Shire-Town.

Marlborough, one of the most considerable Towns of Wiltshire, which as it is
in general a good tolerable well built Town, so it has one Street above the
rest remarkable for its fairness and largeness, being also very much graced
with a large neat Forum or Marketplace at the upper end thereof. About a dozen
years ago there happened a shrewd Fire, which burnt down a great part of this
Street, which being rebuilt to advantage, the Street appears much more stately
than before; and that which gives the greater grace to it, is the Prospect of a
fine House of my Lord Seymour's, at the Towns end, which is the more
remarkable, by reason of a Mount which is ascended by a Path, which winds round
about upward toward the top like a Screw.

Warwick is most pleasantly situated upon the ascent of a Hill, taking its rise
from the side of a River, whose stream runs pointing toward a stately Castle,
the Seat of the famous Guy of Warwick, which having run much to ruin, was
repaired with sumptuous Buildings by Sir Fulk Grevil. There have been 6 fair
Churches in this Town, viz. St Lawrence, St Michaels, John Baptist, and John of
Jerusalem, St. Mary's and St. Nicholas, all gone to ruin but the two last.
This City, yet as the denominating and principal Town of Warwickshire, seems of
equal repute with Coventry it self.

Shirburn, a Town pleasantly seated on the side of a Hill, and very well
adorned with Structures, especially public, as Church, Castle, and
School-house.

Northampton must needs be at this day a very stately Place, for having had the
commendation, from the chief of our English Geographers, of being worthy to be
ranked, for Circuit, Beauty and Building, with the most of the Cities of our
Land. It was by some unfortunate Accident burnt almost totally down to the
ground, and Phaenix-like is risen out of its ashes, much more glorious than
before; and notwithstanding the City of of Peterborough stands within the
County, claims to be the County Town of Northamptonshire.

Nottingham, says our most diligent and industrious Speed, is a Town seated
most pleasant and delicate upon a high Hill; for Building stately, and for
number of fair Streets surpassing many other Cities, and for a spacious and
sumptuous Marketplace, and 3 fair Churches, comparing with the best. Many of
the Buildings of this Town are hewed out of the Rocks, besides many strange
Vaults and Caves; among which those under the Castle are of especial Note: One
for the Story of Christ's Passion, engraven in the Walls, by the Hand of David,
the 2d of that Name, King of Scots, whilst he was there kept Prisoner: Another
wherein Mortimer was apprehended, in the minority of K. Edw. the 3d, whence it
has ever since born the Name of Mortimer's Hole. These have their several
winding Stairs, Windows, Chimnies, and Room above Room, wrought all out of the
solid Rock, as other Houses of the Town also have. This Town being the
Principal of Nottinghamshire, has no City to stand in competition with it.

Newark, the next Town of Nottinghamshire, both for Reputation and Neatness. It
is indeed a Town of a very pleasant Situation upon the River Trent.

Manchester, the fairest and pleasantest, though not the principal Town of
Lancashire, and above all things else peculiarly remarked for its grand Church,
the College and Marketplace.

Wakefield, one of the chief Towns of Yorkshire, as well for its pleasantness
and goodly Buildings, as its great Market and Cloathing-Trade, and other
Remarks: Of which elsewhere.

Stamford, the pleasantest Place of Lincolnshire, next to the City of Lincoln
it self, being adorned with 7 Churches, and an old Hospital.

Boston, the best Town of Lincolnshire next to Stamford: Which is all need be
said of it at present, in regard there will be occasion to speak more of it in
the next Chapter of Towns and Places eminent, etc.

Barstable and Tavestoke in Devonshire, are commended above most in the West of
England for neatness, well compactedness, and elegance of Structure. Tavestoke
is probably enough so called, from the River Taw, upon which it stands, and
which at Barstable is said to be Navigable for great Vessels, both Places being
well inhabited with Merchants, and rich trading People.

Next to Bridgewater, of all the Places of Somersetshire, not dignified with
the title of City, Taunton is accounted of principal Note, and for pleasantness
superior, according to the Testimony of a learned Writer in these words:
Taunton qu. Thonton, from the River The One, is a very fine and proper Town, one
of the Eyes of the Shire; the Country here most delectable on every side with
green Meadows, flourishing with pleasant Gardens and Orchards, and replenisht
with fair Mannor-Houses, wonderfully contenteth the Eyes of the Beholders.

Shrewsbury, as it is the principal Town of Shropshire, there being neither
City nor any other Town of Note in that Shire that can stand in competition
with it, so it may be reckoned among the pleasantest of all England, being
almost surrounded with the Severn, between which and a stately Wall are most
delightful Meadows; the chief Streets graceful of themselves are set out with
several graceful Buildings besides the public, among which the most remarkable
are the two Gate-houses on the Bridges, the Marketplace of Freestone, a
strong Castle mounted on a Hill, a neat Schoolhouse with a Library, 4
Parish-Churches, and 3 of them very large and goodly, besides the Abbey
forehead, without which bears the semblance of an old Cathedral.

Besides Shrewsbury, there are many other pleasant Towns in Shropshire, among
which, the chiefest in repute are Ludlow and Bridgnorth. Ludlow's chief State
consists in its strong Castle, and its lofty situation upon a high Hill; and
proper enough is the Encomium it has gained of Cambden, that it is a Town more
fair than ancient. Bridgnorth also is proudly advanced a great part of it upon
a Rock, out of which the chief Avenues to that upper part are cut; moreover,
the Castle, the Wall, and the Severn's Enclosure, give addition of State as
well as Strength.

Tewksbury in Glocestershire, is a Town that might well enough be insisted on
for its elegancy of Building and pleasant Situation, but that other special
Remarks require the mention of it elsewhere.

The like may be said of Cirencester, which has yet some Ruins left of that
Beauty and Magnificence which it received from the Romans, of whom it was
anciently one of the principal Residences.

The Palaces Royal of England are in the first place Whitehal, built by
Cardinal Woolfie, and from K. Henry the 8th to his present Majesty, the
principal and Imperial Residence of all our Kings. This Palace is in general
rather to be commended for its large Capacity and Convenience, than for State
and outward Show; yet that part which is called the Banqueting House, for its
sumptuous Appearance and Regularity of Architecture, is judged by most of the
Curious, fit to stand in competition with the chief Structures of Europe.

Next, St James's, a House somewhat more sightly to view, and delicately
situated in the most pleasant of Parks; it has been usually the Residence of
the Princes of Wales, but is now of his Royal Highness, the same in Effect,
though not in Title.

Somerset House is the usual Residence of the Queens of England, as it is now
of her present Majesty.

Hampton Court in Middlesex, has been of late the Principal of our King's
Residences out of London, a brave, large, Noble House, in the midst of a most
stately Park.

But at present Windsor-Castle in Barkshire, is his Majesty's chosen Place of
Pleasure and Retirement, being besides its most delightful Situation, as being
advanced upon a high Hill, rising with a gradual ascent, which affords the
sweetest Prospect imaginable, a Place of great Magnificence, and now improved
to a wonderful height of State and Beauty.

Other Places of Note for Royal Seats are Richmond or Sheen, Nonsuch in Surry,
Greenwich and Eltham in Kent, Enfield and Hanworth in Middlesex, Holdenby in
Northamptenshire.

The Noblemens Palaces we shall have occasion to give a full account of, in the
Catalogue of the English Nobility.

The Cathedrals of England are perhaps, take them one with another, as
remarkable as those of any Country whatsoever; but the most eminent (besides St
Paul's) are those of Westminster, Salisbury, Canterbury, York, Worcester,
Gloucester, Chichester, Norwich, Winchester, Exeter, Wells, and Peterborough.
Most of which have been already touched upon, in the several Places to which
they belong; however it will not be improper to speak a little more
particularly of them in this Place.

St Paul's, before its last fatal destruction by Fire, had nothing to stand in
competition but St Peter's of Rome; what it will be when rebuilt, may be in some
measure conjectured, by the Grandeur which already appears.

Westminster-Abbey is a Noble Piece of Work, and is said to have been 50 years
in building, and it receives a great addition of luster, by the addition of K.
Henry the 7th's Chapel, the Workmanship whereof for curiosity of Carving is
hardly to be paralleled.

Salisbury-Minster is famed in general for one of the stateliest of English
Structures, and particularly noted for its high spired Steeple, its double
cross Isles, its Windows answering to the Days, its Pillars to the Hours, and
its Gates to the Months of the Year, besides a Cloister belonging to it, famous
for Largeness and fine Workmanship.

Canterbury-Cathedral has been famous for its rich Window, and the Tomb of
Thomas a Becket.

That of York seems next of Note and Esteem, for an ample and stately Fabric.

Worcester-Cathedral is by a learned Writer deservedly entitled, a passing fair
Building, adorned with many Princely and Noble Monuments.

Nor is Glocester-Cathedral accounted inferior, besides the Fame of its
Whispering Place.

Also that of Litchfield, before its demolishment, is said for elegant and
proportional Building to have yielded very few.

The Church of Chichester is not so large as neat, having a Spire-Steeple,
which advances it self up to a majestic height*

The Cloister of the Cathedral of Norwich, is accounted the fairest in England.

Winchester-Cathedral is a brave old solemn Structure; so likewise is that of
Lincoln; which last is also famous for its great Bell called Tom of Lincoln,
the biggest in England.

Exeter-Cathedral is remarkable for its brave, noble, carved Work, at the
Westend thereof; so likewise are those of Wells and Peterborough.

In fine, There are few or none of the Cathedrals of this Nation, of whose
Grandeur there is not enough to be said to make a Volume.

There are a number of Parish-Churches that deserve particular mention.

In London there are many, especially since the rebuilding of the City,
remarkable for Beauty and State. But the chief are St Sepulcher, and St Mary's
le Bow, whose Steeple is such, that certainly a nobler is scarce to be seen.

The Church of Covent Garden is much admired, for a Fabric of such Magnitude
and State, unsupported with Pillars.

The like may be said of Lincolns-Inn-Chappel, which is also observable for the
curious vaulted Walk over which it is built.

Likewise that round vaulted Roof of the Inner-Temple-Church, under which lie
upon the ground several Sepulchral Statues of Knights, Templars, within a
apiece Empalement of Iron-work, is a Structure of that kind not to be
paralleled by any.

Nor is the new built Church of St Clements to be wholly passed by, as
exceeding much, both for the outward and inward Workmanship, and particularly
the fine Fret-work on the Cieling.

The Church of Bath, though Litchfield be the Bishop's principal Seat, is by
some called a Cathedral, and for largeness and elegance of Building may well
enough be so accounted.

Of the 5 Churches of Derby, that named All-Hallows, is of chief Reputel, for
its Tower-Steeple, of a stately height, and excellent Structure, and whose
Foundation was laid, and part of it built, by young Men and Maids, as appears
by Letters graven thereon.

The Church of Shirburn in Dorsetshire, is much noted for its curious
Workmanship within.

The Church of Grantham chiefly eminent for the excessive height of its
Steeple, which possibly gives occasion of that vulgar Report of this Steeple's
standing awry, and of that fabulous Tradition of its having been, built by
Hell's great Architect, who misliking something or other, gave it such a Blow
with his Ruler, that it has stood awry ever since.

St Mary's of Ratcliff in Bristow, for the stately ascent to it, its largeness,
curious Workmanship, embowed Arch of Stone, and its lofty Steeple, has been
accounted the noblest Parish Church of England.

Another Church in the same City called the Temple, is remarkable for its
Tower, which whenever the Bell is rung, divides from the rest of the
Building, with a Cleft from the bottom to the top, which gapes the breadth of
three Fingers.

In Lancashire, the Collegiate Church of Manchester has a Quire, which though
not very large, is remarkable for its rich adornment of Wood-work.

Among the Churches of Coventry, two standing near each other, viz.
Trinity-Church and St Michaels, are commended for their rare Workmanship and
stately height.

Coln, a little old Town in Wiltshire, has nothing but its fair Church to
commend it.

Also Rippon, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, whose three Steeples show their
lofty Heads at considerable distance, to Travelers approaching the Place.

Upon the Bridge of Wakefield, in the same Riding of Yorkshire, is a beautiful
Chapel, erected by K. Edward the 4th, in memory of those of his Party who lost
their Lives in the Battle there fought.

The Church of Boston in Lincolnshire, beside its largeness, curious
Workmanship, and its aspiring Tower-Steeple, has this also memorable, that
from the bottom to the top, the Steeple is ascended by as many Steps as there
are Days in a Year.

Yarmouth-Church (for it has but one) gives no small addition of commendation
to that Town, which is reckoned among the most considerable of Norfolk.

Oundale in Northamptonshire, is rendered no less memorable for its fair
Church, than for its Free School and Almshouse.

At the Castle of Warkworth in Northumberland, there is a Chapel wonderfully
hewn out of a Rock, without Beams, Rafters, or any thing of Timber-work.

Wrexam in Denbighshire, has a Church, which for neat Building, and the
loftiness of its Steeple, is concluded to surpass all the Churches of
North Wales.

But of all the Churches of this Island, (and they are among the 6 chief
Remarks thereof) the Chapel of Kings-Colledge in Cambridge, already mentioned,
is for rareness of Architecture and Contrivance, renowned above most
Structures, not only of England, but even of Europe also.

The Castles of England were in ancient Times the chief-Seats of our Nobility;
but since the dissolution of the Abbeys, and the demolishment of very many
Castles, in the several Wars of England, diverse of the said Abbeys have become
the Seats of Noblemen and Gentlemen. Yet some Noblemen at this day have ancient
Castles for their chief Seats: As Barkly-Castle in Glocestershire, gives Title
to the Honorable Family of the Barklys. Skelton-Castle is the Seat of the
Barons Bruise.

The chief Castles now in the several Counties, are in Cheshire, Beeston, and
the Castle of Chester. In Barkshire, Windsor afore-mentioned. In Cumberland,
the Castle of Carlisle. In Darbyshire, the Castle of the Peak. In Devonshire,
the Castles of Dertmouth, and Castle-Rugemont in Exeter. In Dorcetshire,
Shirburn-Castle. In the Bishopric of Durham, Bernard-Castle. In Hantshire,
Hurst, Carisbrook, and Saubam Castles. In Herefordshire, Bradwardin-Castle, of
which elsewhere. In Kent, the Castles of Dover and Queenborough, that of
Canterbury being demolisht. In Lancashire, Hornby-Castle, and that of
Lancaster, which is accounted one of the three chief Magnificences of the Town,
the other two being the Church and the Bridge. In Lincolnshire, Belvoir and
Castor Castles. In Monmouthshire, Chepstow and Strighal Castles. In
Northamptonshire, Fotheringhay, mentioned upon another account, Baibroke,
Rockingham and Maxey Castles. In Northumberland, Newcastle, Thrilwale,
Tinmouth, Morpeth, Withrington, Warkworth and Alnwick Castles. In
Richmondshire, the stately Castle of Bolton. In Shropshire, Bishops-Castle,
Clun-Castle, Shrawarden-Castle, Knocking-Castle, Whittington-Castle,
Routon-Castle, Tongue-Castle, whose Bell is very loud, as in noise, so in fame,
in all those Parts. The Castles of Shrewsbury, Ludlow and Bridgnorth. In
Somersetshire, Dunster-Castle, which was built in William the Conquerour's
Time, by the Family of the Mohuns, which flourisht from that time till the
Reign of K. Richard the 2d, in very great splendour, and ever since has
continued in considerable reputation. In Staffordshire, Stourton and
Dudly-Castle, with those of Tamworth, Chartly and Tutbury; to which may be
added, the memory of an old Castle at Stafford, now demolisht. In Suffolk,
Framlingham-Castle, a Place of great State, Strength, Beauty and Convenience,
and the Ruins of Burgh-Castle. In Surry, Holm, Beckworth and Sterborough
Castles. In Sussex, Amberly-Castle, and that of Bodiam, belonging to the Family
of the Lewknors. In Warwickshire, Studly, Macstock and Ausley Castles, and the
Castle of Warwick it self. In Westmorland, Whellep-Castle and Apelby. In
Wiltshire, Castlecomb, Yainsborough and Warder. In Worcestershire, Hertlebury,
Holt and Elmesly Castles. In the VVest-Riding of Yorkshire, Sheafield,
Conisborough, Tickil, Sandal, Harewood, Knasborrow and Cawood Castles. In the
East Riding, the strong Castle of VVreshil. In the North Riding, the Castles of
Scarborough, Kilton, Skeleton, already mentioned, Wilton, Kildale, Gilling,
Skerry-hutton and Hinderskell. In Wales, the most noted Castles in
Caermardenshire, Carreg. In Denbighshire, the strong and almost impregnable
Castle of Denbigh. In Flintshire, Flint and Harding Castles. In Glamorganshire,
Cardiff, now belonging to the Earls of Pembroke, but once the famous Residence
of Sr Marmionwith his 12 Knights, little less renowned in Story than K. Arthur
and his Knights of the round Table, and whose Effigies were lately to be seen
in the Hall of this Castle.

The Bridges of England are not the least of the 7 Remarks of this Nation.

And first, They are remarkable for number, as being reckoned in all 875.

In the next place, They plead precedence in the generality with all others in
Europe.

The Prime is London Bridge, which is said to have been anciently built of
Wood, and was then accounted a very stately Bridge; but afterward received a
far greater pitch of luster by being built of Stone, insomuch that without
controversy it is judged the noblest Structure of that kind in Europe. It
stands upon 19 Arches of Stone, which support a Street of very fair Edifices,
of a quarter of a Mile in length, for so much the breadth of the Thames is
accounted in that place.

The next for Beauty and Magnificence, is that of Rochester; and after that the
Bridge of Stratford upon Avon.

Among the three Beauties of the Town of Lancaster, the Bridge is one, the
other two being the Church and Castle.

Over the River Ouse, which encircles the Town of Buckingham, all but the
North-side, are three fair Bridges of Stone.

The same River Ouse runs through the midst of the Town of Bedford, and has
over it a handsome Stone Bridge, with two Gates upon it.

Over the River Dee is a stately Stone Bridge, which leads to the City of
Chester. It is supported with 8 Arches, and has at each end two strong Gates,
from whence the Walls commence, within which the City lies in an oblong Square.

From the River Derwent, a small Brook runs through the Town of Darby, (which
lies on the Western-bank of that River) under 9 Bridges. But the stateliest of
all is that in the North-East part of the Town, upon which stands a fair
Chapel of Stone.

Over the River VVeer, with which the City of Durham is almost wholly
encompassed, two neat Stone-Bridges, one from the South, the other from the
North-Road, lead into the midst of the Town.

The Bridge leading into VVarwick-Town, over the River Avon, is both sightly
and strong.

But particularly sumptuous with their Towers and Gates, are those two over
Severn, at the East and West Entrances of Shrewsbury.

That over the River Ouse at York, which stands on each side the River, has
one Arch, the largest and loftiest of any Bridge in England.

Several others there are, and some perhaps not unworthy of memory, but these
being the very chiefest, it will not be worth the while to mention any more.

The grand Ornaments of any City are the public Buildings thereof; and next to
the Churches, Palaces and Bridges, are the Monumental Structures, that present
themselves most obviously to the view of Passengers in Streets and Highways,
as Aqueducts, Arches, and the Columnal or Imagery-Works, erected as Trophies in
memory of some great Action or Person; as also Places for public Games and
Spectacles.

For Structures of this kind, never any City of the World was so famous as old
Rome, whose Circus's, Amphitheaters, Columns, Pyramids, Tryumphal Arches,
Equestrian Statues, etc. next to the massy Pyramids of Egypt, were accounted
the greatest Pieces of Art and Magnificence the World ever saw. Nor are the
Pyramids, Columns and Aguglia's of the present Rome, altogether unmemorable.

Of Monuments of this nature in England, the Crosses erected in Streets and
public Places were the chief. And of those the principal were Coventry-Cross;
and in this City Charing Cross, and that of Cheapside, which last was certainly
the noblest Piece of Workmanship of this nature, as well for the largeness as
the curiousness of the Imagery that ever was seen.

Next, The Aqueducts or Conduits have been accounted no small Street-ornaments
in many Towns and Cities, but the mention of those that were in London, may
serve for all the rest.

The chief that were in London before the Fire of 66. were the Standart in
Cheapside, a Structure that might have passed for a noble Piece of Workmanship,
had it not stood so near so rich a Cross. Another at the lower end of
Cheapside. Another in Cornhil. That in Fleetstreet, hard by Shoe-lane end; and
another in Holborn, near Holborn-Bridge, besides several others of less Note.
The only Conduit lately erected, now standing, is a pretty little Structure
between Cow-lane and Snow-hill.

Since the Fire, other kind of Monuments have been raised, which add not a
little to the Ornament of the City in general, and give peculiar Grace to the
Places where they stand. The chief whereof is the Monument erected where the
Fire began, a Pyramid of stately height and curious Workmanship.

Another Monument much of the same nature is designed, and the Edifice raised
some yards above the ground, at the lower end of Cheapside, at or very near the
Place where the Conduit formerly stood: A very rare Design, as appears by the
Model which I have often seen at the House of the ingenious Designer thereof,
Mr Jasper Latham, the City-Mason.

At the Stocks-Market is an Equestrian Statue in Stone of his present Majesty.

And another more excellent than that in Brass, of his late Majesty of happy
Memory, in the Place where Charing Cross stood.

In Covent Garden Square is a Columnal-Dial, which only wants somewhat of
Magnitude to make it a very graceful Ornament to the Place.

Our Theaters at present are only two, That of his Majesty's Servants, between
Bridges-street and Drury Lane; and that of his Royal Highness's Servants, in
Salisbury-street, with a majestic Front toward the Thames side.

Artificial public Bagno's have not been known in England till of late: The
only one yet built is aside of Newgate-street, a pretty well contrived Piece of
Building, had it been more publicly exposed to view on the Street side.

The Gates of Towns and Cities are not the least of Ornaments to the said Towns
and Cities. Of the chief of them, except those in London, we have touched in the
respective Places to which they belong. The principal Gates of London are
Ludgate, Newgate, Aldersgate, Algate, Bishopsgate and Temple Bar; and the two
Gates at Westminster, between Whitehal and Kings-street, most of them not
inferior in Magnificence to the chief in Europe.

But to close all that has been said of public Ornaments, there remains one
thing more, not to be neglected by any Admirer of Art, which is a Piece of
Sculpture in Stone, representing the Resurrection, over a Gate in Shoo-lane,
that gives entrance into a Caemetery or Burying-place, which belongs to St
Andrews-Church. This Piece of Carving I have heard commended by the best of
Artists in this way, for the noblest Piece of Workmanship in its kind that has
been seen in England.

Towns and Places of England eminent for some remarkable Accident, Person, or
Transaction.
THE principal Things that render any Town or Place remarkable, are either the
Glory and Antiquity of its Original, some notable Revolution of Government,
Accidents happening there, whether prosperous or adverse, Battles fought, or
other grand Action performed in or near it, and the Birth, Residence or Death
of Princes, and other eminent Men.

For most if not all of those Remarks, there are many Towns and Cities of
England, famous and principally of all, that which is the principal of all our
Towns and Cities, London, for the most part the Seat of Kings from its
Original; with which as the City Westminster is so united in Place, that it
seems in a manner one and the same City, so the^ mention and discourse of them
cannot well be separated. Of the Antiquity, Splendour of Government, Flourishing
Trade, and Magnificence of Structure, in all which London has the
pre-eminence, not only of all the Places of England, but perhaps of all Europe,
several have discoursed at large, besides what we may happily have occasion to
touch at elsewhere.

It cannot be imagined, but that in a City which has been a flourishing City
for so many Ages, many remarkable Accidents must have happened, and great Actions
been performed, in the mention whereof however all possible brevity must be
used.

King Lud, who reigned here a little before Caesar's arrival, if he were not
the first Founder, as some think, he was at least not only the Enlarger, but
also the Denominator. For among other things he built the West-Gate, which to
this day retains the Name of Ludgate; and what was before of a City, by the
Name of Trinobantium, took the Name of Caer-Lud; and the present appellation of
London is fancied by many to be derived from him, as it were Luds-Town. About
the year 285. here Alectus, Lieutenant to the Emperor Diocletian, was slain by
Asclepiodotus, D. of Cornwall; and together with him was slain his Companion
Gallus, at a Brook, which from him still retains the name of Gall-brook, or
Wall brook. Here Sigebert, third King of the East Angles, who began his Reign
in the year of our Lord 596. and Ethelbert King of Kent, who began his Reign in
the year of our Lord 562. built the Cathedral of St. Paul's in the very place,
as it is said, where there had been a Temple of Diana. In the Reign of Edmund,
surnamed Ironside, this City was closely besieged by the Danes, but the Siege
was soon raised by that valiant Prince King Edmund. About the year 1077. the
Tower of London was built by K. William the Conqueror, whose Successor K.
William Rufus built new walls about it. Anno 1135. in the Reign of K. Stephen
the greatest part of this City was consumed by an accidental Fire. In K.
Richard the Seconds time was the great Rencounter with Jack Straw and Wat Tiler
in East-Smithfield, where in an overture of treaty Wat Tiler behaving himself
with extraordinary insolence, was in presence of the King stabbed by Sir
William Wallworth, Lord Mayor of London, with a Dagger, in memory whereof the
City of London has to this day a Dagger for its Coat of Arms. This City has
had the honor to entertain several great Kings, Princes, and Nobles; but the
grandest transaction that London can boast of, was that most stately Cavalcade
which his present Majesty made through it the 29th of May An. 1660. when he
returned from a long Exile to the Government of these Kingdoms: But the year
1666. was fatal to it by reason of that most dreadful fire that consumed all
before it from Grace-Church Street to the Inner Temple, destroying to the
number, as is generally computed, of 13000 dwelling-houses; and this preceded
but the year before by the fiercest Pestilence that ever raged within the
cognizance of the Weekly Bills. In this City King Stephen kept his Court at
Crosby-house in Bishopsgate-street; King Edward the third in Cornhil where now
the Pope-head Tavern stands; King Henry the eighth at Blackfriars, and
sometimes at Bridewell, once a Regal Palace, where also the Emperor Charles
the fifth was lodged when he came over into England. The Palace of St. James's,
which is in the Pomaeria of London, and which was first built for a Spittle for
Maiden Lepers, has been the Birthplace of his present Majesty K. Charles the
2d, his Highness James Duke of York, Henry late Duke of Gloucester, the Lady
Elizabeth, the Lady Mary late Princess of Orange, and all the Children of his
present Highness by his late Duchess; Edgar Duke of Kendal, James Duke of
Cambridg, deceast; the Lady Henrietta and the Lady Lady Katherine deceast; Mary
now Princess of Orange, the Lady Anne yet unmarried; as also of two Daughters
(both soon hastened to a better World) by his present Duchess. Other persons
of eminent note and immortal memory were born at London, viz. Thomas Becket
Archbishop of Canterbury in the Reign of K. Henry the 2d, by four of whese
Courtiers he was murdered in Canterbury Church, Anno 1170. after a long
contest with the King; Sir Jeoffry Chaucer the most famous of ancient English
Poets, who flourisht in the Reigns of K. Henry the 4th, Henry the 5th, and part
of K. Henry the 6th. Edmund Spencer, styled also the Prince of English Poets,
who flourisht in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; John Leland, Sir Thomas More,
Bishop Andrews. The Tower of London is very eminent for the Confinement,
Murder, and Execution of Illustrious persons: to mention all, especially those
who have been merely Prisoners, would be almost endless; but the most memorable
Imprisonment was that of two Kings at one time in the Reign of King Edward the
third, viz. of David King of Scots, and of John King of France; the first a
Prisoner 11 years, the other four. Here the unfortunate King Henry the sixth,
after Edward the fourth had got the Crown from him by Conquest, was basely
murdered by King Edward's Brother Richard Duke of Gloucester, afterward King of
England. Here George Duke of Clarence, another Brother, was by the practice of
the said Duke of Gloucester, drowned in a Butt of Malmsey: but the most fatal
Tragedy of all was the murder of King Edward the fourth's two Sons, poor
harmless children, viz. Edward commonly entitled King Edward the fifth, and his
Brother Richard Duke of York, and all by the order and contrivement of their
Dear Uncle of Gloucester, who, as most great persons have their peculiar Sports
and Recreations, was principally taken with that of killing men, especially
those of nearest kin; for such he chiefly marked out for death out of mere
kindness to himself, that he might the sooner obtain the possession of that
Crown he had long since aspired to: and indeed he got it sooner, and kept it
longer: (so easy it is for one witty man to delude a Multitude,) than a
curious descanter upon the worlds affairs would have allowed a person so
getting it; however what he got by the death of others he lost by his own, only
more handsomely, not by treachery, but fairly in the field.

In Christ-church in London three great Queens had their Sepulture, viz.
Margaret the Daughter of King Philip of France surnamed the Hardy, and second
Wife of King Edward the second of England. Isabel the Daughter of the French
King Philip the Fair, and Wife to King Edward the second of England. Joan the
Daughter of the said Edward and Isabel, and married to David King of Scots.

Westminster has been the most constant residence of the Kings of England
since the Conquest, till Whitehall was built by Cardinal Wolsey. It will be
needless to mention all the Kings that have been crowned and buried here, in
regard since the Conquest there are not very many who have not been buried, and
fewer that have not been crowned in Westminster Abbey.

At Isleworth, now Thistleworth, a Village pleasantly situate upon the River
Thames, Richard King of the Romans, and Earl of Cornwall, had a stately Palace,
which was burnt to the ground in a tumultuous sally that was made upon it by
certain Malcontents of the London Mobile.

In Surry are places of as eminent note as in most Counties of England. In the
first place Lambeth is chiefly renowned for being the principal Palace and most
usual residence of the Archbishops of Canterbury, from the time of Archbishop
Baldwin who first founded it, and made it his Seat in the year 596, and from
whom it has continued so to this day, the most reverend and learned Prelate
Dr. Sancroft late Dean of Paul's, being worthily advanced to this high Dignity,
and having here his present residence. Here Canutus surnamed the Hardy, the
third and last of our short-lived Dynasty of Danish Kings, ended his days of a
surfeit, as most Writers affirm, by eating and drinking over freely at a
Wedding Feast.

Croydon is another Seat belonging to the Archbishops of Canterbury; and where
the Reverend Dr. Gilbert Sheldon, late Archbishop, lies buried, having a most
statety Monument newly elected to his memory, the Artful Contrivance and
skilful Workmanship of Mr Jasper Latham, the present City Mason.

At Ockly in this County Ethelwolph Son of Egbert won a great Battle over the
Danes.

Oatlands is not more famous for being a Royal Palace, than for the
Neighborhood of Coweystakes where Julius Caesar passed the Thames into the
Borders of Cassibesaunus.

Putney is chiefly considerable in story as being the Birthplace of one of the
most advanced Statesmen and Favorites (for he was but the Son of a
Blacksmith) that our Nation has produced, viz. Thomas Cromwell, chief
Minister of State, for the time, to King Henry the eighth, and by him created
Earl of Essex, who nevertheless had the ill fate, falling under his Princes
displeasure, to be beheaded on Tower Hill.

Wimbleton (where the Earl of Bristol has a pleasant seat) still retains the
memory of a notable defeat given by Cheaulin King of the West Saxons to
Ethelred King of Kent with the slaughter of two of his Dukes in the year of our
Lord 560.

At Richmond, to which in former ages the Kings and Queens of England retired
for pleasure, as of late to Hampton Court and Windsor, there deceased that
victorious Prince King Edward the third, Anne the Daughter of the Emperor
Charles the fourth, and Wife of King Richard the second, Henry of Richmond the
seventh of that name King of England, and that learned and renowned Princess
Queen Elizabeth of happy memory.

Kingston upon Thames a very pleasant and much frequented Market Town, was
probably the usual place of Coronation of the Saxon Monarchs; for there was
kept the Chair of Instalment: but the Kings most particularly mentioned to have
been there crowned, were King Athelstan, Edwin, and Ethelred.

Guilford a Town otherwise of especial note, is also famous for having been the
Royal Seat of the English Saxon Kings.

Merton is doubly upon record, first for the untimely death of Kenulph King of
the West Saxons, who was here slain by Kinea^d King Sigeberts Brother; next for
the Parliament there held An. 21 of K. Henry the third, which Parliament
produced an Act, which to this day is called the Statute of Merton.

Okeham has its chief credit as being the native place of that famous English
Philosopher William de Okeham. Likewise

Ripley no less by the birth of that learned Chemist George de Ripley.

In Essex, Colchester, which is the County Town, has the honorable tradition
of having been built by the ancient British King Coilus; but that which
redounds chiefly to its honor, is, that it is said to have brought into the
world three persons of immortal memory, viz. Lucius the first not only British,
but European King that embraced the Christian Faith. Constantine the first
Roman Emperor, who openly proprofessing Christianity, gave countenance and
protection to the Christians of all parts, and put an end to those heavy
Persecutions which they groaned under so many Ages; and if by his extraordinary
bounty and munificence to the Clergy, he made an inlet to that pride and
ambition among them, which has proved mischievous to Christendom ever since,
it was an error on the right hand, and however succeeding otherwise, an
evidence of his pious generosity and zeal for Religion and Virtue. Helena the
Wife of Constantius, born also in England, and, as it is generally supposed, in
York, and Mother of the said Constantine: her fame shines bright in History for
her piety in general, and particularly for the fame of her being Inventrix
Crucis.

The next Town of note in this County is Maldon, a very ancient Town, and the
Seat Royal of the Trinobantes, of whom Cunobelinus was King about the time of
our Saviors Nativity; it was taken by the Emperor Claudius, and made a Roman
Garrison, being called by the Romans Camalodunum, rased to the ground by Queen
Bunduca or Boadicia, after a mighty defeat given to the Romans in revenge of
some high affronts and indignities she received from them, but was afterward
rebuilt, and is of some reputation at this day, though doubtless far short of
its pristine splendour.

At Walden, famous for Saffron as is already mentioned, was born Sir Thomas
Smith Secretary to Queen Elizabeth.

Kent, as it is a large County, is enobled with very many Towns and places of
note; in the first place Canterbury is a City of that eminence, that next to
London there is hardly a City in England memorable upon so many accounts: It is
said to have been built 900 years before Christ: it is the principal of the
Archiepiscopal Sees of England; it was given by Ethelbert King of Kent to
Austin the Monk and his Companions, upon whose preaching 10000 were baptized in
one day. By the said Austin the Cathedral is said to have been founded, in
which eight Kings of Kent were interred. Even the misfortunes of this City have
been also memorable, for it suffered very much several times by the fury of the
Danes, especially in the Reign of Ethelred, when 42000 of the Inhabitants were
sacrificed to their fury and revenge; it has had the honor of the
Coronations, Nuptials and Interments of several great Kings and Princes. Here
King John and his Queen Isabel were Crowned, King Henry the third and King
Edward the first Married: Edward the Black Prince, King Henry the fourth and
his Q. Joan were Interred: and also with far more cost and magnificence that
great Prelate, and even to adoration adored Saint Thomas a Becket, of whose
rich and stately, Tomb mention has been elsewhere made.

Rochester said to be built by one Roff Lord thereof, is also a City, and not
much inferior in repute to Canterbury. Several Counties there are which have
no City, the Bishops See being but in one of half a dozen Counties, but Kent is
the only one County that has two. This City was also miserably harrass'd by
the Danes, and suffered very much ruin by two dreadful Fires, viz. in the
Reign of King Henry the first and King Henry the second; but being very much
restored by the munificence of King Henry the third, it has continued a
flourishing City ever since.

Maidstone, a pleasant and well-seated Town is the more memorable by the great
defeat given there to the Earl of Holland, who headed the Kentish-men rising
for the King, by Fairfax General of the Parliament Forces.

Feversham is enobled by the Burial of King Stephen and his Queen Maud.

Dover, besides the renown of its Castle, said to be built by Julius Caesar,
and the great honor of the Government thereof, has given reception and
entertainment to many great Kings and Princes.

Queenborough Castle was built by King Edward the third.

Wye, a Seaport Town, where the learned and famous J. Kemp Archbishop of
Canterbury was born.

Horsted is chiefly noted for the Monument now defaced of Horsa, one of the
first Leaders of the invading Saxons, the Brother of Hengift.

The like Monument was made for Catigern, another of the Brothers, at
Circotes-house, which is standing to this day.

Black Heath has been the place of several grand Recounters in the Barons Wars
in King Henry the third's time, as also of Wat Tiler in King Richard the
second's time, and of Michael Joseph and the Lord d' Auhenie in King Henry the
seventh's time. But that which gives the greatest glory and re-renown to this
place, is the memory of that grand appearance at his Majesty's Restoration,
when all the Gentry and Nobility of the Nation, and all the Pomp and splendour
of the City of London met to receive his Majesty and his two Brothers, and
conduct them through the City to the Royal Palace of Whitehall, and even the
armed part of the Nation that but lately had drawn the Sword against him, now
met him with the highest acclamations of welcome.

In Buckinghamshire, Buckingham the Shire Town was fortified by King Edward
surnamed the Elder, against the fury of the Danes, and still shows the ruins of
a strong and stately Castle built upon a hill.

Stony-Stratford was a Station of the Romans, and by them called Lactorodum.
Here the said King Edward the Elder* gave a stop to the violent incursions of
the Danes upon those parts; and this is one of those places where the first of
that name since the Conquest raised a stately monumental Cross in memory of
Queen Eleanor.

At Chilton in this Shire was born that learned Writer in the Law Sir George
Crook.

Amersham, so called qu. Agmondsham, is not only eminent by the name of the
great Agmond, from whom it takes denomination, but by the birth of several
learned Writers, especially John, surnamed from the place of his Nativity,
Amersham; and John Gregory of the present Age, whose posthume works are
worthily reckoned among the principal of English Writings.

At Windover was born Roger, thence surnamed de Windover, Historian to King
Henry the third.

At Houton, Roger Goad, a man of good repute for learning.

In Barkshire are several places of note. Reading boasts the Interment of King
Henry the first, in a Collegiate Church of an Abbey founded by himself, together
with his Queen and his Daughter Maud the Empress. He also built here a strong
Castle which was rased to the ground by King Henry the second. But this Town is
yet more remarked by the birth of William Laud, who of a poor Clothiers Son of
Reading, was advanced to the highest Ecclesiastical Office and Dignity of the
Nation, viz. the Archiepiscopal See of Canterbury: nor is it to be forgotten
how manfully this Town was held out in the time of the late Civil War by Sir
Jacob Aston against the whole power of the Earl of Essex, General of the
Parliaments forces for a whole twelve month's time, but at length it was taken
by the said Earl. And from this place, in the Reign of King Henry the second a
learned Writer, viz. Hugh of Reading, took both Birth and Surname.

At Inglefield the Danes received a great defeat from King Ethelwolf.

Wallingford the Gallena of Ptolomy, was an ancient Station of the Romans, and
the chief City of the Atrebates. From this place Richard of Wallingford took
his birth, and consequently his Surname.

Abington, besides that it was a place of much action in the time of the Civil
Wars in his late Majesty's Reign, gave birth to Sir John Mason, Privy
Counselor to King Henry the eighth, King Edward the sixth, Q. Mary and Qu.
Elizabeth; as also to Sir John Smith, Latin Secretary and Master of Requests to
King James.

Windsor is renowned as having been built by King Edward the third, and as the
place where was first instituted that most illustrous Order of the Knights of
the Garter by that most victorious Prince, and of which the greatest Kings and
Princes of Europe have been fellows from the first Institution to this day; and
likewise for the Interment of King Henry the sixth, King Edward the fourth,
King Henry the eighth, and King Charles the first, whose Body has been since
removed to Westminster, and interred in King Henry the seventh's Chapel.
Moreover this place gave birth to a person of great fame for his learned
Writings, viz. Roger hence surnamed of Windsor.

Eaton, nearly adjoining, and almost contiguous to Windsor, is a place, besides
the fame of being built by King Henry the sixth, trebly renowned for learning,
first as a Nursery for the bringing up of Youth, being one of the chiefest
Free-schools in England; secondly as a place of maintenance and encouragement
for the studious and well advanced in learning; thirdly as the Birthplace of
several learned men, particularly Samuel Collins, William Oughtred the great
Mathematician, and Matthew Stokes.

At Ratcot Bridge Robert Vere Duke of Ireland was put to flight by the Duke of
Gloucester, the Earls of Arundel, Warwick and Derby, with the slaughter of Sir
Thomas Molineux Constable of Chester. This Radcot is by some reckoned in
Oxfordshire.

Sunning is sufficiently signal in history as having bin an Episcopal See for
the residence of eight Bishops, which See was translated to Shirbourn, and
afterward to Salisbury, where it still remains.

Wantage is enobled by the Birth of that great mirror of a Prince, for Virtue,
Learning and Valor, King Alfred surnamed the Scourge of the Danes.

Waltham in the East of this County was an ancient Station of the Romans; so
likewise Sinodum in the North.

Newbury a Town of sufficient note in this Shire, is yet more noted by the
birth of Thomas Hide a learned Writer; and also by two great Fights fought in
the time of the late Civil Wars between the Forces of his late Majesty and the
Parliament Army under the Earl of Essex.

Spene and Pesemere, two places of no other note than by the birth of two
eminent Writers, the first of William Twisse, the other of William Lyford.

In Hantshire, Winchester the ancient Venta Belgarum of the Romans, is said to
have been built by that famous Rudhudibras, great in the Catalogue of the old
British Kings. It was the Seat Royal of the West Saxons, and chief Epicopal
See, and still remains the Episcopal See of a great part of that which was the
West Saxon Kingdom. It was honored with the Coronations of King Egbert and
King Alfred, and the Birth of King Henry the third. Here in the Cathedral built
by King Kenwolf King of the West Saxons, were interred King Egbert, King
Ethelwolf, King Alfred with his Queen Elswith, the first Edmund, King Edred,
and King Edwy; Queen Emma and her Husband the Danish King Canutus, as also his
Son Hardy-Canutus, and after the Conquest King William Rufus and his Brother
Richard. Here King Athelstan kept his Mint. At St. Peter's in the Suburbs of
this City was born John Russel, created Bishop of Lincoln by King Edward the
fourth, and Lord Chancellor of England by King Richard the third. This City
also brought forth two persons of illustious memory for learning, viz.
Lampridius surnamed of Winchester, a Benedictine Monk, who flourisht An. 980.
and Wolstan of Winchester, a Benedictine likewise, and accounted in those times
an eminent Poet, who flourisht An. 1000.

Southampton, built out of the ruins of the ancient Clausentium, and after
many devastations reedified in King Richard the second's time, is a most
pleasant and well fortified Town with a goodly Castle proudly advanced on a
Hill. In a Maison dieu or Hospital here lies interred the body of Richard Earl
of Cambridge, who was executed for Treason in the Reign of King Henry the
fifth. In the Parish of St. Michael in Southampton was born Arthur Lake Bishop
of Bath and Wells, who died An. 1602. as also Sir Thomas Lake Secretary of
State to King James.

At Basingstoke John surnamed of Basingstoke, the first English Author of a
Greek Grammar, who died An. 1252. William Paulett, Baron of Basing and Marquess
of Winchester, (...) to King Henry the seventh, and Lord Treasurer to King
Henry the eighth, Edward the sixth, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, he died
An. 1572. and lastly Richard White, who studying at Doway began to grow famous
for Learning An. 1611.

At Andover was born Robert Thomson, a man of Military fame, who made an
Expedition to Spain An. 1553.

At Warblington Henry Bishop of Salisbury in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth: He
died An. 1615.

At Hide, John styled the Monk of Hide, an Historian, who flourished An. 1284.

Odiam has its chief repute from the birth of William Lilly, the first Master
of Paul's School. He died of the Plague, and was buried in the Porch of St.
Paul's Anno 1522.

Ilchester seems by its ruins to have been a very eminent City of the Romans,
and the principal of these parts in ancient times.

At Wickham in this Shire was born the famous William thence surnamed of
Wickam, Bishop of Winchester, who died An. 5 H. 4.

At Okeley William Warham, Bishop first of London, afterward Archbishop of
Canterbury in the Reign of King Henry the 7th.

In the Isle of Wight, Thomas James the chief, if not only Ornament of that
Island, for eminence of Learning.

Other famous men this Shire has brought forth; Beavise of Southampton, whose
acts of Chivalrie had perhaps stood greater in real History, had they not been
so much falsified by Romantic stories.

Sir John Wallop, whose valor and conduct in Sea-affairs have kept his memory
alive.

Richard Rich, Baron of Lees Abbey in Essex, and Lord Treasurer of England in
the Reign of King Edward the sixth, and Ancestor to the present Earls of
Warwick.

And for Learning, R. Sherburn, Bishop first of St. David's, then of Chichester,
under King Henry the seventh.

John White, Bishop first of Lincoln, then of Winchester, and accounted in his
time not the meanest of Poets, who died about 1560.

Thomas Bilson Bishop of Winchester, who died about An. 1618.

Michael Reneger.

William Alton, a Dominican, who flourisht An. 1330.

David Whitehead, who died An. 1571.

Nicholas Fuller, who died An. 1626.

Charles Butler, who died An. 1640.

Thomas Sternhold, Groom of the Bedchamber, first to King Henry the eighth,
then to King Edward the sixth, who owes his fame in Poetry, not so much to the
Elegancy of Rhimes, as to the fortune of his having been one of the first
Translators of David's Psalms into English Meter; which by reason they happened to
be generally sung in Churches, have been ever since preferred to several better
Translations.

In Bedfordshire, Bedford the County Town has to its cost been the Scence of
much action in the Civil Wars, between King Stephen and the Empress Maud; it
suffered much havoc and devastation, and afterward fell into the hands of the
Barons in their Wars against King John: And lastly, was rased to the ground by
King Henry the third; but being rebuilt again, has flourished ever since in
much tranquillity and splendor. In a Chapel not far from this Town the Body of
the great Mercian King Offa is said to have been interred, concerning which
there goes a pretty odd story, which it were pity to forget, viz. that the
Chapel being overwhelmed by an Inundation of the River Ouse, upon whose banks
it stood, the Leaden incloser of King Offa's body has been often seen of those
that declined the sight, but never could be seen of those that sought to see it.

Dean in this Shire is eminent for the birth of Francis Dillingham, a person of
good note for Learning; as likewise

Laiton Buzzard for the birth of William Sclator.

Sandy was an ancient Roman Station by the name of Selenae; and

Dunstable, another by the name of Magintum; however some vainly have delivered
that it was built by King Henry the first to repress the insults of a notable
sturdy Thief called Dun, and thereupon called Dunstable. This Town is moreover
signalliz'd by the learned Author John surnamed hence of Dunstable.

In Suffolk, Ipsich, qu. Gipswich, from Gipsa, is said to be the Founder
thereof, besides its flourishing Estate in shipping-trade, goodly buildings,
populacy of inhabitants, (though much harrass't in ancient times by the Danes)
is particularly noted for the birth of that great Pageantry of Fortune Cardinal
Woolsy, whose father was a Butcher of this Town.

St. Edmundbury, a Town which seems to commence its Fame from the barbarous
Murder of that Royal St Edmund, King of the East Angles by the Danes; For the
Expiation whereof Canutus erected here that Stately Monastery which was once
accounted the most Rich and Magnificent of Europe. This place is also memorable
for a Parliament here held in the Reign of King Henry the sixth.

Exning, the Birthplace of St Audri, sister to King Ina.

Renlisham, the place where Redwald the first Christian King of the East Angles
kept his Court.

Lidgat, a place chiefly memorable for the Birth of John, thence Surnamed
Lidgate, one of the chief of our ancient Enlish Poets.

In Hertfordshire, St Albans raised out of the ruins of Old Verulamium an
ancient Roman station, is extolled not only for the memory of that great
British Protomartyr Albanus, and that most stately Monastery erected by the
Mercian King Offa, but also for two great battles here fought, the first on the
23d of May Anno 1455, between Richard Duke of York and King Henry the 6th, in
which the King was defeated with the slaughter of the Duke of Somerset, the
Earl of Northumberland, and the Lord Clifford, and 5000 common Soldiers: the 2
d. on the 17 th. of February Anno 1460. where King Henry and his Queen Margaret
had the better against the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk, and the Earls of
Arundel and Warwick. Nor is it to be omitted, that Sir John Mandevil, famous
for his Travels, had here his birth.

Barnet is not more famed for its rich Market and the great concourse to its
Wells, than for the memory of that grand Victory gained by King Edward the
fourth on an Easter Day, being the 14 th of April, An. 1471. against the Earls
of Warwick and Oxford, in which Field the great Earl of Warwick was slain. But
had there been nothing else to give Fame to this Town, it must have been
mentioned for the Birth of John Barnet, Bishop first of Worcester, then of Bath
and Wells, lastly of Ely, and Lord Treasurer of England, in the Reign of King
Edward the 3 d.

Langly (commonly called Kings Langly) is of repute in History, for the Birth
of Prince, Edmund thence surnamed of Langly, fifth Son to King Edward the
third, and the first interment of King Richard the second, whose body was
afterward removed to Westminster. Nor much less Abbots Langly (so is another
Langly termed that lies Easterly) for the birth of Nicholas Break-spear,
advanced to the Sea of Rome, by the name of Pope Adrian the fourth, a man of
true English metal, and that would not bate an Ace of his Pontifical
greatness* for he made the Emperor Frederick hold his Stirrup the better to
help him into the Saddle.

Oister near St Albans is supposed by Cambden to have been the Camp of the
Roman Lieutenant Ostorius. Weathamstead qu. Wheathamstead, chiefly noted for
the birth of John of Wethamstead, a profound Philosopher.

Other places Hertfordshire noted for famous men.

Ware, for Richard de Ware, Treasurer of England under Edward the first, and
William de Ware who was Scotus his Teacher, and flourisht under King Henry the
third.

Baldock, for Ralph Baldock, created Bishop of London by King Edward the first.

Rudburn, for Thomas Rudburn Bishop of St David's, who flourisht An. 1419.

Helmstedbury, for Sir Edward Waterhouse, Chancellor of the Exchequer in
Ireland under Queen Elizabeth.

Gatesden, for John de Gatesden, who flourisht An. 1420.

Hamstead, for Daniel Dike.

Cottered, for Edward Symonds.

Gorham-berry, for Sir Nicholas Bacon.

Nor may we here omit other eminent men of this Shire, viz.

Sir Henry Carry, a great Soldier in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, by whom he
was created Baron of Hunsden, and Lord Chamberlain.

John Boucher, Baron Berners. And of learned men,

Alexander Nequam, who died An. 1227.

Nicholas Gorham, who flourisht An. 1400.

Roger Hutchinson.

Thomas Cartwright, and

Hugh Legate.

In Norfolk, the chief City and Episcopal See Norwich, seems to have sprung out
of the ancient Venta of the Romans, and is chiefly Famous for its sufferings,
having been sacked and burnt by the Danes in the year 1004. And in the
Conquerours time reduced to utmost exigence for siding with Earl Radulph
against the said King William. The Cathedral was Founded by Herbert, who
translating the Bishopric ftom Thetford to Norwich, was the first Bishop of
Norwich.

Thetford, the ancient Sitomagus of the Romans, is a place of much remark for
antiquity; It was the Royal Seat of the Kings of the East Angles, and the
unfortunate place where King Edmund the Martyr was overthrown by the Danes. The
Bishopric which is now of Norwich was translated from Elmham to Thetford, in
the Reign of King William the Conqueror.

Lyn, a Sea Port Town, was made Liber Burgus, and honored with the gift of a
rich Cup by King John, and had their Charter enlarged by King Henry the third,
for their good Service against the Outlawed Barons, and in King Henry the
eighth's time other privileges were added, and the name changed from Lyn
Episcopi to Lyn Regis.

Yarmouth boasts the antiquity of its foundation from the time of the Danes.

Elmham is considerable for having been a Bishops See for several Ages, first
divided with Dunwich in Suffolk, next sole till it was translated to Thetford,
thence to Norwich.

In Sussex the City Chichester boasts the Foundation of Cissa, the second King
of the South Saxons, and had the Bishopric translated thither in King William
the Conquerours time from Selsey, which till then had been the Episcopal See.

Lewis, a Town little if ought inferior to Chichester, is sufficiently of name
in History, as having been one of the places appointed by King Athelstan, for
the Coinage of his Money, and for the strong Castle built by Earl William de
Warren. Here also was a bloody battle fought between King Henry the third and
his Barons, in which the King received a cruel Overthrow.

Pensey, a little Sea Town but great in Story, as the Landing place of King
William the Conqueror, when by one Victorious battle he gained the Crown of
England, with the slaughter of King Harold and his two Brothers, Leofwin and
Goroh, and about 67000 men.

Hastings being the Town near which this successful held was fought, has
gotten so much the greater name, and the very place of fight retains to this
day the name of Battle-field.

Buckstead, a place in some respect of as great note as any has been named.
For here in the thirty fifth year of King Henry the eight, the first Great Iron
Guns that ever were cast in England were cast by Peter Baude and Ralph Hage.

In Cambridge-Shire the Town of Cambride is of too high a renown for its many
Halls and Colleges, the habitations of the Muses, richly endowed for the
advancement and encouragement of Learning, to be here passed by, and too well
taken notice of, and described by others to be longer insisted on.

Eli, the Bishops Seat and denominating City of the Diocese, is said to have
been built by one Audry, who was first wife of one Tombret Prince of these
parts, and afterward of Egbert King of Northumberland, from whom departing,
She here betook her self to a devout life, and built a most stately Monastery,
of which She her self became the first Abbess.

This place is also recordable for the Birth of several Learned men, viz.
Andrew Willet who died An. 1621. Sir Thomas Ridly Dr. of the Laws, who died An.
1629. Richard Parker who died here An. 1624.

Everton in this Shire gave Birth to John Tiptoft, Son of John Lord Tiptoft,
Earl of Worcester, and Lord High Constable of England.

Triplow is memorable by the Birth of Elias Rubens a Writer of grand repute,
who flourisht An. 1266.

Everden gave both Birth and Surname to John Eversden another learned Writer.

Of this County were also Matthew Paris, and Sir John Cheek, Tutor to King
Edward the sixth, and Richard Wethershet, who flourisht in the year 1350.

At Caxton was born William thence Surnamed Caxton, the first Printer in
England.

Wisbich brought forth Richard Hocloet a man eminent for Learning An. 1552.

Linton is only note-worthy for the Birth of Richard Richardson, one of the
Translatours of the Bible, who deceas't An. 1621.

Milton, as it is generally believed, gave birth to Thomas Goad, a Writer of
good note.

Mildred brought forth Andrew Mervail Minister of Hull, a Learned Father of a
Learned and Witty Son, for so was that Andrew who died but a few years since;
he was a Member in the late long Parliament for the Town of Hull, a man of very
acute parts, had he not failed in his affection to the Government, as several
of his Writings testify.

Of this County were Michael Dalton, a Learned Writer, and also Edward Norgate.

In Huntington-Shire, St Neots so called from Neotus, a Holy and Learned man,
is memorable for the defeat given to the Earl of Holland by the Parliament
Forces in the late Civil Wars, An. 1648. as also for being the Birthplace of
two eminent men, viz.

Francis White Bishop of Ely, and Hugh thence Surnamed of St Neots, who
deceas't Anno 1340.

Godmanchester, qu. Gormoncester, from Gormon the Dane, is concluded to have
been the Old Durisiponte of the Romans, and some think from the nearness of the
name, the same with Gunicester, where Macutus had his Bishopric. At this
Godmanchester was born, a man who made too much noise in the world to be
forgotten; Stephen Marshal, one of the chief of those Zealous Trumpetters of
the late times, who from the Pulpit stirred up to War and Bloodshed in the Name
of the Lord.

At St Ives was born Roger thence Sirnam'd of St Ives, who flourisht An. 1420.

At Cunnington the Learned Antiquary, Sir Robert Cotton. Moreover from
Huntington the Capital place of this Shire sprung two very famous men.

Gregory of Huntington, who died An. 1610. and Henry of Huntington, renowned
for his History, who flourish't An. 1248.

Other Celebrated men of this Shire were William Whitlesey, Archdeacon of
Huntington, who died An. 1375.

Henry Saltry, who flourisht 1140.

William Ramsey, a famous Poet.

John Young, and John White.

In Wiltshire, Wilton the Denominating and once the Principal Town of the
Shire, is so much the more notable a place by how much the more despicable it
now appears, as a strange example of the various turns of fortune, and
mutations of human affairs, having only the name left of a Market Town, else
but a pitiful Village, (consisting of one only Parish Church,) which is said to
have been a Town of about seventeen or eighteen Parish Churches, and having no
Memorial or Monument of antiquity, which has been the Theater of so many grand
Transactions. Here Egbert the Westsaxon and at last Sole Monarch of the
English, encountered Bernulf, King of Mercia, and slew him in Battle; but in
this very place he afterward received a terrible overthrow from the Danes.

At Edindon King Alfred gave the Danes a very notable defeat.

Bradford is memoris'd for a bloody Battle fought between two great Competitors
in the Saxon Heptarchy.

At Woodensbury An. 590. Cheaulin King of the West Saxons encountering the
Britains who joined with his Nephew Cealrick, was put to flight, and his Son
Cuth slain.

Here also Ina the West Saxon fought with Ceolred the Mercian.

Old Sarum was a place made choice of by the Romans for a strong encamped
habitation, as by the ruins thereof at this day appears. Here the Britains
received a fatal overthrow from Kenrick the Saxon, besides what spoil was
afterward done by Canutus.

Caln is famous for that great Assembly, which put an end to the controversy
about the Marriage of Priests, by reason of a disaster which happened by the
fall of the Room, to the destruction of several people of all sorts.

Brokenbridge and Cosham, places doubly famous in History. First, as having
been ancient Roman Seats, next, as the Courts of some of the Saxon Kings.

Crekelade, memorable for the Fame of an University said to have been anciently
here erected, and from hence removed to Oxford.

Malmsbury, qu. Maidulphsbury, from Maidulphus, a person of renown both for
Sanctity and Learning, is no less memorable for the famous Monastery there
erected by the said Maidulphus, then for the birth of two great men viz.
William, thence surnamed of Malmesbury, a Celebrated Historian, and Thomas
Hobbes of this present Age, and but a few years since deceast, a man of much
Earning and more cunning Sophistry, for the maintenance of those principles he
maintained thereby.

In Dorsetshire, Dorchester the chief Town, only boasts of some antiquity, as
from the Roman name Durnovaria.

Badbury was anciently the Court of the West Saxon Kings.

At Cern, Austin broke down the Idol of the Saxon God Hell.

Shaftsbury is famed for the History of the Prophesying Eagle, most probably a
man whose name was Aquila. Here was enterr'd the Body of Edward the Son of
Edgar, Murdered by his Mother-in-Law at Corfe Castle.

At Winburn-Minster, built by Cuthburga, Wife in second Marriage to a King of
Northumberland, the Body of King Ethelred was buried.

Shirburn was an Episcopal See for a long time, in the Cathedral whereof were
buried the bodies of King Ethelbald and King Ethelbert.

In Somersetshire the principal place is the City of Bath, Brit. Akamancester,
Lat. Aqua solis and Badissa, very famous and much frequented for its hot
Bathing-Springs, which our old British Traditions will have to be the invention
of Bladud an ancient British King. Bath and Wells jointly together make one
Bishopric.

Wells is principally esteemed for its Cathedral, which is said to have been
built by Inas King of the West Saxons.

Pen now a small Village is memoris'd for a great overthrow given to the
Britains by Kenwald King of the West Saxons, and afterward to the Danes by K.
Edmund Ironside.

Bridgewater is otherwise a Town of very good note, and of memory for a notable
defeat given here to the Danes by Ealstan Bishop of Shirburn, An. 845.

Glastonbury, Avalonia, is principally renowned for its Monastery, delivered to
have been founded by Joseph of Arimathea, the first Preacher (as some Writers
affirm) of the Gospel in this Island. In the Churchyard of Glastonbury in King
Henry the second's Reign, was found a Corpse of a large demension, which by
several circumstances was concluded to be the Body of King Arthur.

Cadbury is recordable for the defeat given by King Arthur to the English
Saxons.

Banesdown (Mons Badonicus) is a place renowned for several other of King
Arthurs Victories, and where King Alfred overthrew the Danes, and brought
Gorrum to the Sacred Font.

Camalet a steep Hill, was doubtless some Fort or Encampment of the Romans, as
appears by the Coins there found; moreover on the top thereof there remains to
this day the Vestigia of some noble Castle, which is said to have been a Palace
of King Arthur. This Town some Writers have placed in Cornwall.

Ilchester appears also by the like demonstration to have been a station of the
Romans, and is still of that repute, that it is the chief place of
Jail-deliver for the County.

In Oxfordshire, Oxford besides the glory of its famous University, and the
Magnificence of its Stately Colleges; Here more frequent Parliaments have been
called than in any place of England next to Westminster, and particularly the
last Parliament called by his present Majesty, and held here in March, 1681.
Here Maud the Empress was besieged by King Stephen, and with great difficulty
made her escape in a disguise by night, and got over the Thames on the Ice.
This place his late Majesty King Charles the first made his chief Head
Quarters, during the greatest part of the Civil War between him and the
Parliament, till the City was taken by Sir Thomas Fairfax, General of the
Rebels Forces. It is moreover famous for being the birthplace of that Martial
Prince King Richard the first, surnamed Ceur de Lion.

Woodstock, besides that it has been anciently a stately Palace belonging to
the Kings of England, claims a particular place in the book of Fame upon
several accounts. In the first place here it was that King Henry the second
built a sumptuous Bower for his Paramour Rosamund Clifford, who for her
singular beauty and in allusion to her name, was styled Rosa Mundi. Next, it
was the Birthplace of Edward the Black Prince, lastly, in the Town of
Woodstock was brought up and educated that most renowned of English Poets Sir
Geoffry Chaucer.

Islip cannot be forgotten so long as the memory of King Edward the Confessor
lasts, who was here born.

In Glocestershire the City of Gloucester (Glenum, Colonia Glenum) eminent for
its Cathedral, of which more elsewhere, is also not obscure in History. Here
Earl Robert, Brother to the Empress Maud, was kept prisoner for some time; but
much more famous, (if we may not say infamous) was the keeping of this City by
the Parliament-Forces under Colonel Massy against his late Majesty King
Charles the First, and the great Battle here fought for the raising of the
Siege.

It was won from the Britains by Cheulin, King of the West Saxons, An. 570.
Here a Monastery of Nuns was founded by Osric King of Northumberland, of which
three Queens of the Mercians were successively Prioresses, viz. Kineburg,
Eadburg, and Eve. Here was born Robert called the Monk of Gloucester, who
flourished under Henry the second, and also Osbernus sirnam'd Claudianus, a
Benedictine Monk.

Alny Isle, a place near Gloucester, where after several bloody Battles between
King Edmund Ironside and Canutus the Dane, the matter was at last decided
between them by single combat, and a division of the Kingdom made.

Cirencester, or Circester, a place of memorable note, as won from the Britains
by Cheulin the West Saxon; this City is doubtless Ptolomies Corinium, Antonines
Durocornovium, and Giraldus his Vrbs Passerum, which last denomination it takes
from a tradition of one Gurmund an African Tyrant who set it on fire, by tying
to the tails of Sparrows certain combustible matter which he put fire to. It
was won from the Britains by Cheulen King of the West Saxons, next possess't by
the Mercians, lastly by the Danes under Gurmund, An. 879. But that which is to
be said greatest of this for it is antiquity and remark is that, that it was
anciently one of the principal residencies of the Romans, by whom it had been
raised to a high pitch of magnificence and grandeur.

At Cicester was born Thomas Ruthal, Bishop of Durham.

At Duresby, Edw. Fox Bishop of Hereford.

At Came near Duresby, Edward Trotman Judge of the Common Law, who was buried in
the Temple Church May the 29th, An. 1643.

At Todington, Richard Son to Sir William Tracy, who flourished under King
Henry the second. This Richard wrote a Book entitled Preparatio ad Crucem, of
much esteem in those times.

At Yate, Thomas Neal Chanter to Bishop Bonner, he was eminent for Learning and
flourished, An. 1576.

At Westbury, John Carpenter Bishop of Worcester.

At Sudely Castle Ralph Lord Sudely, Lord Treasurer and Knight of the Garter
under Henry the sixth.

Other Noted men of this Shire were Tideman de Winchcomb, the Kings Physician,
Abbot of Benle, Bishop first of Landaff, afterward of Worcester.

John Chedworth, Bishop of Lincoln.

Anthony Fitz-Herbert, Judge of the Common Pleas.

Thomas de la More, Knighted by King Edward the first; he wrote the Character
of King Edward the second, a Manuscript now in Oxford Library.

Sir Thomas Overbury, Son to Sir Nicholas.

William Winter, Vice Admiral of England under Queen Elizabeth.

John Sprint, John Workman, and Richard Capel.

Tewksbury-field gave a very fatal blow to the House of Lancaster, An. 1471. in
which Prince Edward was slain, and Queen Margaret taken Prisoner, together with
the Duke of Somerset, the Earl of Devonshire, and others who were beheaded.
Here was born the famous Alan of Tewksbury, who flourished under King John.

Hales, a once flourishing Abbey, but chiefly to be remembered for the birth of
Alexander de Hales, surnamed Dr. Irrefregabilis, who died An. 1245.

In Worcestershire, Worcester the chief City, is questionless the ancient
Branconium of Antoninus and Ptolomie, though since called by the Latins
Vigornea, and by the Britains Caer Wrangon; some think it to have been built by
the Romans for a bound to the Britains. The Cathedral of St Mary in Worcester,
besides the fame of its State and Beauty, is the Repository of the Bodies of
King John, and Prince Arthur, Eldest Son to King Henry the seventh. But that
which gives greatest renown to this City, is the memory of the happy
preservation of his present Majesty, from being taken at the fatal Battle of
Worcester, where the great Gallantry and Valor of His Majesty and his Party
was utterly overpowr'd by the treble forces of the Usurpers.

At Eversham, An. 1265. King Henry the third gained a most triumphant Victory
over his Barons, with the slaughter of Simon Montford and seventeen Lords, and
the taking of Humphry Bohun Prisoner.

In Herefordshire the City of Hereford, besides that it is the Principal City,
an Episcopal See, and noted for its Cathedral, is also memorable for the birth
of Adam de Orleton Bishop of Hereford, Roger of Hereford a Writer of Astronomy,
who flourished under Henry the second, An. 1170.

John Davies of good repute for Poetry. And also Charles Smith Bishop of
Gloucester, in the reign of King James.

Bradwardin Castle gave both birth and surname to that Thomas de Bradwardin
ArchBishop of Canterbury, who for his deep knowledge in Theology, and skilful
management of Disputations, is styled the profound Doctor.

At Ashperton was born John Grandison, Bishop of Exeter.

Other memorable persons of this Shire were Robert Devereux Earl of Essex,
great in deeds of Arms, and a person of great power and favor with his Prince,
yet brought to an untimely end.

Richard Hackluit, whose Book of Voyages is of good repute among the studious
in Geography and History.

William Lemster, a Franciscan and learned Doctor.

John Guillam the noted Herald, whose Systeme of Heraldry is accounted the best
that has been written of this Subject.

In Shropshire besides Shrewsbury the County Town, a noted Mart for Cloth and
Frizes brought hither from Wales and sent to London and other parts of England;
there are very remarkable ruins of some ancient places which were certainly
Towns or Cities of great spendour or resort, as Wrocckester Vriconium, the
ancient Vsoconia, of which Okenyate is a small remainder.

Oswaldstree retains its name from Oswald the 11th King of Northumberland, who
was here slain in battle by Penda King of the Mercians.

In Staffordshire the County Town Stafford, anciently Bitheny, from Bertelin a
holy man, is said to have been built by King Edward the Elder, and was made a
Corporation by King John.

Tamworth, was doubtless anciently a place of more spendour and amplitude than
at present, for here the Mercian Kings for a long time kept their Court.

Litchfield though not the County Town, is yet the most eminent place of the
County, as being a City and Episcopal See jointly with Coventry, the chief
Church and now Cathedral, was built by the Northumbrian King Oswin, upon the
Conquest he gained over the Pagan Mercians; and here Wulferre and Celred were
interred; it was for some time an Archbishopric by the means of King Offa, at
the request of Bishop Eadulph.

At Bloreheath in this County, a cruel battle was fought between the two Houses
of York and Lancaster, in which there fell on the Duke of York's side Sir Hugh
Venables, Sir William Trowthec, Sir Richard Mollineux, and Sir J. Egerton, etc.
with 2400, and the two Sons taken prisoners of the Earl of Salisbury, General
of the Yorkists.

In Darbyshire besides Derby the County town there are memorable;

Ripton, Ripandunum, where was interred Ethelbald, the 9th King of the
Mercians, who was slain at Egiswald by his Subjects, and whence Burthred the
last King was expelled by the Danes with his Queen Ethelwith.

At Melburn John D. of Bourbon taken at Agin Court, was kept prisoner.

Little Chester, an ancient Colony of the Romans, as appears by what Coins have
been dug up thereabout.

In Nottinghamshire, the County Town Nottingham, has not wanted its share in
the grand rencounters that have been in this Nation; the Castle hereof was kept
by the Danes against the Mercian King Burthred, and also against the English
Saxon Monarchs, Elthelred and Alfred.

At Newark in this County, King John who was poisoned at Swinsted Abbey, is said
to have drawn his last breath.

At Stoke near Newark, Lambert Symnel's party was utterly defeated, and his
upholders John de la Pool Earl of Lincoln, Thomas Garadine Chancellor of
Ireland, Fr. Lord Lovel and others were slain with 4000 of their men, and he
himself taken prisoner, June 16th, An. 1487.

At Mansfield was born the first Earl of Mansfield in Germany, one of the
Knights of King Arthurs Round Table.

In Warwickshire, the Town of Warwick is sufficiently famed in story over and
above what is related of Guy of Warwick and his great adventures, and above all
things the antiquity of the foundation is remarkable, if, as the tradition
goes, it were built by Gurguntus, 375 years before the Nativity of our Savior,
however the Castle looks great, and savours much of Antiquity.

Coventry being jointly one Bishopric with Leichfield, is memorable, besides
the beauty of the brave action of Countess Godiva (the wife of Leofrick the
first Lord thereof) well known in History. One of the Gates of this City is
called Gofford Gate, which is the more notable by the Shieldbone of some very
large beast, some say a wild Bore, slain by Guy of Warwick, some say an
Elephant, with the snout whereof a pit was turned up, which is now Swanes Mear.

At Backlow-hill in this County, Pierce Gavesto^ was taken and beheaded by a
party of the Nobles.

At Wolny, An. 1469. King Edward the fourth his Forces were discomfited by his
brother George Duke of Clarence, and Richard Earl of Warwick, and the King
himself taken prisoner.

In Northamptonshire, the County Town Northampton has been the Subject of many
warlike bronts, An. 1106. it suffered much by the contests of the Conquerours
three Sons, Robert, William and Henry, An. 1263. being held by the Barons
against King Henry the third; it was taken by surprise and the Walls thrown
down, An. 1459. King Henry the sixth was here taken prisoner by the Earl of
Warwick and March, with the slaughter of Humphry Stafford Duke of Buckingham,
John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, the Lords Egremont and Beaumont; but the
greatest misfortune that e're befell this Town was in this our Age, viz. An.
1675. when by an accidental Fire it was almost all burnt down to the ground,
yet lay it not long buried in ruin, for it was immediately rebuilt and now
appears in far greater splendor then ever. Here Earl Rivers, Father to Edward
the fourth's Queen taken at Grafton, was beheaded by Robin of Risdal, together
with his son John.

Higham Ferrers in this County has been honored with the birth of a very
great Prelate of this Nation, viz. Henry Chichly, Cardinal and Archbishop of
Canterbury in the Reign of King Henry the sixth. This Chichly was the founder
of All Souls College in Oxford.

Edgecot is signalis'd by a bloody battle fought near it on Danes More, July
the 26th An. 1469. by Robin of Risdal and Sir John Coniers, against William
Herbert Earl of Pembroke who, together with his Brother Richard, the Lord
Rivers, the Queens Brother and Richard Woodvil, were taken prisoners, carried
to Banbury, and beheaded.

At Fotheringhay Castle Mary Queen of Scots was kept a long time prisoner and
was at last beheaded.

In Leicestershire, Leicester the County Town is principally famous by the
tradition of its having been built by King Leir, great in the Catalogue of
ancient British Kings, qu. Leir-cester.

Lutterworth in this County ows its chief credit to the famous John Wickleff,
who was Parson of this place in the reign of King Henry the 4th.

Bosworth, a Town of no great note but for the memory of a most signal battle
fought near it on Redemore, August 22d 1485. which put an end to all
Controversies between the two houses of York and Lancaster, and in which fell
that most Tyrannical of English Kings Richard the third, with four thousand of
his men, and some say, though we are not bound to believe it, with the loss but
of ten men on the Earl of Richmonds side.

Cleycester of which there are now scarce any ruins remaining, was once a
famous City in the West part of this Shire, and by the Romans called Bennone.

In Rutlandshire some mention, as close adjoining, though generally affirmed to
be situate rather in Lincolnshire, the Town of Stamford for the reputation of
an ancient University, and said to have been founded by that Ancient British
King Bladud, who found out the virtue of the Bath-Waters.

In Lincolnshire, Lincoln the chief Town and only City of this Shire, is not
only eminent for its antiquity, and for that it was once acounted one of the
chiefest and the best traded Cities of England, and made by King Edward the
third, the chief Mart for Lead, Wool, and Leather: But also for a great battle
fought by Randolph Earl of Chester, and Robert Earl of Gloucester against King
Stephen, who was here taken prisoner, as also for the success of King Henry the
third, who won it from the Barons, it is said to have had once fifty Parish
Churches.

Wainfleet had been doubtless a place of little note, but for the birth of
William Wainfleet Bishop of Winchester, who living in the reign of King Henry
the sixth, with whom he was great in favor, built here a Free School, and
founded Magdalen College in Oxford.

Grimsby likewise though an ancient Market Town, has its chiefest repute from
its being the Birthplace of Dr. Whitgift Archbishop of Canterbury in the reign
of King James.

Bullingbrook is enobled by the memory of the Birth of King Edward the first,
and King Henry the fourth.

Swinesstead Abbey, the place where King John received from the hands of Simon a
Monk thereof, that baleful potion that gave him his end at Lincoln.

Harstill laments the death of that mir^our of that Conjugal love Queen
Eleanor, the wife of King Edward the first.

In the North Riding of Yorkshire, York the chief of this Shire, and second
City of England, was a Colony of the Romans, and a place of great account among
them, and ever since to this day a splendid and flourishing City; several
Emperors here kept their Court, and particularly Severus had a Palace here in
which he breathed his last. Here also Constantius Chlorus, the Father of
Constantine the Great, is said to have departed this life; nor does the death
of these two Emperors more ennoble this Place, than the Birth of the Learned
Alcuin, who was Tutour to the Emperor Charles the Great. Some write that it
was first made an Episcopal See by the Emperor Constantius, but this is more
certain, that it was made an Archbishopric in the year of our Lord 625.

At Leeds in the West Riding, Oswye King of Northumberland encountered the
united Forces of Ethelbald, Son of Oswald King of Northumberland, Ethelbert
King of the East Angles, and Penda King of the Mercians, to all whom he gave a
mighty defeat; slew Penda and Ethelbert, and put Ethelbald to flight.

Selby, a Town of good trade and resort, but most memorable for the birth of
King Henry the first; this is by some accounted in Lincolnshire.

Wakefield is a Town not more considerable for its Clothing, than for the
memory of a great battle fought between the Houses of York and Lancaster,
besides a defeat given in the late Civil Wars to the Earl of Newcastles Forces
by Sir Thomas Fairfax.

Pomfret Castle was built by Hildebert de Lacy, a Norman.

Hallyfax qu. Holy Hair anciently Horton, the birthplace of Joannes de
Sacrobosco.

Rotheram chiefly boasts in the birth of Thomas of Rotheram Archbishop of York.

In the East Riding Stanford Bridge from the battle, there fought, commonly
called Battle-Bridge.

Drifield is remembered by the Tomb of Alfred King of Northumberland here buried.

Beverly though a Town of flourishing trade, is yet more fame-worthy, as the
last retirement and place of decease of the Learned John Archbishop of York in
the Reign of Oswick An. 721. who was thence surnamed John de Beverly.

Newborough Abbey gives fame to it self by giving name to that Old English
Historian William of Newborough.

Kingston upon Hull, besides the repute of its Trade and Merchandise, is
honored with the fame of being built by King Edward the first, nor are there
wanting who will add the reputation of Andrew Mervail a Burgess of this place,
of whom elsewhere.

Exeter in Devonshire is both of sufficient antiquity, for the Castle called
Rugemont, was once the Palace of the West- Saxon Kings, and afterward of the
Earls of Cornwall, and the Walls and Cathedral were built by King Athelstan; and
also memorable for several transactions; here was born that most renowned Latin
Poet of England, Josephus, hence surnamed Iscanus, or Joseph of Exeter.

At Plymouth, that great Honor of England for Sea affairs, Sir Francis Drake
took Shipping for the Circum-navigation of the World An. 1577.

Teignmouth is noted for the place of the Danes first arrival in England.

Hubbleston, the Burial place of Hubba the Dane.

Crediton the ancient Episcopal See of this County till it was removed to
Exeter.

Camelford in Cornwall is guessed by those pieces of Armor that have been
dug up thereabout, to have been the place of Battle where Mordred was slain,
and where King Arthur received his mortal wound.

Tintagel Castle gave birth to this great Miracle of British Valor, King
Arthur.

At Castle Denis the Ruins of those Trenches are yet to be seen where the Danes
encamped at their first Invasion of this Land.

At Caradoc was born John Trevisa, a learned Writer; who died, Anno 1400.

St. Germains, a place chiefly fame-worthy for having been an ancient Episcopal
See.

At Truroe was born John Arundel, a renowned Seaman in the Reign of King Henry
the Eighth.

Bodmin, the next place to which the Bishop's Chair was removed; from whence it
was translated by King Edward the Confessor, to Exeter, where it has remained
ever since.

This County has brought forth several learned men, viz.

Hucarius, surnamed the Levite; who flourished, Anno 1040.

Simon Thurway; who flourished, Anno 1201.

John, Sir-named of Cornwall; who flourished, Anno 1170.

Michael Blawnpain; who flourished, Anno 1350.

Godfrey, Sir-named of Cornwall.

In NORTHVMBERLAND, at a place called Otterburn, a great Field was fought
between the English and Scots.

Alnwick is of note for the mighty Victory which the English here gained over
the Scots; and for that the Earls of Northumberland in ancient times here kept
their Court.

Emildon brought forth that great Contradiction of his own name for Niceties of
Wit and Subtilties in School-Philosophy. Duns Sir-named Scotus.

In the Western parts of Northumberland are yet to be seen some parts of the
Picts Wall.

In WESTMORLAND, The Aballaba of Antoninus is thought to have been a place of
very great note in the time of the Romans, by the antique Roman Coins that have
been there found in digging, and the station of the Aurelian Maures: and it is
still so considerable, that the Castle thereof is the place where the Assizes
for the County are kept.

Burgh, or Burgh under Stainmore, is undoubtedly the Ruins of an eminent Town,
which was called Verterae; and where a Roman Commander, in the declining time
of the Empire, is said to have kept his station, with a Band of Directores.

Ambleside (Amboglana) not far from Winander Mere, is judged the Ruins of some
famous City of Roman foundation or improvement, both by the paved ways that
lead to it, and the Coins of Roman Stamp often dug up there.

In CVMBERLAND, Carlisle (Luguvallum, or Leucophibia of Ptolomie) if not
illustrious in its Original, for it is delivered to have been built by that
Leil, who is great in the Catalogue of British Kings; was, at least, a
flourishing City under the Romans; and being demolished by the Picts, and
utterly ruined by the Danes, was restored by King William Rufus (who also built
there a Castle:) and by King Henry the First made a Bishop's See.

The Bishopric of DVRHAM gained that Title and Privilege by the great fame and
renown of St. Cuthbert; for the interment of whom the Cathedral of Durham was
first built by Bishop Aldwin; and afterward pulled down, and rebuilt by Bishop
Careleph. The Tomb of this adored Saint was visited with great devotion by King
Egfred, Alfred, Danish Guthrun, Edward and Athelstan: This City was by King
William the Conqueror raised to a County Palatine.

There is a place called Gallile in the West end of the Church, where is to be
seen the Tomb of Venerable Beda.

Binchester (Benovium) by the Coins there dug up, seems to have been a place
of great account among the Romans. So likewise,

Chester in the Street (Condercum.)

At Nevil's Cross near Durham, the Scots were defeated by Queen Philippa, Wife
to King Edward the First, by the Conduct of the Lords Piercy, Moubray and Nevil.

In LANCASHIRE, Lancaster, the County-Town, gives Title of Family from John of
Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, to four Henry's, Kings of England, viz. Henry the
Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh.

Manchester, Mancunium, an ancient Fort and Station of the Romans.

Rible-Chester, from Rhibel, a little Brook near Clithero, a Town of Antiquity
and Station of the Romans, as appears by the pieces of Coin and Statues there
found. But that which renders it most of memory is, that it has been reported
the richest Town of Christendom.

Near Duglas, a small Brook not far from the Town of Wiggin, King Arthur is
said by Ninius to have put the Saxons to flight.

At Billangho, Anno 789. Duke Wade was put to flight by Ardulph King of
Northumberland.

In CHESHIRE, Chester is famous in many respects; as, for its Minster, for its
Entertainment of King Athelstan, who hence settihg forth in a Barge upon the
River Dee, was rowed by Kennadie King of the Scots, Malcolm King of Cumberland,
Macon King of Man, and several Princes of Wales. By being made so great a
Principality by the Investiture of Hugh Lupus, by King William the Conqueror.
The Minster of this City was built by Earl Leofric to the Honor of St.
Werburga, repaired by Hugh Earl of Chester. And in this Minster was buried the
Body of Henry the Fourth, Emperor of Germany.

At Calvely was born Sir Hugh Calvely, a Soldier of great fame in the Reign of
King Edward the Third. As likewise was Sir Robert Knowles of this Shire.

Ecleston gave Birth to Thomas, thence Surnamed Ecleston.

Bunbury is noted by the birth of Robert Braffy; who died, Anno 1558.

Wrenbury boasts of George Patin, another learned Writer.

Moreover, the World owes to this Shire several other great men; viz. Sir
Thomas Aegerton, Lord Keeper, Anno 1596. Sir Humphrey Starky, Sir Henry
Bradshaw, Sir Randal Crew, and Sir Humphrey Davenport; all grand Pillars of the
Law. Ralph Ratcliff, a person eminent for Learning: and Captain John Smith, the
first setler of the Plantation of New England in the Reign of King James.

In FLINTSHIRE, The Castle of Flint; which was founded by King Henry the
Second, and finished by King Edward the First, gave Reception to King Richard
the Second when he came out of Ireland.

In DENBYSHIRE, Denby was walled about, and fortified with a Castle by Henry
Lacy Earl of Lincoln, in the Reign of King Edward the First.

In CAERNARVONSHIRE, Caernarvon is memorable, as having been raised by King E.
1. from the Ruins of that ancient City which is called by Antonine, Segontium
and by Ninius, Caer-Custenith; and where, as Matthew Westminster reports, was
found the Body of Constantius, the Father of Constantine the Great, Anno 1283.

In MERIONETHSHIRE, the principal Town Harlech is only worth memory for its
stately Castle.

In CARDIGANSHIRE, Cardigan the Shire-Town was walled about, and fortified with
a Castle by Gilbert de Clare, who was Lord of the whole County by the Gift of
King Henry the First.

In BRECKNOCKSHIRE, Hay is remembered, by its Ruins, to have been once a place
of Account; for it is reported in History to have been ruined and demolished in
the Rebellion of Owen Glendour. It is judged by the Coins there found to have
been an ancient Seat of the Romans.

Bealt (Buelth) the Buleum Silurum of Ptolomy is famed as the Seat of Aurelius
Ambrose, who possessed the whole Country, and after gave it to Pascentius, Son
of Vortiger. And likewise for the last Prince of the Britains, who was here by
Treachery slain. But Brecknock, being now the fairest Town of the Shire,
carries the Name and Primacy.

In CAERMARDENSHIRE, Caermarden, the Shire-Town, the Maridunum of Ptolomy and
Muridunum of Antonine is not so note-worthy for its large Castle and strong
Wall, as for being the Birthplace of that most famous old British (to give him
the most favorable Title) Prophet, Merlin.

In GLAMORGANSHIRE, The chief Town, and Episcopal See, Landaff, with its Castle
and Cathedral, is not so famous as the Town of Caerdiff; as having been the
Seat and Residence of that renowned Fitz-Hammond and his Norman Knights; who,
after the Conquest of Rhesus Prince of Wales, kept here his Court in the Reign
of William Rufus, and built here a strong Castle, in the Hall whereof are yet
to be seen the Ensigns of the said Fitz-Hammond and his Knights. In this Castle
has been for a long time, and is still kept the Audit for the Earl of
Pembroke's Estate in Wales.

In MONMOVTHSHIRE, Monmouth the County-Town is yet far more considerable upon
several respects: first, as being delivered by Geraldus to have been the place
where great King Arthur kept his Court. Next, as an Academy of Philosophy and
Arts; giving Residence to two hundred Scholars, and Birth to Amphibalus, whose
Disciple, our great Protomartyr, St. Albanus was, and two other noble persons
of our first Martyrs. And likewise as the Birthplace of that noble Prince King
Henry the Fifth.

In RADNORSHIRE, Radnor the ancient Magnos of Antonine, and the station of the
Pacentian Regiment, and fortified with a Castle is yet inferior in beauty of
Buildings to Prestain.

In PEMBROKESHIRE, though Pembroke is the County-Town, yet

St. David's is the more remarkable, as being an Episcopal See, and once an
Archbishopric, translated from Isca Legionum by that great Archbishop Devi,
whom we call St. David.

In MONTGOMERISHIRE, Montgomery is remarkable for its pleasant situation and
strong Castle, and the Title of an Earldom, first given by King James, Anno
1605. to Philip, second Son to Henry Earl of Pembroke, and still continuing in
his Grandchild Philip, now Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery.

In the Isle of ANGLESY, Beaumorris is not more noted for being the principal
Town, than for the frequent transportation of Passengers hence to Ireland, and
the fame of having been built by King Edward the First.

A true and perfect LIST OF THE NOBILITY OF ENGLAND: With their principal
HOUSES, and the COUNTIES which they are in.
DUKES.
* HIS Royal Highness James Duke of York and Albany, and Earl of Vlster. His
Seats,
St. James's, Middlesex. Richmond, Surrey.
The Dukedom of Cumberland extinct by the death of Prince Rupert. The Lord High
Chancellor of England. The Lord High Treasurer of England. The Lord President
of the Privy Council. The Lord Privy Seal. Henry Howard, Duke of Norfolk and
Earl Marshal of England; Earl of Arundel, Surrey, Norfolk and Norwich; Baron
Howard Moubray, Segrave, Brewes of Gower, Fitz-Alan, Clun, Oswaldestre,
Maltravers, Graystock and Castle-Rising. His Seats,
Norfolk House in Arundel Buildings, Middlesex. Arundel Castle, Sussex. Albury
and Waybridge, Surrey. Duke's Place in Norwich, Norfolk. Work-Sop, Nottingham.
Sheffeild-Mannor, York. Graystock Castle, and Drumbugh Castle, Cumberland.
Charles Seymour Duke of Somerset, Marquess of Hertford, Viscount Beauchamp,
and Baron Seymour. His Seats,
Marlborough House, and Allington House, Wilts.
* George Villers Duke, Marquess and Earl of Buckingham, Earl of Coventry,
Viscount Villers, and Baron of Whaddon. His Seats,
Wallingford House, near Whitehall, Middlesex. Colledge-Hill, London.
Buckingham House, and Whadon, Buckingham. Bishop's Hill in the City of York,
and Helmsey Castle, York.
* Christopher Monk Duke of Albemarle, Earl of Torrington, Baron Monk of
Poltheridge, Beauchamp and Teyes. His Seats.
Nun Appleton, and Burley on the Hlil, Rutland. Garrenton, Leicester. Albemarle
House, Middlesex. New Hall, Essex. Potheridge and Wenbury, Devonshire.
Cletherow Castle, Lancaster.
* James Scot Duke of Monmouth and Bucclugh, Earl of Doncaster and Dalkelth,
Baron of Tindal, Winchester and Ashdale. His Seat,
More Park, Hertford. So-Ho Square, Middlesex.
* Henry Cavendish Duke, Marquess and Earl of Newcastle, Earl of Ogle, Viscount
Mansfeild, Baron Ogle, Beutram and Bolsover. His Seats,
Welbeck Abbey, and Nottingham Castle, Nottingham. Bolsover Castle, Derby. Ogle
Castle, Bothal Castle, Heple Tower, Northumberland. Slingsby Castle, York.
Blore Hall, Stafford. Clerkenwell House, Middlesex.
Barbara Villers Duchess of Cleveland, and Baroness of Nonsuch. Her Seat,
Cleveland House, near St. James's, Middlesex.
Louise Querouale Duchess of Portsmouth, Countess of Farnham, and Baroness of
Petersfield. * Charles Lenox Duke of Richmond and Lenox, Earl of March, and
Baron of Settrington. His Seat,
In Scotland.
Charles Fitz-Roy Duke of Southampton, Earl of Chichester, Baron of Newbury,
and Heir in Succession to the Duchy of Cleveland. His Seat,
Nonsuch, Surrey.
* Henry Fitz-Roy Duke of Grafton, Earl of Ewston, Viscount Ipswich, and Baron
of Sudbury; the Remainder, for want of Issue Male, to George Fitz-Roy, his
younger Brother. His Seat,
Grafton Regis, Northampton.
* Henry Somerset Duke of Beaufort, Marquess and Earl of Worcester, Lord
Herbert of Chepstoll, Ragland and Gower, Lord President of Wales, and the
Marshes thereof. His Seats,
Worcester House in the Strand, Middlesex. Badminton, and Wallaston's Grange,
Gloucestershire. Troy House, Monmouth Castle, Ragland Castle, Chepstole Castle,
Tintorne Abbey, and Chepstow Grange, Monmouth. Swanzy Castle, Glamorgan.
Crickhowell Castle, and Tretonor Castle, Brecknock.
George Fitz-Roy Duke and Earl of Northumberland, Viscount Falmouth, and Baron
of Pontefract. His Seats,
Holme Pierpoint, Nottingham. Highgate, Middlesex.
James Butler Duke of Ormond within the Kingdom of England, Earl of Brecknock,
and Baron of Lantony in South- Wales, Lord Steward of the King's House, Duke,
Marquess and Earl of Ormond in Ireland, Viscount Thurles, Baron of Arklow, and
Lord of the Royalties and Liberties of the County of Tiperary in Ireland.
MARQUESSES.
CHarles Pawlet Marquess of Winchester, Earl of Wiltshire, and Lord St John of
Basing. His Seats,
Winchester House in Lincolns-Inn-Fields, Middlesex. Bolton Castle, and Bolton
Hall, York. Basing House, Abbtston, and Hackwood, Southampton. Edington, Wilts.
Hook Castle, Dorset.
The Marquisate of Dorchester lately extinct by the death of Henry Lord
Pierpoint. George Savill Marquess, Earl and Viscount Hallifax, and Baron of
England. His Seats,
Rufford, Nottingham. Hallifax House in St James's Square, Middlesex.
The Lord High Chamberlain of England. The Lord High Constable of England. The
Earl Marshal of England. The Lord High Admiral of England. The Lord Steward of
the King's Household. The Lord Chamberlain of the King's Household.
EARLS.
* AVbery de Vere Earl of Oxford, Viscount Bulbeck, Lord Sanford and
Badlesmere. His Seat.
Bentlie, Essex.
Charles Talbut Earl of Shrewsbury, Waterford and Wenford in Ireland, Lord
Talbot Strauge of Blackere, Gifford of Brimsfield, Furnival, Verdon and
Lovetoft. His Seats,
Grafton, Worcester. Pepperhill, Salop. Alton Castle, Stafford.
Anthony Gray Earl of Kent, Lord Gray of Ruthin, Hastings and Valence. His
Seats,
Wrest House, and Harrold, Bedford. Burbage, Leicester. Goodrich Castle,
Penyard Castle, and Ecleswald Castle, Hereford. Kent House in St. James's
Square, Middlesex.
William Richard George Stanly Earl of Darby, Lord Stanly Strange of
Knockingmohun, and Lord of the Isle of Man. His Seats,
Knowesley, Latham Hall, Greenhalgh, Burlco Abbey, Cross Hall, Pilkington Stand,
and Arnshead Tower, Lancaster. Betham Hall, Westmerland.
John Manners Earl of Rutland, Lord Ross of Hamlake, Trusbut, Belvoir, and Lord
Manners of Haddon. His Seats.
Belvoire Castle, Lincoln and Leicester. Haddon, Darby.
Theophilus Hastings Earl of Huntingdon, Lord Hastings, Hungerford, Botreaux,
moe'ls, Newmarch and Molins. His Seats,
Ashby de la Zouch, Leicestershire. Donington Park.
* Willam Russel Earl of Bedford, and Baron of Thornhaugh. His Seats.
Bedford House in the Strand, Middlesex. Bedford House in Exon, Devonshire.
Woburn Abbey, Bedford. Cheynes, Bucks. Thorney Abbey, Cambridge.
Philip Herbert, Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, Lord Herbert of Cardiff, Ross
of Kendal, Par, Marmion, of St. Quintin and Shurland. His Seats,
Wilton, and Falston alias Fallersdown, Wilts. Cardiff Castle, and Caerphilly
Castle, Glamorgan.
Edward Clinton Earl of Lincoln, and Lord Clinton. His Seats,
Sempringham, and Tattershall Castle, Lincoln.
James Howard Earl of Suffolk, and Baron of Walden. His Seats,
Chesterford, Essex. New Market, Cambridge.
Charles Sackvill Earl of Dorset and Middlesex, and Baron of Buckhurst. His
Seats,
Knoll, Kent. Copthall, Essex. Buckhurst, and Stoneland, Sussex. Milcot House,
Warwick.
James Cecil Earl of Salisbury, Viscount Cranburn, and Baron Essendyne, Under
Age. His Seats,
Salisbury House in the Strand, Middlesex. Hatfield, Hertford Castle, Bygrave,
Chesthunt and Quickswood, Hertford. Cranborne House, Dorset.
John Cecil Earl of Exeter, and Lord Burghley. His Seats,
Burghley, Worthrop, and Wakerley, Northhampton. Snap, York.
John Egerton Earl of Bridgwater, Viscount Brackley, and Baron of Ellesmere,
His Seats.
Ashdrid, Bucks and Hertford. Bridgwater House in Barbican, Middlesex.
Ellesmere, Salop. Markingfield, York. Newborough, Stafford.
Philip Sidney Earl of Leicester, Viscount Lisle, and Baron of Penshurst. His
Seats,
Leicester House in Leicester Fields, Middlesex. Penshurst, Kent. Coyty Castle,
Glamorgan.
James Compton Earl of Northampton, and Baron of Compton. His Seats,
Castle Ashley, Northampton. Compton, Warwick. Cambray, Middlesex.
Edward Rich E. of Warwick and Holland, Baron of Leez and Kensington, under
age. His Seats,
Warwick House in Holborn, and Holland House in Kensington, Middlesex.
William Cavendish, Earl of Devon and Baron of Hardwick. His Seats.
Hardwick, and Chatsworth, Derby. Rowhampton, Surrey. Latimers, Buckingham.
William Fielding, aliter de Hapsburgh Earl of Denby and Desmond in Ireland,
Viscount Fielding, Baron of Newnham, Padox, and St. Lis. His Seats,
Newnham-Padox, Warwick. Martinsthorp, Rutland.
John Digby Earl of Bristol, and Baron of Sherborn. His Seats,
Sherborn Castle, Dorset. Clevedon Court, Somerset.
Gilbert Holles Earl of Clare, and Baron of Haughton. His Seats,
Haughton in the County of Nottingham. Clare-House in the Town of Nottingham.
Clare House in Drury Lane. Middlesex.
Oliver St. John Earl of Bullingbrook, and Lord St. John of Bletsho. His Seats,
Bletsho, and Melchborn, Bedford.
Charles Fane Earl of Westmerland, Baron Le Despencer and Bergherst. His Seats,
Apethorp, and Sewlhay Lodge, Northampton.
Robert Mountague Earl of Manchester, Viscount Mandevile, and Baron of
Kimbolton. His Seats,
Kimbolton Castle, Huntington. Leez Priory, Essex.
Thomas Howard Earl of Berkshire, Viscount Andover, and Baron of Charlton. His
Seat,
Charlton, Wilts.
* John Sheffeild Earl of Mulgrave, and Baron of Butterwick. His Seats,
Mulgrave Castle, York. Mulgrave House near White Hall; Middlesex. Normanby,
Lincoln.
Thomas Savage Earl Rivers, Viscount Colchester, and Baron Darcy of Chich in
Essex. His Seats,
Clifton alias Rock Savage, and Frodsham Castle, Chester. St. Osith, Essex.
Rivers House in Queen Street, Middlesex.
Robert Bertie Lord Great Chamberlain of England, Earl of Lindsey, and Baron
Willoughby of Eresby. His Seats,
Grimsthorp, and Earesby, Lincoln. Chelsey, Middlesex. Havering, Essex.
Henry Mordant Earl of Peterborough, and Baron of Turvey. His Seats,
Turvey, Bedford. Drayton, Luswick alias Lowick, Thrapston, and Sudborow,
Northampton.
Thomas Gray Earl of Stamford, and Lord Gray of Grooby. His Seats,
Broadgate, and Grooby, Leicester.
Heneage Finch Earl of Winchelsy, and Viscount Maidston. His Seats,
Estwell, Wy Court, and Moat, Kent.
Robert Pierrepont Earl of Kingston upon Hull, Viscount Newmarket, and Baron
Pierrepont of Holm Pierrepont. His Seat.
Holm Pierrepont, Nottingham.
Charles Dormer Earl of Carnarvan, Viscount Ascot, and Baron of Wing. His Seats.
Wing, and Ethrop, Buckingham.
Philip Stanhop Earl of Chesterfield, and Baron of Shelford. His Seats,
Bretby, Derby. Shelford, Nottingham. Bockton Malherb, Kent.
Richard Tufton Earl of Thanet, and Baron Tufton. His Seats,
Thanet House in Aldersgate Street, Middlesex. Hoathfeild, and Sylom, Kent.
Scipton Castle, York. Appleby Castle, Brough Castle, Brougham Castle, and
Pendragon Castle, Westmerland. Part of Bolbrook, Sussex.
* William Wentworth Earl of Stafford, Viscount Wentworth, and Baron of New
Marsh, Oversley and Raby. His Seats,
Wentworth Wood-House, Friar House, Tankersly, Tinsly, and Hooton Robert, York.
Stowel, Gloucester.
Robert Spencer Earl of Sunderland, and Baron of Wormleighton. His Seats,
Althrop, Northampton. Wormleighton, Warwick.
Robert Leake Earl of Scarsdale. His Seat,
Sutton, Derby.
* Henry Jermin Earl of St. Albans, and Baron of Almondsbury. His Seats,
St. Alban's House in St. James's Square, Middlesex. Rushbrooke Hall, Suffolk.
Byflet, Surrey. Thafts, Norfolk.
Edward Montague Earl of Sandwich, Viscount Hinchingbrook, and Baron of St.
Neots. His Seat,
Hinchingbrook, Huntington.
Henry Hyde Earl of Clarendon, Viscount: Cornbury, and Baron of Hindon. His
Seats,
Cornbury, Oxford. Swallowfield, Berks.
Arthur Capel Earl of Essex, Viscount Maldon, and Baron of Hindon. His Seats,
Cashiobury, and Hadham Hall, Hertford. Essex House in St. James's Square,
Middlesex.
Robert Brudenell Earl of Cardigan, and Baron of Stanton. His Seats,
Dean, Northampton. Cardigan House in Lincoln's Inn Fields, Middlesex. Stanton
Brudenel, Leicester.
Arthur Annesly Earl of Anglesey, and Baron of Newmarket Pagnel in England;
Viscount Valencia, and Baron of Mount Norris in Ireland. His Seats,
Anglesey House in Drury Lane, Middlesex. Blechington, Oxford. Park-Hall,
Essex. Farnborough Place, Southampton. Totteridge, Hertford.
John Greenvill Earl of Bath, Viscount Lansdown, and Baron of Kilhampton and
Bideford. His Seats,
Stow, Wolston, Stanbury, Clifton, and Lanow, Cornwall. Bideford, Devon.
Charles Howard Earl of Carlisle, Viscount Morpeth, and Baron d'Acres of
Gilesland. His Seats,
Naywort alias Noward Castle, Cumberland. Hilderskelfe Castle, and Grimthorp,
York. Morpeth Castle, Northumberland.
William Craven Earl of Craven, Viscount Craven of Vffington, and Baron of
Hamsted Marshal. His Seats,
Craven House in Drury Lane, Middlesex. Hamsted Marshal, and Ashton Park,
Berks. Comb, Warwick. Winwick, Northampton. Caversham, Oxford. Lenwich,
Worcester. Stoke Castle, Salop.
Robert Bruce Earl of Ailesbury and Elgin, Baron of Wharton and Kinloss. His
Seats,
Ailesbury House in St John's, Middlesex. Ampthil, and Clophil, Bedford.
Wharlton Castle, and Jervaux Abbey, York.
Richard Boil Earl of Burlington and Cork in Ireland, and Baron Clifford of
Lawnsborough. His Seats,
Burlington House, Middlesex. Lawnsborough, Bolton, and Barden Tower, York.
* Henry Bennet Earl and Baron of Arlington, Viscount Thetford, and Lord
Chamberlain of the King's House. His Seats,
Ewston, Suffolk. Arlington House in St. James's Park, Middlesex.
Anthony Ashley Cooper Earl of Shaftsbury, Baron Ashley of Wimborn St Giles,
and Cooper of Paulet. His Seats,
Wimborn St. Giles, Dorset. Kockborn House, Southampton.
William Herbert, Earl and Baron of Powis. His Seats,
Powis Castle, and Buttington, Montgomery. Powis House in Lincoln's Inn Fields,
Middlesex.
Edward Henry Lee, Earl of Lichfield, Viscount Quarrendon, and Baron of
Spelsbury. His Seats,
Dichley, and Lees Rest, Oxford. Quarrendon, Buckingham.
* Thomas Osborn Earl of Danby, Viscount Latimer, and Baron of Kiveton. His
Seats,
Kiveton, Thorp Hall, Wales Hall, Harthil Hall, and Wimbledon, York.
Thomas Lennard Earl of Sussex, and Baron d' Acre. His Seats,
Herst Monceux, Sussex. Kirk Oswald, and d'Acre Castle, Cumberland. Chevening,
Kent.
Lewis Duras Earl of Feversham, and Baron of Holdenby. His Seat,
Holdenby, Northampton.
Charles Beauclair Earl of Burford, and Baron of Heddington. His Seats,
Burford House in Windsor, Berks. Bestwood, Nottingham.
Charles Gerrard Earl of Macclesfield, and Lord Gerrard of Brandon. His Seats,
Thornhill, York. Gawsworth, and Aldford, Chester. Halsal, Lancaster.
Macclesfield House in Westminster, Middlesex.
John Roberts Earl of Radnor, Viscount Bodmin, and Baron of Truro, and Lord
President of the Privy Council. His Seats,
Lauhydroek, and Truro, Cornwall.
William Paston Earl and Viscount Yarmouth, and Baron of Paston. His Seats,
Oxnead Hall, and Paston Hall, Norfolk.
George Berkeley Earl of Berkeley, Viscount Durseley, and Baron of Berkeley
Castle. His Seats,
Berkeley Castle, Gloucester. Berkeley House near St. John's, Cranford,
Middlesex. Durdence, Surrey.
Edward Conway Earl of Conway, Viscount Conway and Killultagh, and Baron of
Ragley. His Seats,
Ragley, and Luddington, Warwick. Conway House in Queen Street, Middlesex.
Eliz. Lady d'Acre Countess of Shippey. Heneage Finch Earl of Nottingham, and
Baron of Daventry. His Seat.
A fair House near Kensington, Middlesex.
Lawrence Hide Earl of Rochester, Viscount Hide. James Bertie Earl of
Abbington, and Lord Norris. His Seats,
Ricot, and Chesterton, Oxford. Wytham; Berks. Lindsey House in Westminster,
Middlesex.
Thomas Windsor Earl of Plymouth, and Baron of Windsor. His Seats,
Hewel Grange, Warwick. Flanchford, Surrey.
Edward Wriothesley Noell Earl of Ganesborough, Viscount Campden, and Baron of
Ridlington and Limington. His Seats,
Campden House in Kingsington, Middlesex. Campden House in Campden, Gloucester.
Exton, Brook, and North-Luffenham, Rutland.
Coniers Darcy Earl of Holderness in the parts of Eastriding, and Lord Coniers
and Meynell* His Seats.
Hornby Castle, Patrick Brompton. Hackforth, Auderly le Miers, York.

VISCOUNTS.
LEicester Devereux Viscount Hereford. His Seats,
Christchurch in Ipswich, Sudburn Hall, Soham Lodge, Suffolk.
Francis Brown Viscount Mountague. His Seats,
Cowdrey, Battel-Abby, Poynings, Sussex.
William Fiennes Viscount and Baron Say and Seal. His Seats,
Broughton, Shutford, and North-Newton, Oxford. Over-Norton, Gloucester.
Thomas Bellasyse Viscount Faulconberg of Henknowle, and Lord Faulconberg. His
Seats,
Newbrough Abbey, Coxwold Hall, Oulston Hall, Aldwark, Murton, York. Henknowle,
Durham. Faulconberg House near Pall Mall, and Sutton Court, Middlesex.
Charles Viscount Mordant of Avelon, and Baron of Rygate. His Seats,
Mordant House in Parsons Green, Middlesex. Rygate, Surrey.
Francis Viscount Newport of Bradford, and Baron of High-ercall. His Seats,
Highercall and Eyton, Salop.
Sarah Viscountess Corbet of Linchalde. Horatio Viscount Townsend of Raynham,
Baron of Lynn-Regis. His Seats,
Raynham Hall, and Stifkey Hall, Norfolk. Denham Hall, Suffolk.
Christopher Viscount Hatton of Gretton, Baron of Kerby. His Seat,
Kerby, Northampton.

BARONS.
HEnry Howard Lord Moubray, eldest Son of the Duke of Norfolk, and bearing the
Title of Earl of Arundel. His Seat.
Castle-Rising, Norfolk.
Elizabeth Baroness Percy, sole Daughter and Heiress of Jocelin late Earl of
Northumberland, first married to Henry Earl of Ogle, only Son of Henry
Cavendish Duke of New Castle, now to the Duke of Somerset. Her Seats,
Northumberland House in the Strand, and Sion House, Middlesex. Petworth Place,
Sussex. Alnewick Castle, Warkworth Castle, and Prudhoe Castle, Northumberland.
Cockermouth Castle Cumberland. Wressel Castle, York.
George Nevil Lord Abergevenny, Under Age. His Seats,
Eridge, Sussex. Abergevenny Castle, Monmouth.
James Touchet Lord Audley, Earl of Castlehaven in Ireland. Charles West Lord
la War. His Seat,
Whorwell, Southampton.
Thomas Parker Lord Morley and Mounteagle. His Seat,
Hornby Castle, Lancaster.
Robert Sherley Lord Ferrers, Baron of Chartley. His Seats,
Chartley Castle, Stafford. Staunton Harrold, and Ragdale, Leicester.
Ettington, Warwick. Astwell, Northampton. Shirley, Derby.
Charles Mildmay Lord Fitz-Walter, under age. His Seats,
Moulsham Hall, Moulsham Friery, and Bishops Hall, Essex.
Henry Yelverton Lord de Gray, under age. His Seat,
Easton Mauduit, Northampton.
Frances Lady Ward, Baroness Dudly. William Lord Stourton, Baron of Stourton.
His Seat,
Stourton Castle, Wilts.
Coniers Darcy, Lord Coniers. His Seats.
Aston, Aughton, Wales Manor, Hardwick, Yorkshire.
Henry Sandys Baron Sandys. His Seat,
Mottessont, Southampton.
Thomas Lord Cromwell, Baron of Oakham in England, Earl of Arglas, and Viscount
Lecale in Ireland. His Seat,
Throwley, Stafford.
Ralph Lord Eure, Baron of Witton. His Seat,
Easby Hall, York.
Philip Lord Wharton, Baron of Wharton. His Seats,
Wharton Hall, Westmorland. Ask, Healaugh Manor, and Woburn, York.
Overwinchendon House, Buckingham.
Thomas Lord Willoughby of Parham. William Lord Paget, Baron of Baudesert. His
Seats,
Beaudesert, and Seaney Park, Stafford. Drayton, Middlesex.
Francis Lord Howard of Effingham. Charles Lord North and Gray of Rolleston.
His Seats,
Kirtling alias Catlidge. Cambridge. Tostock Place, Suffolk. Rolleston,
Stafford. Towting Graveney, Surrey.
James Brugges Lord Chandos. His Seats,
Wilton, Aconbury, and Dewswell, Hereford.
Robert Carey, Lord Hunsdon. William Lord Petre, Baron of Writtle. His Seats,
Thorndon, Writtle Park, Ingerston Hall, and Cranham Park, Essex.
Digby Lord Gerard, Baron of Gerards Bromley, under age. His Seats,
Gerards Bromley, Sandon, and Wislow Bridge, Stafford. Dutton, Chester.
Woodacre Hall, Ashton Hall, and Shorton Hall, Lancaster.
Henry Lord Arundel, Baron of Wardour. His Seat,
Wardour Castle, Wilts.
Christopher Roper, Lord Tenham. His Seat.
Linksted Lodge, Kent.
Catherine Lady O Brian Baroness Clifton, Daughter of the Lord Aubigny, first
married to the Lord O Brian Son to the Earl of Twomond, Afterward to Sir
Joseph Williamson. Foulk Grevill Lord Brook, Baron Brook of Beauchamp's
Court. His Seats,
Warwick Castle, Knowll, and Beauchamp's Court, Warwick. Breamore, Southampton.
Hackney, Middlesex.
Edward Lord Montague, Baron of Boughton. His Seats,
Boughton, and Barnwell Castle, Northampton.
Ford Lord Gray, Baron Gray of Wark. His Seats,
Wark Castle, Chillingham Castle, Dunstaburgh Castle, and Horton Castle,
Northumberland. Gosfield Hall, and Epping Place, Essex. Up Park, Sussex.
Charterhouse Close, Middlesex.
Robert Leake, Lord Deincourt, and Heir of the Earl of Scarsdale. His Seat,
Sutton, Derby.
John Lord Lovelace, Baron of Hurley. His Seats,
Hurley, Berks. Water-Eaton, Oxfo^^
John Lord Paulet, Baron of Hinton St. George, under age. His Seats,
Hinton St. George, Court of Ewick, Lenn Court, and Walton, Somerset. Buckland,
Dorset.
William Lord Maynard, Baron of Eastaines in England, and Wicklow in Ireland.
His Seat,
Easton Lodge and Achdon Place, Essex.
George Lord Coventry Baron of Alesborough. His Seats,
Crombe Court, Alesborough, Severnstoke, and Feckenam Lodge, Worcester. Corse
Court and Cockbury, Gloucester.
William Lord Howard Baron of Escrick. His Seats,
Wheldrake, York. Tolesbury, Essex.
Charles Lord Mohun of Okehampton. Under Age. His Seat,
Boconock, Cornwall.
Henry Lord Herbert Baron of Cherbury in England, and of Castle Island in
Ireland. His Seats,
Llymore Lodge and Llyslin, Mongomery. St. Julians, Monmouth. Chirbury, Salop.
Thomas Lord Leigh Baron of Stoneley. His Seats,
Stoneley and Fletchamsted, Warwick. Hamstal Ridware, Stafford.
William Lord Byron Baron of Rochdale. His Seats,
Newsted Abbey, Buluel Park, and Linby, Nottingham.
Richard Lord Vaughan Baron of Emlyn in South Wales, of Carbery, and Baron of
Molingavin in Ireland. His Seats,
Golden Grove and Emlyn, Carmarthen.
Francis Smith Lord Carington Baron of Wotton in England, and Viscount
Carrington of Barfore in Ireland. His Seats,
Wotton-wawen and Aln Lodge, Warwick. Ledwell, Oxford. Ashby-folvile, Leicester.
William Lord Widdrington Baron of Blankney. His Seats,
Widdrington Castle, Northumberland. Blankney, Lincoln.
Edward Lord Ward, Baron of Birmingham. His Seat,
Dudley Castle and Hinley, Stafford.
Tho. Lord Culpepper Baron Thoresway, His Seats,
Leeds Castle and Greenway Court, Kent.
Jacob Lord Astley Baron of Reading. His Seats,
Allington Castle and Maidstone Place, Kent
Charles Lucas Baron of Shenfield. John Lord Bellasyse Baron of Worleby. His
Seats,
Worleby, Lincoln. Whitton, Middlesex.
Edward Watson Lord Rockingham. His Seats,
Rockingham Castle, VVarmington, and Stoke Albony, Northampton. Great Gidding,
Huntington.
Rob. Sutton Lord Lexington, Under Age. His Seats,
Averham, and Kilham. Nottingham.
Marmaduke Lord Langdale, Baron of Holme. His Seats,
Holme in Spalding-more and Dalton, York.
Charles Lord Berkley Baron of Stratton. Under Age. His Seats,
Stratton House alias Berkley House in Piccadilly, and Twickenham, Middlesex.
Charles Lord Cornwallis Baron of Eye. His Seats,
Brome-Hall, and Carlford Hall, Suffolk. Wilton Castle, York.
George Booth Lord de la mer. His Seat,
Dunham Massey, Chester.
Thomas Lord Crew Baron of Stean. His Seats,
Sean, Northampton. Lawfield-Hall, Essex.
John Lord Freschevile Baron of Staveley. His Seat,
Staveley, Derby.
Richard Lord Arundel Baron of Trerise. His Seat,
Trerise, Cornwall.
James Lord Butler Baron of More-park in England, and Earl of Ossery in
Ireland. Under Age. Hugh Lord Clifford, Baron of Chudleigh, Under Age. His
Seats,
Chudleigh, Devon. Cannington, Somerset.
Richard Lord Butler, Baron of Weston in England, and Earl of Arran in
Ireland. His Seat,
Leyghton, Huntington.
Susan Lady Bellasyse, Baroness of Osgodby. Her Seat,
Osgodby, Lincoln.
Richard Lord Lumly, Viscount Lumly of Waterford in Ireland. George Lord
Carteret. Under Age. John Bennet, Baron Ossulston. His Seat,
Ossulston, Middlesex.
^ William Lord Allington, Baron VVimondly, Constable of the Tower of London.
Thomas Thin, Baron Thin of VVarmister, and Vicount VVeimouth. His Seat,
Long Leat, Wilts.
Ralph Stowel, Baron Stowel of Somerton. His Seat,
Somerton, Somersetsh.

THE ARCHBISHOPS AND BISHOPS.
DOctor William Sancroft, Archbishop of Canterbury. His Seats,
Lambeth-house, and Croydon Palace, Surrey.
Dr. Stern, Archbishop of York. His Seat,
^
Dr. Henry Compton, Bishop of London. His Seats,
London-house, and Fulham-house, Middlesex.
Dr. Nathaniel Crew, Bishop of Durham. His Seats,
Durham Palace, and Aukland Castle, Durham.
Dr. George Morley, Bishop of Winchester. His Seats,
Farnham Castle, Surrey. Wolv^sey House in Winchester, Southampton. Chelsey
House, Middlesex.
Dr. Herbert Crofts, Bishop of Hereford. His Seat,
Hereford Palace, Hereford.
Dr. Seth Ward, Bishop of Salisbury. His Seat,
Salisbury, Wilts.
Dr. Edward Rainbow, Bishop of Carslile. His Seat,
Rose Castle, Cumberland.
Dr. John Dolben, Bishop of Rochester. His Seat,
Bromley House, Kent.
Dr. Anthony Sparrow, Bishop of Norwich. His Seats,
Norwich Palace, and Ludham Hall, Norfolk.
Dr. Peter Gunning, Bishop of Ely. His Seats,
Ely-house in Holborn, Middlesex. Ely Palace in Ely, and Wisbich Castle in
Wisbich, Cambridge.
Dr. Thomas Wood, Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry. His Seats,
Lichfiield Close, and Eccleshall Castle, Stafford.
D. Guy Carlton, Bishop of Chichester* His Seat,
Chichester Palace, Sussex.
Dr. Robert Frampton, Bishop of Gloucester. His Seat,
Gloucester Palace, Gloucester.
Dr. Peter Mew, Bishop of Bath and Wells. His Seats,
Wells Palace, and Banwell, Somerset.
Dr. John Pierson, Bishop of Chester. His Seats,
Chester Palace, Chester. VVigan, Lancaster.
Dr. Humphry Lloyd, Bishop of Bangor. His Seat,
Bangor Palace, Carnarvon.
Dr. William Lloyd, Bishop of Peterborough. His Seats,
Peterborough Palace, and Castor, Northampton.
Dr. Thomas Barlow, Bishop of Lincoln. His Seats,
Bugden, Huntington. Lincoln Palace, Lincoln.
Dr. James Fleetwood, Bishop of Worcester. His Seats,
Worcester Palace in Worcester, and Hartlebury Castle, Worcester.
Dr. John Fell, Bishop of Oxford. His Seat,
Cuddesden, Oxon.
Dr. Thomas Lampleugh, Bishop of Exon, His Seat,
Exon Palace in Exeter, Devon.
Dr. William Thomas, Bishop St. David's. His Seat,
Abergwilly, Carmarthen.
Dr. William Gulston, Bishop of Bristol. His Seat,
Bristol Palace, Somerset.
Dr. William Beaw, Bishop of Llandaff. His Seats,
Matherne Palace, Monmouth. Llandaff Palace, Glamorgan.
Dr. William Lloyd, Bishop of St. Asaph. His Seat,
St. Asaph, Flint.

A SUPPLEMENT TO The Foregoing Work.
I. To the Arable and Pasturage of England.
ANGLESEY yields such plenty of Wheat, that it is called the Mother of Wales.
In Shropshire upon Clee-hill is the best Barley in the Shire. Sheep in the Vale
of Buckinghamshire have a fine soft wool. East Kent for Corn: The Weald for
Wood, Rumney for Meadow. Tenham for Orchard; Sheppey and Reculver for Wheat;
Thanet for Barley. Hedcorn for fat and large Capons.

To the other Productions.
DOctor Caius the Founder of Caius College in Cambridge, in a learned Treatise
of his, divides the Canes Britanici, first into the Generosi, Rustici and
Degeneres; the Generosi he subdivides into the Venatici Aucupatorii and
Delicati: the Venatici first into the threefold S^gax or Hound, viz. the
Terrarius or Terrare, the Leverarius or Harrier, the Sanguinarius or
Bloodhound, next into the Agasaeus or Gasehound, the Leporarius or Greyhound,
the Levinarius s^u Lorarius, the Liviner or Liemmer, the Vertragus or Tumbler
The Aucupatorii into the Hispani^lus or Spaniel, the Index or S^tter, the
Aquaticus or Water-Spaniel, the Inquisitor or Finder. Of the Delicati he makes
only one sort, viz. the Meliteus seu Fotor, the Spaniel Gentle or Comforter.
The Rusti^i into the Pastoralis or Shepherds Dog, the Vilaticus seu
Cathenarius, Mastiff or Bandog. The D^generes into the Admonitor or Wap, the
Ve^sator or Turnspit, the Sal^ator or Dancer.

About Sureby in Yorkshire are great store of Goats, and on the Hills toward
Lancashire Goats and Deer.

In Cornwall on the Cliffs by the Seaside are Marterns, Otters, Badgers, Foxes
in abundance.

In the Isle of Wight are store of Goats, Rother-cattle; Horses low and small
but hardy; and in most parts of Hantshire Conies and H^res particularly abound.

In the River Tiver in Cardiganshire the Beaver has been found.

In Devonshire there are three sorts of Curlicus; the first as big as a
Muscovie Duck, the second as big as an ordinary Duck, the third somewhat less.
The Sanderlin; a Bird about the bigness of a Snipe, of the same make, only of a
lighter Gray.

In Lincolnshire and Yorkshire, near the Sea, are store of Reeves, Roughs,
Gulls, and a Bird called a Stint, somewhat bigger than a Lark. Puffins and
Burranets hatch in the holes of the Sea-Cliffs. Woodcocks, Sparhawks, and
Fieldfares take Cornwall in their way to warmer Climates. There is also in
those parts a Bird called a Spray, thought to be the Halyaetus of Pliny.
Lincolnshire abounds with God wits and Knots, besides Pewets and Dottrels
aforementioned. And about Barton upon Humber is plenty of Mallards.

In the Calf of Man are Puffins, and also Barnacles.

On the Shore of Norfolk Hawks are are sometimes taken.

Turkies, or Guiny-Cocks are said to have been first brought into England, Anno
15 H. 8.

The Shoat is a Fish proper to Cornwall and Devonshire: where also, the Peal,
Trout and Salmon breed in fresh Waters, but live in Salt. Sharks breed and live
in the Rivers.

In Norfolk, the River Yare, by Norwich, is full of a Fish called a Ruff, very
rarely found in other Rivers.

In Worcestershire, The River Severn affords store of fresh Water Lampreys.

About Kilgarran in Pembrokeshire, and in the River Dee in Cheshire, there is
great store of Salmons.

Also Vsk and Wye in Monmouthshire, are full of Salmons and Trouts.

In a great Pool, near Balu in Merionethshire, there breeds a Fish called a
Guinnind, never seen in Dee. As the Pool wants Salmons, which Dee abounds in.

Upon the Seacoast of this Shire are store of Herrings.

Carps are generally concluded to have been first brought in here in King Henry
the Eighth's Reign, with several other things, unknown here before.

Near Bremicham in Warwickshire, are Iron-Mines; the convenience whereof*
possibly, gave beginning to the Smiths Trade in Bremicham. The same may be said
of those near Sheffield in Yorkshire.

At the Head of the River Istwyd in Darbyshire, are Veins of Lead.

In the Rocks, at the Lands End of Cornwall, are Veins of White-Lead, and Brass.

In the West part of the Bishopric of Durham are Iron-Mines. thereabout also,
are Cole-Mines; as likewise, at Mengerfield and Westerley in Gloucestershire.
Nor is Pembrokeshire destitute of Pit-Coal and Marl.

Some parts of Lincolnshire afford Alabaster, and Plaster of Paris.

In Flintshire Millstones are frequent.

And in the Isle of Anglesey, Millstones, Grind-stones, and a kind of Earth,
out of which Alum and Copperas are extracted.

And upon the Shores of Shepey Island, Stones, from which are drawn Brimstone
and Copperas.

In some parts of Derbyshire there is Limestone.

As also, very good in Oxfordshire, near Holton; about Hasely, and between that
and Little Milton.

But Barrow in Leicestershire is accounted the place of England for that sort
of Stone.

At Tormanton, by Sudbury, in Gloucestershire, is a Quarry of Freestone.

And at Eglestone, in the Bishopric of Durham, a Marble Quarry.

On Goldcliff in M^nmouthshire, there is found a Stone of a Yellowish or Golden
Color.

And about Brotherton in Yorkshire, a yellow Marle, very good to fertilize the
Earth.

Upon Dartmore Rocks in Devonshire, there is some quantity, of the Magnes, or
Lodestone.

Not to insist upon the several sorts of Ochre, Fullers Earth, Chalk and
Gypsum, at Shotover, Ga^sington, Witney, and other parts of Oxfordshire; the
Umber at Bladen Quarry, the Caeruleum, or Native Blue, at Blounds Court; the
yellowish colored Earth, with glittering Sparks, about Teynton; the Earth
called Lam, at Teinton, fit for Earthen Floors; the Terra Lapidosa, of the
color of the Turkish Rusma, in the Quarries about Them; the Gold gritty Clay,
or Pyrites aureus at Hampton-Gay; the white Clay at Shotover, used for
Tobacco-pipes, and equal to Tripela for Medals, Galgils, Antiques, and
polishing of Silver; the soft Stone called Maume, near Tetsworth; the
Golden-coloured Marchasite, happily the Pyrites of Kentmanus at Nettlebed and
Henly. All mentioned by Doctor Plat, in his learned and most useful Description
of Oxfordshire.

In Cornwall, as well as on the Cliffs between Deal and Dover, great store of
Samphire grows; which being pickled, makes an excellent Sallad. And also of
Eringus, or Sea-Holly; whose Roots Candied, are reckoned amongst the most
acceptable of Sweetmeats, in regard of their, restorative virtue. And in the
most boggy Grounds of this County there is store of a Plant called Ros Solis.
And upon the Cliffs, and such like Maritine parts, abundance of Wild Hisop,
Rosemary, Marjoram, Sage, Pelamountain. There are likewise in this County very
good Chestnuts; and a kind of Berry, called Whurts, of two sorts. And, for
Garlic, doubtless, this County abounds in general with this sort of Plant, for
that it is much eaten by the Cornish men; whose Health and Longaevity is, by
many, imputed to their frequent feeding upon this Country man's Treacle, as
they call it.

Dorcetshire, especially the Isle of Portland, or thereabouts, produces a rare
sort of Plant, which is accounted much of the same nature, if not the same,
with that which the Greeks called Isidis Plocamos. But, particularly, Birdport,
in this Shire, is noted for the excellent Hemp growing thereabout.

At Dengeness in Kent, Holly Trees grow thick for a Mile in length, among Beech
and Pebbles.

Axholm in Shropshire is noted for a sort of Shrub called Galls, growing
peculiarly thereabout.

About Keinsham in Somersetshire, great store of Percepier, or Parsely Break
Stone.

Neither is Fern so inconsiderable a Plant, but that Cambden takes notice of
abundance of it growing about Reading.

But in Sabernacle Forest in Wiltshire, there is a sort of Fern more remarkable
than ordinary, by reason of the sweetness of its scent.

Several Fruits, and Flowers, and other Plants have not been known in England,
till of late Ages. First Pippins and Cherries, as has been already intimated,
and as Mr. Leonard Mascal of Plumstead King Henry the Eighth's-Gardiner
observes, after that, Apricots, about the fifteenth of the said King's Reign.
And about the same time, Hops from Artois. Some say Apricots, Malacotoons and
Muscmelons came in about the twentieth of Queen Elizabeth. Others say,
Melon-seeds were first sent out of Italy, to King James, and the Stem of a
yellow Rose, which flowers from May till Christmas. Choice Flowers were first
in use and reputation at Norwich, by means of the Dutch, who first brought them
thither. The latest are Gillyflowers and Carnations, the Province and Red Rose,
and that of Jericho: Also the Tulip (perhaps the Lilly, of the Valley) and the
White-Chappel Flower. Moreover, Artichoaks and Asparagus, Oranges and Lemons,
are but of late date here. As likewise, both English and Smirna Corants;
perhaps the soonest of them about an hundred and fifty years since. Tobacco was
first brought into England by Sir Walter Raleigh, though never thought fit to
be planted. About the same time came in Sugar. The first planting of Mulberries
was about Anno 1609.

(...) Flax, Staffordshire, Shropshire, and the Isle of Man are particularly
mentioned; and the last for Hemp. Also Tewksbury in Gloucestershire.

To the Wonders of England.
THE Monument of Stones at Stanton Drew, near Pensford, in Somersetshire,
deserves a particular description, but much more that of Aubury in Wiltshire,
about four Miles West from Marleborough. About this Village is cast a Ditch of
a prodigious depth; viz. as deep as that of Winchester, which is the deepest
that has been observed: and, not without (as usually) but within this Ditch is
raised a very high Bank, or Trench, not in a form absolutely Circular, but
somewhat near. Within the Trench, and answerable to the form thereof, Stones
are set round, excepting those Gaps which appear to have been made by the
Invasion of the Villagers upon these Stones, with Sledges, for their use in
Building. Within this prodigious Round of Ditch, Bank and Stones, i^ the
Village: and two Piles of these large Stones, viz. about eighteen, nineteen or
twenty Foot high, in a manner, somewhat Circular, bur pretty compact together:
but the Church stands wholly without the Round of the Ditch. Moreover, there is
another thing no less remarkable than the rest, namely, a straight Walk made by
two long Tracts of Stone, about five, six or seven Foot high on either hand, of
about a Mile long, leading, as an Avenue, to the said Work. And, at the
beginning thereof, two other Tracts, which make another Walk, leading on the
Right Hand to two other Circles of Stone, one within another, The River Kinnel
running just underneath.

This Description, together with a Delineation of the Stones at Stanton Drew, I
received from a particular friend, Mr. John Aubrey, of the Royal Society; a
person of much worth and ingenuity; but, most especially curious in the search
of Antiquities. And this favor is so much the greater, for that before he had
designed the Description thereof himself, in a Work he intends to publish,
Entitled Monumenta Britanica.

There are Stones near the Barrow, at Stanton Harcourt, called The Devil's
Coits.

Pyramidal Stones in Yorkshire, called The Devil's Bolts.

A Stone, between Neat Enston and Fulwell, somewhat flat, and tapouring upward,
from a broad bottom.

Snake-stones, Cockle-stones and Star-stones, at Purton Passage, over Seavern,
in Gloucestershire: at Shugbury in Warwickshire: on the Rocks by Belvoir Castle
in Leicestershire. Cockle-stones at Sapworth, by Sharston, in Gloucestershire,
at Witney in Oxfordshire, on the Hills by Farnham in Surrey.

Three deep Pits, near Darlington, in the Bishopric of Durham. Hagdale Pit,
near Feversham. The great Pit in the Roadway, between Feversham and Bocton.
Another near Shelwich. One between Daving-Church and Stone-Church. One in the
Parish of Norton. One or two in a Field near Beacon-Field. Under Holm-Castle in
Surrey, is a great Arched Vault.

Near Flamborough-Head in Yorkshire, are certain Waters called Vipsies, which
flow out of Neighboring Springs every other Year; and fall with a violent
Stream into the Sea.

On Cadier Arthur Hill in Cheshire is a Spring, deep as a Well, and four
square, and having no Streams; but there are Trouts found in it.

To the Medicinal Wells, already mentioned, lately found out, may be added,
that of Sellenge, and that of Egerton, near Lenham in Kent; both which were
discovered about forty years since; and the last turns Wood into Stone.

At Ashwell in Bedfordshire rise so many Sources of Springs, that they soon
drive a Mill.

In the midst of the River Nen, South of Peterborough, in No^^hamptonshire, is
a deep Gulf, so cold, that in Summer, no Swimmer is ^^le t^ ^^dure it, y^^ not
frozen in Winter.

At Lutterworth, in ^^icestershire, is a Spring, so cold, that it (...) Straw
and Sticks into Sto^^.

A Valley in Fli^^^hire* at the Mouth of the River, seeming to lie lower than
the Sea; is yet, never overflowed.

A Spring at Chedder, near Axbridge, drives twelve Mills within a quarter of a
Mile.

Several Rivers run under Ground. As, Mole, in Surrey. A Branch of Medway, in
Kent. The little River Hans, in Staffordshire. The little River Alen, in
Denbighshire. At Asply Gowetz, in Bedfordshire, is an Earth that turns Wood
into Stone.


To the Remarks of England may be added, the Artificially cast up Tumuli, or
Barrows of Earth.

An innumerable Company of them on Salisbury Plain.

And that prodigious one called Silbury Hill, between Marlborough and Cawn.

Like which is that called Clay Hill, near Warmister. But that lies in some
doubt, whether Natural or Artificial.

Likewise, diverse Vestigia of Roman Camps, viz.

Yarnborough Castle, on Salisbury Plain. Maiden Castle, about a Mile West of
Dorchester. Badbury Castle, in Dorsetshire. Northsed, on Hounslow Heath. One
near Oswaldstree, in Shropshire. Crednet Hill, in Hertfordshire. Where also
Ariconium; now Kenchester.
To the Manufactures and Inventions of England.
MAsons, Painting and Glasing first brought into England, by Benedict, Anno 728.

Antonio Bonese, an Italian, first taught the English to spin with a Distaff,
20 H. 7.

Fine Spanish Needles were made in Queen Mary's Reign, by a Negro in Cheapside,
who refused co communicate his Art; but it was afterward taught by Elias
Crouse, a German, Anno 8o Elizabethae.

In the tenth year of the said Queen, Richard Dyer came from Spain, and taught
his Countrymen the way of making Earthen Fire-Pots, Furnaces and Transportable
Ovens for baking of Earthen Ware. He had the first sole profit by Patent, Anno
1555.

Walter Rippon is said to have made the first Coach in England: for the Earl of
Rutland, Anno 1564. a hollow turning Coach: for the Queen: Anno 1585. a rare
Chariot.

Others say, William Boonen, a Dutchman, Coachman to Queen Eliz. first
brought the use of the Coach into England. And about the same time came in Long
Wagons.

Making of Copperas in England was first practiced by Cornelius de Vos, a
Merchant, An. 1587.

William Saunders, a Fishmonger, was the first that brought our Caelestial and
Terrestrial Globes to any considerable perfection; but since, they have been
much improved.

William Matthews, in the 5th of Queen Elizabeth, was the first rare Artist in
the making of fine Knives and Hafts, which were marked with a Half Moon; and
for which he had the Queens Letters Patents.

About the same time Pins, which were formerly brought in by Strangers, to the
value of 60000 l. per Annum, were first made in England; and now excel all
that are made in any other part of the World.

One Bourass first made the Engine for Scale-Board.

One Ross is said to have been the first that made Bandores in England: and, to
this, day, that called the Ross Viol is accounted the choicest of all other
Viols.

The ancient way among us of keeping Accounts was by Tallies; and is, in some
measure, and on some occasions, retained to this day. The most considerable
instance is, in the Tallies of the Exchequer. And, not only common Accounts,
but the Account of Time, and the Motions of the Sun, Moon, and other Planets,
anciently in some parts of Derbyshire (and some say, Staffordshire also) were
usually notched and marked out upon a piece of Wood. This sort of Calender-Log,
or Wooden Almanac, has scarce been taken notice of, till of late; and now
some few there are who understand the way of it. The only one I have seen of
them, is in the custody of Mr. John Bagford, a Searcher into Antiquities, Arts
and Ingenuities, much above what might be expected from one of his Education
and Literature.

An Engine for Clock-Wheels was invented about a hundred years since. An Engine
for the speedy cutting down of Wheels for Watches, forty years ago, none now
made after the same manner.

An Engine for drawing of Pinion Wire, of Steel for Watches, about ten years ago.

Mr. Tomakee, about ten years since, was famous for making Chains for Watches
especially, as being the first. His Wife lives in Rose Street, near Long Acre.

Other late Inventions there are, not unworthy to be mentioned. An Engine for
Rasing of Glass, an Engine for Spinning of Glass, the Engine for Cutting Tobacco,
the Rolling Press for Printing off from Copper Plates, Damask Linen, and the
Watering of Silks. The way of separating Gold from Silver. Enamelling in Gold,
Silver and Brass; Boulting Mills, Dark Lanthorns, the Trumpet-makers Trade,
Cane-Chairs; a choice way of Coloring, used by Book-binders; boiling of
Whalebone, making of Hornware. Perriwigs, Women's Masks, Busks, and Fans, and
Muffs are said to have come in here about the time of the Paris-Massacre.

The first pair of black Silk Stockins in England presented to Queen Elizabeth,
Anno 1660.

Sir Walter Raleigh reputed by some, the first Improver of our late Models of
Ships.

The best Saddle-Trees are said to be made at Burford in Oxfordshire, and some
parts of the North of England. The best Riding-Whips at St Edmundbury in
Suffolk.

Besides the Fire-Engin above mentioned, there is lately brought into use a
portable one, of extraordinary advantage, in regard it is capable of being
directed into any particular Room or Chamber.

FINIS.
THE FOURTH PART OF THE Present State OF ENGLAND.

RELATING To its Trade and Commerce within it self, and with all Countries
Traded to by the English, as it is found at this Day Established, giving a most
exact account of the Laws and Customs of Merchants relating to Bills of
Exchange, Policies of Ensurance, Fraights, Bottomery, Wreck, Averidge,
Contributions, Customs, Coyns, Weights, Measures, and all other matters
relating to Inland and Marine affairs.

To which is likewise added Englands Guide to Industry, or Improvement of
Trade, for the good of all People in General.

Written by a Person of Quality.

LONDON, Printed by R. Holt for William Whirwood, near the George Inn in Little
Britain, 1683.

TO THE READER.
REader, wonder not that I present you with the third part of the present state
of this famous and Flourishing Island, the which tho it has been already
largely discoursed on in the former parts, yet it yields such Varity, if
considered aright in its several Capacities, that it is a kind of Ingratitude
to pass over in Silence the materialest part of its Glory; which has of late
rendered the British Empire famous throughout the known World; and caused the
Barbarous Nations with admiration to bless our happy Shoars, and those whose
Industries have rendered the Commodities of this Islands natural Growth
valuable as the Gold of Peru, Jemms of India, Spices of Arabia, or Silks and
Golden Woofs of Persia. No Nation is there which the Sun's large eye beholds,
that ever heard of rich Albion, but were desirous to have Correspondence with
her Merchants, and as from the Storehouse of the Western World, covet a supply
of all things necessary for the use of man, in Lieu whereof the Pregnant
Quarters of the Earths vast Globe, sends us yearly tributes of all that can
contribute to our Temporal happiness, then take it not amiss, if after long
experience I have ventured to unlock this Cabinet of rarities; and expose it to
the public view, which naught but Envy has the power to shut; and sure that
cannot be conceived in any English breast, to stifle that whose hughest aim is
at the Public good; or if those of other Nations be ashamed to see the Glory
of their native Soil, so far eclipsed by ours should endeavor it, yet let them
know therein they wrong themselves by repining at the light, which like a
favorable Guide to a lost Traveller, would put them in the right way to
imitate that which through want of better Experience and Insight, they emulate;
yet if any such this. Age produce, it matters not, I referring this work to
stand or fall by the Approbation of my judicious Countrymen, for whose Sole
Benefit it was compiled by him

Who is, Reader, yours to command J. S.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
OF the Original of Trade, its Increase and the Method to bring it to its
present perfection, etc. Chap. 1 Of the Original of the Companies of London,
and how and when Incorporated. Chap. 2. Of the English Merchants trading into
most parts, the time of their Incorporating and the Improvement of Navigation.
Chap. 3. Of Englands Trade in general, a Survey of the Weights, Measures,
Coyns, Comerse of most of the Counties. Chap. 4. Of the Traffic of London.
Chap. 5. Of the Coyns of England, settled by the Tower Standard. Chap. 6. Of
the Weights and Measures used in England, established by a Standard. Chap. 7.
Of the Trade of Scotland, as to its dependencies with England. Chap. 8. A View
of Ireland, and its present State and Trade. Chap. 9. A View of the Ocean, and
the Islands belonging to the Isle of great Britain. Chap. 10. Of the Measures,
Breadth, and Length of English Cloth. Chap. 11. A View of America, and its
Trade with England. Chap. 12. A View of Virginia, of the Trade, Names, Customs,
and Government of it. Chap. 13. A View of New England, and the Trade thereof.
Chap. 14. A View of Maryland, the Customs and Trade thereof. Chap. 15. A View
of the Peruanan Provinces, their Trade and Customs. Chap. 16. A View of
Africa, and of the Manners, Customs, Trade, Coyns, and Commodities. Chap. 17.
Of Tunis, the Trade, Manners, and Customs thereof. Chap. 18. A View of Argiers,
of their Trade, Manners, and Customs, and Methods for selling of Slaves. Chap.
19. Of the Kingdom of Fez, and its Trade with England. Chap. 20. Of the Kingdom
of Morocco, the Customs, and Trade thereof with England. Chap. 21. Of Nur^idia
and Lydia, and their Trade. Chap. 22. A View of Ethiopia and the Trade thereof.
Chap. 24. A View of Mosambique, and its Trade. Chap. 25. Of Egypt, and the
Trade thereof. Chap. 26. Of Grand Cairo and its Trade. Chap. 27. Of the Isles
appertaining to Africa, the Commodities, Trade, Weights, and Measures. Chap.
28. Of Asia, the Trade, Manners, and Customs thereof, of the Money current, and
Commodities, Weights, and Measures. Chap. 29. A View of Syria and its Trade.
Chap. 30. Of Aleppo, and the Trade thereof, and the Customs of that famous
City. Chap. 31. Of Damascus, and its Trade. Chap. 32. Of Tripoly, and the Trade
thereof. Chap. 33. Of Palestine. Chap. 34. Of America, and its Trade. Chap. 35.
Of Assyria, Mesopotamia, and Caldea. Chap. 36. Of Media, and its Trade. Chap.
37. Of Persia its Trade and Commodities. Chap. 38. Of Hispaan and its Trade.
Chap. 39. Of Tartaria its Trade, Coin, and Customs. Chap. 40. Of India, Intra
and Extra Gangem. Chap. 41. A View of Cambaia, and its Trade. Chap. 42. A View
of Goa, its Trade, Commodities and Customs, etc. Chap. 43. Of Musulipatan.
Chap. 44. Of the City of Satagan, the Metropolis of Bengala. Chap. 45. Of Peru,
the Trade, Coyns, and Customs. Chap. 46. Of Syan and Malacca. Chap. 47. Of
China, and their Trade with England. Chap. 48. Of the Islands, in the Asian
Seas. Chap. 49. Of the Isles of Molucco's, etc. Chap. 50. Of Javas, and the
Trade thereof. Chap. 51. Of other Islands in the Indian Seas. Chap. 52. Of
Cyprus its Trade, Growth, and Coyns. Chap. 53. A Discourse of Gold and Silver,
its true intrinsic value, their Fineness and Allayes, etc. Chap. 54. Of
Diamonds and precious Stones, and their value and goodness. Chap. 55. Of the
Trade of Europe, and their dependencies on England. Chap. 56. Of Sevil in Spain
and its Trade. Chap. 57. Of Malaga, the Customs, Weights, and Measures. Chap.
58. Of Alicant, and its Trade. Chap. 59. Of Madrid, its Trade and Customs.
Chap. 60. Of Lisbon, its Trade, Weights, Measures, and Coyns. Chap. 61. A View
of France, its Trade, Custom, Weights and Measures, etc. Chap. 62. Of Rouen and
the Trade thereof. Chap. 63. A View of Paris, its Trade, Custom, and
Commodities, etc. Chap. 64. Of Lions, and its Trade. Chap. 65. Of Marselia, and
its Trade. Chap. 66. Of Naples, and its Trade. Chap. 67. Of Italy, and its
Trade. Chap. 68. Of Florence, and its Trade. Chap. 69. Of Millain, and its
Trade. Chap. 70. Of the Dukedoms of Mantua and Urbin, and their Trade. Chap.
71. Of Venice, and its Trade. Chap. 72. Of Parma. Chap. 73. Of Leghorn, its
Trade, Customs, Weights, and Measures. Chap. 74. Of Genoa, its Trade and
Commerce. Chap. 75. Of Luca, and its Trade. Chap. 76. Of Rome, and its Trade,
and Customs. Chap. 77. Of Flanders and Holland, their Weights, Measures, Coyns,
Customs, Traffic. Chap. 78. Of Amsterdam and its Trade. Chap. 79. Of Germany,
its Provinces and Trade. Chap. 80. Of Stratsburg, and its Trade. Chap. 81. Of
Vicura, its Trade, Weights, and Customs, and Coin. Chap. 82. Of Hamburg, its
Trade, Commodities, Coyns, etc. Chap. 83. Of Denmark, its Trade, etc. Chap. 84.
Of Elsinore, and the Trade thereof. Chap. 85. Of Norway, its Customs and Tade.
Chap. 86. Of Sweedland, its provinces and Trade. Chap. 87. Of Moscovia, and its
chief City Mosco, its Trade and Customs, etc. Chap. 88. A View of the Kingdom
of Poland its Trade, etc. Chap. 89. Of Hungary, and the adjacent Provinces,
their Trade and Manufacture, etc. Chap. 90. A View of Greece, and its Trade,
the Manufacture and Trade of Constantinople with England. Chap. 91. A View of
the Islands in the Egean and Mediterranean Sea, etc. Chap. 92. Of Candia and
other Islands. Chap. 93. Of Zant, Zeffalonia, and their Trade, Commodities,
Coin, etc. Chap. 94. Of Sicilia, Malta and Sardinia, their Trade. Chap. 95. Of
Greenland and other Northern Islands. Chapter 96. Of the Practice and Custom of
Exchanges, and the Benefit thereof. Chap. 97. Of four Bills of Exchange, of
presenting, paying and protesting, the Laws and Customs of Merchants therein
asserted. Chap. 98. Of the Pair in Exchange, and form of English, Dutch, and
French Bills. Chap. 99. Useful observat. on Bills of Exchange. page 300. Of
Letters of Credit, and why drawn. p. 312. A Survey of Customs of Tonnage, and
Poundage, of Wines of the Growth of France, Germany, Spain, Portugal. p. 314 Of
Policies of Assurance, their Original, Legality, Nature, and Quality. p. 325.
Of Bottomery, the Signification of it, the Commodity or Discommodity of it. p.
332. Of the Rights, and Privileges of Owners of Ships, and Rules to be
observed by them, according to Laws Marine. p. 335. Instructions to be observed
by Masters of Ships. p. 337. Of Freight and Charter part according to Laws
Marine. p. 340. Of Wrecks, and Instructions for Masters and Owners in case of
Wrecks. p. 344. Of Averidge and Contribution, and what Goods maybe cast
overboard in case of a Storm. p. 347. A View of London, with the Customs,
Privileges and Exemptions thereof according to the Charters of several Kings
of England. p. 351. A Survey of the remaining Ports of England, with their
Members, Creeks, etc. together with the Goods Imported and Exported. p. 358.
A Table of the Contents of the second Treatise, Entitled, A Discourse of
Trade.
CHAP I. THat a small Country, and few people by Situation, Trade and Policy,
may be Equivalent in Wealth and Strength to a far greater people, and that
Conveniences for Shipping and Water-Carriage, do most eminently and
fundamentally conduce thereunto. CHAP. II. That some kind of Taxes and Public
Levies may rather increase then diminish the Wealth of the Kingdom. CHAP. III.
That France cannot by Reason of natural and perpetual impediments, be more
powerful at Sea then England and the low Countries. CHAP. IV. That the people
and Territories of the King of England, are naturally as considerable for
Wealth and Strength as those of France. CHAP. V. That the impediments of
Englands greatness, are Contingent and removable. CHAP.. VI. That the Power and
Wealth of England, has increased these last 40 years. CHAP. VII. That one 10
part of the whole Expenses of the King of England Subjects, is sufficient to
maintain 100000 Foot, 40000 Horse, and 40000 men at Sea, and defray all other
charges of the Government, both ordinary and Extraordinary, etc. CHAP. VIII.
That there are spare Hands enough amongst the King of Englands Subjects, to
earn two Millions per Annum more then they now do, and that there are also
Employments ready, proper and sufficient for the purpose. CHAP. IX. That there
is Money sufficient to drive the Trade of the Nation. CHAP. X. That the King of
Englands Subjects, have Stock Competent and Convenient to drive the Trade of
the Whole Commercial World.
THE INTRODUCTION. OR THE ORIGINAL OF TRADE, PLAINLY Demonstrating it is
Increase. The Means and Methods used to bring it to the Perfection it is
arrived to at present. And of the great Benefit reaped thereby, both in
General, and Particular.
CHAP. I.
THat Inland and Maritim Trade and Traffic are (with Gods Blessings on men's
Endeavors) the chief Pillars and ^upport of all Nations, and from whence they
had their first rise and greatness is so evident that Arguments to prove it
would be ineffectual; yet from the World's Original it had not it is perfection,
nor indeed could it till Mankind increased, and by spreading wide in the Earth,
Peopled it is vast Immensity; nor then, for some thousands of Years was it
National, but rather in secret between man and man, few People knowing the
Benefit of any other commodities then what were of the native growth of those
Countries they inhabited; nor so could Riches abound, for Coin was for the most
part useless, or indeed not mentioned till the days of Abraham the Patriarck;
Exchange of Goods being the only Traffic* and consequently on that score few
Traded for more then they had present occasion to use, by Reason many things
were not of lasting quality, and for that they for the most part Traveled from
place to place. Their chiefest Riches consisted in Cattle, but at last when
they Builded Cities and Towns, and found the convenience of a Settlement they
extended their Traffic farther, and one City Traded with another, which still
spread wider; yet long was it 'er they found means to plough the Bosom of the
Sea, and to hold Commerce and Traffic with remote Nations, which no sooner was
brought to my Perfection, but Riches abounding, and Plenty Flowing in on every
side, men then (and not till then) began to give their thoughts large scope,
and not contented with the Portion of Earth allotted them, began to grow emulous
and aspire to universal Sovereignty; as likewise to plant Colonies in (till
then) unhabitable Islands* which had not Shipping been invented must have
continued without inhabitants; as at this time (past doubt) for want of
discovery many do in the remote Seas, especially under the Artick Pole, whose
extremity renders them unaccessible, or at least unhabitable; and of all
Nations the Greeks were the first that brought Navigation to any Perfection, by
which they grew opulent and extended their Colonies to the utmost Orient,
acquiring the Empire of the then known World; their Fame growing every where
great, nor could the Romans bring their Warlike Expeditions to any perfection
till they were Lords of the Sea, and enriched themselves by Traffic, bringing
into that one City the Stores of all Nations; so that from Cottages of
Shepherds, who laid her first Foundation, she soon became Magnificent,
thrusting up her Lofty Spires, bedecked with Gold so high that they in a manner
kissed the Clouds, and rendered her the awful Mistress of the Universe; and by
Trade and Industry, more then by Arms, kept up her Reputation for six hundred
Years, when ranging the World to find out Countries unconquered, at last, from
Gallia, or France, under the leading of Caesar, they entered Britain; a Place
then wild and rude, not knowing how to use the abundant plenty that Nature
bestowed upon them, but refusing all manner of Dainties, fed upon Roots of
Herbs, and Barks of Trees; not Tilling any Ground, nor sowing Corn, otherwise
then scattering it on the untilled Surface of the Earth, and harrowing it over
with Bushes, suffering their Cattle, Fowl, and Fish, of which they had store,
to continue useless, scarcely knowing any shore but their own: Their Traffic,
or Merchandise, for the most part amongst themselves, and that but mean; their
chief Riches consisting (as Strabo says) in Ivory-Boxes, Sheers, Onches,
Bitts, Bridles, Chains of Iron, Wreaths, Glass colored and the like, which
they usually delivered to each other as current Coin, for what their necessity
required; but no sooner had the Romans Civilized them, and instructed them in
such Arts as were most suitable to their Capacities, and might stand them in
greatest stead, but they began to Build Houses (living before for the most in
Huts, and going naked) and turned their Leather Boats into Tall Ships,
Furrowing the Seas broad back, and discovering many Nations, to them, till
then, unknown: So that by Traffic abroad, and Improvement at home, this Island
grew famous, and spread it is Name to the utmost Limit of the known Earth; so
that being rightly termed the Storehouse of the Western World, all the
Neighbour-Nations Traded hither; so that those Ports and Havens that were for a
long time useless, were now filled with Ships of all Nations: So that Silver
and Gold was had in Abundance, and Coyns in imitation of those the Romans
Stamped with the Effigies of their Kings and Princes, which then were many,
each County containing two or three, and they for the most part at variance
amongst themselves, which gave the Romans an opportunity to become Conquerors
at an easier rate then otherwise they could.

During the four hundred Years and odd that the Romans Governed here by their
Lievetenants, and sometimes by their Emperors in Person; Rome, and after her
Constantinople, the new Seat of Empire, abounded with our Stores, so that more
Tribute was paid by this Island then by France and Germany, tho Ten times as
large; but the fame of Britains Wealth proved her unhappyness, for the Goth
breaking in upon the Roman Empire, whose spreading Top was too large to be
supported by the slender Bole, her Branches was torn off on every side, so that
to support their own, the Romans were forced to recall their Legions, who took
with them the Flower of the Brittish-Youth, and left her open to the Picts and
wild-Irish, who spoiled and wasted all her pleasant Places with Fire and Sword,
and after them the Saxons (who were called in to expel them) far worse, so
that of a Flourishing Island, it became for many Years a place of Ruin and
desolation, all her Nobility Slain, and the residue of her Natives forced to
betake themselves to the Fastnesses of Mountains, so that Strangers having
grasped the Scepter, which then Multiplied into seven, from thence called the
Heptarchy of the Saxons Trade again ceased, all the Ships either Sunk or Burnt
in the Ports; but no sooner was the Bloody Tempest over, but the wounded Island
again began to lift up her Head. Foreign Nations again came in with the
growths of their distant Soil, and so she again became a Storehouse of Wealth;
but especially, when the sole Monarchy was reduced under Egbert the nineteenth
King of the West Saxons -- under whom things Flourished in a peaceful manner.
But soon after, as if Fate had envied her happyness, the Danes (no less Bloody
then the Saxons had been) made an Invasion, tempted by the glittering Wealth of
this fair Isle, and never left off till they had grasped the Scepter, and
reduced it to the obedience of Canute, under whom again she Flourished more
then ever, and so continued to do (Trade increasing and Arts duly improved)
till the Conquest by the Norman-Duke, who for a while put a stop to her
aspiring, yet soon after gave encouragements to Industry by Grants, Charters,
and large immunities; and from him, through the Reigns of several Peaceful
Kings, the current of her Prosperity continued. Maritim affairs being
prosecuted with such Success, that our Sailers began to Plough (till then)
unknown Seas, and so Succesfully that they brought home great store of Riches,
opening a way to those that succeeded, to bring to perfection what at this day
renders us happy in all temporal Blessings.

Having thus far proceeded in general to show what Britain has been in her
infancy, I shall now proceed to give the Reader an account of such matters as
have more immediately conduced to the prosperous and Flourishing Estate,
wherein she has for many Years past remained, and does at present remain; which
chiefly, next Heaven, we must attribute to her store of Shipping, and
Expertness in Navigation, so long encouraged by her indulgent Kings, who in
Peace and War have maintained the Sovereignty of the Seas with Navies almost
incredible; so that no Neighbour-Nation durst disturb our Traffic. Not to
insist upon King Arthure, who found out the Russian Tracts, and passed on
conquering almost to the utmost Orient, attended by a Squadron of three hundred
Ships; nor Edgard his Successor, who Ploughed the Bosom of the deep with four
hundred Sail, asserting his Sovereignty on the Main, to the admiration of the
Neighbour-Nations. Nor was Canute the Puissant Danish King, then Reigning in
Britain, less formidable on his watery Empire, being proud to have annexed to
his Style Lord of the Ocean. Nor Edward the Confessor, less Potent in Naval
forces, as appears by the many Ships of War he set forth to give Battle to his
Brother in Law Godwin Earl of Kent, who kept the Seas with a great number of
Ships that spoiled and wasted the Coasts of Britain, as appears in the Reign
of that King; tho indeed Heaven at that time prevented the Shedding of
English-Blood, by sending just as they were about to engage a thick Fogg to
cover the Face of the Deep, so that none could see a Ships length. By this
means Seamen were brought up and fitted for Navigation, in such sort that in
the Nonage of the Norman-Conquest, as is before said, Traffic abroad began to
Flourish; nor was Manufacture, that Sinew of a Nation, less regarded, People
being encouraged thereto, not only by the Princes themselves with large
Indulgencies, but by such Wealthy Peers and others, as more sought the good of
the Publick-Weal than their own Private interest, which ever redounds in the
end to their profit. For tho the Poor be never so industrious, yet wanting what
to Trade with, their Industry will faint; but if they have employment to
improve themselves, Lands, and all things else will be improved, and advanced
to a higher Estimate, and the growth of England be made of value equal, if not
exceeding any European Commodity whatsoever: So that this spot of an Island
may, nay is, rightly termed the Storehouse of the World, who can subsist of
her self, but without whose Commodities few Nations can maintain their Grandeur.

But to the purpose: The Kings after the Conquest intending to make this their
constant Seat, and making little esteem of their Ancient Inheritance, the
Duchy of Normandy did not let to increase the Grandeur of this Kingdom, by
granting large Privileges and immunities to those that were Industrious, but
especially to the City of London, the chief residence of Royalty, named by many
Kings, their Royal Chamber: Nor was any thing thought too dear that might
conduce to her Felicity, as appears by the Charter granted by King William the
first, commonly called the Conqueror, which was in these words.

William King, greeteth William Bishop, and Godfry Porters and all the
Burgesses within London, French, and English, and I grant you, that I will that
you maintain and enjoy all your Laws, that you did in the days of King Edward
(meaning the Confessor 's) and I will, that each Child be his Fathers Heir; and
further, I will, that no man wrong you, and so God keep you.

This free concession gave scope to Trade, being much augmented by succeeding
Kings, so that Tradsemen growing numerous, they so prevailed upon the Benign
Bounty of the Reigning Princes, that they after long Fraternities obtained at
several times to be incorporate in distinct Bodies, or Companies, to Implead,
or be Impleaded as one man. The account of which as it happened in diverse Kings
Reigns, shall in the following Chapters be set down, beginning at the first of
the twelve, and so to proceed in order.

CHAP. II. The Original of the Companies of the City of London, viz. the
Principal twelve, of the time of their being incorporated, and by what Kings
and Queens: As likewise the names of all the other Companies, as at this day
they stand confirmed.
1. THe Mercers (tho then Trading for the most part in Stuffs of the Native
growth) were enabled to be a Company, and Permitted to Purchase twenty pounds
per Annum Lands, in the seventeenth Year of King Richard the second's Reign,
Anno Domini, 1393.

2. The Grocers (tho at that time not brought to half the Perfection that now
it is) called Pepperers, before were Incorporated, by the name, aforesaid, in
the twentieth Year of King Edward the third Anno Dom. 1345.

3. The Drapers for the most part Woollen, were Incorporated in the seventeenth
of King Henry the sixth, Anno 1430. having been a Fraternity from the time that
King Edward the third so earnestly promoted the Woollen Manufacture by
admitting the Flemins and other Nations, the free use of Manual Operation
within his Dominions. That so his Subjects might learn the Craft, and not be
beholden to other Nations, to work the growth of our own Country, and pay them
extraordinary Rates, by the advance of Exportation and Importation; for what
might be otherwise ordered to the Advantage and Glory of our own Nation by
setting many thousands of Poor people on work, otherwise incapable of getting
whereby to subsist.

4. The Fishmongers (a Vocation no less advantageous to this Kingdom by their
encouragement of the Fishing-Trade, of which hereafter I shall speak) were (in
former times) two Companies viz. Stock-Fishmongers, and Salt-Fishmongers; but
in the beginning of the Reign of Henry the Eight, Anno 1509. did bear their
Arms as at present they do, and in the twenty eight Year of the King, Anno
1536, were United and incorporated in one Body without distinction.

5. The Goldsmiths (an Ancient Craft, so I may rightly term it, for formerly
those that sold worked likewise their own Plate) were Incorporated and
confirmed in the sixteenth Year of King Richard the Second's Reign.

6. The Skinners had the Favor to be incorporated in the first Year of the
Reign of King Edward the third, Anno 1327. and were made a Brotherhood in the
eighteenth of King Richard the Second's Reign.

7. The Merchant-Taylors had their first pattent of Arms granted by Sr. Thomas
Holne Clarencieux King at Arms, being then called Tailors, and Linen
Armourers, viz. in the twenty first of King Edward the fourth, Anno 1480. and
since Incorporated by Henry the Seventh, by the name of Merchant Tailors. viz.
in the seventeenth of his Reign, Anno 1501.

8. The Haberdashers, or Hurrers, formerly so called were Incorporated a
Brotherhood of St. Catharine in the twenty sixth of Henry the sixth, Anno 1447.
and by the name of Merchants Haberdashers, confirmed in the seventeenth Year of
Henry the seventh.

9. The Salters had their Arms, and as many suppose, were confirmed in the
twentieth Year of Henry the Eighth 1530. being a Company of good Esteem.

The Iron-Mongers had the Favor to be Incorporated in the third Year of King
Edward the fourth, Anno 1462. at which time they were greatly increased, and
the Mines of our Nation much improved.

11. The Vintners, formerly called Wine-Tunners were Incorporated in the Reign
of King Edward the third, after he had Conquered all Normandy, and by that
means engrossed most of the French Vintage; But were not confirmed till the
fifteenth of Henry the sixth.

12. The Cloath-Workers had their Arms granted by Thomas Benolt, Clarenceux, in
the twenty second Year of Henry the Eighth, but the time of their Incorporation
uncertain.

And thus in brief, have I declared the Original of the twelve Principal
Companies, upon whom the greatest Stress of Trade depends, and by whose prudent
Management, and Industry, Britain Flourishes, and at this day lifts up her
Head above her Neighbor Nations.

Those that remain, are these (whose names I shall only recite, because they
tend not much to our purpose, the Dyers, Brewers, Leathersellers, Pewterers,
Barbers, Chyrugeons, Armourers, White-Bakers, Wax-Chandlers, Tallow-Chandlers,
Cutlers, Girdlers, Butchers, Sadlers, Carpenters, Cordwainers, Painters,
Curriers, Masons, Plumbers, Inholders, Founders, Embroiderers, Poulterers,
Cooks, Coopers, Bricklayers, and Tylers, Bowyers, Fletchers, Blacksmiths,
Joyners, Plaisterers, Weavers, Fruterers, Scriveners, Botlemakers, and Horners,
Stationers, Marblers, Wool-packers, Farriers, Paviers, Lorimors, or Lorinors,
Brown-Bakers, Wood-mongers, Vpholsterers, Turners, Glaziors, Clarks, Watermen,
Apothecaries, and Silk-Throwsters.

All of these are Fraternities, and most of them Incorporated and have Charters
of Privilege, and large Immunities, tho in the days of our Forefathers, many
of them were not known, not having brought their several Trades and Crafts to
perfection, for many of which they were obliged to be beholden to Strangers;
but the Natives of this Kingdom being* naturally Ripe-wited and of a toward
Genius, soon became Arts-Masters, and out-did their Teachers; so that at this
day, no Nation under Heaven can exceed them (if the Materials be alike) in all
respects.

But having given the Reader an account of the Respective Companies, whose
industry at home, improve to a Miracle, what is brought to them from distant
Lands, I shall proceed to give a Relation of the Respective Merchants, whose
Traffic by Sea Inriches the Land, whilst the Land finds them with wherewithal
to drive on their Commerce with all Nations, from whence any Valuable
Merchandise is brought. But before I Lanch altogether into the Ocean, I think
it would be necessary to relate the Incorporation of the Merchant of the
Staple, who once were the chiefest boast, and most profitable to this Nation:
Nor indeed less profitable to others, as France, Flanders, Holland, Saxony, and
many other Countries, the chief Mart being Established at Calis, a little
before taken from the French, by King Edward the third, the profit of our
English Wool then chiefly obliging the Flemings to side with us, against their
Potent Neighbor.

The Merchants of the Staple having been a long while a Fraternity were
Incorporated by the aforesaid King Edward the third, and by him endowed with
many large Privileges, tho at this day the Woollen Manufacture, being greatly
increased, every one buys his Commodity where he can find it best Cheap, so
that there remaining no fixed Staple, these Merchants are not now of such
Repute as formerly.

CHAP. III. Of the several English Merchants Trading into most parts, of the
time of their Incorporating, and Improvement of Navigation.
THe English Merchants Trading by Navigation (who by visiting remote Countries,
and Trafficking with the Inhabitants, bring in the store of the whole World)
are chiefly these, and their Incorporations mostly as follows.

1. The Merchants Adventurers, were Incorporated by King Edward the fourth,
from which time, they Traded with good Success, until the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, who, for a further encouragement to their Industry, not only
confirmed them, but enlarged their Privileges.

2. The Merchants of Russia or Muscovia, who having improved their Trade and
Commerce in that Remote Kingdom, to the Enriching their Native Land, were
Incorporated by King Edward the sixth, greatly encouraged by Queen Mary, and
had their confirmation, with an Augmentation of their Privileges, from the
ever favourer of Navigation the Bounteous Queen Elizabeth.

3. The Merchants of Elbing, were Incorporated by Queen Elizabeth, and by her
greatly encouraged; she, like a prudent Queen, and Patroness of her Country,
well knowing, that by Traffic, not only her Revenues would be improved, but
likewise her People be Enriched, and she rendered formidable to her aspiring
Neighbors, tho since upon some distaste, they have left Trading in that place,
and Trade at Hambourg, and other free Cities and Ports.

4. The Turky-Merchants, or Merchants of the Levant, were likewise Incorporated
by the same Queen, and were confirmed with a large addition, to their
Privileges by King James.

5. The Merchants of Spain, or more properly, Spanish Merchants, or such of our
Nation as Traded to Spain, were Incorporated by Queen Elizabeth.

6. The East India Merchants were Incorporated by Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1600.
from which time they have continually inproved their Trade in those remote
parts of the World, being now one of the Wealthiest Corporations in Europe;
their first rise was by employing a Joynt-stock to build Ships (of which now
they have Store) and so themselves in imitation of the Porteguese, and other
industrious People, Traded to the Indies, and soon found the advantage by
bringing home the same Commodities which we before were beholden to Strangers
for at second Hand, and dear Rates.

7. In the latter end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign and in the beginning of King
James's, the Eastland, Greenland, and French Merchants, were settled in
companies and Traded with great Success, Building many Ships, and continually
employing some thousands of Persons in the Management of their Affairs,
Exporting Commodities of our growth, and bring in those of the growth of other
Countries.

8. There are likewise a Company of Virginia, or West India Merchants, whose
Industry has much improved our Colonies in America, and advance the King's
Revenues in his Customs twenty thousand pound per Annum; which Trade into those
parts has, and daily will increase and turn to the Advantage of our Nation, and
be a means of making further Discoveries in those vast Seas, in which lie hid
past doubt many fair Islands, if not Continents as Rich as those which yield
the Spaniard yearly so many Millions of Ducates in Gold Ore, and Bars of
Silver. These and other Traders in remote parts make England Flourish, and
stand the envy of her Neighbor Nations. There is likewise the Guinnie and
Barbary Companies, both Rich in Shipping and Merchandise, having since their
Incorporation gotten great Esteem, and much improved Navigation. And now,
having given an account of the Constitution and settlement of those in general
that drive on the Trade, and Commerce both by Land and Sea, before I Lanch into
the Ocean, to take a view of other Countries, or to describe their Trade and
Traffic I shall expose to Public view the Commodities of my Native Country,
with all the Islands and Dominions that surround it. viz. such ^s are subject
to the British Scepter; as ^lso, in due place and order. As also of ^he
Current Coyns, the Weights, Mea^ures, and such other Matters relating to
Commerce, as are available to the Compiling of this Treatise; and first of
Eng^and and Wales.

CHAP. IV. Of England, and the Trade thereof in General and Particular, with a
Survey of all the Measures, Weights, Current Coins, Inland Commerce, and what
tends to Navigation. A Description of the most material Counties, and of the
Trade of Wales in general.
ENgland, the Head of the British Empire, is in every Place so admirable
abounding with plenty, that to describe her in every part of her Trade and
Beautiful Situation, would exact a large Volum. Therefore I shall only in brief
expose to view what is most material as to my purpose: And first, I shall begin
with Cornwell, as being the remotest of the English Counties, or Provinces; tho
it be in it self, in many places, to appearance a Barren and Mountainous
Country, yet does it produce Rich Mines of Tinn, which brought to perfection,
is of great esteem in all Countries. With it there is also dug Gold and
Silver, tho hardly worth refining, the Earth not having heat enough to bring it
to perfection; there is found likewise a Stone Transparent, naturally formed in
Angles and Points like a Diamond, which was it not so common, might merit high
esteem. On that Coast, Herrings and Pilchards are taken in great number, which
not only sustain the Inhabitants, but being dried prove good Merchandise in
Spain, France, Flanders, and Italy. The Sea Coast is adorned with many Towns,
of which Falmouth is chief, being capable of receiving many Vessels; nor is St.
Ives of less note, yielding great store of Fish, not reckoned less yearly then
four or five thousand Hogsheads of Pilchards, and five hundred Barrels of
Herrings, besides some Tuns of Congerdoust, and great store of Ray-Fish, which
imploys some hundreds of the Inhabitants, and inables them to provide
plentifully for their Families, and reserve, as the old saying is, a Penny
against a rainy day.

These Commodities, viz. Pilchards, are vended by the Hogshead, four of them
making a Tun, as likewise by the thousand, they allowing twelve hundred small
Tale to the thousand, and a Barrel of Herrings, commonly thirty Gallons, is
sold to the Merchants for eighteen Shillings, twenty Shillings, or according as
the fishing Season is propitious; Congerdoust is sold by the Kintale, viz. one
hundred and twelve pound to the Kintale; Ray-fish are for the most part sold
fresh, and that by the Dozen, at two Shillings four Pence, two Shillings six
Pence, and sometimes three Shillings per Dozen, but their Dozens are
extraordinary large, they allowing sometimes sixty to the Dozen, but sometimes
less, according to the Custom of the Place; their Weight is one hundred and
twelve pound according to the Stander, their Yard and Ell equal to those of
London.

Their Bushel for Grain and Salt imported contains twenty eight Gallons Water
Measure, and so proportionable the greater or the lesser Measures; but their
Bushel used in Public Markets for Corns is but twenty Gallons, their Gallon
agreeing with the Winchester Gallon. The Bakers in those parts are but few, and
the most thing they stand in need of is Salt, Ten thousand Bushel being yearly
spent in Curing their Fish.

The manner of taking Pilchards and Herrings is with Nets, but the Ray-Fish
with Hooks; the first being Fished for from the first of July till the first of
January; the second, from Michalemass till Christmas; and the third and last,
only in the Prime of Summer; sixty Boats, and about four hundred men being
employed therein.

Devonshire is no less Rich in Veins of Tin: adorned it is with many Towns and
good Havens; as Exon, Dartmouth, and Plymouth, the latter famous for producing
the worthy Sr. Francis Drake. The Seaports, as the former, most Subsist by
Fishery.

Dorsetshire abounds in Cattle, Fertile Pastures, and Linen Manufacture; it is
chief Towns being Dorchester, and Waymouth.

Somersetshire is famous for the many Trading Places contained in it is Circuit,
but especially in Bristol, the second City of England for Naval Commerce, as
being stored with Merchants Trading into most parts of the known World; it
abounds in Riches, and the County no less in Corn, Cattle, Wool, Woollen, Cloth
Serges, and other valuable Commodities, which they Trade withal to other
adjacent Counties.

Darbyshire, the Head of which is the Town of Derby abounds in plenty of Corn,
Leaden Mines, and other Minerals.

Wiltshire is an Inland County, but the people Frugal and industrious, their
chief Commodity is Woollen-Cloth, which is dispersed all over England, and
brings them a good return, maintaining at least three thousand Persons in
Carding, Spining, Weaving, Shearing, Dressing, and the like; the Head of this
County is Salisbury.

Hampshire, famous for the great Trade of Honey therein, whose chief Cities are
Southampton, and Winchester.

Barkshire, is famous for Cloth-working, abounding in Cattle, Rich Pastures,
Artificers, Fruits of all sorts, and all things else necessary for the
Subsistence of man.

Surry, is no less abounding in all plenty than the former, and of greater
Trade, by Reason of it is nearness to the City of London, that Mouth of the
Nation, by Reason of which it is Inhabitants have the better opportunity to vend
the growth of that County.

Sussex and Kent, abound in Fruits, Corn, Wood, Wax, Honey, Cattle, and all
other necessary Commodities, which by Reason they border on the Sea, they have
opportunity to dispose of at good rates.

Glocestershire, is for the most part employed in the Woollen Manufacture,
Gloucester being the Head City. In it are found those famous Hills of Cots-Wold
on which numerous Flocks of Sheep Feed, and affoard the best Wool in Europe.

Oxford, is famous for her Rich Pastures, store of Cattle, and Corn, but above
all for her University in her chief City of Oxford.

Buckingham, Bedford, and Hertfordshires, are adorned with pleasant Buildings,
rich Pastures, store of Corn, pleasant Rivers abounding with Fish, and Forests
of Stately Oaks, with which the Wall of the Nation, viz. our Ships of War are
made; nor is Venison in abundance wanting, nor any sort of Fowls common in
England.

Middlesex, and Essex, the first famous for Buildings, and so long together
containing the Palaces of our Kings Courts of Judicature, and above all
incompassing the famous City of London.

The second, for store of Cattle the many famous Ports, and the Commodity
received by shipping, the Silver Thames Washing her Southern Shore as far as
the Hope, it abounding likewise in Corn, Cheese, Butter, and the like.

Suffolk and Norfolk, next take place; the first famous for Butter, Cheese,
Cloth, Cattle, Corn, Wool, and what not: The second for Deer, Conneys, Sheep,
Daries, and store of Corn; but above all, for containing the famous City of
Norwich, which for Industry ought to be accounted the chief Boast of England,
it being seated upon the River Yare, from whence Yarmouth takes it is name, and
thirty Miles from the Sea by Water, tho not above sixteen by Land, has little
foreign Trade, save only with Holland; the chief Trade being with the City of
London, the chief Commodities being Stuffs, and Stockings, which are made for
the most part in the City; it not being guessed, that less then one hundred
thousand pounds-worth of Stuffs every Year are sent up to London; which Stuffs
making and disposing of are under the Government of two Companies, the one
called the Worstes Company, the other the Russia Company: Those Manufactures
under the Government of the Worsted Company (and approved by the Wardens
thereof) have a Seal affixed to each, on the one side inscribed Norwich, on the
other, such letters as stand for the Wardens Names, that are at the Sealing
thereof. The other Seal has on one side these words, viz. Worsted Reformed, and
on the other in Figures containing the quantity of Yards the Piece contains.
Those called the Russia Company, the Manufacture, under whose Government to be
approved, by them is Sealed on the one side with these words* Fidelitas Arts
alit.

This Suff Trade is managed by Partner-Ship between the London and Norwich
Merchants, great quantities whereof have been, and are exported to furnish
other Nations, especially Spain, and the West-Indias. The Stockings here
vended, are reckoned to amount to near sixty thousand pounds per Annum, being
most knit by Children incapable of other Labor; so that at eight Years of Age,
many of them will earn four pence or six Pence a day* these latter are not
under any Governor, but have their Materials found them by certain Citizens,
as well of that City, as of London, which when made into Hose, are sent over
Sea, most of them, to furnish the Neighbor Nations. The County likewise
affoards Sheep, Conies, and Kine in abundance, as also, store of Corn,
especially Barley; which being turned into Malt is sent up to London, as
likewise into Scotland; all Corn is sold according to the Custom of the Country
by the Score, which is twenty Cooms, every Coome containing four Bushels, and
to every Score one Coom is allowed overplus. Their Weights and Measures, both
dry and wet, are consistent to the London Weights and Measures. In the like
manner abound Cambridgshire, Northamptonshire, Huntingtonshire, Leicestershire,
Rutland, Lincolnshire, notinggamshire, Warwickshire, Worcestershire,
Staffordshire, Shropshire, Cheshire, Herefordshire, Yorkshire, the County of
Richmond, Bishopric of Durham, Lancashire, Westmoreland, Cumberland,
Northumberland. And the strong Town and Territories of Barwick upon Tweed, all
abounding in store of things necessary and convenient for the profit and
pleasure of man.

In brief, England affoards more Merchandise than any one Nation in Europe, as
Perpetuanas Bays, Says, Serges, Cotton, Woollen, Cloth of all sorts, Kersies,
Buffins, Mocados, Grogram, Sattins, Calimancates, Velvets, Plushes, Worsted,
Fustains, Durances, Tukes, Cony-Skins, Squiril-Skins, Fitches, Calf-Skins,
Hides.

Also by Mines it produces, first by Tin twelve hundred thousand pounds
yearly, Lead eight hundred Foders yearly, Alum eight hundred Tuns yearly, Iron
of all sorts eight hundred Furnaces daily, Sea Cole yearly 50000000. Chaldron
yearly, Salt 300000. Ways yearly; as likewise all manner of Grain, as Oats,
Wheat, Barley, Rye, Pease, etc. likewise Linen Cloth, Tallow, Leather, Glass,
and Glasses of all sorts, Venice, Gold, and Silver, Train Oil, Salmon,
Pilchards, Herrings, Conger, Haberdine, Hops, Wood, Cheese, Butter, Saltpeter,
Gunpowder, Honey, Wax, Alabaster, Wools, Yarns, and the like, too many here to
insert. Nor is Wales in most parts less furnished, it consisting of the Isle of
Anglesea, the shires of Flint, Denbigh, Carnarvon, Merioneth, Montgomery,
Cardigan, Pembrook, Carmarden, Glamorgan, Radnor, Brecknock, Monmouth,
abounding in Cattle, Pastures, diverse useful Manufactures; nor are the industry
of the Inhabitants wanting to improve the product of their Country to the best
advantage, being a frugal sort of People, insomuch that wherever they Plant
themselves they are thrifty, and increase the smallest Stock to considerable
advantage.

Thus having taken a view of all England and Wales, viz. as to Traffic, and
the native Commerce, London excepted: I shall now take a view of that great
Metropolis, having purposely reserved her for the last, she being as Crown to
the rest of the Nation, and indeed the Beauty of the Universe.

CHAP. V. The Traffic of London.
LOndon, the Mistress of Cities, is placed upon the Banks of the River of
Thames, whose Silver Ebbs and Flows continually wash her Beautiful Walls, she
being supposed to be eight Miles in Circuit especially if the Liberties be
included, and before the dreadful Conflagration in sixty six, was adorned with
one hundred twenty two stately Churches, and now not guessed to contain less
(within the Circuit of her Liberties and all) than 5 if not 600000. Souls, she
being the Center of the Nation, and chief Receptacle of all Commodities, as
well of the native growth, as from all Parts of the Earth, being the residence
of the Merchants and Factors of all Trading Nations, abounding in the Riches of
France, Spain, Holland, Denmark, Sweedland, Russia, Italy, Turkey, Arabia,
China, Persia, Egypt, both the Indias, and of all other Places where any
Commerce is had, or from whence any Commodities are brought. For an instance of
the greatness of her Trade and Traffic, I shall only insist upon the Levant
Merchants, who yearly employ four or five thousand Sailers, besides Porters,
Weighers, Bargemen, Lightermen, Carmen, Shipwrights, Cankers, and others which
cannot amount to less then three thousand more, and are not adjudged to pay
less than five thousand pound per Annum for Customs. The Goods they export is
Cloth, Tin, etc. for which they import Silks, Cottons, Galls, Grograms, Spices,
Drugs, Currants, etc. The general Traders in this City are the Companies in the
(...) Chapter, who Trade for ready money by Bills of Exchange, Verbal credit;
and some Trades deal one with another by Exchange of Commodities, by mutual
allowance at such prices as the Commodity bears. The general way of buying
valuable Merchandise, as to Inland Trade, is by keeping Factors in the Country,
or by holding Correspondence with those that make it their business to improve
Manufacture or keep Fairs and Marts, there to buy up Commodities of all sorts,
when advantage offers. As for Merchandise imported from other Countries, the
Royal Exchange is the place most proper for Bargains, where every day, Sunday
and other high days excepted, between the Hours of 11. and 1. Merchants of all
Nations meet and discourse of their affairs. The way of payment is, either to
draw a Bill upon some Shopkeeper, Merchant of London, or other Wealthy Person:
Or upon some Correspondent beyond Sea; which Bill specifies payment upon sight,
or the time in which it is to be Paid (which shall be more at large
demonstrated when I come to Treat about Bills of Exchange) or to take the
Parties word for 3.6.9.12. Months, or a Bill under his Hand for performance,
for which there is no certain rule, but as those who Trade can agree. There are
likewise several Persons employed that are called Change-Broakers, who are
usually employed to buy up Commodities for Shopkeepers, as they see advantage,
also to make returns of money, viz. for so much money received in London or any
adjacent City, Town, or Village, you shall have a Bill to receive to the value
of it in the Current Coin of France, Spain, Holland, or any other Neighboring
Country, where your Occasions require it. There is likewise an Office that if
any Person delay, to pay a Bill he has accepted, and Trifle with him that is to
receive the money, or refuse to accept of a Legal Bill, you may protest against
the Party or Bill, which is entered, and may at any time be seen, that so men
may be cautious in accepting Bills drawn upon any such Persons: If a Merchant
fail in the World, it is no sooner known, but notice is given upon the Change.

These, and many more are the ways and Customs of Managing Trade in the City of
London; but these are the Principal, and what remains shall be hereafter
touched as I shall see Convenient.

CHAP. VI. Of the current Coyns of England as they have been settled by the
Tower Standard, etc.
MOney being the Life of Commerce, it will not be amiss to set down the several
current Coyns of Gold and Silver, according to their true Value, and as they go
current at this day, especially Silver, but Gold not unless full Weight, by
Reason old Gold is sometimes diminished by keeping carelessly.

The old Gold Coyns now current are pieces of
Twenty two Shillings Sterling, but current at one pound five Shilling six
pence. Pieces of eleven Shillings Sterling, current at twelve Shillings six
pence. Pieces of twenty Shillings Sterling, current at one pound three
Shillings six pence. Pieces of Ten Shillings Sterling, current at eleven
Shillings six pence. Pieces of five Shillings Sterling, current at five
Shillings nine pence. Pieces of two Shillings nine pence the 1/^ part twenty
two Shillings. Pieces of two Shillings six pence the 1/^ part of twenty
Shillings.
The current new Milled Gold.
Pieces of five pound, current at five pound seven Shillings six pence. Double
Guinnies current at two pound three Shillings, sometimes more* Guinnies current
at one pound one Shilling six pence. Half Guinnies current at Ten Shillings
nine pence.
The Silver current Coyns are pieces of
Five Shillings Sterling. Pieces of two Shillings six pence Sterling. Pieces of
twelve pence called Shillings. Pieces of six pence Sterling. Pieces of thirteen
pence half penny Sterling. Pieces of nine pence Sterling. Pieces of four pence
half penny Sterling. Pieces of four pence Sterling. Pieces of three pence
Sterling. Pieces of two pence Sterling. Pieces of one penny Sterling. Pieces of
a half penny Sterling. Piece of a half penny of Copper. Pieces of one farthing
of Copper.
The Account thus, four Farthings make a Penny Sterling; twelve Pence make a
Shilling Sterling; five Shillings make a Crown; four Crowns make twenty
Shillings, or one Pound; tho some there be that Reckon by Marks, Nobles, and
Angels, which is only in the remote parts of the Kingdom. A Noble is six
Shillings and eight pence, a Mark thirteen Shillings and four pence, an Angel
is two Crowns, or Ten Shillings.

CHAP. VI. A view of the Weights and Measures used in England, as they are
Established by Standard, and confirmed by the Laws of the Nation, and by
Parliament.
THe usual Weights that pass throughout England, are Troy Weight, and
Averdupois-Weights; the former consisting of twelve Ounces, each Ounce to
consist of twenty Penny Weight, the Penny Weight to consist or twenty four
Grains; and this Weight is commonly used in Weighing of Bread, Gold, Silver;
all Physical matters, as Electuaries, Powders, and the like; eight pounds of
this Weight being reckoned to Weigh a Gallon, and from thence Multiplied to any
greater Measure; four Gallons making a Peck, four Pecks a Bushel, and (...)
Bushels a Quarter. Wet Measures are likewise derived from this Weight, both at
Land and Sea, viz. twelve Troy Ounces is a Pint of Liquids, eight Pints a
Gallon; which of either Wine, Beer, or Ale, is eight pounds Troy, according to
the Standard of the Exchequer, and Acts of Parliament of the XI. and XII. of
Henry the seventh. And by this Rule the Coopers make their Casks for all
vendible Assize, vix. a Hogshead to contain sixty three Gallons, a Tearce
eighty four, a Pipe one hundred twenty six, a Tun two hundred fifty two
Gallons; as likewise all Casks made for packing up Fish, as a Salmon Butt to
contain eighty four Gallons, the Barrel twenty four, a Herring Barrel thirty
two, an Eele Barrel forty two, a Soap Barrel thirty two Gallons, the lesser
Casks to be divided accordingly.

The other Weight, viz. Averdupois, wherewith is Weighed Butter, Cheese, Flesh,
Wax, all manner of Grocery, and indeed most Commodities vended in England; it
consists of sixteen Ounces to the pound, and is called Garbel, by Reason a
Draught or Wast is allowed to every weighing: Seven pound of this Weight is
accounted to weigh a Gallon of Wheat, and so Multiplied to fifty six pound the
Bushel; seven pound Averdupois, is one hundred and two Ounces of Troy; from
whence it is accounted that a Bushel of Wheat must weigh one hundred and twelve
pound, and a quarter four hundred forty eight pounds Averdupois, and so
consequently fourteen pound Averdupois is sixteen pound eleven Ounces Troy; and
as one penny Sterling is the twentieth part of an Ounce Troy, so seven pound
twelve Shillings Sterling is eighty four Ounces, a half and two penny Weight of
Troy, and six pound eight Shillings Sterling, is eighty two pound Ounce, and
one penny Weight; and from these two are the Weights of Household, Wheaten and
White Bread Calculated.

The Weigh of Cheese is by Averdupois, and runs thus. The Weigh of Cheese one
hundred and twelve pound Averdupois, and the two hundred containing two hundred
twenty four pounds, consists of thirty four Cloves, every Clove being seven
pound. The Weigh of Suffolk Cheese is two hundred fifty six, and the Weigh of
Essex Cheese three hundred thirty six pound Averdupois.

A Sack of Wool was accounted three hundred fifty four pound Averdupois: two
Weighs of Wool make a Sack, and two Sacks a Last.

The last of Herrings is ten thousand, every one thousand to contain ten
hundred, and every hundred sixscore, that is, before they are Barrell'd. Lead
is sold by the Fodder, containing nineteen hundred and at one hundred and
twelve per cent. Averdupois. This Weight likewise of sixteen Ounces to the
pound is made three several Quintars for Weighing several sorts of Merchandise;
the first is of fivescore pound just to the hundred, and called one hundred
Sutle, whereby fine Commodities as Spices, Drugs, and the like are sold, which
are accounted by the pound, and to which over and above is allowed by the
Seller four pound, upon one hundred and four pound taken from the overplus,
derived from the Weights of Antwerp for Spices, and called by the name of Tret.
The second of the Quintars is one hundred and twelve, viz, fivescore and twelve
to the hundred, by which all Gross Commodities are weighed.

The third is sixscore to the hundred, by which Tinn is weighed to his
Majesty's Farmers, and some other few Commodities; and is called by the name of
the Stannery hundred. From this Averdupois Weight, by division the Weight
called the Stone, which is twofold, the long, and the short; the long is
accounted four pounds Averdupois, and the short eight, but in this there is no
certainty, for it differs according to the Customs of Counties and Markets.
There is an other thing in use called a Tod, some places seven pound, others
eight, and some again ten, being altogether variable. They have likewise a
Clove of twenty pound, twenty eight pound, thirty two pound, and the like.
There are likewise in most Markets for weighing of Flesh Stillyards used, but
without the Approbation of the Buyers; they being unintelligible to many, and
oftentimes false; first invented for the Weighing Hay, and Straw, for which
uses indeed they are only proper.

Averdupois consists of sixteen Ounces, every Ounce consisting of eight Drams,
and every Dram of sixty Grains; so that by it the Raw-Silk of Persia, and
Turkey, are sold, but then twenty four Ounces are allowed to the pound, or a
pound and an half, etc.

Thus having distinguished these Weights which are of such use in this Nation,
it is not amiss that I show you what accord the one hundred and twelve pound
Subtle has with other Nations, and Places of Traffic, as for the Equality of
Weight tho they differ in number.

In Europe, it agrees with the Weights of Mersella, the Venetia Sotile, the
Venetia Gross, Sicilia, Lisbon, Florence, Anvers, Lions, Sevil, Dantzick,
Bruges.

In Africa, and Asia, with the Weights of Aleppo, Aleppo, Tripoly, Syria,
Tripoly, Barbaria, Alexandrio-Zera, Alexandria, Forfar, Forfar, Scio,
Constantinople, Rhodes, Acria, Babylon, Balsola, and Ormus. And thus you see,
Reader, the Industry and Improvement of the English Nation, which now I must
leave, and take a View of Scotland.

CHAP. VIII. A view of Scotland, and the Trade thereof in General, together
with the Coyns, Customs, and Increase of that Ancient Kingdom.
SCotland (by Reason of it is continuing a distinct Kingdom for so many hundred
Years, even till the happy Union by King James, and indeed does yet in most
things, unless the Prerogative Royal) is thought worthy to be Treated of
seperately, tho indeed, the North part of Britain, and only separated from
England by the Rivers Tweed, Salway, and the Cheviot-Hills. It Is chief City is
Edenburg, which contains the Kings Palace, the Courts of Justice, and consists
of one great Street, of a Mile in Length; into which all the Petty Streets and
Lanes open. The next chief Cities and Towns are Glasgow, (the Sea of an
ArchBishop, and an University) St. Andrews, Sterling, Perth, Aberdeen, Dondes,
St. John's Town, etc.

The current Money consists of Gold and Silver, and are as follows.
Pieces of twenty two Shillings Sterling. Pieces of eleven Shillings Sterling.
Pieces of five Shilings six pence Sterling. Pieces of two Shillings nine pence
Sterling. Pieces of four Shillings four pence Sterling. Pieces of one Shilling
one half penny Sterling. Pieces of nine Shillings six pence, being of the
thirteen pence half penny. One Mark. Pieces of four pence half penny Sterling.
But note that thirteen pence half penny Sterling, is accounted a Scotch Mark,
or thirteen Shillings four pence Scotch; sixpence three-farthings, a Scotch
Noble, accounted six Shillings and eight pence; twenty pence Sterling is
accounted a Mark and a half Scotch, or one pound Scotch, of twenty Shillings
Sterling is eighteen Scotch Marks; so that Strangers unacquainted with their
Money hearing them discourse about it think them far Richer then they are.

They have other Pieces of Copper Money of small Value, as Babaes, Bodles, hard
Heads, and the like; but indeed they have Principally the money of England,
which is current in that Kingdom, and of late have abounded in Silver. The
chief Commodities of the Country are Cloth, Freezes, Fish, Hides, Salt, Lead
Ore, Tallow, Grain of all sorts, Feathers, Iron, Alum, Seacoal, commonly
called Scotch-Coal, and are divided into two parts, viz. The Highland, and
Lowland, which are divided into Sherifdoms, and Fifes.

They have an Exchange in imitation of ^urs at London, but especially used for
the Exchange of moneys with England.

The keeping of their accounts, diverse ways; some keep them according to the
Method of England, others according to the Ancient use and Custom of their own
Nation, which is in Marks valuable as aforesaid.

Their Weight for weighing Merchandise is but one, and with that they buy and
sell throughout the Kingdom; it contains sixteen Ounces to the pound, and one
hundred of those pounds make their Quintal; which in England is one hundred and
eight pounds Averdupois; and one hundred pound London Subtle Weight makes
ninety two of theirs, or one hundred and twelve English one hundred and three
and a half of Scotch; their Measures for Linen, Stuffs, Cloth, or Silk, is
the Ell which is wanting of ours, insomuch that it differs from our Yard four
per cent. that is, four Yards in a hundred Else, so that seventy five Yards, or
sixty Else English make seventy two Scotch, but in Tale to every hundred they
Reckon six-score. In Measure for Corn, Coals, Salt, Wine, Beer, Ale, Oil, and
the like, they come near at one with ours.

Their Navigation is but small, for the most part Trading with England, and
Ireland, yet are they a People frugal and much bent to improve the growth of
their Country.

And thus having taken a view of Scotland, and the Trade thereof I must pass
over into Ireland the third Diamond in the British Diadem.

CHAP. IX. A view of Ireland, and of the Trade, Manners, and Present State of
that Kingdom.
IReland, is divided into four Provinces, viz. Lempster, Munster, Connought,
Vlster, and Mead, and is four hundred Miles in Length, and two hundred in
Breadth, the chief Cities and Towns are Dublin, Kinnsail, London Derry,
Limrick, Cork, Waterford, Armah, Dungannon, Marleburg, Phillips-Town, Kildare,
and Tradah.

This Kingdom abounds in Navigable Rivers, store of Fish, Cattle, and Hides;
which are Transported into Spain, France, and Italy; Salmon are caught in such
abundance in July, and August, that many Servants in the places of that
Fishery, Covenant with their Master upon their being hired, that they will not
feed upon Salmon, but only so many days in a Week. These they Salt and Barrel
up, sending them into all the Neighboring Countries, where they are received
as good Merchandise; the Herring Fishery is likewise used and improved by them,
as likewise Pilchards, which are taken in August, September, and October; and
Transported into Spain, France, and the Streights of Gibraltar: they have store
likewise of Butter, Cheese, Calves-Skins, and other necessary Commodities:
Their Corn for the most part is the same with ours, yet in value not the same,
for a pound Sterling Irish, is worth, according to the Intrinsic value, no
more then fifteen Shillings English, and the Shilling consequently but nine
pence Sterling, six pence Irish but four pence half penny Sterling. The
Exchange is practiced in the City of Dublin, but of little use as to any
Transmarine Places, unless England, and there Principally London and Bristol,
commonly running at eight pence upon the pound, or at most but one Shilling,
which is but five pound per cent.

The Weights and Measures are (or for the most part) consistent to those of
England, and in fine it is a Country exceeding fertile, abounding in all things
necessary for the use of man, which would turn to great advantage, were the
Inhabitants but Industrious, especially in fitting out Ships for Navigation;
but they for the most part roave abroad, improving other Countries, and
neglecting their own. Their chief Merchandise are in Fish, which they send into
France, Spain, England, Scotland, and other parts of Europe. And thus I shall
leave this Kingdom and return, or rather Sail round Britain, to take a View of
the Islands of the Sea, or Ocean Islands.

CHAP. X. A view of the Ocean Islands, and of their Trade, viz. such as are
Subject to his Majesty of great Britain.
THe Ocean Islands are scattered in the British Sea like so many Pearls to
adorn the Imperial Diadem, and are first, the Orcades, or Isles of Orkney,
thirty two in number. The chief of which is Pomonia, which abounds in Mines of
Tinn and Lead: The next Hethy; and the other (there being only three of them of
note) Shethland bearing Fruit Trees of strange kinds. Especially those whose
Blossoms dropping into the Warter become Flying Birds.

The next are the Islands of the Hebrides, in number forty four; the chief
whereof is Illa, abounding with store of Venison. And Jona, famous for the
Sepulchers of the Scottish Kings; as likewise Mulla, where the Redshanks
inhabit, once so fearful to England; the rest are of little note.

The Islands called the Sorlings are one hundred forty five: The Principal are
Armath, Agnes, Samson, and Scilly, after which name all the rest are called.
The Inhabitants thereof Trade in Fishery, sow Corn, and addict themselves to
Manufacture.

The Isle of Man, is a square Island, being ten Miles in Length, and as many in
Breadth; the growth of it is Flax, Hemp, Oats, Barley, and Wheat, having store
of Cattle and other Merchandise brought in thither by Shipping; the chief Towns
are Ballacury, Russin, or Chasteltown.

The Isle of Anglesey, is accounted a Shire of Wales; and by some called the
Mother of Wales, being twenty four Miles in Length, and seventeen Miles over;
Fruitful it is, even beyond report, in Corn, Fruits, Cattle, Fowl, and Fish;
improved by several Profitable Manufactures: The Inhabitants making great store
of Butter and Cheese, and send out of it yearly three thousand Head of Cattle:
It Is chief Town is Beaumaris, very Commodious for Shipping.

Jersey is a fair Island, in Compass twenty Miles, peopled with Industrious
Inhabitants, yearly improving their Commodidities and vending them to good
advantage. Trading with England and France especially, famous for the many fine
Orchards and Gardens: the chief Towns and places of Traffic being St. Mallo,
and St. Hillary; the former being nightly Guarded without the Walls. From this
Island twenty Miles distant is Guernsey, Surrounded with spacious Harbors; and
in every part Fertile, stored with Cattle, and lying Commodious for Shipping,
Facing the Coast of France; and has for it is chief Town St. Peter's.

The last of the Isles Surrounding Britain, is the famous Isle of Wight, which
is twenty Miles long, and twelve over, and abounds with all things wherewith
England is stored, divided from Portsmouth but by an Arm of the Sea, lying most
Commodious for the Reception of Shipping; and for it is chief Towns has
Yarmouth, New-Port, and Bradring.

And thus much for the Islands of the Sea, surrounding Britain: And now I shall
only take a short Survey of some things further appertaining to the Trade of
Britain, and so Lanch into the Ocean, and take a view of the remotest Parts of
the World, especially such as are Traded to by the English. What more remains,
is an account of such Commodities of English-growth and Manufacture, as are
Exported, being Staple Commodities, and the common Cargo of outward bound
Vessels.

CHAP. XI. A further Account of the Measures of England, with a true Proportion
of the Weight of English Cloths.
FIrst, for the Breadth, Measure and Weight of English-Cloath, that chief of
Staple-Commodities, Kent, York, and Redding Clothes are six quarters and a half
broad, and ought to weigh eighty six pounds; the Cloth in the Piece are in
length thirty, and thirty four Yards. Suffolk, Norfolk, and Essex Clothes of
seven quarters wide, are eighty pounds Weight, twenty nine and thirty two Yards
in Length. Worcester, Coventry, and Hereford Clothes of six quarters and a
half, are in Weight seventy eight pound, and in Measure thirty, and thirty
three Yards. Gloucester, Oxon, and Wiltshire, and Summersetshire Clothes, of
seven quarters wide weigh seventy six pounds, and in length twenty nine, and
thirty two Yards. Suffolk Sorting Clothes of six quarters and a half wide,
ought to weigh sixty four pound, and to be in length twenty four and twenty six
Yards. All sorts of Clothes that are six quarters and a half wide, ought to
weigh sixty pound, and be twenty four and twenty six Yards in length; broad and
narrow Yorkshire of four quarters wide, weigh thirty pound, and in length are
twenty four, and twenty five Yards. Broad-Cloath of Taunton, Dunstable, and
Bridg-Water of seven quarters, weigh thirty pound the Cloth, and in Measure
are twelve, and thirteen Yards. Devonshire Kersies, and Dossens of four
quarters, weigh thirteen pounds, in Measure twelve, and thirteen Yards. Chequer
Kersies, Grays, Striped and Plain of four quarters are in Weight twenty four
pound, in Measure seventeen, and eighteen Yards. Ordinary Penistons or Forests
of three quarters and a half, in Weight twenty eight pound, in Measure twelve
and thirteen Yards. Sorting Peniston of six quarters and a half are pounds
thirty five, Yards thirteen and fourteen. Washers of Lancashire and others the
Clothes are seventeen pounds in Weight, in Measure seventeen and eighteen
Yards. This Custom of assizing Clothes at a certain Weight was first imposed
for the preventing defrauds in making slight sleasy, or imperfect Clothes, and
if any of the aforesaid Clothes prove otherwise then is specifyed, the maker,
or seller, ought to allow according to the want, either in Width, Length, or
Weight, and for so refusing, may be sued for a defraud.

To bring this to perfection the Weight of Wool is thus, the Sack of Wool does
contain three hundred sixty four pounds, the Tod twenty eight pound, thirteen
Tods being accounted to a Sack; every Tod being four Nales, and every Nail,
seven pound: The Sack of Wool is imputed to finish four Standard Clothes, of
twenty four Yards each in length, and six Yards and half quarter wide, of sixty
pound Weight, commonly called Sorting Clothes. In the Weight it is to be noted
whether the Clothes are thick Milled, well scoured, and thoroughly dried, that
the same be Measured by the Yard, and that an Inch be allowed to every Yard:
And thus much for Woollen Manufacture.

And now I am entering on Shipboard, to view the World, and to pass the
unfathomed Paths of the Deep. It will not be amiss to give a more full tho
brief account of the Measures whereby such things are Measured as are sent on
Board for the Subsistence of those that go down into the Deep, etc. as thus,
the English Measures for all Grain according to the Statues in that case made
and provided are the Pint, Quart, Pottle, Gallon. A Gallon being eight Pints,
four Quarts, two Potles; the Peck two Gallons, the half Bushel, two Pecks, the
Bushel, two half Bushels, the Strike two Bushel, the Cornock two Strikes, the
Quarter, two Cornocks. The Weigh either of Corn or Salt is forty six Bushels;
and the Last is eighty Bushels. Note in Salt Water Measure is allowed, viz.
five Pecks to the Bushel. Liquid Measures thus, the Ale Firkin to contain eight
Gallons, Kilderkin sixteen, and the Barrel thirty two. A Beer Firkin ought to
contain nine Gallons, the Firkin eighteen, and the Barrel thirty six; the
Kilderkin of Wine ought to be eighteen Gallons, the Barrel thirty one, the
Hogs-Head sixty three, the Tertian eighty four, the Butt, or Pipe one hundred
twenty six, the Tun two hundred fifty two. A Runlet of Oil ought to be eight
Gallons and a half, a Hogs-Head sixty three, a Pipe one hundred twenty six, and
the Tun one hundred fifty two; tho as to Oil in the Measure thereof, the Custom
of London differs from the Statute, allowing but seven pound to each Gallon,
and by that means the Tun is reduced to one hundred thirty six, and so at this
day it is sold; and thus far having proceeded to give those that are desirous to
Trade, or Traffic, either by Land, or Sea, an insight into most of the English
growth, and Manufactures; I shall now hoise up Sail and bear before the Wind,
not intending to cast Anchor till my adventurous Bark arrive in the late
discovered America, to take a View of the Trade and Traffic thereof, and from
thence into Afric, so to Asia, and then to Europe, all along observing the
Cities, Towns, Ports, Havens, Bays, either in Continent or Island; in
whatsoever place the English have any Traffic of note; or any other European
Navigators.

CHAP. XII. A View of America, of it is Provinces, and the Trade thereof.
AMerica, the so long unknown Part of the World, was first discovered by
Columbus, a Genoese, at the charge of Ferdinand and Isabella, King and Queen of
Castile; who setting sail from Sevil, after sixty three days, discovered that
vast Continent, which was seconded by Amerious Vesputius, a Florentine, at the
charge of Emanuel King of Portugal, who making a perfect Discovery of that
Golden place, had the Honor to have it called by his Name. The next that made
any considerable discovery, was Sebastian Cabbot, a Native of Bristol, being
furnished out for that purpose by our King Henry the seventh; and since him
several of our English Navigators have improved his Discovery, as Sr. Francis
Drake, Willowby, Candish, Buroughs, Forbisher, Davis, etc.

This Immensity is for the most part possessed by the Spaniards, and divided
into two parts, viz. Mexicana, and Peruana; and the former again divided into
these following Provinces, viz. Mexico, Nicaragua, Quivira, Jucutan, Florida,
Virginia, New England; Nurembega, Nova Francia, Corterialis, and Estotilandia.

The Commodities of Mexico (now called Nova Hispania, the Residence of the
Spanish Viceroy, and Archbishop) are Gold, Silver, Sugar, Tobacco, Ginger,
Tallow, Hides, and Spices; and above all, in that Province grows a Tree, called
both by the Spaniards, and Natives, a Mettle Tree, the Leaves of which make
Confections, Paper, Mats, Flax, Mantles, Shoes, Girdles, Cordage, and Saws, and
out of the Root Issues a Juice, which being boiled is perfect Sugar; and from
the Top-Branch, a Gum distills Excellent against Poisons, or Infectious
Vapors. This City was taken by the Spaniards, under the Leading of Harnando
Cortes, Anno 1521.

Quivira, is accounted the second Province, situate on the Western part of
America, first Peopled with Spanish Colonies, under the leading of Vasques
Anno. 1540. It abounds chiefly in Cattle; several wh^ addict themselves to the
bringing them up being Masters of 30000. Head and upwards, which serve the
Inhabitants with their Milk for Drink, their Flesh for Food, and their Skins
for Clothes. They have likewise some Gold, but of small value, and not worth
refining.

Nicaragua, is on the South-West of Mexico, and has for it is chief City
Nova-Granada. It Is Commodities chiefly consisting of Balsom, Cotton, Wax, and
Honey.

Jucutan, discovered Anno* 1517, has for it is chief City Champechio; this
Province yields Wood for dying Rich Colors, and likewise store of Deer and
Cattle, almost like Elks.

Florida was discovered by Sebastian Cabot Anno 1467. which at that time it was
possessed by the Spaniards, with whom the French made War till they consumed
each others people, to that degree that it was abandoned by either Nation, but
since repeopled by the Spaniards, who have built there several strong Forts.
The Commodities are Gold Ore, some Veins of Silver, some Spices, and Woods of
value. And thus much of those Provinces the Spaniards possess. Now I shall come
to Treat of Virginia and New England possessed by the English.

CHAP. XIII. A View of Virginia, and of the Trade, Manners, Customs, and
Government thereof, and of the Commodities of that Colony.
VIrginia being discovered by Sir Walter Raleigh, Anno 1584. had it is name from
our Virgin Queen; it lying in height thirty five degrees North Latitude, and
extends to thirty eight and a half, being planted by the English only from 37
to 34 degrees, under the Protection and Supreme Authority of his Majesty of
great Britain, and having the Bay of Roanoake, and Cape Florida to the
Southward, and Maryland to the Northward. The main entrance out of Virginia
into the Sea, is about 10 Leagues; the Country is full of Navigable Rivers,
stored with Fish, and some of them abounding with Oysters, Crabs, and Sturgeon,
many of the Rivers being 7, 8, 9, or 10 Miles over, running 140 and 150 Miles
up in the Country, so that Ships Anchor with great Security, no Trade being
permitted but with England. So that as soon as any Vessel arrives, the Master,
or Captain, resorts to the Governor, to give him an account from whence he
came, his Residence being for the most part at James' City lying 40 Miles up
James' River; and round about the English Colony, the Indians Inhabit, whose
Treacheries prove too often fatal to our Countrymen, as the several Massacrees
they have made can testify. Their Courts of Judicature chiefly consist of 4
quarterly Courts, the Governor and his Council being Judges, to try and
determine, as well in matters Criminal, as Suits between man and man, and every
year once an Assembly meet in imitation of our Parliament, to settle weighty
Affairs. Their Laws are the same with ours, as likewise what Moneys they have
are of English Coin. The Soil is everywhere Fertile, and the Woods abound with
Oaks of diverse sorts, Black Wall-nuts, Chess-nuts, Ash, Pine, Day-Wood, Cedar,
Saxafras, Mulbury, Small-nuts, Wild Grapes, and the like. The Weather is much
like ours, only in the Summer continues a Month longer hotter, and are troubled
with Flashes of Lightning, dismal Claps of Thunder, and now and then a
Hurricane. The days are about an Hour and an half shorter in Summer, and so
much longer in Winter. All sorts of English Fruits and Cattle thrive there, and
their chief Commodities* amongst themselves are Horses, Oxen, Sheep, Hogs,
Turkies, Geese, and Ducks. Corn of which they have store, and their Woods
abound with Hairs, Roacoons, Possums, Squirrils, Wild-Cats, Foxes, Bears,
Wolves, Elks, and in remote Parts some Lions are found.

Their Corn called Indian Corn or Maiz they buy and sell by the Barrel, which
Barrel contains 5 Bushels, Winchester Measure, and the Indians sell their Corn,
Pease and other Commodities of the like nature amongst themselves by the
Baskets, each Basket containing half a Bushel.

The chief Commodities they Trade with our Merchants for, except Tobacco, of
which I shall speak anon, are Hides, Otter, Beaver, Muskats, Bear, Dear-Skins,
Saxafras, Black-Walnut-Tree-Planks, etc. with them and Tobacco 40 or 50 Ships
are yearly Laden; no Customs being laid upon any thing imported, or exported;
but in England they pay five per cent. for all they carry over, and 2 pence per
pound for every pound of Tobacco brought from thence, and so proportionably for
other Goods.

The Commodities carried from England thither, are Linen, and Woollen-Cloath,
Nails, Iron wrought into Tools, Soap, Starch, Gunpowder, Shot, Wine,
Strong-Water, Brandy, Sugar, Spice, and the like; and when any one comes over
with Servants to Inhabit, as a Planter, he has 50 Acres of Land allotted him,
to manure even where he will choose, unless in such Places as are before in
Possession; and for that Parcel of Land, he pays 12 pence per Annum quit Rent.

The manner of planting, and bringing to perfection their Tobacco, accounted by
them the Staple Commodity of the Colony is thus; in January they sow the Seed,
which is smaller than Mustard Seed, and when it comes up, they take up the
Plants, and place them upon little Hills, which is usually done in May, 4 or
5000. Hills being contained in one Acre, every Hill containing a Plant, the
which when it is about 2* Foot high, they Crop to give more Nourishment to the
Leaves, which Leaves are a Foot or two Foot long, and some a Foot broad* and
when they are at the bigest they cut them up Stalk and all, and hang them up in
Sheads to dry, which done they strip them from the Stalks, and so bind them up
in Handfuls for packing in Casks, or make them up in Rolls. An Acre of good
Ground is reckoned to bear 1500 Weight of Tobacco, not less then 17000.
Hogs-heads, being reckoned to be Shipped yearly for England, Scotland, and
Ireland. Their Servants for the most part consist of Negroes, which they buy of
the Merchants, that bring them thither.

CHAP. XIV. A View of New England, and the Trade thereof.
New England has for it is chief Town or City Boston, where all their Trade
Centres, especially that which accrues by Navigation; a place which contains
about 1500 houses Built of Brick and Timber; in it is a State House, and
Congregational Meeting Houses; the Inhabitants for the most part being
Presbyterians, and Independants; and are supplied with great Quantities of Fish
from Marblehead, and other places. As for Fowl, they Trade with the Indians, as
likewise for Muscat, Beaver, Otter, etc. for which they deliver them
Strong Water, Shagged-Cloath, Beads, Looking-Glasses, and the like; and
thither likewise are brought Provisions from St. Martins, Long Island, Road
Island, Shelter Island; and other places, they all being little spots, standing
in the Sea, and have their Trade chiefly consisting in Provision. The chief
Roads for the safe Riding of Shipping are Boston, Charlestown, Salem, and
Pascataqua.

A Mint they have, in which they Coin English money, as 12 pence, 6 pence, 3
pence, and smaller piece, both Silver and Tinn. The Reason of setting it up,
was upon the spreading of many adulterated Pieces of Eight amongst them,
brought from Peru; but notwithstanding the English Coin, Mexico, and Sevil
Royals, go current at a Crown apiece.

Their Accounts are kept after the Italian Fashion, by such as understand the
way, and those that do not keep them as in old England.

Their Weights are Averdupois, and Troy; the former consisting of 16 Ounces the
pound, and the latter of twelve; their hundred Averdupois is 112 pounds, and by
that they weigh all their gross Commodities, using Troy only for Silk, Gold,
and Silver. Their Measures are likewise consistent with ours.

Their chief Merchandise consists in Hogs, Oxen, Fish, Flower, Pease, Kell, or
Rice, Biskets, Beaver, Muskat Skins, Otter, Pipe-Staves, Masts, and the like;
and some Tobacco, for which they receive in exchange English Linen, and
Woollen-Cloath, Iron-Tools, Stockins, Shoes, Thread, Buttons, Ribons, Lead,
Puter, Tinn, small Ordnance, Gunpowder, Shot, Strong Waters, Wines, Oils,
Fruit, Salt, and the like; not taking any Customs for ought imported, except
Wines, and Strong Waters, and for that not above 30 or 40 Shillings per Tun;
Consolage they take none, their Factorage is from 5 to 10 per cent. for Sails
and returns only, and that not fixed, but as the Trader, and the Factor can
agree. Sugars they have likewise, which they sell in Casks, and have not many
Ships belonging to the Plantation.

Their chief Fishing consists in dry Cod, and poor Jack, which every Spring and
Fall, they take by Hooks, and sell by the Quintal, or hundred Weight, each for
28. or 30 Royals, sometimes more, tho sometimes they Barrel them up; their
Freight per Tun from thence to London, is 3 pound, 3 pound 10 Shillings, and
sometimes 4 pound. They have likewise an Office of Assurance, now much in
request, both by the Inhabitants, and such as Trade thither. And thus much for
New England.

CHAP. XV. A View of Maryland, and of the Customs and Trade thereof.
MAryland is upon the main Continent of America, being an English Colony, lying
between 38 and 40 Degrees North Latitude, bounded on the North by Virginia, and
on the South by New England; the great Ocean on the East, and on the West the
River Pattowmeck, and was first a Colony of English, Anno 1633. and for the
better Increase of Trade, tolerate the Christian Religion of what Profession
soever; and is held by a Governor, or Proprietor, in Fee of the Crown of
England. It abounds with fair Rivers, stored with Fish, and Commodious for the
receipt of Shipping.

The usual way of Trading is Goods for Goods, and the chief of their
Commodities is Tobacco; their Weights, and Measures are consonant with those of
England, without any Tret or over allowance; some Beaver, Otter, and other Furs
they have, which the English that Trade thither purchase, and the Inhabitants
receive them for Tobacco, and Strong-Water of the Indians. Mulberry Trees are
there in Abundance, and some Silk. Their Customs or Taxes are but seldom taken
as to the Subjects of England.

The greatest abuse that Merchants receive, is the Packing of Tobacco; which
loose Packed, or either too dry or wet put up, often deceives their
Expectations; therefore the only way to discover such Frauds, is by weighing
it. A full Hogs-Head, well Packed, will hold 400 Weight, and never less than
300.

For their Commodities, they receive Cloath-Hangings, Stuffs, all manner of
Iron-Ware, Strong-Water, Wine, and the like; and what they Trade with the
Native Indians for, they deliver them Coats, commonly called Match-Coats, made
of coarse Shagged-Cloath, viz. Dutch-Duffields, or English Hogbays, either Red
or Blew.

The new Netherlands, a place Situate in 41 Degrees North Latitude, upon
Hudson's River, is Inhabited by a Colony of the Dutch, who have Incroached upon
the English Trade with the Natives for Beavor, Otter, Elk-Skins, Bears-Skins,
Dear-Skins, and the like; for which they deliver them Iron Instruments, and
Shaged Cloth, and sometimes Guns, Powder, and Rapier-Blades, the fatal
Execution of which they have twice felt by two Massacrees, Committed upon them
by the Indians, to the loss of half their Colony. Their chief Town is
New-Amsterdam, endowed with many Privileges, as the old the better to draw
People thither.

Corterialis, Nurembega, and Nova Francia, are accounted Mexican Provinces, and
for the most part possessed by the French, and some few Portugals. Their Trade
is small, consisting only of Skins, and Furs.

Estotiland, or New-foundland, discovered 1527 by the English, in Winter is so
Extreme cold, that it is not inhabited but by some few Natives, and all the
advantage (which indeed is considerable) that the English Reap thereby, is
their Fishing Trade; the Fish in England being known by the Name of Newland
Fish, and is taken in such abundance, that with them are furnished most parts
of Europe. The manner of the Fishing thus:

The Ships sometimes 40 Sail depart from our Coast, about the end of February,
and about the middle of April arriving there, they unrigg their Ships, and
going on Shore Build Huts; and in Shallops, with Hooks and other Tackling, take
sometimes 30 or 40 great Fish in an Hour, that is one Shallop, which they slit
and dry upon Rocks, and Sandy-Banks; after which they Salt them, and in such
manner continue till September; when laden with their Fish they return and
dispose of them in Spain, France and other Places to good advantage, selling
them either by the hundred Weight, or by Tail; and many times they sell them
before they have caught 'em; that is, Bargain for the delivery of them when
taken; and of late there is an Art found of making Oil commonly called New-Land
Oil.

CHAP. XVI. A View of the Peruanan Provinces, and of their Trade and Customs.
THis South part of America, is divided from the North part, by the Streights
of Darien, a Neck of Land of 10 Miles over; and consists of these
Pro-Provinces, viz. Castella-Aurea, Guinnia, Peru, Brasilia and Chile.

Castella Aurea, takes its Name from the abundance of Gold that is found
therein, and was first discovered by the Spaniards: The chief Cities are
Portabel, and Panama, at which two Places the Viceroy makes his Residence as he
sees fit, and at the Latter of which the Spanish Plate-fleet for the most part
is Loaded. It abounds with standing Pools and deep Waters, and the chief
Commodities are Spices, Drugs, Gold Ore, and Silver. About it are several small
Islands, of which the chiefest are, St. Antonio, and St. Vincent, situate
against Cape Verd.

Guinnia is situated under the Equinoctial Line, being fruitful in all parts,
abounding with rate Fruits, and so Encompassed and branched with great Rivers,
that in Winter time many of the Inhabitants dwell in Trees for fear of
Inundations, often caused by the overflowing of the Rivers. Of this Country
our famous Sir Walter Reighley made the first effectual Survey, and gave Name
to the great River Arinoque calling it Ralinia, a River navigable for 1000
miles, and for Shallops and Wherries 2000. The chief City of this Province is
Manoa, otherwise called the Golden City, of the abundance of Gold that is found
therein, most of the Trade consisting of Gold-Ore.

Peru is for Gold, the richest Province of America: The Mines being more
plentiful then Mines of Lead and Iron in England, and the Riches thereof may be
Conjectured by this: When Piscario the Spanish Captain subdued it, and took the
King Prisoner, he proposed his Ransom, and delivered to the treacherous
Spaniard upon solemn Promise for his Life and Liberty, as much refined Gold and
Silver as amounted to ten Millions, but perfidious as he was, when he had
Possession of the Treasure notwithstanding his Oath, he slew him. The chief
City is St. Michael's, inhabited by the Spaniards; the Soil brings forth all
manner of Fruits, as likewise store of Tobacco; but one thing is more
admirable, on the Banks of the River Riolaplata grow Figtrees, one side of
which bear Figs in Winter, and the other in Summer, and this River is 130.
miles over, and 2000. in length; and in it are many Islands.

Brasile is abounding with Cattle, Corn, and has in it some rich Mines of Gold
and Silver; but especially Red-Wood by us, called Brasile Wood, the Trees of
which are so large, that a dozen Families will make themselves Huts and dwell
in the Branches of one Tree. It was first discovered and peopled by the
Spaniard, but now the Dutch have got strong footing in it, and derive a great
Trade form thence, especially in dying-Woods.

The manner of getting the Gold in these remote Parts of the World, are by
Mining, or Washing and Fishing; As thus, they first search the ground, and
finding it stockt with Ore, they dig into the Mountains, and still as they go
under-prop, or Arch, so that a Mine sometimes is a Furlong under ground; their
Earth they wash through Sieves, and the Mold separated, the Gold appears.
Silver run in Veins or Sprigs, and therefore is got more easily. As for the
Fishing for Gold, it is thus: They turn the Course of small Rivers or Brooks,
at the bottom of the Golden Mountains; or with such things as take up Ballast
in the Thames, drag up the Sand, and then sift it. The Gold which is found in
the Rivers is washed from the Mountains, by the fierce Rains which in those
parts are frequent.

As for the Islands in these and the Virginian Seas, they are many; as the
Isles of Solomon, by some taken for the Land of Ophir; the Isle of Margarita,
in which is found many precious Stones, though void of any other Commodity; the
Island of Trenidado abounding in choice Tobacco; the Island of Baccaloes,
discovered by Sebastian Cabot, whose Rivers abound in Fish, and the Land with
Trees bearing Fruit; the Isle of Beriguen, of which the chief City is St.
John's, inhabited by the Spaniards, the Island abounds with Gold, viz. the
North part of it, and the South part is as much famed for fertility; the Island
of Jamiaca, now an English Colony taken from the Spaniards, Anno. (...) abounds
with all manner of Plenty, as Sheep, Oxen, Corn, Hens, Geese, Ducks,
Fruit Trees, Sugar, Tobacco and the like, and is governed by a Governor, under
his Majesty of Great Britain; the Weights, Measures, Moneys, Laws and
Religion, are the same with ours, and has of late been much increased by the
Trading of English Merchants thither for Pepper, and other valuable Commodities.

Cuba, Luca and Hispaniola, abound in Ginger, Cassia, Mastick, Almonds,
Cinnamon, Sugar, Brass, Gold, and Corn, which are brought thence, and dispersed
all over Europe, and in the latter, the Land is so fertile that it will produce
Herbs, and Roots in sixteen days after setting or sowing, fit for use.

Barmudos is a fruitful Island, abounding with Orange Trees and other Fruits.

Barbados is an Island possessed by the English, containing in length 28.
miles, and in breadth 18. and according to Computation consists of 126000.
Acres of good Land, being naturally fortified with Rocks and Shelves:
accommodated with several Bays and Harbors, for the safety of shipping, the
Principal of which is called Carlisle Bay, and is Guarded by Forts and
Platforms, containing a large Town called St. Michael's, being a place of great
Trade, before which 500. Ships may safely Ride. The next Town of Note, is
Charles Town, situate on Oysten-bay, about two Leagues from the former, the
Houses are built after the English fashion, of Timber, Lime and Brick, and
round this Island lie other small Islands, Maevis, Monsirat, Antego, and St.
Christophers, many of them inhabited by the English, others by the Dutch,
French, and Native Indians; the Island of Barbados is divided into 11.
Parishes, or petty Shires, out of which are chosen two Freemen Planters, to
join with the Governor and his Council, which are 7, to discuss all important
Matters, and to make such Orders, as are necessary for the well regulating the
Plant^tion, and the better to quell any Insurrec^n that may be made by the
Slaves, which are ^ccounted at least 60000. a standing Militia of two Reigments
of Horse, and five of Foot, are in readiness upon all Occasions, and all their
Laws and Customs are Regulated by those of England. Their Religion, according
as they profess themselves, is Protestant. Their Coyns there Current are of
diverse Nations, as English, Spanish, French and Dutch, upon which they set a
passable Value not Coining any themselves. Their Accounts are most commonly in
Muscavado Sugar, according to which all other Commodities are Regulated, their
Interest by reason no Law restrains it, is unreasonable, as sometimes thirty
Per Cent. Their Measures for the most part Concord with those of England, only
they allow but five score to the Hundred, not 112. The growth of the Island is
Tobacco, Sugar, Indico, Cotton-Wool, Log-Wood, Lignum Vitae, etc.

The chief Season of exporting Sugars, and other Commodities of the Native
growth, is from January to September, or October. Wines are imported in
abundance, and are sold in public as in England: So that there is not less
then 2400. Tuns of all sorts spent Yearly, besides Spirits, and other Liquors.
From this Island they transport to Virginia and Barmudos, a Liquor made of the
Sugar Canes, etc. called Rum, and for it receive Pork, Fish, Flower, Biscuit,
Pipe Staves, and the like: The Apparel of the Planters, is the same with what
is worn in England; as for Customs they have none, save only for Wines and
other Liquors, which are Rated at a certain quantity of Muscavado Sugar, and
further are obliged to pay half a pound of Powder, for every Tun upon Entery.

Factorage or Factory-Provision is 10. per cent. 5. per cent. for Sail, and 5.
for return, as also 3. per cent. for Storehouse Room; if any one will export
Corn, or any manner of Provision being the growth of the Island, they must ask
the Governors Consent; 200. English Vessels and upward Trade hither Yearly;
and the usual freight to London is 4. and 5. per Tun, when Ships are Plenty, 3.
pound, when scarce, 6. or 7. pound per Tun: There is no public
Assurance-Office, nor Exchange, unless sometimes in Sugar, for which Money is
received in London. And thus much for Barbados.

The main Land about 100. Leagues from this Island, is called Guinia, lying
Southwardly, and contains a Colony of English planted within the River of
Serenam.

Cracus lies 4. Leagues from the Seaside, and is very fruitful, having a Port,
whose entrance is Guarded with two Forts each containing 14. pieces of Cannon,
and in it are several Plantations of Coquo, some belonging to the Spaniards,
and some to the Indians, the latter being obliged to work for the former 3.
days in the Week. And thus much for America, in particular, and indeed in
general: for this new World, as it is Termed, yields little more then here I
have set down; and indeed in Riches may Compare with any of the other three
Parts, did the Inhabitants know how to improve the growth of the Islands and
Continent accordingly; but indeed the Spaniards possessing the greatest part,
use their utmost diligence to keep out other Nations, and will instruct the
Natives in nothing that is Curious, lest they should leave off to Labor in the
Mines; but thus much concerning America. The Customs, Situation, and Manners
thereof, in the exactest Method.

CHAP. XVII. A view of Africa, and of the Manners, Customs, Trade, Weights,
Measures, Coyns, and Commodity thereof.
AFrica, one of the quarters of the World, is bounded on the North with the
Mediterranean Sea, on the West with the Atlantic Ocean, on the South with the
South Ocean, and on the East with the Red Sea; and is in a manner an Island,
being tied only to Asia, with a Neck of Land of 20 Leagues over, and contains
these Provinces, viz. Barbery, Numidia, Lybia, Negrita, Ethiopia Interior, and
Ethiopia Exterior, Egypt; and the Islands of the Sea.

The Account of the Trade, and Commerce of the Principal Cities, and Towns, but
especially from whence any Commodities are brought and Traded for by the
English Merchants I shall lay down as follows.

CHAP. XVIII. A view of Tunis, the Trade, Manners, and Customs thereof.
BArbary being divided into four Kingdoms, viz. Tunis, Argier, Fess, and
Morocco, I shall take them in order, and first of Tunis.

Tunis is Situate near unto the great Lake, which Extends almost to the Port of
Goletta; and is founded on the ruins of Carthage, being in compass within the
Walls 4 Miles, and accounting the Suburbs 7 Miles in circuit; and is very
Populous, owning for Supreme Lord, the Grand-Signeour, who governs it by a
Bassaw; the Inhabitants being Mahumetans; the Houses are Builded of Square
Stone, and for the most part flat. A Port it has large and Commodious for
Shipping.

Their Money in Gold is mostly the Spanish Doller or Royal, the Venice Chiqeen,
the Spanish Pistolet, which they pass from one to another at full value, unless
diminished, or light Weight in Silver, they have the Spanish Royal, and the
Asper.

Their Accounts are for the most part kept in Dollers, and Aspers.

Their Weights are the Cantar of 100. pounds, yet in Weight are found to exceed
our 112, two pounds, each of their pounds being divided into 16 Ounces, and so
into less, by division, viz. Each Ounce into 8 Tamins; and by this Weight, are
all their Merchandise Weighed, except Silver, Gold, Pearl, etc. which are
Weighed by a Cariot Weight, which is half an Ounce Troy, or Mittagals much of
the same Proportion. In Weight of Cloves, and Nutmegs, they allow 5 pounds per
cent. Tret or overplus, besides the Weight of the Bags.

Their Measures for Silk, Cloth, and the like, are the Pike; there being 3
sorts of them, the first called the Cloth Pike, is 26 Inches and a half
English; the second, the Gray, which is a 16th. part less, by which they
Measure Silks, Sattins, Velvets, etc. The third is the Linen Pike, and is part
less then the Silk Pike.

Their dry Measures are the Coffice, containing about 10 of our Bushels. The
Weab 18 of which make a Coffice, and the Saw of which 12 make a Weab.

Their Liquid Measures, are the Wine Meeter, and Oil Meeter, the former being
near 2 English Gallons and a half, and the latter near 5.

The chief Commodities are Hides, Wax, Oil, Honey, Wool, Corn, Raisons, Dates,
Anniseeds, Estrich Feathers, Sponges, Lemons, Oranges, Almonds, and Olives. For
which they receive of such Merchants as Trade thither, English, and Venice,
Cloth, Lead, Deal-Boards, Shot, Perpetuanos, Spanish Wool, Tartar, Alum,
Iron, Madder, Safaparilla, Pepper, Ginger, Safforn, Cinnamon, Nutmegs,
Cocheneel, Gold Thread, Sea-Horse-teeth, Cotton, Yarn, Venice-Pepper,
French-Canvas, Gulmak, Damask, Sattain, and the like.

Their Customs upon Goods imported, unless Lead, Shot, and Iron, are 9 per
cent. on the Real Value; and before any Goods can be delivered, an exact
Account must be taken thereof by Officers appointed for that purpose; other
charges of Goods imported, besides freight (of which no certainty) is 8 per
cent. more, viz. 2 per cent. consolage. 5 per cent. provision and Broakage, and
one per cent. for petty Charges; the Customs on Goods, that are exported
(Honey, Wax, and Wool, liable to no Customs, excepted) is 5 per cent.

The Counterban, or Goods prohibited to be exported, are Pease, Corn, Oil,
Beans, Butter, Honey, Dates, etc. tho often a License for Exporting the same, is
secretly procured. And thus much for Tunis, in the Description of which I have
described the Trade of all the Cities of that Kingdom, as centering in this.

CHAP. XIX. A view of Argier, and of the Trade, Manners, Customs, Weights,
Measures thereof, and their way of dividing Prizes, and selling Slaves in the
Public Market.
ARgier, that Piratical Kingdom so dangerous to Merchants Trading in the
Mediterranean, contains as her Principal Cities Argier and Tremesin, the former
giving name to the Kingdom which is but small in compass.

The City of Argier, the common Receptacle of Turkish and Moorish Pirates, is
imagined to contain 90000 Souls, in which there are several that protest
against the Thieving Trade, and hold some Commerce with Merchants of diverse
Nations.

Their chief Commodities are Oils, Almonds, Rasins, Figs, Dates, Castile-Sope,
Brass, Copper, Barbary Horses, Estrich Feathers, Honey, Wax, and Drugs.

Their Coin is the Double, accounted of equal Value with our 12 pence or 2
single Spanish Ryals; 4 Doubles are accounted a Ryal and 8/8 called by them the
Olian, 5 Doubles and 35 Aspers is a Pistol Spanish, 7 Doubles are accounted a
Sultany, or Cheeque of Barbary Gold, and 50 Aspers make a Double. And these are
the current Moneys of the Kingdom of Argier.

The Weights are the Rotolos, or 100 pound, which makes 120 pound English, the
10 pound of the small making 6 in gross; some Commodities they likewise weigh
by the Cantar; as Iron, Lead, Yarn, Wool, which Cantar is 150 Rotolos; Figs,
Dates, Soap, Butter, etc. are weighed by a Cantar of 166 Rotolos: Almonds,
Cheese, Cottons, etc. they weigh by a Cantar of 110 Rotolos, Brass, Copper,
Wax, and Drugs, by a Cantar of 100 Rotolos, Flax, by a Cantar of 200 Rotolos.

Gold, Silver, Pearl, and precious Stones, are weighed by the Mittigal, which
is 72 Grains English, and is worth 9 Doubles. The Sultanie Cheeque, or Hunger
Weighs 52 Grains English, being equally Valued with Angel Gold, and by the
Ounce Troy, in England is worth 3 pound 11 Shillings.

Their Measures of Length are two Picos, viz. the Turkish, and the Morisco
Picos.

The former is divided into 16 parts and every part, is called a Robe, and is
131/1^2 part of the English Yard, and the Custom is an Inch allowance to every
Yard, and by these they Measure Silks, Woollen Cloth, and Stuffs.

The dry Measure is a Tarry, which being well heaped, makes 5 Gallons English,
and by this they Measure Salt, Corn, and other Commodities.

They make their Accounts in Doubles, Aspers, Osians, and Sultanies.

Their Customs are 10 per cent. and so in all other cases, as at Tunis, when
any Ship enters and cast Anchors, her Sails or Rudder is demanded to prevent
the passing off without paying such Customs, and then not to Sail without leave
from the Duan, which is the Bashaw, and his Assembly who Regulate all affairs,
which were usually these. To the Kiffa 28 Doubles, to his Chiouse 4 Doubles, to
his Almia 8 Doubles, to the Bashaw Sorman, 2 Doubles, to the Draggerman 8
Doubles, to the Sackagy 8 Doubles, and for the Consuls Duty 24 Doubles.

The Piratical Trade is thus, 2 or more set out a Vessel of Prizage, or Free
booty to Prey upon Merchants Ships, the which when they have taken and brought
into the Port, the Owners divide the Spoil by Lot, making the Partitions or
Dividends as even as possible; as for the Captives they do the like, and if
there happen to be an odd man, they either cast Lots for him, or sell him in
the Market; and divide the Money, the manner of selling of them is to carry
them into the Market, and place them in Stalls like Beasts, where the buyer
Views and handles them; but especially their Hands, by which he is satisfied,
whether they have been Inured to Labor or not, as likewise in their Mouths, to
see if they have good Teeth to bite Biskets as hard as deal Boards; and
according to their Youth, Healthy Complexion and Ability of Body, they go off
to the Buyer, he being ever after acknowledged for their Patron. And thus much
for this Piratical Government, too well known to Merchants, and Saylors who
Trade in the Mediterranean.

CHAP. XX. A view of the Kingdom of Fess, and of the Trade, Customs, Weights,
Measures and current Coyns thereof.
THis Kingdom takes it is name from the Metropolitan City, viz. the City Fess,
being the Goodliest City in Barbary; adorned with 700. Moschs or Temples, of
which 50 are Beautifyed, with Pillars, Jasper, and Alabaster, the chief of
which called Carucen, and Seated in the Heart of the City contains a Mile in
compass, consisting of 190 Arches, and is born up by 2500 Marble Pillars, hung
all about with Silver Lamps, and has 31 Gates, and all things else
porportionable, and the City computed to contain 8600 Families.

The Commodities in General are Dates, Almonds, Figs, Rasins, Honey, Olives,
Wax, Gold, Hides, Furs, and a sort of Cordivant Skins, Cotton, and Wool very
fine, which is dispersed into Spain, Italy, France, and England; and of late
the Inhabitants have found out the Art of making Cloth.

The Principal Money of this Kingdom, is the Xerif, or Gold Ducate, and
accounted worth 10 Shillings Sterling; and is divided into 8 equal parts.

The Weights are two, one used for weighing Gross Commodities, called the
Rotolos, 64 of which are computed to Balance our 100 Averdupois, and 100
Rottolos go to the Cantar. The other is the Mittigal used in weighing Gold,
Pearl, Silver, Musk, and the like; and agrees with those of Tunis, and Argier.

The long Measure is the Cavado, of which 12 are Accounted to a Cane, and 181
or 182 Cavados to make 100 Yards English.

The Customs are 10 per cent. to all Strangers, but to the Natives 2 per cent.
and for what soever they hand, they must pay, whether sold or not, which makes
Merchants sell their Wares on Shipboard, for the most part where Customs are
Paid only for what is sold. And thus much for Fess, and the Trade thereof.

CHAP. XXI. A view of the Kingdom of Morocco, the Trade, Current Coyns,
Weights, Measures, and Customs thereof.
THis Kingdom as the former takes it is Name from the chief City and Center of
it is Trade, and is very Beautiful; tho Inferious to Fess; in it is found a
Burse, and Exchange, formerly much frequented by Merchants, but now for the
most part taken up by Artizans. The Commodities vended there are the same with
those of Fess, except Sugar, in which it more abounds.

The Coyns are the Xerif, and Ducate of Gold, valued as those of Fess. The
Weights are 2 several Quintals, the one agreeing with the Canter of Fese, and
the other with the Quintal of Sevil, and indeed in all things according with
Fess, as being now reduced under one Government. Their Religion, if so it may
be Termed, is Mahumetisme, and of late they have not any considerable Trade
with the English Merchants; tho it is not doubted, but the effects of the
League, between his Majesty of great Britain, and that Emperor may be a means
to revive it, as likewise to enrich our Garrison of Tangier, by rendering it a
Public Mart, it being the Key of Barbary.

CHAP. XXII. A view of Numidia, and Lybia, and their Provinces; with the Trade,
Current Coyns, Manners and Customs.
NVmidia is bounded on the West with the Atlantic Ocean, on the East with
Egypt, on the North with the Mountain Atlas, and on the South with Lybia. The
Country on the North part abounds with plenty, but the South by Reason of the
Excessive heat, is most desert, the Inhabitants build but few Houses, but in
great Companies pass from one place to another, living sometimes in Woods,
sometimes in Caves, according as Heat and Cold affects them. The chief Trade is
among themselves, for Dates, Hides, Furs, and Fruits of all sorts; Cattle they
have, but have not the Art of improving them, their Coyns are few, but those
they have are of Brass and Silver; their Weights and Measures for the most part
Equallizing those of Fess, and Morocco; tho they are little in use, few
Merchants Trading with them.

Lybia is bounded on the East with Nilus, on the West with the Atlantic Ocean,
on the South with Negrita, and on the North with Numidia; and is Barren for the
most part by Reason the heat is Excessive; their Trade, Coin, Weights, and
Measures, are not worth mentioning; by Reason their Commerce is little, no
Merchants caring to deal with the Natives, they being in a manner Savages.

CHAP. IX. A View of Negrita, or the Land of Negroes, with the Trade, Current
Coin, Weights, Measures, and Customs.
THis Province is Inhabited with Negroes, or Blackamoors. Bounded on the West
with the Atlantic Ocean, on the East with Ethiopia Superior, on the South with
Manicongo, and on the North with Lybia, containing a large Tract of Land, and
is fertilized by the overflowing of the River Niger, or Sanaga; and is under
the Regency of 3 Kings, who have of late made 3 Kingdoms of 5, as Tombutue,
Berneo, and Gouga. Each having many famous Havens, Commodious for Shipping.

The City Tombutue, from whence that Kingdom has it is Name, is Situate beyond
the River Niger; and is Traded to by the English, French, and Dutch; and within
four Miles of it is the City Gouga, which is likewise a place of great Trade,
but as for Berneo, the Inhabitants thereof are for the most part Breeders of
Cattle, and Hunters of Wild-Beasts.

The Commodities of these Countries, are Corn, Sugar, Cattle, Rice, Fruits,
Gold Sands, and Ingots; which they expose to Sail for Cloth, Callicoes,
Copper, Basins, Ironwork, Guns, Shot, Glass, Beads, and the like; but
Principally Salt, of which Commodity that Country is deficient; but the chief
Maritim parts are Guinny, and Benin, first discovered by the Portugals, and for
the abundance of Gold the Country affoards called the Golden Coast; the Rumor
of which spreading wide in Europe, the English soon found it out, and after
them the Dutch: and now the French have some Trade there. The manner of Trading
thus: The Ships coming into the Road cast Anchor, and the Merchants or Factors
going on Shore, declare what Wares they have on Board, to the Persons called
Tolkens, or Brokers, which live in little Huts along the Coast, and when the
Moors come down with their Gold, they are informed by them that such and such
Commodities are to be had, upon which taking Boat together they come on Board,
and laying by such things as they like, propose what Gold they will give for
them, which if accepted the Bargain is made; and they return with their Goods
on Shore.

The Customs are various. Particular Officers, being set in every Port, to take
an Account of what is bought and sold; and every one that comes to buy, tho he
buy nothing, must pay a small Stipend for his Person; upon his returning from
on Shipboard, and to prevent defraud, there is still a Son, Brother, or Kinsman
of the Kings, to whom the Port belongs, to see the Toll be duly taken; and he
that buys Commodities under the value of 2 Ounces of Gold, makes his price for
Customs as he can, but he that buy's above which they call a Benda, pays to the
Value of an Angel in Gold for every Benda.

As for Coyns they have none, the Trade among themselves being for Gold-Sands,
or Ingot by Weight, the fineness of which they try with Artificial Needles, in
number 24; in some Places they melt their Gold, and draw it into Wire, and so
cut into small pieces, the better to divide it as occasion requires, and in
other places they have pieces of Iron, which goes Current instead of Money.

Their Weights consist of Copper, the greatest of which is a Benda, containing
2 Ounces Troy, a Benda offa, or half a Benda. The Asseva which is two Pesoes
and a half, the Egebba, or 2 Pesos which is half an Ounce, and so lesser tell
they come to Drams, and Scruples of Troy Weight, but their pound is found the
part of an Ounce heavier than ours.

Their Measures for Cloth is a Jactam, accounted 12 Foot English, which they
divide into two parts; as for their Woollen Cloth, they cut it into long
Slips, and make Girdles of it.

Formerly the Trade in those parts was very advantageous, but of late (one
Nations striving to outvye each other) have given them an insight into the true
value of Gold, and of such Commodities as they receive for it.

The Sugar Trade which is considerable, is engrossed by the Portugals at a
certain Annual rate, and no other Nation suffered to deal therein, the Sugar
made there being Transported to Lisbon, is from thence dispercsd throughout
Europe. And thus much for Negrita, and the Guinny Trade.

CHAP. XXIV. A View of Aethiopia Superior, and Inferior. But of the last
especially, and of the Trade thereof, etc.
THe Superior Ethiopia, otherwise called Abasine, is a Plentiful Country
Governed by Prester John, and the Inhabitants for the most part Christians; it
abounds in Cattle, Fruits, and Minnerals, but being an Inland Province, yields
little. Trade to Merchants.

The Inferior Ethiopia is bounded on the West with the Ethiopian Ocean; on the
East with the Red Sea, and contains Provinces or divisions, Ajan, Zanbiar,
Monomotapa, Caffaria, and Monicongo.

Ajan is chiefly Traded to by the Portugals, and yields store of Cattle, Wax,
Honey, Corn, Gold, Ivory, etc.

Zanibra contains 15 Towns, from which 15 Petty Kingdoms take their Names, and
was first discovered by the Portugals; abounding in Ivory, and Gold, the chief
Town being Mosambique, where they have a Castle, and ingross the Trade for the
most part.

Monomotapa is almost environed round with Water. And is stored with Gold
Mines; and Elephants of which 5 or 6000 are yearly killed for their Teeth.

Manicongo was discovered by the Portugals Anno 1486. And for a long time
yielded them 30000 Slaves yearly, which they carried to Brasile to dig in their
Silver Mines.

The Principal Port, and Center of all their Trade, being at Mosambique. I
shall not instance the Trade thereof, because that in View of that, all the
Trade of the Provinces is Comprehended.

CHAP. XXV. A View of Mosambique, and of the Trade thereof.
MOsambique is for the most part inhabited by Portugals, and has in it a strong
Castle, wherein lives the Portugal Captain, who has a grant of free Trade for
himself, either in the Country, or in the Indies, which is not above 16 days
Sail from thence; but when there, they must stay near 5 Months 'er they can
return, or lose their Season; by Reason of the Mouson, as they call it, or
Trading-Wind Blows all one way for so long. As for his Place it is very
advantageous, yet of but 3 Years Continuance, at the Expiration of which he is
obliged to go into India, and serve under the Viceroy.

The Commodities are chiefly Ingot, and dust Gold, or Sand Gold; which is found
in abundance, there being sever^^ Rich Mines adjacent, as well in the Islands,
as on the Continent, where the King of Portugal keeps Factors to manage the
trade, who barters, and sends Merchandise from one place to another, and so
increase in the growth of each Province; nor is it less commodious for the
reception of the Portugal Fleet, either in their way to or from the Indies.
There is found likewise Elephants Teeth, Ebony, Ambergrease, etc. and from
thence they carry Slaves to India.

Their Coyns of which there are but few, are the same with those of Portugal;
as also are their Weights and Measures, a description of which I shall give,
when I come to take a View of the Trade of the Kingdom of Portugal.

CHAP. XXVI. A View of Egypt, and the Provinces thereof, as also of the Trade,
Commodities, Coyns, Weights, Measures and Customs.
ON the East Egypt is bounded by the Red Sea, on the South with Aasia on the
West with Cyrene, and on the North with the Mediterranean Sea, and Watered with
the Fruitful River Nilus; which dividing it self into 7 Channels, and about the
middle of June. Annually overfloweth it is Banks, and continues so to do for 4
days, laying all under Water; by Reason of which the Towns are seated upon
Hills; and during the Inundation, their Commerce is by Skiffs and Boats.

This River is in Length 3000 Miles, and when it over-flows not, it portenteth
some fatal disaster to the King or Kingdom; and by this means the Land is
Fertilized, for as for Rain there is none. The chief Places of Traffic are
Alexandria, a famous Seaport, founded by Alexander the great, and Cairo
commonly called Grand- Cairo, and in these Center the Trade of the whole
Country. Therefore omitting Places of lesser note, I shall only take a View of
these two Cities, and their Commerce, with such as Trade in those parts, and
first of Alexandria.

Alexandria first founded by Alexander the Great, in Expedition to Conquer the
World, is the chief Maritim City of Egypt, and from all parts of the Kingdom
are thither brought Flax, Hemp, Honey, Wax, Rice, Balsoms, Dates, Drugs, and
Spices; and the Country in general produces abundance of Palm Trees, besides
hither are brought the Plenty of Arabia, India, and Persia; as Spices, Drugs,
Silks, etc. so that the Custom-House is accountable yearly for great Sums of
Gold.

The nature of the Palm Trees that grow in that Country is this, they always
grow in Cupples twisted, or twined, viz. Male and Female, the Female Palm only
bears Fruit, and that not without the Male, for if the Male Palm be cut away,
the Female will not bear; the Fruit is Cods with Seed, and pleasant Juice, the
Pith of these Trees is excellent in taste, and very nourishing; of the Leaves,
they make Fans, Mats, and Baskets; of the outward Husks of the Cod Cordage, and
of the inward Brushes; the Fruit they bear is like a Fig which serves the
Inhabitants for Meat green, and dried for Bread.

The Weights used here are four sorts, first the Quintar of Zera, second the
Quintar of Forfor, third the Quintar of Zaidin, the fourth the Quintar of Mina;
the first is found to be English 112 pounds, the second 93 pounds English, the
third 134 pounds English, the fourth the 167 pounds English, Averdupois Weight.

The Measures are twofold, viz. the Pico Barbaresco, which is used for the
Measuring of Cloth, both Linen, and Woollen, and is in Length 25 English
Inches; and the Pico Turchesco, with which is Measured Silks, fine Stuffs,
Cloth of Gold, etc. and is found to be 22 English Inches; as for wet and dry
Measures, they are of little use, the Customs being to sell by Weight for the
most part.

CHAP. XXVII. A View of Cairo, and the Trade, Weights, Measures, and Customs
thereof.
CAiro is a famous City, Situate in the vast Plain beneath the Mountains of
Mucatun, and not above 2 Miles from the Bank of Nilus, adorned with many
stately Buildings, as Palaces, Colleges, Temples, and the like; and has in it
a large Burse, or Exchange of 3 Story high, the first of which consists of
Warehouses, for Gross Goods; in the second, is laid up Musk, Amber, Silks,
Spices, and the like; and in the third the Merchants who have Warehouses,
there lodge with their Retinues; which Merchants are of 6 sorts, first the
Native Egyptians; secondly the Arabians, or Moors; thirdly the Merchants of
Europe Christians; fourthly the Turks; fifthly the Jews, and sixthly the
Christians of Africa, as, Greeks, Armenians, etc.

The Lord of this City, and Country is the grand Signeour who governs by his
Bashaw or Vice-King. The Commodities Traded for by the Europian Merchants, are
Flax, Rice, Balsoms, Pulls, Fruits, Cottons, Sugars, Hemp, and the like; which
according to the overflowing of Nilus the Soil yields in plenty, or Scarcity,
so that when they have a plentiful Year; they make a Feast to Nilus, or the
River God; as they Term him, and exceedingly Rejoice thereto.

The yearly Revenue of this Kingdom, accrueing by Customs, and other ways
amount to 3 Millions of Sheraffes, each valued at 8 Shillings Sterling, one
Million of which is sent to the grand Signeur, one for maintaining the forces
of the Kingdom, and the other to enable the Bashaw to keep his Court.

The Customs are either paid in Species or compounded for at 10 per cent. only
Money entered pays but one and a half per cent. but outward all Commodities pay
11 per cent. which is accounted the Soldan's Custom.

The Customs of Alexandria are farmed by the Jews at 20000 Medins per diem,
which according to computation, amounts to 55000 pounds per Annum Sterling.

Their Weights and Measures, are the same with those of Alexandria. The Current
Coyns in Egypt, are Spanish Royals of 8 which they call Piastre, and Dollers
the Meden the Asper the Soltana, Xeriffe, and Cheqeen, the value of each as
before recited.

Their Accounts are variously kept, some in one sort of Coin, and some in
another. The chief Trade driven here by the European Christians, is by the
French, and Venetians; the English having of late declined it, as having the
growth of the Country or the same Commodities, at cheaper Rates in India, and
Aleppo. And thus much for the Continent of Egypt.

CHAP. XXVIII. A View of the Isles of the Sea, appertaining to Africa, with
their Commodities, Trade, Weight, Measures, etc.
THe Isles are these, viz. Madagascar, Zocotara, St. Thomas, the Canary
Islands, the Islands of Assores, or Tarceras. The first abounds in Ginger,
Cloves, and Silver Mines, and was discovered by the Portugals Anno 1506. The
money in use amongst the Natives are Glass Beads of Cambaia, which passes
current amongst them; their Weights and Measures are few, and those uncertain.

The second lies in the Mouth of the Red Sea, 10 Degrees Northward from the
Equator, and yields Cattle and Corn, but the chief thing Traded for is Aloes,
which are sold by the Quintar, which Averdupois English is 93 pound.

The third lies under the Equinoctial, in which is a Colony of Portugals; the
chief Commodity it yields is Sugar, of which so much is made, as ladeth
yearly 50 Vessels of good Burden; their Weights and Measures being the same
with those used at Lisbone, as indeed wherever the Portugals Plant themselves
they impose their own Weights and Measures on the Inhabitants.

Fourthly the Canary Islands, which are 7 in number under the Protection of the
King of Spain, are very Fruitful, abounding in Sugarcanes, and those Birds we
call Ca^^ry Birds; and in Canary Wine, which takes it is name from the Islands,
of which 4 or 500 Tuns are yearly exported, and dispersed over Europe. There is
likewise Wood of Excellent use for Dyers.

Hither the English trade, and for the growth of the Island Exchange Says,
Serge, Bays, Linen, etc.

Their Weights, Measures, and Coyns, are the same with those of Sevil; of which
in order I shall speak.

Fifthly the Islands of Assores, or Tarceras, directly under the Meridian, were
first discovered by the Flemings, and abound in Cattle, Corn, Wood, and the
like; but are of little use, some for Harboring, and re-victualling of Ships
in their Voyage to the East Indies, as are many other small Islands, lying in
that vast Ocean. And thus much shall suffice for Africa and the Trade thereof.

CHAP. XXIX. A View of Asia, and of the Trade, Manners, and Customs thereof
together with the Description of their Current Coyns, Weights, Measures, etc.
ASia Earths third Portion, is divided from Africa by the Red Sea, and Egyptian
Isthmus, and from Europe by the Egean Propontis, and Euxian Sea, by Palus
Meotis, Tunais, Duina, etc. and is divided into these Regions or Provinces,
viz. Anatolia, Syria, Palestina, Armenia, Arabia, Media, Assyria, Mesopotamia,
Chaldea, Persia, Parthia, Tartaria, China, India. And the Islands of the Sea.

Anatolia, or Natolias, is bounded on the East with Euphrates, on the West with
Thracius Bosphorus, Propontis, the Hellespont, and Egean, on the North
Propontis, Euxinus, and on the South bounded with the Rhodian, and Lycian Seas.

In this Province Smyrna, is the chief City of Trade, therefore passing over
those of less note, I shall Center the Trade of the whole Province, in that one
City.

Smyrna, the City to which the Church of which St. John directed his
Revelation, is Seated at the Bottom of a Gulgh, called the Gulf of Smyrna;
where resides an English Consul, and the like for the French, and Venetians.
The Principal Trade having been lately removed from Scio thither, by Reason of
the advantageous Harbor for Shipping. This City is under the Government of the
Grand Signeur, and is Inhabited by all Nations, but especially Traded to by the
English, French, and Venetians. The Commodities found there, which are brought
by the Arabians, Persians, and other Merchants of Asia, and sold to the
Christian Traders in that Port, are Cotton Wools, Galls, Anniseeds, Wax,
Cordovant, Cottons wrought Grogram, Yarn, Cute, Carpets, Grograms, Chamblets,
Mohairs, Fruits, Drugs, and store of Persian Silk; which is brought on Camels,
and Dromidaries by Land; for which they receive of our Merchants in Exchange
Suffolk, Essex, and Gloucester Clothes, Yorkshire, and Hampshire Kersies, Lead,
Tinn, Pepper, Calicoes, Indico, Cloves, Cinnamon, and the like; which Spices
were formerly the growth of those Countries; but in the intestine Wars, the
Trees for the most part destroyed, and now supplied by our Merchants being
brought from India.

The Venetians Trade with them for Pepper, Cloth, wrought Silk, Velvets, and
the French bring thither, Cloth, Paper, and Bullion, the latter of which they
convert to Coin, Stamped with the Effigies and Motto of the Grand Signeour for
the most part, and the same with what is current all over his Empire; which
when I come to take a View of Constantinople, and the Trade thereof, I shall
describe.

The Weights in use, is the Quintar, which contains 100 Rotolos, or 24 Oaks,
which are found to be 400 Drams. They have likewise the Lodoro, being 176
Drams, and the Pound Averdupois, has appeared to be 148 Drams, and the Quintar
of 42 Oaks to be 119 pound English, tho sometimes but 117.

Their Measures are two, viz. one for Linen, and the other for Woollen, to
which as before in the Weights, I shall refer the Reader to those of
Constantinople, they being in effect the same.

The Custom-House of Smyrna, is for the most part farmed of the Grand Signeour,
and three per cent. only taken of the English Merchants, unless upon
Extraordinary occasions; and although there has been an Edict, Published by the
Grand Signeour, that no Goods paying in one Port of his Dominious, and brought
into an other Port, shall pay any more duty, yet it is not observed, but the
Merchants are obliged to compound with the Customers upon that occasion. But
this Custom of 3 per cent. is only to the English, by virtue of their Treaty,
for the French, Dutch, and Venetians pay 5 per cent.

The charges of the Port for Ships, before they can be cleared, are sometimes
paid in Commodities, and sometimes in Money, as they can agree; and the most
part are thus. To the Cadie 5 Pico of Venetian Cloth, and Cony Skins to leave
it. To the Cadies Servant, 3 Picos English Cloth, to the Cadies Caya, 3 Picos
of what Cloth he shall choose, to the Cadies Scrivan, a Chicquen in Gold. To
the Cadies Page, 2 Dollars, to the Mosier Bashaw, 1 Picos of Cloth, to the
Cadies Janissaries, a Chicquen in Gold; all of which is commonly accounted to be
worth 68 or 69 Dollars. But to conclude, the Trade of this Port, is most in
request for the abundance of Cotton; which grows in the adjacent parts, after
this manner about the Spring of the Year, it is sowed and comes up with a
Slender Stalk like Wheat; but strong as a Cane, and bears a Bearded Head,
exceeding hard, but when Ripe it opens of it self, and yields both Seed, and
Cotton, the first of which they Preserve to Sow again, and the latter they sell
to the English and French to the quantity yearly of 20000 Quintals.

CHAP. XXX. A View of Syria, and the Trade thereof.
SYria is bounded with the Mediterranean Sea on the West, on the East with
Euphrates, on the South with Palestine, and on the North with Cilicia, and
contains 3 Provinces, viz. Phaenicia, Caelosyria, and Syrophaenicia.

In Phaenicia, are Principally found the Cities of Acria, and Sidon, where the
chief Trade and Commerce is with the Venetians, and French, who Traffic with
the Inhabitants for Corn, Galls, Wool, and Wax, and in the lieu thereof give
them Spices, and Europian Cloth.

Their Weights are the Cantar of Acria which makes 603 pound English, and the
Rottolo which is 4 pound 5 Ounces English, and 650 Drams. Their Measures are
the Brace, with which they Measure their Cloth, and other Commodities. Their
Coyns, especially theirs of Sidon, and the Ryals of 8/^ Spanish, and Chickqeens
of Gold, the Ryal going current for 70 Aspers, and the Chickqeens at 108, but
seldom continue long at a settled value; and thus much for the Province of
Phaenicia.

Syrophaenicia, contains the City of Baruti, formerly called Julia Felix, once
a City of great Trade, but of late reduced to straiter Limits and little Trade;
all they have with Europe, is from the Venetians. Their Commodities are Wax,
Drugs, some Silks, and such like Commodities common to Asia.

Their Weights is the Cantar, containing 100 Rotolo's, each Rotolo being
accounted 502 pound English.

Their Measure is the Pico, 100 containing 86 Venetian Braces.

Their Trade for the most parts is with the Merchants of Arabia, Persia, and
Turkey, who bring thither their Merchandise, at certain Seasons, when the
Carravan sets out, not otherwise daring to venture for fear of the Rovers that
Rob in great Troops.

The chief Metropolis of Caelosyria, is Damascus; which is the Principal Scale
of Trade in that Province. Therefore so that in describing the Trade of that,
the rest will be included.

CHAP. XXXI. A View of Damascus, of the Trade, Weights, Measures, and Current
Coin thereof.
DAmascus is Accounted the Head of Syria, and is pleasantly Seated; abounding
in all manner of plenty, as Grapes, Corn, Cattle, Cottons, Saffron, Steel, Raw
Silk, Oil, Honey, Wax, Balsom, Almonds, Dates, and Rice, which are all the
growth of the Country, and brought thither by the Merchants; as the chief Mart
for which they receive (but mostly of the Venetians) Woollen Cloth, Tinn,
Quick-Silvet, Lead, Latten Wire, Plates, Brimstone, Alum, Beads, Bracelets,
Looking-Glasses, Canvas, Furs, Sugar, Paper, Velvet, Taffata, Damask, Coral,
Beads, and the like; for which besides the abovementioned Wares, at sundry
Seasons, they receive Ginger, Cloves, Mace, Sandals, Incense, Myrrh, Nutmegs,
Indico, Gallingal, Long-Pepper, Mirobulans, Armoniack, Alloes Epatica,
Cardimon, Turbith, Sanguis Draconis, Sugar Candia, Worm-seed, Zedoaria,
Spicknard, Cinnamon, Tutia, Benjamin, Assa Faetida, Manna, and Champhir, which
are sold by the Cantar of Damasco, or the Rottolo; some Musk, Ambergrease, and
Pearls, are found there likewise.

Their Weights are the Cantar, and Rottolo, the former making 600 Venetian
pound Sotile, and 380 pound Gross, which is accounted 416 pound Averdupois.

The Measure of length is the Pico, and is accounted 27 Inches, with which they
Measure their Cloth, Stuffs, and Silks, and to each Measure allow the vantage
of a Hands breadth; and in all Weights Tare of the Casks, Bags, or packing
Mats. Their Coin is the Asper, they have likewise Current, the Chickqeens of
Gold, and some few Ryals. And thus much for Damascus, so famous of old, as is
mentioned in Holy Writ.

CHAP. XXXI. A View of Aleppo, and the Trade thereof, with the Descriptions of
the Weights; Measures, Manners, and Customs of that famous City.
ALeppo formerly called Aram Sobab, is Seated on a fair and fertile Plain, and
Beautifyed with many stately Buildings; each Street being nightly shut up with
Folding Gates, and the Merchants Caves or Warehouses, fortifyed with Iron
Gates, the Trade of Tripoly being by the General consent of the Merchants
removed hither, Merchants of all Nations making it now their Scale of Trade,
tho an Inland City being Seated about 100 English Miles from the Sea; so that
from the port of Alexandretta, or Scanetaroon, the Merchandise coming by
Shipping, are Laden on Camels, and conveyed thither; that Country being in
Subjection likewise to the Grand Signeur.

The Commodity brought by the Merchants of Persia, Arabia, and India, are
Drugs, Gems, Spices, Silks, etc. and the growth of the Country affordes
Grogorams, Galls, Grogram Yarn, Cotton, etc. there is likewise found Silk of
Tripoly, Bacai, Bedovin, and Damasco.

And this is the chief Scale of Trade, for our English Levant Merchants; all
other of his Majesty's Subjects, being prohibited to Trade thither: and by what
is vended there yearly, the Reader may Judge of the profits accruing thereby,
viz. 6000 Cloth and upwards, of several sorts 600 Quintals of Tinn, and not
less then 100000, Ryals of 8/8 in ready Money, besides Linen, Stuffs, Furs,
and other things of English growth, for all which they have large returns.

The next who Trade to Aleppo of note are the Venetians, who bring thither
Wire, Latten, Plates, shaven Latten, wrought Silk, Steel, Ryals of 8
Chickqueens of Gold, Crystal, Looking-Glasses, Damask, Quicksilver, Paper, and
the like; for which they receive all sorts of Cotton, both in Wool, and Yarn;
as likewise Grograms, Mohaires, Drugs, Spices, Gems, Calls, Indicos, and the
like; and upon the same Score, the French Trade thither, all of them having
Consuls, or Vice-Counsuls Resident in Aleppo, Alexandretto, or some place
adjacent to manage their affairs.

The Weights of this place, are the Rottolo, Dram, and Wesno; by the latter of
which little other Commodities then Persian Silk is sold.

The Rottolo is 12 Ounces, the Dram, the 60 part of an Ounce; and 3600 is
accounted to the Wesno, yet for Silver, Gold, and Gems, they have other
Weights; as the Mitigal and Carat, the former of which is 1 Drams, which is
Carats 24 English, or Grains 96, etc.

All sorts of Indico is there sold by the Churl, which is accounted 27
Rottolos, of 720 Drams, Churls, 2 make a Chest, 327 pounds neat Indico being
allowed to a Churl; 3 Ounces for dust, 3 Ounces for Single shirt, and 6 Ounces
for double shirt, being over and above allowed to the Buyer.

Silk of all sorts has allowance, from Heads of Skeins, if coarse 100 in 130
Drams per Wesno, if fine yet 60 Drams; Musk sold by the Mittigal, out of the
Cods, gives no allowance, but in the Cod ^0 per cent. Drugs of the proper
growth of the Country, are sold by the Rottolo of 720 Drams; and is exempted
from Custom, but as for Drugs of Foreign growth they are weighed by the Rottolo
of 600 Drams, as Camphir, Alloes Socotrine, etc. and pay large Customs, even as
the Buyer can agree; Silks of the growth give no allowance in Tare, as being
fine and clean, Opium is allowed 10 Drams in the 100.

Spices of all sorts are sold by the Rottolo 720 Drams, but if ungarble, that
is unseparated the good from the bad, 32 Drams in the 100 are allowed, that is
132 for 100, but if Garbled 10 Ounces only. Galls are allowed for dust, and
defect 2 per cent. Aloes Epaticum, Aloes Socotrina, Assafaetida with the Skins,
as also Bedellium allow 20 in the 100 for waste. Cinnamon, Cubebs, Cassia
Fistula, Oculus Indi, Galbanum, Maces, Opium, Rhubarb, Manna, etc. allow 10 per
100. Camphora, Lignum Alloes, and Nutmegs allow 5 per 100.

The Measure used here is the Pico, accounted 27 English Inches.

The Coyns found current, are those common throughout the Ottoman Empire, viz.
the Soltany which 80 Medines 120 Aspers and 16 Shillings English. The Lion
Dollar, which is 50 Medines, 80 Aspers, and 10 Shillings English, the Ducat
which is 40 Medines, 60 Aspers, and 7 Shillings 6 Pence English. Ryals of 8/^
have passed 6 per cent. better then Lion Dollars 1 Ryals 8/^ has passed for a
Soltany.

Their Accounts are kept in Dollars, and Aspers, which go current amongst the
Christian Merchants; 80 Aspers being accounted to the Dollar, and 1250 Dollars
accounted 312 pound 10 Shillings Sterling.

The Customs paid by the English, are 3 per cent. tho sometimes more, but as
it was agreed between the Mustapha Aga, the Receiver of Customers; and the
English Consul I shall set down for the better Instruction of Young Factors,
and so conclude the Trade of Aleppo.

The Customs thus, Kersies rated at Medines 14 3/2 per Piece at 3 per cent.
Broad Cloth at 120 Medines per Cloth at 3 per cent. Cony-Skins the Bundle
containing 50 Skins, at 14 Dollars. Tinn rated at 50 Rotolo's per chest, and 32
Dollars is 137 Dollars. Indico at 587 Medines per chest. Galls at 12 Dollars
per Rottolo. Grograms the Bale at 33 Dollars. Fidales per Quintal at 33
Dollars. Cotton Wool, per cent. 33 Dollars. Quilt per Bail 50 Dollars.
Battanos per Bale 80 Dollars, Corduvants per Bale 80 Dollars, Turmerick per
Rotolo 80 Medines, Gum Dragant per Bale 60 Dollars; all Spices, as Cloves,
Mace, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, etc. pay 21 per cent. but are rated at 14 per cent.
less then the same Cost; as Commodities of India, viz. Nutmegs valued at
Medines 6; Cloves per Rottolo at 160, Mace per Rottolo 220, Cinnamon per Rottolo
at 30 Medines; Pepper is charged but with half Custom, and consequently rated
at half less then it cost; and thus much for the Trade of Aleppo.

CHAP. XXXIII. A View of Tripoly, and the Trade thereof.
THis City, to distinguish it from that Piratical City in Barbary bearing the
same name, is called Tripoly of Syria; and was formerly the Scale of Trade, but
it has been of late removed to Aleppo, as is before mentioned; so that now it
has little Trade with Europe, except what the Venetians find there. The
Commodities vended, are Cotton in Yarn and Wool, Drugs of several sorts, Corn
and some Spices. The Weight used there, is the Rottolo, of 100 pound; which has
been found to be 416 pound Averdupois; allowing 52 Drams to the Ounce. The
Moneys current, are Aspers, Dollars, Lions, and Soltinies; the Common Money of
Syria; and thus much for the Trade of that Region.

CHAP. XXXIV. A View of Palestine, and the Provinces, Trade, Weights, Measures,
Customs, and Current Coin thereof.
THe Provinces of Palestine are 4, viz. Galilea, Judaea, Idumea, and Samaria.
In these Provinces, the chief Cities are Gaza, and Tyrus; which at present
afford but little Trade, and what is afforded, is carried on by the Venetians;
the Commodities of the former are Cottons in Wool, and Yarn; several sorts of
Drugs, and Spices. The Coyns current there are those of Turkey, the Weights used
are the Rottolo, and Cantar, 100 Rotolo's going to the Cantar.

The latter, viz. Tyrus, formerly very famous for Navigation; as appears by the
Description of that City in Holy Writ, but now wants that Trade, being
Subjected by the Turks; so that what Trade remains is amongst themselves, or
such Neighbors as do not make any great advantage thereof; their Weights,
Measures, and Coyns, are those used throughout the Turkish Dominions.

CHAP. XXXV. A View of Armenia, and the Provinces thereof, together with the
Trade; as likewise of Arabia, the Provinces, and Trade thereof.
ARmenia is bounded on the East with Media, and the Caspian Sea, on the West
with the River Euphrates, and the Euxian Sea, on the North with Tartary, and on
the South with Mesopotamia; and divided into 3 Provinces, viz. Georgia,
Colchis, and Turcomania; and is in Subjection to the Grand Signeour, and
abounds in Cattle, Fruits, Corn, and such like; but has little Commerce with
Merchants, especially by Navigation.

Arabia is divided into 3 parts, viz. Arabia Desarta, Arabia Petrosa, and
Arabia Faelix. The first of which is bounded on the East with the Persian
Gulf, on the West with the Red Sea, on the North with Mesopotamia, and on the
South with the Arabian Ocean; and is memorable for nothing more, then the
Children of Isreal's wandering in it 40 Years, in their Journey out of Egypt to
the Land of Promise; being altogether Barren; nor is the second less sterile,
so that the Inhabitants live upon Robberies, and Spoil of such Merchants Goods
as pass through upon Camels to Aleppo, and other Places.

Arabia Faelix differs from the former, as being Fertile even beyond
Expression, exceeding the Richest Country in Asia in it is abounding with
Balsoms, Mirrh, Frankincense, Gold, Pearls, Spices, Manna, and Drugs of most
sorts which are carried by the Merchants to Aleppo, and other Mart Cities and
Towns, and from thence dispersed over the known World.

The chief Towns are Medina, and Mecha, famous for being the one the Birth
place, and the other the Burial place of the Impostor Mahomet; as also Aden.

The Weights and Measures, are the same with those of Morocco, and Tunis; and
their Coyns are the Asper, the Soltany, and Chequin, etc.

CHAP. XXXVI. A View of Assyria, Mesopotamia, Chaldea, etc.
ASsyria is bounded on the North with Armenia, on the East with Media, on the
West with Mesopotamia, and on the South with Persia; and is famous for its
Metropolis, the great City Ninive; which is now ruined by War, but is a
Province where at present little or no Trade is driven, and therefore I shall
the more lightly pass it over.

Mesopotamia is in subjection to the Ottoman Empire, and has for its chief City
Carumite, the Seat of the Turkish Bashaw, but is of little note as to Trade.

Chaldea is famous for comprehending the great City of Babylon, now called
Bagdet, Builded first by Nimrod, and afterward enlarged, to the circuit of 60
Miles, by Semiramis whose Walls were 200 Foot high, and 75 Foot broad; and is
saluted by the River Euphrates, and at this day keeps Correspondence with
Aleppo, by Carravans, and Camels; so that it retains a considerable Trade: and
what is worthy of note, their advice to and from distant places, is received by
the means of Pigeons, which is in this manner effected; When the Hen sits, they
carry the Cock a days Journey, and then fast'ning a Letter about his Neck, let
him go, who immediately Flies Home, and there the Letter is received by such
as watch his return, and so by degrees bring them to such perfection, that in
24 Hours, a Letter will be carried 100 or 150 Miles. The Commodities of this
Place, are the same with those of Aleppo, and their Weights, the Dram,
Mittagal, Rottolo, and Cantar; the Rottolo being 1 pound 10 Ounces English.

Their Measure is the Pico, which is found to be 27 Inches English, and their
Coyns those usual throughout the Turkish Empire, and therefore it is needless to
repeat them.

CHAP. XXXVII. A View of Media, and the Provinces thereof, as also of their
Trade, Weights, Measures, and the like.
MEdia is bounded on the West with Armenia, on the South with Persia, on the
North with the Caspian Sea, and on the East with Parthia; the chief Cities are
Tauris, Sultania, and Derbent; of which the former is the Metropolis, and
commonly made the Summer Seat of the Persian Sophy, and is conjectured to
contain 100000. Inhabitants; the Trade thereof consists chiefly in Raw-Silk, of
which there is store; which is Traded for by our English Merchants, and others,
and what remains is sent to Aleppo, viz 2000. Sums yearly; the City affords
likewise rich Carpets, and some Drugs, Spices, Cottons, Galls, Alum, and the
like; it being now in the Subjection of the Persian Monarch.

The Weights and Measures, are for the most part the same with those of
Babylon, viz. the Rottolo, Cantar, and Pico; the Country round about is very
Fertile in Corn, and plants, as also in the producing all manner of
necessaries, for the production of Cattle.

CHAP. XXXVIII. A View of Persia, The Province^, Cities, Trade, Weights,
Measures, and Commodities thereof.
PErsia is bounded on the East with the River Indus, on the South with the main
Ocean, on the North with the Caspian Sea, and on the West with Tygris, and the
Persian Gulf; and is divided into 11 Provinces, viz. Persis, Susiana,
Caramania, Gedrosia, Drangiania, Arica, Arachosia, Parapomisus, Saccha,
Hircania, and Ormus; all large Provinces.

Persis has of late changed it is name to that of Far, and is bounded with the
Persian Gulf, Caramania, Susiana, and Media; and abounds in rich Merchandise,
especially Silk, Drugs, and some Spices.

Casbin is now accounted the chief City of Persia, and lately the residency of
the Sophies, and is adorned with many stately Edifices, but chiefly Beautifyed
with the Bussars or Exchanges, which are many, and stored with Rich
Commodities; as Jewels, Drugs, Spices, Silks, either in Damasks, Velvets, or
Raw; where likewise the Merchants of several Nations Trading thither, meet in
the same manner as at London. Their Weights, Measures, and Coyns, agree with
those of Hisphan; of which in order I shall Treat, and therefore refer the
Reader to View them there.

Balsara is Seated on the Persian Gulf, upon the mouth of Euphrates; and
contains the Commodities of Arabia, Turkey, India, and Persia, by Reason of it is
commodious Situation, and is in Subjection to the Grand Signeour, as reduced to
his Obedience by force of Arms, Anno 1550. And pays Customs to his Intendant
or Vizar Bashaw 5 per cent. upon Clothes, Silks, and the like; but to every 100
a Tare, or allowance of 3 pound is Customary, and their Weights is generally
the Wesun accounted 16 of them to the Cantar of Aleppo.

Casan is frequented by the Merchants of India, and the Commodities for the
most part consist of the Manufacture of the Citizens, as Shashes, Turbants,
Girdles, Velvets, Sattins, Dammask, Ormustus Carpets, etc. and thither are
brought Diamonds, Pearls, Rubies, Turquoisies, Spices, etc. and a Law there
is, that all Persons above the Age of 6 Years shall give up their Names to the
Magistrate; and with a Satisfactory account by what means he or she get their
Livings, and if they be found in a false Tale, they are either Battooned, or
put to some Public slavery for a time.

Caramania is a Fertile Province, as to necessary Provisions, and other ways
only worthy of note, for the Cloth of Gold made there; as for Gedrosia,
Drangiana, Arica, Arachosia, Parapomisis, Saccha, and Hircania, they are of
little note as to Trade, and therefore I shall pass them over.

Ormus the last Province of Persia, is exceedingly in request, abounding in
Commodities of Value, and is divided by an Arm of the Sea, of 12 Miles over
from the Continent, and is much frequented by Merchants, Trading in those
parts. The Commodities are chiefly Carpets, Tapestry, Shashes, Grograms,
Mohairs, Turkey Camlets, Arabian Drugs, Indian Gems, and Spices, it being the
Principal Mart, or Magazine of all the Eastern Commodities; for in April and
September, the Carravans come thither strongly Guarded from Aleppo, Syria, and
other Countries, taking Ship at Balsara, and bring all manner of Rich
Commodities, that are to be found in the Traffic of the Mediterranean. The
most advantageous Seaports in those parts are Jasques, and Gombroue, where the
English Ships Trade for this Kingdom, as likewise the Camels, and Drommidaries
of the Indian, and other Merchants that Travel by Land. Their Weight is the
Dram, 96 of which make a pound Averdupois. Their Measures are the Coveda, short
and long; the former is accounted 27, and the latter 37 Inches, and are used in
measuring the proper Manufacture of Persia.

The Moneys current are the Bessee of Copper, which is 4 Cosbags, the Shahee of
Silver, which is 2 Bessees, 29 Cosbegs, or 4 pence Sterling; the Abashee of
Silver, which is 2 Mamothis, 40 Cosbegs, or 16 pence Sterling; the Mamothis
which is 2 Shahees, 29 Cosbegs or 8 pence Sterling, The Asar of Gold which is
20 Shahees, or 6 Shillings 6 pence Sterling. The Toman of Gold which is 10
Asars, or 3 pound 6 Shillings 8 pence Sterling, as also the Larrees, which are
reckoned at 10 pence Sterling.

CHAP. XXXIX. A View of Hispahan, and of the Trade thereof.
HIspahan formerly called Hecatompolis, from it is 100 Gates, is one of the
Principal Cities of the Persian Dominions; Beautifyed with Red Marble-Walls, of
prodigious height, stately Buildings, as Palaces, Seraglio's, and the like;
adorned with Ivory, Ebony, Alabaster, and Carpets of Silk and Gold. The
Inhabitants do all their business on Horseback, unless such as are Slaves; and
the City abounds in the stores of India, Arabia, Turkey, Russia, and China,
which for the most part are brought thither upon Dromidaries; and again
disposed of to such Merchants as Trade thither.

The price of Carriage is thus, 100 Maunds of Wares from Sciras to Hispahan
cost 70 Sehids, and from Hispahan to Casan 60 Sehids, from Hispahan to Ormus,
by Sciras 120 Sehids; and lastly from Hispahan to Tauris 40 Sehids.

The Weights are the Dram, the Mittigal, and the Maund, or Maundshaw, 100 of
the first make 66 of the Second, and of the second 1200 makes the third: the
Measures are the Cavedo, long and short, and are as in the foregoing Chapter;
as also the Coyns current here agree with those of Ormus. Silks are found here
in abundance, both wrought and Raw. And thus much for Persia, and the Trade
thereof.

CHAP. XL. A View of Tartaria, of the Trade, Weights, Measures, Current Coyns,
and Customs thereof.
TArtary the next division of Asia, is bounded on the West with Muscovia, on
the South with the Caspian Sea and Hill Taurus, on the East with the main
Ocean, and on the North with the Frozen Sea, and is divided into 5 Kingdoms or
Provinces, under the Subjection of the great Cham, viz. Precopensis, Asiatica
Antiqua, Zagathai, and Cathaia; but for as much as the last Province, is only
abounding in known Trade, and yields the Commodities of all the rest: I shall
only insist upon it, and in the Description of the Trade of Cambalu, lay down
what ever is to be found in that vast Country.

Cambalu is the Metropolitan of Cathai, through which Runs the River Po^^sanga
and is in circuit accounted 28 Miles, adorned with stately Palaces, and other
Edifices, being the Seat of the great Cham; who maintains 5000 Astrologers or
Wizards, and 12 or 14000 Horse for his ordinary Guard. The Merchants that Trade
thither, have their Caves or Storehouses in the Suburbs, which are in great
number.

The Commodities of the Country are Rice, Grain, Ruhbarb, Coral, Silk, Wool,
Hemp, and the like; they have likewise Silver Mines, and some yielding Gold
Ore, yet their Coin for the most part is made of the inmost Bark of a Mulbery
Tree cut round, stamped with the Princes Seal, and upon pain of Death, none
dare Coin any other, or refuse to take it, tho in some places they have pieces
of Coral, twigs of Gold, and Salt Loaves which go at certain rates in Exchange;
but the money is as aforesaid, and those Merchants are obliged to take it for
their Richest Commodities, and put it away again for such as the Country
affords; they have Spices, Gems, and Drugs; but not of natural growth, but are
beholden to the Arabians and Indians for them; their Country by Reason of the
long continuing cold, not being capable of producing them.

Their Weights are those used generally throughout the Provinces, viz. the
gross Cantar, and the small Cantar; the former of which is only used in
weighing Gross Goods, and is accounted 268 pound English, the small Cantar is
103 pound English.

All their Grain, and other such like Commodities, they vend by a Measure,
called the Chistetto which makes 8 Staios Venice.

The Measure for Silks, Stuffs, and Cloth is the Pico, 100 of which make 126
Braces Venice. And thus much for Tartary; which is mostly Inhabited by Thieves
and Rovers; who rather live by Spoil then Trade, being morose, Savage people,
fit for so cold and Barren a Country, as for the most part. Therefore leaving
this Frozen Clime, I shall pass into India far more Fruitful and Commodious.

CHAP. XLI. A View of India, intra, and extra Gangem, of the Provinces, Trade,
Customs, and valuable Commodities thereof.
INdia is bounded on the West with the River Indus, on the East with China, on
the North Tartary, and on the South with the Ocean; and is divided into 2
parts, viz. India Intra Gangem, and India Extra Gangem; the first contains nine
Principal Kingdoms, viz. Narsinga, Malavar, Ballasia, Cambaia, Mandao, Bengala,
Aristan, Canora, and Dellia; and the second 7 Kingdoms, viz. Macin, Aracan,
Chambaia, Couchin-china, Barma, Siam, and Pegu. The whole Country taking its
Name from the River Indus, which runs 1000. Miles ere it meets the Sea.

As for the Trade of the Indies, I shall briefly lay it down in the Description
of the Principal Scales of Traffic, and first of Diu.

Diu is an Island lying about 20 Leagues distant from the River Indus, and is
under the protection of the King of Portugal, the Portugals indeed being the
first Discoverers of those Tracts; and have a very good Haven for Shipping,
whither resort the Merchants of Arabia, Turkey, Persia, Armenia, etc. bringing
the Richest Commodities of the growth of those Nations, as likewise all the
Banians, Gusrates, and Rumos; that Trade in Cambaia, and from thence to the
Red Sea and Meca, bring thither their Merchandise.

The Commodities this place affords, are Cotton of Linen of sundry sorts,
which there are called Jorims, Sluyers, and Lamparads, and are in England
called Callico's; also there are abundance of Cocus-Oyl, Indian-Nuts, Butter,
Pitch, Tar, Sugar-Candia, Iron, excellent Leather Artificially wrought with
Silks of all Colors; Chests, Cupboards, Boxes, of curious work inlay'd with
Mother Pearl and other rare divices.

As for the Weights, and Measures of this place, I refer the Reader to the
Description of Goa, and the Trade thoreof; and thus much for the Town and
Island of Diu.

CHAP. XLII. A View of Cambaia, of the Trade, Weights, Measures, Coyns,
Commodities, and Customs thereof.
CAmbaia gives a Kingdom its Name, being the Metropolis of Cambaia; and is
vast in circuit, adjudged to contain no less then 800000. Inhabitants; Seated
upon the River Indus, being a City of the greatest Trade in those Parts, and
thither resort Christians, Persians and Arabians; and there both the English
and Dutch have Factories. But the Natives who are called the Gensurates, and
Banians, are the Richest Merchants, and greatest Traders; as likewise of late
grown so Politic, that they have an insight into-most Commodities.

The Commodities this City and Country afford are Callico's of all sorts, Corn,
Rice, Butter, Oil, rich Carpets, fine Chests, Cupboards, Carved and Imbellished
with Mother Pearl, Plates of Silver, Ivory, and the like; there are found in
this Country many precious Stones of great value, as Rubies, Jacinths,
Chrisolites, Amber, Jaspar, Spinals, Granads, and Agats, as likewise several
Rich Drugs, as Opium, Camphora, Bangue, and Sandal-Wood; as also Sugars and
Indico in abundance. The like Commodities are likewise found in Bianny,
Fetterbarre, Shersky, and Labor. In this Tract is the famous Port of Surrat,
which at this day the Dutch make their chief Scale of Trade, and whither all
the Commodities of these Countries are brought, especially those Subject to the
Scepter of the great Mogul.

The current Coyns are Mahomodies tho very Scarce, and are each accounted 12
pence Sterling, the Casanna Ruppy Esteemed worth 3 Shillings 3 pence Sterling,
the Jaquire Ruppe, 5 of which make 6 Casanna Ruppies, the Saway Ruppy valued at
11 Shillings 3 pence Sterling, the Hand Ruppy valued at 2 Shillings 3 pence.
In which and the Casanna Ruppy, the Merchants of Gusurat keep their Accounts.
They have likewise smaller pieces, which are accounted 34 to the Mahmudy, and
the Sahhee, which is accounted 10 Cosbegs; tho in some places they differ in
value, tho the difference is inconsiderable.

The Weights used throughout the Mogul's Dominions are 3, one proper for Silk,
and the other for all other Merchandise, viz. the pice which in Silk is
accounted 5 Mittigals, a Mittigal being about 13 Troy penny Weights, and the
Sear small and great, which vary much, viz. the Sear of Surrat is 18 Pices
Weight of Copper-money, and accounted 13 Ounces Averdupois, the Sear of Agra
called the Sear. Acoberg is 30 Pices and 22 Ounces Averdupois. The Sear of
Agra, called the Sear Janquery 36 Pices and 26 Ounces Averdupois; and so in
several other places vary according to the Custom of the place. They have in
use likewise 2 Maunds, a Maund small of Surrat, being 40 small Sears of that
place and 33 pound Averdupois, the other is 40 great Sears, which makes 54
pound English, and these are Multiplied into a Candil of Surrat, and Cambaia
which contains 20 Maunds.

The Measures at Cambaia and Surrat are two, viz. the Cavado, long and short,
the last of which is used in Measuring of Silks, and is 27 Inches English, the
first is used in Measuring of Woollen Cloth, and is 35 English Inches; but in
Agra, Labor Dilli, and Brampore, the short Cavado is found to be 32 Inches; as
for Concave Measures, none are found in the Moguls Country, their Liquids as
well as Grain, and other dry Commodities being sold by Weight. And thus much
for Cambaia and the Trade thereof.

CHAP. XLIII. A View of Goa, the Trade, Commodities, Weights, Measures, Coyns,
and Customs thereof, and of the Pearl Fishery.
GOa is a famous City at present, the Seat of the Portiguize Viceroy and
Archbishop; and is Seated in an Island to which it gives Name, and is the
chief Mart or Scale of Trade on that part of India; for hither resort Merchants
who bring the Commodities of Persia, Arabia, Armenia, Cambaia, Pegu, Siam,
Bengalia, Malacca, Java, Molucco, and China; a Port it has, Capacious for the
Reception of Shipping, but those of great Burden are obliged to Anchor at
Bardes, some Miles short of Goa, by Reason of the Shallowness of the Water,
where are purposely Built Sore-Houses, for the reception of such Merchandise as
are brought thither, which are set to Sail in the chief Street every day, from
7 to nine in the Morning, in the nature of our Fairs in England; during which
time a great concourse of Merchants and others buy up what Commodities they
like best, or can agree for; and in this place all the Natives of one Craft
live in distinct Streets, being enjoined under severe Penalties, not to Marry
out of their own Trade, nor put their Children to any other Trade. Their Winter
which consists only in terrible Rains, begins about the last of April, and
continues till September.

The Commodities of the growth of this Island, consist only in Palm Trees and
Cocus; but hither are brought Silk, Spices, Jewels, and all the Manufactures of
India, Arabia, Persia, Armenia, etc.

The Weights used here, are the Quintal and Rove, the proper Weights of
Portugal, and are used in weighing most European Commodities. They have
likewise a Maund of 12 pound Averdupois; another Weight they have proper to the
Weighing of Pepper, which is here found in abundance and nearly corresponds
with our neat hundred.

Their Measure for Grain, and the like, is the Medida of which 24 make a Maund,
and 20 Maunds are 14 Bushels English. Their Measure of Length is consistent
with those of Lisbon, to which I refer the Reader.

As for their Coyns, they are two sorts, good and bad, so that when Merchants
Trade, they as well include in their Bargain, what Coin they shall receive or
pay, as what Goods they buy or sell.

The common Money is the Pardus Xeraphin, worth 300 Res of Portugal, or 3
Testons, which are valued at 4 Shillings 6 pence Sterling, one Pardus is worth
4 good Tangas, and one good Tangas is worth 4 good Ventins or 5 Badoves, a
Ventine good is worth 18 bad Basarucos or 15 good ones, 3 Basarucos good, are 2
Res of Portugal. There are current likewise the Persina Larins of Silver worth
110 Basarucos, also the Pagode of Gold worth 10 Tangas, and is accounted 8
Shillings Sterling, the Venetiander of Gold worth two Pardus Sheraphin, the St.
Thomas of Gold worth 8 Tangas, the Royal of 8/^ called Pardus d' Reales worth
440 Res of Portugal; as for the Larins of Persia, they continue not at any
settled price, but rise and fall, as the trade increases or decreases.

All the money received in way of Trade, passes through the Hands of the
Sheraffs; a kind of Officers, who for a small consideration for telling each
Sum, are bound to make it good, either in Tale or goodness, etc.

Having thus far proceeded, I shall now give the Reader a Relation of the
Pearl-Fishery; a View of which may be both pleasant and profitable to the
Reader, as thus.

When the time of this Fishery draws near, which is about the middle of
March; the Boats go out, and let down their Diverse to find where the Beds of
Oysters lie, by Reason they continue not always in one place; which being
found, the Galleys Armed, that are appointed to defend the Fishermen from
Rovers, Anchor, or Cruse at a distance from the Shore, and then the Fishermen
set up a kind of a Wooden Village to contain their necessaries, and to Lodge in
till the time of Fishing be over, and then put out their Boats or Barks, in
each of which is 10 men at least, who mooring by their Anchors, fasten a great
Stone, or Iron Weight to the end of a Rope, and then one of them Stripping, has
his Ears and Nose stopped with Wool, dipped in Oil, and sometimes a Sponge
dipped in Oil in his mouth, and a Basket fast'ned to his left Arm, or about his
Neck; he gets astride upon the Stone or Weight, and with it Sinks to the
Bottom, his Companions holding one end of the Rope, by which when he has filled
his Basket, they draw him up, he giving them notice when to do so by pulling
the Rope, and when he is come up, another is ready to go down; and so take it
by turns till their Bark is full of Fish; which then they carry to Shore and
lay on heaps, every Boats heap by it self, and so continue diving, for the most
part in 14 or 15 Fathom Water, till the middle of April, or sometimes till the
latter end; by which time those they first took are opened by the heat of the
Sun, which drys away the moisture; and then each Boats Crew and such others as
they have to help them fall to searching for the Pearls, but find them not in
every Shell, nor at all times of the same perfection; when the Pearls are
gathered, there are certain Persons that View and sort them, dividing them into
4 distinctions, and accordingly set Prices on them, as they are in Largeness,
Beauty and Goodness, which they discern by a small instrument full of holes.

The divisions of Pearls are these: The first, second, third and fourth sort,
viz. the round Pearl which they call the Aja, or Vnja of Portugal, the wrinkled
Pearl called the Aja of Bengala, the third sort called the Aja of Canora, and
the 4 or worst sort are called Aja Cambaia; and when they are thus divided,
great is the striving amongst the Merchants, who shall make the best purchase;
for note that none are allowed to Fish for them, but such as will pay tribute
and acknowledgment for so doing, and indeed few there are that are expert
therein. And thus much for the Pearl Fishing. As for the manner of their Sail
and the Prices they are sold for in India, I shall speak hereafter.

As for the Coast of Malabar, it abounds with Pepper which is bought up by the
Portugals, six months before it is Ripe, and when it comes to perfection, stored
up till the Arrival of their Ships; and to this Coast are accounted these
places, viz. Romes, Onor, Barsellor, Mongalor, Cananor, Calicut, Granganor,
Cochin, Coulon, and Cape de Comery.

CHAP. XLIV. A View of Musulipatan, the Trade, Commodities, Weights, Customs,
and Coyns thereof.
MVsulipatan is the chief Town upon the Coast of Chormandel, where the English
have settled a Factory; as likewise at the Towns of Petipoly and Armagon in the
same Tract, all depending upon the former; the Port and Situation being
Commodious, both for the Reception of Shipping; and Temperate for English
Bodies being Eastward; the Natives are very Industrious in Manufacture, and the
Soil yields plenty in abundance, and abounds with most Commodities of India;
from this Coast there is found driven a great Trade into Bengala, Pegu, Siam,
and Malacca. In this place it is that the fine Cottons of diverse color sare
wrought, and dispersed not only all over India, but throughout the World.

The Weight used on this Coast is the Candile, which in the Weight of Gross
Goods is found to be 20 Maunds, each Maund being Accounted 26 pound 14 Ounces
English. As for Measures I find not any, they usually weighing both dry and
Liquid Commodities; the Customs were once 12 per cent. but now reduced to 4.
The current Coyns along this Coast is the Pagode of Gold, the Mahomudy and
Fanan of Silver, the Pagode being valued at 15 Fanans, or 8 Shillings English,
a Fanan is 9 Cashees, which are accounted 6 pence Sterling, they have likewise
Ryals of Spain and other Coyns, the Mamody is as is before recited 12 pence
English.

CHAP. XLV. A View of Satagan, the Metropolis of Bengala, the Trade of that
Coast and the River Ganges, and the Commodities, Weights, Customs, etc.
THis Coast begins where the beforementioned ends, through the middle of
which runs the famous River Ganges, making a large Bay or Gulf, called the
Bay of Bengala; and is under the Protection of the great Mogul, whose Coyns are
current in those Parts. As for the River Ganges, the Natives and many other of
far Countries, imagine it to be of that Virtue, that it can cure many
distempers, and by Drinking and Bathing therein, make them capable of obtaining
Paradise, which Superstitious conceit, brings many from distant Places on
Pilgrimage; which Creates a great Trade in Satagan, the chief City on this
Coast, which is Seated on a River some distance from Ganges, up which the Tide
runs 100. Miles, and more, so swift that Boats drive with incredible speed
without Sails or Oars; at the entrance of this River, is a place called the
Butter, where Merchants Build Booths of Straw and Branches of Trees, against
the coming in of the Ships, and furnish them with all manner of Merchandise, by
Reason the River will not admit of Ships of great Burden so high as Satagan,
the which sheds when the Ships depart, they set on fire and remove their Goods
to Satagan; nor are the Commodities vended her a few, for no less then forty
Ships of Diverse Nations, find sufficient to Load them and some to spare.

The chief Commodities found on this Coast are Rice, Cloth of Cotton of diverse
sorts, Lacca, Sugar, Mirabolans, Long-Pepper, Oil of Zerseline, etc. and from
this City the Merchants Trade to Pegu, Musulipatan, and Summatra; and for the
most part to avoid being incommoded by the heat, they meet and Trade in the
Night, and what Goods are bought here by the Natives, are carried up the River
in Boats, and sold in other Cities and Ports.

In these parts the English- East India Company has Factories, and greatly
improve themselves thereby; the Portugals likewise in this Tract have 2 small
Forts, but no considerable Trade, that Nation of late much declining in matters
of Navigation.

The Weights and Coyns are much the same with those of Musulipatan.

Having thus far proceeded, it will not be amiss to give the Reader an Account
of a strange Custom used in this Tract, which is, that if any Debtor break the
day of payment by him consented to, his Creditor goes to the Principal Bramen,
or Archpriest, and procures of him a Rod, with which he makes a circle round
his debtor, charging him in the Name of the King and the said Bramen, not to
depart out of it till he has satisfied the debt, which if he does not, he must
either starve there or by coming out forfeit his Life to the Laws of the
Country; but this is only amongst the Natives.

CHAP. XLVI. A View of Pegu, and the Trade, Customs, Weights and Coyns, of the
Coast thereof.
PEgu is divided into two parts. In the one the King and his Nobles reside, in
the other the Artificers, Merchants, and Mariners; that wherein the former
reside is called the New-Town, and where the latter Inhabit the old-Town; about
which is a Moat of exceeding breadth, in which are many Crocadils kept
purposely, and all the Walls Beautifyed with Turrets, Gilded with Gold; the
Streets are fair, and set on each side with rows of Palm Trees, to keep off the
Sun from such as Pass through them; and upon the Arrival of the Ships, by the
help of the Monson or Trading Wind, great is the concourse of Merchants, who
come from the Coast of Cormandel and other Places, bringing Pointados, wrought
Cotton, and other Merchandise from Maecca, whence come several great Ships
laden with Damasks, Woollen Cloth, Velvets, and Cheqens. From Malacca Vessels
Arrive laden with Pepper, Porcelan, Sanders, Camphora, and other Rich
Commodities. There Arrives several Vessels likewise from Sumatra, with Pepper,
and other Commodities, who for the most part Anchor in a Port called Cosmia,
not far distant from the City; as for the Customs they are narrowly looked into
by Broakers, who are employed for that purpose, and have two per cent. out of
all Commodities, paying Custom for their own share, and are bound to sell the
Merchants Goods for them, and to make good what debts they contract, or false
money they take upon that occasion, and in their dealings they are very Just;
as likewise they are bound to find Lodgings and Warehouses for Merchants;
their contracts are made in Public, yet in such a method that none but the
parties concerned can tell what is done, for by putting their Hands under a
Carpet, and squesing such and such Joints, they know each others meanings
without speaking a word, which is registered by the Broaker, if they come to a
conclusion, in Leaves of Trees, used there instead of Paper.

When a Merchant-Stranger comes thither, the Governor sends several Maids to
him, to take his choice, which done he must agree with her Parents; and then
she serves him, during his stay for both Wife and Servant, and when he departs,
paying what he agreed for, she returns home, and if afterward she be married,
and he comes to that place, he may have her during his stay, her Husband not in
the least making a Scruple thereof, and when he departs, he may send her to her
Husband.

The Native Commodities in this Tract, are Gold, Rubies, Spinals, Saphirs,
Silver; which are dug at a Place called Caplan. There is likewise store of
Benjamin, Long-Pepper, Lead, Rice, Niper-Wine, and Sugar, the growth of the
Country not being liable to Custom.

The current Coin of this coast is the Gausa, made of Copper and Lead, and is
Coined by any that list, so they state it to a certain Weight, which if it be
not, it is soon discerned by the Broakers or Tellers who reject it, and that
Weight is called a Biso, and is accounted for Ryal of 8/8 or 2 Shillings 6
pence Sterling.

CHAP. XLVII. A View of Sian, and Malacca, and of their Trades, Commodities,
Coyns, etc.
FIrst in the Tract or Coast of Siam, are found the Cities of Tenaserim, and
Pattana, in the last of which an English Factory is Established; but Siam is
the chief, and was before it is being reduced by the King of Pegu, who besieged
it with a Million and 400000. men, the chief City of these Parts of India, and
to it as yet Merchants Trade from Couchin-China, Macan, Cantor, Malacca, and
Cambaia; as likewise from the Islands of Sumatra, Banda, and Borneo; and has
diverse Commodities brought from the Inland Cities of Martavan, and Tenaserim,
and is Situate on the famous River Menan, which runs athwart India, and
arises from the Lake Chiama; which every March overfloweth its Banks for 100.
Miles, during which time the Commerce and Correspondence is held by Boats.

The principal Commodities are Cotton, Linnens of all sorts, distilled Liquors,
by the Natives called Nipe, it being extracted from Cocos, as likewise
Benjamin, Lack, and precious Wood called by the Portugals Palo-Dangula, and
Calamba, making Rich Perfumes, and is Weighed often against Silver and Gold,
and the Wood Sapon used by Dyers; Camphora, Bezora-Stones and Gold in
abundance, as likewise some Diamonds of great value, also Nutmegs, Mace, and
other Spices.

The Coyns current in this Tract, are the Tail, valued at 4 Ticals, or 18
Shillings Sterling; a Tical is Accounted 4 Mals, or 4 Shillings 6 pence
Sterling, etc.

Malacca is Situate between Siam and Pegu, and is Subject to the Portugals, as
Conquered by them Anno 1511. and has it is Walls saluted by the River Gasa, 10
Miles broad, and abounds with the Commodities of China, Mul^oco's, Java,
Sumatra, Banda, Siam, Pegu, Bengala and the Coasts of Chormandel, brought
thither by Ships that carry back the Commodities of the growth of this Tract;
as likewise Ships from Lisbone come yearly hither, and lade rich Merchandise.
Here it is observed that the Trade-Winds continue West, and North-West from the
end of August to the end of October; and in November, the Northen and
North-Eastterly Winds begin to blow, which continue so to do till the beginning
of April; and from May to the beginning of August, the South and South-West
Wines Blow.

The Weights on this Coast, are the Cattee Babar, and the Pecul; but in Malacca
only the former, which is divided into 2 parts, viz. the great and the small,
making the first 200. Cattees, reckoning each Cattee at 21 pound Averdupois,
and the last 100. Cattees, which make 295 pound English. The Pecul is 100.
Cattees of China, and is accounted 132 pound English. The Cattee as aforesaid
used in this Tract is Accounted 21 pound Averdupois, but sometimes varies. By
the great Babar, they commonly weigh Cloves, Nutmegs, Pepper, Saunders, Indico,
Alum, Sanguis-Draconis, Palo-Dangula, and Comphora; and by the lesser
Quicksilver, Copper, Vermillion, Ivory, Silk, Musk, Amber, Lignum Aloes, Tinn,
Lead, Verdet, and Benjamin. As for Measures they are rarely used, and indeed so
uncertain, that I shall pass them over. The Coyns are those for the most part
common in India, as Mahomoodies, Portugal-Rees, etc.

CHAP. XLVIII. A View of the Kingdom of China, the Trade and Commodities
thereof.
CHina is a large Kingdom, bounded on the West with India, on the North with
the Wall of China, extending in Length 1000. Miles to keep out the Tartars, on
the South with the Ocean, and on the East with Mare del Zur, and is a very
Fertile Country; Temperate and Healthful, which renders it Populous, it has
great Commerce within it self, by the advantage of the many Navigable Rivers,
tho their Goods are carried for the most part in Boats made of Cane.

The Commodities it yields are Wool, Rice, Barley, Oil, Wine, Flax, Cottons,
and Raw Silk; which they work into many curious Textures; here are wrought
likewise many rare Stuffs, and are found all sorts of Metals to be brought
from Japan; as Gold, Silver, Copper, etc. Fruits, Wax, Sugar, Honey, Ruhbarb,
China-Roots, Purslaine-Dishes, commonly called China-Dishes, Champhir, Ginger,
Musk, Civit, Amber, and all manner of Spices, and Salt; which last is said in
one City only, viz. Cantor to yield Custom to the Prince yearly 180000. Ducats.

This Kingdom is divided into 15 Provinces, each Province containing 2
Kingdoms, in all which as Writers affirm are contained 1597 Cities, and great
Walled Towns 1154. Castles, and 4200. Buroughs without Walls Garrisoned with
Soldiers; besides Villages Innumerable. The chief City being Quinsay-Pequin,
walled about 100. Miles, and has in the midst of it a Lake of 30. Miles
compass; in which are 2 Islands, and in them Palaces and other fair Buildings,
for the King and his Nobles, the said King Stiling himself the Child of the
Sun. And upon the Rivers which Issue from this Lake, are found 12000. Bridges,
it being reckoned that the King can make 10000. Sail of Ships, and Barks of his
own which he keeps on the Rivers to Transport his Armies in time of War; the
Natives for the most part Trade up and down the Rivers, and are so cautious,
that they will not suffer any Stranger to inspect their Affairs, so that their
Weights, Measures, and manner of Traffic are not effectually known, tho the
Portugals, Dutch, and Neighboring Islanders, have of late obtained the favor
of some small Commerce at Canton, Meccan, and Nanquin; but upon such strict
conditions, that in some places it is Death for them to abide a Night, either
in the Town or Suburbs, but must at aset Hour retire to their Ships; and the
better to discover it, they have Notaries to take the Names of all that enter
the Gates in the Morning, the which if the Persons owning them, do not come to
see them Blotted out at the time prefixed, and afterward be found, tho not in
the City, it is present Death, except the Factor for the Portugals, who is
permitted to live in the Suburbs. And to Maccan the Portuguese have a Ship of
1500. Tuns, that comes yearly from the Indies; bringing Oil, Drinking-Glasses,
Looking-Glasses, and Velvet, for which they receive of the Chinois, the growth
and Manufacture of their Country.

The Weights, Measures, and Coyns, that are used in the Places where Trade is
permitted, are known to be these.

The Weights for fine Goods are the Valls and Tay, 99 Valls making a Tay of
Maccan; and a Tay or Tail is 1 Ounce and 11/16 Averdupois. Their Weights for
Gold, Silver, Musk, Ambergris, etc. are the Tays or Tayels, by some called
Tans, Mass, Condreens, Cash, Avons; which are usually marked with Ciphers for
distinction sake, 10. Avos is one Cash, 10. Cash one Condreen, 10. Condreens to
one Mass, 10. Mass to one Tay, and 16. Tays or Tails to on Cattee, the Tay
being as aforesaid.

All Gross Goods are weighed by Cattees, Peculs, and Rotolos; 10. Cattees
making 1. Pecul, 1. Pecul 128 Rotolos of Portugal, which Pecul is Accounted 131
pound Averdupois, tho here as in other Places the Weights vary.

The Coyns current for the most part are Spanish Rotolos of ^/^ which they cut
into several parts, and so pass them away by Estimate.

The Measures in use are the Covid of Maccan, used by the Portugals in the
Measure of Stuffs and Silks, and is Accounted 3. Quarters of a Yard and 2 1/^
Inches and a Covid used by the Chinois, called the Covid of Chinchoses, which
consists of 12 Inches, also an other Covid they have of 14 6/5 Inches. And thus
much for China, and the Trade thereof.

CHAP. XLIX. A View of the Islands, found in the Asian Seas, and of their Trade
and growth.
THe Asian Islands of note are Japan, Zeilan, Moluccos, Java's, Summatra,
Borneo, Celebs, and Cyprus; all abounding in rich Commodities. Of the Trade of
which in brief.

Japan is Situate a small distance from the main Land of China, and is in
length 600. miles, but not above 90. over in the broadest, yet obeys many
Sovereigns; every King or Lord, having Power and Authority over the lives and
Estates of his Subjects; the chief Towns on this Island are Osacaia, Bunguin,
and Meaco; being Havens or Ports for the reception of such Vessels as come to
Trade thither.

The chief Commodities consisting in Silver and Rice, of the latter there is
found such abundance, that the chief Sovereign has 2 Millions of Ducats yearly,
accruing by that Commodity; and in Fiando one of the Islands appertaining to
Japan, the English have settled a Factory. The Weights in use are the Pecul and
Cattee, the Pecul consisting of 100. Cattees, each Cattee being 21 Ounces which
renders the Pecul in Cira 131 pound English, the Measures of length are the
Inchin or Tattamy, which is 2 English Yards, their concave Measures are the
Cocas, which is a Pint English Winchester Measure, 3 of which is a Gant, 100.
Gants are an Ickgoga, 100. Icklogags are one Ickmagog, and 1000. Ickmagogs are
one Mangoga. Their Coyns are the Tale, Mass, and Condery. The Tale is 5
Shillings Sterling, the Mass which contains 10 Conderies, is 6 pence Sterling;
they have 2 Bars of Gold current likewise amongst them, which are called
Ichebo, and Coban; the former of which is Accounted worth 30 Shillings
Sterling, and the latter 34 Shillings 6 pence Sterling.

Zelan is a fair Island, in the Gulf of Bengala, and is so Fruitful, that the
Trees have continual Blosoms, green and ripe Fruit on them; and is a Portugueze
Factory, tho under the obedience of the great Mogul, and in it are found
Nutmegs, Clove, and Pepper Trees good store, and likewise Cinnamon, the primest
sort growing in Groves, it also yields many precious Stones, as Rubies,
Topaz, Garnati; Spinals, and on the Coast store of Pearls are gotten by
Fishing. There are likewise found some Mines of Gold and Silver, Iron,
Brimstone, and Flax growing; and in the Woods is a Beast found, whose Bones are
much of the nature of Ivory. Their Weights, Measures, and Coyns, are either
those of Portugal or India; the Natives being a People of great Subtlety, and
in Body the most Active in Asia.

CHAP. L: A View of the Isles of Molucco's, also the Trade, Weights, Measures,
and current Coyns there in use, and of the other adjacent Islands.
THese Islands commonly called the Islands of Moluccos's, are 5 in number, viz.
Molucco the chief, Tarnate, Tider, Gelolo, and Macian. There are likewise not
far distant Benda, and 70 other Islands, all of which yield Spices, as Nutmegs,
Cloves, Mace, and some Cinnamon, all growing in them; there is also in this
Gulf or Sea Amboina, where the Barbarous Dutch committed Inhumane Cruelties on
the English Factors, etc. and afterward contrary to their contracted
agreement, cut down and killed all the Clove Trees, in the Island of Polerone,
purchased of them by the English.

The common Coin in Moluccoes, Amboina, and Benda, is the Spanish Rotolo, what
otherwise they Barter for is in Commodities.

Their Weights are the Babar and Catte, the Amboinian Babar being 200. Cattes,
or English 625 pound, and is Accounted the great Babar, and in some Islands
they have a Babar 10 times as much as the Amboinian Babar.

A Cattee is near 6 pound English, and 10 Cattes of Mace are Accounted a small
Babar, and valued at 10 Ryals of 8, yet the small Babar of Nutmegs is 100.
Cattes, and valued as the Mace.

The Measures of Length are the Cubit, and Fathom, and Concave Measures for
Grain and Pepper; the Canton which is near 3 Quarts English, and the Quoian,
which is 800. Cantons. The chief Trade of these Islands, being of late
Engrossed by the Dutch; who have of late been found Superior to the Portugals,
who first Discovered them, and held for many years the Principal Commerce with
the Indians.

CHAP. LI. A View of the Java's, and the Trade of that Tract, of the Weights,
Measures, Native Commodities, Coyns, etc.
THe Java's are two Islands, viz. the great and the less, the greater being in
circuit 3000. Miles, and the lesser 2000, and by Reason of their nearness to
the Equinoctial are exceeding Fruitful, and have for their chief Cities
Paluban, Pegar, Agaim, Balambua, Basnia, Samara, Limbrie, and others; but the
chief Scales of Trade are at Sunda, Calapa, Bantum, Jacatra, now Battavia, and
Japarra; in the last 3 of which the English have Factories.

The Commodities with which these Islands abound, are Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace,
Pepper, Indian Nuts, Rice, Cattle, etc. the Pepper is Accounted the best in
India; and grows in such abundance, that yearly the English buy up great store,
the Islands not being judged to produce less then 10 or 12000. Quintals; each
Season there is found likewise Camphora, Frankincense, Benjamin, and precious
Stones; amongst which some Diamonds of great value, for which Commodities the
Natives receive Callicoes of diverse Colors, Cotton, Cloth, Silks, Stuffs,
Glasses, Knives, and the like; in Sunda the principal Mart of Java major, their
Principal money is small Copper pieces, hung upon Strings called Caix's, and
are told out by the 100, or 1000; 200 being Accounted a Satta, 5 Sattas being a
Crusado of Portugal, or in English money, valued at about 6 Shillings. But the
European Merchants keep their Accounts for the most part in Ryals of 8/^
Spanish and pence, 60 pence going to the Rotolo 9/^.

The Weights of Bantam, Jucatra, Japparra, and at Sunda are the Pecul, Cattee,
and Babar, the Cattee contains 20 Ounces, and 100. Cattees are a Pecul, or 125
pound English, a Babar is 330. Cattees of 20. Ounces and supposed to make good
Weight 412 pound Averdupois.

Their Concave Measure is the Timbam chiefly in use for Rice and Pepper; and is
Accounted 10. Sackfuls, or to contain 5 Peculs in Weight, so that each Sack is
reckoned at 62 pound Averdupois 2 Sacks making a Pecul. As for Measures of
length, they are rarely used here, and those that are, are consistent with
those of England, Portugal, and Holland.

CHAP. LII. A View of the Trade of Summatra, and other Islands, lying in the
Indian Seas.
THis Island was formerly called Traprobana, and then Esteemed to be the
largest in the World; being in length 700. Miles, and in breadth 200. Miles,
and is divided by the Equator, one half lying beyond, and the other on this
side the Equinoctial; which renders it exceeding Fertile and Healthful, so that
there are found many Rich Commodities of the Native production, as Pepper,
Ginger, Aloes, Raw Silk, Cassia, Gold, Silver, Brass, and Drugs of Diverse
sorts; there is likewise found a Brimstone mount that continually Burns, as
likewise 2 Fountains yielding the one Balsamum, and the other Oil; yet not any
considerable store.

The chief Cities of this Island are Daren, Pacen, and Andryede; the whole
being divided under many Kings, and the chief Ports are Achin, Ticko Jambe, and
Priuran; in most of which the English have Factories.

This Island standing not above 20 Miles from Malucca, a great part of the
Native Commodities are carried thither, that Island being in the possession of
the Portuguize, tho of late much infested by the Dutch, who have got Footing,
and Built some Fortresses on the Sea Coast. In this Island of Summatra upon its
first Discovery, the Islanders had a Barbarous Custom to eat man's Flesh; and
hoard up their Sculls, which they passed from one to the other as current Coin,
he being counted the best man that had most Sculls by him, but of late they
have in imitation of the Europeans, Coined money both Gold and Silver, as the
Mass worth about 12 pence Sterling, the Tale which is 16 Masses, and the Cattee
which is 8 Tales, or sometimes 7 Tales is Accounted a Cattee, and these Coyns
are current throughout the King of Achin's Dominions, who is the most Potent
Prince in the Island. Tho at Jambe Ticko, and Priaman; the European Coyns are
most in use, and the Accounts are for the most part kept in Spanish 8/8 and for
their better Convenience they divide them into 60 Deniers or pence.

The Weight used in this Island is the Babar, tho it varies according to the
Custom of the place where it is used; but in the English Factories, the Babar
is found to consist of 200. Cattees, each Cattee containing 29 Ounces
Averdupois, by multiplying which the Babar must contain 360 pound English
Sotile Weight.

The Isle of Borneo stands in this Tract, and is crossed by the Equator, being
near 2200 Miles in circuit, and is Fruitful even to a wonder, abounding with
Spices and other Rich Commodities, as Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves, Agrick,
Sweet-Woods, Camphora, Diamonds, Gold, and the Bezoar-Stone, as likewise
Cattle, and Fruits of strange tastes, and shapes in abundance, and has for it is
Metropolis the City Borneo; Seated in a Marsh, after the nature of Venice, from
which the Island takes its Name.

The Isle of Celebs is likewise a fair and Fertile Island lying in the same
Tract and divided by the Equator, as the 2 former, and abounds with the like
Rich Commodities, and has for its chief Ports Durati, Mamaio, Tubon, Maccasar,
etc. and is divided under many Princes or Petty Kings, and is a Factory of the
English.

The Weights used in most Ports are the Ganton, Zicoyan, and Mass. The former
being used both for a Weight and a Measure, and is in Weight counted 5 pound
Averdupois, and in Measure 2 Gallons English, the Mass Weight is 4 Gantons or
200 pound English, a Zicoyan is 20 Masses or 400 pound English; and in Measure
proportioned by the Ganton. The current Coyns are the Mass, Cupan, and Tail;
the Mass is 4 Cupans or 4 Shillings 10 pence Sterling or thereabouts, a Tail is
16 Masses, and Accounted worth 15 Ryals of eight, and is valued at 3 pound 14
Shillings 8 pence, or 3 pound 15 Shillings Sterling, etc.

And now I might proceed to describe the other Islands in the Indian Ocean, but
they being so many, that it would be too tedious, as likewise to little
purpose, by Reason they yield nothing but what has been already laid down;
many of them uninhabited, and but few of them containing any European
Factories, or Traded to; therefore I shall pass them over; they being
Accounted, besides what I have named, no less then 126000. whose small spots
bespangle or rather stud the vast Ocean.

This East Country Trade is now carried on by the English, Dutch, and
Portugueze, to the Enriching of each Nation, and of late mightily improved, and
would be raised to a greater advantage, did not one Nation strive to outvie the
other, by giving the Natives their own Prizes, for Commodities of the growth of
those Countries; and by that means make them sensible of their value, of which
if they had been at first kept in Ignorance, the Europeans might have made
their one Markets in each Port where their Factories are settled, and for little
or nothing brought the Wealth of India into London, Amsterdam, and Lisbon; but
passing this Emulation over that cannot be now redressed, I shall describe the
pleasant Isle of Cyprus, so famed for it is stores and Commodious Situation, and
then leave rich Asia, and return to take a view of Europe. No less abounding
with all things necessary for the pleasure and profit of men.

CHAP. LIII. A View of the Isle of Cyprus, the Trade, Growth, Weights,
Measures, and Current Coyns thereof.
CYprus so Famous in History, feigned by Poets of old, to be the residence of
the Goddess Venus, is Situate in the Syrian Sea, and is a Part of Asia, being
in length 200 Miles and in breadth 65, abounding in plenty of Cattle, Corn,
Oil, Wine, Sugar, Cottons, Honey, Wool, Turpentine, Alum, Verdigrease,
Grograms, Salt, and abundance of other Commodities; but especially in Cyprus
Wood, and has for it is chief Cities Paphos, Famogusta, Nicotia, Lescara,
Salines, etc. in which the English have a Factory for the Cotton Trade, the
English Consul Resident in Aleppo, being imputed Consul of Syria and Cyprus,
and has under him a Vice-Consul, that manages the Trade of this Island for the
English, who bring hither in exchange the Growth of our Country, and such other
Commodities as are Vendible and most coveted by the Natives. Hither it is the
Levant Merchants Trade for most part of their precious Commodities. As for the
Coyns in use they are those of the Grand-Signior, and in the same their
Accounts are kept, for a View of which I shall refer the Reader to the
Description of the Trade of Constantinople.

The Weight most in use is the Dram, of which 750 make a Rotolo, 100 of which
make a Cantar greater by 4 in the 100 then the Cantar of Aleppo, and at
Famogusta there is a Cantar in use that is greater then the common Cantar of
Cyprus by 4 in the 100; and consequently larger then that of Aleppo 8 per cent.
tho sometimes the Weights vary, yet not much.

The Measures of length are two sorts, viz. the Pico and Brace, the former is
Accounted 26 Inches, and by this they Measure Woolen Cloth, Silk, and the
like, the Brace for Linen Cloth is 1/^6 longer then the Pico.

Their Concave Measure for Wine is the Cuss, 7 of which make 6 Fletchers of
Venetia, or a Candy Barrel; so that a Cuss and half, and a Zant Jarre are equal
in quantity; the Oil that is found here is sold by the Rotolo, each Rotolo
being Accounted 1000 Drams. Corn of which there is store is sold by the Moose,
2 and a half of which weigh one Staio of Venetia; by this Measure Salt is
likewise sold. They have likewise a Measure for Grain called a Cossino: And
thus much for Cyprus, and indeed for all Asia; this being the last place I
intend to visit in this part of the World, and from whence I intend to Sail for
Europe; only by the way I shall give the Reader an insight into the goodness,
and as near as possible the true Value of Silver, Gold, and precious Stones;
which will not be amiss, seeing I so lately left the Coasts where those things
which are so generally coveted are acquired.

CHAP. LIVE. A Description of Gold and Silver, their Intrinsic Value: The means
to find out their Fineness and Allays, after the best and most exact Method.
THe Weight used in England for Silver and Gold, is the Troy pound consisting
of 12 Ounces, and each Ounce again divided into 150 Carots, and from thence
into 480 Grains, each Ounce of Silver fine being according accounted worth 5
Shillings 2 pence of our money, and so more or less according to the addition
or diminution of allay. The pound Troy of fine Gold is Accounted worth 36
pound, the Ounce 3 pound or if very fine something more, or again less as the
Allay is, as thus: The Ounce of fine Gold is valued at 3 pound, 33 Kes fine at
2 pound 17 Shillings 6 pence, 22 Kes fine at 2 pound 15 Shillings, 21 Kes 2
pound 12 Shillings 6 pence; the Ounce of 20 Kes fine is worth but 2 pound 10
Shillings, and so losing value 2 Shillings 6 pence per Ounce, as it wants a
Carot in fineness in 24, or the Troy pound. Now to know the goodness or
fineness of Gold and Silver upon the Touchstone, by way of Essay, is to
procure Needles of Gold and Silver, and Copper Allay suitable to any sort of
Gold and Silver in Allay, and to be of 4 sorts, viz. the first of fine Gold and
Silver, the second of Gold and Copper, the third of Gold Silver and Copper, and
the fourth of Silver and Copper only; the first for the trial of Gold, and the
latter for Silver, and of these Mixtures make 24 Needles differing in fineness
from each, as thus; The first must be all fine Gold without any Allay, viz. 24
Carots, the second 23 Carots of fine Gold and one of Silver, the third 22
Carots of Gold and 2 of Silver, and so one Carot worse till there remains but
one Carot of fine Gold in Mixture, with 23 Carots of Silver. And by this Rule
the Gold and Copper, and Silver and Copper must be Allayed; and each Needle
marked of what fineness it is. And by this means you may know the fineness of
any Ingot or Piece of Gold or Silver; as thus, touch the said Ingot or Piece of
Gold or Silver upon your Touchstone, and by it the Needle you think is nearest
it in fineness; and if that suit not with it, try another till it suits with
it, which when wet, will appear, and so by the mark of your Needle, you may be
assured of the fineness of the Silver or Gold so touched, which is a better,
easier, safer, and surer way then to try it by Fire. And thus much for Gold and
Silver, as to their Trial of fineness.

CHAP. LV. A Treatise of Precious-Stones, how to know them and their true
value, viz. Diamonds, Rubies, Saphyrs, etc. as also the goodness and worth of
Pearls in General.
THe Weight usual in India for Diamonds and Precious Stones, were brought
thither by the Portugals, called the Mangear or Fanan, which differs not much
from the Carot, whereof 150 Carots make an Ounce Troy; and is divided into
64.33.16.8.4.2.1. 1/16 Parts. The Mangelue or Mangear is near or altogether 5
Grains Weight, or 2 Tars Accounted the of 1 Carot, so that 4 Grains and 4 Tars
weigh a Fanan, the Fanan being somewhat above 2 of our Carots, for 11 Fanans
are 1 Mittigal. and 6 Mittiglas and make the Ounce Troy; this Fanan in many
parts of India goes current for a Coin, being Equally valued with a Spanish
Ryal; and thus having laid down the proportion of the Weights, I shall first
begin with the Dimonds, the chief of Precious Stones, then to know a good and
true Diamond take this rule. A good and right Diamond is fast and no ways
porous, so that it will resist the Fire, and after several hours continuance
therein, come out bright as at first; and in choice of such a one* it must be
neither Brown, Yellowish, Bluish, nor a Dullish-Black, but of a good
Water-Christaline; not wanting any corner when Polished on a Mill, nor be too
thick nor too thinn, but so as it may be set firm, and to good advantage in a
Ring, or Collet without being upholden by Velvet, and such a Diamond weighing 1
Carot is worth 35 pounds Sterling or upwards.

Note when you have found out the true value of a perfect Diamond or Diamonds,
this Rule is to be observed. Suppose a Diamond weighing a Carot Weight be worth
40 Ducats more or less, then the 4th. part being ten Ducats is the price of a
Diamond weighing half a Carot, so the Diamond weighing a Carot is worth but the
4th. part of the value of one weighing 2 Carots, viz. 40 Ducats, and that
weighing 2 Carots worth 160 Ducats; and so if there be over Weight by Grains,
you must divide all into Grains, and then a Diamond weighing 3 Grains is worth
but the 4th. part of that weighing 6. And this is a General Rule, not only for
Diamonds but all manner of precious Stones, according to Equality in goodness,
as for Example a thick Table Diamond of the goodness aforesaid weighing 1 Grain
is worth 1 pound 17 Shillings 6 pence, weighing 2 Grains is worth 7 pound 10
Shillings, weighing 3 Grains is worth 16 pound 17 Shillings 6 pence, weighing 1
Carot is worth 30 pound, and so proportionably to 8 Carots, yet there are some
Diamonds imperfect, and not of any Extraordinary value, which are called Brut
Diamonds, Naifs, Rocks, and flat-Stones, which are bought and sold at uncertain
rates.

The Ruby is found in Zeilam in India, and called commonly the Carbuncle, tried
in the Fire to know its perfection, the which if it abide and come out Burning
like a Cole and of a high Color, it is Accounted perfect; a Stone of which
perfection weighing but one Carot or, a Fanan is valued at 30 Fanans in
Callicut, and increase in value as the Dimonds according to their Weight; there
is another sort only called a Ruby, found in a River in the Kingdom of Pegu;
but it will not endure the Fire, but loses it is Color* when put to the
Trial; there are likewise several sorts of Rubies as the Carbuncle, Ballas,
Spinal, Garnat, and Rubas; but this Ruby of Pegu is accounted the next in value
to the Carbuncle, and a Ruby square table-wise, perfect, and of high Color of
16.18.20. or 24. Carots in Color, weighing a Fanan is worth sometimes in the
India's, 100. Ducats, and in England weighing 11 Carots, and of 20 Carots in
Color perfect and without Blemish, is worth 350 pound Sterling or rather more.

Saphyrs are found in Zeilam, Calucut, Basinger, Canoner, and Pegu, and those
are accounted best that are of a pure Azure or Sky-Colour, and in that hardness
excels all other Stones the Diamond excepted, and according to their Color
are held in Estimation; as for example, Saphyr weighing one Carot is worth 2
Fanans, one weighing 2 Carots is worth 5 Fanans, one weighing 3 worth 10
Fanans, and one weighing 4 Carots worth 15 Fanans, and so Proportionably each
Fanan being Accounted 2 Carots; after this manner Turquoise, Topaze, Berrils,
Crysolites, Jacynths, Amathists, and other precious Stones are known and valued
every one according to their goodness and Weight; as for Pearls, how they are
taken, I have before set down, and now I shall as far as is necessary make a
report of their true value according as they are in goodness.

The Rule to value Oriental Pearls, from a Grain in Weight to what bigness any
will afford, is by the Color, Roundness, Pear-Fashion, or Oval; and that is in
all parts perfect, as to Water and Gloss, without Knobs, Specks, Yellowness or
other imperfections, and a Pearl of this perfection weighing a Carot is worth a
Ducat in India. But before I proceed further, as to their value it will not be
amiss to relate how they are sold, by those that have the disposing of them,
viz. the Indians sell them by Sieves of Latten full of holes in number 12, one
bigger then the other as to their holes, and according to the largeness or
smallness, the price is regulated; for those of the 10, 11, and 12 Sieve are
seldom capable to be holed, and therefore are called Seed-Pearls; most fit for
Apothecaries, to be used by them in their Physical Preparations; but the others
for the use of Ladies, and others to adorn themselves withal; and for the price
of all large Pearls, they are valued as is said by Weight and fairness, as
Diamonds and other precious Stones, tho seldom before they be holed for fear of
their breaking in the holing; as thus, a Pearl of one Grain is worth 7 pence,
of 2 Grains 2 Shillings 6 pence, of 3 Grains 5 Shillings 7 pence, of 1 Carot 10
Shillings, and so in proportion to those of greater Weight, as for Seed-Pearls,
the smallest of which are Accounted 4500. to the Ounce, and the largest 400 or
450 to the Ounce, and commonly divided into 6 parts, the Prizes are these: The
6th. or smallest sort 4500 are commonly sold for 2 pound 4 Shillings the Ounce,
the 5th. sort are sold for 1 pound 6 Shillings the Ounce, the 4th. sort at 10
Shillings the Ounce, the third sort at 18 Shillings the Ounce, the second at 1
pound 6 Shillings, and the first at 1 pound 15 Shillings. But note that the
first is termed the sixth sort, and so Consequently the sixth the first; the
Rag Pearls which are sold likewise by the Ounce, according to their bigness are
divided into thirds, seconds, and firsts, an Ounce of which containing 350
Pearls, is Accounted worth 1 pound 18 Shillings, an Ounce containing 250 Pearls
is Accounted worth 3 pounds, an Ounce of 150 worth 4 pounds, and so according
to their lesser quantity or number, in making the Ounce, all sorts of half
round Pearls of pure Water, and Gloss are Accounted worth a round Pearl of half
the Weight. And thus much for Gold, Silver, precious Stones, and Oriential
Pearls; with which I shall return to Europe, as the common Receptacle of those
rich Commodities, which were of little value to the Indians, before the
European Navigators set Prizes thereon, and by that means taught the Natives
how to Esteem them; for in the first Discovery of the Indies by the Portugals,
they bought them for Beads of Glass, and such like Trifles, but now they are
not purchased; but at Extraordinary rates.

CHAP. LVI. A View of Europe of it is Provinces, Trade, Manners, Customs,
Growth, Weights, Measures, Current Coin, etc.
THe first that offers it self on the Continent of Europe is Spain, environed
on all sides with the Seas, unless that part toward France; which is bounded
by the Pyraenaean Hills, and the Fortress of Pampelona on the North-West, and
Perpegana on the South-East, and is divided into 12 Provinces, viz. Leon and
Oviedo, which are one, Navar, Corduba, Galicia, Biscay, Toledo, Murtia,
Castille, Portugal, (now an entire Kingdom) Valentia, Catalonia, and Aragon;
and in General abounds with Wines, Sugars, Oils, Metals, Liquorish, Rice,
Cork, Silk, Wool, Oranges, Rosin, Steel, Almonds, Raisins, Lemons, Anchoves,
Anniseeds, Figs, Soda, Barrilla, Honey, Wax, Shumack, Iron, Tuny-Fish, Saffron,
Soape, and Carianders; so that into the Trade of 3 or 4 of the Principal Cities
and Ports, I shall reduce the whole Trade of the Kingdom and it is Provinces.

Passing over Leon, Ovideo, and Navar, as Provinces little adddicted to
Commerce, I shall proceed to Sevil, the chief City of Trade in the Province of
Corduba, and into the Trade of that City reduce the Trade of that Province,
which is Accounted the most Fertile Province of all Spain.

CHAP. LVII. A View of Sevil, the Trade, Weights, Measures, Customs, and
Current Coyns thereof.
THis City is Situate in the Province of Corduba, and accounted 6 Miles in
compass, adorned with many stately Buildings, and is an Archbishop's Sea,
accounted next to Toledo the richest in Spain; through it runs the River Baetis
dividing it into 2 parts, over which is a Stately Bridge, which renders the City
very Commodious for Trade, and from hence it is for the most part, that the
Spanish Fleet sets out for the West Indies, and at their return unlaid their
rich Commodities, as Silver, Tobacco, Ginger, Cottons, Sugar, Ferrinand,
Bucque-Wood, and Wood of Brasil, Sarsafrax, Galbanum, and other Drugs of great
value; and for the King of Spains use, are in these parts brought up and kept
30000. Gennets; nor are bare Customs of this City Accounted to amount to less
then half a Million of Gold yearly.

The Merchants generally keep their Accounts in Maruedies, of which 375 are
Accounted to a Ducat of Exx 11 Ryals, every Ryal being 37 Maru, and some
Strangers residing there keep their Accounts in Ryals of 34 Maru.

The Coyns current are the Ducats of Gold of Sevil, and are as aforesaid valued
by the Spaniards worth 375 Maru, or 5 Shillings 6 pence Sterling, as likewise
the Ryal of Castile which is worth here but 34 Maruides and valued at 6 pence
Sterling, a Dobra current is of Carlin Coin 81/87 Maruedies.

A Dobra of Castile is valued at 375 Mar. or a Ducat in Gold, the Castilian of
Merchandise is worth 485 Mar. or 7 Shillings Sterling.

Their Weights are the 3 Kintars, the first consists of 112 pound, and is
divided into 4 Roves of 28 pound a Rove, the second is 120 pound, composed of 4
Roves of 30 pound each, and the third being the greatest, is composed of 4
Roves of 36 pound the Rove, and accordingly contains 144 pound, and is the
common Kintar of Sevil, and 100 pound Weight of this place has often made 102
pound of London.

Their Measure of Length is the Vare, 100 of which have been found to make 74
Else of London.

The Measure by which Oil is sold is the Rove, 64 of which make a Venetian
Miara and 40 or 41 of the said Roves make a Pipe, the Rove being 8 Summers, a
Somer containing 4 Quartiles, a Quartile being the ^/6 part of a Stoop of
Antwerp, and 2 Pipes or 81 Roves are 25 or 26 Florence Barrils, or 252 English
Gallons, tho in Sevil the Gage of Pipes are Accounted but 118 Gallons the Pipe.

Corn is Measured by the Caffise, which is 28 Satos of Florence; from Sevil it
is that the fine Spanish Wool is brought, as also Cordavant-Leather; in these
parts, but especially at Almeria, great store of Raw Silks are gathered, it
being the primest of all other, and is Accounted worth by the pound Morisco 18
Shillings Florence, or 1020 Maruedies, which amount to 30 Ryals. And thus much
for Sevil and the Trade thereof.

CHAP. LVIII. A View of Malaga, the Trade, Customs, Weights, Measures, and
Coyns thereof.
MAlaga is Situate in the Province of Granado, on the Shore of the
Mediterranean Sea, being Accommodated with a commodious Haven for the reception
of Shipping, being very Fruitful in every part of it is Territories, abounding
in Wine and Raisins known by it is Name, as likewise many delicate Fruits, Corn,
Cattle, and what else can make a Country desirable; they have likewise store of
Sugar, Almonds, Oils, etc. for which they pay Customs outward, tho they be
Commodities of the natural Growth, viz. 7 per cent. Cochineel and such like
Commodities pay outward 10 per cent. and all other Commodities of the Growth
but 5 per cent. and those that are carried from Port to Port 2 pound per cent.

The Weights of Malaga is the 100. divided into 4 Roves of 25 pound each, and
to every pound 16 Ounces, and the 100 pound of Malaga, called commonly the
Kintar of Malaga, is found to make 112 pound 5 Ounces English, tho sometimes
less according to the nature of the Commodity.

Their Concave Measures are the Rove and Somer, the first making 8 of the last,
so that 25 Roves go to a Pipe, which contains 100 English Gallons, by these
only Wine and Oil are Measured; as for Grain it is Measured by the Hanock,
which is divided into 12 Almodos, and is 12 Gallons English weighing upon the
Strike 129 pound.

The Measure of length is the Vare of 27 Inches.

The Coyns current are Ryals, to one of which is computed 34 Marnedies or 6
pence Sterling, and Pistolets of Gold, each being worth 23 Ryals, that is, the
single Pistolet, the double Pistolet which are here likewise in use being worth
27 Ryals.

CHAP. LIX. A View of Alicant, and of the Trade, Measures, Weights, Coyns, etc.
ALicant is Situate on the Banks of the Mediterranian, in the Province of
Murtia, and is by Reason of it is commodious Haven of late become a great Scale
of Trade in those parts, affording delicate Wines and other Commodities in much
request, being of late the Scale to the City Valentia, and affords of its
Native growth Liquorish, Rasins, Wines, Soda-Barrilla, Sugar, Drugs, Bass-Mats,
Ropes, Soap, Anniseed, and many other Merchantable Commodities; which are
Traded for by our English Merchants, and bought partly for money and partly for
Commodities of the growth of our Nation.

And at Alicant the Merchants keep their Accounts in Livers, Solds, and
Deniers, 12 Deniers making a Sold, and 20 Solds a Liver, which is Accounted
worth 5 Shillings Sterling, the Sold being Accounted 3 Pence, and the Denier a
Farthing.

The Weights in use are the Cargo and Rove, 10 of the latter making the former,
and of these Roves there are two sorts, one computed 18 Ounces, and the other
12 to each pound, and by that means tho one be reckoned 36 pound, and the other
but 24, yet in Weight they are equal as to the number of Ounces; and by these
are sold Pepper, Rice, Almonds, Cloves, Cinnamond, and the like; by the Cargo
is weighed all Gross Commodities, it containing 280 pound English. There is
sometimes used a Quintal of 96 pound Averdupois, and by it Drugs are weighed.

The Measure of Length is the Vare, which wants a part of the English Yard. The
Liquid Measure for Wine is the Cantar, which is about 3 Gallons English, and
the dry Measure for Corn is called the Chaffise, and is near 3 Bushel English.

The Customs for the most part are rated at 11 Deniers per centum Livers, and
is payable at 8 Deniers to the Duana and 3 Deniers to the Sisa, paid as well
by the Buyer as Seller as often as Goods are bought, sold, or bartered; for so
that the Buyer and Seller pay between them 9 per cent. And thus leaving
Alicant, I return to take a View of Madrid, Accounted the Principal City of
Spain.

CHAP. LX. A View of Madrid, of the Trade, Coyns, Weights, and Measures thereof.
MAdrid is Situate in the Provinces of Castill, and of late become famous, for
being the place where for the most part the Spanish Court resides; and in it
the Moneys that are dispersed over Spain have their Original. This City abounds
with all manner of Commodities, that either Spain, India, Barbary, Arabia,
Persia, Egypt or other Countries affoard; as Spices, Gold, Silks, Drugs,
Stuffs, Jewels, Drugs, and the like. The Native Commodities of this Province
are Honey, Alum, Wine, Oil, Fruits, Salt, etc.

The Measures and Weights are those common throughout Spain, but by Reason all
the Coyns of the Kingdom Center here, I think it not amiss to set down their
Names and true values.

1. The Ducat of Castil is worth 375 Maruedies.

2. The Castiliano 485 Maruedies.

3. The Florin of Castile is worth 265 Maruedies or near 4 Shillings Sterling.

4. The Ducat Count or Quento of Maruedies is a Million.

5. The Count or Quento of Maruedies is Ducats 2666 2/3^ and at Dobra is
accounted worth 2739 ^^/73 Dobras, the which according to computation amounts
to 733 pound 6 Shillings 8 pence Sterling.

6. The Ryal Single of Castile is worth 34 Maruedies or 6 pence Sterling.

7. The Quento of Mar is worth 3258 Ryals and 3 Maruedies.

8. The Crown of Castile is worth 323 Maruedies.

9. The Ducat of Spain is 5 Shillings 6 pence of our money, the Ryal is 6 pence
and the Maruedie about the bigness of one of our Farthings.

In this City when they give money upon Exchange, they commonly agree to be
repayed in Ducats of Gold, or to the same value in Gold or Silver, for the most
part by Weight to prevent the taking base money, with which Spain abounds, so
that should they not take this course, they would often lose 4 or 5 per cent.

In this Province are yearly 4 Fairs or great Marts, viz. at Medina Del Campo
which lasts 50 days, at Medina de Riosecco which lasts 30 days, at Medina del
Campo again which lasts 50 days, and lastly at Villa Lion which lasts 20 days.

These Fairs, viz. the 3 first are Fairs of Exchange: And when they make
payments they make them in Banco not saying forth, and they are to remit in
Ducats de Oro, in Oro Largo and forth of Banco, and when they agree forth of
Banco, and for ready money there is got 1 per cent. and when they agree for
Ducats of Gold or the worth of them, it is understood that the worth if the
payment be not paid in Ducats, is to be paid in Maruedies at 375 to the
Ducat. And thus much for Spain and the Trade thereof. And now I shall take a
View of the Trade of the Kingdom of Portugal in her chief City, viz. Lisbon one
of the 3 chief Scales of Europe.

CHAP. LXI. A View of Lisbon, the Metropolis of Portugal, of the Trade, Growth,
Weights, Measues, Coyns, and Customs thereof.
LIsbon is the Metropolis of the Kingdom of Portugal, commodiously Seated upon
the Banks of the River Tagus, the City and Suburbs being 10 Miles in compass,
and not imagined to contain less then 38000. Families, Beautifyed with 67
Towers placed upon the Walls and 22 Gates; all the Houses being Built
Magnificent, and indeed the People given to great Industry, but especially to
Navigation, as appears by the many Discoveries they have made; they being the
first that Discovered the Eastern Tract even to the Indias, and there by Trade
and force got Footing, and showed the way to England and Holland; who have now
brought it to perfection, even to the great Enriching either Nation, and of all
the Commodities brought from India, and other parts of the World by the
Portugals, this City is the Scale, for hither come yearly the Spices of Arabia,
the Silks of Persia, the rich Commodities of China, and the Gold, Silver,
precious Stones, and Spices of India; and especially Pearls, the Fishery
thereof remaining for the most part in the right of the King of Portugal, which
being brought to Lisbon, and afterward dispersed throughout Europe. To this
City Flows the Trade of the whole Kingdom and also that of Spain; from which
Kingdom it is now separated as formerly.

The Weights of this City, and consequently of the whole Kingdom are
Principally the small and the great Cantars, the Latter of which is divided
into 4 Roves, and each Rove contains 32 Reals which is 128 pounds, at 14 Ounces
per pound, and of Florence Weight is computed 149 pound, their small Quintar
for Pepper and Ginger is between 110 and 112 pound English, the Rove or
Quartern being 27 and sometimes 27 ^/4 pound, but the great Quintal is 15 or 16
per cent. more than our 112 pound.

The Quintar commonly called the King's Quintar used in his Contractation House
for weighing the Spices and Drugs of India is 114 pound English, and the great
Cantar of Lisbon is mostly computed 130 pound English, etc.

The Measures of length used in this City are the Coueda, which is the third
part of an English Yard, and the Ware which wants but a Nale of an English Ell;
by the former they Measure Woollen Clothes, etc. and by the latter Linen, etc.

The Concave Measures of Lisbon is the Alquire, 3 of which are found to make an
English Bushel, and 5 a Spanish Hannep. They have an other Measure by which
they meet their Salt called Muy, which is 60 Alquires, and 2 Muys and 15
Alquires are a Tunn Bristol Water Measure.

The Custom inward is 23 per cent. that is, to the Dechima 10, to the Sisa 10,
and to the Consolado 3, and outward Merchants pay only 3.

The Coyns are the Croisado of Gold, computed to be worth 400 Reas. The Ducat
of Portugal which is ten Reals and accounted 5 Shillings Sterling or the
Croisado. The Ryal which is 40 Reas and accounted 6 pence Sterling. The Golden
Mirle which is worth 1000. Reas and accounted 2 5/2 Ducats, the Ducat is 2
Ryals or 15 pence Sterling. The Vintin which is 20 Reas or 3 pence Sterling,
the single Ryal of Spain which is 2 Vintines; there are likewise the Coyns of
Spain passable in this City, but seeing they are not the proper Coyns of
Portugal, I shall pass them over as having already mentioned them in the
Description of the Trade of that Kingdom. And now leaving Portugal, I shall
pass into the Kingdom of France, and in viewing the Trade of some Cities
thereof, give a Summary account of the whole Kingdoms Commerce, both Inland and
by Navigation.

CHAP. LXII. A View of France, the Provinces, Trade, Customs, Weights,
Measures, and Current Coyns, reduced into the view of the Principal Trading
Cities of that Kingdom.
FRance is a large and Fertile part of Europe, bounded on the North with the
British Ocean, on the West with the Aquitanian Sea, on the South with the
Mediterranian, and on the East with the Pirenaean Hills and River Rhine; and is
divided into several Provinces, the Trade of which I shall instance in these
following Cities, viz. Bordeaux, Rouen, Paris, Lions, and Marselia, of these in
order.

Bordeaux is Situate on the Banks of Geronde, being the Principal City of the
Province of Aquitain; and is placed in a very Fruitful Soil, especially for
Wines: The Principal Vineyards of France being accounted in its Neighborhood;
of the Grapes therein growing, are made Whitewines and Claret in abundance; and
of late all Palled Wines and such as otherwise are foul and not Merchantable,
they Lmibeck off into Brandies, which for the most part is vended in England,
and Holland. They have likewise several Vineyards yielding Grapes that make
Sweet-Wines, commonly called high Country Wines, the which lest it should
hinder the Sail of the other, they prohibit to be sold in their City till
Christmas day; when the high Country Merchants bring it in, and sell it to
Strangers there resident; and such is the Custom of the place, that that Vessel
or Lighter that first sets her Head on Shore, is accounted free from Impost or
Custom, yet must in lieu thereof for that day give Wine on Free-cost, to such
as come on Board to Drink it. To this City it is that our English Merchants
Trade, and from whence they yearly bring 20000 Tuns of Whitewine, Claret Sweet,
and Brandy Wines in times when no prohibition is laid, this City formerly for
many Years having been English; there are found great quantities of Prunes of
the Neighboring growth, and some other Commodities, tho these are the chief,
and to this place moneys are remitted, for which mostly the Inhabitants Trade
not as in other places of Traffic, freely bartering Goods for Goods. Their
Accounts are kept for the most part in Livers, Sold's, and Denies; as indeed
throughout the Kingdom. Their Weight is the pound, 100 of which are reckoned a
Quintar, or 110 English, 90 pound being 100 pound English. Their Measure of
length is an Auln accounted 42 English Inches, their Wines are computed by
Hogs-Heads and Tearces, viz. Claret and Whitewines, and their Brandy by
Punchings of no certain Gauge.

CHAP. LXIII. A View of Rouen, and the Trade thereof.
ROuen is the Principal City of Normandy, being the Parliamentary Seat of that
Province, and is Seated on the Banks of the River Sein; all its Territories
being Fertile, and it abounding with rich Merchandise, as well of other Nations
as the Growth of the Kingdom of France, and is visited by most of the Merchants
of all the Northern Kingdoms Trading in the Growth of France; the place
affording of natural Growth and Native Manufactury, fine and coarse Linnens,
Buckrams, Paper, Cards, Wine, Stuffs, Combs, etc. for which the Inhabitants or
such French Merchants as send their Commodities thither to be vended, receive
of the English Kersies of Devonshire and Yorkshire, Bays of Coxal, Cottons of
Wales, Pepper, Gauls, Yarn, Tinn, Lead, Fish, etc. but of late they have got a
Custom to Trade for Sterling, many Commodities being allowed at no other
Exchange.

Their Accounts are kept in Solds, Livers, and Deniers. As for Weights here is
principally found the Kings Beam called the Viconte, which exceeds our long
hundred, viz. 112 pound 14 per cent. so that it makes English, 126 pound, tho
sometimes less. Their Measure of length is the Auln, accounted 46 Inches or
somewhat more, by which they Measure Woollen, and Linen Cloth, and in this
Measure they allow 24 for 20 called the Merchants Auln; this City affords great
store of Canvas for the Sails of Ships and such like uses, which is likewise
Measured by the Auln, and has allowance as aforesaid, tho not unless great
quantities are bought. In this City 3 Fairs are yearly held, at 2 whereof
Liberty for 15 days is granted to buy and Transport all Commodities of the
growth Custom-free, provided the Commodities be laden and fallen down the
River, to a Place limited within 15 days after, or else to pay Custom as at
other times, the first of which begins the 3d. day of February and ends the
18th, the second begins on Whit-Monday and lasts 15 days, the third begins on
the 23 day of October and continues 8 days only, and is not Custom-free as the
former.

As for the Concave Measures they are few, and such as are common throughout
France, and of which I shall hereafter speak. Therefore in this Chapter I
willingly Omit them.

CHAP. LXIV. A View of Paris, the Metropolis of France, and of the Trade,
Weights, Measures, Coyns, Customs, exchanges, and Commodities there Vended.
PAris is the Principal city of France, and is accounted 10 Miles in
Circumference, being Situate on either side the River Sein; that River Gliding
smoothly through it, thereby rendering it more Commodious for Traffic; tho
through the Sloth of the Inhabitants it is not improved to the advantage it
might be, yet here are found Commodities of the growth of the whole Kingdom, as
likewise of most Nations tho in no abundance.

The Commodities exported hence are Linnens, Paper, Cards, Combs, Stuffs,
Thread, Plushes, etc. for which they receive English Cloth, Stockings, Lead,
Tinn, Bays, old Shoes, Silks of Italy, and some Indian Commodities. The
Inhabitants are for the most part Gentry, and therefore not addicted to
Manufacture.

The Weights of Paris are the Quintal, which is accounted 100 pound Gross, but
found to make 100 pound of London Subtle 2 per cent. more or less, and is of
Lions Weight of 16 Ounces 116 pound, and Venetian Sottle 144 pound, 100 Sottle
in Venice making Sottle of Paris Weight but 62 ^/2 pound of 15 Ounces to the
pound, the Cargo or great Quintal of Paris is 300 pound of Troy Weight, yet
makes in Florence 487 pound. The Concave Measures for Wine is the Cistern,
which contains 8 Pints or a French Gallon, 96 of which are accounted a Tun.

The Measures of length are two, one for Linen, and the other for Silks, and
are much about the length of the vantaged and unvantaged Aulns, but seldom used
in Gross, by Reason in this City Silks, Stuffs, etc. are sold by Weight, which
to the buyer is advantageous by Reason he cannot be imposed on with slight
Silks, and Stuffs, but that what it wants in goodness will be made out in
Measure.

This City is the chief Standard of Coin for the whole Kingdom; therefore in
this I shall give a particular account of most French Coyns current; first the
Denire, 2 of which make a Double, and twelve a Sold, and 20 Solds a Liver, by
some called a Frank, and in these three, viz. Solds, Deniers, and Livers, the
accounts of that Kingdom are for the most part kept. There are Pieces of 8
Solds, each Piece being the 1/^ part of a Silver French Crown, 64 Sold's being
accounted a French Crown, and 4 Sold's which is of 3 Livors Turnois Pieces of
21 Solds, 4 Deniers being the 1/8 part of the said Crown commonly called
Testons, and the and thereof, and as the Quarter Crowns were at first raised
from 15 Solds to 16, and thereby the 60 Solds to 64; so in the like proportion,
were the Testons raised; the Golden Coyns are the Crown of 3 Livers or 60
Solds, the Crown of the Sun being 3 Livers 16 Sold or 76 Solds, and the Pistol,
each Liver being accounted 12 pence Sterling; there are likewise Crowns of 6
Shillings Sterling, but these moneys, as indeed most Foreign Coyns, do rise and
fall according to the Plenty and Scarcity of Silver and Gold, or more properly
at the pleasure of the Prince whose proper Coyns they are. As for the Exchanges
I shall refer them till I come to Treat in General of the nature of Exchanges.

CHAP. LXV. A View of Lions, and the Trade thereof, etc.
Lions was once the famousest Mart of France, and a great Scale of Trade, but
by Reason of its Incommodious Situation, in wanting a Port or Navigable River
for great Ships, it has given place to the Haven Towns, yet continues some
Trade, especially Inland, being Seated on a Fruitful Soil, Fertilized by the
Branches of the Rivers Rhoan and Soame, the chief Manufactory of Silks in the
Kingdom of France being settled in it, which when wrought is sent through
Europe, the Inhabitants having Commerce with Marselia, the chief Port for the
residence of Shipping. Here Exchanges are practiced, the Bankers or Merchants
of Venetia, Florence and Naples, having Factors resident in Lions for that
purpose, and hither it is that the English Merchants bring Lead, Tinn, Bays,
Cony-Skins, etc. to Exchange for the growth of the Province; the Accounts are
kept as in other parts of the Kingdom. The Coyns current being the same with
those of Paris.

The Fairs are 4, in which all payments either by Exchange or Merchandise are
made, and all payments run from 3 Months to 3 Months, if agreed to in a Public
place or Burse appointed for that purpose; the first of these Fairs begins
immediately after the Octaves of Easter, the second, the first Monday after the
Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, the third the day after All Souls, the fourth
the day after Epiphany, each continuing 15 days; all Exchange business is done,
and all Bills of Exchange are made and dated in one day, and within 2 days
following, they settle the rate of Exchange, and by these Fairs they limit
their payments, and the time allowed in their Bills from hence to Venice,
Florence, and Rome, is commonly 30 days, to Naples and Valentia 25 days; and so
consequently according to the distance of the place it is payable at, tho
agreement be made for longer time it is often granted.

The Weights most in use is the Kings Beam of the Custom-House, and the 2 Town
Beams, the King's Beam is found to be 100 pound the Quintal, and is greater
then the largest of the Town Beams by 8 per cent. and by the Weight thereof all
Customs are Proportioned. This large Town Beam for Gross Goods is accounted
likewise 100 pound of 16 Ounces to the pound, the third Weight is known by the
name of the pound of Mark, and is only used in weighing of Silks containing 100
pound of 15 Ounces, being the least of the three.

The Measure of Lions is the Auln which is 46 English Inches, 7 of them being
found to make 9 English Yards, and 100 pound of London Subtle is found to make
in Lions 96 2/2 pound Silk Weight, and one Liver or pound Sterling of London is
10 Livers Turnois. And thus much shall Suffice for Lions and the Trade thereof.

CHAP. LXVI. A View of Marselia, the Trade, Weights, Measures, Coyns, and
Customs thereof.
MArselia is a fair Port, and the principal Place of Trade in Provence, whither
resort many Merchants; and from which Port the Ships Sail that maintain the
Trade with Turkey, Barbary, Spain, Italy, Flanders, and England, tho indeed not
much, the French Nation not affecting Navigation, but rather choose to improve
the growth of their own Country, for which they have brought home to 'em, the
Commodities and growth of all Nations. The Exchange that is wanting here, is
supplied by the current and intercourse of Lions, it being Governed thereby in
matters of Trade.

And hither the English bring Bays, Cloth, Lead, Tinn, Herrings, Pilchards,
Newland-Fish, Affrican Hides, Wax, Calves-Skins, Salmond, etc. and in Exchange
receive Oils, Wines, Verdigreese, Paper, Linen, and other Manufactures, and at
this Port they have free License to Transport Spanish Ryals of 8/8 which are
found in abundance, and by that means preserve their Trade with Turkey, and
other Places of Traffic in the Mediterranean, from whence they bring Silks,
and some spices; but of late have not been so venturous as formerly, for fear
of the Pirates, by whom they have sustained within a few Years damages to the
value of 3 Millions of Crowns, which has much impaired their Traffic in those
parts.

The Accounts here are kept in Deniers, Solds, and Livers, and in Ryals of 8,
which sometimes are Inhaunced to a part more then their true value.

The Weight is Originally the pound of 16 Ounces, 100 of which make the
Quintal, and 3 Quintals the Cargo, the Quintal is found to make English 88.

The Measure of Length is the Cane, which they divide into 8 Palms, which are
found to be 2 English Yards.

The concave Measure is the Mine, of which the Sack of Leghorne makes 1 ^/3.

The Customs outward are 1 per cent. and inwards 3 per cent. this is meant of
Commodities of the growth of the Country, but if Pepper, Ginger, Indico, and
such like Commodities be imported; they pay the Kings Customs, which are 15 per
cent. And thus I shall conclude the Trade of France, and proceed to take a View
of Italy and the Trade thereof.

CHAP. LXVII. A View of Italy, and the Trading Cities thereof, together with
their Manner of Traffic, Weights, Measures, Coyns, etc.
ITaly is bounded with the Alps, the Ionian, Tyrrhenean, and Adriatic Seas,
and is exceeding Fertile lying in a Temperate Clime, and is divided into 10
Provinces, viz. the Kingdom of Naples, the Dukedom of Florence, the Dukedom of
Millain, the Dukedom of Mantua, the Commonwealth of Venice, the Dukedom of
Vrbin, the Principality of Parma, the estate of Genoa, the estate of Luca, and
the Papacy. Of the chief City or Town of Trade of each in order.

CHAP. LXVIII. A View of the City Naples, and the Trade thereof, together with
the Weights, Measures, Coyns, Customs, etc.
IN Describing the Trade of this City from whence the Kingdom takes its Name, I
shall lay down what is found of value or Merchantable throughout the Province.

The City of Naples is a fair City and accounted 7 Miles in compass, formerly
called Parthenope, and is now Governed by a Viceroy to the Behoof of the King
of Spain, and yields diverse Metals brought from adjacent Mines; likewise
Saffron, Raw and wrought Silk, Oils, Anniseed, Brimstone, Argals, Corn, Cattle
in abundance and other things of value; for which they receive out of England
Bays, Says, Serges, Cloth, Lead, Tinn, Herrings, Pilchards, and Newland-Fish.
There is found likewise the growth of Spain, Portugal, and many East-Indian
Commodities, and it was formerly a City of great Traffic. The Country
generally abounds in Mulberry-Trees, and other pleasant Fruit Trees.

The Weights of this City, and consequently of the whole Kingdom, are the
Rotolo and Cantar, 100 of the former making the latter, which is accounted 196
pound English Averdupois Weight, as likewise in Goeta they have a Cantar, by
which all Gross Commodities are weighed which is reckoned 254 pound of Leghorn.

The Measure of Length is the Cane divided into 8 Palms, nine of which Palms
make the Auln of Lions, and the Cane is 18 English inches.

The Concave Measures of Naples are the Salmo and Staio, by which they Measure
Oil, Wine, Corn, etc.

The Customs are for some Commodities 2, for other 4 per cent. more or less, as
the Viceroy gives order to these that are appointed to receive them, the King
of Spain receiving yearly for Customs upon the Oils of Gallipoly, adjacent to
this Kingdom one hundred thousand Ducats.

CHAP. LXIX. A View of the City of Florence, the Trade thereof, Comprehending
the whole Trade of the Florentine Dominion.
THe City of Florence gives name to the Provence or Dukedom of Florence, and is
a very fair City, Seated near the Rivers Arne and Chian, Beautifyed it is with
many stately Edifices, and much addicted to Merchandising; the Duke being
accounted the richest and chiefest Merchant in Italy, and is now more commonly
known by the Title of great Duke of Tuscany. The Commodities are very rich, the
famous Port of Leghorn being Governed in Trade by this City and Pisa. For hence
for the most part come the Merchandise that are there found, as Marble, Rice,
Wines, Oils, Silks Raw, and wrought, Sattins, Taffatas, Velvets, Grograms,
Plushes, Stuffs of curious Texture, for which they receive of our Merchants,
Pepper, Mace, Cloves, Indicoes, Callico, Lead, Tinn, Cloth, Bays, Says,
Serges, Perpetuanos, etc, the Inhabitants for the most part being very rich by
Reason of the great Banks maintained in this City, where is practiced exchange
from all parts.

Their accounts are kept in Livers, Solds, Deniers, 12 Deniers making a Sold,
and 20 Solds accounted a Liver, and some in Crowns, 7 Livers making a Crown;
they have current in Trade, the Florence Ducat worth 7 Livers, each Liver
accounted 9 pence Sterling.

The Weight is the Quintal or 100 pound of 12 Ounces the pound, and is found to
make 98 pound English. The Measure of Length is the Brace, 100 of which has
been known to make 49 Else English, and the Cane which is 4 Braces, but all
wrought Silks are here sold by the pound.

Wine is sold by the Cogno, which is 10 Barrels, 40 Metadels, 20 Flasks, and
each Barrel to weigh 120 pound.

Oil is sold by the Orcio, which is a Barrel, and accounted 85 pound Weight,
Grain is sold by the Moggio, which is 24 Staios, each Staio accounted 5 pound,
Salt is sold by a Staio of 72 pound. And thus much shall Suffice for Florence.

CHAP. LXX. A View of Millain, of the Trade, Weights, Measures, Coyns, Customs,
and Commodities thereof.
THe City of Millan being the Center of the whole Dukedom, in all respects, I
shall only insist upon it.

Then this City is the fairest of Lomberdy, being seven Miles in compass, and
Furnished with all Commodities of the growth of the Dukedom, nay of all Italy,
being now in Subjection to the Spanish King; the chief Commodities are Oil,
Wine, Rice, Corn, Raw Silk, which is wrought by the Inhabitants into curious
Fabrics, Chambets, Fustians, Gold Thread, and Iron; which are dispersed over
all Italy, Savoy, France, Flanders, Holland, England, etc.

Their Accounts are kept in Deniers, Solds, and Livers, which are in effect
Pence, Shillings, Pounds, etc. and their other current Coyns are the Ducat of
Gold, which is worth about 100 Solds of that money, the Crown of Gold of the
Sun, which is worth 97 Solds. The Italian Gold Crown which is worth 5 Livers.

The Ducat of Gold of 5 Livers, and 18 Solds is worth 6 Livers Imperial, the
Ducat Imperial is esteemed worth 4 Livers. The Ducat of Millain or Imperial of
4 Livers is accounted in exchange 101 Solds the Ducat, and sometimes in
Merchandise 110, and in way of Trade the Coyns of Spain, and France, are here
Current.

The Weight used here is the pound, 100 of which make a Quintal, which is
accounted 70 pound English.

The Measures of Length are the Braces, one for Cloth, and the other for Silk,
the 100 Braces of the last containing 43 Else of London.

The Customs for the most part the same with the other Cities of Italy.

CHAP. LXXI. A View of the Dukedoms of Mantua, and Urbin, and of their Trade,
Weights, Measures, etc.
OF the Dukedom of Mantua, the City of that Name is the chief, and is a fair
and strong Place, on 3 sides environed with a wide Lake, through which runs
a Stream or River into the famous River Poe, and is surrounded with pleasant
Pastures and Fruitful Gardens, Orchards, and Vineyards; but the Trade as to
Merchandise, is inconsiderable for want of a Harbor or Haven, for the
reception of Shipping; only here are found several Fabrics of Silk, as
Taffatas, Sattins, etc. also Watered Chamblets; the Accounts are kept as in
Millain, and their money much the same unless the Ducatoon which is 115 Solds
of Millain.

The Weights of Mantua are the Peso, which is 25 pound, and the Quintal which
is 100 pound, making English 71 pound Averdupois.

The City of Vrbin from which the Dukedom takes its Name, is Seated under the
Appennine Hills, and has 2 famous Seaports, viz. Pisauro, and Fano, where
formerly our Merchants held considerable Commerce, but of late it is decayed,
yet some Trade is still held there, especially by such as go Trading Voyages;
who there find the growth of most Parts of Italy, for which they exchange
Cloth, Tinn, Spices, and some Drugs. Their Accounts are kept in Deniers,
Solds, and Livers, and the rest of the Coyns those for the most part current
throughout Italy.

The Weights are the pound, and the Quintal, 100 of the former making the
latter, and is found to be 77 pound of London Averdupois. The Measures of
length are the Braces, one for Cloth, and the other for Silk, 94 of the former
making 100 of Venice, but the Venice Brace for Silk renders the Vrbin Brace for
Silk 102 or 103, etc.

CHAP. LXXII. A View of the Commonwealth of Venice, and of the Trade, Weights,
Measures, Customs, Coyns etc.
THe City of Venice gives Name to the Territories, and has been and yet is
famous for Trade by Navigation, being so Commodiously Seated for the reception
of Shipping, that nothing can be more; as thus, it is Seated at the bottom of
the Adriatic Sea or Venetian Gulf, upon 72 Islands 5 Miles distant from the
main Land, and is defended against the rage of the Sea by a Bank of 20 Leagues,
through which are cut several passages for Boats, but no Ships are capable of
passing but at Malamecco, the mouth of which is guarded with strong Castles;
and at the Castles of Lio, the Sea runs through most of the Streets, so that
the commerce is held by Boats and Bridges, 12000 of the first, and 4000 of the
last; and as for the Inhabitants they are naturally addicted to Merchandise,
and once made their City the Storehouse of the Commodities of India, Persia,
Arabia, Egypt, and Greece, being both Politic and Powerful at Sea, so that for
those Commodities, most European Merchants Traded thither as the Principal Mart
of the World, but of late the English, Dutch, and Portugals have found the way
to purchase them at the first hand, and by that means much impaired the
Traffic of that Commonwealth, yet still they have Factories at Aleppo,
Constantinople, and Alexandria, and Trade in Silk, Spices, Drugs, etc. but the
chief Commodities found here are Clothes of Gold and Silver, Wine, Oil, Woollen
Cloth, Paper, Anniseeds, Agal, Looking-Glasses, Drinking-Glasses, and
Quicksilver, for which the English Merchants Trading thither, exchange Bays,
Furs, Perpetuanos, Lead, Tinn, Cloves, Nutmegs, Pepper, Ginger, Serges, Says,
Woollen Cloth, Herring, Pilchards, Salmond, and Newland Fish, Indico, etc. and
serves for a Mart to Austria and upper Germany.

The Weights of Venetia are 4, the first and greatest is called the pound
Gross, and 100 pound with which they weigh Wool, Brass, Iron, Copper, Flesh,
Fish, and other Gross Commodities. The second is the Golden Weight in use for
weighing Gold, Silver, Precious Stones and Pearls only, and is called the Mark
consisting of 8 Ounces, and each Ounce of 144 Cariots; the third is applied to
the Weight only of Gold and Silver Thread; the fourth is the pound Subtle, with
which are weighed Silks, Drugs, Spices, Cottons, Cotton-Yarn, viz. by the 100
Weight composed of the Subtle pound, 100 pound Gross being of this Subtle pound
158 pound, and so on Proportionablely; but in Gold and Silver Thread 100 pound
Gross is Subtle, but 116 pound 8 Ounces, the Mark of Gold 8 Ounces, and from
these our English Traders have derived their Weight commonly called Venice
Weight, 100 pounds of Venice Subtle make of London Weight 64 pound, and Gross
106 pound.

The Liquid Measures for Wine are the Amphora, the Bigonsa, the Quart, the
Sachio and Lyre, viz. the Bigonsa 4 of them make the Amphora, and each Bigonsa
is 4 Quarts, and 1 Quart is 4 Sachi, each Sachi being 4 Lyras, and each Lyra a
pound Weight, tho in Gross the lesser Measures hold not out; as for Oil it is
sold both by Weight and Measure, the Weight is called the Staliero, and the
Measure the Miaro, and is 40 Mire which is Gross Weight, 120 pound, one Mire by
Weight is 30 pound 3 Ounces, and by Measure 25 pound. Corn is sold by the
Staio, each Staio being Gross 132 pound of Venetian Weight.

The Accounts are kept several ways according to the Pleasure of the Merchant,
as sometimes in Ducats, and Grosses, accounting 6 Livers, and 4 Solds to a
Ducat or 24 Grosses, others again in Solds and Grosses.

As for their Exchanges, to their great advantage in way of Trade, they make a
difference between their money paid for Merchandise, and that returnable upon
Bills, the disproportion being between 20 and 21 per cent. their Customs are
Extraordinary, especially upon the English Trading to Zant for Currants, which
is in Subjection to that Seignory, both upon Goods imported and exported, the
which has caused the decay of Trade, and was the main Reason of removing the
Scale of Trade to Leghorn, a place no ways so Commodious nor abounding in
Commodities of the Native growth.

CHAP. LXXIII. A View of the Principality of Parma, and of the Trade, Weights,
Measures, Customs, etc.
PArma the chief City of this Principality gives it a Name, and is a pleasant
City abounding with all the Commodities of Italy, as Silks, Stuffs, Oil, Wine,
Copper, Rice, Corn, etc. and as for the Weight used in the City, it is the
pound of 12 Ounces, 100 of which make about 60 Subtle English. The Measure of
length is the Brace, concording with the Brace of Florence. The Coyns are
Deniers, Livers, and Solds, in which their Accounts are kept. But having thus
far proceeded, I shall here take a View of the famous Port of Leghorn, and of
the Trade thereof.

CHAP. LXXIV. A View of Leghorn, the Trade, Custom, Weights, Measures, and
Coyns, etc.
LEghorn the Principal Port, and Scale of Trade in the Mediterranean Sea, is
Situated on a large Plain, and accomodated with a good Harbor for the
reception of Shipping, so that almost the whole Scale of Trade is removed from
the City of Venice thither; it is now a part of the Florentine Dominion, having
some time past been purchased by the Duke of Tuscany for 120000 Ducats of the
Genoese, and from him received large Privileges and Immunities, being enlarged
by a new City Builded to the old, and by Reason of the small Customs taken
there; it is of a Nest of Pirates, Murderers, etc. who formerly Inhabited it,
become famous throughout the World; in this Port the great Duke keeps his
Galleys, and here are found all the sorts of Commodities Italy yields, the
Trade of it being as aforesaid regulated by Florence and Pisa, and to this Port
are brought the Commodities of England, Spain, France, Holland, India, Arabia,
Persia, Egypt, and other Countries.

The Accounts of Merchants in Leghorn, are kept in Livers, Solds, Deniers, 12
Deniers being a Sold, and 20 Solds a Liver, and their other moneys are the same
with Florence, except Quadrins and Craches, 8 Craches being accounted worth 6
pence Sterling, and of Quadrins 60 to a Liver, tho sometimes a different value
is fixed upon the Money of either place, but it continues not long.

The Weights are the same with Florence, viz. the pound of 12 Ounce, 100 of
which make a Quintal, which is computed to make 75 pound English, and by this
they weigh their Gross Commodities. An other Quintal they have of 150 pound,
which makes of London Weight 113 pound, as also an other of 160 pound making
with us 121 pound, by which they weigh Fish, woolls, etc. The Kintar of Alum
is at Leghorn 150 pound, but in England found to make but 143 pound, the Kintar
of Sugar 15^, the Kintar of Fish 160 pound, and make English Weight
proportionably.

The Measures are the Brace and Cane, 4 of the former making one of the latter,
each Brace being 23 Inches English, 100 Braces making 60 Yards or 48 Else.

The Concave Measures for Corn and Salt, are the Stare, the Sack, and the
Salmo, 3 of the first making one of the second, and 3 of the second making one
of the third, which is a London Quarter; they have a Measure likewise called a
Maggio, which contains 8 Sacks.

The Custom of this Port is, that any Merchant may Land his Goods without
paying any Custom, so be they are sold within a Year; but if not, he must pay
Custom; but if for the better disposal of Commodities, they are sent into any
other part of Tuscany, they must pay Custom at Pisa.

CHAP. LXXV. A View of Genoa, the Weights, Measures, Coyns, and Trade thereof.
THe Metropolis of the Republique of Genoa, is the City of Genoa from whence
the Territories have Name, and is 8 Miles in compass, being Commodiously
Situate for Commerce, and has been formerly a City of great Trade; but of late
the Citizens are turned Userers, which has put a stop to their Navigation, and
the Excessive Customs upon Goods imported, deters Merchants from Trading
thither to any purpose. The Merchantable Wares that are found in this City are
Silks, Stuffs, Damasks, Drugs, Wine, Oil, and some Fruits, for which they
receive the growth of the Countries, whose Merchants Trade thither. Their
Accounts especially as to Merchandise are kept in Deniers, Solds, and Livers,
12 Deniers being a Sold, and 20 Solds a Liver, which is 16 pence Sterling.
Their other Coyns for the most part Concord with those of Florence.

The Weights are the pound of 12 Ounces, and Quintal, 100 of the former making
the latter, which is accounted the Quintal Subtle, the Gross Quintal being 150
pound, and makes Subtle Weight of London 105 pound, and by the Gross Quintal
are sold Anniseeds, Honey, Rice, Brass, Lead, Tinn, Soap, Wools, and other
Weighty Commodities.

The Measure of Length is the Cane, found to make 9 Palms or 4 Braces of
Florence, which is used in the Measuring Stuffs and Silks, and for Measuring
of Linen, the Cane is 10 Palms, 100 of which Palms have rendered 27 English
Yards, and consequently one Cane of Genoa is 2 Yards English.

Corn is sold by the Mine, each Mine paying Custom 6 Solds, and Weighs 270
pound, 2 of which are found to be a Harwich Quarter.

Oil is sold by the Barril, 7 of which make a Neapolitan Butt.

Wine is sold by the Mesorole, 5 of which make a Botta Dimena of Naples. All
Goods entering the River or Port pay Consolato of the River 6 Denier per Liver,
which is paid by the Buyer, if a contract be not before made with the seller
for the discharge thereof. And thus much for the Republique of Naples.

CHAP. LXXVI. A View of Luca, and the Trade thereof.
LVca is the principal City of the Republique, and is Situate on the River
Serchio, being 3 Miles in compass, and so adorned with Trees; that such as pass
a far off think it to stand in a Wood. The most Merchantable Commodities here
found are Silks, as Damasks, Sattins, Taffatas, etc. which are here made and
sent to other Cities of Italy, and for them have returned the growth of most
Countries.

Their Accounts are kept in Solds, Deniers, and Livers of Picoly as in
Florence, and their moneys for the most part the same, it having formerly been
a City of considerable Trade, but now of little note.

The Weights are two, the one the Balance Weight, by which all Goods are
bought and sold, the other the Weight by which Merchants pay their Customs,
between which there is observed 12 per cent. difference, the Balance Weight,
the pound containing 12 Ounces, the 100 thereof has been found to make of Lions
Weight 72 and the Customers Weight 81 the Measure of length is the Brace, which
is 23 English Inches, 100 Braces of this Place being found to make 50 English
Else. As for Liquid or Concave Measures, they use not any in way of
Merchandise. Therefore I shall pass them over.

CHAP. LXXVII. A View of the Papacy, and the Trade thereof.
THe Papacy contains several stately Cities, but none of any considerable
Trade as for Merchandise therefore I shall Sum up all in Describing, the Trade
of Rome, once the Mistress of the World, but now her Splendour is much abated.

Rome is Situate on the Banks of Tiber, adorned with 750 Towers placed on her
Walls, and is accounted to contain 466000 Families, and in it are found these
Merchandise, viz. Corn, Oil, Wine, Gloves, Alum, Lutestring, Kid-Skins, and
curious Fabrics of Silk, for which they receive from England Lead, Tinn, Bays,
Says, Stuffs, Pilchards, Herrings, Newland Fish, Calves-Skins, Salt, Salmon,
Tallow, Wax, etc. which are for the most part Landed at Civitaveccia, and from
thence carried up the River Tiber in Boats to Rome.

The Coyns here and through the Papacy, are the same that are current in most
parts of Italy, the Pope having so ordained, that his Incomes may be the more.

The Accounts are kept in Crowns, Julios, or Paulos, Baiochos, and Quatrins,
the Weight is the Quintal or 100 pound which makes 80 pound English, tho
sometimes they weigh by a Quintal of 160 pound, and 150 pound, according to the
fineness or Grosness of the Commodity.

Their Measures of Length are 2, one for Linen and the other for Woollen, the
one a Brace, and the other the Cane, 30 Canes making 100 Braces. Corn is sold
by the Rugio, which is 7/18 Mine of Genoa. And thus much shall suffice for
Rome, and indeed for all Italy, from whence I must pass into Flanders and take
a View of the Trade thereof.

CHAP. LXXVIII. A View of the Trade of Flanders, and Holland, of the Weights,
Measures, Coyns, Customs, Commodities, and Traffic of them, reduced into the
View of Antwerp and Amsterdam.
THo Flanders and the Netherlands are divided into 17 Provinces, viz. 4
Dukedoms, as Limburg, Luxemburg, Gelderland, and Brabant, 1 Marquisat, 7
Ealrdoms, as Artois, Flanders, Hanault, Nemurs, Zutphen, Holland, and Zealand,
5 Borronies, as Westfriezland, Vtretch, Overysel, Machlin, and Groving; yet the
Trade of all these may conveniently be reduced into what is found in Antwerp
and Amsterdam, the one famous for having formerly been the chief Scale of
Europe, and the other for the present commerce held there. Of these in order.

Antwerp is Situate upon the River Scheld, that River sending forth eight
Channels to Water the City by running through her Streets, and has been
formerly accounted a great Scale of Trade, insomuch that all European Merchants
brought their Commodities thither to vend, the acquirement of which Trade was
principally by the means following, first by Reason of 2 free Marts, yearly
holden for 45 days, in which no Person Trading there could be Arrested in his
Goods or Person for Debt or otherwise, secondly by Reason the Portugals
discovering the East Indias Anno 1500. diverted the course of Trade driven by
the Venetians from Alexandria, and the Red Sea to Lisbon; and so kept a Factory
at Antwerp, and exposed to Sail all Indian Commodities which drew most of the
Trading Nations of Europe to Trade thither, exhausting the Trade of Bruges
where the English Merchants Adventurers before resided; the third and last
cause was the Wars between Charles the fifth Emperor, and the French, which
obliged the Nobility, and Gentry for safety to remove their Families thither,
who afterward being taken with the pleasantness of the place would not remove,
but Built them stately Houses, and made that City for the most part the Place
of their residence.

The cause of the decay of Trade in the City of Antwerp, was the Wars with
Spain, in which Merchants were Pillaged, their Ships taken, etc. the
Abridgement of Privileges, and the Trade which the English and Dutch found in
the East Indies, bringing home in their own Bottoms, what before they were
obliged to the Portugals for; but as it is at this Day, a pretty Trade is
driven in the City, most of the Neighboring Countries bringing in their Growth
and Manufacture.

The Commodities found in Antwerp, are Wines, Silks, Arras-Hangings, Spices,
Drugs, Fruit, store of Corn, Woollen Cloth, some Oil, and the like; brought
out of its Neighborhood, and the Adjacent Provinces.

The Accounts of Antwerp are kept in Livers, Solds, and Deniers, which they
reckon Pounds, Shillings, Pence, 12 Deniers making a Sold, and 20 Solds a Liver
or pound Flemish, tho worth no more then 12 Shillings Sterling, or as they
compute it 240 Grosses, 12 Grosses being a Sold, and according to these Values
on Coin they make their Exchanges. The other current Coyns are Doits, 4 of
which make a Stiver, and 10 Stivers make 1 Shilling Sterling. 2 Blanks make a
Stiver, and half 6 Stivers make the Flemish Shilling, 28 Stivers make a
Guilder, which is 3 Shillings 4 pence Flemish, so that 100 pound Flemish is
found to make but 50 pound English, etc.

The Weight is the pound of 16 Ounces, 100 of which pounds make their Quintar,
and the Quintar found to be 104 pound English. So that from this allowance or
over Weight, many imagine that the Tret of London had its Original.

The Measure of length is the Ell, 100 of which are found to make 60 London
Else in the Measure of Linen Cloth. They have likewise an Ell for Measuring
of Silk, which is 1 in the 100 less then the Cloth Ell.

Beer is sold by the Barrel, which in Brabant and Flanders, is accounted 54
Stops, each Stop being 2 Quarts English.

Their Corn they sell by the Vertules 23 of which are a Last of Amsterdam, and
10 Quarters London Measure.

Wine is sold by the Ame, the Stop and the Butt, 1 Ame making 50 Stops, and one
Stop 6 pound, so that the Butt is 300 Stops or 6 Ames, the Wine Stop being
accounted 3 Quarts of London Wine Measure.

The Exchanges are very great, by Reason most of the Bills of Spain are drawn
upon the Merchants and Traders of Antwerp, for the disbursement of money, for
the maintenance of the Army, that is for the most part kept on Foot in the
Provinces.

CHAP. LXXIX. A View of the City of Amsterdam and of the Trade, Coyns, Weights
and Measures thereof.
AMsterdam is a fair City, and Seated on the River Tay, which on the North side
of it Flows like a large Sea, when on the South the River Amster running
through 3 Lakes* enters its Streets and falls into the River Tay aforesaid.

And by the addition or a new City to the old, it is become Commodious and
strong; and by the advantage of the River passing through all Land-carriage is
saved, the Boats in the 5 Principal Streets coming up to the Doors, especially
where the Merchants Warehouses are. The Inhabitants are generally Prompt to
Navigation, and have so improved themselves thereby, that most of the Citizens
are Merchants, and have Vessels of their own, or venture in other Vessels,
wholly relying upon the advantage that Accrues by Trading in foreign Countries,
as wanting Land to improve their Stock at home, so that of late it has been
observed they put out their Money to Interest in England and France, to more
considerable interest then it will allow in their own Country; 4 or 5 per cent.
being great interest there, which is so ordered that by such means, People may
be the willinger to venture in way of Trade by Merchandise, which returns them
for the most part 50. per cent. and all charges paid.

The Commodities found in Amsterdam, as Silks, Cloth, Woollen, and Linen,
Stuffs, Drugs of all sorts, Spices, Dies, Oils, Alum, Brimstone, Gold and
Silver-Thread, Wines, and indeed all sorts of Commodities that are found of any
use in the known World, but the chief Commodities that the Country affords,
which may properly be called the Growth or Manufacture, are Cattle, Butter,
Cheese, Flax, Corn, Linen Cloth, Coarse Woollen Clothes, Tapestry, Pictures,
and all sorts of Fish, but especially Herrings, of which they make an
Extraordinary advantage, employing in the Season for that Fishery 6000 Persons.

The Weight commonly used in Amsterdam is the pound of 16 Ounces, 100 of which
make 107 of Antwerp, and of London 110.

The Measure of length is the Ell, 134 of which make 100 Yards of London, or
100 London Else make 167 1/^ Else of Amsterdam.

Their Concave Measures are for Corn, the Last, the Barrel, the Muyden, the
Sack, the Archeteling, and the Sheple; as thus, 24 Barrels make the Last, each
Barrel containing 1 1/^2 Muydens, a Muyden containing 1 2/24 Sacks, each Sack
being 3 Archetelings, or 3 21/29 Shepels 108 Shepels, making the Last.

The Measures for Wine, Oil, Beer, and other Liquids, are for the most part the
same with those of England; and therefore I shall pass them over.

The Coyns in which the Accounts are kept, are the same with Antwerp, viz.
Livers, Solds, and Deniers, the Liver or Pound Flemish being 12 Shillings
Sterling, 6 Florins make the Flemish pound at 20 Stivers per Florin, so that
120 Stivers are the Flemish pound or 12 Shillings English, 5 Stivers being 6
pence Sterling or 5 Solds Turnois, a Gross is 6 Deniers, a Carolus Gulden is 20
Stivers or 2 Shillings Sterling, or 2 Sols Turnois. And besides these all the
current Coyns of Europe pass here according to their true value, as they again
may be paid for Merchandise to the Merchants of the Countries, to which they
are proper. And thus much for Antwerp and Amsterdam, as also for all the
Provinces and Cities of the Netherlands, the Trade of which being included in
what I have laid down; so that from hence I shall pass into Germany, to take a
View of that large Empire, the Trade of which I reduce into a few heads, or
deliver it in the Description of the Trade of the Principal Cities.

CHAP. LXXX. A View of Germany, its Provinces, and the Trade thereof.
HAving thus far proceeded, as I hope, to the content of the Reader, I shall
Survey the Empire of Germany, which is bounded on the North with Denmark and
the Danish Seas, on the East with Prusia, Poland, and Hungary, on the South
with the Alps, and on the West with France and Belgium, and abounds in Silver
Mines, Copper, Lead, Tinn, Iron, Corn, Wine, Alum, Quicksilver, Linen,
Woollen, Silks, Stuffs, Cattle, Corn, and other Commodities all of its own
Growth and Manufacture.

The Cities and Towns of the Empire, may by good Right be divided into 3 parts,
as first the Hans-Towns, which enjoy large Privileges and Immunities, and are
computed to be about 70, which for the most par are accommodated with Navigable
Rivers, and abound in rich Manufactures. Secondly those called the Imperial
Cities, which are imputed free Cities, by Reason of their great Privileges,
above the rest in Coining money, barring any acknowledgement of Subjection
unless to the Emperor, whom they only do acknowledge for their Protector, and
in lieu of it pay an annual Tribute, being 60 odd in number. And thirdly those
that are under the Subjection of the Electoral Princes, which are commonly
called Principalities.

The Rivers by which these Towns for the most part are enriched are 4, viz. the
Danube which running 1500 Miles receives about 58 Navigable Rivers, and at last
disimbogues it self into the Euzine or Black-Sea. The River Rhine which after
passing through Germany, and Belgia for 800 Miles falls into the German Ocean,
the River Albis which is large and Navigable for near 400 Miles, and the River
Odera, which passing 300 Miles through the Country falls into the Baltic Sea.

There are likewise several other Rivers of note, that greatly contribute to
the Fertilizing the Country, but these being the chief, I shall pass over the
rest, unless the Description of some Cities require the mentioning of them.

CHAP. LXXXI. A View of Strasburg, and the Trade thereof.
STrasburg is an Imperial free City, Seated upon a fair Plain, about a furlong
from the River Rhine, over which they have laid a Bridge, and a Channel cut
which conveys Ships and Boats to the City, which is 8 Miles in compass, adorned
with many stately Buildings; and amongst the rest a Cathedral, whose Steeple is
for curious Architect accounted one of the 7 Wonders of the World, and by
Reason of the Generosity of the Inhabitants toward Strangers, there is great
resort thither, especially of Lutherans, Calvinists, etc. but above all it
abounds in Handicrafts or Artizans who find great encouragement, and by their
Labor is the common Stock improved; tho since its falling into the Hands of
the French King, they have not proceeded with such Alacrity as formerly, by
Reason of the little assurance they have of keeping what they acquire by their
Labor.

The Commodities Traded for hither are Linen Cloth, Iron, Diaper, Rhenish
Wine, Copper, Wax, and Hemp, for which they receive out of England Tinn, Lead,
and Woollen Cloth; out of Spain Fruits* Wines, Oils, Salt, and Wool; and out
of Italy Silks, both Raw and wrought.

The Weights are two, viz. the Gross and Subtle, where upon Trial it has been
found, that the 100 pound Subtle of London has made Incirca 70 in 71 of the
Gross of Strasburg, which Gross Weight is 16 Ounces to the pound, and the
Subtle but 12 Ounces, by the latter of which all Indian Commodities are
weighed, as Nutmegs, Cloves, Cinnamond, Drugs of all sorts, Indicoes and rich
Dies. The Measure of length is the Ell, which is about 38 English Inches; as
for Concave Measures they use but few, and those the same with other Cities of
the Empire, of which anon I shall have occasion to speak.

The current Coin is the Bobemico, Gross, or Blaphace, which is 3 Crutfers, one
Crutfer being 2 pence, one penny 2 Hellers, and one Heller 2 Orchines. And in
these Coyns all the Accounts are kept.

CHAP. LXXXII. A View of Vienna, and of the Trade, Weights, Measures, Coyns,
etc.
VIenna is one of the fairest and strongest Cities of the Empire, and for the
most part the Imperial Seat, having on the North of it the River Danow; which
dividing into 3 Streams causes, as it were, an Island ere it again unites; and
over the Streams are 3 Stone Bridges of 15, 29 and 57 Arches, all the Streets
are adorned with stately Buildings, and in the City many Merchants reside, who
have their Factories in Venice, Florence, Genoa, etc. and by that means it
abounds in rich Commodities of all Nations, especially Sattins, Damasks,
Taffatas, Velvets, Cloth of Gold and Silver, Drugs, Spices, Wool, Lead, Iron,
Copper, Flax, Wine, Oil, Wax, Tallow, Furs, and the like; which is dispersed
into the Neighborhood to supply the Towns and Cities of less note.

The Weight is the pound, which in the Sale of some Commodities is divided into
32 Coets, and in others into 128 Quints, and by some again into 512 Fennings,
of this pound 100 makes the Quintar, which in London is found to make between
122 and 123 pound.

The Measures of length are 2, one for Linen, and the other for Woollen, the
100 Yards of London, are found to make 103 Else of Vienna Linen Measure, and
of the Woollen Measure 113 Else.

The Coyns current are the Rhenis Guilder worth 28 Silver Missens Gross, or 36
Lubeck Shillings, 7 of which make one of our Shillings, the Imperial-Doller
which is worth 33 Lubeck Shillings, the common Guilden worth 28 Lubeck
Shillings, and the French Crown worth 44 Lubeck Shillings, etc.

By Reason of the Emperors residing here, there is a great Exchange, which is
by Rix Dollars of 8 Shillings Flemish, and by Ducats of Gold of 12 Shillings
Flemish.

CHAP. LXXXIII. A View of Hamburg, of the Trade, Weights, Measures, Coyns, and
Commodities thereof.
HAmburg is an Imperial City, Seated on a large Plain, and has on the South
side the River Elve, being Accommodated with a fair Haven, cross which is cast
a Chain to hinder Ships from entering without License; and on the North-East
side, some distance from the Walls of the City runs the River Alster, and is
adorned with many fair Buildings, fortifyed with strong Walls, Ditches, and
Bulwarks. The Trade at present is very considerable, by Reason of the residence
of our Merchants there, and the Factories held in other parts, it being the Key
as it were of that part of Germany, whither the Inland Towns bring their
Commodities to vend, as Quicksilver, Stuffs, Silks, Cloth, Wine, Wax,
Cordage, Corn, and the like; most Italian Commodities are found here, and great
quantities of the Growth of Spain, and here the English vend Cloth, Iron,
Tinn, Lead, Drugs, Spices, and the like, receiving for them the Growth and
Manufactures of the Empire.

The Weight is the pound; 120 of which are accounted the Quintar, which is
divided into 3 parts or denominations, viz. the 12 Stone of 10 pound to the
Stone, 300 pound are accounted the Skip pound, which is the second, and that
which is called the third, is 20 Lispound of 15 pound to the 300, which may be
said to be one Quintar of 120 pound, and another of 300 pound.

The Measure of length is the Ell, by which all Woollen, Linen, and Silks are
Measured, 100 of which are accounted t^ make in London 48 Else for Linen, and
the 100 Yards of London to be 162 or 163 of Hamburg Yards. The Concave Measure
is the Scheple 90 of which make the Last of Corn in this place, tho 83 are
found to do the same at Amsterdam, or to produce 10 Quarters of London Measure.

The Merchants exchange for London by the pound Sterling, and from all other
places upon Rix Dollers of 50 Shillings Lapisto or 54 Stivers. A Doller is here
noted to be worth 3 white pence, each white Penny to be 18 Shillings, each
Shilling 12 pence, and each penny two Hellers. And thus much for Hamburg and of
the Empire.

CHAP. LXXXIV. A View of Denmark, and of its Trade, together with the
Commodities, Weights, Measures, and Coyns thereof.
DEnmark is bounded on the East with the Baltic Ocean, on the West with the
German Ocean, on the North with Sweeden, and on the South with the Germain
Empire; and contains Cimbrick Chersonese, the Islands of the Baltic, and part
of Scandia, which are divided into several Provinces; the which for Brevities
sake I shall pass over, and reduce their Trade into the 2 Principal Cities. And
of the Islands I shall treat in their order. And first of Copenhagen, and the
Trade thereof.

Copenhagen is the Metropolis of Denmark, and the Seat of the Danish Kings, for
the most part, being Commodiously Seated on the Seashore, and provided of a
safe and goodly Haven, for the reception of Shipping, being strongly Fortifyed
and Beautifyed with a Castle and other stately Edifices, which are for the more
part possessed by Merchants that Trade there, for the Growth and Manufacture of
the Kingdom, which chiefly consists in Hides, Tallow, Fish, Bucks-Skins, Armor
of all sorts, Furniture for Shipping, Corn, Cattle and the like; for which they
receive Drugs, Spices, Tinn, Lead, Gold, Silver, Silks, Woollen and Linen
Clothes, etc.

The current Coin is the Dollar and Shilling, one Danish Shilling making one
Lubeck Shilling, and 66 Danish Shillings accounted to the Dollar, which is 5
Shillings Sterling.

The Accounts in this City are kept by Merchants, in Marks of 16 Shillings
Danish.

The Exchanges are practiced by Rix Dollars, to the value as aforesaid.

The Weights and Measures of this Kingdom; I shall Sum up in the next Chapter,
by Reason the difference of Weights and Measures in this City, and the rest
little or nothing vary.

CHAP. LXXXV. A View of Elsinore, and the Trade thereof.
ELsinore is Situate upon the Straight leading to the Sound, and greatly
frequented by Seamen; by Reason of the Extraordinary passage through the
Straight, for which every Vessel pays to the King of Denmark a considerable
Sum for permission, no Ships being otherwise capable to pass by Reason of the
Castles that Guard that pass on either side, viz. Coronsburg, and Elsburg, the
latter being in the Kingdom of Norway; on the East side of the Sealand near to
Elsinore, the King has a Palace for his Summer Recreation, which has a
Prospect over the Sea, and it is reported that this Tole or Duty arising upon
the passing and repassing over Ships into the Sound and Baltic, amounts to
more then all the Crown Revenues besides. The Commodities vended here are for
the most part Fish, Cattle, Corn, Oil, Beer, Cordage, Masts, Sails, and the
like, for fitting out, and revictualling Ships, for which they receive the
Growth of England, Holland, Germany, and France; the Moneys current here are
the same with those of Copenhagen.

The Weights are as in Copenhagen, and in most parts of the Kingdom, the great
and shall 100, the former being accounted 120 pound to the 100, and the latter
112 pound, being accounted 12 Stone of 10 pound to the Stone; they have
likewise a Skip-pound of 32 Stone of 10 pound the Stone, or 20 Lispound of 16
Mark pound is a Skip-pound, and 20 times pounds 16 are 320 pound.

The Measures of the Kingdom in General are for Length, are the Else for
Woollen, Linen, and Silks, 160 of which are accounted to make the 100 Else
English. As for Concave Measures they are little in use unless for Corn. The
Trade of this Kingdom by Navigation is but small, they seldom Sailing out of
their own Seas, or at most, no further then the German, British, and
Mediterranean Seas or Oceans. Therefore I shall desist from any further Survey
thereof, and pass over the Staight to take a View of the Kingdom of Norway, now
Subject to the Danish Scepter.

CHAP. LXXXVI. A View of the Kingdom of Norway, and the Trade thereof.
NOrway is bounded on the West and South with the Ocean, and on the East and
North with Lappia, and the Dofrine Mountains, and abounds in Firr-Trees, which
are brought into England in abundance and serve for Masts, Boards, and Building
Houses; the other Commodities are Stock Fish, Furs, Train Oil, Cordage, some
Rossen and Sail-Cloaths. The Towns by Reason of the coldness of the Clime and
Dampness caused by the Sea are but few, the chief being Nidrosia and Bergen,
once a famous Mart, but now reduced to nothing in respect of Trade, the Trade
that it had having passed through several Cities, is at last settled in
Amsterdam, and what Trade does remain is from the Ships that pass this way to
Moscovia.

The Weight most in use is the pound, 100 of which renders 92 London Averdupois
Weight, tho of late they have got a Custom to Weigh in a String, which is very
uncertain, rendering sometimes more, sometimes less. Their Measure of Length
and Concave Measures, the latter of which is for the most part used in
Measuring of Salt, are agreeable to our Yard and Bushel.

The Commodities vended here are Bays, Says, Linen, Wine, Spices, Sugars,
Gunpowder, Lead, Tinn, Iron, and such like. And thus much may suffice for
Norway, leaving which I shall proceed in this Northern Tract, and take a View
of Sweedland, the Trade of which I shall reduce into the Principal City of that
Kingdom, viz, Stockholm.

CHAP. LXXXVII. A View of Sweedland, of its Provinces, and Trade reduced into
the Trade of the City of Stockholm.
SWeedland has on the East Muscovia, on the West the Dofrine Hills, on the
North the Frozen Ocean, and on the South the Baltic, and contains 5 Provinces,
viz. Gothland, Sweeden, Lappia, Bodia, and Finland, in the former of which is
found Stockholm, the Metropolis of the Kingdom; and Seated in a Watery Marsh in
the nature of Venice, and is much frequented with Merchants, being for the most
part the Regal Seat, so that to it Flow all the Commodities of the Kingdom;
which are chiefly Buck-Skins, Goats-Skins, Ox Hides, Barley, Tallow, Malt, Tar,
Pitch, Rosin, Furs, Lead, Copper, Silver, Iron, Wax, Honey, and the like; and
for its advantageous Situation, it is much Traded to, having a Channel capable
of receiving Ships of any Burden; and so well guarded with Castles of
Extraordinary Strength, that no Ship can pass in nor out without lieve first
obtained; the Buildings are pleasant to behold for their Antiquity and fine
Devices; a place being purposely erected in the Principal Street, for the
convenience of Merchants, and the laying up such Commodities, as they either
have to vend or have purchased; so that in this City are found the Growths and
Manufactures of almost all Nations.

The current Coin of this Kingdom is the Dollar, which is divided into 8 Marks,
and each Mark into 2 Clippings, each Clipping being accounted 9 Stivers
Flemish, and in exchange the Dollar is only used.

The Weight is the pound 116 of which is found to make the 100 pound of London;
they have likewise 2 Skip-pounds, the one the proper Skip-pound of Stockholm,
which is 320 pound of the before mentioned pound, the other is 340 pound and
proper to Dantzick. Of which in order I shall come to Treat.

The Measure of Length is the Ell, 166 of which are 100 Yards of London
Measure, sometimes more sometimes less; for this is the Rule, they take a Piece
of Rope, and Measure it by the bigness of a man's Head, which they call their
Ell, so that according to the largeness or smallness of the Head, by which they
take their Measure, the Measure is found to consist.

Their Concave Measures are of little use, unless for Corn and Malt, and those
are Measured by a Loop, 23 of which make a Last in Amsterdam, and in London 10
Quarters. And thus much shall Suffice for Sweeden, and the Trade thereof.

CHAP. LXXXVIII. A View of Moscovia, and the Trade thereof, reduced into the
Trade of Mosco, the Principal City of that large Dominion.
MOscovia is bounded on the West with Lituania and Livonia, on the East with
Tartary, on the North with the Frozen Ocean, and on the South with the Caspian
Sea, the Ottoman Empire and Palus Maeotis, and is Branched with many large and
Navigable Rivers, as Tanais, Duino, Boristhenes, Onega, and Volga, and is
divided into 9 Provinces, as Novogradia, Valadomira, Plescovia, Rhesen, Servia,
Parmia, Candoria, Petrosa, and Moscovia; from whence all the Country takes its
Name.

These Provinces abound in Corn, Cattle, Furs, Hides, Flax, Hemp, Whales,
Grease, Canvas, Ropes, Cavier, Tallow, Honey, Wax, Venison, Flax, Hemp, and
Fish. The Trade being begun by the English about the Year 1575 in general, tho
before some Vessels of Private Merchants had Traded thither, and found out the
Commodities since so much sought after; and upon the increase of Trade in these
parts, a Society of Merchants in London, are incorporated by the Name of
Muscovia Merchants, having settled a Factory at Archangel.

Mosco the Metropolis of Moscovia, is Seated on the River Mosca, which falls in
to Tanais; this City is reckoned 6 Miles in compass, and is for the most part
the imperial Seat, being much Beautifyed since it was Burnt by the Tartars,
upon their invading the Moscovite Empire; and here the English Merchants find
kind entertainment, unless in Troublesome times, as of late it happened upon
the murder of the Czar, in which general Calamity many suffered in their
Goods; but now things are again reduced to a quiet and settled condition, so
that Trade again begins to Flourish, the Country affording great store of Furs,
as Beaver, Otter, Sables, White, Black, Red, and Dun Fox-Skins, with many
others of the like nature; which are sold by the Timber, Weight, or Tale, being
highly valued of late by the Natives, who perceiving the desire Merchants have
for them, learn thereby to set prices on them accordingly.

The Merchants Accounts are kept here Diverse ways, as those of England in
Rubles and Pence, called by the Natives Muskofkins, 200 of which make a Ruble,
which is rated at 2 Rix Dollars, the Dutch by Rubles, Grevens, and Muscofkins,
20 pence being accounted to the Greven, and 10 Grevens to the Ruble which is
only an Imaginary Coin.

The current money is the Capeck worth a Stiver Flemish, and something more in
value then an English penny, 10 of which make a Greven, which is worth 12 pence
Sterling, and the Ruble 10 Shillings Sterling, 3 Capecks is called an Altine,
by which name all receipts of Bargain, and contracts are made, 33 Altines and
one Capeck making the Ruble.

At Archangel there is exchange practiced, and the price of moneys Russ as the
Plenty or Scarcity will allow, for sometimes the Rubles in exchange pass for 11
Shillings 6 pence Sterling, the Receipts being in August, to return in London
about the latter end of December.

The Weight most in use is the Pood, by which all fine Goods are weighed, as
Silk, Beavor, Wool, and the like; but for Gross Goods they have a Weight called
a Berzovet accounted 10 Poods or the Russ Ship-pound computed to be 360 pound
Averdupois, so that all Goods bought by this Weight, are accounted to be 10 per
cent. profit, so that many have reckoned the Goods so bought to pay the Freight
with over Weight; and all Goods bought by the Pood are reckoned 10 per cent.
less.

The Measure of Length is called the Archin, and is accounted 28 English
Inches, so that the 100 Archings are supposed to produce Incirca 78 Yards of
London Measure.

Oil they sell by the Barrel, each Barrel being accounted a Hogshead, and Tar
by the Hogs-head; as for Concave Measures I observe, they are but rarely in use
by way of Trade, by Reason of the small quantities of Commodities the Empire
affords, that are proper to be Measured thereby. Therefore I shall put a
conclusion to the Trade of Moscovy, and proceed to a View of Poland.

CHAP. LXXXIX. A View of the Kingdom of Poland, together with the Trade,
Weights, Measures, and current Coyns thereof.
POland is bounded on the East with Boristhenes, on the West with Vistula, on
the North with the Baltic Ocean and Sinus Trinicus, and on the South with
Hungary; and is divided into 10 Provinces, viz. Luconia, Lituania, Volinia,
Samogita, Podolia, Russia Nigra, Prussia, Podtasia, Masovia, and Poland; these
Provinces are Branched with several Navigable Rivers Vistula, Reuben, Bog,
Mimel and others, and has for its Metropolis Cracovia. Into which I shall
reduce the Trade of this Kingdom.

Cracovia is the Metropolis of Poland, Situate on the Banks of the River
Vistula, which is Navigable for near 400 Miles, being as it were encompassed
with distant Mountains, and fortifyed with strong Walls and fair Buildings;
being the Seat of the Kings of Poland, and is found to produce the Commodities
of the whole Kingdom, as Tar, Rosin, Pitch, Hemp, Wax, Honey, Barley, Oats,
Amber, Tallow, and Hides, which Commodities are sent up the River; and
distributed to such Merchants as come to Trade for the Growth of the Kingdom.
There are likewise found Furs of diverse sorts, some Minerals, and the like; for
which the Inhabitants receive the Commodities of diverse Nations which are
brought both by Land and Sea.

The Coyns of this City, and consequently of the Kingdom, are the Ducat of Gold
called the Polander; which is accounted 70 Polish Gross. The Silver Guilden
which is worth 30 Polish Groshe or 2 Shillings Sterling, a Dollar in Specie is
worth 4 Polish Groshes, but in all contracts of buying and selling, the Doller
is accounted 36 Groshe, a Crietszar is worth 3 Pot-chanels, 18 Deniers make one
Groshe, a Groshe of Poland or Bohemia is worth 7 Whites, 16 Whites make one
Ort, 4 0rts make a Dollar, and a Dollar is accounted 4 Shillings 4 pence. The
Weight is the pound, 136 of which is accounted the Quintar, which is found in
London to render 114 pound, and the 100 of London yields 120 of Cracovia, but
the common pound is reduced to a Stone of 40 pound, 10 of the said Stones being
accounted the Skip-pound. The Measure of Length is the Ell, 20 of which are 10
English Else, but their Linen they sell by the Shock, the Shock being 57
English Else.

And to this City it will not be amiss to add Elbin, once a Scale of
Merchandise, where the English Merchants had a Factory, being here known by the
Name of the Merchants of Elbin, but since this City has fallen into the Hands
of the King of Poland, it has lost the great Trade it had upon the Abridgement
of the Liberties and Privileges it enjoyed, during its being in the possession
of the Teutonick Knights, so that now it only is famous for what it has been,
and not for what it at present remains, the Trade being dispersed into several
Eastland Cities, or Hans Towns, but from Danzick especially are brought
Soap-Ashes.

The Weights are the Pound and Stone, 40 pound making the Stone, and 40 of
those Stones make the Ship-pound, which is 400 pound, and 100 pound of London
is found to make 120 of Elbin. Their Last of Wheat is reckoned to weigh 5200
pound. Their Measure of Length is the Ell, 163 of which make 100 London Yards.
In this Tract is found Coninsberg, Rhiga, Stetin, Stralesond, and Revel, from
the former of which the Amber is brought, as for the rest they little differ in
Commodities and manner of Trade from Cracovia: Wherefore for Brevities sake, I
shall pass them over, and take a View of Hungary and the Trade thereof, etc.

CHAP. XC. A View of Hungary, and the adjacent Provinces, and of their Trade,
Weights, Measures, Coyns, and Commodities of the Growth and Manufacture.
THe Kingdom of Hungary is bounded on the East with Transylvania and Valachia,
on the West with Austria, on the South with Sclavonia, and on the North with
Poland, and is of it self exceeding Fertile, abounding in Cattle beyond credit,
but by Reason of the continual Wars with the Turks, it standing as the Bulwark
of Christendom, no great matter of Trade relating to Merchandise is found
there; the little that it consists in, is Hides, Tallow, Wax, Honey, Copper,
Tinn, Corn, Wool, Fruits, Fish, Skins, and some Silver Mines, which (since the
civil Disenssions caused by the continual Bandying of the two parties under
pretense of Religion, and the encouragement of those intestines Broyls by the
Grand-Signeour) have been thrown in many of them, and thereby render useless
Buda, and many of the Principal Cities being now in the Hands of the Turks, and
is so Seated upon the River Danube, that it hinders the free Commerce by Boats
and great Vessels; that was formerly very advantageous to the Hungarians; so
that leaving its to recover its Trade, by Submiting to its rightful Sovereign
the Emperor of Germany, and not longer trust the Flattery of the perfideous
Ottomans. I shall take a View of Dacia and Sclavonia.

Dacia, is bounded with the Euxine, on the East, and on the West with Hungary,
on the North with the Carpathian Mountains, and on the South with Greece, and
is divided into these Provinces, viz. Transylvania, Moldavia, Servia, Valachia,
Russia, Bosna, and Bulgaria, all subjected to the Grand-Seigniour, and are
Branched and Fertilized with these Rivers, viz. Danubius, Alata, Salvata,
Cockle, and Morus, besides others of lesser note.

The Commodities found in the several Provinces are Cattle, Wax, Honey, Butter,
Cheese, Tallow, Wool, Silk, Cloth, Mines, of Gold and Silver, Salt Pits,
Wines; and Mountains of Brimstone, which Commodities they send to
Constantinople, Aleppo, and other Marts of the Turkish Empire, and receive in
exchange the Commodities of all Nations, as for Weights and Measures, they are
rarely in use, they selling and buying for the most part by those of the Marts,
whether they resort with their Commodities; their Coyns are those current
throughout the Ottoman Empire. Of which I shall come to speak, in the View of
Constantinople.

Sclavonia is bounded on the South with the Adriatic Sea, on the North with
Hungary, on the West with Italy part, and on the East with the River Drinus,
and a Line that passes from thence to the Sea; and is chiefly divided into 2
parts, viz. Illyria and Dalmatia, the name of the former being lately by the
Turks, changed into that of Windismark, the which abounds in Butter, Cheese,
Cattle, Corn, Oil, Wine, Hemp, Wool, Wax, Honey, Tallow, Iron, and the like. Of
Dalmatia, Rhagusa is the Principal City, so that I will not be amiss to reduce
the Trade of that Province, which is not Extraordinary into its Metropolis.

Rhagusa formerly called Epidaurus, is Seated on the Adriatic Shore, and was
once a Commonwealth of great Traffic, and the first in those parts that
Furnished out Ships of War of considerable force, with which they awed their
Neighbors, and gave Laws in those Seas, but since the English and Dutch
Navigators have turned the current of Traffic another way, and drained those
parts of the Commerce that was wont to Flow in upon them like the Ocean. The
Inhabitants are no ways considerable, yet the Commodities of the Province are
found there, as Honey, Wax, Horses for War, Hides, Tallow, Silver, and Gold
unrefined, some Amber, Corral and the like, but of small value; for which they
receive of those English, that make Trading Voyages, Hampshire Carsies, and
other Coarse Cloth, Lead, Tinn, and such like; and that mostly for provision.

The Coyns in use here is the Gross, 59 of which are accounted a Sultany, or 8
Shillings Sterling.

The Weight is the pound 100 of which make 80 pound English, which is the
Quintal of Rhagusa. Their Measure of Length is the Brace, according with the
Venetian Brace, thus, 100 Braces of Rhagusa of the Cloth Brace, are 120 in
Venice of the same, and of the Silk Brace 116 of Venice make the 100 of
Rhagusa. And thus leaving Hungary, Dacia, and Sclavonia, I shall pass into
Greece, and take a Survey of the Trade of that once famous Empire.

CHAP. XCI. A View of Greece and of the Trade thereof, Comprised in the Trade
found at the famous City of Constantinople, together with the Weights,
Measures, Customs, and Coyns thereof.
GReece famous for being once Mistress of the Universe, is bounded on the South
with the Ionian Sea, on the North with the Mountain Hemus, on the East with the
Hellispont, Aegean Sea, Propontis, and the Thracian Bosphorus, and is
Fertilized by these considerable Rivers; viz. Cephius, Erigon, Alicmon, Sirmon,
Alicus, and Nisus, and is divided into 8 Principal Provinces, viz.
Peloponnesus, Achaia, Epirus, Albania, Macedonia, Thessalia, Migdonia, and
Thracia, all of them replenished with Cities of note; but seeing their Trade
Centers in Constantinople, thither I shall refer it.

The famous City of Constantinople, once the Seat of the Roman Eastern Empire,
and now of the Ottoman Emperor, for the most part is Seated upon a large
Stream, that passes from the Euxine to the Mediterranian Sea, commonly called
the Black and White Seas, so that by such means Ships from either Sea have a
free passage, which causes a quicker return then otherwise could be made, by
Reason from one part or other the Wine rarely fails: It Fronts likewise Asia,
receiving most of the Commodities by Sea and Land that are found in that large
quarter of the World, and stands as it were the Bulwark of Europe, lastly
founded by Constantine the great, and made the Seat of the Roman Empire as
aforesaid, being taken after a long Siege by the Turks Anno 1453, who ever
since have possessed it, it being Builded in a Triangle, having the 2 large
Angles Bordering on the Sea, and the other stretched into the Land, and is
encompassed with a Triple Wall, upon which are diverse Towers, and the Walls
themselves Guarded by deep Ditches, and Cannons all along the works to the Sea;
the Buildings for the most part are very stately, but especially the
Grand-Signeours Palace, on the point of the Angle, being surrounded with a
Wall of 3 Miles in compass, and strong works furnished with great and small
Artiliry.

This City is the common Mart for all Commodities of the Empire, receiving and
dispersing inwards and outward the growth of each Province: And hither the
Merchants of London first began to Trade Anno 1586, and in a short time found
such encouragement upon Queen Elizabeth's sending an Ambassador to mediate on
their behalf; that they soon obtained to be incorporated by the said Queen, and
growing in Trade, were confirmed by King James, with an Augmentation of their
Privileges, and then by King Charles the first, under the Title of the
Merchants of England, Trading in the Levant Seas, or Levant Merchants, upon
whose account a Leiger Ambassador remains at Constantinople, to protect the
Companies Factories, and take care that right be done them, who before his
departure from England, is always approved of by his Majesty, but himself and
retinue have their charges defrayed by the Company, which Honorable trust now
remains in the right Honorable the Lord Shandois, they have likewise several
Consuls to protect their Factories throughout the Empire, who keep Janissaries,
Druggermen or Interpreters, Secretaries, and Ministers, with other the like
necessary attendants in Sallary, being permitted free exercise of Religion: And
hither it is at present that the English are found the Principal Traders, tho
the Venetians, French, and Dutch, by sundry devices have endeavored to
insinuate themselves, into the good opinions of the Turkish Merchants; who are
accounted 4 kinds, viz. the Native Greek, the Turks, the Armenians, and lastly
the Jews. The chief Commodities found here are Grograms, Mohairs, Chamlets,
Persian-Silk, wrought and unwrought Gold, Carpets, Anniseeds, Cumminseeds,
Cottons, Galls, Pepper, Jndico, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Mace, and Drugs, these last
being the Commodities of the East-India's, are brought cheaper and better from
thence, therefore not Traded for by the English at Constantinople, but rather
carried by them thither, and exchanged for the Growth of the Empire, as
likewise Lead, Tinn, Cloth, Furs, as Martins, Cony-Skins, Sables, Titchues,
and the like; at the change of every Ambassador, the Company make a present to
the Grand-Signeour, which is levied by the Company themselves by way of
imposition, the like are the French, and Dutch obliged to do upon some
occasion, and for the support of their Factories and Ambassadors.

The Accounts are kept in Dollars and Aspers, a Dollar being computed 80
Aspers, tho sometimes in way of Merchandise 100 Aspers are accounted to the
Dollar, and and 120 Aspers to the Sultany.

The Coyns current in this City, and consequently throughout the Empire are the
Sultany of Gold, agreeing with the Venice Chequin, or is as aforesaid 120
Aspers, the German Dollar, the Ryal of 8/8 Spanish, current at 80 Aspers; the
Lions Dollar is current at 75 Aspers, the German Sesetine at 70 Aspers, and
indeed any Coin if found good Gold or Silver is current in Constantinople, and
most parts of the Empire; a Policy used to procure plenty of Coin, for the
maintenance of the Janissaries and others, in pay of all Nations.

The Weights are the Grain, 4 of which make a Quillat, a Dram which is 16
Grains of which all greater Weights are composed by Multiplication: as a
Yursdrome is 100 Drams, and found to be 1 pound Sotile of Venice, or 72
Mittigals: a Lodero is 176 Drams, or 19 Ounces Averdupois: an Oak is 400*
Drams accounted 2 pound 11 Ounces: 100 Lodero's are accounted 24 Oaks; and
compose the Quintar of Constantinople, which has been found to render between
118 and 120 pound English Subtle. A Batman is 6 Oaks, or 16 pound English, by
which all Silks are bought, and according to these all other Weights of the
Empire are regulated.

The Measures of Length are the Pico's, which are 3. The first for Cloth which
is accounted 26 Inches.

The second for Grograms, Chamlet, and such like, containing 24 Inches, so that
24 of these Pico's are found to make 16 English Yards. The third is the Linen
Pico, which is the former doubled. To none of these is any advantage allowed as
in England.

The Concave Measure is called the Killow, by which for the most part Corn is
Measured, 8 of which are observed to make the London Quarter, Wines, Oils, and
almost all Liquids are sold by the Meter, weighing 8 Oaks, and is about of an
English Gallon, as indeed most Commodities are sold by Weight.

The Customs paid by the Italians, French, and Jews, outward and inward are 5
per cent. the Turks themselves pay nothing, the English and Dutch pay 3 per
cent. inward, and the like outward, which is paid in Specie, unless the
Merchant does compound with the Customer for money; and further it is to be
observed, that, besides these Customs, there is by agreement paid 1 per cent.
upon all pondrous Commodities, and 1 upon all Measurable Commodities, which is
to be defrayed between the buyer and seller, but if a Turk be one, his part is
remitted, and this is levied for the Maintenance of a Hospital founded by
Sultan Achmet, which duties are farmed by an Emine or Farmer called the
Grand-Seigenors receiver, and are most commonly paid the one half in Aspers,
of 80 Aspers to the Dollar, and the other in Sultanies of Gold, or otherwise as
the Merchants and Customer can agree. And thus having at large described the
Trade of this great City, I shall proceed to take a View of the Islands of
note, lying in the Egean, Ionian, Mediterranian, and Adriatic Seas.

CHAP. XCII. A View of the Islands in the Ionian, Egean, Mediterranean, and
Adriatic Seas; with a Description of the Trade, Weights, Measures, Coyns, and
Commodities of the Growth and Manufacture of the most considerable of them.
THe Islands in these Seas are many, therefore I shall only name those of
little note and insist upon the chief.

First then there is found the Island of Tenedos, abounding with Wines.

The Isle of Samothracia, commodious for the Harboring Ships.

Lemnos from whence comes that Antidote, called Terra Sigilata, or Terra
Lemnos, then Scio or Chios, abounding in Trees, from which they distill
Mastick, which Commodities the Grand Signeour claims as his right.

Next the famous Island of Rhodes, which by Reason of its commodious Situation
in the Ocean, is found to be a Place of great resort. In the chief City from
which the Island takes name, is a considerable Mart, affording Corn, Wines,
Oils, Rasins, Wax, Honey, Cotton, Cordovants, Cotton Wools, and Cotton Yarn,
Dimities, Vermilions, Damask, Stuffs, Silks, and the like; being the
Commodities of diverse Islands in those Seas, and here some Factories are
maintained; and the Accounts kept in Aspers of Turkey, and the other Coyns for
the most part the same. The Weight is the Rotolo, 100 of which makes the
Quintar or 536 pound English. The Measure of Length is the Cane, which is found
to be 84 Inches of English.

The next Island that offers, is the famous Island of Candia, which cost the
Turks so dear a purchase. Therefore I shall not think it amiss to describe its
Commodities, Weights, and Measures.

CHAP. XCIII. A View of the Isle Candia and other Islands.
THe Isle of Candia is Seated in the Mouth of the Egean Sea, and is now in
subjection to the Grand-Signeor, being exceeding Fruitful and affords
considerable Commodities, as Muskadels, Fine-Sugars, Gums, Honey, Wax. Dates,
Oranges, Limons, Olives, Rasins, Corn, Cattle, Fish, and the like; containing
several Cities of note as Candia; from whence the Island has its name, Canea,
Rhettmio, Sittia, and Suda, being a Haven capable of receiving 1000 or 1500
large Vessels, and before the Venetians lost it, their Coyns were current
throughout the Island, and their Weights the Quintars Subtle and Gross. The
Gross 100 of Candia rendering 110 of the like Gross Weight of Venice, or 118
English pound, and 100 pound Subtle of Candia, 114 pound of Venice Subtle, or
76 pound English. The Measures of Length are the Pico's, one for Cloth,
another for Silk, and their Measure for Wine called the Mestach; but the Turks
have since their conquest made some alteration in the Weights, Measures, and
Coyns which as yet are not come to my knowledge, I not having been there since
the reduction.

In the Ionian Sea are also found the Isle of Cerigo, abounding with Marble,
the Strophades or Strivalia, the Cursalari Islands, and Corfue, the last of
which abounds in Wax, Honey, Oil, and Wine, Stuffs, Silk-Fabricks, etc. There
is likewise found St. Mairo, Ithaca, Zeffalonia, and Zant, the 3 latter of
which are famous for the Currants found growing there in abundance, and from
thence dispersed throughout Europe, but mostly spent in England, wherefore I
shall somewhat enlarge in describing the Trade thereof.

CHAP. XCIV. A View of Zant, Zeffalonia, and Ithaca, together with their Trade,
Commodities, Weights, Measures, Coyns, etc.
THe Commodities that these Islands principally afford are Honey, Wax, Oil,
Wine and Currants, being Subject to the Signeory of Venice; and hither it is
that the English Trade for Currants, now being of great use; and from whence
they yearly bring 3000 Tuns or upward, which at first they bought for small
matters, but the Venetians seeing that Fruit so much coveted, began to inquire
into the use they were put to, the which when they found, and thereupon
imagined the English could not Subsist without them, the better to recover the
lost Trade of Venice; that State imposed a Tax of 5 Ducats upon every 1000
Weight, which is since Augmented, notwithstanding the Custom paid in England
with this Proviso; that the Currants be laden in a Vessel that comes purposely
to lade that Commodity, but if She Landeth her outward Freight in Venice or
part thereof, and then goes to Lade at any of these Islands, the Customs then
are moderated.

For the Growth of these Islands; the English Merchants Exchange Cloth,
Perpetuano's, Serges, Lead, Tinn, Herrings, Newland-Fish, and Pilchards, tho
the greatest Trade is for Spanish Ryals; all the other money current amongst
the Islanders, being the same with that of Venice. The Natives keeping their
Accounts as in Venice, tho Merchants Strangers often keep theirs in Dollars,
which are those Ryals of 8/8 and Gassets 80 to the Dollar.

The Weight is the pound of 12 Ounces, 100 of which pounds make the Quintar,
and agrees with Venice, thus the 100 pound Subtle of Venice make but 63 pound
of these Islands, and the Gross hundred of Venice renders but the common 100
pound. Currants are bought by the 1000, which 1000 Weight is reckoned to make
1070 pound English, tho of late by the carelessness of the Factors, or defraud
of the Islanders, it is found much less.

The Measures of Length are the two Braces, the long and the short, the long is
for Woollen and Linen Cloth, and the short for Silks, the former being found
27 English Inches, and the latter to be 6 in 7 per cent. lesser.

Oil is sold by a Measure called the Liver, and is computed to weigh 13 pound
English, 10 of which make a Candia, Barrel. Wine is sold by the Jar 3 of which
make the Candia Barrel. Corn they sell by the Bechelo 3 of which are accounted
the Starro, and should weigh 44 pound, etc.

The Customs raised upon the Commodities of these Islands yearly, are between
40 and 50000 Chequins of Gold; which are the Income of the Signory of Venice.

The Islands found in the Adriatic Sea are Absertides, Cherso, Vegea, Grissa,
Leliva, Cursola, Brassia, Lissia, and Zara, which yield Wine, Corn, Oil,
Cattle, and the like; but enjoy at this Day little or no Trade, except Zara the
chief of them. And therefore I shall pass them over, and enter the
Mediterranean, to take a View of the Islands Seated therein.

CHAP. XCV. Of the Islands in the Mediterranian Sea, and the Trade of the
Principal of them.
IN the Mediterranian Sea are found these Islands viz. Sicilia, Malta, Corsica,
Sardinia, Majorica, and Minorica, of the chief of which in order.

Sicilia is the chief of these Islands, computed 700 Miles in circuit;
Fertilized with many Navigable Rivers, and adorned with many fair Cities, and
is divided in 3 Provinces as Vallis-de-Nota, Masara, and Mona. In this Island
is found the Flaming Mount Aetna, and Mount Hiblia, in which is found great
store of Honey, but for Brevities sake, I shall reduce the Trade of this Island
into that of Messina the chief Port thereof, which stands opposite to Regio in
Calabria, the Island being divided from Italy by a narrow Frith or Channel,
commonly called the Fare of Messina, and formerly accounted dangerous for
Sailors, by Reason of a Rock on the one side, and a Sand on the other, known by
the names of Scylla and Charibdis.

This City for some Years past, has been Garisoned by the French, which put a
stop to Inland Commerce, by Reason that the other Cities were in possession of
the Spaniard, but since their abandoning it, the Trade is again returned, many
Merchants of note residing there, and by Reason of its Commodiousness for the
reception of Shipping, it has acquired a great Trade, so that hither are
brought the Commodities of the whole Island, as Wines, Oils, Wax, Honey,
Saffron, Sugars, Corral, Agates, Pumice, Corn, Cattle, Hides, Skins, Cavear,
Tuny Fish, and the like; so that although Palermo is the chief City and residence
of the Spanish Viceroy, yet this is the chief Scale of Trade.

The Merchants keep their Accounts in Ounces, Tarries, and Grains, one Ounce
making 30 Tarries, and 1 Tarry 20 Grains, and by the same they account their
money, viz. one Ounce or 30 Tarries is 5 Florins or Carlins, 12 Carlins making
the Florin, one Tarry is accounted 12 Solds, 6 Deniers, or one Carline, the
Carline being 10 Grains or 12 Livers, one Grain is 6 Picholis, and is 7 Dew
money of Siciliano, one Pancto is 8 Picholis, and the Ducat of Gold is worth 13
Tarries, and this money is current throughout the Island.

The Weights of Messina are two, viz. the Gross Cantar, by which they weigh all
manner of Gross Commodities, the small or Subtle Cantar 10 pound less then the
former, and is 100 Rotolo's of 30 Ounces, or 2 pound Siciliano pounds, the
former having been found to make 196 in 198 pound English, 20 Peso's being
accounted the Subtle Cantar, and 22 the Gross Cantar.

The Measure of Length is the Cane, divided into 8 Palms or 81 Inches London
Measure.

The Concave Measures are the Salmo and Tomelo, 16 of the latter making the
former, which is accounted 11 Staio's of Florence, Oil is sold by the Cantar,
which is 2 Barrels Florence, and has been found to render in Weight 180 pound
English.

The Custom of this place and of the Island in general, is for the most part 9
and 10 per cent. upon all Sollid goods, but Fish and other Edible Commodities
pay 12 per cent. and all Commodities of Weight imported, whether they are sold
or not sold; pay 3 per cent. at Messina, and removing from Ship to Ship, pays 3
per cent. and sometimes 3, all Merchandise conveyed out of the Island at the
Port of Messina, pay 6 per cent. unless when the fair is, and then according to
a Custom granted, some Commodities pay less then other some, as for instance,
Silk pays but 3 per cent.

The Islands of Malta, Corsica, and Sardinia, afford store of Oranges, Limons,
Citrons, Honey, Wax, Oils, Figs, Rasins, Wines, Honey, Alum, Box-Wood, Iron,
Hides, Cheese, Cattle, and the like; but are not much Traded too. And therefore
I shall forbear to describe them further.

Majorica and Minorica, the former 300 Miles in circuit, and the latter 250 are
Seated in the Mediterranean, 9 Miles distant from each other; and abound in
Corn, Oil, Wine, Fruits, Drugs, which are yearly laded for England and other
Countries; but especially Oil. Their Moneys are for the most part those current
in Spain. Their Weights 2, viz. the Rotolo and Cantar, 100 of the first making
the last called Barbaresco, which there is 117 pound making in London 110
pound, they have likewise another Cantar of 104 pound, called the Cantar of
Majorica, they likewise sell some Commodities by the Cargo, as Pepper Ginger,
Cinnamond, Nutmegs, Rice, and the which Cargo is 3 Cargo's, of 104 pound. The
Measure of Length is the Cane, found to make 67 in 68 London Inches. The The
Oil Measure is the Quartano, 12 of which make the Odor, and 212 that of 126
Gallons which is a Tun of Oil, according to London Gauge, and the Customs and
other charges are reckoned to 2 pound 7 Shillings 6 Pence per Tun.

In this Sea are the Islands of Javisa, affording store of Salt, as also the
Isles Lipara Promentary, Pantcleria, Caprea, Ischia, Progitue, Elba, Gages or
Cales, with some others of smaller note, affording Cattle, Corn, Olive, Oil,
Wine, Gapars, Cavere, Oranges, Limons, Citrons, Fish, and the like; most of
them in the possession of the Spaniard. And thus leaving the Medeterranian, I
shall enter the North Ocean, to take a View of the Islands not as yet mentioned
in this Treatise.

CHAP. XCVI. A View of Greenland, and the Whale Fishery, with an account of
several Islands in the Northern Seas.
GReenland or Gronland is Seated under the Frozen Zone; doubtful whither an
Island or a Continent, by reason part of those Seas are not Navigable upon the
account of the Mountains of Ice that Float therein, and for that none ever yet
passed over Land to the extent of that dismal Country; where from the 14 of
October to the 12 of February no Sun appears, but the Moon shines as in
England, and for 3 Months and a half, in Summer time they have no Night, as for
humane Inhabitants there are none; yet the Woods and Caves abound with Bears,
Foxes, and Dear, and the Voyages the English make thither, are upon the account
of the Whale Fishery, Whales in abundance being found in those deep Seas, the
Ships seting out in May, and Arriving in June at Green-Harbour and Bell-Sound.
They set up their Caldrons Presses and other necessaries, then put again to
Sea, and when they perceive the Whales coming by the rising of the Water, they
send out Skiffs with Hasping-Irons and Cables; when the men therein taking
their advantage strike the Whales, who no sooner find themselves wounded but
Plunge to the Bottom, those in the Boat giving them Rope, and by their Sinking
know where they will rise; and give notice to the Ships who stand off for fear
of being overset, when they rise with horrible Bellowing, they make toward the
Shore spouting Blood and Water; the Reason of their so doing is to endeavor
the rubing out of the Irons upon the Sands, but in vain for then by force of
Cables they draw them on shore, and their cut out their Pulps, of which they
make the Oil, and their Fins, of which our Whalebone is made by drying and
preparing; so that sometimes one Whale is found to yield 3 Tuns of Oil, and
half a Tun Weight of Whalebone. Here it was that several Persons were left a
whole Winter (the Ship going away during their Hunting up in the Country) and
lived in a Hutt upon Bears-Flesh, Venison, Wild-Foxes, Birds, and the Greens or
pressings of the Whales, till next year the Ships came again, and fetched them
off. For 7 Months, all the Seas are Frozen over, and the Country is covered
with Mountains of Snow.

In this Tract is Nova Zembla, where the Pole is elevated 76 degrees, and
whither the Dutch yearly resort to Fish for Whales, and such other Fish as
yield matter for Oil. It abounds in Dear, Wild-Foxes, and the like as
Greenland; and in it likewise not long since several Dutchmen were forced to
Winter, and suffered great Extremity by Reason of the excessive cold. There are
found likewise Sr. Hugh Willoughby's Island, called Queen Elizabeth's Foreland;
likewise Freezland, Iceland and others of lesser note, but by Reason of the
excessive cold, few of them are Inhabited, and the chief Commodities they yield
are Ling, Cod, and Fish Oils.

And thus according to my promise having taken Survey of the Trade of all the
known part of the Universe, as near as can be gathered from long experience and
credible Authority, I shall return with Joy to Tread my Native Soil, and there
take a View of what yet remains in relation to Trade and Commerce. And first I
shall begin with Exchanges, that one necessary part of all Navigational and
Inland Commerce.

CHAP. XCVII. A View of the Practice of Exchanges in General, and the advantage
accruing thereby.
THat Exchanges are a Principal part of Merchandise, it is most certain, and
has been so found for 200 Years p^st, tho not brought to perfection till of
late Days. The places most apt for Exchanges are those where many Merchants of
diverse Nations reside; and have frequent meetings in relation to Trade, and
Prizes of Commodities, whose returns are Subject to great Exchanges, which are
ever advantageous to the place where they are Practiced. Now some places there
are that have Exchanges in themselves, yet are compelled to depend upon other
places; having only certain times or Fairs appointed by the Custom of
Exchangers, in which, or to which Bills of Exchange are either expired,
renewed, or dated, one of which is Placentia; and indeed all Towns in Countries
where there is more then one Exchange established, the Metropolis or Principal
Exchange gives Rules, and Rates to the rest; provided the Coyns be of equal
value and goodness, nor indeed tho many places have attributed the name of
Exchanges, yet that Exchange remains not so much in Esse as in the will of the
Merchants, Bankers, and Exchangers, in whose Power it is to assign the place as
they think convenient; and for the most part pitch upon Principal places, where
their Bills are sure to have a quick dispatch. Now there are several Cities
that exchange in one and the same Moneys, Coyns, and Denomination; as Naples,
Lechie, Barry, the two latter included in the former, Palermo, and Messina,
comprehended in Sicilia; Valentia, Saragosa, and Barselona in Cattalonia;
Sevil, Alcala, and Medina-del-Campo in Castilia; Frankford, Colona, Noremburg,
and Augusta in Germany, with many other of less note. But exchange now from a
Plain and easy Method is reduced to so many mysterious Points, that it is
extraordinary difficult to understand it aright in all places, therefore I
shall only lay down such Particulars as chiefly concern English Merchants; and
are conducing to the Trade of the British Empire. The first thing then that is
to be observed, is the true value of the Coin of the City, or Port where you
make your exchange, which is not to be taken according to the value of the Coin
as it is current, but according to its Weight and fineness, and so the return
may be proportionable; but if Bills are drawn to pay a Merchant residing in any
place where the Coin is current, and he disposes of it for Commodities of the
Growth, or Manufacture of the Country, then it matters not how the Coin has
been inhaunced above its true value, by Reason it is current, tho perhaps
should the Coin be carried into an other Kingdom, it might redound to the loss
of the receiver a third part; and this equallizing Coyns of diverse Nations by
Balance I called a Par, by which all Coyns of Silver or Gold especially, are
reduced to an equal value; as for example, Placentia exchanges with London one
Crown of current money there for 1 Shilling 6 pence ob. Sterling, Lions the
Crown current for 2 Shillings 8 pence Sterling, Rome exchanges her Ducat 87
pence Sterling, Genoa her Crown of Gold at 83 pence Sterling, Millain her Crown
of Gold 84 pence ob. Sterling, Venice her Ducat at 60 pence Sterling, Florence
her Crown at 80 pence, Luca her Ducat at 67 pence Sterling, Naples her Ducat at
66 pence Sterling, Lechy her Ducat at 6 pence Sterling, Bary her Ducat at 62
pence Sterling, Palermo her Ducat at 78 pence Sterling, Messina her Ducat at 72
pence Sterling, Valentia her Ducat at 72 pence Sterling, Saragosa her Ducat at
73 pence Sterling, Barsalonia her Ducat at 72 pence Sterling, Sevil her Ducat
at 72 pence Sterling, Lisbon her Ducat at 69 pence Sterling, Bolonia her Ducat
at 67 pence Sterling, Bergamo her Ducaton at 67 pence Sterling, Frankfort,
Noremburg, Augusta, and Viena (in all which Cities one and the same Coin is
current) Exchange their Florin at 50 pence Sterling; all these Cities and Towns
London exchanges within broken numbers (that is by pence) at the rates
aforesaid, and so Multiplies into greater Sums as occasion requires, but with
Antwerp and Collen, Amsterdam, etc, in whole number, as one pound Sterling for
34 Flemish Shillings, and proportionable for greater Sums.

Again in London and throughout all England Exchangers and Merchants keep their
Accounts in Pounds, Shillings, Pence, and cast them up as is done in other
places, by Solds, Livers, and Denire, viz. 12 pence to the Shilling, and 20
Shillings to the pound, and are found to exchange with Transmarine Cities thus,
viz. to allow 64 pence Sterling, for the Crown of Placentia 64 pence Sterling,
for the Crown of Lions 66 pence Sterling, for the Ducat of Rome 65 pence, for
the Crown of Gold of Genoa 64 2/4 pence, for the Crown of Gold of Millain 50
pence, for the Ducat in Banco of Venice 61 pence, for the Crown of Florence 53
pence, for the Ducaton of Luca 50 pence, for the Ducat of Naples 50 pence, for
the Ducat of Lechy 51 pence, for the Ducat of Bary 57, for the Ducat of Palermo
56, for which Ducat of Messina one pound Sterling, for 34 Shillings Flemish,
with Antwerp and Collon 57 pence, for the Ducat of Valentia 59 pence, for the
Ducat of Saragosa 64 pence, for the Ducat of Barselona 59 pence, for the Florin
of Frankford 52 pence, for the Ducaton of Bergamo 53, for the Ducaton of
Bolonia 53 pence, and for the Ducat of Lisbon 53. And thus the current Exchange
is settled, and continues unless in times of War, when Princes to Enrich their
Coffers, make an Inhaunsment upon the current Coyns in their respective
Dominions, and at other times when the Banker or Exchanger takes the advantage
of the Parties necessity, upon whose Accounts the exchange is to be made.

The Terms of paying Bills of exchange in London with other Cities, are
commonly these. To Venice at 3 Months after date, and so upon return to Antwerp
at one Month after date; and so back to Genoa at 3 Months, and so back to Lions
for the Fair, and so from Fair to Fair as the Custom of that City is; to Pisa
at 3 Months after date, and so back to Placentia, from Fair to Fair according
to the Custom of the place; to Florence at 3 Months after date, and so upon
return to Rouen and Paris at one Month after date, and so back; and these Bills
are current money, insomuch that many Millions are paid by Bills without
telling any money, Merchants passing the Bills to one another by assignment as
current Coyns, of which Bills their Presentations, Intimations, Acceptations,
Protests, and Returns, I shall in the following Chapter, expose to the View of
the Reader.

CHAP. XCVIII. A Discourse of the Forms of Bills of Exchange, how they ought to
be drawn, presented, paid or protested in default; with a caution against
delays, and the danger thereof, according to the Law and Custom of Merchants.
A Bill of Exchange in it self is held so excellent a speciallity, and carries
with it not only as it were a commanding Power to pay; but is for the most part
observed and satisfied with all due regard, tho drawn by a Servant upon his
Master, such a high esteem being ever had for the quality thereof, that nothing
in the way of Trade can be more, for upon it depends the reputation of the
Drawer and Accepter: So that those who fail in the payment of accepted Bills,
wound their credit by suffering Protest to be made, which soon gets Wind and
spreads wide upon the Exchange, and not only so but obliges the Acceptor to pay
the char^^^ of the Protestant return, and cal^s into question the credit of the
drawer.

Of bills of exchange there are two sorts, as (...) and Inland, viz. the former
drawn upon ^. Merchant Banker, etc. Living beyond the Seas, the second upon a
Merchant Banker or other Person living in the same Country, tho distant from
the place where the Bill is drawn; as to make a Bill payable at London, for
money taken up at Bristol; each having equal force ought to have due observance
alike.

As to an Exchange, four, three or two Persons may make it thus, 2 at the place
where the money is taken up, and 2 at the place were it is payable, first the
deliverer, secondly the taket, thirdly the Person that is to take the money,
and fourthly the party upon whom the Bill is drawn. 3 Persons thus, first the
taker, secondly the deliverer, and thirdly the Person on whom the Bill is drawn.

2 Persons, first the Drawer, and secondly the Party on whom it is drawn, the
former making his Bill payable to himself or order, which may of Exchange is
very advantageous as well to Merchants as other Traders.

There is another sort of Exchange called a dry exchange, which is practiced
thus, if a Person have occasion for 100 pound, he goes to a Banker who takes a
Bill of Exchange of him to be paid at Lions, or Paris at double or treble
Usance; tho the Drawer has no Correspondence in either of the Cities, then the
Bill growing due, the Banker receives a Protest for non-payment, upon which the
Drawer in London must pay the money with costs, which is a Trick to evade the
Statute against Extortion.

There is likewise a feigned Exchange which is thus, the Banker agrees to lend
me money upon Bill of exchange payable at Amsterdam, yet between our selves it
is payable here, which if I pay at the time appointed, I receive my discharge
according to agreement, but if I make default, then the Banker Writes to his
Friend at Amsterdam, who sends him a Bill of Exchange for the like Sum owing
him here, so that I who borrowed the money, am obliged to pay the cost of the
exchanges and other charges.

Another Exchange there is called the petty Exchanges as thus, to exchange 20
Shilling in Silver, for 21 Shillings in Brass or Copper, which is the most
inconsiderable. And thus much for the several sorts of Exchangs.

CHAP. XCIX. Of the Pair in Exchange, and the Forms of English, Dutch, and
French Bills of Exchange.
THe Pair is nothing more then an Equalizing or reducing Coyns of several
Kingdoms, to an equal value, let there be never so much difference in the
Pieces, etc. By which means a Bill may be drawn to pay a just Sum in any place
where Exchange is made, either by Tale or Weight, as from Middleburrough,
Lisle, Rotterdam, and Amsterdam: For our pound Sterling is returned or
exchanged 33 Shillings Flemish, which make 10 Guilders at 2 Shillings Sterling;
each Guilder or 10 Livers Turnois, and so in other Countries, our Pence
according to reckoning and Equality are exchanged.

The Form of an English Inland Bill. Laus Deo in London, this 20 of March 1682
For 200 pound Sterling.
At six Days sight, pay this my first Bill of Exchange to Mr. William D. or
assigns. Two hundred pounds Sterling, for the value here Received of Mr.
Richard W. Make good payment and put it to Account as by advice.

To Mr. George L. Merchant d. d. Pma. in Bristol. Your loving Friend Samuel G.


And so the second and third Bill, the first not paid, and if he that does
under-Write the Bill, does make himself Debtor, then he under-Writes, And put
it to my Account; but if he ought to pay it then he Writes, And put it to your
Account; and sometimes they Write, And put it to the Account of such a one,
meaning him.

The Form of an Outlandish Bill in English thus.

Laus Deo in London. This 20 of December 1682. For 200 pound at 36 Shillings 8
pence Flemish per pound.
At Usance pay this my first Bill of Exchange to Mr. Peter Vandrome M. or order
200 pound Sterling at 36 Shillings 8 pence Flemish per pound Sterling, for the
value here received of Mr. James G. Make good payment, and put it to Account as
per advice.

To Mr. Richard L. Merchant d. d. Pma. in Rotterdam. Your loving Friend Charles
B.


And so the second and third at double or treble Usance, if the first be not
paid, or if it be, so be it that the party to whom it is directed, owe the
Drawer so much money as is required.

The Form of a French Bill from Paris. A paris Juillet 1682 pour 350 {water} a
52 pence Sterling p. {water}.
A Double Vsance payez, per Cast, per Miere de Change a Mons'r Autwaine D Ou a
son order trees Centz Escus a Cinquante deux deniers, Sterlins pour Escu
Valleur recu de Monsieur Francivis G. and Passez count Suivant l' advys de.

Mounsieur Monsieur Paul B. Merchant. (...) Londres. Ure tres humble Serviteur.
Frances R.


And so the second or third as aforesaid

The Form of a Dutch Bill is thus.

Rotterdam adi 28 November 1682. Voor 200 pound Sterling.
Op uso betaelt desen mine Ersten Wisselbrief Aen Sr. Jan E. Ost order Hondret
pouden Sterliuex, Valuta Van Sr. Robert L. Stelt op mine reckoning als per advys.

Ersamen Sr. William G. Coopman. tot Pma. London. Martin R.


If any Bill be negotiated by Exchange or the money taken in, and so to be
Assigned over to another Man, the Assignment must be Written on the back side
of the Bill thus.

Pay the Contents on the other side hereof to Mr. James K. or Assigns for the
value received of Mr. William G. London 6 November 1682. Arthur N. and if James
K. do likewise Assign the same Bill for his account, then it requires to be
Written only thus.

Pay the contents hereof to Mr. Thomas L. And so in effect upon all Bills.

CHAP. XCX. Several useful observations to be carefully noted, in the
Management of Bills of Exchange.
OBserve to note in your Book the Name of the place of abode of the Person who
presents the Bill, keep Coppies of the Bills sent to get accepted, make the
direction of Bills on the inside, and all for the Reasons following.

First by knowing the place of Abode of him that presented the first Bill, he
may be the better excused, if he except against the second Bill from the same
Hand, before the first be satisfied.

Secondly by taking Copies of Bills sent to get acceptance, you may know how
Exchanges go in all places, and at the same time to know without any great
trouble, on whom you are to call for your money, and what Day.

Thirdly to make the direction of Bills on the inside, will give larger Scope
to Write this Assignment on the back side.

4ly. Every Person who receives a Bill to get it accepted, whether for himself
or another must, tho some hold the contrary, present the said Bill in due time;
that the Person who is to accept it, may order his affairs accordingly, and not
be surprised with the presentation of a Bill, just when it becomes due.

5ly. If a Bill be protested after acceptance, it does not clear the party who
was faulty in non-payment, but renders him liable to pay the charges; and
exposes him to an Action at Law, to which before he was not liable, nor is the
Drawer cleared, but obliged to see the Bill satisfied.

6ly. Times of payment are according to the distance or Custom of the places,
where the Bills are drawn, and were payable, as has before been briefly
touched, as from London to Antwerp, Midelborrough, Rotterdam, Lysle, Rouen and
Paris, at a Months Usance.

7ly It is dangerous to draw a Bill payable to the bearer, by Reason if a Bill
should happen to be lost, any Person might bring it for acceptance or payment,
therefore the safest way is to make it payable to a particular man, or his
order; for otherwise if it should be paid to the wrong party, and the Bill
received, he on whom it is drawn, is not liable to pay it again unless a Fraud
be proved.

81y. A Bill of Exchange is held so Authentic, that it requires no witness,
nor is it requisite that any Person unless the Person that receives it be
present at the Writing thereof, or that any one be present, when the party who
accepts it under-writes his name, for if any Person either Drawer or Subscriber
should deny his Hand, it may be easiely proved by comparing his Letter or Books
of Account, and if that be proved his credit is inevitably ruined.

9ly. If you receive an Outland Bill present it presently, and if it be refused
protest without delay, and send it back to the Drawer with Protest, which will
be for the advantage of both. Twenty four Hours is the longest time, that you
are obliged to give any Merchant to consider whether he will or not, and after
that, it is at your pleasure whether you will protest or give longer time, and
after protest advice ought to be given to the Drawer by the first Post.

10. If a Bill be drawn on two Persons, and not to them or either of them, but
jointly, yet if one do accept it and the other refuse it the Bill ought to be
protested.

11. If a Bill be presented to any Person, and he by word of mouth, desires it
may be left in his Hands, and does Verbally accept it, although he afterward
refuse to Subscribe it, yet such an acceptance is valid, and he may be Sued
upon due Protest, tho Protest must not be made till the money becomes due.

12. If a man accept a Bill for part and not for the whole, alleging he has no
more in his Hands; the Person to whom the money is payable, may receive the
part and give an acquittance for so much as he receives, but must enter Protest
for non-payment of the rest, and send it away as soon as the party refuses to
accept for the whole.

13. The Drawer is Master of the Bill till it becomes due, and may Countermand
it by sending an Express to the party, who has accepted it not to pay it
without further order, which order must be made, and passed before a public
Notary, and notifyed to the party that has accepted the Bill, but if the money
be paid it is past recovery.

14. A Bill of Exchange may be paid at Usance single, double or treble, that
is length of time according to the quality of the Person; the occasion or
difficulty of passage by Reason of different Seasons, but general Usance is
accounted a Month from the Date of the Bill, each month tho different in number
of Days being accounted, the Month required on that occasion.

15. A Bill payable at Days sight, is from the Day after it is accepted, else
Protest ought to be made. If an accepted Bill be lost, yet it will not Bar the
payment, but may be Sued for as if the Bill were in being, nor is the party who
accepted it bound to pay a second Bill, before the first be discharged, unless
the second Bill be directed to the party who lost the Former in lieu thereof.

16. When a Bill is accepted, there is no revoking it, but it must be either
paid or Protested; tho sometimes it happens that the Acceptor and the Party to
whom the Bill is payable, do conclude upon longer time then the Bill specifies,
or to take it by Parcels; yet if he doubt the honesty of the Acceptor, the
Presentor must nowithstanding make Protest, or the Acceptor may refuse further
payment, and yet not lie liable to be Sued.

17. If a Bill be directed to a party, and he be out of Town, not leaving any
Warrant of Attorney, to empower his Wife or Servants to accept it; and another
Merchant to support the Drawers credit, will accept and pay it, yet Protest
must be made against the party on whom it was drawn for non-acceptance.

18. In some cases half Usance is allowed, especially in Inland Bills, which is
accounted 15 Days.

Note that all Bills must be Protested 3 Days after they become due, it being
dangerous to exceed that time, although one of the Days happened on a Sunday, yet
tho the 3 Days are expired, it is not at all unnecessary to Protest.

19. Bills payable at a fixed Day, are not meant one, and the same Day if they
come from any place where the new Style is practiced, because the old and new
admits of ten Days difference. As for Example, if a Bill be dated new Style
payable on the 10 of March, it is not payable till the 10 of March old Style,
which is the 20th. of March new Style.

20. A Wife or a Servant cannot accept a Bill of Exchange, unless the Husband
or Master empower them by a Warrant of Attorney so to do, or that formerly they
have accepted Bills with his good liking, and by him discharged.

21. If a party on whom a Bill is drawn, live at a distant City or place of
Exchange, from him that is to receive the money, he must go himself or send the
Bill down to some Friend to get it accepted, which if not accepted, Protest
must be entered, if it be a place of Exchange, or by the help of a Letter of
such refusal, from the Friend who endeavored to get it accepted, Protest may
be made at London, tho the party live at Southampton, but if accepted and your
Bill returned when it becomes due, if it be made payable at london, you must
expect there your money, or enter Protest for non-payment.

22. If a Merchant that accepted a Bill prove non-Solvent, and absent himself
from the Exchange; you must before the Bill be due, cause demand to be made by
a Notary for better Security, and in default thereof cause Protest to be made,
and send away the Protest by the next Post to the Drawer of the Bill, who must
defray the charges of such Protest, and all Protests must be made between Sun
and Sun, that is, between Sun Rising and Sun Setting; other Hours being
accounted unseasonable, and held amongst Merchants Illegal.

23. If a Protest be returned to the Drawer or Indorser, he must get an able
man to under-write the Protest, and oblige himself to make speedy payment with
Costs and Rechange, but if the Protest be returned for want of payment, and you
have had Security already upon the Protest for non-acceptance or want of better
Security, then upon receipt of your Protest ^or non-payment, you may only
acquaint the Drawer or party that took up the money, and tarry out the
proportion of time, at which the Bill was made payable, to be accounted from
the time it fell due, before you demand your Principal money, with the Rechange
and charges of the party who drew the Bill or his Security, which according to
the Law of Merchants, they are bound to satisfy either jointly or severally.

24. When you have an accepted Bill protested for want of payment, keep the
Bill, but send away the Protest, by which means the money is recoverable of the
Drawer.

25. If a Bill be delivered to a party to be accepted, and yet by the
carelessness or otherwise of the party that received it in order to accept be
Lost, then must he who brought it demand a note under the Hand and Seal of the
Merchant, etc. who received the Bill for the payment of the money, at the Day
specifyed in the Bill, upon a second Bill if it come to hand, or if not upon
the note it self, and if such note be refused to be given, then the party who
should receive the money upon the lost Bill, must enter protest and send it
away, and when the money becomes due upon the lost Bill, he must make demand of
it, and for non-payment enter Protest a second time, and send it away, or if he
have a note, yet if it be not paid at the time therein limited, he must
Protest as upon a Bill of Exchange.

26. If a Person send a Bill to a Friend of his to get it accepted, tho drawn
upon no particular Person, but a Blanck left to put in the parties Name that
will accept it, it is according to the Law of Merchants sufficient.

27. If a Bill be drawn by one Merchant upon another, upon the account of a
third man; he upon whom it is drawn has liberty to choose whether he will accept
it upon the account of the third Person, or on his account who drew it; but
then he must go before a Public Notary, and declare his intent, of which the
Notary must make an Act indue Form to be sent away to the party whom it
concerns; and he must also cause an Act to be made for payment thereof when it
becomes due, declaring that he will pay it for the Honor of the Drawer, but
upon no other account then is the Drawer accountable to him for the Sum
specifyed in the Bill.

28. If a Bill be drawn upon a Merchant, who after acceptance for want of
money, or otherwise fails to pay it when due, another Merchant for the Honor
of the Drawer may pay the Bill, yet Protest must be made against him that made
default, and sent away, and the safest way in that case is to have the receipt
for discharge of the Bill Written under the Protest, and to keep the accepted
Bill as an Evidence against him who failed in the payment thereof.

29. If a party dye between the time of acceptance, and the time money becomes
due upon a Bill, you must go to the place of his last abode, when the money
becomes due, and demand it of the Executors, and if payment be refused, you
must Protest as you would have done if the party were living.

30. If the party dye to whom a Bill is payable before it become due, although the
Will be not proved, nor Letters of Administration taken out, yet you must
demand the money when due, offering at the same time Security to save the Payer
harmless from the Executors or Administrators, and if upon such offer payment
is refused, you must Protest for non-payment.

31. If a Bill be drawn upon a Person, and upon inquiry no such Person can be
found, you must have your Bill Protested in due Form.

32. If when you go to get your Bill accepted, no Person can accept it be at
home, and that at 2 or 3 goings, you must enter Protest, either for
non-acceptance or non-payment; either at his dwelling House or Lodging in his
absence, which according to the Law of the Merchants is sufficient, for he
ought at Seasonable times to attend his own business, for there is no avoiding
Protest, whether absent or present.

33. If the Figures and words at Length in a Bill of Exchange disagree, then
you ought to be guided by the words at Length and not by the Figures.

34. If a Name be mended or words interlined, and the Bill be accepted, tho it
is a foul fault in the Drawer, yet it is not an excuse sufficient for the
Acceptor to refuse payment, but if the party who accepted allege that it has
been mended, or interlined since he accepted, he must prove it, the which if he
do he may refuse payment, till a second Bill comes to Hand.

35. If a Bill be made payable Positively to a Person by name, then an
Assignment will not be available; for it must be the very man spec^fyed to whom
the Bill must be paid, lest by paying to a wrong party, you are obliged to pay
it again in your own wrong.

36. If a Bill come to any party to get it accepted, and by an oversight it be
not directed to any Person by name, yet in the Letter of credit, the party to
whom it was intended be mentioned; then must it be presented in order to its
being accepted, and if the party for want of his name on the Bill refuse to
accept it, then Protest must be made for the Drawers Omission; and he is liable
to pay the charges.

37. If a Bill be accepted, and protested for non-payment, yet if the Drawer do
satisfy the contents of the Bill, he that accepted the Bill is discharged, as
to the party to whom the Bill was due, but must nevertheless stand engaged to
the Drawer; and if a Bill be by one Person Assigned over to another, if the
first Person be satisfied, the Bill becomes useless, nor can it by Law be
recovered.

And thus much for Bills of Exchange, and now I shall only proceed, to give the
Reader an insight into the nature of Letters of Credence, and so conclude this
one great and necessary part of Merchants affairs.

CHAP. CXI. Of Letters of credit, and to what intent they are drawn.
THere are diverse sorts of Letters, that pass between Merchants and Merchants,
or Merchants and their Factors. As Letters of Commission for buying and
selling, Letters of advice, Letters of Freight, and Letters of Credit; the
latter of which are properly such as are Written to furnish moneys by Exchange,
upon the credit of him that Writes them, so that by virtue of the Letter or
Letters so Written, the Merchant or Banker that Writes the Letter or Letters,
are bound as firmly, as if they had given Bond to satisfy by Bill of Exchange;
or otherwise any Sum or Sums of money, taken upon them by those Persons
specifyed therein. And these Letters are two sorts, the one General and the
other special.

The first is when I Write my open Letter to all Merchants, etc. who shall
Furnish such and such Persons upon my Letter of credit, wherein I do bind my
self, that what Moneys shall be delivered unto such and such parties therein
specifyed, within the time limited at such and such rates, or as the Exchange
is current; I will repay by Bills of Exchange or otherwise: and if any one
should refuse to pay Bills for moneys received upon his Letters of credit, yet
those Letters being produced, and proved to be his, are as binding as Hand and
Seal, and stand as good in Law.

The special Letter of credit, is directed to a peculiar Person, and is of
force equal with the former; as for the Forms of the General Letters of credit,
they are various and suitable to the occasion of the Writer, but the form of a
special or particular Letter of credit may run thus. Laus Deo in Bristol 20 of
February 1683. Mr. James D.
Sr. My last unto you was of the 10th. of December, wherein I Wrote to you what
was needful, in answer unto yours of the 4th. of the same Month; this serves
chiefly to desire you to furnish and pay unto Mr. W. B. English Gentleman, to
the value of 3000 Crowns, at one or more times, according as he shall have
occasion, or desire the same of you; taking his Receipt or Bills of Exchange
for the moneys, which you shall so furnish him with, and put it to my Account,
and this my Letter of Credit shall be your sufficient Warrant for so doing.
Vale.

To Mr. Charles G. Merchant. at Lions. yours Timothy L.


And thus I shall conclude my discourse of Exchanges; only by the way, note
there is in use the old Style and new Style, the former being only practiced or
held in England, and other his Majesty's of Great Britains Dominions, in
Hamburg, Strasbourg, and some other parts of Germany; and the latter in all
other parts of Christendom.

CHAP. CXII. A Survey of the Customs, commonly called Tonnage upon Wines of the
Growth of France, Germany, Spain, Portugal, etc. also upon Beer, Perry, Cider,
Vinegar, Rape, etc. together with the nature of such Customs or Tonnage,
declaring where they are due and where not.
THe Wisdom of the Nation assembled in Parliament Anno 1660, having taken into
their consideration the condition of Merchants Trading into Foreign parts, that
they were frequently Robbed, and spoiled by Pirates and Picaroons, and Ships of
War of diverse Nations, under pretense of Letters of Reprizal. They the better
to prevent such outrages, thought it convenient to Grant his Majesty a Subsidy
of Tonnage and Poundage, payable upon all Merchandise imported or exported,
unless Herrings and some other Fish therein excepted. The better to enable his
Majesty to maintain at Sea several Ships of War, for the securing and convoying
Merchants Ships to and from the diverse Ports and Places, whither they are bound
or have any Commerce, and to overawe and keep under such Pirates and others,
as would otherwise grow numerous, and obstruct all Naval Commerce, the
Principal Commodities paying Tonnage and Poundage, commonly called Customs. I
shall here recite, and for the rest, refer the Reader to the Book of Rates,
rated by the advice and approbation of most of the eminent Merchants of
England; and since published and confirmed by Parliament.

As for Tonnage every Tun of Wine of the Growth of the French King or Crow^ of
France, that shall come into the Port of London or the Members thereof by way
of Merchandise; being the proper Goods of a natural Born Subject, pays eight
pounds 10 Shillings the Tun; or being the proper Goods of an Alien or Stranger,
it pays 10 pound, and so lesser or greater quantities proportionably; but into
any other Port of England, the Native pays 20 Shillings less, and the Stranger
the like per Tun.

Muscadels, Malmasies, Cutes, Tents, Alicans, Bastards Sacks, Canaries,
Mallagoes, Maderoes, and other Wines; of the Growth of Levant, Spain or
Portugal, or any of the Islands or Dominions belonging to them, or any of them
which shall be brought into the Port of London, as Merchandise, etc. by a
Native, shall pay the Sum of 7 pound 10 Shillings the Tun, a Stranger nine
pound, and into any other of his Majesty's Ports 20 Shillings less, the Pipe or
Butt, by either Native or Alien, for Rhenish Wine of the Growth of Germany;
also note that always the Stranger pays 30 Shillings in the Tun more then the
Native is to pay, the Ancient duty of Butlerage which is 2 Shillings in the
Tun; and in these Duties or Customs is included, the Duty formerly of 20
Shillings per Tun, upon all Wines of the Growth of the Levant, by Strangers
known by the name of Southampton Duties, for which sort of Wines the Stranger
is to pay to the use of the Town of Southampton, 10 Shillings for every Butt or
Pipe, as for prize Wines they pay no Customs.

Note that if any Wines be imported, and within a twelve month exported; they
are not liable to pay the Additional Duty, or if it be paid it is to be
returned, viz. 4 pound every Tun of French Wine, and every Tun of Wine of the
Growth of Germany or Madera, 3 pound brought into the Port of London, as in
Statute 12 of Car. 2, it more at large appears.

And all such Wines as are Landed at any of the out-Ports, and afterward
brought into the Port of London by a certificate, shall pay so much more Custom
as was paid short of the Duty in the Port of London.

For every Tun of Beer to be exported in Ships, English built, must be paid 2
Shillings, and for every Tun exported in any other Ship 6 Shillings. If at any
time there shall chance Goods to be exported or imported, not mentioned in the
Book of Rates, agreed on by the commons, Entitled the rates of Merchandise, and
that by such omission there is no set value on them, then it shall be Lawful
for the Customer in being to levy twelve pence in the pound, upon such Goods
according to the true value: which value is to be given by the Merchant or
owner upon Oath, before the Customer, Collector, Comptroller, Surveyer, or any
two of them.

If Vinegar, Perry, Rape, Cider, or Cider-Eager, be imported by a Native from
Foreign Parts, he pays 6 pound 10 Shillings the Tun, but by an Alien only 6
pound, but if they shall again export any such Liquids, then 3 pound 10
Shillings the Tun shall be repayed to the Native, and 4 pound 15 Shillings to
the Alien. There is likewise imposed on Wines, Vineager, Cider and Beer 10
Shillings per Tun, and on Brandy and Strong-Water 20 Shillings per Tun. For
Coynage-Duty, and the money that arises by this Duty, is to be paid at the
Custom-House, to the Collectors and other Officers, to be by them kept apart
from other moneys; and paid quarterly into the Exchequer without Salary or
Fee, and if neglect be made in the payment of this Duty, the Goods are
Forfeitable; but note if that within a twelvemonth, they are Transported, then
the money so paid is to be returned according to Statute the 18 of Car. 2.
There is likewise an Excise or Impost upon Foreign Liquors imported, viz. upon
Beer or Ale, six Shillings the Barrel, Cider or Perry the Tun 10 Shillings,
Brandy or Strong Water perfectly made 8 pence the Gallon, and by the 15 of
Car. 2, if any of these Goods be Landed before these Duties are paid, Warrant
Signed, and in the absence of the Officer, they are forfeitable. And thus much
for Tonnage, the next thing then that I come to Treat of is Poundage.

CHAP. CXIII. A Survey of the Custom commonly called Poundage, according to the
Book of Rates, and such other Customs and Privileges, as are for the profit of
the Merchant.
POundage is a Custom Established by Act of Parliament made in the 12 of his
now Majesty, whereby the Book of Rate called the Rates of Merchandise, is
approved and confirmed, that is a Subsidy granted to his Majesty of the 20 part
of all Goods imported or exported, viz. 1 Shilling in the pound, according as
they are Rated in the said Book, and for Goods not found Rated in the aforesaid
Book, according to the value Sworn to by the Merchant, as it is mentioned in
the foregoing Chapter. As likewise a Subsidy of Woollen Clothes or old Drapery;
agreed on by the Commons-House in Parliament, assembled and Signed by the Hand
of their Speaker, an account of which take as follows.

Every Native shall pay for each short Cloth containing in Length not above 28
Yards, and in Weight not exceeding 64 pound, White or Colored, by him to be
Shipped or carried out of the Kingdom, 3 Shillings 4 pence, being after the
Rate of 2 Farthings Farthing the pound Weight, and after the same Rate for all
other sorts of Cloth of greater Length and Weight, not allowing above 28
Yards, and 60 pound to a short Cloth, viz. for every pound Weight over and
above 64. pound 2 Farthings and Farthings, and for all other lesser Clothes to
be allowed to the short Cloth; but note if a Stranger do export any short
Cloth containing 28 Yards, and in Weight not exceeding 64 pound, either White
or Colored, he shall pay 6 Shillings 8 pence, besides the old Duty of one
Shilling 2 pence, and after the same Rate for all short Clothes, and Clothes of
greater Length and Weight; for a description of the several sorts of which, I
refer you to my Observations upon Woolen Manufactory, in the 11 and 12 Chapters
of this Treatise.

Salt out of Scotland into England pays a penny the Gallon, all Logwood
imported pays 5 pound the Tun.

The Parliament taking care that Ships of force should be employed by
Merchants, have imposed on all Merchandise imported or exported, from and to
the Mediterranean Sea beyond Malaga, in any Ship not having 2 Decks and 16
Guns, allowing two men to each Gun, for such default one per cent. on all
Merchandise that contrary to the express words of the Act, shall be imported or
exported, Ships laden or half laden with Fish only excepted.

There are likewise diverse Duties payable Aliens for Goods imported in Aliens
Ships, commonly called Navigation Duties, by the Act of Navigation made in the
12 of Car. 2.

And note that in all cases where Petty Custom inwards is payable, it is
understood of the fourth part of a Subsidy, according to the Book of Rates of 5
pound per cent. and is called Parva Customa, granted to King Edward the first;
the Merchants Strangers agreeing to pay to him and his Heirs 3 pence in the
pound, for every pounds worth of Goods, imported or exported.

There is another Custom called the Aliens Custom, for all Fish, Oil, Blubber,
Whale-Bone or Whale-Fins, not being caught in Vessels of which the English are
Proprietors; they are to pay double Custom. There is likewise an Impost to be
paid for several sorts of Salt-Fish or dried Fish, not imported in English
Vessels belonging to English Proprietors, or not having been taken in such, as
appears at large in the Statute of the 15 of Car. 2, entitled an Act of Trade.

Likewise all sorts of Foreign Coin, or Bullion of Gold or Silver, may be
exported without paying any Duty or Fee for the same, entry being first made at
the Custom-House, as also Precious Stones and Pearls of all sorts.

Any Person may import from any part beyond the Sea in English Ships, Cinnamon,
Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace, etc. into England, Wales, Guernsey, Jersey, etc. paying
the Customs always, provided they before the lading thereof, give notice to the
Commissioners or Farmers of the Customs, how much they intend to lade, and the
name of the Vessel in which they design to import it, and procure a License
under their Hands, or any 3 of them, if Goods are Wrecked and the Lord Seises
them, yet they ought not to pay Custom, unless in some Extraordinary cases.
Upon the exporting and importing of most Commodities, Fees are claimed over and
above Custom. In the Port of London, the Members and Creeks thereunto
belonging, viz. to the Officers of the Petty Custom outward of the Subsidy
outward, Petty Customs inwards Subsidies inward, great Customs, Clarks Fees,
inwards and outward the Kings Waiters being 18 in number. The Register of the
Kings Warrants. The Usher of the Custom-House. The Saugers of French Vessels
chief Searcher, and the Kings 5 under-Searchers in the Port of London, and his
2 Searchers in the Port of Graves-End, were likewise entered in a Table which
was settled and allowed of by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, and signed by
their Speaker; at which time the Question being put, that for all such Goods as
paid not one pound Custom inwards or outward, there should be but half Fees
taken for Cocquets, Debentures, Warrants, Fransieres, Certificates, etc. and it
was resolved Affirmatively.

Societies or Companies that Trade in one Joynt-Stock, and make but one
Single-Entery, tho the Adventurers are many, yet the Fees do not hinder, but
the Officers and Weighers may receive such Gratuities, as the Master or
Merchants will allow them out of their free Will.

All Goods valued in the Book of Rates at 5 pounds, and paying Subsidy but 5
Shillings, or under, shall pay no Fees.

If any English Merchant shall Land Goods out of one Ship into another (although
the Receipt of the Subsidies be distributed into several Offices) yet he shall
pay but for a Single-Entry.

The Goods appertaining to Partners, are to pass as if they appertained to one
single Person. Fish taken by the English men in English Bottoms, whether inward
or outward pay no Fees.

Post-Entries under 5 Shillings inward pass without Fees, but if above 5
Shillings and 40 Shillings, then pay 6 pence, but exceeding 40 Shillings then
full Fees.

The Merchant for all Goods that are opened, and not entered above 10 Shillings
Custom shall pay Fees; he shall likewise pay for weighing all Goods short
entered above 20 Shillings Custom, but if duly entered, then he is to be at no
charge.

Note that the Merchant is to be allowed for Tare, viz. abated in the Customs;
which Tare upon all Commodities to which it is allowable is settled by the
Customers, and fixed in a Table not to be any ways altered, without the consent
and appointment of the Commissioners-Farmers, such Underofficers as they shall
empower, as the General Surveyers of the Warehouse, etc. And thus much shall
Suffice as to Customs and order of Fees upon the Subsidy of Poundage; until I
come to speak somewhat more of the Privileges and Customs of the City of
London; and now I shall proceed to give the Reader an insight into the nature
of Policies of Assurance, now greatly in Request amongst Merchants.

CHAP. CXIV. Of Policies of assurance, their Original, their Legality, Nature,
Quality, and of the great Encouragement they give to Navigation, etc.
MOst are of opinion that this way of insuring, was first invented by the
Romans, and Suetonius will have it that Claudius Caesar was the first contriver
thereof, and by that means so encouraged Merchants, that they ventured into the
till then supposed innavigable Seas; proposing to themselves that if they
escaped with their Lives, tho both Ships and Goods were lost, they should not
be much indammaged.

All assurances are either Public or Private, the first are those that are
entered in the Office or Court of Assurance, for the Convenience of Merchants
kept upon the Royal Exchange in London; where any one may have knowledge of
what Cargo is insured and of the Premio. The last is in Private between man and
man, and not entered in the Office, and are of equal Validity at common Law,
but by the Statute of the 43 of Elizabeth, only those that are entered in the
Court of Assurance can be tried and determined there, the other being left to
the common Law only. These Assurances are diverse of sorts, some being made for
places general, others certain; those upon certain places or Ports are made
upon Goods laden, which if they miscarry before they are safely Landed at the
place agreed on, the Insurer must make good as far as he has insured, but upon
certain notice of their safe Arrival, he may demand the Premio agreed on, and
the Policy is then void, and the like upon Goods inward bound, or according as
the Merchant and Insurer can agree.

A General Ansurance is when a Ship goes a Trading Voyage, taking in at one
Port and vending at another; so that the Insurer is liable to any damage she
sustains till she returns in safety to the Port from whence She sets out, that
is in her Cargo only, unless the Ship and her Appurtenances are insured, which
are frequently included, tho then the Premio runs higher.

Goods sent by Land may likewise be insured, tho that seldom happens; or if any
Person fears being taken by the Turks or Moors, he may insure his Person of a
certain Premio, and then if he be taken, the insurer is obliged to Ransom him:
that is, pay so much money as is insured, sometimes the Assurers insert in
their Policies lost or not lost, that is, when Ships have been a long time
abroad, and no advice of their being in any Port, but then the Premio runs high
as 30, 40, and sometimes more per cent. for if the Ship be lost at the time the
Policy is Subscribed, yet so much as is insured must be made good, but then it
must be contrary to the knowledge of him that insures, or otherwise it will be
accounted a Fraud.

If any Person assures a Rotten Vessel for more then She is worth, and then
going out of the Port or Harbor, She Privately causes to be Wrecked or Sunk,
if it can be proved it is a Defraud, and he who Subscribed the Policy, is not
bound to make satisfaction, but it is observed of late that seldom any one
Person will insure a whole Ship; but Subscribe 50 pound, 100 pound or more at a
certain Premio, current at the time of assuring; which when the adventure is
Born they receive; but if a loss happens, the Premio is deducted together with
the usual Abatements; so that the insured seldom receives more then 80 pound in
the 100 pound, and many now adays are so adventurous, that they will ensure
against Heaven and Earth; Stress of Weather, Storms, Enemies, Pirates, Rovers,
and all other Casualties. If a Merchant ensures a Ship, he only names in the
Policy of such a Burden, then if She be lost the Insurers are bound to make
the Ship only good, and not the Wares: If the Wares be insured it matters not
whether each particular is mentioned in the Policy, but in general upon the
chief Commodities, and all other Commodities laden or to be laden for the
ensured.

If a Ship be Ensured and take Fire 'ere She break Ground, the Assurers in such
a case are not liable to make Restitution, unless the words be in the Policy at
such a Port, or from such a Port, unless She had first broken Ground, and had
been forced back again by Storm.

If a Ship be Ensured and prove Leaky, and the Master for preservation of the
Cargo, lade it into another Ship, and that Ship be lost, the Ensurer is not
bound to make the Cargo good, unless in the Policy it is mentioned, until the
Goods by the said Ship or any other should be safely Landed at such a place,
naming it.

It is held that if a Person Ensure more Goods then he has on Board, and
several Persons Subscribed the Policy, yet the first Subscribers are only bound
to pay the loss if they miscarry, and those that Subscribed over and above the
value of the Goods, remitting their Premio 10 Shillings per cent. reducted for
their Subscriptions are discharged: If a Cargo be Ensured to such a Port there
safely to be unladed, and her Cargo is sold on Board, the Property being
altered, if the Ship afterward miscarry, the Ensurer is not obliged to make it
good, if the buyer agrees for the Freight to be carried to any other Port.

If Goods be Ensured, and the Ensured contrary to the knowledge of the Ensurer,
Lades prohibited Goods, by which the Ship may become forfeited, then the
Ensurer is not liable to make good the Cargo, unless after the lading of such
Goods they are prohibited.

If any Goods be damaged in the Ship by neglect of the Master or Mariners, the
Ensurer is not bound to make Satisfaction. And further it is always expedient to
prevent differences that may arise between the Ensurer and the Ensured, that
the Bills of lading consist of three parts, one to be sent over Sea, the other
left with the Master, and the last with the Lader.

This Office or Court of assurance, was erected by the Statute of the 43 of
Elizabeth, Chap. 12, whereby the Judges or Commissioners appointed to determine
differences arising, were the Judges of the Court of Admiralty, the Recorder of
London, two Doctors of the Civil Law, two Barristers, eight discreet Merchants
or any five of them, and that they or the Major part, should have Power to
hear, examine, order or decree all such causes in a Summary way, without
pleading or expense, and to have Power to Summon Parties to Examine upon Oath,
commit to Prison upon disobedience, or the like; but this way being found
tedious, because so many parties as made a Court, were not at all times to be
Convened, it was taken into consideration, and in the 12 of Car. 2 Chap. 23
Enacted that 3 Commissioners should make the Court viz. a Doctor of the Civil
Law, a Barrister of 5 Years standing, and a Merchant, etc. who have Power to
Act in all cases, after their being Sworn before the Lord Major; and if the
Witness refuse to come upon the first Summons, and tender of reasonable
charges, upon the second Summons they may imprison them for such their
contempt, or give costs, and commonly differences come to an Issue in a
Fortnight, their proceedings being as well out of Term-time as it.

The Judgments are there given upon mature deliberation, by Persons well
Skilled in Marine affairs; and if the Sentence be supposed unreasonable, then
the Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper, may upon an appeal determine the same; tho
no appeal from thence can lie before the whole money is deposited, and the full
cost paid to the appelled. So that it prevents the trouble of taking up the
Party by Execution, against whom the Decree has passed, and a further advantage
is, they may in this Court decree against 20 Ensurers at once, which at common
Law must be Sued distinctly, tho the Execution cannot lie against Body and
Goods, but against either as at Common Law.

And lastly if a private Policy of assurance, be lost, and no Entery be found,
it is like a Burnt Deed, unless strong Evidence be produced; as likewise a Copy
of the same: but if it be a Public Policy, then the Entery is sufficient
Testimony for this Court to take Cognizance of.

CHAP. CXV. The Original of the word Bottomery, and the Signification thereof,
together with the Commodity and Discommodity accruing thereby.
FOenus Nauticum or Bottomery, is by the Dutch called Bomery, Bodmery, or
Boddemerii; from the Keel or Bottom of a Ship, the Part being taken for the
Whole, and was called by the Ancient Britains Bodo or Bodun, the bottom of a
Ship, Signifying the bottom or the Cargo therein contained, the which as Land
is mortgaged for certain Sums of Money taken up thereon, and is bound to
satisfy the same at return, with such interest as is agreed on the Statute of
usury, in that case being excluded by Reason of the Hazard the Lender runs; for
in many cases money is taken up thus. I lend 100 pound upon a Ship, to receive
150 if the Ship arrives safe at such a Port, but if She chance to Miscarry, my
money is lost, and many times Masters of Ships could not set out, if they did
not in this nature take up Moneys; for which themselves, their Ship or Cargo
become Pledges; but some Persons have taken hold of this occasion to Bar the
Statute of usury: thus they get the Party to feign he has a Ship bound for
Amsterdam or any such Port, making a special obligation to pay the money again
at so much per cent. at a reasonable time Granted for the return of the Ship;
and if She do not in that time return the money to be paid notwithstanding,
but certain it is if a Person have 500 or 1000 pound lying by him, and knows of
an ingenious Merchant or Master of a Ship, who is fitting out for a Voyage, and
is Slenderly stocked, and he lends him this money to buy such Commodities as
will vend in the places whither he is bound, running the Risque to have
nothing, if the Ship miscarry, and 30 per cent. Interest, if She return safe,
it is altogether as profitable for the merchant as Master; as to take up money
at Brokerage, and to Ensure his Ship or Cargo. And if the Merchant or Master
makes double return of the said money he gets sufficiently, as well as the
Venturer, and this cannot be accounted usury.

There is yet another way both profitable and Honorable, as thus, suppose a
Person puts a stock into the Hands of a Company or Society, which is termed a
perpetual stock, the Principal being never to be recalled, tho it may be often
sold for good advantage, but he that put it in or buys it receives still his
dividend, which produces sometimes twenty and sometimes more per cent. and the
Hazard only is if the proportion of the stock that goes out be lost, he must
abate, unless by remitting the dividend he will keep up the stock. And 100
pound in the East India Company has been of late sold at 180 or 190 pound.

CHAP. CXVI. Of the Rights and Privileges of Owners, and Proprietors of Ships,
according to the Laws Marine and Common, together with diverse Rules to be
observed by such as are Partners in Ships, fitted out upon Freight or otherwise.
IF there be several Partners, or Owners of a Vessel, and one refuses to
Furnish her out, according to his proportion, or to suffer her to go the Voyage
intended by the other, he must sell his part, the which if he refuse to do or
to set a price thereon, the other Partners may set her out, and refuse to let
him have any part of the profit accruing thereby; only if the Ship be lost,
they must make good his part according as it shall be valued; but if it happen
the Major part of such Owners refuse to set out any such Vessel, wherein they
have equal propriety, they cannot be compelled, but then such Vessel is to be
valued and sold, and the like where any of the partners prove deficient or
unable to set her forth.

The Master is to be chosen by the Owners, and so he had need, for they are
liable to the Merchants for all damages, he or his Mariners shall suffer or
cause to be done in any Port, Haven, or on the main Ocean; both by the Law
Marine and common Law of England, and they must sue the Master for reparation.

If a Ship be broken up with an intent to convert her Timber to other uses, and
then the parties mind alter, and they will have her rebuilt with the same; the
property by that means is altered, and the Partnership dissolved: If a man take
Planks of another man's to mend his Ship, yet the property remains in the owner;
but if a man take Timber designed to Build a Ship, and build a Ship, the
property of the Ship shall remain in him whose Timber it was, and not in the
Builder: But if the Timber was not designed for the Building a Ship, it is
otherwise; if a Master of a Ship take up moneys for refitting or victualling
his Ship, and there be occasion for so doing, the owners must pay it, but if
there be no occasion, they are not bound so to do.

If a man gets possession of a Ship, having no Title thereto by the Law Marine,
he shall pay damages; such as shall be proved to be sustained by the unjust
detaining of it from the right owner. If a Ship is Fraighed out, and in any
Port an Imbargo is laid thereon, it Bars not the Owners from the Recovery of
their contract for Freight: If any one shall be killed by a fall on Shipboard,
in a fresh River, being within the Body of a County, the Ship is accounted a
Deodand, and becomes Seisable, tho in such cases it is not strictly observed;
but if any one fall and be killed on the Ocean, it is otherwise, for there by
Reason of storms or the like, it is supposed such Accidents cannot be avoided.

CHAP. CXVII. Useful Instructions to be observed by all Masters of Ships, in
the Management of their affairs, and the preventing the Penalties they may
incur through Ignorance, etc.
IF a Master of a Ship be entrusted with Goods, and they be imbeselled either
in Port or upon the main Ocean, he is Responsible to the Owners or Merchant, and
must make them good; nay if a Ship be Fired by carelessness, the Master lies
liable to make both the Ship and Freight good, nay tho Goods sustain any other
damage, by the neglect of the Master, he is bound to make them good, for he is
Exercitor Navis, and is either by the Marine and common Law, liable to answer
for the neglect or Misdemeanour of his Mariners; but if a Ship be taken by an
Enemy, founder, or be lost in a Storm, the Master is not liable to make
satisfaction. If a Master send off his Boat to receive Goods at a Wharf, and
they be imbeselled, he must make them good. If a Master lades Goods on Board
any of the Kings Enemies Ships, tho his own be Leaky, and by that means such
Goods are seized, he becomes liable to make satisfaction to the Owner, nor at
his Peril ought he unknown to the Merchant or owners to Ship prohibited Goods;
and if when he is home-ward laden, he enter or lie by in any Creek, unless
driven in by Tempest, and by that means the Cargo becomes Seisable, he shall
answer it to the Owner, by Reason he ought to have entered one of his Majesty's
great Ports; nor must he Sail with false Colors, carry false Cocquets or other
Papers, for if by such means the Goods are involved in Trouble, lost, or the
like, he lies liable to make Restitution. He must not lade the Ship above the
Birth-mark, set Sail with insufficient Rigging, stay in a Port, unless upon an
extraordinary occasion, if the Wind stands fair for his prosecuting his Voyage,
unless it be Tempestuous Weather; or refuse in any Port to pay due Custom, by
which any damage may befall the Merchant or Owners, upon pain of his making
satisfaction for the same: if he sends Goods to a Wharf in close Lighters, and
send his Mariners to watch them; then if they be imbezled, he is bound to make
them good, but on the contrary the Wharfenger must be accomptible. If when a
Master brings a Ship into any Port, and through his neglect She suffers damage,
he is liable to answer for it. A Master may sell or impawn part of the lading
for money, to mend on refit the Ship, if She be in any danger, but may not do
it to defray any charges of his own: no Master is to import or export any
Commodities from any of his Majesty's Plantations, but in English or Irish
bottoms, or bottoms belonging to the Natives of those Plantations, and that in
such a case, the 3 Fourths of the Mariners be likewise English upon pain of
Forfeiting the Ship and Goods. These and many Obligations are binding upon a
Master, both by the Laws-Marine, and Common. The Mariners being accountable to
the Master, the Master to the Owners, and the Owners to the Merchant, for all
damages sustained by neglect of their respective duties or Breach of contract.

CHAP. CXVII. Of Freight and Charter part, according to the Laws, Common, and
Marine, with useful observations thereon.
Freight is commonly agreed on between the owners and the Merchant, by a
Writing of Charter-party, wherein are concluded the particulars of the
contract; and if there be no such Writing but only earnest given, then if the
Merchant recant it is held by some, nay and often observed that he only loses
his earnest, and that if the owners recant they lose double earnest; tho many
learned in the Law are of opinion, that an Action for damage, if any be
sustained by such revocation will lie; if a Merchant should hire a Vessel, and
not have his Goods ready at the time appointed, and the Vessel lose the Season
of the Passage, or a Ship hired be unfiting to Sail, so that the Merchant must
either lose the passage of his Goods, or lade them on another Vessel, damage
may be recovered by an Action at common Law.

If a contract be made to such a Port, the Freight full laden, and the Ship has
broke Ground; although the Merchant revoke his intentions, yet the Freight is by
the Law Marine due. If in a Voyage a Ship without the neglect of the Master be
disabled, he may lade the Goods on Board another Vessel, and if that Vessel be
cast away, he is not liable to make satisfaction, if he can prove his own Ship
was in a sinking condition, had not the Goods been taken out of her; but if
this latter appear not he is liable, unless both of the Ships are cast away: If
a Ship be laded in Gross, and no particular number of Tuns mentioned, yet the
Merchant shall pay the Sum agreed for. If Pirates set upon a Ship and take
part of the lading, yet if the other part be carried safe to the Port concluded
on in the Charter part, Freight for the whole is due.

If any one Freight prohibited Goods without the knowledge of the Master or
Owners, and they be seized in any Port, or the Ship be detained, the Merchant
shall pay Freight notwithstanding. If a passenger die in the Ship, and none
claim his Goods in a Year and a Day, they shall be divided between the Master,
his Mates, and the Clothes are to be brought to the Ship-Mast head, and after
an appraisement made to be distributed amongst the Mariners, as a reward of
their care for seeing the Body put into the Sea; if Freight be contracted for
Transporting of a Woman, and She by the way be delivered, there is no Freight
due for the Infant.

If the owners Freight out a Ship, and afterward take into it Goods secretly
contrary to the knowledge of the Merchant, by the Law Marine he loses his
Freight, and if in such a case any of the Merchants Goods be cast overboard in
stress of Weather, the owner must make them good, but this is only when a full
Freight is agreed for, but if the owner be not privy to such Goods bringing in,
he is not liable for the defaults of others to the damage aforesaid.

By Law the lading of a Ship is tacitly bound for the payment of Freight, if a
Ship put into any Port then that in which She was Fraighted for, and there
receives damage, the Owner or Master shall answer the same to the Merchant; for
the Charter party obliges the owners to deliver them safe at the Port therein
mentioned, unless Enemies or Storms prevent it, and if a Ship suffer damage by
Reason of defect in Tackling, the Owners or Master are bound to make it good.

If Goods are sent aboard in general it must be specifyed so much, or such
Goods as are accustomed for such a Voyage. If a Ship be Fraighted for so many
Tuns, and She will not bear them, then there is no more Freight due, then the
Ship is computed to be of Burden, or for so many Tun as are sent on Board; but
if a Ship be Fraighted by the great, and no certain Burden mentioned, then the
Sum agreed upon must be paid, or if a Ship be Fraighted for 200 Tuns over or
under, 5 Tuns are the allowance either over or under and no more.

If Wines be Fraighted, and by the way a great part of them Leak out, yet the
Freight is due, the defect being in the Cask; tho some are of opinion, that
unless eight Inches of Wine be left in each Cask, it is in the Election of the
Fraighter, whether they will pay Freight or throw the remainder up to the
Master for his Freight. If a Ship be taken in War, and afterward retaken and
proceed on her Voyage, the property is not altered, but when the Voyage is
performed the Freight becomes due. If any one contract with a Mariner for
Freight, who is not empowered by the owners, and loss happens, that Mariner is
Subject to an Action only, and the Master or Owner free: If a Ship agree for so
much per Month to be paid at her return, and She upon her return be cast away,
yet the Freight is to be paid for so many Months, as She was abroad on that
occasion, as Mariners that dye at Sea, etc.

CHAP. CXIX. Of Wrecks what may properly be termed such according to the Laws
Marine, and Common, with Instructions for owners and Masters in case of a Wreck.
A Wreck is properly when a Ship is cast away, and no live thing escapes to
Shore; and then those upon whose Grounds the Goods are cast by the Sea, ought
unless they are Perishable to keep them a twelvemonth, to see if any will
claim them; and if any do take such Goods, and contrary to the known Laws
convert them to their own use, they are upon Conviction of the same, to pay
four times the value to the owner, and as much to the King; but if the Goods
are Perishable, then the Sherif, Corroner, or Bailif, in whose Jurisdiction
they are found may sell them, but must be accountable for so much money, to
those that can make out the Goods were theirs; and to prevent such Wrecks as
much as may be, all Fishermen upon severe Penalties are forbid to Fish with
Lights in the Night. But if Goods Wrecked be not owned or Sued for within a
Year and a Day, they fall to the King's Exchequer by the Law of Oleron, and the
Islue must be tried before the Judges of the Wrecks; always provided this Law
do not extend to Pirates, Sea-Rovers, Robers, Turks, or Enemies to the
Christian Faith, and if any who unjustly detains any such Wrecked Goods, shall
refuse to deliver them, or satisfaction to the full value, he shall be
Imprisoned, and if a Lords Bailiff be therein found to offend, the Lord is
obliged to deliver his Balif's Body to the King. And as for Custom, Wrecked
Goods rarely pay any, but if the Ship be cast away, or all the Goods or the
Major part of them saved, in such a case they pay an easy Custom, as the
Labor of saving them was more or less difficult, and in that case light Goods
as Silver and Gold, according to value shall pay less then heavy and Gross
Goods. All Wrecks of Whales or great Sturgeon are properly the Kings.

There are other sorts of Wrecks as Flotsam, Jetsam, and Lagan or Ligan; the
former is when a Ship is Sunk, and the Goods are found Floating on the Sea. The
second is when a Ship is about to sink, and to endeavor to save her, the Goods
are cast into the Sea; notwithstanding which the Ship Perishes, and the third
is when Goods are cast over to lighten the Ship and She perishes not, but a
Buoy is fixed to note the place, that so they may be possibly recovered,
especially such Goods as sink downright, in these cases the King shall have
Flotsam, Jetsem, and Lagan; provided the Ship perishes, or when the owners of
the Goods are not known; but when the Ship Perishes not they belong to the
Merchant, who upon proof will recover them. These three are commonly the Kings
grant, within the high and low Water marks by prescription, as it appears by
those in the West Countries, who prescribe to have Wrecks as far as they can
see a Humber Barrel.

If a Ship be ready to Perish, and all the men for preservation of their Lives
escape in their Longboat; yet if the Ship drive afterward into any Port, it is
no Wreck; and the like if a Ship be taken by Pirates, and after taking out the
Men and Goods turned it a Drift.

All owners claiming Wrecks, must make their Proof by their Cocquets or Marks
Personal, Testimony upon Oath or the Books of Entery in the Custom-House, and
if any such Wreck belongs to the King, the party must Sue out a Commission to
hear and determine, and that by the Oaths of twelve men, or else he may bring
his Action at Law, and make his proof by Verdict, but let him be careful that
such his Action be brought within a Year and a Day, or it will not lie; all
Flotsams, Jetsams, and Legans appertain by grant of Charter to the Lord high
Admiral, and must be decided if found upon the high Sea, in the Court of
Admiralty. Wrecked Goods tho such as are prohibited, are not Forfeitable, by
Reason they were not brought in but by the Wind and Tide, contrary to the will
of the Owner, as by Law is supposed.

If the Wreck happen by the negligence or fault of the Master, he is liable to
make Satisfaction, but if otherwise the Owners and Fraighters sustain the loss.

CHAP. CXX. Of Averidg and Contribution, according to the Law Marine, if Goods
are cast overboard in a storm, etc. and what Goods may in such a case be
Ejected, and what not.
IF when a Ship is Fraighted, and at Sea a storm arises, the Master if he finds
the Ship in danger, may by the consent or rather by consulting his Mariners
throw such heavy Goods overboard, as may tend to the Lightning or saving the
Ship, and if the Mariners refuse to consent, then it is Lawful for him to
command it to be done; always provided that he throw over the coarsest Goods,
and those that are most Ponderous, and in that case the rest of the Goods in
the Ship, shall contribute to those thrown overboard; the Sailers Clothes and
Provision excepted. If they are thrown over before half the Voyage is made,
then the contribution shall be according to what the Goods cost, but if when
above half the Voyage then proportionable to what those that remain are sold
for. But upon the arrival of the Ship at the Port intended, the Master and Part
of his Crew must swear that such Goods were thrown over for the preservation of
the Ship, and the rest of the Goods; and if afterward the Merchant bring his
Action against the owners or Master, they may plead the special Matter, which
will remain in Bar to the Plaintifs proceedings; but if any of the Ships
Tackling be lost, no Averidge or Contribution shall be made, unless the Masts
be cut by the Board, etc. or if any Goods be secretly brought into the Ship,
contrary to the knowledge of the Master and Purser, be ejected, no contribution
shall be made: And by the Law Marine, the Master may refuse (in case of
ejection) to deliver the remainder of the Goods before the Contribution is
settled, or if in a storm part of the Goods are dammaged, without any neglect of
the Master or Sailers, such Goods for so much as they are dammaged, ought to
come into the contribution.

If two Ships meet and strike each other, and if it can be proved that either
of them did it wilfully or by carelessness, then that Ship shall satisfy the
damage received by the other, but if either Ships crew Swear their innocence,
then the damage is to be Levied proportionable between them; if any Ejection
of Goods happen by the indiscretion of the stowers in lading the Ship above the
Birth mark, or the like; then the Master or Owners ought to make satisfaction.
If when a Vessel is entering a Port or otherwise part of the Goods be put into
a Lighter or Ship-Boat, and the Boat be cast away, there Contribution must be
made; but if the Ship be cast away, and the Lighter or Boat saved, then no
Contribution; for note where the Ship at any time Perishes, tho a great part of
the Goods be saved, yet they allow no Contribution.

If a Ship be taken by Pirates or Enemies, and the Master contracts with them
for the dismission of the Ship at such a Sum of money, and till the same be
paid yields himself Prisoner, in that case Contribution must be levied upon
the Ship, and lading for the Ransom of the said Master; and so where a Pirate
by consent takes part of the Goods to spare the rest, Contribution must be
made, but if he takes them by force or at his own pleasure, then no
contribution is to be made, unless the Merchants yield so to do after the Ship
is Robbed, but if taken by an Enemy, Letter of Marque or Reprisal the contrary.
If Jewels be on Board in a Box and not discovered, and they be cast overboard,
Contribution shall be for no more then they appeared, viz. a Parcel. If any
thing in a storm be cast into the Sea, and afterward recovered, then
Contribution shall be made for no more then the damage sustained. The Master
and Purser in case of a storm shall contribute toward Goods Ejected, for the
preservation of the Ship and Passenger for such Wares as they have; and if they
have no Wares, then for their Clothes, Rings, etc. according to estimation.

Contribution is to be paid for a Pilots Fee, for bringing a Ship safe into
any Harbor where she is not bound.

If the Master of a Ship, after he has received his Complements, takes in Goods
contrary to the knowledge of the Merchant, and part of the Merchants Goods in
case of a storm are thrown overboard, then the Master is liable to make
Satisfaction.

If Contribution be settled, and the Merchant will not consent to pay it, the
Master may refuse delivering the Goods, and if an Action be brought, he may
Bar the Plaintiff by pleading the special matter, yet in a storm there are some
Ladings, which ought not to be ejected. As Pieces of Ordnance, Ammunition, or
Provisions for the relief of a City Besieged, or in danger so to be, for there
the Law implies, that the Subject ought to prefer the good of his Prince,
before his own life.

CHAP. CXXI. A View of the Port of London, and of the Customs, Privileges,
Exemptions, and Revenues of that great City according to the Charters, Grants,
etc. of several Kings of England.
SEeing the Port of London is the Principal Port of this Kingdom, it will not
be amiss to set down the Privileges and Customs thereof, and what Revenues by
way of Exportation and Importation, accrues to the Honorable City in order to
support its Grandeur.

First then the Port of London, as by Exchequer settled and declared, extends
from the Promontory or Point, called the North Foreland, in the Isle of
Thannet. Thence Northward to the Nase Point beyond the Sunfleet upon the Coast
of Essex, and so continues Westward up the River of Thames; and the several
Channels, Streams, and Rivers falling into it to London Bridge. The usual known
Rights, Liberties, and Privileges, to the Ports of Sandwich and Ipswich, and
their Members excepted, and in regard that Ships did formerly come up to the
Port of London, and unlade in several obsure Creeks at Stairs, to defraud his
Majesty of his Customs, it was therefore ordained, that a Commission should be
forthwith Issued out of the Exchequer, to affix and nominate all such Wharfes,
Keys, and other places as his Majesty by virtue of such Commission should
appoint, in pursuance of which his Majesty has been pleased to Nominate and
Constitute as Lawful Keys, Wharfs, etc. these following for the Landing of
Goods, Merchandise, etc. viz. Brewers-Key, Chestors-Key, Wool-Dock,
Porters-Key, Bear-Key, Wiggons-Key, Youngs-Key, Ralphs-Key, Smarts-Key,
Lyons-Key, Buttolf-Wharf, Hammons-Key, Cocks-Key, Fresh-Wharf,
Billingings-Gate, and the Bridge-House. The former of the two latter being
appointed a common open place for the Landing or bringing in of Fish, Salt,
Victuals, or Fuel of all sorts, Fruit of all sorts, Grocery excepted; all
Native Materials for Building, and for exporting the like, but no other
Merchandise; and the latter, viz. the Bridge-House is appointed for the Landing
of Corn for the City store, tho under pretense of the same several Persons at
this Day Landed their proper Corn; moreover there are these Keys, viz. the
Custom-House Key, some Stairs on the West side whereof are declared not to be
places for Lading or Shipping of Goods. Sabs-Dock has a pair of Stares not held
Lawful for the Landing or lading of Merchandise. The like has Dice-Key,
Summers-Key, and Gaunts-Key; tho otherwise allowable. Therefore it is to be
supposed those Stairs that are accepted against were built for Convenience,
since the declaring them free places of lading, and Landing Merchandise.

These Keys, Wharfs and Docks, yearly produce a great Income to the City of
London, by Scavage, Portage, Packing and Water-Bailage.

As first Scavage being an Ancient Toll or Custom, taken by the Majors,
Sherifs, etc. for Wares showed or offered to Sail within their Precincts,
consists of two parts, viz. that which is payable by the Denizen, and that
which is payable by the Alien or Stranger; and that all Persons Subject to such
Duties, may not be imposed on by such as take them, there are Tables mentioning
each particular set up and approved of by the Lord Chancellor, Treasurer,
President, Steward, and two Justices of the Common Pleas; and by them
Subscribed or some four of them at least, and are to be levied on Goods inwards
and outward.

As all Goods mentioned in the Table of Scavage, and not included in the Table
of Rates, shall pay after the rate of one penny in the pound, according as they
are expressed or valued in his Majesty's Book of rates, and all others not
expressed therein, shall pay the same rates, according to the true value.

All private Bulks of eight Inches square, are by the third Article annexed to
the Book of rates; reputed Timber and valued at 3 pence the Foot, 50 Foot being
accounted the Load, valued at 12 Shillings 6 pence, and the duty for one Load
is one half penny and half a Farthing.

Package is another duty, which is likewise ^itted and ^ted in a Table called
(...) of Pa^ Duties, and all the (...) ^ies the^ mentioned pay one (...)
^ording as they are (...) Majesty's Book of ^^tes, (...) ^ers not mentioned
therein shall (...) the rate of one penny in the pound according to their true
value.

For every Entry in the Packers Book, and for Writing Bills of each Entry
outward they pay 12 pence.

All Strangers are to pay the Laboring Porters for making up their Goods
according to Custom.

Strangers must also pay the Waterside Porters belonging to the Package-Office,
such Fees for Shipping and Lading as for several Years past they have done.

The Packers and Waterside-Porters, have Tables expressing the Duties payable;
and such Goods as are not mentioned therein must pay according to their true
value, so much in the Pound as aforesaid for Package and Porterage-duties over
and above.

Another Ancient duty there is called Water-Bailage, which for many Years past
the City of London have claimed and received for all Goods and Merchandise
imported from any part in the Realm, or out of the Realm, into the Port of
London: and so the like duties with a little alteration, for all Goods exported
out of the Port of London, unless the Goods or Merchandise of Freemen, who are
exempted from paying this Duty, tho many Freemen for Reason best known to
themselves notwithstanding do voluntarily pay it; but of late there has been
considerable Debates, whether the same be due or not, tho no Clause in the Act
of Tonnage or Poundage, does any ways Bar those duties.

All Lighters, Wherries, Fisher-Boats, etc. occupying the River of Thames,
within the Limits of the Cities Jurisdiction, confirmed by their Charter, pay
Sums of Acknowledgement or Duty for the same, which amounts annually to a
considerable value. All Markets within the Precincts of the City, pay the Duty
of Toll to the behoof of the City.

The Citizens of London, viz. those that are Resident are exempted from the
Custom or Impost called Prizage, which is, that out of ten Tuns of Wine the
King is to have one, paying for it 20 Shillings, but Citizens must not own any
Wines so imported under Color, to secure Strangers from paying Prisage. If a
Freeman live in another City, and send Wines to unlade at the Port of London;
he shall not be capable of this Privilege, but must be resident as aforesaid,
for by a private Act in the 24 of Hen. 6 complaint was made, that the Lord
Major would make Strangers Citizens; whereupon it was there declared, that this
Benefit to be discharged from payment of Prisage, extended not to such Citizens
as were made so by Gift, but such as were Legally Citizens, according to the
true, intent and meaning thereof, by Service or Adoption, and resident in the
said City; and it is further observed that if any Merchant not a Citizen break
Bulk, tho he deliver but part of his Cargo, yet the Duty is to be levied upon
all, as if all had been unladen. And this Privilege likewise enjoy the
Inhabitants resident in the Cinque Ports.

Butherage, as I have before said, is 2 Shillings per Tun, upon Wines imported
by Strangers; but the English are exempted from that Duty. And thus much for
the Privileges, Customs, etc, of the City of London, in relation to Trade.

CHAP. CXXII. A Survey of the remaining Ports of England, their Members,
Creeks, etc. with a relation of their Legalities touching Exportation and
Importation, together with what Commodities may be Exported, when sold at the
Port where they shall be laded at certain rates.
THe other Legal Ports of England, their Members and Creeks are these, Ipswick,
has Members, Malden and Colchester, Creeks, Leigh-Burnham, West-Mersy,
East-Mersy, Brickly, Wivenhoe, Maintree, and Harwich. The Port of Yarmouth has
Members, Woodbridge, Alborough, Sowold, Blacking, and Creeks, Orford, Dunwick,
Walderswick, and Lestoffe. The port of Lynn, has Member Wells only, Creeks,
Burnham, Hitcham, Croskeys, and Wisbich. The Port of Boston, has Creeks,
Spolding, Tosdick, Wainefleet, Numby-Chaple, Thethethorp and Salt-Fleet. The
Port of Hull has Members, Grimsby, Bridlington, and Scar^^^^^gh, and one Creek
^^ly, viz. Sainthorp. The Port of New Castle has Members, Whitby, Stockton,
Har^lepool, Sunderland, and yields Creeks, Middleborough, Seatondelaval, and
Blith-Nook. The Port of Barwick has Creeks, Aylemouth, Warnewater, Holy-Island,
and the East-Marches containing the Coast of Northumberland, bordering upon
Scotland. The Port of Carlisle, has for Member, Whitehaven; for Creeks, the
West-Marches containing the Coast of Cumberland, bordering on Scotland,
Workington, Raving-Glass, and Milinthorp. The Port of Chester, has Members,
Lancaster, Boulton, Liverpool, Aberconway, Bewmaris, and Carnarvan; Creeks, Pit
of Towdrey, Graung, Wyrewater, Preston, Riblewater, Sankey-Bridge, Fradsham;
the South shore of the River Mersy, to the Red-Stone, Hilbree, Dawpool, Neston,
Burtonhead, Baghill, Mosten, Holy-Head, Amlogh, Pulhelly, and Barmouth. The
Port of Milford has Members, Aberdony, Cardigan, and Pembrook; Creeks,
Aberustha, New-Port, Fiscard, Haverford, West-Tenby, Carmarthen, Lanelthy, and
North-Burys. The Port of Cardif has for Member, Swansey; Creeks, South-Berrys,
Nealth or Briton-Terry, Newton, Alberthaw, Penarth, New-Port, and Chepstow. The
Port of Gloucester has for Creeks the River Severn, from the Bridge North to
Kings-Road. The Port of Bristol has Creeks, Pill, and Vphill. The Port of
Bridg-Water, has for Member, Minhead. The Port of Plymouth has for Members
Padstow, St. Jues, Pensance, Helford, Falmouth, Fowey and Low; Creeks, Penrin,
St. Maures, Fruro, Salt-ash, and Cowsland. The Port of Exeter has Members,
Ilfracomb, Barustable and Dartmouth; Creeks, Clovelly, Appledore, Biddiford,
Tincomb, Star-Cross, Bear and Seaton, Topsham, Pouldram, Sydmouth, Lympson,
Exmouth, Aylemouth, Saltcomb, Brixham, Torbay, and Totnes. The Port of Pool has
Members, Lyme and Weymouth; Creeks, Bridgport, Charmouth, Portland and
Lulworth. The Port of Southampton has Members, Corves and Portsmouth; Creeks,
Swaridge, Wareham, Christ-Church, Hinington, Yarmouth, New-Port, and Emsworth.
The Port of Chichester has Members, Arundel, Shorham, Lewis, Pemsey, Hawing,
Rye and Hyth; Creeks, Pagham-Point, Selsey, Brighthemston, New Haven, Seaford,
Winchelsea, Lyd and Rumny. The Port of Sandwich has Members Dover, Feversham,
Milton and Rochester; Creeks, Deal, Rumsgate, Margate, Whitestable and
Quinb^rough.

These Ports or Public places are those to which the Officers of the Customs
are appropriated, which contain and include the Guidances, and Privileges of
all the Members and Creeks to them appertaining; being the places appointed for
the Lading, and unlading Merchandise.

The Members are such places as formerly enjoyed Custom-Houses, and have yet
Offices or their Deputies attending; they being accounted Lawful places of
Lading or unlading all Commodities unless such as are prohibited.

The Creeks are places where Officers do or formerly have given their
Attendance by way of Prevention, not out of Duty or Right, and are not
accounted lawful places to Land or Lade any Goods without License or sufference
from the Port or Members, under which any such Creek or Creeks is placed; all
which as they be at present accounted at the Custom-House, are as aforesaid
being respectively in the Body of the Counties, and consequently out of the
Jurisdiction of the Admiralty; in case any thing more then ordinary is done, or
sustained in any of them. And now I shall only inform the Reader, that
Commodities of English Growth and Manufacture, may be exported when sold in
England at certain rates, according to the Statute made in the 12 of Car. 2.
and so put an end to this Work.

Gunpowder when it exceeds not the price of five pound per Barrel, may be
exported; Wheat, Rye, Pease, Beans, Barley, Malt, Oats, Pork, Beef, Bacon,
Butter, Cheese, and Candles; when they do not exceed the Prizes following at
the Ports where they are Laded at the time of their Lading, viz. Wheat the
quarter forty Shillings, Rye, Beans and Pease the quarter twenty four
Shillings, Barley and Malt the quarter twenty Shillings, Oats the quarter
sixteen Shillings, Bief the Barrel fifty pound, Pork the Barrel six pound ten
Shillings, Bacon the pound six Pence, Butter the Barrel four pound ten
Shillings, Cheese the pound thirty Shillings, Candles the dozen pounds five
Shillings, paying the respective rates according as they are set down in the
Book of rates; always provided that his Majesty may when he sees occasion,
prohibit the Exportation of Gunpowder and other Ammunition.

And thus Reader, have I with much Labor Sailing through many Tempestuous
Seas, once again cast Anchor in safe Harbor; hoping this Work may be
advantageous unto many, and useful unto all who are any ways concerned in Trade
or Commerce, whether by Navigation or otherwise, the which if it does, I have
obtained the end of my Design.

FINIS.
ENGLAND'S GUIDE TO INDUSTRY: OR, Improvement of Trade, for the good of all
People in general.

LONDON, Printed by R. Holt for T. Passinger at the three Bibles on
London Bridge, and B. Took at the Ship in St. Pauls-Church-Yard. 1683.

THE PREFACE.
FOrasmuch as men who are in a decaying condition, or who have but an ill
opinion of their own concernments, instead of being (as some think) the more
industrious to resist the evil they apprehended, do contrariwise become the
more Languid and ineffectual to all in all their endeavoures; neither caring to
attempt or prosecute even the probable means of their relief: I as a member of
the Commonwealth, next to the knowing the precise truth in what Condition the
common interest stands, would all in doubtful cases thinkthe best and
consequently not despair without strong and manifest Reasons, carefully
examining what ever tends to lessen my hopes of the Public Wellfair.

I have therefore thought fit to examine the following persuasions, which I
find too current in the World, and too much to have affected the minds of some
to the prejudice of all, viz.

That the Rents of Lands are Generally fallen, that therefore and for many
other Reasons, the whole Kingdom grows poorer and poorer; that formerly it
abounded with Gold; but now there is a great Scarcity both of Gold and Silver.

That there is no Trade nor employment for the people, and yet that the Land is
underpeopled, that Taxes have been many and great. That Ireland and the
Plantations in America, and other additions to the Crown are a Burden to
England, that Scotland is of no advantage; that Trade in General does
lamentably decay, that the Hollanders are at our Heels in the Race of Naval
power, the French grow too fatt upon both, and appear so Rich and Potent, that
it is but their Clemency, that they do not devour their Neighbors; and finally
that the Church and State of England, are in the same danger with the Trade of
England, with many other dismal Suggestions, which I do rather Stifle then
repeat.

It Is true the Expense of Foreign Commodities, have of late been too great:
Much of our Plate had it remained money, would have better served Trade, too
many matters have been regulated by Laws, with natures long Custom and general
consent, ought only to have Governed the Slaughter and Destruction of men by
the late Civil Wars, and Plague have been great the Fire of London and disaster
at Chattham have begotten opinions in the Vulgar of the World to our prejudice,
the Nonconformists increase, the people of Ireland think long of their
settlement. The English there apprehend themselves to be Aliens, and are forced
to seek a Trade with Forraigners, which they might maintain with their own
Relations in England, but notwithstanding all this (the like whereof was always
in all places) the Buildings in London grow great and Glorious, the American
Plantations employ 400 Sail of Ships; Auctions in the East India Company are
above double the principal money: Those who can give good Security, may have
money under the Statute interest, materials for Building (oven Oaken Timber)
are little the dearer, some cheaper, for the rebuilding of London; the Exchange
seems as full of Merchants as formerly; no more Beggars in the Streets, nor
executed for thieves as heretofore: the number of Coaches, and Splendour of
Equipage, exceeding former times; the public Theaters very magnificent; the
King has a greater Navy and stronger Guards then before our Calamities: the
Clergy rich, the Cathedr^ls in repair, much Land have been improved, and the
price of Food Reasonable; and in Brief no man needs to want that will take
moderate pains; that some are poorer then others ever was and will be, and that
many are Querulous, and Envious is an Evil as old as the World.

These general Observations, and that men Eat, and Drink, and Laugh as they use
to do, have encouraged me to try if I could comfort others, being satisfied my
self that the Interest and Affairs in England are in no deplorable condition;
the Method I take to do this is not yet very usual, for instead of using only
Comparative and Superlative words and Intellectual Arguments, I have taken the
course (as a Specimen of the Political Arithmetic I have long aimed at) to
express my self in Number, Weight, and Measure.

A Discourse of Trade. Being a Comparison between England and other parts of
Europe, wherein the Encouragement of Industry is promoted in these Islands of
Great Britain and Ireland.
CHAP. I. That a small Country and few People by Situation, Trade, and Policy,
may be equivalent in Wealth, and Strength to a far greater People and
Territories; and particularly that conveniences for Shipping and
Water-Carriage do most eminently and fundamentally conduce thereto.
THe first principal Conclusion by reason of it is Length I consider in three
parts, whereof the first that a small Country and few People may be equivalent
in Wealth and Strength to a far greater People and Territories.

This part of the first principal Conclusion needs little proof, forasmuch as
one Acre of Land may bear as much Corn and feed as many Cattle as twenty by the
difference of the Soil, some Parcels of Ground are naturally so defensible as
that 100 men being possessed thereof, can resist the Invasion of 500. Bad Land
may be improved and made good, Bog may by dreining be made Meadow; Heath Land
may (as in Flanders) be made to bear Flax, and Clover-grass, so as to advance
in value from 1. to 100. the same Land being built upon may centriple the Rent,
which it yields as pasture; one man is nimbler and stronger and more patient
of Labor than another; one man by Art may do as much work as many, viz. one
man with a Mill can grind as much Corn as 20. can pound in a Mortar, one
Printer can make as many Copies as an hundred can write by hand; one horse can
carry as much upon Wheels as five men upon their backs, and in a Boat, or upon
Ice as 20; so that I say again the first point of this general position needs
little or no proof.

But the second and more material part of this Conclusion is, that this
difference in Land and People arises principally from their Situation Trade and
Policy.

To clear this I shall compare Holland and Zealand with the Kingdom of France.

Holland and Zealand do not contain above 1. Million of English Acres, whereas
the Kingdom of France contains above 80.

Now the original and primitive difference holds proportion as Lands to Land;
for it is hard to say that when these places were 1st. planted, whether an Acre
of Land in Holland was better then the like quantity in France and Zealand: Now
is there any reason to suppose, but that therefore upon the first Plantation
the number of Planters was in proportion to the quantity of Land; wherefore if
the People are not in proportion as the Land the same must be attributed to the
Situation of the Land, and to the Trade and Policy of the People.

The next thing to be shown is that Holland and Zealand at this day is not only
80th. as rich and strong as France, but that it has advanced to the 3d. or
thereabouts, which I think will appear upon the balance of the following
Particulars, viz.
As for the Wealth of France, a certain Map of that Kingdom set forth An. 1647.
represents it to be 15 Millions, whereof six did belong to the Church, the
Author thereof (as I suppose) meaning the Rents of the Land only And the Author
of a most judicious Discourse of Husbandry (supposed to be Sir Richard Weston)
does from reason and experience show that Lands in the Netherlands, by bearing
Flax, Turnips, Clover-grass, Madder, etc. will easily yield 10 pound per Acre,
so as the Territories of Holland and Zealand should by this account, yield at
least 10 Millions per Annum; yet I do not believe the same to be so much, nor
France so little as aforesaid, but rather that one bears to the other as about
7 or 8 to one.

The People of Amsterdam are one 3d part of those in Paris or London, which two
Cities differ not in People a 20th part from each other as has appeared by the
Bills of Burials and Christenings from each, but the value of the Buildings in
Amsterdam may well be half that of Paris by reason of the Foundations, Grafts
and Bridges, which in Amsterdam are more numerous and chargeable than Paris:
Moreover the Habitations of the poorest People in Holland and Zealand are twice
or thrice as good as those of France but the People of the one to the People of
the other being but as 13 to 1. the value of the Housing must be as about 5 to
1. The Shipping of Europe being about 2 Millions of tuns I suppose the English
have about 5000000, the Dutch 900 thousand, the French 100 thousand, the
Hamburgers and the Subjects of Denmark, Sweden, and the Town of Dantzick 250
thousand, and Spain, Portugal, Italy, etc. 250 thousand; so as the Shipping in
our case of France to that of Holland and Zealand is about 1 to 9: which
reckoned great and small one with another at 8 pound per Tun makes the worth to
be 800 thousand pounds to 7 Millions, and 2000000 pounds the Hollanders Capital
in the East India Company is worth about 3 Millions where the French has little
or nothing.

The value of the Goods exported out of France into all parts are supposed
quadruple to what is sent to England alone, and consequently in all about 5
Millions; but what is exported out of Holland into England is worth 3 Millions;
and what is exported thence into all the World besides is sextuple to that Sum.

The Moneys yearly raised by the French King, as the same appears by the Book
entitled the State of France, dedicated to the King printed An. Dom. 1669. and
set forth several times by Authority, is 82 Millions of French Livers, which is
about Millions of pounds Sterling, of which Sum the Author says that one 5th
part was abated for Nonvaluers or Insolvencies.

So as (I suppose) not above 5 Millions were effectually raised, but whereas
some say the King of France raised 11 Millions as the of the Effects of France,
I humbly affirm, that the Land and Sea forces, all the Buildings and
Interleguments which we have heard by common Fame to have been set forth and
made in any of these last 7 years needed not to have cost 6 Millions Sterling;
wherefore I suppose he has not raised more, especially since there were
insolvencies when the Tax was at that pitch.

But Holland and Zealand paying 67 of 100 paid by all the United Provinces,
and the City of Amsterdam paying 27 of the said 67, it follows that if
Amsterdam has paid 4000 pound Flemmish per diem, or about 146000 per Annum,
or about 80 thousand pound Sterling, that all Holland and Zealand have paid
above 2 Millions per Annum; now the Reasons why they pay so much, I think are
these (viz) 1. the Author of the State of the Netherlands says so.

2dly. Excise of Victuals at Amsterdam seems above half the Original value of
the same (viz) ground Corn pays 20 Stivers the Bushel, or 63 Gilders the Last,
Beer 113 Stivers the Barrel, housing of Rent, fruit of what it cost; other
Commodities 1/7 1/9 1/12 Salt ad libitum, all weighed Goods pay besides the
premises a vast sum: now if the expense of the People of Amsterdam at a Medium,
and without Excise, were 8 pound per Annum, whereas in England it is 7 pound,
then if all the several Imposts above named raise it 5 pound more, there being
160 thousand Souls in Amsterdam, the Sum of 800 thousand pound Sterling per
Annum will thereby be raised.

3dly. Though the Expense of each Head should be 13 pound per Annum, it is well
known that there be few in Amsterdam who do not earn much more than the said
Expense.

4thly. If Holland and Zealand pay per Annum 2,000,000 pounds, then all the
Provinces together must pay about 3 Millions, less then which Sum per Annum
perhaps is not sufficient to have maintained the Naval War with England, 72
thousand land Forces besides all other the ordinary charges of their
Government, whereof the Church is there a part. To conclude, it seems from the
Premises, that all France does not raise above thrice as much from the public
Charge, as Holland and Zealand alone do.

5thly. Interest of Money in France 7 pounds per Centum, but in Holland scarce
half so much.

6thly. The Country of Holland and Zealand, consisting as it were of Islands
guarded with the Sea, Shipping and Marshes, is defensible at the charge of a
plain open Country is, and where the Seat of War may be both Winter and Summer,
whereas in others nothing can be done but in the Summer only.

7thly. But above all the particulars hitherto considered that of
Superlucration ought chiefly to be taken in, for if a Prince have never so many
Subjects and his Country never so good, yet if either through sloth or
extravagant Expenses or oppression and injustice, what ever is gained, shall be
spent as fast as gotten, the State must be accounted poor. Wherefore let it be
considered how much, or how many times rather Holland and Zealand are now above
what they were 100 years ago; which we must also do of France; now if France
has scarce doubled it is Wealth and Power, and that the other have decupled
theirs; I shall give the preference to the latter, even although the 9 increased
by the one should not exceed the one half gained by the other; because one has
a Store for 9 years, and the other but for 1. To conclude upon the whole, that
though France being Peopled to Holland and Zealand as 13 to 1, and in quantity
of good Land as 80 to 1, yet is not 13 times Richer and Stronger, much less 80
times, nor much above thrice, which was to be proved.

Having thus dispatched the two first Branches of the first principal
Conclusion, it follows to show that this difference of improvement in Wealth
and Strength, arises in particular from conveniences for Shipping and
Water-carriage.

Many writing on this Subject do so magnify the Hollanders as if they were
more, and all other Nations less then men, (as to the matter of Trade and
Policy) making them Angels, and others Fools, Brutes and Sots as to those
particulars, whereas I take the foundation of their Achievements to lie
originally in the Situation of the Country, whereby they do things inimitable
to others, and have advantages whereof others are incapable.

First, The Soil of Holland and Zealand is low Land, rich and fertile, whereby
it is able to feed many men, and so as that men may live near each other for
their mutual Assistance in Trade, I say that 1000 Acres that can feed 1000
Souls is better than 10000 of no more effect, for the following reasons to it
(viz.) first suppose some great Fabric were in building by 1000 men, shall not
much more time be spared if that they lived all upon 1000 Acres, then if they
were forced to live upon 10 times as large a Scope of Land?

2dly. The charge of their care of their Souls, and the Ministry would be far
greater in the one case then the other, as also of Mutual defense in case of
invasion, and even of Thieves and Robbers; moreover the charge of the
Administration of Justice would be much easier where Witnesses and Parties may
be easily Summoned, Attendance less expensive when men's Actions would be better
known, when wrong and Justice would not be covered as in thin-peopled places
they are.

Lastly those who live in solitary places must be their own Soldiers, Divines,
Physicians and Lawyers, and must have their Houses stored with necessary
provisions (like a Ship going upon a long Voyage) to the great wast and
needless expense of such provisions: the value of this first convenience to the
Dutch I reckon to be about 100 thousand pounds per Annum.

2dly. Holland is a level Country, so as, if in any part thereof a Windmill
may be set up, and by it is being moist and vaporous, there is always Wind
stirring over it, by which advantage the labor of many thousand hands is
saved, forasmuch as a Mill made by one man in half a year will do as much
labor as 4 men for 5 years together; this advantage is greater or less where
employment and ease of Labor is so, but in Holland it is eminently great, and
the worth of this Convenience between near 100 and 150 thousand pound.

3dly. there is much more to be gained by Manufacture than Husbandry, and by
Merchandise than Manufacture, but Holland and Zealand, being seated at the
Mouths of 3 long great Rivers, and passing through rich Countries do keep all
the Inhabitants upon the sides of those Rivers but as Husbandmen, whilst
themselves are the Manufactors of their Commodities, and do dispense them into
all Parts of the World, making returns for the same at what price almost they
please themselves; and in short, they keep the Trade of those Countries through
which the same Rivers pass, the value of this 3d convenience is 200 thousand
pound.

4thly. In Holland and Zealand there is scarce any place of work or business
one Mile distance from a Navigable Water, and the charge of Water-carriage is
generally but the 15th or 20th part of Land-carriages, wherefore if there be as
much Trade there as in France, then the Hollanders can out-sell the French
14/15 of all the Expense of all traveling postage and carriage whatsoever,
which even in England I take to be 300 thousand pound per Annum, where the very
postage of Letters costs the People perhaps 50 thousand pound per Annum, though
farmed at much less, and all other Labors of Horses and Porters at least six
times as much; the value of this convenience I estimate to be above 300
thousand pounds per Annum.

5thly. The defensibleness of the Country by reason of it is Situation in the
Sea upon Islands, and in the Marshes, impassible ground, dicked and trenched,
especially considering how the place is aimed at for it is Wealth, I say the
charge for defending this Country is easier than if it were a plain Champion at
least 200 thousand pound per Annum.

6thly. Holland is so considerable for keeping Ships in Harbor with small
Expense of men and ground-tackle that it saves them per Annum 200 thousand
pounds of what must be spent in France.

Now if all these natural Advantages do amount to above one Million per Annum
of profit, and that the Trade of all Europe, nay of the whole World, with which
our Europeans do trade, is not above 45 Millions per Annum; and if 1/50 of the
value be 1/7 of the profit, it is plain that the Hollanders may command and
govern the whole Trade.

7thly. Those who have their Situation thus toward the Sea, abound with Fish
at home, and having also the command of Shipping, have by consequence the
Fishing Trade, whereof that of Herring alone brings more yearly profit to the
Hollanders than the Trade of the West Indies to Spain, or of the East to
themselves, being as some say viis and modis of above 3 Millions per Annum
profit.

8thly. It is not to be doubted but those who have the Trade of Fishing and
Shipping will secure themselves of the Trade of Timber, for Ships, Boats,
Masts, and Casks, of Hemp for Cordage, Sails and Nets, of Salt, of Iron, as
also of Pitch, Tar, Rosin, Brimstone, Oil and Tallow, as necessary
Appurtenances to Shipping and Fishing.

9thly. Those who predominate in Fishing and Shipping have more occasion then
others to frequent all parts of the World, and to observe what is wanting or
redundant every where, and what each People can do, and what they desire, and
consequently to be the Factors and Carriers for the whole World of Trade, upon
which ground they bring all Native Commodities to be Manufactured at home, and
carried back to the Country where they grow, all which we see, for do they not
work the Sugars of the West Indies, the Timber and Iron of Baltic, the Hemp of
Russia, the Lead, Tin, and Wool of England, the Quicksilver and Silk of Italy,
the Yarn and dying Stuffs of Turkey? etc. to be short in all the ancient States
and Empires those who had the Shipping had the Wealth; and if 2 per Centum in
the price of Commodities, be perhaps 20 per Centum in the Gain, it is manifest
that they who can in 45 Millions under-sell others by one Million (upon Account
of Mutual Interest and instrinsick Advantages only) may easily have the Trade
of the World, without such Angelical Wits and Judgments as some attribute to
the Hollander.

Having thus done with their Situation I come now to their Trade.
It is commonly seen that each Country flourishes in the Manufacture of it is
own Native Commodity, viz. England for Woollen-Manufactures, France for Paper,
Swihltand for Iron-ware, Portugal for Confectures, Italy for Silks. Upon which
principle it follows, that Holland and Zealand must flourish most in the Trade
of Shipping, and so become Carriers and Factors to the whole World of Trade;
now the Advantages of Shipping Trade are as follows, viz.

1st. Husbandmen, Seamen, Soldiers and Merchants are the very Pillars of the
Commonwealth, all the other great professions do arise out of the infirmities
and miscarriages of those: Now the Seaman is 3 of these 4; for every Seaman
of industry and ingenuity is not only a Navigator, but a Merchant, and also a
Soldier, not because he has often occasion to fight, and handle Arms, but
because he is Mamilarized with hardship and hazards extending to Life and Limb;
for Training and Duelling is a small part of a Soldier, in respect of his last
mentioned Qualifications, the one being quickly and presently learned, the
other not without many years most painful Experience, wherefore to have the
occasion of abounding in Seamen is a vast convenience.

2dly. the Husbandmen of England earn but about 4 s. per Week, but the Seaman
has as good as 12 s. in Wages, Victuals, Drink, and (as it were) Housing with
other Accomodations, so a Seaman is ineffect 3 Husbandmen, wherefore there is
little Ploughing or Sowing of Corn in Holland or Zealand, or breeding of young
Cattle, but their Land is improved by building Houses, Ships, Engines, Dickes,
Wharfs, Gardens of pleasure, extraordinary Flowers and Fruits, Dairy and
feeding of Cattle, for Rape, Flax, Madder, etc. the Foundations of several
Advantageous Manufactures.

3dly. Whereas the employments of other men is confined to their own Country,
that of a Seaman is free to the whole World; so as where Trade may (as they
call it) be dead, here or there, now and then, it is certain that somewhere or
other in the World, as Trade is always quick enough etc. and Provision is
always plentiful, the Benefit whereof they who command the Shipping enjoy, and
they only.

4thly. The great and ultimate effects of Trade is not wealth at large, but
particularly abundance of Silver, Gold, and Jewels which are not perishable,
but are wealth at all times and all places; whereas abundance of Wine, Corn,
Fowl, Flesh, etc. are riches but hic et nunc: So as the raising of such
Commodities, and the following of such Trade is not profitable before others,
which do store the Countries with Silver, Jewels, etc. but the labor of Seamen
and Freight of Ships, of the Nature of an exported Commodity, the overplus
whereof above what is imported brings home Money, etc.

5thly. Those who have the command of the Sea-Trade may work at easier Freight,
with more profit then others at greater, for as Cloth must be cheaper made,
when one Cards, another Spins, another Weaves, another Draws, another Dresses,
another Presses, and Packs; then when all the Operations above mentioned were
clunsily performed by the same hand; so those who command the Trade of
Shipping, can build long slight Ships, for carrying Masts, Firr, Timber,
Boards, Bolkes, etc. and that one is for Lead, Iron, Stones, etc. one sort of
Vessels to Trade at Ports, where they need never ly aground, others where they
must jump upon the Sand, twice every 12 hours, one sort of Vessel, and way of
Manning in time of Peace, and for cheap gross Goods, another for War, and
precious Commodities, one sort of Vessel for the Turbulent Sea, another for
Inland Waters and Rivers, one sort of Vessels and Rigging where have is
requisite, for the Maidenhead of a Market, another where or 4/1 part of the
time makes no matter, one sort of Masting and Rigging for long Voyages, another
for Coasting, one sort of Vessels for Fishing, another for Trade, one sort for
War, for this or the contrary, another for Burden only, some for Oars, some
for Poles, some for Sails, and some for draught by men or Horses, some for the
Northern Navigations amongst Ice, and some for the South against Storms, etc.
And this I take to be the chief of several Reasons why the Hollanders can go at
less Freight than their Neighbors (viz.) because they can afford a particular
sort of Vessels, for each particular Trade.

I have shown how the Situation has given them Shipping, and how shipping in
effects has given them all other Trade, and how Foreign Traffic must give them
as much Manufactures as they can manage themselves, and as for the overplus
make the rest of the World but as Workmen to their Ships; it now remains to
show the effects of their policy superstructed upon these natural advantages,
not as some think the excess of their understandings. I have omitted to mention
that the Hollanders were 100 years since a poor and oppressed People, living in
a Country naturally cold moist and unpleasant, and were withal persecuted for
their Etrodoxy in Religion.

From whence it necessarily follows that this People must labor hard, and set
all hands to work, and Rich and Poor, young and old must study the Art of
Number, Weight and Measure, must fare hard, provide for Impotents, and for
Orphans, out of hope to make profit by their Labors, must punish the Lazy by
Labors. I say all these particulars, said to be the subtle Excogitations of
the Hollanders seem to me but with what could not almost have been otherwise.

Liberty of Conscience, Registry of Conveyances, small Customs, Banks,
Lombards, and Law-Merchant, rise all from the same Spring, and tend to the same
Sea. As for Loans of Interest, it is also a necessary effect of all the
premises, and not the fruit of their contrivance.

Wherefore we shall only show in particular, the Efficacy of each, and first,
of Liberty of Conscience; but before I enter upon these, I shall mention a
practice almost forgotten, whether it refers to Trade or Policy is not
material, which is, the Hollanders undermasting and sailing of such of their
Shipping as carry cheap and gross Goods, and whose Sail does not depend much
upon Season.

It is to be noted that of 2 equal and like Vessels if one spreads 1600 yards
of like Canvas, and the other 2500, their Speed is but as 4 to 5, so as one
soon brings home the same Timber in 4 days, as the other will in 5, now if we
consider that although those Ships be but 4 or 5 days under Sail, that they are
perhaps 30 upon the Voyage, so as the one is but 1/30 parts longer upon the
whole Voyage than the other, tho longer under Sail; now if Masts, Yards,
Rigging, Cables, and Anchors, do depend upon the quantity and extent of the
Sails, and consequently hands also, it follows that the one Vessel goes at 3/1
less charge losing but 1/80 of the time and of what depends thereupon.

I come to the first Policy of the Dutch, viz, Liberty of Conscience, which I
can conceive they grant upon these grounds, (but keeping up always a force to
maintain the Common Peace)

1st. They themselves broke with Spain to avoid the Imposition of the Clergy.

2dly. Dissenters of this kind are for the most part thinking, sober and
patient men, and such as believe, that Labor and Industry is their duty
toward God, (how Erroneous soever their Principles be.)

3dly. These People believing the Justice of God, and seeing most licentious
persons to enjoy most of the World and it is best things, will never venture to
be of the same Religion and Profession with voluptuaries, and men of extreme
Wealth and Power, who they think have their Portion in this World.

4thly. They cannot but know, that no man can believe what himself pleases, and
to force men to say they believe when they do not, is vain, absurd, and without
Honor to God.

5thly. The Hollanders knowing themselves not to be an Infallible Church, and
that others had the same Scriptures for guide as themselves, and withal the
same Interest to save their Souls, did not think fit to make this matter their
business, no more but to make Bonds of the Seamen they employ, not to cast away
their own Ships and lives.

6thly. The Hollanders observe that in France and Spain, especially the Latter,
the Church men are about 100 to one, to what they use or need, the principal
care of whom is to preserve Uniformity, and this they take to be a superfluous
charge.

7thly. They observe where most endeavors have been used to keep Uniformity
their Exterodoxy has most abounded.

8thly. They believe that if of the People were Exterodox, and that if the
whole quarter should by Miracle be removed, that within a small time 4/1 of the
Remainder would again become Exterodox some way or other, it being Natural for
men to differ in Opinions in Matters above sense and reason, and for those who
have less Wealth to think thry have the more Wit and Understanding, especially
in the things of God which they think chiefly to belong to the Poor.

9thly. They think the case of the Primitive Christians, as it is represented
in the Acts of the Apostles, looks like that of the present Dissenters, (I mean
externally) moreover it is to be observed that Trade does not (as some think)
best flourish under popular Government, but rather that Trade is more
vigorously carried on in every State and Government by the exterodox party of
the same, and such as profess Opinions differ from what are publicly
established (that is to say) in India where the Mahumetan Religion is
Authorized.

There the Banians are the most considerable Merchants, in the Turkish Empire,
the Jews and Christians, at Venice, Naples, Legorn, Genica, and Lisbon Jews,
and now Papists Merchants Strangers. But to be short, in the part of Europe
where the Roman Catholic Religion now has, or lately has had Establishment,
there 3 qrs. of the whole Trade is in the hands of such as have separated from
the Church, viz. The Inhabitants of England, Scotland, and Ireland, as also
these of the United Provinces, with Denmark, Sweden and Norway, together with
the Subjects of the Norman Protestant Princes, and the Hans-Towns do at this
day possess a quarter of the Trade of the World, and even France it self the
Hugonets are proportionably far the greatest Trades, nor is it to be denied but
that in Ireland, where the said Roman Religion is not Authorized, but the
professors thereof have a great part of the Trade, from whence it follows that
Trade is not fixed to any Species of Religion as such, but rather as before
has been the said, to the heterodox party of the whole; the truth whereof
appears also in all the particular Towns of greatest Trade in England; nor do I
find reason to believe that the Roman Catholic Seamen in the whole World are
sufficient to man effectually a Fleet equal to what the King of England now
has, but the now Papist-Seamen can do above thrice as much. Wherefore he whom
this latter party does effectionately own to be their Head, cannot probably be
wronged in his Sea-concernments by the Author; from whence it follows, that for
the Advancement of Trade (if that be a Sufficient Reason) indulgence must be
granted in matters of Opinion, those Licentious Actings as even in Holland be
restrained by force.

The 2d. Policy or help to Trade used by the Hollanders, is Securing the Titles
to Lands and Houses, for although Lands and Houses may be called Terra firma et
res immobiles, yet the Title unto them is no more certain then it pleases the
Laws, and Authority to make them, wherefore the Holanders do by Registries and
other ways of assurance make the Title as immovable as the Lands, for there
can be no encouragement to Industry where there is no Assurance of what shall
be gotten by it, and where by Fraud and Corruption one man may take away with
ease and by a trick what another has gotten by extreme labor and pains.

There has been much Discourse about introducing of Registories into England,
the Lawyers for the most part do object against it, alleging the Titles of
Lands in England are sufficiently secure already; wherefore omitting the
considerations, of small and oblique Reasons, pro et contra, it were good that
enquiry were made from the Officers of several Courts to what Sum or Value
purchasers damnified for these last 10 Yeahs, by such fraudulent conveyance as
Registries would have prevented, the 10th part whereof at a Medium is the
annual loss which the People sustain for want of them, and then Computation is
to be made, of the annual charge of Registring such extraordinary conveyances,
would secure the Titles of Lands more by comparing these two Sums, the
Question so much agitated, may be determined.

Their third Policy is their Bank, the use whereof is to increase money or
rather to make a small Sum equivalent to Trade in a greater, for the effecting
whereof these things are to be considered: First how much Money will drive the
Trade of the Nation, 2dly, how much current Money there is actually in the
Nation. 3dly. how much will serve to make all payments of under 5 Pound, or any
other convenient Sum throughout the year. 4thly. for what Sum the Keepers of
the Bank are unquestionable security. If all these 4 particulars be well known,
then it may be also known how much of ready Money above mentioned, may safely
and properly be lodged in the Bank, and to how much ready current Money the
said deposited Money is equivalent; (as for example) suppose 100 thousand pounds
will drive the Trade of the Nation, and suppose there be but 60 thousand pounds
of ready Money in the same; suppose also the 20 thousand pound will drive one,
and answer all payments made of under 150 pound, in this case 40 of the 60
being put into the Brank will be equivalent unto 80, which 80, and 20, kept out
of the Bank, do make up 100, viz. enough to drive the Trade, as was purposed.
Where note that the Bank-keepers must be responsible for double the Sum
entrusted with them, and must have power to levy upon the General weight they
happen to lose, unto particular Men; upon which grounds the Bankers may freely
make use of the received 40 pound, whereby the said Sum and with the like Sum
in credit, makes 80 pound, and with the 20 reserved 100.

I might here add many more particulars, but being the same has already been
noted by others, I conclude only with adding one observation which I think to
be of consequence; That the Hollanders do ridd their hands of 2 Trades, which
are of great turmoil and danger, and yet of least profit. The 1st whereof is
that of a common and private Soldier, for such they can hire from England,
Scotland, and Germany to venture their Lives for 6 pence a day, whilst
themselves safely and quietly follow such Trades whereby the meanest of them
gain 6 times as much, and withal by this entertaining of Strangers for
Soldiers their Country becomes more and more peopled, forasmuch as the
Children of such Strangers are Hollanders, and take to Trades, whilst new
Strangers are admitted in finitum; besides, these Soldiers at convenient
intervals, do at least as much work as is equivalent to what they spend; and
consequently by this way of employing of Strangers for Soldiers, they people
the Country, and save their own Persons from Danger and Misery, without any
real Expense; effecting by this Method, what others have in vain attemped by
Laws for naturalizing of Strangers; as if men could be charmed to transport
themselves, from their own native, into a foreign Country, merely by words,
and for the bare leave of being called by a new Name. In Ireland, Laws for
Naturalization have had little Effect, to bring in Aliens; and it is no wonder
if Englishmen will not go thither, without they may have the pay of Soldiers,
or some other Advantage amounting to Maintenance.

Having intimated the way by which the Hollanders do increase their People, I
shall here digress to set down the way of computing the value of every Head one
with another, and that the instance of People in England; (viz.) Suppose the
People of England be six Millions in number, that their Expense at 7 pound per
head be forty two Millions, suppose also that the Rents of Lands be eight
Millions, and the profit of all the personal Estate be six Millions more, it
must needs follow, that the Labor of the People have supplied the remaining
thirty six Millions; the which multiplied by twenty, (the mass of Mankind being
worth twenty years Purchase as well as Land) makes five hundred and twenty
Millions, as the value of the whole People; which number divided by six
Millions, makes above eight Pound Sterling to be the value of each Head, Man,
Woman, and Child, and of a dull Persons twice as much: From whence we may learn
to compute, the Loss we have sustained by the Plague, by the slaughter of Men
in War, and by sending them abroad unto the Service of foreign Princes. The
other Trade the Hollanders have ridd their Hand of, is the old patriarchal
Trade of being Cowkeepers, and in a great measure of which concerns plowing and
sowing of Corn, have put that Employment upon the Danes and Polanders, from
whence they have their young Cattle and Corn. Here we may take notice that as
Trades and curious Arts increase, so the Trade of Husbandry will decrease,
unless the Wages of Husbandmen must rise, and consequently the Rents of Lands
must fall.

For proof whereof I dare affirm that if (...) ^andmen of England, who now
(...) Pence a day, or thereabouts, could become Tradesmen, and earn sixteen
Pence a day, which is no great Wages, two Shillings, and two Shillings and six
Pence being usually given; that then it would be the Advantage of England, to
throw up their Husbandry, and make no use of their Lands, but for Grass,
Horses, Milch-Cows, Gardens and Orchards, etc. Which if it be so, and that
Trade and Manufacture have increased in England, (viz.) If a quarter part of
the People apply themselves to these Faculties more then they did heretofore,
and if the price of Corn be no greater now then when Husbandmen were more
numerous, and Tradesmen fewer: It follows from the single Reason (tho others
may be added) that if the Rents of Lands must fall: as for Example, suppose the
price of Wheat be fifty or sixty Pence the Bushel; now if the Rent of the Land
whereon it grew be the third Sheaf, then of the sixty Pence, twenty Pence is
for the Land, and forty Pence for the Husbandman; but if the Husbandman's
Wages should rise part, or from eight to nine Pence per diem; then the
Husbandman's Share in the Bushel of Wheat, raised from forty to forty five
Pence, and consequently the Rent of the Land must fall from twenty to fifteen
Pence; for we suppose the price of the Wheat still remains; especially since we
cannot raise it, for if we did attempt it Corn would be brought unto us as unto
Holland, from Foreign parts, where the State of Husbandry was not changed.

And thus I have done with the first Principal Conclusion, That a small
Territory and even a few people may by Situation Trade and Policy be made
Equivalent to a far greater, and that conveniences for Shipping and
Water-Carriage do most Eminently and Fundamentally conduce thereunto.

CHAP. II. That some kind of Taxes and Public Levies, may rather increase then
diminish the Wealth of the Kingdom.
IF the money or other Effects levied from the people by way of Tax were
destroyed and annihilated; then it is clear, that such levies would diminish
the Commonwealth: or if the same were exported out of the Kingdom without any
return at all, then the case would be also the same; but if what is levied as
aforesaid be only Transferred from one Hand to another, then we are only to
consider whether the said money or Commodities are taken from an improving
Hand, and given to an ill Husband, or vice versa; as for Example, suppose money
by way of Tax be taken from one, who spends in Superfluous Eating and
Drinking, and delivered to another, who imploys the same in improving of Lands,
in Fishing, in working of Mines, and Manufacture, etc. it is manifest, that
such Tax is an advantage to the State whereof the said different Persons are
members; nay, if money be taken from him who spends the same as aforesaid
upon Eating and Drinking, or any other Perishing Commodities, and Transferred
to one who bestowed it on Clothes, I say that even in this case the
Commonwealth has some little advantage, because Clothes do not perish
altogether so soon as Drinks; but if spent in Furniture of Houses, the
advantage is yet little more; if in Building of Houses; yet more; if in
improving of Lands, working of Mines and Fishing, yet more; but most of all in
bringing Gold and Silver into the Country, because those things are not only
perishable but are esteemable for Wealth at all times, and every where; whereas
other Commodities, which are Perishable or whose value depends upon the
Fashion, or which are Contingently scarce and plentiful, are Wealth pro hic and
nunc, as has been elsewhere said; in the next Place if the People of any
Country, who have not already a full employment, should be enjoined or Taxed to
work upon such Commodities as are imported from abroad, I say, such a Tax does
also improve the Commonwealth; moreover if Persons who live by Begging,
Cheating, Stealing, Gaming, Borrowing without intention of Restoring, who by
these ways do get from the Credulous and careless more then is Sufficient for
the Subsistence of such Persons, I say, that tho the State should have no
present employment for such Persons, and consequently should be forced to clear
the whole charge of their livelihood, yet it were more for the Public Profit
to give all such Persons a regular and Competent allowance by a Public Tax,
then to suffer them to spend extravagantly at the only charge of careless and
credulous and good natured People, and to expose the Commonwealth to the loss
of so many other men, whose lives are taken away for the crimes which ill
Discipline does occasion; on the contrary, if the Stocks of Laborious and
ingenious men, who are not only Beautifying the Country where they live by
Elegant Diet, Apparel, Furniture, Housing, Pleasant Gardens and Orchards and
Public Edifices etc. but also are increasing the Gold, and Silver, and Jewels
thereof, by Trade and Arms; I say, if the Stock of these men should be
Diminished by a Tax, and Transferred to such as do nothing at all but to Eat,
Drink, Sing, Play, Dance, nay to such as Study the Metaphysics, or other
needless Speculations, or else employ themselves in any other way which
produces no material thing, or things of real use and value, in the common
Wealth; in this case the Wealth of the Public will be diminished otherwise
then as such exercises are Recreations and Refreshments of the minds; and which
being moderately used, do qualify and dispose men to what in it self is more
considerable.

Wherefore upon the whole matter, to know whether a Tax will do good or harm,
the State of the People and of their Employments must be well known, that is to
say, what part of the People are unfit for Labor by their impotency and
infancy, and also what part are exempt from the same by reason of their
Wealths, Function or Dignities, by reason of their charge and employments,
otherwise Governing Directing and Preferring those who are appointed to Labor
and Arts.

In the next place Computations must be made, what part of those who are fit
for Labor and Arts, as aforesaid, are able to perform the Work of the Nation
in it is present State and Measure.

3. It is to be considered, whether the remainder can make all, or any part of
these Commodities which are imported from abroad, which of them and how much in
particular; the remainder of such Sort of People, if any be, may safely and
without possible prejudice to the Commonwealth be employed in Arts and
Exercises of Pleasure and Ornament; the greatest whereof is the improvement of
Natural Knowledge.

Having in general illustrated this Point, which I think needs no other Proof
but illustration, I come next to intimate that no part of Europe has paid so
much by way of Tax as Holland and Zealand for these last Forty years; and yet
no Country has in the same time increased -- comparably to them; and it is
manifest they have followed the general rates abovementioned; for they Tax
Meats and Drinks most heavily of all, to restrain the excessive expense of
those things which twenty four hours does as to the use of man, wholly
annihilate; and they are more Favorable to Commodities to the greater
duration: nor do they tax according to what men gain, but in extraordinary
cases, but always according to what men spend, and most of all to what they
spend needlessly and without Prospect of return; upon which Grounds their
Customs upon Goods imported and exported are generally low; as if they intended
by them only to keep an Account, of what Foreign Trade, and to retaliate upon
their Neighbors States, the prejudices done them by their Prohibition and
Imposition.

It is farther to be observed that since the year 1636, the Taxes and Public
Levies made in England Scotland and Ireland have been Prodigiously greater then
at any time heretofore, and yet the said Kingdoms have increased in their
Wealth and Strength for these last Forty years, as shall hereafter be shown; it
is said that the French King does at present levy the Fifth part of his peoples
Wealth, and yet great Obstructions is made of the present Riches and Strength
of that Kingdom; although great care must be had in distinguishing between the
Wealth of the people and that of an absolute Monarch, who takes from the
people where, when, and in what Proportion he pleases, the Subjects of two
Monarchs may be equally Rich, and yet one Monarch may be double as Rich as the
other; viz. If one take the Tenth part of the Peoples Substance to his own
dispose, and the other Twentyeth; nay, the Monarch of a poor people may appear
more splendid and glorious then that of a Richer; which perhaps may be somewhat
the case of France, as hereafter shall be examined. As an Instance and
Application of what has been said I conceive that in Ireland wherein is above
one hundred thousand people, near three hundred thousand Smoaks or Hearths, it
were more tolerable for the people, and more profitable for the King, that each
head paid two Shillngs-worth of Flax, then that each Smoke should pay two
Shillings in Silver, and yet for these following Reasons.

1. Ireland being under-Peopled, and Cattle and Land very cheap, store of Fish
and Fowl, the Ground yielding every where excellent Roots (and particularly
that bread like Root-Potatoes) and withal they being able to perform their
Husbandry with such Harness and Tackling as each man can make, living in such
Houses as (almost) every man can Build; and every Houswife being a Spinner and
Dyer of Wool, and Yarn, they can live and Subject after their present Fashions,
without the use of Gold and Silver money, and can supply themselves, with
necessaries above named, without Laboring two Hours per diem. Now it has been
found by reason of insolvencies arising, rather from the uselesness, then want
of Money amongst these poor People, that from 300000 Hearths, which should have
yielded 30 thousand pounds, not much above 15000 thousand pounds of money could
be levied; whereas it is easily imagined that 4 or 5 People dwelling in that
Cottage which has but one Smoke could easily have Planted a ground-Plat of 40
Foot Square with Flax, or the 50th. part of an Acre; for so much ground will
bear eighth or Ten Shillings-worth of that Commodity, and the rent of so much
ground in few places amounts to a Penny; nor is there any skill requisite to
this Practice, wherewith the Country is not already Familiar. Now as for a
Merchant for the said Flax, there is imported into Holland it self, over and
above what the Country produces, as much Flax as is there sold for between
eighth Score and 200000 pound. And into England and Ireland is imported as much
Linen Cloth made of Flax and there Spent as is worth above half a Million of
money, as hereafter shall be shown. Wherefore having shown that Silver money is
useless to the poor People of Ireland, that half the Hearth-money could scarce
be raised by Reason thereof, that the People are part employed, that the People
and Land of Ireland are competently qualifyed for Flax, that one Pennyworth of
Land will produce Ten Shillings-worth of the same, and that there is Market
enough and enough for above 100000 pounds-worth; I conceive my Proposition
sufficiently proved, at least to set forward and promote a practice, especially
since if all the Flax so produced should yield nothing, yet there is nothing
lost, the same time having been worse spent before upon the same Ground: the
like Tax of two Shillings per head, may be raised with the like advantage from
the People of England which would amount to Six hundred thousand pounds. -- per
Annum to be paid in Flax manufactured into all sorts of Linens, Threads, Tapes
and Laces which we now receive from France, Flanders, Holland and Germany, the
value whereof does far exceed the sum last mentioned, as has appeared by the
examination of Particulars.

It is observed by Clothiers and others who employ great numbers of poor
people, that when Corn is extremely plentiful the Labor of the Poor is
Proportionably dear, and Scarce to be had at all; (So licentious are they who
Labor only to Eat, or rather to Drink:) wherefore when so many Acres of Corn
as do usually produce sufficient store for the Nation, shall produce perhaps
double to what is exported, or necessary; it seems not unreasonable, that this
common Blessing of God should be employed to the common good of the People,
represented by their Sovereign; much less that the same should be abused by the
vile and brutish part of Mankind, to the prejudice of the Commonwealth; and
consequently that such Surplusage of Corn should be sent to Public
Storehouses, from thence to be disposed of to the best advantage of the
Public. Now if the Corn spent in England at five Shilings per Bushel Wheat,
and two Shillings six Pence Barley be worth 10,000,000. It follows that in
Years in great Plenty when the said Grains are part cheaper, that a vast
advantage might accrue to the Commonwealth, which now is spent in once feeding
the People in quantity, or quality, and so* in disposing them to their usual
Labor. The like may be said of Sugar, Tobacco, and Pepper, which Customs has
now made necessary to all sorts of People, and with overplanting them has made
unreasonably cheap; I say, it is not absurd that the Public should be
advantaged by this Extraordinary Plenty.

That an Excise should be laid upon Corn also is not unreasonable not only for
this but for other Reasons.
The way of the present Militia or train-Bands in a Gentle Tax upon the
Country, because it is only a few Days Labor in the Year, of a few in respect
of the whole, using their own Goods, that is, their own Arms. Now if there be
300,0000. of Males in England there be above 200,000. of them who are between
the Age of sixteen and thirty unmarryed Persons, and who live by their Labor
and Service; for of so many the present Militia consists, and if 150,000. of
these were Armed and trained as Foot, and 50000 as Horse, the said Force at
Land together with 30,000. men at Sea, would by Gods ordinary Blessing, defend
the Nation being an Island against any force in view; but the charge of Arming,
disciplining and rendevouzing all their men twice or thrice a Year would be a
very Gentle Tax levied by the People themselves and paid to themselves.
Moreover if out of the said number part were selected of such as are more then
ordinary fit for War, and exercised and rendevouzed fourteen or fifteen times
per Annum, the charge thereof being but a fortnights pay in the Year, would be
also a very Gentle Tax. Lastly if out of this last mentioned number again
should be selected, making 16,000. Foot, and 6000 Horse to be Exercised and
rendevouzed forty Days in the Year, I say that the charge of all these three
Militia's, allowing the latter six Weaks pay per Annum, would not cost per
Annum above 120,000. pounds which I take to be so easy a burden for so great
a Benefit.

Forasmuch as the present Navy of England requires 36,000. men to man it, and
for that the English Trade of Shipping requires about 48,000. men to manage it,
it follows that there ought to be about 48,000. competently qualifyed for these
Services; for want whereof, we see it is a long while before a Royal Navy can
be made, which till it be, is of no Effectual use but lies at charge. And we
see likewise upon their occasions that Merchants are put to great straights,
and inconveniences, and do pay excise-rates for the carrying on their Trade.
Now if 24,000. able Bodyed Tradesmen whereby 6000 per Annum brought up and
fitted for Sea-service, and for their encouragement allowed twenty Shillings
per Annum for every Year they had been at Sea, even when they stay at home, not
exceeding six pound for those who have served six years or upwards; it follows
that about 72000. pound at the medium of three pound per man would so satiate
the whole number; and so forasmuch as half the Seamen which manage the
Merchants Trade are supposed to be always in Harbor, and are about 40000
together with the said half, the Auxiliaries last mentioned, would upon
Emergencies man out the whole Royal Navy, leaving to the Merchant 12000 of the
able Auxiliaries to perform their business in Harbor, till others come home
from the Sea; I say that more then this Sum 72000 pounds per Annum is
Fruitlesly spent and over-paid by the Merchants whenever a great Fleet is to
be fitted out. Now these whom I call Auxiliary Seamen are such as have another
Trade besides wherewith to maintain themselves when they are not employed at
Sea; and the charge of maintaining themselves the 72000 pounds per Annum I take
to be little or nothing for the Reasons abovementioned, and consequently an
easy Tax to the people because levied by and paid to themselves. As we
propounded, that Ireland, should be Taxed with Flax, and England by Linen and
other Manufactures of the same; so I conceive that Scotland might be Taxed as
much to be paid in Herrings, as Ireland in Flax. Now these three Taxes of Flax,
Linen and Herrings, and the maintenance of the Triple Militia, and of the
Auxiliary Seamen abovementioned, do all five of them together amount to
1,000,000. pounds of money, the raising whereof is not a Million spent but
gained to the Commonwealth, unless it can be made appear that by Reason of all
or any of them the Exportations of Woollen Manufactures, Lead and Tin, are
lessened, or of such Commodities as our own East and West India Trade do
produce; for as much as I conceive that the Exportation of these last mentioned
Commodities is the Touchstone, whereby the Wealth of England is Tried, and the
Pulse whereby the Health of the Kingdom may be discerned.

CAP. III. That France cannot by Reason of natural and perpetual Impediments be
more Powerful at Sea then England, or the low Countries.
POwer at Sea consists chiefly in men able to fight at Sea; and that in such
Shipping as is most proper for the Seas. Wherein they serve; and those are in
these Northern Sea-Ships from between 300 to 1300 Tuns, and of these such as
Draw much Water, and have a deep latih in the Sea, in order to keep a good Wind
and not to fall too Leward, a matter of vast advantage in Sea-Service;
wherefore it is to be Examined, first, Whether the French King has Ports in the
Northern Seas, where he has most occasion, for his Fleets of War in any
Consists above, to receive the Vessels abovementioned in all Weather, both in
Winter and Summer Seats; for if the French King could bring to Sea an equal
number of Fighting men with the English or Hollanders in small Float Leward
Vessels, he would certainly be of the weaker side; for a Vessel of 1000 Tuns
manned with 500 Fighting men with five Vessels of 200 Tuns each manned with 100
men apiece, shall in common Reason have the better offensively and defensively;
for as much as the great Ship can carry such Ordnance as can reach the small
ones at a far greater distance, then these can reach, or at lest hurt the
other, and can batrer and sink at a distance, when a small one can scarce
pierce.

Moreover it is more difficult for men out of a small vessel to enter a tall
Ship, then for men from an higher place to leap down into a lower; nor is small
Shot so effectual upon a tall Ship, as vice versa. And as for Vessels drawing
much Water, and consequently keeping a good Wind, they can took or tear Leward
Vessels at pleasure, and secure themselves from being boarded by them.

Moreover the Windward Ship has a fairer mark at a Leward Ship, then vice
versa, and can place her shot upon such parts of the Leward Vessel as upon the
next tack will be under Water. Now the French King having no Ports able to
receive large Windward Vessels between Dunkirk and Vshant, what other Ships he
can bring into those Seas will not be considerable; as for the wide Ocean which
his Harbors of Breas^ and Brovage do look into, it affords him no advantage
upon an Enemy, there being so great a Latitude of engaging, or not, even when
the Parties are in sight of each other^ wherefore although the French King were
immensly rich, and could build what Ships he pleased both for number and
quality, yet if he have not Ports to receive and shelter that sort and size of
Shipping which is fit for his purpose, his Riches will in this case be
Fruitless and a mere expense, without any return or profit. Some will say that
other Nations cannot build so good Ships as the English, I do indeed hope they
cannot; but because it seems too possible that they may sooner or later, by
Practice and Experience, I shall not make use of that Argument, having only
bound my self to show that the Impediments of France (as to this purpose) are
natural and perpetual, Ships and Guns do not fight of themselves, but men who
act and manage them; wherefore it is more material to show that the French
King, neither has, nor can have men sufficient to man a Fleet of equal
Strength, to that of the King of England.

The King of England's Navy consists of about 70,000. Tuns of Shipping, which
requires 36,000. men to man; these men being supposed to be divided into eight
parts, 1/^ part must be Persons of great Experience and Reputation in
Sea-Service; another part must be such as have used the Sea seven Years, and
upwards; half of them or part must be such as have used the Sea above a twelve
Month, viz. 2, 3, 4, 5, or six Years, allowing but one quarter of the whole
compliment, to be such as never were at Sea at all, or at most but one Voyage,
or upon one Expedition; so that at a medium, I reckon the whole Fleet must be
men of three or four Years growth one with another. Fournier, a late judicious
Writer making it his business to persuade the World how considerable the Kings
of France was, or might be at Sea, in ninety two or ninety three Pages of his
Hierography, says, that there was one place in Britany which had Furnished the
King with 1400 Seamen, and that perhaps the whole Sea coast of France might
have furnished him with fifteen times as many. Now supposing the whole
Allegation were true, yet the same number amounts but to 21,000, all which if
the whole Trade of Shipping in France were quite and clean abandoned, would not
by above a third man in a Fleet, be equivalent to that of the King of England,
and if the Trade were but barely kept alive there would not be one third part
men enough to man the said Fleet.

But if the Shipping Trade of France be not above a quarter as great as that of
England, and that one third part of the same, namely the Fishing Trade to the
Banks of newfound Land is not peculiar nor Fixed to the French; then I say,
that if the King of England who has Power to press men cannot under two or
three Months time man his Fleet, then the French King with less then a quarter
of the same help can never do it at all; for in France, as shall be elsewhere
shown, there are not a 15000 Tun of Trading Vessels, and consequently not above
15,000. Seamen reckoning a man to every tenth Tun, and it has been showed that
the French King cannot at present man such a Fleet as is above described.

We come next to show that he never can bring under natural and perpetual
impediments viz. First if there be but 15,000. Seaman in all France to manage
it is Trade, it is not to be supposed that the said trade should be
distinguished, nor that it should spare above five of the said 15,000. toward
managing of the Fleet, which requires 35,000. men; now the deficient 30000 must
be supplied out of these four ways; either by taking in Land-men, of which sort
there must not be above 10,000, since the Seamen will never be contented
without being the Major part, nor do they Heartily wish well to Land-men at
all, or rejoice even at those Successes of which the said Land-men can claim
any share, thinking it hard that themselves, who are bred to Miserable and
Painful and dangerous employments and yet profitable to the Commonwealth,
should at a time when Booty and purchase may be gotten, be Dogged or hindered
with any Conjunction, which Landmen are forced to admit these to any equal
share with themselves.

Secondly the Seamen which are supposed 20,000 must be had, that is, shired
from other Nations, which cannot be without Tempting 'em with so much wages as
exceeds that given by Merchants; and withal Counterpoyse the damage of being
hanged by their own Prince, and allowed no quarter if taken, the trouble of
carrying themselves away when restraints are upon 'em, and also the infamy of
having been Apostates to their Country and Cause. I say their wages must be
more than double to what their own Prince gives them; and their Aurum must be
very great, that they shall not at long run be abused by those who employ them
(as hating the Traitor tho loving the Treason) I say moreover that those who
will be thus tempted away must be of the basest and lewdest sort of Seamen, and
such as have not enough of Honor and Conscience to qualify them for any
Gallant performance.

3. Another way to exonerate Seamen is, to put great numbers of Land-men upon
Ships of War in order to bring always Seamen; but this course cannot be
effectual, not only for the abovementioned Antipathy between Land-men and
Seamen, but also because it is seen that men at Sea do not apply themselves to
Labor and Practice without more necessity then happens in over manned Shipping.
For where there are fifty men in a Vessel that Ten can sufficiently Navigate,
the Supernumerary forty will improve little; but where there shall be often but
one or two Supernumeraries, then necessity will often call upon every one to
set his hand to the work, which must be well done at the Peril of their lives;
moreover Seamen shifting Vessels every six or twelve months, do sometimes Sail
in small Barges, sometimes in midlingships, and sometimes in greater Vessels of
defense, sometimes in Lighters, sometimes in Hoyes, sometimes in Ketches,
sometimes in three wasted Ships, sometimes they go to the northward, sometimes
to the Southward, sometimes they Coast, sometimes they Cross the Ocean; by all
which Varieties of Service they do in time complete themselves is every part
and Circumstance of this faculty: Whereas those who go out for a Summer in a
man of War, have not the Variety of Practice, nor a direct necessity of doing
any thing at all; besides it is three or four Years at a medium that a Seaman
must be made, neither can there be less then three Seamen to make the fourth of
a Landman, consequently the fifteen thousand Seamen can increase but five
thousand Seamen in three or four Years, and unless their Trade should increase
with their Seamen in Proportion, the King must be forced to be at the charge of
this improvement, out of the quick Stock which is intolerable, so as the
question which now remains is whether the Shipping Trade of France is like to
increase, upon which account it is to be considered, that France is stored with
all kind of necessaries within it self, as Corn, Cattle, Wine, Salt,
Linen Cloth, Rape, Silk, Fruit, etc. As they need little Shipping to import
more Commodities of Weight and Bulk, neither is there any thing of Bulk
exported out of France but Wines and Salt, the Weight whereof is under
1000,000. Tun per Annum, yielding not employment to above twenty five thousand
Tun of Shipping, and these are for the most part Dutch and English, who are not
only already in possession of the said Trade, but also are better fitted to
maintain it then the French are, or perhaps ever can be, and that for the
following Reasons, viz. Because the French cannot Victual so cheap as the
English or Dutch, nor Sail with so few Hands. Secondly the French for want of
good Coasts and Harbors, cannot keep their Ships in Port under the charge that
the English or Hollanders can. Thirdly by Reason of the paucity and distance of
their Harbors one from another their Seamen and Tradesmen relating to Shipping
cannot correspond with, or Assist, one another so easily, cheaply,
advantageously, as in other places; wherefore if their Shipping-Trade is not
like to increase within themselves, and much less to increase by their beating
out the English and Hollanders from being the Carriers of the World, it follows
then, their Seamen will not be increased by their increase of their Trade,
wherefore and for that they are not like to be increased by any of their
several ways above specifyed, and for that their parts are not fit to retain
Ships of Burden and quality fit for their purpose, and that by Reason of less
fitness of their Ports then those of their Neighbors: I conceive that which
was propounded has been competently proved.

The aforenamed Fournier has Labored to prove the contrary to all this in the
ninety Second and ninety eight Page of his Hydrography, unto which I refer the
Reader, not thinking his Arguments of any Weight at all in the present case,
nor indeed does he make his comparison with English or Hollanders but with the
Spaniards, who, nor the Grand Senior (the latter of whom has greater advantages
to be Powerful at Sea then the French King) could never attain to any
illustrious greatness in Naval Power, having after attempted but never
succeeded in the same, nor is it easy to believe that the King of England
should for so many Years have continued in his Title to the Sovereignty of the
narrow Seas, against his Neighbors ambitious enough to have gotten it from
him, had not their impediments been natural and perpetual, and such as we say
do obstruct the most Christian King.

CHAP. IV. That the People and Territories of the King of England are naturaly
as considerable for Wealth and Strength as those of France.
THe Author of the State of England among the many useful truths and
observations he has, sets down the proportion between the Territories of
England and France to be, as thirty to eighty two; the which if it be true,
then England, Scotland, and Ireland, with the Islands unto them belonging, will
altogether be near as big as France; tho I ought to take all advantages for
proving the Paradox in hand, I had rather grant that England, Scotland, and
Ireland, with the Islands before mentioned, together with planted parts of new
Found-Land, new England, new Netherland, Virginy, Maryland, Caulin, Jamaica,
Barmuda's, Barbado's, and all the rest of the Carib Islands, do not contain
more Territory then France, and what planted Land the French King has also in
America a. And if any man will be Heterodox in behalf of the French Interest, I
could be contented against my Judgment to allow the French King's Territories
to be a seventh, sixth, or fifth part greater then those of the King of
England, believing that both Princes have more Land then they do employ to its
utmost use.

And here I beg leave among the several matters, I intend for serious, to
interpose a jocular, and perhaps a Ridiculous digression, and which I indeed
desire men to look upon rather as a Dream, then a rational Proposition: Which
is if that all the movables and People of Ireland, and the High-lands of
Scotland, were transported into the Kingdom of Great Britain, that then the
King and his Subjects, would thereby become more Rich and Strong; both
offensively and defensively, then now they are.

Its true, I have heard many wise men say, when they were bewailing the vast
Losses of the English, in preventing and suppressing Rebellions in Ireland; and
considering how little profit has returned either to the King or Subjects of
England for these five hundred Years doing and suffering in that Country; I
say, I have heard Wise men in such their Melancholies, wish that the People of
Ireland being saved, that that Island were sunk under Water. Now it troubles me
that the Distempers of my Mind in this point, carry me to Dream, that the
Benefits of these Wishes may Practically be obtained without sinking that vast
Mountainous Island under Water; which I take to be somewhat difficult, for
although Dutch Engineers may drein its Bogs, yet I know no Artists that could sink
its Mountains.

If ingenious and Learned men, amongst whom I reckon Sr. Thomas Moore, and Des
Carts, have disputed that we who think our selves awake, are, or may be really
in a Dream: And if the greatest absurdity of Dreams, is but a Preposterous and
Tumultuary Contexture of Reallities, I will crave the umbrage of these great
Men to say something too, of this wild Conception, with Submission to the
better Judgments of all those that can prove themselves awake: If there were
but one man Living in England, then the benefit of the whole Territories could
be but the third Livelihood of that one Man: But if another man were added,
the Rent or Benefit of the same would be double, if three triple; and so
forewards until so many were Planted in it, as the whole Territory could afford
Food unto; for if a man would know what any piece of Land is worth, the true
natural question must be; how many Men will it feed, and how many Men are there
to be fed.

But to speak more Practically, Land of the same quantity and quality in
England, is generally worth three or four times as much as in Ireland? And but
one quarter, and a third of what it is in Holland; because England is four
times so well Peopled as Ireland, and be a quarter so well as Holland: And
moreover, where the Rent of Land is advanced, by reason of the multitude of
People, there the number of years purchase for which the Inheritance may be
sold is also advanced, tho perhaps not in the very same Proportion; for twenty
Shillings per Annum in Ireland, may be worth but eight pound, and in England
where Tithes are very sure about twenty pound, in Holland about thirty pound, I
suppose that in Ireland, and the Highlands of Scotland, there may be above
1800,000 People, or about part of what is in all the three Kingdoms. Wherefore
the first question will be, whether England, Wales, or the Lowland of Scotland,
cannot afford Food, that is to say, Corn, Flesh, Fish, and Fowl, to a more
People then are at present planted upon it; with the same Labor that the said
part does now take where they are, for if so, then what is propounded is
naturally possible. Secondly it is to be inquired into, what the movables
which upon such removable, must be left behind are worth; for if they are worth
less than the advancement of the price of Land in England will amount unto,
then the Proposal is to be considered.

3. If the relict Land and the immovables left behind upon them may be sold for
money, or if no other Nation shall dare to meddle with them without paying well
for them, and if the Nation who shall be admitted shall be less able to
prejudice and annoy the Transplanters into England then before; then I conceive
the whole proposal will be a pleasant Dream indeed.

As to the first part, whether England and the Lowlands of Scotland will
mantain one fifth more then they now do, that is to say, nine Millions of Souls
in all, I say, first that the said Territories of England, etc. contain about
thirty six Millions of Acres, that is four Acres for every Head, Man, Woman and
Child, but the united Provinces do not allow Acre, and England it self,
rescinding Wales, has but three Acres to ever Head according to the present
State of Tillage and Husbandry. Now if so considered that England having but
three Acres to a Head, do so abound in Victuals as that it makes Laws against
the importation of Cattle, Flesh and Fish from abroad, and that the Dreining of
the Fens, improving of Forests, enclosing of Commons, Sowing of cinque-Foyl
and Clover-Grass be grumbled against by Landlords, are the way to depress the
price of Victuals, then it plainly follows, that till then three Acres
improved, as it may be, will serve the turn, and consequently that four will
Suffice abundantly. I could here set down the very number of Acres that would
bear Bread and Drink, Corn, together with Flesh, Butter, and Cheese, sufficient
to Victual nine Millions of Persons, as they are Victualled in Ships and
regular Families; but I shall only say in general that 12,000,00. will do it,
with supposing that Roots, Fruits, Fish, and Fowl, and the ordinary profit of
Lead, Tin, Iron-Mines, and Woods would piece up any defect that may be found.
As to the second I say that the Land and Housing of Ireland, and Highlands of
Scotland, at the present Merchant-Rates, are not worth ten Millions of money,
nor would the actual charge of making the Transplantation amount to two
Millions more; so then the question will be whether the benefit expected from
this Transplantation will exceed two Millions.

To which I say that the advantage will probably be six times the last
mentioned Sum, or about seventy two Millions. For if the rent of England and
Wales and the low Land of Scotland be above nine Millions per Annum; and if
this fifth part of the people be Superadded unto the present inhabitants of
these Countries; then the rent will amount to 10,800,000. and the number of
Years purchase will rise from seventeen to more which is twenty one, so that
the Land which is worth but nine Millions at seventeen Years purchase making an
hundred fifty seven Millions and a half will then be worth 10,800,000. at one
and twenty Years purchase, viz. 226,800,000. that is, 69,300,000. more then was
before; and if any Prince willing to enlarge his Territories will give three
Millions for the said relinquished Land and Housing, which were estimated to be
worth ten Millions, then the whole profit will be above 72,000,000. or six
times the value as the same was above computed; but if any man should object
that will be dangerous unto England to be put into the Lands of any other
Nations, I answer in short that that Nation who ever shall purchase it being
divided by means of the said purchase, shall not be more able to enjoy England
then now in it is united condition.

Now if any man shall desire a more clear explanation how and by what means the
Rents of Lands shall rise by this closer cohabitation of people above
described, I answer that the advantage will arise in Transplanting about
eighteen thousand people from the Poor and Miserable Trade of Husbandry, to
more Beneficial Handicraft; for which the Superaddition is to be made, a very
little addition of Husbandry to the same Lands will produce a fifth part more
Food; consequently the additional Hands earning but forty Shillings per Annum
more, (as they may very well to eight pound per Annum at some other Trade; the
superlucration will be above 3,600,000. pound, which at twenty Years purchase
is seventy two Millions. Moreover as the Inhabitants of Cities and Towns spend
more Commodities and make greater consumption then those who live in wild thin
Peopled Countries; so when England shall be thicker Peopled in manner before
described, the very same people shall then spend more then when they lived more
sordidly, inurbantly and further asunder, and more out of the sight,
observation and Emulation of each other; every man desiring to put on better
Apparel when he appears in company, then when he has no occasion to be seen.

I further add to the charge of the government, Civil, Military, and
Ecclesiastical, would be more cheap, safe and effectual, in this condition of
close habitation then otherwise, as not only Reason, but the example of the
united Provinces do demonstrate. But let this whole digression pass from a mere
Dream, I suppose will serve to prove that in case the King of Englands
Territories should be a little less then those of the French King, that
forasmuch as neither of them are over Peopled, that the difference is not
material to the question in Hand; wherefore supposing the French Kings
advantages to be little or nothing in point of Territory, we come next to
examine and compare the number of Subjects which each of those Monarchs do
govern. The Book called the State of France makes the Kingdom consist of twenty
seven Parishes; and another Book written by a Substantial Author, who
profoundly enquires into the State of the Church and Churchmen of France, sets
down as an extraordinary case, that a Parish in France should have six hundred
Souls, where I suppose the said Author who has so well examined the matter, is
not of opinion that every Parish one with another has above five hundred, by
which reckoning the whole people of France are about thirteen Millions 500,000:
Now the people of England, Scotland and Ireland with the Islands adjoining, by
computation from the number of Parishes (which commonly have more people in
Protestant Churches then in Popish Countries) as also from the Hearth-money,
Post-money and Excise, do amount to above nine Millions; there are in new-
England about fifty thousand men mustered in Arms, about eighty thousand able
to bear Arms, and consequently about five hundred thousand in all; but this
last I leave to every man's conjecture, and I see no Reason why in all the rest
of the Plantations there should not be five hundred thousand more, and
consequently I suppose the King of England has above ten Millions of Subjests,
ubivis terrarum orbis. Although it be very material to know the number of
Subjects, belonging to each Prince; yet when the question is concerning their
Wealth and Strength, it is also material to examine how many of 'em do get more
then they spend, and how many less: in order whereunto, it is to be considered,
that in the King of Englands dominions there are twenty thousand Churchmen, but
in France, as the aforementioned Author of theirs does aver who sets down the
particular number of each Religious order, there are about 270000. viz. 250000.
more then we think are necessary; that is to say, two hundred and fifty
thousand withdrawn out of the World; now the said number of adult and
able-Bodyed Persons are equivalent to about double the same number of the
Promiscuous Mass of Mankind; and the same Author affirms that the said
Religious Persons do spend one with another above eighteen pence per diem which
is Triple to what a Laboring man requires: Wherefore the said two hundred and
fifty thousand Churchmen, living as they do make the French King 13,500.
thousand to be really no better then twelve Millions or thereabouts. In the
next place it is to be considered that the inhabitants of the inner parts of
France remote from the Sea cannot be probably Superlucrators. Now if there be
two Millions in the King of England's Dominions more then in the French Kings
who earn more then they spend, or if ten men in England earn more then twelve
in France, then the Subjects of England are as effective as to the gaining of
Wealth and Riches as those of France, and if Ten men can defend themselves as
well in Islands as twelve men upon the Continent, then the said Ten being not
concerned to increase their Territory by the invasion of others are as
effectual as the twelve in point of Strength also; wherefore that there are
more Superlucrators in the English then in the French Dominions, we say as
follows. There be in England Scotland and Ireland about sixty Millions
Seamen, in France about a quarter so many; but one Seaman earns as much as
three common Husbandmen; wherefore this difference of Seamen added to the
account of the King of Englands Subjects, the equivalent of 90,500,000.
Husbandmen.

There are in England, Scotland and Ireland six thousand Tuns of Shipping,
worth about 4500,000. 4. and the actual charge of maintaining the Shipping
aforesaid by new building and reparation is about of the said Sum, which is
the wages of 150. Husbandmen, but it is not the wages of above so many Artisans
as are employed upon Shipping of all sorts, viz. Shipwrights, Calkers, Joyners,
Carvers, Painters, Blockmakers, Rope-makers, Mastmakers, Smiths of several
sorts, Flagmakers, Compassmakers, Brewers, Bakers, and all sorts of
Victuallers, all sorts of Tradesmen relating to Guns and Gunners-Stores;
wherefore there being four times more of these Artisans in England then in
France, they further add to the account of the King of Englands Subjects the
equivalent 80 m. Husbandmen more.

The Sea line of England Scotland and Ireland and the adjacent Islands is about
3,800. Miles, according to which length and the whole content of Acres the said
Land would be an oblong or Parallelogram Figure of 3,800. long, and twenty five
Miles broad, and consequently every part of England, Scotland and Ireland, is
one with another but about twelve Miles from the Sea; whereas France containing
but about one thousand Miles of Sea line is like the computation above sixty
five Miles from the Seaside, and considering the paucity of Ports in
comparison to what are in the King of Englands Dominions as good as seventy
Miles distance from a Port; upon which grounds it is clear that England can be
supplied with all Gross and Bulky Commodities of Foreign growth and
manufacture at far cheaper rates then France can be; viz. above four Shillings
per Annum Rent cheaper the Land carriage; for the difference (between England
and France) of the distance from a Port being so much or near thereabouts, now
to what advantage this convenience amounts upon the importation and exportation
of Bulky Commodities, cannot be less the Labor of one thousand of People,
meaning by Bulky Commodities all sort of Timber Blank and Staves for Cask, and
all Iron, Lead, Stones, Brick, and Tiles for building; all Corn, Sart and
Drink, all Flesh and Fish, and indeed all other Commodities, wherein the gain
and loss of four Shillings per cent. is considerable. Where note the like Wines
are sold in the inward parts of France for four or five pounds a Tun which near
the Ports yield seven pound.

Moreover upon this principal the decay of Timber in England is no very
formidable thing; as the rebuilding of London, and of the Ships wasted by the
Dutch-War, do clearly manifest: nor can there be any want of Corn or other
necessary provision in England, unless the Weather has been universally
unseasonable for growth of the same, which seldom or never happens; for the
same cause which makes dearth in one place, does after cause plenty in another,
wet-weather being propitious to Highlands, which drowneth the low.

It is observed that the poor of France have generally less wages then in
England, and yet their Victuals are generally dearer there, which being so,
there may be more Superlucration in England then in France.

Lastly I offer it to the consideration of all those who have traveled through
England and France, whether the Plebeian of England, for they constitute the
Bulks of any Nation; do not spend one sixth more then the Plebeian of France;
and if so it is necessary they must first get it, and consequently that Ten
Millions of the King of Englands Subjects are equivalent to twelve of the
French Kings, and upon the whole matter to the thirteen Millions, at which the
French Nation was estimated.

It will be here objected that the Splendour and Magnificences of the French
King appearing greater then those of the Kings of England, that the Wealth of
France must be proportionably greater then that of England, but that does not
follow forasmuch as the apparent greatness of the King does depend upon the
quarter parts of the peoples Wealth which he levieth from them; for supposing
the People are equally Rich; if one of the Sovereigns levy fifth part, and the
other fifteenth, the one seems actually thrice as Rich as the other, whereas
potentially they are both equal.

Having now dicoursed of the Territory, People, Superlucration and
defensibleness of both Dominions, and in some measure of the Trade, so far as
we had occasion to mention Ships, Shipping and nearness to Ports, we come next
to enlarge a little further upon the Trade of each, some have estimated that
there are not above three hundred Millions of people in the whole World,
whether that be so or no is not very material to be known; but I have fairer
Ground to conjecture, and would be glad to have it more certainly, that there
are not above eighty thousand with whom the English and Dutch have commerce, no
Europeans I know of Trading directly or indirectly where they do not so as the
whole commercial World or World of Trade consists of eighty thousand of Souls
as aforesaid.

And I further estimate that the value of all the Commodities, yearly exchanged
among them, does not exceed forty five thousand; now the Wealth of every
Nation consisting chiefly in the share which they have in foreign Trade with
the whole commercial World; rather then in the Domestic Trade of ordinary
Meat, Drink, Cloth, etc. And which brings in little Gold, Silver, Pearls and
other universal Wealth; we are to consider the Subjects of the King of England
(Head for Head) have not a greater share hereof then those of France.

To which purpose it has been considered that the manufactures of Wool, yearly
exported out of England into sevesal parts of the World, viz. all sorts of
Cloth, Serg, Stuff, Cotton Bays, Frize, or also Stockens, Caps, Rugs, etc.
exported out of England, Scotland and Ireland; do amount unto five hundred
thousand pound per Annum.

The value of Lead, Tin and Coals, to five hundred thousand pound.

The value of all Cloths, Houshold-Stuf^ etc. carried into America two hundred
thousand pound per Annum.

Silver and Gold taken from the Spaniards sixty thousand pound.

The value of Sugar, Indico, Tobacco, Cottham, and Catao from the Southward
part of America six hundred thousand pound.

The value of Wool, Butter, Hides, Beef, Herrings, Pilchers, Salmon, exported
out of Ireland, eight hundred thousand pound.

The value of Coals, Salt, Linen, Yarn Herrings, Pilchers, Salmon, brought out
of Scotland and Ireland five hundred thousand pound.

The value of Saltpeter, Pepper, Callicots, Diamonds, Drugs, and Silks,
brought out of the East Indies, above what was spent in England, eight hundred
thousand pound.

The value of Slaves brought out of Africa to serve in the American Plantation
twenty thousand; which with the freight of the English Shipping Trading into
foreign parts being above fifteen hundred thousand makes in all Ten Millions
and a hundred and eighty thousand.

Which computation is sufficiently justified by the Customs of three Kingdoms,
whose intrinsic value are thought to be near about one Million per Annum: viz.
Six hundred thousand Payable to the King, one hundred thousand for the charge
of collecting, etc. two hundred thousand Smackled by the Merchants, and one
hundred thousand gained by the Farmers, according to the common opinion and men
saying; and this agrees also with that proportion or part of the Trade of the
whole World, which I have estimated the Subjects of the King of England to be
possessed of, viz. for about Ten of forty five Millions; but the value of the
French commodities brought into England (notwithstanding Mr. Fortree's
estimates) are not above twelve hundred thousand per Annum, and the value of
all the export into all the World besides not above three or four times as
much, which computation also agrees well enough with the account we have of the
Customs of France; so as France not exporting above half the value of what
England does, and for the commodities of France except Wines, Brandy, Paper,
and the first Patterns and Fashions for Cloths and furniture, of which France
is the mint, are imitable by the English, and having withal more people then
England it follows that the people of England etc. have Head for Head, near
thrice as much foreign Trade as the people of France, and above two parts of
nine of the Trade of the whole commercial World, and 2/7 of all the Shipping;
notwithstanding all which is not to be denied that the King, and some great men
of France, appear more Rich and splendid then those or the like quality in
England; all which arises, rather from the nature of their Government, then
from the intrinsic and natural cause of Wealth and Power.

CHAP. V. That the Impediments of England's Greatness are contingent and
removable.
THe first impediment of Englands Greatness is, the Territories thereunto
belonging are too far asunder and divided by the Sea into so many several
Islands and Countries; and I may say into so many Kingdoms and different
Governments, viz. There be three distinct Legislative Powers in England,
Scotland and Ireland, the which of instead of uniting together do often cross
one and others Interest, putting Bars and Impediments upon one and others
Trades; not only as they were forraigners to each other, but sometimes as
Enemies.

The Islands of Jersey and Guernsey and the Isle of Man are under jurisdictions
different from those either of England, Scotland and Ireland.

The Government of New England (both civil and Ecclesiastical) do so differ
from that of his Majesty's other Dominions, that it is hard to say what may be
the Consequence of it.

And the Government of the other Plantations do also differ very much from any
of the West, although there be naturally substantial Reasons for the Situation,
Trade and Condition of the People, why there should be such differences; from
all which it comes to pass the small divided remote Governments being seldom
able to defend themselves, the Burden of the Protecting them all, must lie
upon the chiefest Kingdom of England; and all the small Kingdoms and Dominions,
instead of being additions, are really diminutions.

The Wealth of a King is Threefold, one is the Wealth of Subjects, the second
is the quota parts of his Subjects Wealth given him for the Public Defense,
Honor and Ornaments of the people, and to manage such undertakings for the
common good as no one, or a few private men, are sufficient for.

The third sort are the quota of the last mentioned quota parts which the King
may dispose of as his own Personal inclination and discretion shall direct; now
it is most manifest that the aforementioned distance and differences of
Kingdoms, and jurisdictions, are great impediments to all the said several
sorts of Wealth, as may be seen in the following particulars.

1. In case of War with foreign Nations, England commonly bears the whole
Burden and charge, whereby many in England are utterly undone.

2. England sometimes prohibiting the Commodities of Ireland and Scotland (as
of late it did the Cattle, Flesh, and Fish, of Ireland,) did not only make
Food, and consequently Labor, dearer in England, but also has forced the
People of Ireland to fetch these commodities from France, Holland and other
places which before was sold them from England, to the great Prejudice of both
Nations.

3. It occasions an unnecessary trouble and charge in collecting of Customs
upon Commodities passing between the several Nations.

4. It is a damage to our Barbados and other American Trades, that the Goods,
which might pass thence immediately to several parts of the World, and be sold
at moderate Rates, must first come into England, and there pay Duties, and
afterward (if at all) passing to those Countries whither they might have gone
immediately.

5. The Islands of Jersey and Guernsey are protected at the charge of England,
nevertheless the Labor and Industry of that People (which is very great)
redound most to the profit of the French.

6. In New England there are vast numbers of able Bodied Englishmen employed
chiefly in Husbandry, and in the meanest part of it (which is) breeding of
Cattle, whereas Ireland would have contained all those Persons, at the worst
would have afforded them Lands in better Terms then they have them in America,
if not some other better Trade withal, then now they can have.

7. The Inhabitants of the other Plantations, although they do indeed Plant
commodities which will not grow so well in England, it grasping at more Land
then it will suffice to produce the said exotics in a sufficient quantity to
serve the whole World, they do therein but distract and confound the effects of
their own Endeavors.

8. There is no doubt that the same people far and wide dispersed must spend
more upon their Government and Protection then the same living compactly, and
when they have no occasion to depend upon the Wind, Weather, and all the
Accidents of the Sea.

A second impediment to the greatness of England, is the different
understanding of several material points, viz. The Kings Prerogative,
Privileges of Parliament, the obscure differences between Law and Equity, as
also between Civil and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, doubts whether the Kingdom
of England has Power over the Kingdom of Ireland, besides the wonderful
Paradox, that the Englishmen lawfully sent to suppress Rebels in Ireland
should (after having effected the same) be (as it were) disfranchised, and
loose that interest in the Legislative Power which they had in England, and pay
Customs as forraingers for all they spend in Ireland, whither they were sent
for the Honor and Benefit of England.

The third impediment is that Ireland being a conquered Country, and containing
not the Tenth part of as many Irish Mastives as there are English in both
Kingdoms, that natural and firm Union is not made between the two Peoples by
Transplantation and proportionable Mixture, so as there may be a Tenth part of
Irish in Ireland, and the same Proportion in England, whereby the necessity of
maintaining an Army in England at the expense of the quarter of all the Rents
of that Kingdom may be taken away.

The fourth impediment is that the Taxes in England are not levied upon the
expenses, but the whole Estate, not upon Lands, Stock and Labor, but chiefly
upon Land alone, and that not by any equal and indifferent Standard, but the
casual Predominacy of Parties and Factions; and moreover that these Taxes are
not levied with the least trouble and charge, but let out to Farmers, who also
let them from one to another without explicit knowledge of what they do, but so
are to conclude the poor people pay twice as much as the King receives.

Now the fifth impediment is the inequality of Shires, Diocesses, Parishes,
Church Livings, and other Precincts, as also of the Representations of the
people in Parliament, all which do hinder the operations of Authority, in the
same manner as a Wheel irregularly made, and excentrically hung neither moves
so easily, nor performs it is work so timely, as if the same were duly framed
and poised.

6. Whether it be an impediment that the Power of making War and raising money
be not in the same hand much may be said; but that I leave to those who may
more properly meddle with Fundamental Laws. None of these impediments are
natural but did arise as the irregularities of Buildings do by being built part
at one time and part at another, and by the changing of the State of things
from what they were at the respective times, when the Practice we complained of
were first admitted, and perhaps are but the warpings from the rectitude of the
first institution.

As these Impediments are contingent so they are also removable, for may not
the Land of Superfluous Territories be sold, and the people with their
movables be brought away? may not the English in the American Plantations who
Plant Tobacco, Sugar, etc. compute what Land will serve their turns, and then
contract their Habitations to that proportion, for quantity and quality? As for
the people of New England I can but wish they were Transplanted into old-
England or Ireland, according to Proposals of their own, made within this
twenty Years, although they were allowed more liberty of Conscience then they
allow one another.

May not the three Kingdoms be united into one, and equally represented in
Parliament? might not the several Species of the Kings Subjects be equally mixed
in their habitations? might not Parishes and other Precincts be better
equaliz'd? might not jurisdictions and Pretenses of Powers be determined and
ascertained? might not Taxes be equally aplotted and directly applied, to their
ultimate use? might not dissenters in Religion be indulged, they paying a
competent force to keep the Publick-Peace? I humbly venture to say all these
things may be done; if it be thought fit by the Sovereign Power, because the
like has often and Succesfully been done already at Several Places, and Times.

CHAP. VI. That the Power and Wealth of England has increased these last forty
Years.
IT is not much to be doubted but that the Territories under the Kings
Dominions have increased, for as much as New England, Virginy, Barbados, and
Jamaica, Tangier, and Bombay, have since that time been either added to his
Majesty's Territories, or improved from a desert condition to abound with the
People, Building, Shipping, and the Production of many useful commodities. And
as for the Land of England, Scotland and Ireland as it is not less in quantity
then it was forty Years since, so it is manifest, that by Reason of dreining of
Fens, Watering of dry Grounds, improving of Forests, and Commons, making of
Heaths and barren Grounds to bear Cinquefole, and Clovergrass, meliorating and
multiplying several sorts of Fruits and Garden-stuff, making some Rivers
Navigable, etc. I say it is manifest, that the Land in it is present condition
is able to bear more provision and commodities then it was forty Years ago.

2. Although the People of England, Scotland, and Ireland, which have
Extraordinarily Perished by the Plague and Sword within this last forty Years,
do amount to about three hundred thousand, above what have dyed in the ordinary
way, yet the ordinary increase by Generation of Ten Millions, which doubles in
two hundred Years, as has been shown by the observations upon the Bills of
Mortality, may in forty Years (which is a fifth part of the said Time) have
increased near a fifth part of the whole number or two Millions. Where note by
the way, that the accession of Negroes to the American Plantations, being all
men of great Labor and little Expense, is not considerable. Besides it is
hoped that New England, where few or no Women are Barren, and must have many
Children, and where people live long and Healthfully, has produced an increase
of as many people as were destroyed in the late tumults in Ireland. As for
Housing these Streets of London it self speaks it, I conceive it double in
value in that City to what it was forty Years since; and for Housing in the
Country, they have increased at Bristol, New Castle, Yarmouth, Norwich, Exeter,
Portsmouth, Cowes, Dublin, Kingsale, Londondary, Coolervin in Ireland, far
beyond the Proportion of what I can learn has been dilapidated in other places;
for in Ireland where the ruin was greatest, (the Housing taken altogether) is
now more valuable then forty Years ago; nor is this to be doubted, since
Housing is now more splendid then in those days, and the number of Dwellers is
increased by near a fifth part, as in the last Paragraph is set forth.

As for Shipping, his Majesty's Navy is now triple, or quadruple to what it was
forty Years since, and before the Sovereign was Built; the Shipping-Trading to
New Castle, which are now about eighty thousand Tuns could not then be above a
quarter of that quantity; first because the City of London is doubled; secondly
because the use of Coal is also at least doubled, because they were heretofore
seldom used in Chambers as now they are; nor were there so many Bricks Burned
with them as of late, nor did the Country on both sides the Thames make use of
them as now; besides, there are employed in the Guinny and American Trades
above forty thousand Tun of Shipping, which Trade in those days was
inconsiderable, the quantity of Wines imported was not near so much as now, and
to be short, the Customs upon imported and exported commodities did not then
yield a third part of the present Value; which shows, that not only Shipping,
but Trade it self has increased somewhat near that Proportion. As to money the
interest thereof, was within these fifty Years at Ten pound per cent. forty
Years ago at eight pound, and now at six pound, no thanks to any Laws which
have been made to that purpose; for as much as those who can give good security
may now have it less, but the natural fall of interest, is the effect of the
increase of money.

Moreover if Rented Lands and Houses have increased, and if Trade has increased
also, it is certain that money, which pays those Rents and drives on Trade,
must have increased also.

Lastly I leave it to the consideration of all observers, whether the number
and Splendour of Coaches, Equipage, and Household Furniture have not increased
since that time. To say nothing of the postage of Letters, which have increased
from one to twenty, which argues the increase of Business and Negotiation; I
must add that his Majesty's Revenues is near triple, and therefore the means to
pay and Bear the same has increased also.

CHAP. VII. That one tenth Part of the whole expense of the King of England's
Subjects is sufficient to maintain one hundred thousand Foot, forty thousand
Horse, and forty thousand men at Sea, and defray all other Charges of the
Government; both ordinary, and extraordinary, if the same were regularly Taxed
and raised.
TO clear this point we are to find out what is the middle Expense of each Head
in the Kings Dominions between the highest and the lowest; to which I say it is
not probably less then the Expense of a Labourer, who earns about eight pence a
day, for the wages of such men is four Shillings a Week without Victuals, or
two Shillings with it; wherefore the value of his Victuals is two Shillings per
Week, or five pound four Shillings per Annum. Now the value of Clothes cannot be
less then wages given to the Poorest Maidservant in the Country, which is
thirty Shillings per Annum, nor can the charge of all other necessaries be less
then six Shillings per Annum more, wherefore the whole charge is seven pound.

It is not likely that this Discourse will fall into the Hands of any that
lives at seven pound per Annum; and therefore such will wonder at this
Supposition; but if they consider how much the number of the Poor and their
Children is greater, then that of the Rich, although the personal Expense of some
Rich men should be above twenty times more then that of a Labourer; yet the
expense of a Labourer above mentioned, may well enough stand for the Standard
of the expense of the whole Mass of Mankind.

Now if the expense of each man one with another be seven pound per Annum, and
if the number of the Kings Subjects be Ten thousand; then the tenth part of the
whole Expense will be seven thousand; but about five thousand, or a very little
more will amount to a years pay for one hundred thousand Foot; forty thousand
Horse, and forty thousand men at Sea, Winter and Summer, which can rarely be
necessary, and other ordinary charge of the Government in the time of deep and
secute peace was not 600000 per Annum.

Where a People thrive there the Income is greater then the Expense; and
consequently the tenth part of the Expense is not the tenth part of the Income.
Now for men to pay a tenth part of their expense in a time of greatest exigency
(for such it must be when so great forces is requisite) can be no hardship,
much less a deplorable conditon, for to bear the tenth part, a man must needs
spend a twentyeth part less, and Labor a twentieth part more for half an hour
per diem extraordinary; both which in common Experience are very Tolerable,
here being very few in England, who do not eat by a twentieth part more then
does them good: and what Misery were it, instead of wearing Clothes of twenty
Shillings per Yard to be contented with that of nineteen Shillings, few men
having skill enough to discern the difference?

Memorandum that all this while, I suppose all of these Ten thousand of people
are obedient to their Sovereign, and within the reach of his Power, for as
things are otherwise, so the Calculation must be varied.

CHAP. VIII. That there are spare Hands enough amongst the King of England's
Subjects to earn two Millions per Annum more then they now do, and that there
are also Employments ready, proper and sufficient, for the purpose.
TO prove this point, we must inquire how much all the People could earn if
they were disposed or necessitated to Labor, and had work whereupon to employ
themselves, and compare the Sum with that of the Total Expense abovementioned;
deducting the Rents and profit of their Land and Stock, which properly speaking
saves so much Labor. Now the proceed of the said Land and Stock in these
Countries is about three parts of seven of the whole Expense; so as where the
expense is seventy thousand, the Rent of the Land and profit of all Personal
Estate, interest of money etc. must be about thirty thousand, and consequently
the value of the Labor forty thousand; that is, four pound per Head; but it is
to be noted, that about a quarter of the Mass of Mankind are Children Males and
Females under seven Years old, from whom little Labor is to be expected; it is
also to be noted that about another tenth part of the whole people are such as
by Reason of their great Estates, Tithes, Dignities, Offices, and professions
are exempt from that kind of Labor; we now speak of their business being or
ought to be to Govern, Regulate, and direct the Labors and Actions of others,
so that of Ten Millions there be about six thousand and a half, or two thirds
which if need requires might actually Labor, and of these some might earn
three Shillings a Week, some five Shillings and some seven Shillings, that is,
all of them might earn five Shillings a Weak at a medium one with another, or
at least Ten pound per Annum, allowing for Sickness and other Accidents whereby
the whole might earn fifty six thousand pound per Annum, that is, twenty five
more then the Expense.

The Author of the State of England says that the Children of Norwich between
six and sixteen Years old do earn twelve thousand pound per Annum more then
they spend. Now for as much as the people of Norwich are a three hundredth part
of all the people in England (as appears by the Account of Hearth-money) and
about the five hundredth part of all the Kings Subjects throughout the World,
it follows that all his Majesty's Subjects between six and sixteen Years old
might earn five thousand per Annum more then they spend. Again forasmuch as the
number of People above sixteen Years old are double the number of those between
six and sixteen, and that of each men can earn double to each of the Children,
it is plain that if the men and Children every where did do as they do in
Norwich they might earn twenty five thousand pound per Annum more then they
spend; which estimate grounded upon matter of Fact and Experience, agrees with
the former.

Although as has been proved the people of England do thrive, and that it is
possible they might Superlucrate twenty five thousand pound per Annum, yet it is
manifest they do not nor twenty three which is less by two thousand herein
meant; for if they did Superlucrate twenty five thousand, then in about five or
six Years time the whole Stock and Personal Estate of the Nation would be
double, which I wish were true, but find no manner of Reason to believe;
wherefore if they can Superlucrate twenty five, but not actually Superlucrate
twenty three, nor twenty, nor ten, nor perhaps five, I have then proved what
was propounded, viz. that there are spare hands among the Kings Subjects to
earn two Millions more then they now do.

But to speak a little more particularly concerning this matter, it is to be
noted, that since the fire of London, there was earned in four Years by
Tradesmen (relating to building only) the Sum of four Millions, or one Million
per Annum without lessening any other sort of Work Labor or Manufacture, which
was usually done in other four Years before the said occasion; but if the
Tradesmen relating to Building only, and such of them as wrought in and about
London could do one Million-worth of Work extraordinary, I think that from
thence and from what has been said before, that all the rest of the spare Hands
might very well double the same, which is as much as was propounded. Now if
there were spare Hands to Superlucrate Millions of Millions, they signify
nothing unless there were Employment for them, and may as well follow their
Pleasures and Speculation as Labor to no purpose; therefore the more material
point is to prove that there is two Millionsw-orth of Work to be done, which at
the present the Kings Subjects do neglect.

For the proof of this there needs little more to be done than to compute how
much money is paid by the King of Englands Subjects to Forreingers for freight
of Shipping.

2. The Hollanders gain by their Fishing-Trade Practiced upon our Seas.

3. What the value of all the commodities imported into and sent into England,
which might by diligence be produed and Manufactured, here to make short of
this matter upon perusal of the most authentic accounts relating to these
several particulars I affirm that the same amounts to above five Millions
whereof I propounded but two Millions.

For a further proof whereof Mr. Samuel Fortry in his ingenious discourse of
Trade exhibited the particulars, wherein it appears that the Goods imported out
of France only amount yearly to 2600,000. pounds, and I affirm that the Wines,
Paper, Cork, Rosin, and Capers, and a few other Commodities which England cannot
produce, do not amount to one fifth part of the said Sum; from whence it
follows that (if Mr. Fortry has not erred) the two Millions here mentioned may
arise from France alone, and consequently five or six Millions from all the
three Heads last above specifyed.

CHAP. IX. That there is money sufficient to drive the Trade of the Nation.
SInce his Majesty's happy Restoration it was thought fit to call i^, and now
Coin the money which was made it the times of Usurpation. Now it was observed
by the general consent of Casheers that the said money (being by frequent
revolutions well mixed with the Gold) was about a seventh part thereof, and
that the said money being called in was about 800,000. pound, and consequently
the whole 5600,000. pound or five Millions and a half, whereby it is probable
(that some allowance being given for hoarded money) the whole Cash of England
was then about six Millions, which I conceive is sufficient to drive the Trade
of England, not but that the rest of his Majesty's Dominions have the like
means to do the same respective fully.

If there be six Millions of Souls in England, and that each spends seven
pound per Annum, then the whole expense is forty two Millions or about 800,000.
pounds per Week; and consequently if every man did pay his expense Weekly and
that the money could circulate within the compass of a Week, then less then one
Million could answer the ends proposed. But forasmuch as the Rents of the Lands
in England which are paid half yearly are eight Millions per Annum, there must
be four Millions to pay them; and forasmuch as the Rent of Housing of England
paid quarterly are worth about four Millions per Annum, there needs but one
Million to pay the said Rent; wherefore six Millions being enough to make good
the three sorts of Circulation above mentioned, I conceive what was proposed is
proved, at least till something better be held forth to the contrary.

CHAP. X. That the King of England's Subjects have Stock competent and
convenient to drive the Trade of the whole commercial World.
NOw for the further Encouragement of Trade, as we have shown, that there is
Money enough in England to manage the affairs thereof, so we shall now offer to
consideration whether there be not competent and convenient Stock to drive the
Trade of the whole commercial World. To which purpose it is to be remembered,
that all the Commodities yearly exported out of every part of the last
mentioned World, may be bought for forty five Millions, and that the Shipping
employed in the same World are not worth above fifteen Millions, and
consequently that sixty Millions at most will drive the whole Trade
abovementioned without any trust at all; but forasmuch as the Grovers of
Commodities do commonly trust them to such Merchants or Factors as are worth
but such a part of the full value of their Commodities as may possibly be lost
upon the sail of them which is rather to be expected; it follows then less then
a Stock of sixty Millions, nay then half of the said Sum is sufficient to
drive the Trade above mentioned; it being well known that any Tradesemen of
good Reputation worth five hundred pound will be trusted with above one
thousand pounds-worth of Commodities, where less then thirty Millions will
suffice for the said purpose, of which Sum the Coin, Shipping and Stock
already in Trade do at least make one half.

And it has been shown how by the Policy of a Bank any Sum of money may be
made equivalent in Trade unto near the double of the same. By all which it
seems that even at present much is not wanting to perform what is propounded;
but suppose twenty thousand or more were wanting, it is not improbable that
since the generality of Gentlemen and some Noblemen do put their Younger Sons
to Merchandise, that they will see it reasonable as they increase in the number
of Merchants so to increase the Magnitude of Trade, and consequently to
increase Stock; which may effectually be done by in-banking twenty Mil. worth
of Land not being above a sixth or seventh part of the whole Territories of
England, that is to say, by making a Bond of such value, to the security for
all Commodities bought and sold, upon the account of that Universal Trade above
mentioned.

And thus it having appeared, that England having in it as much Land, like
Holland and Zealand, as the said two Provinces do themselves contain, with
abundance of other Land, not inconvenient for Trade, and that there are spare
Hands enough to earn many Millions of money, more then they now do; and that
there are also Employments to earn several Millions (even from the Consumption
of England it self) it follows from* thence, and what has been said in the last
Paragraph about enlarging of the Stock both of Moneys and Lands, that it is not
impossible, may ^very visible matter for the keeping of Englands Subjects, to
gain the Universal Trade of the whole Commercial World.

Nor is it unseasonable to imitate this matter, forasmuch as the younger
Brothers of good Families of England, cannot otherwise be provided for* so as to
live according to their Birth and Breeding; for if the Lands of England are
worth eight Millions per Annum, then there be at a Medium about ten Millions.
Families of about eight hundred pounds per Annum, in each of which one with
another, we may suppose there is a younger Brother, who in less then two or
three hundred pounds per Annum, will not maintain suitable to his Relations.
Now I say that if neither the Offices at Court, nor Commands in our ordinary
Army and Navy, nor Church-preferments, nor the usual gain by the profession of
Law and Physic; nor the employments under Noblemen, and Prelates will all of
them put together furnish Livelihood of above three hundred pounds per Annum,
to three thousand of the said one thousand younger Brothers, wherefore it
remains that Trade alone must supply the rest; but if the said seven thousand
Gentlemen be applied to Trade, without increasing of Trade, or if the hopes to
increase Trade without increasing of Stock (which for ought appears is only to
be done by in-Banking a due proportion of Lands and Money) we must necessarily
be disappointed: where note that selling of Lands to Forraigners, for Gold and
Silver, would enlarge the Stock of the Kingdom.

Whereas doing the same between one and other does effect nothing, for he that
turns all his Land into Money, disposes himself for Trade, and he that parts
with his money for Land does the contrary, but to sell Land to Foreigners
increases both money and people, and consequently Trade; wherefore it is to be
thought, that when the Laws denying Strangers to purchase, and not permiting
them to Trade without paying Extraordinary Duties, were made, that then the
Public State of things, and Interest of the Nation were far different from
what they now are.

Having handled these ten Principal Conclusions, I might go on with others ad
infinitum; but what has been said already, I look upon as sufficient to show
what I mean by Political Arithmetic, and to evince the uses of knowledge of
the true State of the Peoples Lands, Stock, Trade, etc. Secondly that the Kings
Subjects are not in so bad a Condition, as discontented men would make them;
Thirdly to Demonstrate the greatest effects of Unity, Industry, and Obedience,
in order to the common Safety, and each man's particular Happiness, other then
which I have now.

FINIS.

