Certain Seasonable REFLECTIONS upon the BILL for Raising the Penalty of 500 l.
Humbly Offered to the Consideration of the Parliament.


Ireland, and the whole Power of France; for I hear that many Thousand
Protestant Families, their Wives and Children, will be ruined by the Passing of
this Bill?

Quo animo: Some were moved by Ambition, Revenge and Interest; others by
Principles of Obedience, Conscience and Fear: some designed nothing but
Mischief, and others ventured their own Fortunes to protect their cashiered
Friends from Persecution; nay, there were some (though you will not easily
believe it) that purposely neglected the Oaths, that they might with more
freedom assist his present Majesty at his first Landing, which they did
accordingly.

Unequal in relation to other Offenses, which are many in number, and of a
higher nature; and you will not make a Law for to save your own Purses, which
shall be like a Cobweb, Catch the lesser Flies, and let the greater escape: It
seems more equal, that a Catalogue of all Offenses should be made, and every
Offender, within each respective Offense, Fined according to your discretion,
and the heinousness of the Offense; and the rather, for that it is a Quaere:



For, first, all Men that had particular Dispensations in their Patents (as all
Justices of Peace had, and many others) I may plead the Judgment in Sir Edward
Hale's Case at Westminster Hall; which Judgment is good till it be Reversed,
and protects all those that relied upon it. If that Judgment be Erroneous, let
it be Reversed, and then all Men have a fair warning; if it were corruptly
obtained, then let the Judges suffer, and not the poor ignorant Protestants in
the Country. In the Case of the Ship Money, all those that promoted the same,
and readily submitted to it, and solicited others to the like Compliance, were
Censured in Parliament as guilty of betraying the Rights of the People, and the
Privileges of Parliament, and yet the Judgment of the Judges in
Westminster Hall protected them from the least punishment whatsoever. In the
next place, the late King's General Pardon, though possibly it may not be
pleaded in Bar to a particular Impeachment of a great Minister of State, which
is grounded upon a particular Reason of Law; yet it will be good in Law for all
others that are not Impeached; and many Thousands have been discharged upon
that Pardon already; so that Pardon being allowed good, as it must be in Law,
many never acted since that time; others that did, had time till last Term, and
by consequence till this, had not the Old Oaths been Abrogated, and being now
willing to take the New Oaths within the time prescribed, instead therefore
humbly hope for equal benefit.

Offices of the Kingdom; Look into the Treasury; look into the Commissions of
the Customs; the Excise; the King's Council; the new Sergeants; even the Privy
Counselors themselves; Nay you may also find them very numerous in both the
Houses of Lords and Commons, and it would do well first to pull the Beam out
of our own Eyes before we see the Mote in our Brothers. These things are no
secrets, but, on the contrary, being common discourse, it is hoped that no
person will accuse the Author of partiality or reflection on the Government;
for I Will assure you, an impartial sentence upon all Offenders is the great aim
of this Paper, both for the Honor and Interest of the Government; and I speak
the truth more boldly, because it is generally reported that his Majesty's
natural inclinations are against the Passing of this Bill; The happy influences
whereof will make Thousands of poor Protestants, who are heartily sorry for
their past Offenses, and now wish well to the present Establishment, both pray
and fight for the preservation of his Sacred Person.

I shall not presume to make a Quaere, Whether this Bill will consist with his
Majesty's Alliances abroad, because it is out of my present purpose, which is
only to make some Modest Inquiries into the Consequences of this Bill in
relation to Protestants.

Westminster Hall? for though, no doubt, all true Protestants will readily
agree to all Taxes for the public good, when they see that even you your
selves are comprehended, and so grounded upon an equal basis and foundation;
Yet the Law of Self-preservation, and even Necessity, will force them to try
the utmost means, rather than submit to so much severity, and even the utter
ruin of themselves and families. And if in such a Case the Judges, when they
come upon their Oaths in a Judicial manner, upon Argument of Council cannot
reconcile their Judgments in Law, to the Interest of the Nation, what sad and
dismal Consequences may this produce? And no man can be sure that this will not
happen, since it is a notorious Crime for any to examine, or for the Judges to
deliver their Opinions before hand.

England are greedy of a particular Revenge, but abominate an universal
Calamity.

FINIS.

