CERTAIN QUERIES UPON Dr. PIERCES SERMON At Whitehall Feb. 1.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1663.

CERTAIN QUERIES UPON Dr. PIERCES SERMON At White Hall. Feb. 1.
Querie 1. Nation were in the right, we would crave public countenance and
settlement, whereas now we humbly desire only public favor and indulgence as
those that are presumed to be in the wrong; and therefore it is but lost labor
to spend whole Sermons to prove that we are so?

Qu. 2.

Qu. 3. men have done, but as men ought to do? If you mean primitive rules, you
mean either the Scripture, or something added to it, not any thing added to it:
for you say Cursed is he that adds any thing to it, or takes away any thing
from it? and if you mean the Scripture it self, the Query is, Wrether it be a
rule of reformation, as some men understand it, or as all men do: not as all
men do, for then either we should have no reformation, all men never agreeing
to the rule of it: or we must have as many reformations as there are opinions
in the world; and as you reform beyond us, according to your sense of
Scripture, so the Presbyterian reforms beyond you in his sense of it, and the
Fanatic beyond him according to his sense, and primitive rule of Reformation?
If as some men do understand the Scripture it be a rule of Reformation, then
either as you do, or as we do? If you say as you do, you are partial in your
selves, and you allow your selves what you with so much bitterness deny us to
be Lords over men's faith, to be judges of controversies? If as we do, then you
in your whole discourse have beaten the air, you have prevailed in vain, and
they have heard in vain.

Qu. 4. Rome, you have contended, as you say, for that which was from the
beginning, seeing you contended only for the old Protestant way? And that
besides the Church of Rome, the Eastern Churches claim a greater antiquity than
yours; and if Popery were down, there are a world of Sects and ways that
desire no more than to try with you out of the Scripture, and that which was
from the beginning, the whole throng of non-conformists cry, To the Law and to
the Testimony, i. e. Let us worship God according to the Scripture, Let us
serve God in spirit and in truth, as he was served in the beginning, you teach
for doctrines the traditions of men, making the Commandments of God of none
effect. And you know who it was that said, the Scotch way comes nearest the
primitive way than either yours (meaning the Catholic, and speaking to a
Catholic Gentleman) or ours, meaning the old Protestant, and indeed.

Qu. 5. beginning? where do you find (says the Fanatic) Lordbishops in the
beginning? where were the Bishops Courts in the beginning? where was Infant
Baptism in the beginning? where was your Sunday a Sabbath in the beginning? you
use Cross, Surplice, Copes, Altars, Organs, Church-musick, but in the beginning
it was not so? you impose upon tender consciences, say they? you undo poor men
for things in themselves indifferent: you hinder men to preach the Gospel,
necessary to salvation, for things in themselves not necessary to salvation, in
the beginning it was not so: you sing your prayers, you use vain repetitions,
you pray by book they say, in the beginning it was not so: you, they say, have
rich Bishoprics, Deanaries, Prebendaries, Sinecures, Pluralities (as you your
self Dr. Benit are Rector of Brington, President of Magdalen College in
Oxford, Prebend of Canterbury, Canon of York, Chaplain to his Majesty) in the
beginning it was not so: you have Lay chancellors, Officials, Surrogates,
Faculty-men, promoters, and a whole train (as they call them) of Popish
officers, they tell you in the beginning it was not so: you preach in Gowns,
you pray and preach by the hourglass, you meet in Steeple Houses, you are
called Masters, you preach for hire, in the beginning (says another sort) it
was not so: the Question is then whether by examining our way by what there was
in the beginning? you have not taught others to examine yours so too, and to
cast off the authority of your way for a new reformation, as you have cast off
the authority of ours for an old one, and whether you will not as little bear
the rest of the Scripture, and the primitive times, in the Presbyterian sense
of them, as you think we can bear the rest of them in your sense of them?

Qu. 6. i. e. the Presbyterians, deny themselves from Aerius, as you say p. 7.
who only said, that a Bishop is no more a Minister than any other Minister,
rather than from St. Peter, who 1 Pet. 5.12. says, he was no more though an
Apostle, than an ordinary Presbyter. The Presbyters that are among you I
exhort, who also am a Presbyter, Feed the flock of God which is among you,
performing the office of Bishops, or from Clemens Romanus, who says Presbyters
and Bishops are one: why should the reprobatorious derive themselves from Simon
Magus, who believed no eternal way to which men might be reprobated, or the
Manicheer, who only taught fate in things of this world, either than from the
Apostle Paul, who writes of God thus, that before the children had done either
good or evil, he says, Jacob have I loved, Esau have I ^ated. He will have
mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens. Why should the
Solifidians and Antinomians derive themselves from Eunomius, who only said,
That the Law saves us not, but faith; or from misunderstanding, the Scripture,
which says, We are not saved by the works of the law, but by faith. And the
Anabaptists and Socinians look not upon Agrippinus and Subellus, who thought no
such thing; however you mistake them in your cursory, and light way of reading
and writing, but they all look as you advise them upon the Scripture, which
(according to the Liberty you take your selves and all on them) they understand
every one as he pleases: you say you must ask every one how he reads in the
beginning; and the Anabaptists says he reads Repent, believe (which he says a
child cannot do) and be Baptized: The Socinian reads, The Father is higher then
I: The Millonary reads, and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.

Quer. 7. that every one may know all that is required to save him, rather then
from the Scripture, which says, to Peter thy faith shall not fail; which
speaks of full assurance of faith; of the impossibility of deceiving the Elect;
of the Church being the pillar and ground of the truth, against which the gates
of bell shall not prevail. Why must the Romanists have their Purgatory from
Tertullian, or Montanus, or the Heathens, (though truth is never the worse for
being among them, for their errors and corruptions as you say the Papists were
blinded with many doctrines most sound and Orthodox) rather then from the
beginning, when it is written that some shall be saved, yet so as by fire; that
Christ preached to the spirits in prison: why should you only upon the
Emperor Maximilian the second's words, who was forced by Prorestants to write
that Letter in Thuanus, said that Priests marriage was never forbidden until
Calvin's time: when S. Paul advises them not to marry, and that they that go
a warfare do not entangle themselves with the affairs of this life: and our
Savior says that in the Kingdom, or under the Gospel; as your beloved
Hammond and Grotius explains it, you shall be as the Angels, who neither marry,
nor are given in marriage; and you know the Priests are called the Angels of
the Churches, and they are the Virgins that follow the Lamb: why should quote
we Scotus that transubstantiation was not a truth before the Lateran Council,
whereas he says only forecast till then, whereas indeed, it was a truth since
Christ said This is my Body, this is my Blood; and the Apostle says he that
eats or drinks it unworthily, eats or drinks his own damnation: no man is
damned for eating a piece of bread, or drinking a drop of wine sure: therefore
the bread and wine is the body and blood of Christ. Why should you say that the
half Communion was only since Tho. Aquinas: when you do not find in the
beginning any whole Communion? did Christ give the wine to any but Disciples or
Ministers? did the Apostle in the 11. of the Corinthians say any more but that
the Lord did suffer death, not the Scripture said that the Christians went from
house to house only breaking of bread: And your Vasquez says no more but that
it was used in the Latin Church, he does not say it was allowed; and indeed
here once for all, I must needs say, that though you tell the King and the
world, that your quotations are the usefulest part of your performance, as
being the warrant and evidence of all the rest, yet when we examine them they
are either misquoted, or impertinently used, was not the Jewish Liturgy in the
Hebrew for all Nations, Tongues and Languages for Jews and Proselytes? were not
the primitive Liturgies in Greek and Latin? and is Public Prayer before the
people in an unknown tongue only preached, as for a form Gregory the Great: as
bad manners occasioned Pope Gregory's decree, which established that by an
Ecclesiastical Law, which was already established by primitive practice. If
Invocation of Saints, when not heard of in S. Austin's days, it was heard of
in S. Clement's days, and Ignatius's: if those Epistles and genuine, the
universal Supremacy of the Pope was from S. Peter by Right, though it pleased
God he could not get his right until Boniface the third's time, who gave him
that actually, which he had rightfully before; so that touching these errors
as you call them, we may say from the beginning it was so.

Qu. 8. etc. one way since Christ; be of one accord, of one mind: what is a a
particular Church? is not a particular Congregation under one Pastor meeting in
the same place; if so, why do not you suffer the several congregations in
England to enjoy their own Liberty in indifferent things? is it a Nation? where
do you read that every Nation should have it is own way of serving God, or do
you not rather read that they should be all: of one heart, and of one way.

Qu. 9. England, etc. Were the Reformers here in England members of the Roman
Church, or were they not? if they were not, they were of no Church, there being
none then visible, and so were no Christians, and so not fit to reform a
Christian Church: if they were members of the Roman Church, could they the
members reform the Church? if they could, why may not other members of your
Church which desire a further reformation, reform yours.

Qu. 10. Trent may not as well add several points to be delivered, upon pain
of damnation* as well as you add several things to be done upon pain of
damnation: especially when as you say the things themselves bind not unto
damnation, but the power that enjoins them: so those articles require not a
belief upon pain of damnation, but the Church that establishes them.

Qu. 11. But having recourse to the Scriptures, and the primitive Fathers of
the Church, etc. where did they find the Scripture and the Primitive Fathers?
did they not find them in the Church? and must they run from the Church to go
to the Fathers and Scriptures? you say that as the Papists separate from the
P^imitive Christians, so the Reformers did from them: what Christians did the
Papists separate from, when there were no Christians but in the Church of Rome?
all the Religion that was then in the world was in the Church of Rome, all
Christians holding Communion with it; and therefore as Rome could not make a
schism unless from it self: so the need has made schism from Rome.

Qu. 12. Rome, was not the leaving of the Scripture the Primitive Church, and
the four general Councils which are all owned in Rome*

Qu. 13. Jerusalem (as you say) to the Jew, yet Rome may not be the mother
Church of the Gentiles*

Qu. 14. Gildos's Report of Christianity in Britain, the later-time of
Tiberius, do not make the British Church subject to the Sea of Rome, especially
seeing Gildos in the same Epistle, says that Christianity was brought hither
by S. Peter?(...)


