THE CABAL Of Several Notorious Priests and Jesuits, DISCOVERED, AS, WILLIAM
IRELAND, THO. WHITE alias WHITE-BREAD, Provincial of the Jesuits in ENGLAND.
WILLIAM HARCOURT, pretended Rectr of LONDON. JOHN FENWICK, Procurator for the
Jesuits in ENGLAND. JOHN GAVEN alias GAWEN, And ANTHONY TURNER, etc.


SHOWING Their Endeavors to Subvert the GOVERNMENT, and PROTESTANT RELIGION.

VIZ. Their Treasonable Practices in England and France: Articles of their
Creed: Their stirring people to Rebellion: frequenting Quakers meeting in all
sorts of Apparel: Their Usurpations: Murdering of Infants and Incontinency in
their own Classis: Their unclean acts in their Visits, Churches, Houses,
Travels and Nunneries: Coining false money: Bloody Revenges and strange
Ingratitudes: The number of their Orders with the divisions and strifes now in
that Society.

By a Lover of his King and Country, who formerly was an Eyewitness of these
things.

Printed in the Year, MDCLXXIX.

THE CABAL OF Several Notorious Priests and Jesuits discovered, etc.
CHAP. I. The Jesuits Treasonable Practices in England.
IT is well known, that from the beginning of the happy Reign of our Religious
and Virtuous Queen Elizabeth, even unto this day, the Jesuits have had, and
still have as great a Rancour and Malice against this Kingdom of England and
its Rulers, as ever, yea, much greater than against any Nation whatever; as by
the following Relation will appear, they having under the Notion of Quakers,
and other dangerous Sects cloaked their Hypocrisy with seeming Simplicity,
Honesty and Holiness, to delude the Ignorant sort of people, as by plain
demonstration you shall hereafter understand.

The Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, who were both Arraigned, and
Condemned for High Treason in Queen Elizabeth's days, in the Year 1569, are
yet a Monument of the Jesuits Malice against England, who (together with the
Pope) induced them to Rebellion against their lawful Princess. So likewise is
the Duke of Norfolk, who for his Treasonable Practices against Queen Elizabeth,
being moved to it by some Emissary Jesuits, for it lost his life, 1572. And
Edmond Campian, Rodulph Shervin, and Alex. Brian, who had engaged to a Company
of Jesuits in England to dispossess the Queen of the Kingdom, and to plot her
Ruin, and to stir up both Nobles and Commons against her, but being
apprehended, suffered Death for this their High Treason, in the Year 1581.

Henry Sam a Jesuit, was one of the Incendiaries who corrupted the Duke, and
for this his Treason suffered the reward of a Traitor, in the Year 1582.

The Conspiracy of William Parre, against the Queen, in the Year 1584, stirred
up unto it by the persuasion and inducement of these Jesuits, Benedictus
Palmey, Hannibal Cawdrey, and William Crithon, with others, may confirm this
our Warning-Piece.

Ballard a Jesuit, and Babington, who by Ballard's Divellish Counsels was to
kill the Queen, and being both discovered and apprehended, received condign
punishment for their Crime, in the Year 1571, are sufficient evidences of the
Jesuits Practices and Designs against England.

The coming of Henry Garnet, out of Italy into England, 1586, with a
Plenipotentiary power from the Pope, of ordering, acting, ordaining and
disposing of things in England, to whom were added for the carrying on of the
Pope's Interest, Oswald Tismond, called Greenoway, and John Garrett, who had
great Correspondence with Parson the Superior of the College of the English
Jesuits at Rome, with Peter Creswell in Spain, and with Peter Baldwin in
Flanders.

And the first Invasion of England by the Spaniard, which was set on foot, and
brought to that progress by the croaking persuasion of these Froggs, in the
year 1588, are evident demonstrations of their never-dying-malice against this
Nation.

The Execution of Williams, and York, in 1594, who had plotted to murder the
Queen, by the instigation of Jesuit Holt; and others of the same Society; and
that of Mr. Edward Squirre, for intending to poison Queen Eliz. and the Earl of
Essex, by the Hellish persuasions and advices of the Jesuit, Richard Wallpott,
1598, are sufficient evidences of the Jesuitical Machinations.

One Robert Elcot an English man in Spain, 1597, was induced by the Jesuits, to
feign himself an English Earl, and that he was sent to the King of Spain, by
the Nobility of England, who promised him ready help to invade England, and so
being led to the King by an English Jesuit, he performed the deed, acting so
cunningly and deceitfully his part, that the King of Spain received his
Proposals.

Francis Page an English Jesuit, who being convicted of Treason, in 1602, was
put to death in London; and Garnet, one of the Confederates in the
Gun-powder-Treason, who was executed for his Crime, 1606: And that Catalogue of
Jesuits, and Incendiaries, that have been put to death, at the beginning of the
Long Parliament, are sufficient evidences of the continual workings, and subtle
practices of that Generation.

CHAP. II. Treasonable Crimes perpetrated by the Jesuits in France.
IT is one of the Highest degrees of Ingratitude, to hate him whom by Nature we
are obliged to Love, and to rejoice at his loss whilst we live under his
Protection and by his favorable deeds. Lewis the 13th. K. of France, during
his Reign, (notwithstanding the Murdering his Father K. Henry the 4th.) did
continually heap benefits upon the Jesuits, and daily obliged them. The money
he gave them to buy and build that famous Edifice in Paris, which both in
bigness, beauty and riches, far exceeds the Palace Royal in Paris, and the
Annual revenues of 1000 l. sterling. that he has assigned them out of the
Crown-land, in a poor and peeled Country, do amount to above a Million of
Money; that that Monarch has largly bestowed upon them in several parts of
France, but all these his Princely gifts to them, (which might tame Tygars and
change the Heart of the most malicious and inveterate Enemy) could not in the
least root out of their mind that inveterate ill will which they had conceived
against the blood and posterity of H. 4th. Lewis's Father.

The Sentence of the Parliament of Paris given against them, and John Chastell,
for their attempt upon the life of this Monarch, the Execution of John Guignard
of their Society, who for this crime was hanged, the Pyramid at Paris, and
their Exile out of that Kingdom are still fresh and alive in their memory, with
such Rancour and bitterness of Spirit, that all the prosperity of that Kingdom
is to them a grief and vexation of mind, and its adversity is their joy.

Some of their gross and Criminal Actions shall be touched to show their Mortal
hatred to these Nations.

Whilst the Spaniard had the best in his War against France, in the Frontiers
of Picardy, under the Command of John the Verth, and had taken the City of
Corbey: the College of the Jesuits in Bourdeaux, (where our Author then was)
did so exceedingly rejoice at it, that ten of them having secretly conveyed
into their Chamber, brooms, and some Faggots upon the Vault of the Steeple of
the Church, they made there a Bonfire with them, and sung the Te Deum, with the
Emperor, and King of Spain's victories, composed by them in verses, the noise
hereof being perfectly heard in the College, the Rector, who knew the deed,
dissembled it, and the Provincial who had notice of it, entreated the party who
informed him, not to divulge it.

Let us then consider what they have not Plotted, and what do they not daily
Plot against all Protestant Princes and Kingdoms, and especially against
England, where by the Edict of Queen Eliz. and several Acts of Parliament, they
have been banished as not fit nor worthy to live in a Commonwealth, and which
by the Grace of God has utterly cast off the Tyrannical yoke of Popish
Superstition.

CHAP. III. The Jesuits Creed.
TAKE here their Creed in their own words, and by it judge of them.

1. I believe in two Gods, of whom, one is, both Son, Father and Mother
Metaphorically, in an eternal Generation, and the other is Metaphorically
Father and Mother in the Temporal Generation, to whom the name of Mother must
as well belong as to the Blessed Virgin, as if both were an Hermaphrodite or
Androgine. 2. I believe in Jesus Christ the only Son of them both
Metaphorically, after an Eternal and Temporal Creation. 3. I believe that Jesus
Christ, as man, was conceived and born of the Virgin Mary, as being his Father
and Mother Metaphorically by a Paternal and Maternal Virtue. 4. I believe that
he suffered and was dead, not truly and really, because he could not dye. 5. I
believe that he was buried, although he was not truly and really dead. 6. I
believe that his Soul Metaphorically descended into Hell, being it was not
separated from his body. 7. I believe that by the same Metaphor he rose from
the dead, as he dyed. 8. I believe that he Ascended into Heaven, and sits at
the Right hand of the Father, and thence shall come to judge both the quick and
the dead. 9. I believe in the Holy Ghost, who did speak by the Prophets, who
sometimes were deceived. 10. I believe the Church to be most part holy, and the
Communion of Saints. 11. I believe the forgiveness of Sins, through a sudden
coming of the Holy Ghost upon the ungodly. 12. I believe the Resurrection of
the most part of the flesh, and the life ever lasting, not without some fear of
the contrary.
You may read this word for word in the Appendix of Vargos of Toledo his
Relations in the 133. Page of his Book printed 1641. And how impious and horrid
a censure upon the Apostles Creed the Jesuits of England and Spain have given,
you may read in the same Author, page 337.

Their Axiom may also be here set down as being a most horrid thing, That He
commits the Sin against the Holy Ghost, who does not, when he can betray and
deceive the Heretics.

CHAP. IV. Their Practices to stir people to Rebellion.
THat the Impious book not long since dispersed in England, is a Jesuitical
Piece that was forged in the School of Satan, for to embroil this Nation, will
clearly appear by these expressions that were in that Book of Sanctarillus the
Jesuit, Intituted de Haeresibus, Schismatibus, etc. The Pope has both the
directive, and corrective power over Princes; for he cannot have the directive
without the corrective; why may he not then punish unjust Princes by
Ecclesiastical Censure? Hence I infer that his Holiness has the power to
punish Heretic Princes, even with Temporal punishments: therefore has he
power not only to Excommunicate, but also to deprive Princes of their Kingdoms
and Dominions, and to free their Subjects from their obedience, and allegiance
The Pope deposes the Emperor for his iniquities; and sets Governors over
Princes, when they are unfit to govern their people. The Pope deposed the
Emperor without any Assembly of Council, because the Pope's, and Christ's
Tribunal are all one. And it is a very just thing that the Pope should have
such a Supreme and absohite power to dethrone and punish Princes, and it is
requisite for the good of the Commonwealth, that there be such a Supreme
Monarch, that may correct the Exorbitances of Kings, and punish their faults,
and exercise justice over them, when their malice and the Republick's necessity
do require it. The Pope may depose a Prince for many grievous offenses, and
also because of his Faith, because of his heresy and schism, and also because
of his insufficiency, because of his resistance and unprofitableness to the
Pope; and he may give his Kingdom and Principality to another, if the Church do
not dissent from it. The Pope has the power to dethrone negligent Kings: as
Peter had the power given him to punish with a Temporal punishment, yea with
death it self, some persons for the Example and correction of others, so
likewise must the Church and the Pope, (the Head thereof) have such power to
punish even with death, the Transgressors of Divine Laws; therefore it is in the
Pope's power to warn Princes and to put them to death. It Is said to Peter and
his Successors, FEED MY FLOCK: now it is in these Pastors power to punish their
flock with such punishments as their reason shall think fit: and if for the
public good their discretion and good reason requires, that disobedient and
incorrigible Princes be punished with temporal punishment, and be deprived of
their Kingdoms, the Pope may inflict such punishments upon them as he pleases,
for they are or were part of the Flock.

Janus Guignar, a Rector of a College of Jesuits in France, was convicted, by
his own handwriting before the Parliament of Paris, in the year 1595, to
assert in diverse Letters, That it was lawful to Murder Kings and Princes, and
that the tumultuous crew that arose against the King of France, (on that
Bartholomew-day) did very ill that they did not open his Vena Basilica; which
if they had done, then the King would not have fallen from his Fever into
Frenzy: but he was well paid for his labor; for in the same year he was
strangled by Sentence of the Parliament.

CHAP. V. Their frequenting Quakers meetings, with their Apparel.
NOw as what has already been said and shown, may be a sufficient motive to
all Princes not to credit these Wolves in Lamb Skins; we will give a word of
Caution now to the people by this following relation. There dwelt an English
Merchant in Naples, who by reason of his Trade and Traffic often resorted to
Rome, where he acquainted himself with a College of Jesuits, whereof the
greatest part were English: he had at last so frequent and familiar intimacy,
whereof was White-bread, Harcourt, Fenwick, Ireland, Gaven and Turner, with
them, that he had the names of above 30 of them: but some few years since, his
occasions calling him into England, he past by Rome, and calling there at the
College, he enquired for such and such Gentlemen by their Names, it being
Answered, That there was not one of them there, he asked what was become of
them? they told him that his Holiness had sent them all over into England, to
do the work he had set them upon. This Gentleman landed in Exeter, where his
occasions lay chiefly, but his business calling him up to London, as he past by
the Town of Dorchester, he espied a great concourse of People, and approaching
nearer, he found that they were those people called Quakers, but earnestly
looking upon White-bread their Teacher, he knew him again, to be one of those
Jesuits with whom he was acquainted at Rome, and calling him by his Name, asked
how he did, who replied, I know thee not, but the Gentleman said to him again,
What? do you not know me? I am sure I know you very well. The Jesuit upon this,
wished him to stay till he had done, which the Gentleman did; and then they
went both into the Merchants Inn, and being in private, White-bread
acknowledged he was the same party, and kneeling down at the Gentleman's Feet,
asked pardon and begged his life of him; the Merchant answered him, That for
his part he would not have a hand in his Blood, but said to him, Go thy ways,
thou art a Villain, and I hope divine Justice will find thee out: but having
asked him what was become of the rest of his Society, he told him that part of
them were there in the West of England, and the others in the North.

Their habits too are so various that it is hard to know them, sometimes
appearing like simple Quakers, sometimes armed like Commanders, and others
sometimes like Gallants of the Town, with their Feathers and powdered
Perruques, so that disguising themselves into so many shapes, 'its impossible
to know them; but if Perruques were once out of Fashion, then should they be
deprived of one of their shifts, at least to persons to whom they are well
known.

CHAP. VI. Their Encroachments and Usurpations.
OF a thousand who speaks of the Jesuits Revenues, Nine hundred accuse them of
Covetousness. I can safely say (without falsehood) that to enlarge their
possessions and increase their revenues, they supplant and defraud the Widows
and Orphans, not scrupling to oppress (even by false Contracts) the Tradesmen
and the Poor. The Jesuits having taken the possession of the Priory of St.
Macaire upon Garonne, when it was worth but 500 Crowns rent per annum, have by
their inventions so augmented and improved it, that now it is worth above 2200
Crowns rent. After they once know that a poor Country man has not a clear
Title to defend himself, it is nothing with them to sue him with some forged
Manuscript and to cast him, you shall see more particularly by the ensuing
story. Malescot the Provincial and Sabbathery Procuror of that Province, had
framed an Antidaie in the business of Tillack against Mr. Dedie, (a Gentleman
and Citizen of Bordeaux:) This Antidate had been as secret as several others
they have forged, if Malescot the Provicial had not been so violent against
Peter du Bois a Priest of their Society. The Provincial a bold and vindicative
man was mistaken in taking Du Bois for an indiscreet and timorous man: if
Malescot had dissembled, this Priest had not divulged this thing farther; but
threatening him and partly informing himself of him, that he and his procuror
Sabbathery had forged this Antedate: Du Bois mistrusting these Interrogatories,
and answering that one Riverius had told him of it, (who then was a Clerk of
the College and now a Priest in the Bishopric of Bordeaux, who punctually knew
the thing,) he perceived by the Provincial's looks, that it concerned him to
take heed to himself: He therefore took three of the chiefest Priests and hid
them in his Closset for witnesses, and having invited Riverius into his
Chamber, entreated him to relate again confidently, how this falsification was
done. Riverius (who thought he was alone with Du Bois) plainly discovered their
order and proceeding in making this Antedate, and the reasons why they had done
it thus, but entreated his Secrecy, For fear (said he) that some of us be
hanged: Du Bois proving this before Mutius Vitelleshi, their General, requires
Justice; the evil was so gross and their Spirits so exasperated, that he could
not deny it them; therefore least the public, and especially Mr. Dedie (who
they feared) should know thereof, they first agreed and ended the Suit: And as
intending to give satisfaction not so much to Peter du Bois as to Mr. Dedie,
with a kind of daubed Justice, Sabbethery was removed, Du Bois was advanced
into the Procurors office of the College of Bourdeaux, and the Provincial
Malescot (the time of his Office being expired, instead of being sent to the
Gallows, or according to the Monastical Laws shut up in a perpetual Prison, as
a perjured Person and Imposture) was sent out of the Province as a kind of
banishment, but it was effectually to be Rector of Tournon.

CHAP. VII. Their Murdering of Infants, etc.
THe Remembrance of Herod the Ascalonite, has been cursed above these Sixteen
Hundred years for Murdering the Innocents. Pharaoh the worst of Egyptian Kings
ordered the Hebrew Children to be drowned so soon as born: these cruelties are
ceased in Egypt, and these Murders no more to be found in Palestine, though
both under the Turks power; but these bloody Slaughters are entered into
Christendom even amongst those that pretend to the most strictness and purity
of living.

In the Hospital of St. James (which was erected by Pious Persons for the
releif, maintenance, and education of those poor little Infants, Bastards that
are found and exposed, and is in the hands and government of the Jesuits) of so
great a number of Children as are carried into it every year, there can scarce
one be found alive at the years end; hence it is that the Jesuits have
engrossed, and still do to themselves, the means and estates of these Children.
It is a hard thing to declare precisely the several means they use for to
destroy most of these little Innocents; sometimes they put out these Children
(for Covetousness sake) to some poor beggarly starving Women, that both the
Nurse and Child cannot but dye for hunger by reason they allow so pitiful a
low rate to maintain them.

Another way they have to be rid of these Children is, That they give them away
to Strumpets rotten with infectious Diseases, that these poor Innocents,
instead of Milk, may suck Poison. Another way, They leave them out so long,
before they take them in, and so late, before they provide them a Nurse, that
it is easy to know that they have more mind to kill them than to save them.

The Author, as appears by his own Book, was employed about burying one of
these Children, and at that time saw that little Child's Winding Sheet all
bloody; and moved with Compassion, asked How it came? One Huget (a Shoemaker
by Trade who belongs to that Hospital) with another named Philoleau, answered
him, That his Nurse which had left her course of lewd living and Adultery but a
little before, as she virtuously resisted some Villains, who desired to use her
as before, had so irritated them, that in a rage they had broken this Infant's
Legs, and so murdered it. Upon which he related the same to Francis Iratus,
then Rector of the College, who made this answer, We should have too much to
do, the Child is in Heaven, and it is not fit to spend the College-money to
revenge a forfeit that has put him out of misery.

If we mention in this Chapter their other Murders, it may not be impertinent.

Was not Peter Panna convicted and condemned at Leiden 1598. the 10th day of
April, for having plotted with the Provincial, and with the Rector of the
School of Duacum, (both Jesuits) to murder Maurice Prince of Orange, who
advanced him a great Sum of Money, with large promises, giving him an
Absolution, and the Sacrament to engage him to it.

In the Year 1572. the Jesuits poisoned Albreta Queen of Navarre, with a pair
of poisoned Gloves, because she was a Friend to the Protestants, and their
Patroness, and so by them was murdered.

William Prince of Orange, 1584, was murdered by Baltasar Gerhard, who
confessed that he was induced and engaged to do it by a Jesuit of Trevers in
Germany, and by Gereon a Franciscan, and three other Jesuits of Tournay in
France.

Stephen Boskay Prince of Transylvania was poisoned by them, because he was
their open and professed Enemy.

CHAP. VIII. Their Incontinency and Uncleanness in their own Classes.
It Is only the property of the Sun to extend his Beams upon Marshes, and Dirt,
without infecting or corrupting it is own purity and brightness. It may be a
troublesome undertaking to lead the Reader to a sight and Contemplation of these
acts of Uncleanness, without incurring the danger, to infect our Imagination
with unclean thoughts.

They seem by their Countenance in devotions, to fly by Ejaculations of spirit
into the Sanctuary of Divine Majesty, as the Eagles up into the Sun; but most
of them are like a stinking ravenous Bird, which in the Sublimity of their
flight still bend their Eyes down wards for to fall upon the Serpents and other
filthy prey, as soon as they can espy it. The Jesuits Subtilty is to persuade
these credulous and superstitious Votaries, that their Sect exceeds in
incomparable purity and holiness all the other Orders. For my part, says the
Author, (who lived diverse years amongst them) I do not subscribe to it. And if
Chastity is no better observed in the other Frieries than in their Houses; we
must needs say, That holiness is fled away from all their Monasteries.

There is scarce any crime and sin of incontinency and lasciviousness, but I
shall convict the Jesuits of, and without going farther than three or four
Colleges in the Province of Guienne.

The College of Limoges cannot deny that Sanguimere one of their Regents,
oftentimes calling a pretty Boy to his Chamber upon the Sundays and Holidays,
under pretense of correcting his compositions, entertained him with Amorous
discourses, and made him touch him with such a passion, that the habitude in
this Evil at last so blinded him, that even he made him come into his great
Pulpit; ut inter manus illius se pollueret, whilst that his other School
Fellows were attentive at their Composition in the Classis. The Author has
surprised Francis Mingeloseaux, the Regent of the 4th Classis in Again (where he
himself was Prefect) kissing vehemently a young Gentleman, one of his
Scholars, and embracing him with his Arms, close within his two Legs. The
Child who was Innocent thought himself well beloved and cherished, but had his
Father known it, not withstanding the Jesuits repute, he had perhaps cut off
his Ears.

These horrid Sodomies are not only to be found in great Universities, but also
in small Schools and Colleges, for so common is this evil amongst that society,
that two of the Scholars of St. Macayre have complained to their Parents, and
their Parents to the Superior of the place, that their Master Gervaiseus had
abused and forced them; indicating so distinctly and punctually the place, the
manner, and the Circumstances, that it was easy to convict the Gomorrean, and
Sodomist. Christophorus Penandus the Prefect of the place is a Witness of this
Conviction. There are eminent persons in Bourdeaux, who have been made to pull
off their Clothes by Leonard Alemay, that he might contemplate them naked: and
to whip their Scholars with the Hand, is a gallant sport for these Infamous
Fellows.

CHAP. IX. Their foul Actions committed in their Visits.
P Hilip the 2d, their great Protector, and a Prince of great Spirit, one day
jesting at them, asked them, How they could be chaste, treating privately, and
familiarly with the fairest Ladies of his sumptuous Court. We carry, (said
they) an Herb about us, through which we avoid and escape the Danger of
unchastity, and resist all its Assaults: being urged to name it: they answered,
That it was the fear of God; but I assure you if they had it then, they have
lost it now. From their Classes now let us follow them into Women's Company, and
see if they make use of this precious Herb.

Peter Gauls Rector of the College of Bourdeaux, left his Regents to make the
Orations at the renewing of Studies in his absence, that he might spend that
time in the visits of Women.

Father Dancerean one of their Order, cannot deny that he said once to the
Author, That a Jesuit (whose name he would not divulge) had abused a
Gentlewoman on the further side of his Bed, she faining to be Sick, and he to
come to comfort her with Religious and devout Meditations. Father Anthony Raoul
of the same Society, has declared, That he saw the same thing through the void
space of the Curtains in a house of Poettiers, where Father Bonnet went to take
the same pleasure with one of his penitent Mistresses. Gilbert Rosseau, one of
the same fraternity, being sent to Nerac did so often converse by Active and
Passive visits with his Landress, that he got her with Child. But to hide such
a Notorious Villainy committed in a Protestant Town; which took the advantage of
defaming the Jesuitical Preacher, they gave out underhand that the Minister of
the place had forged it to scandalize him; but the thing has plainly appeared
since. The History of Father Olivers one of their Preachers, would pass for a
Romance, if it were not as well known amongst their order, as that the Sun is in
Heaven. A Chambermaid whom he had courted in the Professor's house of
Bourdeaux, and seen often too near behind a door, came to him at St. Mary's
Port, four Miles from Again where he Preaches in Lent. He gave out that she was
his Niece, and to enjoy her more privately and freely, feigned that she was
come to communicate to him some weighty affairs concerning her house and to
fetch him away after the Sermons into the Country, to order the dividing of an
Inheritance. The Lay Brother ( John Test by name) perceiving not this Juggling,
took it to be edification, to see that this Maid did lie in a Chamber by her
self in the same Lodgings, and submitting his Judgment by a blind obedience,
thought that all the familiarity he saw, was between an Uncle and a Niece. It
would be too tedious to tell you all the Journeys that this Villain commanded
this simple Brother to Paravis, (in going whereto he was to pass a River) that
he might have time to discharge himself every Afternoon of the care of his
Sermons into the Bosom of this Slut: after which this Ignorant Brother opened
his Eyes when the Superiors asked him where he had left her, and knew that she
was a Strumpet.

If you thought the Jesuits were very Chaste and Continent, pray mend your
Error, and persuade your self that through their sly tricks they corrupt and
debauch more Maids and Women, than all the rest of Friars. The Author knew the
Wife of a Lieutenant General of a Sea Town (whom he names not for respect sake)
who has had to do with a Jesuit that is a great Philosopher; And the Wife of a
great Lawyer of the same Town, who invites too often into the Country a Jesuit
her Spiritual Father, that for his filthy life is defamed in Limoges and
Perigeux. If it were sit to name the great Ladies by Name as well as the
Jesuits, Gentlemen might be made to tremble, Presidents to chafe, Counselors
to blush, Advocates to wax pale, and even Treasurers and Governors of places
to revenge themselves of the wrong.

Cotton the Jesuit, a greater Courtier than Ecclesiastical man; and a greater
Flatterer, got a Nun with Child, and for this had a Process in Avignon, where
he was cast: He also wrote Love Letters to the Lady Clarensa wherein were these
words, That he hoped to see her shortly, and then he would make her amends for
her long absence, and that his Affection to her was such and so great, that he
could not believe his Joy would be perfect in Heaven, if he should not find her
there. And yet this famous Father did presume to glory before diverse Nobles,
That he had lived 22 years together without committing any deadly Sin.

Father Mena a Jesuit and a Professor in Theology at Valedolit in Spain, got a
Maid with Child, and being deeply enamoured of her, he privately kept her with
him, and had two Sons by her, the thing was brought to the Inquisition, and
Sentence given upon him; but by the Arts and Shifts of the Jesuits he escaped
his deserved Punishment: As the Jesuits in Bavaria intended to bring secretly
into their College a Woman that they had hid in a Hogshead, the bottom of the
Hogshead broke out in the Street; and thus to their shame was their Deed
discovered.

Somermanus an Helvetian Jesuit, feigning to cast an unclean Spirit out of a
Nun, begat her with Child.

Not many years ago was a Jesuit found in carnal Company with a Whore in the
Street of Antwerp by the Watch, who got a Sum of Money of him to stop their
mouths, that they might not discover him to the Magistrate.

CHAP. X. Acts of Uncleanness committed in their own Churches.
IT has clearly been demonstrated that the Jesuits are Lechers by the former
Chapters: in this it shall be proved that they are Sacrilegious persons. These
stinking Ordures cannot be stirred without shame, but for the Public they must
needs be brought to open view. Now observe that the most usual places for their
unclean Acts is the Church: They have almost every where else a Companion, in
the Church they are alone with their Love. Of fifty Examples that I might
allege, I shall only instance in three, that I may the sooner draw off from
these filthy and unclean Subjects.

Manianus the most illustrious and most followed Preacher that the Jesuits have
had these twenty years, in the Pulpit of St. Didier in Poictiers, is one of
them that have profaned their Chapel: This infamous Wretch having designed to
go to divert himself with the Attorney into Ligugey after his preaching, did so
entice and court by his smooth and fine speeches a simple devout Woman of the
Town, that he persuaded her to come to see him in the Priory: the Church was
appointed for the meeting place where they were catched in strange Postures,
and in the very Fact by Father Morin, who cannot deny what is here said.

We need not go far to find an abomination of the like nature. An honest
Merchant of Poictou being gone into the Jesuits Chapel a quarter of an hour
after four in the Morning on a Summers day, heard distinctly a man to stir and
make some small noise in acting filthiness with a Woman in a Pew next adjoining
to that, where he was at his Prayers and Devotions; he being amazed at this
horrid act, began to make some noise, lissening and looking whether any one
would appear; he heard a man rising up softly, and peeping out to see whether
any one had heard him, he espied a Face whose Beard was growing Gray. At that
instant he would have gone into the College to inform the Superior of it, but
his business that called him to Rochel hindered him; and to proceed more
punctually and discreetly in the declaration of this thing, he resolved to take
the direction of a Father-Confessor, who having judged by the declaration of
his Penitent, that the Crime was Evident, engaged him to acquaint the Superior
of the College with the Deed, and so he did. The Sexton was suspected, but left
any of the Consultation (yea, perhaps the Rector himself) might be found
guilty, they made no farther noise of it, still observing their Maxim, Si non
cast, saltem cante.

In the same College was John Surnius shut up in the Vestry with a Gentle
woman, whom he loved precisely behind the Altar. Gentlewomen of Quality have
complained to a discreet man of their Order, that Peter Regginer by his filthy
and lascivious interrogatories had provoked them to evil in their Confessions,
and asking them, whether they had made use of such and such ways to take their
carnal pleasures, had taught them to practice shameful Obscenities. This Jesuit
more wicked then subtle was so Lascivious, whilst he was the Rector of
Fountenay College, that he did entice and draw the Lascivious women under
pretext of converting them by the means of those which were honest and
Innocent. The hour that he took for to see them in the Church (viz.) when the
Masses were ended and all the People were gone, and all the other Jesuits were
at Table, has given strong suspicions that he did call them, not so much to
convert them, as to pervert and abuse them. What was the cause that their
Brother Miroart of the Vestry at Bourdeaux was ejected out of it, but because
he helped the Rector of the College to take his contentment, and pleasure with
a woman at his leisure in Magdalen Chapel? John la Rhede, who caught them in
the very act, can witness the same.

The Church of Limoges is infamous by reason of the lascivious Discourses that
have been uttered in it. That of Again is full of pollutions and infected with
Sacrileges; and that of St. Macayre and of Marrennes have also suffered, upon
their Benches in their Porches, and retired corners, immodest and dishonest
Actions.

CHAP. XI. Unclean Acts committed by them in their own Houses.
THE chiefest Zealots of the good Fame and Reputation of their Order, have said
in the hearing of the Author, That if any of them that depart from the Society
should relate Petiot's Story, they should be wholly disgraced. Now may Disgrace
reflect upon them, to the Glory of God, and the Edification of the Public, by
the Revelation of the Crime.

Stephen Petiot is well known for his brave Qualities in the Country of
Guienne, and has still passed amongst them of the Robe for one of the most
Sober and Modest of his time. I do not here relate the Crime of a Simple and
Ignorant Brother, but a Jesuit, a great Scholar, (as they say) a Professor of
the fourth Vow, Humanist and great Preacher. This famous Fellow was in the
Provost his House Preaching in St. Project at Bourdeaux: and that he might not
appear idle, between the Advent and the Lent, he went sometimes to the
Confessional, as many others do, rather for Divertisement, and to catch his
Prey, than to convert Sinners, and teach Souls. This man, who in the Pulpit
seemed to be a Saint, was an Asmodaeus in the Confessional, and fell in Love
with a pretty black Maid, which had cast her self at his feet, to unload her
self of her Sins, and so kindled his Love through his Eyes and Ears, while he
looked earnestly upon her, and heard her speak, that contrary to the Maids
expectation, he sent her back laden with more Sins than she had brought. His
first care was, to gain her by his smooth and alluring Speeches, and to engage
her to come to him when the Jesuits would be at Table, that he might with more
Confidence and Liberty entertain her betwixt the two doors. The Maid, who was
but a poor Servant, thought it a high degree of happiness to be courted and
beloved of that Person, who was every where praised and esteemed, and so
reciprocally conceived so much Love and Affection for her Lover, that she no
longer failed to convey her self to the appointed Places at the times prefixed.
I shall forbear to set down all that passed betwixt these two Lovers, it is
sufficient to say, that there was no manner of feeling but she permitted, nor
any kind of Pleasures but this Villain gave her, even to the last carnal
Embraces; one only Care molested them, that they were to step out ever and
anon, to see whether any Stranger drew near to interrupt their Delights. In
short, not to stain this Paper any longer, this Wench has told three or four
several Jesuits, that Petiot had embraced her, felt, kissed, whip't her with
his hand, etc. yea, effundens semen in manum ejus, oh Filthiness! had said to
her, My dear heart, behold, ex quo luto nascuntur homines. This Preacher, that
he might have the liberty to study, had a Chamber apart from the rest, with
Lock and Key, adorned and fitted purposely for his habitation, by order of
Provincial Jacquinot. He judging that it would be easy for him to bring in
this Maid, and to keep her without danger, persuaded her to disguise her self;
having so agreed, she took her leave of her Mistress, and reckoned with her,
then bought her self a Hat and a Canvas Suit fit for a Country Lad of her
pitch, and went into a Vineyard near the Galiens Palace, where she cut off half
her Hair, folding part of her Maids clothes up into a Bundle, and the rest she
made Use of, attiring her self like a young man, and taking with her a bundle
of little sticks, made show of bringing them to the Jesuit, who then was so
curious as to mark some of them with a hot Iron. He who still watched to see
her coming through the Church, according to the Design, went down to receive
her; and taking her as a Countrey-mans Servant, who brought him some sticks,
without any suspicion or danger brought her into his Chamber. Their Passion,
which till that time had now and then some startles, did then break out like an
impetuous River that overflowes its Banks. Nevertheless their Love was not as
those Rivers that carry their Waters under the Earth, from the noise and sight
of men. Women can keep no Secrets, though they be their own filthy Actions.
This Wench went to Confess to the Jesuit Nathaniel Sicard, and discovered to
him particularly all that had passed between her and Petiot, even in his
Chamber; and to make up her Stupidity or Malice, gave him power (as he said
himself) to make Use of it as he thought fit. But the Wench, which could no
longer see her Friend Petiot (who was sent to wait upon the Bishop of Zaints in
his Visits) began already to speak loud, and did again declare in Confession to
Peter Thomas, that she had lived eight days in the Provost his house, with
this Preacher, and that she would go and acquaint the Bishop of Bazas with it,
if they did not give her the Money that had been promised her by that man who
had enticed her to that Debauched Life. This second Confessor kept not this
Auricular Confession with any more Secrecy than the first had done, for he
called Francis Labrusse and the Author, who were his Companions in the
Cardinals Circuit, and asked their Advice what to do in a Business so dangerous
to the Name and Reputation of the Society; whose Advice was, that the Maid
should relate, not by way of Confession, but in familiar talk, what she had
related in the Secrecy of that pretended Sacrament, otherwise they could not
declare the Crime without committing a greater. The Wench did, upon his
persuasion, relate it to the Author, and that with such plainness and
Confidence, that it was impossible to doubt of it. She did exactly relate what
Places she had passed, how many Stairs there were up to his Chamber, of what
fashion his Closet was, where the Bed stood, and of what Stuff and color the
Furniture was, and what they were, and what Pictures, even to the length of the
Sheets; his Diet, his Meat and Drink, how many of the Fathers had come to visit
him during her Abode with him, and where she hid her self, with her Shepherds
Garment, what pretenses and Excuses that worthless Person used to carry them
some wither else, etc.

This Maid was Servant in Carnan-street at Bourdeaux; she was born at Reole in
the Bazadois, and was Cousin German to a poor Woman, whose Husband was an old
blind man, dwelling near to St. Michaels Church at Reole; and when she
confessed her self so punctually to Peter Thomas, and intimated that she would
publicly declare these Villainies, she was a Servant in the House of the Regent
of the Place.

Here may be added the Story of that Jesuit Rector in Languedock, who took a
poor blind Wench as she begged at his door, and for the space of three Months
kept her in his Chamber; then being weary of her, put her in the Hospital, with
fair Promises to visit her, and to reward her well, but she being discontented,
declared the matter: and to confirm it to one of his Brothers, she said to him,
You came to visit him such a day, and spoke to him of such things. I was then
in his Closet.

CHAP. XII. Filthy Actions committed by the Jesuits in their Travels.
AN amorous Friar when he goes abroad out of the Cloister, is like a loose
Horse; Petiot, being commanded to go to Pan, there to Preach in Lent, made his
Journey famous by the wicked Deeds he committed in the Way, this beastly Fellow
desiring to debauch one of his Devouts of Sainctonges, which had wounded his
Heart, feigned that he would not go out of the Country till he had saluted our
Lady of Verdelais, and courteously offered himself to this Maid to confess her,
and to say Mass to her in that Place, if she would go along thither,
(Pilgrimages are never so pleasant to Maids as when a Monk guides the
Devotion:) she took this Service as a great Favor; he had appointed one of his
Bawds to go along with this poor Innocent, that is to say a Wolf with a Lamb,
and they both did so play their Parts. After they had been carried some four
Miles upon the River of Garonne, they came on Shore to lie that Night in an Inn
by the way. I am ashamed to discover the malicious Practices of a Society
wherein I have lived so long a time, (says the Author.) But the Obligation
that I have upon me to give Glory to God, requires me to reveal these
Wickednesses. This old Bawd which had endeavored in the Boat to inflame this
civil Maid by lascivious Discourses, intended to bring her Project to an Issue
in the Chamber of the Inn; for, having by a thousand cunning Tricks and smooth
Speeches enticed them both, she left them alone, under Pretense of providing
Supper. This seed of Canaan and not of Juda, found a Susanna, who vigorously
and magnanimously defended her Chastity; for this harmless Maid, who through
Fears had suffered a thousand Kisses, and a thousand Embraces, at last, fearing
God, and the Disgrace she was like to fall into, frustrated this Villain of his
Hope, so that he was glad to content himself with the Bawd, on whom he
satisfied his beastliness before this Maid, with such mutual lascivious words
of Love, that they might have caused Impudence it self to blush; the Heat being
over, he came again to himself, and conjured the Maid to keep the thing secret,
which she did for the space of a Fortnight; but at last being pricked in her
Conscience, for having suffered these his lascivious Actions, she went to
declare the whole matter to the Superior of the Provost his House, and this is
the first day of the Journey.

After his gallant and religious Pilgrimage toward the Town of Pau, being
arrived at the Lady Mumma's house (which is one of the noblest Houses in Beard)
with John Francis Marin, who entered into his Company at St. Macaire; he was so
smitten with the Eyes and Features of this Ladies Maids, that from the first
Hour he sought all means possible to catch some of them. His first act of
Impurity was, as he came from saying Mass, to thrust his hands up under the
Smock of a Maid as he went up Stairs, saying to her, Fair maid, you lift your
Legs too high: His second was more dangerous, as being more cunningly guided,
for having learned of another by his Questions to her, that she was going away
from her Mistresses Service, come (said he) bring me some Paper and Ink, and I
will help you to a good Place with a Lady-President at Bourdeaux, which shall
be a thousand times more advantageous to you than this; This poor innocent
Maid, which thought already to be raising her Fortune, brought him some Paper
into a remote Chamber of the house, where this Forger of Mischief writ such a
favorable and recommendatory Letter, that he exceedingly rejoiced this silly
Maid; then taking the Advantage of this his Letter, he said to her, Is not this
to love thee most dearly at the first Sight? what art thou not bound to do for
such a great Friend? who would give a Letter written not only with Ink but with
his own Blood for to prefer thee well and to do thee Good, kissing her Forehead
in the mean while, and her Lips, and embracing her with such a Passion, that
the Maid saw the Danger she was like to be in, and withdrawing away from him, I
do not intend Sir (said she) to buy your Recommendations with the Jeopardy of
my Soul. The Rumor of this foul Business was first spread in the House amongst
the Maids, then at last it came to the Ladies Ears, who reproachfully said to
Francis Marin, his Companion, What a Whore-Master have you brought into my
House, who has already offered to abuse two of my Maids?

This Sardanapalus, the next day, after his Return to his College, went to
divert himself near the house, in a Place called the Wood-Lowys, and to make
his Recreation every way criminal, he enticed with some little Agnus Dei's a
Farmers Daughter, who was not above nine or ten years old, under Pretense of
teaching her to pray, and led her into the thick Walk of the Wood. This wicked
Wretch put himself in a Posture to violate this Child, and already with his
Impure Fingers dilatabat ei vas foemineum; when her Father, hearing her cry and
Complain, run in soon enough to snatch her from this Wolf's Clutches: the
Disorder wherein he found this infamous Jesuit, and his Child's Posture,
enkindled such a Wrath in the Spirit of her afflicted Faith, that he run, at
that very Instant, to the College to excuse him.

CHAP. XIII. Their Acts of Unchastity in the Nunneries.
SOME Libertines of this Society have dogmatized in the Nunns Parlours, and
have taught them that God by his Commandment in the Decalogue, Thou shall not
commit Adultery, does not oblige men farther than to be discreet in their Love,
and not Scandals to others, because he has naturally imprinted in our Hearts,
an Inclination to Love, and that consequently all the lascivious Actions
betwixt Men and Women that are managed by Discretion, are no Sin before God,
but only those that come to men's knowledge; and because the Law promulgated
generally to all, did equally engage every one, that the Friars and the Nunns
might lawfully visit each other in Secret and Private, conditionally, that
their Communications were buried in a deep Silence, their Condition being not
worse than that of others.

Peter Cluniack of their Society did expound to one of the Nuns of St. Ausoni
in Engolesme, the Discourse of those Defects and Hindrances that make Marriages
void and null, where he did not omit to speak fully and at large of those men,
who by Nature are defective and impotent. Father John Adam, one of their best
Preachers, did expound to an Vrseline, in the Nunnery of St. Macair, the
Treatise of Generation, speaking as plainly and nakedly of those parts that
contribute to the Procreation of Children, as any other Author in their
Anatomies. James Beasey taught a Maid of our Lady at Pau, the Art of
Physiognomy, and the way to know by the parts of the face those parts that are
most secret in the Humane Body. Reginner's chief Discourse in the two Nunneries
of Fountenay, was concerning the Matrix, and the stopping of the Menstrues,
etc. Every one of these Fellows almost has his Minion, whom he courts by the
name of Love, Sweetheart, and Angel, etc. The Contrectations which they make
with their hands through the Grates, are ordinary. Above half a dozen of these
Villain Jesuits, and as many Lascivious Nuns, have showed each other their
Nakedness through the Grates. The Jesuits of Pau made such a disorder and
confusion in the Nunnery of our Ladies Daughters, that many of them were got
with Child, and those of them that were guilty, were dispersed here and there,
whereof some are now in Bourdeaux. The Bishop of Limoges has intercepted
diverse Love Letters, that some of their young Philosophers were writing to the
Nunneries, and has sent them to the Rector, with Prohibition of Visiting those
Ladies. Of two Jesuits, who by permission had entered into a Nunnery of
Perigeux, the one exhorted a dying Nun to prepare for Death, and the other
locked himself alone in a Chamber with a beautiful Nun, with whom he had had
long and intimate familiarity before. The Author witnesses, that Petiot and
Laborieur have been so violent against the Philosopher of Rochell, that they
had utterly undone him in his Reputation, if he had not vigorously defended
himself; forasmuch as he being better liked by the Women, drew out of his
Confessional, their Tricks and Practices.

All those who were in the College of Poictiers 1646. do know the Quarrels that
were between John Adams and James Biroat, two of the chiefest of the Society,
who assaulted one the other with such Hostility, that they have discovered, by
a secret Providence of God, their foul Practices, and James was at last
convicted, that instead of ringing the Bell (according to their Orders) and
enquiring of her that keeps the door, for her with whom he would speak, he was
wont to strike with a stone softly against a Floor, to bring his Mistress down,
who still watched for him at the hour, and then went to entertain him near a
little Wall, where it was easy for them to pass one to the other. Father
Debatz knows punctually the whole story.

CHAP. XIV. Their Coining of False Money.
IT is justly said, that the Jesuits are Covetous, and as truly, that they want
no Inventions to get Money; though I should use no other Argument to prove it,
than their Impostures some few years ago in Bourdeaux, to fill their Purses;
there is no man of Judgment but will subscribe to this Truth. Having received
from Rome a Relic of St. Francis Xavier, they imagined that those Bones would
serve to gather, amongst the Devout Persons, a vast Sum of Money. The truth is,
the Burdelois were very free, and gave more than was needful to make a Shrine
of a notable bigness, all of Maily Silver. But Rousseau, the Author of this
cunning Cheat, who then was the Superior, deceived their Devotion, and caused
a Shrine of Wood to be made, which he covered only before with a thin Silver
Plate, which caused so ill a smell, that the People complained thereof, and
made such a noise about it, that to cover the shame of this base and dishonest
trick, the General sent him Penance from Rome for it.

In the year 1641. there were in the College of Engoulesme, a Preacher named
Cluniack, and a Regent of the second Classis, called Marsan, who, having found
out the old Caves that are under the fourth and fifth Classis, (very fit for
their Design) when their Brothers were in their first sleep, did usually rise,
and getting through a Window of the Refectory went down into the Court, and
thence crept into the fifth Classis; and from a Window that looks into the
Garden, entered by a false Postern into that Cave under Ground, and there coined
false Money far from the Hearing and Sight of men.

This Crime is no new Crime amongst them, but though some of their Society have
been hanged and put to Death, for almost every sort of Crime, they have yet no
Martyr for coining false Money; but if Justice do them right, they may have
some of this sort speedily put into their Martyrology.

But would you know how this criminal Action was discovered? Then thus. Some of
the Regents perceiving that these two Jesuits did employ a pretty big youth, a
Scholar of theirs, to prepare in his Lodging some certain Materials, and to
boil them until they were half consumed: they first mistrusted that they were
about some Chimical work, but after that, having seen in Marsan's hands a
little Mass of Silver, and little round pieces, unstampt, they were convinced
that they were guilty of coining them with the King of France's Stamp. James
Bechelier the Coadjutor of that Society, discovered, that Cluniack had been a
whole day in the Abbey of the Crown, drawing the Figures of several Pieces of
Silver in Sand, and upon both of them were found diverse new Pieces of Silver,
like unto them, that newly come out of the Mint.

The Scholar, whose Labor and Simplicity they employed for to prepare their
Materials, was a young man, called Roche Fove, and born at Villa Nova, and then
in Anno 1641, was a Scholar of the second Classis; he, who first was an
Instrument to discover this Action of theirs (and to accuse them to Provincial
Pitard) was one Michael Brunet, then Regent of the fifth Classis of the same
College, and afterward Councellor to the King of France, in the Court of
Judicature at Rochel, otherwise called Mr. De Rousay. Mr. Guillen, who was
Regent of the third Classis of that College, showed to the Author and others,
the Coals and Linen Clothes that these false Coyners kept hid over the second
Classis, having for that Purpose unnailed a board out of the Floor. Stephen du
Nayer the then Rector and Bentrand Valaders dug us the Instruments, as Hammers,
Bellows, and other Tools that they had hid in the Ground, thereby to bury that
Crime which God does in his Providence manifest to the Shame and Confusion of
that Society, that imposes Penances for speaking at night after the Litanies,
and yet entertains in her Bosom false Coyners.

CHAP. XV. Their Revenges and Ingratitudes.
THAT famous Author, who describing an Ungrateful man, and a Revengeful man,
said of the former, That a good Turn done him was in his mind lighter than a
Feather; and of the latter, That Wrath was as Lead in his Mind; has in two
words set forth an express Character of the Jesuits Manners and Nature. These
ungrateful men do not only deserve to be deprived of that wherewith noble and
liberal Persons have filled them, but even to be ranked under brute Beasts,
which have some Reflection upon a good Deed. My Lord De Ville Montey has built
them a gallant Church, and given them means to build a Sumptuous House,
procured them an Augmentation of 500 l. Rents in Rochelle, bestowed large Gifts
on the College of Poictiers, has protected them against the University by his
Authority and Credit; but he is not free from their bloody Calumnies. When
those Provinces (whereof he was afterward Governor) did petition to the King,
that he might be re-invested in his former Offices, some Jesuits did highly
murmur at it, and take the Part of his Adversaries with such Impertinency, that
the Author went to Fountenay to Peter Reignier the Rector, to warn him, that if
he did not stop the mouth of two Fathers that were in the College, he would
write about it to the General; it being an unworthy thing, that this noble
Person, having an excellent suffrage every where, should be opposed in his
Re-establishment by those who live upon his Favors and Liberality.

All France does well know how obliged the Jesuits are to the late Duke d'
Espermon, for having contributed more than any man living, to the Admitting and
Re-establishing them in France, out of which, the Parliament of Paris had by an
Act, meritoriously banished them for their Crimes; and yet all the Country of
Guienne, whereof he was Governor, has seen (with great Indignation) that
these Ungrateful Wretches were not contented (as the other Monks were) not to
forbear interessing themselves in that great Contest that happened betwixt him
and the Archbishop, but declared themselves for the Archbishop, espoused his
Interest, Preached the Interdict, were Witnesses in the Quarrel; and that which
is abominable, and worthy of Death, they were the Authors of that Scandalous
Libel that accuses the Duke by the name of Tyrant and Persecutor of the Church,
with so much Infamy and Calumny, that the Cardinal la Valetie, not being able
to bear the Insolency of that Book, has made strict enquiry about the Author,
but could never find him out. The Author of that Book is Leonard Alemay, a
Jesuit, an Eloquent Person, who not long since taught Rhetoric in Bourdeaux
with the Author. The Superiors had commanded him to write it, and indeed Peter
Guales, his Rector, and the Superior of the Professor's House, furnished him
with the Arguments and Memorandums. There be several Witnesses of this; amongst
whom is, Lorentius Fontenay, and Peter Gabanel, both Jesuits, who could not
digest this bold Attempt, omitting, that the Duke having given them the Abbey of
Tenaille in Xanctoign, they have since that complained of him for building his
Sumptuous House of Plassa upon his Land, and have made him pay them above 1000
l. for it. And thus it is the Will of God, that sooner or later, those, who
favor and patronize the Society of the Jesuits (so prejudicial to all Estates
and Commonweals) shall be punished and rewarded for their Deeds.

The Jesuits Axiom is, that he who can cheat and deceive Heretics, and does
it not, commits the Sin against the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. XVI. How many Orders of Jesuits there are.
THere are four sorts, or Degrees amongst the Jesuits. The first, and most
Noble, is that of the Professors of four Vows; in which Degree are the General,
the Assistants, the Provincials, the Superiors of the Professors House, the
Learned Divines, the Renowned Preachers, and the rare Humanists: None is to be
admitted to this Degree but able Persons. The Essence of this State consists
in four Vows. 1. Of Poverty. 2. Chastity, and of double Obedience; whereof the
last Obedience is to the Pope in these Terms, Insuper promitto specialem
obedientiam summo Pontifici circa missiones. Farthermore, I promise a special
Obedience to the high Pontiff, to go whithersoever he be pleased to send me:
They who have made this Vow, are engaged to the Pope by a strict hand, and the
Superiors do give to his Holiness the Names of those who are devoted to him,
and they may properly be called the Popes men.

The second Degree of them is of the Professors of three Vows, viz. of
Poverty, Chastity and Obedience simple: they differ from the first in this,
that they engage not to the Pope's Obedience because they are not so learned as
they.

The third Degree is of Coadjutors, formed Spiritual; they are Coadjutors to
the Professors, and (as one said) they are little Titus and Timothy's in
Comparison of the great Paul's and Peter's: they make three simple and public
Vows, of Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, and cannot aspire higher, though in
time they should be as learned as Aristotle.

The fourth and last Degree is, of them who dedicate themselves to the Order,
for to serve the Order in the mean Services of the House, in the Vestry, in the
Kitchen, and Shoo-makers Office, etc. They are called Temporal Coadjutors, for
they help the Professors in Temporal things.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Divisions and Strifes in the Society.
ALL is not Gold that glisters. What Splendor soever the Jesuitical Government
has, it is too Political to be Good. By the bad Color of a Sick Body, and by
an intemperate Pulse, it is reasonably conjectured, that there is some Crudity,
and faulty Humors in his Stomach. Those Capital Crimes whereof they are
Accused and Convicted, and the great number of them that forsake them upon just
causes, and the infinite number of them that are Discontented, yet living
amongst them, as, the Guilty Persons in Goals, do infallibly show the
Indisposition of that Society that declines to its own ruin. Whosoever shall
make Reflection, That their Government is Tyrannical, that false Reports
amongst them are ordinary, that the Employments and Offices amongst them are
ill distributed; he will wonder that the Inferiors Discontents do not break
forth more than they do; for of Ten Letters that they write to those that
Govern, Eight of them do contain some Complaints, and ordinarily Grievous, and
sad ones; therefore John de la Renandie, who was one of their Provincials, was
wont to say, That the Eminentest of their Society, for to undergo easily and
patiently all their Displeasures, ought to persuade themselves to be Condemned
to an hundred and one years Slavery at Sea. Where Treason is in the Throne, no
body can be said there to live without Discontent. Now the Corporation of the
Jesuits is an Assembly of Traitors, therefore is there so many Complaints
amongst them; Jealousy divides the Spirits of their Great Ones: Ambition forms
in the minds of the chiefest of them, great Ideas of their Persons; for as they
see themselves raised up to a higher Degree than their Brethren, they think all
is their own, then and that the rest must bow down to them. Hence arise those
heavy Complaints, those bitter Animosities, those sore Discontents, that divide
the Spirits, change and cool Charity. If therefore they say, that their Society
is the Land of Goshen, full of Light, when Egypt is overspread with Darkness;
then may we say, that it is a Land full of Mists and Clouds: and if they add,
(in presumptious Boasting) that it is the Suburbs of Paradise, then may it be
feared, that it is the Entry into Hell, whereof their Virgil speaks;

Luctus and ultrices posuere cubilia curae,
Pallentesque habitant, morbi tristissque senectus,
Terribiles visu formae, Laethumque labosque
Tum Consanguineus, laethi, sopor and mala mentis,
Gaudia mortiferumque adverso in lumine bellum,
Ferreique, Eumenidum Thalami, and discordia demens,
Viperium crimen vitiis innexa cruentis.
Multa ubi praeterea variorum Monstra ferarum,
Centauri in foribus stabulant Scyllaeque biformes,
Et centum geminus, Briareus, ac bellua Lernae,
Horrendum Stridens, flammisque armata Chimera;
Gorgones, Harpiaeque, and forma tricorporis umbrae.
But if we speak more Christian like, with the Gospel, we may say, that God
does cast such Hypocrites as the Jusuits are, In tenebras exteriores ubi est
fletus and stridor dentium.

FINIS.

