The Famous HISTORY OF Auristella, Originally Written By Don Gonsalo de Cepedes.

TOGETHER With the Pleasant STORY OF PAUL of Segovia, BY Don Francisco de
Quevedo.

Translated from the Spanish

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, Bookseller to his Royal Highness, at the
Black Bull in Cornhil, 1683.

To the Honorable Lady, Henrietta Grenvile.
Madam,
THIS little piece of the growth of Spain, was pleasing to me in the reading
it; and having too much leisure now, I took the pains to make it speak English;
and when I had done it, I had an inspired thought (on some previous Discourses
of your Noble Family, and particularly of your self) to present it to you;
supposing as it could add little to your better diversions; yet at least it
could take little from them; besides I had Presidents from others, who have
done something of like nature, Dedicated to Persons of Quality to manifest
their respects and service to them. Thus encouraged in this attempt by such
examples, I durst publicly prefix your Ladyship, for such a Patroness so
Honorable by Descent, and so famed for Ingenuity: For you Madam, to the
invincible Courage and Conduct of your Heroic Ancestors (some whereof worthily
knew how to make an Alliance between the Laurel and Olive, as a living Branch
of their Illustrious Stem) have added to their Renown, that Sweetness, Beauty
and Ingenuity, which eminently have influenced all who have had the honor to
be well-acquainted with you, to esteem and review you for them. That singular
Virtue you are Mistress of, obliges me among others to pay you this Homage,
which I humbly supplicate you would vouchsafe to accept, as coming from a
person that loves and honors you with all his heart; desiring that you would
pardon my confidence in this Address, which sprang from the observation I have
made and heard of your Goodness and excellent Merits; at least that you would
be pleased to connive at my boldness to Dedicate this Trifle to kiss your
hands; thereby imitating that Roman Emperor's meekness, who dain'd to accept of
a Cup of Water from a poor Woman that in humility presented it: I am loath to
tire you with reading of my zeal to serve you; (for I have not Rhetoric enough
to express your Praises) and therefore I hasten to tell you, that I remain with
a particular reverence, as being one who counts it his highest honor to
publish himself.

Madam, Your Ladyships affectionate Kinsman, and most humble Servant, W. B.

The Famous HISTORY OF Auristella.
THE City of Seville, the renowned and Opulent Emporium of all Spain, gave me
Birth, to which my Father retired and settled ever since he had solemnized the
Marriage with my Mother, whose Father was honorable and rich, and had left her
at his Death a considerable Fortune, which he had acquired by the many
important Emploies in his Majesty's Service in that eminent Port, where they
passed many years in Love and Splendour, until my unfortunate Self was born,
being the last and only Surviving Offspring from their Marriage Bed. My Name
Philander, so called in remembrance of my Mothers Father, whose Name was
Philander de Taurello's --

My Mother (whom I merited not to know) being dead through the unhappy Travil
she suffered in bringing me into the world, I remained from my tender Infancy
subject to such Incommodities, wherewith such are most commonly brought up
with, who are deprived of their Maternal care and kindnesses; although that
misfortune was in some measure repayed by the Education which I had in the
Noble Family of Cosmos my Father. But the tender love which he had for my
Mother, so much augmented that loss and his affliction, that he could receive
no comfort, notwithstanding the assiduous Artifices of his best friends to
effect it; insomuch, that this fatal Blow at once took from him all Joy, Health
and Tranquillity of Mind, and made him a deplorable Picture of Tears and Grief.
But at lenth, observing that the highest part of his misery was caused by
continuing in that same place, where had passed his Youth in the enjoyment of
his Dearest Spouse: he resolved and prepared to remove from all that did so
continually torment his Memory; and to leave the Kingdom of Spain his once so
beloved Country, selling some of his Estate which he converted into money, and
leaving the rest toward the support and maintenance of me his Son: he
embarked on a Man of War bound for Ostend in Flanders, whither in few days
the favorable Winds brought him; but 'ere he went he committed me to the
Conduct of one of my Uncles, who was his Brother. My Fathers health was wholly
restored him in that Foreign Country, where we heard he lived so content and
honorable, that we lost all hopes of seeing him again; not doubting but that
he would forget those regards which his proper Blood might almost challenge
from him, by the increase of his Fortune and Honor, if Providence had not
altered his design in the manner I am about to describe.

A Gentleman of Quality of the Kingdom of Castile, a Native of the City of
Toledo, whose Name was Lorenzo D'spado, having spent a considerable Fortune
which he possessed, had reduced his honoorable Family to that extreme want,
that it had scarcely wherewith to subsist: at length he resolved, (hoping to
raise his Fortune in another Country, and to avoid the troublesome disgraces in
his own) to take the same Voyage as my father did, leaving, however with many
sentiments of sorrow the company of his dear Wife, and his beautiful young
Daughter, whose name was Auristella, his chiefest Joy. Yet his Wifes and her
Tears and Sighs (which might have softened Marble) could not change his
resolution; therefore they must submit to this Voyage and the loss of his
company for the space of ten years, which he determined to stay from them.

As he had but little of his Estate left, yet what remained he gave for the use
of of his Wife and Daughter, and requested them to be advised in all their
Affairs by his ancient and faithful servant Andreo Scordos, (a Biscaner by
Birth) who was likewise his Kinsman, and one whom he loved as entirely as if he
had been his son, and in whom he had great reason to confide, which was the
greatest comfort he was able to frame to his discomposed thoughts in those
great afflictions.

His good Fortune or my unhappy Star rather, guided him (when landed in
Flanders) to go to Brussels, having changed his name as is customary with the
Spaniards, when they are in Foreign Lands; who also are wont to conceal their
Qualities that they may be induced to seek a maintenance most profitable. He
Arrived about the time my fathers Lieutenant Colonel was slain, and my father
being then at Brussels, and accidentally meeting Lorenzo D'spado, (who being
educated together in their Youth at Salamanca) both were surprised to see each
other; and after many generous and affectionate Congratulations, made friendly
enquiries of each others condition; which being fully made known; my father, by
the great interest his good fortunes had acquired him from the noble Governor
of those Provinces, quickly got his favorable consent, that Lorenzo should be
his Lieutenant Colonel, representing him to be of a noble Extraction, and one
that was fitly qualified for such a Command. It so happened, that Lorenzo
D'spado soon got great honor by his prudent Conduct, having also an Office
conferred on him, by which he grew very rich in few years.

But at length the Air of that Country not agreeing with his health, and above
all desiring to return to his dear Country of Spain; he one day took an
occasion to tell my father the resolution which he had taken. It is difficult
to express the grief my father had in the fear to lose so gallant a Companion
and ancient a friend, when he was informed of his intended return, therefore he
made his chiefest prayers and applications to him, that he would not leave
those parts, and conferred about the best ways and means to re-establish his
health. Besides, he made use of many Artifices and plausible pretenses whatever
he could invent to alter his resolution, and persuade his stay; but all in
vain, for Lorenzo, who could never appear insensible of the many graces he had
received from the Governor, and other Nobles of that Country, as well as from
my father, thought that it was now high time no longer to disguise the reasons
that further obliged him to return, and for some time to quit his Emploies. The
most important were to see his dear Wife and Daughter, and to retrieve an
ancient Estate, which had been mortgaged, and would be forfeited, and therefore
it was fit to get that and other things settled to his liking, and for the good
of his family; and when his health permitted he would again return to Flanders.

Those reasons were so evident that my father had nothing to reply, which did
not only satisfy, but also for a particular love to his company, made him
himself to think of returning to; considering also, that in his heart the love
for his own family and Country did not a little oblige him to do so, having now
also got a fair Fortune to make him the more welcome.

Thus concerting their interest, love to their Families, and the high esteem of
each others Company, they both resolved to leave Flanders; which that they
might do with all possible Honor and Respect, they both took leave of that
Court, which did dispense with their just and important reasons for some time;
so they both prepared together to ship at Ostend, from whence after a happy
Navigation, they arrived at the famous Port of San Lucar, where all the
Relations of my Father went to meet him, having received Letters of Advice by
the Post to that purpose. But e're they came to Land, my Father had entertained
Lorenzo with his fervent Desires to coment their friendship, that it might be
never altered; and just before they left the Ship, he took occasion to speak to
him in these terms. I do not doubt (dear friend) but that you are satisfied of
my Friendship, as I am assured of yours, therefore I much wish that our
separation may not lessen it, and nothing in the World may be capable to
destroy it. And to perpetuate it, I have meditated one expedient (if you please
to approve it) that it may be eternal, which is to make an Alliance between us
by the marriage of your Daughter to my Son, if it has pleased Heaven to let
them live which we now at our landing shall quickly know) You see I communicate
to you the inmost recesses of my Soul, and it will be your part now to let me
frankly know your resolution herein. Lorenzo answered him with tears of joy,
which evidenced the consent of his heart to his Proposals, and soon granted him
his Daughter, which he demanded for me; protesting to him that he was master of
his Life, Honor and of his good Fortune; and so they fell to embrace each
other. That done, they both came on shore, where my Kindred and my self, who
were all ready come to San Lucar, in expectation of him, saluted them with much
joy; my Father having been wanting fourteen years, and I then but six when he
quitted Spain and went for Flanders.

My Father having taken solemn leave of Lorenzo, was impatient of all delays
that might obstruct his seeing his ancient place of Residence; and we came to
Seville, to the unspeakable satisfaction of our Friends and Relations. My
Father told me of the Marriage he had agreed on for me, which I disposed my
self to obey with all Pleasure and Delight, and had prepared my self
accordingly for my departure, to wait on the fair Auristella, my intended Wife.
In few days after a Courier was sent from Lorenzo (as was agreed he should) to
advertise that he was safely come to his own abode at Toledo. Who can imagine
the mutual joys of his Wife, Daughter, and Friends, for his safe return; but
surely mine were not less than theirs, especially since the Messenger had
represented to me the incomparable Qualities and Virtues of Auristella; and
that she was the most renowned Beauty of all Castile, which made me believe I
should never soon enough see the hour of my departure for Toledo. He gave an
account also, by his Letter, that he found to his extreme content, his Wife and
Daughter in perfect health. He gave them also an account how he had spent his
time, and what great Honors he had attained in his Travails, and of the
Marriage that was concerted with my Father, which was received with the general
applause of his Family, Kindred, and Friends, who were resolved to make
honorable preparations for all things necessary for our Marriage. And now the
time of my departure being come, I had my Fathers Blessing, and went to take
leave of one of my intimate and particular Friends, named Bennato, of whom I
shall speak more in the pursuit of this Discourse, then taking Post, with some
of my People, I arrived in four days at the renowned City of Toledo, and went
strait to my Mistresses Father's House; I had no sooner quitted my Stirrup, but
instead of finding all the Joy and Welcome I expected, I saw nothing but an
extreme confusion, and abundance of Tears, Sadness and Grief, which infinitely
surprised me, although I were received with many marks of satisfaction, my
presence seeming an evident Consolation to that afflicted Family, from whom I
was immediately informed; (showing me the Body of Andres their ancient
Domestic servant the Biscaner (whom I before mentioned) which was extended on
a black Cloth, pierced with five cruel Wounds; which Body was found near the
Gate of their House that very morning, wrapped up in bloody Linen, without
knowing or imagining who how or when it was put into that deplorable state,
although they used all possible diligence to discover the Author of his Death:
They related to me the friendship that Lorenzo had for him, the confidence he
had in him, the good service he had done, and particularly during his absence;
that I could not condemn the resentments of his unfortunate End, nor the
strange reception I found. This occasioned hour the delay of our Marriage for
two days, which seemed so many long years; for having seen the fair
Auristella, and enjoyed her lovely society, my desires were inflamed with
greater violence.

At last, the happy day was come, and the night so mutually desired; But alas!
no sooner was I fallen asleep, but the hands and cries of Auristella awakened me
in a strange afright, lowdly called me to the assistance of her Fathers House,
which at the same time was consuming by dreadful flames: I hastily put on my
Gown, and immediately ran from my Apartment, being lighted by the sparkling
Flames that this pitiless Element sent upwards to its Sphere; then running to
the place where they appeared most violent, I met Lorenzo, his Wife and others
of the Family; and in a moment (the Bell giving the occustomed Signal) all the
Neighborhood being alarmed, came and used all possible diligence to put some
stop to the force of the Fire. All the House being filled with noises and
cries, in that confusion I saw and heard my Auristella, my greatest and
chiefest care in this misfortune was for her, to whom I came, being called by
the sad Echoes of her Sighs; I found her in a Swoon, between the arms of her
loving Mother near to a deep Well, where all the servants were, which redoubled
my afflictions, when they told me that the cause of that mortal Aecident was no
less dolorous than the death of the miserable Biscaner; and that a young
Damosel, named Mariana, servant to Auristella (employing her self among the
rest to draw water out of the Well to give it to others to quench the Fire) was
fallen into it in the sight of her Mistress, and was therein drowned before she
could be taken up, but when with much ado she was taken out, it did so much
augment the Tears of the Mother and Daughter, who loved her dearly, having bred
her in their service from her Childhood, that nothing was able to comfort them;
and I could add less consolation to them than others in the pitiful Estate
which these sad adventures had reduced me to.

In fiine, Time which is a Grand Master, heald all these troubles though they
still seemed present to my remembrance as sad Auguries and unhappy Presages of
our Marriage.

Having passed some months at Toledo, I received Letters from my Father to
require my return, and Auristella took leave of her Parents. (which was not
performed without many Tears) We set forwards, and Bennato with us, who
returned from the Court to Seville, from whence he went about the same time as
I did; he came very opportunely, and was so kind as to keep us company, by
which means our Journey seemed very agreeable. At length we came to my Fathers
House, where we were expected with much impatience, by whom and our Kindred we
were received with many marks of the greatest welcome, which much contributed
to moderate the griefs which Auristella by being now removed from her own
Parents. We had convenient Lodgings assigned us, where we were daily visited by
my dear Friend Bennato: I lived so contented a life with my dear Auristella,
that I could hardly consent to be one moment from her; but the Fates envying my
Repose, permitted me not longer to enjoy the pleasures which I had done above
four years past. The friendship which was contracted between Bennato and my
self was so great, that seldom a day passed without an interview; he coming to
me or I to him, and we lived with such conformity as if we had lain in the same
Belly, and been nourished with the same Blood. But one day that Bennato could
not meet me, nor I him, (being as it were jealous of each other, attributing it
to some neglect) which would at the same time give some marks of our careful
respect; and seeing it was late, I resolved to wait for him at his Lodging, and
he at the same time came to mine, with design not to stir from thence till I
returned.

Auristella, who was indisposed, kept her Bed, near whom Bennato staid
expecting my return, whilst I weary with expectation of him, at length came
home, remitting my Visit to some other time: But finding the Door shut, (which
was never done when I was abroad) I knocked several times e're it was opened. I
must protest that this gave me some slight suspicion; I drew near to a little
Crany, which appeared through the ill-joyned Boards, to see or hear what passed
in the House; would Heaven had rather made me blind than permitted me to have
had such a Curiosity! I saw a Slave descending, carrying a man on his shoulders
toward the Garden-door, where leaving him, he came and opened that at which I
stood. One may judge of the trouble and alteration that this sight gave me: I no
sooner entered, but I ran to the Garden, where I perceived a man to hide himself
among the Myrtles, which more than my Transport was the cause of his Death. For
being not well able to put himself in a posture of Defense, nor disengage
himself from the Branches of the Trees; I with my drawn Sword gave him three
thrusts through the Body, e're I could (through excess of my blind passion)
observe that he called me by my name, or tell me who he was. At length falling
at my feet, I observed it was my intimate and faithful Bennato, whom I had
treated with this inhumane severity. I was so surprised, that I remained dying
as he, who with a feeble voice requested me to cause a Confessor to come unto
him. I had lost all sense knowing the Crime I had committed, and could not but
with some pain hearken to his last words, which proved his Innocence and my
Injustice. My dear Philander, (said he) is it possible that Heaven should
consent, that the Sword of my best Friend should give my mortal Wound?

In what has your Bennato offended, that you with so much cruelty should
resolve to avenge your self? But I wrongfully complain against you; I forgive
you my Death, it was a scruple ill-grounded that I had, that being alone near
Auristella, (and your Door being shut) you might not suspect her hnour or my
fidelity, which I call Heaven to Witness, has always been for you inviolable
-- Death gave him no more time, but shut his Eyes; he yielded up his Soul
within my arms. I know not how, that mine took not the same way, being so
oppressed with Grief and Repentance. I was at length constrained to quit this
unfortunate Corpse, and went to Auristellas Apartment, where I found her not,
nor in all the House, through which I heard nothing but the cries of her Maids,
who were seeking their Mistress, when suddenly one of them told me she had cast
her self (in her Shift) out of the window into the street, having been informed
of the death of innocent Bennato, fearing that in my furious indignation, I
might not give her time to justify her self. That same Maid related also to
me, how Auristella had obliged him to do what he did, because that hearing of
the knocks I gave at the Gate (which one of my people had shut unawares) she
apprehended that I would enter into some just suspicion of her. Ah! dear
Bennato, said she, wherefore did your prudence permit it self to be governed by
the ill grounded fears of a Woman? I was a thousand times about to take
vengeance on my self, of the tragical end of my friend, but Heaven thought it
not fit, that it might reserve me for something more cruel.

I could not yet have any news of Auristella, whom I sought in vain, therefore
I concluded 'twas best for me to hide my self; so leaving the House in that
confusion, (as cannot easily be imagined) I went to the Convent of the
Carthusian Fathers, who recieved me with all possible humanity, and secured my
unhappy Life, which has been destined to infinite troubles, a thousand times
worse than death it self; I was privately visited by my particular friends, who
took all imaginable pains to represent my innocence, and procure my pardon.

Auristella was retired to a Nunnery, as soon as she recovered her fall into
the street, which was not without much hurt, and with some difficulty first
got, as well as she could, to a House which she saw open, and there discovered
to the master what she was, who charitably received her. But the next morning
they were informed with what diligence the Officers of Justice searched after
her and me, and therefore they thought it convenient to lead her to a Nunnery.
I had notice thereof all most as soon as it was done, which gave me as much
comfort as I was capable to recieve, but Heaven would not that I should long
have it, and I was but at the beginning of my miseries.

All these mortal discontents so strongly seized on Auristellas heart
(together, with the dismal bruises she received by her fall) that she fell into
a great sickness, her memory perpetually tormenting her, with the consideration
to find her self exposed to the evil tongues of the people, guessing at what
risque her Honor and Reputation was subjected; so that in few days there was
a period put to her unhappy Life. But first she applied her self to the
superior of that Nunnery, to whom she gave sealed, written with her own hand,
and requested that it might be instantly delivered unto me; I received it about
the same time as I heard of the deplorable news of her death. Nothing is
capable to express the griefs of my Soul, the alination of its Faculties, and
the subversion of my Senses: I was a long time (as it were) hovering betwixt
death and life, which was protracted only to bring eternal afflictions on me.
And to conclude this mournful Discourse, behold what remains to be further
known in the proper terms of the Letter to me.

Auristella to Philander.
THE Day is come (my Dear Philander) on which I must pay to Death an inevitable
Debt: It Is an execution of that rigor, which no person can be exempted from.
Although I have resentments of all that humane weakness can on such occasions
produce; he who stands ready to be my Judge, truly knows that the greatest
torment which I suffer, is to be separated from your amiable Company; and my
chiefest sadness, is not able once more to see you, to bid you farewell, to
clear up your suspicions, and to assure you of my fidelity; which has been
inviolable, ever since the happy day of our Marriage, to the last moment of my
Life. And since I am come to the time to speak the truth which relates to the
Eternal Salvation of my Soul. It is but just dear Philander, that you be
informed as well as the whole world, of a Secret which I have so long concealed
to the prejudice of my Conscience. Read carefully this Letter, and you will
pardon my offense, (if it be true that it was done against your Honor) to have
done a thing which was executed against my consent, against my will, and before
we were married. I persuade my self that you will do Justice to my
Innocence, that my Reputation be not stained either before you, or before those
who shall have notice of my misfortune.

I doubt not but you still remember the unhappiness which so much afflicted our
Family on the day you came to Toledo, which possibly might prognosticate the
present disgraces. You may call to mind also the diligence which was used to
find the Assassinate of our Andreo the Biscaner, which then proved
unsuccessful; and still might be so to the Day of the last Judgment, if this
which is my last did not oblige me to declare, and protest that my unhappy Self
was his Murdress; his infamous Treachery will I hope obtain my pardon at the
Sovereign Tribunal, next to my extreme and hearty repentance for my sins. Know
then dear Philander, that no sooner had the Biscaner been informed of my
Fathers Return; and that our Marriage was concluded on, but he fell sick of a
Fever, which in the beginning seemed very dangerous: my Parents who loved him
as their own Child, procured the most renowned Physicians of the City to attend
him, who could find no remedy that could relieve him, and said his Malady
proceeded from an excess of Melancholy, which made our whole Family very
mournful for him. The Night before you came thither, he made me know (to my
utter ruin) what it was that reduced him to that miserable condition --

It was about Midnight (yet I was not asleep) that I heard some walking in my
Chamber, where to my sorrow I was that Night without a Bedfellow, and opening
the Curtains of my Bed, I saw our sick Biscaner appear, whom I supposed to have
some Delirium by the excess of his Fever: and I not seeming to be angry for
his audacious coming into my Chamber (and so late at night when I was laid in
Bed) spoke to him in as affable a manner as if I had been his Sister, and far
(Heaven knows) from suspecting any ill design against me. But he with a
profound sigh, looking on me with a furious eye, spoke to me in these Terms --

It is most certain Auristella, that the grief I feel can have no remedy but
from your hands, in which is my Life: You have obligations enough which I hope
will deter you from being ungrateful to me for the good offices and services I
have rendered you, and in a time too, when your cruel Father treated me with so
much rigor. I waited not for a requital of the pains I took in your Education,
nor of that which I suffered in his absence, toward the subsistence of his
Family, with honor; all which I did with a kind of delight and satisfaction;
in hopes nevertheless of some acknowledgment; at least to have granted me to
pass my remaining days in the beloved Company of the fair Auristella, which
Joy I am about to be deprived of with so much Injustice. This therefore is my
greatest Malady, which increases in proportion to the approaching time, to see
you in the power of another: Wherefore I come resolved, not to leave your
Chamber without the recovery of my health, and assurance that you shall be
mine: If I lose my Life, let me be your Husband first, for just Heaven has
reserved that Honor and good Fortune for me alone. I expect no other answer
from you, but the giving me your hand: You cannot defer it, nor do I fear you
are able to find the means to avoid it, since the accomplishment of my desires
is now in my power; for I will deprive you of Life with this Poniard in the
same instant, that you shall make the least resistance to give me satisfaction.
So he took his Poniard from his Cincture, which he presented to my Throat*
which so much affrighted me, that it was a long time e're my Tongue could
pronounce any thing; sometimes considering the peril of my Honor, and then I
was surprised with excess of fear of my death, which is natural to our Sex;
which made me thoughtful either to avoid my Death, or put my Chastity out of
danger. To divert his resolution without reproaching his Treachery, I
endeavored to sweeten him by the tendrest Words could utter, and promised him
with a thousand Oaths I would be his Wife; and believing that he would at
present content himself by my permitting him my hand (as he at first demanded)
I gave it him, but he no sooner had it, e're I found my self drawn into his
arms, and my strength failing me in the affright I was in, I could not prevent
his disposal of me as he pleased: But just Heaven (to which all the complaints
of my afflicted Soul ascended) did not permit the chastisement which this
offense and Treachery merited to be long deferred, for he received it from my
own hands with his own proper Poniard. The resentment of my shame animating my
weakness with an undaunted courage. As soon as I found him fast asleep I took
my revenge, and seizing of that fatal Weapon which before had overawed me -- I
thrust it through his heart, and by many other stabs, which I redoubled, I made
a large gap for his perfidious Soul to pass; and without being heard, I wrapped
his miserable Corpse in my sheets drencht in his own Blood, and dragged it out,
and left it near to our House. This was not the end of my disgraces, for when I
saw you come they did afresh renew; and if I had not been prevented by the
fears of punishment in another world, I had made the same Sacrifice of my own
life; because I was afraid, and did believe I could never hide my infamy from
you. But in this desperate imagination, I found some comfort in thinking that
Mariana might be now very useful to me, who having been bred up with me from
her Infancy, bore part in my most secret thoughts and actions; and yet I knew
not how to declare to her what was come to pass, till the fatal Melancholy
into which I was plunged, and in a time when I should show the greatest joy,
gave her the first occasion to ask who did conjure me, with much earnestness,
to let her know the true cause of it, so that I saw my self obliged to tell her
all without disguising the least particular, and being not able, but by her
means to find any remedy for my affliction; I put my life and honor into her
hands, and after I had importuned her by all that I found the most powerful and
sacred to persuade her; (as much as my necessity and the time would permit) I
made her at length to condescend to my request, which was to put her self in my
place on my Wedding-night, being certain of her honesty and virtue: I believed,
I might by that deceit prevent the suspicion which you must perceive by me, and
I forbear to apprehend --

Mariana with great persuasions, and not without much difficulty, consented,
not only for the loss of what she held the dearest thing in the World, but for
the uncertainty of success in this subtle Affair. But at last she resolvd to
extricate me from the Labyrinth I was in, and put off all other considerations;
which did succed as I hoped it would; for as soon as you came to Bed, and the
Lights withdrawn, I desired you to permit me to make a prayer before an Image
in my Chamber, to perform a vow I had made. I arose, and Mariana, whom I had
concealed, was ready, and easily took fit time to put her self in my place. But
after some time, seeing she (contrary to the orders I gave) remained with you,
I suspected she was well pleased to stay in your Arms, or else she migt also
fall asleep; and hearing that the clock struck three, I began to conclude I was
in extreme peril, considering that it was impossible to awake her and you not
perceive me. When taking counsel from my jealousy, I descended softly into the
Hall, where I put as many combustible things as I could find, and placed them
next the Tapistry, and with a Candle put all in a flame, and quickly returned
to your Chamber, assuring my self that the confusion which this accident would
put you in, would not permit you to make any reflection or nice remembrances,
and that hearing my voice, you would immediately go to the assistance of the
House, which accordingly you did, and so you left me alone with Mariana, so
transported with anger against her, for the too long time she staid with you,
for the disorder which she was the cause of, and the loss which must necessary
follow; that I was almost resolved to thrust her through the Body with your
Sword. To these considerations, I joined such as might succeed, apprehending
the consequence of what had passed between you and her, at least to find my
self a continual slave to the faith and inconstancy of a maid, which necessity
alone had subjected to my service: In fine, I went down with her to the Well,
where our servants were busy to draw Water, and whilst they went and came, I
believing I had an happy opportunity to disentangle my self from the confusion
I was in, I commanded her to draw some Water also, and observing carefully,
that none perceived me, I with much ease pushed her into the Well, where
leaving her some time struggling with her last Agony, and supposing her to be
certainly drowned, dissembling my ingratitude and cruelty, I made loud
Outcries, and shed a Torrent of Tears (so well feigned) that you as well as the
rest of the Family believed that no one could be more afflicted than I appear
to be.

That horrible offense, and this abominable sin, wherewith I have so highly
offended Heaven, have drawn down all the miseries and just punishments of your
unhappy Auristlla, who still loved and respected you with all imaginable
fidelity and constancy, of which Truth both Heaven and Earth are Witnesses.

Thus my dear Philander, I request of you (as the last Grace you can confer on
me) to believe that your Reputation was never blasted by any deportment of
mine. I could have concealed what I now inform you of, but I would that by the
sincerity of this Declaration you may the better judge of my Words, which is all
the consolation that remains in my afflicted heart; and I recommend to you to
do such things as a Zeal so Christian-like, as yours will both prompt and
oblige you to, but more particularly that you would make satisfaction (as much
as is possible for you to do) for those two cruel Murders, which is the only
thing that does and ought to torment me in this World.


Auristella died the same day, and I immediately left Seville, hoping that
Heaven would be so propitious to take me out of this Land of the Living, where
now I write this Tragical History, that I may be soon rejoyned to my amiable
and faithful, though unhappy Auristella.

The Pleasant Story of the Life of PAUL of Sigovia.
I am of Sigovia, my Fathers Name is Clement Paul, a Native of the City;
(Heaven take his Soul) to speak the truth, he was by Trade a Barber; he married
Aldonce Saturna of Revola who had the reputation not to be the best Christian
of that Country; and there might be made very pleasant Remarks on both their
Lives, for he passed for a dextrous Thief, and she for the most expert person
of the Kingdom in the Traffic of Maidenheads; the breach whereof she would so
well repair, that they seemed better than whole-new; but I will not so much
enlarge on the Subject of their many famous Exploits, that I may the sooner
give you a particular account of my own.

I was early put to School, where I contracted friendship with the son of Don
Alonso Coronello, a person of Quality, which served me not a little to parry
against the subtle calumnies which the Scholars made at me; some calling me
Don of the Lance, and others Don of the Wind; in fine, I was their Butt at
which they shot a thousand raileries of this nature, and I had not wit enough
to repel them, as you may judge by a simplicity I am to relate to you. One day
as I was walking the Street with my friend Don Diego Coronello, we met a man
named Pontius Daguira, a man of public employ; Don Diego bid me call him
Pontius Pilate, which to divert him I did, but the man became so fiercely
angry, that drawing his Knife pursued me to my Masters House, where I saved my
self, but to appease him, my master lustily whipped me, asking at every lash he
gave me, will you sirrah say Pontius Pilate again? you may believe I promised I
would not. This made so dreadful an impression on my spirits, that the day
following, I being called to say my Prayers, instead of saying (as in the
Creed) he suffered under Pontius Pilate, I said he suffered under Pontius
Daguira: Judge you now if this simplicity made them not to laugh enough at me?

It happened not long after (the Time of Carnival) a King of the Scholars was
to be made; (a pleasant custom in those Parts) and the Lot fell on me, and
therefore I requested my Parents to send me a proportionable Equipage for my
new Dignity. The day being come for our public Parade, I appeared mounted on a
Horse, who through his very weakness rather than civility, so walked as if he
was making reverence; he had his Flank like a Monkey, and a swelling like a
Camel, being blind and without a Tail; in fine, moving from one side to
another, with the gravity of a Pharisee, and my companions walking on foot near
me, we came to the Marketplace amongst the Fruiterers, my Horse being almost
famished, greedily seized on a Cabbage, and almost made but one swallow of it:
The accursed Fruiterer (to whom it appertained) began with full-mouth to rail
at us, and in an instant the rest being alarmed, pelted us with Stones, Pears,
Turnips and a thousand other parts of Trash were hurled at the poor King; I
would have quitted my Horse (judging that this Combat would be best
determined afoot) but my Horse receving a cruel blow made him reel into a
Jakes, into which we both fell; my Comrades in the mean time with stones
repulsed the Fruiterers, and vvounded two of them in the head; at length the
Officers of Justice came and seized some of them and some of the Scholars, and
disarmed them, for they had Svvords and Poniards as the Kings Guards. I now
was got up again out of the filth in a stinking posture, as you may imagine,
and I threvv into a House my Arms, my Hat and my Mantle to have them washed.
Then an Officer of Justice loudly cried, deliver your Arms, I replied I had
none offensive but only against the Nose. He would carry me to Prison, but
knowing not what part to take me, he was constrained to let me alone; I
returned to Don Alonso Coronello with his Son, who was preserved in the Battle:
His Father soon after that took a resolution to place his son Pensioner, with a
Graduate named Cabra, who in his House had the Tuition of some young Gentlemen
of Quality, and got my Parents to consent that I should be his servant.

We were Listed the first Sunday after Easter, under the power of a Living
Famine. The said Segnior Cabra had nothing great but Stature; he had a very
little head, covered with red hair; and it is sufficient to say according to
the Proverb, no good Cats or Dogs that are red; his eyes were sunk into the
hindermost part of his head, insomuch that he seemed to look through a Trunk;
his Nose half eaten by Scurf, which came not to pass through Debauchery because
that would cost money: His Mustachios were thick about his mouth, whieh seemed
to have a desire to devour them, so famished it did appear: He had several
Teeth wanting, which doubtless he had caused to be drawn to set to adorn the
Bell of an itinerant Tooth-drawer: His Throat was as long as an Austritchs; the
Apple whereof seemed so large as if necessity had forced it out to see for
Victuals; his Arms dry; his Hands as shrivled Loppings of Vines, viewing him
from the Wast downwards: He seemed like a Fork or Compass, so long and magre
did his Thighs appear when he moved; His Bones resounded like the Ivory
Clickets of a Leopard, which they use to give People notice to avoid them; His
Tongue was stammering; his Voice whining; his Beard long, which was never
shaved to save charges, saying he had so much repugnance that a Barbers hand
should touch his Face that he had rather die than be shaved: He wore in Summer
a Bonnet which was nibled by Mice, which heretofore might be Cloth, and was
lined with the sweaty Greece which fell from his Head: many People said that
his Vest was miraculous, because one could not divine what color it had; some
seeing it so bear, said it was made of Frogs skins; others said it was an
illusion which near hand seemed black, and at a distance blew; it was never
girt about him; and he had no Cuffs or Band: His long Hair that covered his
Vest (as narrow and short as it was) made him look like a true Lacquey of
Death; in his miserable Chamber he conjured the Rats, for fear they should eat
his old Rags; His Bed was on the Ground on which he lay on the brink of it,
that he might not wear out his Bed-cloths; In fine, one may call him the
Prototype of Poverty and Misery.

Don Diego and I were delivered into the hands of this Phantosm, who appointed
a Chamber: The time of Dinner being come, the Gentlemen set themselves at a
Table, in a place no larger than the half of a Bushel, which served as a
Refectory: I soon observd that there were no Cats; an old Domestic (whose
leanness manifested that he was a Retainer to this Inn) perceiving that I
seemed astonished, said to me (half weeping) who told you that Cats are friends
to Fastings and Penances? I perceive you are but a Novice here: This I protest
began much to afflict me, and much the more when I certainly perceived, that
such as had for some time been in this House had Complexions which looked as if
daubed with Diachilon.

The Segnior Cabra placed himself at the Table, and gave the Benediction, after
which an eternal Meal was made, which had neither beginning nor end. -- There
was brought us in Wooden Ladles a Broth so clear, that if Narcissus had taken
it, he might have been in more danger than at the Fountain. I considered what
pains the poor fingers took in swimming in it, and to dive to pull up from the
bottom of the Ladle one Orphelim or only Pease; at each gulf which Cabra
swallowed; Ah! (said he) It Is sure enough that there is nothing better than the
sup, let People say what they will, all the rest is but superfluity and
Gormandise; and when he had ended, it is this said he that gives Health, and
sharpens the Wit; the Devil take thee (said I to my self) and then I beheld a
Boy come in (whom I took for a half Ghost, so lean and unflesht he was)
carrying a Dish in, which was a morsel of meat, which looked as if it had been
cut from his Carcass, with a few Turnips about it; Cabra cries out in seeing
it, How! how! here are Turnips? I svvear nothing in the World can compare
with this Cheer; eat my Lads, I am much pleased when I see you eat well,
then he gave to each of them so great a part, that their Nails and Teeth had
prepossest it, and none left for their longing Stomachs: O admirable
entertainment for people half dead with hunger: Thus was the worthy Repast
ended, of which there remaining a little skin and a fevv Bones; here said
Cabra (very gravely) preserve the rest for the servants, they must eat too as
well as their masters, we will not have all for our selves. May the Devil
confound thee with all thou have eaten said I, thee who make so cruel Threats
to my Bowels: After Grace he said to his Pensioners, go and divert your selves
in the Walk, and use some exercise till two a Clock, that what you have eaten
may not make you sick; at which I could not forbear to laugh, which obliged him
to give me a sharp reprimand, to which he added four or five old Sentences;
then we sat our selves at Table, and I seeing the miserable report, against
which my Belly demanded Justice; but being lately better fed, and stronger than
the others, I pulled the Dish to me, which all had seized on, and of three
morsels I swallowed two, which made them grumble; and Cabra entering at the
noise was made; how now, said he, ate as brethren, since Heaven gives you
enough, do not quarrel; is there not sufficient for all of you? I swear, to ye
that there was one of us, who was a Jasconer, that had so utterly forgot how
and through what one eats, who holding a little morsel of Skin, that fell to
his share, put it twice to his Eyes and Hands, the third time had much ado to
conduct it to his Mouth: Then I took a pot full of Water to drink, but scarcely
had I put it to my Lips, but the half Ghost Boy (I spoke of) took it from me,
and made it pass from hand to hand, as delicately as one takes the Wine after
the Communion. I then arose with much grief, to find my self in such a place,
where one drinks to the health of the Bowels, although nothing can come to them
to do reason for it. Although I had not eaten, I took a fancy to uneat (that is
to say, to do my necessities) and asked of an ancient Guest, where the
convenient place was, he replied, he believed there was none, and that for one
only time that this might happen, whilst I staid here, I might make use of any
Post I pleased; and that he himself had had no need these two months, from the
day he first entered, and then he did (as well as I perhaps) only emply what he
had received the Eve before. O how could I express my sorrow! It was so great,
that considering the little that should for the future come into my Body, I
durst never let any thing out, what desire soever I should have.

Don Diego asked me what he should say to his Bowels, to persuade them that he
had eaten, which most assuredly would not believe him. The ills that Inanition
causes, were more frequent in this House than those which too much repletion
causes in another. But now 'twas Supper-time; there was served up a little of
the Masters Name which is Goat Roasted. Did the Devil ever invent such a
Ragoust? He told us that nothing was more wholesome or profitable, than to eat
little at supper, and cited a million of Aphorisms of hellish Physicians, which
proved that slender diet hindered vain and false dreams -- Could one make falser
at his house than to dream that one had eaten? They supped and were sapp'd, and
yet did not sup. Well we went to bed, and neither was it possible for Don Diego
or me, to sleep one wink the whole night long, but spent the time in contriving
fit means to complain to his Father, and I counseled him with much earnestness
so to do, to which in time he did. But sir, are you very assured, said I, that
we are living? Have we not been killed in the Combat that happened between the
Fruiterers and us? Are we not Souls condemned to the pains of Purgatory? If it
be so, it is a raillery to believe that your Father can clear us from hence;
this cannot be done, if some charitable persons do not recite for us
extraordianary Prayers of Jubilee, and cause Masses to be said for us on some
priviledg'd Altar. With these entertainments, and a little time that we nodded,
it was morning and time for us to rise. At six a clock the Segnior Cabra called
us for to say our Lessons -- Fear had made me leaner in one day than others in
fifteen, My Shoulders and my Stomach did already swim in my Doublet; my Legs
had need of seven pair of Stockins; my Teeth were become of an Orange color
(the true color of despair) He made me read the first Lesson to the others,
and my hunger was so great, that I broke my Fast in eating half of the words.
All this may be easily believed by him who shall know what his Man told me,
that he had seen two fat pad Nags put to him to keep, which three days after
were become so lank, that they might as 'twere, fly through the Air: Also two
fat Mastiff-dogs, that within a days space, went out more slender than
Greyhounds. He did assure me that all this was true and, I; who began to be
acquainted with the Inn, did easily believe it.

Cabra at length heard that there were many murmurrings in the City against
him, for the bad cheer he made us, resolved it should be better, and to that
end he got a Box made of Tin, full of holes, in which he put a little Bacon,
and having fastened a little string to it, he let it hang a little while in the
Pot, but finding that it was too expensive, he believed it to be sufficient
only to show it the Bacon without putting it in.

Don Diego and I being not able longer to support our hunger, which had
afflicted us for a month, feigned our selves sick, not of a Fever, for it
might be easily observed we had none; and to complain of Headaches, or Aches of
the Teeth, that was not sufficient to get us more meat. At length we concluded
to say, that we had great griings in our Guts, for having not been at stool in
a long time; hoping that for saving of six pence, to provide us remedy, he
would rather be prevailed with to send us to Don Diego's Fathers House, but the
Devil ordered it otherwise, for Cabra had inherited a Receipt from his Father,
who was an Apothecary, and so sent for an old Hag of seventy years old (who was
his Aunt) who served him as a Nurse-keeper, whom he ordered to prepare each of
us a Clyster; they began with Don Diego, who could not resist them, and the old
Nurse, instead of putting it into his Body, pusht it between his Skin and the
Chine of his Back, and spouted it up to the Nape of his Neck, in as much as
that which should have served him for inward Furniture, served to garnish him
without, which made the poor Lad to cry for help, but Cabra coming in bid her
give the other Clyster to me, and then they would prepare another for Don
Diego. I had put on my Clothes (purposely to avoid it) but that would not serve
my turn, for Cabra himself with a Crew, he had got hold on me in such manner as
I could not stir; and the Nurce gave it me with as much dispatch as she could,
but I presented a good part to her Nose before she had leisure to get out of
the way: The Master thereupon fell into a rage against me, and threatened to put
me out of doors, but it was not my good fortune to be so used.

We made our complaints to Don Diego's Father, but Cabra sent him word it was
only because we would not study, so that all we could do or say proved
unsuccessful.

He made his old Aunt the Governess of the Family, and to dress our provision
for us, and to serve his Pensioners; and turned away his man, because on a
Friday he perceived some few Crumbs of Bred to be on his Clothes; Heaven knows
what we suffered under this damned Hag. She was exceeding deaf, and blind,
moreover she was so great a mutterer of Pater Nosters, that one day the string
of her Beds being broke they fell into the Pot, which made her serve us with
the devoutest sop that ever I eat in my life, some said look here what black
Pease we have, without doubt they are Ethiopian Pease: Our master was the first
who tasted, and having got one of them into his mouth, and biting it broke one
of his Teeth; she would ordinarily put the Fire-pan into the Pot instead of the
Ladle: I commonly found hairs, little sticks and rolls of flocks that she usd
to spin, which I fancied she put in on purpose to cram our Bellies the more.

All these miseries we endured until the Lent following, the beginning whereof
one of the Pensioners fell fick; Cabra to avoid expense, delayed sending for a
Physician, till the poor Patient had need of, and requested, a Confessor, at
length he had procured a Mountebank to come, who feeling his Pulse, said that
Famine had by little and little killed the young man; they brought him the Holy
Sacrament, and when he saw it (he who had not spoke in a whole days time)
said, my Lord and Savior, it was necessary that I saw you enter into this
House for to convince me that it was not Hell; and after the receiving it he
died, and was poorly buried because he was a stranger, which grieved us
exceedingly. The Rumor of this pitiful Death spread through the City, and came
to the Ears of Don Alonso, who having no other Child but Don Diego, he became
disabused of the Cruelties of Cabra, and gave credit to two shadows; (for we
were reduced to that Estate) and quickly came to take us from this detestable
Inn, where although he saw us before his eyes yet asked of us (our selves)
where we were; but when he came to the perfect knowledge of us, he treated the
Graduate Cabra in very foul terms; then he got us carried from thence in a
Chair, and our miserable companions followed us with their eyes, with the same
sentiments as the Slaves at Algire do, when they see the departure of such as
are Redeemed: Being arrived at Don Alonso's House, they put us very gingerly
into Bed least our Bones should get out of their places and fall on the Ground:
Spies were sent for to pry into what part of our Faces our Eyes were hid: And
as my sufferings had been greatest, and my hunger imperial; (for I was always
treated as a servant) it was a long time e're they could find my Eyes.
Physicians were speedily sent for, who strait ordered that the dust on our
mouths should be brushed off with a Foxes Tail, as is usually done from
Pictures; then they directed to give us some substance, especially good
Jellies. It is impossible to tell the illuminations of Joy that our Bowels
received on the first Nourishment which we took. They forbad chiefly, that
during nine days any one should speak aloud in our Chamber, because our
stomachs being hollow every word made an Echo; With these and some other
precautions, we began to amend, and to recover a little motion; but they had
much ado to make us open our Jaws, which they effected by little and little
with certain Engines which they invented. At the end of four days we arose,
but looked like the shadows of other men; and so yellow and magre we were,
that once we were taken to be the Offspring of the Fathers of the Desert. We
spent most of our time in paying our thanks to Heaven for redeeming us from the
Captivity of the cruel Cabra, praying that never any Christian might fall into
his Tyrannick hands. We related sometimes to Don Alonso all his Maxims against
Gormandizing; (although the miserable Cabra was never guilty of that sin) and
we made him laugh heartily, when we told him, that when he taught us the Holy
Commandment (one of which says) Thou shall not kill -- he still added mark, ye
said he, Kill? Kill what? not only Men, but Patridges, Pheasants, and Capons,
or any thing else indeed that he would not give us to eat. After we had been
three months at Don Alonso's, he took a resolution to send his Son to complete
his Studies at Alcala, and asked me if I would attend him; I was never more
pleased than to be sent far enough from the sound of the very name of this
persecutor of Stomachs, and I humbly accepted the Service, and to live with him
as long as he should command me. Alonso allotted his Son a Steward, whose name
was Aranda, to govern his Affairs, with a Bill of Exchange on a Merchant called
Julian Merluche, and accordingly we took Coach.

At Alcala, Don Diego received a Letter from his Father, in which there was one
also for me, which came from one of my Uncles named Archos Rampion, a very
virtuous Man, and well known in Segovia, by the justicial Office he exercised;
for all which had been done these four years, passed through his hands; not to
tell you a lie -- he was Hangman there, but an Eagle in his Profession; and few
men that ever saw him practice, but were ambitious to be hanged by him. I will
read you what he writes --

My dear Nephew Paul,
The continual Occupations in which the King emploies me, in my Function of my
charge, have hindered me from Writting to you sooner; you know that his
Majesty's Service ought to be preferred above all things. I am (though with
much regret) obliged to acquaint you with some ill news -- Your Father died
eight days since, with more courage and resolution, than ever any showed
against the Attacques of Death. I can speak it to my certain knowledge, as one
who raised him up, and was his Supervisor. He mounted on an Ass, without
putting Foot in Stirrup; the Robe which serves on these occasions, seemed to
have been made for him: He went with much gravity; he looked on the Windows (as
he passed) saluting all who quitted their Occupations to see his Procession; he
twice turned up his Mustachios, bid his Confessors take Breath, and observed
the most remarkable points of their Discourse to him, which they were glad to
hear, and praised him highly for it. He arrived to the Gallows, and ascended
the Ladder with as much dexterity as the best Cat in Christendom could do; and
perceiving one Round of the Ladder to be broken, he descended again, and with a
graceful presence of Wit, applied himself to the Officers of Justice, minding
them to get it mended for some others, because every one had not as much
agility as he. I cannot express the admiration which his Bon-graces attracted
from the whole World. Being sat on the top of the Ladder, he turned back the
folds of his Robe, then he took the Halter and put it about his own Neck, and
seeing that the Thealin [one of a religious Order] would again preach to him;
said he, good Father, I account I have had preaching enough, let us dispatch I
pray, for I desire not to appear Prolix in my Affairs; He recommended to me the
placing of his Bonnet on his Ear, and to wipe well his Face when he was dead,
which I faill'd not to do: He fell without opening his Legs, or making the
least grimace, and all with a gravity without example. I quartered him and gave
him the Highwayes for his Sepulcher. Heaven knows the dolor which I resent, to
see him there to keep open Table for the Jayes and Crows; but I hope that the
Pastry Cooks of this Country, will give us some Consolation, and put him into
Paste in their pettit Pattees. I might almost tell you the same of your Mother
(although she survives him) for she is in the Inquisition at Toledo, she is
charged with disinterring the Dead, and going every night to have a Benediction
at the Sabbal; [which is the Conventicle of Witches] there has been found with
her more Heads, Legs and Arms, than in a Chapel of Miracles.

I am much afflicted that she is such a dishonor to all of us, and more
particularly to my self, that am a Minister of his Majesty's, for such Kindred
are a great prejudice to the dignity of my Employ.

There rests here some Money concealed from your Father, which may amount to
about 400 Ducats; I am your Uncle, and all I have shall be for you: I advise
you on receipt hereof, that you make a turn hither, with what Latin and
Rhetoric you have learnt, for you will become a singular man in the art of
Hangmanship.

^^dress to me your sudden answer; in the mean time Heaaven preserve you,

So I remain, Your good Uncle Archos Rampion.


I cannot deny but this News did very much afflict me, but that which brings me
some comfort (at least to mitigate some part of my sorrow) is the hopes and
honor of my Uncles Letter, which I confess is full of brave and learned
Expressions, which made me withdraw from the presence of Don Diego to write him
an answer; and I thought it would become my prudence not to acquaint him with
the purport of it; for who does know whether in this prying Age, he or some
other great person by their interest at Court, of the powerfulness of Purse,
might not prevail with his Majesty, or the Magistrates of Segovia, to get the
Reversion of that high Office from me, which my honorable Uncle seems to
design for me; so writing my thoughts, I found it much trouble to show some
Eloquence being not used to it, nor knew I well how to address it -- then I
began to write my Letter.

Dear Uncle -- phsa -- (said I) that is not well begun, and looks too
Citizen-like -- Honored -- Uncle -- And this begins as it were wrote to an
ordinary Gentleman, Most Honorable Uncle; ay that sounds very well, and is fit
for a person of so high Quality and Education; so having blotted out the two
first, I fairly wrote it over, and resolved to address it.

For the Honorable Archos Rampion, His Majesty's High Officer of Justice at
Segovia.
Most Honorable Uncle,
YOUR generous Lines were so emphatically welcome, that I kissed them a million
of times, that done, I assumed Pen Ink and Paper, to present to you my
acknowledgements for your most obliging Letter, in which you manifest an
heroic zeal for the welfare of your Kindred, and particularly of my unworthy
self; I did not until now consider the advantage and preferment that Latin and
Rhetoric may bring me to, for I perceive by yours that it is very necessary in
your high Employ. Another man would have writ me that my Father was hanged, and
Mother a Thief, Baud and Witch, and that is all; but you Sir I find, according
as is expected from persons of your great quality, do not plainly tell matter
of Fact, as Common Rogues do, but express it in a gallant and honorable
phraise, according to to the rules of Grandeur. I protest Sir, your Letter has
almost, distracted me with joy, that I may become honorable too, after the
time that I have been afflicted in the cruellest manner that ever a living
Creature was, for I must tell you that I have been almost starved at a Villains
House, called CaCabra, and all I got by my long suffering, was that which you
so much commend -- Latin and Rhetoric; and here I shall learn more -- and so
by that and your Favor I may get the honorable Dignity you mention, and have
wherewith now and then to eat an Oli-podrido, and White Bread and good Oil,
instead of melted Tallow, the droppings of Candle (for we had no Kitchin-stuff)
which my niggardly Master treasured up to be eaten only on high Festivals for
Sauce, and to lie on a soft Quilt instead of a sack of hard knotted Flocks and
Straw; but now Sir I eat pretty well, and will eat much more, to make me of a
height requisite, which this Employment may require; and I begin to turn up
some Hayes already toward the obtaining of Mustachios, which I fancy are very
becoming, and will show Greatness and State on the top of the Ladder. In short
Sir, I shall study my Eyes out but I will make my self fit to take your place,
which I hope and request you will secure for me; So I humbly kiss the hands of
your Seignory, and subscribe my self,

Most Honorable Uncle, Your overjoyed and most honorable Servant, Paul of
Segovia.
Honorable Sir,
PErmit this Postcript to request you, that if you know of any other Name my
Father had, than Paul of Segovia, to give me notice of it, that I cease to use
this, for methinks I should have a great Name for my Office, yours sounds
bravely, but I wonder you do not write your self Don Archos Rampion: I request
your Sentiments herein and Directions of your Command in this material Notion,
for as yet I am not versed in the Politics; nor have I read any thing relating
to State Affairs or Offices of His Majesty's Service; once more I humbly kiss
the hands of your Seignory: Which Letter I sent by the Post; and when I have
received an answer I will tell you more of my Adventures.




On the Qualities of a Marriage; or certain Rules for the Choice of a Wife, in
a Letter to the Countess of --
THAT which I ought to desire in a Wife for my repose, my honor and my safety,
is to have had her Educated in your Graces Service, in your own House, since
she can bring me no better Portion, either Temporal or Spiritual, than to have
been well instructed in obedience, and to be able with just Title to say that
she had the Quality of your most humble Servant. But if your Grace shall
command me to say more, I will frankly tell you all the parts that I wish I
could find in a Wife, that I might expect from the favor of Heaven or your
Bounty; and this I will declare rather out of a design to entertain than to
instruct you.

Madam I am no other thing but what your Graces Husband has made me, for
without him I was without credit in the World and undone man; and if at this
day I am any thing more, it is because he was pleased to make me cease to be
what I was -- I have been wicked more ways than one, and ceasing to be so, yet
I cannot lawfully say that I am good, because I forsook not evil but when I was
weary to commit, and not with a real desire to repent of it; I had not in this
any end, but to put my self in safety; and I cannot be deceived, having no sort
of malice which has not served me as an example or aversion.

I am in some consideration among my Neighbors, Master in my own House and Son
of Ancestors, whose Memory honors one, but I mortify them by mine.

As for my riches and my years, I shall always govern them in such manner as I
will endeavor to make it evident, that I have less years than Goods.

My Person gives neither disgust nor aversion; and if it acquires not great
praises, at least it attracts no maledictions or railleries from such who see
me.

Those who love me not, say that I am lame, for true it is that I seem so to
them by a negligence in walking, insomuch that they determine not whether I am
effectually lame, or whether I make continual reverences.

Now that I have avowed who and what I am, I will declare how I wish a Wife to
be that the Lord should please to give me; I confess it would be too great an
impudence in me (without the command of your Graces) to say how I would have a
Wife, since that few Women would have me such as I am.

I desire, precisely, that she be noble, and she have Wit; for if she be
innocent, she would be incapable of Conversation, and to possess two things
which I account most essential to a noble Soul, which are Equality and Virtue.
I expect in her what is necessary in a married Woman, which may not be in a
Blessed and Religious One; and that her Oratory be her Duty to her Husband.

But I would rather love her Innocent than Scient as a Preacher, it being more
easy to endure that which a person knows not, than to suffer by that which he
presumes.

I would have one neither Fair nor Ugly, between those Extremes, the middle is
more agreeable and safe; Ugly, she is no company, but a perpetual disgust;
Fair, she is not so much a delight as a continual care; but if it must be that
she be one or the other, I would have her to be rather Fair than Ugly; for it
is better to have Care than Fear; and to have one guard than to fly from.

I would not desire one rich or poor, that she had only so much as was
necessary; that she might not be said to buy me or I her; where Virtue is to be
found Wealth ought not to be in great consideration.

If he who possesses her, quits her because he believes her to be poor, he
cannot be rich but with Infamy -- And if he who possesses her not, desires her
because he believes her to be rich, he is poor with Infamy.

I should love her better Gay than Sad; for in Domestic Affairs the occasions
of sadness will not fail us, which honestly moderate carefulness and joy will.

To have a Wife that is dull and always retired like a Cobweb in a Corner, it
is to espouse a continual disgust of life.

It is necessary that she be Proper, for my only satisfaction, and not to
please those who have but leisure to partake her; she should be dressed with what
becomes her best, and not with that which the Libertism of other Women invents;
she must not do that which some do, but that which all ought to do.

I should love her rather to be a Huswife than a Prodigal, for from the one
nothing but fears is to be expected, and from the other profit is to be hoped
-- But it would be a great good to fin done that is liberal --

It would be indifferent to me whether she was Brown or Fair, I desire only
that if she be Brown, that she labor not to become Fair -- for falsities and
disquiets gives commonly more suspicion than Love.

It imports not much whether she be Short or Tall; Chiopins or Stilts (much
used in Spain and Italy) make almost all sizes, and each Stature has its
peculiar Charms and Graces --

As for what regards Fatness or Leanness, if I cannot find one of a necessary
plumpness, she would rather please me, being lean, and would be more acceptable
to my Fancy, to be rather slender as a Cow than gross as a Tun.

I would have one neither in Infancy nor much Aged; the one would be as a
Cradle, the other as a Coffin. I have forgot how Children are Rocked; and I
have not yet learned the Responses, which are said for the Dead -- I must have
one made, which I nevertheless wish was a young one -- I wish above all, that
she had not those delicate Hands, those fair Eyes, and that pretty Mouth; for
with those three things, which of themselves are perfectly good, it would be
impossible that one could suffer it, because that Women make themselves
unsupportable with their costly Bracelets, to have their Hands gazed on, which
are always as 'twere fencing with their curled Hairs, and still weaving them
into Cobwebs, and emploping them about their Head-tire, to give occasion to
consider their fair Eyes, which they rock, and put them to sleep, then awake
'em on a sudden, and make 'em seem dying; with so many Apish postures, that the
Devil himself cannot not suffer. Is it not ridiculous to see a Woman at every
moment to show her Teeth, to haev'em admired, rolling and biting her Cherry
Lips, to give fresher color to 'em, as if she affected to study the Grimaces
of an angry gurling Mastiff, or of one that was damned. Too much care is
disadvantageous to perfection, when negligence most often hides defects.

I covet not that she be an Orphan, because I would not be obliged to so many
comemorations of the Dead; neither would I have her to have much Kindred, it is
sufficient if she has a Father and a Mother in this World, and all her Aunts in
Purgatory, for whom I will cause as many Masses to be said as she in reason
should request.

I should esteem it a favor of Heaven, if she was a little deaf, or did a
little stammer; those Qualities will avoid long Conversations and frequent
Visits, which will make the best conditioned Woman, to lose half of the Ware in
words, which are profitable for nothing.

And that which would be the most important, is that she suffer no Governess
(Duegna) in her House, which is in my opinion an instrument little necessary in
Huswifery: However it is certain, that I will esteem her such as I shall have
her; and that (if it must be so) I will suffer as I merit, presuming that I may
be married with little good fortune: But that it is very difficult that I be
ill-married.

FINIS.

