AN ACADEMY OR COLLEGE: WHEREIN Young Ladies AND GENTLEWOMEN

May at a very moderate Expense be duly instructed in the true Protestant
Religion, and in all Virtuous Qualities that may adorn that Sex: also be
carefully preserved, and secured, till the day of their Marriage, under the
Tuition of a Lady Governess, and grave Society of Widows and Virgins, who have
resolved to lead the rest of their lives in a single retired Religious way,
according to the Pattern of some Protestant Colleges in Germany.

In the SAVOY, Printed by Tho. Newcomb. 1671.

An ACADEMY or COLLEGE; Wherein Young Ladies and Gentlewomen, may at a very
moderate expense be duly instructed in the true Protestant Religion, etc.
BEfore the late unhappy Troubles in England, it was the usual Observation of
Foreigners, who had been acquainted with this and other Nations, that the
English Lady was the most modest, chaste, and pious Woman in Europe; that she
was eminent for Reverence, Obedience, Faithfulness, and Affectionateness to her
Husband, for discreet, frugal management of her House and Family, for Sobriety,
Retiredness, Taciturnity, Humility, Patience, and all other Graces and Virtues,
wherewith the holy Women of old were endowed: Since which, by a general
licentiousness, during our late unnatural War, not only all kind of Sects, and
with them Irreligion, Atheism, and Debauchery, were introduced amongst the Men
of this Nation; but also most of those forementioned excellent Qualifications
are now at length (to the great grief of all sober persons) become more rare
amongst Women, then perhaps in any of our Neighboring Countries: which having
been seriously and sadly considered, it is by many Godly prudent men judged
very expedient, that most earnest endeavors should speedily be used by some
extraordinary way of Education to reduce (if possible) the Female Sex of
England to their Pristine Virtues; that so by their Godly Conversation, and
good Examples, their Husbands, Children, and Servants may in time be won, and
at length a general Reformation wrought in this Kingdom.

Some have thought best to set their Daughters to be educated in the Maiden
Schools in and about London, where either through the Unskilfulness, or
Negligence; through the Unfaithfulness, or Covetousness of the Mistresses, too
much minding their private profit, the Success often times has not answered the
Expectation of their Parents and Friends; whereof there are diverse lamentable
Examples, and grievous Complainings.

Others therefore (though of the Protestant Religion) have chosen rather to be
at the great Charges, and hazard of sending their Daughters to be bred up (till
the time of their Marriage) in some Popish Monasteries of our next Neighboring
Countries: whence they have returned otherwise very virtuous, but generally
tainted with, and inclined to Romish Superstitions, and Errors.

Some have assayed to educate their Daughters always at home, but thereby have
found them apt to be corrupted, or betrayed by Servants, (of whose
unfaithfulness and viciousness there is now a more general complaint than
ever;) or else in continual danger to be stolen away by some debauched indigent
Neighbors; or if they are rich Orphans, to be sold by the Trustees; whereof
there are also diverse Examples; or to be wholly ignorant and unacquainted with
the World; or at least to want that handsome becoming Deportment, which usually
sets off, and recommends young Ladies to good Husbands, and is to be acquired
only abroad in a virtuous converse with others.

Lastly, Diverse Gentlemen of this Kingdom have, of late for the Education of
their Daughters, had recourse to the Families of some Non-Conformists, where
perhaps a stricter Education may sometimes be found, but then if any advantage
be there had, it is usually attended with this great mischief, that thereby
schismatical and rebellious principles are insensibly instilled into them,
which may one day occasion (if not timely prevented) the final overthrow of the
present established Church and State.

Now the Premises considered, and also, that for the Education of Sons in all
Virtue and Piety, no way has been found to succeed better generally, then to
let them pass their youth in a Collegiate life, under the eye and care of a
discreet, learned, pious Tutor, and under the regular Government of the Head
and Fellows of a College: It is not to be doubted but that some such
Collegiate life (if rightly instituted) may prove as successful, and perhaps
much more, for the Education of Daughters; and that thereby may be founded not
only excellent Seminaries and Nurseries, out of which, Persons of Honor and
Worth may at all times make choice of Virtuous Wives; but also Provision
(whereof there is great want in England) may be made for sober, pious, elder
Virgins and Widows, who desire to separate themselves from the vanities of the
World, and yet employ their Talents to the benefit of the Public.

These are therefore to give notice, to all whom it may any way concern, that
near London, in a pleasant healthy Soil and Air, there is for both the purposes
abovementioned, proposed a large House, with a Chapel, fair Hall, many
commodious Lodgings, and Rooms for all sorts of necessary Offices; together
with pleasant Gardens, Orchards, and Courts, all encompassed and well secured
with strong high Walls: Also there is a Reverend, Learned, and Pious Divine in
the same Parish, ready to officiate daily Morning and Evening as Chaplain; a
grave discreet Lady to be Governess, with diverse other Matrons, who having
taken up a resolution to live a retired, single, and religious life, are to
assist in the Government of the College, without expecting any gain, profit,
or emolument for themselves; but to bestow gratis all their care and pains in
governing the College and the young Ladies in their Education. Moreover, there
will come at due times the best and ablest Teachers in London for Singing,
Dancing, Musical Instruments, Writing, French Tongue, Fashionable Dresses, all
sorts of Needle Works; for Confectionary, Cookery, Pastery; for Distilling of
Waters, making Perfumes, making of some sort of Physical and Chyrurgical
Medecins and Salves for the Poor, etc.

There are also prepared a Body of Statutes and Rules, whereunto all upon their
Admission are to submit themselves; until the whole Society, with the consent
of the Visitor, who is a Person of great Eminency and Worth, shall think fit to
alter, or repeal any of them, for the better promoting this Pious Design.

If therefore any Honorable and Worthy Persons desire that their Daughters, or
any Trustees, that their Orphans, should be admitted Commoners or Pensioners of
this College; or any Devout Widows or Elder Virgins, who intend not to marry,
desire to be admitted Fellows and Assistants in this Government, and to lead
the rest of their days without cares and troubles of the World, to live with
honor and reputation, to devote themselves to the service of God and the good
of their Country, by contributing their advice and assistance in the training
up of young Ladies and Gentlewomen, and securing their Persons and Fortunes,
till the time of their Marriage: let them repair either to Mr. Horn a Stationer
at the South Side of the Royal Exchange, to Mr. Martyn a Stationer at the Bell
in St. Paul's Churchyard, to Mr. Thomas Collins Stationer, at the Middle Temple
Gate, to Mr. Herringman Stationer in the New Exchange, to Mr. Mortlack
Stationer in Westminster Hall, or to Mr. Tailor a Stationer on London Bridge,
and they shall be farther informed.

THe Reader may also take notice, That near London in a good Air, there is a
like Design for a College for OldMen, either Batchelors or Widdowers, who may
for a reasonable sum of money be accommodated during life with Diet, Lodging,
and all other Necessaries; where they may pass the rest of their days without
trouble or care in a comfortable society and converse with men of the like age
and condition, according to the pattern of a College in Holland.

For the perfecting of these Designs there are diverse Persons of Eminency and
Worth, who have expressed not only their approbation, but also their readiness
to contribute thereunto; and it is to be hoped that many others who are Lovers
and Encouragers of Virtue and Piety, will upon right information afford their
assistance to a work so much tending to a General Reformation of Manners.
Therefore for the better securing all Persons that their Moneys shall be
employed to those ends and uses for which they lay it down, these following
Proposals are offered, which by Gods assistance will be faithfully and
carefully performed.

First, Whatsoever Money shall be subscribed, shall be paid in to the Mercers
Company in London, which is of unspotted reputation and clear Credit, and will
be accountable for the Moneys received, and give Receipts or Acquittances to
every one that shall pay in any Money.

Secondly, That the same Money may be employed no otherwise than for the use
intended, it is proposed that it may not be issued out but by Warrant from such
Persons as shall be nominated Trustees, whereof there are diverse Persons of
Worth ready to take upon them that Trust.

Thirdly, It is proposed and desired, That all who are resolved to promote this
Design, would send in their Subscriptions and take effectual Order for paying
in their Money so soon as conveniently they can, and at farthest before the end
of next Trinity Term.

Fourthly, It is desired, That every Subscriber would set down the place of his
usual abode, with his Name, Quality, and Title, and the Name of every
Subscriber which he shall procure, to the end that they may be all registered
and recorded in a fair Velome Book, to be carefully preserved in the College
to all posterity, and if occasion require, that thereby notice may be given to
him of any concernment of this Undertaking.

Fifthly, That in case of want of necessary provision and contribution, this
laudable Design should not go on (which God forbid) then the several sums of
Money to be repaid to each Contributor respectively with Interest at 5 per
Cent. if it be demanded within two years.

The Form of the Subscription to be as follows:
WE whose Names are subscribed, do hereby solemnly promise to pay the several
Sums by us underwritten, into the hands of the Company of Mercers, or in the
Chamber of London, to be disbursed in due time for the purchasing of a Fair
House near London, to be made a College, according to the Proposal
abovementioned, and to give Order from time to time to the Trustees to take
thence such Sum or Sums as they shall judge expedient for the purpose aforesaid.

FINIS.

