THE Spanish Decameron: OR, TEN NOVELS.

VIZ.

The Rival Ladies. The Mistakes. The Generous Lover. The Libertine. The Virgin
Captive. The Perfidious Mistress. The Metamorphos'd Lover. The Impostour
Outwitted. The Amorous Miser. The Pretended Alchymist.
Made English by R. L.

Licensed, Febr. 17th. 1686. R. P.

LONDON, Printed for Simon Neale, in Angel-Court, in St. Martin's-Lane, near
the Church. 1687.

THE PREFACE.
THE Age is grown so Critical, now adays, that a Book dares not appear without
a Preface, or an Epistle to it; for fear of being Censured, which obliges me
not to be singular. As to this Decameron of Novels; they are Spanish Relations,
Written by a Famous Author of that Kingdom. One of the most Refined Wits of
France, thought it worth his Pains, to render it into the Language of his
Country, with all the Graces and Advantages it might derive from either; I have
done it out of the Latter, with a Freedom of Alteration, and Addition, as my
Fancy led me, to make it the most divertive I could in ours, which is the only
Recommendation of things of this Nature. The Word Decameron is derived from the
Greek; tho the Learned Boccace thought fit to make use of it, in his Book of
Tales; which he divides into ten Days, of whom Count Balthazar in his Preface
to his Courtier, makes mention, and affirms, that his Work of Recreation
(meaning his Decameron) brought him more Honor, than all those more Serious
Pieces which he Composed. As to these Novels in the main, they are Concise, and
carried on with much ease and freedom; whereby the Reader might be diverted,
and not tired, and receive profitable Advice how to avoid those Dangers, and
Inconveniences others have run themselves into. As to the Plots, and
Contrivances of these Stories, in the Original they have been so well approved
of, by many of our Modern, and most Ingenious Poets, insomuch, that many of
their Plays have been built upon these Foundations. I have no more to satisfy
the Reader in at the present, only, that the Englishing of them has been a
Diversion to me, and I hope to others they will not be unpleasant.

R. L.

THE Rival Ladies A NOVEL.
IN Spain, not far from Sevil, at a Town upon the Road, Commodious for the
Reception of Travelers; a Stranger well mounted, without any Attendants,
toward the Evening came to an Inn; who nimbly alighting from his Horse, betook
himself to a Bench; where hastily opening his Breast, he soon gave Evident
Demonstrations of a Fainting Fit; with which Surprise of Nature, his whole Body
grew motionless: Whereupon, the Mistress of the House immediately ran for
Water, and throwing some of it on his Face, in a short time brought him again
to himself.

The Stranger blushing to be seen in such disorder, desired presently to be
showed his Lodging; and if it were possible, that he might have a Chamber to
himself; the Mistress of the House told him she had but one Chamber empty,
which had two Beds in it, and was the only Accommodation she (...) left for the
Entertainment of another ^est.

^he Stranger replied, he would give ^r any satisfaction, provided he might
enjoy the Room to himself; thereupon the Landlady assured him, that none should
disturb him; upon which the Stranger retiring to his Chamber, locked the Door
fast after him; and to make the surer work, (by that which afterward appeared)
he had set two Chairs against it; scarce had he thus fortified his Chamber
Door, but the Master, Mistress, the Hostler, and two of their Neighbors, being
there by chance, laid their Heads together, (as if they had been so many Grave
Counselors) and began to spend their Verdicts upon the Deportment of this new
Guest; concluding, they never in their Lives saw a Fairer, or more Beautiful
Young Gentleman; then examining his Age, they judged it to be Sixteen, or
Seventeen: Much Prate they had about it; and more particularly, what might be
the cause of his Fainting upon the Bench; but that being beyond their reach
they rested contented, being rapt up with Admiration, and Wonder, at the rare
Proportion and Comeliness of the Person.

It was not long after, but another Stranger entered somewhat like the former,
in Person, and no ways inferior for Beauty in Shape, and Features; insomuch,
that the Mistress cried out, Heavens bless me! Are Angels come to Lodge here?
How so, said the Stranger? Sir, (said she) I speak for no harm, only I am sorry
I have never a Bed to Entertain you, therefore you need not give your self that
Trouble to alight; for I had but one Chamber vacant, wherein is two Beds, and a
Gentleman has newly taken it up, and paid me for both already; he is minded to
be private, seems to be Melancholy, and shuns Company; it is not for me, Sir,
(who you know must please all Gentlemen) to be so rude, as to enquire into the
Reason of it; he is a very comely Person, and such a Beauty ought not to be
concealed, but that all the World should both see and admire it.

Is he such a one as you proclaim him to be (replied the Gentleman?) Yes, Sir,
(answered the Woman) and when you see him, you will be of the same Opinion as I
am: If it be so as you say (said he) though I sit up this Night, I am resolved
to view this curious piece of Nature you so highly applaud; and presently
alighting, gave order for his Supper, which was immediately got ready.

Now, whilst he was at Supper, in comes a Catchpole of the Town, (as commonly
they do in little Villages) and sits down by the Gentleman to keep him company;
he did not forget to throw down three or four full Glasses of Wine, neither was
he backward in tasting of his fare, with a very little entreaty; a Kindness
which the Catchpole thought he had deserved to the full, by telling him a
thousand idle Stories.

Nor was the Master of the House less impertinent than the Catchpole; who
having made an end of his other Affairs, comes and sets himself down, to make a
third Man; he knew his Trade, and therefore, without a By your Leave, fell to
tasting of the Gentleman's Wine very liberally: he did not spare to commend it;
for after every Glass he took, he would wry his head, and then lay it on his
left Shoulder, saying, This Wine (quoth he) would carry a Man into the Clouds,
though he must not stay long there, least he should have too much Water in it.
Ever, and anon he praised his Guest, that had locked up himself, Relating,
first, his Fainting, then his paying for two Beds, and how he would have
nothing for Supper, discoursing of several other things, as the Richness of his
Apparel, and all Accoutrements fit for a Gentleman, only he wondered he had not
any Attendance.

These Aggravations stirring up an eager desire in the new Guest to have a
sight of him, he entreated the Innkeeper by one means or other, so to bring
the business about, that he might get into the Chamber, and lie in the other
Bed, promising him a good reward for his pains; but though the greediness of
gain, had already wrought the effect upon the Inn-Keeper's Will, yet he found
it was neither seasonable, by reason he had shut himself in, neither durst he
wake him out of his Sleep: besides, he considered with himself that he was paid
well for both the Beds al^eady.

But all these rubs, the Catchpole easily removed: For (said he) I will knock
at ^he Door, pretending to come from a Ju^tice of the Peace, and that by the
command of my Master, I had an Order to bring this Gentleman hither to Lodge,
and finding one Bed empty, I should place him in it, and not suffer him to sit
up all Night: Upon this, the Innkeeper was to complain of the great Injury
done the Gentleman that had hired the Chamber, and that there was no reason in
the World, why he should not freely enjoy what he had paid so well for before
hand; whereupon the Catchpole was to use his Authority, and save the Innkeeper.

This Plot of the Catchpole's was very well liked, and the Gentleman who had a
longing Desire to see this rare Jewel that was locked up, gave the Catchpole a
reward for his Contrivance, and presently puts his Plot in Execution: So that
in Conclusion, the first Guest showing great Resentment, removed the Chairs,
unlocked the Door to the supposed Justice; the second Guest, craved Pardon for
the Disturbance he had given him, laid himself down in the spare Bed, the other
returned him not so much as one Word in answer to his Complement, much less
would he suffer him to see his Face; for he had no sooner opened the Door, but
he flew back to his Bed, and covered himself over Head and Ears, with his Face
to the Wall; the other also betook him to his rest, hoping in the Morning he
might satisfy his Curiosity.

The Nights were of the tedious December Measure, and one would have thought
the Coldness of the Weather, with the Weariness of their Journey might have
enforced Travelers to pass them over without breaking their repose; but in
regard, the first Guest knew neither what ease, or rest was, no Satisfaction
could Sleep procure him.

Presently after Midnight he began to sigh so grieviously, that with every
sigh, he seemed to send his Soul of an Errand out of his Body; and so deeply
were they fetched from the Heart, that though the second Guest were fast
asleep, the Lamentations of his Chamber-fellow waked him. So that wondering at
the throbs, wherewith he accompanied those sighs, he attentively set himself to
listen to the passionate Murmurs of one that seemed to be in the greattest
distress in the World.

Nor could the other prevent his bursting forth into the following
Lamentations. Of all others, I the most unfortunate! Whither does the
irresistible force of thy Destiny hurry thee? Or what hope have I to get out of
this intricate Labyrinth wherein I am. I wander up and down, young in Years,
void of Council, and know not where will be the end of all my Toil? How light a
value, O my Honor, have I set upon thee? How has my Love been ill requited!
How have I trodden under Foot the Duty that I owed my Noble Parents! Faithless
Don Manuel, ungrateful Man, where art thou? Whither, forgetful of me, art thou
fled? Answer me, I conjure thee, for I direct my Discourse to thee alone;
perform thy Vows to me, and relieve in this distress, her that has so many ways
obliged thee.

Having said this, the seeming Centleman was silent, manifesting by his sighs,
that his Eyes were not sparing of their Tears, at the same time; all which the
second Guest lay harkning, with a still and quiet Attention; Collecting by
those Discourses, which he had heard, that without doubt it was a Woman, that
uttered those sad Complaints, and bewailed her wretched Condition; which did
but the more increase his Desire, to know who she was: So that he was thinking
sometimes to call to her, and comfort her, being fully persuaded it was a
Female; and doubtless he had done it, if at that very instant, he had not heard
him rise, and opening the Chamber Door, call to the Master of the House to get
ready his Nag; but the old Tossed not having so much sorrow at his Heart, after
he had suffered himself a good while to be called upon, made answer, It was but
a little past Midnight, and he had more need sleep, and take his Rest; and
moreover, that it was so exceeding dark, that it would be a great piece of
indiscretion to put himself upon his Journey.

This the sorrowful Stranger took to be good Advice, and having shut the Door,
threw himself upon the Bed, sending forth withal, a most Terrible Sigh: All
which the second Guest observing, resolved to speak, and offer him all the
kindness that lay in his power, if he might be so happy as to know the Cause of
his Sufferings.

To this purpose (said he) Certainly, Sir, should not your Sighs and Words move
me to Compassionate the Torments of your Mind, I might well think my self void
of common Pity. The Compassion I resent of your Condition, and the Purpose I
have to hazard my Life for your Redress, if it may merit any Requital, I
beseech you (Sir) reject not my Friendship; for I will rather perish, than
abandon your Relief, when once I understand the ground of your Trouble.

If Sorrow had not bereft me of my Sense, (answered he that complained) I might
very well have bethought my self, that I was not alone in this Lodging, and and
so ought to have put a Bridle to my Tongue, and made a longer Truce with my
Sighs; and therefore to punish a Memory that has so much failed me, and in a
place where it so much imported me to be more careful, I will grant your
Request; perhaps by renewing the sad Story of my Misfortunes, it may happen,
that a fresh feeling of their Torments may put a Period to my Miserable Life.

Sir, (then said she) you are to understand, that I who entered into this
Lodging (as no doubt you have been informed) in Man's Apparel, am an
Unfortunate Maid; at least, one that was so, not full eight days ago; but now
have lost that Noble Name, by my own Unadvisedness, and by giving Credit to the
well Composed, but Counterfeit Words, of Faithless Man! My Name is Carola, my
Country one of the Chiefest, and most Delightful parts of all Andaluzia; the
Name I silence, because it does not so much import you to know it, as it does
me to Conceal it; my Parents are Noble, and more than meanly Rich, who had
between them one Son, and one Daughter. My Brother who was to be the Comfort of
their Old Age, and an Honor to their House, they sent to Salamanca to Study,
and me they kept at home; where they bred me up with so much Circumspection, as
best became their Virtue, and Nobleness; and I, without the least repining, was
always Obedient, and Conformable to their Wills, till either my Happiness,
being in the Wain, or, my Misfortune growing toward the full, betrayed my
Duty.

A Gentleman of great Extraction, and more Endowed with Riches than I was,
presented himself to my Eyes: The first time I saw him I was not sensible of
any thing else, save only a Complacency, and kind of satisfaction in having
seen him; nor was it in me a thing so inexcusable, that I should be somewhat
taken with a Sight so Charming; his Gentile Carriage, his Countenance, and
Mien, rendered him the most accomplished of any; all which Perfections were much
more heightened by his rare Discretion and Affability.

But what does it avail me to praise my Enemy? Or, to go about, by way of
Discourse, to descant upon this my unfortunate Success; or, (to say better) the
beginning of my Folly: He saw me not once, but often from a Window that was
over against mine. From thence, (as it seemed then to me) he darted his Soul
into my Breast, by his Eyes and mine; with another kind of Content than at
first: I took Pleasure in beholding him, and did even enforce me to believe
that they were pure Truths, which I read in his Face, and Behavior: His Eyes
were the Intercessors, and Dictators of Speech; his Speech the Interpreter of
his Desire; and his Desire the Inflamer of mine. To these he added Promises,
Oaths, Tears, Sighs, and all that a firm, and constant Lover could possibly do,
to express the Integrity of his Affection, and the Sincerity of his Heart.

As for me, Unhappy! Who had never purchased Experience at so dear a Rate
before; every Word was of that force, that part of my Honors Fort could not
withstand his Charms. At length, upon a Serious, and Solemn Vow of Marriage, I
set all my Retiredness by, and ushered in that Freedom which Love approves of,
(my Parents unconsulted) never discovered any of my Folly, while Don Manuel's
Page (for that is the Name of him that now disturbs my rest) brought me the
unwelcom News of having lost his Master, when scarce had he taken possession of
what he so much coveted, his Parents, nor any other person could imagine which
way he took, or what was become of him.

Now in what a Disconsolate Condition was I then left in? Let him speak that is
able to pronounce it, for it is past my skill ever to know more, save only to
bewail and lament it. I tore my Hair as if that had been guilty of my Errors. I
martyriz'd my Face, believing it had been the Occasion of all my Misery. I
cursed my Fate, accused my too quick Determination, and the Tears which I shed
were numberless. I silently complained on Heaven, then reasoned with my own
thoughts, to see if I could discover any Path that might lead to my Relief. At
last, the only Expedient I could find, was to Disguise my self in Man's Apparel,
and go in search of this Defrauder of my Lawful and well grounded hopes; and so
without any deeper Meditation, occasion offered me Accoutrements fit for my
sorrowful Journey, and waiting my opportunity in an exceeding dark Night, made
my Escape. Now, Sir, I design my Journey to Salamanca, in pursuit of this most
Perfidious Man; for since my setting forth from my Father's House, I heard he
is gone thither; all the care, and fear I have now upon my Spirits, is to keep
my self undiscovered from any other Person, and that none of my Relations may
pursue me and find me out.

But should this Cloud of Fear vanish, another may soon appear greater than the
former, and prove a Storm; for should I meet with my Brother who is in
Salamanca, oh! how his Wrath would boil into a Tempest, and nothing can appease
him, or expiate my Crime; but this wretched Life, which at this time seems very
burdensome; if he should with patience hear me plead Excuses, yet the least
point of his Honor, will over-poise the Balance, and over-sway the
powerfullest Expressions I shall be able to utter.

Nevertheless, I am resolved, (though I lose my Life in the pursuit) to follow
this false Man, my Husband, for so I dare call him; he in point of Honor cannot
deny it, unless the perjured Wretch will renounce those holy Vows which Heaven
was witness to, and deny that Ring of Diamonds which I joyfully received of him
as a Matrimonial Pledge; the Posie of it is, Manuel is Carola's Husband, if I
find him out I Will ask him mildly what moved him so quickly to leave me? But am
fully purposed that if he disanuls his vowed Engagements to me, and denies me
for his lawful Wife; Then shall this Dagger reach his perfidious Heart, and
this Hand shall be the Executioner. I Will show my self as ready to take revenge,
as I was facile in suffering him to wrong me; for that Noble Blood which my
Parents gave me, rowses up my Spirits, and warms me with such a Courage, that
they already promise me Satisfaction for my received abuse, or full revenge of
my offered Disgrace.

This (Noble Sir) is the true and unfortunate Story you so much desired to
know, and which may sufficiently plead the excuse of those Sighs and Words that
disturbed you of your rest: and now I beg of you (as you are a Gentleman) to
assist a disconsolate Lady, or at least, to afford me your best advice, how I
may avoid those dangers that seem to threaten me, and that my being found out
may be prevented; and lastly, that which I so much desire may be obtained.

He who had attentively hearkened to the Story of the enamored Carola,
continued silent, and so long that she thought he had been asleep; and had
heard nothing of what she had related; for her better satisfaction, she called
to know if he were awake. Indeed Sir (said she) you may well Sleep in the midst
of a Repetition of Miseries, tedious to your Ears, and truly sensible to none
but them that feel them.

I sleep not (dear Madam) replied the Gentleman, but rather am so far from it,
and so sensible of your Misfortune, that I know not whether I may not be
thought to have as deep a share in them as your self, and what advice I am
Master of, you may command; for assure your self, I will assist you to the
utmost of my Ability: Considering the Management of your Story, you have
declared so rare an understanding, that methinks your own Judgment should not
have been so easily misguided; for I perceive (Madam) your own Inclination more
deceived you, then Don Manuel's persuasions; yet your few and tender years may
be a sufficient Apology for your not having Experience in discerning the frauds
of Men.

My advice (Madam) at this time is only to be patient; and if you can to take
your repose during this small remnant of Night, and to Morrow we will both
contrive what course is best to be steered. Carola having expressed her
thankfulness, ad^ddrest her self to the rest, more out of ^omplaisance to the
Gentleman, than any ^tisfaction to her self; but he that gave that ^dvice to
the Lady, could take no rest him^lf, for he began to toss and tumble in the
^ed, and fell to Sighing so loud, that Caro^ was obliged to make the same
enquiry after the cause of his Sighs, as he did after ^er Lamentations; and in
retaliation of his ^indness, she uttered many Protestations to ^rve him to her
utmost power.

To which the Gentleman replied, Sup^ose (Madam) you are the occasion of my
^isquiet, yet you are not the Person that ^an relieve me; for were it so, I
should ^ot be sensible of any pain. Carola could ^ot well understand whither
these confused ^xpressions tended, yet she suspected some ^morous Passion had
surpised him, and ^hought within her self that she might be the ^nstrument;
concluding, that the Solitude and Darkness of the Room, and the Disco^ery she
had made of her self might be no ^mall Incentives to kindle heat in youth^ul
Blood.

Fearing the worst, she made her self rea^y with all silence, and have
imaginable, and sat down upon her Bed expecting the ^pproach of day, which
within a while after appeared. The Gentleman no sooner perceived day light at
the Window, but leapt from his Bed, and called to Madam Carola, to get her self
ready; assuring her that the Protestations he had made to her last Night, he
would begin to put in Execution this Morning; and that he would never leave
her, till she had obtained Don Manuel for her lawful Husband: Which if he
refused, he would vindicate her Honor with the point of his Sword, and the
longest Liver gain the Victory, and by this (Madam said he) you may know how
deeply your Misfortunes have engaged me.

Then opening the Windows, and the Chamber Door, which pleased Carola, who with
a longing Expectation had a desire to see the Person whom she had held
Discourse with all Night: But when she had viewed him, and knew him, then she
wished it had never been Day, but that her Eyes had been closed up in perpetual
Night; for he had scarce cast his Eyes upon her, but she presently perceived he
was her Brother, whom she so much dreaded. At the first sight of him, she had
almost lost her Eyes, and remained Speechless; the Color in her Cheeks was
fled away, and in the place of Roses appeared Paleness.

But re-assuming Courage from Fear, and Danger from Discretion, drawing out her
Dagger, she took it by the Point, and addressed her self to her Brother upon
her Knees, in these Words.

Take this, Dear Brother, (said she) and give me the Punishment of that Folly
which I have committed. Satisfy your Displeasure upon so great a Crime as mine
is, for I can expect no Mercy to be extended toward me. I confess my Offense;
and acknowledge my Guilt; but would not that my Repentance should serve to
excuse my Fault; only, I beseech you, that the Torment may be such, as may take
away this Wretched Life, but not my Honor: For although I have forced it into
apparent danger, by absenting from my Fathers House; yet can it not escape a
real Censure, should not the Punishment be secret.

Her Brother looking wishfully upon her, seeing her in Tears, raised her from
the ground; telling her, that since he could not find out a convenient
Punishment answerable to her Folly, he would suspend it for the present: And
moreover told her, he did believe Fortune had not as yet shut the Doors against
all Remedy; and that he had rather choose to procure it by the best means, than
to take Revenge of that Wrong and Affront, which by her overmuch Credulity
reflected upon his own, as well as her Honor.

With these kind Expressions Carola began to recover her lost Spirits, her
Color returned to her Face, and her almost dead hopes were revived. Don
Sebastian, (for so was her Brother called) forbear after that to Nominate any
thing of her Disaster, knowing how harsh that Note would sound in her Ears; but
did advise her to change her Name of Carola, to Carlos, concluding both to go
to Salamanca, to find out Don Manuel: Carola referred her self wholly to her
Brother, and the Business to his Management.

Then calling for the Master of the House, they desired somewhat might be got
ready for Breakfast, intending presently to be gone: But in the Interim of time
enters a Gentleman Traveller into the Inn, who was instantly known by Don
Sebastian. Carlos likewise knew him, but durst not come out of the Room, for
fear of being discovered. Don Sebastian having embraced him, inquired what News
was in those Parts from whence he came; he replied, that he came from the Port
of Santa Maria, where he left four Galleys that were bound for Naples, and in
one of them he saw a very good Friend of his Imbarqu'd; which was Don Manuel,
the Son of Don Lopez. This News pleased Don Sebastian wondrous well, returning
thanks to Fortune, that she had made so fine a Progress; after some Complements
the Gentleman took his leave.

No sooner was the Stranger gone, but Don Sebastian and his Sister set forward
for their Journey. Leaving those that were behind to descant upon 'em. As they
Traveled together Don Sebastian acquainted his Sister with the News he had
heard concerning Don Manuel, and that he thought it requisite with all speed,
to hasten to Barcelona, where usually the Galleys which ^re bound for Italy, or
return for Spain, ride there a day or two, in one of which he did not question
but to find Don Manuel. Carola was very well pleased at the News and thanked
him for his good Advice.

Don Sebastian, by the way picked up a Mule Driver, for a Guide to 'em, and told
him he must have Patience, for his occasions pressed him to go to Barcelona,
and for his time he would give him a good Reward; the Muliteer being a good
Jolly Fellow, believed, that Don Sebastian was a Noble, Free Gentleman, made
answer, that he would do him what Service he could, and go with him to the end
of the World.

Then Don Sebastian, like a Prudent Traveller, examined the Strength of his
own, and his Sisters Stock; and finding it considerable, proceeded forward on
their Journey; and at length reached within Nine Miles of Barcelona: There they
had notice that a Gentleman of Quality who was going to Rome, staid in
Barcelona, expecting the Galleys. The News liked 'em so well, that they doubled
their Speed, till entering into a little Wood, they espied a Man come running
out of it, and looking behind him as one that had been scared out of his Wits.
Don Sebastian riding up to him asked him, What fears put such Wings to his
Feet? It Is time to run, (quo' the Fellow) for a Man that has no mind to be
Robbed, or have his Throat Cut. For in short (said he) there is a Legion of
Thieves in that Wood, and therefore I advise you to consider before you go
forward; for as the Man said by his Wooden Gods, I don't like 'em. Robbers at
this time of day, Quoth the Muliteer, I don't love to hear of? Pox on 'em,
they will never consider my Mules will be hungry at Night.

But as the Fellow had put them in a Fright, so he gave them some Consolation
again, by telling the Muliteer they had done their business, and were newly
gone; ^aving Bound to the Trees no less than Thirty Passengers, Stripped even
to their very Shirts; only they left one Man at liberty to unbind the rest, so
soon as they had recovered a little Mountain, from whence they would give him a
Signal to set the rest free. If this be so (replied the Muliteer) we may safely
go on, there being no danger after a Robbery Committed.

Then they resolved to advance, but they had not gone far, before they saw the
People Robbed, and Bound, and the Fellow unbinding them as fast as he could, it
was a strange Spectacle to behold, some stark naked, others covered with the
Robbers tattered Rags, some weeping to see themselves Robbed, and Stripped of
all; others laughing to see the strange Habits of their Fellow Sufferers; one
was reckoning up what he had lost; another was bewailing his Great Grandfathers
Seal-Ring, that had served his Family for many Descents; a third hoped they
would drink his Health, or else, quo' he, they are a Company of ungrateful
Rascals.

In Conclusion, every one had their several Humors, though not without some
Passion of Discontent. The whole Scene drew a Natural Pity from the two
Brothers; but nothing was more worthy of their Compassion, than to see Bound to
the Trunk of an Oak, a Youth about the Age of Sixteen Years, with a Shirt only
on his Back, and a pair of Linen Breeches; but of so Fair, and Lovely a
Countenance, that he moved all that beheld him, to pity. Carlos alighted to
Unbind him, for which the Youth returned very Courteous, and Thankful
Expressions, for the received kindness: Then Carlos desired the Muliteer to
lend the Youth his Clo^k, which he accordingly did; then Carlos asked him
whence he came, and whither he was Traveling.

The Youth answered he was of Andaluzia, which Don Sebastian, and Carlos knew
to be but two Leagues distant from their own Habitation, he moreover told them,
that he came from Sevil, and that his design was to go for Italy, to try his
Fortune in the Exercise of Arms. He confessed he did not like his ill
beginning, nor the rough usage of the Thieves, for they had taken from him in
Money, and Cloths, a Sum not in every one's Pocket; yet however he would
prosecute his Design, and not be discouraged at the first ill Success that
befell him: The Discreet Language of the Youth. begat such a strange Affection
in the two Brothers, that they hired the Muliteers own Beast for him, and in a
short space arrived at Yqualada, where they learned, that the Galleys had put
into Barcelona the day before; and that within two days they were to be gone,
if foul Weather did not hinder 'em.

This News made 'em rise early next Morning before Sun Rising, for little Sleep
sufficed them. Now, as the two Brothers, and the Youth were sitting together,
Carlos fixed his Eyes very wishly on his Face, and viewing him very narrowly,
his Mind prompted him that the Youth must needs be of the Female Sex; then Don
Sebastian asked him whose Son he was, the Youth made answer, he was the Son of
Don Frederique de Monasco; Don Sebastian replied, he very well knew the
Gentleman, but never heard that he had a Son: (by which he perceived, that he
was loath to discover his Parents.) It is true, (answered the Youth) Don
Frederique has no Sons, but Lorenzo his Brother has: Indeed (said Don
Sebastian) you are under a Mistake, for he has never a Son, but one Daughter,
who is reported to be the Fairest Virgin in all Andaluzia, though I never was
so happy as to see her. What you say, Sir, is certainly true, (replied the
Youth) Don Lorenzo has but one only Daughter, but not so Fair as Busy Fame
reports her; and if I told you I was the Son of Don Frederique, it was only to
be the higher in your Esteem.

But ingenuously to confess, I am not the Son of Don Frederique, but of Don
Lorenzo's Steward, my Name is Leonardo, at length grown up to these Years, and
having given my Father some disgust, I resolved not to abide at home, but
rather chose to try my Fortune in the Wars abroad, where I have heard of many
of mean Birth, that have attained to high, and great Preferments: To all this
Relation Carlos attentively listened, yet it still more and more confirmed the
Suspicion he had entertained. Thereupon Carlos having given Don Sebastian
notice of his intent, took the Youth aside into another Room, and there began
to take him into a kind Examination.

I could wish Senior Leonardo, it had been my happiness to have been owner of
such Opportunities, wherein I might have served you so far, as at this time I
might raise from you an Obligation not to deny me some Request, which will be a
great satisfaction to me; however, though you should deny me, yet will I never
cease the Friendship I now profess to you. I must confess I have a Jealousy,
you are not what your Habit proclaims you to be, but of the other Sex, and your
Beauty publishes you to be born of Noble Blood; if then that which I suspect be
true, deal plainly with me, for by the Faith of a Gentleman, I Will die to serve
you.

With great attention, did this Youth hearken to what Carlos said, and
continued silent for a while; at last took hold of both his Hands, and bringing
them with a kind force to his Lips, not only Kissed, but likewise Bathed 'em with
his Tears. Carlos being surpised at this sudden Passion, could not forbear
Weeping for Company. At length, after a short Prologue of Sighs, and Tears;
Sir, said the Disconsolate Youth, I neither will, nor can deny, but that your
Suspicion has been true; I am a Woman, and of all Women the most Unfortunate,
that ever saw the Suns bright Luster: And since the Favors received, and the
fair Offers you have made me, oblige me to Obedience, I shall declare to you my
Name, and Family, if it may not be offensive to your Ears, to hear another
Misfortunes. The pain that I shall suffer, will be that they are yours (replied
Carlos) but the Pleasure will be greater when you have eased your Mind, perhaps
some Refreshments may flow from one Breast to another.

What I told as to my Country was true, (said the Youth) but as to my Parents I
made a Concealment. I am that unfortunate Daughter of Lorenzo, Don Frederique's
Brother, who for her Beauty (as your Brother said) is so much praised and
commended, though the mistake is easily discerned, in that little, or none at
all, that poor Angelia is owner of.

Now, Sir, two Leagues from the place of my Birth, lives a Noble Gentleman,
that has a Son, named Don Manuel; who if Fame be not overlavish in his Praises
as she has been in mine, is in the Rank of those Gentlemen, which deserve no
mean Commendation. This Gentleman, and my Father took great delight in Hunting,
and he frequently came and staid at our House five or six days together. From
this occasion, Fortune, or Love took their opportunity to throw me headlong
from the Precipice of my Honor, to the bottom of his low Condition, wherein I
now am; his Gentileness, and Discretion, Lineage, Beauty, and Wealth was such,
that all the Happiness I did desire, was to obtain him for my Husband; many
Hours, and Days were spent in Courtship, and after many Solicitations, having
given me his Faith under the most binding, and Solemnest Oaths imaginable to
Marry me, I resigned my self wholly to his Will and Pleasure: besides all this,
I obtained from him a Writing, signed with his own hand, and strengthened with
so many powerful Circumstances, that I thought nothing could be more sure: thus
relying upon a false security I contrived a way to convey him such a Night to
my Lodging, where without any disturbance he might reap that Fruit, which for
him alone I had reserved, and at last came that Night which by me was so much
desired.

Till she came to this point Carlos had the patience to continue silent, having
her Soul depending on Angelia's Words, whose Expressions pierced her to the
very heart; especially when she heard the Name of Don Manuel, she beheld the
rare Beauty of Angelia, and considered the greatness of her Worth intermixed
with such a singular Discretion, as she had so well manifested in the
repetition of her Story: But when she came to say, at last came that Night
which by me was so much desired, she had like to have lost all her Patience; so
that not being able to contain her self any longer, breaks out, Very well,
(said he) and when this happy Night was come, What did he then? Did he enjoy
you? Did he anew confirm the Writing? Did he rest well pleased in taking that
from you, which you say was only his? Did your Father know of it? Or, in what
end, ended these wise Beginnings?

They ended (replied Angelia) in putting me into this Condition; for I did
neither enjoy him, nor he me, nor came to any final agreement: With these Words
Carlos began to recover a little Breath, and recalled those Spirits, which by
little and little were leaving her disordered Heart; such was that raging
Pestilence of Jealousy, which began to spread, and diffuse it self into the
most secret Retirements of the Vital Parts. Carola at last re-setled, though
not without some Qualms, and inward Resentments, began again to hearken to the
Fair Angelia, who thus proceeded.

About some eight days after, I was credibly informed that he was gone from his
House, and carried with him a Young Lady, whose Name was Carola, a Virgin of
extraordinary Beauty, and rare Endowments: This was soon spread abroad, and
presently arrived to my Ears, and with it that fearful Lance of Jealousy,
which pierced my Heart, and set my Soul on such a flaming fire, that turned my
Honor into Ashes, consumed my Credit, and wasted all my Patience to nothing.

Then most Unfortunate! Cried I, for I then began to figure in my Imagination,
Carola to be Fairer than the Sun, and more Happy than I am Miserable: Then I
read over and over the Writing which I had, looked how it was Signed, and
presently my Hopes fled thither for shelter, as to a Sanctuary; but when I
considered the Person that Don Manuel had carried along with him, then again
all my Hopes fell immediately to the Ground: I tore my Hair, and cursed the
Face that had betrayed me. At last, to finish all my Sorrows, I resolved to
leave my Fathers House, and in Disguise, chosing a Night that had put on its
blackest Mantle, I walked unto a little Town, where I found the Convenience of
a Wagon, and in two days after I arrived at Sevil: There I bought me some
Apparel, and a Mule, and traveled along till Yesterday with some Gentlemen,
that were with speed going to Barcelona, to take the opportunities of the
Galleys bound for Italy.

But falling unfortunately into the Hands of Thieves, and Robbers, I lost that
Jewel which kept me alive, and lightened the burden of my Afflictions; it was
the Writing I had from Don Manuel. But how easily would he deny Words written
in Paper, who denies those Obligations which ought to be engraven in his Soul?
besides, if he is accompanied with the unparrallel'd Carola, he will never
vouchsafe to look upon wretched Angelia. However, I am resolved to die, or to
find 'em both out, to the end the sight of me may disturb their quiet. Let not
that Enemy of my rest think she shall enjoy at so cheap a rate, that which is
mine; I Will seek her out, and if I can, will deprive her of that life, which she
enjoys in those Embraces due to none but my self.

But what fault can you find with Carola, (said Carlos) if happily she were
deceived by Don Manuel, as well as you have been? That cannot be (replied
Angelia) for if they live together, as Man and Wife, the Case is evident. But
be they in the remoter Deserts of Lybia, or the furthermost parts of Frozen
Scythia, She questionless enjoys him.

It may be (said Carlos) you are mistaken, and Jealousy has misguided your
thoughts, or blinded the Eyes of your Understanding, for I know her very well,
whom you call your Enemy; and I am so privy to her Condition, and Retiredness,
that she will never adventure to forego her Fathers House, nor yield to the
Will of Don Manuel: But admit she should, if she never knew you, nor knew any
Contract between you, she has done you no wrong at all; and where there is no
Wrong offered, no Revenge ought to be taken: Of her Retiredness, (said Angelia)
you may say your Pleasure; but, I think, I was as Retired as she: And whereas,
you urge she did me no Wrong, should I look upon the Fact without Passion, I
must confess, she did me Justice; but the Torment of my Jealousy makes her a
Criminal to my Misfortune: This is that Sword which is Sheathed in my Bowels,
and none can blame me, if I pluck out that which wounds me.

I perceive (said Carlos) the Passion which at present possesses your Mind,
will not permit you to judge of things aright; nor are you at this time in any
fit posture to receive good Instructions; however, I will be ready to aid and
assist you, according to my Ability, in what is requisite; and I am sure the
Natural Inclination, and Generosity of my Brother, will not suffer him to do
otherwise. Our Course is designed for Italy, and if you resolve to go with us,
your good Company will be very acceptable: You may guess at your Entertainment,
by that little you have found already. Angelia returned him hearty thanks, and
earnestly besought him to take her into his Protection; which Carlos faithfully
promised to do; so taking their Leaves of each other, they departed to their
respective Lodgings, for their Repose.

Carola repeated all to her Brother, what Angelia had related; at which he was
much surprised; but told her, were there a Confirmation of what she had then
spoke, she was for Beauty, and Riches, one of the Noblest Ladies in all
Andaluzia; and now (said he) we must use our utmost skill, in preventing her
speaking first to Don Manuel, for though the Writing may be lost, yet the
remembrance of it will be found.

Carola having heard her Brothers Discourse retired to her Bed, thinking to
take her rest, but that raging Torment of Jealousy would not permit her the
least Repose. Sometimes Angelia's Beauty, and the Perfidiousness of Don Manuel
appeared to her Imagination in the highest Magnitude; and then the Writing,
that appeared so dreadful, that nothing but Blood was seen instead of Ink. Such
Agonies as these perplexed her dubious Thoughts, and hindered Sleep, which proves
a Friend to Care.

Her Brother was kept waking, by Torments of another Nature; for no sooner did
he hear who Angelia was, but his Heart was all on Flame, such force has Beauty
that it conquers Hearts, and never ceases but in a happy fruition: He did not
imagine Angelia could be used so barbarously as to be tied to a Tree, or clad
in a Tattered Habit, but in her Rich Apparel in her Father's House; and now
wishing for the welcome day, that he might pursue his Journey, and find out Don
Manuel, not so much to make him his Brother, as to prevent his Marrying
Angelia; desiring rather to see his Sister Comfortless, and Don Manuel fairly
Buried, than to see himself Hopeless.

Thus all with differing Thoughts, at the Approach of Day they all forsook
their Beds; but Don Sebastian being first up, sent for a Habit to fit his
dearest Angelia; she putting them on, Girded her Sword about her with that
Lively Grace, and Vigor, as surpised Don Sebastian's Admiration, and
multiplied a thousand Jealousies in Carola. About Eight in the Morning they
departed their Inn, setting forward on their Journey for Barcelona; and here I
want Words to express the Thoughts which the two Brothers entertained touching
Angelia. Carola wishing her Death, and Don Sebastian desiring her Life; Carola
seeking to find out Faults in her, that she might not despair of her Hopes, and
Don Sebastian finding out those Perfections which more obliged him to love her:
All these thoughts hindered not their Journey, for they reached Barcelona before
Sunset.

But as they entered into it, there was a Tumultuous Noise, and great Numbers of
People were gathering together; but upon enquiry into the Cause of it, answer
was made, it was a Quarrel between the Seamen, and some of the Inhabitants of
that City. Then riding up to the Seashore, they saw several Weapons drawn, and
Multitudes of People Hewing, and Hacking one another, and could distinctly
discern the Faces of some that fought; all this while Don Sebastian beholding
this Cruel Scuffle, observed amongst those that took part with the Seamen, a
Young Gallant that laid about him like a Tiger; the Briskness, and Valor of
this young Gentleman, together with the richness of his Cloths, caused all
those that beheld the Fight to fix their Eyes upon him, and in such steadfast
manner did Carola and Angelia behold him, that at one Instant both cried out,
Heavens bless me! Either I have no Eyes, or that is Don Manuel: Then with great
Nimbleness they alighted, and drawing their Swords, they cleared their way
through the Crowd, and placed themselves on each side of Don Manuel.

Fear nothing Don Manuel (cried Angelia) for you have one by your side, who
with the loss of his own Life will rescue yours: Who doubts it (replied Carola)
while I am here? Don Sebastian saw, and heard what had passed, but followed
close, resolving to take his share. Don Manuel being busy in defending
himself, took little notice of his two Seconds, but continued still eager in
Fighting, till at last he was forced to retreat, with his two Valiant Amazon^
on each side: The Fray it seems was not ended, but Stones, the Instruments of
Popularity, were thrown plentifully, whereof one very unluckily, with a well
directed force hit Don Manuel full on the Breast, and struck him backwards,
Angelia no sooner saw him fall, but presently caught him in her Arms, and
Carola did the like.

Don Sebastian was likewise defending himself from the Showers of Stones which
rained about his Ears, yet saw the Accident which happened to Don Manuel; and
desirous withal to approach to his Souls delight, a certain Catalonian Knight
of great Authority in the City, called to him, to keep along by his side, with
a Promise to save him from the Insolency of the Unruly Rout: Don Sebastian
returned the Knight hearty thanks for his friendly proffer, but besought him
that he might pass forwards; telling him he saw that in great danger, which he
valued more than his Life.

This stop was a great hinderance to Don Sebastian; for before he could reach
to 'em, the Longboat belonging to the Admirals Galley, had taken in Don
Manuel, and Angelia, who would never let him go out of her Arms: But as for
Carola, he arrived seasonably enough, she being either weary, or overcome with
Grief to see Don Manuel Wounded; or else, enraged with Jealousy, to see her
Rival gone along with him, had neither Power, nor Strength to get into the
Boat; and doubtless had fallen into a Fit, and dropped into the Water, had not
her Brother at that juncture of time appeared to her Relief; who (indeed)
himself felt no less Torment, than his Sister did Pain, to see that Angelia was
gone away with her Lover Don Manuel.

The Catalonian Knight being very much taken with the goodly Presence of Don
Sebastian, and his Brother, called them from the Sea Shore, (where Multitudes
were still thronging) and desired them to go with him, for he would Conduct
them safe from the Rabble; thus forced by necessity, and being afraid of the
People, not yet pacified, they willingly accepted of his friendly kindness:
Thereupon, the Knight alighting from his Horse, with his Sword in his Hand,
made way for 'em through the midst of that Tempestuous Crowd.

The Knight having thus preserved the two Brothers, brought them to his own
House, which was one of the chiefest in all the City. Then he inquired of Don
Sebastian in which of the Galleys he came; who replying, that he was newly come
into the City as the Hurly-Burly began, and espying in the Engagement, a
Gentleman, who was wounded on the Breast with a Stone, but could not by any
means come to his assistance: Moreover, (added he) this Gentleman is a Person
on whom depends all my Felicity in this World; and therefore, if I might obtain
that favor from a Person so obliging, I could wish he might be brought on
Shore: Thereupon, the Knight freely told him, that he would go himself, and see
him safe brought hither, which according to his Promise he performed: He found
Don Manuel in a Languishing Condition, and the Chyrurgeons dressing of his
Wounds, gave their Opinion it was very dangerous, being near the Heart; which
caused the Knight to be so urgent with the Admiral, that he gave him leave to
take Don Manuel along with him, which was done with all the Care imaginable.

Being Landed, the Knight brought Don Manuel, and Angelia to his House, making
them both welcome: At the same time Chyrurgeons were sent for, all confirming
the dangerous Condition wherein Don Manuel was. Angelia, and Carola heard it
with that Grief of Heart, as if they had heard the Sentence of their own
Deaths, but not willing to discover their Sorrow, they endeavored at that time
to suppress it. Angelia resolving with her self to lose no time, but to take
the first opportunity of speaking to Don Manuel, no sooner were the Chyrurgeons
gone, but she entered the Chamber were Don Manuel lay, where were present the
Knight, Don Sebastian, Carola, and others: She sat by the Bedside, and taking
him fast by the Hand, Sir, (said she) it is now no seasonable time, considering
your Condition, to utter many Words, and therefore I shall only entreat you to
lend your Ear to some few which are requisite; for it would prove ill in me,
who never disobliged you, to be at this time the Cause of your Disturbance.

At these Words, Don Manuel lifting up his Eyes, looked steadfastly on Angelia,
having recollected himself, and in a manner taken her into his Memory, more by
the Tone of her Voice, than by her Physiog^omy, with a feeble Voice, as one
that was full of Pain, Say on, Sir, (said he) what you please, for I am not yet
so near my end, but I can listen to your Story, nor is that Voice of yours so
harsh, and unpleasing, that it should give me the least Disquier.

Carola hearkened most attentively, and every Word that Angelia spoke, pierced
her to the Heart, and at the same time Wounded the Soul of Don Sebastian, who
also heard her, then proceeding, Sir, (said she) if some strange Misfortune had
not hurt your Memory; or rather, if some foul Blemish has not stained my
Virtue, you cannot but remember her, who not long since, you were pleased to
Honor with the Name of your Celestial Treasure; you would then remember who
Angelia was, and your Promise you gave her in Writing, Signed with your own
Hand; neither can you forget the Worth of her Parents, her Fidelity, and the
Obligations wherein you stand bound to her; for resigning up so easy a Victory
to your Vows, and Protestations. If your Memory does not at this time fail you,
(though thus Disguised) you may easily perceive I am your most Unfortunate
Angelia. No sooner had you taken your speedy Flight, but I began my sorrowful
Journey; despising the worst of Miseries that could happen to me, I was
resolved to wander up and down, leaving no place unsearch'd, till I had found
you out; for if ever you felt the Power of true Love, or heard of the Rage of a
Deceived Woman; you will not be Astonished, but rather Convert your Wonder into
Pity. And now let me beg of you, for the Love you bear to Heaven, your own
Honor, and for the sake of her, to whom you owe more than to all the World;
only to be true to Justice, let that be perfectly Consummated now in Public,
which you were so willing to Contract in Private; for no further Delays can be
allowed of, without the ruin of your Honor, and my eternal Shame. Here
Angelia stopped: Now they that were in the Room, expected when Don Manuel; would
give an Answer; who in a little while lifting up his Eyes, said to her,

Fair Angelia, I am not ignorant of any Obligations, wherein I stand engaged,
for those many Favors received from you; neither do I forget the Worth of your
Noble Parents, nor your own Unblemished Virtues; neither do I disesteem you for
seeking me out in a Disguise so subject to Censure: But I must proclaim a
truth, and if it prove unpleasant to your Ears, I am an unwelcome Herald. I
confess, Fair Angelia, I loved you well, for which you conferred on me a
Retribution: but yet the Writing which you are pleased to command, was given
you more in Complaisance to your Request, than any Act of my own Inclination,
for many days before I surrendered up my Heart with as pure a Flame as was
proportionable to the Beauty I so much admired. The Fair Carola, is the Object
whom I must Adore, and to whom I will perform those Vows, in the Face of
Heaven: Therefore, pray Madam, take it not for so high a Crime; for I left not
only you, but her, in the same Suspense. I do acknowledge I am guilty of the
Imprudent Proceedings of a rash Young Man, being void of Judgment, Meditation,
or Consideration: And as for the Writing, I look upon it to be indifferent;
this I thought fit to impart before my Death, that the Memory of this Truth may
not be Buried in Oblivion.

While Don Manuel, thus Discoursed with Angelia, his Arm was the Support on
which his Head rested; but having made an end of speaking, he was ready to
faint, and had not Don Sebastian ran immediately and caught him in his Arms,
he had fallen into a Swoon. Recovering his Spirits, he cast his Eyes on Don
Sebastian; then taking him by the Hand, he forced it to his Lips; mutually they
Embraced, and Kissed each other, using many Complements, whereby they renewed
their former Friendship: Then said Don Manuel, Sir, the great Joy I receive in
seeing you, renews my Sorrows, for you set before my Eyes my Ingratitude which
I am guilty of, but since it cannot be remedied, whatever Misery now befalls me,
i will receive it with pleasure, in exchange of this short Enjoyment of your
Friendship. Sir, replied Don Sebastian, I have been an Ear Witness of your kind
Expressions you were pleased to use, in acknowledging that Passion you have for
my Sister Carola; (then taking her by the Hand, who was all this while weeping)
and (Sir) to complete that Happiness the more, I here present her to your Hand,
who (I believe) at this time may effect upon your Wound an Excellent Cure: They
were both so transported with Joy, that their Cheeks were Bathed in Amorous
Tears.

All that were in the Room were silent, being surprised with admiration to
behold so strange an Accident: at the same time Angelia perceiving how things
went, and what would be the Product in the end; that her Hopes were quite
frustrated of ever obtaining Don Manuel, she stole out of the Company, and
being got out of the Room, instantly made into the Street, intending to have
wandered wherever Despair would lead her; scarce had she got out of Doors,
when Don Sebastian began to miss her, and as if he had lost his Soul, made
strict enquiry after her; but no Body could give him intelligence which way she
was gone: Like one almost distracted, he posted first to the Muliteers Inn; but
finding her not there, he ran like a Mad Man through the Streets, searching all
places as he went through; believing at length, she might design for the Sea
side, whither he hastened with all Speed: As he drew near, he heard a Voice
calling aloud for the Boat belonging to the Admirals Galley, who presently knew
it to be Angelia; he flew to her as swift as an Eagle to his Prey: Angelia
stood at first upon her Guard with her Sword in her Hand, but perceiving it to
be Don Sebastian, she was grieved at the Heart he should find her, especially
in a place so remote from Company: She discerned that Don Sebastian had a real
Passion for her, and could have wished that Don Manuel had loved her but half
so well: Don Sebastian was glad he had so fortunately Retrieved her, and more
pleased at the Opportunity of the Place, where he applied himself to her, in
these Words.

Since Fortune has proved thus kind to me, fair Angelia, should I now want
power to discover the Secrets of my Soul, there would lie concealed in this
Bosom, the most Cordial Affection, that was ever harbored in a Lover's Breast:
Don Manuel, has the Advantage of me only in this, that he is the first that
had the Possession of your Heart; but since his Heart was not in his Power to
give, nor your Happiness to receive, may the Gods inspire you with that Love,
that in Exchange for his you may take mine. My Extraction is not Ignoble, nor
my Fortune much Inferior, to Don Manuel; but what Heaven's Bounty (Madam) has
opened her Hand to give, I will humbly prostrate at your Feet, to take:
Angelia, continued silent, all the while; letting fall some Tears, and fetching
some few Sighs; then taking her by the Hand, he kissed it very often; still
kissing of it between whiles. Madam, (said he) remove this pain which I endure;
and speak that happy Word, that Angelia is Sebastian's? Let me beg of you to
entertain so importunate a Passion, that nothing but a suitable return, can be
Satisfactory: pronounce, (Madam) that happy Sentence, and then may Torments
equal to your Hate (if such could be found out) fall on me, if ever Passion was
so pure as mine, or shall prove so constant.

Angelia, so soon as she had dried those Tears which had bedewed her Cheeks,
she said, Sir, I look upon you as a Gentleman, far above what I can pretend or
lay claim to, but more than ever I can merit; yet if you think me worthy of
your Marriage Bed, and what you utter with your Tongue, proceeds from a real
Affection, I shall (said she with a little redness) surrender up my self, and
consent if Heaven has so decreed it; but if what you said should prove untrue;
it will the more increase my Torment. Ah, Madam! (said Don Sebastian) may the
brightest Luminary ever cease to display his Beams upon me, if ever Sebastian
proves false unto Angelia. Then give me Sir, (said she) that Hand of yours, and
in Exchange take mine, and let those Clouds, these Sands, and Seas, with the
still silence of this place (only interrupted by my Sighs, and your Entreaties)
be Witnesses of this Engagement. Having said this, she permitted Don Sebastian,
to embrace her, and by Exchange of Hands, they solemnized their private
Nuptials with the shedding of a few Tears, rejoicing at the flight of their
past sorrow.

This Ceremony being ended, they presently returned to the Knight's House,
where at the Entrance, they heard a noise of Music, with great Expressions of
Joy, not dreaming so sudden a performing of the Nuptials of Don Manuel, and
Carola; which afterward they were fully informed of, with the Reasons of so
quick a dispatch. At their return they were received with great Joy, by the
Catalonian Knight, Don Manuel, Carola, and the rest: Don Sebastian having
informed them what passages had happened between him and Angelia, they were
infinitely well pleased, embracing each other, the Priest being in the House
gave order to have Angelia's Habit changed, which being done, he joined their
Hands, as he had done Don Manuel's and Carola's, pronouncing them Husband and
Wife, which gave Satisfaction to all that were present. After that the Knight
desired their Companies in a Room, which he kept for public Entertainment of
Friends; where was a Table furnished with all Varieties, ^hey all seating
themselves, feasting very ^lentifully, and closing with the Bride and
Bridegrooms Health they departed the ^oom.

Now all their Care and Diligence was about Don Manuel's recovery of his Wound;
^ut the Chyrurgeons so applied their ut^ost Skill that in Fourteen days he was
per^ectly cured, and able to perform his Jour^ey; the day of departure being
come they ^ll took leave of that Liberal Knight, who ^ad heaped on them so many
Favors, and ^iven them such noble Entertainment; his Name was Don Martin de
Coligni, most Noble in his Blood, and as Famous in his ^erson; thus making a
thankful Acknow^edgment, Don Sebastian presented him with a Rich Diamond Ring,
which he im^ortuned him to take, as a small remem^rance: Then they proceeded
upon their ^ourney, where in a few days from the top ^f a high Hill, they could
discern their re^pective Houses.

They discovered likewise from the same ^art of the Hill, a large and spacious
Val^ey, and under the shade of an Olive Tree* (...) tall lusty Gentleman, upon
a strong limbed Horse, with a white Shield on his left Arm, and a very strong
well pointed Lance in his right Hand; while they were observing him with a
fixed Eye, they perceived two more among the Trees, well mounted, with the same
Arms the other had: soon after, they all three met together, and having
consulted a while, two of 'em went a part some few Paces, then putting Spurs to
their Horses they encountered very furiously, and with such dexterity, as
clearly proved they were Masters in that Exercise; the third Man stood as a
Spectator, without moving from his place: Don Sebastian being very impatient to
see so well a maintained Combat, and himself at so far a distance, he running
withal that speed he could make, down the Hill (leaving Carola, Angelia, and
Don Manuel to follow after) drew near the Combatants; just as they were both
slightly wounded, one of their Helmets being fallen off, in the turning of his
Face, Don Sebastian knew it was his Father, and immediately flung himself among
the Combatants, desiring to be informed of the Cause of this Engagement; by
this time, Don Manuel, Carola, and Angelia, were come to 'em; Don Manuel,
presently knew the other to be his Father: Angelia also having earnestly eyed
the Person who did not engage, knew him to be her Parent, with which sight all
four were strangely surpised. But this their sudden Passion not admitting the
formalities of Discourse, they all fell down, and cried, stay your Hands, for
we who beg this of you are your own Flesh and Blood; then said Don Manuel, my
Honored Father, I am he, for whom I Imagine these your Venerable Gray Hairs
are in dispute; let me beseech you to lay aside your Anger, and those Weapons,
or Exercise them upon me, who indeed deserves to be the Object of your fury;
then perceiving that Don Frederick, Angelia's Father, was alighted, and
embracing of her, she gave him a Relation of what had passed in all their
Travels, and desired him to give his two Friends an account; which he presently
did; and the other two immediately alighted, most lovingly embracing them, but
not without the mixture of some Tears which sprang from the Fountains of Love
and Joy.

Not long after, there appeared in the same Valley, several Gentlemen,
completely armed, which were to be Seconds to these Noble Persons; but as they
drew near, perceived they were embracing one another, but could not tell what
to think of it, while Don Frederick went and informed them who they were, and
what his Daughter Angelia had told him: then they immediately alighted, and
paid them that respect which was due to their Quality. In the Conclusion, Don
Manuel's Father proposed to have both the Weddings re-solemnized at his own
House, which being agreed upon, they departed home; as they went along, Don
Sebastian, and Don Manuel, enquired into the Cause of this Combat, and found,
that Carola, and Angelia's Fathers, had Challenged Don Manuel's suspecting him
to Conceal his Sons Designs.

The next day after their return home, their Nuptials were Solemnized, with
great Splendor, who lived many Years happy together, and left behind them a
Noble Stock to Posterity: The Place in Andaluzia I shall forbear to name,
because I desire to keep up the Reputation of those two Ladies, whom
peradventure, some Tongues, either Malicious, or Foolish, might be Censorious,
and tax of lightness in their Desires: But I shall entreat them not to blame
the like Liberties, and Exercises, till they look back into themselves, and
seriously call to account, whether they were never smitten with Cupidinian
Fires, or felt the force of Love, which in Effect is unresistable.

As for the Mule-Driver, he never met with such Entertainment in his Life, he
lived bravely all the time of the Weddings, and at last Don Sebastian, and Don
Manuel, sent him away so well Contented, what with his Liberal Pay, and many
Gifts bestowed upon him, you may be sure he took care to avoid the Wood where
Angelia was Robbed; and when he got Home, his Wife never made him so Welcome in
all his Life; besides the many Flaggons of Wine his Neighbors bestowed on him
for relating the Story of his Travels.

THE Mistakes: A NOVEL.
TWo Young Gentlemen, Fellow Students in Spain, were resolved to leave their
Studies, and go for Flanders; led thither by the heat of their Youthful Blood,
the desire they had to see the World, and to learn the Exercise of Arms: To
this purpose they arrived there (but in a time of Peace and Quietness, contrary
to their Expectation, or else Articles of a Treaty suddenly to be Ratified)
Coming to Antwerp they received Letters from their Fathers, which testified to
'em their Displeasure, for leaving their Studies without their Assent; and the
not acquainting them with their intended Journey, whereby they might have
appeared in an Equipage suitable to their Birth, and Quality.

Don Bernardo, and Francisco, these two young Gentlemen, perceiving that what
they had acted displeased their Parents, designed to return back to Spain,
since they saw there was nothing of Action in Flanders; yet before they
returned, they would satisfy their Curiosity in seeing all the most Famous
Cities of Italy: Having viewed them all, with Delight, and Admiration, they
settled themselves in Bologna; where highly applauding the Methods of Study in
that Famous University, and earnestly desiring, that there they might
accomplish their Education, they immediately Posted away Letters to their
Friends, informing them of the great Advantage they could reap by their
Studies, in that so much Famed University: Upon the Receipt of their Letters,
their Friends were extraordinary glad, that they were so careful of their
Learning, and sent them several Bills of Exchange, to receive Sums of Money,
whereby they might furnish themselves with those Necessaries Equivalent to
their Birth and Quality.

Don Francisco was about Twenty Six Years of Age, and Don Bernardo two Years
younger; they visited the Schools often, and had attained to that great Skill
in Music, and Poetry, with other extraordinary Endowments, that they were
Admired, and Applauded by the whole University. They showed themselves to all
very Courteous, and Liberal, and were far from that Pride, and Arrogance
Spaniards are generally taxed withal.

But young Blood running in their Veins, and being full of Jollity, they were
desirous of taking a Prospect of the Chief Beauties belonging to that City; and
though there were many Gallant Ladies, Married, and Single, that were Extolled
for Beauty, and Virtue; yet above all, the Lady Evadne was Fame's Jewel, and of
a Noble Extraction.

Evadne, extremely Fair, and Beautiful, Adorned with all the Excellencies
Nature could design; that to do her Justice, she was indeed Nature's
Masterpiece; her Parents both dying, she was left under the Guardianship of
Marcellus her Brother, an Honorable, and Valiant Gentleman: They left behind
them great Riches, which makes Orphanship the more pleasant, and easy. Her
Retiredness was so strict, that she would not admit of any Visitants; and her
Brother's Care was so great, and tender of her, that he permitted her to do
what she pleased, without contradicting of her.

But the Fame, and Report of her Transcendent Charms raised an Ambition in Don
Francisco, and Don Bernardo to view her; but all the Stratagems they could
think of was in vain, for they could not once obtain the Sight of her. Seeing
their Hopes frustrated, their Desires by degrees were wholly extinguished; and
now wholly applying themselves to Study, and the Diversion of some Innocent
Recreations, they led a Facetious Life together, seldom rambling abroad in the
Night, or when they did, they always went well Armed.

It happened, not long after, they had made an Agreement to walk abroad one
Evening; but a Vagary came into Don Bernardo's Head, that he framed some Excuse
to stay a while behind, but desired Don Francisco to go on before, and he would
presently follow after. I am not in such Post have (replied Don Francisco) but
I can stay for you; or, if neither of us goes out this Night, the Matter's not
great. After a few Entreaties, Don Bernardo persuaded him to go first, and he
assured him he would follow him: Don Francisco told him, he thought it was some
Maggot, and bid him use his own Pleasure; but if he did follow him, he should
find him in the same Walk, they generally used.

The Night was somewhat Dark, and the Hour Eleven; Don Francisco having walked
through two or three Streets, and finding none to Converse withal, resolved at
last to return home; but passing through a Street, which had a Portico built on
Pillars of Marble, he heard some Body Whist with a soft and low Voice; the
Night being dark, he could not imagine from whence it came; but Halting a
little, and attentively listening, he perceived a Door open half way, drawing
near to it, he heard a low, small Voice speak, Who Is there, Giacomo? Yes, said
Don Francisco: Then take this (replied they within) and be careful to have it
safely kept, and return again hither immediately: Don Francisco putting forth
his Hand felt something ponderous, but could not guess what it was; and
thinking to take it with one Hand, he found there was occasion to use both: No
sooner had he received it, but the Door was shut; then marching off, he found
himself in the Street with his unknown Treasure; but by that time he had gone
some few Paces, he heard a Child cry, which it seems was newly born: What to do
in this Strange Case he was ignorant, being full of Amazement: To return back
to the House, he considered with himself, might prove dangerous to the Infant
and himself; he having assumed the Person of him to whom it was intended; and
to leave it in the Street, he looked upon it as Inhumanity; but remembering the
Charge he had received, to be Careful, and have it safely kept, and to return
immediately, He resolved to carry it to his own House, and leave it in the
Custody of an Elderly Woman, which was his Housekeeper, whose Name was Dorila,
and then return back, to see what further occasion there was of his Service, or
what more Mistakes there might be committed.

At length he brought it Home to his House, (Don Bernardo being gone to find
him) and entering into a Room next at hand, called Dorila to him, and bid her
Unswath the Infant. When she had opened it, they both viewed it, and found it
to be a Male Child, very Fair, and Beautiful; the Ornaments about it declared
it was of no mean Parentage, or ordinary Extraction. Then Don Francisco desired
her to procure a Nurse for it, but first to take of those rich Mantles, and to
put on meaner: And for the better Concealing my bringing it hither, you shall
Convey it to a Midwife, who is seldom unprovided of necessary Expedients upon
such Occasions; and for her Gratification, take Money with you to defray the
Charge; you may nominate what Parents you shall think fit, and give it what
Name the Midwife and you shall agree upon: All this Dorila promised should be
faithfully performed according to his Order.

The Business being thus contrived, Don Francisco with all speed hastened back
to the place, to hear whether they would Whist any more to him. But instead of
that, a little before he came to the House where the Whisting came from, he
heard a great Clashing of Swords, as if several had been Fighting: He listened a
while but could hear no Words spoke, but by the Sparks which flew from their
Weapons, he perceived by the Glimpse, that one was set upon by a great many;
and had a Confirmation of it, by hearing one say, False Traitors, though you
are many against one, yet shall not your Advantageous Number gain you the
Victory.

Don Francisco at these Words, transported by his eager Courage, at two Leaps
made to the side of the Gentleman assaulted, and drew out his Sword with so
much Gallantry, saying, Sir, fear nothing, for such Aid is come to your Relief,
as will not fail you, till his Sword or Life fail: And therefore, fortify your
Strength and Resolution; for Traitors, though numerous, are not always
successful. Immediately one of the Adverse Party replied, Villain thou Lie,
here is no Traitors: But where there is Justice in a Cause, there is always hopes
of Victory.

They had not time to use more Expressions, for the have they were in to
Conquer each other, would not admit of a Parley; the unequal Party pressed very
hard upon Don Francisco, and his Companion, that at two Thrusts they laid the
Stranger on the Ground: Don Francisco believing he had received his Mortal
Wound, reassumed to himself that Courage, seconding his Blows so powerfully,
and with such nimbleness, that they were forced to retreat.

But all his Magnanimity had not been able to have defended him against so
Potent an Enemy, had not Dame Fortune stepped in to his Protection; for the
Inhabitants by this time were alarmed, and opened their Windows; others came
forth with Lights, and to cry out for help, which the greatest Party
perceiving, forsook the place, and made their Escape.

By this time the Stranger that was fallen, had recovered himself, for those
Thrusts he received, lighted on some private Armor he had on, which was as
hard, as the very Adamant. Don Francisco in this Skirmish having lost his Hat,
by chance took up another, which he put on, without looking whether it was his
own.

The Gentleman rising up, said (to Don Francisco) Sir, that I am indebted to
you for my Life, is not a greater truth, then that, I shall never scruple to
lose it in your Service; and what Fortune has been pleased to bestow on me, I
shall be very ready to lay at your Feet; but lest my Ignorance might (when
occasion serves) render me incapable of paying you that Debt, I shall beg to be
acquainted with your Name, that by my future Gratitude I may express my
thankfulness.

Sir, (replied Don Francisco) the Service I have paid you, is so much the Duty
of one Gentleman to another, that it merits not an acknowledgment; but to
comply with your Desires, I shall give you that satisfaction which is agreeable
to your Demands. I am a Gentleman, a Spaniard, and a Student in this
University, and if my Name can render you any Service, I am called Don
Francisco de Bazola.

You have highly honored me (replied the Stranger) in every respect, but I
dare not discover my Name to you, but am willing you should be informed from
another, rather than my self; and I will take that care, you shall not remain
long a Stranger to it. By this time they perceived eight Persons, making
toward 'em; Don Francisco thinking them to be Enemies, desired the Stranger to
be in a readiness to receive 'em, and he would not be wanting in his Duty to
assist him: though their number be so unequal, I believe, Sir, (replied the
Stranger) they are not Enemies, but Friends; the Words were no sooner spoke,
but they surrounded him, Whispering some few Words to him, but so low, as Don
Francisco could not hear 'em.

Upon this, the Stranger turning aside from 'em to Don Francisco, he embraced
him, saying, Sir, these Gentlemen are my Friends, and have promised me their
assistance, else I should have created you farther trouble, by conducting me to
some place of Safety; but since Fortune has offered this means for my
Preservation, I will resign my self up to their Protection. Having lost his Hat
(as he pretended) he desired his Friends to get him another; scarce had he
spoke the Word, when Don Francisco offered him the Hat which he had; the
Stranger no sooner viewed it, but returned it to him again, saying, Sir, this
is not mine, but I beseech you except of it, and wear it as a Trophy of this
days Victory: Moreover, (he added) I am sorry that Time Summons me away, which
hinders me the paying you that further respect that is due to your Merits.
Using some short Complements, the Stranger took his leave of Don Francisco; who
was in a great Surmize, who this Person should be; but by the richness of the
Hatband of Diamonds, which was on the Hat the Stranger gave him; he concluded,
he must be some great person of Quality.

Don Francisco as he was returning home, met Don Bernardo his Companion, who
told him he thought he had been lost; and withal desired him to turn back, and
walk with him some few Paces, and he would give him a Relation of what had
happened to him in his Absence: Don Francisco, willing to hear his Story,
returned back with Don Bernardo, who gave him this following Account.

A little more than an hour after you were gone, I went in order to find you
out, and before I could reach thirty Paces, saw a Person coming in great have,
as it were to meet me, and approaching nearer to me, (...) perceived it was a
Woman, in a long Habit, who with a Voice, interrupted with Sighs, and Tears,
said, Sir, are you a Stranger, or one of this City? Madam, (I ^eply'd) I am a
Stranger, and a Spaniard at ^our Devotion, and am ready to assist any Lady in
Distress: I see Amazement, Madam, in your Face, 'Pray are you Wounded, or have
you received any prejudice whereby your Life is in danger? Sir, (said she) the
Injury I have received, may prove my Death, without some speedy Remedy:
Therefore, I beseech you, by that Civility which is never wanting in any
Gentleman of your Nation, to Conduct me safe to your Lodging with the greatest
speed imaginable; there I will inform you of my Person, and the occasion of
giving you, Sir, this trouble.

Seeing my assistance was desired with speed, without any reply, I led her
through private ways to my Lodging; Roderigo my Page was ready, who when he had
opened the Door, I ordered him to withdraw, and without his seeing her,
conveyed her to my Chamber: She was no sooner entered, but she threw her self on
the Bed, and fell into a Swoon; upon which, I uncovered her Face, which was
shaded with a Vail, and discovered the greatest Beauty that ever Mortal Eyes
beheld; her Age, I Conjectured, might be about Seventeen: I stood a while in
admiration at such a rare Angelical Form, and Shape, but recovering of her
self, she put me out of that deep Ecstasie I was in, but she continued sighing,
and lamenting her Condition; lifting up her Eyes she looked earnestly upon me,
and said, Do you know me, Sir? No, Madam, (I replied) I never was so happy to
be acquainted with so much Beauty.

O unhappy is that Beauty (said she) which Heaven bestows on many for their
great Misfortune! But this, Gentle Sir, is no time to commend Beauty, but to
remedy the Events of Future Mischiefs: Therefore I beseech you, by your Worth,
and Nobleness, to leave me here locked up from all Humane Eyes, and presently
return to that place, where I received from you that kind assistance: If there
be any Persons engaged with one another, I entreat you, Sir, side not with any
Party, but rather seek to reconcile their difference; for whatsoever Blood is
spilt on either side, will be a new supply to my former Miseries. Having done
speaking, I assured her those Commands she had laid upon me, should be obeyed,
and punctually observed; so having left her to her self, I am now going to
finish my Promise.

The Accident is very strange, (replied Don Francisco) and if you have done, I
will give you an Account of my Adventures. So relating to him the whole Story
of what had happened to him, but particularly of the Quarrel he engaged himself
in, in rescuing a Gentleman who was defending himself against a very unequal
number; which he believed might be that Engagement he was going to inform
himself of, and which the Lady would receive satisfaction from: Moreover, he
told Don Bernardo, all things were now silent; and did believe that those
Persons who were engaged, were Persons of great Quality. They both admired at
each others Fortune, resolving now to hasten homewards to look after their
Charge, and give their Attendance to the Lady.

As they were walking home, Don Bernardo acquainted Don Francisco of the
Obligation the Lady had laid on him, and of his Promise he made to her for
performance of it; which was, That none should be admitted into the Chamber,
but himself. Don Francisco replied, I will devise some Stratagem or other to
behold this Beauty you have so highly commended. In discoursing, Don Bernardo
cast his Eyes on the Hatband Don Francisco had, which did sparkle, and shine
with great luster; so taking it from his Head, they both found it to be
exceeding rich, and of great Value: This Hat (replied Don Francisco) was
presented to me by the Person whom I assisted, telling me, I should accept of
it, because it was well known; and keep it as a remembrance of that Days
Victory.

Being arrived at home, Don Bernardo opened his Chamber Door, and finding the
Lady leaning her Cheek on her Hand, which she had bathed with her tender Tears,
Don Francisco having an earnest desire to see her, put his Head half way in; at
which instant, the sparkling of the Diamond Hatband shined in those Eyes which
were full of Tears. Come in my Lord Duke (said she) come in, Why will you
distribute to me with so sparing a Hand, the richness of your Presence.

Madam, (replied Don Bernardo) your Ladyship's mistaken, here is no Duke to
excuse himself; for not waiting on you. How, Sir, (said she) no Duke! Then have
my Eyes deceived me; for that Person that looked into the Room must needs be
him, whom the richness of his Hat cannot conceal. Indeed Madam, I can assure
you, (replied Don Bernardo) the Hat which you saw, no Duke wears it; and if you
are willing to be fully satisfied, by giving him admittance into your Presence,
the Person (Madam) shall attend you: Sir, if it will not be too great a trouble
to you, (said she) to request that favor of him, I shall be more at ease; yet
if my hopes are frustrated, and he prove not to be the Duke, it will make an
Addition to my Affliction; Don Francisco heard what was said, and having leave
granted for his Admittance, he made his Entry into the Chamber, and having paid
those Respects due to her Person and Quality, she was soon convinced that he
was not the Duke: then Blushing at the Mistake, with a discomposed Voice said
to him,

Unhappy, and Miserable that I am! Inform me, Sir, I beseech you, without
holding me in Suspense, whether you know the Person that did own this Hat?
Where you left him? And whether happily alive? or is it the unwelcome Messenger
of his Death? Then Weeping (she said) And is it possible for me to behold those
sparkling Diamonds here, and to behold my self thus clouded without thee,
immured up in a Chamber under the Power of Strangers? Dear Madam, said Don
Francisco, torment not your self, the Owner of this Hat is not dead, neither
are you in such hands, that you will receive the least prejudice by; for our
Lives and Fortunes are ready to protect you when ever any occasion shall
require our Service; and be assured Madam, that all the Respect shall be paid
to you, which is due to your Birth, and Quality. Then she desired him to give
her an Account of what Passages happened in the Enterprise, for (said she) that
Hat belongs to Cosmo de Medicis, Duke of Millain.

Don Francisco, not willing to hold her longer in Suspense, recounted to her
the whole Relation. Madam, (said he) the Person who presented this Hat to me, I
suppose is the Duke of Millain, I left him in very good health, and in the
Company of some Friends that came to his assistance. This (Madam) that I have
related to you is a certain Truth. Evadne returned him many Thanks, and told
him her Mind was much eased for the present.

By this time Dorila had dressed the Child, and going to carry it out, as she
passed by the Lady's Chamber, the Child cried so strongly, that it gave an
Alarm to the Lady, who enquiring of both the Gentlemen, desired to know what
Child that was, which to her thi^king, was newly Born: Madam (replied Don
Francisco) it is a Present was said at our Doors this Night, and Dorila our
Woman is going to get a Nurse for it. (...) Pray, Sir, let her bring it to me
(said the Lady) and i will exercise that Charitable Act for others, since Fortune
is not so kind to permit me to do it for my own. Then Don Francisco called
Dorila, to bring the Child, which he presented to the Lady, saying, (Madam) you
may behold the Gift which this Night has produced, and it is no surprise to us,
for we often meet with such Accidents. The Lady Evadne having the Child in her
Arms, looked as earnestly on the Face, as she did on the meanness of the Cloths
it had on, and could not refrain from weeping; so covering her Breast, that she
might with more Modesty give the Infant Suck, she applied it to her Nipple, and
laid her Face to the Child's, bathing it with her Tears.

The Lady considering the Child received little or no Sustenance, she returned
it to Don Francisco, saying, In vain have I exercised my Charity, I find I am
not experienced in these Cases: Then she desired him to give order, that the
Child might not be carried out into the Air at that time of Night, but be kept
till the next day, and before it went she desired it might be brought to her,
for she took great delight in viewing it.

Don Francisco returning the Child to Dorila, gave her order to take care of it
till the next day, and then dress it up as handsomely as she could in those Rich
Mantles it was brought in, but not bring it till he called for it: Then
returning to the Lady's Chamber, where there was only Don Bernardo, with the
Lady Evadne, who through grief being ready to faint, desired something to eat
whereby she might support her Spirits, that she might be able to utter her
intended Relation. Then Don Bernardo went immediately to his Closet, and
fetched thence some Conserves, and Sweetmeats, wherewith she being refreshed,
she began her Account in these Words:

I am one of this City, (whom I doubt not but you have heard very often
nominated) the Unfortunate Evadne Barbarino; and by those which used to flatter
me, was famed for Beauty; but such as it is, (Gentlemen) you may perceive that
those which did applaud it, wanted Skill: Being a young Orphan, I was left
under the Guardianship of Marcellus my Brother, who was indeed very Vigilant
over me: Thus being confined to Solitude, only accompanied by my Woman, which
Waited on me, growing up in Years and Stature, Fame's Trumpet blew aloud, by
the Breath of those Persons who had privately visited me, and by a Picture
which my Brother's Curiosity would have done by a Famous Painter of Italy. But
all this would have been the least part of hastening my Misfortunes, had not
the Duke of Millain done a Kinswoman of mine the honor to give her in
Marriage. My Brother, to add more Guests to it, desired my Company; there it
was the Duke beheld me, and wronged his Judgment, in making me the Object of
his Love; who now has brought me to endless Misery.

Gentlemen, I will not relate to you, the Devices, Plots, and Means, how the
Duke at the end of two Years came to obtain his Desires, which had their Birth
at this Wedding: For neither Guardings, Watchings, Brotherly Admonitions, nor
any other Humane Industry, were sufficient to hinder our private Assignations;
but before I would surrender up my self into his close Embraces, he gave his
faithful Promise upon his Honor, to Marry me: I begged of him very often to
inform my Brother of his Intentions; but to what I desired, he pleaded those
Excuses, which he entreated me to approve of, to be requisite, and necessary:
In Obedience to his Commands, I did, as many other Lovers do, believe the best;
within a few days I found an Alteration in my Self, and not willing to discover
my Condition, I feigned my self Sick, and Melancholy, desiring my Brother to
remove me to that Kinswoman's House, where was the beginning of my Affliction.

There did I ease my Mind, and make known the present danger which seemed to
threaten me; for small Felicity did I take, when Jealousies and Fears were
always tormenting me, thinking that my Brother had suspected my Imprudence. But
it being fully agreed upon between the Duke and my self, that when I was in my
last Month, I should give him notice of it; and that he with some other Friends
would make Provision for me to go to Millain, where those Matrimonial Rites
should be solemnized.

This was the Night that was concluded on for his coming, and this very Night
waiting and expecting of him, I heard my Brother pass by, with many other
Persons, which seemed to be ready to engage, by the noise of their Armor; this
sudden Fear, made Passion so prevalent, that instantly I was delivered of a
Son, and this waiting Woman of mine, who was the Duke's Sollicitress, and privy
to all my Actions; she seeing this sudden Alteration, wrapped the Child in other
Clothes than this Infant has on, which was laid at your Lodging, and going to
the Street Door, she gave it (as she informed me) to a Servant of the Duke's.
In a little while after, accommodating my self the best I could, answerable to
my present Necessity, I left the House, thinking the Duke had been near at
hand, which indeed I did contrary to his Orders; but the fear of my Brother's
severity hindered room for better Consideration, and foolishly forced me forth,
where I met with this Charitable Reception at your Hands.

Having ended her Discourse, her Head fell from her arm whereon it rested; the
Gentlemen ran immediately to see whether a Fainting Fit had not seized her; but
perceiving she wept bitterly, Don Francisco applied himself to her in these
Words: Madam, if my Self and Companion, when Ignorant of your Birth and
Quality, have had that Commiseration of you as a Lady in Distress, we are now
ready (Madam) being fully informed of your great Worth, to pay those double
Obligations and Respects which are due to your Merits, and you may command
(Madam) what ever Spanish Civility can lay claim to: Though you never were
under the like Misfortune before; yet I beseech you, Madam, by your Nobleness,
show Patience an Example: Believe me (Madam) I am of that prophetic Spirit,
that such strange beginnings will terminate in a happy Conclusion: for the Gods
will never permit that so much Beauty should be Oppressed, and such Virtuous
Thoughts so ill rewarded: The best advice, (Madam) I now can Dictate to you, is
to take your rest, and preserve your Spirits; Dorila our Servant shall attend
you, whom you may place Confidence in, and knows as well how to silence your
Misfortunes, as she does how to pay her Respects and Services; and will
endeavor to wade through all difficulties to oblige you.

Sir since you will oblige me so far (said Evadne) let me see her; for being
proffered to me by so good a hand as yours, I shall think her very necessary in
this present Occasion, but I desire that none else may be Eyewitnesses of my
Misfortunes. None Madam (replied Don Francisco,) shall dare to approach you or
invade your privacy, without your Knowledge: so leaving her alone, they went
out, and Don Francisco called to Dorila, and ordered her to carry in the Child
dressed up in its Rich Mantles; which she had done in the same manner he
brought it home: Then Dorila went in with the Child, being informed before what
she should answer to such questions as the Lady should ask her.

So soon as the Lady Evadne saw her, she bid her welcome, and said to her,
prithee Dorila, give me that pretty Creature, and bring hither the light.
Evadne taking the Child in her Arms, she seemed to be much concerned and looked
very earnestly upon it, saying, Dorila, tell me truly, Is not this the same
Child you brought some few hours since? Yes, Madam, (she replied.) How comes
this sudden Alteration in the Mantles, (said Evadne?) Either these are other
Garments, or else, this is not the same Infant? then she fell a weeping,
saying, tell me, I conjure thee, dear Dorila, by all which thou love best,
and all that is nearest and dearest to thee, tell me, I say, where thou had
this Babe and Mantles, for I am the unfortunate owner of 'em, if sense of Sight
and Memory does not fail me; for in this Garb, I delivered to my Maid, the most
beloved of my Soul.

Don Francisco and Don Bernardo, hearing her in this Passion, were not willing
she should be held any longer in Pain or Suspense, resolved to remove the
Doubts and Scruples which at that time had got Possession of her: Then Don
Francisco said to her, these Mantles and this Child (Madam Evadne) are both
yours; then he related to her by Degrees, that he was the Person whom the Maid
delivered the Child to, how he brought it home, and ordered Dorila to change
the Mantles, that the Child should not be known: However, after her Ladyship
had acquainted him with her Delivery, he was certainly assured it must be her
Son, and he had informed her sooner, had he found out an opportunity; but now
seeing her sudden Passion, proceeding from misdoubt, it might be recompensed
with the supervening Joy of knowing her own. Infinite were the Tears of Joy
shed by Evadne, endless were the Kisses she gave her Son, and many the thanks
which she rendered to Don Francisco and Don Bernardo, calling them her Guardian
Angels, with many other Titles, in Expression of her Thankfulness.

Thus leaving her with Dorila, to whose Care they recommended the Lady, with a
strict Charge to let nothing be wanting that was necessary for a Person in her
State and Condition; having so done, that little remnant of Night which was
left, they had Occasion to use it for rest; the next Morning they enquired
after Evadne, how she had slept that Night, Dorila told 'em pretty well, and
that she was not yet awake; whereupon, they went to visit the Schools, and
passed through that Street where the Duke was set upon, and by the House, which
the Lady Evadne came from, to harken out, if any Discourse were concerning
Evadne, or the Duke; but all was hushed up and silent, perceiving no notice to
be taken of either.

Having heard their Lectures they returned home. Evadne hearing of them come,
sent Dorila immediately to desire their Company. Don Francisco, and his
Companion told Dorila, they were ready to attend her Pleasure. So entering her
Chamber, having complemented Evadne, they told her they had waited upon her
sooner, but they were not willing to be so presumptious as to press into her
presence without Order: She desired them with Tears and Entreaties, not to use
those Ceremonies now to her, but to lay them by for a more fit opportunity. For
she having the Happiness to see none but themselves, and Dorila, she looked
upon Freedom to be the only Felicity could here be enjoyed; then she enquired
of them whether they heard any reports concerning her escape: they informed her
they had made enquiry with all the Curiosity they could devise, but not a word
was to be heard concerning it.

Whilst they were Discoursing, one of the Pages came to the Chamber Door, and
told Dorila there was a Gentleman below, attended by two Servants, whose name
is Marcellus Barbarino, and desires earnestly to speak with Don Francisco de
Bazola: Upon the hearing of this Message, Evadne, with a low Voice, uttered
these Words; My Brother! (Gentlemen) my Brother! it is he! Doubtless, he has
had Intelligence of my being here, and is come with an intent to deprive me of
my Life; therefore, I beseech you Noble Spaniards, succor and protect a poor
Distressed Woman, and suffer her not to be murdered in your presence.

Don Bernardo entreated her to have Patience, and told her she needed not fear
any danger would happen to her, so long as he had a Life to lose in her
Defense, then ^e desired Don Francisco to walk down, and hear what the Lady's
Brother had to ^ay; which accordingly he did: then Don Bernardo called for his
brace of Pistols (which were ready charged) and laid them on the Table,
commanding his Men to be ready with their Swords if there should be Occasion:
Dorila seeing these Preparations, shaked like an Aspen-Leaf, and the Lady
Evadne, fearful of some ill success, trembled much more; but Don Bernardo being
of a cheerful Courage, comforted her up, with great Expressions of his Fidelity
toward her.

In the mean time, Don Francisco, found Don Marcellus at the Door, who after
having complemented one another, Marcellus said, Sir, I beseech you, (for this
is the Custom of Italy,) to honor me with your Company to that Church over
against us, for I have a Secret to impart to you, which my Life and honor
depends upon; Sir, I am very ready to wait on you (replied Don Francisco:) so
walking over to the Church, they chose out at a place where none could hear
'em, and Marcellus began his Relation in these Words:

Noble Spaniard, my Name is Marcellus Barbarino, so well known to others, that
I need not sound a Trumpet in my own Praise; I have for some years since
continued an Orphan, and had left to my Care one only Sister, to whom for
Beauty Nature has been so Bountiful, that it is beyond the power of Art to
delineate it; to deal ingeniously with you, there is not a Beauty, take it all
together, that can equalize it; her youthful and tender years, made me careful
in the keeping so rich a Jewel, but the imprudent will of my Sister Evadne (for
that is her Name) has defrauded all my Preventions.

The Duke of Millain, with Lynx's Eyes overcame those of Argos; outwatch'd my
Vigilance, and overpowr'd my Industry; for he not only enticed my Sister,
taking her out of a Kinswoman's House by Night, but is (as it is reported) newly
delivered of a Child by him; it was late ere I had notice of it, and this very
Night I went in search of him and found him out, but in the Battle some Angel
stepped in to Assist him, and would not permit me to fetch out the stain of my
Honor with his Blood. My Kinswoman informed me, that the Duke had deluded her
under the promise of Marriage, and Allurements of the Sweet Name of Husband:
Thus being bereaved of a Sister, and my Honor, I have until how locked up my
Bosom, and was not willing to declare my mind, till I could find but a speedy
Remedy.

My Resolution is now to go to Millain, and require of the Duke full
Satisfaction, ^ither by Marrying my Sister, or dispute ^t with his Sword. In
which Journey and Enterprise, (Noble Sir) I would desire ^our good Company,
being so well assured ^f your Courage, that good Fortune will ^ot be wanting in
any of your Proceed^ngs. I was unwilling to acquaint any Relations with this
Design, least they should frustrate my Intentions; but from ^ou (dear Sir) I
have a greater Confi^ence of Encouragement in the pursuit ^f it, then any
Disswasion to the con^ary.

Sir (replied Don Francisco) I am sorry ^or the Occasion, but am glad of having
^he opportunity of serving one of so mag^animous a Soul; from this time I
dignifie ^y self your Defender; and take to my ^harge, either the Satisfaction
or Revenge ^f your Honor, and since the Gods are ^ur Judges we need not fear
partiality, for ^e Justest Sword will be the sharpest, and ^d therefore the
conquered will be esteemed Guilty. Now (Sir) all that remains, is, that you
resolve upon the time, which, I think, the sooner the better, for the Iron is
to be wrought while it is hot; the heat of Choler increases Courage, and an
Injury whilst it is fresh, rouses up Revenge.

Don Marcellus hearing these Words, arose from his Seat, and embraced Don
Francisco in his Arms: Sir, (said he) having so Generous a Breast as yours is,
it will be needless to use Motives, by setting before you any other Interest,
than that of Honor; the gaining of which, in this Enterprise, shall be wholly
yours, if Fortune be not wanting to give us Success; and for our Journey, if it
stands with your Convenience, to Morrow Morning will be a proper time, for I
shall be able to day to provide all things necessary.

Your time shall be mine, (replied Don Francisco) only give me leave Seignior
Marcellus, to Impart this to a Friend and Companion of mine, a Gentleman, whose
Valor, and Silence, you may as well build upon as mine. Since you have taken
my Honor to your charge, (replied Marcellus) I know you will Impart it to
none, but what are as Judicious as your self; and this Gentleman being a Friend
and Companion of yours, I should be much wanting in my Respects, if I declined
so great a Favor; for that Person must needs be happy, who is worthy of your
Acquaintance; and good Fortune must needs attend him, whom you are pleased to
style your Friend and Companion.

Then they embraced each other, and took their leave, Marcellus telling him he
would send one next Morning to call him, and so take Horse without the City,
that there might be no notice taken of their Journey: After this Don Francisco
went home, and acquainted Don Bernardo, and the Lady Evadne, of what had passed
between Marcellus and himself, and of the Resolution they had made of taking
their Journey next Morning.

Dear Sir, (said Evadne) your kindness is very great, and as great your
Confidence: How suddenly have you engaged yourself in an Affair so full of
Inconveniences? How are you certain, Sir, whether my Brother will lead you to
Millain, or convey you to some other place, the better to accomplish his
Designs of Revenge? But wheresoever you go, you may be assured, my best Wishes
go along with you; though I confess my self a Wretched, and Unfortunate Woman,
which am afraid of every shadow; yet my Timorousness is the more excusable,
since my Life, or Death depends upon the Duke's Resolution. Who knows but Fury
in 'em both may rage to that height, that nothing but Blood can Expiate the
Wrong? And Sir, you cannot choose but think, that your Absence will create in me
a strange Suspense, expecting every hour between Hope, and Fear, either the
welcome, or unwelcome News of your Success. Do I so little love the Duke, or my
Brother, that I dread not the Misfortunes of 'em both, and feel the Anguish of
a double Event lie heavy on my Mind?

Raise not your Fears (said Don Francisco) Madam, to that pitch, but leave some
place for hope: Trust to my Care and Conduct in this Affair, and I make no
question, but all things will end in a happy Union; our going to Mill^n is not
to be excused, neither can I decline assisting your Brother: We are yet
ignorant of the Duke's Intentions, neither do we believe he knows of your
Flight from your Kinswomans House: But perhaps, we may have a very fair Account
from his own Mouth, and no Man can better give a Relation of it than himself;
and (Madam) I must deal plainly with you, I have that equal Honor and
Friendship for the Duke and your Brother, that Duty binds me to be Careful and
Vigi^lant for both their Safeties.

The Gods protect you (said Evadne) and give you that good opportunity of
bringing your Affairs to a happy Issue, and ^me a thankful acknowledgment for
all Favors received from you in this my Extremity: For had I not been so
fortunate as to have met with this high Civility at your Hands, I must have
remained the most Unfortunate; but Thanks to your Goodness, which led you to so
much Charity and Pity, as to Relieve the Distressed: However Fears may assault
me in your Absence, or Hope hold me in Suspense, yet methinks (...) long now to
see you gone, and as quickly to see you return; that I may receive the welcome
News of your Prosperous Success.

Don Bernardo approved well of the Design, and thanked Don Francisco for
recommending of him to Don Marcellus; assuring him he would accompany them in
their Journey, not knowing what might happen, but perhaps they might have
occasion for a third Person; so, for fear of the worst he would be ready to see
how Affairs went, and to prevent all unjust Proceedings.

It is not requisite (said Don Francisco) the Lady Evadne should be left alone;
no^ to make Seignior Marcellus suspect, that I wanted Courage to perform my
Promise, and Resolution: The Respect I have for the Lady's Safety (replied Don
Bernardo) shall not be wanting; whatever Enterprise you engage in, you must
allow me a Participation; therefore abandon all Excuses, or else disanul our
Friendship: My Intention is to follow you at a distance undiscovered by Don
Marcellus; and (I presume) the Lady Evadne will not be displeased at it; and I
am confident Dorila will be so careful, that there will be nothing wanting in
our Absence toward her Accommodation.

I shall be so far from resenting your Departure, (said Evadne) that it will be
rather a satisfaction to me, that you accompany one another; and I should be
guilty of breaking the Bonds of Friendship, if I should interceed to the
contrary: Besides, Sir, (speaking to Don Francisco) who knows what danger you
may be exposed to, that may require Don Bernardo's Assistance. Then taking out
of a little Cabinet which stood by, two rich Jewels, she presented one to Don
Francisco, and one to Don Bernardo, desiring them to accept them as small
Remembrances for those many Favors she had received at their Hands: but they
modestly returned them, and told her they would not hazard so great a Treasure
in the Enterprise they were going to undertake: So recommending of her to the
care of Dorila their Woman, they humbly took their leave.

Dorila used her Industry and Diligence in waiting on Evadne, wondering at her
Master's Journey, but was ignorant where they went, and about what business;
the next Morning Don Marcellus came betimes to the door, and found Francisco
ready prepared for the Journey, handsomely Accoutred, with his rich Hat, but the
Hatband he covered with Cyprus, the better to conceal it: So walking out of the
City into a Garden, a remote place, they took Horse, and taking Bye-Paths, they
went toward Millain.

Don Bernardo upon a fine Nag, and in a good riding Suit followed after 'em at
a distance; but he perceiving they espied him, especially Don Marcellus,
resolved to take the direct way to Millain, not questioning but there he should
meet with them: They had scarce gone out of the City, but Evadne had given
Dorila an Account of all Transactions, concerning the Duke and herself; not
concealing the occasion of her Master's Journey, or her Brother Don Marcellus
his Resolution.

Dear Madam (said Dorila) I perceive the danger you are in is greater than you
are sensible of, which if not speedily prevented may utterly prove your ruin:
If you please (Madam) to receive my Sentiments, I don't believe Seignior
Marcellus your Brother is gone to Millain; but rather that he has decoyed them
from home, whereby he may accomplish his designs in taking away your life: Pray
(Madam) consider how slightly we are guarded, if any such black design should
evidently appear, how weak and poor an Opposition could be made; we have only
three raw Pages left behind, and what Courage, or Skill can they use in your
defense? Indeed (Madam) I have too high a respect to delude you with Flattery,
for my Heart Prophetically tells me of the ruin which threatens this House,
and for a speedy Remedy I will employ my Life in your Preservation.

Evadne hearing Dorila's Arguments which she uttered with so much earnestness;
and showed such Manifestations of Fear, that she was wholly possessed, all she
had spoke was certainly true; so contemplating with her self, that if Don
Francisco, and Don Bernardo should be Slain, her Brother might be entering the
Chamber, and execute his Revenge: Being thus perplexed, she asked Dorila what
Counsel she could give her to prevent this Storm, which she perceived was
coming.

Madam, (replied Dorila) there is an honest Curate of a Country Village, two
Miles from Millain, whom I once did serve; he will do any thing for me that I
can require, or is in his power to perform: If you please I will take care to
find one out to carry us safe thither; and as for the Nurse which Suckles the
Child, she will go along with us to the Worlds end: And admit, (Madam) that you
should be found out it is more honorable for you to be in the House of an old
Curate, than under the Roof of two Young Spanish Students. In Conclusion, she
rendered such Reasons, that poor Evadne was willing to follow her Advice; and so
in less than four hours, they had both of 'em got into a Wagon, together with
the Nurse, and the Child; and without being heard of the Pages, set forwards of
their Journey for the Village where the Curate dwelt; all which was done by the
Persuasion of this foolish Woman Dorila.

To defray the Charges of this Journey, Evadne would have given Dorila a Jewel
to have Pawned, but she informed her, she could furnish her; for her Master,
not long before, had paid her a Years Wages. Evadne having heard Don Francisco
discourse, that he, and her Brother would not ride the direct Road to Millain,
she gave order to the Waggoner to take the Common Road, the better to avoid
'em; bidding him drive leasurely, and she would reward him well for his pains.

We will now leave them on their Journey, and return to Don Francisco and Don
Marcellus, of whom it is reported, they had Information upon the way, that the
Duke was not in Millain, but Bolognia: So leaving the Bye-Ways, they entered
into the High Road, considering with themselves that the Duke must pass that
way in his Return from Bolognia: They had not been long entered into the Road,
but they espied a Party of Horse marching toward them: upon this Don Francisco
persuaded Seignior Marcellus to step aside out of the Road, for if the Duke
should happen to be in the Company, he would entertain him with some Discourse,
before he entered into Millain, if he saw a fit Opportunity: Marcellus approved
of his Advice, and told him, he would leave the management of it to his Care.

So soon as Marcellus was gone aside, Don Francisco slipped off the Cyprus which
covered his Hatband, for some Reasons he had, which he afterward declared: By
this time the Horse drew pretty near, amongst them was a Woman upon a Brown
Nag, and in a fair riding Suit with a Mask on, either for the better concealing
her self, or for a Preservative from the Sun and Air. Don Francisco made a Halt
whilst the Horse came up to him; as they drew near him, they viewed his Lively,
and Spriteful Deportment, his Physiognomy, the Gallantry of his Garb, and the
rich luster of his Diamond Hatband, together with the proudness of his Horse;
more especially the Duke of Millain, who was in the Company: he no sooner
espied the Hatband, but presently apprehended it must be Don Francisco de
Bazola, who rescued him from that great danger wherein he was surprised; so
entertaining the verity of it in his Thoughts, he made up to him, and said
after this manner, Noble Sir, if I call you Don Francisco, I hope I shall
commit no Mistake, for your brave Deportment, and gentle Disposition, together
with that Hatband, confirms me to be in the right.

Sir, (replied Don Francisco) you are under no Mistake, for I never was yet
guilty of any dishonorable Practices, whereby the concealing of my Name was
found necessary, and since my Name has received that Honor to be known by you,
I hope (Sir) you will inform me of the occasion, and make me so happy that I
may remain no longer ignorant of yours, but that I may pay those Respects due
to your Person and Quality.

Seignior Francisco, (replied the Duke) I am one who stands indebted to you for
my Life, and one whom your Victorious Arm so lately did protect; and had not
the Gods designed it, Death, at that time, had been my Portion: My Name is
Alphonso, but more known by the Title of the Duke of Millain: The Duke had no
sooner declared himself, but Don Francisco, with great Agility alighted from
his Horse, the Duke with the same nimbleness, was as soon out of his Saddle,
and took Don Francisco and embraced him in his Arms. Seignior Marcellus from a
far beholding these Ceremonies, dubious whether they were Actions of Kindness,
or Anger, put immediately Spurs to his Horse, but in the midst of his Carreer,
he took him up gently by degrees, and made a Halt, seeing the Duke, and Don
Francisco Complementing each other. The Duke espying Don Marcellus, knew him at
the first Sight, but had not the least Cogitation of his being so near him: he
was somewhat amazed at it, and enquired of Don Francisco, whether he was of his
Company: Yes, (said Don Francisco) and I will acquaint your Excellency with the
occasion of it; so defiring the Duke to step a little aside out of the Road, he
thus proceeded:

Don Marcellus, whom your Excellency sees there, has a great Accusation against
you, concerning his Sister the Lady Evadne, and the Relation was to this
effect: That four Nights since, you conveyed her from his Kinswomans House, and
have deluded, and dishonored his Sister; for which now he is come to demand
satisfaction from you: All he expects (Sir) from you is, either by performing
your Promise to her of Marriage, or to end the Dispute with your Sword; he has
desired me to accompany him, and to be an Umpire in this Affair, or else his
Second, which I have freely undertaken: Now (Sir) understanding from his own
Words, the occasion of the late Animosity between you, I am well assured you
were the Master of this Present you pleased to honor me withal, and to be the
Donor of; and knowing likewise, that none could better be an Arbitrator in this
Cause than my self, nor be more tender of your Excellencies Safety than I am, I
was the more eager in the Prosecution of what I have undertaken: Now that (Sir)
which I would desire of you is, That you would declare whether that be true
which Don Marcellus alleges.

Dear Sir, (replied the Duke) it is such an Invincible Truth, that I dare not
deny it, though my Inclinations led me to it: But farther, I must speak in my
own Vindication, I have neither deceived the Fair Evadne, nor conveyed her
away; though I am not ignorant she is removed from her Kinswomans House, but
whither, I remain a Stranger at this time: I do here Vow the Lady Evadne to be
my Wife, and if I did not publicly Celebrate those Nuptials, the Reason of it
was, The Duchess my Mother was desirous to Match me to the Lady Livia,
Daughter to the Duke of Ferrara; but my Mother being now more ready for Deaths
Arrest, than for Life's Protection, I can now the better perform my Duty to the
last Period of her Life, and after her Death, keep that Fidelity and Constancy
I ever had for dear Evadne.

I will instance to you some few Particulars of these grand Mistakes; the same
Night you wrought my Deliverance, my Intention was to have Conducted Evadne
safe to Millain; she was in that Month, which she was to bring forth that happy
Issue the Gods had ordained her to be Mother of; now whether it were by reason
of the Rencounter, or my own Negligence, I am dubious for when I went to her
Kinswomans House, I found at the Door Laurana her Maid, the Supervisor of our
Contracts, Jocular Meetings, and Agreements: I enquired for her Lady, she
answered me, she was newly gone, but had that very Night been delivered of a
Son, one of the Fairest Creatures that ever Eyes beheld; and that she had given
it to my Servant Giacomo. Laurana is here with me and Giacomo, but my Child and
Evadne, are both missing. I have been two days in Bolognia ^n search after 'em,
but by all my inquiry I can receive no satisfactory account.

Now, Sir, (replied Don Francisco) when ^he Lady Evadne and the Child shall
appear, ^ou will receive 'em both as yours, the one ^or your Duchess, the
other as your Son? Most joyfully, (replied the Duke) as long ^ched Ground
receives the welcome Showers; for though I value my self as a Gentleman, yet I
esteem my self more to be a Christian: The Lady Evadne's Virtues Merit a
greater Title than I am able to dignifie her with; and should that Glorious Sun
but once appear, or my Mother's Days be expired, the World shall then be
certified, that if I understood what it was to be a Lover, I also knew how to
finish those Vows in public, which solemnly I made to her in Secret.

This will be joyful News to Don Marcellus, (said Don Francisco) if your
Excellency will permit him to be a sharer in it, and not be held any longer in
Suspense. I much resent it, (replied the Duke) he has remained unhappy so long
under a Mistake. Don Francisco being infinitely well ple^, made Signs to Don
Marcellus to advance toward 'em, who immediately Dismounted himself, not
thinking of the good Fortune which attended him: The Duke met him with open
Arms embracing him, and greeted him with the Name of dear Brother: Marcellus
being surprised, scarce knew suddenly how to return an Answer to so loving a
Salutation, and courteous a Reception: Thus while he was standing in Suspense,
before he could recollect himself, Don Francisco applied himself to him in this
^anner:

The Duke (Seignior Marcellus) has been pleased, out of his own Generosity, to
declare, that his Affections for your Sister are so great, that nothing but the
making of her his Wife, he hopes, will give full satisfaction; and what he
avers here in private, he is ready to avouch at any time in Public; the Duke
informs me, that four Nights since, he went to search away the Lady Evadne from
your Kinswomans House, to conduct her to Millain, and to wait for a Conjuncture
in the cel^brating his Nuptials, which he had deferred upon very good Reasons
which he has imparted to me; his Excellency has likewise acquainted me with
the Rencounter he had with you: and morever, when he went for your Sister (the
Lady Evadne) he met with Laurana her Woman, which is here in Company, who
informed him, that it was not above an hour since her Lady Evadne had been
delivered, and that she gave the (...) to a Servant of the Duke's, that (...)
believing the Duke was there, went ^ily out of the House, imagining that yo^,
(Seignior Marcellus) had already (...) of her Proceedings: however Laurana
(...) ^ot the Child to the Duke's Servant, (...) to another by Mistake: Evadne
is concealed, and you reprehend the Duke: Now he declares, that wheresoever the
Lady Evadne shall appear, he will receive her as his true and lawful Wife: Now
Seignior Marcellus, what can the Duke express more, or what more, in reason,
can you desire, or wish for, than only the finding out of those two Rich, and
Unfortunate Pledges?

Don Marcellus throwing himself at the Duke's Feet, who hastily took him up: to
whom Marcellus applied himself, Of your Dignity and Magnificence, (most Noble
Sir, and dear Brother) my Sister, nor my self could never expect more from you,
than what you have declared; first in equalizing her with your self; and next,
in ranking me in the number of your Friends and Alliance: With that the Tears
fell from their Eyes; but considering it might portend weakness to manifest
their Grief, they suppressed and wiped 'em away.

Thus things stood, when Don Bernardo discovered himself; but drawing near he
made a Halt for some little time; for though he knew Don Francisco, and
Marcellus, he knew not the Duke; he could not tell what to do with himself,
whether he should go on or retire: At last coming up to one of the Duke's
Servants, he demanded of him whether he knew that Gentleman, which was with the
other two, pointing to the Duke? He answered, It was the Duke of Millain; at
which he was amazed, and knew now less what to do with himself than before; but
Don Francisco put him out of this Perplexity by calling to him out of this
Perplexity by calling to him by his Name; thereupon Don Bernardo alighted,
seeing they were on Foot, and approaching near the Duke, received him with much
Amity, as being Don Francisco's Friend and Companion.

Then Don Francisco related to Bernardo, all which had passed between him, and
the Duke; Don Bernardo was exceeding glad, and asked him, why he did not
complete the Joy and Happiness of these Gentlemen, by informing them where the
Lady Evadne, and her Child was? The Duke and Marcellus hearing them speak of
Evadne and the Child, inquired of them, what they discoursed of: Gentlemen, not
to hold you any longer in Suspense, (replied Don Bernardo) I am willing to be
an Actor in this Tragick-Comedy, and to alter the Scene, by the Discovery of
the Lady Evadne, and her Child, who are both safe at my Habitation* So they
both repeated to them the ^ole Story, of what has been before related* which
gave the Duke and Marcellus great satisfaction: Then Marcellus embraced
Francisco, and the Duke, Don Bernardo, returning then thanks for this happy
News, and relinquishing them of their Fe^rs.

Then calling to Laurana, Evadne's waiting Woman, that delivered the Child to
Don Francisco; she having taken notice of Marcellus, stood trembling and
quakirg for fear; they asked her if she knew the Person, to whom she delivered
the Infant? She replied no; but asked him if he were Giacomo? And he answered,
yes, and upon that belief she gave it him: that is very true, said Don
Francisco, and immediately you shut the Door, bidding me have a care of it, and
see it safe kept, and return quickly back: I confess you are in the right,
answered Laurana, shedding many a Tear; but the Duke bid her refrain, adding
that now there was no Occasion of Mourning but Rejoicing; and since Fortune has
been so favorable to us, I will not as yet enter Millain, but return back to
Bolognia; for all these seeming Contentments are but as a shadow, till the
seeing of Evadne, make them prove real; so unanimously they consented and
presently turned about for Bolognia.

Don Bernardo rode away before, to prepare Evadne, that she might not be
surpised, with any sudden Passion upon the unexpected coming of the Duke, and
her Brother; but not finding of her he appeared the most dejected Man in the
World; though when he saw that Dorila was wanting, he imagined that by her
Diligence and Persuasions Evadne was missing. The Pages informed him that
Dorila, was wanting the same day his Master Don Francisco, and he went; but as
for the Lady he inquired for, they never saw her. Don Bernardo, was in great
Distraction at this unexpected Accident, fearing the Duke would take them for
great Liars and Impostures; or perhaps, imagine some great abuse, which might
redound much to the prejudice of their Honor, and Evadne's Reputation.

Whilst he was thus pondering and casting these doubts and scruples with
himself, entered the Duke, Don Francisco and Marcellus, by Streets and Lanes
unfrequented, having left the rest of their Equipage without the City, they at
length came to Don Francisco's House, and found Don Bernardo sitting in a
Chair, in a posture altogether Melancholy, and Pale as Death; what, are you not
well? (cried Don Francisco) where is Evadne? How can it be expected I should be
otherwise, (replied Don Bernardo) since Evadne is absent? Who with Dorila that
we left to attend her, went away the same day which we did. Nor was Francisco
the less surpised, when he heard this unfortunate News.

In a word, they were all extremely troubled, full of ^ares and various
Imaginations, not knowing what to think; but whilst they were thus in their
Distraction, there came a Page to Don Bernardo, who whispering him in the Ear
acquainted him that Diego, Don Francisco's Page, had concealed a very handsome
Woman in his Chamber, ever since his Master went, and did believe her Name was
Evad^e, for he had heard him call her so. Bernardo's trouble was now renewed
afresh, and rather desired that Evadne should not be found at all, (knowing
that she was one whom the Page had hid) than to find her in such a place; yet
without being perceived, he went privately to the Pages Chamber, where finding
the Door locked, and him gone out, with a low Voice he called, Lady Evadne,
open the Door, and receive your Brother, and the Duke your Husband; to which,
he heard a Voice from within answer, You need not jear me, I am not so ugly;
but that Dukes and Earls may come after me; but this it is to have to do with
lousie Pages. I deserve indeed no better a reward. By which Words, Don Bernardo
saw he was mistaken, and that she was not the Lady Evadne.

While this passed, came Diego the Page, who posted presently to his Chamber,
and finding Don Bernardo at the Door, he commanded the Key from him to open it,
then falling down upon his Knees, he beseech'd him, if his Master had not heard
of it, that he would be pleased not to acquaint him with it; for he did confess
he had committed a fault, and was sorry for what he had done; that she had been
there three Nights, and he would now instantly put her out of the House. And
what is this Woman's Name? said Don Bernardo, Sir, (replied the Page) it is
Evadne.

The Page who made this discovery (and who envied, Diego) came down, where the
Duke, Don Francisco, and Marcellus, were talking of Diego. That Page yonder,
said he, has kept up Evadne as close, like a Hawk in a Mew, and could have
wished his Master had not come home so soon, that he might have taken his
Pleasure of her three or four days longer. Marcellus over-hearing this, asked
him, what is that you say my Friend? Where is Evadne? Above (answered the
Page.) The Duke had no sooner heard this, but like Lightning he flew up Stairs
to see Evadne; so happening to go to the Chamber, where Don Bernardo was, he
cried out; where art thou Evadne? Where is my Dearest Life? She that was wrapped
up in the Sheet, with a maundring Voice, said here is Evadne, there is not so
much harm done as you think there is, nor such a strange thing for a Woman to
Lie with a Page, that you need make such a wonder of it. Marcellus being there,
In a great fury took the Sheet by one of the Corners and pulled it off;
discovering a Woman of no ill Aspect; who being abashed clapped her Hands before
her Face, and made have to reach her Cloths to her, which served her instead of
a Pillow. They saw she was a common Hackney of the Town: then the Duke demanded
whether her Name was Evadne; she made him answer it was, and that she had
Relations of very good Account, and Credit in the City, that would scorn to do
what she did.

The Duke was so vexed, that he almost imagined the Spaniards had put a trick
upon him; but that he would not give way to the entertaining of so ill a
Suspicion, he turned his back, and without speaking one word, Marcellus
following him, they got to their Horses, and went their way, leaving Don
Francisco and Don Bernardo more vexed than they; then they determined with all
speed to use their utmost Endeavors in the finding out Evadne, and in
satisfying the Duke of their Integrity. They put Diego out of the House, and
dismissed him their Service, as a bold impudent Fellow, and turned that
shameless Strumpet out of Doors.

They went to Marcellus's House, to enquire after the Duke, who told them, that
he made no stay at all but went directly for Millain, leaving order with him to
make dilligent search for his Sister; moreover, telling them the Duke was very
well satisfied of their Fidelity, and that the Duke and himself did impute it
only to Evadne's Timorousness; but they did hope in process of time she would
be heard of.

Thus they comforted themselves, not being willing to make enquiry after her by
public Proclamation, but by some private means, in regard her being mist was
known to none but her Kinswoman, and amongst those that did not know the Duke's
Resolution, his Sister might run the hazard of her Reputation.

The Duke being now upon his return to Millain, as good Fortune would have it,
or rather Divine Providence had so ordered it, that he came to that Village,
which the Curate belonged to, where was Evadne, the Child, the Nurse, and
Dorila, the Plotter and Contriver of their Escape; they had given him an
account of all the Proceedings, and desired his Advice and Counsel, what they
were best to do.

The Curate was a great Lover of the Duke, to whose House fitted and
accomodated like that of a Clergyman, well to pass, the Duke used oftentimes
to visit from Millain, and from thence went a Hunting. For he took great
delight in the Curates Gravity and Discourse, so that the Curate was not
troubled to see him there; but to see him so Melancholy, presently perceiving
that his mind was overwhelmed with some extraordinary Passion. Evadne hearing
the Duke was there, extremely resented his coming, being ignorant of the
Occasion; thus being perplexed, and in a great Agony, fain she would have spoke
with the Curate, but he being busy entertaining the Duke, he had not the
leisure to Discourse with her.

At length, said the Duke to him, Father, I must confess my Spirit is very much
oppressed with Grief, and I do not intend this day for Millain, but will be
your Guest; therefore, 'pray send one of your Servants to bid those which came
with me, to make have to Millain, this being done, there was immediately great
Preparations made to entertain him. Evadne waiting for an opportunity to speak
with the Curate, at last she sent for him, and holding him fast by both hands;
O Father! said she, 'pray what is the Duke's Occasion of coming hither? Inform
me, I beseech you, and if you can by any means, raise some Discourse concerning
me, by that means you may discover whether his Intentions be real or false;
this I entreat you to do according to your own Sagacity.

The Curate replied, the Duke was very sad and pensive, but had not as yet
declared the Cause: My advice to you is this, That you presently dressed up the
Child, as rich as you can, and adorn him with your own Jewels, and those which
the Duke gave you, then leave the rest to me; Evadne thanked him, and promised
she would go immediately about what he had so well advised her. The Curate in
the mean time, went forth, to entertain the Duke till Dinner was made ready,
and as he was discoursing of diverse things, the Curate humbly implored the
Duke's Pardon, for taking that boldness upon him as to enquire into the Reason
of his being so Melancholy; and with all, excusing it, that he had not assumed
that Liberty to himself, had it not been so apparent to be seen.

Father, (said the Duke) it is evidently to be seen that inward Passion will
demonstrate it self in the Physiognomy of either Man or Woman, and the greatest
of my Grief is that I cannot as yet Communicate it to any that can ease me of
my pain; why (my Lord replied the Curate) were you in a Capacity to be merrily
disposed, I could present to your Eyes one of the delightfullest Objects in the
whole Universe, which is left to my Care and Conduct. That Man, (replied the
Duke) would be very much void of Reason, who could have a Remedy applied to his
Malady, and should refuse the taking of it; Therefore (Father) 'pray show me
this piece of Curiosity you so much applaud, for I believe it must be some
extraordinary Rarety.

The Curate presently went to the Lady Evadne's Chamber, to fetch the Child,
who was just made an end of dressing, very finely adorned indeed, with her
Jewels, and looked very sweetly; so taking the Child in his Arms, he went to
the Duke, beseeching him to look upon it: The Duke viewing of it, said, indeed
it was a fine Child, and took it out of the Curates Arms and kissed it; then
looking steadfastly on the Jewels, he knew they were the same he gave to Evadne;
being full of Admiration, he asked the Curate whose pretty Child it was? and
told him it was as fine as a young Prince.

My Lord, (replied the Curate) indeed I don't very well know, but some Months
since, a Gentleman of Bolognia brought it to me, and charged me to be very
careful of him, and breed him up, according to his Quality, for he was a Noble
Man's Child; there came likewise a Nurse to attend him, of whom I have enquired
several times, if she knew the Parents, but she told me, she could not satisfy
me in that particular; but if the Mother be as Fair and as Beautiful as the
Nurse, she must needs be the flower of all Italy; now I have seen the Child
(replied the Duke) I hope, Father, I may have that Liberty, of seeing the
Nurse: Yes, (replied the Curate) your Highness may command it, I will
immediately attend you to the Chamber where she is, for if the Child has thus
transported you which is but a Copy, what will the Mother not do which is the
Original? The Curate would have eased the Duke's Arms, and have taken the Child
from him, but he would not part with it till he had given it many Kisses. In
the mean while, the Curate stepped a little before, to inform Evadne the Duke was
coming to visit her, and desired she would be ready to receive him.

Evadne being surpised with a sudden Passion, that there arose such fresh
Colors in her Face, which were mighty becoming, and rather proved a Friend
then an Enemy to her Beauty. The Duke was intent, and astonished at the sight
of her, and Evadne throwing her self immediately at his Feet, would have kissed
them; but the Duke, without saying one Word, gave the Child to the Curate, and
went with great have out of the House; which Evadne seeing, she turned about to
the Curate, and being much amazed at this sudden Motion;

Alas, Sir, (said she) has the sight of me so scared the Duke, that he cannot
endure me in his presence? Am I grown so Odious, and deformed in his Eyes, that
he Loathes and Abhors me? Has he forgot those Obligations wherein he stands
bound to me? Would he not vouchsafe to speak so much as one Word to me? Was his
Son so Burthensom to him? Was he so weary with holding him, that he so quickly
rather threw, than put him out of his Arms? To all which complaint, the Curate
replied not a word, but wondering at the sudden flight of the Duke, for it
seemed to him to be rather a flight than any thing else.

But all this have was made to no other end, save only to call Giacomo, whom he
commanded to make all the have he could to Bolognia, and bid Marcellus, and the
two Spanish Gentlemen, Don Francisco, and Don ^do, with all speed, and laying
all Ex^s aside, to meet him at the Curate's House. Giacomo was not slothful,
but p^ly put his Lord's Command in Execution; who being thus dispatched, the
Duke presently returned back again where Evadne was, but found her weeping,
upon which, the Duke took her in his Arms, and ad^ng Tears to Tears, exchanged
a Thousand Kisses on her Rosy Lips, but their Tongues were locked up in an
Amorous silence.

The Nurse and Dorila observing these Amorous Passages, leapt for Joy, and were
transported with the Pleasure of seeing it. The Curate also bestowed a Thousand
Kisses on the pretty Infant, which he had in his Arms. By this time the
Curate's Dinner disturbed their close Imbracements; but being at Dinner, Evadne
gave the Duke an account of all that had happened to her, since she left her
Kinswoman's House, and that Dorila a Servant of Do^ Francisco's persuaded her
to come hither* and that she had served her very faithfully, and with a great
deal of Respect. The Duke likewise recounted to her all that which had befaln
him to this present.

Some three days after came Marcellus, Don Francisco, and Don Bernardo, who
were in great hopes the Duke had heard of the Lady Evadne: But Giacomo who was
purposely sent for them, could not any ways acquaint them with the Business:
the Duke went forth to receive them in a large Room, adjoining near to that
where Evadne was: he did not show a Countenance of any Satisfaction at all,
which made these new Guests to remain still sad and pensive, looking dejectedly
upon one another; however, he des^'d them to sit down: So ^eating himself by
them, he directed his Discourse to Marcellus.

You know well, Seignior Marcellus, that (...) never did delude your Sister,
the fair Evadne, you are not unacquainted of the ^illigence I have used, for
the finding of (...) out, in order to the happy Union of (...) ^oth, according
to those Vows I have ^ten made to her; neither are you a Stran^, that she
appears not, and my word ^ught not to be Eternal. I am in my ^thful Years, and
not so well grounded ^d experienced in the World, as to avoid ^ose Delights and
Pleasures, which offer ^selves very often to me; the self same ^ction which
made me promise to be Evadne's Husband, led me likewise, before (...) p^st my
Word unto her, to promise Mar^ge to a Country Girl, a Farmers Daugh^ in this
Village, whom I thought to (...) put off, that I might have applied my (...) to
Evadne's Worth, though not to (...) which my Conscience dictated to me, ^ch was
no small Manifestation of my (...) Love; but since no Man Marries a (...) which
is Invinsible, and that it does (...) stand with reason, that a Man should
(...) seek after a Wife that forsakes him, there is no reason I should stay for
Evadne that flies me: I say this (Sir) that you may see how willing, and ready
I am to give you satisfaction. And thus I have demonstrated to you, that I
never did, o^ had any intention of doing you the leas^ Injustice, or Injury:
And therefore, (...) would crave that leave of you, that (...) may comply with
my first Promise to Marry this Country Maid which is here in the House.

Whilst the Duke was making this Speech Marcellus's Countenance changed very
often, and was very restless; which we^ evident Proofs and Tokens of Passion,
taking possession of his Senses: Don Francisco, and Don Bernardo were much
disturbed: The Duke then reading their Mind in their Faces, he desired
Marcellus to b^ patient, and enjoined him not to retur^ him one word in answer;
for (continue^ he) I mean to show you the beauty of tha^ Person, whom I intend
to make my Wife not doubting, but it will oblige you t^ gratify my desires,
for it is such, and s^ powerfully Charming, that it will easil^ excuse me for
far greater Errors: When the Duke was risen, and gone from 'e^ they all
consulted together, and Don Francisco told Marcellus, he thought the Duke's
Request was very unreasonable, and that he ought to give some seasonable time
for the finding out of the Lady Evadne.

While they were thus debating this business, from out of a Room just before
'em, came Evadne, led betwixt the Curate and the Duke; after them followed
Laurana, Evadne's Woman (the Duke having sent for her to Millain); then the two
Nurses, and Dorila, which belonged to the two Spanish Gentlemen: When Marcellus
saw his Sister, and had taken a full view of her, and knew that it was she,
stumbling for ha^, he went and threw himself at the Duke's Feet, who took him
up, and placed him in his Sisters Arms, who embraced him with all possible
Demonstrations of Joy. Then Don Francisco, and Don Bernardo, told the Duke,
that he had put upon 'em the most discreet, and most pleasing deceit in the
World.

The Duke took the Child which Lau^ana brought in her Arms, and giving it to
Marcellus, Here Brother (said he) take your Nephew, and my Son, and see now
whether you will give me leave to Marry this Country Lass, who is the first
that ever I plighted my Faith to: It were endless to repeat Marcellus's Replys;
what Don Francisco asked him, what Don Ber^rdo thought, the rejoicing of the
Curate, the Joy of Laurana, the Content of the Adviser, Dorila, the Admiration
of Giacomo, and the Nurse: And in a Word, the general content of all.

The Curate forthwith Married them; Don Francisco was the Father that gave her;
and amongst them all it was agreed upon, That those Nuptials should be
concealed* till they had received the News of the Duchess his Mother's Death,
who was now almost spent, by reason of her long Sickness, that in the mean time
Evadne should return with her Brother to Bolognia.

But the Duchess shortly after dyed, and Evadne entered into Millain rejoicing
the City with her Fair Presence; Mourning Weeds were turned into Gay and Rich
Cloths; the Nurse, and Dorila were liberally rewarded; Laurana was Married to
Gi^como; Don Francisco, and Don Bernardo, were wonderfully well contented, that
it had been their good Fortune to have been any way serviceable to the Du^, who
offered them two of his near Ki^women to be their Wives, with exceeding ^ich
Dowries. But they told him, the Gentlemen of Biscay, for the most part, Married
in their own Country; and that not out of any scorn, but to comply with that
commendable Custom, and the Will of their Parents, who had already provided
Wives for them, they could not except of this his most Noble Offer.

The Duke admitting of their Excuse, however sought all Generous Opportunities
to send them Presents to Bolognia, which were very considerable. The Duchess
gave also one of her Jewels to Don Francisco, and another to Don Bernardo; who
when they saw all their Modest Refusals would not serve, they with unwilling
willingness received them. Evadne was visited very often at Millain, by most of
the great Ladies; among whom her Transcendent Beauty, and Incomparable Virtues,
made her shine with as much Superiority, as a Star of a greater Magnitude
exceeds in Splendor the lesser Luminaries; and the Duke grew every day more
Enamored of her than ever.

Sometime after, Don Francisco, and Don Bernardo, returned into their own
Country, where they were Married to Rich, Noble, and Beautiful Young Ladies;
continuing still their Correspondence with the Duke, and the Duchess, and with
Seignior Marcellus Barbarino, with all the Love and Amity in the World.

THE Generous Lover A NOVEL.
OH the Lamentable Ruins of Unhappy Nicosia! The Blood of thy Valiant and
Unfortunate Defenders, being yet scarce dry! if (as thou art insensible of it)
thou had any feeling at all in this Disconsolate Condition wherein now we
are, we might jointly bewail our Misfortunes: It would help to ease me in some
manner of my torment, to find a Companion of my Sorrows, and make that burden
of my grief the lighter, which now I find so heavy (I had almost said
insupportable) for me to bear: But however, there is some hope yet left thee,
that these thy strong Towers demolished, and laid level with the ground; thou
may one day behold them, (though not in so just a posture of defense, as
when they were overthrown) erected to their former Beauty and Strength.

But I, of all Unfortunate, (the most unfortunate of Men.) What Felicity can I
hope for in that* wretched Consternation wherein I now find my self? If I
should return to the same Station wherein I was, before I fell into this, such
is my Misfortunes, that when I was free, and at liberty, I knew not what
Happiness was; and now in this my Captivity I neither have, nor can hope for it.

These Words did a Christian Captive utter, looking with a sad, and mournful
Countenance from the rising of a Hill upon the ruined Walls of lately lost
Nicosia. Thus did he discourse with them, and compared his Miseries with
theirs, as if they had been able to understand him: The common, and proper
condition of afflicted Persons, who being violently carried away with their own
Imaginary Conceptions, both do, and say those things which are beyond all
Reason, without either Study or Consideration.

Whilst he was thus Complaining to himself, from a Pavillion pitched in the
Field, not much distance from him, came out a Sprightly Turk, a Young Man of a
Noble Presence, and with an Ingenious Aspect, accompanied with Briskness and
Courage, answerable to his Physiognomy; who drawing near to the Christian,
without much Ceremony, yet in a kind, and civil manner; Sir, (said he) I durst
lay a Wager with you, that those Pensive Thoughts, which I read in your Face,
have brought you hither: You read aright, answered Gasparino, (that was the
Captives Name) such Thoughts as those have brought me hither indeed: But what
does it advantage me? Since wherever I go, I am so far from procuring any
Peace, that I cannot obtain so much as a Truce, or the least Cessation of my
Sorrows: Nay, rather these Ruins, which from hence discover themselves, have
rather increased my Pains. Those of Nicosia you mean, (replied the Turk?) I
mean none else, (answered Gasparino) but those which here offer themselves to
my View. You have great occasion (quoth the Turk) to weep, if you entertain
your Thoughts with such Contemplations; for they who but two years since had
seen this famous and rich Island of Cyprus in its Prosperity, and peaceable
State; the Inhabitants thereof enjoying all that Humane Happiness and Felicity,
Heaven could afford, or themselves desire, and now should behold them banished
from it, or made miserable Slaves within it, could not have such Impenetrate
Hearts, as to forbear bewailing their Calamity.

But let us leave discoursing of things, that are not to be remedied, and come
to your own Bosom Sorrows, for I long to know if they be such as you express
them to be; and therefore, I earnestly entreat, nay Conjure thee, by that which
thou owe for those Services I have done thee, the good Will I bear, and the
Love I have shown thee, seeing we are both of the same Country, and bred up in
our Childhood together, to deal freely with me, and acquaint me with the cause
of this thy Melancholy: For though Captivity alone be sufficient to afflict the
stoutest Heart in the World, yet I imagine the Current of your Disasters has a
deeper Bottom.

For Generous Minds (such as thine is) do not use to render up themselves to
common Misfortunes, in such a measure, as to make show of Sorrows so
extraordinary; which I am the rather induced to believe, because I know that
Poverty is not so much your Master, but you may pay your Ransom upon reasonable
terms; nor are you immured up in the Towers of the Black Sea as a Prisoner of
Note, or Captive of Consideration, who late, or never obtains his desired
Liberty: For which Reason your ill Fortune has not yet deprived your hopes of
seeing your self set free; and therefore when I see thee so much overcharged
with Grief, and making such doleful Lamentations, I am forced to believe, that
the pain proceeds from some other cause than thy lost Liberty, which I entreat
thee to discover to me, upon the faithful promise of all the assistance I am
able to afford thee. Who knows, but that Fortune in her Wheeling has brought
this about, that I should, Proteus like, be clad in this Habit, which I so much
abhor, to the end I may be serviceable to thee?

Thou know already, Gasparino, that my Master is a chief Minister in this
City; thou likewise knows the great Sway which he bears here, and how much
Interest I have in him; together with this, thou art not ignorant of the
servent desire I have not to die in this State, which I thus seem to profess;
for my own Heart can testify, if ever I should come to the Test, I am resolved
openly to confess the Christian Faith, from which my few Years, and less
understanding, separated me: From all this that has been said, I leave it to
thy self to infer the Conclusion, and to consider seriously, whether my
proffered Friendship may be useful to thee.

Now, that I may know what Remedy thy Misfortune requires, it is requisite thou
should recount it to me; the Relation of it being as necessary for me to
hear, as the Rich Patient's mind to his Physician: And I assure thee by all the
Fidelity that belongs to Friendship, to secure it in the deepest Silence. To
all these Words of his, Gasparino gave an attentive Ear; though his Tongue was
silent, and seeing himself obliged by those kind Expressions, and his own
necessity, returned this Answer:

My dearest Pyrrhus, said he, (for so was this Turk called) if as thou have
conjectured aright at my Misfortunes, thou could prescribe as well the
Remedy, I should think my self happy in my lost Liberty, and would not change
my State for the greatest Felicity imaginable; but I understand well the Cause
is such, that all the World may take notice whence it proceeds; though that Man
is not to be found who dares undertake to find out a Remedy, much less to give
me the least Relief; and that thou may be informed of the verity of my
Discourse, I will relate as briefly as I can, the Cause of my Woes; but before
I enter into this confused Labyrinth of my Miseries, I would first desire thee
to acquaint me with the Cause, why Bazon Bashaw has pitched here in this Field
these Tents and Pavillions, before he makes his entry into Nicosia, being
deputed to be Viceroy or Bashaw there.

I will, (said Pyrrhus,) answer your demands in a few Words; and therefore you
must know, that it is a Custom among the Turks, that they who come to be
Viceroys of some Province, do not immediately enter into the City where their
Predecessor resides, till he departs out of it, and leaves the Place free to
his Successor. For when the new Bashaw has made his Entrance, the old one stays
without in the Field, expecting what Accusations shall come against him, and
what Misdemeanors (during his Government) they shall lay to his Charge; which
being alleged and proved, are recorded, and a note taken of them; now the
other being settled in his Residence, he gives to him that leaves his Charge, a
Scrole of Parchment sealed up very close, and therewith he presents himself at
the Gate of the Grand Seignior; which being seen and perused by the Vizier
Bashaw, and by those other inferior Bashaws, they either reward or punish him
according to the Relation that is made of his Behavior. For this Reason, thy
Master Bazon Bashaw has remained in this Field four days, but he of Nicosia is
not as yet come forth, having been very sick; but being now upon the mending
hand, he will without fail come forth, either to day or to morrow at the
farthest, and is to lodge in certain Tents which are pitched behind this rising
Hill, which as yet thou have not seen, and thy Master is forthwith to enter the
City. Thus much to your first Question; now in the Prosecution of my promised
Relation.

But let me first ask you, whether you know in our Town of Trepana a Virgin, to
whom Fame has given the repute of being the fairest in all Sicily; in whose
praise the most transcendent Wits have expressed themselves, and of whom the
most Judicious have concluded, that she was the perfectest Pattern of Beauty,
that the past Age had, the present has, and that which is to come, can hope to
have. Nature indeed had bestowed on the whole composure, every thing so
perfect, that envy it self could not tax her in any one particular.

And it is possible (Pyrrhus) that all this while thou have not told me, yet
who she ^s, nor her Name? I verily believe, either ^ou do not lend an Ear to
me all this while, or when thou wast in Trepana thou ^ert senceless. Pyrrhus
replied, That if she whom he had set forth, with such incom^arableness of
Beauty, were not Graciana ^e Daughter of Pisaura Sorescos, he knew ^ot who she
could be, for that she alone ^ad all that fame to attend her he had spoke (...).

It Is she, Pyrrhus, (replied Gasparino) it is ^he (my dearest Friend) who is the
princi^al cause of all my Felicity, and Misfortune. It Is she, and not my lost
Liberty, for whom ^y Eyes have shed so many numberless Tears. It Is she, for
whom my Heart is ready to ^urst with continual sighing. It Is she, for whom my
Complaints weary the Gods by ^y Invocation, and the Ears of those which ^e my
Auditors. It Is she, for whom thou ^ook'st me to be Distracted, or at least, for
(...) man of low Esteem, and less Courage. It Is Graciana, to me a Tygress, but
to another, Affable, and Courteous: She it is that keeps me in this Wretched,
and Mise^able Estate.

For you must understand, that from my Minor Years, or at least, ever since I
gave place to Reason, I not only Loved* but did Adore her, and kneeled to her
Devotion as to a Deity; her Parents knew my Addresses were designed to a
Vertuo^ Intent; for many a time have they acquainted Graciana with that Ardent
Love, and Affection I bare to her, and have often i^portun'd her to grant me a
kind Acceptance.

But she who had placed her Eyes on Hippolito the Son of Moronio de Corisea,
(who^ you know very well, a Young Spark, Ne^ and Spruce, Lilly white Hands, and
Cu^led Locks, a Charming Tongue, and Am^rous Expressions, composed of Civit,
Mu^ and Amber Grease, Gay Cloths, and a Pleasant Deportment) would not so much
(...) bestow one Glance of her Eyes on me, w^ had not altogether so pleasant a
Coun^nance as Hippolito; nor vouchsafe to ente^tain with the least Grain of
Gratitude m^ best Endeavors to please her, my man and continual Services, but
still require them with Disdain and Hatred; and to su^ Extremes did the Excess
of my Love brin^ me, that I should have rendered my s^ happy, had her Disdains,
and Cruelty put a Period to my Life, that I might no^ have been Witness of her
conferring such open, though truly modest Favors upon Hippolito. Consider now,
being thus tormented with Disdain and Hatred, and almost mad with Rage, and
Jealousy, in what a miserable case my Soul was, while two such Mortal Plagues
were reigning there! Graciana's Parents concealed those Favors she bestowed on
Hippolito; thinking that he, attracted by her most Exquisite, and Incomparable
Beauty, (which indeed was matchless) would propose a Contract, and so in him
acquire her a Richer Husband, and perhaps he might be so: But I dare be so
presumptious to declare, (without any Ostentation) that my Birth, and Quality
is no ways inferior to his; and for his mind, it cannot be nobler furnished
than mine; neither can his Valor, if once called in question, gain the
Victory: But that indeed which over-balanc'd me, was Graciana's Favor, and her
Parents promoting of the business, which only made the Scales uneven, by their
inclining to Hippolito.

Now it so happened, that persisting in the pursuit of my Pretentions, I had
intelligence, that one day in the Month of May, last past; Graciana, her
Parents, and Hippolito, accompanied with their Kindred, Friends, and Servants,
to make merry in Moronio's Garden, near adjoining to the Sea, toward the Salt
Pits. I know the place well, (said Pyrrhus) go on Gasparino, I was more than
four days in one, but I could have wished I had not been there four Minutes. I
knew that, (replied Gasparino) and at that very moment that I understood it, my
Soul was possessed with such a Fury, such a Hell of Jealousies, that it
bereaved me of my Senses; as you may perceive by my following Relation.

I hasted to the Garden, where I was informed they were, I found most of the
Company very pleasant, and Hippolito, and Graciana sitting under a Wall-Nut
Tree, at some distance from the rest: How pleasant an Object I was to 'em, I am
yet to learn; but the sight of her wrought so upon me, that I stood like a
Statue without either Sense, or Motion; but I continued not long in that
Ecstasie, before my Anger rouzed my Passion, and Rage gave Motion to my Hands
and Tongue: I confess, my Hands at present were bound by the respect which was
due to that fair Face, which I had in view, but my Tongue breaking Silence, I
uttered all that a Rejected Lover, or Passion could invent.

But all I did say, could not move Hippolito to displace himself, but sat
looking on me as one amazed, not offering once to rise; yet my Voice was so
loud, and my Expressions so sharp, as occasioned those which were walking in
the Garden to draw near; who hearing the revengeful Language I gave my Rival,
came in to his assistance; and then all Drawing upon me, there began a most
furious Combat between us: I valued not their number, but encountered them with
such an Undaunted Courage, that I Wounded seven or eight, and put Hippolito to
his Flight; at the same time Graciana affrighted at this Engagement, fell into
a Swoon, which, as it reinforced my Courage, so it enraged my Enemies the more
to Revenge, which it had been impossible for me to escape, had not Fortune
provided a Remedy worse than the Disease; for on a sudden there rushed into
the Garden a great number of Turks, Pirates of Viserta, who with two Galleys,
had put into a little Creek of the Sea, between two Rocks hard by the Shore,
where they Landed, without being heard, or seen by the Sentinels of the
Watch-Towers, or discovered by those Scouts, whose daily office it was to
scour the Coasts, and see that all was clear. When my Antagonists espied 'em,
leaving me alone, they swiftly ran away, and shifted so well for themselves,
that they got safe out of their danger, so that of all the whole Company, the
Turks took no more Captives, but only three Persons besides my Self and
Graciana, who lay there still in a swoon. I defended my Self and Graciana, as
long as strength would permit me, till at length being wounded in four places,
and having killed four upon the place, I was constrained, as the stoutest Heart
must to his Fortune yield.

The Turks with their accustomed Diligence, having got as much as they could,
though not very well pleased with the Success, made have to imbarque
themselves, and presently put out to Sea, so that what with their Sails, and
help of their Oars, in a short space they recovered Fabiana; where they
mustered their Men, and finding they had lost four of their best Soldiers,
Levant-men (as they call them) they were the more willing to take their revenge
of me; and therefore the Admiral of the Captain-Galley commanded them to hang
me up at the Main-yard's Arm. Graciana beholding the speedy Preparations for my
Death, gave the Captain of the Galley to understand that I was a Person of
Quality; and that if he did not spare my Life, he would certainly lose a
considerable ran^om, and therefore advised him to tack a^out again for Trepana,
whence his ransom Money would soon be brought him aboard. This was the first
and the last Kindness which Graciana showed me, and all for my greater Injury.
The Turks hearing what Graciana had reported, easily believed her; and this
their hope of profit turned the Course of their Malice. The next Morning,
hanging out a flag of Peace, they anchored before Trepana; as for the Night
before, how I employed it, you may better conceive than I express; not so much
for the care of my Wounds, but to think on the danger wherein my cruel Enemy
was amongst those Barbarous People. Being come now well to the City, one of the
Galleys entered the Haven, the other stood off. All the Citizens flocked to the
Sea side, and amongst the rest was Hippolito, who stood ^far off observing what
passed in the Galley, whilst my Steward was treating with the Turks; but I had
given him order not to ^eat about my Liberty, but of Graciana's: and for her
freedom to offer all I was worth, either in Lands, Goods, or Chattels,
commanding him moreover to go on Shore, and acquaint Graciana's Parents, that
they should leave it to him to treat about their Daughter's Liberty.

The chief Captain who was a Grecian, but a Renegado, demanded for Graciana,
six thousand Crowns, and for my self four thousand, declaring withal, he would
not sell the one without the other. The setting so great a price, (as I
understood afterward) was, he was smitten with the Beauty of Graciana, and was
therefore unwilling she should be redeemed. Graciana's Parents offered him
nothing on their part, relying on the promise my Steward had made them, by my
order; neither did Hippolito, make any Propositions toward her ransom. And so
after many demands and Capitulations, my Steward concluded the Business, giving
for Graciana five thousand Crowns, and for my self three thousand; the Captain
accepted this offer, forced thereunto by the Persuasions of his Companion, and
all the rest of his Soldiers; but because my Steward had not so much Money in
cash, he desired only three days time, intending to sell so much of my Goods,
till he had made up the sum. Rozak, (so was the Captain called) was glad of
this, thinking in the mean while, to find some Occasion to break off the
Bargain, and so sailed back again to Fabiana, with a promise to return at the
end of three days, and to receive his Money according to Agreement. But it so
unfortunately fell out at the same time the Turks discovered, from the main
Topmast, six Italian Galleys, and guessed them, (as it was true) to be either
of Malta or Sicily; so that the Captains immediately hoysting Sail, and turning
their Prowes toward Barbary; in less than two hours lost the sight of those
Galleys, and by the help of approaching Night, secured themselves from the
danger that threatened them.

Now I leave it to your good Consideration (Friend Pyrrhus) how much my mind
was troubled in this Voyage, finding it to fall out so cross and contrary to
that which I expected; and much more, when the next day the two Galleys
reaching the Island of Pantanalea on the South part, the Turks went to get
Wood, and fresh Victuals; but most of all, when I saw both the Captains Land,
and share between them all those prizes they had taken, which was to me a
lingering Death: Rozak, gave to Ledalbo, (for so was the other Captain called)
six Christians, four for the Oar, and two very Beautiful Boys, both Born in
Corso, together with my self, that he might have Graciana for his own: It Is
true I could not understand what they said, though I was not Ignorant what they
did; neither had I known then the manner of their sharings, if Ledalbo had not
come to me and told me in Italian; Christian thou art now mine, (as my Captive)
rated at two thousand Crowns; if thou will have thy Liberty, thou must give me
four thousand, or resolve here to end thy days. I then demanded of him whether
the Christian Lady, were his? He told me, No, but that Rozak kept her for his
own use, with Intention to make her turn Moore, and then marry her. Whereupon I
promised him if he would bring the Business so about that the Christian Lady
might become his Captive, I would give him ten thousand Crowns in good Gold for
her ransom. He replied, it was impossible, but he would acquaint Rozak, with
the great Sum which I offered for her Freedom; perhaps, said he, considering
the profit he will reap by it, he may alter his purpose, and accept of the
ransom. He did so, and then presently commanded all those of his own Galley to
embark themselves as soon as possible they could, intending for Tripoli in
Barbary, where he was born; Rozak likewise determined to go for Viserta; and so
embarked with the same have they used to do when they discover any Galleys
which they fear, or Vessels which they think to be a prize; besides they saw
the weather begun to change, inclining to a Storm.

Graciana was on Land, but not where I might see her; save only at the time of
her imbarking, where we both met at the Seaside. This her new Lover led her by
the hand, and setting her foot upon the Plank which reached from the Land to
the Galley, she turned back to look upon me, though my Eyes were never off from
her; looking upon her with so much tender Affection, and languishing so long,
at length I was deprived of that little sense of seeing I had left, and fainted
away; the like they afterward told me befell Graciana, who dropped from the Plank
into the Sea, where she had been drowned, but that Rozak leapt in after her,
and brought her out in his Arms.

But when I came again to my Senses, and saw my self alone in one Galley, and
the other steering a contrary Course, and sailed out of sight, carrying away
with them the one half of my Soul, or (to speak truth) all of it; new Clouds
hovered over my Heart, and I began again to curse my Misfortune, and called
aloud for Death to seize me: such and so great was the Lamentation I made, that
it proved so offensive to my Master's Ears, that he threatened if I did not hold
my Peace, he would severely punish me. Whereupon I suppressed my Tears, and
smothered my Sighs: But froward Fortune, not contented to have brought me into
this so narrow straight, took a course to overthrow all, by taking from me all
hope of Remedy; for in an Instant, the storm we so much feared overtook us, and
the Wind which blew strongly from the South, blew full in the Teeth of us; and
began with such fury to reinforce it self, that we were forced to tack about,
and suffer our Galley to go which way the Wind would carry her.

Our Captain's Design was to have put into Some part of the Island for shelter,
and more particularly, on the North part thereof; but it fell not out according
to his Expectation, but rather, quite contrary to what he had designed; for the
Wind blew so high, that within little more than Fourteen hours, we saw our
selves within two Leagues, or thereabouts, of the same Island, from whence we
had put forth; and now there was no remedy for hindering our being driven upon
it, amongst very high Rocks, which presented themselves to our view, threatening
us with inevitable Death.

We saw on the one side of us, that other Galley wherein was Graciana, and all
their Turks, and Captive-Rowers laboring hard with their Oars, to keep
themselves off as well as they could from running upon the same dangers. We
used the same means in ours, but with better success; for they being tired out
with their Voyage, and overcome by the stiffness of the Wind, and blustering
storm, forsaking their Oars, and abandoning their own safety, suffered
themselves to fall amongst the Rocks, against which the Galley dashing it self,
was split in a thousand pieces.

Night was then drawing on, and so great was the cry of those that gave
themselves for lost; and the Consternation of those in our Vessel made aching
Hearts, for that not any of those things our Captain commanded was understood
or done by them; only they plied their Oars, allowing it for their best remedy,
to turn the Prow to the Wind, and cast two Anchors into the Sea, to keep off
Death for a while, which they expected every moment: And although the terror
of dying was dreaded by all the rest, yet in me it was quite contrary; for
flattering my self with the alluring hopes of having a prospect of her in the
other World, who was so lately departed out of this; every minute that the
Galley deferred its drowning, or splitting against the Rocks, seemed to me an
Age of Pain: and yet I could not forbear, but cast my Eyes sometimes, upon the
insulting Waves, to see whether I could espy floating upon those proud Billows,
the Body of unfortunate Graciana.

At length day appeared, but with the Symptoms of a much greater Storm than the
former, at which time, we found our Vessel riding out at Sea, some distance
from the Rocks; but having discovered a point of the Island, which we perceived
might easily be doubled, both Turks and Christians, began to be cheerful, and
with new Hopes, and new Hearts, falling with Courage to their work, in six
hours we doubled the point, where we found the Sea more calm; insomuch that
coming under the Lee of the Island, the Turks leapt out to Land, and went to
see if there were any Relics remaining of the Galley, which the Night before
fell among the Rocks; but even then neither would Fortune be so Favorable to
me, as to grant me that poor Enjoyment which I hoped to have received, of
having Graciana's Body in these my Arms; whom, though dead and bruised I should
have thought my self happy to have embraced, thinking thereby to have mastered
Fate, and linked my self to her though Dead, whose Life my Stars had utterly
denied me. To which purpose, I entreated one of the Renegadoes to go on Shore,
to view whether the rolling Sea had not cast her Body on the Land: But all in
vain; for just at that very Instant the Wind began to rise, and the Sea grew
rough, so that the shelter of that Island, was of no benefit to us.

Ledalbo seeing this, would not struggle against Fortune, who before had so
violently persecuted him; and therefore commanding his Men to fit the Galley,
to bear little Sail, and to turn the Prow to the Seaward; while he himself took
Charge of the Rudder, he suffered the Vessel to run through the wide-Sea; being
well assured that no impediment would cross its Course; which made its way with
that Swiftness, that in three Days and three Nights, passing in sight of
Trepana, of Melazo and Paler^o, we arrived at Tripoli in Barbary, where my
Master fell Sick of a Pleurisy, attended with a burning Fever, in that violent
manner, that in three days it sent him of an errand into the other World.

The king of Tripoli seized presently upon all his Wealth, and I fell into the
Hands of his Viceroy; and within fifteen days after he received his Commission
for Cyprus, with whom I am here arrived, but do not intend to seek my
Redemption, though he has often importuned me to it, (by Reason, Ledalbo's
Soldiers had informed him of my Ability,) and wondering that a Person of my
Quality should be so much wanting to my self, as not to entertain so good a
motion. I gave him a slender answer, and only told him, that he had received a
wrong Information; but know assuredly (Pyrrhus) I will never return back to
that place which will prove my torment, and where Graciana's Death will in
part, if not be wholly imputed to me.

This (Pyrrhus) is my ill Fate, and the Occasion of these my Sighs and Tears.
Graciana is dead, and with her are buried all my hopes; and though that which I
had (whilst she lived) hung but by a slender Thread; yet, yet, -- and then his
Speech forsook him, whilst his Tears, which were numerous had eased his
Passion; but having vented his Grief, and recovering himself, Pyrrhus promised
him all the Kindness and Assistance that a true Friend could accomodate him
withal. And to that end, assured him of his utmost endeavor so to contrive it,
that they might be both Slaves to one Master; and that living both together,
they might be the more serviceable one to another; for my Master (continued
Pyrrhus) is Judge of this City, and none is his Superior in it; nor none more
in his Esteem than my self.

While they were thus discoursing, as luck would have it, they saw a great
throng of People coming out of the City, occasioned by the old Viceroy's
coming forth into the Field, to give place to Pyrrhus's Master. Here they left
off any farther Communication for that time, and went to the Tents, just at
that very Instant, as the old Basha^* came thither, and the new one came forth
to receive him at the Tent door. Hattem Bashaw, (for so was he called, that
left the Government) came attended with Ianizaries (being the ordinary Garrison
Soldiers in Nicosia, ever since the Turks were Masters over it) to the number
of five hundred. They marched in two Divisions, the one with Muskets, and the
other with drawn Scymeters. When they came to the Tent of the new Bashaw,
Hazen, they were drawn round it; and when Hattem Bashaw approached the Entrance
of the Tent, he made a low Reverence to Hazen, who with a less bowing of his
Body congyed to him again.

This being done, Hattem presently entered into Hazen's Pavillion: Then there
was brought him a very stately Horse, richly Caparison'd, upon which he was
mounted, and conducted round the Tents, and a great part of the Field, with
loud Acclamations in their own Language; Long live Solomon Sultan, and Hazen
Bashaw, his Viceroy; they repeated this very often, and then presently
returned back to the Tent, where Hattem Bashaw remained all the while; and then
with the Cadi, or Judge, Hazen and Hattem, shut themselves up close for the
space of an hour, to treat of the Affairs of the City. Within a little while
after, the Cadi, or Judge of Causes, came forth to the Door of the Tent, and
with a loud Voice in the Turkish, Arabic, and Greek Language: Declared, That
all who had any thing to lay to the Charge of Hattem Bashaw, might have free
^mittance: for there was Hazen Bashaw, whom the Grand Signior had sent his
Viceroy into Cyprus, would do them all Right and Justice. Some Greek
Christians, and some Turks entered to crave Justice; but their Charge was so
slender, that the Judge dispatched them immediately, finding no grounds for
their Complaints.

In this Interim entered in an Officer, who gave the Bashaw notice, that there
was a Jew at the Tent Door, who had brought a most Fair and Beautiful Christian
Virgin to be sold; the Judge or Cadi commanded that she should be brought in:
Upon which the Officer went forth, and presently returned, ushering in an
Ancient Jew, who led by the hand a Woman in a Barbary Habit; so richly attired,
that the wealthiest Moore in Fez or Morocco was not able to compare with her;
for throughout her whole Dress, she surpassed all the Affrican Women, her Face
was covered with a Sea^ of Crimson Taffata: The small of her Legs, and her
Arms, (which through thin Saroenet were easy to be seen) were adorned with
Bracelets of Gold, wherein were set scatteringly, many fair Pearls and precious
Stones. In Conclusion, the fashion of her Cloths, and all other her Furniture,
were such, that the Cadi or Judge, and the two Bashaws, upon the very first
sight of so much Grandeur, being mightily taken, before any other thing was
said or questioned by them, desired the Jew to take the Sea^f from off the
Christian's Face; But then such a splendor, such a Beautiful Countenance
discovered it self, as dazzled the Eyes of all the Beholders.

But he in whom this amazing Beauty, wrought the deepest Impression, was the
sorrowful Gasparino, as one who better than any other knew her, she being his
cruel and beloved Graciana, who so often, and with so many Tears, had by him
been reputed, and deplored for dead. No^ was Gasparino the only Person that
suffered Loves powerful Reign, but at the same time, the two Bashaws and the
Cadi were equally smitten. And therefore, without questioning the Jew, where or
how he came by her, they only asked him, what he would take for her? The
Covetous Jew, replied, Two thousand Crowns; he had scarce set the price, but
Hattem Bashaw proffered to give him his Money down.

But Hazen Bashuw, who was resolved he should not have her though he ventured
his Life; Well, (said he) and I will give the Jew two thousand Crowns, which he
demands; not that I would either give so much, or go about to circumvent
Hattem, did not that enforce me, which were he as sensible of it as my self, he
would not be so unjust as to condemn me; for this lovely Slave belongs not to
any of us, but to the Grand Signior; and therefore, say I, I buy her in his
Name; now let me see who dare be so insolent as to offer to take her from me.

That dare I, replied Hattem, because for the self same end and purpose do I
buy her; and it belongs more especially to me, to tender this present to the
Grand Signior, by reason, I am taking my Voyage for Constantinople, and am
provided with that convenience for her safe conduct. And by that means, I may
the better obtain the favor of the Grand Signior. Nay, rather, it will be
better received from my Hands, (replied Hazen) to take Care of sending her to
the Grand Signior, since I do it without any respect to my own private
Interest, or Expectation of profit. And whereas you allege the convenience of
carrying her along with you; I will send her in a Galley of my own, well armed,
and provided with a sufficient Convoy at my own Charges. At these Words,
Hattem's Blood began to rise, so that laying his hand on his Scymeter, Hazen,
said he, My Intentions are the same with yours, and she is mine, for I was the
first that purchased her; therefore if thou think to circumvent me, this
Scymeter shall defend my Right, and chastise thy Presumption.

The Cadi, who was attentive to all that had past between them, and burned no
less in Loves Flames than either of the other, fearing least he should lose his
Treasure; Hazen and Hattem, said he, let me entreat you both to lay aside these
your differences, which I doubt not but to compose in such a manner, that both
of you may effect your intentions, and the Grand Signior be sensible of both
your Services. To these words of the Judge, they showed themselves obedient.
Hattem, you would have this Christian, (said the Judge) for the Grand Signior;
and Hazen says the like: You allege, That you were the first in offering the
demanded price, Hazen contradicts you; and though he does not enforce his
Argument so home, yet I understand you both agree to buy the Slave for the same
purpose; only you got the start of him, in declaring first; yet he ought not to
be wholly defrauded of his intentions; and therefore in my opinion, let this
business be thus accorded, Hazen shall pay two thousand Crowns, and Hattem
shall lay down the other two thousand, and let the Captive remain in my power,
to the end that I may send her in both your Names to Constantinople, that
neither of you may remain unrewarded; for (as an Eye witness) I can c^fie the
forwardness of you both to gratify the Grand Signior; to which purpose I will
send her at my own cost and charge, with that Equipage and Attendance, which is
due to him, to whom she is sent.

The two enamored Bashaws neither could nor would contradict him; each of them
forming, and imagining in his mind a hope (though doubtful) of promising to
themselves the attainment of the end of their inflamed desires; Hazen, who was
to continue Viceroy of Cyprus, thought to win the Judge by great Gifts, to
deliver the Captive up to him, and Hattem having other projects in his Head,
and both conceiting his own design the surest, they easily condescended to what
the Judge propounded, and with a Joint consent delivered the Captive presently
to him, and made present payment to the Jew of a thousand Crowns a piece; but
then the Jew would not part with her upon those terms, unless they would
likewise purchase her wearing Apparel, and Jewels, which he valued at a
thousand Crowns more. Upon which the C^di or Judge, that he might not show
himself less Bountiful than the two Bashaws, promised to pay those thousand
Crowns, thinking it proper to have her presented in the same dress (which she
then wore) to the Grand Signior.

When Gasparino saw all this, and that it was no Dream, he came to Pyrrhus, and
wispering him in the Ear; Friend (said he) do not thou know her? Not I, said
Pyrrhus; then replied Gasparino, this is Graciana. How (answered Pyrrhus?) It Is
very certain (replied Gasparino.) Peace then, replied Pyrrhus, for Fortune is
now so ordering the business, that thou shall find her Complaisant, since
Graciana is in my Masters power. Gasparino would have put himself into some
place to have been seen by her, but Pyrrhus would by no means permit him, for
fear some sudden passion should overthrow his present hopes.

Graciana being thus surrendered up to the Judge, he came to her and taking her
by the Hand delivered her to Pyrrhus commanding him to convey her to his Lady
Rodula, with orders to use her kindly, as being the Grand Signior's Slave.
Gasparino seeing Pyrrhus lead her away, all alone, followed her as far as he
durst; but having lost her, he went to seek out the Jew; whom after he had
found out, he civilly demanded of him where he had bought that Captive
Christian; and by what means she came to his Hands. The Jew made him answer
that he met with her in the Island of Pantanalea; and that he bought her of
certain Turks, whose Galley had been split against the Rocks of that Island.
And as he was proceeding in his discourse he was interrupted by one which came
from the Bashaws to inform the Jew, That he must come immediately to 'em.

Now as Pyrrhus waited on her between the Tents and the Town, he took occasion
to ask Graciana, Whence she was, and where born; who made him answer, her
Native place was in the City of Trepana: Then Pyrrhus questioned her whether
she knew in that City, a Rich and Noble Gentleman called Gasparino? At her
hearing him named, Graciana fetching a deed sigh, Too well Sir (said she) to my
prejudice: How to your prejudice, Madam (said he?) Because he knew me (said
Graciana) to his own, and my unhappiness. But I pray resolve me (said Pyrrhus)
did you know in the same City another Gentleman, a very worthy person called
Hippolito? I likewise knew him, replied Graciana, and I may say much more to my
Grief than Gasparino.

But, pray Sir, if I may be so bold to ask you, where had you this
Intelligence? I am (said Pyrrhus) of Palermo, and by various accidents in this
Disguise; and for Gasparino, and Hipollito, I know them well, in regard it is
not many days, since they were both in my power; for certain Moors of Tripoli
in Barbary had taken Hippolito Captive and sold him to a Turk, who brought him
to this Island.

But tell me Sir, how came Gasparino to this Island, he came (replied Pyrrhus)
with a Pyrate who took him Prisoner in a Garden, near the Sea shore of Trepana
and with him a certain Virgin, but I could never get him to tell me her name.
He staid here some few days with his Master, who was to go and visit Mahomet's
Sepulcher, but just at the time of his departure Gasparino fell so extremely
Sick, that his Master left him with me, (as being his Countryman) that I might
use all the best means I could for his Recovery, and take care of him till his
return hither, and if he did not return hither, that I should send him to him
to Constantinople, according to the advice I should receive from him.

But the Gods had otherwise ordered it, since that, unfortunate Gasparino
without any Symptom of a dangerous Sickness, within a few days ended his Life;
making often mention of one Graciana, (whom as himself told me) he loved more
than his own Life, and was as dear to him, if not dearer than his own Soul.
Graciana (as he related to me) suffered Shipwreck at the Island of Pantanalea,
the Galley wherein she was, being split upon the Rocks, and her self drowned,
whose Death he continually lamented, till his mourning had brought him to
breath his last.

Well (Sir) replied Graciana; but as to that other young man Hippolito, whom
you spoke of, in those his discourses which he had with you, did he not at any
time speak of Graciana? Did he tell you how she and Gasparino were made
Captives? Speak of her (said Pyrrhus!) yes a thousand and a thousand times; and
enquired of me very frequently, whether any Female Christian of that name had
of late been brought to this Island; telling me withal how joyful he would be
to hear any Tidings of her, that he might ransom her; to which purpose he
possessed his Master with so much Credulity, that she was not so rich as he
supposed her to be; and that having had the happiness of enjoying of her
formerly, he needed not set so great a value upon her; however if three or four
hundred Crowns would purchase her freedom, he would willingly Disburse it for
the kindness he had formerly received from her.

It seems, said Graciana, he valued her kindness but at a low rate that would
not go beyond four hundred Crowns; but Gasparino was more Noble, Valiant and
Generous, Fuller of Magnanimity than to make so poor an offer. O ye Gods
forgive that inconsiderate wretch, who was the occasion of Generous Gasparino's
death! for I am that unhappy woman, whose death he so much lamented. And Heaven
knows were he now alive, how much I would repay his kindness! and should be
witness how sensible I am of his misfortunes, who has endured so much for
mine! Having so said she besought Pyrrhus, (considering she knew not where she
was, nor whither her Fates would hurry her) to assist her in her miseries.

Pyrrhus replied, he would perform to her all the service he was capable of,
and advise her according to his best understanding. With that he informed her
of the Difference between the two Bashaws, upon her account; and how she now
remained in the power of the Judge his Master, in order to convey and present
her to the great Turk, Han the Fourth at Constantinople: But he hoped Heaven
would otherwise dispose of her: how-ever he advised her in the mean time to use
a fair deportment, and ingratiate her self into the favor and good opinion of
Albuma his Master's wife, in whose Custody she is to remain till they send her
to Constantinople, acquainting her withal, of Albuma's temper and qualities,
with many other things which might redound to her benefit; at length they were
arrived at his Master's house; Albuma seeing her so richly attired, and so
lovely, gave her a very friendly and kind entertainment. Pyrrhus having rendered
up his charge, returning back to the Tents, gave Gasparino an account of what
had passed between him and Graciana.

Gasparino having attentively heard the relation of his Friend: How must we
(said he) proceed in this Affair, and employ our time to the best advantage?
that which is first of all to be done, (answered Pyrrhus) is for you to be
entertained in my Master's Service, which being effected we will afterward
consult, what is in the next place most convenient. But whilst they were thus
talking, came the Guardian of the Christian Captives belonging to Hazen, and
took Gasparino along with him. The Judge returned with Hazen to the City, and
Hattem taking his leave, prepared forthwith to set forward on his Journey,
being very importunate with the Judge to hasten the sending of the Captive
Virgin; and withal, to Write to the Grand Signior in his behalf, for the better
promoting his Interest: All which the Judge promised to perform, though he
meant otherwise.

Hattem being gone full of false hopes, and Hazen abiding behind, not
altogether in despair; Pyrrhus so brought the business about, that Gasparino
was entertained into his Master's Service: But still Time's Hou^-Glass run on,
and Gasparino burned so with desire to see Graciana, that he could not enjoy
one Minute of rest: And now Gasparino was advised to change his Name, the
better to conceal himself from Graciana's knowledge, before he had seen her,
(So he gave himself the Name of Mauritinio,) but it was so difficult a Task to
see her, that he could not as yet obtain it.

Yet one day it so happened, that the Lady Albuma beh^ld her Slave Mauritinio,
and took such an affection to him, that he made a deep impression in her Heart,
and fixed a stronger in her Memory, and perhaps taking little or no
satisfaction in the cold Embraces of her Aged Husband, she easily gave way to
this her Lustful Desire, and acquainted Graciana, (whom she now dearly loved)
with her filthy wished for Embraces: Gra^iana indeed was of an obliging Temper
and Sweet Behavior; her therefore Albuma informed, that the Judge had received
into his House a Christian Cap^ive, of a lovely Aspect, and fine Deportment;
that in her Eye he was the Comliest Person that ever she beheld, and that he
was of the same Country with Pyrrhus, but could not contrive which way to bring
it about, whereby he might understand her affection for him, and she fearing he
should slight her Amors when he did know of it.

Graciana being willing to please her, asked what was the Captives Name? Albuma
told her Mauritinio: to whom Graciana replied, if he be a Gentleman, and of
that place you say he is, I must needs know him; but of the Name of Mauritinio,
I don't remember any such in Trepana; but if your Ladyship will permit me to
see him, and Discourse with him, I shall be able to inform you, both who he is,
and what may be expected from him: It shall be done (said Albuma) with the
first Opportunity; and according to your Discretion you may give him some light
of my Affections, and in so doing this Friendly Office, I shall place the
greater Esteem upon you.

As Albuma had thus declared her self to Graciana: within less than two hours
after, the Judge calling Pyrrhus, and Mauritinio to him; with no less Efficacy
than Albuma his Wife had done to Graciana, did he discover to them the
Affections he had for the Virgin Captive, requiring their Privacy, and Advice,
what course he should take to keep the Female Christian to himself, and yet
comply with the Grand Signior whose she was; acquainting them withal, that he
would rather die ten thousand Deaths than once resign her up to him. After
several Consultations, among Persons aiming at contrary ends, it was at length
concluded, that Mauritinio, as being a Person of her own Native Country, should
undertake to Court her for his Master, and if he could not prevail by fair
Means, he should then use Violence to force her; and that being done, they
should then report abroad, she was Dead. The Judge, or Cadi rested extremely
well satisfied with this Contrivance of his Slaves, gave Pyrrhus his Liberty,
and after his Death half of his Goods: He likewise promised Mauritinio, not
only his Freedom, but good store of Crowns if he succeeded.

Now if he were so Generous and Noble (...) promising, his Captives were as
Prodi^l in their Performances, offering to pul^ ^own the Moon to do him
Service; much ^ore easily to draw Graciana to his Imbra^, so as Mauritinio
might have the op^rtunity of discoursing with her. I will ^ant him free access
to her, said the Cadi, (...) Judge, as often as need requires, if that ^ill
advance the business; and to that pur^se I will send away Albuma my Wife to ^r
Friends in the Country; and in the ^ean time Graciana shall have all the Li^rty
in the World to Discourse and Con^rse with her Countryman: This Agree^ent being
made between these three, all ^as hushed.

The next day the Cadi, or Judge came (...) Albuma, and in a pleasant Humor
told ^r, she might, when she pleased, visit her ^ather and Mother, and stay in
the Coun^y as long as she would, or till he sent for ^er: But in regard her
heart was overjoyed ^ith those fair hopes which Graciana had ^en her, she had
no inclination of go^g; and therefore told him, at this time ^e had no great
fancy to depart from home, ^r to go thither; when she had, she would ^quaint
him with it, but whenever she ^ent she did design to take the Captive Christian
along with her: By no mea^ (replied the Judge) for it is not requi^ that the
Grand Signior's Female Slav^ should be seen by any person. That matter^ not
much, (replied Albuma) for she man be as private in my Father's House, as an^
where else: Besides, the longest time (...) mean to spend with them, shall not
be (...) bove four or five days; for that will see^ an Age to me to be so long
absent from you^ The Judge made no reply, because h^ would give her no occasion
to suspect h^ farther Intentions.

Whilst these Transactions were agit^ ting, the Judge had some Affairs to min^
which Albuma his Wife, knew would d^ tain him from home, for the space of for
hours: He was no sooner gone, but she commanded Mauritinio to be called to he^
No sooner was Mauritinio admitted, b^ he walked through the whole House, g^
zing about him, yet could he not perceiv^ any thing, save a dumb, and still
Silenc^ till he cast his Eye aside, where Gracia^ sat, at the foot of a
curious Staircase (...) polished Marble, which led up to a spa^ ous Gallery
that surrounded the who^ House. Instantly so many Passions seiz'^ the Enamored
Gasparino, as wrought (...) him both Amazement, and Refreshment^ be considered
with himself, that he was a Cap^, and (...) another's Power; but at length
^ercoming with all Facility, those little (...); with a Formidable Love, and
^ilarating Sadness, and Pusillanimous ^ourage, advanced to the place where she
^e; at what time Graciana turning her ^d aside, fixed her Eyes upon Mauritinio,
(...) looked no less steadfastly upon her.

But when both their Looks encountering ^us each other, by different effects had
^en evident signs of that which their se^eral Souls felt within: Gasparino was
at a ^d, and wanted motion to advance fur^; and Graciana, who upon Pyrrhus's
^lation of Gasparino's Death, gave credit (...), (...) beholding him now so
unexpect^y live, full of Fear and Amazement, (...) he^ self, as if she had seen
some Appa^ Gasparino coming to himself, and ^derstanding by her Gestures, the
true (...) ^f Graciana's Fears, assured her in the (...) passionate
Expressions, that a Lover ^ld ^vent, that he was the same unfor^ ^parino, whom
she had made so. (...) having dissipated her Fears, de^ ^im to speak lower, and
not speak of (...) to what she should ask him: (...) you may be sure our Lady
has (...), and may over-hear our Discourse; and (to deal plainly with you) has
acquainted me, that she is a great Admirer of you, and has employed me to
interceed with you in her behalf: if you answer her Desires, your days here in
Captivity may seem more easy to you, though in the end prove pernicious:
However for the present you must counterfeit your Embracements, first for my
desire, and next it is a piece of rudeness to despise any Lady's Addresses.

To this Gasparino replied, I never could harbor any such Thought, Fair
Graciana, that any Service you should ever command me to undertake, should
prove so hard a Task for me to perform, as this which you lay before me;
neither is it agreeable to the Honor and Faith of a Gentleman, or the
Reputation of a good man, to feign and dissemble in such weighty Consequences:
However, because you shall not say I gave a refusal to your first Request, your
Commands shall be obeyed; I Will Ianus like look two ways, pursue the ill,
because it is for good to come of it. I will to satisfy your desire, and
Albuma's Pleasure, (Lust I should have called it) comply as far as a
counterfeiting yielding will permit, so that thereby I may gain the Happiness
of seeing you; to which purpose do you study for my Answers to her, according
to your Discretion, which having said he entreated her briefly to tell him how
she escaped from the hands of the Pirates, and how she came in^o those of the
Jew, who so lately sold her.

The Story of my Misfortunes, (answered Graciana) require more leisure than
time will now permit, yet will I not leave you wholly unsatisfied: Know then,
that the very same Evening we parted, Rozak's Galley was carried with a strong
Wind to the same Isles of Pantanalea, where we likewise saw your Vessel; but
ours, we being not able to hinder it, ran unavoidably upon the Rocks* However
Rozak foreseeing his own Dest^uction and mine before his Eyes, be^e the fatal
ruin happened, took care to have ^e rowed on Shore, between two C^ks fastened
together, which was done at first by the Captain himself, who had ventured his
Life to save mine, till an unfortunate Billow threw him upon the Rocks, and
dashed out his Brains. After which, two others which were endeavoring to save
themselves, took hold of my Cable, and hall'd me to Land, where I lay in a
Swoon for some time; but of this I know nothing my self, but by information.
With me, eight other Persons saved themselves, who though Turks used me with as
much respect, as if I had been related to them: We kept our selves close in a
Cave for eight days, the Turks fearing the Christians should espy 'em, which
had command of the Fort in the Island; and all that time we fed upon nothing
but the wet Biscuit which the Sea had cast upon the Shore, from the broken Bins
of the Galley, which the Turks gathered up by Night, that they might not be
discovered.

At the eight days end, there arrived upon that Coast, a Vessel of the Moors,
which came to an Anchor a little off the Land; upon which the Turks made such
signs to the Vessel which lay not far off, that they which were in her
perceived they were Turks that called to 'em. Thereupon they sent out their
Cock-Boat, and received them into their Bark, wherein was an exceeding rich
Jew, a Merchant; all the Lading of the Vessel, or the most part of it was his,
being Freighted with Carpets, and Hides, with other Commodities, which they
carry from Barbary to the Levant. In that Vessel the Turks sailed for Tripoli;
and in that Voyage they sold me to the Jew for two thousand Ducats, an
Excessive Price, if his Love toward me had not made him so generous, as he
afterward declared to me.

Leaving the Turks after all this in Tripoli, the Vessel Tacked about to
perform her Voyage, and the Jew began to be very hot in his Solicitations: At
length despairing to obtain his lustful ends, he resolved to make the most of
me, the first opportunity that should offer it self: At last he understood that
the two Bashaws were in this Island, where he might sell and vend his
Merchandise, as well as in Xio, whither he was bound; and intending to sell me
to one of the Bashaws, he put me in this Habit which I have on, to make me the
more Sailable and Amiable to the Eyes of those that bought me.

And now I understand this Cadi, or Judge has purchased me, with a design to
send me as a Present to the Great Turk, of which I am not a little fearful:
Here I heard of your supposed Death, and I must now declare to you, if you dare
believe me, That it grieved me to the very Soul; though I rather envied than
pitied your Misfortune; not out of any disrespect, but because I knew you were
then happy, while I continued still in misery.

Dear Graciana, (replied Gasparino) you judged aright, in what you have now
spoken; only Death had deprived me of this Happiness which I now enjoy, in
seeing of you once more; a Felicity which I esteem more dear than my Life: But
Fairest of Creatures, I am now to acquaint you, the Judge my Master, by no less
various Accidents than yours, entertains the same Affection to you, as Albuma
your Lady declares she has for me; and he has made choice of me to be the
Interpreter of his Thoughts: I received the Motion, though not to do him that
piece of Service, but to gain the happy opportunity of conversing with the Joy
of my Life. Thus you may see (Dear Graciana) to what hard measure our
Misfortunes have hurried us; you to be Agitator in working such
Impossibilities; and me likewise to be Sollicitour in such a P^odigious Cause
as this, which rather than obtain, I would forfeit Life, and all I have, which
now I value, since it has afforded me this great Happiness.

I am doubtful what to say, or imagine, (replied Graciana) how we shall be able
to get out of this Labyrinth; but you see, what our Condition constrains us to
make use of: I am sure our Inclinations never tended to Dissimulation, and
Deceit; we must now make a Virtue of necessity; and therefore I will acquaint
Albuma with some feeling Expressions pretended to be yours; that shall rather
entertain her with Hopes, than drive her to Despair: You shall likewise report
of me to the Judge, what you think most convenient, that may not prove
prejudicial to my Honor, but prevent his designs; and since I wholly entrust
you with it, you may assure your self it never was yet violated, though indeed
those Difficulties I have endured might call it in question: As for our
Conversing one with another, will (by their means) appear very easy, provided
you declare to none your Pretensions to me, for in that very hour, you do that,
you must expect never to see me more; for I would not have you prize me at so
low Rate, to think that Captivity can effect that, which Liberty could not
attain to.

Madam, (replied Gasparino) as to that Particular you may at present easily
command my Obedience: I am willing, ever I entertain such Thoughts, to give you
farther Proofs of my Affection, in working your Deliverance, and mine: Now as
to what concerns the Judge, take you no care of that, but do you undertake the
like with Albuma. With this they took their leaves of each other; Graciana
remained very well satisfied with Gasparino's fair Intentions, and he the most
joyful man in the World that he had heard Graciana speak with so much sweetness.

Albuma, in this Interim of time, had shut her self up in her Oratory, praying
to her Prophet Mahomet, that Graciana might bring her good Tidings of the
Business recommended to her Care. Nor was the Judge less sollicitous than his
Lady, as wholly depending upon a good successful Answer, which he hoped to
receive from Mauritinio; to whose Charge he committed his discoursing with
Graciana.

Graciana greatly pleased Albuma, by giving her very good hopes that Mauritinio
would acquiesce to her Desires, but telling her withal, he must entreat her
Patience while two Moons were first expired; before which time, he could not
answer that, which he much more desired than her self; and this forbearance was
only desired, that he might finish his Vows, for his Deliverance from Bondage.
Albuma was not at all displeased with the excuse of her beloved Mauritinio, but
promised to obtain his Freedom, before the appointed time, provided he would
answer her Expectation; and therefore entreated Graciana to inform him of it,
and see what Operation she could make with him to dispense with the said time;
engaging withal to furnish him with as much Money as the Judge should require
for his ransom.

As for Gasparino before he would return an answer to his Master, he consulted
with Pyrrhus, what answer to make him, and the result of it was, that they
should acquaint him, the Case was desperate, without any hopes of winning her;
and therefore, as soon as possible he could, he should carry her away to
Constantinople; and that in the way thither, either by fair means or by force,
he might obtain his Desires. Then to keep from the Grand Signior's Displeasure,
he should purchase for him another Slave, which in the Voyage should be thrown
overboard, upon pretense that Graciana was fallen Sick, and dead of her
Distemper, which they said should be done in such a manner, as it should never
be discovered; neither should he incur the Grand Signior's Displeasure, but
fulfill his own Heart's Desire; afterward, for the continuance of his Favor,
they would invent some Stratagem, which should make all firm and secure.

This old Judge, his strong Affections to Graciana had so blinded the Eyes of
his understanding; that had they told him a thousand greater unlikely hoods, he
would have believed them all; only one more difficulty offered it self to the
Judge, which in his Opinion was greater than all the rest; which was, least his
Lady should hinder him from going to Constantinople, without permitting her to
go with him; but immediately they removed that Obstacle, by informing him, that
in the Room of the Christian which they were to buy, and to throw Overboard
instead of Graciana, Albuma would serve Excellent well for that purpose; and
none better to please him, whom he earnestly desired to be freed from, more
than Death.

This scruple being thus removed, that very day, the Judge Discourses with
Albuma concerning the Voyage he intended to make to Constantinople, to
transport the Christian to the Grand Signior; by whose Bounty, he hoped to
receive some higher preferment. Albuma replied, she approved very well of his
Design, thinking he would leave Gasparino at home. But when she found he was to
go with him, she began to change her Opinion, and to dissuade him from that,
which before she had advised him to. In short, she concluded, That if he did
not take her with him, she would (...) all the means that possibly could be for
out to hinder his Voyage: that pleased (...) Judge, who had before determined
to shake off that Yoke, which was so uneasy to him.

All this while, Hazen Bashaw was not negligent in soliciting the Judge to
resign up the Christian Slave to him, offering him Mountains of Gold; but all
his Gifts and Promises wrought no effect upon him, but to forward him more in
his departure. Within twenty days, he had fitted and rigged up a Bregantine of
fifteen Banks, Manning it with Voluntary Soldiers, lusty young able Men, partly
Moors, and some Greek Christians. Therein he embarked all his Wealth; neither
did Albuma leave any thing in her House of any considerable Value, for Albuma's
Design was the same with that of Pyrrhus's, That when the Vessel was out at
Sea, Gasparino and he should make themselves Masters of the Bregantine, and
Sail away with it. But she thought not fit to declare her Intentions to them,
till she saw her self embarked, hoping thereby to gain Gasparino's Affection;
being verily persuaded, that carrying such store of Wealth along with her, he
would not refuse her for his Wife.

But as private as Albuma kept her Design, Gasparino understood it from
Graciana, whom Albuma had made acquainted with her Contrivance; and now the day
of departure being come, Hazen went forth, accompanying them with all his
Soldiers to the Sea side; where he remained with his Eye fixed upon the
Bregantine, till he had quite lost the sight of it. But then as one who having
long continued in such torment, oppressed by Love which did disturb this quiet,
being ready furnished with Intentions, without delay he put that presently in
Execution, which with long Deliberation he had fore-casted; having therefore a
Vessel for that purpose ready in another Port, he clapped into her fifty
Soldiers, with all his Friends and Acquaintance, whom he had obliged by many
Gifts and Promises, giving the strict Charge to put forth to Sea immediately,
and recover the Iudge's Bregantine, and to put to the Sword all that were in
her except Graciana the Captive; also he gave them order to sink the Vessel,
that nothing might remain, the better to prevent discovery.

Nor did they need many Arguments; for their Covetousness of the Plunder added
Wings to their Feet, and Courage to their Hearts; considering the vastness of
the Spoil, which was known to be in the Vessel. Two Days had the Bregantine
Sailed in her intended Course, which to the Judge seemed two Ages; for the
first day he greatly desired to have put his Design in Execution, but his
Slaves advised him to the contrary, for the first Contrivance was that Graciana
should fall sick, the better to show a pretense to her Death, which would
require a little longer time; he did not approve of so long a delay, but would
have it reported she dyed suddenly; and so quickly make an end of what they
had projected, by dispatching his Wife out of the way, that he might allay the
heat of that Fire, which by degrees consumed his Bowels. But in Conclusion to
what they proposed, he at length condescended.

In this space of time, Albuma had discovered her Design to Pyrrhus, and
Gasparino, and they were ready to put it in Execution, as soon as they had
doubled certain points they were to Sail by; but the Judge was so hasty with
them, and so sharp set, that they were forced to promise him to perform the
task they undertook, upon the first opportunity that should offer it self. And
now the day began to appear, wherein (according to the Contrivance of Pyrrhus
and Gasparino) they were to accomplish their Desires, or to end their Days,
when upon a sudden they descried a Vessel, which with Sails and Oars made
briskly after them; at first they were afraid, they had been Christian Pirates,
from whom neither the one nor the other could expect any Benefit.

Thereupon they prepared to defend themselves, and to do all that might be done
in such a Case of Necessity, three hours afterward they drew nearer to them,
till they came within Cannon-Shot. Perceiving this, they immediately struck
Sail, and loosed their Oars, and put themselves in a posture fit to receive
them. But when the Vessel came within sight, the Judge bid them cheer up and
fear nothing, for the Vessel was Turkish, and would do them no prejudice;
withal, he commanded a White Flag should presently be hung out, which they in
the other Galley, already blinded with greediness of gain, took no notice of,
but made up with greater fury to Board the Bregantine. At the approach of this
danger, Pyrrhus, by chance, turning his Head aside, perceived from another
point of the Compass, another Galley bearing up with full Sails carrying
Christian Colors.

Now I am apt to believe the Judge would have given all the hopes of his
Pleasure, to have found himself again in Nicosia, so great was his Confusion
and Amazement; more especially to see himself so fiercely attacked by the first
Vessel, that they wanted very little of sinking his Brigantine. But when he saw
them to be Soldiers of Nicosia, he soon guessed the Cause of their coming, and
by whom set on work, and gave himself for a lost Man: Indeed had it not been
that the Soldiers more minded the Spoil than the Slaughter, not a Man had
escaped alive.

But by this time, when they were most busy about their Pillaging, the Vessel
bearing Christian Colors, came up with the Victor Galley, and began to batter
it very rudely; but before she came to grapple with her, the Captain demanded
what Vessel that was, and from whence: They made answer that it belonged to
Hazen the Bashaw, Viceroy of Cyprus. How comes it then to pass that you being
Musselmen, have robbed this Vessel, which carries the Judge of Nicosia? To
which they answered, that they were commanded to take her by their Superior,
and therefore they were to obey, without asking any Questions.

The Captain of the last Vessel thus satisfied with that which he desired to
know, fell off from Hazen's, and made toward that of the Judge, and with the
very first Volley of Shot he killed him ten of his Men; and presently after
entered her with great Courage and speed. But they had scarce set their Feet
upon the Hatches, but the Judge instantly knew Bazon, the Bashaw, who with the
same Design as Hazen, had pursued him; and that he might not be known, had put
forth Christian Colors.

The Judge, understanding the Intentions of both these Lovers, finding himself
thus set upon, began to show his Anger, reviling one, reproaching another, and
threatening others, and so severely rebuked the Soldiers, for drawing their
Swords against a Judge and Minister of Mahomet, and their Natural Sovereign the
Grand Signior, that the Seamen began to consider what they had done, and were
about to put up their Scymeters, only Bazon shut his Eyes and Ears to all that
he saw or heard; and falling upon the Judge, gave him such a cut on the Head,
that if the blow had not been born off by the thickness of his Turbant, he had
cleft his Scull in sunder; for it came with such a force, that it struck him
down between the Banks of the Vessel.

This Action caused Bazon's Soldiers to follow the Example of their General, so
that all was now again in worse Confusion than before; Bazon's Men fell upon
the Judge; and Hazen's Soldiers fearing that Bazon's Men should get their
Plunder from them, entered Bazon's Vessel, that in Conclusion, the Slaughter was
so great, that there was hardly a Turk left alive, but what was much wounded.
Gasparino and Pyrrhus, observing that the Turks were in a manner all slain; and
those which remained alive, were sore wounded, now thought it their only
opportunity; and therefore calling to their Assistance two Kinsmen of Albuma's,
and being aided by the Volunteers, who were Venetians, with a great deal of
ease, and without receiving so much as one Wound, they cut the Throats of all
the rest; and Boarding Bazon's Galley, which they found without Defense, they
took it, with all that was in it. Of those that dyed in the second Encounter,
was Bazon the Bashaw, whom a Turk in Revenge to the Judge ran through the Body.

Being now Masters of all the three Vessels, by Pyrrhus's Advice they took out
all things that were of any price or value, both in their own, and Hazen's
Vessel, and stowed them in Bazon's Galley, which was a Vessel of far greater
Burden, and fitter to take in the Lading; nor did they want Rowers, for they
being most Venetian Slaves, were glad of the opportunity to return home, after
they had carried the Vessel where Pyrrhus should require them. But before they
set Sail, Pyrrhus and Gasparino, full of Expressions of Joy, for their good
Success, went to Albuma, and told her, that if she would return to Cyprus, they
would man her own Vessel, and give her one half of the Goods, which she had
embarked. But she having not yet lost that Amorous Affection, which she bare to
Gasparino, told him, she would go with him to Venice, or elsewhere.

The Judge was by this time come to himself, having dressed and bound up his
Wound, as well as the place would permit, they likewise informed him that he
should take his choice, either to go with them, or to return in the same Vessel
he set forth, to Nicosia. To which he replied, that since his ill Fortune, had
been so great, he would rather accept of his Liberty, and supplicate the Grand
Signior to redress those Injuries* he had received from Bazon and Hazen, two of
his Bashaws. In the end, they manned his own Vessel, and furnished him with all
things necessary for his Voyage; they gave him some Chequins, of those which
once had been his own; and so having taken his leave, he begged that Graciana
would vouchsafe but only to embrace him; which he would look upon as a great
Kindness, and would of it self be sufficient to make him forget all his
Misfortune; to which Graciana yielded, at the request of Pyrrhus and Gasparino;
that done, the Judge further begged her but to lay her Hands upon his Head, not
doubting but her charming Hand would heal his Wound. Which Graciana did
likewise perform according to his Desire; and now having bored many holes in
Hazen's Vessel to sink it, a merry Eastern Gale seeming to court the Sails,
they made such fresh way, that in a very few hours they lost the sight of the
Judges Brigantine, who with Tears in his Eyes, stood beholding how the Winds
carried away his Wealth, his Wife, and Graciana his Souls Delight.

The Wind still favoring them, without touching any where, in a few days they
got within sight of their beloved Country; which not a little augmented that
Joy, which had already taken Possession of their Hearts; and no wonder their
Spirits were transported with a new Contentment, which is one of the greatest
that can be purchased in this Life, to arrive after a long Captivity, safe in
their own Native Country, there being nothing can equalize it, but the Pleasure
of Victory and Conquest. About an hour after Daybreak, they found themselves
within less than a League of the City, at what time Gasparino gave Order to ^m
the Vessel with several Flags, Streamers, and Pendants, and rowed leasurely
into the Haven; which being discovered from the Port, an infinite number of
People presently showed themselves upon the Sho^e.

In the mean time Gasparino entreated Graciana to cloth and dress her self in
the same manner, as when she was conducted by the Jew into the Bashaw's Tent.
Gaspari^o and Pyrrhus also put themselves into Turkish Habit, as also did the
Christians that plied the Oar; for the^e were Garments enough of the slain
Turks to serve them all. This occasioned a pleasant delusion of the sight to
those that were upon the Land; for the People that stood gazing to b^hold a
stout Vessel so gayly trimmed with Streamers, and Pendants playing, and
triumphing in the Air: But when they b^held the Turkish Habits and white
Turbants, they began to grow fearful and jealous of Stratagems; thereupon they
forthwith betook themselves to their Arms upon the Haven, while the Horse were
sent out to s^ the Coast.

But those fears were soon dispelled, when Landing, they with Tears of joy
saluted the ground, as an Evident sign they were Christians, who had made prize
of the Vessel. The last that landed was the fair Graciana, having a Veil cast
over her Face of Crimson Taffety, led by Pyrrhus and Gasparino: Which object
drew after them the eyes of all that infinite multitude, who at their Landing
kneeling as the rest did, Saluted the Earth with their prostrate Lips. By that
time this was done, the Captain and Governor of the City were come up unto
them, who presently knew Gasparino, and ran with open Arms, and all the
manifestations of exceeding joy to embrace him. With the Governor came
Hippolito, and his Parents, and the Parents of Gasparino and Graciana with all
her Kindred and Acquaintance, who were the greatest Persons of Rank and Quality
in the whole City; all whom Gasparino received with a Joy and Affection, equal
to what they had showed to him. Then taking Graciana in one hand and Hippolito
in the other, whose Color then began to change; but Gasparino saluted him with
much respect according to his degree and quality, and then declared himself.

Gentlemen (said he) you may well remember the misfortune which some Months
since happened to me in Moronio's Garden, together with the loss of Graciana;
nor can you forget the diligence which I used to procure her liberty, offering
my whole Estate for her ransom; which though to you it may seem a kindness,
was to me none, it being to redeem what I prized above all the World. What from
that time has happened to us both, will require long time and a seasonable
opportunity to relate; let it suffice for the present to tell you, That after
many various and strange Accidents, and after a thousand lost hopes of
remedying our misfortunes, the Gods have protected us and returned us home to
our Native Country, with Riches agreeable to our Contentment, and Completed
our Happiness; yet neither from this nor my procured liberty, is the end
answerable to my desire, but in that great pleasure which I conceive my sweet
Enemy takes as well to see her self Fre^, as to see before her here the chief
object of her affections.

In short I offered my whole Estate for her Ransom, resigned up my Heart only
to her self, contriving the means for her Liberty, and adventured my Life for
her safety; and though from all these may be raised engagements of moment, yet
I will not impose any one thing upon her, except this one, which I presume she
will agree to; and so saying he puts up his hand, and with a Grace full of
humility, took away the Scarff from before Graciana's Face; which had the
resemblance of the dissipating of a Cloud which darkens the Sun's brightness;
Here, Hippolito, (said he) I deliver thee such a Jewel, which it behooves thee
to esteem above all those things that are esteemed worthy. In the same manner
(fair Graciana) I freely give thee that which thou have ever had in thy Memory;
for this if you please you may call me Generous, since in comparison of this
Gift, to give away my Life, Estate, my Honor, all is nothing. Take her most
fortunate of Men; and if thy understanding can but soar so high as to value her
worth, thou art the happiest of all mankind; and with such a Jewel as here, I
give and allow thee as much Wealth as comes to my share in this adventure.

Having thus said he was silent, as if he had laid a charm upon his Tongue; but
presently recollecting himself, What Jurisdiction (said he) have I over
Graciana, to give her to another? Or how can I dispose of that to another which
is none of my own? Graciana is his, and so much his, that her affections to him
can meet with no opposition; or if there may intervene those obligations which
she may think she owes me, from this time forward I disclaim and cancel them; I
give therefore to Hippolito nothing; because I neither can nor dare do
otherwise; only I confirm the grant of my Goods made to Graciana, without
desiring any other recompense, but only that she would be so credulous, and not
think otherwise, but that my intentions were honest and just, and never aimed
at any other design but what was agreeable to her infinite Beauty and
Perfections.

Here Graciana, turning to Gasparino, If any favors (Sir said she) were by me
showed to Hippolito, you must believe them to be Virtuous, and to proceed more
from duty than affection. But now if they will give me leave freely to dispose
of that which your Valor and Generosity has obliged me withal. Here her
Parents interrupted her, telling her she had free liberty to do as her
discretion should direct her. For, which when she had returned (...) her humble
thanks with all duty and (...), I had rather incurr, said she, the censure of
inconstancy, than to be taxed with ingratitude; and therefore Valiant
Gasparino, my affection, hitherto so reserved and dubious, shall now declare it
self, to be in your Favor; I am yours, Gasparino, and will be yours till
death, if the knowledge of some more deserving Beauty have not prevented my
happiness.

Gasparino hearing these words was so transported with Joy, and in a manner in
such an ecstasie that he knew not how presently to return Graciana an answer in
any other dialect than by prostrating himself on his Knees to her, and kissing
her fair hands, which he held so fast, amd bathed often with his tender and
affectionate Tears. Hippolito likewise wept, but 'twas for Grief for the loss
of Graciana. Graciana's Parents wept Tears of Joy and Gladness, while all the
Standers bye were full of admiration and astonishment.

Gasparino having recovered himself out of that deep ecstasie of Joy wherein he
was lost, they all seated themselves at a small Banquet which Graciana's
Friends had prepared. They were full of Mirth, and Jollity, exchanging
multiplicity of kisses with each other, and thinking of their past misfortunes;
amongst the rest Graciana remembered a Song which Gasparino's Boy Sung in the
Garden, a little before the Turks came and surpised them; which occasioned her
often to reflect upon her ingratitude, in not making a Suitable return to his
affections; but withal desired that his Boy might Sing it. He told her that
Song was now quite out of date with him; but to satisfy her request it should
not be wanting; so calling his Boy he commanded him to Tune his Instrument, and
Sing that last Song which he Sung in the Garden: He readily obeyed his order
and began.

The SONG.
Go, Treacherous hopes, by whose uncertain Fire
I cherish my Tyrannical desire:
Love is a more uncertain Guest than Care,
And my Fate's such,
That it will cost as much
To Love as to Despair.
It Is true, our Lives are but a long disease,
Made up with real care and seeming ease.
Ye Gods that such uncertain Favors give,
Oh, tell me why,
It is so hard to dye,
And such a Task to live!
This being ended the Bishop of that City was then present, who with his
Benediction and License conducted them to the Cathedral Church, and instantly
Married them. Pyrrhus and Albuma were reconciled to the Church, who seeing it
was imposible to be Gasparino's Wife, contented her self in matching with
Pyrrhus, to whom Gasparino gave Generous and Noble Gifts: in conclusion all
remained fully contented and satisfied; and the fame of Gasparino spread it
self through all Italy, and many other places under the name of, The Generous
Lover.

THE Libertine: A NOVEL.
THe Sun having run his due Course in a hot Summers day, the Evening being
approached, an Ancient Gentleman, accompanied with his Wife, his Son a little
Youth, a Daughter about Seventeen Years of Age, with a Maid Servant, having
been taking a Walk for their Recreation upon the Banks of the River of Toledo,
and were returning home, the Night was clear, and bright, and the Hour Eleven,
the Highway large, and their Paces slow, that they might not lose, through
weariness, those Pleasures which the delightful Meadows, lying by the River
side, afforded them, and depending on the security, which the strict course of
Justice, and the well disposed Humor of the People of that City warranted, the
good old Gentleman walked leasurely along with his small Family, not the least
surmizing of being disturbed; but far from the thoughts of having any Disaster
happening to 'em. But in regard Misfortunes commonly approach, when least
thought of, contrary wholly to his Expectation, and quite beyond all imaginary
Conceptions, there happened one, who not only disturbed their present
Recreation, but gave them great cause to weep many Years after.

There was a Gentleman of that City about the Age of two and twenty, whose
great Wealth, his nobleness of Blood, but chiefly his depraved Disposition, and
too much assumed Liberty, together with the loose, Extravagant Libertines, like
himself, which he kept Company withal, led him to commit such Obscene Actions,
as ill became his Person and Quality, and entitled him only to Audaciousness
and Insolency: This Gentleman, ((...) Name, for Modesty sake we shall conceal,
and call Octavio) with four other Frolicksome young Gentlemen full of Jollity,
were upon the top of a Hill singing to their Instruments in a mad merry Humor,
these following Verses.

How Sweet, and how Free is the Plunder,
When we care not for Jove, nor his Thunder?
When we enter a Town,
Then the Lasses go down,
And to their Overcomers lie under.
Why then should we study to Love, and look Pale,
And make long Addresses to what will grow Stale?
If her Fingers be soft, long, and slender,
When once we have made her surrender,
She will handle a Flute,
Better far than a Lute,
And make what was hard to grow tender.
Why then, etc.
If her Hair of a dark Chest nut brown is,
And her Belly as soft as the Down is,
She will fire your Heart,
In performing her Part,
With a Flame, that more hot than the Town is.
Why then, etc.
When the Houses with Flashes do glitter,
And we sever the Sweet from the Bitter;
And in that bright Night
We can take our Delight,
No Damsel shall escape but we'll hit her.
Why then should we study to Love, and look Pale,
And make long Addresses to what will grow Stale?
As the old Gentleman had reached the Foot of the Hill, these Libertines were
coming down; and meeting with this harmless Family, they in a very rough
manner, Vizarding their own Faces, threw up the Veils of the Mother, Daughter,
and Maid: The old Gentleman was not a little offended at the Action, and
reprehended them exceedingly for it; telling them, they did not understand the
Rules of Civility, nor indeed good Manners, to offer any such Abuse to Ladies,
which were Modest, and not for their turn.

They minded not his Discourse, but in stead of giving him a suitable Answer,
they Retorted upon him with Scoffs, and Scorns, repeating, If her Hair of a
dark Chest-nut Brown is, etc. and without farther Misdemeanour, went forward on
their way: But the great Beauty of Almeria, which Octavio had seen; (for that
was the Name of this Gentleman's Daughter) began to rouse his unbridled Passion
in such a manner, that he resolved to Enjoy her, in despite of all
Inconveniences that might ensue; and to that purpose, consulting with his
Companions, they all returned back immediately, with an Intention, and full
Resolution, to force her from her Parents: They being willing to please
Octavio; for in Spain, rich Men which are lewdly and Licenciously given, shall
never want those that will Canonize their evil Actions; and therefore in their
Communication, they approved of the design, and resolved to put it in Execution
after this manner.

They put on their Vizards, and with their Swords drawn, they faced about, and
with a swiftness of foot, presently overtook those, who were rejoicing for
their late Delivery: Octavio seized upon Almeria, and taking her up in his
Arms, ran away with her, with all the speed imaginable, she having no strength
to defend her self from this Violence; for the sudden Passion that possessed
her, was so prevalent, that it took away the use of her Voice, which Fear and
Amazement had rendered useless; and Swooning away, she was deprived of all her
Senses: Her Father made what resistance he could, and called out as loud as his
Voice would permit him, the Mother Shrieked, her little Brother Cried, and the
Maid Wept, and tore her Hair; but neither their Cries nor Shrieks were heard,
nor could their Tears move Compassion, for the Solitariness of the place, the
late Season of Night, and the Resolute Cruelty of those D^bauchees that
assisted their wicked Design: So that the one went away Jocund and Merry, and
the other went home Sad and Pensive.

Octavio returned home to his House, rejoicing at his Adventure; but the
Parents of Almeria with great Affliction, and full of Despair, were without
Sight, and destitute of all the rest of their Senses, wanting their Daughter's
Eyes, which were the Light of theirs; they were very melancholy, lacking the
Sweet, and Facetious Company of Almeria; they were in Confusion, and Amazement,
not knowing which way to steer their Course; whether they should give timely
notice of their Misfortune to the Ministers of Justice, or else conceal it:
They were loath to be the principal Instrument of publishing their own Shame,
and Dishonor; nor did they know on whom to complain, but their own hard
Fortune. Octavio in the mean time, being Subtle, and Crafty, brought Almeria
home to his Father's House, who having locked her up in his own private
Lodging, while she was yet in a Swoon; and the better to keep her ignorant of
the way he had brought her, he Blindfolded her with a Handkerchief, that she
could not take notice of the Streets she had passed through, nor of the House,
or Room whereunto he had brought her.

Before Almeria had recovered her Swooning, Octavio had satisfied his Lustful
Passion; for the unchaste violence of Youth seldom or never, respect either
time, or place, but runs on headlong, whither their unbridled Lust leads 'em,
letting loose the Reins to all Licenciousness: Having the light of his
understanding thus blinded, he robbed Almeria in the dark, of the best Jewel
she had; for the Sins of Sensuality reach no farther for the most part than the
accomplishing and fulfilling of them: Octavio presently resolved to turn the
abused Almeria out of doors; and it entered into his Imagination to lay her out
in the Street, being thus in a Swoon as she was; but going to execute this
Villainous purpose, he perceived she was newly come to her self: At what time
recovering her Voice; Heavens defend me, (said she) where am I! What Darkness
is this? What Clouds have compassed me about? What ails me? How comes this to
pass? Then calling out for her Father, and Mother, and neither answering, she
repeated a thousand Lamentations in the dark; and calling to remembrance how
she was assaulted, and forced violently from her Parents, she at last took fast
hold of Octavio's Hands: If thou art such a one (she cried) whose Soul will
admit of Entreaty, I earnestly beseech thee, since thou have thus triumphed
over my Honor, gain the Victory likewise over this wretched Life; Deprive me
of it, I conjure thee immediately; for it is but requisite I should lose the
one, since I cannot regain the other: And consider with thy self, that the
rigor of that Cruelty which thou have exercised upon my Weakness, will be
tempered and mollified by the pity thou will extend toward me, by taking away
the Life which thou have now made so deplorable and miserable.

These mournful Arguments which Almeria alleged to Octavio left him so amazed,
and confused, that the horridness of the Crime seemed to make him sensible of
the wrong he had committed, that he knew neither what to say or do; so that his
silence made Almeria think at first, it might be some Apparition that was with
her; but when she found that she touched a real Body, and calling to
remembrance the violence used to her walking along with her Parents, and duly
weighing the greatness of her Misfortune, with the very Thoughts thereof, she
returned anew to vent those words which her many Sighs, and Tears had before
interrupted.

Bold Ravisher, (she cried) thy Actions make me judge thee to be one of no
great Years; I pardon thee the Violation thou have offered me, and forgive thee
that foul Offense thou have committed, provided thou will here solemnly Swear
to me, that as thou have covered my Honor with this Darkness, so likewise that
you would bury it in perpetual Silence, never to acquaint any person with it:
It is but a small satisfaction, I crave at your Hands, in comparison of so
great an Injury; yet to me, (considering this perplexed State I am now in) it
will be the greatest that I can beg of you, or you can grant me: Consider
besides, That I never beheld your Face, nor ever do desire to see it; for
though I cannot but deseant upon the offense, yet will I endeavor to forget
the Offender: Neither will I imprint in my Memory, the Image of the Author of
my Woes, but pour forth my Complaints between my self and Heaven, without
desiring the World to be my Auditors, for they are not Competent Judges of
such Cases, as to their real effects; but are rather Commentatours to cast ill
Reflections upon 'em. I must confess my Passion has made me guilty of
Ignorance, in uttering these Verities to you, which indeed ought to be grounded
upon the experience of more Years, than ever I had the honor to arrive to; yet
I may make that Interpretation, that Grief and Sorrow, does with equality, fix,
and dissolve the Tongue of the Afflicted; one while amplifying the received
Injury, that others may be the more induced to believe it; another while
burying it in the Grave of Silence, the better to hinder the application of
Remedies: So that whether I express my self in Words, or remain silent, I
flatter my self with those Persuasions, that you cannot be wanting of Motives
to believe me, or of Remedies to supply me; since that Incredulity in you,
would but imply Ignorance, and to afford me Relief, be an Impossibility: yet
may your Charity extend so far, as to grant me some ease in this my Affliction,
whereby no place may be vacant to entertain Despair, since the expense of it
will amount to so little a charge: Yet flatter not your self with vain, or
false hopes, that Time shall allay, or pacfy that just Rage, which I shall ever
bear toward thee; neither make farther Attempts upon my lost Honor, since thy
Designs in that Enterprise will be wholly frustrated; for having already
satisfied thy base Lust, I should think thy evil Concupiscence might be less
inflamed: Impute this your Offense to heat of Passion, committed against
Reason, by Accident; and I will pronounce that rash Judgment upon my self, that
I was not Born, and brought forth into the World, but to prove Unfortunate;
convey me therefore presently into the Street, or at least, near unto the great
Church, from which place I can take Directions to my own Home: Promise me, and
Swear likewise, not to pursue me, or be at all inquisitive after my Habitation,
Name, or Parents; for I would not have them so unhappy as to bear a share in my
Misfortunes: Return me a suitable answer, I beseech you, to these my Requests.
If that fear does possess thy Spirits, that thy Voice should discover thy self
to me, then answer me in Silence.

All the answer Octavio returned to the long Discourse of the afflicted
Almeria, was no other than a kind Embracing her, as if he intended to renew the
Combats of his Amorous heat; which being perceived by Almeria, she used that
force and resistance which her tender Years rendered her capable of, and
defended her self with that Courage, and Resolution, using her Feet, Hands, and
Teeth; then with her Tongue broke out into these following Expressions.

Know, Cowardly Traitor as thou art, and basest of all Humane Kind, without
either Fear, or Shame, who ere thou art, those Wrongs which thou have offered
me, thou might have exercised upon a Stock, or Stone; for I was bereft of
either Sense, or Motion; the Conquest, and Triumph of this Nights Victory
cannot but redound to thy Reproach: As for thy second Ignoble, and Filthy
Attempt, thou shall never obtain thy unlawful Desires, unless thou take away
my Life: Though thou robbed'st me of that precious Jewel, when surprised by a
Swooning Fit, and acted thy lewdness with Pleasure, and Delight; yet know that
now my Spirits are returned to my assistance, thou shall sooner conquer my Life
than gain the Victory over my Honor; for if I, now being able to make
resistance, should yield to thy abominable Lust, thou might then very well
conjecture, and boast, that the Ecstasie I was in, was only feigned, when thou
wast so audacious and insolent in the operating my utter ruin and destruction.

But in conclusion, Almeria used so strong an opposition, and made such a
manful resistance, that the Strength, and Courage, and with it, the vigorous
Desires of Octavio, were weakened; for the Insolence he had used to Almeria,
had no other rise, than from a violent Lascivious Impetuousness; from which
root never springs that true Love which is permanent; but instead of that heat
of Love, there remains only Repentance, and a coldness of Affection to second
it. Octavio, then waxing some degrees cooler, but much more weary, without
uttering a Word, left Almeria, to her self in his Chamber, and went to hunt out
for his Libertinian Companions, to consult and advice with them, which Method
he should take, both for his and Almeria's satisfaction, and safety.

Almeria perceiving her self alone, and fast locked up, arose from the Bed, and
went groping about the Room with her Hands, to search out for a Door to get
out, or a Window to leap down. She first found the Door, but locked too strong
for her to open it; then she found out the Window, which she unhaspt, and
opened the Wooden Shutters, and by the light of the Moon that shone so clear
and bright, being in its plenitude, she perceived the Chamber richly Hung, the
Bed gilded, and all the Furniture very magnificent; that it seemed rather the
Apartment of a Prince, than of a private Gentleman; she summed up the number of
the Chairs, which were very rich, and the Escritores, and Cabinets which were
very gay and stately: She took notice of the Door, and the Pictures which
adorned the Room, though she could not well discern the Figures whereby to
describe 'em; the Window was very large, and strongly secured with Iron Bars, a
defense against Banditties, and Robbers, which are there very frequent: The
Prospect before the Window was a lovely Garden, with a pleasant Fountain in the
middle, adorned with all that Art and Nature was capable of: Near it was a
little Wilderness, in the center whereof was a Spring, whose Water was received
in a Cistern of Alablaster, which was held by the Statue of a Nymph cut in
White Marble: Near unto it stood a row of Orange Trees, whose Fragrant smell
was very comfortable: The Walls of the Garden which enclosed it were very high;
many Difficulties stood in opposition to hinder her escape, and the view that
she had taken of every thing induced her to believe, that the Owner thereof
must needs be some Magnifico, and not one of an ordinary Extraction: Wandering
some time round the Apartment, at length she spyed a Table Book, richly Bound
in Seals Skin, neatly over-laid with Silver, and curiously wrought, and
engraved, with a large Silver Pin belonging to it, which lay upon a Cabinet
that stood near to the Window: She took it and put it up in her Pocket, not out
of any ill design of Robbery; but being inspired to promote a discreet Design,
which her Thoughts prompted her to: Having secured it, she shut the Window,
leaving it as she had found it, and returned back to the Bed, expecting what
kind of end such a bad beginning would produce.

To her thinking, it was not much above half an hour after, that she heard a
Door open, and some person coming to her, and without so much as speaking one
Word, with an Handkerchief Blindfolded her; and taking her by the Arm, took her
out of the Room, and shut fast the Door after him. This Person was Octavio, who
though he had been upon the search for his fellow Libertines, yet he was not
altogether willing to find them, or give them the least intelligence of that
Nights Transactions; and therefore resolved to acquaint 'em, that repenting
himself of that ill Act, and being moved with the Virgin's Tears, left her in
the Midway: Having thus recollected himself, he returned back with all speed,
to convey Almeria, near to the Great Church, according to her own Directions:
Before the Morning was approached too far, and to avoid the inconveniency of
detaining her till the Night following; in which Interval of time, he resolved
to exercise no more Violence, nor give any other occasion to discover himself.
Having conducted her to the place appointed, he told her in a kind of broken
Language, and with a counterfeit Voice, She might then go securely to her own
Habitation, and that none should follow her to espy where she went; so left her
to untie the Handkerchief which he had bound about her Eyes; which before she
could loosen, he was got far enough out of her sight.

Almeria being now at Liberty, she made all the have she could, still looking
behind her, at every step she fetched; going to her Father's House, she found
her Parents amazed, and astonished, and so far from preparing themselves to go
to Bed, that they had not so much as entertained the least thought of taking
any Rest: When they saw her, they ran to her with open Arms, and Embraced her,
and indulgently received her. Tears of Joy had furnished their Eyes, and their
Tongues could not express their Gladness, for the present, their Hearts being
so transported within them: But Almeria's Heart being loaded with Passion, and
overwhelmed with Grief, besought her Parents to withdraw into a private Room,
and there, in a few Words she gave them an account of what had befaln her, and
her unfortunate Success, with all other Circumstances belonging to it, but
could not by any means discover the person that robbed her of her Honor: She
acquainted them with all she had beheld in that Famous Theater, wherein was
Acted that Woeful Tragedy of her Misery; the pleasant Garden, and Fountains, the
Cabinets, the Bed, and Hangings of rich Arras; and last of all, she showed them
the fine Table Book, which she had brought from thence with her: She likewise
told 'em, though she did not desire to come to the knowledge of him, who was
the Offender; yet if they thought it convenient to have him discovered by the
means of that Table Book they might do it, by causing it to be publicly
proclaimed, that he who had lost such a Table Book might have it restored at
such a place, as the Party that lost it should appoint: So by knowing the Owner
of it, they might both know the House, and likewise this Libertine. But
(Almeria's Father replied) your Advice, Dear Child, is very pertinent, and
would take good effect, were it put in Execution, if the Subtilty, and
Craftiness of the World, now in these days, did not make any opposition: For,
in all probability, such a Trifle as that may not suddenly be missed; but,
perhaps if it should, they would set no great value on it, especially such an
Owner, as you describe this Libertine to be, and when he recollects himself,
that the Person which was with him in his Apartment took it away, he will
rather desire to have it Concealed than Divulged.

Her Father therefore advised her to keep it secure, for perhaps (said he) in
process of time, thou may have occasion to make use of it; for as it has
been a Witness of thy Dishonor, it may at last be an Evidence to procure thee
Justice, and revenge that Wrong which thou have so lately received: I tell
thee, Dear Child, that the least Grain of public Dishonor lies heavier upon
us, than a ponderous weight of secret Infamy; True Dishonor consists in Sin,
and true Honor in Virtue: The Powers Divine, are offended with our Sayings,
Doings, and Desires; and since that thou neither in Thought, Word, or Deed,
have provoked the Divine Vengeance, esteem thy self Virtuous; for I shall ever
have that Charity for thee, and continue to thee still a Kind, and Indulgent
Father. With these Prudential Reasons, did this old Gentleman comfort up his
Daughter Almeria; and her Mother Embracing her, confirmed what her Father had
cherished her withal; and desired her not to let any Sorrow, or Grief disturb
her Mind, for she retained the same Affection for her now, as she had formerly:
Whereupon, she burst forth into showers of Tears, and often did abscond her
self, and through Modesty's Promptitude, she betook her self to a Private, and
Retired Course of Life, under the Shelter, and Protection of her Parents.

Octavio in this Interval, being returned home, and sitting down in his
Chamber, as he cast his Eye upon the Cabinet, he missed his Table Book, but
presently he imagined, the Party that he brought home might take it away with
her; he made slight of it, and never made any enquiry after it: Many days
before, Octavio had determined to Travel into Italy, for his Father who had
been there in his Minority, persuaded him to go, instructing him, that they
could not attain to true Gentility, who had not gained it by Experience in
Travel; Octavio ^ut on that Resolution, to be Conforma^le to the Will of his
Father, whom he knew would set him forth in a good Equi^age; he gave him Bills
of Exchange pay^ble at Sight, for good round Sums of Money, for all those
places, whether he intended; so that he, and two of his Libertinian Companions,
prepared for their Journey: They had taken up three Places in the Italy Coach,
to go for Rome, Genoa, and Na^; there were three Persons in the Coach, besides
themselves, which had taken Places in the Coach, a Lady, a Young Gentleman, and
an University Scholar. Amongst all their Discourse Octavio enquired what Italy
afforded for the satisfaction of Gentlemen? The Stranger that was in the Coach,
told him it was a place very Pleasant, Ingenious, and Witty, for he had been
there, and could give a very good account of it: As for the People, many of 'em
were of an Effeminate Disposition, he told him, for he had heard many Stories
from them, which he could relate, if it would not tire out their Patience:
Octavio, and the Lady told him, he would highly oblige them, and it would prove
a very Diversitive Recreation: The Gentleman informed them, that he was willing
to contribute any Discourse to the good Companies Satisfaction, and should
esteem it as a great Honor, if what he was to relate, should receive their
kind Acceptance; so that not to hold them any longer in Suspense, he related
the first that came in his Mind, and directed himself to 'em all.

In one of the Cities of Italy, there lived a Person, a Man, of whose Nature,
if one might judge by the Complexion of his Face, that he was a greater Servant
to Bacchus, than to the Priests of Diana; he had Married a Woman of a large
Fortune, and good Reputation, and who governed her Family and Children very
discreetly, at which her Husband was much satisfied: One day it was told him,
that his Wife was fallen very Sick, being taken suddenly, and was in very great
danger of ending her days; whereat ^e appeared as sorrowful as a Man might be,
and in great Diligence made haste to her relief. He found her in that desperate
Condition, that she stood in more need of a Priest to absolve her, than of a
Physician to cure her; and therefore he expressed for her the greatest
Lamentation in the World; and the better to dissemble his Grief, he spoke
faintly, and with a hollow accent in the Throat, in Imitation of his dying
Wife; and that Painter must be a good Artist, that could lively represent the
sadness of his Looks and Countenance.

After that he had paid all the Services to her that possibly he could, she
then desired that a Crucifix should be brought her; which the good Man
perceiving, he cast himself on the Bed, and thinking his Wife past all hopes of
recovery, he cried out, and fal^ering with his Tongue, did Expostulate, O
Heavens! What shall I do, I shall lose my poor Wife, I shall become the most
wretched, and most unhappy Man in the World! With diverse other Complaints. At
the last, when he perceived there was no Body in the Room but his dying Wife,
and a young Chambermaid, Beautiful enough, and very amiable, he called her
softly to him, and said to her, Sweetheart, I am ready to die my self, to see
thy Mistress in this Condition; I am so overwhelmed with Grief, I know neither
what to say or do, but only to recommend my self to thee, and to Desire thee to
take Care of my House and Children: Here take these Keys, and look well after
what I commit to your Charge, for I shall not be able to look after them any
more.

The poor Girl being moved with Compassion to hear him express these Words, did
endeavor to comfort him what she could, and did beseech him, that he would not
enter into so great a Despair; for if she must lose her Mistress, she hoped she
should not lose her good Master also. He replied, Sweetheart, it is
impossible, for I find my self to be a dying Man, and not for this World, See
how the cold Sweat stands upon my Brow; put your Cheek unto mine, and your Lip
unto my Lip; and speaking these Words, he forced his Hand into her Breast,
whereat the Maid seemed very Coy* but he desired her to let all Fears vanish,
for if she had any hopes of his Recovery, she must approach nearer to him, and
with those Words, he took her in his Arms, and threw her on the Bed. His Wife
who had not spoken in two days before, did with her weak Voice, begin to cry
out as loud as possible she could, Ah, ha! what are you a doing? I am not as
yet Dead; and threatening them with her hand! O you wicked Creatures! I am alive
still, and hope I shall not die yet.

Her Husband and the Chambermaid hearing her Voice, did immediately rise; but
she was so extremely incensed against them, that her Anger consumed all the
moisture of her Catarrh, which was the load she was perplexed withal before,
and caused her to r^ttle in the Throat, and could not utter so much as one
Word; but now she gave them all the Opprobrious Language she could imagine. And
from that Minute she began to recover, and perpetually did reproach her
Husband, for making so much of his Chambermaid.

Having ended his Story, the Gentleman appl^ed himself to the Lady, Madam (said
he) you may see the Hypocrisy of Men, that for a little pleasure, they forget
all the Sorrows and Pains their poor Wives endure; but we must have so much
Charity for him as to believe he thought it the only. Remedy for her Recovery;
for seeing all his Kindness and Affection could not raise her out of that
languishing Condition, he was resolved to try this Experiment, which indeed
proved a Catholicon. Indeed Sir, (replied the Lady) I cannot blame you for
harboring so much Charity for your own Sex; but had it been my Case, I should
not have rise only out of my Bed, but out of my Grave also, to be revenged on
such a Husband. What wrong (replied the Gentleman) Madam did he do to comfort
himself a little after he thought she was Dead; for I hope there is none of the
Company here Ignorant, that the Bonds of Matrimony continue no longer than
Life, and then the Knot is untyed. But how untied, (said the Lady?) It Is true,
the Obligation of the Oath is of no effect any more; but a good Husband, would
always preserve the Obligation of Love; he had soon laid aside his Mourning,
who could not have Patience, till Death had put a period to her Life.

By this time they were well forward on their Journey, and the Gentleman told
them, he could relate to them a Story which was contrary to this, wherein the
Woman was very Diligent to create a Kindness from him. After they had all
returned their thanks, they earnestly entreated him to furnish them with what
he was pleased to relate: whereupon he proceeded as follows.

In Spain there lived an A pothecary, whose Name I shall conceal, who had
espoused a Virtuous Woman, a good House-wife, and Beautiful enough to give him
content. But as he tasted of diverse Druggs, so he did often times of diverse
Women, the better to enable himself to Discourse of all Complexions; whereat
his Wife was so much tormented, that she lost all Patience; for he made slight
of her, and loved her not so well, as she expected. One day this Apothecary
being in the Shop, and his Wife near at hand, where she concealed her self, the
better to listen to his Discourse, there came to him one of his Gossips, a
Woman of the City, and troubled with the same Disease his Wife was, and sighing
to the Apothecary, O dear Sir! she said, I am the most fortunate Woman in the
World: For I Love my Husband as well as I love my self, and perform whatever
Obedience, or Duty binds me to to him; but all my Labor is but lost, for he
loves the most wicked, the most deformed, and the most nasty Slut in all the
Town, better than he Loves me. I would therefore entreat you, good Neighbor,
if you have in your Shop, any Drug that may serve to change his Complexion,
that you would let me have it; for I am not well used by him; and I assure you,
I will give you what ever it shall cost me.

The Apothecary having a great desire to Pleasure his Customer, said to her,
that he had a Powder, which if she put it in something either boiled or
roasted, and gave it to her Husband, it would make him give her the best and
fullest Contentment in the World; the Woman being very earnest to see that
Miracle, desired to know what it was; he represented to her that it was only
the Powder of Cantharides, of which he had great store in his Shop; and before
she went away, she constrained him to prepare and weigh out some of that Powder
for her; and she took with her so much as he knew would serve to do the
Business; for which she afterward paid him, and gave him many hearty thanks;
her Husband being a strong bodied Man, and not taking too much of it, felt no
great Alteration in himself, but she found the good effects of it.

The Wife of the Apothecary, understanding all this Discourse, did think with
her self, that she stood altogether in as much need of the receipt as her
Companion. And observing the place, where her Husband did put the remainder of
the Powder that was left, she resolved to make use of it her self, the first
opportunity she could find; which within three or four days after wards she
did, her Husband de^ng her to make him some good Pottage, (for he was troubled
with a great cold in his Stomach.) She told him that something ^ed would do
better, and be more profitable. wherefore he commanded her to go presently to
the Market, and to buy some what to roast, and to take Cinnamon and Sugar out
of the Shop to put in the Sauce: which she did accordingly, and did not forget
the rest of the Powder, which he had given before part of it to her Companion;
she put it in, without regard either of Weight or Measure. Her Husband eat
heartily of the Meat she had prepared, and liked it very well, and not long
afterward found the Heat and Effects of it, which he thought to qualify with
his Wife, which was impossible for him to do, for the Heat within him, and the
Instigation, was so extraordinary, that he did not know on which side to turn
him. Whereupon he persuaded his Wife she had poisoned him, and was very
importunate to know of her what she had mixed with his Meat; she confessed the
truth unto him, and withal assured him, that she had as much Occasion of that
Receipt, as the Woman whom he prescribed it to for her Husband.

The poor Apothecary could not use any rigor to her, for the wrong she had
done him, being at that time in so great an Extremity, but commanded her to go
out of his sight, and send for his Brother Apothecary, in the same City, to
desire him to take that Trouble upon him to give him a Visit, who administered
to him all the cooling things that were effectual for his Recovery. In a short
time he was well amended, and his Brother Apothecary did reprehend him very
sharply for his rashness, that he should be guilty of so much folly, as to
advise another to take those Drugs, which he would not make use of himself; and
that the good Woman his Wife, had done no more, than what she ought to do, to
procure to her self that Love from him, which she so much desired. At length,
the poor Man was forced to overcome his folly with Patience, and to acknowledge
it was but just to make that Ridiculous Experiment fall upon himself which he
had prepared for another.

Now Madam, (said the Gentleman) in my opinion the Love of this Woman, was as
indiscreet as it was great. Do you call that Love, Sir, to her Husband (replied
the Lady) to make him suffer so much torment, in a fond hope that she might
receive some pleasure from him? I do believe Madam, (said the Gentleman) that
she had no other intention than to recover her Husband's love, which she
conceived, if not to be altogether lost, yet certainly to be gone astray; for
to obtain so great a blessing, a Woman ought to leave nothing undone to
accomplish it; the Lady told him she thought it her Judgment, that no Woman
ought to give her Husband any thing either to eat or drink, without advice from
others or her own Experience, whether it may prove hurtful; but ignorance ought
to be excused, in regard it was a Woman, that was blinded with the passion of
Love, and are allowed to be weaker Vessels; they all laughed heartily at the
Repartees between 'em, and returned the Gentleman many thanks for his diverting
of them; and now being arrived at their Journeys end, for that Stage, they
allighted, and called for a Dinner, where we will now leave 'em, and return to
Almeria.

Octavio had no resentments of what had past betwixt himself and Almeria but
appeared very Jocund and Merry, while she in the interim led a sedentary Life
in the House of her Parents, with all possible retiredness, not permitting any
person to visit her, least any discovery should be made of her misfortunes; in
this Solitariness within a few Months, she perceived, that she was obliged to
confine her self, and to be obscure from all Eyes, except those which were
continually with her. She saw it was convenient to live Cloystered up, finding
to her sorrow, her unhappy condition, in having an Infant, without any Husband,
a misfortune which occasioned those many Tears, which were before a little
mitigated, but now sprung forth a fresh like running Fountains; those Sighs
which for a while remained calm and quiet, rise again like fierce and
tempestuous winds that blow against each other; her Mother used all the
diligence, that her Maternal care could furnish her with to allay the violence
of her passion, but all her gentle persuasions could not afford her sorrows any
relief.

Time fled away with a swift Wing, and the time of her Delivery was come; which
was carried with that Secrecy, that she would not entrust any Midwife; but her
Mother taking that Office upon her, soon performed it, and brought into the
World, a little young Son, one of the loveliest and beautifullest Babes that
Nature could produce; which as it was born with wariness and secrecy, so it was
conveyed with the like Circumspection to a Country Village, where he continued
four years; at the end whereof under the denomination of Nephew, his
Grandfather brought him home to his own house, where he was bred up very well,
in that which his Minority rendr'd him capable of; Nicola (for so was the Child
called) was of a fair Complexion, a delightful Countenance, and a sweet
disposition together with a quick Wit, that in all those Actions which he
performed, in that tender age, he gave apparent demonstrations, that his
Extraction was of noble parentag^; so that his Wit, Beauty, and pretty
Behavior, Created so great an affection in his Grandfather and Grandmother,
that they esteemed their Daughters misfortune, to be a happiness; she having
furnished them with such a Grandchild. As he went through the Streets, some
praised his Beauty, others blessed the Mother that bare him, some the Father
that begat, and others those that had brought him up, and had bestowed upon him
such good Education. With this applause of those that knew him and of those
which were Strangers, the Child grew to be seven years of Age; in which time he
had learned to read Spanish and Latin, and to write a very good hand; and made
so great improvement at his years, that he was the admiration of all his
instructours.

Now it happened one day that the Child was sent to visit a Kinswoman of his
Grand-mothers, and it was his chance to pass through a Street where some
Gentlemen were running Careers with their Horses, which the Child staying to
look upon, and for his better convenience of seeing them, ran cross the Street,
from one side to the other, just in such an ill Conjuncture of time, that he
could not avoid a Horses running over him; whose rider with all the strength he
had, was not able to stop in the Fury of his Career, so that he left him
sprawling on the Ground for dead, much Blood issuing out of his Mouth.

This sad mischance had scarce happened, when an Ancient Gentleman, who was
beholding the Career, with extraordinary agility leapt from his Horse, and
taking the Child out of the Arms of him that held him, into his own, neither
considering his own Grey-hairs, nor regarding his Authority, which was great,
he hastened home to his own House, and sent his Servants immediately for a
Surgeon; many Gentlemen followed him grieving and lamenting at the sad
accident that had befaln so sweet and fair a Child. The ill news presently was
dispersed abroad, that the Child which had received the harm, was Nicola, the
Nephew of such a Gentleman, naming his Grandfather; this report went from one
to another till it reached at last the Ears of his Grandfather and
Grandmother, and his disconsolate retired Mother Almeria; who being fully and
truly informed of this unhappy Accident, ran immediately out of Doors, in great
distraction, so see what was become of their only Darling.

They quickly understood, the Gentleman that took care of him, was well known
to be a person of great Quality in the City; therefore flying thither in a
hurry betwixt love and fear, they arrived at the Gentleman's house, just at that
instant when the Child was under the Chirurgeon's hands. The Gentleman and his
Wife, who were the owners of the House, entreated those whom they supposed to
be the Child's Parents, not to weep, which would do the Child no good but
prejudice. They began to be a little cheerful when the Surgeon, who was one
Famous for his skill, having dressed him, informed 'em that the wound was not
so Mortal, as at first he imagined it to have been.

When Nicola was dressed and laid to sleep, his Grandfather began to give the
Master of the house thanks, for the great Care and Charity he had extended
toward his Nephew; to which the Gentleman replied that he had no occasion to
thank him; intimating to him that when the child fell, he perceived so much of
his Son's Physiognomy in the Face of the Child, that it moved him to pity and
Compassion, to take care for that which represented one that he loved so
tenderly; moreover he told him he should be kindly entertained in his House
till the Surgeon had fully completed the Cure, and that he should not want
whatever his house could afford him, that was needful and necessary for him;
his Wife, who was a fine, noble and well accomplished Lady, repeated many words
to the same effect, somewhat more enlarging and endearing her promises.

The Grandfather and Grandmother of the Child did much admire at this their
wonderful Charity and Love, but the Mother much more, for her mournful Spirit
being in some measure Comforted by the Chirurg^s reviving words, she diligently
observed the Lodg^g where her Son lay, and by manifest signs and tokens clearly
perceived that it was the Room, which put a period to her Honor, and a
beginning to her misfortunes. And tho it were not now so richly furnished as
then it was, yet she remembered the Figure and Form of it; she viewed the
Windows which were strongly fortified, which looked into the Garden; but that
which with the greatest Curiosity she observed, was the Bed, which gave her
that assurance, that it was the same, which proved a Tomb to her Virginity, and
moreover that the same Cabinet whereon lay the Table Book which she carried
away with her, remained still ^oved from that place where she left it; and
lastly the number of the Stairs certified he^ to be in the right by reason she
had retained the account of them in her Memory, ever since she was led
blindfolded out of the House into the Street.

When she returned home, she gave a large account to her Mother of these
passages, who like a discreet Woman, informed her self whether this Gentleman
where her Neph^w lay, had any Son, or no? And she found that he, whom the Story
calls Oct^io, was his Son, and at that time in Italy; and so summing up the
time, that he had bin absent from Spain, they saw that it agreed with the age
of the Child; the Grandmother gave notice of all this to her Husband, and
betwixt them two and Almeria their Daughter, they agreed to wait with
Expectation, to see how the divine powers would be pleased to dispose of the
Child, who within Fifteen days was out of danger of his received hurt, and at
the end of thirty, was upon his Feet, and of ability to walk up and down the
Chamber; in all which time, he was visited by his Mother and Grandmother, and
was as indulgently made much of by the Gentleman and his Wife, the owners of
the House, as if he had been their one Child.

Moreover, Dona Traciana (for so was the Gentleman's Wife called) Discoursing
with Almeria, told her this Child so much resembled a Son of here is who was in
Italy, that she never looked upon him, but he put her in mind continually of
him, that he was always harbored in her Thoughts; from which Words of hers,
Almeria taking upon Occasion an opportunity, when she was alone, which in a
little time after offered it self; Madam (said she) the day that my Parents
heard of that sad Disaster their Nephew received, their credulity advanced to
that pitch, they verily imagined that the Divinity had wholly excluded them,
and that all the orbicular Crosses had attended them; they conceived that they
had lost the light of their Eyes, whom they loved so dearly, and in such an
extraordinary Passion of Love that by many degrees it exceeds that which
Parents commonly bear to their own Children; but (as we usual say) that when
Heaven decrees the Wound, it likewise prescribes for it a remedy. This Child
has now tried that Experiment, and has found the Expedient in this House; and
I my self can recollect my Memory, to inform me of some Transactions which I
shall never cease to forget the longest day I have to live, and the last hour
that I retain my Senses. I must now acquaint you, (Dear Madam) I am not of
Ignoble Extraction, by reason my Parentage proves it to the contrary, and so
have been all my Ancestors, whose Progeny with a meaner benevolence of Fortune
have still happily supported their Honor and Reputation wheresoever they
inhabit, being our selves, though fallen from their pristine Glory.

Dona Traciana was stricken both with wonder and suspense at Almeria's
discourse, considering how feelingly her words came from her, and could not
give Credit, though she was witness of it, that so much discretion could be
Comprehended in so few years, not judging her to be above Twenty years of Age;
so that without replying so much as one word, she stood expecting to hear what
she would further express her self in, which was at length sufficient enough,
to inform her of her Sons Lasciviousness, and Wantonness, and of her own
dishonor, in the violation of her Virginity, of his hurrying of her away by
force and violence, of his tying a handkerchief over her eyes, and of his
bringing her to that very room wherein she now was, and giving her many
demonstrations, and signal tokens, whereby she certainly knew that it was the
same Chamber, which so strongly confirmed her suspicion; and furthermore, the
better to confirm what she had related for truth, she pulled out of her Pocket
the Silver Table Book, which she had taken from off the top of the Cabinet:
then she proceeded in this manner.

Madam, I hope the divine Powers, who were Eyewitnesses of the wrong which was
offered to me, will in their due time revenge my cause, and afford me that
relief and reparation of my Honor, as in due satisfaction and right I may
claim that interest, from the top of that Cabinet I took this Table Book, to
reserve as a Mirror only to put me in mind of the injury I received, but not to
imprecate a revenge for my misfortunes; only Madam, I beg of you to exercise
your Charity toward me, by assisting me with your comfortable and prudent
Council, whereby I may the better be enabled to bear this my injured innocence
with strength and patience, this Child (Madam) on whom you have extended the
utmost of your Charity, may without any imposturous design claim an alliance to
you, it being the off spring of your own Son; and for the disaster which befell
it, it was Heaven's decree it should be so ordered, that by his being received
into your House, his Mother might hope to find some redress in this her
Calamity, if not the Remedy, which is most Convenient for the Curing of her
misfortunes, yet at least the means in some measure to support and refresh her
fainting Spirits.

Having said this, she fainted away in Dona Traciana's Arms, who like a noble
Lady, in whom compassion and pity, flowed like a mighty stream, had scarce
perceived Almeria to faint, but she joined her Cheeks to hers, bestowing so
many Tears upon 'em, that there was no occasion of springling any Water on her
Face to revive her; while they both thus remained in this kind of ecstasie, it
was Dona Traciana's Husbands Fortune to enter into the Room, leading Nicola in
his Hand, who beholding Traciana Weep and Almeria, lying in a Swoun by her, he
was amazed, and with great earnestness hastily enquired into the occasson of
such a Scene of astonishment. The Child Nicola embraced his Mother, as his
Cozen, and his Grandmother, as his Benefactress; and he likewise asked the
occasion of their Weeping. Great and Strange Transactions I have to relate to
you, replied Traciana to her Husband; the ultimate of it is, I can assure you,
this Lady, which remains in this ecstasie, is your Daughter, and this loving
Boy, your Grandchild; this truth which I inform you of, was related to me by
this young Lady, and the Physiognomy of this young-Child confirms it; having
often both of us beheld in his Countenance the Lineaments of our own Son: If
you give me intelligence of no more than this, Wife, (replied her Husband) I do
not understand your meaning.

By this time Almeria had recovered her self, she lift up her Head, holding
fast the Silver Table Book in her Hand, and seemed to be like Niobe turned into
a Sea of Tears, all which put the Gentleman into a greater Confusion and
Amazement than he was before, till Traciana had freed him from his surprise, by
informing him what Almeria had imparted to her; so that at length he was as
fully convinced, as if the whole had been proved, and attested by many
substantial and credible witnesses; thereupon he comforted and embraced
Almeria, and kissed his Grandchild Nicola; and the same day dispatched a Post
to Italy, requiring the immediate return of his Son home with all speed,
intimating to him that he had concluded a Marriage for him, one that was Rich,
Fair, and Beautiful; and such a Lady as was most proper and convenient for him,
and very agreeable and suitable to his Condition, Person, and Quality; nor would
they by any means permit Almeria, or consent, that either she or her Child
should return back to her Fathers house, who were indeed beyond measure
satisfied with the News of this good Success of their Daughter and only Child
Almeria. They returned very often infinite thanks to the divine Powers of
granting them this opportunity in receiving so seasonable and happy a redress.

Nor was it long ere the Post hasted speedily from Naples, and Octavio out of
an eager, and fervent desire to enjoy so fair a Wife, with all those
Accomplishments as his Father had represented to him; within two days after the
receipt of his Father's Letters, occasion of passage being offered unto him for
his return into Spain, taking hold of that opportunity he embarked himself,
with two of his Libertinian Companions, who had never left him; and with a
prosperous Gale of Wind, in twelve days he safely arrived at Barcelona, and
from thence (furnishing himself with good Posthorses) in seven more he came to
Toledo, and entered into his Father's House in such a brave, and gallant
Equipage as did exceed many in that Country; his Parents rejoiced in great
Measure to see him, after so long an Abscence, and he was no less glad to find
'em in good health, after so long and tedious a Voyage and Journey.

Almeria, who kept himself in Obscurity, yet from a private Window had a full
view, and prospect of him, that she might not transgress the Directions
dictated to her by Traciana; she entered into a great Consternation with her
self, being dubious what Effects this business would produce. Octavio's fellow
Libertines were very willing, and defirous to return presently home to their
respective Houses; but Traciana would by no means permit 'em, they being in
some measure to be instrumental in effecting of her design. The Evening was
near approaching when Octavio arrived, and in the Interim of time that Supper
was a providing, Traciana watched an opportunity, to discourse with her Sons
two Companions, alone by her self; for it entered into her thoughts, that these
must needs be two of those three, whom Almeria informed her of, which
accompanied her Son Octavio that Night when he carried her away; and with
great, and earnest Entreaties she besought them to oblige her so far, and to
give her that intelligence, Whether they did not remember, that her Son on such
a Night, so many Years since, had carried away (by Violence) such a Virgin? For
to be certain of the Verity of that Nights Transaction, so much concerned her,
that upon it depended the Honor and Peace, not only of his Parents, but the
whole Affinity of Kindred.

This she required with so many Endearments, engaging her self solemnly to
them, that the Discovery of it should be no ways prejudicial, but should remain
in her Breast as great a Secret, as though it never had been revealed. They
were not a little surpised at her Words, and acquainted her that it was not
customary for Associates to declare each others Proceedings, or make any
Discovery likewise of their Frolicks: But seeing she was so urgent, and they
ignorant of the Emergency of the occasion, they thought fit to declare what
their Memory could recollect; and were it not in so weighty a Cause, as she is
pleased to express her self, they were liable to be branded for Betrayers of
Secrets.

Then they acquainted her, that what she desired to be informed of, was of a
certain truth, that them two, and another of Octavio's Friends were upon the
Ramble one Night, in the Summer time, with a Resolution to Debauch some young
Virgin, the next that opportunely offered for their purpose; and they did not
know but that it might be the same Night, which she had nominated to them: At
last they met with their Prize, which was a Young Lady, walking to take the
Pleasure of the Evening, accompanied by her Father, Mother, and Attendants; her
they Assaulted, and Octavio took her up in his Arms, and posted away with her,
whilst the other three detained the rest of the Company, that they might not
obstruct his Enterprise, nor any ways rescue her from his intended Proceedings.
The next day following, Octavio informed them, that he conveyed her to his
Lodging: What farther Progress he made, they were not acquainted with, neither
were they so inquisitive, as to press him to any other Confession, more than
what his own Voluntary Inclination prompted him to. This being all which they
could relate, they hoped, if it gave her satisfaction, they had discharged
their Duty, in Obedience to her Commands.

This Confession of theirs, was the Key which unlocked the Door to all the
Doubts and Scruples, which in such Cases offer themselves: And therefore, she
put on that Resolution, to go on with the Design she had contrived, and to
bring the Issue of it to a happy Conclusion: To effect it the better, a little
before they went to Supper, Octavio's Mother went apart with her Son into
another Chamber, and pulling a small Picture out of her Pocket very well drawn
by a Curious Artist, put it into his Hands, saying withal, Son Octavio, I
intend this Night to make you very welcome, and your Friends, with a very good
Supper, and to entertain you with a very Pleasant, and Savory Dish, and for
your Diversion, to propose to you a Bride; this is her true Effigies; but
withal, I must tell you, that you may consider the better upon it, what Nature,
by her Defects, has been wanting to her Beauty, is superabundantly supplied to
her in Virtues and Graces. She is Noble, Discreet, Worthy, and indifferently
Rich; and since your Father, and my self have made choice of her for you, I
hope you will place the greater esteem on her, and not be guilty of
disobedience by your Refusal; for I can assure you, she is such an one, as is
most proper, and worthy my Recommendation.

Octavio beheld the Picture with a searching, and judicious Eye; and after he
had done viewing of it, If Painter's (said he) who commonly are used to be
prodigal of their bestowing Beauty on those Faces which they deleneate, have
been busy with Flattery in this Copy, I dare be confident to say, and may very
well give Credit to it, that the Original must of necessity be made when Nature
was in have; and instead of perfection, has made use of nothing but surprising
Deformity. In truth, Madam, it is but just, that Children should obey their
Parents in all their lawful Commands; but withal, it is likewise requisite, and
necessary, that Parents should in some measure condescend to what is most
agreeable, and s^itable to their Childrens Dispositions; for since the Bonds of
Matrimony are not to be loosed, but by each other's departure from this Life;
nor the Cord, which, like the Gordian Knot, be untied, but by the cold Hand of
Death; it were convenient, and much to be desired of every Person, to have Wove
in this Knot, where there is Nobleness, Virtue, Discretion, and Riches, to mix
Beauty with it in stead of Deformity, which would make a complete Composure,
and make a more pleasant Mansion for Love to seat it self. Indeed, Madam, in
obedience to my Father's Commands, and yours, I can perform my Duty by my
Acceptance; and should all those Gifts, and Graces, which you are pleased to
mention, meet in a happy Union; yet if the Physiognomy is not attractive, it
will rather extinguish the flame of Love, than kindle the Affections.

For if Beauty, and good Features be wanting, Matrimony will soon halt, and
become lame, and contradict Love which is its second Intention: Therefore, Dear
Madam, as you are my Mother, by the Decrees of Heaven, I humbly beseech and beg
of you, that you would not let your Maternal care be wanting, in granting me an
Object that may create an Affection, and not smother it; for Married Lives are
often accompanied with many Misfortunes, and Inconveniences which may usurp,
and disturb their Quiet; and should Deformity then appear, all the little
Pleasure, and Delight, which Mankind would enjoy, must immediately Vanish. If
this Lady be Noble, Discreet, and Rich, she cannot want a Husband, that may
happily be of a far more different temper than my self, and more suitable to
her Humor, and Disposition; for some seek after Honor, others Riches, others
Wisdom, and some for Beauty, of which last property I am one of that number: As
for Honor, and Riches, thanks to the Gods, my Ancestors, and Parents, have
furnished me with a good Competency of them, and it is only Beauty that can
complete my Felicity; one of a good Aspect, Brown Complexion, and well
featured, and one on whom Nature has bestowed some Pains, and Care in the Task
she undertook: Such a one (Madam) I could freelier enjoy without Honor, or
Wealth, than espouse those two chief Idols, which the World adores, than to let
Beauty, and an entire Affection be wanting.

His Mother was very well satisfied with his earnest Motives, and strong
convincing Arguments, which indeed carried on her Designs the better, and told
him, since he was so much averse to the Match she had proposed, she would
endeavor to procure such a Marriage for him, as should be answerable to his
Desire, and desired that what she had said might not prove a torment to him, it
being so easy to find out a Remedy, and disanul the former Contract and
Agreement. Octavio rendered her many thanks for her Care, and the hour of Supper
being come, they immediately prepared to sit down; at what time the Father and
Mother, Octavio, and his two Friends, being already set at the Table, Traciana,
after a Careless manner, as if her Memory had failed her, Bless me, quoth she!
sure my mind is intoxicated, to place my self before all my Guests are seated?
and one of my own Sex wanting, to whom I ought to be more obliging! go
immediately, and desire Almeria to come and honor my Table, and to lay aside
all Excuses, for here are none but Friends with me; thus far was her Designs
carried on, and Almeria had received before of her, Instructions; a little
space after, Almeria, with her Son in her Hand entered the Room, presenting on a
sudden in her Person, all the Splendour and Beauty, that either Art or Nature
could Contribute; she was very Rich attired, adorned with Pearls and Diamonds,
on her Head a Coronet of Ribbands, Tufts of Feathers intermixed with Rubies,
and other precious Stones which were interwoven, with them. They cast so great
a Luster that she dazzled the Eyes of all that beheld her.

Almeria was of a Facetious Disposition, an affable Temper, and of a quick and
lively Apprehension; two Maid Servants led the way, with two Wax Tapers in
Silver Candlesticks; when they beheld so rare a Masterpiece of Nature, the
more they looked the more they were astonished, and all rose up to pay their
Obedience, as if she had been some Deity sent from above. Almeria, with a
pleasant Deportment, and a serene Carriage, Gracefully saluted, with Modesty,
the whole Company, and Traciana taking her by the Hand, placed her by her; the
Youth Nicola, was seated by his Grandfather. Octavio was strangely surpised
at her transcendent Beauty, that he was even charmed into a kind of Rapture;
which gave Admittance to Almeria's Perfections, to take Possession of his Soul;
he often contemplated with himself, that had that been a fair Copy, which his
Mother showed him, of so blessed an Original as Almeria produced, he had been the
most happy Man in the World. Nor did Almeria's Eyes, less discover her Passion
than Octavio's, her Heart was so inflamed, with Loves powerful Darts,
perceiving him so near who had conquered her Affections, that she was even
ravished at his presence. Sometimes she would re-call to mind what had formerly
passed between her and Octavio, and then those hopes began to vanish which his
Mother had given her of his being her Husband; being Timorous that the
narrowness of her Fortune, would not be efficient to his Mothers Promises. She
ponderously considered with her self, how near she was of being happy, or
unhappy for ever. And so intense was this Consideration, and such the Violence
and Strength of her Conceptions and Imaginations, that it infused such
Perturbations upon her Heart, and on all her Vital Spirits, that she began to
change her Complexion, and to look pale and wa^ in an Instant; and presently
fainted away; and in this Trance she fell into Traciana's Arms.

Upon this, they all rose from the Table, being so surpised, and astonished
with this so sudden Passion. They immediately Addressed themselves to procure
means for her Recovery out of this languishing Condition. But he who gave most
Demonstrations of his Grief, was Octavio, who being in so extraordinary a
Passion himself, for mere have received two falls upon the Ground; but neither
the cutting her Laces of her Gown, nor sprinkling Water in her Face availed any
thing, to bring her again to her Senses; but the Rising and Pa^pation of her
Breast, and the faint bearing of her Pulse, discovered great symptoms of her
approaching Death. So that all were in so great a Consternation, and
overwhelmed with Grief, that they were even ^it for nothing but to entertain
Despair. The Servants of the House more Passionate than Prudent, made loud and
dolefu^l out cries that Death had seized her, and that she was a dead Woman.
They were altogether in so much Disorder, and Amazement, that they knew not
what Methods to take, or Remedies to apply. Octavio ^ag'd and stormed like one
that was Lun^tick, till his Mother Traciana endeavored to cheer up his
Spirits, by telling him, (what indeed she was not certain of) there was hope of
Life.

This sorrowful News, attended with such woeful Lamentations, arrived, and soon
gave the Alarm to the Ears of Almeria's Parents; whom for a more pleasing
Occasional Scene, Traciana had kept close and Secret; till she found a fit
opportunity, to make public this her private Design. Now without Orders being
given them by Traciana, Almeria's Parents hastily rushed into the Room, where
they were; but whereas they imagined to have found but one in a Swoon, contrary
to their Expectation, they perceived two. For Octavio was become a Sympathizer,
in the same Condition with Almeria, his Face leaning on Almeria's Breast, with
a Countenance equalizing Death it self. His Mother not presently perceiving his
Complexion, as she did the posture he was in, permitted him that Liberty, and
was very willing he should be so near her, she being the just and only proper
Object of his Love; but when she beheld her Son was likewise Motionless, and
lay prostrate for Dead, she was in a manner bereaved of her Senses, and had
been overcome with Passion, had she not immediately perceived him Breath;
Octavio having recovered himself, was not much out of Countenance, for having
been seen in such an Ecstasy, since it proceeded from such a sudden Passion,
as commonly the Effects of Love produces.

But his Mother, as one that prophetically knew her Sons Thoughts, addressed
her self to him after this manner, Dear Octavio (said she) ne'ne let these
transports trouble thee, for they are Natural, and it is usual for Lovers to be
inclined to them; I am sorry I have concealed that from thee so long, but it
was only out of a Design of a better opportunity; my Intention is now to put
thee out of all suspense, and to declare to you the true purport of this
Affair. You must know, dear Octavio, that this young Lady which lies there
intranc'd, your Father and my Self have made choice of for your Wife; and that
Picture which I showed you, was only a Counterfeit; I hope you will have no
Cause to repent of this our Care, but thank Heaven, and us, for so happy a
Union.

Octavio, at his Mothers Words, was transported with his Amorous Passion, and
inflamed Desire; and the Name of Husband removed all those Obstacles, which the
Respect and Decency of the place, seemed to oppose to his Affection; he
instantly ran to Almeria, and laying his Face close to hers, remained as one
expecting his Soul should breath its last, and either to bring hers back again,
or leave his with hers for ever.

But at length, when all their Expectations were almost at a period, and that
their Cries and Lamentations had almost wearied Grief it self. Almeria came
again to her self; and with her returning to Life, returned that pleasing Joy
and Content, which for a time had absented it self from the Hearts of those
that were about her. Opening her Eyes, she found her self fast in Octavio's
Embraces, from whence by a Modest force, she sought to unloose her self. But he
unwilling to let her go, told her it was not requisite she should depart his
Arms, who held her already so fast in his Soul. With which kind Words, Almeria
perfectly recovering her Strength, Traciana ordered the Priest forthwith to
make an end of the Matrimonial Ceremony.

Which being now fully concluded, I leave it to some choicer Pen, to sum up the
general rejoicing of all that were present; the Embraces and Congratulation
which Almeria's Parents gave Octavio; the thanks which they returned Heaven,
and to his Parents; the Admiration and Wonder of Octavio's Friends and
Companions, who so unexpectedly were Eyewitnesses the same Night of their
Arrival, of beholding so fair a Match concluded; and their greater wonder, when
they knew by Traciana's Discourse, that Almeria was the Virgin, which her Son
had violently carried away, that Night when they were in his Company.

Octavio, not being willing to remain in Suspense, but for his better
Certification, he entreated Almeria, that she would acquaint him with some
Proceedings, whereby he might render himself, the more capable of an
Acknowledgment of his Crime, since he was no ways dubious of the verity of it,
because his Parents had so well approved of his choice. Whereunto Almeria
replied, when I returned (Sir) out of that fainting fit I was in, I found my
self in your Arms, bereaved of my Honor; but I think it now well bestowed,
since in this my latter Recovery, I find my self in the same Arms I did then,
but with much more Honor and Reputation: and if this signal token be not proof
sufficient, let the Table Book be an Evidence, which none could take from you
but my self, which you could not chose but miss next Morning; and if that be
the very same which your Mother has now in her Custody, you are the Image of
my Soul which I highly. Esteem and Adore, and you shall ever remain still
nearest and dearest to me, as long as Heaven shall permit us to live together.
Then embracing her a new, iterating their Kisses over and over, they saluted
all the Company there with them; they having now a little respite of time,
Octavio's Father enquired of him concerning his Travels, how he had improved
his time, and what Diversion he had met withal.

Whereupon, Octavio replied, he was very well received, and met with very
facetious Company; and that in the return of his Journey, they were much
diverted with pleasant Stories. Supper being not yet ready, Octavio desired his
Friend Gregorius to furnish the Company with one of them. Gregorius willing to
oblige them, told them any service they were pleased to command him, he was
very ready to obey; whereupon he began:

There was a Gentleman in Italy, (whose Name I shall conceal,) and name
Gallipus, who afterward for rare Endowments was preferred to Honor, and was
highly esteemed by most Persons: he was often invited to Banquets where several
Ladies met. One day being in a Mask, he led in the Dance one of the most Brave
and Beautiful Ladies that was in that City; when the Music ceased, he always
entertained her with a Discourse of Love, which was his chief Delight, but she
would return him no answer; but oftentimes to interrupt his Discourse, and to
give a stop to his Desires, she would assure him, that she neither did, norever
would Love any but her Husband, and would by no means seem to Countenance him.
At this answer, the refused Gentleman would not desist, but vigorously
prosecuted his Suit for some time.

But for all his Endeavors, he found her steadfast in her Resolutions, neither
to love him, nor any else, which he could hardly believe, seeing the hard
Favor, and course Deportment of her Husband, and the Excellent Beauty of her
self; he determined therefore with himself, since she used Dissimulation, to
practice the same Art himself, and from that hour did forbear his Courtship,
and so narrowly enquired after her Conversation, that he found at last she
loved a Gentleman in the same City, who was Young, Handsome, and well Educated.
Gallipus by Degrees, acquainted himself with this Gentleman, with such cunning
and sweetness, that he mistrusted not in the least the Occasion; and the
Gentleman loved him so entirely, that next to his Mistress, who was this Lady,
there was none in the World that he tendered more affectionately. Gallipus to
pluck his Secret from his Heart, did Counterfeit to tell him all his own, and
amongst other Affairs acquainted him, that he loved such a Lady, when indeed he
scaree ever thought of her, and desired him to keep it private, as he was not
dubious at all of it, by Reason he placed in him so great a Confidence. The
poor Gentleman to show him a Reciprocal Love, did declare unto him very often
the Affection which he had for that Lady, on whose disdain, Gallipus would
revenge himself; once a day they met together, to acquaint one another with the
Fortunes which on that day they incountred, which the Gentleman did in Reality,
and the other in Dissimulation.

The Gentleman confessed to him, that he had loved this Lady three years,
without receiving any thing but good Words from her, and an assurance to be
beloved. Gallipus did Counsel and Instruct him in all the ways that possibly he
could, by which he might arrive to the Fruition of his Desires, which the
Gentleman found so Effectual, that in a few days she consented to all he
desired, and there remained nothing but to find out the opportunity, which by
the means of Gallipus was brought about. One day a little before Supper, the
Gentleman said to him, I am more obliged to you, than to all the Gentlemen in
the World; for by your good Directions, I hope to enjoy that this Night, which
so many years I have desired. 'Pray Sir, (said Gallipus) acquaint me with the
manner of your Enterprise, to see if there be any Deceit or Danger in it, that
I may assist, and serve you, according to the Obligations of our Friendship.

Whereupon, the Gentleman did particularly relate to him, that the Lady had got
the opportunity to have the great Gate of her House left open, in pretense of
an infirmity which one of her Brothers had, by reason whereof, every hour in
the Night they must send into the City, to help him with some Remedy in his
Necessity: She informed him that he might safely come into the Court, but
advised him to have a Care how he went up the Stairs, and that he might more
safely pass another way, and on less Stairs, which were on the right hand; and
that being come into the first Gallery, where were the Chambers of her
Father-in-Law, and her Brother-in-Law, he should come to the third Chamber,
next the little Stairs, and (knocking at the Door gently) if he should find it
to be locked, that then he should begone, for he might assure himself, her
Husband was come home, but if he found the Door open, that he should softly
come in, and lock the Door fast, being confident that there was none in the
Chamber but her self; and above all things, that he should not forget to come
to her with Shoes made of Felt, for fear of making a noise, and withal, that he
should have a great Care, that he came not till two of the Clock after
Midnight, because her Brothers-in-Law, who were much given to play, did seldom
go to Bed till after One.

The Gods protect thee, and Guard thee from all Inconveniences, (said
Gallipus,) and if my Company may do you any Service, it shall not be wanting.
The Gentleman thanked him very heartily, and told him, that in such an Affair
he could not be too secure, and that he would go to prepare himself. But
Gallipus would not hear of that Ear; and seeing it was the only time to revenge
himself on that cruel Lady, he retired to his own Lodging betimes, and had his
Beard cut, after the same size of the Gentleman's, and his Hair cut after the
same Fashion, that by her feeling she might not find any Difference. He
remembered likewise the Shoes of Felt, and did put on such Cloths as the
Gentleman was accustomed to wear, when he appeared most Gallant, and because he
was very well beloved by the Father-in-Law of the Lady, he feared not to go
thither before the appointed hour; conceiving with himself, that if he was
perceived, he would go directly to his Chamber, with whom he had some Business.

About twelve of the Clock he entered the House, where he found many Servants,
and some others coming and going, amongst whom he passed without being known,
and came into the Gallery. And thrusting against the two first Doors, he found
them shut, but the third not, having softly knocked at it, he went in, and
having locked the Door, he found all the Chamber hung in White, and a Bed of
Needle Work excellently well wrought, all in White, that it was impossible to
have it better, and the Lady alone within it, having on very rich Linen, Point
of Venice, and Jewels, which he perceived through a corner of the Curtain,
being not as yet seen by her, for there was burning in the Chamber a great
Candle of White Wax, which made the Chamber as bright as Day. And for fear he
should be known by her, he first of all put out the Light which was burning in
the Chamber, afterward he put off his Cloths and came into the Bed to her, who
thinking it was he whom so long she loved, did receive him with all the love
that possible she could.

But he who knew well enough, that it was in the Name of another, did not speak
one Word, and thought on nothing but thoroughly to put his Revenge in Execution,
which was to deprive her of her Honor, and Chastity against her Consent; but
the Lady was so well taken with that Revenge, that she thought she had
recompensed him for his long Sufferings. The Clock had now struck One, which
was the time to bid her farewell; and speaking to her as softly as he could, he
asked her, If she were as well pleased with him as he was with her? She
thinking that it was her Friend, made answer, that she was not only pleased,
but also marvell'd at the Greatness of his Love, which had held him a whole
hour without speaking to her. At that he began to laugh outright, and said to
her, now Madam will you refuse me another time, as you have been accustomed to
do, until this present? She knowing him too late, both by his Laughter, and his
Voice, was struck into an Amazement with the Shame she had brought upon her
self, and called him a thousand times wicked Traitor and Imposture, and would
have thrown her self out of the Bed, to have sought for a Knife to have killed
her self, because she was so unfortunate to have lost her Honor, with one whom
she loved not, and who, to be revenged of her, might divulge her shame
throughout the World.

But he held her in his Arms, and by sweet words did assure her, that he loved
her with a far greater passion, than the Gentleman whom she loved, and that he
would conceal that which touched her Honor, that she should never receive the
least discredit: Which the poor Lady believed, and understanding the invention
which he contrived to obtain her, and the difficulties he went through to
accomplish it, she did protest unto him, that she did love him better than the
other, who knew not how to conceal a Secret: But she did heartily entreat him,
that for a time he would forbear to appear at any Feast or Meeting where she
was, unless it were a Mask only, for she knew well enough that she should have
so many Blushes in her Cheeks, that her Countenance would declare it to all the
World: This he promised to proform, and also entreated her, that when his
Friend should come about two hours hence, that she would make him welcome and by
degrees withdraw her self from him; of which she made a great difficulty, but
because it was his desire, she at last consented to it; and taking his Farewell
of her, he did leave her so satisfied, that she could have been well contented
to have had him to have stayed longer.

After that he had rose, and dressed himself, he made have out of the Chamber
and left the Door half shut and half open, as he found it; and because it was
almost two of the Clock after midnight, he entertained a fear that he should
find the Gentleman in the way: he retired himself a little into a private
corner on the top of the Stairs, where not long afterward he observed the
Gentleman to pass by, and to enter into the Lady's Chamber; whereupon he
himself repaired directly to his own Lodging, to take some repose after his
Nights Travels, which he accordingly did, and rise not till Nine of the Clock,
at what time the Gentleman came to him; who never failed to give him an account
of his proceedings, which was not now so good as he hoped it would have proved;
for he told him, that when he came into the Lady's Chamber, contrary to his
expectation, he found her out of Bed, and in her Nightgown, having a great
Fever upon her, her Pulse beating very violently, her Face all on Fire, and a
great Sweat running down her Cheeks; wherefore she did immediately entreat him
to return from whence he came, for fear she should be enforced to call unto her
Maids to come to her Assistance, so violent was her Distemper, insomuch that
she said that she had more need to think of Death, than Love, and to discourse
rather of Heaven, than of Cupid.

However she was very sorry, for the hazard into which he had put himself for
the Love of her, because she had no power to make him in this World any
requital for his true Love, being ready to be gone into another; at this he was
so sad, and so astonished, that his Fire and his Joy were converted into I^ and
Sorrow, and so immediately he departed. In the Morning, on the break of day, he
sent to be more surely informed of her Health, and found for certain, that she
was in an extreme Indisposition, and Multiplying his Complaints for her, he
wept so abundantly, that it seemed as if his Soul was coming out with his
Tears; Gallipus who had as great a a desire to laugh, as the other had to weep,
did comfort him the best that possibly he could, and told him, that things of a
long Continuance, did always meet with an untoward beginning, and that love did
a little draw back, but to come on with the greater force, and to make the
delight more grateful; and upon these words they departed.

The Lady for a certain time kept her Bed, and upon the recovery of her Health,
bid adieu to her first Servant, and grounded it on the fear she had of Death,
and the remorse of her Conscience, and continued her Familiarities with
Gallipus, the continuation of whose Love, (according to the old Custom) was as
the Beauty of Flowers in the Feilds.

Gregorius having ended his Story, Supper not being yet ready, he informed the
Company that he had one more, if it would not tire their Patience, which was
transacted when he was upon his Travels into France; the Company desiring much
to hear it, entreated him very earnestly to relate it; whereupon he began as
follows:

In the Port of Cauloon, hard by Niort, there was a Ferry-mans Wife
Indifferently handsome, who Night and Day did nothing but Ferry over
passengers; it fell out that two Students of Niort passed the River with her
alone; and because it is one of the longest passages in all France (to keep
themselves in Action) they Courted the Woman in the way of Love; she returned
them a very good answer, though not suitable to their question; but they who
were not tired with the Journey they had taken to the River side, nor cold by
any Distemper of the Water, nor ashamed at the Denial of the Woman, they both
resolved to take her by force, and if she offered to cry out, they threatened to
throw her into the River; the Woman being as Wise and Cunning as they were
Foolish and Malicious, said to 'em, Gentlemen, I would not have you to think me
so hard hearted as I have expressed my self, all I desire of you is, only to
grant me two things, and you shall then understand that I have a greater desire
to obey you than you have to entreat me. The Students Swore Solemnly to her,
that she should not ask that thing of 'em, which they would not grant, provided
she would perform what they so much desired.

Whereupon, she told 'em in the first place, that she required both of 'em to
promise and swear, not to declare to any person in the World, the kindness they
should receive from her; to which they both very willingly consented. Secondly
(said she) I require that but one at a time shall caress with me, for I am not
a Woman of that Impudence to have any Witness that may behold my Frolicks;
therefore make your result which of you will engage first; they found this
request very just, and reasonable, and the youngest of 'em gave consent to the
Senior the privilege of exercising first; so drawing near to a small Island,
she said to the youngest stay here, and have a little Patience, until I have
carried your Friend into yonder Island; if at his return he recommends me to
you, we will leave him here, and then you and I will go together.

Whereupon the youngest of the Students leaped into the Island where he
attended the return of his Companion, whom the Ferry-woman was rowing to
another Island; when she came to it, she made a pretense to fasten her Boat,
least the stream should drive it away; then she applied her self to him and
said, Sir pray find out the privatest place you possible can; whereupon the
Senior Student entered upon the Island to find out some convenient corner fit
for their purpose; as soon as she saw him landed, with one of her Feet against
a Tree she thrust back the Boot, which presently returned into the River, and
left both the Students in the two Deserts, and then cried out as loud, as she
could to 'em, Sirs, pray wait there till I come to you, which I don't intend
shall be this day, nor the next week. The two poor distressed Students finding
the deceit, fell both on their knees upon the Banks of the River, begging and
entreating her, not to put them to that open disgrace, and assured her, that if
she would take 'em again into her Boat, and waft them to the place where they
intended to Land, they would use no farther importunity with her.

But she minded her rowing, and cried out, Who Will be the Fool then! I am glad I
have escaped a scowring and got so well rid of you; so returning to the
Village, she called her Husband and many others to behold this Comical Scene,
who attended her with a numerous train, that neither little nor great would
stay behind, but would all be participators of this sight; the poor Students
beholding so great a Company coming, went and hid themselves, but they were
soon found out after some diligent search, and were forced to receive the
Scoffs of the Multitude. Every one had their saying, especially the Waterman;
who jeeringly said to 'em, What! did you want a fresh bit, Neighbor? Indeed I
don't like you should have such an Extraordinary kindness for my Bedfellow,
but I Will pass it by this time provided you will not do so no more: the poor
Students could not tell what to do or say, they were so out of Countenance at
their Scoffs and Scorns; but they at last happened upon another Ferry-boat, and
so made their escape from the multitude; at last these Transactions reached
their Governors ears, who severely reproved 'em for it; but ever afterward
they were free from those absurdities.

Having ended his Story, Supper immediately came in, and the Musicians were
come which were beforehand provided for this purpose. Octavio beheld himself
in the Mirror of his Son's Countenance; the Kindred on both sides wept for joy;
nor was there any Corner in all the whole House which was not visited with
rejoyceing; and although time flew away with its nimble Wings, yet it seemed to
Octavio not to fly, but to walk with Crutches; so earnest was his desire to be
embraced in the Arms of his dear Almeria. At last came that so much expected
hour, they all of them went to Bed to take their rest, and the whole House
remained buried in Silence.

THE Uirgin Captive: A NOVEL.
AT what time the Queen of the Northern Island, won, and ransacked the City of
Cadiz, Prospero, Admiral of one of her Squadrons of Ships, upon his return
home, carried along with him to Mundolin, the chief City of the Northern Isle,
a young Virgin about seven Years of Age, contrary to the knowledge of the
General, who contenting himself with the spoil of their Goods, left the
Inhabitants free in their Persons: And therefore upon the complaint of her
Parents, he commanded diligent search to be made for the Child, to the end she
might be restored to her Father, and Mother. It seems, she was one of the most
lovely Children in all Cadiz; and therefore, notwithstanding all the General's
Proclamations, and Threats, Prospero had her kept close, and would by no means
obey the General's Command.

In short, her Parents were forced to sit down by the loss, afflicted, and
disconsolate; and Prospero went away not a little satisfied with his Prize:
Being arrived at Mundolin, he presented the fair young Virgin, as a rich Jewel
to his Wife; but as her kind Stars did direct her, all they of Prospero's
Household were Christians, though indeed outwardly they seemed to profess the
Religion of the Country. This Prospero at the same time had a Son called
Philocles, about twelve Years of Age, well Educated by his Parents; and Sabina,
the Wife of Prospero, a Noble, and Prudent Lady, had such a great Love, and
Affection for Aurelia, that had she been her own Daughter, she could not have
been more careful of her Breeding; and the Child was so well Endowed with
Natural Abilities, that she easily apprehended, and learned, whatever they
taught her. So that what with time, and the kind usage she received, she at
length forgot the Caresses of her true Parents.

She handled her Needle to Perfection, that few excelled her, and played to a
Miracle upon all those Instruments of Music, which became the Decency of her
Sex. All these acquired Graces, besides those that were natural to her, by
degrees kindled the flames of Love in Philocles's Heart; to whom, as being her
Master's Son, she carried her self with all fair respect, and Modesty. At
first, Love prompted him on, with only a kind of liking, and Complacency, in
beholding the matchless Beauty of Aurelia, and Contemplating upon her infinite
Virtues, wherewith she was adorned; and then, within the Bounds of Modesty, he
only loved her as a Sister: But when Aurelia began to grow toward Woman's
Estate, his former Affection, and Pleasantness, changed themselves into most
Ardent Desires, yet Virtuous, and Honorable, all Expectations else were in
vain from the virtuous Aurelia, nor would the nobleness of his own Quality, nor
the high esteem he had for so much Virtue, give place to any other Cogitations.

Many times he determined with himself to discover to his Parents, the
affection he had for her; and then as often did he retract his Determination,
being assured they had designed him for a higher Fortune; and therefore being
much per plex'd, and pensive, is ignorant what course to steer. To attain the
end of his happy wishes, he led such a Melancholy kind of life, as had almost
brought him to the point of losing it. All the whole Family was very much
troubled for Philocles Sickness, but his Father and Mother more especially,
considering he was their only Child, and had acquired to himself those great
perfections that all persons did admire him. All this time the Physicians upon
their result could give no report of his Disease, and he being timorous would
not discover his Malady: But in the end, being fully resolved to break through
these Difficulties, one day amongst the rest, that Aurelia gave her attendance
to him, seeing her alone, with a low Voice, but fainting utterance, expressed
himself:

Fair Aurelia, thy great Virtue, and excelling Beauty, not to be paralleled by
any, has reduced me to this Extremity, wherein I languish: And therefore,
since my Life is in thy Power, oblige me so far as to preserve it by complying
with my Virtuous Desires, and to receive me into thy Chaste Embraces: My Designs
are truly noble, and of no other ends, but what portend to Conjugality; but
conceal this from my Parents, least they deny me that happiness which so much
concerns me. Speak, dear Aurelia, am I that happy object that may seem worthy
of thy Love, and be entertained thy affectionate admirer? and tho I should
never arrive to that felicity of enjoyment, yet at the least approve of this my
passion, since my Life depends upon it; for assure your self, dear Aurelia,
never Breast did entertain a purer Flame than mine, or Lover prove more
constant.

To this, with a modest and sober look, Sir, said Aurelia, since the rigor or
clemency of Heaven, has deprived me of my Parents, and wholly disposed of me
unto yours, I have put on that resolution, that I will ever obey their Will and
Pleasure; so that the inestimable Favor, which you are so much willing to
confer upon me, without their approbation, will rather prove my Misery than
happy Fortune; and if in reality you have given me so large an Empire over you,
if they, being made acquainted with it, and shall deem me worthy to deserve
you, I shall wholly resign that Will and Consent which they shall empower me;
in the mean time your dependence may so far rely upon this, I shall remain
yours, in wishing you all the happiness which Heaven can give you.

Thus these two modest Lovers took their leaves; he with Tears and she with
Admiration, she being astonished, to see that Philocles should surrender up his
Affection to hers. Being now raised from his Bed, (to his Parents seeming by a
Miracle) he was resolved now no longer to conceal his thoughts, and therefore
one day he discovered them to his Mother, acquainting her in the end of his
discourse, that to deny him Aurelia, and to give him his Death's wound, would
prove alike in the experiment; his Mother was not Ignorant of Aurelia's
Virtues, and well perceiving the reality of her Son's affection, put him first
in hopes and then repeating to her Husband, all the particulars of her Sons
desires and intententions, easily moved him to give way to what Philocles so
earnestly required, to put off the other match, which was in a manner already
concluded.

At that time was Aurelia Fourteen years of Age, and Philocles twenty. They
were indeed the Miracle of their Age, being endued with so much prudence and
discretion; and now there were but four days wanting to come before the
Nuptials were to be Celebrated; his Parents esteeming more the Dowry of
Aurelia's Virtues, than the vast Wealth which was offered with the other Match.
The Wedding Cloths were already prepared, their Kindred and Friends invited; so
that there was nothing wanting, but the Queen's Consent, which among those of
Noble Blood, is requisite to make the Nuptials effectual. But when all things
were brought to this Fortunate Period, one evening gave disturbance to all this
their Joy; a Servant of the Queens brought a Message to Prospero, with an
express Command from her Majesty, that the next Morning he should bring to
Court his Virgin Captive. Prospero being surprised at the news, made no delay,
but dispatched the Messenger with an Answer that her Majesty's Will and
Pleasure should most willingly be obeyed.

After the Messengers departure, the whole House was in great disorder of
Passion, at this unexpected news; which was the overcasting of their Joy, they
hoped was so near. The Lady Sabina expressed her fear, least it should come to
the Queens knowledge, that they were Christians, and had bred her up to the
same profession, but arguing backwards and forwards, they did at last
conjecture, that they did believe, that if the Queen had known, that they were
Christians, she would not have sent them so mild a Message, from whence they
might infer, that she was only desirous to see Aurelia, whose unequal Beauty
and Virtues had come to her Ears, and those of the Court; but Prospero was
fearful he had offended the Queen, by reason he had not presented his Prisoner
to her Majesty, be fore she sent for her; but that offense they intended to
excuse by declaring, that from the very moment he took possession of her, she
was designed for his Son Philocles; but in this too, they likewise found
themselves amiss, for contracting such a Match without her Majesty's leave and
approbation; however well understanding the utmost punishment of such an error,
Prospero and Sabina agreed amongst themselves, that Aurelia should go to Court
in that Equipage Equivolent to his Son's Quality.

Being thus resolved, the next day they invested Aurelia very rich after the
Spanish Mode, in a Garment of Green Satin cut upon Cloth of Gold, embroidered
with Esses of Pearls, round her Neck a Neck-lace of Orient Pearls, her Head
adorned with a Luster of Diamonds and other precious Stones, being completely
dressed to attract her beholders; this being done in a fair Caroach he conducted
her to Court, and so into the presence Chamber where the Queen was; Aurelia
being entered into the Room; But, oh Gods! with so much Majesty and Humility
together, that it was admired how two such distant Graces could meet in one
Subject; her Eyes had antipathy to the Liberties of our Sex, destroying all
those that beheld them; her shape and motion had peculiar Charms, and she had a
certain Air, and Vivacity in her Countenance, that might assure all her
beholders, that her Wit was not inferior to her Beauty, and might with great
ease be perceived, that time which is the ruin of all other Faces. would but
improve hers, she being not then above Fourteen years old. She advanced toward
the Chair of State, and with a graceful Humility falling on her Knees before
the Queen, besought her Majesty, that she might obtain the Honor of kissing her
Royal Hand.

The Queen continued looking upon her a good while, not expecting so great a
prospect to entertain her fight, (as afterward she told one of her most
Familiar Ladies) that she beheld some new Miracle of Beauty, that she had never
seen in all her Court before, neither can be paralleled: Some of the Ladies
envied her Beauty, some admired her, but all confessed her the Compleatest
piece of Natures Workmanship, that ^ver they beheld. After some time, the Queen
commanded Aurelia to rise, and turning toward Prospero, said to him, Prospero,
you have done us wrong, to keep so Rich a Treasure so long concealed from us;
but I cannot blame your Covetousness in this particular; however you are bound
to restore it us, for by right it is ours, and properly belongs to us. Madam
(replied Prospero, with a great submission) what your Majesty has now
Commanded, I am bound in Duty to obey; I confess my offense if it be one to
have concealed this Treasure, that I might preserve it in that perfection, as
was fitting to appear in your Majesty's presence; I must humbly confess, I
thought to have much improved it, by craving your Majesty's leave in granting a
contract between Philocles and Aurelia, and so to have presented to your
Majesty, at once, in these two, all that I am able to bequeath you in this
World.

Her very Name gives us good content (replied the Queen) there could nothing
have taken off from that perfection which is in her, but the want of that very
name. But why! without our leave Prospero, have you proposed the Marriage of
your Son? May it please your Majesty, (answered Prospero) I cannot deny but
that I have made a Contract, but it was upon the Confidence that the many and
noble Services which my self and my Ancestors have done this Crown, might
obtain of your Majesty other more difficult Favors, and the rather for that my
Son is not yet Married to her. Neither shall he (said the Queen) marry Aurelia,
till he in his own propper person shall deserve her; our meaning is, that
neither your own, or your Ancestors Services shall any way excuse him in this
particular; but that he in his own person shall merit for himself, and acquire
by his own Valor, this sweet pledge, whom we esteem, as if she were our own
Daughter.

Aurelia had scarce heard this last word delivered, when humbling herself on
her Knees before the Queen; Madam (said she) since your Majesty has been
pleased to Honor me with the name of Daughter; upon so great a Favor, what ill
Fate can attend me? Or what good Fortune may I not hope to find, since your
Majesty has received me under your gracious protection?

Now whatever Aurelia uttered, came from her so gracefully, and so winningly,
that the Queen was extremely affected with her; and commanded that she should
remain at Court in her Service; recommending her to the care of one of the
chiefest Ladies of her Bedchamber; the Enamored Philocles fearing to be
bereft of what he loved more passionately than his Life, was almost overcome
with grief; but recollecting himself, and falling upon his Knees before the
Queen, Madam (said he) to incite me to serve your Majesty, there needs no other
reward than that which always attends on Loyalty: And therefore since it is
your Majesty's Royal Will and Pleasure, that I should serve you more
particularly, I most humbly beg that I may know in what capacity I may tender
my Obedience to your Commands.

The Queen answered that she was then putting out to Sea Four Ships of her Navy
Royal, of which she intended to make the Baron of Lansac Admiral, and him
Vice Admiral, assuring her self, that the Noble Blood which ran in his Veins,
would supply the defect of his years. She ^id him consider the Favor which she
did him in giving him an opportunity to serve her, for which he should receive
the greatest reward his heart could wish or desire; and then told him, that she
her self would be Aurelia's Guard, till his return. Philocles kissed the Queens
hand, and having returned her his most humble thanks, for the Favor she had
done him, presently went from her to Aurelia, to whom he would feign have
spoke, but could not; for Love and Grief had so tied up his Tongue, that had
his Life depended on it, he could not utter one word. However the Tears stood
in his Eyes, and were so brim full, that they began to run over, which he
endeavored to conceal as much as in him lay; but could not hide them from the
Queens observance, who thereupon took an occasion, and said to him;

Think it no contemptable sight, Philocles, to weep, nor value your self the
less, for having given at this your farewell such tender demonstrations of your
Affections; for there is difference, betwixt encountering with the Enemy, and of
taking your leave as a passionate Lover; then proceeding, Aurelia (said she)
embrace your Philocles, and give him your best wishes, for his generous
kindness well deserves them. Aurelia who stood amazed and astonished, to see
Philocles's tender affection, and with what reality he grieved for her sake,
whom she loved as dearly as her self, minded not what the Queen had commanded
her, but melted into Tears, and stood as motionless as if she had been a mere
Statue. Which wonderful mutual Affection of these two, did not a little move
the Compassion of the beholders; and so Philocles without speaking a word to
Aurelia, or she to him they turned away one from the other, and so Prospero and
his Friends, having made their obeisance to the Queen, departed her presence,
variously distracted in their Thoughts and Imaginations.

Thus Aurelia now remained at Court, and within two days after Philocles put
forth to Sea, resolved to do some extraordinary piece of Service, to win him
the Title of Aurelia's Deserver. Six days this Navy Sailed with a prosperous
Gale of Wind, shaping their course for the Tercera Islands; a place where never
are wanting, either Ships of Portugal, from the East Indies, or others that
come thither from the West Indies. At six days end there arose such a cross
wind full in their Teeth, which continued so long and so violent, that not
being able to reach the Islands, they were enforced to make for Spain; near
unto whose Coast, at the Mouth of the Straight of Gibralter, they discry'd
three Ships; one a very tall and goodly Vessel, the other two much less.
Philocles made up to the Admiral for orders what to do; and at last coming so
near he understood that the Admiral died suddenly the Night before of an
Appoplexy.

Philocles by Virtue of the Queens Commission, being now Commander in chief,
went aboard the Admirals Ship; and now being at his own Liberty, he resolved to
speak with those Vessels, which they had so lately discovered; and which after
a short chase they found to be Turkish Galleys; 'twas Philocles's Policy at
that time to carry Spanish Colors, so that the Pirates believing they had been
Spanish Vessels, spent and worn with a long tedious Voyage, came up briskly;
which Philocles observing, suffered them to come nearer and nearer, till he had
them close within the Command of his Guns, and then letting fly a whole
broadside, discharged with so much Fury, Shot one of the Galleys thorough and
thorough; upon which the other Galley endeavored to fly, but Philocles soon
fetched her up, then Boarded her, and put all the Turks to the Sword, and by
that means set at liberty a great number of Christians.

Having thus mastered both the Galleys, he made up to the great Vessel, which
proved to be a Portuguese Prize, which the Turks had taken two days before,
very richly laden, from the East Indies; immediately, Philocles sent fifty
Seamen on Board to take Possession of her; and for more security, put into her
six great Guns out of his own Vessels. As for the Christian Captives who were
most of them Spaniards, he gave them one of the Galleys, with Provision and
Money to carry them on Shore: but before they were discharged, Philocles
resolved to go on Board the Portuguese Prize himself, to see what Condition she
was in, and to take Care for the safety of the Goods, and partly out of
Curiosity to view the Christian Slaves, and to have the Honor of disposing of
his own Liberality. Of all which, when he had taken sufficient notice, the
Christians were all put a-Board the Galley, with Provisions necessary for their
Sustenance, and Money in their Pockets, saving only one, a Person somewhat
Aged, and of a comely Aspect, who Addressed himself to Philocles in this manner:

Valiant Sir, (said he) I should Esteem it a Happiness for me, amidst my many
Misfortunes, that you would rather carry me along with you to Mundolin, than
send me into Spain: For though it is my Native Country, and not above six days
since I left it, yet can I find nothing there, but what is Instrumental to the
reviving my former Sorrows and Afflictions. For know most (Noble Sir) that in
the loss of Cadiz, which is now some Fifteen years since, I lost a Daughter,
which some of the Conquerors carried away into their own Country; and with her,
I lost the comfort of my Old Age, and the Light of my Eyes. And since that no
Object yet, could be ever pleasing to them, she being gone, together with my
Wealth, which was all at the same time taken from me; my self, and my Wife
(which is that sorrowful Woman which sits there) resolved to go for the Indies,
the common Refuge for decayed Persons; to which purpose, having embarked our
selves but six days since in a Ship of Advice, we had no sooner put out of
Cadiz, but those Pirates took our Vessel, and we became their Slaves, whereupon
our Misery was renewed, and our Misfortune corfirm'd.

Here Philocles interrupting him, asked what his Daughter's Name was? he
answered, Aurelia; this confirmed Philocles in whatbefore he suspected; that he
who told him the Story, was his beloved Aurelia's Father; and so without giving
him any Tidings of her, he told him, that very willingly he would carry him and
his Wife to Mundolin, where happily they might hear some News of what they so
much desired; and having so said, he presently conveyed them aboard his own
Ship, and with a fair Gale of Wind, within nine days they came within sight of
Mundolin; being entered the River, and being Landed, great Multitudes of People
attended him; he went directly to the Court, where the Queen being in a
Gallery, stood expecting the News of her Ships. There was, besides many other
Ladies with the Queen, the Fair Aurelia, who seeing Philocles, began to change
Color, and look pale and wan; fear and hope of bad and good Success,
distracting her Mind with various Thoughts.

Being come into the Queen's Presence, he fell upon his Knees, and having
kissed her Majesty's Hand, he gave her an account of the General's Death, of
his Engagement with the Turks, of his releasing so many Christian Slaves, to
whom he had given one of the Galleys in her Majesty's Name to carry them home,
only that he had brought one Man and a Woman along with him, who chose rather
to be conveyed into her Territories, that they might see the Grandeur of her
Majesty's Court. And lastly, he gave her an Estimate of the Prize which he had
taken, valued at a Million of Gold. Which done, he put her Majesty in mind of
her Promise, in Reference to Aurelia.

Rise, Philocles, (replied the Queen) I will give her you, not only because of
my Promise, but by Reason, she is worthy of you, and you of her; and as you
have preserved this Rich Prize, you have taken, for me, so I have likewise kept
this Jewel for you; Aurelia, is yours, and when you please your self may take
Possession of her; and I dare say, you may have her Consent, for she is
Prudent, and knows well how to value the Friendship which you have shown her;
to Morrow wait upon us, and I will more particularly hear you relate unto us
what you did in this Voyage, and how Valourously you behaved your self; and
bring those two Persons with you, who as you inform us, were so willing to come
and behold our Court, that we may return them our Thanks for their Visiting us.

Philocles in most humble manner returned her Majesty his hearty thanks for all
the Favors she had bestowed upon him. The Queen retired; and then after he had
stayed a while, to satisfy the Curiosity of some of the Court Ladies, went
home to his Father's House, whither he had sent Aurelia's Father and Mother
before, with a Desire to Prospero, not to discover any thing to Aurelia, till
he should disclose it himself. The next day after, Philocles went to Court,
carrying with him the Father and Mother of Aurelia, both of them newly
Apparelled after the Fashion of Mundolin; they appeared all, where the Queen
was sitting in the midst of her Ladies, expecting Philocles, whom she was
willing to Grace and Favor, by placing Aurelia next to her, having on the same
Attire, and Ornaments, which she wore, when she came first to the Court,
appearing no less Beautiful now, than she did then. The Parents of Aurelia,
were stricken with Wonder and Admiration, to behold so much Greatness and
Splendor met together; but their Eyes were chiefly fixed upon Aurelia, though
they knew her not: However, their Hearts, (as Presagers of some good Fortune,
being near at hand) began to leap in their Bosoms; not out of any sudden
Passion, but of some Inspiration of Pleasure and Contentment, which they could
not rightly be Apprehensive of.

And now it was, that the Queen to divert the Company, commanded Philocles to
relate the particulars of his Adventure, and the manner of his Engagement with
the Turkish Pirates; which he did with that Prudence, that he gave to every one
that had signalized themselves in that Service, their particular due, to the
end, the Queen might take particlar notice of their Duty and Services. But when
he began to speak of the Liberty, which in her Majesty's Name, he had given the
Christians; Madam, (said he) those two Persons, a Gentleman and his Wife, which
stand there (pointing to Aurelia's Parents) whom Yesterday I mentioned to your
Majesty; who out of the great Desire which they had, to see the Greatness and
Magnificence of your Court, did so earnestly entreat me, to bring them along
with me. They are of Cadiz, and by their own Information, and my Observation of
them, I know they are Persons of no ordinary Extraction, but of Worth and
Quality.

The Queen then commanded them to approach nearer to her; at what time, Aurelia
lifted up her Eyes to take a view of those Persons; who were reported to be
Spaniards, and more particularly of Cadiz; out of a Desire she had to learn if
happily they knew her Parents; which Aurelia had no sooner done, but her Mother
looked steadfastly upon her, and diligently observed her Countenance: On the
other side, Aurelia began to consider that certainly she had formerly known
that Gentlewoman which stood before her. Her Father was also in the like
Confusion, yet durst not give Credit to the Truth, which his Eyes represented
to him.

Philocles was very attentive to observe the Motions of all three, whom he saw
strangely perplexed, yet not able to disintrigue their Understandings. Nor was
the Queen insensible of their Behavior, Natural to Persons in such an
Astonishment. Aurelia thus confused, desired nothing more than to hear the
Gentlewoman speak, whom she imagined to be her Mother, hoping that her Ears
would put her out of doubt, of what her Eyes suspected; which fell out
according to her wish, the Queen commanding Aurelia to speak to the ancient
Lady in her own Language, and to ask them the Occasion, that moved them to
refuse the Liberty, which Philocles had offered them? All which, no sooner
Aurelia had demanded, but her Mother on a sudden, and ready to stumble for
haste, without any regard to Place or Person, with her hand lifted up Aurelia's
right Ear, and having there discovered a black Mole; the Mark that confirmed
her Suspicion, and plainly perceiving that it was her Daughter Aurelia, she
could no longer contain her self, but embracing her, cried out abruptly,
Daughter! Daughter! and not being able to utter a word more, her Speech
failing, fell into a Swoon in Aurelia's Arms.

Her Father no less Prudent than tender, gave manifest Signs how sensible he
was of the Discovery; but with no other Demonstrations, than a silent shedding
some few Tears, which were observed to trickle down his Cheeks, while Aurelia,
who being busy in attending on her Mother, supporting her from falling,
turning her Eyes toward him, gave him such an Affectionate Look, that thereby
he might easily understand the Pleasure and Contentment her Soul took in seeing
her Parents so near her. The Queen wondering at so rare and strange an Accident;
this was some Contrivance of your laying, (said she) turning to Philocles: But
I must tell you, I don't know whether it was so well done as you may imagine:
For we find by Experience, that a sudden transport of Joy, as soon kills, as
an overwhelming Grief. Soon after Aurelia's Mother coming to her self, besought
her Majesty's Pardon for committing so much Rudeness in her Presence, but had
not a sudden Passion of Excessive Joy arrested her Vitals, she had not
appeared Guilty of so great an Offense; to whom the Queen made Answer, that
such Accidents as these none could withstand, neither would extraordinary
Transports of that Nature admit of any Ceremonies; but withal, she was very
glad to see her recovered out of that Ecstasy.

And thus it was that Aurelia came to the Knowledge of her Parents, and her
Parents of her; whom the Queen commanded to reside in the Court, for the better
Satisfaction of each other; wherewith Philocles was wonderful well pleased: and
now Philocles laden with the Queen's Favors, wanted nothing but the Enjoyment
of his Aurelia, to which purpose he humbly put the Queen once more in mind of
her Promise; who being satisfied, that there needed no new Proofs of his
Valor, told him, that after the Expiration of four days, she would deliver
Aurelia to him, and confer upon them all the Honor, and Rewards she possibly
could. Upon which, Philocles took his leave, being the most joyful Person in
the World; for now he thought he had his Aurelia in his Power, without any fear
of losing her, which is the last and utmost Desire of Lovers.

But when Love and Fortune are at Varience, the Craftiness of Fortune is too
hard for Loves Innocence; as now it happened to Philocles's Sorrow; for it so
fell out at that time, that a great Court Lady, and Favorite to the Queen, to
whose Charge Aurelia was committed, had a Son of the Age of two and twenty
years called Endymion, being of an Arrogant, Haughty, and Extravagant
Disposition; this Endymion then was enamoured of Aurelia, and so vehemently,
that his very Soul parched within him; and though in Philocles's Absence, he
had by some Signs discovered his Desires; yet he received the least
Encouragement from Aurelia, which disdain of hers the more encreast Endymion's
Flame: in this Agony of Love he discovered his violent Affection to his Mother,
acquainting her withal, that unless he enjoyed Aurelia, she must not expect
long to enjoy her Son. The Mother admired and wondered to hear such Expressions
fall from her Son; on the other side, well knowing the Obstinate Nature, and
Eagerness of his Passion, she feared that Love once disappointed might produce
some unhappy Accident; yet notwithstanding, as an Indulgent Mother, not willing
to cross his Intentions, promised him to speak to the Queen about it; though
not with any hopes of obtaining such an impossibility.

In the mean time, the Morning appointed for solemnizing the Nuptials, being
come, the Ladies were not a little busy in attiring Aurelia at Court, and
Philocles no less Diligently employed to Adorn himself at home; when Endymion's
Mother coming hastily into the Queen's Presence, and falling upon her Knees,
besought her to suspend the Ceremony for two days longer; the Queen wondering at
the reason of her demand; whereupon the Lady declared to her Majesty, her Son's
Affections for Aurelia, adding with the Fears she had, that if he did not
obtain her, he would either grow desperate, or commit some unworthy Action to
his own Destruction: The Queen made her this Answer, that she would neither
break her Promise made to Aurelia, nor defraud Philocles of his, for all the
Interest in the World. The Lady immediately went and acquainted her Son, with
the Queen's Answer, and positive Resolution; Endymion flew instantly from his
Mother, and in a fury heightened by Love and Jealousy, ran to Philocles's
House, and there dressed up as he was in all his Wedding Gallantry and Bravery,
challenged him the Field, as one that neither did, nor could deserve so fair a
Lady, as he was going to Marry. Philocles prefering his Honor before his Love,
accepted of the Challenge, very freely; and told him he had thought he would
not have passed so harsh a Sentence upon him, as either to call his Affection
or Courage in Question. Then he desired him to name his Place, (the time he
supposed was present,) and he would readily attend him, with all the haste
imaginable; so soon as he could privately withdraw himself from the Company.

But the noise of this Challenge soon flew to Court; which so highly incensed
the Queen, that she presently commanded the Captain of her Guard to go
instantly and apprehend Endymion, who being brought into her Presence, she
ordered his Sword to be taken from him, and to be confined close Prisoner to
his Chamber during Pleasure. All these things tormented the Heart of Aurelia,
and very much perplexed her Parents, who so suddenly saw the Sea of their
quietness troubled: However this hurly burly occasioned the Nuptials to be
deferred till the next day; which being but a short time, Endymion's Mother
resolved to improve it to the best Advantage; and thereupon advised the Queen,
that to remove the Quarrel betwixt her House, and that of Philocles's, the only
Remedy was to take away the Cause; which was Aurelia, by sending her into
Spain, and so the Effects would cease; which now it was to be feared would not
be easily suppressed. To which the Queen answered, that for the sending of her
into Spain, she would hear no more of it, as being a Person in whom she took so
much Delight; and that Doubtless, if not that very day, the next following,
without all fail she would Marry her to Philocles according to the promise she
had made him.

With this Resolution of the Queens, Endymion's Mother was so disheartened, that
she returned not so much as one Word in Answer; and therefore concluding there
was no other way nor means left in the World to mollify that rigorous
Condition of her Son, nor reduce Philocles to terms of Peace, but by taking
away Aurelia, she determined to put in Practice one of the greatest Cruelties,
that could ever enter into the thoughts of any Noble Lady, and especially so
Principal a one as she was; which was to make away Aurelia by Poison. And
because it is commonly the Condition, and Natural Inclination of Women to be
speedy, and resolute in what they intend to go about; she made so quick a
dispatch, that the same Evening she gave the Innocent Lady her Dose, in a
certain Conserve, forcing her in a manner to take it, telling her it was
Excellent good against those Passions of the Heart, wherewith she seemed to be
troubled.

Within a little while after Aurelia had taken this Hellish Electuary; her
Tongue, and her Throat began to swell, and her Lips to grow black, her Voice
hoarse, her Eyes troubled, and her Stomach and Bowels, tormented with Gripings,
all manifest Symptoms that she was Poisoned. Presently the Ladies came to the
Queen, and acquainted her Majesty, with Aurelia's Misfortune, and certified her
that Endymion's Mother, was the Actress in this Scene of Cruelty. There did not
need much pressing Arguments to induce the Queen to believe the verity of it,
and therefore she went immediately to see Aurelia, who was almost breathing her
last. The Queen commanded her Physicians should be sent for in all have, and in
the mean while, before they came, she caused a quantity of Unicorns-Horn to be
given her, and some other Preservatives against Poison, which Great Princes
have always ready at hand, upon the like Cases of Necessity. The Physicians
came and applied their best Remedies, and Antidotes, but withal, besought her
Majesty, that she would be pleased to command the Lady to be examined, of what
Nature the Poison was she had given her; whereupon, she discovered her Infernal
Secret, and the Physicians accordingly applied those Remedies pertinent to the
Contagiousness of her Condition, that in few days there was hopes of Life left
in her Recovery.

She also commanded this Lady, Endymions Mother to be apprehended, and confined
to a Chamber in her Court, with an Intention to punish her, according to the
Nature and Quality of her Crime. This sad News being brought to Philocles, made
him almost in such a distracted Condition, that, he was ready to offer Violence
to himself. In Conclusion, Aurelia did not lose her Life, yet such was the
force of the Poison, that she lost the Hair of her Head, and her Eyebrows; her
Face was strangely puffed up, the Grain of her Skin spoiled, her Complexion
ruined, her whole Body mightily swelled, and her Eyes Distilling, ran with
Water: In a word, she was grown so foul and ill favored; that she who till
then seemed a Miracle of Beauty, now seemed to be a Monster of Deformity. And
they who knew her before held it the greater Misfortune of the two, that she
remained in this unfortunate Condition, than if she had dyed of the Poison.
Notwithstanding Philocles made a new Adress to the Queen, and besought her
Majesty, that he might obtain leave to convey Aurelia safe to his own House,
supporting himself with this, that though Aurelia had lost her Beauty, yet
could she not lose her infinite Virtues.

Thou Judge right, (replied the Queen,) your Request shall be granted,
Philocles; and still make that Favorable Construction, that thou have in thy
Possession a Rich Diamond unpolished; I would freely have resigned her up as
Beautiful to thee, as thou deliveredst her to me; but since it is impossible,
and cannot be retrieved; what was wanting by me in Favor to you, in being
overseen by differing it so long, I will make up in Justice Happily the
Punishment I shall inflict upon the Criminals, may in part satisfy thy Desire
of Revenge; Philocles did very often endeavor to enterceed with her Majesty to
be graciously pleased to pardon Endymion's Mother, since the Reasons she
alleged were sufficient Motives to embrace her Clemency; in Conclusion,
Aurelia and her Parents, the Queen recommended to his Care, and Philocles
immediately conducted them home to his Fathers House; many rich Presents the
Queen sent along with Aurelia of Jewels and Diamonds, which manifested her
great Affection, and Love she had for her; she remained for the space of two
Months, without being of ability to be restored to her former Beauty. But time
flying away, her Skin began to fall and to peel of, and a smooth Grain
appeared, and discovered it self.

In this interval, Philocles's Parents, presuming it was not possible, that
Aurelia should become the same Woman, which heretofore she was; resolved to
send for that Northern Lady, with whom Philocles, by Agreement was to marry,
before they knew of his Affection to Aurelia, and this resolve they put in
Execution, without acquainting him with their Design; not doubting but that the
present Beauty of this new Bride, would withdraw his Affection from Aurelia,
whom they purposed, with her Father and Mother to send into Spain, and to
gratify with such store of Wealth, as should fully recompense their former
losses which they had received, and sustained.

There passed not above six Weeks, when without Philocles's Knowledge, the new
Bride arrived at his Father's House, with great Attendance, which accompanied
her in her Journey; she was indeed a fair, and Beautiful Person, that next to
Aurelia, when she was in her primitive Perfection; there was not her equal in
all Mundolin. Philocles was infinitely amazed at the unexpected sight of the
Lady, and so much fear immediately seized upon his Spirits, least the
suddainess of her coming, should surprise Aurelia, and create in her some
violent Passion, and put a period to her Life; and therefore to remove this
Obstacle of Fear by a timely Prevention, he went to the Bedside, where Aurelia
lay; and finding only his Father and Mother in the Room, he sat down by her,
and taking her by the hand.

Aurelia (said he) my visit to thee at this time is, to inform thee of a very
pretty passage, which indeed has created in me a Wonder and an Admiration, and
by Reason I would not have you surpised, I come at this time to acquaint you
with the pleasantness of the Intrigue; my Parents out of their great Love and
tender Affection toward me, remaining as yet without full Satisfaction of
being informed, of that extraordinary Passion of Love, which I ever had, and
ever continue for thee, have brought a Lady hither, with whom they Design I
shall Marry, not in the least asking my Gonsent, or enquiring into my
Resolutions, nor having that Patience to expect thy Recovery; but I am apt to
think, that their Conceptions are such, they believe, the great Beauty of this
Lady, will induce me to relinquish you in this present Condition. But know,
dear Aurelia, that your Perfections are so deeply imprinted in my Mind, that
none but the Iron Teeth of time, with putting a period to my Life, can ever
raze them out; from the first time I beheld thee, I admired and loved thee, and
with so pure a flame, and free from all ends of sensuality, that I could have
out-vied Plato, to enjoy thy Friendship. Though thy Beauteous Aspect did
Captivate my Senses, yet thy infinite Virtues took my Soul Prisoner: So that
being Beautiful I loved thee, now thou art Deformed I adore thee; and for a
farther Testimony of this my real Affection, by this, and this, and this,
(imprinting several Kisses on her Lips) I for ever vow my self yours, from this
very hour, and nothing shall be wanting to complete our Happiness.

Aurelia remained in some suspense upon these Words of Philocles; and knew not
well what to say or do, but often kissed his Hand; till at last trembling, she
told him with many Tears that she freely accepted of his Affection, and wholly
resigned her self up to his Disposal. Her Parents were amazed and astonished at
the passionate Expressions of these two Lovers, that they could not refrain
from Weeping; Philocles desired them not to put on Grief, but told them withal,
that he had never any Inclinations to the Northern Lady, neither would he
withdraw his Affections from their Daughter, and if his Parents according to
their Design should desire Aurelia's and their departure to Spain, that he
would not have them decline it, but by all means accept of their proffer, and
take the Voyage; and that they should certainly expect him within two years
afterward either at Cadiz or Sevil; assuring them upon the Word of a
Gentleman, that e're that time was expired, he would not fail to be with them
if Heaven permitted him so long Life; but if the time perfixed should be
preterlapsed, they should then rest assured that some great Misfortune or Death
which was the more certain, had crossed his intended Journey.

Aurelia told him, she would not only wait two years for him, but as long as
she lived, till she heard the sorrowful News of his Death; and whenever that
harsh Note should reach her Ears, it would prove Instrumental to finish her
Days; with these kind Expressions fresh Tears sprung from the Fountains of all
their Eyes; and Philocles went immediately to his Parents and informed them,
that he could entertain no such thoughts as to accept of their Kindness, in
Marrying the Northern Lady, till by a twelve months Travel, he had qualified
himself fit for a Matrimonial Life, farther telling them, that considering the
solidity which belongs to that State, he would willingly make these
Preparations to it, that nothing hereafter might disturb his Happiness. He used
such Arguments, and laid down so good Reasons for what he said, to the Parents
of Livia, (for that was the Lady's Name) that they were all very well
satisfied, and Livia was contented to remain in her Father-in-Law's House, till
Philocles returned after a year's Travel.

This being thus concluded and agreed upon, Prospero told Philocles of his
Resolution of sending Aurelia and her Parents to Spain, if the Queen would be
pleased to grant him that Liberty to effect it, for (continued he) perhaps the
Air of her own Country will hasten and facilitate her Health, which now she
begins to recover. Philocles that he might not give the least Suspicion of his
Design, answered (though but coldly) his Father, that he might use his own
Discretion and Pleasure, only he besought him, not to take from Aurelia any of
those Riches the Queen had bestowed upon her. Prospero did promise and engage
to him, that he would not command any thing from her which was her own; the
same day he went and waited upon the Queen, to ask her Majesty's Consent, as
well for the matching of his Son to Livia, as for the sending of Aurelia, with
her Father and Mother into Spain.

The Queen was well pleased at both his Requests, and approved of Prospero's
Determination; and the same day without calling Endymion's Mother in Question,
she dismissed her from her place in her Bedchamber, and Fined her ten Thousand
Crowns to be paid to Aurelia. As for Endymion she banished him for six years.
Four days were scarce past and gone, but that Endymion, began to take Order for
his Banishment, having already given Directions for the returning of his Money.

The Queen then sent and commanded a Rich Merchant that dwelt at Mundolin, to
come to her, who had a very good Correspondency in France, Italy, and Spain; to
whom she delivered ten thousand Crowns, and required of him Bills of Exchange,
for the returning of 'em to Aurelia's Father in Sevil, or any other part of
Spain. The Merchant discounting his Interest and Profit, told the Queen that he
would make certain and sure Payment of them in Sevil, by Bills of Exchange upon
another French Merchant, his Correspondent, in this manner and form, viz. That
he would write to Paris, to the end, that the Bills might be made there by
another Correspondent of his, because they would accept and allow of those that
came from France, but not from this Island; by reason of the Prohibition,
betwixt those two Kingdoms; and that a Letter of Advice from him should serve
turn, by a private mark that passed between them two; and that without any more
ado, the Merchant of Sevil, should pay him the Money by the Letter of Advice he
would receive from Paris.

In fine, the Queen took such good security of the Merchant, that she made no
doubt of the true payment of it. And not contenting her self with this, she
sent for the Master of a Flemish Ship that lay in the River, and was to put
forth the day following for France, only to take Testimony thereof in some
Port, that he might be the better able to pass into Spain, under the Title of
coming from France, and not from the Island; whom she earnestly entreated to
carry with him in his Vessel Aurelia, and her Parents, and that he should use
them well and kindly, and Land them in Spain, at the very first place he should
come at on that Coast. The Master who desired to give the Queen Content, told
her Majestv that he would do it, and that he would Land them either in Lisbon,
Cadiz, or Sevil; having taken sufficient security of the Merchant, and
assurance from the Master, the Queen by way of Message, sent unto Prospero to
forbid him the taking any thing away from Aurelia either of Jewels or Cloths
which she had given her.

The next day Aurelia with her Father and Mother, went to Court to take their
leaves of the Queen, who received them with a great deal of Love, and Favor:
the Queen gave them the Merchants Letter, and many other Gifts, as well in
Money, as other Curious things for their Voyage. Aurelia with so much Elegancy
expressed her thankfulness to her Majesty, for all Honors, and Favors
received from her, that she Created in the Queen, fresh Obligations from her,
to continue her Favors still toward her. She took her leave likewise of the
Ladies; who now that she was grown disfigured, was very sorry she should leave
them, seeing themselves free from that envy they had against her Beauty, and
would have been very well contented, to have enjoyed her Gifts of Wit and
Discretion; the Queen embraced all three of them, and recommending them to
their good Fortune, and to the Master of the Ship; and laid her commands upon
Aurelia to Advertise her of her safe arrival in Spain, and from time to time,
of her welfare by the way, of the French Merchant; she took her leave of
Aurelia, and her Parents, who that very Evening imbarqued themselves; Prospero
and his Wife, with the whole Family shed many Tears, extremely troubled at her
unfortunateness and departure.

At this their taking their leaves Philocles was not present, but procured some
Friends to go abroad with him that day a Hunting; the better to divert him from
expressing his Grief, and giving demonstrations of his Sorrow; the Gifts which
the Lady Sabina gave Aurelia at her Voyage were many, her Embraces infinite,
and her Tears plenty; her earnest entreaties that she would often write to her
were numerous; and the thanks rendered by Aurelia and her Parents where
answerable thereunto; so that though weeping, they left each other very well
satisfied.

That night the Ship hoisted Sail, and having with a prosperous Gale of Wind
touched upon the Coast of France; and there taking in such fr^sh provisions as
were necessary for their Voyage into Spain: within thirty days after they
entered into the B^rr of Cadiz where Aurelia and her Parents disimbarqued
themselves; and being known by all those of the City, they received them with
Expressions of much joy; likewise they received a thousand praises, and
thanksgivings which was invocated to Heaven for the finding out of their
Daughter Aurelia and of their Liberty which they had obtained, being first
Captivated by the Moors, and afterward by the Northern Islanders; having been
made acquainted with all the Transactions of their Affairs, by those Captives
whom the liberality of Philocles had set free.

And now Aurelia in the mean time began to give great hopes of returning to a
speedy recovery of her former Beauty; however they remained but a little more
than a Month in Cadiz to refresh themselves of their weariness after their long
and tedious Voyage; but went from thence to Sevil, for to see whether the
payment would prove good of the ten thousand Crowns, which were to be placed to
the Account of the French-Merchant, who had undertaken for to see it disbursed.
Two days after their arrival at Sevil, they enquired after him, and found him
out, and gave him the French Merchants Letter, upon which he excepted of the
Bill; but told them, that until he had received Letters from Paris, and a
Letter of Advice, he could not pay them the Money, but withal he expected every
moment to receive Advertisement of it.

Aurelia's Parents had hired a very fair House, over against Santa Paula for
the Convenience of being near a Kinswoman of theirs, which was a Nun in that
Monastery; and by reason Aurelia had informed Philocles, that if he made any
enquiry after her, he should find her in Sevil; and that her Kinswoman a Nun of
Sancta Paula would direct him to her House; and that for his better
Information, and Knowledge; he needed give himself no farther trouble, than to
enquire for that Nun which had the best voice in the Monastery; this being a
very good token, and not easily to be forgotten; for indeed she had the rarest
and sweetest Voice in all Spain.

It was forty days, before Letters of Advice came from Paris, and within two
days after they were come, the French Merchant paid the Ten thousand Crowns to
Aurelia, and she delivered them to her Parents; and with them and some other
which they had got together, with some of Aurelia's Jewels which they sold; her
Father began again to follow his Trade of Merchandise, not without the
admiration of those who knew his great losses. In short, within a few Months
Aurelia's Father repayed his lost Credit, and Aurelia's Beauty returned to it is
former perfection: Insomuch, that when any discourse arise concerning fair
Women, all of them gave the Laurel to the Northern Spaniard, who was as well
known by this Name, as she was for her Beauty throughout the whole City.

By the French Merchant of Sevil's Order, Aurelia and her Parents Writ Letters
to the Queen of the Northern Isle, of their safe Arrival in Spain; but penned
with such humble acknowledgements and submissions, as the many Favors received
from her Majesty, did require; they likewise writ to Prospero and his Lady
Sabina, Aurelia Complementing them with the Title of Father and Mother; and her
Parents Stileing them their dearest and best Friends: From the Queen they
received no Answer, but from Prospero and his Lady Sabina, they had a return,
wherein they Congratulated their safe Arrival, certifying them, that their Son
Philocles, the next day after their departure went for France, with an
intention to visit some other parts of Christendom, being requisite and
necessary for him to go, the better to ease his mind, which he confessed to them
was so much disturbed; adding to these other discourses and Complements of much
Love, and Affection, besides many other fair and Friendly protestations; to
which Letters of their^ they returned another in answer no less Courteous and
Loving than Thankful.

Aurelia presently imagined, that Philocles leaving his Country, was upon his
Voyage into Spain, to find her out, and flattering her self with this fond
hope, she began to lead the most contented Life in the World, and studied to
live in such a serious manner, that when Philocles should come to Sevil he
might soon hear the good report that went of her Virtues, then come to the
knowledge of her House. Seldom or never did she go out of Doors, unless it were
to the Monastery, but spent all her whole time in retiredness, and good desires
waiting with Expectation the welcome news of the Arrival of Philocles.

This her great retiredness did set on Fire and inflamed the Hearts and desires
not only of the young Gallants of that Street where she dwelt, but of all those
who but once had a sight of her; in the Night she was disturbed often with
Music, serenading at her Window, and in the day careering with their Jennets,
and from this her not suffering her self to be seen, and from others much
desiring to see her en^s'd, their finding out of cunning Bawds which were
Mistresses in their Art, and promised no less to show themselves so, in
soliciting Aurelia; and there were not some wanting, who endeavored to bring
this their wicked purpose to pass, by Witchcraft, Charms, Sorceries, Philters,
and the like lewd Courses; but against all these Aurelia was like a Rock in the
midst of the Sea, against which the Winds, and the Waves ^eat, and dash against
it to no purpose.

A year and a half was now fully past when the aproaching hope of those two
yea^s promised by Philocles began with more earnestness than hitherto it had
done, to vex and grieve the Heart of Aurelia; but whilst she was Contemplating
with her self, that Philocles was come, and that she had her desired object
before her eyes, parleying with, and questioning him of the occasion of
delaying his coming, and of his keeping so long from her, and then imagining to
her self the just excuses which Philocles pleaded for his long absence, and how
willingly she believed and received them, and how lovingly and affectionately
she embraced him in her Arms and hugged him in her Bosom, as being part of her
own Soul; then, even then when she was in the height of all her hopes, a Letter
came to her Hands from the Lady Sabina, baering date from Mundolin, some fifty
days since, it was written in the Tongue of the Island, but she read it in
Spanish as follows.

Sabina to Aurelia.
DAughter of my Soul, Bilonio, Philocles's Page, accompanied his Master in his
Journey, and by a former Letter Iadvertized you, that Philocles made for
France, the second day after your Departure, and from thence was to Travel
farther; we have received no News from him this Sixteen Months, but yesterday
Bilonio the Page, came home, and brought with him these sorrowful tidings, That
Endymion had by Treachery killed Philocles in France; therefore (Daughter)
Consider in what a Deplorable Condition, his Father, my Self, and Livia his
Bride are upon the Arrival of this heavy Intelligence; the portent of it is
such, that it has left no room for hope, but to entertain despair of ever
overcomeing this our Misfortune. My earnest entreaties and best wishes are that
you would still think of Philocles, who loved you with so real an Affection,
and for the Sake of him, to invocate the Divine Powers to assist us in this
Ex^remity, and to grant us Patience, to our ^ives end.

Your disconsolate Mother, SABINA.


By the Letter, Hand, and Seal, there ^as not any the least doubt left to
Aurelia ^or not giving Credit to the Fatal News ^f the Death of her dear
Philocles. She ^new very well his Page Bilonio was a (...) true and faithful
Servant, and no way ^endaciously given, and that he had no ^eason to forge
this, as an Experiment to ^ry her affection, and as little his Mother Sa^ina;
being it would import them nothing in ^ending her news so sorrowful; in
conclusion ^he could no ways divert her imaginations, ^r put out of her
thoughts in the least, ^he contradiction of this unfortunate News. After she
had read the Letter, without shedding a Tear, and without showing any sym^toms
of Sorrow, with a Serene counte^ance, and to appearance a quiet and con^ented
mind, she rose from the Couch where she sat, and kneeling down De^outly, made
a Solemn Vow to live a single Life all her days, since the God's ^ad deprived
her of her dear Philocles, and left her a Widow.

Her Parents dissimulated their dolorous Grief, and covered their Sorrows with
their discretion, which this sad news had occasioned in 'em, that they might be
the better enabled to comfort their Daughter Aurelia in the anguish of her
Affliction, who being now as it were fully satisfied o^ her Sorrow, moderating
it with the resolution which she had put on, she fell to comforting of her
Parents, to whom she discovered her intent; but they advised her that she
should not put it in Excecution, but to stay till the two years were overpast
which Philocles had limited for his coming; for thereupon much depended, the
Confirmation of the verity of Philocles's death, and she might then with more
safety and security change this her Estate and Condition.

Aurelia followed their advice, and (...) the remaining Six Months she spent
them in the exercises of a Religious Virgin; and for the better preparing and
fitting of her self, for her entering into the Monastery, having made choice of
that of Sancta Paula where her Cousin resided; but now the term of the two
years where expired, and the day approached wherein she was to take upon her
the Religious Habit; the news whereof was soon spread throughout the whole
City, not only amongst those who knew her by sight, but among those ^lso that
knew her only by report; now ^n regard the Monastery stood not far off from
Aurelia's House, and her Father invi^ing his Friends, and Acquaintance, Aurelia
^ad one of the noblest and most honoura^le Trains to accompany her thither, as
upon such occasions was ever seen in Sevil.

Thus has the Story brought this poor distressed Lady to the very brink of
theprecipice; she that thought she had a loving Husband alive, being now
deceived and frustrated of all her hopes, is now going to renounce the World,
and dedicate her self to a retired Life remote from those pleasures which she
thought to have enjoyed. Now in the manner of the Ceremony, there accompanied
her the Assistant, the Dean of the Church, and the Vicar General to the
Archbishop, with all the Ladies and Gentlemen of Title, and Quality, or
Eminent Note that were in the City; so great was the desire which all of 'em
had to behold the resplendent rays of Aurelia's Beauty, which had so many
Months suffered an Eclipse; and by reason it is the Custom, and fashion of
those Virgins, which take upon 'em the religious Habit, to deck and adorn them
selves, as bravely and as gallantly as they possibly can devise, who as one,
that ever after, from that instant, sets up her rest, and takes her leave and
farwell of all bravery, and wholly discards it. Aurelia was willing (that she
might not break so Ancient a Custom) to attire and set forth her self in the
best and most curious manner, that possibly she could invent; and therefore she
arrayed her self in the same Gown and Girdle, and those rich dressings which
she had on when she went to Court, with all those other ornaments of Pearls and
Diamonds which the Northern Queen bestowed upon her.

Aurelia went out of her House on Foot; for her being so near unto the
Monastery excused Coaches, though they repented afterward they did not take
them; for the concourse of the People was so great, that they would scarce give
them way to get to the Monastery. Some showred Blessings on her Parents, others
thanked Heaven for enriching her with so much Beauty, some stood on tip-toe for
to view her, others having had a Prospect of her, ran to get before that they
might satisfy the curiosity of their Eyes to see her again; but he that showed
himself most sollicitous in this Multitude, and in so extraordinary a manner,
that many took great notice of him; was a person clad in a Slaves Habit, which
they commonly wear, when they are redeemed and return home from their
Captivity; this Captive then at that very juncture of time that Aurelia had set
one Foot within the porch of the Covent, as the Prioress and the Nuns were come
forth to receive her; with a loud Voice, he cried out, Stay, Aurelia, stay; for
whilst I am a live thou can not enter into any Religious Order; at the
hearing of these words, Aurelia and her Parents looked back, and espied a
Person forcing his way through the thickest of the throng; which was the
Captive making toward them; in the crowd his Furr Cap which he wore, was lost
off his Head, which made a discovery of a confused and entangled skein of
Golden wired Hairs, curling themselves into Rings, and a Countenance intermixed
with Snow and a Vermillion Color, so pure Red and White was his Complexion,
having withal a curious Aspect; all which gave them such assured signal
demonstrations, that induced them to believe he was a Stranger.

In short by pressing through the people with such have, he received many falls
by the way; but having as nimbly recovered himself, he came at last where
Aurelia was, and taking her by the Hand, Do thou not know me Aurelia, (said
he?) Behold, and view me well! I am thy dear Philocles. Yes I know thee
(replied Aurelia) if thou art not a walking Spirit, or some false assumed
Apparition, that is come to disturb my repose. With that Philocles with Tears
in his Eyes, besought her that the strangeness of that Garb, wherein she now
beheld him; might not prove any bar or hinderance to her better knowledge of
him, and that this his mean and dejected Condition might not be any stop to the
fulfilling of those Vows and faithful Promises, which they had so solemnly
given to each other. Her Parents drew by degrees nearer to him, and viewing him
very narrowly, in conclusion came certainly to know him: Aurelia
notwithstanding the news of his death, chose rather to give more Credit to her
Eyes, by the object which she had present before her, than to trouble her self
to make any further needless enquiry, and therefore kindly Embracing the
Captive; You are doubtless (said she) the person who can only hinder my
determination, as being really my Husband, and can be no less than the better
part of my Soul; and though thou have been absent from thy Aurelia so long, yet
I have thee Imprinted in my Memory, and have fixed thee so firm in my Heart, by
so true an Affection, that no Object in this World can undermine it. Turn
therefore, dear Philocles, to my Fathers House, which is wholly at your
Command, and there take possession of your faithful Aurelia.

At the hearing whereof the standers by, where all of 'em struck with
admiration, and stood amazed as people astonished; and nothing would serve them
but a present satisfaction of their Curiosities, by hearing a relation of the
whole Trasactions: Whereupon Aurelia's Father told them, that the History
required another place, and more time, to unfold it in, than opportunity at
that present offered it self; and therefore besought them, since they were so
willing and eager to understand it, that they would be pleased to return back
with him to his House, and there he would give them a true and perfect Account,
to their full satisfaction. This was no sooner said, to appease the People, but
a blunt Fellow among the Crowd cried out, Gentlemen this man is a great Pyrate,
for I know him well enough, though he it may be thinks I don't; this is he whom
some two years since, and somewhat more; took from the Pirates of Argiers, a
Portugal Ship, which came from the Indies: Ye need not doubt, but that this is
the same Man, for I confidently tell you that I know him; for he gave me my
Liberty, and Money to bring me home to Spain; therefore Neighbors I tell you,
I know him: And at that time, he did not only free me, but three hundred
Captives more besides, furnishing them with Victuals, and Money. With these
Words the Vulgar were in an uproar, and the desire afresh revived, which all of
them were possessed of, to know, and see such Intricate Riddles as these to be
clearly Explained.

In short, the Persons of more especial Rank, and Quality, returned back to
accompany Aurelia to her House, leaving the Nuns sorrowsul, and weeping, that
they had lost so fair a Sister, and Companion, as Aurelia; who arriving at
home, she brought the Gentlemen into a spacious large Hall, and entreated them
to sit down; and although Philocles was willing enough to take upon him to give
the Relation, yet notwithstanding, he chose rather to trust Aurelia's Tongue,
and Discretion with it, than his own: All that were present were in a still
silence, and having their Ears, and Hearts ready prepared to be Aurelia's
Auditors, she began to relate the Story, which I abbreviate to this: She
delivered an account of all that had happened from the very day that Prospero,
by Stealth, carried her away from Cadiz, till her return thither again; not
omitting the Battle which Philocles fought with the Turks, and the Liberality,
and Bounty which he had used toward the Christians; and the Solemn Vows which
both of them had engaged each to other, to be Husband and Wife; the Promise of
two Years, the News which she had received of his Death, and that so certain,
as she apparently thought, that as a Motive it induced her to that Estate which
so lately they had seen her, of professing her self a Nun: She likewise
acquainted them with the Northern Queens Bounty toward her; also of Philocles,
and his Parents Affection toward her: So ending her Relation, she desired
Philocles that he would relate what had befallen him from the time that he left
Mundolin, until this very present.

Which done, Philocles likewise made a short Relation of what had happened to
him since Aurelia's Voyage for Spain, telling them how he had been pursued by
his Rival Endymion; who with four others, set upon him, and Shot him into the
Body with four Pistols, leaving him for dead; and that his Servant, awakened
with the Noise, out of fear, leaped down from a Window, and hied him out of the
Inn with such fear, and haste, that he did not so much as look back, or make
any stay till he came to Mundolin; so that he might well bring the News of his
Death; and that it was two Months, and better, before he was able to Travel; at
the end of which he came to Genoa, where he found no other Passage, save two
small Boats, which he, and two other principal Spaniards hired; that as they
were coming for Spain, they were taken by the Turks, and stripped of all that
they had, even to their naked Skins; and that the Turks carried him to Algiers,
where he found the Fathers of the Order of the Blessed Trinity, treating about
the redeeming of Christian Captives, with whom he discoursed; and that they,
moved out of Charity, though he was a Stranger to them, redeemed him for three
hundred Ducats.

In conclusion, (said he) I came to Spain, with fifty redeemed Captives: In
Valen^ia, we made a general Procession, and from thence, every one went his own
way which he liked best, with these Ensigns, and Tokens of their Liberty, which
are these poor kind of Habits. This day I entered this City, with so great, and
earnest a desire to see my Dear Aurelia, to whom I was engaged; that without
any other things detaining me, I inquired for this Monastery, where I was to
receive intelligence of her; for further Confirmation of what Philocles had
already said, Heaven had so ordained it, that a Florentine Merchant was present
at all this, who was to pay him ten thousand Ducats, upon a Bill of Exchange,
which escaped the Turks Hands, which he presently showed, to the Admiration,
and Amazement of them all.

Supper time being not yet come, Philocles told Aurelia, that he had heard a
Story, coming home from his Captivity, which made him Weep, and think of his
poor Aurelia, calling often to remembrance her languishing at his Fathers House
in that Deplorable Condition, the Poison had brought her to. Aurelia desired
him to relate it; but Philocles being somewhat weary, desired Brisac, his
Companion which came with him, to relate the Story of the Platonic Lover,
whereupon, the Company being all silent, he began.

In Florence, there lived a Gentleman more rich in Virtue, Beauty, and in
Courtesy, than in the Goods of Fortune, who most entirely loved a Young
Gentlewoman, whose Name I will not rehearse, in respect unto her Kindred, who
are descended of good, and great Families; but you may assure your selves, that
the Story is most true; and because he was not descended of as great a House as
she was, he durst not discover his Affection to her; for the extreme Love he
had for her, was so absolute, and perfect, that he chose rather to embrace
Death, than the Entertainments of any thing that might prejudice her Honor;
and seeing himself in so low a Condition, in comparison of her, he could not
entertain the least hopes to espouse her; wherefore his Love was grounded on no
other end, but only with all his power, to love her as perfectly as possibly he
could, of which at last she received some Intelligence; and seeing the honest
Affection, which he had for her, was so full of Virtue, and Civility, she
thought her self happy to be esteemed, and beloved by so worthy a Person, and
made so much of him, that he who could not have wished for more, was greatly
contented at it.

But Malice, the Enemy to all quiet, could not long suffer the continuance of a
Life so happy, for some Informers whispered in the Mother's Ear, that they much
wondered, that this Gentleman was of such power in her House, and that they
suspected, the Beauty of her Daughter to be the only occasion of it, with whom
they oftentimes observed him to be very Conversant. The Mother, who no ways
doubted the Honesty of the Gentleman, but assumed to her self as much assurance
of him, as she did of any of her own Children, was very sorry that there was
spread abroad such an uncharitable Opinion of him; but fearing that some
Scandal might arise, by the malice of bad Tongues, she entreated him at last,
that for a certain time he would not come so frequently to her House, as he was
accustomed to do. This was hard of digestion to him, knowing that the civil
Discourse which he had always with her Daughter, did not deserve that
restraint. Nevertheless, to stop the Report of all ill Tongues, he retired for
a time, until that Report was silenced, and afterward returned, as he had been
accustomed to do.

His Absence had no ways diminished his Affection; being in the House, he
understood the young Lady was to be Married to a Gentleman, who in his Opinion
was not of that great Estate, but that his own Service might be as well
entertained, and be as acceptable as his: He therefore began to reassume
Courage, and employ his Friends to speak on his behalf, supposing that if the
Choice were offered to the young Lady, that she would prefer him before the
other. Nevertheless, her Mother, and her Kindred, did make choice of the other
Person, because he was far more rich; whereat the Gentleman was extremely
melancholy, knowing that his Mistress would lose in that Enterprise as much
Contentment as himself. Whereupon, by degrees, without any other Sickness, he
began to consume away, and in a short time, was so much changed, that it had
clouded the Beauty of his Countenance, with the shadow of Death, to which, day
succeeding day, and hour following hour, he did joyfully repair.

In this Extremity he could not forbear, sometimes for speaking to her whom he
loved so entirely: But at last his Strength failed him, and he was reduced to
keep his Bed, of which he would not advise her whom he loved so entirely,
because he was unwilling, that she should partake in his Affliction: And
suffering himself to sink into despair, he at last could neither Eat, Drink,
Sleep, or take any rest; insomuch, that it was impossible to know him, by
reason of his Leanness, and the strange, and sharp Countenance which he had.
Some there were who advertised the Mother of his Mistress, of it, who was a
Woman full of Pity, and loved the Gentleman so well, that if all her Kindred,
and Confidents had been of the same Opinion as her self was, and her Daughter,
they had preferred his Virtue, and fair Deportment, above all the others
Wealth, and Riches; but the Kindred, who were on the Father's side, would not
adhere to it: Nevertheless, she resorted with her Daughter to visit the poor
Gentleman, whom they found rather dead, than alive; and perceiving the end of
his Life did approach, he endeavored to put himself in a posture to bid adieu
to the World, thinking to have died without feeing any one.

But being ready to obey Deaths Summons, and descend into his last Sleep,
unexpectedly beholding her, who was both his Life and Resurrection, he found
himself so fortified, that he arise up in his Bed, and directed himself unto
the old Lady; Madam (said he) some Occasion I presume has brought you hither,
to give a visit unto him who has already one Foot in his Grave, and of whose
Death you are the Occasion. The Lady made answer, how can that possible be;
that he whom we love so well can receive his Death by our neglect? Pray, inform
me, Sir, upon what grounds of Reason you pronounce so hard a Sentence? Madam,
(said he) although as much as it was possible for me, I have concealed that
Love which I most faithfully have born unto Mademoiselle your Daughter, until
my Friends (have motion'd the Marriage between her and my self) have been more
Zealous upon it than I desired, perceiving thereby I have received the
Misfortune of having all my hopes frustrated; neither does it so much afflict
me for my own particular, but my prophetic Spirit tells me with an assurance,
she can never be so well respected by any other, nor will be so well beloved as
by me. The Observation which I make, that she shall lose the best, and most
affectionate Friend and Servant that she has in the World, does more afflict
me than the loss of my own Life, which only for her alone I would preserve; but
because I find it cannot be serviceable any ways to her, it is an Advantage to
me to lose it.

The Mother and the Daughter hearing these Words, did do the best they could to
comfort him; Sir, said the Mother to him, take Courage I beseech you, and I
here solemnly promise to you, that if the Divine Powers restore you to your
former Health, my Daughter shall have no other Husband but your self. She is
now here present before you, and I command her upon the Obligation of her Duty
to make the same promise to you. Her Daughter melting into Tears, did the best
that she could to give him an assurance of that which her Mother had promised;
but he apprehending, that if he were recovered he should not enjoy his
Mistress, and that the good Words that were given him were only by Degrees to
restore him unto his lost Health, did say to them, That if these Words had been
spoken to him but three Months ago, he had been the most Healthful, and the
most Happy Man in the World, but this relief came so late to him, that it could
neither be believed, nor hoped. And when he observed that, they did endeavor
to enforce a belief into him of what they promised, he said to them since so
faithfully you have promised that great Happiness which can never arrive unto
me, (though now you both consent to it) by reason of the great weakness which
is upon me, I shall crave a far less Favor, which as yet I have not had the
boldness to demand. Immediately, they both solemnly made Protestations, that it
should be performed, and desired him with Confidence to demand it; whereupon,
he said unto the young Lady's Mother, I earnestly beseech you that you would
place her in my Arms, whom you promise shall be my Wife, and that you command
her to embrace and kiss me.

The young Lady, who was not accustomed to such familiarities, made some
difficulty of it, but her Mother expressly did command her, seeing that he had
lost both the understanding and force of a living Man. On that command the
Daughter did advance her self upon the Bed of the poor sick Gentleman, and said
to him, Sir, 'pray be Amorous; the poor Gentleman, languishing in his extreme
weakness, stretched forth his Arms, which were only Skin and Bones, and withal
the force of his Body embraced the Cause of his Death, and kissing her with his
pale and cold Lips, held her close to him as long as possible he could, and
said to her, the Love which I have ever had for you has been so great and
virtuous, that Marriage excepted. I never desired of you any other Happiness
than what I now enjoy, for the event whereof, and in this Possession of it, I
with Joy shall entertain Death as the most welco^est Friend, after receiving so
great a Satisfaction of having now my Desires in my Arms.

And having spoke those Words he took her again into his Arms, and with so much
vehemence, that his weak Heart could not endure the strength of his Love, which
was immediately abandoned of all the Faculties of Life, for his Joy was so much
dilated, that the seat of the Soul failed, and although the poor Body continued
a long time without Life, and therefore could no longer possess the rich Prize
it so lately gained, yet the Love which the young Lady had till then concealed,
did now so violently declare it self, that the Mother of the Living, and the
Servants of the Dead had much to do to separate the Union, and were at last
enforced, to pull the Living almost Dead, from him who was already Dead, whom
they did honorably interr; but the greatest Triumph of his Obsequies, were the
Tears, the Sighs, and the Complaints of this poor young Lady, who declared her
self as much after his Death, as she concealed her self in his Life, and now as
it were satisfied for the Injury she had done him. And since (as I have heard
it reported) the Husband she was married to (to take off from himself thoughts
of Melancholy) could never be entertained with any true Joy or Comfort of Heart.

Brisac having ended his Story, Supper came in, and several sorts of
Instruments played the while, several Healths went round, especially the
Northern Queen's, Philocles and Aurelia's; they earnestly besought the
Assistant, that he would honor their Wedding, which some eight Days hence they
did purpose to Celebrate. The Assistant was very well pleased with the Motion,
and within eight days after, accompanied with all the Highest and Principal
Persons of the City, he waited on them to the Church. By these turnings and
windings, and by these Circumstances, Aurelia's Parents recovered their
Daughter, and were restored to their former Wealth; and she assisted by her
many Virtues, in despite of so many Inconveniences lighted on a Husband, of
such especial Rank and Quality as Philocles, in whose Company she lived many
years in great Amity and Splendor, leaving behind them Heirs to uphold the
Names of Philocles and Aurelia.

THE Perfidious Mistress: A NOVEL.
VAlentia, one of the most Eminent Cities of Spain, the Nurse of so many
Families, the Center of Ingenious Spirits, and the sacred Receptacle of the
Bodies of diverse Saints, gave Birth unto Don Principio, a Person of Noble
Extraction, Young, and Master of all those Excellent Qualities, for which Men
are either loved or admired. Having left his Country about twelve years before
in the Company of an Uncle of his, who had the Command of a Troop of Horse in
Flanders, he behaved himself with so much Gallantry in those Parts, that he was
in a short time advanced to be Cornet, under his Uncle, who dying, he supplied
his place, and so continued twelve years in the Service of his Catholic
Majesty, Phillip the Third, against the revolted Provinces of the
Low Countries. He was at last in Compensation of his Services, Honored with
the Order of St. James, with the ordinary Allowances belonging thereto.

During that part of the year, which makes a kind of Cessation of Arms in those
colder Countries, his abode was in the City of Antwerp, where, by certain
Letters from Valentia, he received the News of his Father's Death, which made
him, being the Eldest, Heir of a very considerable Estate. He might indeed now
have lived plentifully on his own, and pursued his Pleasures, as many other
young Cavaliers did, who place all the Felicity of this Life in the Infamous
Enjoyments thereof: But he, a Dutiful Son of Honor, chose rather to continue
the Exercises of War, and serve his Country, than by a sudden Exchange of
Enjoyments, blast his Reputation, and incur the Reproach of a Person impatient
of hardship, and guilty of effeminacy. This Consideration discovers him to be
much more stayed than those young Gentlemen, who prefer whole Skins, the
shameful Blandishments of ease, and the warmth of their own Fires; before the
Honor, which a Person truly deserving that Name should endeavor to purchase
in the Service of his Prince.

But Don Principio considering withal, that he could not, upon this News of his
Father's Death avoid taking a Journey to Valentia, to order the Disposal of his
Estate, he desired leave to do it, of his most serene Highness the Archduke
Albert, who finding the just Occasion he had to go, easily condescended,
proffering him, at his return, what Advancement he could reasonably expect;
which obliged him to make the more earnest Promises to come back into Flanders,
contrary to the Presumptions of many, who immagin'd that he had made an exit
from the Military Stage, thence-forward to follow the more pleasant
Divertisements of a Civil Life.

Being come to Valentia, where his Relations and Friends kindly entertained
him, he began to order the Management of his Affairs, not trifling away his
time in unprofitable Diversions, whereto young Men, are but too much addicted.
For though he were a Soldier, yet was he no Lover of gaming, a Disposition for
which he was much to be commended, considering his Age and Quality: inasmuch as
gaming Occasions a thousand Misfortunes, and unhappy Accidents, whereof there
had happened not a few at Valentia. Nor was Don Principio as yet any way
inclined to Love, though he could not want Occasions to express his Courtship,
and how far he had studied the Mysteries of Love and Eloquence, since what
added much to the Luster of that City, was the great number of fair Ladies,
shining in it like so many Stars; but his most ordinary Employment was the
Exercising of his Horses. Of these he had four Excellent ones, extremely well
managed which he had bought in Andaluzia, and one which he rode a hunting the
Bulls, according to the Custom of the Country, showing himself, at that sport,
more dextrous than all those, who were accounted the Bravo's of the City.

It Is a Custom in Valentia, that in the beginning of the Spring, for the space
of about fifteen days together, most of the Families of the City go about the
Silk Husbandry, which they have in the adjacent Villages. One day, Don
Principio rid abroad into the Country, through that Delightful plain, which is
near a Garden not far from Valentia, known by the Name of the Monastery of our
Lady of Hope, and having spent the whole Afternoon about those pleasant
Gardens, refreshing himself with the sweet scent of the Flowers of the
Orange Trees, whereof there is good store there abouts, (the Sun being so far
declined, that it seemed to be equally divided between us and our Antipodes) he
passed by a Country House, not far from the pleasant River of Turia, where he
heard, at a small distance, one playing on a Lute, so well, that he thought he
had not heard any Music comparable to it before. He stopped his Horse,
imagining the Person playing on that Instrument so excellently, might also sing
to it. He expected awhile with much Impatience; but the Musicianess putting
the Instrument into several different Tunes, did not what he so much desired,
which was, to hear her Voice. In the mean time Night came on, and Don Principio
extremely delighted with the place he was in, gave his Horse to his Lacquey,
and commanding him a little distance off, he staid alone, under the green
Balcony, whence the Music came, to find out who made it. But he had not waited
long, ere he could perceive, by the light of the Moon, that it was a Lady, who
being got into that Balcony to take the Advantage of a gentle Wind then
blowing, began a-fresh her delightful Music on the Lute, whereto she joined
that of an admirable Voice, singing an Air, which made an absolute Conquest of
that Heart, wherein all the hardships of War had not made the least breach.
Whence we may deduce this Remark, that Cupid can do more in a Minute, than Mars
in a Troy-Siege.

To say the same thing again in other Words, the Excellency of the Voice, and
the transcendent Nimbleness of the Hand, the Compliance and Competition between
them, so ravished our young Gallant, that he wished she might never give over,
at least not till he were satiated with that Pleasure. But the Lady laid by her
Instrument, and leaning her Breast on the Balcony, though 'twere Night, made a
shift to see the young Gallant, whom her Music had charmed so long his Ears;
who also perceiving her, would needs make his Advantage of so blessed an
opportunity. So that getting as near as he could, he broke forth into this
Complement.

How infinitely happy must that absent Gentleman be, Madam, (for in the Verses
she had sung, she bemoaned the absence of a certain Person) who deserves so
Excellent a Voice to bemoan his Absence. I should be extremely glad of his
Acquaintance, that I might give him that Account of this good News, that he is
so obligingly bemoaned by so deserving a Lady as you seem to be. The Lady
wondered to find her self surpised, but recovering out of her Astonishment,
though she knew not the Person who had spoken to her, yet she gave him this
answer. As to the Song you heard, Sir, you are not to imagine it Sung out of
any Tenderness I have for some Person now far from me, and therefore you may
spare your self that trouble of making any enquiry who it is, and consequently
of informing him how highly he is in my Favor, as you imagine. What Assurance
can I have of that, (says Principio) knowing, by what I have heard from your
own Mouth, the predominant Passion of your Soul? How, I pray Sir, may you be
concerned in that, (said she to him?) Very much, (replied he) for the
Enchantment of your Voice has been so powerful over him who has heard it,
that it is not without Reason he requires Assurances of what he asks you, to
prevent the disquiet, which he must otherwise expect.

She could not forbear laughing at this Discourse of Don Principio's, and
telling him withal, that Women do prudently, when they are flattered, not to
believe any thing that Men say to them, in regard they never speak truth,
representing things, not as they really are, but as they appear to their
beguiled Imaginations. Wherein, I beseech you, (says Principio) do you think,
Madam, that I have told you any thing short of truth? Mistake me not, (replied
she,) I don't charge you with a coming short, but going much beyond it, for you
are so Prodigal of your Commendations of a Person you are very little
acquainted with, nay, have not so much as well viewed, that you must either
laugh at my simplicity, or think me a great admirer of my self, if I should
credit what you say. To convince you of either your Error or palpable
Flattery, of many, I need only give you this one Instance, that, when I my
self, and others whose Judgments I dare trust, think I do not sing tolerably
well, you would make me believe, that my Voice has raised you into Ecstasies,
when another would not have a Minutes Patience to hear me. Nay, Madam, (replies
Principio) take heed your Reproaches rebound not upon your self, disparage not
your self so far, and slight not truth so much as to call her by any other Name
than her own; you have an admirable Voice, and the Subject of the Words you
sung must needs be such, since it is not to be imagined you sung them in vain;
to make them perfect, there needs only the mixture of a little Jealousy, were
it not that the happy Man, upon whose account those Words were made, knowing
your Worth, cannot give you any.

Upon this, the Lady removed from the place where she was, that she might more
commodiously proceed in her Discourse with Don Principio, (though she knew him
not) for she imagined he could not talk at that rate without some ground; which
made her say to him, If you make any comparison between that Enchantment you
speak of, and the suspicion you seem to have, I can assure you, that you are
very well read in the Art of Flattery; and therefore, I beseech you, attribute
not a Melancholy Humor, I am subject to, to any Regret occasioned by the
absence of any Person, for I was never yet troubled with any such thing, and I
think, shall not as long as I live. I would give all I am worth in the World,
(says he) conditionally, what you say were true. Would your hazard be very
great in that, (replied she)? Very little, (said he) considering the account
upon which I proffer it; but I should say no less, were I possessed of all the
World, and think it well bestowed. I am extremely happy, (answers the Lady) to
hear things so highly spoken to my advantage; but I should be transcendently
vain, to imagine I should raise Love in any Person, before I am seen by him:
Nay, I dare promise you, that if you had seen my Face, you would not, perhaps,
be so resolute. My hearing cannot deceive me; (replys he) and I presume, that
the Person, who is so excellent to satisfy that auricular part, may be the
like in other Curiosities, which the envious Night permits me not a view of at
present. And when you consider, that in the Discourse I have had with you, I
have not talked of Beams, nor Splendor, nor used those Expressions, which they
seem to have studied, who with affected Hyperboles, make it their business to
flatter, and abuse Ladies, you should in some measure assure your self, that I
begin to conceive an unfeigned Passion for you.

Well, to humor you a little, (says she) I have some Inclination to believe
you, which will be much confirmed, if you tell me who you are. I have a desire,
(said he to her) first to deserve it by my Services, that in case there may be
any thing wanting in me, as to quality, those I hope to render you, may supply
the Defect. Nay, then I am satisfied, (said she) that you are a Person of
Quality, when you have such a distrust of your self. Pardon me, that I am
forced to leave you, for I hear my self called to receive some Company newly
come into the House, and if I should not immediately be gone, some would come
and find me here: Do me the favor then (says Principio) to give me leave to
wait on you here to Morrow at this time. I know not whether it may be in my
power, (said she to him) however, do you not fail to come hither; and though
something may prevent my giving you the Meeting, yet shall I think my self very
much obliged to you. I shall infallibly expect you, (replys the Enamored
Gallant) more fixed in my Resolution, than the Stars, you see, are in the
Firmament. Your last Words, (replied she) if I cannot sleep to Night, will find
my Thoughts a Diversion to deceive the dull Season; but when you come next, I
beseech you, be not so liberal of your Hyperboles, methinks they grate the Ear,
and I think all that use them great Flatterers, and consequently, no great
Honourers of truth; especially considering, how meanly I deserve.

Having said thus, and given him a very obliging Salute, she got out of the
Balcony, leaving Principio in a little disturbance, to see that she left him so
soon, for he was extremely taken, as well with the Excellency of her Voice, as
that of her Discourse: He had a great desire to know who she was, and she had
the same Curiosity concerning him, for she immediately commanded a Servant to
follow him, and not to return till he had discovered who he was; which he did,
without much trouble; inasmuch, as not far from thence, he saw him get up on
Horseback, and knew him, and presently returned with News to his Mistress, who
was overjoyed to hear it was Don Principio; of whom she had heard such noble
things, and seen behave himself so gallantly, at the Hunting of the Bulls.

Don Principio being come home, enquired of a Neighbor of his, who that Lady
might be, to whom he had spoken and describing to him the place where she
lived, he understood, her Name was Donna Iulietta, (the Surname for some
reason I shall omit) a Lady of great repute in the City, and of extraordinary
Endowments, whose Understanding was equal to her Beauty, Daughter to one Don
Speranza Lopez, a Person of great Fame, for his long Services in the Wars; who
having quitted the Military Life, and Married, well advanced in Years, had left
that Fair Daughter, who was then Fatherless, and Motherless, with a very
inconsiderable Fortune; in regard her Father's Estate consisted most in
Pensions bestowed on him by King Philip the Second, in requital of his
Services. This Lady lived with an Aunt of hers, an Ancient Gentlewoman, who for
the most part kept her Bed, and was then retired to that Country House, to look
after her Silk Husbandry.

Thus was Principio fully informed of all he desired to know; though he had a
particular account of the Perfections, which made the City of Valentia full of
Discourses of her Beauty, and Wit, which was such, that she had the reputation
of Writing good Verses, a Property very recommendable in a Person of her Sex,
and Quality. Principio had never seen her, and understanding she lived at that
Country House, his desire was the more inflamed; which made him ride abroad the
oftener, hoping to be favored with such another Opportunity, as he had met with
before; but he had not that Happiness a good while, her Aunt being so sick,
that she could not stir out of the Room where she lay. About fifteen days
afterward, the Old Gentlewoman being a little recovered, she had the liberty
to go and see the Processio^ of a Nun, at the Royal Monastery of Zaida, which
was not far from the Country House; at which Ceremony all the Gallantry of
Valentia, of both Sexes, was present. Donna Iulietta came thither also, but
having her Face covered with her Mantle, and attended only by one of her Women,
she got into a little obscure Chapel.

Principio on the other side, who failed not to be there, hoping to meet her,
on whom he had fastened his Affections, wondered very much that he found her not
among the other Ladies; and suspecting she might be one of those who were
retired into the Chapel, and had their Faces covered with their Mantles, he
went in to them, with two other Friends, to whom he said, (presuming it was she
as soon as he saw her) the new-made Nun is not much obliged to these Ladies,
who retire to a place, where they cannot see those Ceremonies which all the
rest are so desirous to behold: But I attribute this indifference to the little
inclination they have to become Nuns. Iuli^ was not a little pleased to see
(...), whom she had before observed in the Church, and wished not so well
attended as he then was. However, changing her Voice, she returned him this
Answer.

Being not invited to this Festival, we cannot expect the same welcome as those
that are; and for the little Curiosity we discover to see the Ceremonies used,
at the reception of a Nun, having seen the like several times before, we do not
much mind this in regard the seeing of it but once* is enough to satisfy a
person inclinable to be a Nun. Nay, then I see, (says one of Principio's
Friends) you are not one of their number, who have a desire to enter into that
Profession. I have no answer to make to you as to that, (replied she) only to
give you my Sentiments; that a Person cannot enter into this State of Life,
unless they are qualified for it; a Favor I do not yet find in my self to be
worthy of. We may then (replies Principio) infer from this Discourse of yours,
that you are not Married, but desirous to be so: What my Inclinations are, as
to Marriage, (said she) I am not obliged to give you an account, who are very
far from being related to me so nearly, as that I should acquaint you with my
Resolution in a business of that Concernment: However, you may satisfy us so
far, Madam, (says Principio) as to let us know, which condition of Life you
would rather choose. Which, I pray, Sir, would you advise me to, (said she to
him?) That of Matrimony, (says Principio.) What, Whether I have the
Accommodations requisite to enter into that State, or not, (replied s^e)? If
all be wanting, (says he to her) you must endeavor to forget your self, for
she who is not born to be a Nun, and cannot be Married, must remain Neuter, as
being incapable of both. I could very well follow that advice, (said she.) But
if you please, Madam, (says Principio) to discover what your Mantle permits us
not to see, I will give you better Advice.

Coming up nearer to her, as if he were confident of that favor, she met his
desires, and purposely gave him a full view of one of her fair Eyes, which
Principio's two Friends also took notice of; if the advice you intend to give
me, (said she) should prove to my disadvantage, 'twere better, I should still
continue undiscovered, though to hear your advice, I should not think it much
to answer your Expectation. That can do you no prejudice, (says Principio to
her) in regard we have observed some things which assure us, that you ought to
choose the State of Matrimony, in which you would make the Person you should
think worthy your Enjoyments, the happiest man in the World: Nay, ere I know
any more of you than I do already, I wish my self the Person, for whom that
Felicity is reserved. His two Friends affirmed the same thing on their own
behalf, being extremely satisfied with her Wit, and the little they had seen of
her Face. Can there be any happiness comparable to mine, (said she) who have
three such handsome Persons at my Devotion, of whom it is in my power to make
one the happiest Man in the World? Well, Gentlemen, since you cannot expect I
should make a sudden choice in a business of this concern, you will give me
leave to examine your several Perfections, that I may pitch upon him, who, in
my Judgment, may pretend to most.

Upon that every one began to celebrate his own worth, and undervalue his
Competitors: They passed away some time in that pleasant Discourse, without any
offense taken, though the place they were in should have minded them, that some
other Conversation would have been more suitable: But the Lady having had the
Patience to hear what every one had to say on his own behalf; she answered them
all together, thus: I am fully informed of the Qualities, and Deserts of
Persons every way so excellent: I am now to advise with my Pillow, which of the
three I should prefer; though, to tell you the truth, I have, in a manner
resolved upon my choice already, finding in my self a stronger inclination for
one of the three, than for either of the other two. The Person I mean, has
many excellent Qualities, but the particular inducement I have to think him
worthy my Approbation, is, that I know him to be a very great Wit; all I have
to object against him, is, that he fears I am already engaged to some other,
whence I infer he is Jealous, and consequently of an ill Nature,

Principio immediately apprehended she spoke of him, reflecting on what had
past in their Discourse the first time he had seen her. The time being come for
people to go out of the Church, the three Lovers out-vy'd one the other, to
find out passionate Complements to take leave of the Lady: Principio purposely
staying to be the last, only to whisper these Words to her. It Is too great a
Tyranny, Madam, toward a Servant so passionately yours, in so long a time, not
to vouchsafe him a full sight of you. I beseech you, be more kind to him
hereafter, least your further disdain may have some fatal effects on him; the
indisposition of an Aunt, (replied she) whom I must constantly attend, I hope,
you will think an allowable excuse; and what I tell you is much more true, than
the Expressions you make to me of your Love; but I will endeavor your
satisfaction, and put a Period to your complaints, when, possibly, y^u least
expect it; Principio had not the time to return her any answer, and so he
parted from her, leaving her deeply in Love, and extremely desirous to
discourse with him more at Leisure.

Some few days after Fortune favored her with an opportunity to her own
wishes, at the same Balcony where he had spoken to her the first time; as soon
as she perceived Principio, she came down, and they discoursed a long time
together, without any Interruption. The Effect of this interview and long
Conference, upon Principio, was, that his Love, which before was little better
than kindled, now broke forth into a Flame. Iulietta came not much behind him,
yet had that command of her Passion, as not to grant him the greatest kindness
that can happen between persons of different Sexes, though it were out of this
only reflection, that to have done it, at the first interview, would have
argued such a Compliance and easiness of Nature as no violence of affection
should ever be able to excuse.

Principio, being now fully satisfied that Iulietta was both a great Wit and a
great Beauty, writ several Love Letters to her, and the better to Express his
Passion, he also sent her some Verses of his own Composure. Iulietta knew, that
Principio among so many other qualities he had acquired, was also skillful in
Poetry, and consequently was the more surpised and satisfied therewith: Some
of his missives she very modestly answered in these terms.

The Letter.
THose Commendations which transcend the Merit of the person on whom they are
bestowed, do rather injure than oblige, and disparage the Judgment of the
giver, inasmuch as the receiver, thinking her self unworthy the Honor, justly
takes the Elogy for a Satyr. I am not so much a stranger to my self but that I
can distinguish between flattery and truth; nor am I so poorly conceited of my
self, but that I think I deserve somewhat of the Praises you give me. I shall
think it an Obligation, if you abate some part of what you tell me, and find
out a mean between excessive Praise and Contempt, for the former my own
imperfections advise me to look on as an abuse: I have no great Experience of
your disposition, and therefore think it not strange, if I give not the Credit
you expect to your Poetry, because it is the Language of fiction; nor yet to
your prose, because it proceeds from the same Author, who, it is very likely
has read Romances. Whether they were the Dictates of a sincere Affection, or
an Obliging Complement, it is only in the power of time to discover, and withal
to assure me, whether I am to acknowledge your Civilities, or resent the
injuries you have done me.


The Fair Iulietta found out an expedient to convey this Letter into the Hands
of Don Principio, her newly caught Gallant, who, desirous to set himself right
in the opinion of his Mistress, and assure her of the Fluency of his Style in
things of this kind, caused the Messenger to stay, and take along with him this
Answer.

The Answer.
I See then, Madam, so that you procure your own satisfaction, you care not
what inconveniences I may run into; since that to be more moderate in your
praises (as you seem to desire) cannot be without so much the greater prejudice
to my reputation, in that I think my self far short of transcendency, in that
particular, and I am forced to bring in the excess of my Love, to supply the
defects of my Poetry; that I may therefore be no more guilty of such a Crime, I
will henceforth express my self in Prose, and in some measure do what you
Command me in your Letter; you will find it no great difficulty to believe me,
if you were sensible what I feel; nay though out of modestly you pretend to be
Ignorant of it, I de^ie you to do it; unless withal you resolve never to
Consult your Glass any more. Well, Madam, it may be the time of your Conversion
is not yet come; when it shall, your Eyes will be opened, and you shall find,
that of all the Hearts, subdued by the Charms of your Beauty, mine perhaps may
be the least, but withal the most passionate Captive. Time, which gives all
things their Birth, Perfection, and Period, shall be the Touchstone to try
whether this be truth or a fiction; nay I leave it to the same old Gentleman to
assure you of a thing, you yet pretend to be ignorant of, which is, That, while
I live, you shall be sole Sovereign Mistress and Directress of my Inclinations;
and then perhaps good Nature, Gratitude, and Generosity will rather advise you
to acknowledgements of the Love I bear you, than a resentment of the injuries
you charge me withal.


This Letter gave Iulietta that satisfaction concerning her new Gallant, which
she expected; the frequent Visits where continued on Principio's side, and the
Epistolary Correspondence on both sides: so that the inclinations they had one
to another were, by these degrees heightened into a noble Flame of Mutual Love;
his Mistress commanded him above all things to keep his pretensions to her,
very Secret, which he inviolably promised to do; nay she was so scrupulous, as
to that particular, that if in the Church, or some other public place, her
Gallant did so much as cast his Eye on her, in the Company of some Friend, she
immediately imagined, that he acquainted him with his Passion; and as if she
had heard all their discourse, she failed not to send him a Letter concerning
it, if she could not see him time enough, that he might receive her reproaches
himself. Principio cleared himself the best he could, still assuring her of the
contrary; and inflamed with Love and Indignation, all he could do was to dispel
that diffidence, which troubled him extremely; but the sameLove, which is wont
to reconcile the lesser differences and dissatisfactions, that happen between
Lovers, helps them also out of the greatest and most difficult; 'twas
Principio's design to marry this Lady, though her Fortunes were very low: but
he delayed the doing of it, till he had affected a business he was then engaged
to prosecute. His Uncle and himself had done the King very considerable
Services in Flanders, for many years together, and he was then making his
applications to his Majesty for some Command in Compensation thereof; and the
obstructions and delays he met with in that affair contributed more to his
after-happiness, than the Expedition could have done, as will appear anon.

Iulietta had taken order that he should not be seen in the Street where she
lived, much less look up to her Window to be seen by her, and it was puctually
observed by Principio, who was not known to have given her a meeting any where;
but she her self was the first that forgot what she had enjoined; it happened
thus: During the time of the Carnival, which in Valentia, is Celebrated with
Masquerades, Balls, Tiltings and Disguises, Principio had in some of these met
with his Mistress, yet without discovery of more than ordinary kindness between
them, though they had talked, and danced together; one Evening after the Ball,
there was to be a meeting of certain Ladies, at the House of a Friend of
Iulietta's, to which she with some others had been invited: Principio and some
other Friends of his were to be there, not in order to any Ball, but only to
discourse; Iulietta came there betimes before any of the rest, and soon after
her a Woman, very sumptuously attired, attended by two Gentlemen Ushers of her
own retinue, whom her Mother had ordered to wait on her to that Neighbor's
House, who was very much her Friend. Principio coming into the Room, was very
kindly received by the Ladies then present, whom he endeavored to entertain
the most lovingly he could, till the rest of the Company were come in.

The Lady who came in last rose from her Seat to go and look upon a piece of
Tapstry, that was in the Room, wherein there were represented lighted Torches;
the Admiration she expressed at the Excellency of the Work-man-ship, obliged
Principio to come also to see it; there was Pen, Ink, and Paper upon the Table;
Lucretia (so was the Lady called) took the Pen in her Hand, and drew several
strokes upon the Paper; Principio took occasion to commend all she did with
such high Complements, that his Mistress, who was already possessed with a
Jealousy, to see him so near her, was almost ready to burst with indignation
to hear them; he minding only his own diversion in all he did, took no notice
of it; nay on the contrary, being acquainted with Lucretia, through her
Brother's means, whom he often visited, and a person of much Freedom in his
Behavior, he continued his Gamesome Humor, and snatched out of her Hand a Pen
she was making to Write withal; after which having dashed a little Ink upon her
Hand, he jestingly told her, that the blackness of the Ink never appeared less
than it did then; she pretending to be displeased at that Freedom gave him a
clap upon his Shoulder with he^ Hand, to get off the Ink; but perceiving h^
laughed at the revenge she had taken, she gave him another harder than the
former. Iulietta who minded their Jesting more than what was said to her by the
Mistress o^ the House, (with whom she was then discoursing) starts like a Fury
from her seat, and not considering what she was doing* gave Principio such a
blow over the Face* that his Nose bled; the poor Gentleman wa^ extremely
startled at it, and all he could do was to take a Handkerchief out of his
Pocket, to receive the Blood; telling his Mistress, very Coldly, Well, Madam
you see (...) have kept the Secret Committed to my trust* you have first
revealed it and transgressed the Law you have made your self; concluding this
reproach with a low Congy, he quitted the Room, and went home.

Iulietta had no sooner given the blow, but she was infinitely troubled at it,
not so much out of the respect she bore to the Mistress of the House, who was
her intimate Friend, as for her, who had occasioned her Jealousy; in this
interval, her Sisters, upon whose account this meeting had been appointed,
coming into the House, Iulietta had the opportunity to retire with her Friends
into another Room.

Being got together, only they two, my dearest Iulietta, (says her Friend to
her) What do you think of? How are you grown another Person than what I have
ever known you? I have hitherto admired your Modesty and Reserv'dness; how you
should now be Guilty of such a miscarriage in Behavior, is the Matter of my
Astonishment; the Action you have done, assures me, without your speaking,
what, in many Words, you should hardly have persuaded me to. I was ignorant of
this Affection of yours, because you ever kept it secret; and since I know it
by this discovery, I am more obliged to your Jealousy, than your Friendship.
Principio is a person of Worth and Quality; I am very glad he is your Servant,
you may henceforward publicly own him, for it is to no purpose to dissemble.

Iulietta was at such a loss, that she knew not what to answer; but having a
little recovered herself, I must acknowledge, dear Madam, (replied she) since
this Eruption of my Jealousy and Indignation has betrayed me, that Principio
is my humble Servant; my inconsiderate Passion, has, to my Shame, discovered
what I kept not only from your knowledge, but that of all others. I must
acknowledge, I say, that Principio serves me with a violent Passion, which yet
exceeds not the Affection I have for him. I never saw him so indifferent, as he
discovered himself in this last Action; his familiarity with Lucretia touched
me to the quick. That short fury, which we commonly call Jealousy, forced me
to that extravagant discovery of my Love. Since what is past cannot be
recalled, (said her Friend to her) let us find out some Remedy, to alleviate
the Inconvenience, for it is not fit we should be deprived of Principio's good
Company, nor he of the Pleasure of this meeting. Besides, we should not give
Lucretia the time to make any Reflection on this Accident, or conceive
Apprehensions which would prove Disadvantageous to you. What is to be done in
this Conjuncture, (replied the Jealous Lady?) The only way I can think of,
(says her Friend) is, immediately to write to him. She followed her Advice, and
sent him these Lines.

The Letter.
JEalousies, when they are really the Effects of Love, though expressed with
some harshness, are rather to be accounted Favors than Afronts, by a Lover,
whose Soul exhales a sincere Passion toward his Mistress. The Injury I have
done my self in wounding my Reservedness, is greater than the Violence you will
do your self in passing by what is now past. It much concerns my Reputation,
that you immediately return to the meeting. But if you persist in your
Resentment, you will have farther Occasion, if the loss of my Favor may give
you any.


A Messenger was immediately sent with this Letter to Principio, who expressed
much gladness at the Receipt of it; and, without any Recollection, obeyed his
Mistress, as being satisfied in Mind, that nothing discovers a real Passion,
more than Jealousy. He comes very gayly into the Room where the Ladies were,
which ^cretia perceiving was not a little troubled, for she doubted not of his
being in Love with Iulietta, though she thought so well of him as to wish he
had rather ^ddress'd his Affections to her self.

Principio finding himself in the presence of Iulietta, thought it not
requisite to speak to any other, ere he had first assured her of his Compliance
with her Desires. Approaching her with a Graceful Smile, he made her this
Complement, Madam, I have considered this Room with as much Respect as if it
had been a Temple, and your Person no less; since it not only kept me from
profaning the one, and offering any violence to the other, but also from
revenging by that kind of Duel, which the Law permits between Gallants and
their Mistresses. (Iulietta replied) being so much, as I am, a Servant to Madam
Lucretia, I have taken upon my Account the Affront you have done her, when she
would have shown you a Kindness, never thinking of any Law that permits a Man
to revenge himself of a Lady by way of duelling.

Lucretia knowing that that indiscreet Action of Iulietta's proceeded merely
from her Jealousy, would not be engaged in her excuse, so that she very
confidently made answer thus. There was never so great a Familiarity between
us, Madam, as might oblige you to take my part with so much Passion, in an
Occasion wherein I should not have wanted Confidence to revenge my self. But
not knowing any thing that sho^ oblige me to Jealousy, and thinking not the
affront done to me so great as you would persuade me it were, my Precipitation
was not accordingly so great as yours. I am very glad you make me the Riddle of
your Interpretations; let them be thought such by whom you please, but for my
part, I have already given them an easy Solution, such as none in the Company
can be ignorant of. Iulietta, not a little moved at the freedom of that
Discourse, would have replied; but the Gentlewoman of the House unwilling the
Difference should go any further, interrupted them, and obliged them to sit
down, for several other Ladies were coming into the Room.

Principio was, that Night, not only very sumptuous in his Apparel, but also
full of Excellent Discourses, insomuch that there were few Ladies in the
Company, who were not much taken with him, among whom Lucretia was the most
concerned of any. Her thoughts were full of what had happened between her and
Iulietta, and she was now resolved to use all the Artifices she could, to get
away that Gallant from her; wherein at last she had her Desire, as the Story
hereafter mentions.

All the Favors which Principio received of his Mistress, were paid by her
with extraordinary Demonstrations of Affection; for indeed the Lady had a
greater Kindness for him than any other, though at that very time she loved
another absent Gentleman, whom she had granted more particular Favors than
ever she had Principio's. For the Gallant then absent had received of her by
way of Kindness, what in Matrimony is called due Benevolence, and consequently
had she not been lost to all Modesty, she would have kept the promise she had
made him, since the breaking of that and her own Reputation were not distinct
Actions.

This Gallant of hers, whose Name was Don Frederick Dorella, had made a Journey
to Madrid, to prosecute a Suit at Law against the Count of Boceyna, his Uncle,
for a considerable Estate in Lands, which at last was decided in a Sovereign
Council of Arragon. He was returned to Valentia, with a Decree to put him into
Possession of the said Estate which amounted to two Thousand Crowns per Annum.
Iulietta was extremely put to her Shifts, not knowing how she should keep in
with both these Gallants, and satisfy them at the same time. She considered
that her Honor was engaged with Don Frederick, and her Love with Principio:
Her Affections being so much the more heightened toward the latter in requital
of his assiduou^ Att^ndances, as it was remitted toward the f^er, by Reason of
his Absence. So that it is as much a Miracle to see some Women forget their
Engagements, (when they to whom they are made, are once out of their sight) and
mind only the present Enjoyments, as to see Geese go barefoot.

But as drowning Persons will catch at any thing, and the distressed are
commonly glad of any Advice, this Lady whom we represented before, one of the
greatest Wits of her Nation, reduced to this extremity, must needs advise with
a Maid, whose Fidelity and Secrecy she had great Assurances of, resolving in
her self to find out some Expedient, whereby she might make sure of the one and
not lose the other. She received Don Frederick into the House, in the Night,
thinking she could not civilly deny him the Reiteration of a Kindness she had
once granted him: and she kept the other in hand with Love Letters, allowing
him not to see her as often as he desired, as well to add fuel to his Love, as
that the other, whom she was more obliged to favor, might have the freer
Access. Her excuse to Principio was, that she wanted not Overseers, that her
Friends were very shie in point of Honor, that one of them watched her Day and
Night, and that the greatest Pleasure he could do her, was, to forbear passing
through the Street where she lived, till she had assured him that the Coast was
clear. Principio who had really loved her, and suspected nothing of the
Imposture, easily credited all she said and punctually obeyed her.

Don Frederick was willing to requite the Kindness he had received from her, by
marrying her; but having a Mother alive, who would not have been well pleased
with that Marriage, he took Occasion to put it off, hoping it would not be long
ere she were removed out of the way, as being very ancient. So that he passed
away the time very jocundly with his Mistress, whilst she by her cunning
Insinuation and Artifices, endeavored to bring Principio into a Fool's
Paradise, and make him believe all proceeded from Affection.

There happened about this time a Difference between Principio, and another
Gentleman, of the most eminent about the City, whose Name was Don Renatus, as
they were playing at Tennis. Some Friends interposed between them, and 'twas
conceived they were made Friends; but the Reconciliation proved such as neither
was satisfied. Principio was a Person of a Generous open Nature, grounding his
Gallantry on the Employments he had in Flanders, and imagining that no Man,
having any thing to say to him, would do it otherwise than by the ways of
Honor. But his Adversary, conceiving he had more reason to be offended than
the other, who had not expressed so much Resentment, smothered his Malice, in
hopes of an opportunity, wherein he might revenge himself with Advantage.

Don Frederick was gone to a certain place in the Country, where he stayed
three or four days. Iulietta who had a great Kindness for Principio, sent him
word to come to her House in the Night, but so secretly and with such Caution
that none might perceive it, inasmuch as the freedom she gave him, concerned
her Reputation in the highest Degree. The Amorous Cavalier obeyed her in this,
as he had done in many other things she had commanded him, coming thither at
such hours as it was not likely any should see him. Thus by his Credulity he
promoted the Designs of this Deceitful Woman, who would craftily make the most
of both her Gallants; so that, preventing their being Jealous of one another,
nay, knowing that they were Rivals, she gulled them both. Had she been free to
make her own choice, no doubt she would have pitched upon Principio for her
Husband. But Frederick being aforehand with her, she could do no less, though
'twere only out of a fear to lose him, and prevent the Reproaches he might make
her, than keep him still in play, and expect the Performance of the Promise he
had made to Marry her, as soon as his Mother were marched off. But out of an
Apprehension that even then he might possibly break his Word with her, she
thought it Prudence to give Principio also a little more Line. Upon these
Considerations, she suffered her self to be Courted by both.

Principio being now more kindly entertained by his Mistress than he had been,
began to conceive a hope to obtain of her, within a short time, the Grand
Favor can be expected from a Woman. But he reckoned without his Hostess; for
it was her fear, that if she obliged him in what he so much desired, he might
become absolute Master of those Inclinations, which she had so dexterously
divided between them both. However, Principio passed away the time pleasantly
enough, during the absence of Frederick; but as soon as he was returned to
Valentia, Iulietta began to put on a greater Reservedness, and would not be so
much as seen by Principio. She made him such plausible Excuses for it, that he,
loving her as he did, believed all she said, though not without some Suspicion,
that there might be something else in the Wind: Upon which account he often
disguised himself, that he might, undiscovered, visit the Street where she
lived, in the Night. But he never could meet with any Person, of whom, he might
conceive any Jealousy; yet that Disguise did him a Courtesy; for by that
means he escaped being discovered by the Cavalier who sought to be revenged of
him. That he met not with Frederick in that Street, proceeded hence, that
Iulietta, foreseeing all Inconveniences, had ordered, that Frederick should
come to her House, through that of a She-Friends of hers, which was another
Street, and had a Backdoor, leading into a Garden joining unto Iulietta's, in
whose Embraces she spent the whole Night.

It happened, one Night, that Principio being in the Street where his Mistress
lived, his Adversary, Don Renatus, attended by two of his Servants, comes into
it by another way, being not well assured it was he, they followed him at a
Distance, being loath to do another that Mischief which they only intended him.
Principio at last observed them, and finding himself unfurnished with Pistols,
to deal with Persons who never went without them, as having only his Sword to
defend himself, he besought him to make the Signal he was wont at Iulietta's
Door, who as good luck would have it, was come down Stairs, after she had put
Frederick into Bed. She looks out at the Window, to see what her second Gallant
would have, who, as soon as he perceived her, desired her immediately to open
the Door, otherwise he was a dead Man, in regard Renatus his Enemy followed
him, and he was destitute of Weapons to defend himself. The Lady imagined that
Principio would only have put a trick upon her, and only said so, that he might
be the sooner admitted in: But Principio, with many Oaths, affirmed he said
nothing but the truth, and that Renatus, with two others, were comi^g upon him.

Iulietta was extremely troubled at his Discourse, and for answer, told him,
that a certain Gentlewoman of her Acquaintance was come to see her, and to be
her Bedfellow that Night, and that she durst not open the Door, least she
should see him. Principio pressed her the more to do it, aggravating the danger
he was in, and charging her that she had little love for him, when she denied
him entrance into her House in so great an Extremity, which the greatest
Stranger in the World would not have denied him. Iulietta told him again, that
she could not do it without prejudice to her Reputation. That as to the love
she bore him, he needed not doubt of it, since it could not be greater than it
was, and called Heaven to Witness, that she was extremely perplexed, that she
could not satisfy his Desires. Principio told her, that since her Friend was
in a Room above-Stairs, she might without any scruple open the Door, and let
him stay below, till such time as he might retire with safety.

Iulietta seeing him so importunate, imagined it proceeded from some Suspicion
he had conceived of her, and that he had seen Frederick coming into the House.
To be assured whether it were so or no, she looked into the Street, and saw the
three Men who pursued him, and whispering one to another, as being in some
uncertainty whether it were the Person they looked for. These Circumstances
fully satisfied her, that Principio was in very great danger; and to find some
Expedient to give him entrance, she bid him expect a little with Patience, and
she would see whether she could open the Door. She went up Stairs to see
Frederick, who, wondering at her stay, asked her what occasioned her going
down. She told him her Aunt was not fallen a Sleep, and that she could not come
to Bed, till she were. Desiring him to have a little Patience.

Having thus satisfied him, she went into another Room, to consider with her
self what might be done in such an Extremity. On the one side she saw Frederick
posses^'d of her Bed, a Person of a Fantastic Humor, yet one whom she was
engaged to, and had made Master of the most precious thing she had, and still
humoured out of a hope to be one day his Wife; so that her Honor was on his
part. On the other, the Love she bore Principio would have prevailed with her,
not to suffer him to be assassinated by his Enemies, which he must run the
hazard of, if she relieved him not, it being in her power to do it: So that she
was strangely distracted, not knowing whether she should follow the Dictates of
Honor, or those of Love. At last, after diverse Considerations, that of Honor
prevailed with her, and obliged her not to receive Principio into the House.
For if she did, she reflected that her Reputation would be endangered two ways;
one, that it could not be done without Fredericks's hearing of it, who would
thence take Occasion to break his Promise; another that if Princi^io were
pursued by his Enemy, and that he should see him come into her House, he would
be apt to make an ill Construction of it, and that might come to the Ears of
Frederick, even though he saw him not.

Having thus resolved to stick to the surer ^ide, she went down stairs, and
finding Principio still at the Door, my dearest Love, (said ^he to him)
Heaven's my Witness, how wil^ing I am to satisfy your Desires, by giving ^ou
Entrance, not only into my House, but even into my Heart, which is absolutely
at ^our Disposal. I see you are pursued, as you ^old me, but it would be too
great an Incon^enience to me, that you should be seen co^ing into my House at
such an unseasonable ^our, being a Person yet so unblemished in my ^eputation
as I am. I beseech you consider with your self what Discourses it might
Oc^asion; besides my Friend, who is my Bed^ellow this Night, is awake, and, as
Women ^re extremely inquisitive, she will be desirous ^o know the Occasion of
my stay, and who ^ath kept me so long from her, for there is a ^ery great
familiarity between us. Pardon ^e therefore, that I cannot grant your desire;
it is the greatest Affliction imaginable ^o me, that I must leave you in such a
dan^er, but reflecting on that of my Reputa^ion, I know you would not have me
to ha^ard it, since I doubt not but you are so ge^erous, as to prefer my Honor
before your own Life.

This unworthy Treatment of his Mistress, in so pressing an Extremity, went to
the very Heart of Principio; nay he was so startled to find himself thus
deceived, that it would not have troubled him much if Renatus had set upon him,
that he might be revenged of the affront done him by Iulietta, by dying before
her Eyes. I should never have imagined, (said he parting from her) that you
could have been so Barbarous, as to put me off so poorly in so dangerous an
Exigency, or so inexorable, upon the entreaties of so faithful a Servant. If
you ever had any real Kindness for me, that Reputation you stand so nicely
upon, would have run no hazard, either as to your Friend, or my Enemy, by your
receiving me as a Husband, upon which account only I made my Addresses to you:
upon which if you, ungrateful Woman, had entertained me, and not insisted on
frivolous Respect grounded on such Maxims as I cannot like, my Heart had at
this time been absolutely at your Disposal. To make it deservedly such, has
been the main end of all my Courtship^ and Services, but Heaven would not
permit it; and since I could find no Compassion in your Heart, I will go and
try what I may expect from my Enemy, with a Resolution never to forget a
procedure I am so much astonished at.

Iulietta would have made him some answer, and, extremely moved at his
Discourse, was resolved to hazard all, to assure him of her Affection. But when
she went to call him, he was got a great way down-the Street, pursued by
Renatus, who being assured he was the Person he looked for, was going to set
upon him. His Resentment of her Unkindness, considering the Imminency of the
danger, seemed just to her, and being extremely troubled thereat, after she had
blamed her self, she quarreled at Heaven, which in the mean time secured her
Lover from Danger, and reserved him for happier Adventures. Renatus coming
within Pistol-Shot of Principio, perceived that he had met with his Friend Don
Alonzo, who with his Servant, was going home to his Lodging, which prevented
him from executing his Design. For Renatus being, in appearance, and that
before several Persons, reconciled with him, all would have blamed him, had he
assaulted him upon the old account, especially at Advantage, and with
Firearms. So that seeing he had lost such a fair opportunity to revenge
himself, he slipped aside, to avoid being known, imagining he had not been
discovered. Principio related the whole Story to his Friend, and how he had
been pursued thither; which he much wo^dred at, seeing Renatus so little minded
the Engagement he had made before so many Persons of Quality, and that so
slight a Business should stick so close to his Heart.

It was by this time very late, and as well for that Reason, as to be satisfied
of what he suspected, Principio being near to Don Alonzo's Lodging, resolved to
take part of it that Night, which his Friend was very glad of. They got in, and
ere they lay down, they fell into Discourse about what had passed Principio
opened himself to Don Alonzo, and acquainted him how Affairs stood between him
and Iulietta. Don Alonzo had heard somewhat of the mutual Love there was
between her and Frederick, and was vexed to see his Friend had so far
mis-placed his Affections, and particularly at the Resolution he had made to
marry her: whereupon he could not forbear telling him what he heard of her and
Frederick; which Principio understanding, he immediately presumed, that the
reason why she opened not the Door, must needs be, that her former Gallant was
with her. A thousand Passages came into his Mind, but he particularly reflected
on the Prohibition, which the crafty Gentlewoman had made him* of speaking to
her in the Night, and that it was only since Frederick's return from Madrid:
upon which communicating his Thoughts to his Friend, they jointly concluded,
that Frederick must needs be in the House with her. To be fully assured of it,
they ordered a Servant of Don Alonzo's to examine the Business, and to continue
in the Street, till it were day: and for further certainty, another Servant was
appointed to stand Centry in the other Street, by which Frederick was wont to
get in at a Back Door. With this Precaution they went to Bed together; but
Principio was in such a Disturbance, that he could not sleep a wink. About half
an hour before day, one of the Servants brought Intelligence that he had seen
Don Frederick going out of the House belonging to Iulietta's Friend, and that
about the same time, he had seen Iulietta in one of the Windows that looked
into that Street, looking on him as he went out, and that he was sure it was no
other than she her self. This Account satisfied Principio so fully, that all
the Love he formerly bore that impudent Woman, immediately vanished. 'Twas not
imaginable, that Frederick frequented that House upon the account of the
Mistress of it, who being turned of fifty, could not be courted by any
Gallants. Besides, she had the Reputation of being a very Charitable Person in
Love-Affairs, and was wont to promote the Enjoyments of younger People, and to
give Excellent Directions how they might most Cautiously accomplish their
Desires.

The Night following, Principio would himself, from the House of a certain
Friend of his, see Frederick getting into the Sanctuary of that Charitable
Sollicitress; and for his further Assurance, he lay perdue upon the Roof,
whence he discovered. That that favored Gallant continued there, till word was
brought him that he might make his Entrance into Iulietta's that very Night.
The dissembling Gossip, would needs endeavor to satisfy her Lover, as to the
Dissatisfaction he might justly have conceived of her: To leave nothing
unattempted, and to keep in as near as might be withal, she sent Principio a
Letter by her Servant-Maid in whom she reposed great Trust, and who was not a
Stranger to the Loves of both the Gallants, and promoted the Design of her
Mistress in abusing them, for the Advantage she reaped thereby. Hearing she
staid to speak with him, he called her up, and received from her a Paper
containing these Words.

Iulietta to Principio.
I Should not think the Resentment you justly have against me so great as I do,
were I able to express the Trouble I am in to have been the Occasion of it.
That I have not been so Compassionate, as the Exigency required, be pleased to
attribute to the Tenderness I had for my own Honor, the Consideration whereof
made me inexorable. I love you beyond my own Life; but one of my Birth and Sex
may be pard^n'd, if she Sacrifice all things to the security of her Reputation,
rather than expose her self to the Censures of ill Tongues. You may well
imagine, when I denied you entrance into my House, that my good Name must run a
strange hazard with that troublesome Bedfellow, whom, to my unhappiness, I was
then forced to entertain. Notwithstanding the Resentment wherewith you left me,
you could not but observe the Distraction I was in: whence you may infer, how
thankfully I have since acknowledged the Indulgence of those higher Powers, who
rescued you out of a Danger, which I thought unavoidable. You could not have
lost your Life in that Adventure, but mine must have run the same hazard, and I
do not know any thing but Honor which I should prefer before two things I
account so precious. Let me therefore Conjure you, to smother your Resentment
of it, and to appease your Indignation: which if I may obtain of you, I shall
think all the Devoirs your Love may require little enough to requite it. Your
Compliance with my Desires herein will inform me, what Tenderness you have for
her Satisfaction and Life, who prays Heaven to preserve yours, as she wishes it
may here is, who loves you with all her Soul.

JULIETTA.


Principio was extremely incensed at this Letter, and though he did all he
could to dissemble it, yet the Maid looking on him very earnestly during the
perusal, sufficiently observed it in his Gestures. He entreated her to walk
into the Garden, and stay for an answer; which was this.

To Julietta.
YOur Satisfactions, hitherto, have ever heightened my Love, but this last has
wrought in me a quite contrary effect, for I know it to be as far from Truth,
as I am from Dissimulation, I never thought my self a Person to be entertained
only to pass away the tedious Interval of another Man's Absence, nor to act the
ridiculous part you have put me upon, only to come upon the Stage, between the
several Acts of your Secret Prostitutions. If it be any Satisfaction to you,
know, I have disengaged all Resentments of your Hypocrisy, and shall never
complain of the frivolous Elusions, wherein y^u suffered my Love to Languish:
No, I am more obliged to your Denials, than ever I should have been to your
Caresses. My Life indeed would have been secured, if you had received me into
your House; but my Honor would have been irrevocably lost, if, without my
Discovery of it, you could have exercised your Charity on two several Persons,
the sanie Night. It Is very probable you loved me beyond your own Life, when,
being so closly engaged to another, you thought me the fittest Person in the
World to make your Diversion. I am really obliged to those who intended to be
my Murderers, since by their means I came to discover your Imposture: Make
sure of that Fortunate Gallant, whom your Charitable Neighbor was ushering to
your Bed, while I was knocking at your Door. Make sure of him, perfidious
Woman, and henceforth, keep all your Cares, and all your Caresses only for him.
Live as happily with him as the Conscience of your inhumanity toward me will
permit, and never think more of Principio, who for his part, disclaims all
future thoughts of you.


It was not long ere this Letter came to the hands of Iulietta, whom the Maid
found in that Neighbor's House of hers, through which Frederick had access to
her. She received it with some Disturbance; and asking the Maid, what Humor
she found him in, she told her, that he had made her a very cold Reception, and
that he expressed nothing of the Kindness he was wont to do at other times.
Iulietta a little cast down at that Discourse, it seems then, (said she) I am
not to promise my self any great Satisfaction from this Letter. Having opened
and read it, she was like one put into a fright, not able to speak. Her Friend
asked her what it contained? She thinking it too great a burden, to acquaint
her by Word of Mouth, gave her the Letter to peruse. The old Croney no less
disturbed than the young Mistress, found, that Frederick's Love was discovered,
to the great Disadvantage of her Reputation, inasmuch as it clearly expressed,
that it was through her House, Frederick made his Approaches to her Friend,
whereat she was extremely afflicted. Iulietta was so troubled at the Contents
of that Letter, that she cursed the day and hour she had suffered Principio to
Court her; the only Comfort she could raise to her self, was, that she knew him
to be of so generous a Disposition, that, though he had a just Occasion to be
incensed against her, yet would he conceal her weakness, and not publish the
Correspondence there had been between them.

But Iulietta's Unhappiness was not come to its full height, and the Malice of
her ill Fortune thought not this Affliction heavy enough. When the Wheel of
that Vagabund-Goddess begins to turn, every Spoak of it brings anew

Misfortune, one Disgrace coming still on the Neck of another. It happened
then, that as the Maid was coming out of Principio's Lodging, to bring the
Letter to her Mistress, Frederick saw her with it in her Hand, she having been
careless to hide it, because she was dis-satisfied with Principio, who had only
that time omitted to make her some Present. Frederick immediately began to
suspect somewhat, and, undiscovered, followed her to the House where Iulietta
was, and got into one of the upper Rooms, without any one's taking notice of
it; the Maid by a second oversight, having left the Door open: He easily saw
what past, he heard the Letter read from one end to the other, and withal,
their several Discourses and Comments upon it; the afflicted Lady bursting
forth into Indignation at every Word, and not imagining she was overheard, she
sufficiently expressed her Resentment of so pressing a Misfortune.

The Gentleman in the next Room, who would have been glad of any Occasion to
break the promise he had made to Marry her, (for a Lover once admitted to
Enjoyment has other-guise thoughts than he who is still kept in hope) hearing
all these things, conceived them a very fair pretense to dis-engage himself. He
therefore goes very confidently into the Room where they were, and addressing
himself to Iulietta, who was most startled at his presence; I expected, (said
he) considering the mutual Obligations between us, that you would have
corresponded thereto, with a sincerity suitable to my Desires, which aimed only
at this, to see us one day united by Marriage, and to enjoy those Pleasures
lawfully, and without any sting or remorse, which we have, upon hopes of the
Accomplishment of that sacred tie, presumed to anticipate. But since,
ungrateful Creature, I find you lost to all Modesty, and have entertained new
Gallants, I am free, to dispose of my self as I shall think most convenient,
since it were neither just, nor rational I should be inseparably bound to a
Person, destitute of all Conduct and Honor, and so live the rest of my days in
perpetual Jealousies and Distrust. Having so said, he left the Room, a little
troubled at the Distraction of the Woman; but well satisfied in his own
thoughts, that he had drawn his Neck out of the ^ollar, that is, shifted
himself out of an Affair, which bred him a great deal of Trouble, since his
Prosecution of it to that point had been with the dis-Approbation of his Mother.

It Is not to be imagined, that the Constancy of any Woman, should be able to
endure so great a shock of Misfortune. Iulietta fell into a Swoon between the
Arms of her Friend, and continued in it a long time; but at last being come to
her self again, she spoke such things as raised a great Compassion in her who
heard them. She sought for Remedies to her Misery, and not finding any strong
enough to re-engage Principio, who was acquainted with her former Engagement,
nor yet to bring back Frederick, whom she knew she had offended, she was not
able to smother the Grief she conceived to find her self so justly slighted by
both. She imputed all her Misfortune to her own Misgovernment of her self.
Whereupon she fell a tearing of her Hair, and spoke what ever rage could
inspire into a Woman exasperated in the highest Degree.

She passed away the rest of the Afternoon in continual disquiet, not finding
any Comfort in either her Friends Discourses, or her own. In the Evening, she
went to her own House, but her Distractions went along with her, so that it is
not to be imagined but the Night proved as Restless, as the Day had been
Unfortunate. Let us a while leave her in her Bed, formerly the Receptacle, but
now the secret Remembrancer of her former Miscarriages, in the midst of her
Troubles and Transportations, and give an Account what became of Principio.

As soon as he had dispatched away the Maid with his Letter to Iulietta, he sat
down a while to consider with himself what course he should take, for he saw
there was nothing to be expected there, and that it was not for his reputation,
to continue his visits any longer; he had always had a great inclination for
the Fair Lucretia, ever since she had occasioned Iulietta to break forth into
that extravagant discovery of her Jealousy; he considered she was a
Gentlewoman well descended, and of a great Fortune; and thereupon he resolved
to make his addresses publicly to her, by demanding her in Marriage of her
Father and Brother, which they, upon the first motion, very willingly granted,
even with great demonstrations of Gladness, inasmuch as Principio was a person
generally beloved in his Country, as being endu'd with those qualities, which
deserved the respects and esteem of all: The Contract of Marriage was soon
drawn up, and the business immediately spread over the whole City of Valentia.

But when this News came to the Ears of Iulietta, imagine whether she were not
extremely troubled thereat; nay so much the more, in that he pitched on the
Person, whom of all the World she had most reason to hate, ever since that
fatal meeting, wherein she had expressed so much indiscretion. She said a
thousand things against her, and made many imprecations against him and her
self, charging Heaven with injustice, and sometimes bemoaning her self, and
sometimes Cursing her misfortune. But it was not only one she had to Curse; for
the very same day it was seconded by another, yet greater, inasmuch as Fredrick
having had a plausible occasion to break the promise he had made to her,
treated about a Marriage, with another Fair and Rich young Lady, whom his
Mother had long before recommended to him; the Contract was in a few days drawn
up, and though done as secretly as could be, yet was it soon known all over the
City, and it was not long ere the news came to the Ears of Iulietta. She still
retained a slender shadow of confidence in the Love of Fredrick, which made her
imagine he would not break the promise he had made to her, conceiving she had
sufficiently obliged him thereto by the highest Demonstrations of Love and
Tenderness.

Thus she flattered her self, till the very day that she was clearly convinced
of the contrary, by seeing his Marriage concluded, and her self absolutely
forsaken; but reflecting on the other side, what an unworthy breach of trust
she was Guilty of, toward him, to whom she had devoted her Honor, how could
she imagine he should not leave her in the lurch? How could she expect, if they
Inter-married, he should be able to live with her in perpetual Disturbances and
Alarms? The very day that certain News was brought her of this Gentleman's
being Married, she fell into such extravagance, that she would be revenged of
her beautiful Face; she gave her self several blows, tore her Hair, and did all
the Actions, which could only proceed from Madness and Despair; her fair Eyes
became two Fountains, perpetually running; and when her Sighs and Grief gave
her a little freedom of speech, Wretched Woman that I am, (would she say) of
whom all good Fortune has taken its last leave; how deserv'dly is thy
ingratitude required with ingratitude? How justly art thou punished, for having
kept thy Faith to a base, treacherous, and perfidious Person, after thou had
entrusted him with the disposal of the dearest thing thou had in the World?
Thou see, he denies the debt; thou see, he pays it with inconstancy and
oblivion; let all easie-natur'd, and inconsiderate Women take example by me;
let those, who, deluded by Flatteries and fair Caresses, are drawn in to lose
what they shall never recover again, cast their eyes on my Misery, and then
consider whether there be any other in the World, whose Affliction may be
compared to mine. I wish for what all others abhor, Death; but it is deaf and
inexorable, nay slights me, and will not come and put a Period to my Trouble.

Having thus bemoaned her self into some Remission of her Grief, she went to
see her Friend, through whose House Frederick came into here is; who though she
endeavored all that lay in her power to comfort her, yet was her trouble so
great, the cause of it so pressing, and so little hope of any Remedy, that all
her Remonstrances prevailed nothing; the only Expedient that seemed then to
offer it self, was, to forbid the Banes, since there was some ground to do it;
but what proof could be made of so secret a Love, without any promise of
Marriage in Writing, or any Testimony, but that of a Servant-maid, who
belonging to her, would not have been so easily credited? The last and surest
expedient this unfortunate Woman could pitch upon, was to become a Nun, upon
which Account she was received into the Royal Monastery of Z^ida, three days
after the Marriage of Frederick had been fully concluded.

This sudden change occasioned a great deal of noise and discourse in Valentia;
all wondered at it, especially those who knew her to be one of the handsomest,
and the most desirous to be Courted of any Lady in Valentia. It was indeed a
kind of Miracle, to see a young Lady; who spent her time so passionately at
Balls, Plays, and other public Meetings, exchange all those nobler enjoyments
of Life, for the imaginary felicity of Mortification and Retir'dness; this
sudden resolution was attributed, at first, not to the true cause thereof, for
things were carried so closely that very few knew it; but to the secret
inspirations of that Wind, which blows where it lists, and is pleased to
amuse mankind with the strange ways it takes, to transplant the affections of
such as are ordained to Eternal bliss, from the transient Vanities of this
World, to the Constant pursuance of the perpetual joys of a better.

Thus this Lady met with a kinder Spouse than she could have expected
elsewhere, and spent the rest of her time with great Content, Blessing her
former Afflictions and the crosses of her Love, which had brought her to the
tranquillity she now enjoyed; she frequently used this Expression, that in that
House wherein there are many mansions, she hoped there was one for such
penitent Magdalens a^ she, who by timely Repentance, expiate the follies of
their greener years. Nor was this Acknowledgment of hers, unrewarded even in
this Life; for she became the Oracle and Spiritual Directress of all those,
whose Love-Misfortunes reduced them to any Extremity, especially those of her
own Sex, of whom she so effectually convinced many, that, disgusting the World,
they embraced a Religious Life. At Valentia, the Sanctity of her Life, and her
Charitable Directions to such as had Occasion to Address themselves to her,
were the Admiration of all, insomuch that she was reputed a Saint, even while
she lived.

Frederick, had a Wife, but Heaven was pleased to punish his Perfidiousness
with her Barrenness, for she bore him no Children; and instead of the great
Fortunes he expected with her, he had many Baggs, full of Law-Sutes, Troubles,
and Differences with other People, and not a few Discontents with his Wife. He
wished, but too late that he had chose rather to have entered into a Monastery,
than into Matrimony, the Inconveniences whereof sufficiently convinced him,
that Iulietta had made the better choice. He visited her often, and was obliged
to her for her Prudent and Pious Admonitions.

On the contrary, Principio was the happiest Man in the World in his disposal
of himself; his Lucretia brought him many fine Children, and, by the Death of
some Friends, a far greater Fortune than he could have expected. They also
visited their old Acquaintance Iulietta, who received them kindly, and gave
them Occasion to admire the strange Attractions of Divine Love in that Person,
and the Esteem they had before for the Excellency of her Endowments, was now
converted into a Reverence of her Sanctity, and an Admiration of her Conduct.

THE Metamorphos'd Lover: A NOVEL.
DON Philip, a Gentleman of very high Quality, was Born at Villefranche, an
Ancient City upon the Confines of Galicia; he was descended from a very Noble
Family, and was brought up in his own Country, with his Elder Brother Don
Lodwick, and a Sister called Donna Cornelia: But his Father and Mother leaving
this World ere he was full fifteen Years of Age, he was forced into that Course
of Life, which is commonly taken by the younger Brothers of Noble Houses, who
have not much left them, and with the little Money he could get together, he
went to Trail a Pike in Flanders. He behaved himself so gallantly there upon
several occasions, that he got the Colors of a Company of Foot, and after
other successful Encounters against the Dutch, he was advanced to the Command
of the same Company. Having afterward, in that Charge, made yet greater
Demonstrations of his Conduct, and Valor, he Achieved at length, the Order of
the Knights of Alcantara, with an assurance of the first Commandry, that should
be void, belonging to that Order.

Having obtained that, he still continued his Military Employments, till such
time as there was a Cessation of Arms made between the King and his Enemies of
the Low Countries, to last a Year and a Day. This Opportunity, together with
the News he received out of Spain, of his Elder Brother's Death, obliged him to
desire leave to make a Journey into his Country, where two Children his Brother
had left, and his own Sister, stood in need of his presence; the former to be
protected by him, the latter to be disposed of in Marriage. Don Philip arrived
at Ville-franche, fifteen days after his Sisters departure to Villadolid, where
the Court was then, with an Aunt of his, a Widow, his Father's Sister, who
would needs have her along with her; this old Lady, who had a great kindness
for her, having resolved to leave her all she had at her Death, in hopes she
might, with those Advantages, meet with a better Match.

As soon as Don Philip was come into his Country, he took order about his
Brother's Estate, and the Tuition of his Nephews, whom he left in the Custody
of an Ancient Kinsman of his, whom having entrusted with the care of their
Education and Maintenance, he resolved to go and Visit his Sister at
Villadolid. As he was setting things in order for his Journey, passing through
the broad place of Ville-franche, he saw abundance of people going toward an
Inn, which was at the end of it, accompanying two Litters, in one whereof,
there was an Old Gentleman; and in that which followed, a Young Lady, whose
Transcendent Beauty, heightened by the sumptuousness of her Attire, ravished the
Eyes, and Hearts of all that beheld her, but above all those of Don Philip; he
was so enflamed by that Transient Sight of her, that, covering with his Cloak
the order he was of, he followed the Litter, so transported out of himself,
that he reflected not on what those who observed him might say of his
Demeanor. He saw her lighting at the Inn-Gate; and if he was before raised
into a kind of Astonishment at the Beauty of her Face, he was now no less, at
the handsomeness of her Body, the Magnificence of her Apparel, and the
Sweetness of her Complexion. In a word, he was reduced to such an Extremity, by
the Passion he immediately felt in himself for her, that he made enquiry, and
set himself to find out, who that Miracle of Perfections might be, which had so
of a sudden surpised his Heart, and attained so absolute a disposal of his
Liberty.

He was soon satisfied, as to that Particular; for, meeting with one of her
Servants, going from the Inn toward the Marketplace, he with much Civility
asked him, who that Old Gentleman was, and whither he was then going? The
other, who understood Civility well enough, returned him this Answer: The
Gentleman, whose Name you are so desirous to know, and who is my Master, is
called the Marquess Grimani, a Person of the highest Rank next to Sovereign
Princes, who comes into Spain, an ordinary Ambassador, from the Emperor of
Germany, to his most Catholic Majesty: He brings along with him his Beautiful
Daughter, the Lady Eleanora, to be Married to Henricus, his Excellency's
Nephew, who is at the present at Villadolid, a Gentleman of extraordinary
worth, who in the Flower of his Youth left Germany to go and see Foreign
Countries. He has traveled all over Europe, and is now resolved to make his
Abode in Spain, having already continued some time at Court, with a very great
Train, and is very highly in Favor with his Catholic Majesty, and well
respected by all the Nobility about the Court; nay his Generosity and excellent
Conversation have acquired him the Esteem of all the greatest Persons in this
Country. This Marriage of Signior Henrick had been treated of in Germany with
this Lady Eleanora, the only Daughter of my Master, who leaving his Country
upon the being Honored by the Emperor with the present Embassy, has
solicited the Business with greater earnestness; So that his Imperial Majesty
seems Desirous that this Match should go forward. We came by Sea, but had such
distress of Weather, that we were like to be cast away several times. While we
were in that danger, my Master, a Gentleman much inclined to Devotion, made a
vow that if he escaped, through the Intercession of the Glorious Patron of
Spain, he would visit the place where his sacred Body lies buried, so well
known all over the World, for the great Miracles daily done there. Being come
to Villadolid, my Master continued there fifteen days, during which time, all
things were agreed upon, in order to the Marriage. That great Affair being
concluded, he would needs perform his Vow, and go to Saint James's. His Nephew
Henrick is not come along with him, but stays at Villadolid, to send to Rome
for the Dispensation, for the Lady Eleanora, and Signior Henrick are Cousin-
Germans, thus Sir, I think I have satisfied your Desire, as to the Question you
put to me.

Don Philip gave the Servant very great thanks for the account he had given him
of his Master, and assured him he would requite his Kindness, if it lay in his
Power, and so took leave. This Discourse happened after Night, as they walked
over the Marketplace, it being so dark as that the Marquess's Servant could
not take any particular notice of Don Philip, who did all he could to avoid
being discovered. The account he had received, that the Beauty, which had
stolen away his Heart at the first sight, was already engaged, and, within a
short time to be Married, caused him to return home a much sadder Man than he
had left it. This Affliction, with the Love which he already had for her,
bereaved him of all rest. That very Night, he would needs go and see the
Marquess and his Daughter at Supper, yet so as he might not be perceived by
them. The Master of the House placed him so as that he might see all at his
ease, yet not be seen himself; and this was to leap out of the Drying Pan into
the Fire. The next day, the Marquess went thence, so as that Don Philip saw not
the Lady Eleanorae any more that time: Nor was he much troubled at it, for
having in the Night advised with his Pillow, to find out some Remedy for his
disquiet, he found it necessary, that he should not be seen, either by the
Marquess, or his Daughter, or any one belonging to them, that he might the
better compass a Design which only Love could inspire him withal.

The Kingdom of Galicia is very full of Mountains, and consequently the way to
St. James's must be troublesome to Travel, so that the Marquess could make but
short Journeys, whence Don Philip inferred, that he could not be back in less
than twenty days, presuming he would make some abode at Compostella, to do his
Devotions, and refresh himself, ere he set out for his return. Accordingly, he
disposed of his Affairs in order to the Design he had bethought himself of,
and, taking leave of all his Acquaintance, he went to Pont-Ferrada, a Town
which lay four Leagues further from the Court, than Ville-Franche. He took up
his Quarters at an Inn, whence he stirred not in the daytime, but only took
the Air a little in the Night, yet with such a Caution not to be known to any,
he discovered himself to none of the Inhabitants; but only his Landlord, whom
he acquainted with his Quality, and the Design had brought him thither. He was
attended only by one Servant, whose Fidelity and Courage he had many years
Experienced; for he had served him as a Soldier, and waited on him, from the
time of his first departure from Ville-Franche. Marco (so was this faithful
Servant named) perceiving his Master more Melancholy than he had been wont to
be, and that somewhat kept him from resting in the Night, for he heard him
disquietly turning in his Bed, and sighing ever and anon, he imagined that the
Cause of his Disturbance was not at Pont-Ferrada, inasmuch as if it had been,
he would not have failed, Night or Day, to discover by his Visits, what could
not be known by his Disquiets and Sighs. Thus this discreet Lover not
discovering any thing of his secret Passion, Marco, could not guess at the
Occasions which bred such a Distraction in his Mind: Nay, though he did all lay
in his Power to pry into it, yet could he never meet with any Satisfaction. One
day, finding his Master all alone, and not able to endure that Reserv'dness in
him any longer, he thus spoke to him.

I should never have imagined, Sir, that you could be guilty of so great a
closeness toward a Servant, whom you have ever found faithful, and to love you
even beyond his own Life. You have heretofore thought me worthy the Knowledge
of your most importunate Secrets; Pardon me, if I presume to tell you, that
your silence now gives me just cause to conceive, that you have not the same
thoughts of me, and that I must be guilty of some Crime, whereof I have not my
self the least Apprehension; Wherein, I pray, Sir, have I offended you? You
must needs harbor some ill thoughts of me, since you conceal from me the
Disquiets which deprive you of all Appetite or Rest. Sure they proceed from
Love, or I am mightily mistaken. You close not your Eyes all Night, and spend
the day in Retirement, avoiding all Society, and giving your self up to
perpetual Solitude, and Melancholy; which I am extremely troubled to see. You
have left your Country, telling your Friends that you were going to Court;
whereas you continue in an obscure place, where you are afraid to be known!
it is impossible for me to forbear grieving at it, as long as I am Ignorant of
the Cause: Pardon my Curiosity, Sir, which however impertinent, is an Argument
of my Fidelity, and Readiness to serve you. I know it is the Duty of a good and
faithful Servant, punctually and implicitly to obey the Commands of his
Master, without insinuating himself further into his Secrets, than he is
willing he should be acquainted therewith. I have hitherto kept my self within
those bounds, and have so lived with you as that I fear not any reproach you
can make me. But now at last, my ancient Fidelity gives me the boldness to ask
you, what Business may have brought you to this place; what occasions your
Disquiet, and what you intend to do in this obscure Inn, where you admit not of
any Enjoyments? Have you a greater Confidence of the happy Master of this
House, whom you have known but within this four days, than of an old Servant,
of whose Zeal and Fidelity you have had so many Experiences? You have hitherto
thought my Advice worth the asking, nay have followed it, in things, for ought
I know, of as great importance as this.

Marco having thus ended his Complaint, his Master conceived himself obliged to
make him some answer, which was this: Marco, I must confess, I have looked on
thee, and that justly as my Friend; a Title I may well allow one who has
shared with me, in War the Dangers, in Peace the Enjoyments I have been engaged
in. It is a very hard thing, not to say impossible, that any man should, in the
disposal of himself, take a Course contrary to that intended him by Heaven;
though it be said, that a Wise Man shall have dominion over the Stars: That is,
(as Astrologers expound it) Humane Prudence shall elude the Decrees of Fate. I
am born to love a Beauty, which surprising my Heart, has withal possessed it
self of all the Faculties of my Soul. I find my self no longer Master of my own
Liberty, that I am not able to make the least disposal of my Will, and so it
were a madness for me, to oppose the inclination, whereto the Sovereign Powers
have made me subject. I suffer my self to be foolishly carried away by my
Passion, though I know well enough that I attempt a thing absolutely
impossible, and beyond my strength: This is the cause of my disquiet, musing,
and melancholy, spending the Nights without rest, and the Day in Solitude,
suffering a thousand Afflictions, which I cannot express; and loving where I am
not to hope the least return of Love, by reason of an Invincible Obstacle that
lies in my way. This is that which destroys my Enjoyments, and poisons all my
Joy.

I have seen that Divine Beauty, that Mortal Angel, that Prodigy of Miracles,
who passed through our Town with her Father the Marquess Grimani: The excellent
Endowments she is Mistress of, and, which thou may have admired as well as
my self, are all the Excuses I can allege for the blindness of my Passion; but
they feed it not with any hope. There is an Obstacle lies between me, and the
possession of her, which I shall find it impossible to remove. This
Transcendent Beauty is already made sure to a Gentleman of great Worth, who is
her Cousin-German, named Henrick; and methinks, I see her ready to join Hands
with him. I hear such high Commendations of his Excellent Parts, that I find
the little hope I had, ready to leave me. I Love her, or to say better, I Adore
her; and if I may judge by the present Agitations of my Heart, I may say, it
will never be disengaged from the Passion I have for her. I know it is madness
in me to think of her, and that I cannot without Extravagance, ever hope she
may be mine, to the disappointment of a young Lord, who, with the advantages of
Blood, has all those of Nature: Nay, I think it almost impossible, to find out
some means to acquaint her with my Love, and to get a Letter conveyed to her. I
know that the Houses, whence I derive my Extraction, are not inferior to those
of Grimani and Henrick; and consequently, that I am as Nobly descended as she
is; that would not be the greatest Obstacle, if I could but make my self known
at Court. I hear that she intends thither, when she returns from her
Pilgrimage; I have but three Months to carry on this Business, which is the
time requisite to get the Dispensation from Rome.

I have a long time considered with my self of the means, how I might get
access to her; and that I conceive the most likely to take, is to counterfeit,
what indeed is but too real, a certain distraction of Mind: By acting the Mad
Man's Part, I might so disguise my Extravagances, as that the Father, pleased
with my Humor, may perhaps carry me along with him to the Court. This
certainly, is a design Fantastic enough, and not only contrary to my Quality,
but absolutely opposite to the Opinion I should endeavor to raise my self in
the World. I have a great confidence, that at Court I shall be known to very
few, because I have been a long time out of Spain. Besides these
Considerations, the Habit I will put on, being altogether extravagant, I shall
be so disguised, that my nearest Friends and Relations will hardly know me. If,
by this means, I can get into the Marquess's House, I shall hope the Plot will
take: For I have heard this Lady is not fully satisfied with the Marriage,
having understood that her Cousin is a Person of a Debauched Life, and inclined
to Women; and that she admits of his Addresses only out of obedience to her
Father. I have communicated my design to the Master of the House, as being a
discreet Person, who may serve me, and puts me in hopes to get me into the
Marquess's Service, when he comes to give him an account of my pleasant
Extravagances, as we have already agreed together. Thus my dear Marco, have I
given thee a faithful Character of my self; thou know now as much as I do,
as well of my Affliction, as my Love; mistrust not the Confidence I have of
thee, and assist me with all thy Wit and Industry, or expect ere long to be a
Witness of my departure out of this World.

Marco out of Compliance with his Master, approved of the Project, though he
doubted much the success of it. He saw his Master was too far transported to
receive any prudent Advice; so that he promised to assist him according to the
Design he had laid to get access to his Mistress, and troubled not his thoughts
with any thing but how to compass it. It was his Business therefore to get
Cloths made for Don Philip, suitable to his Extravagance. He put him into a
Cassock after the old Fashion, with puffs at the Sleeves of Green Satin, and
large Skirts, a Cloak somewhat like a Rocket, very short, and a Milan Cap, of
green Plush. Being thus disguised, he changed his Quarters, and went to the
Host's Brother's House, who also must of necessity be acquainted with the
Secret. All this could not be done without some yellow pieces, whereof he had
brought good store out of Flanders, with some Jewels of value he had gotten by
gaming, at which he was very fortunate.

About this time the Marquess, with the Beautiful Lady his Daughter, were upon
their return from their Pilgrimage. Before they got to Pont-Ferrada, the Beams
of his litter-broke, so that he was forced to come to the Town on Horseback,
and to stay there two days, while the Litter was mended. The Marquess took up
the same Inn where Don Philip had lodged, as being the best in the Town. The
Host being taught what he had to say to the Marquess, for the furtherance of
Don Philip's Design, soon met with an opportunity to do it. For, as most
Persons of Quality, when they Travel, are very inquisitive to know what is rare
or Remark^ble at the places through which they pass, ^he Marquess Desirous to
hear what there ^ight be at Pont-Ferrada, called for the Host. Having traveled
several times before into Spain, he spoke the Language very well, was a very
sociable Person, and glad of Company.

The Host being come into the Room, he began to ask him concerning the
Antiquities of the Town, the Illustrious Families that had lived in it, the
Disposition of the Inhabitants, the Beauty of the Ladies, and such Particulars:
Wherein the Host satisfied him, giving him a very exact account of all he knew.
Among the Antiquities, and remarkable things of the Town, he came to speak of
Don Philip, telling such Stories of him as might raise a desire in the Marquess
to see him. There is come, (said he to him) within these fifteen days, a very
rare Person to this Town, Fantastically clad in green Stuff; but there is a
greater Extravagance in his Behavior than there is in his Cloths, and yet in
the height of his Distraction, there may be observed certain Shadows of
Understanding and Staidness, which renders him excellent good Company. Being
asked by some o^ our Inhabitants, who he was, I am (said he) Son to the River
Sill, which passes by the Walls of this Town, and descended from one of the
most Illustrious Families of Gal^cia. He expects to be Treated with you^
Honor, and your Lordship, in Discourse though he is known by the Title of
Knig^ of the Noble Order of Prim roses.

The Fooleries he tells to make good the Title he assumes, are so ridiculous,
that the^ force Laughter from the most Melancholy. He seldom comes out of his
Lodging, Feeds high, and we cannot imagine whence he should have means to live
at that Rate. He has a Servant to wait on him, who knows the length of his
Foot, and complies with him in his Madness, either for his advantage, or else
he has a soft place in his Head, as well as his Master; and I think 'em both
very well worth your Observation. I wonder the Knight has not been yet to wait
on your Excellency, for he is mighty desirous to Converse with Strangers, and
finds them out as soon as he hears of their Arrival.

The Marquess was much pleased with this Relation of the Host, and desired him
to bring him acquainted with that Noble Knight. The Fair Lady Eleanora
expressed also a desire to see him, for she had been present at the Host's
Discourse. He gladly satisfied them, being overjoyed the Prologue of the Design
had taken so well. He went to his Brother's to fetch him, having before told
the Ambassador, that he must Treat him Honorably, if he expected to make any
Sport with him; inasmuch, as being extremely self-conceited in his Madness, he
would be put out of all Humor, if he were entertained with any dis-respect, or
indifference.

The Marquess, who was a Person naturally inclined to Mirth and Civility,
promised him he would observe his Directions. Whereupon, the Host marches away
for Don Philip, who came into the Room very humorously in his Fools Coat,
making wry Mouths, and some Fantastic Gestures, the Introduction to his future
Extravagance. The Ambassador, how serious soever he would appear, as being
obliged by his Quality to dissemble, could not forbear Laughing, to see him in
that Equipage, attended by Marco, who, on the other side, acted very well the
Part that had been given him. He went to receive him at the Chamber door, with
this Complement: Welcome to the Noblest piece of Gallantry that ever Spain saw:
Welcome the Mirror of all the brave Knights that ever were Celebrated for
their Heroic Actions. The News your Excellency tells me, (replys Don Philip)
deserv^ not the reward that may be expected for it* You are extremely mistaken,
if you think your self the first of those who have admired Natures Prodigality
toward me in Excellent Parts and Endowments. Give me the favor at least,
(answers the Marquess) to b^ one of the most faithful Witnesses thereof, which
no doubt I shall, ^f you please but to honor me a while with your sweet
Company. For, as a rich Diamond pleases all the World, so the Attractions of
your Countenance, and the Transcendent Infinuation of your Behavior forces the
Admiration of all that see you.

Don Philip was by this time got near the fair Lady Eleanora, whereupon looking
with a certain Astonishment on her Miraculous Beauty, my Lord Marquess, (said
he to him) I beseech you forbear at present the praises you are pleased to give
me, for it were to profane those which are due to this Excellent Creature. I
pray let me know whether she be your Daughter, for if she be, you will be much
concerned in the Elogies I shall give this -- this -- this -- (well) Miracle.
Her coming into the World was to Embellish our Hemisphere, to supply Cupid with
fresh Darts, to become the Lodestone of Hearts, the Delight of the Eyes, the
Astonishment of the Universe, the Masterpiece of Heaven, and the Miracle of
Nature: By the Noble Order of Knighthood I am of, I swear, that the very Minute
I first cast my Eye on this Accomplished Beauty, I found my Heart was grown
rebellious, and no longer mine; my will bereaved of all freedom; and my Soul
become absolutely her Slave. In a Word, Sir, I think my self somewhat different
from what I was before, and the more I feel my self, the more I am astonished
at the strange Metamorphosis.

The Commendations you give me renowned Knight, (replies the Lady) smell too
much of flattery, I am confident you do not your self believe one half of what
you have said, and therefore it will be hard for you to persuade me to it. You
consider not that you act against your own sentiment, when you speak against
your Conscience. I should never advise a Gallant, who would raise himself an
esteem with the Ladies, to hazard his own disappointment by so ill a Prologue;
for to give undeserved praises breeds a suspicion of imperfections; and to be
forced to the belief of falsehood brings truth into question. The truth I tell
you, (replies the Amorous Extravagant) is such, so pure, so clear, and so far
from all suspicion of being otherwise, that you shall ever find it as plainly
in my Mouth as in your own Looking-glass; be not so hasty, Honorable Knight,
(says the Lady to him) be pleased to take a Chair, for we desire to discourse
with you at leisure: were it Heavens pleasure, Madam, (says Don Philip, as soon
as he was sat) that I might ever continue near you! But I see the Honor you
are pleased to do me will be but short, and my Joy soon be over, for I
understand, that within two days you leave this place, and if you go without
me, I shall dye out of pure Grief; in the mean time, give me leave to look on
this Mansion as the Imperial Heaven, since so great a Deity has Honored it
with her presence. We forget all Civility, (says the Marquess) when we fall
into other discourse, before you have first entertained us with your own noble
adventures, that we may thereby know what respects we ought to pay your worth.
There is not any due to me, Sir, (replies the disguised Cavalier) but that the
service I have vowed you, may be the better received, I will give you an
account of my Extraction, and relate to you the perfect History of my Life
hitherto; be pleased to afford your Attention to what I shall say.

The Kingdom of Galicia was heretofore Governed by Counts, and afterward by
Kings. Gondamor Reigned in that time, and continued a Widower after the Burial
of his first Wife, by whom he had no other Children but the Infanta Theodomira,
who coming to Reign after him was called the Wenching-Queen; she fell in Love
with the Gallant Cialto, one of the richest and properest Persons in the
Kingdom; he ever kept about the Court, and was a Kinsman, though somewhat a far
off to the King, but his principal Favorite, by which means he had access into
the Queen's Chamber, and got of her that Favor whereby mankind is propagated.
I proved to be the Issue of that Amorous Union; and the good hour of my Birth
happened at a time that the King chanced to be at his Daughters Lodging; the
pains of Childbirth surpised her, and being a Novice in such adventures, she
could not dissemble her Labor, even in the presence of her Father, who
imagined it was some other Accident had happened to her; her Women helped her
to Bed, not knowing the Disease that troubled her; but not long after I came
into the World, it seems, to run through all the misfortunes that have happened
to me since.

Being received into the World by a faithful Servant, who knew of my Mothers
Amors, she took me in her lap, to be delivered to a Brother of hers, who was
also acquainted with the business. As she went out of the Infanta's Lodging,
she meets with the King, going to visit his Daughter. She was afraid his
Curiosity would have prompted him to examine what she had in her Lap; which
made her turn back of a sudden, and, by a secret Pair of Stairs, go down into
the Garden, where having disposed of me into a little Wicker Basket, she put me
into the River Sill, which ran by the Wall thereof, and told the Infanta that
she had delivered me to her Brother, as they had resolved. I was carried awhile
on the Crystal Waves of that clear River; but at last, the Water growing
somewhat rough, I sunk, and was received into the Arms of the God of that
River, who encompassed by his Fair Nymphs, conducted me into his own Crystal
Palace. You may perhaps imagine this Discourse a feigned Story taken out of the
Inventions of the Poets; but give me leave to assure you, that the business
happened no otherwise than as I tell you.

I was brought up by the Nymphs in that secret Mansion, and instructed by the
God of the River, who wished I might prove worthy so Noble an Education. He
caused me to be instructed in all manner of Sciences, and spared no pains to
make me an Accomplished Person. I learnt three or four Languages, but
particularly the Latin above any of the other. Being arrived to the twentieth
Year of my Age, Love, to show his Omnipotency, and that all places are under
his Jurisdiction, caused his Flames to fasten on me even through the Water. In
that Virginal Company of Nymphs, there was one, for whom the God of that Watery
Habitation had a particular Esteem; and she deserved it, for she very much
excelled all her Companions; her Name was Anacarsia. Her Endowments were
extraordinary, and her Beauty beyond all Comparison. In Complexion and Stature
she came somewhat near this fair Lady your Daughter, and had the same Advantage
over the rest of the Nymphs, as the Delphick-Torch has over the other Planets.
She played excellently well on all kinds of Instruments; to sum up all in a
Word, she was a prodigy of all Perfections. I fell so passionately in Love with
this Beauty that I had not a Minute's rest, from the time that little Deity had
wounded my Heart, with the Mortal Darts of her sparkling Eyes.

I found it a hard business to discover my Love to her, in regard I could never
meet her alone; she was perpetually haunted by some of those who lived in that
Crystal Palace; they followed her every where, and would never be out of her
sight. But one Day, when all the other Nymphs were gone to a Musick-meeting, at
which were also to be read certain Lectures of Poesy, being the ordinary
Divertisements of the God of that River, the Divine Anacarsia purposely
pretended some Indisposition, to give me an opportunity to speak with her. She
sent me notice of it, by one who came to tell me from her, that she kept her
Bed only for my sake, than which I could not have expected a kinder Complement
from one of her Sex. I went to her Chamber, and found her carelessly laid on a
Bed of Moss, exceeding in Whiteness the fine Sheets she lay on, and disputing
as to Splendor and Light, with the Sun, who then beheld her. I was startled at
the sight of so many Charms, and was upon the point of lo^ing all Sentiments,
an Effect Natural enough in those who are truly touched with Love. But
recovering my self a while, though still much troubled, and my Tongue but as it
were newly loosened, I took the Confidence to make this Discourse to her.

Adorable Nymph, the glory of these deep Habitations, but the unavoidable rack
of those Hearts, which are captivated by your Beauty, my Soul, since the first
time I saw you, is absolutely disposed to serve you; I have no power over her,
she is wholly yours, and glories in her Slavery. Treat her as a thing belongs
to you, and as I have vowed her to you with an inviolable Fidelity. You have
done me an extraordinary Favor in allowing me to declare the Amorous Passion I
have for you: May I further hope, that you will allay it, and if I should be
admitted to that Degree of Felicity, should I not be the Happiest and most
Glorious of all Men?

The fair Anacarsia, infinitely pleased with so obliging a Discourse, and the
Worth she observed in me, highly honored me with her Affection, and complied
with my Amorous Desires, in such sweet and melting Expressions, as put me in
hopes of the happy Accomplishment of my Love. But it was not long ere our
Discourse was interrupted by the God of the River, who finding neither of us at
the meeting, came straight to her Chamber, and slunk in so softly, that he
overheard some part of our Amorous Conference; which so incensed him against
me, that he immediately resolved to give a check to my Presumption. He laid
Siege, with his clear Waters, to the Chamber of Anacarsia, and ere he had quite
damm'd up the Door, he cast me out with such violence, that I was got to the
Bank of the River. I presently heard a voice saying unto me, Guadomarus, thou
art descended from Kings, though it be a long time since they have had Scepters
in their Hands; Princes of another Family have displaced them. Thou art born a
Pagan, choose what Law thou think best; if thou will follow my Advice, take
that which is observed in this Kingdom, under which lived thy Illustrious
Ancestors. I have justly banished thee out of my Dominions, because it was not
fit I should suffer profane Love to be made to a Nymph who had vowed her
Chastity to me as I had mine to her. I have promised her my Protection and
Assistance in all things. Keep henceforward within thy Kingdom, and assure thy
self I wish thy good and advancement, so far am I from doing thee any
prejudice. Whithersoever Fortune shall dispose of thee, be Confident, thou will
not be out of the reach of my Care.

With those Words the waters of the River, seemed to stir themselves into a
gentle curl, which being presently laid, it became as smooth as it had been
before. I immediately found my self (by what Adventure I know not) in a
pleasant Garden, in the midst of a Bed of fine Prim-roses, which I looked on as
a good Omen, and thought my self obliged to derive my Name thence. Afterward
at my Baptism, I took the Name of Peter Blasco of Galicia, taking the surname
from the Kingdom which had been heretofore in the Possession of my
Predecessors, who have been dead this four hundred years, as I have found in
History. Besides that Name, I have taken an Additional Title, that of Knight of
the noble Order of Prim-roses. I have assumed it my self; for an Illustrious
Hero, as I am, may be his own Herald, and by what Appellations he pleases
raise himself above the sphere of the common sort of People.

Thus have I given your Excellency an account who I am, and discovered to you
my true Original. If the Qualities and Endowments I own, deserve the Honor to
be received into your Alliance, Give me leave, O most Illustrious Marquess, to
make my Addresses to this Super-Coelestial Beauty, this Miracle of our Age,
whom Nature was humorously pleased to frame for the delight of the Eyes, and
Torment of Hearts. I only expect your good Will, give it me, I beseech you, and
thereby satisfy my extraordinary Passion. I think you so generous, that you
will not deny it me, if you consider, that granting it not, you bereave me of
my Life, which you know is the most Illustrious of any in Europe; and are
consequently satisfied, that the World, losing in me, the most Renowned Knight
it ever had, must withal lose the worthiest Kinsman of his Catholic Majesty.

He delivered these last Words with such pleasant Gestures, the better to
express the Violence of his Passion, that both the Marquess and his Daughter
had much ado to forbear Laughing. Marco was astonished to see the force of that
Passion, which, of an Accomplished Gentleman made a Ridiculous Laughing Stock;
and could turn a Person of Eminent Parts and Judgment, into a Counterfeit
Extravagant: For if he had not pretended the loss of his Wits, he had lost all
the hopes of his Love; and he could not have gotten near so Fair a Lady, upon
any account but that of Madness.

The Marquess composing his Countenance to more seriousness, returned him this
Answer. Seignior Don Pedro Blasco, the most Illustrious, and only Knight of the
most Noble Order of Prim-roses, I am extremely pleased with the knowledge you
have given me of your Person, and the account you have entertained me with of
your Miraculous Birth, and Noble Education: Had a Person, less Illustrious than
your self, acquainted me therewith, I should have mistrusted his Discourse, and
imagined he told me Fables: But (...) Person of your Worth and Quality ought to
be credited in all things. What further confirms me in the truth thereof, is,
that he is no less than a Prince who speaks to me. Believe me, I have a great
respect for your ^are Qualities, and such an Honor for your Person, that I
would assure you my own is wholly at your Service. I have that esteem ^or your
Friendship, that I shall endeavor the continuance of it while I live. I wish
my self a natural Inhabitant of this Kingdom, that I might have the greater
Opportunities ^o further your satisfaction. I shall stay here but till such
time as his Imperial Majesty shall send order for my return; but during the
abode I shall make here, command me in any thing that lies in my power: As for
the permission you desire, to make your Addresses to my Daughter, I from this
time give it you, and I allow her to accept of it, and to entertain you kindly;
but she is already made sure to a Cousin of hers, and I have sent to Rome for a
Dispensation, which once come, the Marriage will be concluded: This Obstacle
lies in your way, and you will find it a hard matter to remove it. I am sorry I
had not the happiness of your Acquaintance before; for how gladly would I have
embraced the honor of having a Son-in-Law of your Worth and Quality, and to
see my Family allied to the Blood Royal of Galicia? The end of most Courtships
is Marriage; of yours you see it cannot be: To address your self to my Daughter
upon any other account, I know you would not; the Husband she expects is a
person of so much Gallantry, as not to receive any such Affront.

The disguised Extravagant broke forth into great Resentments upon his obliging
Discourse, which made excellent sport for all that were present. But having
laughed their fill, the Marquess and his Daughter could not forbear making
Charitable Reflections on that strange kind of Distraction. It pitied them to
see a Gentleman every way so Accomplished, fallen into such unheard of
Extravagances, as to allege himself descended from a River, and brought up in
it five hundred Years before: While some that were present, purposely to urge
him to speak, opposed the Stories he had told them, and he endeavored to give
them satisfaction. The Marquess acquainted his Daughter with a design that came
into his mind, which was to carry Don Pedro along with him to the Court, it
being likely he would find them excellent sport by the way: They resolved to
treat him as a Person of Eminent Quality, having understood by his Servant,
that he was really such, and that upon his recovery out of a great sickness,
that Madness had seized him. The Lady Eleanora was very well content, leaving
it to some other time to acquaint him therewith. Don Pedro Blasco coming to
take his leave of the Marquess said to him, that since he was so unhappy as not
to deserve his Fair Daughter's Hand, in the Quality of a Husband, he would
allow him to Love her with a Virtuous Love, such as even her Husband should not
disapprove: The Marquess gave way, desiring him to honor him with his Company
at Supper that Night, by reason he had somewhat to Communicate unto him. Don
Philip gladly excepted the Proffer, and thereupon they parted.

The Marquess and his Company talked very much of Don Pedro, wondering at the
strange kind of Madness he was fallen into. He acquainted them with the design
he had to take him along with him to the Court. The Master of the House where
he was Lodged happening to be then present, told him, that he doubted, Don
Pedro Blasco would hardly be persuaded thereto, if the Marquess treated him as
an Inferior; for he was mighty self-conceited, and stood much upon his Honor;
but if he were willing, there would arise another difficulty in the manner of
his Traveling: In regard, (said he to him) your Excellency going by Litter, I
think he would be loath to go by Horse: We'll find an Expedient for that, (says
the Marquess) which is, that my Daughter, as his Mistress, shall command him to
entertain her at the side of her Litter; for if his Love continues, he will be
glad of the opportunity; and he shall have an excellent Horse, richly
Harnass'd, which I have led after me, to ride on when I am a weary of the
Litter.

Don Philip, who had been acquainted with all these Discourses, failed not to
come to Supper, to which he had been Invited. The Marquess received him very
civilly, and caused a Chair to be set for him, near his Daughter, which he
thought a very signal Favor. They Talked of diverse things, the Marquess
finding he had an excellent Wit in his Intervals, which he ever closed with
some pleasant Extravagance. They were very Merry at Supper, and were obliged
for their Diversion, to the Merry Discourses of Don Philip. At last, the Cloth
being taken away, the Marquess broke his Mind to him in these Words.

It Is a thousand Pities, most Renowned Knight, that a Person so Accomplished as
you are, and one furnished with all the Excellent Endowments that recommend men
to the Favor and Esteem of Princes, should as it were defy their Courts, and
spend your time and Talents in such an obscure place as this is. I have heard
that the reason of this your Retirement is, that you have not means to live
suitably to your Condition, and the Rank you should maintain. If it be so, give
me leave to propose an Expedient to you, out of the particular Esteem I have
for your Seignory. I shall take it for a very great favor, if you will be
pleased to go along with me to Villadolid, where you shall be treated, in my
Quarters, with all the Submissions and Respects due to a Person of your
Quality, yet so as that it shall not cost you any thing. By this means coming
to be known, and your Worth spreading it self, you may meet with a rich Wife,
of some Illustrious Family; wherein my Daughter may do you a kindness, in
regard she having occasion to see many of them, will advance you into her
favor, for whom you have most Inclination: Let me obtain of your Knighthood,
the Favor I desire of you: Live freely with us, since you would have me
believe, that the Love you bear my Daughter is pure and sincere; I will
undertake it shall be kindly taken by the Husband she hopes to have: I expect
your Answer to this particular, and I desire it may be Consonant to the Esteem
I have for your Worth.

Don Philip was extremely satisfied, that the Imposture had taken so well, and
immediately apprehended, that, living in the House with the Marquess, he should
be near her whom he Adored, which was the main end of his Desires; whereupon he
returned him this Answer. No Temptation in the World should have forced my
Removal from this place, but the extraordinary Civilities I have received from
your Excellency. I had resolved to spend the rest of my days in this
Retirement, as conceiving it the best course for a Person of my Quality, whose
Revenues are much below his Honor, to confine himself to some Place, where he
is not much known, and so avoid the charge of Servants and Cloths. But the
Respects you are pleased to have for me, together with this transcendent
Beauty, who by the forcible Attractions of her Divine Countenance, draws Hearts
after her, as the Thracian Orpheus did living Creatures, Stones and Plants, by
the Harmonious sound of his Harp, have made me wholly at your service. I shall
not trouble either you or my self to tell you how Persons of my Quality ought
to be treated, as thinking it enough, that I have already acquainted you with
my Titles, and particularly that I am of the Blood Royal. The greatest Favor
you can ever do me, is, that you command me to wait on your Daughter, which if
you do, I shall the more willingly accept of the proffer you are pleased to
make me.

The Marquess finding him willing to go along with them, all that remained to
be done was to persuade him to do it on Horseback, which he was content to do,
that he might the better entertain his Mistress at the side of the Litter. Don
Philip helped the Lady into her Litter, being proud in his Mind at that
Introduction of his Service to her, and that he had the Happiness to take her
by the fair hand, continuing his Attendance on her from their departure from
Pont-Ferrada, till they came to Villadolid. All the way along, he entertained
her with pleasant Discourses, intermixed with Amorous Expressions, and at every
Inn they came to, she failed not to give her Father an Account of the divertive
Discourses she had with Don Philip.

The last day of their Journey, Don Philip would needs feel the Pulse of his
Mistress as to her intended Marriage, and endeavored to discover how she was
inclined thereto. He brought the Business upon the Stage so dexterously, as
that she might not suspect him guilty of any impertinent Curiosity. It is
commonly observed that Persons any way afflicted are apt to break their minds
to any People, but especially to those with whom they are familiarly
acquainted. Accordingly, to ease her own thoughts, and satisfy Don Philip, she
made him this answer. Worthy Knight of the most Honorable Order of Prim-roses,
I must needs acknowledge, that my Cousin Henrick is a Person endowed with all
the Qualities, capable to raise a Woman's Love to the highest pitch, but I have
withal discovered him to be so fickle, and one so naturally inclined to address
himself to all sorts of Women, not regarding whether they be nobly or meanly
descended, that it very much cools my Affection toward him, and makes me fear
his Alliance, though I find my self sufficiently inclined thereto, could I
perceive any likelihood of his reforming himself of that insufferable humor;
but, far from that, since my coming into Spain, when he should have endeavored
to give me greater assurances of his Affection, I find him as indifferent as to
my satisfaction as ever; and Heaven knows with what apprehensions I am induced
to condescend to this match; for if I am now frightened at the thoughts of his
miscarriages, what must I not fear, when he obtains the Superiority? the
obedience I ow my Father, and the necessity I find that this Marriage should be
concluded, for the Composure of some differences in our Family, make me wholly
passive in the business, and so content it should go forward. I admit of his
Addresses not without some violence to my own inclination, and all I can do, is
to pray Heaven, that it would inspire him with better resolutions.

Don Philip could have wished that she had not been so resolute, as she seemed
to be; he therefore, though then personating a Fool, answered her as a Wise
man, and advised her to bear a while with the failings of her Cousin. Despair
not, Madam, (said he to her) but Don Henrick may become another Man, and that
if he be such as you describe him now, that volatile Humor will be fixed in
him, when he comes to be possessed of so fair and accomplished a Lady; but he
resolved, upon the first opportunity should present it self, to express his
mind to her in other terms; and to make a full discovery of himself to his
Mistress.

They came that day to Villadolid, and Henrick met them half a days Journey
short of it; he was very kindly received, both of the Marquess and his
Daughter, whereat the disguised Don Philip was not a little troubled; for
finding Don Henrick a very graceful Person, he began to entertain some doubts
of the success of his enterprise; the Marquess thought to make him acquainted
with Don Philip, that, by the Character he gave him, he might accordingly treat
him. Nephew, (said he to him) I pray take notice of this Noble Cavalier, who
has Honored us with his Company from Galicia, for his person, and the rare
qualities he is Master of, are such as deserve the highest esteem. I desire you
to respect him accordingly, and assure your self all you do will be below his
Merit, not only upon the Account of the Royal-Blood from which he is descended,
but also the Romantic Title he assumes to himself, of Knight of the Honorable
Order of Primroses: He pretends a Jurisdiction over all those places where ever
any of that Flower grows, and never sees it, but he thinks of the Complexion of
a Mistress he once had, who spent most of her time in Gardens, in one whereof
it was Love's Pleasure to make him a Captive to her Beauty, as she was
gathering some Prim-roses.

This Description made Don Henrick take a particular notice of Don Philip, and
he doubted not, as well by his Accoutrements, as by the Fantastic Title he had
taken to himself, to conclude him a most transcendent Extravagant, and that, as
such, they had entertained him into their Company. Accordingly, to comply with
his Uncle, he made this Complement to Don Philip, Most Honorable Knight of the
Order of Prim-roses, I shall receive your Acquaintance with as great
Satisfaction as I should do that of the greatest Monarch in the World, and
think my self infinitely obliged to you, that, being a Person of such
extraordinary Parts, you were pleased to honor the Marquess my Uncle, and my
Cousin, with your Company so far out of your own Territories. In Acknowledgment
of that Noble Favor, be pleased to accept the proffer I make to you of ever
being your most affectionate and most humble Servant, than which I cannot
expect a higher Relation to you, when I consider the Character my Uncle has
been pleased to give you.

Don Philip returned him most humble thanks, and said to him, I have so high an
esteem for whatsoever this fair Lady is concerned in, that I shall make it my
Business to Sacrifice all you think most Excellent in me to her Satisfaction
and yours, as long as it shall please his Excellency to give me leave to be of
his retinue. How, (replies Henrick) may we expect that farther Happiness as to
enjoy your Company for some time? I see no Reason you have to be so glad of it,
(replies the Marquess) for you must know, that Don Peter Blasco is fallen
deeply in Love with your Cousin, and that it is his Affection has occasioned
this Acquaintance, though he has assured me, that, since he understood she was
designed for you, that Love is turned into a pure fraternal Friendship, and
under that Innocent Passion he endeavors to oblige her what lies in his Power.
Be pleased to take my further Assurance of it, says Don Philip, that no thought
of that may break your rest; for that Consideration laid aside, I should think
my self capable to raise a Jealousy even in Narcissus himself, were he now
alive: For I dare, without any vanity, affirm it, that there is not a Person in
the World may be compared to me either as to Gracefulness of Body, or
Accomplishments of Mind. I am sufficiently convinced of the Truth of what you
say, (says Henrick) though I have not known you long: And therefore wholly
relying on the promise you make me, I shall fear nothing as to your
Pretentions, which were they any other Persons, I should not be guilty of so
great an Indifference.

With these Discourses, they got to the Court, and the Ambassador being
alighted at his House, he there found many Ladies, impatiently expecting the
Arrival of the fair Lady Eleanora, who was received out of her Litter into the
Arms of her designed Husband, whereat Don Philip could do no less than conceive
a little Jealousy. Henrick, to begin the Demonstrations of his Love, had
prepared a magnificent Supper, to which were invited all those, of both Sexes,
who were come thither to receive the Ambassador and his Daughter.

Don Philip went to Bed presently after Supper, extremely troubled in mind,
that he had engaged himself in an Enterprise, wherein he found so great
difficulties. He could not imagine any means to bring it about, so that as that
he might come off with Credit; he met with too many Obstacles, and what
afflicted him most of all, was, the Resolution the Lady had taken to satisfy
her Father's Desire, who was desirous the Marriage should be concluded with
Henrick, though he had been acquainted, as well as she, with his Miscarriages.
Marco could not forbear grumbling at the Resolution of his Master, which must
have ended amidst those Difficulties. He exposed himself as an Extravagant
Person in a Court where he might have raised himself into Esteem, and out of a
hope not likely to be brought to any Effect, he ran himself daily into new
Inconveniences. The Master and Servant spent some part of the Night in
discoursing about the Business, till at last Don Philip fell a sleep, with a
Resolution to discover himself to his Mistress, and, if his Addresses were not
well entertained by her, to return immediately into Galicia.

The visits of the Cavaliers and Ladies, continued six days, during which time
the Marquess and his Daughter were often seen, both of them taking much
Pleasure in the pleasant Demeanor of Don Philip, who acted the part he had
undertaken so admirably well, that his Extravagances became the Discourse of
the whole Court, all speaking of him as one of the most Humorous Fools that had
come upon the Stage of a long time; insomuch that some advised the Ambassador
to bring him to the Palace, assuring him the King would be much pleased with
his Behavior. Don Philip coming to hear of it, seemed to be very angry, and
excused himself, out of a fear his Majesty might not entertain him, suitably to
his Quality and Extraction; that he would not run the hazard of receiving an
affront, and that the least dis-respect shown him would force him to violent
Resentments thereof. The Ambassador pressed him no further, lest he might put
him out of Humor, perceiving he liked not the Proposal, and put it off to some
other time, when perhaps he might find him more inclined to Compliance.

Henrick, who was also lodged in the Ambassadour's House, had only two Servants
to wait on him, whom he trusted with the Knowledge of all his Love Adventures.
It happened that both these fell sick at the same time, a time when he should
have shown more Reservedness in his Amors, to raise himself into a better
Esteem with his Mistress; but he on the contrary, minded his own Enjoyments
above all things, and never considering the present posture of his Affairs, he
continued his Night-Visits, as he was wont to do before her Arrival. Being thus
disappointed of their Attendance, who were best acquainted with his Humors, he
conceived he could not pitch upon a fitter Person to accompany him than Marco,
who, with the leave of his Master Don Philip, went along with him, finding him
a subtle Fellow, and experienced in such Affairs, he thought him a Person fit
for his Purpose, and accordingly that he might trust him with any thing. He
took him along with him three or four Nights together to a certain House, out
of which he came at a very unseasonable hour. Though Marco went in with him,
yet durst he not be so impertinently inquisitive, as to ask who was the
Mistress of the House, till the third or fourth Night that he had accompanied
him thither; and then being alone with the Servant-Maid (who taking Example by
her Mistress began to express some Kindness toward Marco) he asked her whose
House that was, and to whom Henrick made his Visits.

Love and Secrecy are seldom found in the same Lodging. She was a Servant, and
in Love with Marco; there needs no more to be said, to make it appear, that she
satisfied him in whatever he desired to know. Marco understood from her, that
that House belonged to his Master Don Philip's Aunt, and that his own Sister
was the Person whom Henrick had at rack and manger, upon a Promise of Marriage,
she had gotten from him a little before under his hand, she by reason of her
Retiredness, being innocently Ignorant of the Treaty of Marriage between him
and his Cousin the Lady Eleanora.

Marco having pumped out all these particulars, failed not to give his Master
an account thereof the next day. Don Philip was extremely surpised thereat;
not without Indignation against his Sister, though that procedure of Henrick
raised him into some hopes of effecting his Design, presuming the more upon it,
in that being equal, as to Birth, to Henrick, he was resolved he should never
Marry any other, than her whom he had so highly dishonored. He thereupon
commanded Marco to acquaint the Maid who had made those discoveries to him,
that the Marriage of Henrick and his Cousin was agreed upon, and that a
Messenger was sent to Rome for the Dispensation, not forgetting the rare
accomplishments of the Lady Eleanora; to the end she might acquaint his Sister
therewith, to see what Course she would take, and how she would Remedy the
affront intended her.

He punctually executed the Orders he had received from Don Philip, so that the
Night following Donna Cornelia (so was Don Philip's Sister called) was
acquainted with the whole Business. She thereupon had a great Contestation with
Don Henrick, who impudently denied that he had any thing to do, as to Marriage,
with his Cousin. In fi^e, having done all he could to vindicate himself, and
appease Donna Cornelia, she pretended to be satisfied with him, provided he
more fully justified his Innocence the next Morning. So she dismissed Henrick,
who went away well satisfied, imagining her to be so too, but resolving with
himself not to give her any Visit awhile, he pretended some Indisposition. Don
Philip understood that Night from Marco all that had passed between Don Henrick
and his Sister, and was extremely incensed against her, that she had given
Credit to the deceitful Words of a Perfidious Man. However, he thought fit to
let pass two days, to see what Course his Sister would take in that time,
commanding Marco to prosecute his Discoveries.

The next day, Don Henrick not coming to clear himself, as he had promised,
Donna Cornelia was so enraged, that she would stay no longer, but resolved to
be satisfied from the Mouth of the Ambassador, of the affront intended to be
done her. She took a Coach, and veiling her Face, came to his House, but at
such an unfortunate time, that she met Don Henrick at the Door, who,
discovering who she was, presently imagined what might Occasion that Visit, and
that her coming thither was to acquaint the Ambassador how he was engaged to
her, and to show him that promise of Marriage. Don Henrick received her with
extraordinary Kindness, which she ^aking otherwise than he expected, added the
more to his Suspicion. He told her, he had something particular to acquaint her
with, and entreated her to go along with him to a Room at some distance from
his Uncle's Lodg^ngs. Donna Cornelia would not be persuaded a good while to
give him that Satisfaction, telling him, that she must first speak with the
Ambassador, and that afterward he should talk with her as long as he pleased.
That Don Henrick endeavored to prevent, ^ssuring her, that he was at that
time, very ^usie, looking over a packet of Letters he had received from the
Emperor. He was ^o importunate with her, that she would hear him before she
spoke with the Ambassador, that at last he prevailed. Whereupon conducting her
to Don Philip's Chamber, he en^reated him to bear her Company, till he came
back to speak with her.

Cornelia having her Face veiled all this time, Don Philip knew her not, but by
the discoveries he had received, he suspected her to ^e his Sister; on the
other side, he was so transformed by the Extravagance of his Cloths, and, what
added much to his disguise, his perpetual wearing of Spectacles, that she could
not have the least imagination of his being her Brother. Don Philip kept her
Company a while, without enquiring into the occasion of her coming thither, and
at last, leaving her locked up in the Room, he went to look for Don Henrick; to
know how he would have him dispose of her; he was then busy with his Uncle,
but sent one to desire Don Philip, to entertain that Lady a while, with this
excuse, that, as soon as he could, he would come and dispatch her, Don Philip
returning to his Chamber, immediately locked the door.

In the mean time the Lady Eleanora had understood, that her Cousin had spoken
to a Woman with her Face Veiled, in one of the walks leading to the
Ambassadour's house, and desired Don Philip to conduct her to his Chamber; the
jealousy she conceived thereat raised in her a desire to know who she might
be, which she might easily discover, by reason there was a passage from her
lodgings to Don Philip's Chamber, and at the end of it a door, whereof she had
the Key, she opened it very softly, lest she might be perceived, and that just
as Don Philip, coming into the Room, found his Sister with her Face Unveiled,
expecting to be seen only by Don Henrick, whom only she staid for; as soon as
he had taken a slight view of her, he applied this discourse to her.

Ungracious and unhappy Woman, unworthy of the House out of which thou are
descended, and that I should call thee my Sister! is it possible thou should
be Guilty of so strange an Oblivion of thy self, as relying on the vain
promises of a treacherous Person to come into this House to seek him who has
abused thee, and to whom thou have impudently prostituted thy self? Come thou
to importune a Man that has forgotten thee, and to Court him who has so
palpably deceived thee? If, besotted with a fond Love, it be thy design to be
Married to him, thou have Friends to whom thou might have Communicated thy
desires, rather than have abandoned thy self to a Man who treats thee with so
much contempt; and, notwithstanding all his Caresses, laughs at thee in his
Sleeve; he is upon the point of Marriage with his Cousin; art thou so simple,
as that thou only should be ignorant of what is known all over the Court?
Had I not a respect for the place where thou art, this Sword should dispatch
thy Criminal Soul into the other World, that thou might be an example to all
such simple Gull's as thou art; have thou so far forgotten the respect due to
thy Aunt, as to profane her house, by assigning Henrick his Nocturnal meetings
in it? Thou should have bethought thy self who thou art, that he is of no
better house than thy ^elf, and that thy quality is as high as his. It Is a
great happiness to thee, that an humor took me to come into this Court, though
thou see me in this ridiculous Habit, to prevent, what lies in my power,
Henrick's further abuse of thee; which I will do with the hazard of my Life;
tell me, infamous Woman, what has passed between you, that I may take some
course therein, and dissemble not the truth in any thing, for it concerns thee
no less than Honor and Life.

The Disconsolate Donna Cornelia heard this discourse with her Eyes fastened on
the Ground and flowing with Tears, without giving him the least interruption;
but at last, to obey her Brother, whose indignation she saw justy grounded, she
told him in few words, how Henrick had seen her at a certain public Meeting,
that he liked her, and, having inquired out her Lodgings, he had sent her
several Letters; that having continued his Addresses to her with great
demonstrations of affection, she had granted him entrance into the House, and
that upon a promise of Marriage under his hand (which she had about her) she
had permitted him to dispose of her as he pleased; in fine she gave him a
particular account of all that happened between them; whereupon he, to add no
more to her affliction, put her in some hope' that Henrick should be forced to
perform the promise he had made to her.

The fair Lady Eleanora had heard all this discourse at the Door, which was
between her Lodgings and Don Philip's Chamber, extremely astonished how a
Person of Quality (such as she found Don Philip to be by his discourse) and one
of such an excellent Wit, could put on a Fool's Coat, and behave himself as an
Extravagant in their House, and all about the Court. She was ignorant of the
cause of that strange Metamorphosis, and yet she had a certain suspicion, that
it might be upon her account; on the other side, she reflected on the double
Treachery of her Cousin Don Henrick, in treating of a Marriage with her, having
given a promise of the same thing to another, and to a person so highly
qualified as Dona Cornelia seemed to be.

Being fully satisfied as to those two things, she would not stand to hear them
any longer, but rushed into the Room so of a sudden, as that she had not the
time to put any thing over her Face, nor he to dissemble his indignation.
Seeing her coming toward them, Ah Madam, (said he to her) what mean these
Ambushes? What Is your Design therein, Sovereign Princess of my Soul, and
absolute Directress of my Inclinations? Do you use such a Treachery against
those who could not so much as imagine you guilty of any such thing? I wish so
great a Beauty would not give me any more such Apprehensions, for another
surprise of this Nature would make me die out of pure Joy, as it has been the
Fortunes of others to die out of an excess of Grief. There is no Dissembling
any longer, (replies the Lady) for I am fully assured that you are not the
Person you seem to us to be, and that the Affliction you are in requires rather
secret and real Resentments, than personated Extravagances. My Curiosity
heightened by a little Jealousy, procured me the Discovery of more than you
imagine, I have found the Perfidiousness of my Cousin Don Henrick; greater
toward me than I could have expected, considering his pretended Kindnesses. I
would fain be delivered out of the Confusion I am in, and I earnestly entreat
you to resolve me this Riddle, for its Obscurity Perplexes me very much: But
before you take that Trouble upon you, give me leave to carry this Lady your
Sister to my Lodgings, and if my Cousin comes in the mean time to enquire after
her, you may tell him, that she went away much displeased at his long stay, and
leave the rest to me.

Having so said, she took Donna Cornelia along with her, assuring her she would
do all lay in her Power to serve her, which put her in hope of a better Success
in her affairs, than she could have derived from either her Brother's
Indignation, or Henrick's Treachery. The Lady Eleanora left Donna Cornelia
among her Women, and returns to Don Philip; who though at first surpised at
the sight of her, and the thought of her having overheard the Infamy of his
Sister; yet was he withal glad of it, since her Jealousy and Curiosity had
discovered his Transformation, and the unhandsome Carriage of her Cousin. Don
Philip therefore was very glad to see his Mistress returned as might be seen by
the Cheerfulness of his Countenance. She desired him to take a Chair, and doing
the like her self, she opened her mind to him in these Words.

I have been in an extraordinary Confusion for some days past, and so incensed
against my Cousin Don Henrick, to see the strangeness of his Behavior toward
me, that I come to receive your Advice how far I ought to resent it, and withal
to be satisfied in some things, whereof I must yet Acknowledge my self
Ignorant. One is, and that much raises my wonder, to see you counterfeiting the
Fool and Extravagant, in a Court, where you might rather act the Part of a
Person of Honor and Gallantry, as having the advantage of being Brother to so
fair a Lady as Donna Cornelia, who, besides the Recommendation of Beauty, seems
to be Mistress of many other good Qualities. You may infer from my Discourse,
that being of the Quality I suppose you to be, you dishonor your self in
representing the Natural and Ridiculous Person, as well in regard of the Habit
you have assumed, as the extravagant Actions wherewith you amuse the World.
Which since I cannot imagine you would do but that there must be some Mystery
in it, I am the more desirous to know your Motives thereto, in that I conceive
it will be a means to clear my mind of certain doubts which now lie somewhat
heavy upon it.

Having delivered this with the best grace in the World, the fair Lady was
silent, and left Don Philip the Liberty to make this reply. If you find me at
any loss, Madam, in satisfying your Desires as to this particular, I question
not but you will have the goodness to attribute it, to that Distraction poor
Mortals are Subject to, when they Address themselves to the Objects of their
Vows and Adorations. You cannot be Ignorant, (though you knew it not by
Experience) that Love is a powerful Divinity, to whom Men Sacrifice all things;
no Intrigues but he is Author of; no Difficulties but he overcomes, to compass
his Designs. This premised, I am in the next place freely to acknowledge, that
the day you passed through Ville-Franche, which is the place of my Birth, I
found my self wounded by the Lightning of your fair Eyes. I did all lay in my
Power to oppose that Passion; but it still proved predominant, and the
Engagement I knew there was between you and your Cousin Don Henrick could not
abate on tittle of it. Nay, though I knew all the particulars of that
Engagement, wherein you rather complied with the Commands of a Father than your
own Inclinations, inasmuch as you looked on that too happy Kinsman, as a fickle
Person, unworthy your Affection, a truth I have since heard confirmed by your
self; nay, though I saw the Marriage in a manner concluded, yet all could not
break the Resolution I had taken to disguise my self as you have seen to
traverse it, and Fortune now seems to Favor my Design.

I am not therefore, Madam, to repent me of the slur I may have put upon my
Blood, and the Noble House from which I am descended, in acting the Fool's part
in yours, into which it was my Business to introduce my self by all means
imaginable, since the imposture has proved so fortunate, and that I begin to
conceive some hope of attaining my Desires. You know, Madam, that I durst not
have presumed to make you a real Discovery of my self, for besides that I
should run the hazard of not finding credit with you, I came in at a time when
your Marriage was in too great forwardness to be easily crossed by after
Applications. In fine, it was Heaven's Pleasure, that a strange Conjunction of
my Sister's Misfortune, and your own just Jealousies, should give you a
discovery of what, perhaps, I should yet a while have kept from your Knowledge.
My true Name is Don Philip de Gamboa and Toledo, and consequently I may affirm
my self to be of the most eminent Families of Spain, since I am descended from
the Seigniors of Ville-Franche and Astorga. I have the Honor to be Knight of
the Order of Alcantara, and I have acquired it by some years Services done his
Majesty in Flanders, with hopes, ere long, to be gratified with an Advantageous
Commandry. I have given you an Account of my Quality, and have not concealed
from you my Presumption. All I have now to Apologize for, is, my Love; and, I
am the more confident of your pardon as to that, if you but ever so little
consider the unavoidable Influence of your own Attractions. Nay, I cannot but
account it a happy Offense, since it has proved the occasion of your being
undeceived; and when I make a joint reflection on my own happiness, and my
Sister's Credulity, I cannot repent me of a disguise, whereof the satisfaction
infinitely exceeds the Shame, for it is in your power to restore me the Honor I
have deprived my self of, only for your sake; and I shall force him, who has
cajoll'd my Sister out of her Honor to perform the promise he has made her,
or it shall cost him his Life.

The Fair Lady was Ravished to hear these words from her disguised Lover, and
thought her self obliged to make an extraordinary return to so extraordinary a
demonstration of Affection; and being now fully undeceived as to the Sycophancy
of her Cousin Don Henrick, she made him this answer. Seignior Don Philip that
you have, upon so slight a gound as the little Beauty I can pretend to, engaged
your self in an enterprise so prejudicial to your reputation and descent, I
cannot but look on, as a transcendent Expression of your Love; though I do not
excuse you as to this, that the Noble Accomplishments you are Master of, might
no doubt have more happily and more worthily been otherwise employed. I have
resented, as I ought, the little respect my Cousin expressed toward me, and
therefore it is but just he should not enjoy me, since it may be inferred from
the forwardness of his matching with another, that he never truly intended it.
It must needs be an extraordinary joy to me, that I am undeceived before we
were joined by that tie which only death can dissolve: I am satisfied as to the
little affection he had for me, and I do yours but justice, when I assure you,
that I shall be so far from forgetting it, that I shall endeavor all lies in
my power to requite it.

This was delivered with so obliging an accent, that the Amourous Cavalier
would have cast himself at her Feet, would she have permitted it; he returned
her his thanks with a thousand submissions for so extraordinary a Favor, and
the sweet encouragement she was pleased to give his Love; it was not now a
seasonable time to expatiate into Complements; Donna Cornelia was left in the
Lady Eleanora's Lodgings, whose return she expected, and Don Philip looked for
Don Henrick, to enquire after the Lady he had recommended to his Custody; the
Lady Eleanora went to comfort her whom she had left among her Women, and to put
in Excecution, what had been resolved, between her and Don Philip. About half
an hour after her departure thence, comes Don Henrick to his Chamber, to look
after the Lady he had left there: Don Philip told him, that he could stay her
no longer, that she was gone, thinking he would not have come to her again: Nay
then, I am glad I staid so long, (says Henrick) since my stay has occasioned
her to do as I would have had her, which was that she might be gone out of the
House. This Woman Plagues me extremely, and it was no small happiness to me,
that she met not with my Uncle; for I should have been much troubled had she
had any discourse with him. Don Philip asked him some odd questions, as he was
wont to do, to sift something further out of him; but Don Henrick would
discover no more, the other easily apprehended, by the little had fallen from
him, what course he intended to take, and the indignation he conceived at his
slighting of his Sister was so great, that it was not without much violence
done himself, he forbore calling him to account for it.

In the mean time the Lady Eleanora had visited Donna Cornelia, of whom she had
received a punctual Relation of her Amors, which were but too much confirmed
to her by the promise of Marriage she had brought with her; and after she had
entered into a second admiration at the double perfidiousness of her Cousin Don
Henrick, she sent to desire her Father to come to her, who being alone with
her, she entertained him, with this following Discourse.

Sir, it has ever been a laudable Custom, that Fathers should dispose of their
Daughters in Marriage, as they either pleased themselves, or found most
convenient for their Affairs; but with this Caution, That it should not be
absolutely done contrary to their Wills and Inclinations; many are yet willing
to do so, out of a presumption, that Matrimony will change Men's Humors; but
it is seldom found to work that effect: Those therefore may be said to do well,
who, refering the Success to the higher Powers, by an implicit obedience,
comply with the disposal of their Parents; but those in my Judgment do better,
who use some precaution, and endeavor to prevent the inconveniences, which
they must otherwise fall into. I have ever been ready, Sir, to do whatever you
commanded me, especially in the business now in agitation, though I have found
my Cousin Don Henrick to be of a disposition so contrary to mine, that I
promised my self little satisfaction from our being joined together in the
inseparable Estate you intended. I have endeavored to obey you, though with some
violence to my own inclinations, which directed my Affection to other persons
not inferior to him, either in Quality or Estate. I consented to this Marriage
because you seemed so much to desire it. When it was fully concluded, there was
a person sent to Rome for the dispensation; and even during that time, when I
expected my Cousin should have expressed most Love to me, I have found he has
done quite contrary, for he has given a promise of Marriage to another Lady,
whom you shall presently see.

She thereupon called for Donna Cornelia, whom she had left in her own Chamber,
and who immediately came before the Ambassador; having disposed her into a
Chair, the Lady Eleanora continued her discourse: This, Sir, is the Lady I
spoke of, to whom my Cousin has given a promise of Marriage under his hand,
which she now has about her, and you shall see, how this perfidious Person
became thereby Master of her Honor. Coming hither to speak with you, and
Complain of the affront intended her, she met him, who, giving her fair words,
locked her into Don Philip's Chamber, under pretense that you were busy, and
that it would require some time to stay ere she could see you; some little
curiosity occasioned my my going to that door, which is between my Lodgings and
his, and there I came to the knowledge of this Business, having overheard some
part of their discourse. I thought fit to bring this Lady to my Chamber, to
give you further satisfaction of so pressing a truth; her quality is great,
since she is of the House of Gamboa and Toledo, two of the most Illustrious
Families in Spain: She is resolved to make the Case known to her Friends, who
are very Noble, and of great Credit in this Court, that they may oppose my
Marriage and prevent our common Affront. I have hitherto obeyed you as a
Father, I now appeal to you my Judge, and I beseech you discharge me of so
unjust an obedience for the future; for I am resolved rather to confine my self
the remainder of my days, in the most Austere Monastery about this City, than
ever be Wife to a man so insensible of Worth and Honor.

The Ambassador was extremely astonished at both what he saw, and what he had
heard; he examined the promise made to Donna Cornelia, and found that that
discovery alone was sufficient to prevent his Daughters Marriage with Henrick;
he immediately resolved to break all to pieces, and to dismiss his Nephew, that
there might be no more talk of the business; he caused the Ladies to withdraw,
and sent for his Nephew, whom he showed the Schedule he had made to Donna
Cornelia, asking him whether he knew the Hand; he not a little troubled, and
changing Color, began to deny it; but the Ambassador told him, that as he
could not do it sincerely, so it would be very unhandsomly proffered, since the
truth would be proved by several of his Letters written with the same hand; at
last Don Henrick, not without extreme Confusion, acknowledged, that blinded by
Love, he had indeed made that promise, but he would lose his Life ere he
performed it.

Don Philip having quitted his Fool's Coat, and put on a very rich suit, with
the Cross of Alcantara on his Coat, and Cloak, heard this Discourse from a
corner of the Room, where he was disposed, and not able to contain himself any
longer; Seignior Henrick, (said he coming up to him) have a better care what
you say, and consider her quality whom you injure; her Birth is at least as
Noble as yours: she is my Sister, and, as such, I am obliged to vindicate and
protect her; if you perform not the promise you have made her, I wear a Sword
by my side, which shall force you to do it, if Honor will not. I have already
considered what I am in Duty obliged too, as to that point, (replies Don
Henrick) and no Man shall force me, by menaces, to do any thing against my
Will: This so enraged Don Philip, that he gave Don Henrick a Challenge; the
Dispute grew higher and higher, which obliged the Ladies to come in between
them, and to give orders the doors should be shut, least they should put the
Challenge in Execution.

While these things passed, the Ambassador minded not the Person of Don
Philip, but imagined him some other Person come thither after his Sister; for,
seeing him so well habited with the Cross of Alcantara and without Spectacles,
which he constantly wore, he knew him not; but having considered him better, he
found that he who challenged his Nephew was the same person, who, by his
pleasant Extravagances, had found him so much sport; the Lady Eleanora
perceiving her Father had his Eyes fastened on him, with some astonishment,
imagined the cause of it; and gave it a check in these Words: He, Sir, whom you
see in a Habit so different from that he was wont to wear, and who seemed so
ridiculous to you, is Don Philip de Gamboa and Toledo; when this dispute is
over, you shall know the motives obliged him to that disguise.

The Ambassador was the more astonished at that, and would have pressed his
Daughter to make a further discovery of that Secret, had he not seen the two
Cavaliers, with Swords drawn, ready to make that Room the place of their Duel;
he ran in between them, and endeavored by mildness to persuade his Nephew, not
to contest in a business, which was not to his advantage; that if he satisfied
not the injured Cavalier, mischief would attend it; that he should not rely on
any protection he might hope for from him, inasmuch as seeing the little reason
he had on his side, and the affront he intended that Lady, he should rather be
against him, by assisting his adversary, than countenance him in so unjust a
Cause; that as to his Daughter, he might quit all hope of her, that he should
never be her Husband, and that it would discover a great poorness of Spirit in
her, if she had any thoughts of kindness for him, after he had so unworthily
treated her.

Don Henrick, finding himself pressed, with reproaches on all sides, and withal
harkning to the Advice of his Conscience, thought it best to follow his Uncle's
Counsel, he thereupon went with open Arms to his true Wife, to whom he once
more gave his Hand as a Husband, and then Embraced his Brother-in-Law, whom he
yet knew not: the Lady Eleanora thought it a good opportunity, before the whole
Company, to give her Father an Account, how Don Philip had fallen in Love with
her, how he got into his retinue in the Quality of a Jester; that she conceived
her self obliged to requite the Extraordinary demonstration of his Affection to
her, by an Exchange of hers to him, if her Father approved of it; the Old
Gentleman had so much Mettle left, as to admire the strange Conducts of Love in
all its Operations; and particularly, how it made the wisest Man Mad, and the
Mad Wise, making its Advantages of Extravagance it self, to compass its design;
without any further demurring, he gave his Consent. Whereupon the Lady Eleanora
took him by the hand, and Don Philip was so happy, as, by odd and unlikely
means to see all his desires accomplished.

The Solemnities of both the Marriages were put off till eight days after; all
the Grandees about the Court came to them; the Balls thereat, and the Tiltings
were Extraordinary; but what more nearly touches the Story, is, that the King
Honored these two Cavaliers with great advantages, wherewith Don Philip had
also those of a numerous Issue; for which Don Henrick needed not much to have
envied him, being the most satisfied man in the World with his choice, whom he
infinitely Loved, and thereby made it appear, that the inclinations of two
person, before they are United by Matrimony, though by some intervening
Occurrences somewhat remitted, may yet, by that sacred tie, be heightened into a
Noble and vigorous Flame of perfect Love.

THE Impostour Outwitted: A NOVEL.
IN the great and famous City of Sevil, the Metropolis of Andaluzia, Mother of
so many Noble Families, and Excellent Wits, the Treasury of all the Wealth,
which flows into Spain from the West Indies, was Born Don Antonio de Mendoza, a
very Accomplished Cavalier, of the Illustrious Family of the Dukes of Alcala,
so highly esteemed all over the Kingdom. By their Death, from whom he derived
his being in this World, there fell to him an Estate of four Thousand Crowns
Annual Rent, upon which he lived very nobly at Sevil, being the most Remarkable
Person at all public Actions done about the City. He had at Madrid a
Cousin-German who followed the Spanish Court, and was gone thither about some
Affairs of great Importance, which he had brought to a happy Issue. Having
lived there awhile, he liked it, and the Conversation of the Cavaliers
inhabiting it, so well, that he Exchanged the place of his Birth for that
Illustrious City. He there became intimately acquainted with an Old Cavalier,
whose Name was Don Alonzo de Castiza, a Person who had raised himself into a
general Esteem, by the Excellent Endowments he had. Besides which, he was
honored with the Illustrious Order of the Patron of Spain, with a Commandery
of two Thousand Ducats of Annual Rent.

This old Gentleman was a Widower, having but one only Daughter, to whom all
his vast Estate was to fall at his Death. Nature it seems had made it her
particular concern to enrich this young Lady, with all the Graces and
Perfections to be wished in one of her Sex. Which occasioned the envy of all
the Ladies about the Court toward her, since she had, in point of Beauty, the
same Advantages over them, as the Sun has over all the rest of the Planets.
Her Father, Don Alonzo, wished her well Married to his Mind, that is, one equal
to her, in Estate and Extraction. Don Martinio de Mendoza (so was called Don
Antonio's Cousin whom I spoke of first) might have aspired to the Honor of
making his Addresses to her, as well upon account of the House, from which he
was descended, as the Familiar Acquaintance there was between him and her
Father Don Alonzo.

But being a Younger Brother, he thought himself too low, in point of Estate,
to pretend to so Advantageous a Match. However, he thought fit to make some
Proposals to the Old Gentleman, on the behalf of his Cousin Don Antonio, who
lived at Sevil, whom he highly recommended to him for his Excellent Qualities,
and the greatness of his Estate; for he was the only Son of a Noble House. Don
Alonzo took it very kindly from him, but thought it withal, Prudence, to make
further enquiry into the Business, knowing that Persons speaking for their own
Relations, are commonly very partial, and think it no mortal Sin to exceed the
Truth. So that Don Alonzo, immediately writ to a particular Friend at Sevil,
earnestly desiring him to give him an account of the Person and Estate of Don
Antonio de Mendoza, inasmuch as it highly concerned the Honor of his House, to
meet with a Cavalier Worthy his Alliance, to be Husband to his only Daughter,
Donna Catharina.

'Twas not long ere he received an answer, wherein his Friend confirmed all
that Don Martinio had said of his Kinsman, with somewhat more, protesting in
the Conclusion, that he was so far from being partial or insincere, in the
account he had sent him, that he rather told less than truth. He thereupon went
to Don Martinio, and told him, that he might write to his Cousin, and assure
him he should be very welcome, if he had any Inclinations for his Daughter. He
made him answer that he would, and Don Alonzo, as a further Obligation, would
have his Daughter's Picture, sent him, that he might therein find some of the
rare Qualities that were in her, permitting his Cousin, to be present at the
taking of it, that he might assure Don Antonio, the Painter had not flattered
her, and that the Copy was below the Original.

Don Martinio failed not to write to his Cousin, to whom he also sent the
Picture, celebrating the Virtues of that Amiable Person, which the Painter
could not represent, as he had done the Lineaments of her Beautiful
Countenance. His Cousin Don Antonio was extremely satisfied therewith, and
referred to him to make some Overtures in the Treaty of Marriage, till he came
thither himself, for the further Prosecution whereof, he sent him a full
Procuration.

In the mean time, Don Antonio was preparing for his Journey to Madrid, to wait
on his Mistress, who, having received his Picture, was as much taken with it,
as he had been with hers, leaving his retinue at Sevil, till a rich Livery,
then making, was finished, he began his Journey, having only one Person to wait
on him, and a Groom to look to their Mules, who followed them at a little
distance. Don Antonio carried always about him his Mistress's Picture enclosed
in the same Letter, wherein his Cousin had sent it him. Being come within half
a days Journey of Toledo he sent away the Groom, to provide Lodgings for them
in the City. He had entertained at a Dinner some of the Inhabitants of Orgaz,
which was the place where they had baited. The Cloth being taken away, they
fell to Cards; he lost his Money, and was vexed, which occasioned their playing
on till he had recovered his Losses, and by that time it was grown later than
he could have wished. Being horsed, he and his Man put forward, but ere they
had rode a League, Night surprised them, so that they made ashift to lose their
way, and got in among certain Olive Trees, about half a League short of Toledo.
Not knowing where they were, and fearing to go too far out of their way, they
thought it their best Course to alight, and rest themselves under one of the
Olive Trees, till it were day. They accommodated themselves the best they
could, and weariness soon laid them asleep, yet little dreamed of the
Misfortune which was to happen to them. Being in their first Sleep, which is
commonly the soundest, four Men came to the place, very softly, for the Noise
of their Mules brought them thither; and these were of a Profession, which for
the most part finds those that are of it more Work by Night than by day. They
had been upon a Design which had not taken, and so they were returning very
disconsolate with empty Pockets to Toledo.

Coming up to them, and finding them both asleep, they tied their Hands behind
them, and took away all they had, but their Wastcoats and Drawers, and, to get
off with more speed and safety, they made use of their Mules. Don Antonio,
being thus basely surprised, was exasperated at the Misfortune; but his Man
told him that it had happened to them through his fault, because he had not
given over playing sooner. They discoursed of it, till the Birds gave them
notice of the approach of Aurora. Soon after, hearing the noise of some Cattle
not far from them, they called to him that looked after them, very much
bemoaning the Condition they were in. They asked him, how far it was to Toledo,
and he told them it was not quite half a League, but if they would go along
with him to a Country House hard by, he would gladly show them the way, and
that he doubted not, but the Lady, who lived in it, would relieve them in that
extremity.

They took his Advice, and he brought them to a very fair House. Having knocked
at the Gate, it was immediately opened by an old Man, who was Steward to the
Lady, and had the oversight of the Shepherds, and the Profits arising from the
Sheep. The Shepherd who brought them thither went in to the Lady, and in few
Words gave her an account of the Misfortune that happened to those Strangers,
and the Condition he had found them in, whereupon she ordered them to be
brought up to her Chamber. Don Antonio presented himself to her, very much out
of Countenance to see himself almost naked, having upon him only an old Coat,
which the Shepherd had lent him. He told her that his Journey was for Madrid,
about a Lawsuit of great Importance, not discovering who he was, but only that
he was a Gentleman of Sevil, named Don Torpino de Hezzo. The Lady whose Name
was Donna Olivia, was much troubled to see him in that deplorable Condition.
There were in the House two Chests full of Cloths, which had been a Brother's
of hers, who dyed not long before. She ordered two Suites to be brought out,
which they put on, that which Don Antonio had proving so fit, that the Lady was
much taken with his Person, and had her Eyes always fastened on him. She
invited Don Antonio to Dine with her, which he did, taking Occasion ever and
anon, to make extraordinary Acknowledgements of the Favors he had received
from her.

They continued two days in that Country House, ere the Lady made any discovery
of the Affections she had for Don Antonio, save only what she did with her
Eyes, which were the silent Interpreters of the Trouble she was in. Don Antonio
was not insensible of it, and had some Discourse concerning it with his Man;
yet had he not the Confidence to tell him what he really thought of it, being
(as he was) upon the point of disposing himself otherwise. The Servant advised
him not to let slip so fair an opportunity, and told him he should not be so
hard-hearted, toward a Lady of so great Worth, and one that had so highly
obliged them. The Solitude of the place, the Beauty of the Lady, and the silent
Discoveries she made him by her Gestures, obliged Don Antonio to answer her
Affection. He entered into some Love Discourses with her; but though she were
really in Love with him, yet would she not grant him any particular Favor,
unless he first assured her she should be his Wife, and that she had a Promise
of it under his hand.

Don Antonio, on the other side, had so great a Kindness for her, that he had
in a manner forgot the Mistress, whose Picture he had carried about him, and
advising with his Servant, (who was a dangerous Confident, and a subtle Fellow)
what he should do; he told him very roundly, that he ought not to let slip so
sweet and favorable an opportunity; that he might easily have the Enjoyment of
her, and withal give her the Promise of Marriage she desired, provided he put
not into it his own Name, but filled it with the Supposititious Name he had
assumed, fince she knew neither his Country nor Extraction. Don Antonio
followed his Advice, and thereupon had his Desires of Donna Olivia, who having
made the Blot, could do no less than give him leave to enter. He continued
there four days, at the end whereof, acquainting the Lady that his Business at
Madrid was of such Importance as required his Personal Attendance there, she
consented to his departure, on Condition he would return again as soon as he
could; which he with Oaths, promised to do.

The next Morning betimes, he departed, leaving the Lady o're-flown with Tears;
he was somewhat troubled, or at least pretended it. The Lady having furnished
him with all things necessary, he put forward; but ere he had gone far, he
received some part of the Chastisement which he deserved for his
Perfidiousness, for the Mule he was mounted on, being apt to start, gave him a
fall, whereby he so sprain'd one Foot, that he was forced to make some stay at
Illescas, a place half way between Toledo and Madrid, and to send for
Surgeons to set all things right again.

Leaving him there confined to his Chamber for some days; let us return to
Donna Olivia, who very much bewailed the absence of her Gallant, the very
thought of whom caused her no small Affliction. A Servant of hers who had made
the Bed where he lay, found, under the Bolster, a Picture of the Lady whom Don
Antonio was to be married to, folded up in a Letter which his Cousin had writ
to him from Madrid, which she delivered to her Mistress, who opening the Paper,
saw the Picture, whereat she was much disquietted; but she was much more
astonished, when she cast her Eye on the ensuing Letter, which contained these
Words:

Dearest Cousin,
YOU will receive herein enclosed the Picture of the Lady Donna Catharina de
Castiza, which is very exactly taken from the Original; I doubt not but the
charms of her Beauty will oblige you to hasten your Journey. Her Father, Don
Alonza de Castiza, expects you with great Impatience. In the mean time, the
Contract of Marriage is a drawing up, and will be ready, before you be here to
Sign it. Assure your self you will be extremely satisfied, that you have found
so Excellent a Wife. I am

Your Affectionate Cousin, Don Martinio de Mendoza.


Donna Olivia had scarcely come to the period of this Letter, but, through the
Trouble she received at the reading of it, she fell into a Swoon, and continued
therein above half an hour, in the Arms of her Maid. At last she came to her
self, bursting into Sighs and Tears; she railed at the Sevillian Impostour, but
much more at her own simplicity, that she had so lightly prostituted her Honor
to an unknown Person, whom so strange an Adventure had brought to her House.
She spent that wholeday in weeping and bemoaning her Misfortune: But
considering withal, what hazard her Reputation was in, she resolved it should
not be said of her, that she had been so basely affronted by any Man.
Whereupon, with the light she received from the Letter, of the Occasion of his
Journey, and the Person to whom he was to be Married, she put things in Order
to her Removal to Madrid; which she might better do than any other, in regard
she had not any Kinsman near enough to whom she might Communicate her
Intention. She Communicated her Design to Dilario, an old Servant of hers, who
had brought her up from the Cradle, and was very glad to wait on her.

Upon this Resolution, she caused two Wagons to be laden with all things
necessary to furnish a House fit to receive a Person of Quality, and took her
way toward Madrid. Being come thither, she commanded her Servant Dilario, to
enquire where abouts lived Don Alonzo de Castiza, and whether the young
Cavalier, whom he intended to make his Son-in-Law, were come from Sevil. She
understood by him, that he was not yet come, but that they expected him, which
much troubled the Lady, who knew nothing of the Accident had happened to him
near Illescas.

The first thing this affronted Lady did, was to take a House for her self near
that of Don Alonzo de Castiza, and ordered Dilario to live in it as Master
thereof, that done, she sent him to Don Alonzo's, to enquire whether she wanted
a waiting-Gentlewoman, for she would disguise her self, that she might not be
known by Don Antonio. The Business had the effect she desired, for Donna
Catharina was then enquiring for a Widow to wait on her, a Custom much
practiced in Spain, where Ladies of Quality have several of them, whom, being
Widows, they call Duenna's. When this was proposed by Dilario, who went under
the Name of Father to his Mistress, Donna Catharina not only received her into
her Service, but her Father, Dilario, was entertained into Don Alonzo's.
Dilario gave his Mistress an account of his Negotiation, whereat she was
extremely satisfied: So that having put her self into the habit of a Duenna,
she went the next day to present her self to Donna Catharina, conducted by her
pretended Father, Dilario. They were both very kindly entertained by Don Alonzo
de Castiza and his Daughter. Donna Olivia wished she had not been so handsome,
that the Suitor she expected might be the less taken with her; however, she
Courageously resolved to prosecute the Impostour she was engaged in. Donna
Catharina asked Dilario what Countryman he was. He told her that he was born
at a place called Utrera, near Sevil; that his Name was Jacob de Granatus (by
which we shall henceforth call him) that his Daughter had been Married to a
Merchant of that City, who died as he was going for the West Indies, leaving so
great Debts behind him, that all his Estate went to satisfy his Creditors.

Don Alonzo hearing that Granatus was of Andaluzia, asked him, whether he had
lived any time at Sevil. He told him that he had often been in that City, but
that his Daughter had lived there. Don Alonzo would not at that time enquire
any farther, nor enter into any Discourse with him concerning Don Antonio de
Mendoza. Donna Olivia was entertained as Duenna to Donna Catharina, who took
such an Affection to her, that she trusted her with all her Keys, to the great
discontent of her other Servants, who had lived with her many years. Granatus
told them that he had a House of his own, not far from Don Alonzo's, and a Wife
(for Flora an ancient Maid of Donna Catharina's, was to act that part)
whereupon he had no Lodgings assigned him in Don Alonzo's.

It is now time we return to Don Antonio de Mendoza, who being recovered of his
fall, came to Madrid, and lighted at the House of his Cousin Martinio, who was
much troubled that he had not been there sooner. He told him the Cause of it,
and gave him a particular account of all had past in Donna Olivia's
Country House, even to the promise he had made her, under a feigned Name. Don
Martinio asked him, what Quality the Lady was of: whereto he answered, that her
Name was Donna Olivia de Priola, and that she was of one of the most Noble
Families of Toledo. Don Martinio, was very much dissatisfied with his
procedure, reprehending him with the unworthy Action he had committed in
abusing and dishonouring that Lady, and that it was to be feared, she might
hear of his coming to Madrid, in order to a Marriage to another, and find means
to be revenged for that affront.

They afterward fell into Discourse concerning Donna Catharina, and Don
Antonio told him, he extremely fancied the Picture he had seen of her, but
that, with the other things he had been robbed of, he had lost it: though he
knew well enough, he had left it under the Beds-Head at Donna Olivia's, which
troubled him not a little, however he dissembled it. Don Martinio told Don
Antonio, that it were requisite he put himself into other Apparel, before he
waited on his Mistress, and that he must keep within Doors till they were
ready. Within two days a very fair Riding-Suit was brought him, wherein;
pretending he was but newly come to Town, he goes to the House of Don Alonzo de
Castiza, by whom he was received with great Demonstrations of Kindness. Notice
was immediately carried up to Donna Catharina that the Person designed to be
her Husband was coming up to her Chamber, where she was with her Maids about
her, who had just made an end of dressing her. Don Antonio coming in, conducted
by Don Alonzo and Do^ Martinio, was infinitely satisfied at the sight of his
Mistress, whom he very civilly and discreetly saluted, for he was a Person of
an Excellent Wit, and a Confident Carriage and Demeanor. He found by the
Original of Donna Catharina, that the Painter had done his Work very
faithfully, a Virtue not much practiced by Painters, especially upon such
Occasions as that was. He was ravished to see so great a Beauty, and she on the
other side was wel^ satisfied with the handsome Personage of Don Antonio.

There were yet some things to be done in order to the absolute Conclusion of
the Marriage, at which there was a necessity of Don Antonio's Presence;
whereupon he, Don Alonzo and Don Martinio withdrew into another Room, where
they locked themselves in with a Notary, and some Friends, who were to be
Witnesses at the Articles of the Agreement. Donna Catharina continued all that
time in her Chamber, with her Servants talking of Don Antonio, her Husband to
be, every one congratulating her good Fortune, save only Donna Olivia, who
saying nothing at all, her Mistress observed it, and being all alone with her,
Donna Artimisa, (said she to her, for that was the Name she had assumed) whence
comes it, that, while all the rest celebrate the Happiness of my choice, you
only are silent? Methinks you might have contributed somewhat to the public
Congratulation, though you had done it only out of Complaisance. I pray give me
some Reason for it. Donna Olivia had done it purposely, in Prosecution of her
Design, and this Question came as seasonably as she could have wished it, so
that she made her this answer. As to the Person of Don Antonio, Madam, there is
not any thing to be said against it, nay he is so accomplished that there is
not any thing to be wished in him, which he is not already possessed of. My
silence proceeds hence, that I had a particular Knowledge of him at Sevil, for
I lived in a quarter of the City, which he much frequented. I neither will, nor
ought to conceal from you the Occasion of his so often coming thither; for it
is my Duty to be faithful to you, as having no other Design than to serve you,
and endeavor your quiet, so as that you may not live in a perpetual
dis-enjoynment of your self all the rest of your days; know then, Madam, that
if you Match your self with Don Antonio you will be brought to a kind of Civil
death, instead of receiving the satisfaction of Wedlock. Donna Catharina was
much astonished at this discourse, and pressed her Duenna, to discover to her
more clearly, what she had but too great a desire to tell her: Whereupon
entreating her to retire into a more secret place, where they might not be
observed by her other Women, Donna Olivia gave her this Malicious account of
the perfidious Don Antonio.

I should not live with the respect and duty I owe you, as my Mistress, nor
according to the Affection I bear you, if I expressed not my self clearly to
you, in a business wherein you are so highly concerned, and on which depends
your greatest Felicity in this World; know then, Madam, that Don Antonio fell
in Love with a Lady at Sevil, one very handsome and well descended, in a word
wanting nothing but a Fortune Suitable to her Quality; he Courted her so
earnestly, that she, finding her self obliged by so great demonstrations of
affection-Letters, and continual Embassies, attended with Presents, from Don
Antonio, satisfied his desires, upon a promise that he would make her his Wife,
whereof there are many Witnesses; but the business was to be kept secret for a
time; for Don Antonio's Father was then a live, who, having received some
Intelligence of that Love, endeavored all he could to prevent Don Antonio's
Marriage with Donna Marcellina de Loprezza; (so was the Lady called.) The
continuance of his Visits to her produced living proofs, which were two Son's
and a Daughter, who were at that time with the Mother; when Don Antonio's
Father was removed out of the way, (which happened not long after) Donna
Marcellina expected he should make good his promise, and Marry her, but he, for
some time, came not so much as to see her; what Inconveniences she was put to
from the time of their acquaintance she knows to her Sorrow, and I am not
Ignorant thereof, for I lived near her, and went often to her Hou^e.

Being now convinced that he intended to leave her in the Lurch, she discovered
the business to two Cousin- Germans of hers, who were so ^nrag'd thereat, that
they immediately resolved to oblige Don Antonio, by force, to perform the
promise he had made to their Kinswoman. Don Antonio went to a certain Farm he
had, not far from Sevil, to avoid his adversaries, who, knowing he went out of
the way purposely because he would not satifie their Cousin, resolved to be the
Death of him: things were in this posture when my Father brought me to Madrid,
where I have been about this six Weeks; this is the Account I can give you of
Don Antonio, who must not think himself secure in this Court; for the Lady's
Kinsmen, whom I know to be Gallant and Stout Persons, as soon as they hear of
his being here, will be sure to attend his Motion, and revenge the aff^ont done
to their Cousin; nay it will be easier for them to do it here than at Sevil.

DonnaCatharina heard very attentively the Story told her by the Duenna, and
was extremely troubled, to find Don Antonio so far engaged with another. She
asked her a thousand questions, among others, whether he was much in Love with
that Mistress, whether that Donna Marcellina was very handsome, etc. Whereto
she made such Answers as were suitable to her design, which was to put Don
Antonio clearly out of her favor. Donna Catharina resolved to give her Father
an Account of all, and leave it to him to inform himself more fully of the
business. She immediately went to the Room where he was to speak to him, for
all things were concluded as to the Marriage.

In the mean time Donna Olivia was left in the outer-room, where the Women and
Duenna's are wont to wait, there came in to them a Servant of Don Antonio's,
whom he had sent to the Post for Letters from Sevil; enquiring for his Master,
to give him the Packet. Donna Olivia told him, that he was within, but that as
soon as he came out, she would deliver it to him; having opened the Packet;
she put into it a Letter, which she immediately writ, and, Sealing it up again,
came where her Mistress was; she asked her whither she was going with those
Letters? The other answered without the least discovery of any Malice, that
they were directed to Seignior Don Antonio, and had been brought thither a
little before by one of his Servants from the Sevil Post. Curiosity was an
ingredient of the first Woman, and it is very fruitfully spread through the
whole Sex. Donna Catharina showed her self not free from it on this Occasion,
and she was the more excusable considering the Story had been told her by the
subtle Duenna; she was tempted to open the Packet, wherein finding one Letter
Written with a Woman's hand, (which was that, Written, by Donna Olivia) she
could do no less than open it, and directing her Eye down to the bottom of it
found it subscribed by one Donna Marcellina de Loprezza; she read it, and was
confirmed in what before she not fully credited.

The Letter.
My Dearest,
YOUR Absence and my Indisposition have reduced me to such an Extremity, that I
cannot imagine I have any long time to live, it being impossible I should hold
out, after the News I have heard of your Resolution to be Married at Madrid,
which cannot easily be done, without a transcendent Baseness, by a Person so
nearly engaged to me as you are. You know that you cannot bestow on another
what is so Lawfully due to me, especially if you make the least Reflection on
the precious Pledges there are between us thereof. I have no other Advice to
give you, as things now stand, but that, if you are at such a loss of all Shame
and Conscience, there is a Deity, who sees our most secret Thoughts, and passes
a just Judgment on them; and that I have many Noble Friends, who measuring the
small Account you make of them by your slighting of me, will not fail to
revenge the affront done to us all. I hope we shall not be forced to those
Extremities, considering how highly you are obliged to do things suitably to
the Nobleness of your Birth, and to Acknowledge, as you ought, her, whom, while
we, both Live, you must look on, as

Your Lawful Wife, Donna Marcellina de Loprezza.


This Letter fully satisfied Donna Catharina, that all she had heard from the
malicious Duenna was true; her Father coming into the Room as she had done
reading it, she acquainted him with all that concerned Don Antonio, showing him
the Letter from Donna Marcellina; he was extremely astonished, to find that a
Cavalier of so noble a Family, had abused a Lady of such Quality, and that
having Children by her, he should be so impudent as to make his Addresses to
his Daughter; he forbear reproaching him therewith, till he had better informed
himself from a Friend of his of Sevil, then at Madrid, whom he immediately went
to look for.

Don Alonzo was hardly got out of doors, but Don Antonio and his man came in,
for his man having told him that he had delivered the Packet to one of
DonnaCatharina's Women, he was come to receive it from her, since it was not
brought to his Cousin's, whither all his Letters were directed; it was his
Fortune to meet with Donna Catharina in the Outer-room, where her Father had
left her; I should not have returned so soon, my dearest Lady, (said he to her)
had not somewhat extraordinary obliged me thereto; it is to receive some
Letters, which my Man tells me he delivered to one of your Women. She thought
(says Donna Catharina) that you had been still with my Father: I casually
meeting her as she was coming into the Room, asked her what she came for; she
answering, it was to deliver you the Packet, I took it from her and (presuming
that a Cavalier of your Age and Complexion could not have lived to this time in
Sevil, and not have an inclination for some Lady) a certain Conjunction of
Curiosity and Jealousy persuaded me to open it. That Curiosity has done me a
Courtesy, and has satisfied me in some things which before I only suspected;
and therefore I forbear desiring your excuse, since I have received so good an
Information, before I was any further engaged with you; for had it come too
late, I had been ruined: Here Is a Letter from a Person you should be well
acquainted with; this would have been enough to undeceive me, but it only
confirms a relation I had received before, upon which I was almost resolved to
put such a Check to your pretensions to me, as that you should have but little
encouragement to continue them. Farewell, my presence will but trouble you, this
Letter will acquaint you with what you are not Ignorant of.

Don Antonio receiving the Letter out of her hand was not a little surpised,
not imagining what might have happened to him. He read it, and presently
inferred, that it was a trick put upon him by some envious Person, who was
desirous to obstruct his happiness. Meeting with Donna Olivia, (whom, as we
said before, he knew not in her Widow's Habit) ah Madam, (said he to her) what
Forgeries are these? I a Mistress at Sevil, and of this Name? I Children by
her, and that upon a Promise of Marriage? If it be not the greatest Untruth
that ever Humane Malice invented, let me never look Man in the Face again. (For
my part, replies the subtle Duenna) I find my self inclined to believe, that
what you say may be true; but your main Concernment is to bring my Lady to that
Persuasion. I know her to be of such an Humor as not easily to quit a
Resentment, which she entertains upon just Grounds; and I much Question,
whether she will admit your Addresses any further, for I know she has
acquainted her Father with all, and he is gone to a Gentleman of Sevil, an
intimate Friend of his, who is now in this City. I am very glad of it, (says
Don Antonio) for he will find it to be an absolute Impostour, and that there is
not any Lady in Sevil that goes under the Name of Donna Marcellina de Loprezza.

But I beseech you tell me, Madam, whether your intimacy be very great with the
Lady Donna Catharina; so great (replied she) that I am the only person in her
favor, and to whom she is pleased to communitate her thoughts; if it be so,
(says Don Antonio) it is possible you may procure me the favor from her, that I
may vindicate my self. I much question whether she will ever speak to you
again, (said she) for she is extremely incensed against you, and when once
angry, if justly, she is the hardest to be appeased that ever I knew; but,
(said he) if you are so much in her Favor, you may prevail somewhat with her,
by representing to her the Extraordinary affection I have for her. It is in my
power, (said she) to do with her what you desire; but what will you give me if
I can procure you a favorable Audience from her? any thing you can desire,
(said he to her) if you mind only matter of advantage. You see I am very young,
(said she) and consequently may hope to be Married again, Money is the only
principal Verb, which I have occasion for; if I answer your Expectation, may I
rely on your Liberality for my Reward. That you may know how earnestly I desire
it, (says, he) do what I require, and I will make your Fortune heavier by five
hundred Crowns than it is. I most humbly thank you, (replies she) but I must
tell you, Sir, that I have been so deluded by the verbal promises sometimes
made me by a Person of your Quality, that I have reason to mistrust whatever is
promised, ^f I have it not in writing; you will be pleas^d to excuse me, Sir,
if my Fear to be de^eiv'd as I have been, force me to these Pre^autions, and to
assure your self, that those ^atisfied, I will endeavor to serve you to the
^tmost of my Power. To give you absolute ^atisfaction, as to that point, Madam,
(said ^e) help me with Pen, Ink and Paper, and ^ou shall have what security you
Desire your ^elf.

Donna Olivia would see the Issue of it, and ^o brought him what he desired.
Don Anto^io kept his Word with her; nay, either out ^f Ignorance, of the Form
of such Obliga^ions, or to make a greater Expression of his Earnestness that
she should assist him, he pro^ed so Liberal, as to give her a Blank Signed and
Sealed, not mentioning the Sum where^o he obliged himself, telling her he had
not ^pecified it, out of a Design to requite her ^eyond his Promises,
proportionably to the Service she should do him, in the Recovery of his
Mistress's Favor. She saw this happened according to her Wishes, so that
acknowledging the Favor Don Antonio had done her, she promised him her utmost
endeavors to deserve it, by recovering him into the Favor of his Mistress.
The Amorous Cavalier believed her, and took his leave. Dilario, coming in soon
after, Olivia gave him an account of what Progress she had made, and putting
into his Hands the Blank Signed by Don Antonio, bid him write abov^ his Name a
formal Promise of Marriage, dating it about the time of his being at her
Country House near Toledo, with two Witnesses^ which Dilario did, imitating as
near as he could Don Antonio's Hand.

That day, Don Alonzo failed to meet the Gentleman of Sevil, and put of the
visit he intended him till the next. In the mean time, Donna Olivia understood
from Donna Catharina, that she was resolved to lead Apes i^ Hell, rather than
have Don Antonio to he^ Husband. Having already trusted her Duenna with some of
her Secrets, she though^ she might make an absolute discovery of her self to
her, and thereupon told her, how that before her Father had treated of a
Marriage between her and Don Antonio, she had been Courted by a Person of
Honor, named Don Valerio de Merdea, that she had some Inclination toward him;
and that the Persuasions of her Father, had prevailed with her to entertain the
Applications of Don Antonio; but having discovered his Unworthiness, she was
resolved to re-address her Affection to Don Valerio.

Donna Olivia was almost out of her self for Joy to hear that News, for it put
her into a Confidence, that her Design would take; and the more to promote it,
she disposed Donna Catharina as much as lay in her Power ^o favor Don Valerio.
He must needs be dis^leased with me, (says she to her) yet I ^oubt not but a
Letter from me will re-ingage him my humble Servant. The crafty ^uenna,
proffered to be the Bearer of it, on Condition she might do it by Coach. Don^a
Catharina was very glad to find her Wo^an so ready to serve her, especially in
a Bu^ness which she was so much pleased with; and so she commanded a Coach to
be made ^eady, and that she should go immediately to ^e Don Valerio, to whom
she writ a Letter. Donna Olivia took Coach, pretending to go to Don Valerio's
House, but she went to her own, and bid the Coachman return to Donna Ca^arina,
and tell her, that for fear notice ^ight be taken of the Coach, she would go
^foot to the Place where she had sent her, ^onducted by Granatus her pretended
Father. from that House, she writ two Letters, one, ^o Don Alonzo, desiring him
to come to her; ^he other to Don Valerio, to the same Effect, with Directions
to find the House.

While the Letters were carried abroad, she put off her Widows Habit, and put
on that of a Person of the highest Quality, expecting these two Visits with the
accustomed Ceremonies of Spain. Don Valerio de Merde^ was not long a coming,
though he knew nothing of the Person who had written to him. There had not past
many Complements between him and Donna Olivia, but word wa^ brought her that
Don Alonzo de Castiza was alighted out of his Coach, and was coming into the
House. Sir, (said she to Don Valerio) I am obliged to speak with the Person who
is coming up, all alone. Not but that you may hear the Discourse we shall have
together; and therefore let me entreat you to stand behind this Curtain, whence
you will hear all we say, for it concerns you more than you imagine, and will
prove to your Advantage. Don Valerio complied, not knowing what might be the
issue of this Precaution.

Don Alonzo came in, and having taken a Seat, Donna Olivia (whom he knew not as
she was then dressed) Addressed her self to him with this Discourse. I doubt
not, Sir, but you somewhat wonder, you should be entreated hither by a Letter,
and that from a Person not known to you. To recover you from that Confusion, I
will give you an account of my self. I was Born in the Imperial City of Toledo,
the only Daughter of the House from which I am descended, and Heir thereof. I
am of the Family of Priola, so well known all over Spain, that I need say
nothing of it. As to my Quality, I am to tell you farther, that my Father was,
in his time, honored with the Order of St. James, and my Brother of that of
Alcantara, with the Command of a Troop of Horse under his Majesty in Flanders,
upon his Death I retired to a Country House I have near Toledo, where I lived
privately, contenting my self with the Innocent Enjoyments of a Country Life,
without the least Acquaintance of any thing of Love, till that, one Morning a
Shepherd of mine brought to my House, two Men, who had been robbed, and
stripped the Night before by certain High-way-Men. I took Compassion of them,
especially him who by his Demeanor seemed to be the Master, and out of two
Chests of Cloths my Brother had left, I furnished them with two Suites,
wherewith they covered their Nakedness. They seemed to be very thankful for so
seasonable a Favor; but the more considerable of the two has treated me very
ungratefully, which is the ordinary style of Courtiers, and has requited my
Charitable Offices only with Flatteries and Deceit.

I was so simple as to be cajoll'd, by the Caresses he made me, during four
days that I kept him at my House, and he prevailed so far with me, that I was
no longer at my own Disposal. The re-iterated Oaths and Protestations of a
Person of that Worth, raised me into a Persuasion that he really loved me, and
that induced me to love him again; to be short, upon a Promise he made me of
Marriage, he got me in a Humor to grant him the greatest of Favors. He made
me believe that his going to Court was for the Prosecution of some Law-Business
that concerned him very highly. He desired my leave to go to Madrid, promising
to return again in a short time, but with such Demonstrations of Love as might
easily have prevailed with one who had not fancied him so affectionately as I
had done. I supplied him with all things necessary, and he left me extremely
troubled at his departure. Now, by a Picture and Letter he left behind him
under the Bolster, I found that the Occasion of his coming to this Court was in
Order to a Marriage between him, and that Miracle of Beauty Donna Catharina,
your Daughter. Now, our Honor being the most considerable thing we ought to be
tender of, I could do no less, upon the procedure of Don Antonio, than resolve
to come to this Court, and to apply my self to my Friends, that, by their
Favor, I might cross the Marriage he is about, and you will find, that I may
easily do it, if you but see what Cards I have to play.

I conceived my first overture should be to acquaint you with my Disgrace, the
Dishonor I have run into by the Acquaintance of Don Antonio, and his Treachery
toward me, that receiving it from my own Mouth, you may not be too forward to
conclude what is already resolved between you, as I have understood. With the
Paper I have here in my Hand, I will prosecute him to the utmost; it is under
his own Hand and Seal, and Witnesses to it: be pleased, Sir, to peruse it, and
see whether I have not Reason to prosecute this Ungrateful and Perjured Man,
and to force him to a performance of the Promise he has made me.

Don Alonzo was astonished at this Relation of Donna Olivia's, and, by what was
put into his Hands, found out the Disposition of Don Antonio, and concluded him
a fickle imprudent Person, who pursued his Enjoyments, without any thought of
the Consequences thereof, and thereupon he resolved there should be no farther
talk of any Marriage between him and his Daughter. Opening the Paper which
Donna Olivia had given him, he found in it these Words.

THis present Writing, written with my own Hind, and Sealed with my Seal,
Witnesses, that I, Don Antonio de Mendoza, an Inhabitant of Sevil, acknowledge
my self to be the Lawful Husband of Donna Olivia de Priola, an Inhabitant of
Toledo, and that I will perform the present Promise I make her of Marriage
whenever I shall be, by her, thereto required. Signed and Sealed in the
presence of Dilario and Flora, Servants to the said Donna Olivia.

Don Antonio de Mendoza.


Having read this promise, and knowing the Hand and Seal of Don Antonio, Don
Alonzo said to her, Madam, I am very much troubled, that Don Antonio (a Person
so well descended as he is) should be guilty of so unworthy an Action, and a
Demeanor so full of Treachery; for at the time when he gave you this Writing,
he was coming hither purposely to be Married to my Daughter. But the Account
you have given me of him is such, that I assure you, I will have no more to do
with him, since you have so much Reason to oppose it. Prosecute your own Right,
and leave him not till you have obtained your Desires, and be assured I shall
assist you to the utmost of my Power, since I find your Honor so highly
concerned in it. I have some Friends here, and those powerful, I will engage
them all to serve you, that you may find I am a Person, who prefers a just
Cause before all Self-Interest.

Donna Olivia gave him very humble thanks for so great a Favor, and the Tears
that fell from her at the close of her Discourse, heightened his Zeal and
Tenderness toward her. Don Alonzo took along with him the Writing which Donna
Olivia had shown him, that he might thereby induce Don Antonio to an
Acknowledgment of his Fault. With those Protestations he took leave of Donna
Olivia, promising to see her again within a short time, and to return the
promise of Marriage, reiterating the Desires he had to serve her. He thereupon
left her, giving Don Valerio the Liberty to come upon the Stage. As soon as he
had taken his seat, you have understood, (says Donna Olivia, to him) if so be
you have heard the Discourse between Don Alonzo and my self, what has passed
between me and Don Antonio. Upon which account, (as you have heard from her
Father) you find he is never like to be Husband to the fair Donna Catharina.
She sent me hither to acquaint you, that what has been done on her part in
order to the Marriage between her and Don Antonio was purely out of Compliance
with the Commands of her Father, and that she is glad of the Occasion she now
has to quit him, and reassume that Kindness and Affection she ever had for
you. What I say, you will find in Writing under her Hand, when you have perused
this Letter. Don Valerio having read it, was the most satisfied Man in the
World, to find his blasted hopes now beginning to spring again.

Donna Olivia perceiving it, to confirm his Satisfaction, continued her
Discourse to him thus: I know Signior Don Valerio, you will be astonished in
your self, how this Letter should fall into my Hands, it is my self only can
unriddle it. Being in Love, as you are, you know that that little Divinity is
the Author of many Disguises and Transformations, as you are taught by Ovid in
his Metamorphosis, and consequently you doubt not, but that I, Loving an
Unconstant Person, who had had such precious Pledges of my Affection, should
leave nothing unattempted to recover my Honor, and oblige him to the
Satisfaction of what he owes me. I am come to this Court, with a Design, being
what I am, to get into the Service of Donna Catharina, and have effected it.
For though you see me in this House, (which was taken upon my account) I live
in hers, waiting on her in the Quality of a Duenna, a part I have assumed, the
better to elude Don Antonio, and to do all lay in my Power to put him out of my
Mistress's Favor; and I have also brought that so far about, that I am
Confident there will never be any Marriage between them, and she is wholly
inclined to Favor you. Now consider with your self what you would have me to
say to your Mistress, for I am just going to put on my Widow's Habit, and I
must return presently, and am afraid she will think I have stayed too long. If
you will return her an answer, you have here all things requisite to do it. I
think it necessary you should, that Donna Catharina may see, I have punctually
obeyed her Commands. As to the secret of my Disguise, I pray keep it such, for
it concerns me, that it should not be discovered a while. I rely on your
Discretion, and, knowing you to be a Person of Honor and Worth, I presume you
will not discover it.

This Discourse very much surprised Don Valerio, who took Occasion to commend
her Courage and Generosity, and returned her his most humble thanks, for the
Favor she had done him, in entrusting him with the secret of her Love, and
prayed Heaven to give him Life to acknowledge and requite so great an
Obligation. He promised her not to discover any thing till she commanded him to
do it; and thereupon, seeing her in have to be gone, he writ a Letter in answer
to what he had received from his Mistress, full of Amorous Complements, and
Protestations of Fidelity to the last gasp. While he was Writing Donna
Catharina put on her Widow's Habit, and made all the have she could to Don
Alonzo's.

In the mean time Don Antonio, extremely resenting the Impostour put upon him,
acquainted his Cousin, Don Martinio with it, whereupon they went both together
to Don Alonzo's. He not being within, they asked for Donna Catharina, who came
out without any Ceremony to receive their Visit, that it might be the shorter;
for she had no great mind to see Don Antonio. The poor Gentleman endeavored to
vindicate himself, swearing a thousand Oaths, that he never heard of any Lady
in Sevil, of the name mentioned in the Letter, and that no doubt some envious
Person had put this trick upon him; and that if Don Alonzo should upon enquiry
find it to be true, he would be content to loose his Honor and Life, nay more,
the hopes of ever enjoying her.

The earnestness of his Discourse put Donna Catharina into some doubt, that
what she had heard was some Impostour advanced purposely to obstruct his
Pretentions, and referred it to her Father to make a full discovery thereof.
Her answer to them was, that she was not at her own disposal, that it was her
duty, to comply with that of her Father, and consequently, she could not quit
the Ill-impression she had received of Don Antonio, till she were better
informed of the truth; that her Father would come in ere long, and she could
take no resolution without his Orders, in a business of so great importance.

While they were engaged in this discourse, Don Alonzo comes in from the visit
he had made to Donna Olivia. Don Martinio made him a short relation of what had
happened, and renewed to him the just complaint which his Cousin had reason to
make of the Crime laid to his charge. Whereupon both desiring him to hold his
hand, at least till there were an Exact enquiry made into the business, he
desired them to sit down, and gave them this Answer.

Gentlemen, I went out in hopes to be informed by some Friends of Sevil, now
here, whether that which is imputed to Don Antonio were true, and I could not
meet with them; but if I had found them, it is possible they might know nothing
of the business, for Sevil is a great City, and some parts of it lie at such a
distance from others, that they may well be accounted different places. What I
found most certain is, that Don Antonio has made a promise of Marriage to a
Lady of Toledo, who entertained him at a Country House of here is, after he had
been Robbed by certain Thieves; and what is yet more to be considered, she
thought it not much to secure his affection by the forfeiture of her Honor. I
have it from the Lady her self, who sent for me, and showed me the promise
under his Hand, which since we all know, there can be no evasion.

He thereupon showed it both the Cousins, who were both at such a loss that
they knew not what to say, especially Don Antonio, who sufficiently betrayed
his guilt by his astonishment, but swore withal that he had not made that
promise under his own Name, but under a feigned. But Don Martinio knowing all
the Circumstance of the business, was most Liberal of his reproaches to his
Cousin, which raising a certain compassion in Don Alonzo, forced this Discourse
from him.

Signior Don Antonio, we find by many Experiences, that a young man, once
fallen in Love, will do any thing to obtain his desires; that Love should
overcome you, I wonder not at all; but what occasions my astonishment, is, that
you should have the confidence to Address your self to a Person of the Quality,
this Lady is of, and dishonor her, without ever considering, that, in time,
she might acquaint her Friends therewith, who would be sure to revenge the
affront; and what adds to this astonishment, is, that you durst do such an
Action when you were coming hither purposely in order to your matching with my
Daughter, for whom, if any credit may be given to your Letters, you pretended
to have a passionate affection. I see not how your Heart could be capable of
such a Competition of Passions, that you should pretend the greatest
inclinations imaginable for one, and treat of a Marriage with another; being a
Person of Honor, I doubt not but you will make it appear in you Actions, and
that is, that you stand to the Promise you made to the Lady Olivia, though it
were only out of this Confideration, that it argues a more Generous Nature to
do that willingly, which must otherwise unwillingly be done. The Lady is not so
destitute of Friends, as you perhaps imagine; she is now at Madrid, come
expressly to recover her debt, which no doubt she will; and her cause being so
just, it is not likely she will want Assistance. My Advice is, that you
endeavor to prevent the ill reports which the business must raise of you;
perform what you have promised, and let not your Love to my Daughter blind you
any further, for I am resolved to shut her up in a Cloister, for the remainder
of her Life, rather than she shall ever be your Wife.

With that he rose up, and, without any Complements, went into another Room.
Donna Catharina followed him, and the two Cousins, without so much as a word
exchanged, went home, where Don Martinio fell into bitter expostulations with
his Cousin, for his engaging himself in so unworthy an Action. Don Antonio had
nothing to reply, but that he was astonished how that promise came to be signed
with his own Name, having made it only out of a supposititious.

Leaving them in that Confusion, making several Reflections on the Adventure,
let us return to the feigned Waiting Woman, who was got back to Don Alonzo's,
and had delivered Don Valerio's Letter to Donna Catharina. She was infinitely
satisfied with it, as fearing he would not have been so easily retriv'd into
her Service. Donna Catharina acquainted her, how that Don Antonio and his
Cousin had been there; what had passed between them and her Father; and that he
had absolutely dismissed them, it being discovered, that Don Antonio had
committed another impertinence, and had made a promise of Marriage to a Lady of
Toledo, who was come express to Madrid, to obstruct his pretensions to her.
Donna Olivia pretended the greatest astonishment in the World, and burst forth
into imprecations against Don Antonio.

In the mean time there came a Message to Donna Catharina from a She-Cousin of
hers, ^nviting her to a Comedy which was to be ^epresented at her House, that
Night, where^o she sent Answer, that she would come; Donna Olivia having made
so successful a progress in her business, bethought her self of an ^nvention
that should bring it to an absolute Period, for she had the Management of all.
She told Donna Catharina, that if she pleased ^o wave her going to the Comedy
she might ^ave a meeting that Night with Don Valerio ^n a secure place, to wit
at her Father's House ^here she might do what she pleased her self; ^he Lady
had a great kindness for Don Vale^io, and was desirous to prevent the
reproaches he might make upon her former discard^ng of him, and so she accepted
the proffer made by her Woman. She immediately sent for Granatus, and gave him
a Letter for Don Valerio, whereby he was desired to come that Night at Eight to
Donna Olivia's House. He was sent with another to Don Antonio de Mendoza
acquainting him that Donna Catha^ina, notwithstanding the Indignation of her
Father, and what she her self had said, was resolved secretly to Marry him, and
desired to meet him that Night, at a house, whither the Bearer would bring him,
and that he should not fail to be there at Nine. The two Cavaliers kindly
received their Letters, especially Don Antonio, who being but a little before
dismissed, was recalled to join Hands with Donna Catharina, and imagined it
done by the intercession of the Waiting-Gentlewoman, to whom he thought himself
infinitely obliged, and the present he had made her well bestowed; the two
Gallants failed not to be there at the time appointed, and in the mean Donna
Catharina and her Woman took Coach, leaving Don Alonzo at home, ready to go to
Bed; they went to Donna Olivia's House, which seemed to be that of Granatus,
where they were received by Flora, Olivia's Maid, who went under the name of
her Stepmother; while Donna Catharina was expecting the Arrival of Don
Valerio, she sent Dilario with a Letter to Don Alonzo containing these words.

To Don Alonzo de Castiza.
SIR,
MY Lady Donna Catharina, instead of going to see the Comedy, whereto she had
been invited, is come to my Father's House, with a Resolution to be secretly
Married to Don Antonio, notwithstanding your prohibition to the contrary, I
conceived it my duty to give you notice thereof, it is your Work to take what
course you think fit to prevent it: for my part I have done what lay in me, and
I shall not need to fear any reproach from you, since I have sent you timely
Notice of her intentions.

Donna Artimiza.


Granatus was dispatched away with this Letter, and ordered not to deliver it
till half an hour after Nine, which he did. In the mean time Don Valerio failed
not to come, precisely at his time, and was directed to his Mistress, who gave
him such satisfaction as silenced all his Complaints. Olivia left them together
in a Room, where she locked them in; not long after came Don Antonio, according
to the time appointed him, and was received by Olivia, who disposed him into a
Room, without light, alleging it concerned him, that he were not seen; that he
should forbear making any Noise, and that it would not be long ere his Mistress
came to him, he promised to obey her in all things, and staid there so long as
that Olivia might shift her self into Cloths suitable to her quality, that
done, she went into the Room, and speaking very low, it was no hard matter for
her to deceive Don Antonio, and to make him believe he was very much in his
Mistress's Favor.

Leaving these young People thus matched, let us return to Don Alonzo, who
received the Letter from the Duenna just as he was getting into Bed; the Old
Gentleman was extremely surpised thereat, and going out of doors, attended by
Dilario, he went to the Commissary's House, which was hard by; the afflicted
man acquainted him what posture things were in; whereupon the Commissary taking
some of his People about him, they went to Dilario's house, where, after some
knocking, they were let in; they had luckily a Lanthorn with them, and it did
them good Service, for they found the House without any Light, they lighted a
Torch, and went into several Rooms, in one whereof finding Don Valerio and
Donna Catharina, the Commissary asked them, what they did there? Don Valerio
told him he was there with his Wife, which was confirmed by Donna Catharina.
Don Alonzo would have run him through; but the Commissary telling him she was
not with the Person he imagined, that that Gentleman was DonValerio de Merdea,
a Person of great Quality and well known about the Court, Don Alonzo could do
no less than approve of their Marriage, though 'twere only out of a
satisfaction, that she was not fallen into the hands of Don Antonio, whom he
hated extremely, for the strange Pranks he had played.

They went thence unto another Room, which they found locked, and thereupon
threatening to break open the Door. Don Antonio opened it within, and comes out
telling them that he was there with Donna Catharina his Wife, and that it was
with her Consent, he was come into that House to Marry her. Upon that discourse
Donna Olivia came out of the Room and said to him, you are deceived, sweet
Seignior Don Antonio, I am not the Woman you think me, but Donna Olivia de
Priolo, who expects from you the Reparation of her Honor; the recovery whereof
obliged me to enter into the Service of Donna Catharina, serving her in the
Quality of a Waiting Woman. Don Alonzo de Castiza looking on her a little more
attentively than he had done, knew her, as also did the fair Lady Donna
Catharina; both of them reflecting on the disguises she had run through to
retrive her Honor, very seriously commended her Courage and Contrivances, and
as much blamed Don Antonio, who finding himself Convinced, and Condemned of
all, ratified once more the promise he had made her. Don Valerio and his
Mistress were ensur'd one to the other, and the solemnity of their Marriage
ordered to be Eight days after; they proved both very happy in their Wives, of
whom they had many Children, who were the Comfort and Felicity of their
Parents; but particularly for Don Antonio, when he reflected on the strange
Adventures whereby Donna Olivia, engaged him to his Duty, he looked on all as
so many Extraordinary Demonstrations of her Affection, toward him, which
occasioned his to be Multiplied toward her, besides the kindness he had for
her upon the Account of her Ingenuity; for Wit in a Woman is a great inflamer
of Love, especially that Woman's Wit which is ever best at a dead lift.

THE Amorous Miser: A NOVEL.
AT Sevil in Spain, a Lady, being young, and having lately buried her Husband;
resolved to remove into another quarter of the City: and being sumptuous in
Cloths, and perfectly handsome, did not as many other Widows are wont to do,
who, as soon as their Husbands are marched off, dress themselves as fine as
Hands can make them, and deriving a little advantage from their Mourning seek
out opportunity to show themselves to the Gallants purely out of a Design to
get other Husbands. But ours, though young, had had so great Experience, that
she resolved to play a game and that no small one.

There was come into the Fleet from Peru, a Man Born amidst the Mountains of
Leon, who had begun his Fortune by the Relation of a Servant to a Merchant of
Sevil, and one who, upon his Master's Cost, and some little Trading into the
Indies was grown Rich, insomuch that in few Years, he was accounted one of the
ablest Merchants that traded to Peru. He makes another Voyage thither, being
advanced to a certain public Employment, and having thereby added much to his
Wealth, he was returned again to Sevil, in that years Fleet, where he sold the
Commodities he had brought over at double what they had cost him; so fortunate
was he in all his Ventures.

Mercator (so was this lucky Merchant called) was a Person of about fifty years
of Age; the most Covetous and wretchedst natured Fellow that ever was. He
grudged himself what he eat and drunk, though even below Moderation; nay he
many times fasted purposely to spare so much. He had no more Servants than he
needed; his whole Train consisted in a Factor, a Lacquey, a Moor-Slave, who
looked to his Mule, and a Maid to dress his pitiful Commons. He kept his Family
so ^ort in point of Victuals, that it was wondered any one would serve him; his
Miserly Disposi^ found the whole City Discourse; another would have been
ashamed of it, but he only laughed at it, applauding himself, and making it his
whole Business to heap up Wealth, whereof he had abundance.

Corrina (so was this Designess called) hearing this account of him, began to
consider, and weigh all the Circumstances, and after she had a little reflected
thereon, she concluded, that he might be made an excellent Cully, whom if she
could smite, as she expected, her Condition would be better than ever it had
been. Mercator lived without the City, in a little Tenement he had purchased of
one who owed him some Money, which he knew not well how to get in otherwise;
for he was naturally so perfect a Slave to his Profit, that he little minded
his Pleasures. So that he got that Tenement, with a neat House on it, very
cheap, and in Satisfaction for his dept; it stood near St. Bernard's Monastery,
in the midst of a pleasant Valley. He lived there to spare the Rent of a House
in the City; he had so fortified it, that no Thieves, either by Day or Night,
could make any breach into it; all the Doors were of extraordinary thickness,
the Windows had Bars and Grates, the Walls very high and very strong. He had
secured the place within with many Firearms, which he always kept Charged, and
many Halbards and Partisans which were disposed of near the Gate. He was forced
to take one Person more into his Retinue, to wit, a Fellow to order his Garden,
and to make the best Advantage he could of it, a married Man, who should carry
the Fruits and other things to the Market to make the best of them, so vigilant
was his Avarice. His Treasure was disposed into a secret place behind his Bed
where he lay himself, in strong Iron-Chests; and every Night before he went to
Bed, he, like an over-doing Constable, searched all the Rooms in the House.
Thus did this wretch'd Fellow live, though he had no Children to succeed him,
for he had never been married, nor intended to be, though very Advantageous
Matches were daily proffered him.

Corrina had laid her Design to bring in this Covetous Merchant into the Noose,
and to effect it, she communicated it to a Person who was excellent at such
things; this Man had played some pranks at Madrid, which had occasioned his
Removal thence to Cadiz, and his Achievements there, his departure thence to
Sevil, where he went lurking up and down, and spending some Money, which it
cost him more hazard than pains to get. He was one of the most Accomplished Men
in point of Thievery of his time, but very fearful of falling into the hands of
Justice, lest there might rise up in Judgment against him some of his former
Offenses; which were such as had preferred him to the Galleys. This Person
(whose Name was Vasquez,) Corrina took to assist her in the compassing her
Design. Having given him Instructions what he was to do, and told him, that
Mercator returned not to his House, till about Sunset, as he was wont to do,
they both passed by Mercator's Garden, he on a Mule, and she on a good Horse.
She had put off her Mourning, and put on another Dress, with a Hat and Feather,
as the Sevil Ladies are wont to go, when they are in the Country.

They passed by the Garden, just as the Gardener was opening the Door. Vasquez,
coming up to him, Friend, said he, here is a Lady would not willingly go into
the City to day. If you will afford her entertainment this Night, I will
satisfy you to your own Desires; besides that you will do us an extraordinary
Kindness, for you will thereby prevent a great Misfortune, which she cannot
otherwise avoid. The Gardener, who was afraid of his Masters Displeasure, told
him that he durst not be so bold, as to receive any Person into his House,
without his Knowledge, though he had not expressly forbid him the doing of any
such thing. But Vasquez, who knew the Virtue and Power of many, took a
considerable Sum out of his Pocket, and giving it to the Gardener, here,
Friend, (said he) take this in earnest of more. The Gardener's Wife longing to
know what Business they might have with her Husband, comes up to them, and
seeing the proffers were made him, undertook to lodge the Gentlewoman in her
own Room, making it appear to her Husband, that their Master should never come
to the Knowledge of it, in regard their Houses were at a good distance one from
the other, and that they should not be so unhappy, being certain, that that
Night he would not search the whole House, as many times a toy took him in the
Head to do.

In short the Wifes Arguments prevailed, so that the Gardener was content the
Gentlewoman should Lodge secretly that Night at his House, upon the receipt of
six Royals which Vasquez gave him as an earnest of a greater Sum promised him.
He thereupon took Corrina off the Horse, and brought her into the Garden, where
she took leave of Vasquez, who had already received the Orders whereof we shall
give an account hereafter.

Being come into the Gardener's Room, she took off what covered her Face, and
astonished the Gardener and his Wife at the sight of her Beauty, though she
seemed to be very Melancholy, as if some great Misfortune had happened to her,
to wit, that which she had ready to relate to Mercator, in Case she might come
to Discourse with him. The Sun was hardly set, but he came into the Garden: The
Negro entering a little before to have the Door opened, which he himself locked
on the inside, and carried the Key along with him. He chanced to be that Night
a little more weary than ordinary, which occasioned his going to Bed very
betimes, after he had eaten a piece of Bread, and some of his own
Garden-Fruits, and washed them down with a Glass of Spring Water. He only
visited that part of the House where he lodged himself, and came not down to
the Gardeners, which never escaped his privy-search, when he thought of. His
Family, who kept more Fasting-days in the Year than the Church her self had
appointed, Supped that Night, in Imitation of the Master very soberly.

Mercator gets up the next Morning betimes, and gives the Slave Money, to go to
the Market, while, he went about his Affairs in the City, with order to have
Dinner ready against his return. Corrina was at a loss how to compass her
Design, finding things fell not out according to her Expectation: But still
waiting the opportunity, she told her Entertainers that she was extremely
troubled at her Uncle's stay (so she called Vasquez) and that all her sadness
proceeded thence. The Gardener's Wife, who was a good hearty Woman, found her
all the Diversion she could.

Mercator comes home at Noon, with an Intention to Dine in his Garden, and
before he sat down, he would needs take a turn about it, to see if any thing
were wanting; and he observed that there wanted some pieces of Wood for the
more convenient watering of the several knots. As he was going to the Gardeners
to see if he had any fit for that purpose, the Wife perceiving him coming, very
hastily shuffled Corrina into a little back Room, where she was wont to lie:
But in regard it could not be done so suddenly, but that Mercator coming in
might hear the ruffling of the Silks, and see Corrina's shadow, he steps into
the Room where she was retired, and having found her, he led her out by the
Hand and bringing her out to the Light, he found her so Beautiful, that he was
astonished thereat. The Gardener's Wife wondered, that her Master, instead of
chiding her, as she expected, only asked her who the Lady was; she answered,
that the Night before, passing by their door with an Ancient Gentleman, who
seemed as sad as her self, they had very earnestly entreated she might be
lodged there but that Night, to avoid a great Misfortune, which would have
happened to them, if they had gone any further.

While the Gardener's Wife was giving Mercator this account, he very
attentively considered the strange Lady, who seemed to be extremely troubled in
mind, which added to the attractions of her Beauty. Mercator was so taken with
her, that discharging his unsociable and Covetous Humor, he told the Gardener's
Wife that she had done very well, in entertaining that Lady, though contrary to
his Orders, which in such a Case were not to be observed, where Compassion and
Charity plead for the relief of those that are in Trouble. This Lady, (said he)
deserves a better reception than she has sound in your poor Lodgings, I
heartily proffer her my House, if she will but honor it with her presence.
Corrina thanked him very civilly for his obliging proffers, and entreated him
to allow her the privacy of some other Lodging, for the little time she had to
stay there, in regard she expected an Uncle of hers to come and fetch her away
that Night.

Mercator, who began to be enflamed, was sorry to hear that her stay at his
House would be so short, but after a little pause, he told her, that though it
were but for an hour, she would infinitely oblige him, in the acceptance of
the proffer he made her with so much Affection. She, who expected that lue all
the while, told him, that, to make some return to so great Civilities, she was
ready to wait on him: with that she went to Mercator's Apartment, whither he
led her by the Hand, to the great satisfaction of the Gardener's Wife, who
extremely wondered to see her Master, contrary to his Custom, of a Civil and
Obliging Humor; as she passed through the Rooms, she took particular notice of
all things; for though Mercator, were Naturally a very covetous Person; yet, as
to the Furniture of his House, he was otherwise, he had very rich Tapstry,
Chairs suitable thereto, and Cabinets of Ivory, and Ebony; nay indeed many
things brought out of the Indies, which though they cost him not much there,
are here of very great price, he immediately commanded his Slave to prepare an
excellent Dinner, an Employment he undertook with great alacrity, as knowing he
might reap some advantage of that extraordinary Liberality of his Master.
Corrina dined with him, who treated her still with the best the Table afforded,
with importunate Excuses that there were no better for her.

As soon as they had dined, he conducted her into a Chamber, set forth with a
great number of curious Pictures, and also a sumptuous Bed of China-Work, where
he entreated her to repose her self on it, a Custom the Spaniards have in
Summer, as soon as they have dined, by reason of the Sultriness of the Country.
He entreated her also to give her disquiet some Remission, out of an Assurance;
that she should be as safe in his House as in any Sanctuary, and that she
should not want any thing which lay in his Power. She again returned him her
most affectionate thanks, and complying with his Desires, she staid alone in
the Room, which was the same where Mercator took his repose every day. He went
into another, where he laid himself down, much troubled and disquieted, as
being fallen deeply in Love with his fair Guest, and not knowing by what means
he might induce her to favor him in what he desired of her, which if he could
effect, he concluded himself the happiest Man in the World. Before he
acquainted her with his Design, he was Desirous to know the Cause, and what
might occasion her stopping at his Garden, and thereby find whether there were
any Obstruction that might oppose his Desires to serve her. To be satisfied in
this, it was requisite he staid till she awoke; but she slept not at all, for
she spent the time in considering, what answer she should make him, when he
came to question her.

Mercator thinking it now high time to speak to her, in order to the
Satisfaction of his Curiosity, goes into her Chamber, telling her it was a
close day, and that he was afraid she might over-sleep her self, and craving
her Pardon that he had taken the Boldness to give her that Caution. She thanked
him for the Tenderness he had for her Health, and assured him, that she had not
refreshed her self at all, the trouble she was in not permitting her to take
any rest. He begged of her that she would no longer smother the Cause of her
Disquiet, and renewed the proffers he had made to serve her to the utmost of
his Power. Having returned him her thanks, and thinking it now time to make
some Progress in her Design, she gave him this Relation of her Adventures.

Granada, one of the most Famous and Eminent Cities of Spain, is the place of
my Birth; my Parents (there is no Necessity I should Name them) are of the most
Ancient and most Noble Families of any in all the Mountains of old Casteel, and
the whole Issue of their Matrimony was only a Brother of mine and my self. My
Brother spent the Youthful part of his Age in Courting Ladies, and, among other
young Persons like himself, he played some mad pranks of Youth, which obliged
him, for fear of falling into the Hands of Justice, to absent himself from
Granada; and for my part, I made it my only Business to serve and humor those
who had brought me into the World. I spent whole days at my Needle, not taking
Example from my Companions, who only minded their Divertisements; nay, I was so
Ignorant what love meant, that I laughed at what ever related thereto, and
thought those, who spent their time in Courtships and entertaining those they
called their Gallants, little better than so many distracted Persons.

But love it seems would punish this contempt of mine, and you shall see how he
did it. My Father and Mother being one day gone to visit a Friend of theirs in
the Country, who had buried his Wife not long before, I heard in the Street the
clashing of Swords, as if some People had been fighting; and looked out at the
Window to see what might be the matter. I had never been guilty of such a
Curiosity before, and had it been Heaven's Pleasure I might have shunned it
then, I should not now be telling you my Misfortunes, which are such, that I
shall never think on them without Tears. I there saw, to my sorrow, three Men
with their Swords drawn, fighting against one, who defended himself with so
great Courage, that he not only made his party good along time against so many
Enemies, but also hurt two of them in the Head, he himself having received only
a slight Wound. These three Hectors finding themselves so worsted by one
Person, resolved to do their utmost to take away his Life; so that exasperated
by their Wounds, they pressed upon him so much, that he was forced to retreat
within our Gates where they gave him two several thrusts into the Breast, upon
which he fell, and was left for dead. Moved with Compassion to see so proper a
young Man so disadvantageously engaged, I came down to the Gate, calling my
Maids about me, to see what might be done for him. (Our House being in a
lone-Street) for those who were come upon the noise we made, were so few, and
those unarmed, that they were not able to part them. We locked the Doors and
brought him in, and a Surgeon was immediately sent for. His Wounds were so
great, that we thought fit to dispose him into a Bed, in a Ground-Room, where
my Brother was wont to lie.

The young Man hanked me very civilly for the Favor he received from me; but
alas! that good Office began with Compassion, but ended in Love. The
Surgeon viewed his Wounds, but could not presently give any certain Judgment
of them, though he whispered me in the Ear, that he thought they might cost him
his Life. That account of him struck me to the Heart, for having seen him sight
so gallantly, I must needs acknowledge, that I had even then conceived an
Inclination for him. But his kind Expression afterward, and his thanking me so
genteelly for the Obligations he said I had put upon him, raised it into a
perfect Love. My Father and Mother returned from their visit, and, ere they
were got to our House, were told by one of the Neighbors, a Person of some
Quality, what had happened in their Absence, and how that I had put a period to
a Quarrel, by entertaining the wounded Party into their House, out of
Compassion and a Fear that he might be killed; whereat they were well
satisfied, and commended the Charitable Office I had done in such an Extremity;
for they were Persons who gladly embraced any opportunity to Exercise their
Charity. They visited the wounded, encouraged him to take Heart, assuring him
he should want nothing, their House could afford, and acknowledged it well done
by me, that I had so rescued him; upon which I took Occasion to spend most of
my time in waiting on him; him, I say, who is the Cause of all the Troubles and
Afflictions which lie so heavy upon me. At the second dressing, the Surgeon
assured us that his Wounds were not Mortal; which caused much Joy in our House,
particularly to me, who became every day more and more passionately in Love
with him. As often as I could get out of my Father and Mother's sight, I went
to pass away the time in his Chamber, for which Kindness he made me
extraordinary Acknowledgements.

This young Cavalier was Born at Barcelona, and one of the most Eminent in that
City. His Business at Granada was to prosecute a Lawsuit, against a very
powerful Person, who finding but little Justice of his side, that the Cause was
of great Importance, and that notwithstanding the Favor he had in Court, the
Judges must pass Sentence against him, and would put a period to the Suit by a
shorter cut, and rid himself of his Adversary, by Employing three Men to
Murder him, who were his own menial Servants. A Month slipped away, ^ere
Calphorus (so was the wounded Person named) got out of his Bed having all that
time been attended with as much Care as might be. The second day after his
getting up, he had the opportunity to see me, for my Mother was gone abroad
upon a visit, wherein I accompanied her not, because I had a greater mind to be
alone with my young Gallant. He discovered himself to me so opportunely, and
gave me such sensible Assurances of his Affection that it raised a no less, in
me toward him, insomuch that there past mutual Promises of Fidelity between
us. I knew nothing all this time that my Father was upon a treaty of Marriage
between me and a Gentleman of Granada, who was infinitely Desirous to enter
into our Alliance, while I was very well satisfied, with the choice I had made
my self. Calphorus, coming to hear of the other's Pretensions to me, was not a
little troubled at it; but the only remedy was Patience, in regard he would
make no Discovery of his Estate, till his Law Suit were ended, which he hoped
would be in a short time, and I in the mean time kept my Father in play with
Persuasions, that he would not be overhasty in concluding my Marriage with the
Granadine.

Calphorus, being perfectly cured, and requiting the Kindness and Noble
Entertainment he had received at our House, with many considerable presents,
returned to his own quarters, to bring his Business to a final end. For my
part, my Troubles increased more and more upon me; for my Father, never giving
me any notice of it, as if I had been a Person not at all concerned, concluded
the Contract with the Granadine, and passed his Word he should have me; which
when I came to understand, I was so surpised, that I minded not what I did.
This new Servant of mine, who expected ere long to be my Master came to give me
a visit: But I soon satisfied him, that he had reckoned without his Hostess,
for whereas he had flattered himself into a foolish Imagination that he should
have found the kindest Reception in the World from me, he met with such a
Repulse, as he himself concluded, must rather proceed from the Aversion, then
any Indifference I had for him. In a word, being not one of Fortunes
Favorites, who promise themselves the Attainment of things impossible, he
easily discovered, that my Refusal was the effect of some other Cause, than the
Modesty, which a young Maid ought at least to pretend, upon such Occasions: and
knowing withal that the wounded Calphorus had lodged sometime in our House, he
presumed, that my disdain toward him was occasioned by the Love I had for the
other, and thence inferred, that having not been so happy as to prevent him in
the Acquisition of my Favor, he had, at best, but a hazardous after-game to
recover it. The Jealousy he conceived upon this Presumption, obliged him to
make trial of all the ways he could imagine, to be assured of it, so as that he
might not do any thing, that should cause him afterward to repent of.

I was in an extraordinary Confusion during these overtures; I acquainted
Calphorus with my Condition; he came to see me that very Night, and we agreed,
the next, to leave my Father's House, and to go to some of his Relations, where
we might be secretly Married. The expected hour being come (unhappy hour to me,
considering the Misfortunes I have run through since!) as my Dearest and I were
going out of the House and crossing into another Street, my Jealous Servant
(who spent the Nights to be assured of his Suspicion, which he now found to be
too true) presently knew us, and, attended by two Servants, he set upon
Calphorus, who never thought of any such surprise; so that ere he had the time
to draw his Sword, he received three Mortal Wounds, and fell down dead, without
uttering one Word. The little noise which the Murderers had made, occasioned
the Neighbors to come out with Lights, upon the appearance whereof they ran
away, fearing they might be discovered. By this time there was a great uproar
at my Father's, that I could not be found, while I was in a manner dead, to see
my Dearest lying Breathless at my Feet. Having recovered my self, I considered
it was to little Purpose for me to stay in the Street, after such an Accident,
so that gathering up my Cloths, I hasted away as fast as I could, to a Friend's
House of my Father's, an aged Person and very Poor, to whom I told what had
happened to me, and how much it concerned me not to stay any longer at Granada.
Whereupon taking a Horse, he set me on him, and brought me to the next Village,
where we took up another for him, and thence we are come hither, to avoid my
Father, who accompanied by Officers, makes a search after me, as I have
understood by the way. For that Reason I thought it not safe, that we should go
into Sevil as soon as we came hither, but that it was better I concealed my
self in some place near it. It was the Pleasure of Fortune to direct me to this
Habitation of yours, into which, upon extraordinary entreaties your Gardener
ventured to receive me for this last Night.

Thus Sir, have you the story of a wretched Maid, (if there were ever any such)
whose only Comfort now is in the good Entertainment you are pleased to afford
her. May Heaven requite your Charity, since there cannot be a greater than to
relieve such as are afflicted and persecuted to that extremity as I am.

The Conclusion of this dismal story, which Corrina had had the time to invent
and study so well, was a shower of Crocodile-Tears, which raised such a
Compassion in Mercator, that he could not forbear them himself. The cunning
Gypsy, who notwithstanding her Counterfeit-Tears, observed all the Actions of
Mercator, perceived that he gave Credit to her feigned story, and that love
began to enter at that breach which Compassion had made in his Heart. This
encouraged Corrina to prosecute her Impostour, being now in a manner Confident
to bring it to some effect. They continued a good while together, she weeping
as if she had done it for a Wager, and he endeavoring all that he could do to
Comfort her: but that Comfort came not up to the height of offering her the
Remedy she could have wished, for he had not yet overcome his Covetous Humor.

Having with great Attention considered the great Beauty of Corrina, her
Affliction, and strange Adventures, and that his Happiness was as it were
fallen into his Mouth, he inferred that Heaven, as a signal Addition to his
former Happiness, had directed her to his House. This was the first Love that
had ever moved Mercator's Heart, and, in all sorts of Persons that first
Passion ever acts violently. Is Mercator fallen in Love? He must needs then be
Liberal. Has he entertained Corrina into his House? That Kindness will be the
dearest to him that ever he expressed. O Love! O insinuating Passion, who do
bewitch the World, who do ruin and beset Men! what Metamorphoses in them do
thou not Operate? What Dispositions do thou not change? What Resolutions do
thou not dispense with? What Felicities do thou not disturb? And what Hearts
is it not in thy power to soften? That of this insatiable Miser, which had cast
off all sense of Humanity toward his nearest Relations, Love has changed; so
that he has transformed a Covetous and Sordid Person into a Liberal and
Magnificent. He is extremely taken with Corrina; he is passionately in Love
with her; she will ere long be Mistress of his Heart and Wealth. She said many
things in her Relation, which might have betrayed her, had not the Affection,
wherewith Mercator hearkened to her, closed both his Eyes and Ears: Nay, he was
so prepossessed with his Passion that he would have believed many other things
from her, though they had been more improbable than they were.

The effect of this sad Narration of Corrina, was, that Mercator proffered her
all the Favor and Assistance she could expect from him, his Estate, Life,
Heart and Soul, giving her the Title of Absolute Mistress of all he was
possessed of, further entreating her, of all Love to give over thinking of her
Misfortunes, and assure her self that she was in a House where she might
command, and that whatever she desired, her orders should be obeyed, as far as
it lay in his Power; Corrina very kindly thanked him for so many generous
proffers, concluding her Complement with a fresh shower of Tears, a kind of
Tempest she could raise, whenever she either pleased, or had occasion.

With this Artifice, she became Mistress of Mercator, and all he had, so as
that she might dispose of him and it, as she pleased; her Beauty had given him
a kind of Itch, and he was mighty desirous to try whether she would be as
willing to Cure him of it; but he knew not well how to acquaint her with his
indisposition; he resolved at last, in case he could do no good upon her by his
submissions and presents, to use the last Remedy, which was to Marry her. This
is a bait that many times takes the shiest of that deluded Sex; but when they
are so taken, he that does it is commonly snapp'd himself; for Corrina had no
other design than to examine the Chests of the greedy Merchant, and that she
would not be any way engaged till she were secure of her prize; for she had
heard that many of her calling had been shown slippery Tricks, which made her
extremely Distrustful.

Mercator staid all that day in his Garden, and neglected his business in the
City; but the next Morning betimes, leaving his guest asleep, he takes his
Mule, and goes about his Ordinary occasions, having charged the Gardener's
Wife, to get a good Breakfast for the Lady, as soon as she were awake, and to
have a care of the House; he locked the Chamber Door where his Money was, and
as he went out, charged the Gardener not to suffer any to come into his Garden,
but the Old man who had brought Artemiza thither, for that was the name the
dissembling Corrina went by.

That done he went about his Business, attended by the little Negro, whom he
gave Money to Buy Provisions for a good Dinner. Corrina got up and the
Gardeners Wife punctually obeyed the Orders she had received from her Master,
treating her the best she could, out of this respect, that all the Domestics
made their advantage of those magnificences. Corrina comes down into the Garden
where she took occasion to commend the Walks, and contrivances of it; for the
Gardener kept it in very good order, and well supplied with Herbs, Fruits, and
Flowers; finding the Sun beginning to grow hot, she went into the House, where
casually meeting with a Lute, on which Mercator's Factor was wont to play, she
set it in Tune, and made her entertainment, till such time as Mercator returned
from the City, who hearing her at it, was not a little glad to find that
perfection in her more than he knew before; perceiving that Mercator hearkened
to her Music, she joined her Voice to the Instrument, to breed one Maggot more
in his Brain than he had already; and so Sung these following Stanza's.

While on those lovely looks I gaze,
To see a Wretch pursuing;
In Raptures of a blessed amaze,
And pleasing Happy ruin.
It Is not for pity that I move,
His Fate is too aspering;
Whose Heart, broke with a Load of Love,
Dies, Wishing and Admiring.
But if this Murder you would forego,
Your Slave from Death removing;
Let me your Art of Charming know,
Or learn you mine of Loving.
But whether Life or Death betide,
In Love, it is equal Measure;
The Victor Lives with empty Pride,
The Vanquished dye with Pleasure.
She Sung so excellently, that Mercator was ravished at the Melody, and
acknowledged that it was not a voice of a Mortal Creature, but an Angel come
down from Heaven; he continued his attention a while, imagining she would have
begun another Song; but perceiving she laid by the Lute, he comes into the
Room, and, transported with joy, how has this poor Habitation been felicify'd,
(said he to her) by your retirement into it, most adorable Artemiza? What
happiness did the Hour of your Arrival here, bring me, who never had known any
before? What Honor have I received in beholding your transcendent Beauty, and
to obscure in you from time to time, a thousand unknown excellencies; which are
not discovered at the first sight? This house may, no doubt, enter into
Competition with Heaven it self, since such an Angel Honors it with her divine
presence; what I say, Madam, is but little, in Comparison of the passion I have
for your worth, which were it to be ^ommended proportionably to the
appre^ension I have of it, I think the most Elo^uent Persons that ever were,
would be at (...) loss for expressions suitable to so adorable a ^ubject.

You press too hard upon me, Dear Sir, (re^lies the Counterfeit Artemiza,
seeming to ^lush at those excessive praises) I am not such (...) stranger to my
self, but that I know it ar^ues excess in the highest degree to bestow ^uch
extraordinary Commendations, on a ^erson that deserves so little; had I
mistrust^d your being within hearing, I would have ^ut off my diversion to
another time, since ^tis not unlikely my voice may seem harsh to you, compared
to the excellent ones of this City, which you often hear, unless it be, that
generous Natures have an inclination to favor Persons of mean parts, by
flattering them by their praises, into an Imagination, that their Edowments are
greater than indeed they are. No more Complements, I beseech you, (replies
Mercator, raised up to the highest pitch of ^esotted Love,) my words come short
of my Faith, and I am to assure you withal, Madam, that though I have heard
excellent voices in Sevil, (for I must confess there are some such) yet yours
is infinitely beyond any of them. Your most humble Servant, Sir, (says Corrina)
your Commendations, are infinitely beyond my deserts, and the Honor you do me
can do no less then raise in me a hearty wish that my poor abilities might find
you some further diversion with this Instrument, since you are pleased to
acknowledge your self so much satisfied therewith; but my troubles are so great
and pressing, that in what I did, I mended only my own. I must see them at an
end, ere you leave this House, (says Mercator to her) and therefore let me
entreat you, if you cannot conclude an absolute peace with your afflictions, at
least Condescend to a short cessation of Arms.

These reiterations of your Favors must needs extremely oblige me, (replies
Corrina) and consequently force me to a grateful compliance with your Commands,
as far as lies in my Power, but I cannot promise it you so fully as I wish,
finding the Person who brought me hither, has forgotten he did it, otherwise
he would have found some means to have given me a visit once in three days; let
not that create you any trouble, (replies the Amorous Miser) but rather imagine
there may be some Cause for his neglect. I have some apprehensions, (said she)
that he may be returned to Granada, out of a fear, that, being missed there, he
might be questioned as a Complice of my Escape; and this would prove the
greatest of my misfortunes, for if he be gone, he has carried all I had along
with him. Never fear it, (says Mercator) for he must have more Compassion than
to forsake you in so great an extremity; but though he and all else fail you,
assure your self, I shall not, whereof I cannot give you a greater assurance,
than you may derive from this sincere protestation, of my being so passionately
your Servant, that I imagine not my self to be the same Person I was before I
saw you; this transformation is wholly to be attributed to your Divinity, and
thence you may infer the influence you have over me.

Having so said, Mercator made an absolute discovery of his Love; the cunning
Gypsy pretending she understood not his meaning, returned civil answers to the
proffers he made her, acknowledging her self extremely obliged to him for his
kindness, and that she doubted not of the performance of what he was pleased,
out of his own good Nature to promise. By this time Dinner was set on the
Table; they both sat down, and the entertainment was very noble, suitable to
the Love of the Founder; for where that little Deity comes once to reign, the
first Act he makes, is for the banishment of all baseness and avarice.

Corrina and Vasquez had agreed together, that he should come to her, when he
were sure the Old Merchant was abroad, and that he should disguise himself like
a Beggar, that he might not be known, nor any suspicion be conceived of him;
she had studied several ways to chouse the Miser of some part of his Treasure,
but could not fix on any one she thought might prove effectual, the Chamber
where it was locked being extremely fortified; she had continued there 3 days
ere she had either seen or heard from Vasquez, and during the time, she
expressed so great a discontent, as put Mercator to much trouble, in regard it
kept him from making those free discoveries of his Love, which he would
otherwise have done; in the mean time Corrina, who watched all occasions,
cunningly discovered the place where the old Man hid the Keys of his
Iron-Chests.

Mercator went, according to his Custom, into the City, which being observed by
Vasquez, he comes to his House in Beggars weeds, as they had agreed together,
with two Crutches; being got under the Window, at which Corrina was looking
out, he Begged an Alms of her; she threw him down something, and asked him
whence he came, whereto Vasquez answering that he was of Granada, she seemed to
be extremely glad, and thereupon turning to the Gardeners Wife, let us go down
a little into the Garden, (said she to her) this poor fellow is come out of my
Country, I would fain have some discourse with him, to know what News he has
brought thence; the poor Woman suspecting nothing, made no difficulty to let
him into the Garden. Corrina asked him how long it was since he had left
Granada, whereto he answering about nine or ten days, she continued her
questions so long, that the Gardener's Wife weary of their discourse, and
having something else to do, left them. Being rid of her, they considered what
was to be put in execution the Night following, and agreed upon the course they
were to take, to possess themselves of Mercator's Treasure.

That done, Vasquez departed, and Corrina went up to her Chamber, telling the
Gardener's Wife, she had understood so much from that poor Fellow, concerning
her Affairs, that it would not be long ere she returned into her Country. The
Gardener's Wife, and Maid were little pleased to hear that News, as fearing
their Master would, upon her departure, reassume his niggardly Humor, and keep
as miserable a House as he had done before, nay perhaps put himself and all the
Servants to a greater penance in their Diet, to get up what had been
squandered away, during her abode there.

Mercator being come home found Corrina that Night more cheerful than at any
time before; which gave him the Confidence to acquaint her more freely with his
Love then he had done, and to assure her of the disquiet he was in upon her
Account. Corrina seemed not to take it amiss, nay by a greater Familiarity than
she had expressed toward him before, she raised in him some hopes of seeing
his desires satisfied. Whence the Old Dotard began to presume, that the Fort
would in a short time be taken, upon reasonable terms; upon this presumption,
he bestowed on her a Ring, which he had purposely bought for her, wherein was a
Diamond worth about an Hundred Crowns, set about with little Rubies; the Lady
gave him many thanks for so noble a present, and in requital promised him a
Lesson on the Lute, to which she Sung some new Aires, though she quarreled at
the dullness of the Instrument. Mercator promised her a better the next day;
they parted for that time, but with differrent thoughts, Mercator desirous to
obtain those Favors he expected from Corrina, and to oblige her thereto by
presents, which overcome the greatest difficulties; and Corrina contriving how
to compass the Robbery she intended.

The next day, Vasquez (a Person of great experience in such designs) got some
others of the same profession to carry on the Work; and having observed
Mercator going into his House, they staid till he were gone to Bed, which was
somewhat late; for Corrina, who held a Correspondence with them, had purposely
kept him up. About midnight, Vasquez and his Comrades brought a thing that had
the Figure of a Man, stuffed with Straw, having about him a Cloak, which cast
over his Shoulder, covered his Face, and pitched over against the principal
Window toward the Garden, which was that part of the House where Mercator
Lodged, and left it there fastened to a S^ake they had thrust into the Ground.
The Night was somewhat dark, and so more proper for their Design. Having placed
that Figure, as I told you, they knocked at the Door so loud that it might have
been heard from one end of the Garden to the other. Mercator awakened thereby
leaps out of (...) Bed, it being so strange to him to hear such knocking at his
Garden Door, at such an unseasonable time, as being a thing had never happened
to him before; he called up his Servant and bid him see who knocked at the
Door; the Servant went out between sleeping and waking to see what the matter
was, calling as loud as he could, who knocks there? but no Body answering, and
he not minding the Figure that stood in the Garden, told his Master that there
was not any body.

Mercator upon that got into Bed again and composed himself to rest, but it was
soon Interrupted, for Vasquez knocked more violently then he had done before,
which astonished him the more, and obliged him to send down his Man a second
time, to see what the matter was. Bringing his Master the same Account he had
done before, he got up himself, puts his Cloak about him, and calls at the
Window, Who knocks at my Door thus unseasonably? Where to no answer being made,
he grew the more enraged, but looking a little more earnestly about the House
than his man had done, he perceived the Figure planted before his Windows.
Mercator was extremely afraid, at the sight of a Person, who, as he thought,
knocked at his door, yet made him no answer, and assuming more, Courage than he
was naturally Master of, he said to him very loud: It Is basely done of you,
Sir, to abuse me thus, you shall find I am not a person to suffer it; pray keep
on your way, and disturb not my rest any more if you think not you are
invulnerable, and that a brace of good Bullets will make no impression in your
enchanted Skin.

Having made that bravado, he shut to the Window and went to Bed; but he was
hardly got warm in it, ere they began to knock more violently than they had
done before; which obliged him to take a Fire-Lock, which he always kept ready
charged for the security of his Money. Opening the Window, he found him still
in the same posture, who would not have stirred out of it, had he not been
forced out of it by some other means. What obstinacy of Impudence is it in you
(said he to him, very much incensed) to Authorize a Mischief, you are nothing
the better for, in thus disturbing my Rest? It Is impardonable, and deserves an
Exemplary Chastisement; be gone immediately from my Door, or I shall send you
going the next way. Whereupon, cocking the Fire-Lock, and aiming at him, and
the other never stirring, as it were out of a Presumption, that he believing he
had not any Firearms, whereby he might make good his Threats, he gave him
notice the third time, that he would not oblige him to offer a Violence which
he was very unwilling to do. At last perceiving he minded not any thing, he
said, but as it were defied him, he resolved to give Fire, not only to fright
him, but if he could, to hurt him. He discharged off his Piece and shot the
Figure, which fell to the Ground; upon which Vasquez, who was not far off,
cries out with a doleful tone, O God I am killed, and immediately he and his
Comrades made a great noise at the sight of a Man so unfortunately Murdered.

Mercator was extremely troubled at what he had done, it being observed, that
Covetous Persons are for the most part Cowardly, and very much fear whatever
may Occasion their Losses. He shut the Window, and in a great fright awaking
Corrina (who had greater things to mind than Sleeping) told her what he had
done. She seemed to be extremely troubled at it, and much blamed him, that he
had executed so cruel a Resolution. For since he knew himself to be safe enough
in his own House, he might have suffered them to knock at his Door, till they
had been weary; that he had better have endured that Noise, and lost a little
of his Rest, than be in the Trouble he was in, to be the Occasion of a Man's
Death. She added several other Reasons, which so confounded poor Mercator, that
he knew not what to do. She advised him for his safety, to go immediately and
take Refuge in the Monastery of St. Bernard, it being certain, that if the Dead
Person were found there the next Morning, he would be carried to Prison, as
being Murdered so near his House.

Mercator was so perplexed, that he wished he had never been born; and it is to
be imagined, that if Corrina had not been very highly concerned to Dissemble
upon this Occasion, she would have dyed with laughing. He raised up all his
People, and told them what had happened, and all blamed him, for his being so
forward to commit such an Action, which made the poor old Dotard almost mad. He
imagined himself already apprehended, his Money carried away, and but a small
matter between him and Hanging, at least if he were obliged by Tortures to
Acknowledge his Crime, never considering that it was pardonable for one Man to
kill another in his own Defense. At last he resolved to go to Saint Bernard's
Monastery; but knew not how to dispose of his Money. He thought it no Prudence
to leave it at the Discretion of his Servants; to carry it to a Friend's House
(in case he had any, for Persons of his Humor have very few) he had not time.
In this Distraction he desired Corrina to advise him; she seeming very much
troubled, and no less fearful than he, pretended she could not give him any;
but after a little pause she gave him that Advice, which she had prepared long
before, and he followed it. She asked him what Money he might have in the
House? He ingeniously confessed that he had about four thousand Crowns in Gold,
and somewhat better than half the said Sum in Silver.

I tell you what I would do, were I in your Case, (says the cunning Gypsy)
(since it cannot be carried to a Friend's House without being seen) I would
bury it in the Garden, in some place, where you may afterward find it, by some
mark you shall set to that purpose. This you must do your self, so as that your
very Servants may not know any thing of it, lest they be tempted to prove false
to you; for the times are such now, that a Man must have a Care whom he trusts.
I would assist you herein, and keep your Counsel, were it not that I am afraid,
when the search comes to be made, and I be left here, I shall be the first
taken; and I would be loath to run my self into that hazard, having but just
escaped those I have acquainted you with. In the midst of his Affliction,
Mercator was troubled to perceive by his Guest's Discourse, the Disturbance she
was in upon his Account; and what struck him most to the Heart, was, that he
saw himself upon the point of losing her. This Consideration forced from him
not only Tears, but also bitter Exclamations, against the Malicious Crossness
of his Fortune. Corrina desired him to be of good Courage, persuading him to do
as she advised him, and hope the best. So that having commanded all his
Servants to go to their several Chambers, and not to stir thence, he and
Corrina, whom only he durst trust, went to the place where the Money was. It
lay in a huge Chest, covered all over with Iron-Bars, and the Keys were so
extraordinary, that it was impossible to Counterfeit them, or to get a piece
thence by any other wile than what was invented by our subtle Ferret.

They first took out all the Silver, and then put the Gold into a little Box,
and, having brought all into the Garden, they made two holes, at some distance
one from the other, in one whereof they put the Silver, and in the other the
Gold, setting a mark that they might find the place again. Mercator took along
with him two hundred Crowns in Gold, and gave Corrina fifty, to shift for her
self, till the Business were over.

That done, they went up into the House, whence they might see several Persons
walking with a Light; 'twas Vasquez and his Comrades, who represented the
Magistrate, which Corrina showing him, advised him to make all the have he
could to Saint Bernard's. To do that, they got over the Garden-Wall, as being
afraid to open the Door, for they perceived the Actors of this Comedy kept a
Watch there, with such Authority, as if they had been really the Officers of
Justice. All Mercator's Family followed him over the Wall, fearing they might
come into Trouble for their Master's Fault. Mercator and his Mistress lurked
somewhere there abouts, till it was day, that they might have the Church-Door
open, to get into the Monastery. Vasquez was hard by, to see what became of
Mercator, and his People. Finding he had left his House, and got into the
Monastery with Corrina, he went about an hour after Sunrising to Saint
Bernard's in the Habit of a Secular Priest, that he might the better speak to
Corrina. She told him how things stood, and how they had buried the Money in
the Garden, and that it was all in Silver, intending to reserve all the Gold
for her self.

About Midnight, Vasquez and one of his Comrades went along with Corrina,
disguized in Man's Cloths to the Garden. They helped her over first, to go and
see whether there might be any Body in the House, but all were vanished as if
the House had been visited. She thereupon called Vasquez and his Companions,
and, having taken up the Money, they carried it away, and took up their
Quarters at one of the farthest Inns of the Suburbs. Having been merry a while,
and drunk their own Healths, and to the good Success of their future Designs,
they went all to Bed, the two Men together, and Corrina by her self. As soon as
she found they were asleep, she puts on the same Habit, and returns to the
Garden. Where, being come, she took up the little Box of Gold, and, without any
disaster, got safe to the Inn before her Companions awaked.

The next day, having divided the Silver, whereof she and Vasquez had the best
part, and sowed up the Gold in her Cloths, she left Sevil, taking Vasquez along
with her, who, finding what Advantages he might make of her Company, resolved
to run Fortunes with her. They took their way toward Madrid, to which place
they will not be long a going, and now let us see what is become of Mercator,
whom we lest in Saint Bernard's Monastery.

Having continued there four days after Corrina's departure from him, he knew
not what to think of her that she came not again, as she had promised. He
addressed himself to one of the Monks, who had great Acquaintances in the City,
and entreated him to inquire, what Proceedings there might be against him, upon
the Murder he had committed. The Religious Man promised him an account of it;
but having enquired at those places where he thought he might most probably
hear, but no body could give him any Satisfaction. He thereupon told Mercator,
that he might safely go abroad, and needed not to fear any thing. He went out
one Night to a Friends of his, whom he acquainted with all that had past, as
also the great perplexity he was in, desiring him to make a more particular
enquiry into the Business, than he thought the Religious Man had done. He did
so, and gave him the same Account as the other. Yet would not that satisfy
him, but he must Desire his Friend to go to his House, whereof he gave him the
Mistriss-Key. At his Request he went, and found it without any Body in it, and
his Mule being Dead for want of Meat, and Attendance. His Friend returned to
him with this News, and advised him to come out of the Monastery, and go home,
and thence about the City, as he was wont to do.

The Death of his Mule troubled him not much, so glad was he to find himself
once more at Liberty: The only thing gave him any Disquiet, was, that his
Artemiza (under which Name Corrina went) came not to see him. But he imagined
the Occasion of it might be, that being a young Maid, she had sheltered her
self somewhere, to keep out of the hands of Justice, or that perhaps she might
have been met with by her Father, who, as she had told him, sought after her.
He went to his House, whither, soon after, came the Gardener and his Wife, and
his other Servants. He goes into the Garden, and, notwithstanding all the Fear
and Distraction he had been in, remembered the place where he had hid his Money,
and was not a little glad to find the Mark where he had set it; so that before
he went to Bed, he resolved to secure his Treasure in its former Garrison. As
soon as it was dark, he takes the Gardener with him, and a Lanthorn and Candle,
and goes first to the place, where the Silver was, and bids him digg. He did
so, but there was nothing to be found, whereat, Mercator was extremely
surprised. He went thence to the place where they had laid the Gold, and there
they found as little, only Corrina knew what was become of all. He walked
several turns about the Garden, with much Vexation, imagining the marks might
be misplaced; but what in looking after the marks, and what in digging, the
Night slipped away, so that at last dispairing to find any thing that Night, he
behaved himself like a Person distracted. The Gardener knew not what he looked
for, nor for what Reason he had brought him thither. The poor Man resolved to
have a little Patience till the next Morning, being still in some hopes to find
what he had hidden.

He went to Bed, or rather to spend the Night in insufferrable Torments; but as
soon as it began to dawn, he got up, and having called up the Gardener, they
returned to the work they had been at the Night before. Having dug again at
those places, where he was Confident he had laid the Money, all they could find
was, that there had been two holes made there before, and that Money or
something else had been hidden there, but all was removed. This Assurance made
him run stark mad, throwing himself on the Ground, running his Head against the
Wall, and doing such things as raised a Compassion in his Servants, who thence
concluded that he had lost his Money, and suspected the feigned Artemiza, to
have robbed him, by the Orders he gave them to search after her all over the
City. But she was far enough out of his reach, and had so well secured his
Money, that it was not likely it would come into his Chests any more. He kept
his Bed a good while, out of a pure Madness, that he had so soon lost, what had
cost him many Years Trouble, and Pains to get together. The Robbery was soon
divulged all over the City; some, who knew not his Humor, pitied his
Misfortune, but such as had Experience of his insatiable Avarice, were not a
little pleased to find him so justly punished.

THE Pretended Alchymist: A NOVEL.
AS soon as Corrina had done her Work at Mercator's, and had made a broken
Merchant of one, who was accounted the Wealthiest about Sevil, she thought it
not Prudence to make any long stay, for fear of falling into the Hands of
Justice, whose Officer's would be abroad, upon the Solicitations of the Party
robbed. She was gone far enough out of the way, ere he was sensible of his
loss; for the next Night after they had taken away the Money, she and Vasquez
hired two Mules, upon which they came to Carmona, which lies about half a days
Journey from Sevil. They had taken up two places in the Madrid-Coach, which was
to pass through that City, and take them up as it went. They alighted, at
Carmona, at one of the best Inns, where Corrina, keeping out of sight, was
resolved to expect the Coach, considering with her self, what she might come to
in time, seeing, she was now already Mistress of four thousand Crowns in Gold,
in good double Pistols and Quadruples, which was all that penurious Merchant
had gotten together, during his whole Life, with much pains taking, and many a
hazardous Venture into the most remote Climates. And herein, you may behold,
the exemplary punishment, which many times happens to those Miserable Wretches,
who become the Slaves of their own Wealth. And what infinitely adds to their
Misfortune, is, that People are more apt to congratulate than bemoan it: For
how can they expect that others should entertain any Kindness for them, when
they themselves have not any but for what they lay up in their Chests?

The Coach which our Fortunate Adventurers expected to carry them to Madrid,
came at its usual time to Carmona. There were in it already six Persons, a
Gentleman, and his Lady, a Priest, two University-Scholars, and a Servant
belonging to the Priest, a young Lad about fifteen Years of Age. They all knew,
that there were two Persons to be taken in at Carmona, who had paid some what
extraordinary for the best Places: They accordingly Resigned them, as soon as
they perceived their coming toward the Coach: But Vasquez, who was a very
Civil, and Obliging Person, would needs recommend his interest in the place to
the Gentleman's Lady, whom he seated on the lift side of Corrina, and sat
himself in the forepart of the Coach with her Husband.

All being placed to their Content, they left Carmona on the Monday Morning, it
being in September, when most Fruits are ripe. All thought it a great
happiness, that they had met so good Company; but Corrina, and Vasquez had
another secret satisfaction, arising from the thought of the good Prize that
had brought them into that good Company. The Gentleman was a Person of
Excellent Discourse, the Priest, of a very Sociable, and Conversative Humor,
and the two Young Scholars made it appear, that they had not misspent their time
at the University, every one being desirous to make the best discovery he could
of his Abilities. The Priest took occasion to inform them that he was going to
Court, to get a Privilege, to put two little Pieces of his into the Press,
being such as (some Friends of his had assured him) he should oblige the World
in the Publication of them. The Gentleman, who sat next him, was a Person
acquainted with Letters, and expressed a great Curiosity to know what they
might treat of. Doctor Berilliere (so was the Priest called) told him they were
Books of Discourses, and Divertisements; representing to him, that things of
that kind, were kindly received at Court; that one of them contained several
Novels, and the other a Collection of Poems Written by him, during his
Residence at Salamanca. He told them withal, that, if they thought it not
tedious, he would entertain them with somewhat out of the former, whenever they
should be at leisure to give him Attention.

Corrina, who was a great Lover, and Reader of such Treatises, entreated the
Doctor, if it were no trouble to him, to read one of his Novels, promising her
self, from the assurance she had of his Excellent Parts, that the Style, and
Conceptions would be answerable to the Worthiness of the Author. I have
endeavored all I could, Madam, (says the Doctor to her) to conform my self to
the Style now used at Court; my Prose is free from Affectation, and
consequently, will not weary the Reader, nor are the Conceits so flat as to
produce the same Effect. I make it my business to give my Writings a little
Life, and Smartness, which may raise in the Reader an Earnestness to know the
Period of the Adventures. I Write as I speak, because I see Men love those
things that are Natural, better than those which smell of too much Study, and
Affectation; and take it from me as a thing very certain, that it requires a
certain measure of Confidence for any Man to Write, as the Times go now; which
proceeds hence, That so many Excellent Wits busy themselves in Writing, and
Publish things as Admirable as Ingenious, and not only Men, who profess
Letters, but also some Women. The Doctor having ended this Discourse, he took
out his Book of Novels, and the Company having Composed themselves to Silence,
and Attention, he entertained them with that which follows.

There was an Ancient Gentleman, who had lost one of his Eyes; and was Married
to a Wife far younger than himself: His Business lay much abroad, which was the
occasion that he could not see his Wife so often as he would. She in his
Absence did so much forget her Honor, and her Conscience, that she fell in
Love with a young Gentleman: In Process of time, which brings all things to
Maturity, and Perfection, the Report was so hot, and so current, that her
Husband was Advertised of it, who could not be induced to believe it, by reason
of the great Affection she always expressed toward him. Nevertheless, one day
he determined with himself to make Experience of it, and, if he could, to
revenge himself upon that Person who had thus dishonored him.

To accomplish his Design, he pretended Business to a certain place, not far
from home, for three or four days. He was no sooner departed, but his Wife sent
to her Friend to acquaint him with it, whereupon he immediately came to pay
those Assignations of Love which she expected. He had not been with her above
half an Hour, but, behold! her Husband was returned, and knocked aloud at the
Gate. She who knew him, told her Gallant of it, who was so amazed, and put into
such a Fright, that he wished himself safe at home, and Imprecated both her,
and her Love, who had brought him into so much danger; but she assured him,
that he need not perplex himself, for she would contrive (...) means to convey
him safe forth without being discovered, and desired him to put on his Cloths
with what speed he could, Dur^g this Interval, her Husband continued knocking
at the Gate, and called upon his Wife as loud as he could, but she seemed not
to take notice that it was he, but spoke aloud to a Servant that lay above
Stairs, Why don't you Rise, and Answer that rude Person, whoever it is, which
makes such a Noise at the Gate? Is this a seasonable Hour of the Night for any
one to come into a Civil House? If my Husband were at Home, I Am sure you du^st
not do so.

The Husband hearing the Voice of his Wife, called to her as loud as he could,
Wife open the Door, will you have me stay here until Morning? When she
perceived her Gallant dressed, and ready to go, she opened the Door, and ran to
Embrace her Husband, saying to him, Dear Husband, How glad am I of your coming?
For I was in a Curious Dream, and was so well pleased, better than ever I was
in my Life before: For methought, you had recovered the Sight of your other
Eye; whereupon, Kissing of him, she clapped her Hand upon the Speculative Eye,
and asked him whether he did not see much better than he used to do? In the
mean time, whilst she had blinded him, her Friend slipped out of Doors, of which
her Husband immediately mistrusted, and told her, By Heavens, Wife, i will never
Watch you any more; for thinking to Catch you, I have had the finest Trick put
upon me by you, that I think ever was invented: I see it is not in the power of
any Man to put any Stop to a Woman's Proceedings, unless he should Kill her, or
Burn her; for a Lewd Woman nothing can Refine, or Purge her, but Fire:
Therefore, since the good Entertainment, I have given you, cannot conduce to
reclaim you, I shall henceforth study for some Chastisement, whereby you may be
better Disciplined. This said, he departed from her into another Room, leaving
her perplexed, and Disconsolate enough, who by the means of her Friends, and
Kindred, and by her Tears, and Excuses, was afterward reconciled to him.

This Pleasant Novel entertained the Company till they came to their Inn that
Night. Every one took occasion to commend Doctor Berilliere, as well for the
smartness of his Invention, as for the Excellency of his Style. The Old
Gentleman told him, that if the whole Piece were answerable to the Pattern he
had shown them of it, no doubt, but his Novels would be very well received in
the World, and that he would gain as much Reputation by them, as they had had
Pleasure. And thereupon, he earnestly Entreated him to Communicate somewhat of
the others to them, that so their Traveling might be the less Tedious. The
Doctor gave him, and all the rest of the Company his very hearty Thanks for the
good Opinion they had of him, and proffered them, when they should be weary of
Discoursing, to divert them with some of the other Novels, till they came to
their Journeys end, provided they thought them not Tedious. They all, with much
Gladness and Thanks, accepted of his proffer.

Being come within a Musket Shot of the Ancient City of Corduba, heretofore
the chiefest of the Kingdom, while the Moors were possessed of all Spain, after
Sunset, an unexpected Accident caused them to make a little halt. Two
Gentlemen being come out into the Fields, upon a Challenge, which one had sent
to the other, and having Fought, one of them was worsted, being run through the
Body in two several places; which had obliged his Adversary to make his Escape,
to get into some place of Sanctuary. The Wounded Person cried out for some Body
to receive his Confession, just as the Coach passed by: Which being heard by
the Company, Doctor Berilliere, who was a Priest, and a Confessor, could do no
less than get out, accompanied by Vasquez, and Mistress Corrina, who had a
great desire to see the Wounded Man. They came to him, and as soon as the
Doctor had received his Confession, and given him Absolution, he lost his
Speech, being supported by Vasquez. The Doctor returned to the Coach, and
having called several times upon Corrina, who pretended she could not get away
Vasquez, the Coachman perceiving it began to grow Dark, put on the Horses,
having sent them Word what Inn they should take up. Corrina was much troubled
to see the Coach gone, having left her, and Vasquez behind, Charitably
Exhorting the Dying Person to recommend himself as much to the Mercy of Heaven;
but he was so far gone, that, to spare them further Exhortation he gave up the
Ghost.

They were much troubled, what they should do with the Body, when certain
Officers of Justice came in, who, having at a distance seen the dead Person in
the Arms of Vasquez, and a Woman standing by, and had notice before that two
Men were seen going out of the City, with a design to fight a Duel, presently
imagined that Vasquez was one of them, and consequently the Murderer of the
other; upon which Presumption, he was sent to Prison, and order given to the
Jailer to put him fast enough. Corrina had more favor, being confined in the
House of one of the Officers, who was to have a care of her forthcoming. They
both used all the Arguments they could to clear themselves, from having any
thing to do with the Murder, alleging upon what occasion they came to the
Body: But their own Words would not be taken, and it was presumed, the Duel had
been upon the account of Corrina. The Judge ordered her to be brought to his
own House to be further Examined, which was accordingly done. When she came
thither, there were in the Room several Gentlemen, and among others, a
Florentine, a very Rich Merchant, whom some business of his own had brought
thither: They had no sooner seen Corrina, but they all admired her Beauty, and
the Majesty of her Air, but the most satisfied of any was the Florentine, who,
to give him his due, was of a very Amorous Constitution. Corrina was extremely
troubled that such an Affront should be done her by the way, as perceiving,
that if they were staid the next day, they should lose the opportunity of
continuing their Journey.

The Judge put several Questions to her, concerning the Duel, and the
Gentleman's Death; whereto she answered, that she knew nothing of it, and that
she was coming in the Sevil Coach, to go for Madrid, accompanied by some other
Persons then in the Inn, whom she Named; that as the Coach passed by, a certain
Person, who had been Wounded upon the Highway, not far from them, called out
for some Body to receive his Confession, and that a Priest, who was with them
in the Coach, went out to do it, with whom also she went out of Curiosity,
accompanied by an Uncle of hers, who came along with her. They ordered, in
regard it was grown late, to Adjourn the Business till the next day, that a
more exact Enquiry might be made into it; and, in the mean time, that all who
came along with the Coach, should not stir from Corduba, without Permission.
This done, Corrina was brought back to the Officer's House, where she was to
continue that Night. The Florentine, who lived not far from it, accompanied
her; but though he had lived at a far greater distance, he would have thought
it no great way to wait on a Lady, with whom he was already over Head and Ears
in Love. Taking leave of her at the Officer's House, he proffered her all the
Services lay in his Power, for which she thanked him, yet taking it for no more
than a Complement* The Vexation she conceived at her being thus unexpectedly
staid, brought her into some Fits of a Fever, the first, of a Tertian, which
she afterward fell into.

The next day, all the Persons who came in the Coach, being Examined, gave the
same account as Corrina had done before; whereupon, Vasquez was set at Liberty.
Other Witnesses also, who knew somewhat concerning the Duel, were heard, and
gave the Judges a perf^ct knowledge of the Murder. Vasquez went immediately to
visit Corrina, expressing himself extremely troubled at her Indisposition; he
did all he could to cheer her up, that they might prosecute their Journey: But
the Physician, who had visited her, advised her not to remove thence, till she
had recovered her Fever, and told her, that she could not Travel any further,
without hazard of her Life; which being so, the Coachman was forced to leave
them behind, but they were adjudg'd to defray the Charges of their stay, and he
to deliver up what they had in the Coach. The Florentine came often to see the
Fair Traveller, at the Officer's House, and began to Treat her very Nobly, an
Humor the more remarkable in him, who, for sordid Niggardliness might be
compared to the Covetous Mercator; but Love, though but a small Deity, yet many
times does very great Miracles, turning Avarice into Prodigality, and Cowardice
into Courage.

Corrina kept her Bed fifteen days, during which time, she was constantly
visited by Signior Nicola (so was called the Amorous Florentine) and after the
Visit, came in a Servant with a Treat of Sweetmeats, and Wild-Fowl, which the
Officer and his Wife were glad to see, for the best share fell to them. At
last, the Lady, with her Health, recovered also her good Complexion, and her
Beauty, and the Florentine continuing his Civilities, proffered her a House
with a Fair Garden, which he had on the side of a pleasant River. Vasquez, whom
she called her Uncle, advised her not to refuse that proffer, for he had
discovered the Man to be extremely in Love with her, that he was very rich, and
that they might get as much out of the Florentine, as they had out of the
Covetous Mercator. Corrina accepted the proffer, and set things in order to go
to the Florentine's, and to continue there till she had recovered her self so
well, as that she might prosecute her Journey. The Florentine would not have it
known at Corduba, that he had brought her to his Country House, to prevent
Peoples Talk, and other Inconveniences that might have ensued. So that, with
the Consent of Corrina, he gave out, that she had left the City in order to the
Prosecution of her Journey. Accordingly there were two Mules brought for her,
and Vasquez, and two others to carry their Luggage, and having left Corduba,
toward the Evening, to blind the Eyes of the Inquisitive, they kept on their
way toward Madrid: But having rid about half a League, they turned back again,
and took up their Quarters at Signior Nicola's, which was not above two slight
Shots from the City. There he expected her, with a Magnificent Supper, which he
had provided. Here the Florentine discovered his Love to her more freely than
he had done before.

As to his Person, his Age was about Forty and of a good manly Countenance,
having Buried his Wife some two years before, by whom he had no Children; he
was a wholesale Merchant, and traded in all sorts of Commodities, insomuch that
all the other Merchants, not only of the City, but also of other places there
abouts came to him, for he held Correspondences in all parts; he was a very
thrif^y Person, nay, to give him his due Character, I should use other
expressions: He had some yearly revenue, besides twenty thousand Crowns in
ready Money, and sixty thousand in Credit, and his own Trading, which was very
great; he was a great Student, and had Studied at Pavia and Bologna, before he
became Heir to his Brother, who died a very Rich Man in Spain, and that
Inheritance it was, that occasioned his Marriage at Corduba; he had so
passionate an Affection for Corrina, that he used all the ways he could imagine
to insinuate himself into her Favor. Upon that account it was that he proffered
her the use of his Country House, to take the Air, and recover her
indisposition; conceiving, that, being at his own House, it would be the more
easy for him to compass his desires. She had been told by Vasquez, that this
Merchant was a well Feathered Fowl, and might be easily plucked, and since this
good luck had fallen to them by Chance, they should make the best advantage
they could of it.

That night they only Supped, and every one went to his rest, for it was very
late; the Florentine made as if he would have returned to the City, and lie
there; but his Servants, whom he had before instructed, persuaded him not to go
abroad at that unseasonable time of the Night, for fear of meeting with any
Thieves; besides, there being a Press in the City, where many young men
presumed to do mischief in the Night, and Robbed all they met: At last, being
persuaded not to stir out, he was glad to pass away some part of the Night in
discoursing with Corrina, and being got to Bed, his business was to consider,
by what means, and with least charge, he might obtain his desires of her.
Several things came into his mind, but the easiest he could find, suitably to
his Humor, was to forget her, and never think of her any more; for he knew the
Age we live in to be such, that it is a Miracle to get any kindness in Love,
without Liberality.

The next Morning he command'd somewhat should be made ready for her
Breakfast, not Imagining she was up: but when word was brought him that she
was out of Bed, the Florentine would needs go into her Chamber, to chide her
for rising so soon, and by that means to see whether Corrina's Beauty were any
way obliged to Artifice; he found her a Combing her Head, and so he had a full
sight of her Hair, which was of a great length, and of a Chest-nut Color; the
Florentine gave Heaven thanks, who, with so many other perfections, had
bestowed on her such an excellent Head of Hair: but he was much more
astonished, when, upon her dividing it into two parts, to make him an answer,
he saw her Face, as Beautiful as it had appeared to him when she went to Bed; a
thing able to inflame a Person less inclined to Love and more to avarice then
he was, inasmuch as there is not a greater Charm, to secure a Lovers Heart,
that to see than the Beauty of his Mistress is Natural, and scorns to borrow
any thing of Art. Corrina indeed was not much troubled to look after Waters,
Paints, Pomatums, Unguents, and such things, wherewith such Women, who stand in
need of them, hasten on their Age with their wrinkles, and lose their Youth ere
they are aware; she only washed her self in fair Water, and needed no other
Vermillion to heighten the Beauty of her Face, than that of her own lively
Complexion; the Merchant asked whether she would be pleased to see the Garden?
She made answer, that she was extremely obliged to him for the trouble he gave
himself to divert her; and to satisfy him how kindly she took that Favor at
his Hands; she went along with him just as she was, without putting up her
Hair, which hanging down over her Shoulders, added much to her Beauty, and it
is not much to be doubted, but she had a design in it. She went down with this
new Gallant of hers, who thought it an extraordinary pleasure to have her by
the Hand; and in that posture she saw the whole Garden, seeming to be much
taken with the delightfulness of it.

Having recreated her self with him, till the Sun began to be somewhat hot, she
returned into the House, and broke her Fast, after which, having discoursed of
several things, she desired to see the whole House. The Amorous Florentine
desiring nothing so much as that she might see his Wealth, shows her a great
number of excellent Pictures, done by the best Painters in Europe, some very
rich pieces of Tapestry, Cabinets of Ebony, of several Fashions, Embroidered
Beds, and all Sorts of Household Stuff of great Value, in a word, there wanted
not any of those things requisite for the furnishing of a House fit for a
Nobleman. Having seen all the Rooms, he opened a curious Closet, near which
there was a little Oratory, and in that Closet there were a great many Pieces
of Painting, done at Rome, of extraordinary Value, Agnus Dei's of Gold and
Silver Gilt, and Flowers done as near the Life as could be imagined. The Closet
was full of Books, very richly Bound, and neatly disposed into Gilt Drawers.
Vasquez who was a curious Person, and had read much, was looking very earnestly
on the Titles of the Books, which were in one Drawer, and having put that into
its place, he took out another, wherein there were others very curiously Bound,
but had no Titles on the Backs. Vasquez opens one of them, and finds the Author
of it to be Arnaldus de villa Nova, and near that were the Works of Rosino,
Alquindus, Raymond Lullius, Cornelius Agrippa, and Doctor Dee's Actions with
Spirits.

The Merchant perceiving him so taken up with the Perusal of those Books, asked
him what he looked on so attentively. I find here, Sir, (replies Vasquez,) a
great many Books of Chemistry, and, from the curiosity I observe in your
Collection of Treatises of that kind, I infer, that you have Studied that
Science: It Is true, (says the Florentine,) I have spent some time in the
Perusal of those Authors; but how far, I pray, are you acquainted with them?
Only so far, (replies the other) that I have spent the best part of my Life in
that Study. Nay then, (says the Florentine) you must needs be a very great
Chemist. I am not to acknowledge what I am, (replies Vasquez,) we will
discourse another time of these things more at large; for the present, I shall
only tell you, that, besides these Authors, I have read all I could ever meet
with that treated of this Science; I have turned over the Works of Avicenna,
Albertus Magnus, Terno, Pythagorus; the Secrets of Callidus, the Book of the
Allegory of Morillus, that of the Secret Stone, and that Entitled, de Tribus
Verbis; besides many Manuscripts, which I never showed any man; the Florentine
was almost out of himself for joy to hear these things; I am extremely glad,
(said he to him) that this Science pleases you, for I have a particular
inclination for it. I know it very well (replies Vasquez,) (which he said,
having already resolved how to put a slur upon him,) but in regard I place a
great confidence in you, I will tell you a thing in your ear, which you will be
much astonished at; it is this (whispering him in the Ear) that my Niece knows,
without any Study, in a manner as much as I do of this Art, and is very
Fortunate in the Practick part of it, as you shall see by experience; but I
entreat you not to speak to her of it at this time, for she would not have it
known to any, nay would not take it well. Vasquez could not have pitched upon a
more likely way to bring the Florentine into the Gin; for his avarice was such,
that he would, have parted with his Soul to find out the Philosophers Stone,
hoping, if he once got that Secret, ever afterward to swim in Gold.

Corrina busied her self at the other end of the Closet, while Vasquez made
this Discourse to the Florentine, and was looking upon some other Curious and
Pleasant Books, for there were of all sorts; yet was she not so attentive, but
she heard somewhat of Vasquez's Discourse concerning Chemistry, and perceived
the Merchant was much taken with it; the Truth is Vasquez had some knowledge in
that Science, and had spent a considerable Sum of Money, to find out the
Philosopher's Stone, which though many had sought, yet could not any affirm
they had met with it; the success he had had in that business only satisfied
him of their folly, who spent their time and Estates in so ridiculous a
disquisition, and he was glad to meet with so good an opportunity, to recover
some part of the Money he had squandered away in the search after it: for the
Florentine, crediting what was told him by Vasquez, imagined himself somewhat
above a Prince; he told him, that, in that very House, he had all things
requisite to make the experiment; and thereupon brought him into a Room full of
Furnaces, Alembicks, Glasses, and Crucibles, with all the Instruments used by
the Chemists, and good store of Char-coal. Vasquez seeing that, concluded the
Merchant would be easily taken, and what made him the more confident was, that
he imagined he understood all those Books, whereas Vasquez was satisfied he
knew only so much of them, as would serve to bring him into the Noose: In fine,
they gave over talking of it any further at that time, though the Florentine
was unwilling to quit the discourse; they went down thence into a Ground-Room,
the Windows whereof looked into the Fairest part of the Garden, where Dinner
expected them. After Dinner, Vasquez pretending it was his Custom to take a
Nap, left the Merchant alone with Corrina, to whom he took occasion to make a
full discovery of his Love, assuring her, that all he had was at her Service,
and desiring her to dispose of it as she pleased. She seemed to entertain the
proffers of his affection with much kindness, yet at that time she only raised
him into a slight hope, showing her self very pleasant to him.

Having seen a Lute, in one of the Rooms above Stairs, she desired it might be
brought down for her Music, at which she was excellent, and contributed much
to bringing about of her designs; the Merchant, who had a little skill at that
Instrument himself, was very glad to hear that she used it, and caused it to be
immediately fetched, saying that his Deceased Wife played excellently well upon
it, and that about a Seven-night before, having entertained some of his Friends
with a Collation, they had set it in Tune. The Lute being come, Corrina began
to play, and made it appear, that there were very few that could excel her at
that Instrument: the Florentine was astonished at her dexterity, and to bring
him absolutely to her lure, she Sung an Air to it, but with such a grace, that
he was at a loss, whether he should more admire her Hand, or her Voice; the
truth is, she had a particular excellency in both, so that his excessive
Commendations of them; were not so full of flattery as might be expected from a
person passionately in Love; with a modest blush, which spread it self gently
over her face (a thing she could command, though never acquainted with shame) she
seemed to express a certain bashfulness, and ere it was quite dispelled,
Signior Nicola, (said she to him) What I have done was only for your diversion,
be pleased to receive it with some regard to the desire I had to endeavor your
satisfaction; which yet I have not done without much temerity, before a Person
of so delicate an Ear as you are Master of, and one, no doubt, wont to hear the
best Voices in the World. I never heard any, (replies Nicola) that came near
yours, and therefore I beseech you, let not your Modesty occasion you any
prejudice; nay rather be proud, Madam, of the excellent endowments you have so
liberally received from Heaven, and acknowledge the Favors it has done you;
be more sensible of your own worth, and think my approbation below it; and yet
when I was a young Man, I was much addicted to Music, and some would needs
persuade me that my time was well bestowed in it. I must confess the Spanish
Tongue comes not so natural to me as the Italian, the Graces and Beauties
whereof, I have better Studied upon the Theorbo, which I am so far Master of,
as in some Measure I may satisfy the Hearer. Whereupon perceiving that Corrina
would have laid by the Lute, he desired her to make use of it a little longer,
and to Sing one Air more, which she, to Honor him, did.

Nicola took occasion to give his dear Corrina greater Commendations for the
excellency of her Voice than he had done before, and she, to renew her thanks
to him, for the Favor he did her; he thought it time to give her leave to take
a little rest, and he went himself into another Room to do the like. Vasquez on
the other side, instead o^ Sleeping, was contriving how to get the
Philosopher's Stone, not for the Credulous Florentine, but out of him; he had
so persuaded him of his abilities, in that Science, that he desired nothing so
much as to be as knowing in it as he was, but all out of no other design than
to satisfy his own insatiable avarice; he imagined that if he could find the
Philosopher's Stone (a Rock rather, against which so many have wracked
themselves) all his Household Stuff should be of Gold, that he should be as Rich
as Croesus, and that the Wealthiest about the City, compared to him, would be
little better than Beggars.

Vasquez had also along discourse with Corrina, about the means how they should
get the Gudgeon into the Net; he gave her some instructions in Writing, that
the Florentine might find she knew something of the Science, at least the Terms
of it: Corrina got them by Heart, and, to begin the Cheat, Vasquez asked for
some Links of a Gold Chain, she had brought from Sevil; it was a large one, and
if there were a Dozen Links taken from it, they would not have been missed;
being come into the City, he goes into a Gold-Smith's Shop to melt down those
Links into an Ingot, which he brought back to the House, and communicated his
Design to Corrina.

Nicola, who had slept all this while as soundly as if he had not been in Love,
comes in to them, and they began to talk of several things, far from having any
Relation to the Business he had been about, which Vasquez did purposely to
engage the other to fall first into that Discourse, and indeed within a quarter
of an hour, he was gotten into the Subject of Chemistry. Vasquez discoursed of
it after the rate of a Man that had spent his whole Estate in the Work;
insomuch that Nicola was astonished thereat, for though he pretended much skill
in the Science, yet could he not but acknowledge himself much inferior to the
other. Vasquez Desirous to give the Merchant all the Satisfaction he could
Desire, told him, that he could turn what Metal he pleased into Gold. The
Florentine was ravished at the proposal, and earnestly entreated him that he
might see it done. Vasquez asked him whether there were any Char-Coal in the
House; the Florentine told him there was good store, for he had had the
Curiosity to make some trials thereof himself.

They went up both into the Room where they had been before, and finding it
full of Furnaces, Creusets, Alembicks, and other Chemical Instruments, Vasquez
said to him, Here we have all things requisite for the present. He caused some
Fire to be brought, and having put a little Copper into a Creuset to melt, the
Florentine saw it melting: Vasquez took a Box out of his Pocket, wherein there
was a Paper full of Powder, which he said was the most Principal Ingredient in
the whole Work. He put it into the Creuset, which having brought as cleverly as
he could to the Window, he poured out the melted Copper, and put in the Ingot
of Gold into its place, and when he had covered it, he told the Florentine,
that it should not be stirred thence for half an hour. That time they spent in
Discoursing of several things in Chemistry, wherein Nicola desired to make some
further Progress. At last, Vasquez thought it time to show him what he had
done, and so opening the Creuset, he took out the Ingot and showed it him. The
Covetous Miser was transported with Joy to see it, though he were not fully
satisfied of its being perfect Gold. Vasquez wished him to have it tried by a
Goldsmiths; which trouble he would needs take upon himself, and having found
that it was very fine Gold, of twenty two Carats, he returns extraordinarily
well satisfied. While he was gone out, Vasquez instructed Corrina, how to
effect their Design upon Nicola, who being more Covetous than Amorous, would
have them immediately to begin the great Work of finding the Philosopher's
Stone. He promised Vasquez extraordinary Recompenses, and told him, that he
would be at the whole Charge, though it should amount to twenty thousand Crowns.

Vasquez, who had contrived how he intended to gull the Merchant, returned this
answer to the great proffers he had made him. Signior Nicola (said he,) I am
now gone almost seven years beyond the grand Climacterical Year of my Life,
which is as much as to tell you, that I have passed the greatest and best part
of it. It were no hard matter for me, with the help of the Science I am now
Master of, to spend the little which is yet to come, at my ease, and it may be
more plentifully, than some of the Wealthiest Grandees of Spain; and that I can
be without any Man's Favor or Assistance, I think you may have observed
yourself. And in regard I have no Children, to inherit my Estate, which, I
thank Heaven, is somewhat considerable also in Lands, the main concernment I
have in this World, is to look after this young Woman, my Niece. She is already
but too Rich, in that she has all I have, though her Father, who was my Elder
Brother, left her no mean Fortune. She might, had she a mind to it, be as Nobly
Married as she was before, for her late Husband was descended from the Noblest
Houses in Andaluzia. Nor were it hard for me to add to her Wealth, you know it;
but such is my Confidence in you, that I will tell you the Reason why I do not.

That I am the Ablest Alchymist in all Spain, is known to many, which being
also come to the Ears of his Majesty, I am sought after every where; but I have
hitherto had the Happiness to keep out of their Clutches who are perpetually
employed to find me out, having spread a report, that I was gone for England.
It is not out of any contempt of the Honors and Wealth of this World, that I
avoid the searches of those, whom his Majesty has enjoined to bring me to him,
but out of this Consideration, that I would not purchase any favor with the
loss of my Liberty, for I must expect no less, than to spend the rest of my
days in a Noble kind of Captivity. I will express my self more clearly to you.
His Majesty has at the present very great Armies on Foot in several parts,
which put him to a vast Expense, such as his own Revenue, and what comes from
the Indies are not able to defray: So that, to satisfy his Ambition, he is
forced to make use of the Industry of his Subjects. Now were it my hard
Fortune, to be found by those who so narrowly search after me, the King,
knowing that, with the Assistance of my Art, he might easily recruit the Charge
he is at, and would immediately dispose of me into some Fortress, where being
confined for the rest of my days, I should be perpetually kept at Work, to
augment his Treasures, and supply his pressing Exigencies. I should not think
it much to do it once or twice, but the Avarice of Men is grown to that height,
that they are not satisfied with abundance, if they have the least
Apprehension, that the source of it may ever be dried up. This is the true
Reason, Signior Nicola, which obliges me to keep out of my own Country, and to
play least in sight; and therefore receive what I have told you as a great
Secret, such as I should not have communicated to my own Brother, had he been
in the World: But I have that Confidence of you, that you will never reveal it.

Nicola returned Vasquez his most affectionate thanks for the great Trust he
reposed in him, and thought himself so happy in the discovery he had made to
him, that he conceived the greatest Nobles might justly envy him. His answer to
him, was, That the Grounds and Motives, on which he concealed the excellent
knowledge he had acquired, were just and rational, since that no doubt but he
would be confined, though for no other reason than this, to prevent his
carrying over such a secret into another Country, to serve a King that were an
Enemy to his Catholic Majesty. He acknowledged himself infinitely obliged to
him, and wished it were in his power to serve him; but having only the Wealth
he was possessed of to proffer him, he entreated him to dispose of it as freely
as if it were his own, and since he had shown him a trial of his Abilities,
that he would not think that enough, but ere he left Corduba, would give him
such further Instructions, as, being observed, he should not miscarry in the
great Work. Vasquez promised to satisfy his Desires, telling him withal, that
so precious a thing as Gold could not be gotten but with Gold, and that the
Foundations of all Designs require Charge; that the Philosopher's Stone could
not be found without cost and much pains; that if he weer resolved, he should
attempt the doing of it, he must be at the whole Charge, and that afterward
the profit should be equally divided, and that in a short time he would be
glutted with Wealth.

The Florentine, ravished at that Proposal, proffered to spend all he was worth
upon that Account. Corrina promised to assist them. Nay, (says Vasquez to her,)
there is such a Necessity of your Assistance; that we shall not be able to do
so well without it. They thereupon resolved, that within two days they should
begin the great Work. Vasquez told him, that the Principal of the Divine
Elixir, (so the Chemists call the Perfection of their Work) was formed out of
the solidity of Mercury, and other things which he named to him, together with
the Urine and Excrement of a Red-Hair'd Child; that all was to be put into an
Alembick, with Powder of Aloes, the Infusion of Opium, Toads-Grease, Arsenick,
and Saltpeter: But he hoped to do it chiefly with the Urine, and Excrements
aforesaid, which he ordered Nicola by all means to procure, as being the most
necessary ingredient of all.

He promised to find it; and, to begin the Work, the Merchant delivered him
five hundred Crowns in Gold, to buy certain precious Drugs, which he said were
necessary; and this the Florentine did the more willingly, as well out of the
Confidence he had to receive them multiplied into so many thousands, as o^t of
a Design he had thought on the Night before, of making Corrina his Wife, and by
that means assuring himself of Vasquez. Whereupon that very Evening after
Supper, he took Occasion to carry Vasquez along with him into the Garden, and
acquainted him with his Resolution. The Alchymist thought it a good way to
further his Work, and accordingly he approved of his Intention, and
acknowledged it would be a great Honor to his Niece to meet with so worthy a
Person; but that there was one Obstacle to be first removed. What may that be
(says the other?) Vasquez told him, that his Niece could not be Married, till a
Dispensation were first obtained from Rome, in regard, that out of the
extraordinary regret she conceived at the loss of her late Husband, she made a
vow to enter into a Religious Life; that the Occasion of their going to Madrid,
was to receive six years Arrearages of a Rent due to them from a Person of
Quality, who was very backward in paying, in Order to her Reception into a
Nunnery; but that as soon as the Dispensation were come from Room, they would
conclude the Marriage, which he doubted not but she would accept, not only out
of the Compliance she had ever expressed toward him, but also out of this
Confideration, that she was to match her self with a Person inclined to the
study of a Science, wherein she had naturally attained so great Perfection.
Nicola was the most satisfied Man in the World to have such a parcel of good
Words given him, insomuch that from that very hour, Vasquez became absolute
Master of all he was possessed of,

Vasquez and Corrina having conferred Notes upon this new overture, were more
Confident then ever to Compass their Design. He freely laid out the Money
received of Nicola, in Druggs, persuading him they were not to be had under
such and such Rates. He also furnished himself with new Furnaces, Creusets and
Alembicks, pretending that those in the House before, were not for his Purpose.
In the mean time, the silly Merchant was enquiring up and down where he might
have the Urine of a Red-Headed Child, Which he had much ado to get; for the
Mother's fearing it was to be used in some Operation of Witchcraft, would not
easily let him have it; but Money is Omnipotent, and can do any thing. Vasquez
could have done as much in one day as in a hundred, as to the performance of
what he had promised, but the poor Merchant must be fooled some way or an
other, till he met with an opportunity to smite him, and take a Dogg's leave of
Corduba, with as much as he could shift away on two good Horses, which lay
leager in a secret place for that Purpose.

He disposed all the Destillations into the Furnaces, in the presence of
Nicola; he bought some Metals, as Brass, Copper, and Tin, several sorts of.
Salts, and other things commonly used by Chemists; and setting Fire to the
Furnaces, they destilled what had been put into them, but contributing nothing
to the Business, and only to abuse him, who was the Charge of all the Foolery.
As to Nicola's Love, he was much better treated than he was before; inasmuch as
since the Proposal of Marriage, Corrina, the better to carry on the main
Design, grew more kind to him, especially in Vasquez's Absence, which the
besotted Coxcomb was so transported with, that he knew not whether his Head or
his Heels were on the Ground.

About this time Nicola received a Bill of Exchange of a considerable Sum, to
be paid within twenty days after sight. This, with the breaking of some of his
Debtors in other Countries, put him into some fear of doing the like, if his
Attempts in Chemistry proved not successful. But to prevent all inconveniences,
he did what most of his Quality and Kidney are wont to do, who being upon the
point of Breaking, secure what they can of their Estates, that they may
afterward the more Commodiously remove into some other Country. So our
Merchant, finding himself within some distance of Breaking, provided for the
Misfortune, in case it should happen, and so promoted the mischievous Plot of
Vasquez, and Corrina, whom he truly acquainted how Affairs stood with him, as
if they had been his most Faithful Relations. Vasquez had left in the Custody
of a certain Friend of the Merchant's, a good Sum of Money, and some Jewels of
great Value, with order they should not be delivered to any, but to one of them
two. Besides which, he brought some to his Country House, and hid them in a
secret place, in the presence of Corrina, of whom he had a Confidence, as if
she had really been his Wife, Vasquez, who was still busy about his
Destillations, put him into good hope, that within twenty days he should see
the end of the great Work, and his House full of Gold, to recover the loss he
had received by his Debtors.

About this time, there happened a business which obliged the Merchant to take
a Journey, to advise with a Correspondent of his, how to prevent the misfortune
he saw coming upon him. Vasquez, and Corrina being entrusted with the House,
thought it a fair opportunity to dislodge, and make the best they could of the
present Game. They secured all the Money, and Jewels they could come at, and
left the Plate and some other things, they could not so conveniently carry
away, behind them, though with some regret, thinking it more prudence to make a
safe retreat with what were considerable, than to hazard all, by grasping at
too much. Having therefore laden themselves with what was most precious, they
left the Furnaces, and the Alembicks, which made the Philosopher's Stone, at
the cost of the absent Merchant, and took Horse while the People of the House
were fast asleep. They took their way toward Malaga, and traveled all Night,
having about them above six thousand Crowns in Money and Jewels, and left upon
a Table near the Furnaces, a Paper of Verses, to hasten the Credulous Merchant
to hang himself.

Two days after their departure he returns home, very ill satisfied with his
Journey, in that he had not done any thing in the business which occasioned it.
All the hope he now had, was in his Uncle, Vasquez, imagining, by his means, he
should yet be able to show his Head, and not only keep up his Reputation, but
also be richer than ever he had been, such a strange Mist had the Witchcraft of
Chemistry cast before his Eyes.

He came not to his Country House till after Night, where he found the Servant
whom he had left with Vasquez and Corrina, for the rest of his People were in
the City. The Servant received him with a sad Countenance, and being got up
Stairs, he asked him (fearing somewhat were amiss) where his Guests were, of
whom the Servant could give him no account, as having not seen them when they
went out, and could only say, That two Nights before, they had Locked him in at
two Room where he lay, which he had been forced to break open, because he could
no otherwise get out. They searched up and down, and found that the Chests had
been opened, and all the Money Conveyed away. This was not the worst the
Merchant feared, but that they had also been with him, in whose Custody he had
greater Sums of Money, and the most precious of his Household Stuff. It being
too late to make any enquiry that Night, he thought it his best Course to go to
Bed; but desirous to visit the Furnaces once more, he finds on the Table the
Paper, left there by Vasquez, which having opened, he found in it these Lines.

Signior Nicola,
IT is the just Reward of those who attempt things impossible, to be shamefully
disappointed. Many of your Profession have been ruined by their Faith, in
things relating to their Trade; it was therefore but fit you should repent your
Credulity, in a business you understood not. It was indeed impardonable, to
expect to see that done by any Man, in a few days, which the Sun, who has a
greater power over the Metal you were so Covetous of, cannot perfect under four
or five hundred Years. Your loss, I must confess, is great, but you have this
comfortable Consideration, that you may now defy Chemistry, and all its
Cheating Professors, to show you such another Trick as we have done. But, to
avoid all future Temptations, take this hearty Advice from two dear Friends of
yours; put all the fine Treatises you have of that Pernicious Art, into your
Furnaces, and having set fire to them, and your House together, fairly run away
by the Light of it.


The poor Merchant had no sooner read them, ere he was Convinced, they were his
kind Guests who had robbed him, and Extracted what he had in his Chests and
Cabinets, with more ease than he had infused it into them. How he spent the
Night, is only to be imagined, being just upon the Point of breaking, and not
knowing any means to remedy it. All the hope he had, was, that the Money, and
Jewels which he had left in a Friend's Hands, were safe enough; nay, he
despaired not to find out those, who had done him the mischief. He turned
himself from one ^ide to another, not out of any disturbance, occasioned by his
Love to the Crafty Corrina, (for that was absolutely lost with his Money) but
that he had been so basely trapann'd by a Beggarly Rascal. Then did he begin to
Curse Chemistry, and all the Authors that ever Writ of it, whereas he should
rather have given Heaven thanks, who, by the Cheat which was put upon him, had
prevented the Prosecution of his Design, which might have absolutely ruined him.

As soon as he perceived any appearance of day, he got up, and went into the
City, to his House, whom he had entrusted with the keeping of his Money, and
other things. He asked him whether Vasquez had been with him? The other
answered that he had, and had taken away whatever he had in his Custody, and
that therein he had followed his own Orders. The Word struck him almost dead;
nay, the Resentments he expressed of that loss were so great, that if the other
had not known the cause of it, he would have thought him out of his Wits. He
Comforted him the best he could, and told him, that his only Course was to make
a speedy search for the Robbers. He did all he could to that purpose, sending
Officers, and others several ways; but that which Vasquez and Corrina had
taken, was so extraordinary, that they could never meet with them. So they
returned to Corduba, to be paid for their fruitless Pursuit, by him who had
sent them, which, as his Affairs stood then, added not a little to this
Affliction.

This Adventure was soon known all over the City; and the Florentine, not able
to except of another Bill of Exchange that had been sent him, was forced to
absent himself, and to return to Florence, with what he could make by the Sale
of his Goods. By this means he turned Bankrupt, and defied his Creditours, who
could not find any thing he had left behind him. The same things happens many
times to those, who, with small Estates, engage themselves in too great
Affairs, presuming upon this, that if it comes to the worst, they can secure
themselves by an Escape.

FINIS.

