THE CABAL OF ROMISH GHOSTS, AND MORTALS: OR, THE DEVIL DECEIVED, AND THE SICK
POPE.

LONDON: Printed for Norman Nelson, at Grays-Inn-Gate in Holborn. 1680.

TO THE Jocose, or Serious, READER.
MOst moderate Papists, I imagine, (as they believe) so they abhor the
Transactions of this Age: When the simple Vulgar of that Sect, (being egged on
by the florid Documents of the Romish Clergy) are so wedded to their Opinions,
that they dare not trust their Eyesight, nor Sense, in what they actually and
really behold and comprehend. They do not look through magnifying Glasses, but
rather through such Glasses, as make Objects appear less than they in reality
are. They will more safely believe, an Image spoke, or that the consecrated
Wafer in the Eucharist, leapt out of the Priest's Hands, because he was a
wicked Fellow, than to give credit to the abominable Births, brought lately
forth from their Church in this Age. This Dialogue, I believe, because it is a
little Drolling, may by some be disliked. Some will say perhaps, it is only a
Flash in a Pan, that it is no serious Argumentation against the Romanists, but
like the burning of a Paste-board Pope, on a Gunpowder-Treason. To that I
Answer, That from this Dialogue a serious Argument might be made, and that
though it may be Drollery, yet there may be some Truth in it. It is, I confess,
a Medley of Ghosts and Mortals; but by an impartial Reader, some Reason may be
picked from it, and a Man may easily create to himself a belief, that it is a
Religion grounded altogether upon Policy, to fatten the Clergy, impoverish the
Laity, and fill the Pope's Exchequer. As for Example: A Priest shall come to
you, when you are almost at the point of Death, shall terrify you, by a subtle
Eloquence, with the dreadful pains of Purgatory; and if you are a Man of an
Estate, and of a weak-believing Capacity, you will willingly give half your
Estate to the Church, to be freed from those dreadful Torments. This is one way
they greaze themselves by, besides by many more Exactions, Pardons,
Absolutions, etc. which would be too long to insert in an Epistle, or Preface.
I shall conclude with Democrates Junior, in the old Edition, Page 648. Above
all others, says he, that High Priest of Rome, the Dam of that monstrous and
superstitious Brood, the Bull-bellowing Pope, which now rages in the West,
that three-headed Cerberus, has played his part, whose Religion at this day is
mere Policy, a State wholly composed of Superstition and Wit, and needs nothing
but Wit and Superstition to maintain it, that uses Colleges and Religious
Houses, to as good purpose, as Forts and Castles, and does more at this day by
a company of scribbling Parasites, zealous Anachorites, hypocritical Confessors,
and those Pretorian Soldiers his Janizary Jesuits, than by any thing more
sound and substantial.

The Names of the Persons contained in this Dialogue, are here under inserted.
The Ghost of Cardinal Woolsey. The Ghost of Ravilliack. The Ghost of England's
Guardian-Angel. The Ghost of Lucifer.


Mortals The Pope. A Jesuit. A Traveller.


The DEVIL Deceived, OR The Sick POPE.
HIS Holiness was in private, and in a melancholy Disposition, censuring the
long stay of his Infernal Envoy, whom he had sent for England, to collogue that
perverse Nation to return to Mother Church, when an unexpected darkness
o'respread the Air; and thereupon came one immediately into his presence,
habited like a Cardinal, with whom the Pope had the ensuing Conference. Pope.
Who art thou, and whence do thou come?


Cardinal. When I lived in the World, England was the Soil of my Nativity and
Residence, where I was a Cardinal; and my Ambition had almost raised me to the
Dignity thou enjoyest. I had hoarded, being withal Husband good enough, to keep
what I stole from the King my Master, and the Commonwealth, against I came to
the Popedom. And as I had Ambition enough in me, to aim at a Mark so high, so
was I not without the excellent Qualities of Pride, Vainglory, and Hypocrisy,
nay all, or rather more than all the Perfections, that are requisite to make a
complete Pope. I brought my self withal to that incomparable pitch of Pride, as
to contemn my Lord and Sovereign: He was titularly King, while I began to make
my self actually so, thereby showing my self to have had some skill in the Art
of Ingratitude; (he that will be a Pope, can never be esteemed infallible,
without that excellent Quality.) When at length my too insolent Behavior, made
my Design have a very ill scent, insomuch that most of the Courtiers begun to
stop their Noses, when I was near any of them; till at length that sneering
jesting Rogue, Will. Summers, with some more of his Confederates, made not only
a full Relation of my whole Plot to the King, but discovered likewise all the
Treasure I had been so many years hoarding. Whereupon I was immediately cast
out of his favor, and banished the Court; when I broke my heart, and with me,
all my high Designs, Plottings and Contrivances, died.


Pope. Oh ho! Thou art the rich English Cardinal, that through an holy, as well
as self-interessed zeal, had almost molded thy Plot to its most perfect form,
when an adverse Fate broke thy pious Intentions. I love and honor thy Memory,
for the great reach thou had in all humane Affairs, and for the Care thou
did take to propagate the Interest of the Church.


Card. I am your Holiness's most humble Servant, and in this bodiless Being am
come from the shady Territories, to pay you my most dutiful Respects, having
withal understood, from some Infernal Ministers employed in my Service, how
affectionate your Intentions are at this Juncture of time, to our Stygian
Prince, manifested in your Endeavor on Earth, to advance yours and your
Creatures Interests, by extirpating Root and Branch, (with the Trap of
Dissimulation, and the edge of a well-prepared Sword) the abominable Heretics
of Great Britain. The Care of his Infernal Majesty in this Affair, I doubt not
but you have sufficiently experienced, since he has condescended to set all
the Engines in his diabolical Dominions at work, to encourage so worthy a
Design.


Pope. My Thanks are too poor an acknowledgment, of this kind and unexpected
Visit from you, more especially now my Head is filled with the Fumes of so dark
a Melancholy, expecting the Return of your Black Monarch, who was pleased to
stoop to so low a step of Humility, (a Quality, I dare be bold to say, not
agreeing with his Nature) as to Post my Envoy into England, where I sent him
(knowing him to be a fleet Messenger) to see if the Plot was near accomplished.
He had been there five or six times before, but did not make a stay so long as
he has now done; but at those times, with the best Documents of Virtue he had,
he did, by my Instigation, and my Cabal of Jesuits, held there and at St.
Omers, corrupt not only a great many of the Vulgar, whom he pollished with the
glitterings of Sense-pleasing Idolatry, but likewise others of eminent Quality,
whom he has cunningly drawn into the Plot, and since has in his Princely
Courtesy listed some of them in his Roll of Damnation. But his too long
absence has rendered me not only impatient, but has wrought in me so strong a
Purge, that Barbados Nuts are stoppers to it. I have sat this 24 hours upon
an indulgent Close-stool, and have likewise had some Sweats with
over-straining, and one day some of my Guts did most inhumanely peep through my
Posteriors: Grant, kind Lucifer, this be not as ominous, as it is painful to me.


Card. I beseech your Holiness to be of good Cheer; there can be nothing
ominous to you. Don't you know that your Statesmen, the Jesuits, will pretend
to control Fate it self, and strive against Omnipotency? If you know this, you
will be comforted; if you don't, you must not be angry at the expression, if I
tell you, you are a very ignorant Pope. But I love you more than I can utter,
for the Care you take to keep up, and improve the Interest of the Church. What
if you do support it by Treasons and Murders; is it not the Church your Care
is upon? What must not be done for the sake of a Church, especially a Church
built upon such splendid Principles as yours is? I could almost embrace you;
but as you have a Sense deep enough to know, that what seems in me to be
Substance, is a Composition of Air, you will, I hope, pardon me. But now I have
been talking to you of Air and a Church, what do you think the Heretics that
live in England say of us Papists?


Pope. Pray let me hear it.


Card. That the Religion or Church whereof you are the Head, is a Being without
Substance, like my self.


Pope. Impudence, Impudence, Impudence! A Scandal, as I live; a mere Scandal to
the Holy Church; but they will ever be prating. A zealous Catholic cannot now
in his Ordure, evacuate so much as an Enigmatical Mass Book, or a Fraudulent
Image, but it is presently discovered, though he don't so much as whisper it in
the Ear of a silver Crucifix, a Jesuit Dormant, or a Nun Couchant, when a
devout Friar is listening to her Confession.


Card. So it was when I lived in the World; they did ever abuse us, and
misconstrue our sacred Intentions. But how does your Holiness now feel your
self? Have you yet no stoppage of this violent Looseness?


Pope. No, nor shall not, till my industrious Demon returns with cheerful News
from England: Oh! if I could but turn that Heretical Kingdom topsy-turvy, the
very pleasure that would fill my heart, which would without a further miracle
instantly work a Cure in me. But I fear this rigid Distemper presageth a
contrary Effect; if so, all future Plots against that Nation must die, and it
will almost begin to make me believe, that some unknown Power protects it,
expressly to disturb my repose, and the little diabolical Instruments I have set
to work. I have raised Commotions in that spot of Ground, filled the Brains of
the People full of Fears and Jealousies, and have even been ready to set all
together by the Ears. The Plot, my Jesuits, together with my infernal
Emissaries, are now at work about. When I perceived that every ones Nose begun
to discover a rank scent of it, I caused them to broach Rumors abroad, that
there was no such thing, and in fine persuaded many People to give no credit to
their Eyesight: And truly whether it was out of complacence, or whether their
Eyes were dim, indeed the most part were so credulous to believe this politic
Report for a truth, notwithstanding our Endeavors in the interim to set London
once more in a Flame, as well as the whole Nation --


Card. Thou art an exquisite Pope: This was an incomparable beginning; but how
far did you proceed?


Pope. And when any House was fired, to clear us from Suspicion, we whispered
it abroad for an Accident, coloring it with plausible Stories; and thus it was
for the most part stifled. At length my Worthy Friend, Prince Lucifer, whisking
through the Air, comes in at my Window in great haste, and told me, They had
made a hopeful beginning already, for one of their Justices of the Peace, a too
forward Man in searching into the depth of our Mysteries, we have honorably,
and with our usual decency, dispatched. I was glad to hear this, and thereupon
sent him instantly away again, (not giving him time to comfort himself with a
Glass of Sack and a Crust) to know what further Effect this had wrought: And
for his Answer, I have now waited longer than usual, and during his absence,
have got this fierce Looseness.


Card. I pity your Holiness, and fear indeed this Distemper may prove ominous
to your pious Undertakings: However you know, when I lived in the World, in the
Quality of a Cardinal, I was esteemed a Person as learned as politic: My
Studies were deep in all Arts and Sciences; among others, I acquired no mean
knowledge in Physic. Now since I have been freed from the gross Covering of a
Body, the Virtues of Herbs, Plants, Minerals, all sorts of Creatures, as well
Men, as Birds and Beasts, the four Elements, the Stars and Planets, are
discovered to me in a more pure manner, than when I lived in the Flesh, and I
can as aptly apply and use them; this is the Nature of Etherial Beings. Now if
your Holiness thinks fit to make use of what I shall prescribe to you, I will
give you a Receipt, whereby your Looseness may be stopped.


Pope. I am infinitely obliged to your Lordship, and in returning you my
thanks, will give an attentive Ear to this sovereign Remedy.


Card. You must take two handfuls of the Powder of Humility, put it into the
clear Water of Truth, distilled from the Alembick of Purity, there let it
dissolve, till some gross Lumps of Superstition and Tyranny disappear; then
melt down your Triple Crown, and cause it to be curiously wrought or formed
into a mysterious Chasing-dish, on which you must put this Cordial, in order to
be kept continually warm; under it kindle the Coals of Honesty, and with the
Bellows of Sincerity, blow away the Ashes (that obstruct its clearness) of
Jesuitical Policy: Drink of it morning and evening, as warm as you can devoutly
bear it; and sometimes to quench your thirst, drink of the Cup of Temporality;
but beware of Spirituality, too much of that will bring you to a Relapse.


Pope. My Lord, I thank you; but these Remedies cannot agree with my
Constitution, and therefore dare not venture on them, since a squeamish
Stomach, as I have too, would make me vomit it all up again.


Card. I am sorry they agree not with your Temper. But none can be more like me
when I lived in the World, than you are: When I began to fall into Disgrace, I
had just such a Looseness as you have now upon you; though had I but taken the
like Remedies I have prescribed to you, I had been freed from the Calamities I
endured, as well out of the World, as in it. Adieu.

As a Cloud of Mists and Vapors, hanging in the middle Region of Air, does by
degrees dissolve and disappear from the Eye of the Beholder, even so did this
bodiless Cardinal, from the view of the Pope, whom he left rather more
disconsolate than he had found: But the entrance of a Jesuit, his particular
Friend, (of the same Society with those that lived in the City of Rome) did
something mitigate the troubles of his mind, who held the ensuing Discourse
with him.
Jesuit. I come to thank your Holiness, in the Name of the rest of the Society,
for the Bull you granted us against Great Britain: It was well meant, and in
time I hope we shall draw that People from their Allegiance to their Prince,
and make them pay Homage, according as their Duty binds them, to none but you.


Pope. I granted it to you freely; though at that instant a Prophetic Fancy
did almost seem to tell me, that something beyond the reach of Sense or Nature,
would obstruct our noble Design. I have summoned all the infernal Crew to our
assistance; not a Devil, either on the surface, or in the entrails of the
Earth, but by my toilsom Endeavors, and your Necromantick Policy, does put a
helping hand to forward so great a Work.


Jes. And there is nothing we leave untryed, to perform our Duty to the holy
See. We have set our Instruments at work, to deprive England of its Crown and
Dignity, that thereby they may own you for their supreme Head, as well in
temporal as spiritual Affairs --

That word was scarce out of his mouth, when they heard a Voice as from under
the ground, crying as loud as it could bawl, If you are for such Handiwork,
take me into your Council. The Jesuit being well skilled in Conjurations,
obliged the Thing that spoke, to appear before them; it was a rough-hewn,
ill-faced Fellow, in a Priest's Garb.
Jes. From what Country art thou?


Ghost. I am a French Ghost, a vostre Service. I was called Ravilliack when I
lived with Mortals, and my Name must needs inform you, that it was I murdered my
King and Master Henry the 4th. It was your Reverend Society set me to work; and
hearing you have now some such Business in hand to be executed in England, I
took a flight from Hell, to know the certainty of it; and whether or no it is
so exquisitely Diabolical, as our Monarch King Lucifer told us, when he spoke
to us in commendation of the Deed, applauding the Contrivance, both for the
advancement of your Honor and Interest, and for the propagation of his
infernal Dominions. However I thought time had made you weary of these Actions,
but I see the World must first be weary of you.

I stabbed my King bravely; was it not a noble Act? And had not your Fraternity
cheated me of my Soul, I should have had a good conceit of it still. I thought
to have gone as directly to Heaven, as I did to be executed; I was obstinate,
and relied wholly upon the Absolution I had from the Pope, for that famous
Deed, which I thought was enough, and more than enough, to keep me from the
broad Road; nay, I denied upon my death, that any one counseled me to perform
that Act, but owned it as done by my own Inclination, and did manfully say,
(like a true Roman Catholic) that if it were to do again, I would do it. Thus
I died, and thus I have received my Reward.


Jes. Thou art a very foolish Ghost; why should you care where you go, when you
are dead, provided you are true to the Church upon Earth? Can you think, Fool
that you are, that you can endure too much (be it where it will, in the World
or out of it) for the sake of the Church? Fie, fie! I wonder a Ghost of your
Parts will talk so.


Rav. It Is true, I went Nobly to be damned, led by the Rule of your devout
Maxims, and I esteemed the Murder I committed, a meritorious Act, and I think
it has proved so. For as your Society does most piously instruct all your
Pupils, that Protestant Princes should be cut off, and that he or they that
shall accomplish their Death, do merit Heaven thereby; I esteeming my Master
King Henry inclined that way, and that he did design to send his Forces against
his Holiness; egged on by the Fire of Devotion, and receiving Encouragement
from you, I at length most happily accomplished this heroic Act, which has
rendered my Memory as superlatively famous, as it is possible for the deepest
Infamy to render to after-Ages. My Name was most ingloriously extirpated the
Realm of France, and those I judged that would have been my Friends, and have
extolled the Deed, did most worthily, to my everlasting shame, fill the whole
World with bitter Invectives and Exclamations, against a thing I thought so
just.


Jes. Thou have been an honest well-meaning Fellow in thy lifetime to the
Church, and did boldly undertake to be damned, like a valiant Soldier of his
Holiness, and therefore I will deal plainly with so worthy a Ghost, and reveal
to thee some Secrets, which were not perhaps invented, when thou were among
Mortals; and I believe, thou art as honest a Ghost as thou were a Man, and
would, if thou could live upon Earth again, be still devoted to serve us.


Ra. I fear I should not, more especially if I should be in the least sensible,
that the Torments I now suffer, should be my Reward again.


Jes. Art thou still for this impertinent Talk? I thank Lucifer, we don't want
thee; for we have those in the World that are as bold, nay rather bolder, than
ever thou were, that will drudge, and take as much and more pains to be damned,
than ever thou did -- But to come to the purpose: We design first, since the
King of Great Britain will be no Roman Catholic, to remove him out of the way,
as an Obstacle to our Design --


Ra. How out of the way? As I did my Master?


Jes. Even so. Then having furnished with Arms and Ammunition, all the English
Romanists, (and that is not a few) besides many Foreigners, that be at our
beck, the time being appointed, and the sign given, they shall rise
helter-skelter, cut Throats merrily, and make three Meals in a day of those
Heretics; which as it will be to the great Comfort of us Catholics in
general, so your Holiness will more particularly relish the Sweets of such
Transactions, in a more savoury manner, especially when you begin once more to
receive Peter pence, sell Absolutions, and redeem Souls from Purgatory in that
Island, with innumerable many more Benefits, which will from thence accrue to
the holy See, whereby you will treble your Revenues.


Pope. There Is life in this Discourse: Methinks the power of it has almost
stopped my Looseness; Oh how I would hug thee, if this day were come to pass!


Ra. I doubt you will not be altogether so successful as I have been.


Pope. Now thou show thy self a very ill-natured Ghost to me, in using these
discouraging Expressions. Conduct me to my Close-stool again; Heartsick! These
laxative words have increased my Disease.


Ra. I had neither took upon me the trouble to come into the World, nor had the
least suspicion of any thing, but that I heard Whisperings among the most
notable of the damned Crew, as if the Mortals had invented new ways, to
replenish the infernal Mansions with more Company; which if there be any
Consolation to be had in those tormenting Dwellings, the hopes of this News did
seem to give it them: Old Noll belched out nothing but Treasons and Murders;
and some of your Holiness's Predecessors, that I have the Honor to know there,
cried out as loud as they could bawl, (as filled with Joy) Sedition, a
Conspiracy, Cut, Hack, Destroy, Massacre. I seeing such an unusual Joy among
the Damned, smelt a Rat, and prepared my self for a Journey into the World: And
having experienced when I lived there, that the most notorious Rebellions, the
most blood-thirsty Treasons, the most savage Murders, and impious Seditions,
had commonly their Birth and first Contrivance, in all Ages, under your sacred
Nose, I happened to arrive in the nick of time into your presence, when this
learned Jesuit and you were discoursing on such Affairs. But methinks if you
consider the ill success your Designs have ever had against that Nation, it
should dishearten you: But you do perhaps imagine, according to your Reason,
that the ill-managing the former Plots, obstructed their desired Effects,
without giving your self the least trouble to think, an overruling Power can
withstand that controlling Force, your politic Contrivances carry along with
them.


Pope. You don't talk as if you had so much Cunning as a Mortal, much less as a
Ghost. The Revolution and Changes of Kingdoms, are sometimes wrought by our
subtle Magic; our Policy shall out-reach Lucifer's; we have more ways to
attain our damnable Ends, than ever Proteus had to turn himself into such
various Shapes; and to sympathize with him, we can turn our selves into more
Shapes than ever he dreamed on. In Protestant Nations we can be one day a
devout Divine, and the next a Porter; sometimes we turn our selves into Persons
of extraordinary Quality, and huff it with our Coach and six, when immediately
after the Scene perhaps is changed, and we turn wilful Beggars; sometimes we
are illiterate Coxcombs, as Countrey-Clowns, Dunces, and seemingly Naturals;
then we render our selves Objects of Folly to the whole World, when in a small
time afterward, we are found arguing some deep Points in Philosophy, or some
other piece of Learning, with Persons as knowing as our selves; and then again,
according to the Convenience we find to prosecute our Purpose, none shall rail
more against Popery than we; none to appearance such true English Churchmen,
Quakers, Anabaptists, Presbyterians, Muggletonians, and what not: No Sect
whatsoever but we make use of, as Instruments to further our Contrivances;
sometimes we are looked upon as such devout men by the multitude, that we are
raised to a Pulpit, to teach and instruct them; then we make it our business to
rail against Government, and with a subtle kind of tempting Rhetoric to praise
Novelty; this gains us immediately the hearts of the Hydra, or Vulgar: Thus the
seeds of Sedition being pretty well sown, we begin to be assured of having laid
a perfect Platform, toward the accomplishment of our Desires. But now we have
made use of these Tricks so often, that the British Heretics are grown so wary
to keep us at a distance, to our great trouble, though the study of our
Politics affords us new ways to be even with them.


Ra. This is incomparable! We Ghosts have Cunning enough in us, but that that
mass of Flesh, that gross Substance, called Man, should sound to that depth of
diabolical Policy, it is enough to make not only me, but all the Demons and
Cacodemons in Hell, bless themselves, which they don't use to do.


Jes. Because I will not lie, nor equivocate with a Ghost, as I do with Mortals, I
will acquaint you what I my self did at Rouen in France, with a
Brother-Confederate of mine: You know there are a great quantity of Protestants
in that Kingdom, whom we style Hugonots; I had ordered my Confederate to
personate a zealous one; and I was to meet him at such a Place in the Street,
(it was in a Street we knew to be well stored with Hugonots.) After we had
seemed for some time to discourse of very indifferent Matters, (according to
the Design we had laid) there began between us as loud, as eager a Dispute, he
arguing for the Protestants, and I for the Papists; our Discourse was so hot
and high, that in an instant we had a great crowd of both Sects incompassing
us, to hear us. After we had gathered a good Congregation, my Confederate did
by degrees seem to yield to the force of my Arguments, and at length after a
great many pro's and con's, wholly to be convinced, and consequently converted
to the Church of Rome, and made me a faithful promise, (loud enough that the
People might hear) to go to Mass the next opportunity. The Effect answered our
Expectation, for the Catholic Party immediately set up a great shout, and the
most ignorant of the Protestants followed the Steps of my Confederate, and went
to Mass too.


Pope. You see, worthy Ravilliack, the Religious means we are forced sometimes
to use, to bring that obstinate People to pay their Duty to the triple Crown.


Ra. Such like politic Traps we used in the Age I lived in the World, which
sometimes miscarried, and when we could not catch them, as we would have them;
then we were constrained to use Force, and dispatch them out of the World, with
all the modest Expedition we could. But now methinks I am wanted in Acheron,
whose Inhabitants, I fear, already grumble at my long stay in the World. In
being forced to return then, I remain your Holiness's very humble Servant:
Commend me to all those of your Acquaintance, that take care to follow my
Track, by seeking to wash their hands in the Blood of Princes.

This Ghost had some Manners in him, for he vanished with a Complement in his
mouth, and left the Pope and the Jesuit by themselves, who were many days
consulting the great Affair, of turning England upon her Head, and to strip her
of all her graceful Ornaments, that her Nakedness might render her
contemptible, and her Contempt make her appear in the view of all Europe, to be
the greatest Slave that ever Rome trampled under foot; but the time is not
come. One day when they were in very private Discourse, word was brought his
Holiness, that there was a Gentleman in his Palace, who waited with much
earnestness to speak with him; that he had something of Importance to
communicate to his Holiness, and that his Garb spoke him a Traveller. Entrance
was immediately commanded to be given him; when being come, he thus began.
Trav. The Affection I bear your Holiness, has occasioned my traveling some
hundreds of miles out of my way, not only to pay my Duty at your sacred Feet,
but likewise to give you intelligence of some Passages in the World, relating
to the Church.


Pope. Thou have done like a dutiful Son, and my Benediction shall protect
thee, vi and armis, wherever thou go.


Trav. I have made it my Business to travel all my Life; hardly a Mousehole, or
Corner of the known World, but I have been, or peeped in: I have been Eastward
10000 Leagues beyond the Walls that separate China from Tartaria; I have washed
my Face and Hands in the Clouds 7 years together without omission; then it was
I was going to take a Journey through the middle Region of Air, to visit the
Inhabitants of the Sun, Moon and Stars, when my Tackling (which were some
Egg-shells, filled with May-Dew, and a light Wicker Chair) was not rightly
fixed, which disappointed my intent. I have sailed from Grand Caire, upon the
Borders of Nyle, to Lapland, in a Cockboat, where I had a great deal of good
Advice given me to turn Wizzard, though the commanding Power of my Amber-Beads
and Crucifix, made their Attempt fruitless. But that which moved in me the
greatest Surprizal, was at a time when I was at Dinner with Prester John, comes
me to the Table something, I profess, that half frighted me -- I dare hardly
presume to tell your Holiness, because being an abuse to you, it may offend
you; it was done, as I understood afterward, by the Power of Magic.


Pope. Tell it me, Son, and fear not.


Trav. Your Commands must be obeyed. Then wonder not if I tell you, That that
Head you have now upon your Shoulders, (or it seemed to be the same) was
brought in, (upon a large silver Dish) well dressed, and seasoned with
Heretics Blood, and well larded with the fattest Bulls and Dispensations, that
your Holiness has dispersed since you came to the Popedom. After this came in
the Head of Pope Pascal the first; and as a token that he was the first that
constituted Cardinals, it was surrounded with variety of Cardinals Heads,
seasoned with the Brains of diverse Jesuits, and garnished with red Caps.


Pope. Monstrous! Prester John shall repent putting these Abuses upon me.


Jes. Abominable! I Will instantly hire a Ravilliack to kill him.


Trav. This is not all yet. He took upon him the boldness to ask me to eat some
of these Dainties (as he called them) with him; but I abhorring the very
thoughts of so foul a Deed, would touch none: Whereupon, like a wicked Heathen
as he is, he asked me, Why I was more merciful to my holy Father, than to my
God, whom I could swallow without the least scruple of Conscience? These Sights
and Stories frighted me from his Court, when I took my leave of him, and went
directly for France.


Pope. Prester John is a very ill-bred wicked Man: From this time forward, the
Country he is Master of, is none of his own, I bestow it on one of my Nephews.


Trav. When I came for France, there it was I heard a great talk of a Plot,
intended to subvert the Government, and cry down the Religion of Great Britain,
and that it was contrived, and to be carried on by your Holiness, the Jesuits,
and the most zealous of the Laity; although by the joking of the Frenchmen, and
their sneering at such a Report, made it appear, that it was not believed for a
truth in that Kingdom. Now I had so good an opinion of your Holiness, that I
knew you would pretermit no opportunity, wherein you might propagate and
advance your Interest, and per consequens, that of the Church, let it be where,
or how it will: Why should you not pull now at that heretical Kingdom, as well
as your Predecessors have tugged at it formerly?


Pope. Son, You speak the truth, and the good opinion you have of me, (though
it be your duty to have no other) I have endeavored to deserve.


Trav. I doubt it not. But to come to my purpose: Being at Paris, and hearing
there the several Censures of this Plot, the noise of it had almost tired my
Senses, when I took a resolution to divert my self, by seeing a new Play which
was to be acted: Whence it comes in my Head to tell you a pleasant Passage I
observed in it. Enters a Traveller, (as I may be) and his Friend, who after he
had given him an Account of a great many more and stranger Places, than I have
been at, told him, that now he came from England, where traveling on the Banks
of the Thames, he spied at a small distance from him, a glorious Fleet of
Ships, riding at Anchor, among which there was one of a larger bulk, and of a
more beautiful aspect, than the rest. This Traveller had a short Cloak on, with
a pair of Boots, that reached up to his Armpits; this stately Ship, says he,
carried 100 brass Guns: Standing on the Shore, proceeded he, to view it more
fully, it appeared to my Eye, as if it had sprung a Leak, and was sinking; I
taking pity of it, (for it would have grieved me to have seen such a delightful
Object perish) flung my Cloak over it, and carried it away under my Arm. His
Friend wanting that Faith, which a great many of us Catholics are strongly
possessed with, did seem to doubt of the truth of what was told him, and begun
to question the probability of it. Since you are so hard of belief, said he,
take a Voyage into England, where you shall find two substantial Witnesses,
ready to vouch and swear to the truth of it.

When the Play was done, I went to my Lodging, and there begun to ponder upon
this Subject; I fancied to my self, that there was some extraordinary mystery
in it, and therefore could find no quiet nor peace in my mind, till I had given
that Island a Visit: When coming to London, I found the Rumor of a Plot, so
much laughed at in France, a comfortable Truth, to the everlasting Credit and
Honor of the holy See. I likewise found the two substantial Witnesses,
vouching to things far more probable, than the Ship with 100 brass Guns; for by
more than mere Circumstances, they have vouched some of our dear Friends to a
Gallows, and there are more, I fear, that must in their due order follow; which
thing, though it may multiply the Catalogue of Roman Saints and Martyrs, yet to
see the detriment this Discovery has done our holy Church, made me burst out
in tears.


Pope. Oh my industrious Devil, without thee I am undone! Where art thou? I
fear thou have made but small progress now in the Errand I sent thee for: Oh my
Stomach! -- my Guts! how I am griped? Let me but outlive this Disgrace, and
the next Plot shall make amends.


Trav. I thought to have stayed there longer, but a general Search being made
for Priests and Jesuits, made me sick to come away; and my zeal to your
Holiness led me hither, to acquaint you with this News: And now I have
performed my Duty, I shall depart contentedly for India, where I am now going.
Holy Father, farewell, and if Heaven will not smile upon your Endeavors, may
Hell's Flatteries please you, its Power assist you, and its Injustice protect
you, under its sable wings.


Pope. Adieu, and peace be with you, but (I mean now you are gone) that the
worst of my Curses may light upon you, for coming to fill my Ears with this
Din. What a prodigious Looseness have I got now? This must surely kill me, which
if I am sensible of, after I have given my self an Absolution for the sins I
have been guilty of, (if Popes can commit any) and when I have begged my own
pardon for my past failings, especially that great one, (I mean the miscarriage
of this Plot) I shall die with some content.


Jes. Be comforted, holy Father, and expect the Return of your familiar Master
and Servant Lucifer, who will doubtless give a more full Account than this
impertinent Traveller. Travelers are made up of lies; you may put more faith
in one Devil, than in twenty mortal Travelers.

At this instant the Clouds began to thicken, the Air to whisper, and a noise
was heard, as proceeding from the bowels of the Earth, when suddenly one part
of the Heavens seemed at variance with another, by the terrible blustering of
all the Winds, and the thick and dark hollow Clouds, did with their hanging
bellies, cover the tops of Towers and Steeples, which filled with Thunder,
raised a general Consternation in all Roman Catholic Kingdoms, more especially
in the City of Rome, when the infernal Monarch, at the music of a horrid clap
of Thunder, made his Entry through the Cieling, into the Pope's presence.
Luci. Freighted with more Confusion, than my infernal Dominions are stored
with; struck with more Terror, than those brimstony Mansions afford the
Damned, I am comfortlesly come to tell thee, That the All-commanding Hand has
withheld my Power, the All-discerning Eye of Heaven has pryed into our secret
Councels, and that Hell must be enlarged, to contain those Mortals, that are
hastening to my Kingdom. Although my diligent Endeavors can deserve no blame: I
have, according to my Nature, compassed the World, seeking whom I may devour;
nay further, according to my usual Tenent, which you Jesuits have politickly
borrowed from me, I have appeared like an Angel of Light, to seduce Man: I have
filled not only England, but all the World, with the most notorious Heresies,
(to make way for Sedition, and consequently Murders and Treasons) that it is
possible for the large reach of a Devil to invent or fathom. And though this
Plot has been discovered, yet the devout Catholics, that suffered for the
same, I have caused, according to the usual Jesuitical Mode, to deny, with an
excellent Impudence, the Charge they were found guilty of. At their very
Deaths, I have gone so far, as to procure a Writing to be put in one of the
Pockets of those that were hanged, who indeed could neither write nor read,
(and therein my Cunning failed me) in which he declared his Innocence,
hypocritically prayed for the King, and manfully reviled the Judges that
condemned him. That which induced them to do this, was cunningly extracted from
the virtue of your Absolutions, and their thoughts filled with the hopes of
being freed from the pains of Purgatory. All this I have done, and caused to be
done, by Jesuitical Instruments, to make those Heretics mis-understand us, and
have a more charitable belief of us, than to think that ever any Plot was
intended.


Pope. And could you do no good? Were they such Infidels, not to believe what
you had spread among them?


Luci. No, on the contrary, they are rather more eager to proceed, and to
search into the very bottom of it; and the general Council of that Nation, who
in spite of my teeth, will pretend to honor and obey their King, will, as I
heard say, stick by him, and venture their Lives and Fortunes for him, and the
public Good. Oh that I had some moisture in my Eyes, that I could but shed a
Tear for so great a Disappointment!


Pope. Hold -- Hold me up; I shall faint away; set me upon my Close-stool; my
Guts! my Guts! Oh this Looseness!


Jes. Patience. Let Us hear him out; perhaps it is not altogether so bad: Come,
my faithful Demon, proceed.


Luci. The telling the rest is enough to break a Devil's heart, I am ready to
cry at the thoughts of it; however since it must out, it shall. Just as I was
coming away to complete my damnable Misery, I was crept into a hollow Cliff by
the Seaside, ready to sail through my usual Road, the Air, for Rome, when at
the entrance of it, I found this Scrowl, [which he gave to the Pope] and
immediately after, an unusual Luster, brighter than the Sun in his Meridian
Glory, filled me with both Terror and Amazement; amidst the Rays, appeared a
beautiful Being, in shape like Man, but had something more pure and perfect in
it; at first my diabolical Knowledge could not construe what it was, till the
words it pronounced, (which were the same your Holiness has in the Scrowl)
made me take it for England's good Angel. Terrified I was to some purpose,
especially when he pronounced the Name of Jehovah with such an Emphasis, and
would thereupon have run away, had not this bright Being withheld me, and
given me Command to hear him out. There was no resisting, I must do it; and
then he charged me to give the Scrowl to the Bishop of Rome, which Commission I
had likewise no power to refuse, and now your Holiness may peruse it.


Pope. Oh me! I have no -- Stomach to read, here (said he, giving it to the
Jesuit) do you read it.


Luci. Let me first be gone.


Pope. Thou art at liberty, but with thee my hopes are now gone too.

With that the Devil in an instant dived into the Ground, like a Duck in the
Water, and the Jesuit read the following lines to the Pope. By England's
Guardian-Angel.
FRom the bright Orb of everlasting day,
Where deathless Glory bears triumphant sway;
From the Abyss of ever-during Joy,
Where naught, dull and terrene does us annoy,
Where Souls refined, piercing as light, appear,
Clothed with the beams of Purity t'th' Sphere,
Where Hallelujahs melt admiring Hearts,
With more diviner Joys, not mixed with Arts,
But sweet celestial Raptures, sung in praise
Of Great Jehovah, midst his heavenly Rays,
I come: To thee my Charge, dear England, sent
From the Protector of the Innocent,
With Power to prevent the threatening doom,
Hatched in Hell's Bowels, and the Heart of Rome.
Oh! do thou tremble? Fiend, haste to be gone,
To thy infernal Cave and Mansion,
Or to the Cabal of Jesuits; thy Friends
Have new Designs to make some sweet amends,
For the miscarriage of the latter; go,
And think that Heaven will not prevent that too.
Let me embrace thee in my folded Arms,
My dearest Charge, to save thee from all Harms,
That Hell and Rome can equally invent,
To color thee with Blood and Discontent.
Run on blind Romanists in Cruelty still,
And think that Providence cannot prevent your will,
And that you may your selves the more deceive,
Your own invented Cruelty don't believe.
Delude your Fancies, politickly plot,
For your own Interest, naught should be forgot.
Do this and more, if worse can be than Evil,
To glad your best devoted Friend, the Devil.
While I protect my Charge: But Heaven
Has a more sacred One to Raphael given,
Britain's Great Monarch, great, next being divine,
The mortal Emblem (that below does shine)
Of the immortal Being, him has he
From the heavenly Power, in his security.
Rome shall look sad, and tremble, to perceive,
She could the Eye of Prov'dence not deceive.
Live happy, Mighty Monarch, live to see,
The downfall of so cruel an Enemy.
Great was his aim at thy too precious Life;
But the All-stretching Hand, before 'twas rise
For Action, guided my more willing Arm,
To stop the Blow, t'obstruct so great a Harm.
For thee a more delightful Fate's designed;
Heaven to Majestic Souls is ever kind.
Traitors shall die, while loyal Hearts do sing,
With Tears of Love, Great God, preserve the King.

Pope. This don't relish with me; this racking Torment destroys me, that is most
certain: Yet my Disease is not altogether so loathsome to my self, as the scent
of it is fulsom to the rest of the Christian World, that we should fail in the
execution of this renowned Design, after we had spent so much Time and Oil in
studying and contriving. Carry me to my Close-stool again, I cannot bear it.


Jes. Most holy Father, The Experience you have had in this World, which I may
well say, does parallel your years, should, if I may presume to give my weak
Opinion, not dishearten the prosecution of your Interest. Look back a little, I
beseech you, upon the Times past, and observe the Transactions of those Ages,
when our Plots were crowned with Success. In the year 1561. although the
Hugonots in France obtained many signal Victories against us Romanists, we at
length out-stript them in Policy, when by contriving a Match for the Admiral of
France, the Head of the Hugonots, we wheedled him to Paris, with all his
Followers, a great many of the Nobility being among them, as the Prince of
Conde, and others; when coming according to the Agreement of both Parties,
unarmed, and when we had given them our Faith, that they should not be
molested, nor have the least affront or injury offered to them, [but you know
our Jesuitical Maxim, to keep no Faith with Hereticks] the Marriage was
solemnized, with all the Triumphs that are requisite for such a day, when, in
fine, nothing of a Design being dreamed on against that Party, the Admiral not
being beloved by the Commonalty, had a Guard seemingly for his safety, but
indeed intended for his destruction. He had been shot some time before from a
Window, as he passed along the Streets, by a Party unknown, and at this instant
lay ill of his Wounds; when one day, hearing a noise of Arms in his House, and
having very few Persons with him, the principal whereof were two Chirurgions, a
Minister, and one or two Servants, yet to show himself a Man, would not seem
daunted; but hearing the noise approach his Chamber, he caused his Friends
about him to lift him out of his Bed, and putting on a Nightgown, stood upon
his Feet, and bade his Servants and Friends to shift for themselves, and to
take no care for him: At length they broke into his Chamber, and in that
defenseless posture, valiantly run a Sword in his Bowels, then struck him down
with a blow on the Head, when another, with a most undaunted courage, shot him
through the Breast with a Pistol, when the Duke of Guise, a true Romanist as
ever pist, staying in the Court, cried out aloud, and asked, if the Work was
done; answer being made it was, then cried the Duke of Guise, if such a one,
(meaning King Henry's Bastard) don't see it with his Eyes, he will not believe
it; throw him out at Window: Then, to the joy of all bloody Hearts, down they
threw him; which noble Act being performed, his Face being covered with Blood,
by means of the Wound in his Head, for which reason it was difficult to
discover, whether it was he or no; but the Duke of Guise to be certain, kneeled
on the Ground, and wiping him with a Napkin, Now, said he, I know him, it is
he. The Rage they exercised upon his dead Carcass, by cutting off his Head, and
most of other Members, and then to drag him to the common Gallows, and there to
Hang him up by the Feet, was a Deed worthy of none but Roman Catholics; his
Death was accompanied with the delicious murdering of about 100000 Hugonots
more; for they gave them a Pattern at Paris, which they immediately imitated
over the whole Kingdom.


Pope. This is a heal^ng Story, but it will work no Cure in me, for I grow
worse.


Jes. I thought the Ghost of Guy Faux, and Bishop Bonner, would have paid their
Respects to your Holiness at this time too. There was an Age for you, that the
latter lived in, when they sent the English Heretics hissing into the other
World; that was a blessed Time: But for Guy Faux, let us not talk of him, and I
fear too, that his Ghost is ashamed to appear amongst us, he was served as we
are now -- Mum -- not a word more of him. But when I think of Ireland, that
Thought makes my Heart laugh within me; he that occupied the holy Chair then,
reeled like a drunken Man; and truly, since your Holiness has given my Tongue
freedom in your presence, I do think in my Conscience, that the superfluity he
tasted of those Heretics Blood, did soundly fox him.


Pope. Call in my Chamberlains, and let me be carried to my Bed, I am sick to
death: Call in my Secretaries; for because I will die like a true Father of the
Church, my last Will and Testament, that I intend to leave behind me, shall
show how much like a Pope I died.


Upon Order given, he was removed, his Secretary called to him, who in
obedience to his Commands, drew the following Will, wherein he has left a
great many necessary Legacies. The Pope's Last Will and Testament.
I Give and bequeath my Soul to the Lot of him it falls to; my Body to the
Earth, there to be decently interred, with all the humble Magnificence, meek
Pride, and afflicted Ostentation, of my Predecessors. To my very cordial
Friend, the Great Turk, all the domineering Power, Religious Tyranny, and
exquisite Cruelty, that shall remain among the Clergy at my decease. Item, I
give all the Nuns within my Reach and Power, to be sent to the Seraglio at
Constantinople, and their Chastity therein to be preserved by the Great Turk,
with the same Discretion it was in the Nunneries. Item, All the Priests and
Friars I can grasp, I likewise give and bequeath to my trusty Friend the Grand
Seignior, to be castrated and created Eunuchs, to be sent to the Seraglio, to
give their Attendance on the aforesaid Nuns. To the Barbarians of Africa, I
give all the Jesuits that shall be in my power at my decease, that they may
teach them Christian Cruelty, and the way to Hell, by seeming to aim at Heaven.
Item, To the Jews, who though they are my Enemies, I give and bequeath the Art
and Power of Transubstantiation, that they may eat our Savior with the same
Conscience they crucified him. To the Witches of Lapland, all my Amulets,
Charms, Miracles, Exorcisms, Conjurations, Imprecations, and Excommunications,
for the use and benefit of them and their Heirs for ever. To the Kingdom of
England, as many Curses, as there are Letters in this my last Will and
Testament.

Witness my Hand and Seal, Papa Ecclesiae Romanae.
In the Presence of Antonio Superstitioso, Cardinalis Superbus, Don Diego
Irreligioso.




FINIS.

