Certain Propositions Relating to the Scots Plantation of CALEDONIA, and the
National Address for supporting thereof, briefly offered to Public View, for
removing of Mistakes and Prejudices.
I. THAT the Scotch Planters have entered upon Caledonia by Warrant, and under
Security of an Act of Parliament, and Letters patent from his Majesty under the
Great Seal, and most strictly within the Terms and Conditions thereof;
otherwise there had needed no more to Ruin them, than a Declaration of their
having Forfeited their Act and Charter.

II. That their Right is confirmed by Invitation from, and League with the
original free Natives of that Country, who only can have the primary Natural
Right to the Soil, and from whom the Spaniards have, contrary to all Justice,
Faith, and Contract, usurped what they now prossess in America, having obtained
their Possession by Fraud and Force and Barbarous Cruelty, and by the Popes
Donation upon certain Conditions, which they have not in the least observed, as
is fully made appear by Bartholomew de las Casas Bishop of Chiapa, one of there
own Missionaries.

III. That the place chosen by the Scots was never inhabited by the Spaniards
or any other European, and consequently the Scots have the same freedom to take
Possession of it, as the English to possess any part of the Coast from
New England to Florida, the French in Canada and Messasippy, the Portuguez in
Brasil, and the Dutch in Suranam, being all upon the same Continent, which the
Spaniards from Columbus's discovery, do challenge to themselves. And indeed it
is evident, That the Crown and Kingdom of Scotland has not a better Title, nor
a more just Right to any Scots Territory from the Mule of Galloway to the Week
of Cathnes then to Caledonia in America.

IV. That not only have the Scots the sole unquestionable Right to this
Important Place: But likewise, albeit they have been hitherto debarred from all
Benefit of free Trading in other Plantations, yet they have very frankly
offered both to the English and Dutch, their Protestant Neighbors, a
reasonable Share in all the Advantages of Caledonia, which for Natural Wealth
and Strength, and convenience of Trading, is without Dispute, the most
considerable in the whole World.

V. That if the Scots be forced to abandon their Plantation, the French will
undoubtedly seize upon it, not only for the sake of Trade, Gain, and Empire;
But likewise in Zeal for rooting out the Northern Heresy, both from America and
Europe, which may be easily foreseen, both by the vast occasion of Power and
Wealth, that so imporrant a Post will bring to the French Greatness, and by the
keen Resentment that all the Popish Courts, and particularly the Court of Rome
have testified against the Scots possessing thereof, and by the no less
unpolitick than cruel Persecution that, at this day rages in France against the
poor Remnant of Protestants, who cannot comply with their Superstition and
Idolatry.

VI. That there is such an hopeful appearance of propagating the pure Gospel
amongst an Harmless, good Natured People in the Neighborhood of Caledonia, who
seem well disposed to receive it, as ought to excite Reformed Protestants to
contribute thereto with the greatest Vigor; and to strengthen themselves
against the Romish Power; especially when Popery prevails so mightily over all
Europe, and the Papists compass Sea and Land to gain Proselites; Nor does the
Remotness, Danger and Barbarities of China, Japan, Tartary, and all the back
parts of the English Plantations discourage or faint their Zeal.

VII. That therefore, it is the undoubted Interest and Duty of all Protestants,
to support this Colony in the Scots hands, who have the only just Right
thereto; and in whose Possession, it must certainly prove more beneficial to
all other Protestant Kingdom and States, than any other more wealthy and
powerful Kingdom or State would suffer it to be unto the rest, if they did
possess it alone. And it must be the unquestionable duty of all true hearted
Scots Men to endeavor by all Just, Legal, and orderly ways, the Preservation
of their own Colony.

VIII. That whatever has been the Cause of the late Disaster of Caledonia, yet
most Evident it is, that the Colony cannot now be preserved to Scotland, unless
the Force and (...) of the West India Proclamations be taken off, and that ob,
very speedily, si^^^ (...) is undeniably manifest, that the Company under t^eir
present hard Circumsta^^^, and now sadly redoubled Misfortunes, are not able to
support the same, and vigio^^ the very speedy Assistance of a Parliament, not
only must so Great and Honor (...) Enterprise fall to the Ground, but the
remaining Persons, and the Treasure empl^^^d therein must Perish, to the
Irreparable Less and Dishonor of the Nation*

IX. That the only (...) and effectual Way for Remedy, is (in imitation of the
Dutch-East-India-Compa^^ ^ho having been unsuccessful in their two first
Voyages, were supported by the (...)-General) in all Humble and Dutiful Manner,
to Address the King for the Meeti^^ (...) the parliament; which having been
already done by the Company, and his Majes^y having been pleased to regret
their and the Kingdoms loss, and to promise that the ^^^^iament shall meet,
when the Good of the Nation does require it; There can (...) nothing more
Natural, than for the Nation themselves to acquaint his Majesty (...) ^^e
urgent Necessity of the Parliament's speedy Meeting, upon so weighty and
^^^sing a Juncture, and of so Universal a Concern to the whole Nation.

X. That the Natural ^^^at of Petitioning, in a Legal and Orderly Wa^^ being
revived and asserted by (...) Claim of Right, the Happy Purchase of the late
^^^ricus Revolution: And His Majesty, our Great De^^^ under God, having alw^^^
^estified a just Regard to the ^^oresaid Right of Petiti^^ (...) ^en in that
Proc^^^^tion that forbids Illegal Meth^^; However His Majesty (...) ^^me
things, h^ ^een misinformed, to the Pr^^^ice of this His Ancient King (...)
Yet it is nev^^ (...) be imagined, but that where (...) understands their true
Good from themselves, (...) ^ill Graciously grant their Je^ and Necessary
Desires, and with (...) ^^n Countenance, and take ^^^e of their Righteous Cause.

XI. That tho it be Di^^^yal for any Man, to doubt of the Kings granting (...)
^liament, when sought by (...) considerable a part of the Nation: And to doubt
o^ (...) Parliament's supporting ^^^donia, is unworthy of a Scots Man; Yet if
the Question^ (...) asked, What is to be don^^^ case of Refusal? The Answer is
pl^in, That first, the N^tion shall have the Satisfa^^ion of having done their
Duty; and next, they shall have the Melancholy Advant^^e of knowing, that
further Attempts for an American-Plantation must at present ^ease, so as they
need not fruitlesly throw away more Men and Money to be lost in ^oubtful
Expectations, but must gather up their Shipwreck, and call Home what ^^^^ns.

XII. That in a Cas^ (...) Universal and Pressing Concern, as Persons of
differ^^ Interests have been in (...) ^o enter into the Trading Society, so it
ought to frigh^ none from their Duty (...) ^^omoting this Address, because
Persons of the same di^^ring Interests join in it; ^^nce the Address it self is
National, Loyal and Protestan^, and one of the best Securities to the present
Government; and so also is the Design, in which all does Center.

XIII. That albeit some ill Minded Persons bestir themselves in blowing about
Insinuations, Surmises and Jealousies, to raise Dust and blind Peoples Eyes,
yet these are so weak and groundless, and are convincingly found to be so very
idle Stuff, that they deserve the utmost Contempt, since Persons of all Ranks
engaged in the Address, do on all Occasions openly disown all Intentions of
Disquieting or Prejudging the Government in Church or State, as now by Law
established, and declare their only Design to be His Majesty's true Honor, and
the Good of the Country, which are inseparable, and the Christian Glory of the
Church, in the Propagation of the Gospel by the Protestant Presbyterian
Ministers of the Church of Scotland. Besides, that, there is an absolute
Impossibility, if Matters be duly pondered, that it should be otherwise; or
that an Address for the Meeting of that Parliament, which effectuated the late
Happy Revolution, and for the Support of Caledonia, can have any other Tendency.

XIV. That the General Assembly, by their Acts, and the Commission, by their
Letter to the Colony, their Mission in Summer last, and their late
Recommendation to Presbyteries, have testified so peculiar a Regard to the
Caledonian-Undertaking, and so just a Sense of the great Interests of Religion
therein, That no Minister of the Gospel, who will not blindly truckle to a
Party, or is not misled by the Power of Prejudice, can hesitat upon the
Necessity, much less upon the Expediency of so Dutiful and Loyal an Address,
when the Countries Good, and the Service of the Nation, does so urgently
require it.

GLASGOW, Printed in the Year, 1700.


