THE HISTORY Of the RENOWNED DON QUIXOTE De la MANCHA.

Written in Spanish by Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra.

Translated from the Original by several Hands:

And published by Peter Motteux Servant to his Majesty.

Adorned with Sculptures.

Nullum magnum ingenium sine mixtura dementiae. Vol. I.

LONDON Printed for SAM. BUCKLEY at the Dolphin in St. Paul's Churchyard.
M.DCC.

To the Honorable HENRY THYNNE, Esquire
SIR,
DEdications, like all Romances, are generally the same; and it is as difficult
now for an Author to find a new Complement to his Patron, as to make a
Knight Errant court his Mistress without more Rivals in his Words than in his
Love. This Consideration, Sir, has engaged me to seek some Person whose
peculiar and distinguishable Virtues might afford me a Subject to say something
new. I found Honor and Generosity in one Gentleman; Candor, Affability, and
strict Morality in another. Some were noted for their Wit; and others
remarkable for their Learning and Judgment. But these and other esteemable
Qualifications have separately engag d the Addresses of most Authors already. I
was therefore obliged, as the newest Subject I could find, to pitch on a Person
who had all these Perfections together.

Here I had a great Obstacle to my Undertaking: For, whereas other Authors can
recommend their Dedications to the World by surprising Discoveries, making
Virtue shine where the Public could never find it, my poor Epistle must want
all these Advantages. Your Merit is so universally acknowledged, that should I
enlarge in its praise, I can say no more than is owned by all those who have
the happiness of knowing You. Men cannot say I flatter, lest they accuse
themselves of Adulation; and I am secure from the Censure of World, since, tho
it differs in most things, it always agrees in Your Commendation. You have
frequently met Cervantes in Your Travels, and conversed with him in some of
those foreign Languages of which you are Master. It Is upon the Presumption of
this Acquaintance abroad, Sir, that he humbly begs your Countenance at home.
For You have not only Delicacy of Taste to discover and relish his most hidden
Beauties, but a generous Humanity to excuse his Faults. Those two noble
Qualifications, as well as a thousand others, were in Perfection entailed on
You by Your Noble Father. He already sees You in possession of that rich
Inheritance of Virtue, which flows down in a plentiful Stream, without
impoverishing the inexhaustible Fountain; while, retired from the Hurry and
Business of the World, he enjoys that Philosophical Happiness which is the
pleasing Result of his Noble Actions and steady Course of Life, blessed in so
just a Representative of his great Abilities.

This Piece, Sir, has had the Fortune to be very happily patronized in other
Languages; yet Don Quixote in his present Circumstances is bound in Gratitude
to own the greatest Veneration to the Name of an English Nobleman. If he finds
as kind and generous Entertainment here as his Translator has met with, he need
not repent his changing Climates; and, if his Faults are not unpardonable, he
doubts not of a kind Reception. The Favors of the Generous English always
outstrip Merit, and it is the Character of the Nobility to be kind to Strangers.
Those Favors I have received from You, Sir, the World will judge of by their
being Yours: To say that You have conferred them, implies they have been Great.
Your own Generosity, not my Acknowledgments, must be the Estimate of Your
Bounty; which Cervantes pleads for his Entertainment at Long-Leat, that
delicious Seat of Your Noble Family. Be pleased to let him amuse You there some
Moments, till You oblige the Town with Your Return, and condescend once more to
honor me with that improving Converse, which at Your leisure has been the
greatest Happiness of,

SIR Your most Humble and Most Devoted Servant, P. Motteux.

The TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE.
EVery man has something of Don Quixote in his Humor, some darling Dulcinea of
his Thoughts, that sets him very often upon mad Adventures. What Quixotes dos
not every Age produce in Politics and Religion, who fancying themselves to be
in the right of something, which all the World tells 'em is wrong, make very
good sport to the Public, and show that they themselves need the chiefest
Amendment. We have our Sancho's that adhere to such Adventurers, and who like
the Squires Ass love to feed upon Thistles. Diogenes in his Tub was no less
romantic than Don Quixote in his Cage; and our Modern Philosophers in their
Abyss of Knowledge seem as fairly enchanted as the Knight in Montesino's Cave.
The Philosopher's Stone is like Sancho's Earldom; and the Virtuoso's Perpetual
Motion has very much of the Windmill. What can be more romantic than the
Schemes of some Projectors, who are still erecting Castles in the Air; or more
extravagant than some Poets, Men who abuse every Body, tho their Dependence be
on every Body, who in their mad Attempts invoke their Muses, as Knights-Errant
do their Mistresses, and charge their ill Success on the ill nature of the
Times, or Malice of Fortune, as Don Quixote did his Mistakes on the envy of
Inchanters; while their Disappointments are only chargeable on the jadish
Tricks of their Pegasus, who like the Knight's Rozinante is sure to stumble in
the Career. But among all the Quixotes of the Age I must not forget my self in
regard to this present undertaking. I have engaged to rescue the Hero of
Cervantes out of the hands of his former Translators, and to set him at large
to seek happier Adventures in a more proper Dress: for whatever a few People,
who either take things upon trust, or can like nothing that is done in the Age
in which they live, may say of the Old Version, it is granted by impartial
Judges that the Language falls short of the Purity of the English Tongue, even
of that time, and that it owes the little Reputation it has to the last
Translation's being done so obscenely and ridiculously. For the first
Translators generally kept so close to the Author, that they were obscure, and
even as much Spanish as he in ten thousand places; and in others, either through
haste or want of skill, they seem not to have understood him: but the Original
is so beautiful, that it is scarce in the Power of any one to miss of pleasing,
tho, like them, he translated word for word, and often as Schoolboys do their
Exercises. I need say nothing of a new Edition of that old Translation, which,
I hear, is hastily furbish'd up by Capt. Stevens; for the Judicious will easily
conclude, that it is impossible to mend it by patching, tho it were attempted
by a Man who had some Genius for Comedy, and was able to suit his Style to all
the various Characters in this incomparable Work, which in short is in a manner
a Dramatic Piece. As for the Don Quixote what was published some years ago,
it is rather a Burlesque Imitation of the French Translation than any thing
else. Never did Spaniard suffer more by Drake, than our Knight of La Mancha by
the Writer of that English-Spanish Quixote: He has transformed him worse than
any of his own Magicians, and handled him so ill, that his Valor appears only
passive; so that in his Book he may truly be called the Knight of the
ill-favor'd Face. He has omitted a great number of entire Paragraphs, a whole
Story, and several Papers of Verses, changed the Sense, ridiculed the most
serious and moving Passages, removed all the scandalous places in London into
the middle of Spain, and all the Language of Billingsgate into the Mouths of
Spanish Ladies and Noblemen. He has confounded the Characters and the
Countries, and added a World of Obscenity and fribling Conceits. He seems
indeed to have let his Fancy run away with his Judgment, and to be sure will
plead Design for his Mistake, and tell you plainly that he thought himself a
Man of greater Parts than Cervantes; and that his Piece is an Improvement, not
a Translation of Don Quixote. Now I have so mean an Opinion of my Talent this
way, and so great a Veneration for the wonderful Genius of the Author, that I
fancy it the greatest Justice to my self to be just to him. Not that it is to be
expected that a Work of this Nature can always admit of a literal or close
Translation; that would be to make the Book unintelligible, and not English. In
some places we have minded the Sense more than the Words; some things having a
Grace in one Language, that would not be liked in another. That high sounding
pompous way of Expression which becomes the Spanish, cannot always look so well
in our Tongue: yet I hope every thing will appear to have an Air of the
Original. Tho our Spaniard speaks English, he is still in his own Country, and
preserves his native Gravity and Port. When the Knight or the Historian
discourse of matters of Chivalry, you here will find their Expression dashed
with some antiquated or bombastic Words, as Cervantes has done, but no where
else: his Style being polite and modern wherever the Author speaks, or Men and
Women of Sense are introduced. So that it was necessary to do equal Justice to
the English as well as to the Spanish, to give a good Translation of this Work.
And I have found it exceedingly more difficult to do the first than the last,
notwithstanding the great Assistance I have received from the best Judges of
both Languages. Here I ought to own how much I am obliged to those worthy
Gentlemen, some of whom have not only supplied me with their Advice, but
generously contributed otherwise to enable me to perfect this Undertaking.
Among the first, with all grateful Respect, I make bold to mention the
Honorable Colonel Codrington, Colonel Stanhoppe, Sir Henry Sheer, William
Aglionby Esquire; who obliged me with the Story of the Captive, translated by him
some years ago; Thomas Sergeant Esquire; who has favored me with that of the
Goatherd; and some other Gentlemen, who are not only Masters of the Spanish,
but of the Delicacies of our Tongue. I have also Acknowledgments to pay to Mr.
Wycherly, Mr. Congreve, Dr. Garth, Dr. Pellet, Thomas Cheek Esquire; Mr. Savage,
Mr. Thomas Brown, and some other ingenious Friends, not forgetting Don
Bernardino Navarro, at once a just Critic in his own Language, and so good a
Master of ours, as to have made an excellent Grammar, which will be printed in
some time. I am so far from denying the Helps I have received, that I would
choose to magnify my Assistance to strengthen my Party against the Censorious.
I must own that I have made my advantage of the mistakes and Beauties of the
former Translators; and by imitating what was good, and avoiding their Errors,
may possibly have made this a tolerable Translation. Where I have fallen in
with their Expression, it is sometimes by accident, but oftener by design. I have
had the good fortune to be a little conversant with the Stage, of which
advantage my Predecessors in this Affair were destitute, as may appear by their
losing the Genius of Comedy which runs through the Author, and which I have
endeavored to maintain by avoiding all Improprieties of Speech.

Here I cannot forbear admiring his strange Art of moralizing with so facetious
an Air. He has chosen to make his Book an exact Mirror of Mankind, where every
man may view his Face without any abuse, but the silent Reflection of the
Shadow, as it naturally flows from the Substance. This dumb sort of Instruction
he was sensible must be very prevalent with the World; since every body is fond
of seeing their own face, be it never so ugly. In short, his Book is in a
manner a Dramatic Piece, with great variety of Characters justly maintained by
the nicest Rules of Art, his Style generally following the nature of the
Subject; and his Example is as just a Rule for the Stage as his Precepts. What
can be more full and comprehensive than the Humors of Sancho? Any man with
half the Squire's Wit may read in this single Character the mean, slavish, and
ungenerous Spirit of the Vulgar in all Countries and Ages: a crouching E^^^,
awkard Lying, sordid Avarice, sneeking Pity, a natural Inclination to Knavery,
and a superstitious Devotion. The whole Multitude in little. The Ancients had
recourse to a supernatural many-headed Beast to express and signify the Rabble;
but he makes Nature spin the Web out of her own Bowels, and shows us the
Monster without frighting us with the Hydra. The Character of Don Quixote must
speak its own praise: it is an Original without a Precedent, and will be a
Pattern without a Copy; its greatest fault was its too great Beauty, by which
some think it answered the Design too effectually: Many men being still of
opinion that the wonderful Declension of the Spanish Bravery and Greatness in
this last Century may be attributed very much to his carrying the Jest too far,
by not only ridiculing their Romantic Love and Errantry, but by laughing them
also out of their Honor and Courage: But that this was far from the Author's
Design, is very evident from his many noble Sentiments of Love and Honor
through his Book. The Ladies are infinitely obliged to him, the Characters of
the Fair Sex are generally virtuous. He gives their Love all the moving
Softness that can raise our Passions, without offense to their Modesty. He
makes them love like Women, but speak like Angels: And we may gather from his
favorable opinion of the fair Sex, as much as by his Courtly Style, that he
kept the best and noblest Company.

The Consideration of so many Graces in the Original were enough to make any
Translator suspect his Ability for undertaking so great a Work; but on the
other hand, so many Beauties are sufficient to entice any man to an imitation.
Magnis tamen excidit ausis, was a noble excuse; and the Attempt in a great
Design is sometimes as laudable as succeeding in a trifle.

I should make a Complement to those Honorable Gentlemen, whose Liberality has
proved so substantial an Encouragement to me in this Undertaking: but I must
change my note to an Apology, for the smallness of the Edition, and the best I
can make is humbly to beg their Pardon. I designed it a handsome Folio with a
fair Letter; but there was a necessity of publishing this first Part of the
Work immediately, being informed that while it was supervising with all
leisurely Care, the Booksellers concerned in the old Translation had got it
altered with all speed, and resolved at any Rate to have it come out first. I
hope my generous Patrons will forgive a Delay which was the effect of my good
Fortune; I mean the Employment, for which with all Thankfulness, I am proud to
own my self obliged to the great Mr. Mountague's Recommendation, and the Favor
of those noble Patriots Sir Robert Cotton, and Sir Thomas Frankland. This made
the Bookseller think of casting this into four little portable Duodecimos; and
indeed there is this Reason for it, that the Book being more for Diversion than
Study, is therefore more proper for the Pocket than the Closet.

I have nothing more to add but the Names of those noble Encouragers of this
Translation, which I presume to insert in the Order they subscribed, for my
particular Benefit. The Right Honorable Charles Mountague, Esquire; The Honorable
Colonel Codrington, the Right Honorable the Earl of Dorset, the Right Honorable
Henry Lord Colerane, the Honorable Hugh Hare, Esquire; the Honorable Edward Coke,
Esquire; Richard Norton, Esquire; Anthony Henly, Esquire; Mr. John Freeman, William
Bridgman, Esquire; his Grace the Duke of Devonshire, the Right Honorable the Lady
Vicountess of Weymouth, the Honorable Henry Thynne Esquire; Sir Robert Worsely Bar.
the Honorable H. Heveningham and J. Manners Esquires, Sir John Smith Bar. the
Right Hon. the Earl of Darwentwater, the Hon. Charles Boil Esquire; Sir Rich.
Blackmore, Charles Caesar Esquire; and Sir Godfrey Kneller.

THE Author's PREFACE TO THE READER.
YOU may depend on my bare Word, Reader, without any farther security, that I
could wish, this Offspring of my Brain were as ingenious, sprightly, and
accomplished as your self could desire; but the mischief on it is, Nature will
have its course: Every Production must resemble its Author, and my barren and
unpolished Understanding can produce nothing but what is very dull, very
impertinent, and extravagant beyond imagination. You may suppose it the Child
of Disturbance engendered in some dismal Prison, in the very seat of
Wretchedness, and amidst all manner of Inconveniences. Rest and Ease, a
convenient Place, pleasant Fields and Groves, murmuring Springs, and a sweet
Repose of Mind, are helps that raise the Fancy, and impregnat even the most
barren Muses with Conceptions that fill the World with Admiration and Delight.
Some Parents are so blinded by a Fatherl Fondness, that they mistake the very
Imperfections of their Children for so many Beauties; and the Folly and
Impertinence of the brave Boy must pass upon their Friends and Acquaintance for
Wit and Sense. But I, who am only a Step-Father, disavow the Authority of this
modern and prevalent Custom; nor will I earnestly beseech you, with Tears in my
Eyes, which is many a poor Author's Case, dear Reader, to pardon or dissemble
my Child's Faults: For, what Favor can I expect from you, who are neither his
Friend nor Relation? You have a Soul of your own, and the privilege of
Freewill, whoever you be, as well as the proudest He that struts in a gaudy
Outside: You are a King by your own Fireside, as much as any Monarch in his
Throne. You have Liberty and Property, which set you above Favor or Affection,
and may therefore freely like or dislike this History according to your humor.

I had a great mind to have exposed it as naked as it was born, without the
addition of a Preface, or the numberless Trumpery of commendatory Sonnets,
Epigrams, and other Poems that usually usher in the Conceptions of Authors: For
I dare boldly say, that tho I bestowed some time in writing the Book, yet it
cost me not half so much labor as this very Preface. I very often took up my
Pen, and as often laid it down, and could not for my life think of any thing to
the purpose. Sitting once in a very studious Posture, with my Paper before me,
my Pen in my Ear, my Elbow on the Table, and my Cheek on my Hand, considering
how I should begin, a certain Friend of mine, an ingenious Gentleman, and of a
merry Disposition, came in and surpised me. He asked me what I was so very
intent and thoughtful upon? I was so free with him as not to mince the matter,
but told him plainly that I had been puzling my Brain for a Preface to Don
Quixote, and that I had made my self so uneasy about it, that I was now
resolved to trouble my head no further either with Preface or Book, but rather
not to let the Achievements of that noble Knight be published. For, continued
I, why should I expose my self to the Lash of the old Legislator, the Vulgar?
They will say that I have spent my youthful Days very finely, to have nothing
to recommend my Gray Hairs to the World but a dry insipid Legend, not worth a
rush, wanting good Language as well as Invention, barren of Conceits or pointed
Wit, and without either Quotations on the Margin, or Annotations at the end,
which other Books, tho never so fabulous and profane, have to set 'em off.
Other Authors can pass upon the Public by stuffing their Books from Aristotle,
Plato, and the whole Company of ancient Philosophers, thus amusing their
Readers into a great opinion of their prodigious Reading. Plutarch and Cicero
are slur'd on the Public for as Orthodox Doctors as St. Thomas, or any of the
Fathers. And then the Method of these Moderns is so wounderfully agreeable, and
full of variety, that they cannot fail to please. In one Line they will
describe you a whining amorous Coxcomb; and the next shall be some dry Scrap of
a Homily, with such ingenious Turns as cannot choose but ravish the Reader. Now
I want all these Embelishments and Graces; I have neither marginal Notes, nor
critical Remarks: I do not so much as know what Authors I follow, and
consequently can have no formal Index, as it is the fashion now, methodically
strung on the Letters of the Alphabet, beginning with Aristotle, and ending
with Xenophon, or Zo^lus, or Zeuxis; which two are commonly crammed into the
same Piece, tho one of them was a famous Painter, and the other a saucy Critic. I
shall want also the pompous Preliminaries of commendatory Verses sent to me by
the Right Honorable my Lord such a one, by the Honorable the Lady such a one,
or the most ingenious Mr. such a one: tho I know that I might have them at an
easy rate from two or three Brothers of the Quill of my acquaintance, and
better, I Am sure, than the best Quality in Spain can compose.

In short, my Friend, said I, the great Don Quixote may ly buried in the musty
Records of La Mancha, till Providence has ordered some better hand to fit him
out as he ought to be; for I must own my self altogether incapable of the Task;
besides, I am naturally lazy, and love my ease too well to take the pains of
turning over Authors for those things which I can express as well without it.
And these are the Considerations that made me so thoughtful when you came in.
The Gentleman, after a long and loud Fit of laughing, rubbing his Forehead; OF
my Conscience, Friend, said he, your Discourse has freed me from a Mistake that
has a great while imposed upon me: I always took you for a Man of sense, but
now I am sufficiently convinced to the contrary. What! puzzled at so
inconsiderable a Trifle! A business of so little difficulty confound a man of
such deep sense and searching thought, as once you seemed to be!

I Am sorry, Sir, that your lazy Humor and poor Understanding should need the
Advice I am about to give you, which will presently solve all your Objections
and Fears concerning the publishing of the Renowned Don Quixote, the Luminary
and Mirror of all Knight-Errantry. Pray Sir, said I, be pleased to instruct me
in whatever you think may remove my Fears, or solve my Doubts. The first thing
you object, replied he, is your want of Commendatory Copies from Persons of
Figure and Quality: There is nothing sooner helped. It Is but taking a little
pains in writing them your self, and clapping whose Name you please to them:
You may father 'em on Prester John of the Indies, or on the Emperor of
Trepisond, whom I know to be most celebrated Poets. But suppose they were not,
and that some presuming Pedantick Critics might snarl, and deny this notorious
Truth; Why, let them, it is no matter: and tho they should convict you of
Forgery, you are in no danger of losing the Hand with which you wrote them.

As to marginal Notes and Quotations from Authors for your History, it is but
dropping here and there some scattered Latin Sentences that you have already by
rote, or may have with little or no Pains. For example; in treating of Liberty
and Slavery, clap me in, Non been pro toto libertas venditur auro. And at the
same time make Horace, or some other Author vouch it in the Margin. If you
treat of the Power of Death, come round with this close: Pallida mors aequo
pulsat pede pauperum tabernas, regumque turres. If of loving our Enemies as
Heaven enjoins, you may, if you have the lea^ Curiosity, presently turn to the
Divine Precept, and say, Ego au^em dico vobis, diligite inimicos vestros. Or if
you discourse of bad Thoughts, bring in this Passage; De cord exeunt
cogitationes mala.

If the Uncertaint of Friendship be your Theme, Cato offers you his old Couplet
with all his heart: Donec eris felix multos numerabis amicos: Tempora si
fuer^nt nubda, solus eris. And so proceed. These scraps of Latin will at least
gain you the credit of a great Grammarian, which, I Will assure you, is no small
Accomplishment in this Age. As to Annotations or Remarks at the end of your
Book, you may safely take this Course. If you have occasion for a Giant in your
Piece, be sure you bring in Goliath, and upon this very Goliath (who will not
cost you one Farthing) you may spin out a swinging Annotation. You may say, The
Giant Goliath or Goliat was a Philistine, whom David the Shepherd slew with the
thundering stroke of a Pebble in the Valley of Terebintho, Vide Kings in such a
Chapter and such a Verse, where you may find it written. If, not satisfied with
this, you would appear a great humanist, and would show your Knowledge in
Geography, take some occasion to draw the River Tagus into your Discourse, out
of which you may fish a most notable Remark. The River Tagus, say you, was so
called from a certain King of Spain: It takes its Rise from such a Place, and
buries its Waters in the Ocean, killing first the Walls of the famous City of
Lisbon; and some are of opinion that the Sands of this River are Gold, etc. If
you have occasion to talk of Robbers, I can presently give you the History of
Cacus, for I have it by heart. If you would descant upon Whores or Women of the
Town, there is the Guevara.
Bishop of Mondonnedo, who can furnish you with Lamia, Lais and Flora,
Courtesans, whose Acquaintance will be very much to your Reputation. Ovid's
Medea can afford you a good example of Cruelty. Calipso from Homer, and Circe
out of Virgil, are famous Instances for Witchcraft or Enchantment. Would you
treat of valiant Commanders, Julius Caesar has writ his Commentaries on
purpose; and Plutarch can furnish you with a thousand Alexanders. If you would
mention Love, and have but three Grains of Italian, you may find Leon the Jew
ready to serve you most abundantly. But if you would keep nearer home, it is but
examining Fonseca of Divine Love, which you have here in your Study; and you
need go no farther for all that can be said on that copious Subject. In short,
it is but quoting these Authors in your Book; and let me alone to make large
Annotations, I Will engage to crowd your Margins sufficiently, and scrible you
four or five Sheets to boot at the end of your Book. And for the Citation of so
many Authors, it is the easiest thing in nature. Find out one of these Books
with an Alphabetical Index, and, without any farther Ceremony, remove it
verbatim into your own: and tho the World will not believe that you have occasion
for such Lumber, yet there are Fools enough to be thus drawn into an opinion of
the Work: at least, such a flourishing Train of Attendants will give your Book
a ashionable Air, and recommend it to sale; for few Chapmen will stand to
examine it, and compare the Authoritys upon the Counter; since they can expect
nothing but their Labor for their Pains. But after all, Sir, if I know any
thing of the matter, you have no occasion for any of these things; for your
Subject, being a Satyr on Knight-Errantry, is so absolutely new, that neither
Aristotle, St. Basil, nor Cicero, ever dreamt or heard of it. Those fabulous
Extravagances have nothing to do with the impartial Punctuality of true
History, nor do I find any business you can have ither with Astrology,
Geometry, or Logic; ^^d I hope you are too good a man to mix Sacred things with
Profane. Nothing but pure Nature is your business; her you must consult, and
the closer you can imitate, your Picture is the better. You have no need to
hunt for Philosophical Sentences, Passages out of Holy Writ, Poetical Fables,
Rhetorical Orations, or Miracles of Saints. Do but take care to express your
self in a plain easy manner, in well chosen, significant, and decent Terms, and
to give a harmonious and pleasing Turn to your Periods. Study to explain your
Thoughts, and set 'em in the truest Light, laboring as much as possible not to
leave 'em dark nor intricate, but clear and intelligible. Let your diverting
Stories be expressed in diverting Terms, to kindle Mirth in the Melancholic, and
heighten it in the Gay. Let Mirth and Humor be your superficial Design, tho
laid on a solid Foundation, to challenge Attention from the Ignorant, and
Admiration from the Judicious; to secure your Work from the Contempt of the
graver sort, and deserve the Praises of Men of Sense; keeping your Eye still
fixed on the principal end of your Project, the fall and destruction of that
monstrous Heap of ill-contriv'd Romances, which tho abhorred by man^, have ^o
strangely infatuated the greater part of Mankind. Mind this, and your ^u^ine^s
is done.

I li^^nd ver^ attentively to my Friend's Discourse, and found it so reasonable
and convincing that ^^^hout any reply, I took his Advice, and have ^d ^ou the
Story by way of Preface; wher^^^ o^ may (...) Gentlemen, how happy I am in
^o^^g^nious (...) Friend, to whose seasonable Counsel y^u are a^ obliged for
the ^mission of all th^s Peda^tic Garniture in the ^istory of the Renowned Don
Quixote de la Mancha, whose Character among all the Neighbors a^^u^ Montiel
is, that he was the most chaste over, and the most valiant Knight that has been
known in those Parts these many years I will not urge the Service I have done
you by introducing you into so considerable and noble a Knight's Acquaintance,
but only beg the favor of some small Acknowledgment for recommending you to
the familiarity of the famous Sancho Pan^ his Squire, in whom, in my opinion,
you will find united and described all the scattered Endowments which the
voluminous Foppery of Books of Knight-Errantry can afford to one of his
Character. And now I take my leave, entreating you not to forget your humble
Servant.

Advertisement.
THE two last Volumes will be published very speedily, to complete this Work.

THE Life and Achievements Of the Renowned Don Quixote de la Mancha. PART I.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I. The Quality and way of Living of the Renowned Don Quixote de la
Mancha.
AT a certain Village in La Mancha, which I shall not name, there lived not
long ago one of those old-fashioned Gentlemen, who are never without a Lance
upon a Rack, an old Target, a lean Horse and a Greyhound. His Diet consisted
more of Beef than Mutton, and with Minced Meat on most Nights, Lentils on
Fridays, Scraps and Penance on Saturdays, and a Pidgeon extraordinary on
Sundays, he consumed three quarters of his Revenue. The rest was laid out in a
Plush Coat, Velvet Breeches, with Slippers of the same for Holidays; and a Suit
of the very best home spun Cloth, which he bestowed on himself for
Working-days. His whole Family was a Housekeeper something turned of forty, a
Niece not twenty, and a Man that served him in the House and in the Field, and
could saddle a Horse, and handle the Pruning-hook. The Master himself was nigh
fifty years of age, of a hale and strong Complexion, lean-body'd and
thin-fac'd, an early Riser, and a Lover of Hunting. Some say his Surname was
Quixada or Quesada (for Authors differ in this particular) however, we may
reasonably conjecture he was call d Quixada; tho this concerns us but little,
provided we keep strictly to truth in every point of this history.

You must know then, that when our Gentleman had nothing to do (which was
almost all the year round) he passed his time in reading Books of
Knight-Errantry; which he did with that application and delight, that at last
he in a manner wholly left off his Country Sports, and even the care of his
Estate. Nay, he grew so strangely besotted with those amusements, that he sold
many Acres of arable Land to purchase Books of that kind, by which means he
collected as many of 'em as were to be had. But among them all, none pleased
him like the Works of the famous Feliciano de Silva. For, the clearness of his
Prose, and those intricate expressions, with which it is interlac'd, seemed to
him so many Pearls of Eloquence; especially when he came to read the Challenges
and the amorous Addresses, many of them in this extraordinary style. The Reason
of your unreasonable usage of my Reason, does so enfeeble my Reason, that I
have Reason to expostulate with your Beauty. And this: 'The Sublime Heavens,
which with your Divinity, divinely fortify you with the Stars, and fix you the
Deserver of the Desert that is deserved by your Grandeur. These and such like
Expressions strangely puzzled the poor Gentleman's understanding, while he was
breaking his Brain to unravel their meaning, which Aristotle himself could
never have found, tho he should have been raised from the dead for that very
purpose.

He did not so well like those dreadful wounds which Don Bellianis gave and
received; for he considered that all the Art of Surgery could never secure his
Face and Body from being strangely disfigured with Scars. However, he highly
commended that Author for concluding his Book with a Promise of giving the
remaining part of the unfinished Adventure; and many times he had a desire to
put Pen to Paper, and faithfully finish it himself; which he had certainly
done, and doubtless with good success, had not his thoughts been wholly
engrossed in much more important Designs.

He would often dispute with the In Spain the Curate is the head Priest in the
Parish, and he that has the cure of Souls. Thus el Cura means the Rector, or,
as the vulgar has it, the Parson; but the first not being commonly used, and
the last seeming too gross, I choose to make it Curate, those who have read the
former Translations being used to the word.
Curate of the Parish, a man of Learning, who had taken his Degrees at
Ciguenca, who was the better Knight, Palmerin of England, or Amadis de Gaul.
But Master Nicholas, the The Barber in Country Towns in Spain is also the
Surgeon.
Barber of the same Town, would say, that none of 'em could compare with the
Knight of the Sun; and that if any one came near him, 'twas certainly Don
Galaor, the Brother of Amadis de Gaul; for he was a man that would dispense
with any Thing; neither was he so finical, nor such a puling whining Lover as
his Brother, and as for Courage he was not a jot behind him.

In fine, he gave himself up so wholly to the reading of Romances, that a
nights he would pore on till 'twas Day, and a Days he would read on till 'twas
Night: and thus by sleeping little, and reading much, the moisture of his Brain
was exhausted to that degree, that at last he lost the use of his Reason. A
world of disorderly notions, picked out of his Books, crowded into his
imagination; and now his head was full of nothing but Enchantments, Quarrels,
Battles, Challenges, Wounds, Complaints, Amors, Torments, and abundance of
Stuff and Impossibilities. Insomuch that all the Fables and fantastical Tales
which he read, seemed to him now as true as the most authentic Histories. He
would say, that the Cid Ruydiaz was a very brave Knight, but not worthy to
stand in competition with the Knight of the Burning Sword, who with a single
back-stroke had cut asunder two fierce and mighty Giants. He liked yet better
Bernardo del Carpio, who at Roncevalles deprived of Life the Enchanted Orlando,
having lifted him from the ground, and choked him in the air, as Hercules did
Antaeus the Son of the Earth.

As for the Giant Morgante, he always spoke very civil things of him; for tho
he was one of that monstrous brood who ever were intolerably proud and brutish,
he still behaved himself like a civil and well-bred person.

But of all men in the world he admired Rinaldo of Montalban, and particularly
his sallying out of his Castle to rob all he met; and then again when he
carried away the Idol of Mahomet, which was all massy Gold, as the History
says. But he so hated that Traitor Galalon, that for the Pleasure of kicking
him handsomely, he would have given up his Housekeeper, nay, and his Niece
into the bargain.

Having thus lost his understanding, he unluckily stumbled upon the oddest
Fancy that ever entered into a Mad-man's Brain. For now he thought it convenient
and necessary, for the Increase of his Honor, and the Service of the Public,
to turn Knight Errant, and roam through the whole World, armed cap-a-pee, and
mounted on his Steed, in quest of adventures: that thus imitating those
Knights-Errant, of whom he had read, and following their course of life
redressing all manner of Grievances, and exposing himself to Danger on all
occasions, at last after a happy conclusion of his Enterprises, he might
purchase everlasting Honor and Renown. Transported with those agreeable
Delusions, the poor Gentleman already grasped in imagination the Imperial
Scepter of Trebisond, and hurried away by his mighty Expectations, he prepares
with all expedition to take the Field.

The first thing he did was to scowr a suit of Armor, that had belonged to his
Great Grandfather, and had lain time out of mind carelessly rusting in a
corner. But when he had cleaned and repaired it as well as he could, he
perceived there was a material piece wanting; for instead of a complete Helmet,
there was only a single Headpiece. However, his Industry supplied that defect;
for with some Pasteboard he made a kind of a half Beaver or Vizor, which being
fitted to the Headpiece, made it look like an entire Helmet. Then to know
whether it were Cutlass-proof, he drew his Sword, and tried its edge upon the
Pasteboard Vizor, but with the very first stroke he unluckily undid in a moment
what he had been a whole week a doing. Now tho he found he had broke it with so
little difficulty, he was not very well pleased to find he had lost his labor;
and therefore to secure it from the like accident, he made it anew, and fenced
it with thin plates of Iron, which he fixed on the inside of it so artificially,
that at last he had reason to be satisfied with the solidity of the work, and
so without any further Experiment he resolved it should pass for a full and
sufficient Helmet to all intents and purposes.

The next moment he went to view his Horse, whose Bones stuck out like the
corners of a Spanish Real, being a worse Jade than Gonela's; qui tantum pellis
and ossa fuit: However, his Master thought that neither Alexander's Bucephalus,
nor the Cid's Babieca could be compared with him. He was four days considering
what Name to give him: For, as he argued with himself, there was no reason that
a Horse, bestrid by so famous a Knight, and withal so excellent, should not be
distinguished by a particular Name; and therefore he study d to give him such a
one as should demonstrate as well what kind of Horse he had been before his
Master was a Knight Errant, as what he was now; thinking it but just, since the
Owner changed his Profession, that the Horse should also change his Title, and
be dignified with another; a good big Word, such a one as should fill the
Mouth, and seem consonant with the quality and profession of his Master. And
thus, after many Names which he devised, blotted ou^, rejected, changed, liked,
dislik d and pitch d upon again, he concluded to call him Rozin commonly means
an ordinary Horse. Ante is before and formerly. Thus the word Rozinante may
imply that he was formerly an ordinary Horse, and also that he is now a Horse
that claims the precedence from all other ordinary Horses.
Rozinante; a Name, in his opinion, lofty, sounding, and significant of what he
had been before, and also of what he was now In a word, a Horse before or above
all the vulgar Breed of Horses in the world.

When he had thus given his Horse a name so much to his satisfaction, he
thought of choosing one for himself; and having seriously pondered on the matter
eight whole days more, at last he determined to call himself Don Quixote.
Whence the Authors of this most authentic History draw this Inference, that
his right name was Quixada, and not Quesada, as others obstinately pretend. And
observing that the valiant Amadis, not satisfied with the bare appellation of
Amadis, added to it the name of his Country, that it might grow more famous by
his Exploits, and so styled himself Amadis de Gaul; so he, like a true lover
of his native soil, resolved to call himself Don Quixote de la Mancha; which
addition, to his thinking, denoted very plainly his Parentage and Country, and
consequently would fix a lasting honor on that part of the world.

And now his Armor being scowr'd, his Headpiece improved to a Helmet, his Horse
and himself new-nam'd, he perceived he wanted nothing but a Lady, on whom he
might bestow the Empire of his Heart: For he was sensible that a Knight Errant
without a Mistress, was a Tree without either Fruit or Leaves, and a Body
without a Soul. Should I, said he, by good or ill Fortune, chance to encounter
some Giant, as it is common in Knight-Errantry, and happen to lay him prostrate
on the ground, transfix d with my Lance, or cleft in two, or in short overcome
him and have him at my mercy, would it not be proper to have some Lady to whom
I may send him as a Trophy of my Valor. Then when he comes into her presence,
throwing himself at her Feet, he may thus make his humble submission: Lady, I
am the Giant Caraculiambro, Lord of the Island of Malindrania, vanquished in
single Combat by that never-deservedly-enough-extoll'd Knight Errant Don
Quixote de la Mancha, who has commanded me to cast my self most humbly at your
Feet, that it may please your honor to dispose of me according to your will. Oh
how elevated was the Knight with the conceit of this imaginary submission of
the Giant; especially having withal bethought himself of a person, on whom he
might confer the Title of his Mistress! which, it is believed happened thus.
Near the place where he lived, dwelt a good likely Country Lass, for whom he
had formerly had a sort of an inclination, tho it is believed she never heard of
it, nor perceived it in the least. Her name was Aldonca Lorenco; and this was
she whom he thought he might entitle to the Sovereignty of his Heart; upon
which he studied to find her out a new name, that might have some affinity with
her old one, and yet at the same time sound somewhat like that of a Princess or
Lady of Quality: So at last he resolv d to call her Dulcinea, with the addition
of del Toboso, from the place where she was born: A name, in his opinion,
sweet, harmonious, extraordinary, and no less significative than the others
which he had devised.

CHAP. II. Of Don Quixote 's first Sally.
THese Preparations being made, he found his designs ripe for Action, and
thought it now a crime to deny himself any longer to the injured world that
wanted such a Deliverer; the more when he considered what grievances he was to
redress, what wrongs and injuries to remove, what abuses to correct, and what
duties to discharge. So one morning before day, in the greatest heat of July,
without acquainting any one with his design, with all the secrecy imaginable he
armed himself Cap-a-pee, laced on his ill contrived Helmet, braced on his
Target, grasped his Lance, mounted Rozinante and, at the private door of his
back yard, sallied out into the Fields, wonderfully pleased to see with how
much ease he had succeeded in the beginning of his Enterprise. But he had not
gone far e're a terrible Thought alarmed him; a thought that had like to have
made him renounce his great undertaking. For now it ^^me into his mind, that
the honor of Knighthood had not yet been conferred upon him, and therefore,
according to the Laws of Chivalry, he neither could nor ought to appear in arms
against any professed Knight. Nay, he also considered, that tho he were already
Knighted, it would beeome him to wear white Armor, and not to adorn his Shield
with any Devise, till he had deserved one by some extraordinary demonstration
of his valor.

These thoughts staggered his resolution, but, his folly prevailing more than
any reason, he resolved to be dubbed a Knight by the first he should meet,
after the example of several others, who, as his distracting Romances informed
him, had formerly done the like. As for the other difficulty about wearing
white Armor, he proposed to overcome it, by scowring his own at leisure, till
they should look whiter than Ermines. And having thus dismissed these busy
scruples, he very calmly rode on, leaving it to his Horses discretion to go
which way he pleased, firmly believing, that in this consisted the very Being
of Adventures; and as he thus went on, I cannot but believe, said he to
himself, that when the History of my famous Achievements shall be given to the
World, the learned Author will begin it in this very manner, when he comes to
give an account of this my early setting out. Scarce had the ruddy-colour'd
Phoebus begun to spread the golden Tresses of his lovely hair, over the vast
surface of the earthly Globe, and scarce had those feathered Poets of the
Grove, the pretty painted Birds tuned their little Pipes, to sing their early
welcomes in soft melodious strains, to the beautiful Aurora, who having left
her jealous Husbands Bed, displayed her rosy Graces to mortal Eyes, from the
Gates and Balconies of the horizon of La Mancha, when the renowned Knight Don
Quixote de la Mancha, disdaining soft repose, forsook the voluptuous Down, and
mounting his famous Steed Rozinante, entered the ancient and celebrated Plains
of Montiel. This was indeed the very Road he took, and then proceeding, O happy
Age, O fortunate Times, cried he, decreed to usher into the World my famous
Achievements, Achievements worthy to be engraven on Brass, carved in Marble,
and delineated in some Masterpiece of Painting, as some monuments of my Glory,
and examples for Posterity. And thou, venerable Sage, wise Enchanter, whatever
be thy name, thou whom Fate has ordained to be the Compiler of this rare
History, forget not I beseech thee my trusty Rozinante, the eternal Companion
of all any Adventures. After this, as if he had been really in Love; O,
Princess Dulcinea, cried he, Lady of this captive heart, much Sorrow and Woe
you have doomed me to, in banishing me thus, and imposing on me your rigorous
Commands, never to appear before your Beauteous Face. Remember, Lady, that
loyal heart your Slave, who for your Love submits to so many miseries. To these
extravagant conceits he added a world of others, all in imitation, and in the
very style of those which the reading of Romances had furnished him with: and
all this while he rode so softly, and the Sun's heat increased so fast, and was
so violent, that it would have been sufficient to have melted his Brains, had
he had any left.

He traveled almost all that day without meeting any adventure worthy the
trouble of relating, which put him into a kind of Despair, for he desired
nothing more than to encounter immediately some person on whom he might try the
vigor of his arm.

Some Authors say that his first Adventure was that of the Pass called Puerto
Lapice; others, that of the Windmills; but all that I could discover of
certainty in this matter, and that I meet with in the Annals of La Mancha, is,
that he traveled all that day, and toward the evening, he and his Horse being
heartily tired, and almost famished, Don Quixote looking about him, in hopes to
discover some Castle, or at least some Shepherds Cottage, there to repose and
refresh himself, at last, near the Road which he kept, he espied an Inn; as
welcome a sight to his longing eyes as if he had discovered a Star directing
him to the Gate, nay, to the Palace of his Redemption. Thereupon hastening
toward the Inn with all the speed he could, he got thither just at the close
of the evening. There stood by chance at the Inn-door two young
Female-Adventurers, alias Common Wenches, who were going to Sevill with some
Carriers that happened to take up their Lodging there that very evening; and as
whatever our Knight Errant saw, thought, or imagined, was all of a Romantic
Cast, and appeared to him altogether after the manner of the Books that had
perverted his Imagination, he no sooner saw the Inn but he fancied it to be a
Castle, fenced with four Towers, and lofty Pinacles glittering with Silver,
together with a deep Mote, Drawbridge, and all those other appurtenances
peculiar to such kind of places.

Therefore when he came near it, he stopped a while at a distance from the Gate,
expecting that some Dwarf would appear on the Battlements, and sound his
Trumpet, to give notice of the arrival of a Knight. But finding that no body
came, and that Rozinante was for making the best of his way to the Stable, he
advanced to the Inn door, where spying the two young Doxies, they seemed to him
two beautiful Damsels or graceful Ladies, taking the benefit of the fresh Air
at the Gate of the Castle. It happened also at the very moment, that a
Swineherd chanced to Wind his Horn, to get his Hogs together, and Don Quixote
presently imagined, this was the wished for signal, which some Dwarf gave to
notify his approach; therefore with the greatest joy in the world he rode up to
the Inn. The Wenches, affrighted at the approach of a man cased in Iron, and
armed with a Lance and Target, were for running in to their Lodging; but Don
Quixote perceiving their fear by their flight, lifted up the Pasteboard Beaver
of his Helmet, and discovering his withered dusty Face, with comely Grace and
grave Delivery, accosted 'em in this manner. I beseech ye Ladies do not fly,
nor fear the least offense; the Order of Knighthood which I profess, does not
permit me to countenance or offer injuries to any one in the Universe, and
least of all to persons of your Ladyship's exalted Rank and Merit. The Wenches
looked earnestly upon him, endeavoring to see his Face, which his ill
contrived Beaver partly hid; but when they heard themselves thus complimented
with the Title of Ladyship, an honor to which their condition never had the
least pretense, they could not forbear laughing outright, which Don Quixote
resented as a great affront. Give me leave to tell ye, Ladies, cried he, that
Modesty and Civility are very becoming in the fair Sex; whereas laughter
without ground is the highest piece of Indiscretion; however, added he, I do
not presume to say this to offend you or incur your displeasure. No, Ladies, I
assure you I have no other design but to do you service. This uncommon way of
Expression, joined to the Knight's scurvy Figure, increased their Mirth, which
incensed him to that degree, that this might have carried things to an
extremity, had not the Innkeeper luckily appeared at that juncture. He was a
man whose Burden of Fat inclined him to peace and quietness, yet when he had
observed such a strange disguise of human Shape, in his odd Armor and Equipage,
he could hardly forbear keeping the Wenches company in their laughter. But
having the fear of such a Warlike appearance before his eyes, he resolved to
give him good words, and therefore accosting him civilly, Sir Knight, said he,
if your Worship be disposed to alight, you will fail of nothing here but of a
Bed; as for all other accommodations, you may be supplied to your mind. Don
Quixote observing the humility of the Governor of the Castle, (for such the
Innkeeper and Inn seemed to him) Senior Castillano, said he, the least thing
in the world suffices me; for Arms are the only things I value, and Combat is
my Bed of Repose. The Innkeeper thought he had called him Castillano signifies
both a Constable or Governor of a Castle, and an Inhabitant of the Kingdom of
Castille in Spain.
Castillano, as taking him to be one of the true Castillans, whereas he was
indeed of Andaluzia, nay, of the neighborhood of St Lucar, no less thievish
than Cacus, nor less mischievous than a truant Scholar, or a Court Page, and
therefore he made him this reply. At this rate, Sir Knight, your Bed might be a
Pavement, and your rest to be still awake; you may then safely alight, and I
dare assure you, you can hardly miss being kept awake all the year long in this
house, and much less one single night. With that he went and held Don Quixote's
Stirrup, who not having broke his Fast that day, dismounted with no small
trouble or difficulty. He immediately desired the Governor, (that is the
Innkeeper) to have special care of his Steed, assuring him, that there was not
a better in the Universe. Upon which the Innkeeper viewed him narrowly, but
could not think him to be half so good as Don Quixote said; however, having set
him up in the Stable, he came back to the Knight, to see what he wanted, and
found him pulling off his Armor, by the help of the good natured Wenches, who
had already reconciled themselves to him; but tho they had eased him of his
Corslet and Backplate, they could by no means undo his Gorget, nor take off his
ill contrived Beaver, which he had tied so fast with green Ribbons, that 'twas
impossible to get it off without cutting 'em. Now he would by no means permit
that, and so was forced to keep on his Helmet all Night, which was one of the
most pleasant sights in the World. And while his Armor was taking off by the
two kind Lasses, imagining 'em to be Persons of Quality, and Ladies of that
Castle, he very gracefully made 'em the following compliment. [in imitation of
an old Romance] There never was on Earth a Knight
So waited on by Ladies fair,
As once was he Don Quixote hight,
When first he left his Village dear:
Damsels t'undress him ran with speed,
And Princesses to dress his Steed.


O Rozinante! for that is my Horses Name, Ladies, and mine Don Quixote de la
Mancha I never thought to have discovered it, till some Feats of Arms achieved
by me in your service, had made me better known to your Ladyships; But
necessity forcing me to apply to my present purpose, that passage of the
ancient Romance of Sir Lancelot, which I now repeated, has extorted the secret
from me, before its time. Yet a day will come, when you shall command, and I
obey, and then the Valor of my Arm shall evince the reality of my Zeal to serve
your Ladyships.

The two Females, who were not used to such Rhetorical Speeches, could make no
answer to this, they only asked him, whether he would eat any thing? That I
will, with all my Heart, cried Don Quixote, whatever it be, for I Am of opinion,
nothing can come to me more seasonably. Now as ill luck would have it, it
happened to be Friday, and there was nothing to be had at the Inn, but some
pieces of Fish, which is called Abadexo in Castile, Bacallao in Andaluzia,
Curadillo in some places, and in others Truchuela or Little Trout, tho after
all it is but Poor John: so they asked him, whether he cou d eat any of that
Truchuela, because they had no other Fish to give him. Don Quixote, imagining
they meant small Trout, told 'em that provided there were more than one, 'twas
the same thing to him, they would serve him as well as a great one; for,
continued he, it is all one to me, whether I am paid a Piece of Eight in one
single Piece, or in eight small Reals, which are worth as much. Besides, it is
probable these Small Trouts may be like Veal, which is finer Meat than Beef, or
like the Kid, which is better than the Goat. In short, let it be what it will,
so it comes quickly; for the weight of Armor and the fatigue of Travel, are not
to be supported without recreating Food. Thereupon they laid the Cloth at the
Inn-door, for the benefit of the fresh air; and the Landlord brought him a
piece of that Salt-fish, but ill watered, and as ill dressed, and as for the
Bread 'twas as moldy and brown as the Knights Armor. But 'twou'd have made
any one laugh to have seen him eat; for having his Helmet on, with his Beaver
lifted up, 'twas impossible for him to feed himself without help, and one of
the kind Wenches had that office; but there was no giving him Drink that way,
and he must have gone without it, had not the Innkeeper bored a Cane, and,
setting one end of it to his Mouth, poured the Wine in at the other; all which
the Knight suffered patiently, because he would not cut the Ribbonds that
fastened his Helmet.

While he was at Supper, a Sow-gelder happened to Wind his Silvato de Cannas.
Instrument four or five times, as he came near the Inn, which made Don Quixote
the more positive of his being in a famous Castle, where he was entertained
with Music at Supper, that the Poor Jack was young Trout, the Bread of the
finest Flower, the Wenches great Ladies, and the Inn keeper the Governor of
the Castle: Which made him applaud himself for his Resolution, and his setting
out on such an account. The only thing that vexed him, was, that he was not yet
dubbed a Knight; for he fancied he could not lawfully undertake any Adventure
till he had received the Order of Knighthood.

CHAP. III. An Account of the pleasant method taken by Don Quixote to be dubbed
a Knight.
DOn Quixote's mind being disturbed with that thought, out of his short
Ordinary he made yet a shorter Supper; and as soon as he had done he called his
Host, then shut him and himself up in the Stable, and falling at his feet, I
will never rise from this place, cried he, most Valorous Knight, till you have
graciously vouchsafed to grant me a Boon which I will now beg of you, and which
will redound to your honor, and the good of mankind. The Innkeeper, strangely
at a loss to find his Guest at his feet, and talking at this rate, endeavored
to make him rise, but all in vain, till he had promised to grant him what he
asked. I expected no less from your great magnificence, noble Sir, replied Don
Quixote, and therefore I make bold to tell you, that the Boon which I beg, and
you generously condescend to grant me, is, that to morrow you will be pleased
to bestow the honor of Knighthood upon me. This night I will watch my Armor in
the Chapel of your Castle, and then in the morning you shall gratify me, as I
passionately desire, that I may be duly qualified to seek out Adventures in
every corner of the Universe, to relieve the Distressed, according to the Laws
of Chivalry, and the Inclinations of Knights-Errant like my self. The
Innkeeper, who, as I said, was a sharp fellow, and had already a shrewd
suspicion of the disorder in his Guest's understanding, was fully convinced of
it when he heard him talk after this manner; and to make sport that night,
resolved to humor him in his desires, telling him, he was highly to be
commended for his choice of such an Employment, which was altogether worthy a
Knight of the first Order, such as his gallant Deportment discovered him to be;
that he himself had in his youth followed that honorable Profession, ranging
through many parts of the world, in search of Adventures, without so much as
forgetting to visit the These are all places noted for Rogueries and disorderly
doings.
Perchele^ of Malaga, the Isles of Riaran, the compass of Sivil, the
Quicksilver-house of Segovia, the Olive field of Valencia, the Circle of
Granada, the Wharf of St Lucar, the Potro of Cordona, the Hedge Taverns of
Toledo, and diverse other places where he had exercised the nimbleness of his
feet, and the subtilty of his hands, doing wrongs in abundance, soliciting
many Widows, undoing some Damsels These are all places noted for Rogueries and
disorderly doings.
, bubbling young Heirs, and in a word making himself famous in most of the
Courts of Judicature in Spain; till at length he retired to this Castle, where
he lived on his own Estate and those of others, entertaining all
Knights-Errant, of what quality or condition soever, purely for the great
affection he bore 'em, and to partake of what they got, in recompense of his
good will. He added, that this Castle at present had no Chapel where the
Knight might keep the Vigil of his Arms, it being pulled down, in order to be
new built; but that he knew they might lawfully be watched in any other place
in a case of necessity; and therefore he might do it that night in the
Courtyard of the Castle: and in the morning all the necessary Ceremonies
should be performed, so that he might assure himself he should be dubbed a
Knight, nay, as much a Knight as any one in the world could be; he then asked
Don Quixote whether he had any Money? Not a Cross, replied the Knight, for I
never read in any History of Chivalry that any Knight Errant ever carried Money
about him. You're mistaken, cried the Innkeeper, for, admit the Histories are
silent in this matter, the Authors thinking it needless to mention things so
evidently necessary as Money and Clean Shirts, yet there is no reason to
believe the Knights went without either; and you may rest assured that all the
Knights-Errant, of whom so many Histories are full, had their Purses well lin d
to supply themselves with necessaries, and carried also with 'em some Shirts,
and a small B^^ of Salves to heal their wounds; for they had not the
convenience of Surgeons to cure 'em every time they fought in Fields and
Deserts, unless they were so happy as to have some Sage or Magician for their
Friend, to give 'em present assistance, sending them some Damsel or Dwa^
through the Air in a Cloud, with a small Bottle of a Water, of so great a
Virtue, that they no sooner tasted a Drop of it, but their Wounds were as
perfectly cur d, as if they had never received any. But when they wanted such a
Friend in former Ages, the Knights thought themselves obliged to take care,
that their Squires should be provided with Money and other Necessaries, as Lint
and Salves to dress their Wounds; and if those Knights ever happened to have no
Squires, which was but very seldom, then they carried those things behind 'em
in a little Bag, as if it had been something of greater value, and so neatly
fitted to their Saddle, that it was hardly seen, for had it not been upon such
an account, the carrying of a Bag was not much allowed among Knights-Errant. I
must therefore advise you, continued he, nay I might even charge and command
you, as you are shortly to be my Son in Chivalry, never from this time forwards
to ride without Money, nor without the other necessaries, of which I spoke to
you, which you will find very beneficial, when you least expect it. Don Quixote
promised to perform very punctually all his Injunctions: and so they disposed
every thing in order to his watching his Arms in a great yard, that adjoined to
the Inn. To which purpose, the Knight having got 'em all together, laid 'em in
a Horse-trough close by a Well in that Yard, then bracing his Target, and
grasping his Lance, just as it grew dark, he began to walk about by the
Horse-trough, with a graceful deportment. In the mean while the Innkeeper
acquainted all those that were in the House, with the extravagancies of his
guest, his watching his Arms, and his hopes of being made a Knight; they all
admir d very much at so strange a kind of Folly, and went out to observe him at
a distance; where they saw him sometimes walk about with a great deal of
gravity, and sometimes lean on his Lance, with his eyes all the while fixed upon
his Arms. 'Twas now undoubted Night, but yet the Moon did shine with such a
brightness, as might almost have vy'd with that of the Planet which lent it
her; so that the Knight was wholly exposed to the Spectators view. While he was
thus employed, one of the Carriers, who lodged in the Inn, came out to water
his Mules, which he could not do without removing the Arms out of the Trough.
With that Don Quixote, who saw him make toward it, cried out to him aloud, O
thou, who e're thou art, rash Knight, that prepares to lay thy hands on the
Arms of the most valorous Errant that ever wore a Sword, take heed! Do not
audaciously attempt to profane 'em with a Touch, lest instant Death be the too
sure reward of thy Temerity. But the Carrier never regarded these dreadful
Threats, and laying hold on the Armor, by the Straps, without any more a do
threw it a good way from him; tho it had been better for him to have let it
alone; for Don Quixote no sooner saw this, but lifting up his eyes to heaven,
and addressing his thoughts, as it seemed, to his Lady Dulcinea; Assist me,
Lady, cried he, in this first opportunity that offers it self to your faithful
Slave, nor let your Favor and Protection be denied me in this first trial of
my Valor. Repeating such like Ejaculations, he let slip his Target, and
lifting up his Lance with both his hands, he gave the Carrier such a terrible
knock on his inconsiderate head with his Lance, that he laid him at his Feet in
a woeful condition, and had he back d that Blow with another, the Fellow would
certainly have had no need of a Surgeon. This done, Don Quixote took up his
Armor, laid it again in the Horse-trough, and then walked on backwards and
forwards, with as great an unconcern as he did at first.

Soon after, another Carrier, not knowing what had happened, came also to water
his Mules, while the first lay yet on the ground in a Trance; but as he offered
to clear the Trough of the Armor, Don Quixote without speaking a word, or
imploring any one's assistance, once more dropped his Target, lifted up his
Lance, and then let it fall so heavily on the Fellows head, that he broke it in
three or four places. His outcry soon alarmed, and brought thither all the
People in the Inn, and the Landlord among the rest; which Don Quixote
perceiving, Thou Queen of Beauty (cried he, bracing on his Shield, and drawing
his Sword) Thou Courage and Vigor of my weakn'd heart, now is the time, when
thou must enliven thy adventurous Slave, with the Beams of thy greatness, while
this moment he is engaging in so terrible an Adventure. With this, in his
opinion, he found himself supplied with such an addition of Courage, that had
all the Carriers in the world at once attackt him, he would undauntedly have
faced 'em all. On the other side, the Carriers enraged to see their Comrades
thus used, tho they were afraid to come near, gave the Knight such a Volly of
Stones, that he was forced to shelter himself as well as he could under the
Covert of his Target, without daring to go far from the Horse-trough, lest he
should seem to abandon his Arms. The Innkeeper called to the Carriers as loud
as he could, to let him alone, that he had told 'em already he was mad, and
consequently the Law would acquit him tho he should kill 'em. Don Quixote also
made yet more noise, calling 'em false and treacherous Villains, and the Lord
of the Castle, base and inhospitable, and a discourteous Knight, for suffering
a Knight Errant to be be so abused; I would make thee know, cried he, what a
perfidious wretch thou art, had I but received the Order of Knighthood. But for
you, base, ignominious Rabble! Fling on! Do your worst! Come on, draw nearer,
if you dare, and receive the Reward of your Indiscretion and Insolence. This he
spoke with so much spirit and undauntedness, that he struck a terror into all
his assailants; so that partly through fear, and partly through the Innkeepers
persuasions, they gave over flinging Stones at him; and he on his side
permitted the Enemy to carry off their wounded, and then returned to the guard
of his Arms as calm and composed as before.

The Innkeeper, who began somewhat to disrelish these mad tricks of his Guest,
resolved to dispatch him forthwith, and bestow on him that unlucky Knighthood,
to prevent further mischief: So, coming to him, he excused himself for the
Insolence of those base Scoundrels, as being done without his privity or
consent; but their audaciousness, he said, was sufficiently punished. He added,
that he had already told him there was no Chapel in his Castle, and that
indeed there was no need of one to finish the rest of the Ceremony of
Knighthood, which consisted only in the application of the Sword to the Neck
and Shoulders, as he had read in the Register af the Ceremonies of the Order;
and that this might be performed as well in a Field as any where else; that he
had already fulfilled the obligation of watching his Arms which required no
more than a two hour^ Watch, whereas he had been four hours upon the Guard. Don
Quixote, who easily believed him, told him, he was ready to obey him, and
desired him to make an end of the business a^ ^^on as possible; for if he were
but Knighted, and should see himself once attackt, he believed he should not
leave a man alive in the Castle, except those whom he should desire him to
spare for his sake.

Upon this, the Innkeeper, lest the Knight should proceed to such Extremities,
fetched the Book in which he used to set down the Carrier accounts for Straw
and Barley, and havin^ brought with him the two kind Females already mentioned,
and a Boy that held a piece of lighted Candle in his hand, he ordered Don
Quixote to kneel: then reading in his Manual, as if he had been repeating some
pious Oraison, in the midst of his Devotion, he lifted up his hand* and gave
him a good blow on the Neck, and then a gentle slap on the Back with the flat
o^ his Sword, still mumbling some words between his teeth in the tone of a
Prayer. After this he ordered one of the Wenches to gird the Sword about the
Knights waste, which she did with much Solemnity, and I may add Discretion
considering how hard a thing it was to forbea^ laughing at every Circumstance
of the Ceremony. It Is true, the thoughts of the Knights late Prowess did not a
little contribute to the checking the expression of her mirth. As she girded on
his Sword, Heaven, cried the kind Lady, make your Worship a lucky Knight, and
prosper Don Quixot Dubbed a Knight. Errant by the Innkeeper. V. 1. page (...)
you wherever you go. Don Quixote desired to know her Name, that he might
understand to whom he was indebted for the favor she had bestowed upon him,
and also make her partaker of the honor he was to acquire by the strength of
his arm: To which the Lady answered with all humility, that her name was
Toloso, a Cobblers Daughter, that kept his Stall among the little Shops of
Sanchominaya, at Toledo; and that whenever he pleased to command her she would
be his humble Servant. Don Quixote begged or her to do hm the favor to add
hereafter the title of Lady to her name, and for his sake to be called
hereafter the Lady Toloso; which she promised to do. Her Companion having
buckled on his Spurs, occasioned the like Conference between 'em; and when he
had asked her Name, she told him she went by the Name of Miller, being the
Daughter of an honest Miller of Antequera. Our new Knight entreated her also to
style herself the Lady Miller; making her new Offers of Service. These
extraordinary Ceremonies (the like never seen before) being thus hurried over
in a kind of Poste-haste, Don Quixote could not rest till he had taken the
Field in quest of Adventures; therefore having immediately saddled his
Rozinante, and being mounted, he embraced the Innkeeper, and returned him so
many thanks at so extravagant a rate for the high obligation he had laid upon
him in dubbing him a Knight, that it is impossible to give a true relation of
'em all: To which the Innkeeper, in haste to get rid of him, returned as
rhetorical, to shorter answers, and without stopping his Horse for the
Reckoning was glad with all his heart to see him go.

CHAP. IV. What befell the Knight after he had left the Inn.
AVrora began to usher in the Morn, when Don Quixote sallied out of the Inn, so
well pleased, so gay, and so overjoyed to find himself Knighted, that he
infused the same satisfaction into his Horse, who seemed ready to burst his
Girts for joy. But calling to mind the admonitions, which the Innkeeper had
given him, concerning the Provision of necessary accommodation in his Travels,
particularly Money and clean Shirts, he resolv d to return home, to furnish
himself with them, and likewise get him a Squire, designing to entertain as
such, a Laboring Man his Neighbor, who was poor, and had a charge of
Children; but yet very fit for the office. With this resolution he took the
Road, that led to his own Village, and Rozinante, that seemed to know his Will
by instinct, began to carry him a round Trot, so briskly, that his Heels seemed
scarcely to touch the ground. The Knight had not traveled far when he fancied
he heard an effeminate Voice, complaining in a Thicket on his right hand; I
thank Heaven, said he, when he heard the cries, for favoring me so soon with
an opportunity to perform the Duty of my Profession, and reap the Fruit of my
desires! For these complaints are certainly the means of some distressed
Creature, who wants my present help. Then turning to that side, with all the
speed which Rozinante could make, he no sooner came into the Wood, but he found
a Mare tied to an Oak, and to another a young Lad about fifteen years of Age,
naked from the waste upwards. This was he who made such a lamentable outcry,
and not without cause; for a lusty Country Fellow was strapping him soundly
with a Girdle, at every stripe putting him in mind of a Proverb, Keep your
Mouth shut, and your Eyes open, Sirrah: Good Master cried the Boy, I Will do so
no more, as I hope to be saved, I Will never do so again! Indeed Master,
hereafter I Will take more care of your Goods. Don Quixote seeing this cried in
an angry tone, Discourteous Knight, it is an unworthy act, to strike a person
who is not able to defend himself: Come, bestride thy Steed, and take thy Lance
(for the Farmer had something that looked like one, testing upon the same Tree,
to which his Mare was tied,) then I Will make thee know, thou have acted the part
of a Coward. The Country Fellow, who gave himself for lost, at the sight of an
apparition in Armor brandishing his Lance at his Face, answered him in mild
and submissive words: Sir Knight, cried he, this Boy whom I am chastizing is my
Servant, employed by me to look after a flock of Sheep which I have not far
off, but he is so heedless that I lose some of 'em every day. Now because I
correct him for his Carelessness, or his Knavery, he says I do it out of
Covetousness, to defraud him of his wages; but upon my Life and Soul he belies
me. What, the Lie in my presenee, you saucy Clown, cried Don Quixote, by the
Sun that shines I Have a good mind to run thee through the Body with my Lance! Pay
the Boy this instant, without any more words; or by the power that rules us
all, I Will immediately dispatch and annihilate thee. Come, unbind him this
moment. The Countryman hung down his head, and without any further reply
unbound the Boy, who being asked by Don Quixote what his Master owed him, told
him, 'twas nine months Wages, at seven Reals a month. The Knight having cast it
up, found it came to sixty three Reals in all; which he ordered the Farmer to
pay the Fellow immediately, unless he intended to lose his life that very
moment. The poor Countryman trembling for fear, told him, that, as he was on
the brink of Death, by the Oath he had sworn (by the by he had not yet sworn at
all) he did not owe the Lad so much; for there was to be deducted for three
pair of Shoes which he had bought him, and a Real for his being let blood
twice when he was sick. That may be, replied Don Quixote, but set the price of
the Shoes, and the Bleeding against the stripes which you have given him
without cause; for if he has used the Shooe-Leather which you paid for, you
have in return misused and impaired his skin sufficiently; and if the Surgeon
let him blood when he was sick, you have drawn blood from him now he is in
health, so that he owes you nothing on that account. The worst is, Sir Knight,
cry d the Farmer, that I have no Money about me, but let Andrew go home with
me, and I ll pay him every Piece out of hand. What! I go with him, cried the
youngster, the Devil a bit, Sir! Not I, truly, I know better things; for he would
no sooner have me by himself, but he would flea me alive like another St
Bartholomew. He will never dare to do it, replied Don Quixote; I command him,
and that is sufficient to restrain him; therefore provided he will swear by the
Order of Knighthood which has been conferred upon him, that he will duly
observe this regulation, I will freely let him go, and then thou art secure of
thy Money. Good Sir, take heed what you say, cried the Boy; for my Master is no
Knight, nor ever was of any Order in his life: He Is John Haldudo, the rich
Farmer of Quintanar. This signifies little answered Don Quixote; for there may
be Knights among the Haldudo's; besides, the brave man is his own Herald, and
every man the Son of his own works. That Is true, Sir, quoth Andrew; but of what
works can this Master of mine be the Son, who denies me my wages which I have
earned with the sweat of my Brows. I do not deny thee to pay thee thy wages,
honest Andrew, cried the Master, be but so kind as to go along with me, and by
all the Orders of Knighthood in the world, I swear, I Will pay thee every piece,
as I said, nay, and sweet scented to boot. You may spare your perfume, said Don
Quixote, do but pay him in Reals, and I am satisfied; but be sure you perform
your Oath; for if you fail, I my self swear by the same Oath, to return, and
find you out, and punish you, though you should hide your self as close as a
Lizard: and if you would be informed who it is that lays these injunctions on
you, that you may understand how highly it concerns you to observe 'em, know I
am the valorous Don Quixote de la Mancha, the righter of wrongs, and avenger
and redresser of grievances; and so farewell; but remember what you have
promised and sworn, as you will answer the contrary at your peril. This said,
he clapped Spurs to Rozinante, and quickly left the Master and the Man a good way
behind him.

The Countryman, who followed him with both his Eyes, no sooner perceived that
he was past the Wood, and quite out of sight, but he went back to his Boy
Andrew. Come, Child, said he, I will pay thee what I owe thee, as that righter
of wrongs and redresser of grievances has ordered me. Ay, quoth Andrew, on my
word, you will do well to fulfill the Commands of that good Knight, whom Heaven
grant long to live; for he is so brave a Man, and so just a Judge, that adad if
you don't pay me, he will come back, and make his Words good. I dare swear as
much, answered the Master; and to show thee how much I love thee, I am willing
to increase the Debt, that I may enlarge the payment; with that he caught the
youngster by the Arm, and tied him again to the Tree, where he handled him so
unmercifully, that scarce any signs of Life were left in him. Now call your
righter of wrongs, Mr Andrew, cry d the Farmer, and you shall see, he will ne re
be able to undo what I have done, tho I fancy it is but part of what I am to do;
for I have a good mind to flea you alive, as you said I would, you Rascal.
However, he untied him at last, and gave him leave to go and seek out his
Judge, in order to get his Decree put in Execution. Andrew went his ways not
very well pleased you may be sure, yet fully resolv d to find out the valorous
Don Quixote de la Mancha, and give him an exact account of the whole
Transaction, that he might pay the abuse with sevenfold usury. In short, he
crept off sobbing and weeping, while his Master staid behind laughing; and in
this manner was this wrong redressed by the valorous Don Quixote de la Mancha.

In the mean time, being highly pleased with himself, and what had happened,
imagining he had had given a most fortunate and noble beginning to his Feats of
Arms, as he went on toward his Village, O most Beautiful of Beauties, said he
with a low voice, Dulcinea del Toboso, well may thou deem thy self most
happy, since 'twas thy good fortune to captivate and hold a willing Slave to
thy desires, so valorous and renowned a Knight as is, and ever shall be Don
Quixote de la Mancha; who, as all the world knows, had the order of Knighthood
bestowed on him but yesterday, and this day redressed the greatest wrong and
grievance that ever Injustice could design, or Cruelty commit: This day has he
wrested the Scourge out of the hands of that Tormentor, who so unmercifully
treated a tender Infant without the least occasion given. Just as he had said
this, he found himself at a place where four Roads met; and this made him
presently bethink himself of those Cross ways which often used to put
Knights-Errant to a stand, to consult with themselves which way they should
take; and that he might follow their Example, he stopped a while, and after he
had seriously reflected on the matter, he gave Rozinante the Reins, subjecting
his own Will to that of his Horse, who pursuing his first intent, took the way
that led to his own Stable.

Don Quixote had not gone above two miles, but he discovered a great Company of
people riding toward him, who proved to be Merchants of Toledo, that were
going to buy Silks in Murcia: They were six in all, every one skreen'd with his
Umbrella, besides four Servants on Horseback, and three Muleteers on Foot. The
Knight no sooner perceived 'em, but he imagined this to be some new Adventure,
and because he was resolved to imitate as much as possible the passages which
he had read in his Books, he was pleased to represent this to himself as such a
particular Adventure, as he had a singular desire to meet with; and so, with a
dreadful grace and assurance, fixing himself in his Stirrups, couching his
Lance, and covering his Breast with his Target, he posted himself in the middle
of the Road, expecting the coming up of the supposed Knights-Errant. As soon as
they came within hearing, with a loud Voice and a haughty Tone, hold, cried he,
Let all Mankind stand, nor hope to pass on further, unless all Mankind
acknowledge and confess, that there is not in the Universe a more beautiful
Damsel than the Empress of La Mancha, the peerless Dulcinea del Toboso. At
those words the Merchants made a halt, to view the unaccountable Figure of
their Opponent, and easily conjecturing both by his expression and his
disguise, that the poor Gentleman had lost his Senses, they were willing to
understand the meaning of that strange confession, which he wou^d force from
em; and therefore one of the Company, who loved and understood Raillery, having
discretion to manage it, undertook to talk to him. Sir Knight, cried he, we do
not know this worthy Lady whom you talk of; but be pleased to let us see her,
and then if we find her possessed of those matchless Charms of which you assert
her to be the Mistress, we will freely and without the least compulsion own the
truth which you would extort from us. Had I once showed you that Beauty,
replied Don Quixote, what wonder would it be to have you acknowledge so
notorious and evident a Truth? The Importance of the thing lies in obliging you
to believe it, confess it, affirm it, swear it, and maintain it, without seeing
her, and therefore make this acknowledgment this very moment, or know, it is
with me you must join in Battle, 'ye proud and unreasonable Mortals. Come one
by one, as the Laws of Chivalry require, or all at once, according to the
dishonorable Practice of men of your Stamp, here I expect you all my single
self, and will stand the encounter, confiding in the Justice of my Cause. Sir
Knight, replied the Merchant, I beseech you in the name of us all the Princes
here present, that for the discharge of our Consciences, which will not permit
us to affirm a thing we never heard or saw, and which besides, tends so much to
the dishonor of the Empresses and Queens of Alcarria, and Estremadura, your
Worship will vouchsafe to let us see some Portraiture of that Lady, though
'twere no bigger than a grain of Wheat; for by a small sample we may judge of
the whole piece, and by that means rest secure and satisfied, and you contented
and appeased. Nay, I verily believe, that we all find our selves already so
inclinable to comply with you, that tho her Picture should represent her to be
blind of one Eye, and distilling Vermillion and Brimstone at the other, yet to
oblige you, we should be ready to say in her Favor, whatever your Worship
desires. Distill, ye infamous Scoundrels, replied Don Quixote, in a burning
Rage! Distill, say you? Know that nothing distills from her but Amber, and Civit.
Neither is she defective in her Eyes or Shape; but more strait than a
Guadaramian Spindle. But you shall all severely pay for the horrid Blasphemy
which thou have uttered against the transcendent Beauty of my incomparable
Lady. Saying this, with his Lance couched, he ran so furiously at the Merchant
who had thus provoked him, that had not good fortune so ordered it that
Rozinante should stumble, and fall in the midst of his Career, the audacious
Trifler had paid dear for his Raillery. But as Rozinante fell, he threw down
his Master, who rolled and tumbled a good way on the ground, without being able
to get upon his Legs, tho he used all his skill and strength to effect it; so
encumbred he was with his Lance, Target, Spurs, Helmet, and the weight of his
rusty Armor. However, in this helpless condition, he played the Hero wirh his
Tongue, Stay, cried he, Cowards, Rascals, do not fly! It Is not through my fault
that I lie here, but through that of my Horse, ye Poltroons.

One of the Grooms, who was none of the best natured Creatures, hearing the
overthrown Knight thus insolently treat his Master, could not bear it, without
returning him an answer on his Ribs; and therefore coming up to him, as he lay
wallowing, he snatched his Lance; and having broke i^ to pieces, he so be
labored Don Quixote's sides with one of 'em, that in spite of his Arms he
thresh'd him like a Wheatsheaf. His Master indeed called to him, not to lay him
on so vigorously, and to let him alone; but the Fellow, whose hand was in,
would not give over rib-roasting the Knight, till he had tired out his passion
and himself; and therefore running to the other pieces of the broken Lance, he
fell to it again without ceasing, till he had splinter'd them all on the poor
Knight's Iron-Enclosure. He on his side, notwithstanding all this storm of
Bastinadoes, lay all the while bellowing, threatening Heaven and Earth, and
those villainous Ruffians, as he took 'em to be. At last the Mule-driver was
tired, and the Merchants pursued their Journey, sufficiently furnished with
matter of Discourse, at the poor Knights expense. When he found himself alone,
he tried once more to get on his feet; but if he could not do it when he had
the use of all his limbs, how should he do it now, bruised and battered as he
was. But yet for all this, he esteemed himself a happy man, being still
persuaded that his misfortune was one of those accidents common in
Knight-Errantry; and such a one as he could wholly attribute to the falling of
his Horse; nor could he possibly get up, so sore and mortified was his Body all
over.

CHAP. V. A further account of our Knight's misfortunes.
DOn Quixote perceiving that he was not able to stir, resolved to have recourse
to his usual Remedy, which was to bethink himself what passage in his Books,
might afford him some Comfort, and presently his Folly brought to his
remembrance the Story of Baldwin, and the Marquis of Mantua, when Charlot left
the former wounded on the Mountain; a story learned and known by little
Children, not unknown to young Men and Women, celebrated and even believed by
the old; and yet not a jot more authentic, than the Miracles of Mahomet. This
seemed to him, as if made on purpose for his present circumstances, and
therefore he fell a rolling and tumbling up and down, expressing the greatest
pain and resentment, and breathing out with a languishing voice the same
complaints, which the wounded Knight of the Wood is said to have made.

Alas, where are you, Lady dear,
That for my Woe you do not moan,
You little know what ails me here,
Or are to me disloyal grown.
Thus he went on with the Lamentations in that Romance, till he came to these
Verses, On thou, my Uncle, and my Prince,
Marquis of Mantua, noble Lord! --
When kind Fortune so ordered it, that a Plowman, who lived in the same
Village, and near his House, happened to pass by, as he came from the Mill with
a sack of Wheat. The Fellow seeing a Man lie at his full length on the ground,
asked him, who he was, and why he made such a sad complaint? Don Quixote, whose
distempered Brain presently represented to him the Countryman for the Duke of
Mantua, his imaginary Uncle, made him no answer, but went on with the Romance,
giving him an account of his misfortunes, and of the Loves of his Wife, and the
Emperors Son, just as the Book relates 'em. The Fellow star'd, much amazed to
hear a man talk such unaccountable stuff, and taking off the visor of his
Helmet, broken all to pieces, with the blows bestowed upon it by the
Mule-driver, he wiped off the Dust that covered his Face, and presently knew
the Gentleman. Master Quixada, cried he! (for so he was properly called, when
he had the right use of his senses, and had not yet from a sober Gentleman,
transformed himself into a wandering Knight) how came you in this Condition? but
the other continued his Romance, and made no answers to all the Questions the
Countryman put to him; but what followed in course in the Book. Which the good
man perceiving, he took off the battered Adventurer's Armor, as well as he
could, and fell a searching for his Wounds, but finding no sign of any Blood,
or other hurt, he endeavored to set him upon his Legs; and at last with a
great deal of trouble, he heaved him upon his Ass, as being the more easy and
gentle Carriage, he also got all the Knights Arms together, not leaving behind
so much as the splinters of his Lance, and having tied 'em up, and laid 'em on
Rozinante, which he took by the Bridle, and his Ass by the Halter, he led 'em
all toward the Village, and trudged afoot himself very pensive, while he
reflected on the extravagancies, which he heard Don Quixote utter: nor was Don
Quixote himself less melancholic, for he felt himself so bruised and
mortified, that he cou d hardly sit on the Ass, and now and then he breathed
such grievous sighs, as seemed to pierce the very skies; which moved his
compassionate Neighbor once more to entreat him, to declare to him the cause
of his grief. But one would have imagined the Devil prompted him with Stories,
that had some resemblance of his circumstances, for in that instant, wholly
forgetting Baldwin, he bethought himself of the Moor Abindaraez, when Rodrigo
de Narvaez, Alcayde of Antequera, took and carried him Prisoner to his Castle;
so that when the Husbandman asked him again, how he did, and what ailed him, he
answered word for word, as the Prisoner Abencerrage, replies to Rodrigo de
Narvaez, in the Diana of George de Monte-Mayor, where that Adventure is
related; applying it so properly to his purpose, that the Countryman cursed
himself to the Pit of Hell, for hearing his strange Nonsense; and being now
fully convinced, that his Neighbors Brains were turned, he made all the haste
he could to the Village, to be rid of his tedious and troublesome impertinences.
Don Quixote in the mean time, thus went on, You must know, Don Rodrigo de
Narvaez, that this Beautiful Xerifa, of whom I gave you an account, is at
present the most lovely Dulcinea del Toboso, for whose sake I have done, still
do, and will atchieve the most famous Deeds of Chivalry that ever were, are, or
ever shall be seen in the Universe. Good Sir, replied the Husbandman, do you
not plainly perceive that I am neither Don Rodrigo de Narvaez, nor the Marquis
of Mantua, but only a poor Sinner, Pedro Alonso by name, your Worships
Neighbor? Nor are you Baldwin, nor Abindaraez, but only that worthy Gentleman
Senior Quixada. I know very well who I am, answered Don Quixote; and what is
more, I know that I may not only be the persons I have named, but also the
Twelve Peers of France, nay, and the nine Worthies all in one; since my
Achievements will out-rival not only the famous Exploits which made any of 'em
singly Illustrious, but all their mighty Deeds accumulated together.

Thus discoursing, they at last got near their Village about Sunset; but the
Countryman staid at some distance till 'twas dark, that the distressed
Gentleman might not be seen so scurvily mounted, and then he led him home to
his own house, which he found in great confusion. The Curate and the Barber of
the Village, both of 'em Don Quixote's intimate acquaintance, happened to be
there at that juncture, as also the Housekeeper, who was aguing with 'em. What
do you think, pray good Doctor Perez, said she, (for this was the Curates Name)
what do you think of my Masters mischance? Neither he, nor his Horse, nor his
Target, Lance, nor Armor have been seen these six days. What shall I do, wretch
that I am? I dare lay my Life, and it is as sure as I am a living Creature, that
those cursed Books of Errantry, which he used to be always poring upon, have
set him besides his Senses; for now I remember I have heard him often mutter to
himself, that he had a mind to turn Knight Errant, and jaunt up and down the
world to find out Adventures. May Satan and Barrabas even take all such Books
that have thus cracked the best Headpiece in all La Mancha! His Neice said as
much, addressing herself to the Barber. You must know, Mr Nicholas, quoth she
(for that was his name) that many times my Uncle would read you those
unconscionable Books of Disventures for eight and forty hours together; then
away he would throw you his Book, and drawing his Sword, he would fall a Fencing
against the Walls, and when he had tired himself with cutting and slashing, he
would cry, he had killed Four Giants as big as any Steeples; and the sweat
which he put himself into, he would say, was the Blood of the Wounds he had
received in the Fight; then would he swallow you a huge Jug of cold water, and
presently he would be as quiet, and as well as e're he was in his life; and he said
that this same water was a sort of precious Drink brought him by the Sage
Alquife.
Esquife, a great Magician, and his special Friend. Now it is I who am the Cause
of of all this Mischief, for not giving you timely notice of my Unkle's Raving,
that you might have put a stop to it, e're 'twas too late, and have burnt all
those excommunicated Books; for there are I don't know how many of 'em that
deserve as much to be burned as those of the rankest Heretics. I am of your
mind, said the Curate, and verily to morrow shall not pass over before I have
fairly brought 'em to a Trial, and condemned 'em to be burned, that they may
not minister occasion to such as would read 'em, to be perverted after the
example of my good Friend. The Countryman, who with Don Quixote stood without,
listening to all this Discourse, now perfectly understood by this the Cause of
his Neighbor's disorder, and therefore without any more ado, he called our
aloud, Here! House! Open the Gates there, for the Lord Baldwin, and the Lord
Marquis of Mantua, who is coming sadly wounded, and for the Moorish Lord
Abindaraez, whom the valorous Don Rodrigo de Narvaez, Alcayde of Antequera,
brings Prisoner. At which words they all got out of doors, and the one finding
it to be her Uncle, and the other to be her Master, and the rest their Friend,
who had not yet alighted from the Ass, because indeed he was not able, they all
ran to embrace him; to whom Don Quixote, Forbear said he, for I am sorely hurt,
by reason that my Horse failed me; carry me to Bed, and if it be possible let
the Enchantress Vrganda be sent for, to cure my wounds. Now in the name of
mischief, quoth the Housekeeper, see whether I did not guess right, on which
Foot my Master halted? Come, get you to Bed, I beseech you; and my life for
yours, we'll take care to cure you without sending for that same Vrganda. A
hearty Curse, and the Curse of Curses, I say it again and again a hundred
times, light upon those Books of Chivalry that have put you in this pickle.
Thereupon they carried him up to his Bed, and searched for his wounds, but
could find none; and then he told them he was only bruised, having had a
dreadful fall from his Horse Rozinante, while he was fighting ten Giants, the
most outrageous and audacious that ever could be found upon the face of the
Earth. How, cried the Curate, have we Giants too in combination against us? Nay
then, may I forfeit my Habit, if I don't burn 'em all by to morrow night. Then
did they ask the Don a thousand questions, but to every one he made no other
answer, but that they should give him something to eat, and then leave him to
his Repose, a thing which was to him of greater importance. They complied with
his desires, and then the Curate informed himself at large, in what condition
the Countryman had found him, and having had a full account of every
particular, as also of the Knight's extravagant talk, both when the Fellow
found him, and as he brought him home, this increased the Curate's desire of
effecting what he had resolved to do the next morning. At which time he called
upon his friend, Mr Nicholas the Barber, and went with him to Don Quixote's
house.

CHAP. VI. Of the pleasant and curious Survey which the Curate and the Barber
took of the Library of our ingenious Gentleman.
THe Knight was yet asleep, when the Curate came attended by the Barber, and
desired his Niece to let him have the Key of the Room, where her Uncle kept his
Books, the authors of his Woes; she readily consented, and so in they went, and
the Housekeeper with 'em. There they found above a hundred large Volumes
neatly bound; and a good number of small ones. As soon as the Housekeeper had
spied 'em out, she ran out of the Study, and rerurn'd immediately with a
Holy-water-pot and a Sprinkler, Here Doctor, cried she, pray sprinkle every
Creek and Corner in the Room, lest there should lurk in it some one of the many
Sorcerers these Books swarm with, who might chance to bewitch us, for the ill
will we bear 'em, in going about to send 'em out of the World. The Curate could
not forbear smiling at the old woman's simplicity, and desired the Barber to
reach him the Books one by one, that he might peruse the Title pages, for
perhaps they might find some among 'em, that might not deserve to be committed
to the Flames. Oh, by no means cried the Niece; spare none of em, they all
helped some how or other, to crack my Unkle's Brains. I fancy, we had best throw
'em all out at the Window into the Yard, and lay 'em together in a heap, and
then set 'em o'fire, or else carry 'em into the Back yard, and there make a
pile of 'em, and burn 'em, and so the smoke will offend no body. The
Housekeeper joined with her, so eagerly bent they were both upon the
destruction of those poor Innocents. But the Curate would not condescend to
these irregular Proceedings, and resolved first to read at least the Title
Pages of every Book.

The first that Mr Nicholas put into his hands was Amadis de Gaul, in four
Volumes. There seems to be some mystery in this Books being the first taken
down (cried the Curate, as soon as he had looked upon it) for I have heard it is
the first Book of Knight-Errantry, that ever was printed in Spain; and the
model of all the rest; and therefore I am of opinion, that, as the first
Teacher and Author of so pernicious a Sect, it ought to be condemned to the
Fire without mercy, I beg a reprieve for him, cried the Barber; for I have been
told, it is the best Book that has been written in that kind; and therefore as
the only good thing of that sort, it may deserve a Pardon. Well then, replied
the Curate for this time, let him have it. Let Us see that other, which lies
next to him. These, said the Barber, are the exploits of Esplandian, the
lawfully begotten Son of Amadis de Gaul. Verily, said the Curate, the Fathers
goodness, shall not excuse the want of it in the Son. Here, good Mistress
Housekeeper open that Window, and throw it into the Yard, and let it serve as
a foundation to that Pile we are to set a blazing presently. She was not slack
in her obedience, and thus poor Don Esplandian was sent headlong into the Yard,
there patiently to wait the time of his fiery Trial. To the next, cried the
Curate. This, said the Barber, is Amadis of Greece; and I Am of opinion that all
those that stand on this side are of the same Family. Then let 'em all be sent
packing into the Yard, replied the Curate; for rather than lose the pleasure of
burning Queen Antiquinestra and the Shepherd Darinel with his Eclogues, and the
confounded unintelligible discourses of the Author, I think I should burn my
own Father along with 'em, if I met him in the disguise of a Knight Errant. I
am of your mind, cried the Barber. And I too, said the Niece. Nay then, quoth
the old Female, let 'em come, and down with 'em all into the Yard. They were
delivered to her accordingly, and many they were, so that to save herself the
labor of carrying 'em down stairs, she fairly sent 'em flying out at Wjndow.

What overgrown piece of Lumber have we here? cried the Curate. Olivante de
Laura, returned the Barber. The same Author wrote The Garden of Flowers; and to
deal ingenuously with you, I cannot well tell which of the two Books has most
Truth in it; or, to speak more properly, less Lies: But this I know for
certain, that he shall march into the Back-Yard, like a nonsensical arrogant
Blockhead as he is.

The next, cried the Barber, is Florismart of Hircania. How! my Lord
Florismart, is he here, replied the Curate? Nay, then truly he shall even
follow the rest to the Yard, in spite of his wonderful Birth and incredible
Adventures; for his rough, dull and insipid style deserves no better usage.
Come, toss him into the Yard, and this other too, good Mistress! With all my
heart, quoth the Governess, and strait she was as good as her word.

Here Is the noble Don Platir, cried the Barber. It Is an old Book, replied the
Curate; and I can think of nothing in him that deserves a grain of pity: Away
with him, without any more words; and down he went accordingly.

Another Book was opened, and it proved to be The Knight of the Cross. The holy
Title, cried the Curate, might in some measure atone for the badness of the
Book; but then, as the saying is, The Devil lurks behind the Cross! To the
Flames with him.

Then the Barber taking down another Book, cried here is the Mirror of
Knighthood. Oh I have the honor to know him, replied the Curate. There you
shall find the Lord Rinaldo of Montaban, with his Friends and Companions, all
of 'em greater Thieves than Cacus, together with the twelve Peers of France,
and that faithful Historian Turpin. Truly, I must needs say, I am only for
condemning 'em to perpetual Banishment, at least because their story contains
something of the famous Boyardo's Invention; out of which the Christian Poet
Ariosto also borrowed his subject; yet, if I happen to meet with him in this
bad Company, and speaking in any other Language than his own, I ll show him no
manner of favor; but if he talks in his own Native Tongue, I ll treat him with
all the respect imaginable. I have him at home in Italian, said the Barber, but
I cannot understand him. It Is not convenient you should, reply d the Curate;
and I could willingly have excused the good Captain who translated it, that
trouble of attempting to make him speak Spanish; for he has deprived him of a
great deal of his primitive Graces; a misfortune incident to all those who
presume to translate Verses; since their utmost wit and industry can never
enable 'em, to preserve the native Beauties and Genius that shine in the
original. For this reason, I am for having not only this Book, but likewise all
those, which we shall find here treating of French affairs, thrown and
deposited in some dry Vault, till we have maturely determined what ought to be
done with 'em; give me leave to except one Bernardo del Carpio, that must be
somewhere here among the rest, and another called Roncesvalles; for whenever I
meet with 'em, I will certainly deliver 'em up into the hands of the Secular
power. The Barber gave his approbation to every particular, well knowing that
the Curate was so good a Christian, and so great a lover of truth, that he
would not have uttered a falsity for all the world. Then opening another
Volume, he found it to be Palmerin de Oliva, and the next to that, Palmerin of
England. Ha! Have I found you, cried the Curate! Here, take that Oliva, let him
be torn to pieces, then burnt, and his ashes scattered in the Air. But let
Palmerin of England be preserved, as a singular Relic of Antiquity; and let
such a costly box be made for him, as Alexander found among the Spoils of
Darius, which he devoted to enclose Homer s Works. For I must tell you,
Neighbor, that Book deserves particular respect for two things. First for its
own Excellencies; and Secondly, for the sake of its Author, who is said to have
been a learned King of Portugal. Then, all the Adventures of the Castle of
Miraguarda are well, and art fully managed. The Dialogue very courtly and
clear, and the Decorum strictly observed in every Character, with equal
Propriety and Judgment. Therefore, Mr Nicholas, continued he, with submission
to your better advice, this and Amadis de Gaul shall be exempted from the Fire;
and let all the rest be condemned without any further enquiry or examination.
By no means, I beseech you, returned the Barber; for this which I have in my
hands is the famous Don Bellianis. Truly, cried the Curate, he with his second,
third, and fourth parts, had need of a Dose of Rhuharb to purge his excessive
Choler: besides, his Castle of Fame should be demolished, and a heap of other
Rubbish removed: In order to which I give my Vote to grant 'em the benefit of
Transportation; and as they show signs of amendment, so shall Mercy or Justice
be used toward 'em: In the mean time, Neighbor, take 'em into custody, and
keep 'em safe at home, but let none be permitted to converse with 'em. Content,
cried the Barber; and to save himself the labor of looking on any more Books
of that kind, he bid the Housekeeper take all the great Volumes and throw 'em
into the Yard. She, who longed to be at that Sport, as much as to be making her
Wedding Smock, had no need of being twice spoken to; so that laying hold on no
less than eight Volumes at once, she presently made 'em leap toward the place
of Execution. But as she went too eagerly to work, taking more Books than she
cou d conveniently carry, she happened to drop one at the Barbers Feet, which
he took up out of Curiosity, to see what it was, and found it to be the History
of the famous Knight Tirante the White; good lack-a-day, cried the Curate! Is
Tirante the White here? Oh pray, good Neighbor, give it me by all means, for I
promise my self to find in it a Treasure of Delight, and a Mine of Recreation.
There we have that valorous Knight Don Kyrie-Eleiso of Montaban, with his
Brother Thomas of Montaban, and the Knight Fonseca; the combat of the valorous
Detriante with the Mastiff; the dainty and witty conceits of the Damsel
Plazerdemivida, with the Loves and Guiles of the Widow Reposada; together with
the Lady Empress, that was in Love with Hippolito her Gentleman Usher. I vow
and protest to you, neighbor, continued he, that as for style there is not a
better Book in the World. Why, here your Knights eat and drink, sleep and dye
natural Deaths in their Beds, nay, and first make their last Wills and
Testaments; with a World of other things, of which all the rest of these sort
of Books don't say one syllable. Yet after all, I must tell you, that for
wilfully taking the pains to write so many foolish things, the worthy Author
fairly deserves to be sent to the Galleys for all the days of his life. Take it
home with you and read it, and then tell me whether I have told the truth or
no. I believe you, replied the Barber: But what shall we do with all these
smaller Books that are left? Certainly, returned the Curate, these cannot be
Books of Knight Errantry; they are too small: You Will find they are only Poets.
And so opening one, it happened to be the Diana of Montemayor, which made him
say (believing all the rest to be of that stamp) These do not deserve to be
punished like the others; for they neither have done, nor can do that mischief
which those Stories of Chivalry have done; being generally ingenious Books,
that can do no body any prejudice. Oh! good Sir, cried the Neice, burn 'em with
the rest, I beseech you; for should my Uncle get cured of his
Knight-Errant-Frenzy, and betake himself to the reading of these Books, we
should have him turn Shepherd, and so wander through the Woods and Fields, nay,
and what would be worse yet, turn Poet, which they say is a catching and an
incurable Disease. The Gentlewoman is in the right, said the Curate, and it
will not be amiss to remove that stumbling Blockout of our Friends way; and
since we began with the Diana of Montemayor, I am of opinion, we ought not to
burn it, but only take out that part of it, which treats of the Magician
Felicia, and the enchanted water; as also all the longer Poems; and let the
work escape with its Prose, and the honor of being the chief of that kind.
Here Is another Diana, quoth the Barber, the second of that name, by Salmantino,
nay, and a third too, by Gil Polo. Pray, said the Curate, let Salmantino
increase the number of the Cr^minals in the Yard; but as for that by Gil Polo,
preserve it as charily, as if Apollo himself had wrote it; and go on as fast as
you can, I beseech you good Neighbor; for it grows late. Here, quoth the
Barber, I Have a Book call d the Ten Books of the Fortune of Love, written by
Anthony de Lofrasco a Sardinian Poet. Now by my holy Orders, cried the Curate,
I do not think, since Apollo was Apollo, the Muses, Muses, and the Poets,
Poets, there was ever a more comical, more silly Book. Of all the works of the
kind, commend me to this; for in its way it is certainly the best, and most
singular, that ever was published, and he that never read it, may safely think,
he never in his Life read any thing that was pleasant. Give it me Neighbor,
continued he, for I Am more glad to have found it, than if any one had given me
a Cassock of the best Florence-Prunella. With that he laid it aside with
extraordinary satisfaction, and the Barb^^ went on. These that follow, cry d
he, are The Shepherd of Iberia, The Nymphs of Enares, and The Cure of Jealousy.
Take 'em Jailer, quoth the Curate, and never ask me why; for then w^ shall
never have done. The next, said the Barber, is The Shepherd of Filida, he is no
Shepherd, returned the Curate; but a very discreet Courti^^, keep him as a
precious Jewel. There Is a bigge^, cried the Barber, called The Treasure of
diverse Poems, had there been less of 'em, said the Curate, they would have been
more esteemed. It Is fit the Book should be pruned, and cleared of several
trifles, that disgrace the rest. Keep it however, because the Author is my
Friend, and for the sake of his other more heroic and lofty Productions. Here Is
a Book of Songs by Lopez Maldonado, cried the Barber, he is also my particular
Friend said the Curate, his Verses are very well lik d when he reads em
himself, and his voice is so excellent, that they charm us whenever he sings
'em. He seems indeed to be somewhat too long in his Eclogues; but can we ever
have too much of a good Thing? let him be preserved among the best. What Is the
next Book? The Galatea of Miguel de Cervantes, replied the Barber. That
Cervantes has been my intimate acquaintance these many years, cried the Curate,
and I know he has been more conversant with misfortunes than with Poetry: His
Book indeed has I don't know what that looks like a good design; he aims at
something, but concludes nothing: Therefore we must stay for the Second Part,
which he has promised us; perhaps he may make us amends, and obtain a full
Pardon, which is now denied him for the present; till that time keep him close
Prisoner at your house. I will, quoth the Barber: but see, I have here three
more for you, The Auricana of Don Alonso de Ercilla, The Austriada of Juan
Ruffo, a Magistrate of Cordona, and the Monserrato of Christopher de Virves, a
Valentian Poet. These, cried the Curate, are the best Hereies we have in
Spanish, and may vye with the most celebrated of Italy. Reserve em, as the most
valuable performances which Spain has to boast of in Poetry.

At last, the Curate grew so tired with prying into so many Volumes, that he
ordered all the rest to be burnt at a venture. But the Barber showed him one
which he had opened by chance ere the dreadful Sentence was past. Truly, said
the Curate, who saw by the Title 'twas The Tears of Angelica, I should have
wept my self had I caused such a Book to share the Condemnation of the rest;
for the Author was not only one of the best Poets in Spain, but in the whole
World; and translated some of Ovid's Fables with extraordinary success.

CHAP. VII. Don Quixote's second Sally in quest of Adventures.
WHile they were thus employed, Don Quixote in a raving fit began to talk aloud
to himself. Here, here, valorous Knights, cried he, now is the time that you
must exert the strength of your mighty Arms; for, lo! the Courtiers bear away
the honor of the Tournament. This amazing Outcry called away the Inquisitors
from any further Examination of the Library, and therefore the Housekeeper and
the Neice being lest to their own discretion, it is thought The Carolea, and Leo
of Spain, with the Deeds of the Emperor, written by Don Lewis D' Avila, which
to be sure were part of the Collection, were committed to the flames unseen and
unheard, without any legal Trial. A Fate which they perhaps might have escaped,
had the Curate been there to have weighed what might have been urged in their
defense.

When they came into Don Quixote's Chamber, they found him risen out of his
Bed, as mad as ever he was, tearing his throat and making a heavy bustle,
laying about him with his Sword back-stroke and fore-stroke, as broad awake as
if he had never slept. They ran in upon him, caught him in their arms, and
carried him to bed again by main force; where, after he was somewhat quiet and
settled, turning himself to the Curate, Certainly, cried he, my Lord Archbishop
Turpin, it is a great dishonor to us who are called the twelve Peers, to suffer
the Knights of the Court to bear away the honor of the Tournament without any
further opposition, after we the Knights Adventurers had carried it for three
days before. Be pacified, my good Friend, replied the Curate; Fortune may have
yet better success in reserve for you, and they who lose to day may win to
morrow; at present, think on your health, for doubtless you must needs be now
extremely tired, if not very much wounded. Wounded, replied Don Quixote! No,
but as for being bruised, I will not deny it; for that base-born Knight, Don
Orlando, has battered all my Limbs with the Trunk of an Oak, out of mere Envy,
because he sees that I alone dare rival his Exploits. But may I no more be
called Rinaldo of Montalban, if, in spite of all his Enchantments, I do not
make him severely pay for this, as soon as I can leave my Bed; and therefore
let my Dinner be brought in, for it is what I want most at this juncture, and
then let me alone to revenge this abuse. Accordingly they brought him some
Victuals, which when he had eaten, he fell asleep again, and they left him, all
of 'em strangely amazed at his uncommon madness. That Night the Housekeeper
burnt all the Books, not only those in the Yard, but all those that were in the
House; and several suffered in the general calamity, that deserved to have been
treasured up in everlasting Archives, had not their fate, and the remissness of
the Inquisitor prevented it. And thus they made good the Proverb, That the good
often fare the worse for the bad.

One of the Expedients, of which the Curate and the Barber bethought themselves
in order to their friend's recovery, was to stop up the door of the Room where
his Books lay, that he might not find it, nor miss them, when he rose; for they
hoped the effect would cease, when they had taken away the cause; and they
ordered, that if he enquir^d about it, they should tell him, that a certain
Enchanter had carried away Study Books and all. Two days after, Don Quixote
being got up, the first thing he did was to go visit his darling Books, and as
he could not find the Study, in the place where he had left it, he went up and
down and looked for it in every Room. Sometimes he came to the place where the
door used to stand; and then stood feeling and groping about a good while, then
cast his Eyes and star'd on every side, without speaking a word. At last, after
a long deliberation, he thought fit to ask his Housekeeper, which was the way
to his Study? What Study, (answered the Woman, according to her instructions)
or rather what nothing is it you look for? Alas, here is neither Study nor Books
in the House now; for the Devil is run away with 'em all. No, 'twas not the
Devil, said the Niece, but a Conjurer or an Enchanter, as they call 'em, who,
since you went, came hither one night mounted on a Dragon, o'top of a Cloud,
and then, alighting, went into your Study, where, what he did, he and the Devil
best can tell, for he went out a while after; and flew out at the Roof of the
House, leaving it all in a smoke; and when we went to see what he had done, we
could neither find the Books, nor so much as the very Study Only the
Housekeeper and I very well remember, that as the wicked old man was going
away, he cried out aloud, that out of a private grudge, which he bore in his
mind to the Owner of those Books, he had done the House a mischief, as we
should soon perceive. And then I think he called himself the Sage Muniaton. Not
Muniaton, but Freston, you should have said, cried Don Quixote. Truly, quoth
the Niece, I cannot tell whether 'twas Freston or Friston; but sure I am his
name ended with a Ton. It Is so, returned Don Quixote, for he is a famous
Negromancer and my mortal Enemy; and bears me a great deal of malice,
foreseeing by his Art, that in spite of all his Spells, in process of time I
shall fight and vanquish in single Combat, a Knight whose Interest he espouses;
therefore he endeavors to do me all manner of mischief. But I dare assure him,
that he drives against the stream, nor can his power reverse the first decrees
of Fate. Who doubts of that, cried the Niece? But, dear Uncle, what makes you
run your self into these quarrels? Had not you better stay at home and live in
piece and quietness, than go rambling up and down like a Vagabond, and seeking
for better Bread than is made of Wheat; without once so much as considering
that many go to seek Wool, and come home shorn themselves? Oh! good Niece,
replied Don Quixote, how ill thou understand'st these matters? Know that before
I Will suffer my self to be shorn, I Will tear and pluck off the beards of all
those audacious Mortals, that shall but attempt to profane the tip of one
single hair within the Verge of these Mustachio's. To this neither the Niece
nor the Governess thought fit to make any reply, for they perceived the Knight
began to grow angry. Full fifteen days did our Knight remain quietly at home,
without betraying the least sign of his desire to renew his Rambling, during
which time there past a great deal of pleasant discourse between him and his
two Cronies, the Curate and the Barber; while he maintained that there was
nothing of which the world stood in so much need as Knights-Errant, wherefore
he was resolved to revive the Order. In which disputes Mr Curate sometimes
contradicted him, and sometimes submitted; for had he not now and then given
way to his fancies, there would have been no conversing with him.

In the mean time, Don Quixote earnestly solicited one of his Neighbors, a
Husbandman, and a good honest Fellow, if we may call a poor man honest, for he
was poor indeed; poor in Purse, and poor in Brains; and in short the Knight
talked so long to him, plied him with so many Arguments, and made him so many
fair promises, that at last the poor silly Clown contented to go along with
him, and become his Squire. Among other inducements to entice him to do it
willingly, Don Quixote forgot not to tell him, that 'twas likely such an
Adventure would present it self, as might secure him the Conquest of some
Island, in the time that he might be picking up a Straw or two; and then the
Squire might promise himself to be made Governor of the place. Allured with
these larg^ promises, and many others, Sancho Panca (for that was the name of
the fellow) forsook his Wife and Children, to be his Neighbors Squire.

This done, Don Quixote made it his business to furnish himself with Money; to
which purpose, selling one House, mortgaging another, and losing by all, he at
last got a pretty good sum together. He also borrowed a Target of a friend,
and having patched up his Headpiece and Beaver, as well as he could, he gave
his Squire notice of the day and hour when he intended to set out, that he
might also furnish himself with what he thought necessary; but above all he
charged him to provide himself with a Wallet; which Sancho promised to do,
telling him, he would also take his Ass along with him, which being a very good
one, might be a great ease to him, for he was not used to travel much a foot.
The mentioning of the Ass, made the noble Knight pause a while, he mused and
pondered, whether he had ever read of any Knight Errant, whose Squire used to
ride upon an Ass; but he could not remember any precedent for it. However, he
gave him leave at last to bring his Ass, hoping to mount him more honorably
with the first opportunity, by unhorsing the next Discourteous Knight he should
meet. He also furnished himself with Shirts, and as many other necessaries as
he could conveniently carry, according to the Innkeepers injunctions. Which
being done, Sancho Panca, without bidding either his Wife or Children good-b'y,
and Don Quixote, without taking any more notice of his Housekeeper or of his
Niece, stole out of the Village one night, not so much as suspected by any
body, and made such haste, that by break of day they thought themselves out of
reach, should they happen to be pursued. As for Sancho Panca, he rode like a
Patriarch, with his Canvas Knapsack or Wallet, and his Leathern Bottle, having
a huge desire to see himself Governor of the Island which his Master had
promised him.

Don Quixote happened to strike into the same Road which he took the time
before, that is, the Plains of Montiel, over which he traveled with less
Inconveniency than when he went alone, by reason it was yet early in the
morning; at which time the Sunbeams being almost parallel to the surface of
the Earth, and not directly darted down, as in the middle of the day, did not
prove so offensive. As they jogged on, I beseech your Worship, Sir
Knight Errant, quoth Sancho to his Master, be sure you don't forget what you
promised me about the Island! for I dare say I shall make shift to govern it,
let it be never so big. You must know, Friend Sancho, replied Don Quixote, that
it has been the constant practice of Knights-Errant in former ages to make
their Squires Governors of the Islands or Kingdoms they conquered; now I am
not only resolved to keep up that laudable Custom, but even to improve it, and
outdo my Predecessors in Generosity; for whereas sometimes, or rather most
commonly, other Knights delayed rewarding their Squires till they were grown
old, and worn out with service, bad days, worse nights, and all manner of hard
duty, and then put 'em off with some Title, either of Count, or at least
Marquis of some Valley, or Province, of great or small extent: Now, if thou and
I do but live, it may happen that before we have past six days together, I may
conquer some Kingdom, having many other Kingdoms annexed to its Imperial Crown;
and this would fall out most luckily for thee, for then would I presently crown
thee King of one of 'em. Nor do thou imagine this to be a mighty matter; for so
strange accidents, and revolutions so sudden and so unforeseen, attend the
Profession of Chivalry, that I might easily give thee a great deal more than I
have promised. Why, should this come to pass, quoth Sancho Panca, and I be made
a King, by some such like Miracle as your Worship says, then happy be lucky,
would our Joane Gutierez be at least a Queen, and my Children Infanta's and
Princes, an't like your Worship? Who doubts of that, cried Don Quixote? I doubt
of it, replied Sancho Panca; for I cannot help believing, that tho it should
rain Kingdoms down upon the face of the Earth, not one of 'em would sit well
upon Joane Gutierez's Head: For I must needs tell you, she is not worth two
brass Jacks to make a Queen of: No, Countess would be better for her, an't
please you; and that too, God help her, will be as much as she can handsomely
manage. Recommend the matter to Providence, returned Don Quixote; 'twill be
sure to give what is most expedient for thee: But yet disdain to entertain
inferior thoughts, and be not tempted to accept less than the Dignity of a
Viceroy. No more I will not, Sir, quoth Sancho: especially since I have so rare a
Master as your Worship, who ll take care to give me whatever may be fit for me,
and what I may be able to deal with.

CHAP. VIII. Of the good success which the valorous Don Quixote had in the most
terrifying, and never-to-be-imagin'd Adventure of the Wind-mills; With other
Transactions worthy to be transmitted to Posterity.
AS they were thus discoursing, they discovered some thirty or forty Wind-mills
that are in that Plain; and as soon as the Knight had spied 'em, Fortune, cried
he, directs our affairs better than we our selves could have wished: Look
yonder, Friend Sancho, there are at least thirty outrageous Giants, whom I
intend to encounter; and having deprived 'em of Life, we will begin to enrich
our selves with their spoils: For they are lawful Prize, and the Extirpation of
that cursed brood will be an acceptable service to Heaven. What Giants, quoth
Sancho Panca? Those whom thou see yonder, answered Don Quixote, with their
long extended Arms; some of that detested Race have Arms of so immense a size,
that sometimes they reach two leagues in length. Pray look better, Sir, quoth
Sancho; those things yonder are no Giants, but Wind-mills, and the Arms you
fancy, are their Sails, which being whirled about by the Wind make the Mill go,
It Is a sign, cried Don Quixote, thou art but little acquainted with Adventures!
I tell thee, they are Giants; and therefore if thou art afraid, go aside, and
say thy Prayers, for I am resolved to engage in a dreadful unequal Combat
against them all. This said, he clapped Spurs to his Horse Rozinante, without
giving ear to his Squire Sancho, who bawled out to him, and assured him that
they were Wind-mills, and no Giants. But he was so fully possessed with a strong
conceit of the contrary, that he did not so much as hear his Squires outcry,
nor was he sensible of what they were, although he was already very near 'em. Far
from that, Stand, Cowards, cried he as loud as he could; stand your ground,
ignoble Creatures, and fly not basely from a single Knight, who dares encounter
you all. At the same time the Wind rising, the Mill-sails began to move, which
when Don Quixote spied, Base Miscreants, cried he, though you move more Arms
than the Giant Briareus, you shall pay for your arrogance. He most devoutly
recommended himself to his Lady Dulcinea, imploring her assistance in this
perilous Adventure, and so covering himself with his Shield, and couching his
Lance, he rushed with Rozinante's utmost speed, upon the first Windmill he
could come at, and running his Lance into the Sail, the Wind whirled it about
with such swiftness, that the rapidity of the motion presently broke the Lance
into Shivers, and hurled away both Knight and Horse along with it, till down he
fell rolling a good way off in the Field. Sancho Panca ran as fast as his Ass
could drive to help his Master, whom he found lying and not able to stir, such
a blow he and Rozinante had received. Mercy of me, cried Sancho, did Don
Quixot's Encounter with the Windmills V. 1. page. 64
not I give your Worship fair warning! did not I tell you they were Wind-mills,
and that no body could think otherwise, unless he had also Wind-mills in his
head? Peace, friend Sancho, reply d Don Quixote. There is nothing so subject to
the inconstancy of Fortune at War; I am verily persuaded, that cursed
Negromancer Freston, who carried away my Study and my Books, has transformed
these Giants into Wind-mills to deprive me of the honor of the Victory; such
is his inveterate malice against me. But in the end, all his pernicious wiles
and stratagems shall prove ineffectual against the prevailing edge of my Sword.
Amen, say I, replied Sancho; and so heaving him up again upon his Legs, once
more the Knight mounted poor Rozinante, that was half shoulder-slipt with his
fall.

This Adventure was the subject of their discourse, as they made the best of
their way toward the Pass of Lapice, for Don Quixote took that Road, believing
he could not miss of Adventures in one so mightily frequented. However, the
Loss of his Lance, was no small affliction to him, and as he was making his
complaint about it to his Squire, I have read, said he, friend Sancho, that a
certain Spanish Knight, whose name was Diego Perez de Vargas, having broken his
Sword in the heat of an engagement, tore down a huge massy Branch of an Oak,
and did such wonderful Execution, crushing and grinding so many Moors with it
that day, that he won himself and his Posteriy the Surname of Machuca.
The Grinder. I tell thee this, because I intend to tear down from the next Oak
we meet, a branch as good as that at least, with which I hope to perform such
wondrous Deeds, that thou will esteem thy self particularly happy in having had
the honor to behold 'em, and been the ocular witness of Achievements, which
Posterity will scarce be able to believe. Heaven grant you may, cried Sancho; I
believe it all, because your Worship says it. But an't please you, sit a little
more upright in your Saddle; you ride sideling methinks; but that, I suppose,
proceeds from your being bruised by the fall. It does so, replied Don Quixote;
and if I do not complain of the pain, it is because a Knight Errant must never
complain of his Wounds, though his Bowels were dropping out through 'em. Then I Have
no more to say, quoth Sancho, and yet Heaven knows my heart, I should be glad
to hear your Worship hone a little now and then, when something ails you. Don
Quixote could not forbear smiling at the simplicity of his Squire, and told
him, he gave him leave to complain not only when he pleased, but as much as he
pleased, whether he had any cause or no; for he had never yet read any thing to
the contrary in any Books of Chivalry. Sancho desired him however to remember
'twas high time to go to Dinner; but his Master answered him, that he might eat
when e're he pleased, as for himself he was not yet disposed to do it. Sancho
having thus obtained leave, fixed himself as orderly as he could upon his Ass,
and taking some Victuals out of his Wallet, fell to munching lustily as he rode
behind his Master, and ever and anon he lifted his Bottle to his Nose, and
fetched such hearty pulls, that 'twou d have made the best pampered Vintner in
Malaga adry to have seen him. While he thus went on stuffing and swilling, he
did not think in the least of all his Masters great promises; and was so far
from esteeming it a trouble, to travel in quest of Adventures, that he fancied
it to be the greatest pleasure in the world, tho they were never so dreadful.

In fine, they past that Night under some Trees; from one of which Don Quixote
tore a withered Branch, which in some sort was able to serve him for a Lance,
and to this he fixed the Lead or Spear of his broken Lance. But he did not sleep
all that night, keeping his Thoughts intent on his dear Dulcinea, in imitation
of what he had read in Books of Chivalry, where the Knights pass that time
without sleep, in Forests and Deserts, wholly taken up with the entertaining
thoughts of their absent Mistresses. As for Sancho, he did not spend the Night
at that idle rate, for having his Paunch well stuffed with something more than
Wind, he made but one nap of it, and had not his Master waked him, neither the
sprightly beams which the Sun darted on his face, nor the melody of the Birds
that cheerfully on every branch welcomed the smiling morn, would have been able
to have made him stir. As he got up, to clear his eyesight, he took two or
three long-winded swiggs at his friendly Bottle, for a Mornings Draught: But he
found it somewhat lighter than it was the night before; which misfortune went
to his very heart; for he shrewdly mistrusted that he was not in a way to cure
it of that distemper as soon as he could have wished. On the other side, Don
Quixote would not break fast, having been feasting all night on the more
delicate and savoury thoughts of his Mistress; and therefore they went on
directly toward the Pass of Lapice, which they discovered about three a clock.
When they came near it, Here it is, Brother Sancho, cried Don Quixote, that we
may wanton, and as it were thrust our Arms up to the very Elbows in that which
we call Adventures. But let me give thee one necessary Cau^i^n, Know that tho
thou should see me in the greatest extremity of Danger, thou must not offer
to draw thy Sword in my defense, unless thou findst me assaulted by base
Plebeians and vile Scoundrels, for in such a case thou may assist thy Master.
But if those with whom I am fighting are Knights, thou must not do it, for the
Laws of Chivalry do not allow thee to encounter a Knight, till thou art one thy
self. Never fear, quoth Sancho; I Will be sure to obey your Worship in that, Ill
warrant you; for I Have ever loved peace and quietness, and never cared to thrust
my self into Frays and Quarrels; and yet I don't care to take blows at any ones
hands neither, and should any Knight offer to set upon me first, I fancy I
should hardly mind your Laws; for all Laws, whether of God or Man, allows one
to stand on his own defense, if any offer to do him a mischief. I agree to
that, replied Don Quixote; but as for helping me against any Knights, thou must
set bounds to thy natural impulses. I Will be sure to do it, quoth Sancho. Never
trust me if I don't keep your Commandment as well as I do the Sabbath.

As they were talking, they spied coming toward 'em two Monks of the order of
St Bennet, mounted on two Dromedaries, for the Mules on which they rode were so
high and stately, that they seemed little less. They wore Riding-Masks with
Glasses at the Eyes, against the Dust, and Umbrella's to shelter 'em from the
Sun. After 'em came a Coach with four or five Men on Horseback, and two
Muleteers afoot. There proved to be in the Coach a Biscayan Lady, who was going
to Sevill to meet her Husband that was there, in order to embark for the
Indies, to take possession of a considerable Post. Scarce had Don Quixote
perceived the Monks, who were not of the same company, tho they went the same
way, but he cried to his Squire, Either I am deceived, or this will prove the
most famous Adventure that ever was known; for without all question, those two
black things that move toward us must be some Negromancers, that are carrying
away by force some Princess in that Coach; and it is my Duty to prevent so great
an Injury. I fear me, this will prove a worse job than the Wind-mills, quoth
Sancho. Slife, Sir, don't you see these are Benedictin Friars, and it is likely
the Coach belongs to some Travelers that are in it. Therefore once more take
warning, and don't you be led away by the Devil. I have already told thee,
Sancho, replied Don Quixote, thou art miserably ignorant in matters of
Adventures. What I say is true, and thou shall find it so presently. This said,
he spurred on his Horse, and posted himself just in the midst of the Road,
where the Monks were to pass. And when they came within hearing, Cursed
Implements of Hell, cried he, in a loud and haughty tone, immediately release
those highborn Princesses, whom you are violently conveying away in that
Coach, or else prepare to meet with instant Death, as the just Punishment of
your pernicious deeds. The Monks stopped their Mules, no less astonished at the
Figure than at the Expressions of the Speaker. Sir Knight, cried they, we are
no such persons as you are pleased to term us, but Religious men, of the Order
of St Benedict, that travel about our affairs, and are wholly ignorant whether
or no there are any Princesses carried away by force in that Coach. I Am not to
be deceived with fair words, replied Don Quixote, I know you well enough,
perfidious Caitiffs: and immediately, without expecting their reply, he set
Spurs to Rozinante, and ran so furiously with his Lance couched against the
first Monk, that if he had not prudently flung himself off to the ground, the
Knight would certainly have laid him either dead or grievously wounded. The
other, observing the discourteous usage of his Companion, clapped his heels to
his overgrown Mule's Flanks, and scowr'd over the Plain, as if he had been
running a race with the Wind. Sancho Panca no sooner saw the Monk fall, but he
nimbly skipt off his Ass, and running to him, began to strip him immediately:
But then the two M^leteers, who waited on the Monks, came up to him, and asked
why he offered to strip him? Sancho told them, that this belonged to him as
lawful Plunder, being the Spoils won in Battle by his Lord and Master Don
Quixote. The fellows, with whom there was no jesting, not knowing what he meant
by his Spoils and Battle, and seeing Don Quixote at a good distance, in deep
discourse by the side of the Coach, fell both upon poor Sancho, threw him down,
tore his Beard from his Chin, crampled on his Guts, thump'd and ma^^'d him in
every part of his Carcass, and there left him sprawling, without breath or
motion. In the mean while, the Monk, scar d out of his wits, and as pale as a
Ghost, got upon his Mule again as fast as he could, and spurred after his
friend, who staid for him at a distance, expecting the issue of this strange
Adventure; but being unwilling to stay to see the end of it, they made the best
of their way, making more signs of the Cross than if the Devil had been posting
after 'em.

Don Quixote, as I said, was all that while engag d with the Ladies in the
Coach; Lady, cried he, your Discretion is now at liberty to dispose of your
beautiful self as you please; for the presumptuous arrogance of those who
attempted to enslave your person lies prostrate in the dust, overthrown by this
my strenuous Arm; and that you may not be at a loss for the name of your
Deliverer, Know, I am called Don Quixote de la Mancha, by Profession a
Knight Errant, and Adventurer, Captive to that peerless Beauty, Donna Dulcinea
del Toboso. Nor do I desire any other recompense for the service I have done
you, but that you return to Toboso to present your selves to that Lady, and let
her know what I have done to purchase your deliverance. To this extravagant
talk, a certain Biscayan Squire, Gentleman Usher, or what you will please to call
him, who rode along with the Coach, listened with great attention, and
perceiving that Don Quixote not only stopped the Coach, but would have it
presently go back to Toboso, he bore briskly up to him, and laying hold on his
Lance, Get gone, (cried he to him in bad Spanish and worse Biscayan) Get gone,
thou Knight, and Devil go with thou, or by the he who me create, if thou no
leave the Coach, me kill thee now so sure as me be Biscayan. Don Quixote, who
made shift to understand him well enough, very calmly made him this answer.
Were thou a Knight or Gentleman, Cavallero in Spanish signifies a Gentleman as
well as a Knight.
as thou art not, ere this I would have chastised thy insolence and temerity,
thou inconsiderable Mortal. What, me no Gentleman, replied the Biscayan? I
swear thou be Liar, as me be Christian. If thou throw away Lance, and draw
Sword, me will make no more of thee than Cat does of Mouse. Me will show thee
me be Biscayan, and Gentleman by Land, Gentleman by Sea, Gentleman in spite of
Devil, and thou lie if thou say contrary. I Will try Titles with you, as the man
said, replied Don Quixote; and with that throwing away his Lance, he drew his
Sword, grasped his Target, and attacked the Biscayan, fully bent on his
Destruction. The Biscayan seeing him come on so furiously, wou d gladly have
alighted, not trusting to his Mule, which was one of those scurvy Jades that
are let out to hire; but all he had time to do, was only to draw his Sword, and
snatch a Cushion out of the Coach, to serve him instead of a Shield; and
immediately they assaulted one another with all the Fury of Mortal Enemies. The
bystanders did all they could to prevent their fighting; but 'twas in vain;
for the Biscayan swore in his gibberish he would kill his very Mistress, and
all those who presumed to hinder him, if they would not let him fight. The Lady
in the Coach, being extremely affrighted at these Passages, made her Coachman
drive out of harms way, and at a distance, was an Eyewitness of the furious
Combat. At the same time, the Biscayan let fall such a mighty blow on Don
Quixote s shoulder over his Target, that had not his Armor been Sword proof,
he would have cleft him down to the very Waste. The Knight feeling the weight
of that unmeasurable Blow, cried out aloud, Oh, Lady of my Soul, Dulcinea!
flower of all Beauty, vouchsafe to succor your Champion in this dangerous
Combat, undertaken to set forth your worth. The breathing out of this short
Prayer, the griping fast of his Sword, the covering of himself with his Shield,
and the Charging of his Enemy, was but the work of a Moment; for Don Quixote
was resolv d to venture the Fortune of the Combat all upon one blow. The
Biscayan, who read his Design in his dreadful Countenance, resolved to face him
with equal ravery, and stand the terrible shock, covered with the Cushion, not
being able to manage his Jaded Mule, who, defying the Spur, and all other
provocations, would move neither to the Right nor to the Left. While Don
Quixote thus with his Sword aloft was rushing upon the wary Biscayan with a
full resolution to cleave him asunder; all the Spectators stood trembling with
Terror and Amazement, expecting the dreadful event of those prodigious blows
which threatened the two desperate Combatants: The Lady in the Coach with her
Women were making a thousand Vows and Offerings to all the places of Devotion
in Spain, that Providence might deliver them and the Squire out of the great
danger that threatened 'em.

But here we must deplore the abrupt end of this History, which the Author
leaves off just at the very point when the Fortune of the Battle is going to be
decided, pretending that he could find nothing more recorded of Don Quixote s
wondrous Achievements than what he had already related. However, the second
undertaker of this work could not believe that so curious a Histor^ could lie
for ever inevitably buried in oblivion; or that the Learned of La Mancha were
so regardless of their Countries glory, as not to preserve in their Archives,
or at least in their Closets, some Memoirs, as Monuments of that famous Knight;
and therefore he would not give over enquiring after the Continuation of this
pleasant History, till at last he happily found it, as the next Book will
inform the Reader.

THE Life and Achievements Of the Renowned Don Quixote de la Mancha. PART I.
BOOK II.
CHAP. I. The event of the most stupendous Combat between the brave Biscayan,
and the valorous Don Quixote.
IN the first Book of this History we left the valiant Biscayan, find the
Renowned Don Quixote, with their Swords lifted up, and ready to let fall on
each other, two furious and most terrible blows, which had they fallen
directly, and met with no opposition, would have cut and divided the two
Combatans from Head to Heel, and have split 'em like a Pomgranate. But as I
said before, the story remained imperfect, neither did the Author inform us,
where we might find the remaining Part of the Relation. This vexed me extremely,
and turned the pleasure, which the perusal of the beginning had afforded me,
into disgust, when I had reason to despair of ever seeing the rest. Yet, after
all, it seemed to me no less impossible, than unjust, that so valiant a Knight
should have been destitute of some learned Person, to record his incomparable
Exploits; a misfortune which never attended any of his Predecessors, I mean the
Knights Adventurers, each of whom was always provided with one or two learned
Men, who were always at hand, to write, not only their wondrous Deeds; but also
to set down their trivial Thoughts, were they never so hidden. Therefore, as I
could not imagine, that so worthy a Knight should be so unfortunate, as to want
that, which has been so profusely lavished, even on such a one as Platyr, and
others of that stamp, I could not induce my self to believe, that so admirable
a History was ever left unfinished: And rather chose to think that Time, the
devourer of all things, had either hid or consumed it. On the other side, when
I considered that several Modern Books were found in his Study, as The Cure of
Jealousy, and The Nymphs and Shepherds of Henares, I had reason to think, that
the History of our Knight could be of no very ancient date, and that, had it
never been continued, yet his Neighbors and Friends, could not have forgot the
most remarkable passages of his Life, Full of this imagination, I resolved to
make it my business to make a particular and exact inquiry; into the Life and
Miracles of our renowned Spaniard, Don Quixote, that refulgent Glory and
Mirror, of the Knighthood of la Mancha, and the first, who in these depraved
and miserable times, devoted himself to the neglected profession of
Knight-Errantry, to redress Wrongs and Injuries, to relieve Widows, and defend
the honor of Damsels; such of 'em, I mean, who in former Ages, rode up and
down with Whip in hand, mounted on their Palfreys, with all their Virginity
about 'em, secure from all manner of danger, and who, unless they happened to
be ravished by some boisterous Villain, or huge Giant, were sure, at fourscore
years of Age, (all which Time, they never Slept one Night under a Roof) to be
decently laid in their graves, as pure Virgins as their very Mothers. For this
reason and many others, I say, our gallant Don Quixote is worthy everlasting
and universal praise; nor ought I to be denied my due commendation for my
indefatigable care and diligence in seeking and finding out the continuation of
this delightful History; tho after all I must confess, that had not Providence,
Chance, or Fortune, as I will now inform you, assisted me in the discovery, the
World had been deprived of two hours diversion and pleasure, which it is likely
to afford to those, who will read it with attention.

One day being in the Alcana at Toledo, I saw a young Lad offer to sell a
Parcel of old written Papers to a Groom; now I being apt to take up the least
piece of written or printed Papers that lies in my way, tho 'twere in the
middle of the street, could not forbear laying my hands on one of the quires,
to see what it was, and I found it to be written in Arabic, which I could not
read. This made me look about to see whether I could find e're a Moorish Rabbi
to read it for me, and give me some account of it; nor was it very difficult to
meet with an Interpreter there, for had I wanted one for a better and more
ancient Tongue that place would infallibly have supplied me. 'Twas my good
Fortune to find one immediately, and having informed him of my desire, he no
sooner read some lines, but he began to laugh: I asked him what he laughed at?
At a certain Remark here in the Margin of the Book, said he. I prayed him to
explain it; whereupon, still laughing, he did it in these words. This Dulcinea
del Toboso, so often mentioned in this History, is said to have had the best
hand at Salting of Pork of any Woman in all La Mancha. I was surpised when I
heard him name Dulcinea del Toboso, and presently imagined that those old
Papers contained the History of Don Quixote. This made me press him to read the
Title of the Book, which he did, turning it thus extempore out of Arabic, The
History of Don Quixote de la Mancha, written by Cid Hamet Benengely, an Arabian
Historiographer. I was so overjoyed when I heard the Title, that I had much ado
to conceal it; and presently taking the Bargain out of the Grooms hands, I
agreed with the young man for the whole, and bought that for half a Real which
he might have sold me for twenty times as much, had he but guessed at the
eagerness of his Chapman. I immediately withdrew with my Purchase to the
Cloister of the great Church, taking the Moor with me; and desired him to
translate me all those papers that treated of Don Quixote, without adding or
omitting the least word: offering him any reasonable satisfaction. He asked me
but two An Arroba is about 32 l. weight.
Arrobes of Raisins, and two Bushels of Wheat, and promised me to do it
faithfully with all expedition. In short, for the quicker dispatch, and the
greater security, being unwilling to let such a lucky prize go out of my hands,
I took the Moor to my own house, where in less than six weeks he finished the
whole Translation.

Don Quixote's Fight with the Biscayan was exactly drawn on one of the leaves
of the first quire, in the same posture as we left 'em, with their Swords
lifted up over their heads, the one guarding himself with his Shield, the other
with his Cushion. The Biscayan's Mule was pictured so to the life, that with
half an eye you might have known it to be a hired Mule. Under the Biscayan was
written, Don Sancho de Aspetia, and under Rozinante, Don Quixote. Rozinante was
so admirably delineated, so slim, so stiff, so lank, so lean, so jaded, with so
sharp a Ridge-bone, and altogether so like one wasted with an incurable
Consumption, that any one must have owned, at first sight, that no Horse ever
better deserved that name. Not far off stood Sancho Paunch.
Panca, holding his Ass by the Halter; and at whose feet there was a crowl, in
which was written, Sancho Haunches, or rather Thigh-bones.
Cancas. And if we may judge of him by his Picture, he was thick and short,
paunch-belly'd, and long-haunch'd; so that in all likelihood for this reason he
is sometimes called Panca, and sometimes Cancas in the History. There were some
other niceties to be seen in that Piece, but hardly worth observation, as not
giving any light into this true History, otherwise they had not past
unmention'd. For none can be amiss so they be authentic. I must only acquaint
the Reader, that if any objection is to be made as to the veracity of this,
it is only that the Author is an Arabian, and those of that Country are not a
little addicted to Lying. But yet if we consider that they are our Enemies, we
should sooner imagine that the Author has rather suppressed the Truth, than added
to the real worth of our Knight; and I am the more inclinable to think so,
because it is plain that where he ought to have enlarged upon his Praises, he
maliciously chooses to be silent. A proceeding unworthy of an Historian, who
ought to be exact, sincere, and impartial; free from passion, and not to be
biased either by interest, fear, resentment or affection, to deviate from
Truth, which is the Mother of History, the Preserver and Eternizer of great
Actions, the professed Enemy of Oblivion, the Witness of things past, and the
Director of future Times. As for this History, I know 'twill afford you as
great variety as you could wish in the most entertaining; and if in any point
it falls short of your expectation, I am of opinion it is more the fault of the
unworthy Author, than the subject; and so let us come to the Second Book,
which, according to our Translation, began in this manner

Such were the bold and formidable looks of the two enraged Combatants, that
with uplifted Arms, and with destructive Steel, they seemed to threaten Heaven,
Earth, and the Infernal Mansions; while the spectators seemed wholly lost in
fear and astonishment. The Choleric Biscayan discharged the first blow, and
that with such a prodigious force, and so desperate a fury, that had not his
Sword turned in his hand, that single stroke had put an end to the dreadful
Combat, and all our Knights Adventures. But Fate, that reserved him for greater
things, so ordered it, that his Enemy's Sword turned in such a manner, that tho
it struck him on the left Shoulder, it did him no other hurt than to disarm
that side of his head, carrying away with it a great part of his Helmet, and
one half of his Ear, which like a dreadful Ruin fell together to the ground.
Assist me, ye Powers! But it is in vain: The Fury which then engrost the Breast
of our Hero of La Mahcha is not to be expressed; words would but wrong it; for
what color of Speech can be lively enough to give but a slight Sketch or faint
Image of his unutterable Rage? Exerting all his Valor, he raised himself upon
his Stirrups, and seemed even greater than himself, and at the same instant
griping his Sword fast with both hands, he discharged such a tremendous blow
full upon the Biscayans Cushion and his Head, that in spite of so good a
defense as if a whole Mountain had fallen upon him, the Blood gusht out at his
Mouth, Nose and Ears all at once, and he tottered so in his Saddle, that he had
fallen to the ground immediately, had he not caught hold of the neck of his Mule.
But the dull Beast itself being roused out of its stupidity with that terrible
blow, began to run about the Fields, and the Biscayan having lost his Stirrups,
and his hold, with two or three winces the Mule shook him off, and threw him on
the ground. Don Quixote beheld the disaster of his Foe with the greatest
Tranquillity and Unconcern imaginable; and seeing him down, slipped nimbly from
his Saddle, and running to him, set the point of his Sword to his Throat, and
bid him yield, or he would cut off his Head. The Biscayan was so stunned that
he could make him no reply; so that Don Quixote had certainly made good his
threats, had not the Ladies in the Coach, who with great uneasiness and fear
had beheld these sad transactions, hastened to beseech Don Quixote very
earnestly to spare his life. Truly, Beautiful Ladies, said the Victorious
Knight, with a great deal of loftiness and gravity, I am willing to grant your
Request; but upon condition that this same Knight shall pass his word of honor
to go to Toboso, and there present himself in my Name before the Peerless Lady
Donna Dulcinea, that she may dispose of him as she shall see convenient. The
Lady, who was frighted almost out of her senses, without considering what Don
Quixote enjoined, or enquiring who the Lady Dulcinea was, promised in her
Squires behalf, a punctual obedience to the Knights Commands. Let him live
then, replied Don Quixote, upon your word, and owe to your Intercession, that
Pardon, which I might justly deny his arrogance.

CHAP. II. What further befell Don Quixote with the Biscayan, and of the danger
which he ran, among a parcel of Janguessians.
SAncho Panca was got up again before this, not much the better for the Kicks
and Thumps, bestowed on his Carcass by the Monks Grooms; and, seeing his Master
engaged in Fight, he went devoutly to Prayers, beseeching Heaven to grant him
Victory, and that he might now win some Island, in order to his being made
Governor of it, according to his promise. At last, perceiving the danger was
over, the Combat at an end, and his Master ready to mount again, he ran in all
haste to help him; but e're the Knight put his Foot in the stirrup, Sancho fell
on his Knees, before him, and kissing his hand, An't please your Worship, cried
he, my good Lord, Don Quixote, I beseech you to make me Governor of the Island,
which you have won in this dreadful and bloody Fight, for tho it were never so
great, I find my self able to govern it, as well as the best he that ever went
about to govern an Island in this World. Brother Sancho, replied Don Quixote,
these are no Adventures of Islands; these are only Rencounters on the Road,
where little is to be got besides a broken Head, or the loss of an Ear;
therefore have patience, and some Adventure will offer itself, which will not
only enable me to prefer thee to a Government; but even to something more
considerable. Sancho gave him a world of Thanks, and having once more kissed
his hand, and the skirts of his Coat of Armor, he helped him to get upon
Rozinante, and then, leaping on his Ass, he followed the Hero, who, without
taking leave of those in the Coach, put on a good round Trot, and rode into a
Wood, that was not far off. Sancho made after him as fast as his Ass would
trot; but finding that Rozinante was like to leave him behind, he was forced to
call to his Master, to stay for him, Don Quixote accordingly checked his Horse,
and soon gave Sancho leisure to overtake him. Methinks, Sir, cried the fearful
Squire, as soon as he came up with him, it will not be amiss for us, to betake our
selves to some Church, to get out of harms way; for if that same man whom
you have fought with, should do otherwise than well, I dare lay my life, they ll
get a Warrant from the Holy Brotherhood, and have us taken up, which if they
do, on my word, 'twill go hard with us, e're we can get out of their Clutches.
Hold thy Tongue, cried Don Quixote! Where did thou ever read, or find, that
any Knight Errant was ever brought before a Judge for the Homicides which he
committed? I cannot tell what you mean by your homilies, replied Sancho; I don t
know that ever I saw any in my born days, not I. But well I wot, that the Law
lays hold on those that go to murder one another in the Fields, and as for
your what do you call 'ems, I Have nothing to say to em. Then be not afraid, good
Sancho, cried Don Quixote, for I would deliver thee out of the hands of the
Chaldeans, and with much more ease out of those of the Holy Brotherhood. But
come tell me truly, do thou believe the whole World can boast of another
Knight, that may pretend to rival me in valor? Did thou ever read in
History, that any other ever showed more resolution to undertake, more vigor
to attack, more breath to hold out, more dexterity and activity to strike, and
more art and force to overthrow his Enemies? Not I, by my Troth, replied
Sancho, for I never could read nor write; but that which I dare wager, is, that
I never in my Life served a bolder master than your Worship; pray Heaven this
same boldness may not bring us to what I bid you beware of; all I Have to put you
in mind of now is, that you get your Ear dressed, for you lose a deal of Blood;
and by good luck, I have here some Lint, and a little White-Salve in my Wallet.
How needless would all this have been, cried Don Quixote, had I but bethought
my self of making a small Bottle-full of the Balsam of Fierabras, a single drop
of which would have spared us a great deal of Time and Medicaments! What is
that same Balsam, an't please you, cried Sancho? A Balsam, answered Don
Quixote, of which I Have the Receipt in my Head, he that has some of it may defy
Death itself; and dally with all manner of wounds; therefore, when I have made
some of it, and given it thee, if at any time thou happen'st to see my Body cut
in two, by some unlucky Back-stroke, as it is common among us Knights-Errant,
thou have no more to do, but to take up nicely that half of me, whith is fallen
to the Ground, and clap it exactly to the other half on the Saddle, before the
Blood's congealed, always taking care to lay it just in its proper place; then
thou shall give me two Draughts of that Balsam, and thou shall immediately see
me become whole and sound as an Apple. If this be true, quoth Sancho, I Will quit
you of your Promise about the Island this minute of an hour, and will have
nothing of your Worship, for what service I have done, and am to do you, but
the Receipt of that same Balsam; for I dare say, let me go wherever I will,
'twill be sure to yield me three good Reals an Ounce, and thus I shall make
shift to pick a pretty good livelihood out on it. But stay tho, continued he,
does the making stand your Worship in much, Sir? Three Quarts of it, replied
Don Quixote, may be made for less than 3 Reals. Body of me, cried Sancho, why
don't you make some out of hand, and teach me how to make it. Say no more,
Friend Sancho, returned Don Quixote, I intend to teach thee much greater
secrets, and design thee nobler Rewards; but in the mean time dress my Ear, for
it pains me more than I could wish. Sancho then took his Lint and Ointment out
of his Wallet; but when Don Quixote perceived the Vizor of his Helmet was
broken, he had like to have run stark staring mad, strait laying hold on his
Sword, and lifting up his Eyes to Heaven, By the Bowels of my Father, cried he,
by my Allegiance to Dulcinea, by the whole Frame of Nature, I swear to lead a
Life like the great Marquis of Mantua, when he made a vow to revenge the Death
of his Cousin Baldwin, which was never to eat Bread on a Table-cloath, never to
lie with the dear partner of his Bed, and other things, which, tho they are now
at this time slipped out of my memory, I comprize in my Vow, no less than if I
had now mentioned 'em, and this I bind my self to, till I have fully revenged
my self on him, that has done me this injury.

Good your Worship, (cried Sancho, amazed to hear him take such a horrid Oath)
think on what you're doing: for if that same Knight has done as you bid him,
and has gone and cast himself before my Lady Dulcinea del Toboso, I don't see
but he and you are quit, and the man deserves no further punishment, unless he
does you some new mischief. It Is well observed, replied Don Quixote, and
therefore as to the point of Revenge I revoke my Oath; but I renew and confirm
it, protesting solemnly to lead the life I mentioned, till I have by force of
Arms dispoil'd some Knight of as good a Helmet as mine was. Neither do thou
fancy, Sancho, that I make this protestation rashly: No, I have a laudable
precedent for it, the authority of which will sufficiently justify my
Imitation; for the very same thing happened about Mambrino's Helmet, which cost
Sacripante so dear. Good Sir, quoth Sancho, let all such cursing and swearing
go to the Devil, there is nothing can be worse for your Souls health, nay, for
your bodily health neither. Besides, suppose we should not this good while meet
any one with a Helmet on, what a sad case should we then be in? Will your
Worship then keep your Oath, in spite of so many hardships, such as to lie
rough for a month together, far from any inhabited place, and a thousand other
idle pennances which that mad old Marquis of Mantua punished himself with by
his Vow: Do but consider that we may ride I don't know how long upon this Road
without meeting any armed Knight to pick a quarrel with; for here are none but
Carriers and Waggoners, who are so far from wearing any Helmets, that it is ten
to one whether they ever heard of such a thing in their lives. Thou art
mistaken, friend Sancho, replied Don Quixote; for we shall not be two hours
this way without meeting more Men in Arms than there were at the Siege of
Albraca, to conquer the fair Angelica. Well then, let it be so, quoth Sancho;
and may we have the luck to come off well, and quickly win that Island which
costs me so dear, and then I don't matter what befalls me. I have already bid
thee not trouble thy self about this business, Sancho, said Don Quixote; for
should we miss of an Island, there is either the Kingdom of Denmark or that of
Sobradisa, as fit for thy purpose as a Ring to thy finger, and, what ought to
be no small comfort to thee, they are both upon the Continent. But we'll talk
of this in its proper season: At this time I Would have thee see whether thou have
any thing to eat in thy Wallet, that we may afterward seek for some Castle
where we may lodge this night, and make the Balsam I told thee; for, I protest,
my Ear smarts extremely. I have here an Onion, replied the Squire, a piece of
Cheese, and a few stale crusts of Bread; but sure such course fare is not for
such a brave Knight as your Worship. Thou art grossly mistaken, friend Sancho,
answered Don Quixote; know, that it is the glory of Knights-Errant to be whole
months without eating; and when they do, they fall upon the first thing they
meet with, tho it be never so homely; had thou but read as many Books as I
have done, thou had been better informed as to that point; for tho I think I
have read as many Histories of Chivalry in my time as any other man, I never
could find that the Knights-Errant ever eat, unless it were by mere accident,
when they were invited to great Feasts and Royal Banquets; at other times they
indulged themselves with little other food besides their thoughts; and tho it
is not to be imagined they could live without supplying the exigencies of
humane nature, as being after all no more than mortal men; it is likewise to be
supposed that as they spent the greatest part of their lives in Forests and
Deserts, and always destitute of a Cook, consequently their usual food was but
such course Country fare as thou now offerst me: Never then make thy self
uneasy about what pleases me, Friend Sancho; nor pretend to make a new world,
nor to unhinge the very Constitution and ancient Customs of Knight-Errantry. I
beg your Worships pardon, cried Sancho; for, as I was never bred a Scholard, I
may chance to have mist in some main point of your Laws of Knighthood; but from
this time forwards I Will be sure to stock my Wallet with all manner of dry
Fruits for you, because your Worship's a Knight; as for my self, who am none,
I Will provide good Fowls, and other substantial Victuals. I don't say, Sancho,
replied Don Quixote, that a Knight Errant is obliged to feed altogether upon
Fruit; I only mean, that this was their common food, together with some Roots
and Herbs, which they found up and down the Fields, of all which they had a
perfect knowledge, as I my self have. It Is a good thing to know those Herbs,
cried Sancho; for, I am much mistaken, or that kind of knowledge will stand us
in good stead e're long. In the mean time, continued he, here is what good
Heaven has sent us. With that, he pulled out the provision he had, and they
fell to heartily together. But their impatience to find out a place where they
might be harbored that night, made 'em shorten their sorry meal, and mount
again, for fe^^ of being benighted. So away they put on, in search of a
Lodging. But the Sun and their hopes failed 'em at once, as they came to a
place where some Goat-herds had set up some small Huts; and therefore they
concluded to take up their Lodging there that night. This was as great a
mortification to Sancho, who was altogether for a good Town, as it was a
pleasure to his Master, who was for sleeping in the open Field, as believing
that as often as he did it he confirmed his Title to Knighthood, by a new act
of possession.

CHAP. III. What past between Don Quixote and the Goat-herds.
THe Knight was very courteously received by the Goat-herds; and as for Sancho,
after he had set up Rozinante and his Ass as well as he could, he presently
repaired to the attractive smell of some pieces of Kids flesh which stood
boiling in a Kettle, over the fire. The hungry Squire would immediately have
tried whether they were fit to be removed out of the Kettle into his Stomach,
but was not put to that trouble; for the Goat-herds took 'em off the fire, and
having spread some Sheepskins on the ground, soon got their rural Feast ready,
and cheerfully invited his Master and him to partake of what they had. Next,
with some course Complements after the Country way, they desired Don Quixote to
sit down on a Trough with the bottom upwards, and then six of 'em, who were all
that belonged to the Fold, squatted 'em down round the Skins; While Sancho
stood to wait upon his Master, and give him drink in a Horn Cup, which the
Goat-herds used. But he, seeing his man stand behind, said to him; That thou
may understand, Sancho, the Benefits of Knight-Errantry, and how the meanest
Retainers to it have a fair prospect of being speedily esteemed and honored by
the world, it is my pleasure that thou sit thee down by me, in the company of
these good people, that there be no difference now observed between thee and
me, that thou eat in the same Dish, and drink in the same Cup: For, it may be
said of Knight-Errantry as of Love, that it makes all Things equal. I thank
your Worship, cried Sancho; but yet I must needs own, had I but a good deal of
meat before me, I Would eat it as well, or rather better standing, and by my self,
than if I sat by an Emperor; and to deal plainly and truly with you, I had
rather munch a crust of brown Bread and an Onion in a corner, without any more
ado or ceremony, than feed upon Turkey at another Man's Table, where one is fain
to sit mincing and chawing his Meat an hour together, drink little, be always
wiping his Fingers and his Chops, and never dare to Cough nor Sneeze, tho he
has never so much a mind to it, nor do a many things, which a Body may do
freely by ones self; therefore, good Sir, change those tokens of your kindness
which I have a right to, by being your Worships Squire, into something that may
do me more good; as for these same honors I heartily thank you, as much as if
I had accepted of 'em, but yet I give up my right to 'em from this time to the
world's end. Talk no more, replied Don Quixote, but sit thee down, for the
humble shall be exalted, and so pulling him by the Arm, he forced him to sit by
him.

All this while the Goat-herds, who did not understand this Jargon of
Knights-Errant Chivalry and Squires fed heartily, and said nothing, but star'd
upon their Guests, who very fairly swallowed whole Luncheons, as big as their
Fists, with a mighty appetite. The first Course being over, they brought in the
second, consisting of dried Acorns, and half a Cheese as hard as a Brick. Nor
was the Horn idle all this while, but went merrily round up and down so many
times, sometimes full and sometimes empty, like the two Buckets of a Well, that
they made shift at last to drink off one of the two Skins of Wine which they
had there. And now Don Quixote having satisfied his appetite, he took a handful
of Acorns, and looking earnestly upon 'em, O happy age, cried he, which our
first parents called the age of Gold; not because Gold, so much adored in this
Iron Age, was then easily purchased; but because those two fatal words Mine and
Thine were distinctions unknown to the people of those fortunate Times. For all
Things were in common in that holy age. Men for their sustenance needed only to
lift their hands, and take it from the sturdy Oak, whose spreading arms
liberally invited 'em to gather the wholesome savoury Fruit; while the clear
Springs, and silver Rivulets, with luxuriant plenty offered 'em their pure
refreshing Water. In hollow Trees, and in the Clefts of Rocks, the laboring
and industrious Bees erected their little Commonwealths, that men might reap
with pleasure and with ease the sweet and fertile harvest of their Soils. The
tough and strenuous Cork-Trees did of themselves, and without other art than
their native Liberality, dismiss and impart their broad light Bark, which
served to cover those lowly Huts, propt up with rough-hewn Stakes, that were
first built as a shelter against the Inclemencies of the air. All then was
Union, all Peace, all Love and Friendship in the World. As yet no rude
Plough-share presumed with violence to open and pry into the pious Bowels of
our Mother Earth; for she without Compulsion kindly yielded from every part of
her fruitful and spacious bosom whatever might at once satisfy, sustain and
indulge her frugal Children. Then was the time when innocent beautiful young
Shepherdesses went tripping over the Hills and Vales, their lovely hair,
sometimes plaited, sometimes loose and flowing, clad in no other vestment but
what was necessary to cover decently what Modesty would always have concealed.
The Tyrian Dye, and the rich glossy hue of Silk, martyred and dissembled into
every color, which are now esteemed so fine and magnificent, were unknown to
the innocent plainness of that age; yet bedeckt with more becoming Leaves and
Flowers, they might be said to outshine the proudest of the vain dressing
Ladies of our age arrayed in the most magnificent garbs, and all the most
sumptuous adornings, which Idleness and Luxury have taught succeeding Pride.
Lovers then expressed the Passion of their Souls in the unaffected Language of
the Heart, with the native plainness and sincerity in which they were
conceived, and divested of all that artificial Contexture which enervates what
it labors to enforce. Imposture, Deceit and Malice had not yet crept in and
imposed themselves unbrib d upon mankind in the disguise of Truth and
Simplicity. Justice, unbiased either by Favor or Interest, which now so
shamefully pervert it, was equally and impartially dispenc d: Nor was the
Judges Fancy, Law; for then there were neither judges, nor Causes to be judged.
But in this degenerate age, Fraud, and a Legion of Ills infecting the World, no
Virtue can be safe, no Honor be secure, while wanton Desires, diffused into
the hearts of Men, corrupt the strictest watches, and the closest retreats;
which, tho as intricate and unknown as the Labyrinth of Crete, are no security
for Chastity. Thus that primitive Innocence being vanished, and Oppression
daily prevailing, there was a necessity to oppose the Torrent of Violence. For
which reason the order of Knighthood-Errant was instituted, to defend the
honor of Virgins, protect Widows, relieve Orphans, and assist all the
distressed in general. Now I my self am one of this Order, honest Friends; and
tho all People are obliged by the law of Nature, to be kind to Persons of my
Order, I ought to pay a particular acknowledgment for the good entertainment,
which you so generously afford me and my Squire; the rather, as you have done
it without being in the least acquainted with my circumstances; and therefore
with all the sincerity imaginable, I return you my hearty thanks.

All this long Oration, which might very well have been spared, was owing to
the Acorns, that recalled the Golden age to our Knights remembrance, and made
him thus hold forth to the Goat-herds, who devoutly listened, but edified
little, the Discourse not being suited to their Capacities. Sancho, as well as
they, was silent all the while, eating Acorns, and frequently visiting the
second Skin of Wine, which for Coolness-sake was hung upon a neighboring
Cork-Tree. As for Don Quixote, he was longer and more intent upon his Speech
than upon his Supper; when he had done, one of the Goat-herds addressing
himself to him, Sir Knight, said he, that you may be sure you're heartily
welcome, we'll get one of our Fellows to give us a Song: He is just a coming: A
good notable young Lad he is, I Will say that for him, and up to the Ears in
Love. He Is a Scholard, and can read and write, and plays so rarely upon the
Fiddle that it is a charm but to hear him. No sooner were the words out of the
Goat-herds mouth, but they heard the sound of the Instrument he spoke of, and
presently appeared a good comely young man of about two and twenty years of
Age. The Goat-herds asked him if he had supped? and he having told them he had,
Then, dear Antonio, says the first speaker, prithee sing us a Song, to let this
Gentleman, our guest, see that we have those amongst us who know somewhat of
Music, for all we live amidst Woods and Mountains. We have told him of thee
already, therefore pray thee make our words good, and sing us the Ditty thy
Uncle the Prebendary made of thy Love, that was so liked in our Town. With all
my heart, replied Antonio, and so without any further entreaty, sitting down on
the stump of an Oak, he tun d his Fiddle, and very handsomely sung the following
Song.

Antonio's Amorous Complaint.
THo Love never pratti^^ at your Eyes,
(The Eyes, those silent Tongues of Love)
Yet sure, Olalia, you're my Prize:
For Truth, with Zeal, ev n Heaven can move.
I think, my Love, you only try,
Even while I fear you have sealed my Doom:
So, tho involved in Doubts I lie,
Hope sometimes glimmers through the gloom.
A Flame so fierce, so bright, so pure,
No Scorn can quench, nor Art improve:
Thus like a Martyr I endure;
For there is a heaven to crown my Love.
In Dress and Dancing I have strove
My proudest Rivals to outvy:
In Serenades I ve breathed my Love,
When all Things slept but Love and I.
I need not add, I speak your Praise
Till every Nymph's Disdain I move:
Tho thus a thousand Foes I raise,
It Is sweet to praise the Fair I love.
Teresa once your Charms debased;
But I her Rudeness soon reproved:
In vain her Friend my Anger faced;
For then I fought for her I loved.
Dear cruel Fair, why then so coy?
How can you so much Love withstand?
Alas! I crave no lawless Joy,
But with my heart would give my hand.
Soft, easy, strong is Hymen's Tie:
Oh! then no more the Bliss refuse.
Oh! wed me, or I swear to dye,
Or linger wretched and reclose.
Here Antonio ended his Song; Don Quixote entreated him to sing another, but
Sancho Panca, who had more mind to sleep, than to hear the finest singing in
the World, told his Master, there was enough. Good Sir, quoth he, your Worship
had better go and lie down where you are to take your rest this night; besides,
these good people are tired with their days labor, and rather want to go to
sleep than to sit up all night to hear Ballads. I understand thee, Sancho,
cried Don Quixote, and indeed I thought thy frequent visiting the Bottle would
make thee fonder of sleep than of Music. Make us thankful, cried Sancho! we all
liked the Wine well enough. I do not deny it, replied Don Quixote; but go thou
and lay thee down where thou please; as for me it better becomes a man of my
profession to wake than to sleep. Yet, stay and dress my Ear before thou go,
for it pains me extremely. Thereupon one of the Goat-herds beholding the Wound,
as Sancho offered to dress it, desired the Knight not to trouble himself, for
he had a Remedy that would quickly cure him; and then fetching a few Rosemary
leaves, which grew in great plenty thereabouts, he bruised 'em, and mixed a
little Salt among 'em, and having applied the Medicine to the Ear, he bound it
up, assuring him, he nedeed no other Remedy; which in a little time proved very
true.

CHAP. IV. The Story which one of the Goat-herds told to those that were with
Don Quixote.
A Young Fellow, who used to bring 'em Provision from the next Village,
happened to come while this was doing, and addressing himself to the
Goat-herds, Hark ye, Friends, said he, do you hear the News? What news, cried one
of the Company? That fine Shepherd and Scholar Chrystostome died this morning,
answered the other; and they say, 'twas for Love of that devilish untoward Lass
Marcella, rich William's Daughter, that goes up and down the Country after the
way of a Shepherdess. For Marcella, cried one of the Goat-herds? I say for her,
replied the Fellow, and what is more, it is reported, he has ordered by his Will,
they should bury him in the Fields like any Heathen Moor, just at the Foot of
the Rock, hard by the Cork-Tree-Fountain, where they say he had the first sight
of her. Nay, he has likewise ordered many other strange things to be done,
which the head of the Parish will not allow of, for they seem to be after the way
of the Pagans. But Ambrose, the other Scholar, who likewise reparell'd himself
like a Shepherd, is resolved to have his Friend Chrystostome s Will fulfilled
in every thing, just as he has ordered it. All the Village is in an uproar, but
after all it is thought, Ambrose and his Friends will carry the day; and to
morrow morning he is to be buried in great state, where I told you; I fancy
'twill be worth seeing; howsoever be it what it will, I Will even go and see it.
Well all go, cried the Goat-herds, and cast lots who shall tarry to look after
the Goats. Well said, Peter, cried one of the Goat herds; but as for casting of
Lots, I Will save you that labor, for I Will stay my self, not so much out of
kindness to you neither, as because of the Thorn in my Toe, that will not let
me put on my best Shoes Thank you however, quoth Peter. Don Quixote, who heard
all this, entreated Peter to tell him who the Deceased was, and also to give
him a short account of the Shepherdess.

Peter made answer, That all he knew of the matter was, That the Deceased was a
wealthy Gentleman, who lived not far off, that he had been several years at the
University of Salamanca, and then came home mightily improved in his Learning:
But above all, quoth he, 'twas said of him that he had great knowledge in the
Stars, and whatsoever the Sun and Moon do in the Skies; for he would tell us to
a tittle the Clip of the Sun and Moon. We call it an Eclipse, cried Don
Quixote, and not a Clip, when either of those two great Luminaries are
darkened. He would also (continued Peter, who did not stand upon such nice
distinctions) foretell when the year would be plentiful or estil. You would say
steril, cried Don Quixote, steril or estil, replied the fellow, that is all as
one to me: But this I say, that his Parents and Friends being ruled by him grew
woundy rich in a short time; for he would tell 'em, This year sow Barley, and
no Wheat: In this you may sow Pease, and no Barley: Next year will be a good
year for Oil: The three after that you shall not gather a drop; and whatsoever he
said would certainly come to pass. That Science, said Don Quixote, is called
Astrology. I don't know what you call it, answered Peter, but I know he knew
all this, and a deal more. But, in short, within some few months after he had
left the Versity, on a certain morning we saw him come dressed for all the world
like a Shepherd, and driving his Flock, having laid down the long Gown, which
he us d to wear as a Scholar. At the same time one Ambrose, a great friend of
his, who had been his fellow Scholar also, took upon him to go like a Shepherd,
and keep him company, which we all did not a little marvel a^ I had almost
forgot to tell you how he that^s dead was a mighty man for making of Verses,
insomuch that he commonly made the Caro's which we sung on Christmas-live; and
the Plays which the young Lads in our neighborhood enacted on Corpus Christi
day, and every one would say that no body could mend 'em. Somewhat before that
time Chrysostom's Father died, and left him a deal of Wealth, both in Land,
Money, Cattle, and other goods, whereof the ^oung man remained dissolute
Master; and in troth he deserved it all; for he was as good natured a Soul as
e're trod on Shoe of Leather, mighty good to the Poor, a main Friend to all
honest people, and had a Face like a Blessing. At last it came to be known that
the reason of his altering his garb in that fashion, was only that he might go
up and down after that Shepherdess Marcella, whom our Comrade told you of
before, for he was fallen mightily in love with her. And now Ill tell you such a
thing you never heard the like in your born days, and may not chance to hear of
such another while you breath, tho you were to live as long as Sarnah. Say
Sarah, cried Don Quixote, who hated to hear him blunder thus. The Sarna, or the
Scab, (for that is all one with us, quoth Peter) lives long enough too; and if
you go on thus, and make me break off my Tale at every word, we an't like to
have done this twelvemonth. Pardon me, Friend, replied Don Quixote; I only
spoke to make thee understand that there is a difference between Sarna and
Sarah: However, thou say well; for the Sarna (that is, the Scab) lives longer
than Sarah; therefore pray make an end of thy story; for I will not interrupt
thee any more. Well then, quoth Peter, you must know, good master of mine, that
there lived near us one William, a Yeoman, who was richer yet than
Chrysostom's Father, now he had no Child in the varsal World, but a Daughter,
her Mother died in Childbed of her (rest her Soul) and was as good a Woman as
ever went upon two Legs. Methinks, I see her yet standing before me, with that
blessed Face of hers, the Sun on one side, and the Moon on the the other. She was
a main Housewife, and did a deal of good among the Poor; for which I dare say
she is at this minute in Paradise. Alas! her death broke old William's heart,
he soon went after her, poor man, and left all to his little Daughter, that
Marcella by name, giving charge of her to her Uncle, the Parson of our Parish.
Well, the Girl grew such a fine Child, and so like her Mother, that it used to
put us in mind of her every foot. However, 'twas thought she would make a finer
Woman yet, and so it happened indeed; for, by that time she was fourteen or
fifteen years of age, no man sat his eyes on her, that did not bless Heaven for
having made her so handsome; so that most men fell in love with her, and were
ready to run mad for her. All this while, her Uncle kept her as charily as the
Apple of his Eye, and as close as an Usurer's Gold. Yet the report of her great
Beauty and Wealth spread far and near, insomuch, that she had I don't know how
many Sweethearts, almost all the young men in our Town asked her of her Uncle;
nay, from I don't know how many Leagues about us, there flocked whole Droves of
suitors, and the very best in the Country too, who all begged and su'd, and
teiz'd her Uncle to let them have her. But tho he would have been glad to have got
fairly rid of her, as soon as she was fit for a Husband, yet would not he
advise or marry her against her Will; for he is a good Man, Ill say that for
him, and a true Christian every inch of him, and scorned to keep her from
marrying to make a benefit of her Estate; and to his praise be it spoken, he
has been mainly commended for it more than once, when the people of our Parish
meet together. For I must tell you, Sir Errant, that here in the Country, and
in our little Towns, there is not the least thing can be said or done, but
people will talk on it; but let busy Bodies prate as they please, my Life for
yours, the Parson must have been a good Body indeed, who could bring his Parish
to give him a good Word, especially in the Country. You Are in the right, cried
Don Quixote, and therefore go on, honest Peter, for the Story is pleasant, and
thou tell it with a Grace. May I never want grace, quoth Peter, and may I be
sure to tell our Flocks right, for that is the telling most to the purpose. But
for our Parson, as I told you before, he was not for keeping his Niece from
marrying, and therefore he took care to let her know of all those that wou d
have taken her to Wife, both what they were, and what they had, and he was at
her, to have her pitch upon one of 'em for a Husband; yet would she never
answer otherwise, but that she had no mind to Wed as yet, as finding herself
too young for the burden of Wedlock. With these and such like come-offs, she
got her Uncle to let her alone, and wait till she thought fit to choose for
herself. For he was won t to say, that Parents are not to bestow their
Children, where they bear no liking, and in that he spoke like an honest Man.
And thus it happened, that when we least dreamt of it, that coy Lass, finding
herself at liberty, would needs turn Shepherdess, and neither her Uncle, nor
all those of the Village who advised her against it, could work any thing upon
her, but away she went to the Fields to keep her own Sheep with the other young
Lasses of the Town. But then 'twas ten times worse, for no sooner was she seen
abroad, when I cannot tell how many spruce Gallants, both Gentlemen and rich
Farmers changed their garb for love of her, and followed her up and down in
Shepherds guise. One of 'em, as I have told you, was this same Chrysostom who
now lies dead, of whom it is said, he not only loved, but worshipped her.
Howsoever, I wou^d not have you think or surmize, because Marcella took that
course of life, and was as it were under no manner of keeping, that she gave
the least token of naughtiness or light behavior, for she ever was, and is
still so coy, and so watchful to keep her honor pure and free from evil
Tongues, that among so many Wooers who suitor her, there is not one can make his
brags of having the least hope of ever speeding with her. For tho she does not
shun the Company of Shepherds, but uses 'em courteously, so far as they behave
themselves handsomely, yet whenever any one of 'em does but offer to break his
mind to her, be it never so well meant, and only in order to marry, she casts
him away from her, as with a Sling, and will never have any more to say to him.

And thus this fair Maiden does more harm in this Country, than the Plague
would do; for her courteousness and fair looks draw on every body to love her;
but then her dogged, stubborn coyness breaks their Hearts, and makes 'em ready
to hang themselves, and all they can do, poor wretches, is to make a heavy
complaint, and call her cruel, unkind, ungrateful, and a world of such names,
whereby they plainly show what a sad condition they are in: were you but to
stay here some time, you would hear these Hills ring again, with the doleful moans
of those she has deny d, who yet cannot for the blood of em give over s^^aking
after her. We have a place not far off, where there are some two dozen of
Beech-trees, and on 'em all you may find I don't know how many Marcella's cut
into the smooth Bark. On some of 'em there is a Crown carved over the Name, as
much as to say that Marcella bears away the Crown, and deserves the Garland of
Beauty. Here sighs one Shepherd, there another whines; here one is singing
doleful Ditties, there another is wringing his hands and making woeful
complaints. You shall have one lay him down at night at the Foot of a Rock, or
by some Oak, and there lie weeping and wailing without a wink of sleep, and
talking to himself till the Sun finds him there the next morning; you shall
have another lie stretched upon the hot sandy ground, breathing his sad
lamentations to Heaven, without heeding the sultry heat of the Summer-Sun. And
all this while the hard-hearted Marcella never minds any one of 'em, and does
not seem to be the least concerned for 'em. We are all mightily at a loss to
know what will be the end of all this Pride and Coyness, who shall be the happy
man that shall at last tame her, and bring her to his Lure. Now because there is
nothing more certain than all this, I am the more apt to give Credit to what
our Comrade has told us, as to the occasion of Chrysostom's Death; and
therefore I would needs have you go and see him laid in's Grave to morrow;
which I believe will be worth your while, for he had many Friends, and it is not
half a league to the place where 'twas his Will to be buried. I intend to be
there, answered Don Quixote, and in the mean time I return thee many thanks for
the extraordinary satisfaction this story has afforded me. Alas, Sir Knight,
replied the Goat-herd, I have not told you half the mischiefs this proud
Creature has done here, but to morrow mayhap we shall meet some Shepherd by the
way that will be able to tell you more. Mean while it will not be amiss for you to
take your rest in one of the Huts; for the open air is not good for your wound,
tho what I Have put to it is so special a Medicine that there is not much need to
fear but 'twill do well enough. Sancho, who was quite out of patience with the
Goat-herds long Story, seconded him in his good advice to his Master, and at
last prevailed with him to lie down in Peter's Hut, where Don Quixote, in
Imitation of Marcella's Lovers, devoted the remainder of the night to amorous
Expostulations with his Dear Dulcinea. As for Sancho, he laid himself down
between Rozinante and his Ass, and slept it out; not like a disconsolate Lover,
but like a man that had been soundly kicked and bruised in the morning.

CHAP. V. A continuation of the Story of Marcella.
SCarce had the rising Day began to dawn in the Eastern quarters of the Sky,
when five of the Goat-herds got up, and having waked Don Quixote, asked him if
he held his resolution of going to the Funeral, whither they were ready to bear
him company. Thereupon the Knight, who desired nothing more, presently arose,
and ordered Sancho to get Rozinante and the Ass ready immediately; which he did
with all expedition, and then they set forwards. They had not yet gone a
quarter of a league before they saw advancing toward 'em, out of a cross-path,
six Shepherds clad in black Skins, their Heads crowned with Garlands of Cypress
and bitter Coast-mary, with long Holly-Staves in their hands. Two Gentlemen on
Horseback, attended by three Lacqueys on foot, came immediately after 'em: As
they drew near, they saluted one another civilly, and after the usual question,
Which way dye travel? they found they were all going the same way to see the
Funeral, and so they all joined company. I fancy, Senior Vivaldo, said one of
the Gentlemen, addressing himself to the other, we shall not think our time
misspent in going to see this famous Funeral; for it must of necessity be very
extraordinary, according to the account which these men have given us of the
dead Shepherd and his Mistress. I am so far of your opinion, answered Vivaldo,
that I wou d not only stay one day, but a whole week rather than miss the
sight. This gave Don Quixote occasion to ask 'em what they had heard concerning
Chrysostom and Marcella? One of the Gentlemen made answer, That having met
that morning with those Shepherds, they could not forbear enquiring of 'em, why
they wore such a mournful Dress? Whereupon one of 'em acquainted 'em with the
sad occasion, by relating the Story of a certain Shepherdess, named Marcella,
no less lovely than cruel, whose coyness and disdain has made a world of
unfortunate Lovers, and caused the death of that Chrysostom, to whose Funeral
they were going. In short, he repeated to Don Quixote all that Peter had told
him the night before. After this, Vivaldo asked the Knight why he traveled so
completely armed in so peaceable a Country? My profession, answered the
Champion, does not permit me to ride otherwise. Luxurious Feasts, sumptuous
Dresses, and downy Ease, were invented for effeminate Courtiers; but Labor,
Vigilance and Arms, are the portion of those whom the world calls
Knights-Errant, of which number I have the honor to be one, tho the most
unworthy, and the meanest of the Fraternity. He needed to say no more to
satisfy 'em his Brains were out of order; however, that they might the better
understand the nature of his Folly, Vivaldo asked him, what he meant by a
Knight Errant? Have you not read then, cried Don Quixote, the Annals and
History of Britain, where are recorded the famous deeds of King Arthur, who,
according to an ancient Tradition in that Kingdom, never died, but was turned
into a Crow by Enchantment, and shall one day resume his former Shapes, and
recover his Kingdom again? For which reason since that time, the people of
Great Britain dare not offer to kill a Crow. In this good Kings time, the most
noble Order of the Knights of the Round Table was first instituted and then
also the Amors between Sir Lancelot Du Lake, and Queen Guin v r were really
transacted, as that History relates, they being manag d and carried on by the
Mediation of that Honorable Matron the Lady Quintaniana. Which produced that
Noted Romance so celebrated here in Spain, There never was on Earth a Knight
So waited on by Ladies fair,
As once was he Sir Lancelot hight,
When first he left his Country dear.


And the rest, which gives so delightful an account both of his Loves and feats
of Arms. From that time the order of Knight-Errantry begun by degrees to dilate
and extend itself into most parts of the world. Then did the great Amadis de
Gaul signalize himself by Heroic Exploits, and so did his Offspring to the
fifth Generation. The valorous Felixmart of Hircania got then immortal Fame,
and that undaunted Knight Tirante the White, who never can be applauded to his
worth. Nay, had we but lived a little sooner, we might have been blessed with the
conversation of that invincible Knight of our Modern times, the valorous Don
Bellianis of Greece. And this, Gentlemen, is that order of Chivalry, which,
unworthy as I am, I profess, with a due observance of the Laws which those
brave Knights observed before me; and for that reason I choose to wander through
these solitary Deserts, seeking Adventures, fully resolved to expose my person
to the most formidable dangers which Fortune can obtrude on me, that by the
strength of my arm I may relieve the weak and the distressed.

After all this stuff, you may be sure the Travelers were sufficiently
convinced of Don Quixote's frenzical folly. Nor were they less supriz'd than
were all those who had hitherto discover d so unaccountable a distraction in
one who seemed a rational Creature. However, Vivaldo, who was of a gay
disposition, had no sooner made the discovery, but he resolved to make the best
advantage of it, that the shortness of the way would allow him.

Therefore, to give him further occasion to divert 'em with his Whimsies,
Methinks, Sir Knight Errant, said he to him, you have taken up one of the
strictest and most mortifying Professions in the world. I don't think but that
a Carthusian Friar has a better time on it than you have. Perhaps, answered Don
Quixote, the Profession of a Carthusian may be as austere, but I somewhat
doubt, whether it may be as beneficial to the world as ours. For, if we must
speak the truth, the Soldier who puts his Captains Command in execution, may
be said to do as much at least as the Captain who commanded him. The
application is easy: For while those Religious men have nothing to do, but
with all quietness and security to say their Prayers for the Prosperity of the
World, We Knights, like Soldiers, effect what they do but demand, and procure
those Benefits to Mankind, by the strength of our Arms, and at the hazard of
our Lives, for which they only intercede. Nor do we do this sheltered from the
injuries of the Air, but under no other roof but that of the wide Heavens,
exposed to Summers scorching heat, and Winters pinching cold. So that we may
justly style ourselves The Ministers of Heaven, and the Instruments of its
Justice upon Earth; and as the business of the War is not to be compast without
vast Toil and Labor, so the Religious Soldier must undoubtedly be preferred
before the Religious Monk, who living still quiet, and at ease, has nothing to
do but to pray for the afflicted and distressed. However, Gentlemen, do not
imagine I would insinuate as if the Profession of a Knight Errant were a state
of Perfection equal to that of a holy Recluse: I wou d only infer from what
I Have said, and what I my self endure, that ours is without question more
laborious, more subject to the Discipline of heavy Blows, to Maceration, to the
penance of Hunger and Thirst, and in a word, to Rags, to Want and Misery. For
if you find that some Knights-Errant have at last by their Valor been raised
to Thrones and Empires, you may be sure it has been still at the expense of
much Sweat and Blood And had even those happier Knights been deprived of those
assisting Sages and Inchanters, who helped 'em in all Emergencies, they would
have been strangely disappointed of their mighty Expectations. I am of the same
opinion, reply d Vivaldo. But one thing among many others, which I can by no
means approve in your Prof^ssion, is, that when you are just going to engage in
some very hazardous Adventure, where your Lives are evidently to be much
endangered, you never take care to implore the assistance of Heaven, as every
good Christian ought to do on such occasions, but only recommend your selves to
your Mistresses, and that with as great Zeal and Devotion as if you worshipped
no other Deities; a thing, which, in my opinion, strongly relishes of Paganism.
Sir, replied Don Quixote, there is no altering that method; for should a
Knight Errant do otherwise, he would too much deviate from the ancient and
established Customs of Knight-Errantry; which inviolably oblige him just in the
moment when he is rushing on, and giving birth to some dubious Achievement, to
have his Mistress still before his Eyes, still present to his mind by a strong
and lively Imagination, and with soft amorous energetick Looks implore her
Favor and Protection in that uncertain Trance. Nay, if no body can overhear
him, he is obliged to whisper, or speak between his teeth some short
Ejaculations, to recommend himself with all the fervency imaginable to the Lady
of his Wishes, and of this we have innumerable Examples in ^istory. Nor are you
for all this to imagine that Knights-Errant omit recommending themselves to
Heaven; for they they have leisure enough to do it, even in the midst of the
Combat.

Sir, replied Vivaldo, you must give me leave to tell you, I am not yet
thoroughly satisfied in this point. For I have often observe d in my Reading,
that 2 Knights-Errant, having first talked a little together, have fallen out
presently, and been so highly provoked, that, having turn d their Horse-heads
to gain room for the Career, they have wheeled about, and then with all speed
run full Tilt at one another, hastily recommending themselves to their
Mistresses in the midst of their Career; and the next thing has commonly been,
that one of 'em has been thrown to the ground over the Crupper of his Horse,
fairly whipp d through and through with his Enemies Lance; and the other forced to
catch hold of his Horses Mane to keep himself from falling Now I cannot
apprehend how the Knight that was slain had any time to recommend himself to
Heaven, when his business was done so suddenly. Methinks those hasty
Invocations which in his Career were directed to his Mistress, should have been
addressed to Heaven, as every good Christian would have done. Besides, I fancy
every Knight Errant has not a Mistress to invoke, nor is every one of 'em in
Love. Your conjecture is wrong, answered Don Quixote; a Knight Errant cannot be
without a Mistress, it is not more essential to the Skies to have Stars, than
it is to us to be in Love. Insomuch, that I dare affirm, that no History ever
made mention of any Knight Errant, that was not a Lover, for were any Knight
free from the Impulses of that generous Passion, he would not be allowed to be
a lawful Knight; but a misborn Intruder, and one who was not admitted within
the pale of Knighthood at the Door, but leap d the Fence, and stole in like a
Robber and a Thief. Yet, Sir, replied the other, I Am much mistaken, or I have
read that Don Galaor, the Brother of Amadis, never had any certain Mistress to
recommend himself to, and yet for all that, he was not the less esteemed. One
Swallow never makes a Summer, answered Don Quixote. Besides, I know, that
Knight was privately very much in Love; and as for his making his addresses,
wherever he met with Beauty, this was an effect of his natural inclination,
which he could not easily restrain. But after all, it is an undeniable truth,
that he had a favorite Lady, whom he had Crowned Empress of his Will, and to
her he frequently recommended himself in private, for he did not a little value
himself upon his discretion and secrecy in Love. Then, Sir, said Vivaldo, since
it is so much the Being of Knight-Errantry to be in Love, I presume, you, who
are of that Profession, cannot be without a Mistress. And therefore, if you do
not set up for secrecy as much as Don Galaor did, give me leave to beg of you
in the name of all the Company, that you will be pleased so far to oblige us,
as to let us know the name and quality of your Mistress, the place of her
Birth, and the Charms of her Person. For without doubt, the Lady cannot but
esteem herself happy in being known by all the world to be the object of the
wishes of a Knight so accomplished as your self. With that Don Quixote
breathing out a deep sigh, I cannot tell, said he, whether this lovely Enemy of
my repose, is the least affected with the world's being informed of her power
over my heart; all I dare say, in compliance with your Request, is, that her
Name is Dulcinea, her Country La Mancha, and Toboso the happy place which she
honors with her Residence. As for her quality, it cannot be less than Princess,
seeing she is my Mistress and my Queen. Her Beauty transcends all the United
Charms of her whole Sex: even those Chymerical Perfections which the
hyperbolical imaginations of Poets in Love have assigned to their Mistresses,
cease to be incredible Descriptions when applied to her, in whom all those
Miraculous Endowments are most divinely centred. The Curling Locks of her
bright flowing Hair are purest Gold; her smooth Forehead the Elysian Plain; her
Brows are two Celestial Bows; her Eyes two Glorious Suns; her Cheeks two beds
of Roses; her Lips are Coral, and her Teeth are Pearl: her Neck is Alablaster;
her Breasts Marble; her Hands Ivory; and Snow would lose its whiteness near her
Bosom. Then for the parts which Modesty has veiled, my imagination, not to
wrong 'em, chooses to lose it self in silent admiration, for Nature boasts
nothing that may give an Idea of their incomparable worth. Pray, Sir, cried
Vivaldo, oblige us with an account of her Parentage, and the place of her
Birth, to complete the Description. Sir, replied Don Quixote, she is not
descended from the ancient Curtius's, Caius's, nor Scipio's of Rome; nor from
the more Modern Colonna's, nor Vrsini's; nor from the Moncada's and Requesens's
of Catalonia; nor from the Rebilla's, and Villanova's of Valencia; nor from the
Palafoxes, Nucas, Rocaberti's, Coreillas, Lunas, Alagones, Vrreas, Foze's, or
Gurrea's of Arragon; nor from the Cerda's, Manriquez, Mendoca's, and Gusman's
of Castile; nor from the Alencastros, Pallas, and Menezes of Portugal; but she
derives her great original from the Family of Toboso in La Mancha, a Race,
which, tho it be Modern, is sufficient to give a noble Beginning to the most
illustrious Progenies of succeeding Ages. And let no man presume to contradict
me in this, unless it be upon those conditions, which Zerbin fixed at the Foot
of Orlando's Armor; Let none but he these Arms displace,
Who dares Orlando's Fury face.
I draw my Pedigree from the Cachopines of Laredo, replied Vivaldo, yet I dare
not make any Comparisons with the Toboso's of La Mancha, tho, to deal sincerely
with you, it is a Family that I never heard of till this moment. It Is strange,
said Don Quixote, you should never have heard of it before.

All the rest of the Company gave great attention to this Discourse; and even
the very Goat-herds were nowfully convinced that Don Quixote's Brains were
turned topsy turvy. But Sancho Panca believed every word that dropped from his
Masters mouth to be Truth, as having known him from his Cradle to be a Man of
Sincerity. Yet that which somewhat staggered his Faith, was this story of
Dulcinea of Toboso; for he was sure he had never heard before of any such
Princess, nor even of the Name, tho he lived hard by Toboso.

As they went on thus discoursing, they saw, upon the hollow Road between the
two neighboring Mountains, about twenty Shepherds more, all accoutred in Black
Skins, with Garlands on their Heads, which; as they afterward perceived, were
all of Ewe and Cyprus. Six of 'em carried a Bier, covered with several sorts of
Boughs and Flowers: Which one of the Goat-herds espying, These are they, cried
he, that are carrying poor Chrysostom to his Grave: and it was in yonder Bottom
that he gave charge they should bury his Corpse. This made 'em all double their
pace, that they might get thither in time; and so they arrived just as the
Bearers had set down the Bier upon the ground, and four of 'em had began to
open the ground with their Spades, just at the foot of a Rock. They all saluted
each other courteously, and condol'd their mutual loss, and then Don Quixote,
with those who came with him, went to view the Bier, where they saw the Dead
Body of a young man in Shepherds weeds, all strewn over with Flowers. The
Deceased seemed to be about 30 years old, and dead as he was, 'twas easily
perceived that both his Face and Shape were extraordinary handsome. W^^hin the
Bier were some few Books, and several Papers, some open, and the rest folded
up. This doleful object so strangely filled all the Company with sadness, that
not only the Beholders, but also the Grave-makers and all the Mourning
Shepherds remained a long time silent; till at last, one of the Bearers,
addressing himself to one of the rest; Look, Ambrose, cried he, whether this be
the place which Chrysostom meant, since you must needs have his Will so
punctually performed. This is the very place, answered the other: There it was
that my unhappy Friend many times told me the sad story of his cruel Fortune;
There it was that he first saw that mortal Enemy of Mankind; There it was that
he made the first Discovery of his Passion, no less innocent than violent;
There it was that the relentless Marcella last denied, shunned him, and drove
him to that extremity of Sorrow and Despair, that hastened the sad Catastrophe
of his Tragical and Miserable Life; and There it was, that, in token of so many
Misfortunes, he desired to be committed to the Bowels of eternal Oblivion.

Then, addressing himself to Don Quixote and the rest of the Travelers, This
Body, Sirs, said he, which here you now behold, was once enlivened by a Soul,
which Heaven had enriched with the greatest part of its most wealthy Graces.
This is the Body of that Chrysostom, who was unrivaled in Wit, matchless in
Courteousness, incomparable in Gracefulness, a Phaenix in Friendship, Generous
and Magnificent without Ostentation, Prudent and Grave without Pride, Modest
without Affectation, Pleasing and Complaisant without Meanness. In a word, the
first in every esteemable Qualification, and second to none in Misfortune: He
loved well, and was hated; he adored, and was disdained; he begged Pity of
Cruelty itself; he strove to move obdurate Marble; pursued the Wind; made his
moans to solitary Deserts; was constant to Ingratitude, and for the Recompense
of his Fidelity became a prey to Death in the Flower of his Age, through the
barbarity of a Sheperdess whom he strove to immortalize by his Verse, as these
Papers which are here deposited might testify, had he not commanded me to
sacrifice 'em to the Flames, at the same time that his body was committed to
the Earth.

Should you do so, cried Vivaldo, you would appear more cruel to 'em than their
exasperated unhappy Parent. Consider, Sir, it is not consistent with Discretion,
nor even with Justice, so nicely to perform the Request of the Dead, when it is
repugnant with Reason. Augustus Caesar himself would have forfeited his Title
to Wisdom, had he permitted that to have been effected which the Divine Virgil
had ordered by his Will. Therefore, Sir, now that you resign your Friends Body
to the Grave, do not hurry thus the noble and only Remains of that dear unhappy
man to a worse Fate, the Death of Oblivion. What, tho he has doomed 'em to
perish, in the height of his Resentment, you ought not indiscreetly to be their
Executioner: But rather reprieve and redeem 'em from eternal silence; that they
may live, and flying through the World transmit to all ages the dismal story of
your Friends Virtue and Marcella s Ingratitude; as a warning to others that
they may avoid such tempting Snares, and enchanting Destructions. Therefore, in
the name of all the company, like me, deeply affected with a sense of
Chrysostom's extraordinary merit, and his unhappy fate, and desirous to
prevent such deplorable disasters for the future, I beg that you will permit me
to save some of these Papers, whatever you resolve to do with the rest. And so,
without expecting an answer, he stretched out his arm, and took out those
Papers which lay next to his hand. Well Sir, said Ambrose, you have found a way
to make me submit, and you may keep those Papers; but for the rest, nothing
shall make me alter my Resolution of burning 'em. Vivaldo said no more, but,
being impatient to see what those Papers were, which he had rescued from the
Flames, he opened one of 'em immediately, and read the Title of it, which was
The Despairing Lover. That, said Ambrose, was the first Piece my dear Friend
ever wrote; and therefore, that you may all hear to what a sad condition his
unhappy Passion had reduced him, read it aloud, I beseech you, Sir, while the
Grave is making. With all my heart, replied Vivaldo. And so the Company, having
the same Desire, presently gathered round about him, and he read the following
lines.

CHAP. VI. The unfortunate Shepherd's Verses, and other unexpected matters.
The Despairing Lover.
RElentless Tyrant of my heart,
Attend, and hear thy Slave impart
The matchless Story of his Pain.
In vain I labor to conceal
What my extorted groans reveal;
Who can be rack d, and not complain?
But oh! who duly can express
Thy cruelty, and my distress?
No humane Art, no humane Tongue.
Then, Fiends assist, and Rage infuse!
A raving Fury be my Muse,
And Hell inspire the dismal Song!
Owls, Ravens, Terrors of the Night,
Wolves, Monsters, Fiends, with dire affright,
Join your dread accents to my Moans!
Join, howling Winds, your sullen Noise,
Thou grumbling Thunder, join thy Voice,
Mad Seas your Roar, and Hell thy Groans.
Thou still I mourn in dreiry Caves,
To desert Rocks, and silent Graves,
My loud complaints shall wander far;
Born by the Winds they shall survive,
By pitying Echoes kept alive,
And fill the World with my despair.
Love's deadly Cure is fierce Disdain,
Distracting Fear, a dreadful Pain,
And Jealousy a Matchless Woe,
Absence is Death; yet, while it kills,
I live with all these mortal Ills,
Scorned, jealous, loathed, and absent too.
No Dawn of hope e're cheered my heart,
No pitying Ray e're soothed my smart,
All, all the sweets of Life are gone.
Then come, Despair, and frantic Rage,
With instant Fate my Pains assuage,
And end a thousands Deaths by one.
But even in Death, let Love be crowned,
My fair destruction guiltless found,
And I be thought with Justice scorned.
Thus let me fall, unlov'd, unblest,
With all my Load of Woes oppressed,
And even too wretched to be mourned.
Oh! thou, by whose destructive hate,
Im hurried to this doleful Fate,
When I Am no more, thy Pity spare!
I dread thy Tears. Oh spare 'em then --
But oh, I rave, I was too vain:
My Death can never cost a Tear.
Tormented Souls, on you I call;
Hear one more wretched than you all.
Come, Howl, as in redoubled Flames.
Attend me to the eternal Night,
No other Dirge, nor Funral Rite,
A poor despairing Lover claims.
And thou, my Song, sad Child of Woe,
When Life is gone, and I m below,
For thy lost Parent cease to grieve.
With Life, and Thee my Woes increase,
And, should they not by dying cease,
Hell has no pains like those I leave.
These Verses were well approved by all the Company; only Vivaldo observed that
the Jealousies and Fears of which the Shepherd complained, did not very well
agree with what he had heard o^ Marcella's unspotted Modesty and Reservedness.
But Ambrose, who had been always privy t^ the most secret Thoughts of his
Friend, inform d him that the unhappy Chysostome wrote those Verses when he had
torn himself from his adored Mistress, to try whether absence, the com^^^ cure
of Love, would relieve him, and mitiga^^ his Pain. And as every thing disturbs
an absent Lover, and nothing is more usual than for him to torment himself with
a thousand Chymera's of his own Brain, so did Chrysostom perplex himself with
jealousies and suspicions, which had no ground but in his distracted
imagination; and therefore whatever he said in those uneasy Circumstances
could never affect, or in the least prejudice Marcella's Virtuous Character,
upon whom, setting aside her Cruelty, and her disdainful Haughtiness, Envy
itself could never fix the least Reproach. Vivaldo being thus convinced, they
were going to read another Paper, when they were unexpectedly prevented by a
kind of an Apparition, that offered it self to their View. 'Twas Marcella
herself, who appeared at the top of the Rock, at the foot of which they were
digging the Grave, but so beautiful, that Fame seemed rather to have lessened
than to have magnified her Charms; those who had never seen her before gazed on
her with silent wonder and delight; nay, those who used to see her every day
seemed no less lost in admiration than the rest. But scarce had Ambrose spied
her, when with anger and indignation in his heart, he cried out; What make
thou there, thou fierce, thou cruel Basilisk of these Mountains? come thou to
see whether the Wounds of this murdered Wretch will bleed afresh at thy
presence? Or come thou thus mounted aloft, to glory in the fatal effects of
thy native Inhumanity, like another Nero at the sight of Flaming Rome? Or is it
to Trample this unfortunate Corpse, as Tarquin's ungrateful Daughter did her
Fathers? Tell us quickly, why thou come, and what thou yet desire? For
since I know, that Chrysostom's whole study was to serve and please thee,
while he lived, I Am willing to dispose all his Friends to pay thee the like
obedience, now he is dead. I come not here to any of those ungrateful ends,
Ambrose, replied Marcella; but only to clear my Innocence, and show the
injustice of all those, who lay their misfortunes and Chrysostom's Death to my
charge. Therefore, I entreat you all, who are here at this time, to hear me a
little, for I shall not need to use many words, to convince People of sense of
an evident Truth. Heaven, you're pleased to say, has made me beautiful, and
that to such a degree, that you are forced, nay, as it were compelled to love
me, in spite of your endeavors to the contrary; and for the sake of that
love, you say I ought to love you again. Now tho I am sensible that whatever is
beautiful is lovely, I cannot conceive, that what is loved for being handsome,
should be bound to love that by which it is loved, merely because it is loved; he
that loves a beautiful object may happen to be ugly, and as what is ugly
deserves not to be loved, it would be ridiculous to say, I love you because you
are handsome, and therefore you must love me again, tho I am ugly. But suppose
two persons of different Sex are equally handsome, it does not follow, that
their desires should be alike and reciprocal; for all Beauties do not kindle
Love; some only recreate the sight, and never reach nor captivate the heart.
Alas, should whatever is beautiful beget Love and in slave the mind, Mankind's
desires would ever run confused and wandering, without being able to fix their
determinate choice; for as there is an infinite number of beautiful objects,
the Desires would consequently be also infinite; whereas, on the contrary, I
have heard that true Love is still confined to one, and voluntary and unforced.
This being granted, why would you have me force my Inclinations, for no other
reason but that you say you love me? Tell me, I beseech you, had Heaven formed
me as ugly as it has made me beautiful, could I justly complain of you for not
loving me? Pray consider also that I do not possess those Charms by choice;
such as they are, they were freely bestowed on me by Heaven; and as the Viper
is not to be blamed for the Poison with which she kills, seeing 'twas assigned
her by Nature, so I ought not to be censured for that Beauty which I derive
from the same Cause. For Beauty in a Virtuous Woman is but like a distant
Flame, or a sharpedg'd Sword, and only burns and wounds those who approach too
near it. Honor and Virtue are the ornaments of the Soul, and that Body that is
destitute of 'em cannot be esteemed beautiful, tho it be naturally so. If then
Honor be one of those Endowments which most adorn the Body, why should she
that is beloved for her Beauty, expose herself to the loss of it, merely to
gratify the loose Desires of one, who for his own selfish ends uses all the
means imaginable to make her lose it? I was born free, and that I might
continue so, I retired to these solitary hills and plains, where Trees are my
Companions, and clear Fountains my Looking-glasses. Those whom I have attracted
with my sight, I have undeceived with my words. And if hope be the food of
desire, I never gave any encouragement to Chrysostom, nor to any other; it may
well be said, 'twas rather his own obstinacy than my cruelty that shortened his
life. If you tell me, that his intentions were honest, and therefore ought to
have been complyd with, I answer, that when, at the very place where his Grave
is making, he discovered his Passion, I told him I was resolved to live and dye
single, and that the Earth alone should reap the spoils of my Reserv'dness and
Beauty; and if after all the admonitions I gave him, he would persist in his
obstinate pursuit, and sail against the Wind, what wonder is it he should perish
in the Waves of his Indiscretion? had I ever encouraged him, or amused him with
ambiguous words, then I had been false; and had I gratified his wishes, I had
acted contrary to my better resolves. He persisted, tho I had given him a due
caution, and he despaired e're he was hated. Now I leave you to judge whether I
ought to be blamed for his sufferings? If I have deceived any one, let him
complain. If I have broke my promise to any one, let him despair. If I
encourage any one, let him presume. If I entertain any one, let him boast. But
let no man call me cruel nor murderer, till I either deceive, break my
promise, encourage, or entertain him. Heaven has not yet been pleased to show
whether it is its will I should love by destiny; and it is vain to think I will
ever do it by choice. So let this general caution serve every one of those who
make their addresses to me for private ends. And if any one hereafter dies on
my account, let not their Jealousy, nor my Scorn or Hate be thought the cause
of their death; for she who never pretended to love cannot make any one
jealous, and a free and generous Declaration of our fixed Resolution, ought not
to be accounted hate nor disdain. In short, let him that calls me a Tygress and
a Basilisk, avoid me as a dangerous Thing; and let him that calls me
ungrateful, give over serving me; I assure 'em I will never seek nor pursue
'em. Therefore let none hereafter make it their business to disturb my ease,
nor strive to make me ha^^^d among men the quiet I now enjoy, which I am
persuaded is not to be found with 'em. I have wealth enough; and the innocent
conversation of the neighboring Shepherdesles, with the care of my Flocks,
help me to pass away my time, without either coquetting with this man, or
practicing Arts to ensnare that other. My Thoughts are limited by these
Mountains; and if they wander further, it is only to admire the Beauty of
Heaven, and thus by steps to raise my Soul toward her original dwelling.

As soon as she had said this, without expecting any answer, she left the
place, and ran into the thickest of the adjoining Wood, leaving all that heard
her charmed with her Discretion as well as with her Beauty.

However, so prevalent were the Charms of the latter, that some of the Company,
who were desperately struck, could not forbear offering to follow her, without
being the least deterred by the solemn Protestations, which they had heard her
make that very moment. But Don Quixote perceiving their design, and believing
he had now a fit opportunity to exert his Knight-Errantry, Let no man, cried
he, of what Quality or Condition soever, presume to follow the fair Marcella,
under the penalty of incurring my furious indignation. She has made it appear
by undeniable Reasons, that she was not guilty of Chrysostom's Death, and has
positively declared her firm resolution, never to condescend to the desires of
any of her Admirers. For which reason, instead of being importuned and
persecuted, she ought to be esteemed and honor d by all good men; as being
perhaps the only Woman in the World, that ever lived with such a Virtuous
Reserv'dness. Now, whether it were, that Don Quixote's. Threats terrified the
amorous Shepherds, or that Ambrose's Persuasion prevailed with 'em to stay, and
see their Friend interred, none of the Shepherds left the place, till the Grave
being made, and the Papers burnt, the Body was deposited into the Bosom of the
Earth, not without many Tears from all the assistants. They covered the Grave
with a great Stone, till a Monument were made, which Ambrose said he designed
to have set up there, with the following Epitaph upon it.

Chrysostom's Epitaph.
HEre of a wrethed Swain
The frozen Body's laid,
Killed by the cold Disdain
Of an ungrateful Maid.
Here first Love's Power he tried,
Here first, his Pains expressed,
Here first, he was denied,
Here first, he chose to rest.
You, who the Shepherd mourn,
From coy Marcella fly:
Who Chrysostom could scorn,
May all Mankind destroy.
The Shepherds strewn the Grave with many Flowers and Boughs, and every one
having condol'd a while with his Friend Ambrose, they took their leaves of him,
and departed. Vivaldo and his Friend did the like; as did also Don Quixote, who
was not a person to forgot himself on such occasions. He likewise bid adieu to
the kind Goat-herds that had entertained him, and to the two Travelers, who
desired him to go with 'em to Sivill, assuring him, there was no place in the
world more fertile in Adventures, every street and every corner there producing
some. Don Quixote returned them thanks for their kind information; but told
'em, he neither would nor ought to go to Sivill, till he had cleared all those
Mountains of the Thieves and Robbers, which he heard very much infested all
those parts. Thereupon the Travelers, being unwilling to divert him from so
pious a design, took their leaves of him once more, and pursued their Journey,
sufficiently supplied with matter to discourse on, from the story of Marcella
and Chrysostom, and Don Quixote's follies. As for him, he resolved to find out
the Shepherdess Marcella, if possible, to offer her his service to protect her
to the utmost of his power. But he happened to be crossed in his designs, as you
shall hear in the sequel of this true History. For here ends the second Book.

THE Life and Achievements Of the Renowned Don Quixote de la Mancha. PART I.
BOOK III.
CHAP. I. Giving an account of Don Quixote's unfortunate Rencounter with
certain Yanguesian Carriers.
THe Sage Cid Hamet Benengeli relates, that when Don Quixote had taken his
leave of all those that were at Chrysostom's Funeral, he and his Squire went
after Marcella into the Wood; and having ranged it above two hours, without
being able to find her, they came at last to a Meadow, whose springing Green,
watered with a delightful and refreshing Rivulet, invited, or rather pleasingly
forced em to alight, and give way to the heat of the day, which began to be
very violent. So leaving the Ass and Rozinante to graze at large, they ransackt
the Wallet, and without Ceremony the Master and the Man fell to, and fed
lovingly on what they found. Now Sancho had not taken care to tie up Rozinante,
knowing him to be a Horse of that Sobriety and Chastity, that all the Mares in
the Pastures of Cordona could not have raised him to attempt an indecent thing.
But either Fortune, or the Devil, who seldom sleeps, so ordered it, that a good
number of Galician Mares, belonging to some Yanguesian Carriers, were then
feeding in the same Valley, it being the custom of those Men about the hottest
time of the day to stop wherever they meet with Grass and Water to refresh
their Horses. Nor could they have found a fitter place than that where Don
Quixote was. Rozinante, as I said before, was chaste and modest, however he was
flesh and blood; so that as soon as he had smelt the Mares, forsaking his
natural Gravity and Reserv'dness, without asking his Masters leave, away he
trots it briskly to make 'em sensible of his little necessities: But they, who,
it seems, had more mind to feed than to be merry, received their Gallant so
rudely with their heels and teeth, that in a trice they broke his Girts, and
threw down his Saddle, and left him disrobed of Don Quixot and the Carrier
Fighting for the Inn keepers Maid. V. 1. Page: 134
all his Equipage. And for an addition to his Misery, the Carriers, perceiving
the violence that was offered to their Mares, flew to their relief with Poles
and Pack-staves, and so belabour'd poor Rozinante, that he soon sunk to the
ground, under the weight of their unmerciful Blows.

Don Quixote and Sancho, perceiving at a distance the ill usage of Rozinante,
ran with all speed to his Rescue; and as they came near the place, panting, and
almost out of breath, Friend Sancho, cried Don Quixote, I perceive these are no
Knights, but only a pack of Scoundrels, and Fellows of the lowest Rank, I say
it, because thus thou may lawfully help me, to revenge the Injury they have
done Rozinante before our faces. What a Devil do you talk of Revenge, quoth
Sancho? We are like to revenge our selves finely! You see they are above
twenty, and we are but two, nay, perhaps but one and a half. I alone am worth a
hundred, replied Don Quixote; then without any more words, he drew his Sword,
and flew upon the Yanguesians. Sancho, encouraged by his Masters example, did
the like, and with the first blow, which Don Quixote gave one of 'em, he cut
through his Leathern Doublet, and gave him a deep slash in the Shoulder. The
Yanguesians, seeing themselves thus rudely handled, betook themselves to their
Leavers and Pack-Staves, and then all at once surrounding the valiant Knight
and his trusty Squire, they charged 'em, and laid on with great fury. At the
second round down they settle poor Sancho, and then Don Quixote himself, who,
as Chance would have it, fell at the feet of Rozinante, who had not yet
recovered his Legs; neither could the Knights Courage nor his Skill avail
against the fury of a number of rustical fellows, armed with Pack-staves. The
Yanguesians, fearing the ill consequences of the mischief they had done, made
all the haste they could to be gone, leaving our two Adventurers in a woeful
condition. The first that came to himself was Sancho Panca, who finding himself
near his Master, called to him thus, with a weak and doleful voice, Ah Master!
Master! Sir, Sir Knight! What Is the matter, Friend Sancho, asked the Knight, in
the same feeble and lamenting tone? I could wish, replied Sancho, that your
Worship would help me to two good Draughts of the Liquor you talk on, if you
have any by you, perhaps it is as good to cure broken Bones, as it is to heal
outward wounds. Oh! that I had some of it here now, cried Don Quixote, we could
not then be said to want any thing: But I swear to thee, honest Sancho, by the
Faith of a Knight Errant, within these two days (if no other Disaster prevent
me) I will have some at my disposal, or it shall hardly escape my hands. Two
Days, Sir, replied Sancho! Why, pray how many Days do you think 'twill be
before we are able to stir our Feet? As for my self, answered the bruised Don
Quixote, I must own I I cannot set a certain term to the days of our Recovery;
but it is I, who am the fatal cause of all this mischief, for I ought not to
have drawn my Sword against a Company of Fellows, upon whom the honor of
Knighthood was never conferred, and I do not doubt but that Providence suffered
this Punishment to befall me, for transgressing thus the Laws of Chivalry:
therefore, Friend Sancho, observe what I am going to tell thee, for it is a
thing that highly concerns the welfare of us both, it is, that for the future
whenever thou perceiv'st us to be any ways abused by such inferior fellows,
thou art not to expect I should offer to draw my Sword against them; for I will
not do it in the least: No, do thou then draw, and chastise 'em as thou think
fit: But if any Knights come to take their parts, then will I be sure to step
between thee and Danger, and assault em with the utmost Vigor and Intrepidity.
Thou have already had a thousand Proofs of the greatness of my Valor, and the
prevailing strength of my most dreadful Arm: (So arrogant the Knight was grown,
since his Victory over the bold Biscayan.) But Sancho was not so well pleased
with his Masters admonitions, but that he thought fit to answer him: Sir, says
he, I am a peaceful man, a harmless quiet fellow, do you see: I can make shift to
pass by an Injury as well as any man, as having a Wife to maintain, and
Children to bring up; and therefore pray take this from me, by the way of
Advice, (for I Will not offer to command my Master) that I will not in any wise
draw my Sword, neither against Knight nor Clown, not I. I freely forgive all
mankind, High and Low, Rich and Poor, Lords and Beggars, whatever wrongs they
ever did, or may do me, without the least exception. Sancho, (said his Master,
hearing this) I heartily wish I had Breath enough to answer thee effectually,
or that the pain which I feel in one of my short Ribs would leave me but for so
long as might serve to convince thee of thy error. Come, suppose, thou silly
wretch, that the gale of Fortune, which has hitherto been so contrary to us,
should at last turn favorable, swelling the Sails of our Desires, so that we
might with as much security as ease, arrive at some of those Islands which I
have promised thee: What would become of thee, if, after I had conquered one of
'em, I were to make thee Lord of it? Thou would certainly be found not duly
qualified for that Dignity, as having abjured all Knighthood, all thoughts of
Honor, and all Intention to revenge Injuries, and defend thy own Dominions.
For thou must understand, that to Kingdoms and Provinces newly conquered, the
hearts and minds of the Inhabitants are never so thoroughly subdued or wedded
to the Interests of their new Sovereign, but that there is reason to fear, they
will endeavor to raise some Commotions to change the face of affairs, and, as
men say, once more try their Fortune. Therefore it is necessary that the new
Possessor have not only Understanding to govern, but also Valor to attack his
Enemies, and defend himself on all occasions. I would I had had that
Understanding and Valor you talk of, quoth Sancho; but now, Sir, I must be
free to tell you, I have more need of a Surgeon, than of a Preacher. Pray try
whether you can rise, and we'll help Rozinante, tho he does not deserve it, for
he is the chief cause of all this Beating. For my part, I could never have
believed the like of him before, for I always took him for as sober and
peaceable a person as my self. In short, it is a true saying, that a man must
eat a peck of Salt with his Friend, before he knows him; and I find There Is
nothing sure in this World. For, who would have thought, after the dreadful
slashes you gave to that Knight Errant, such a terrible Tempest of Bastinadoes
would so soon have showered upon our Shoulders? As for thine, replied Don
Quixote, I doubt they are used to endure such sort of showers; but mine, that
were nursed in soft Linen, will most certainly be longer sensible of this
Misfortune; and were it not that I imagine (bu^ why do I say imagine!) were it
not that I am positively sure that all these Inconveniences are inseparable
from the Profession of Onivalry, I would abandon my self to grief, and die of
mere Despair on this very spot. I beseech you, Sir, quoth Sancho, since these
Rubs are sometimes the Vails of your Trade of Knighthood, tell me whether they
use to be very brief among you, or whether we may look for 'em at set times;
for, I fancy, if we meet but with two such Harvests m^re, we shall never be
able to reap the third, unless Miracles assist us? Know, Friend Sancho,
returned Don Quixote, that the Life of Knights-Errant is subject to a thousand
Hazards and Misfortunes: But, on the other side, they may at any time suddenly
become Kings and Emperors, as experience has demonstrated in many Knights, of
whose Histories I have a perfect Knowledge. And I could tell thee now (would my
pain suffer me) of some of 'em who have raised themselves to those high
Dignities only by the strength of their Arms; and those very Knights, both
before and after their advancement, were involved in many Calamities. For the
valorous Amadis de Gaul saw himself in the Power of his mortal Enemy Arcalaus
the Inchanter, of whom it is credibly reported that when he held him Prisoner he
gave him above two hundred stripes with his Horse Bridle, after he had tied him
to a Pillar in the Courtyard of his house. There is also a secret Author of no
little credit, relates, That the Knight of the Sun being taken in a Trap in a
certain Castle was hurried to a deep Dungeon, where, after they had bound him
Hand and Foot, they forcibly gave him a Glyster of Snow-water and Sand, which
would probably have cost him his Life, had he not been assisted in that
Distress by a wise Magician his particular Friend. Thus I may well bear my
misfortune patiently, since those which so many greater persons have endured
may be said to out do it. For I would have thee to know, that those wounds
which are given with the Instruments and Tools which a Man happens to have in
his hand do not really disgrace the Person struck. We read it expressly in the
Laws of Duels, That if a Shoemaker strikes another Man with his Last which he
held in his hand, tho it be of Wood as a Cudgel is, yet the party who was
struck with it shall not be said to have been cudgel d. I tell thee this, that
thou may not think we are in the least dishonored, tho we have been horribly
beaten in this Rencounter; for the weapons, which those men used, were but the
Instruments of their profession, and not one of 'em, as I very well remember,
had either Tuck, or Sword, or Dagger. They gave me no leisure, quoth Sancho, to
examine things so narrowly; for I had no sooner laid my hand on my Weapon, but
they crossed my Shoulders with such a Wooden Blessing, as settled me on the
ground without sense or motion, where you see me lie; and where I don't trouble
my head whether it be a Disgrace to be mawl'd with Cudgels or with Pack-staves:
Let 'em be what they will, I am only vexed to feel them so heavy on my
Shoulders, where I am afraid they are imprinted as deep, as they are in my
Mind. For all this, replied Don Quixote, I must inform thee, Friend Sancho,
that there is no Remembrance, which time will not deface, nor no Pain, to which
Death will not put a Period. Thank you for nothing, quoth Sancho! What worse
can befall us, than to have only Death to trust to? Were our affliction to be
cured with a Plaster or two, a man might have some Patience; but, for ought I
see, all the Salves in an Hospital will not set us on our best Legs again Come, no
more of this, cried Don Quixote; take Courage, and make a Virtue of necessity;
for it is what I am resolved to do. Let Us see how it fares with Rozinante; for,
if am not mistaken, the poor Creature has not been the least suflerer in this
Adventure. No wonder at that, quoth Sancho; seeing he is a Knight Errant as well
as (...) rest; I rather wonder, how my Ass ha^ ^^cap'd so well, while we have
fared so ill (...) our Disasters, returned Don Quixot^ Fortune leaves always
some door open to ^me at a Remedy. I say it, Sancho, because that little Beast
may now supply the want of Rozinante, to carry me to some Castle, where I may
get cured of my Wounds. Nor do I esteem this kind of riding dishonorable, for
I remember, that the good old Silenus, Tutor and Governor to the Jovial God of
Wine, rode very fairly on a goodly Ass, when he made his Entry into the City
with a hundred Gates. Ay, quoth Sancho, 'twill do well enough, could you ride
as fairly on your Ass, as he did on his, but there is a deal of difference
between Riding and being laid cross the Panel like a pack of Rubb^^^. The
Wounds which are received i^ Combat, said Don Quixote, rather add to our
honor, than deprive us of it; therefore, good Sancho, trouble me with no more
replies, but, as I said, endeavor to get up, and lay me as thou please upon
thy Ass, that we may leave this place e're night steal upon us. But, Sir, cried
Sancho, I have heard you say, that it is a common thing among you Knight-Errants
to sleep in Fields and Deserts the best part of the year, and that you look
upon it to be a very happy kind of Life. That is to say, replied Don Quixote,
when we can do no better, or when we are in Love; and this is so true, that
there have been Knights who have dwelt on Rocks, exposed to the Sun, and other
Inclemencies of the Sk, for the space of two Years, without their Lady's
Knowledge: One of those was Amadis, when, assuming the Name of The Lovely
Obscure, he inhabited the Poor Rock, either eight years, or eight months, I
cannot now punctually tell which of the two; for I don't thoroughly remember
that passage. Let it suffice that there he dwelt, doing Penance, for I don't
know what unkindness his Lady Oriana had showed him. But setting these
Discourses aside, prithee dispatch, lest some Mischief befall thy Ass, as it
has done Rozinante. That would be the Devil indeed, replied Sancho, and so
breathing out some thirty Lamentations, threescore Sighs, and a hundred and
twenty Plagues and Poxes on those that had decoy d him thither, he at last got
upon his Legs, yet not so but that he went stooping, with his Body bent like a
Turks Bow, not being able to stand upright. Yet in this crooked Posture he made
a shift to harness his Ass, who had not forgot to take his share of
Licentiousness that day. After this, he helped up Rozinante, who, could his
Tongue have expressed his Sorrows, would certainly not have been behindhand with
Sancho and his Master. After many bitter Oh's, and Screwed Faces, Sancho laid
Don Quixote on the Ass, tied Rozinante to its Tail, and then leading the Ass by
the Halter, he took the nearest way that he could guess to the high Road; to
which he luckily came before he had traveled a short League, and then he
discovered an Inn; which, in spite of all he could say, Don Quixote was
pleased to mistake for a Castle. Sancho swore bloodily 'twas an Inn, and his
Master was as positive of the contrary. In short, their Dispute lasted so long,
that before they could decide it they reached the Inn-door, where Sancho strait
went in, with all his Train, without troubling himself any further about the
matter.

CHAP. II. What happened to Don Quixote in the Inn which he took for a Castle.
THe Innkeeper, seeing Don Quixote lying quite athwart the Ass, asked Sancho,
what ailed him? Sancho answered, 'Twas nothing, only his Master had got a fall
from the Top of a Rock to the Bottom, and had bruised his Sides a little. The
Innkeeper had a Wife, very different from the common sort of Hostesses, for
she was of a Charitable Nature, and very compassionate of her Neighbor's
Afflictions; which made her immediately take Care of Don Quixote, and call her
Daughter, (a good handsome Girl,) to set her helping hand to his Cure. One of
the Servants in the Inn was an Asturian Wench, a Broad-fac'd, Flat-headed,
Sadle-noss'd, Dowdy; blind of one Eye, and the other almost out: However, the
Activity of her Body supplied all other Defects. She was not above three Foot
high from her Heels to her Head; and her Shoulders, which somewhat loaded her,
made her look downwards oftener than she could have wished. This charming
Original likewise assisted the Mistress and the Daughter; and with the latter,
helped to make the Knight's Bed, and a sorry one it was; the Room where it
stood was an old gambling Cock-loft, which by manifold Signs seemed to have
been in the days of Yore, a Repository for chopped Straw. Some what further, in a
Corner of that Garret, a Carrier had his Lodging; and though his Bed was nothing
but the Pannels and Coverings of his Mules, 'twas much better than that of Don
Quixote, which only consisted of four rough hewn Boards laid upon two uneven
Tressels, a Flock-bed, that, for Substance, might well have passed for a Quilt,
and was full of Knobs and Bunches, which had they not peeped out through many a
hole, and shown themselves to be of Wool, might well have been taken for
Stones: The rest of that extraordinary Bed's Furniture, was a pair of Sheets,
which rather seemed to be of Leather than of Linen Cloth, and a Coverlet
whose every individual Thread you might have told, and never have missed one in
the Tale.

In this ungracious Bed was the Knight laid to rest his belabour'd Carcass, and
presently the Hostess and her Daughter anointed and plastered him all over,
while Maritornes (for this was the Name of the Asturian Wench) held the Candle.
The Hostess, while she greased him, wondering to see him so bruised all over; I
fancy, said she, those Bumps look much more like a dry Beating than a Fall.
'Twas no dry Beating Mistress, I promise you, quoth Sancho, but the Rock had I
know not how many cragged Ends and Knobs, whereof every one gave my Master a
Token of its Kindness. And by the way, forsooth, continued he, I beseech you
save a little of that same Tow and Ointment for me too, for I don't know what is
the matter with my Back, but I fancy I stand mainly in want of a little
greasing too. What, I suppose, you fell too, quoth Sancho Pancha toss 't in
(...) Page 146
the Landlady. Not I, quoth Sancho, but the very Fright that I took to see my
Master tumble down the Rock, has so wrought upon my Body, that I Am as sore as
if I had been sadly mauled. It may well be as you say, cried the Inn-keeper's
Daughter; for I have dreamed several Times that I have been falling from the
Top of a high Tower without ever coming to the Ground; and, when I waked, I
have found my self as out of order and as bruised as if I had fallen in good
earnest. That Is even my Case, Mistress, quoth Sancho; only ill Luck would have
it so, that I should find my self even almost as battered and bruised as my
Lord Don Quixote, and yet all the while be as broad awake as I am now. How do
you call this same Gentleman, quoth Marifornes? He Is Don Quixote de la Mancha,
replied Sancho; and he is a Knight Errant, and one of the primest and stoutest
that ever the Sun shined on. A Knight Errant, cried the Wench, pray what is
that? Heigh-day, cried Sancho, does the Wench know no more of the World than
that comes to? Why, a Knight Errant is a Thing which in two Words you see well
Cudgelled, and then an Emperor. To day there is not a more wretched Thing upon
the Earth, and yet to morrow he will have you two or three Kingdoms to give away
to his Squire. How comes it to pass then, quoth the Landlady, that thou who art
this great Person's Squire, have not yet got thee at least an Earldom? Fair
and softly goes far, replied Sancho. Why, we have not been a Month in our
Gears, so that we have not yet encountered any Adventure worth the naming:
Besides, many a time we look for one thing, and light on another, But if my
Lord Don Quixote happen^ but to get well again, and I escape remaining a
Cripple, I Will not take the best Title in the Land for what I am sure will fall
to my Share.

Here Don Quixote, who had listened with great Attention to all these
Discourses, raised himself up in his Bed with much ado, and taking the Hostess,
in a most obliging manner by the hand, Believe me, said he, beautiful Lady, you
may well esteem it a Happiness, that you have now the opportunity to entertain
my Person in your Castle. Self-praise is unworthy a Man of Honor, and
therefore I shall say no more of my self; but my Squire will inform you who I
am. Only thus much let me add, That I will eternally preserve your Kindness in
the Treasury of my Remembrance, and study all Occasions to testify my
Gratitude. And I wish, continued he, the Powers above had so disposed my Fate,
that I were not already Love's devoted Slave, and captivated by the Charms of
the disdainful Beauty, who engrosses all my softer Thoughts; for then would I
be proud to Sacrifice my Liberty to this beautiful Damsel. The Hostess, her
Daughter, and the kind-hearted Maritornes, star'd on one another, quite at a
loss for the meaning of this high flown Language, which they understood full as
well as if it had been Greek. Yet conceiving these were Words of Complement and
Courtship, they looked upon him and admired him as a Man of another World. And
so, having made him such Returns, as Inn-keeper's Breeding could afford, they
left him to his Rest. Only Maritornes stayed to rub down Sancho, who wanted her
help no less than his Master.

Now you must know that the Carrier and she had agreed to pass the Night
together; and she had given him her Word, that as soon as all the People in the
Inn were in Bed, she would be sure to come to him, and be at his Service. And
it is said of this good natured Thing that whenever she had passed her Word in
such Cases, she was sure to make it good, though she had made the Promise in the
midst of a Wood and without any Witness at all. For she stood much upon her
Gentility, though she undervalu'd her self so far as to serve in an Inn, often
saying that nothing but Crosses and Necessity could have made her stoop to it.

Don Quixote's hard, scanty, beggarly, miserable Bed was the first of the four
in that wretched Apartment; next to that was Sancho's Kennel, which consisted
of nothing but a Bed-Mat and a Coverlet, that rather seemed shorn Canvass than
a Rug. Beyond those two Beds was that of the Carrier made, as we have said, of
the Pannels and Furniture of two of the best of twelve Mules which he kept,
every one of 'em goodly Beasts and in special good Case; for he was one of the
richest Muleteers of Arevalo, as the Moorish Author of this History relates,
who makes particular mention of him, as having been acquainted with him, nay,
some don't stick to say he was somewhat akin to him. However it be, it appears
that Cid Mahamet Benengeli was a very exact Historian, since he takes care to
give us an Account of Things that seem so inconsiderable and trivial. A
Laudable Example which those Historians should follow who usually relate
Matters so concisely, that they seem scarce to have dipped in 'em, and rather
to have left the most essential Part of the Story drowned in the bottom of the
Inkhorn, either through Neglect, Malice, or Ignorance. A thousand Blessings
then be given to the curious Author of Tablante de Ricomonte, and to that other
indefatigable Sage that recorded the Achievements of Count Tomillas; for they
have described even the most minute and trifling Circumstances with a singular
preciseness. But, to return to our Story, you must know that after the Carrier
had dressed his Mules and given 'em their Night's Provender, he laid him down on
his hard Bed, expecting the most punctual Maritornes's kind Visit. By this
Time, Sancho, duly greased and anointed, was crept into his S^y, where he did
all he could to sleep, but his aching Ribs did all they could to prevent him. As
for the Knight, whose Sides were in as bad Circumstances as his Squire's, he
lay with both his Eyes open like a Hare. And now was every Soul in the Inn gone
to Bed, not so much as a Mouse stirring in the House, nor any Light to be seen,
except that of a Lamp which hung in the middle of the Gate-way. This general
Tranquillity setting Don Quixote's Thoughts at work, offered to his Imagination
one of the most absurd Follies that ever crept into a distempered Brain from
the Perusal of Romantic Whimsies. Now he fancied himself to be in a famous
Castle (for, as we have already said, all the Inns which were honored with his
Presence, seemed no less than Castles to him) and that the Inn-keeper's
Daughter (consequently Daughter to the Lord of the Castle) strangely captivated
with his graceful Presence and Gallantry, had promised him the Pleasure of her
Embraces, as soon as her Father and Mother were gone to Rest. This Chimera
disturbed him, as if it had been a real Truth. So that he began to be mightily
perplexed, reflecting on the Danger to which his Honor was exposed. But at last
his Virtue over-came the powerful Temptation, and he firmly resolved not to be
guilty of the least Infidelity to his Lady Dulcinea del Toboso; though Queen
Genever her self, with her trusty Matron Quintaniona should join to decoy him
into the alluring Snare.

While these wild Imaginations worked in his Brain, the gentle Maritornes was
mindful of her Assignation, and with soft and wary Steps, barefoot and in her
Smock, stole into the Room, and felt about for her beloved Carrier's Bed. But
scarce had she got to the Door, when Don Quixote, whose Ears were on the scout,
was sensible that something was coming in; and therefore having raised himself
in his Bed, sore and wrapped up in Plasters, as he was, he stretched out his
Arms to receive his fancied Damsel, and caught hold of Maritornes by the Wrist,
as she was, with her Arms stretched, groping her way to her Paramour; he pulled
her to him, and made her sit down by his Bed's-side, she not daring to speak a
Word all the while: Now, as he imagined her to be the Lord of the Castle's
Daughter, her Smock, which was of the courcest Canvase, seemed to him of the
finest Holland; and the Glass Beads about her Wrist, precious Oriental Pearls;
her Hair that was almost as rough as a Horse's Main, he took to be soft flowing
Threads of bright curling Gold; and her Breath, that had a stronger Hogo than
stale Venison, was to him a grateful Compound of the most fragrant Perfumes of
Arabia. In short, his flattering Imagination transformed her into the likeness
of those Romantic Beauties, one of whom, as he remembered to have read, came to
pay a private Visit to a wounded Knight, with whom she was desperately in Love;
and the poor Gentleman's obstinate Folly had so insatuated his outward Sense,
that his Feeling and his Smell could not in the least undeceive him; and he
thought he had no less than a balmy Venus in his Arms, while he hugged a
fulsome Bundle of Deformities that would have turned any Man's Stomach but a
sharp-set Carrier's. Therefore, clasping her still closer, with a soft and
amorous Whisper, Oh! thou most lovely Temptation, cried he, Oh that I now might
but pay a warm Acknowledgment for the mighty Blessing which your extravagant
Goodness would lavish on me; yes, most beautiful Charmer, I would give an
Empire to purchase your more desirable Embraces; but Fortune, Madam, Fortune,
that Tyrant of my Life, that unrelenting Enemy to the truly Deserving has
maliciously hurried and rivetted me to this Bed, where I lie so bruised and
macerated, that, though I were eager to gratify your Desires, I should at this
dear unhappy Minute be doomed to Impotence: Nay, to that unlucky Bar, Fate has
added a yet more invincible Obstacle. I mean my plighted Faith to the
unrivaled Dulcinea del Toboso, the sole Mistress of my Wishes, and absolute
Sovereign of my Heart, Oh! did not this oppose my present Happiness, I could
never be so dull and insensible a Knight as to lose the Benefit of this
extraordinary Favor which you have now condescended to offer me.

Poor Maritornes all this while sweated for Fear and Anxiety, to find her self
thus locked in the Knight's Arms; and without either understanding or willing
to understand his florid Excuses, she did what she could to get from him, and
sheer off, without speaking a word. On the other side, the Carrier, whose lewd
Though^s kept him awake, having heard his trusty Lady when she first came in,
and listened ever since to the Knight's Discourse, began to be afraid that she
had made some other Assignation; and so without any more ado, he crept softly
to Don Quixote's Bed, where he listened a while to hear what would be the end
of all this Talk, which he could not understand: But perceiving at last, by the
struggling of his faithful Maritornes, that 'twas none of her Fault, and that
the Knight strove to detain her against her Will, he could by no means bear his
Familiarity; and therefore taking it in mighty Dudgeon, he up with his Fist,
and hit the disastrous Knight such a swinging blow on the Jaws, that his Face
was all over Blood in a moment. And not satisfied with this, he got of top of
the Knight, and with his splay Feet betrampled him as if he had been treading a
Hay-mow. With that the Bed, whose Foundations were none of the best, sunk under
the additional Load of the Carrier, and fell with such a noise that it waked
the Innkeeper, who presently suspects it to be one of Maritornes's nightly
Skirmishes; and therefore having called her aloud, and finding that she did not
answer, he lighted a Lamp and made to the Place where he heard the Bustle. The
Wench, who heard him coming, knowing him to be of a passionate Nature, was
scared out of her Wits, and fled for shelter to Sancho's Stye, where he lay
snoring to some Tune: There she pig'd in, and slunk under the Coverlet, where
she lay snug, and trussed up as round as an Egg. Presently her Master came in,
in a mighty heat. Where Is this damned Whore, cried he: I dare say this is one
of her Pranks. By this, Sancho awaked; and feeling that unusual Lump, which
almost over-laid him, he took it to be the Nightmare, and began to lay about
him with his Fists, and thump'd the Wench so unmercifully, that at last Flesh
and Blood were no longer able to bear it; and forgetting the Danger she was in,
and her dearer Reputation, she paid him back his Thumps as fast as her Fists
could lay 'em on, and soon roused the drowsy Squire out of his Sluggishness,
whether he would or no. Who finding himself thus pammell'd, by he did not know
who, he busled up in his Nest, and catching hold of Maritornes, they began the
most pleasant Skirmish in the World. When the Carrier perceiving by the Light
of the Inn-keeper's Lamp, the dismal Condition that his dear Mistress was in,
presently took her part; and, leaving the Knight whom he had more than
sufficiently mauled, flew at the Squire, and paid him confoundedly. On the
other hand, the Innkeeper, who took the Wench to be the cause of all this
hurly burly, cuff'd and kicked, and kicked and cuff'd her over and over again:
And so there was a strange Multiplication of Fisticuffs and Drubbing. The
Carrier pummell'd Sancho, Sancho mauled the Wench, the Wench belabour'd the
Squire, and the Innkeeper thrash'd her again: And all of 'em laid on with such
Expedition, that you would have thought they had been afraid of losing Time.
But the best Jest was, that in the heat of the Fray, the Lamp went out; so that
being now in the dark, they plied one another at a Venture, they struck and
tore, all went to Rack, while Nails and Fists flew about without Mercy.

There happened to lodge that Night in the Inn one of the Officers belonging to
that Society which they call the old holy Brotherhood of Toledo, whose chief
Office is to look after Thieves and Robbers. Being waked with the heavy Bustle,
he presently jumped out of his Bed, and with his short Staff in one hand, and a
Tin Box with his Commission in it in the other, he grop'd out his way; and being
entered the Room in the dark, cried out, I charge ye all to keep the Peace: I
am an Officer of the holy Brotherhood. The first he pop'd his hand upon
happened to be the poor battered Knight who lay upon his Back, at his full
length, without any Feeling, upon the Ruins of his Bed. The Officer, having
caught him by the Beard, presently cried out, I charge you to aid and assist
me: But finding he could not stir, though he gripped him hard, he presently
imagined him to be dead, and murdered by the rest in the Room. With that, he
bauld out, to have the Gates of the Inn shut. Here Is a Man murdered, cried he;
look that no Body makes his Escape. These Words struck all the Combatants with
such a Terror, that as soon as they reached their Ears they gave over, and
left the Argument undecided. Away stole the Innkeeper to his own Room, the
Carrier to his Pannels, and the Wench to her Kennel; only the unfortunate
Knight, and his as unfortunate Squire, remained where they lay, not being able
to stir, while the Officer, having let go Don Quixote's Beard, went out for a
Light; in order to apprehend the supposed Murderers. But the Innkeeper having
wisely put out the Lamp in the Gateway, as he sneaked out of the Room, the
Officer was obliged to repair to the Kitchen Chimney, where, with much ado,
puffing and blowing a long while among the Embers, he at last made shift to get
a Light.

CHAP. III. A further Account of the innumerable Hardships which the brave ^on
Quixote, and his worthy Squire Sancho underwent in the Inn, which the Knight
unluckily took for a Castle.
DOn Quixote, who by this Time was come to himself, began to call Sancho with
the same lamentable Tone as the Day before when he had been beaten by the
Carriers in the Meadow. Sancho, cried he, Friend Sancho, art thou asleep? Art
thou asleep, Friend Sancho? Sleep, replied Sancho, mightily out of Humor, may
Old Nick rock my Cradle then. Why, how the Devil should I sleep, when all the
Imps of Hell have been tormenting me to Night? Nay, you are in the right,
answered Don Quixote, for either I have no Skill in these Matters, or this
Castle is enchanted. Hear what I say to thee, but first swear, thou will it
never reveal it till after my Death. I swear it, quoth Sancho. I am thus
cautious, said Don Quixote, because I hate to take away the Reputation of any
Person. Why, quoth Sancho, I tell you again, I swear never to speak a word of
the Matter while you live; and I wish I may be at liberty to talk on it to
Morrow. How, cried Don Quixote! Have I done thee so much wrong, Sancho, that
thou would have me die so soon? Nay, it is not for that neither, quoth
Sancho; but because I cannot abide to keep things long, for fear they should
grow moldy. Well, let it be for what thou please, said Don Quixote: For I
dare trust greater Concerns to thy Courtesy and Affection. In short, I know,
that this very Night there has happened to me one of the strangest Adventures
that can be imagined; for, the Daughter of the Lord of this Castle came to me,
who is one of the most engaging and most beautiful Damsels that ever Nature has
been proud to boast of: What could I not tell thee of the Charms of her Shape
and Face, and the Perfections of her Mind! What could I not add of other hidden
Beauties, which I condemn to Silence and Oblivion, lest I endanger my
Allegiance and Fidelity to my Lady Dulcinea del Toboso! I will only tell thee,
That the Heavens envying the inestimable Happiness which Fortune had thrown
into my Hands; or rather, because this Castle is enchanted, it happened, that
in the midst of the most tender and passionate Discourses that past between us,
the profane Hand of some mighty Giant, which I could not see, nor imagine
whence it came, hit me such a dreadful Blow on the Jaws, that they are still
embru'd with Blood; after which the discourteous Wretch presuming on my present
Weakness, did so barbarously bruise me, that I feel my self in a worse
Condition now than I did Yesterday, after the Carriers had so roughly handled
me for Rozinante's Incontinency: From which I conjecture, that the Treasure of
this Damsel's Beauty is guarded by some enchanted Moor, and not reserved for me.

Nor for me neither, quoth Sancho; for I have been Rib-roasted by above Four
Hundred Moors, who have hammered my Bones in such guise, that I may safely say,
the Assault and Battery made on my Body by the Carrier's Poles and Pack-staves,
were but ticklings and stroakings with a Feather to this. But, Sir, pray tell
me, do you call this such a pleasant Adventure, when we are so lamentably pounded
after it? And yet your hap may well be accounted better than mine, seeing
you have hugged that fair Maiden in your Arms. But I, what have I had, I pray
you, but the heaviest Blows that e're fell on a poor Man's Shoulders? Woe's me
and the Mother that bore me, for I neither am nor ever mean to be a
Knight Errant, and yet the elder Brother's Portion of Mischiefs falls still to
my Lot. What, have thou been beaten as well as I, said Don Quixote? What a
Plague, cried Sancho, have NOT I been telling you so all this while? Come, never
let it trouble thee, Friend Sancho, replied Don Quixote; for I Will immediately
make the precious Balsam that will cure thee in the twinkling of an Eye.

By this time the Officer, having lighted his Lamp, came into the Room, to see
who it was that was Murdered: Sancho seeing him enter in his Shirt, a Napkin
wrapped about his Head like a Turbant, and the Lamp in his hand, he being also an
ugly ill-look'd Fellow; Sir, quoth the Squire to his Master, pray see whether
this be not the enchanted Moor that is come again to have the other Bout with me,
and try whether he has not left some place unbruis'd for him now to maul as
much as the rest? It cannot be the Moor, replied Don Quixote: For Negromancers
never suffer themselves to be seen. If they don't suffer themselves to be seen,
quoth Sancho, at least they suffer themselves to be felt: If not, let my
Carcass bear witness. So might mine, cried Don Quixote: Yet this is no
sufficient Reason to prove, that what we see is the enchanted Moor.

While they were thus arguing the Officer advanced, and wondered to be (...)
^wo Men talk so calmly to one another (...) Yet finding the unfortunate Knight
lying (...) same deplorable Posture as no left him, ^^^tch'd out like a Corpse,
bloody, ^^nis'd and beplaister'd, and not able to stir himself ^^^w^s't honest
Fellow, quoth he to the Champ^^, how do you find your self? Were I your Fellow,
replied Don Quixote, I would have a little more Manners than you have, you
Blockhead, you, is that your way of approaching Knights-Errant in this Country?
The Officer could not bear such a Reprimand from one who made so scurvy a
Figure, and lifting up the Lamp, Oil and all, hit Don Quixote such a Blow on
the Head with it, that he had Reason to fear he had made Work for the Surgeon,
and therefore stole presently out of the Room, under the Protection of the
Night. Well, Sir, quoth Sancho, do you think now 'twas the enchanted Moor or no?
For my part, I think he keeps the Treasure you talk of for others, and re^^ves
only Kicks, Cuffs, Thumps and Knocks (...) your Worship and my self. I am now
convinced, answered Don Quixote: Therefore, let us wave that Resentment of these
Injuries, which we might otherwise justly show; for considering these
Enchanters can make themselves invisible when they please, it is needless to
think of Revenge. But, I prithee rise, if thou can, Sancho, and desire the
Governor of the Castle to send me some Oil, Salt, Wine and Rosemary, that I may
make my healing Balsam; for truly I want it extremely, so fast the Blood flows
out of the Wound which the Fantasm gave me now.

Sancho then got up as fast as his aching Bones would let him, and with much ado
made shift to crawl out of the Room to look for the Innkeeper, and stumbling
by the way on the Officer who stood harkening to know what Mischief he had
done; Sir, quoth he to him, for Heavens sake do so much as help us to a little
Oil, Salt, Wine and Rosemary, to make a Medicine for one of the best
Knights-Errant that e're trod on Shoe of Leather, who lies yonder grievously
wounded by the enchanted Moor of this Inn. The Officer hearing him talk at that
Rate, took him to be out of his Wits; and it beginning to be Day Light, he
opened the Inn Door, and told the Innkeeper what Sancho wanted. The Host
presently provided the desired Ingredients, and Sancho crept back with 'em to
his Master, whom he found holding his Head, and sadly complaining of the Pain
which he felt there; though after all, the Lamp had done him no more harm than
only the raising of two huge Bumps; for that which he fancied to be Blood, was
only Sweat and the Oil of the Lamp that had liquor'd his Hair and Face.

The Knight took all the Ingredients, and having mixed 'em together, he had 'em
set over the Fire, and there kept 'em boiling till he thought they were enough.
That done, he asked for a Viol to put this precious Liquor in. But there being
none to be got, the Innkeeper presented him with an old earthen Jug, and Don
Quixote was forced to be contented with that. Then he mumbled over the Pot
above fourscore Pater-noster's, and as many Ave-Maria's, Salve-Regina's, and
Creedo's, making the Sign of the Cross at every Word by way of Benediction. At
which Ceremony, Sancho, the Innkeeper, and the Officer were present; for, as
for the Carrier, he was gone to look after his Mules, and took no manner of
Notice of what was past. This blessed Medicine being made, Don Quixote resolved
to make an immediate Experiment of it on himself, and to that purpose he took
off a good Draught of the overplus which his Jug would not hold. But he had
scarce gulp'd it down, when it set him a Vomiting so violently, that you would
have thought he would have cast up his Heart, Liver, and Guts: And his reaching and
straining put him into such a Sweat, that he desired to be covered up warm, and
left to his Repose. With that they left him, and he slept three whole Hours,
and then waking, found himself so wonderfully eased, that he made no question
but he had now the right Balsam of Fierabrass; and therefore he thought he
might safely undertake all the most dangerous Adventures in the World, without
the least hazard of his Person.

Sancho encouraged by the wonderful Effect of the Balsam on his Master, begged
that he would be pleased to give him leave to sip up what was left in the Pot,
which was no small Quantity; and the Don having consented, honest Sancho lifted
it up with both his Hands, and with a strong Faith, and better Will, poured
every drop down his Throat. Now the Man's Stomach not being so nice as his
Master's, the Drench did not set him a Vomiting after that manner; but caused
such a wambling in his Stomach, such a bitter loathing, kecking and reaching,
and such grinding Pangs, with cold Sweats and Swoonings, that he verily
believed his last Hour was come, and in the midst of his Agony gave both the
Balsam and him that made it to the Devil. Friend, said Don Quixote, seeing him
in that sad Condition, I begin to think all this Pain befalls thee only because
thou have not received the Order of Knighthood; for it is my Opinion, this
Balsam ought to be used by no Man that is not a professed Knight. What a plague
did you mean then, by letting me drink it, quoth Sancho? A Murrain on me and
all my Generation, why did you not tell me this before? At length the Dose
began to Work to some purpose, and forced its way at both Ends, so copiously,
that both his Bed-Mat and Coverlet were soon made unfit for any further use;
and all the while he strained so hard, that not only himself but the
standers-by thought he would have died. This dreadful Hurricane lasted about
two Hours; and then too, instead of finding himself as free from Pain as his
Master, he felt himself so feeble and so far spent, that he was not able to
stand.

But Don Quixote, as we have said, found himself in an excellent Temper; and his
active Soul loathing an inglorious Repose, he presently was impatient to depart
to perform the Duties of his adventurous Profession. For he thought those
Moments that were trifled away in Amusements or other Concerns, only a Blank in
Life; and all Delays, a depriving distressed Persons, and the World in general,
of his needed Assistance. The Confidence which he reposed in his Balsam,
heightened if possible his Resolution; and thus carried away by his eager
Thoughts, he sadled Rozinante himself, and then put the Panel upon the Ass,
and his Squire upon the Panel, after he had helped him to huddle on his
Cloths. That done he mounted his Steed, and having spied a Javelin that stood
in a Corner, he siez'd and appropriated it to himself to supply the want of his
Lance; above twenty People that were in the Inn stood Spectators of all these
Transactions, and among the rest the Inn-keeper's Daughter, from whom Don
Quixote had not Power to withdraw his Eyes; breathing out at every Glance a
deep Sigh from the very bottom of his Heart; which those who had seen him so
mortified the Night before, took to proceed from the Pain of his Bruises.

And now being ready to set forwards, he called for the Master of the House,
and with a grave Delivery, my Lord Governor, cried he, the Favors I have
received in your Castle are so great and extraordinary, that they bind my
grateful Soul to an eternal Acknowledgment. Therefore that I may be so happy as
to discharge part of the Obligation, think if there be e're a proud Mortal
Breathing, on whom you desire to be revenged for some Affront or other Injury;
and acquaint me with it now, and by my Order of Knighthood, which binds me to
protect the Weak, relieve the Oppressed, and punish the Bad, I promise you I Will
take effectual Care that you shall have ample Satisfaction, to the utmost of
your Wishes. Sir Knight, answered the Innkeeper with as austere a Gravity, I
shall not need your assistance to revenge any Wrong that may have been offered
to my Person; for I would have you to understand, that I am able to do my self
Justice when ever any Man presumes to do me Wrong. Therefore all the
Satisfaction I desire, is, That you would pay your Reckoning for Horse-Meat and
Man's-Meat, and all your Expenses in my Inn. How! cried Don Quixote, is this an
Inn? Yes, answered the Host, and one of the most noted and of the best Repute
upon the Road. How strangly have I been mistaken then, cried Don Quixote! Upon
my Honor I took it for a Castle, and a considerable one too. But if it be an
Inn, and not a Castle, all I have to say, is, That you must excuse me from
paying any Thing; for I would by no means break the Laws which we
Knights-Errant are bound to observe. Nor was it ever known that they ever paid
in any Inn whatsoever. For this is the least Recompense that can be allowed 'em
for the intolerable Labors they endure Day and Night, Winter and Summer, of
Foot and of Horseback, pinched with Hunger, choked with Thirst, and exposed to
all the Injuries of the Air, and all the Inconveniences in the World. I Have
nothing to do with all this, cried the Inn keeper, pay your Reckoning, and
don't trouble me with your foolish Stories of a Cock and a Bull: I cannot afford
to keep House at that Rate. Thou art both a Fool and a Knave of an Innkeeper,
replied Don Quixote. And with that, clapping Spurs to Rosinante, and
brandishing his Javelin at his Host, he rode out of the Inn, without any
Opposition, and got a good way from it without so much as once looking behind
him to see whether his Squire came after him.

The Knight having thus gloriously Bilk'd his Lodging, and Bully'd the
Innkeeper out of his Reckoning, the Master being marched off, there remained
only the Man, who being as it were left in Pawn, would gladly have sheer'd off
too; but not being so lucky in giving his Host the slip, he was fairly stopped
for the Reckoning. However he swore bloodily he would not pay a Cross; for, the
self same Law that acquitted the Knight acquitted the Squire. This put the
Innkeeper into a great Passion, and made him threaten Sancho very hard,
telling him if he would not pay him by fair Means, he would have him laid by
the Heels that Moment. But Sancho swore by his Master's Knighthood, he would
sooner part with his Life than his Money on such an Account; nor should the
Squires in after-Ages ever have occasion to upbraid him with giving so ill a
Precedent, or breaking their Rights. But as ill Luck would have it, there
happened to be in the Inn four Segovia Clothiers, three Cordoua Point-makers,
and two Sevil Hucksters, all brisk, gamesome, arch Fellows; who agreeing all in
the same Design, encompassed Sancho, and pulled him off his Ass, while one of
'em went to get a Blanket. Then they put the unfortunate Squire into it, and
carried him into the Back-yard, where they tossed him in the Air for several
times together in the Blanket, as they do Dogs on Shrove-Tuseday in Spain. Poor
Sancho made so grievous an Outcry all the while, that his Master heard him; and
imagined those Lamentations were of some Person in Distress, and consequently
the occasion of some Adventure; but having at last distinguished the Voice, he
made to the Inn with a broken Gallop, and finding the Gates shut, he rode about
to see whether he might not find some other way to get in. But he no sooner
came to the Back-Yard-Wall, which was none of the highest, when he was an Eye
Witness of the scurvy Trick that was put upon his Squire. There he saw him
ascend and descend, and frolic and caper in the Air with so much Nimbleness
and Agility, that it is thought, the Knight himself could not have forborne
Laughing, had he been any thing less Angry. He did his best to get over the
Wall, but alas he was so bruised, that he could not so much as alight from his
Horse. This made him fume and chafe, and vent his Passion in a thousand Threats
and Curses, so strange and various, that it is impossible to repeat 'em. But the
more he Stormed, the more they Tossed and Laughed; Sancho on his side Begging,
and Howling, and Threatening, and Damning, to as little purpose as his Master;
for 'twas Weariness alone could make the Tossers give over. Then they
charitably put an end to his high Dancing, and set him upon his Ass again
carefully, wrapped in his Mantle. But Maritornes's tender Soul made her Pity a
Male Creature, in such Tribulation, and thinking he had danced and tumbled
enough to be a Dry, she was so generous as to help him to a Draught of Water,
which she purposely drew from the Well that Moment, that it might be the
cooler. Sancho clapped the Pot to his Mouth, but his Master made him desist;
hold, hold, cried he, Son Sancho, Drink no Water Child; 'twill kill thee.
Behold, I have here the most Holy Balsam, two Drops of which will cure thee
effectually. Ha, (replied Sancho, shaking his Head and looking sowerly on the
Knight with a side Face) Have you again forgot that I Am no Knight? Or would you
have me cast up the few Guts I Have left since yesternights Job? Keep your
Brewings for your self in the Devil's Name, and let me alone. With that he
lifted the Jug to his Nose, but finding it to be mere Element, he spirted out
again the little he had tasted, and desired the Wench to help him to some
better Liquor. So she went and fetched him Wine to make him amends, and paid
for it too out of her own Pocket; for to give the Devil his Due, 'twas said of
her, that tho she was somewhat too free of her Favors, yet she had something
of Christianity in her. As soon as Sancho had tipp'd off his Wine, he visited
his Asses Ribbs Twice or Thrice with his Heels, and free Egress being granted
him, he troop'd off, mightily tickled with the Thoughts of having had his Ends,
and got off shot-free, tho at the Expense of his Shoulders, his usual Sureties:
It Is true, the Innkeeper kept his Wallet for the Reckoning; but the poor
Squire was so dismayed, and in such haste to be gone, that he never missed it.
The Host was for shutting the Inn Doors after him, for fear of the Worst; but
the Tossers would not let him, being a sort of Fellows that would not have
mattered Don Quixote a Straw, tho he had really been one of the Knights of the
Round-Table.

CHAP. IV. Of the Discourse between the Knight and the Squire, with other
Matters worth relating.
SAncho overtook his Master, but so pale, so dead-hearted, and so mortified,
that he was hardly able to sit his Ass. My dear Sancho, said Don Quixote seeing
him in that Condition, I am now fully convinced, that this Castle or Inn is
enchanted: For, what could they be that made themselves such barbarous Sport
with Thee, but Spirits, and People of the other World? And I the rather believe
this, seeing, that when I looked over the Wall and saw thee thus abused, I
strove to get over it, but could not For, nor by any means alight from
Rozinante. For, by my Honor, could I either have got over the Wall or
dismounted, I would have revenged thee so effectually on those discourteous
Wretches, that they should never have forgot the Severity of their Punishment,
though for once I had ^nfring'd the Laws of Chivalry, which, as I have often
informed thee, do not permit any Knight to ^ay Hands on one that is not
Knighted, unless ^t be in his own Defense, and in case of great Necessity. Nay,
quoth Sancho, I would have ^ay'd 'em home my self, whether Knight or no Knight,
but 'twas not in my Power; and yet I ^are say, those that played at Shuttlecock
with my Carcass were neither Spirits nor enchanted Folks, as you have it, but
mere Flesh and Blood as we be; I Am sure they called one another by their
Christian Names and Sirnames, while they made me vault and frisk in the Air;
one was called Pedro Martinez, the other Tenorio Hernandez; and as for our Dog of
a Host, I heard 'em call him Juan Palomeque the Left Handed. Then pray don't
you fancy, that your not being able to get over the Wall nor to alight was some
Enchanter's Trick. It Is a Folly to make many Words, it is as plain as the Nose
in a Man's Face that these same Adventures which we hunt for up and down, are
like to bring us at last into a Peck of Troubles, and such a plaguey deal of
Mischief, that we shall not be able to set one Foot before the other. The short and
the long is, I take it to be our wisest Course to jog home, and look after our
Harvest, lest we leap out of the Drying Pan into the Fire, or out of God's
Blessing into the warm Sun. Poor Sancho, cried Don Quixote! how ignorant thou
art in Matters of Chivalry! Come, say no more, and have patience: A Day will
come when thou shall be convinced how honorable a Thing it is to follow this
Employment. For tell me, what Satisfaction in this World, what Pleasure, can
equal that of vanquishing and triumphing over one's Enemy? None without Doubt.
It may be so, for ought I know, quoth Sancho; though I know nothing of the
Matter. However this I may venture to say, that ever since we are turned
Knights-errant, (your Worship I mean, for it is not for such Scrubs as my self
to be named the same Day with such Folk) the Devil of any Fight you have had the
better of, unless it be that with the Biscayan, and in that too, (Heaven help
your Head) you came off with the loss of one Ear and the Vizor of your Helmet.
And what have we got ever since pray but Bastinadoes, Kicks, and Thumps; Kicks,
Thumps, and Bastinadoes; and Thumps, Bastinadoes, and Kicks; Blows and more
Blows, Bruises and more Bruises? Besides this tossing in a Blanket which fell
all to my Share, and for which I cannot be revenged, because they were
Hobgoblins that served me so forsooth, though I hugely long to be even with 'em,
that I may know the Pleasure you say there is in vanquishing one's Enemy. I
find Sancho, cried Don Quixote, thou and I are both sick of the same Disease.
But I will endeavor with all speed to get me a Sword made with so much Art,
that no sort of Enchantment shall be able to hurt whosoever shall wear it; and
perhaps Fortune may put into my Hands that which Amadis de Gaul wore when he
styled himself, The Knight of the burning Sword, which was one of the best
Blades that ever was drawn by Knight; for besides the Virtue I now mentioned,
it had an Edge like a Razor, and would enter the strongest Armor that ever was
tempered, or enchanted. I Will lay any Thing, quoth Sancho, when you have found
this Sword, 'twill prove just such another help to me as your Balsam; that is
to say, 'twill stand no Body in any stead but your Dubbed Knights, let the poor
Devil of a Squire shift how he can. Fear no such Thing, replied Don Quixote;
Heaven will be more propitious to thee than thou imaginest.

Thus they went on Discoursing, when Don Quixote, perceiving a thick Cloud of
Dust arise right before 'em in the Road, The Day is come, cried he, turning to
his Squire, the Day is come, Sancho, that shall usher in the Happiness which
Fortune has reserved for me. This Day shall the Strength of my Arm be
signalized by such Exploits as shall be transmitted even to the latest
Posterity. See thou that Cloud of Dust, Sancho? It is raised by a prodigious
Army marching this way, and composed of an infinite number of Nations. Why
then, at this Rate, quoth Sancho, there should be two Armies; for yonder is as
great a Dust on the other side. With that Don Quixote looked, and was transported
with Joy at the Sight, firmly believing that two vast Armies were ready to
engage each other in that Plain: For his Imagination was so crowded with those
Battles, Enchantments, surprising Adventures, amorous Thoughts, and other
Whimsies, which he had read of in Romances, that his strong Fancy changed every
Thing he saw into what he desired to see; and thus he could not conceive that
the Dust was only raised by two large Flocks of Sheep that were moving in two
different Roads in that spacious Plain, and could not be discerned till they
were very near. He was so positive that they were two Armies, that Sancho
firmly believed him at last. Well, Sir, quoth the Squire, what are we to do, I
beseech you? What should we do, replied Don Quixote, but assist the weaker and
the injured Side? For know, Sancho, that the Army which now moves toward us is
commanded by the great Alifanfaron, Emperor of the vast Island of Taprobana The
other that advances behind us is his Enemy the King of the Garamantians,
Pentapolin with the naked Arm, so called because he always ^^ghts with his Arm
bate. Pray Sir, quoth Sancho why are these two great Men going together by the
Ears? The occasion of their Quarrel is this, answered Don Quixote: Alifanfaron,
a strong Pagan, is in Love with Pentapolin's Daughter, a very beautiful Lady
and a Christian: Now her Father refuses to give her in Marriage to the Heathen
Prince, unless he abjure his false Belief, and embrace the Christian Religion.
Burn my Beard, cried Sancho, if Pentapolin ben't in the right on it. I Will stand
by him, and help him all I may. I commend thy Resolution, replied Don Quixote;
it is not only lawful but requisite; for there is no need of being a Knight to
fight in such Battles. I guessed as much, quoth Sancho: But where shall we
leave my Ass in the mean time, that I may be sure to find him again after the
Battle? For I fancy you never heard of any Man that ever charged upon such a
Beast. It Is true, answered Don Quixote; and therefore I would have thee turn
him loose, though thou were sure never to find him again; for we shall have so
many Horses after we have got the Day, that even Rozinante himself will be in
Danger of being changed for another. Then mounting to the Top of a Hillock,
whence they might have seen both the Flocks had not the Dust obstructed their
Sight, Look yonder, Sancho, cried Don Quixote! that Knight whom thou see in
the gilded Arms, bearing in his Shield a Crowned Lion couchant at the Feet of a
Lady, is the valiant Laurcalco Lord of the Silver Bridge. He in the Armor
powdered with Flowers of Gold, bearing three Crowns Argent in a Field Azure is
the formidable Micocolembo Great Duke of Quirocia. That other of a Gigantick
Size, that marches on his Right, is the undaunted Brandabarbaran of Boliche,
Sovereign of the three Arabia's; he is arrayed in Serpents-skin, and carries
instead of a Shield, a huge Gate which they say belonged to the Temple which
Sampson pulled down at his Death, when he revenged himself upon his Enemies.
But cast thy Eyes on this side, Sancho, and at the Head of the other Army see the
ever victorious Timonel of Carcaiona, Prince of New Biscay, whose Armor is
quartered Azure, V^rt, Or, and Argent, and who bears in his Shield a Cat Or, in
a Field Gules, with these four Letters, MIAV, for a Motto, being the beginning
of his Mistresse's Name, the beautiful Miaulina, Daughter to Alpheniquen, Duke
of Algarva. That other monstrous Load upon the Back of yonder wild Horse, with
Arms as white as Snow, and a Shield without any Device, is a new-created
Knight, called Pierre Papin, Baron of Vtrick in France. He, whom you see
pricking that py'd Courser's Flanks with his armed Heels, is the mighty Duke of
Nervia, Espartasilardo of the Wood, bearing in his Shield a Field Vert,
Powdered with Asparagus, and a Harrow for his Device, with this Motto, So
trails my Fortune.
Rastrea mi Suerte. And thus he went on, naming a great number of others in
both Armies, to every one of whom his fertile Imagination assigned Arms,
Colors, Impresses and Motto's, as readily as if they had really been that
moment extant before his Eyes. And then proceeding without the least
Hesitation, That vast Body, said he, that is just opposite to us, is composed of
several Nations. There you see those who drink the pleasant Stream of the
famous Xanthus. There the Mountaineers that Till the Massilian Fields. Those
that sift the pure Gold of Arabia Foelix. Those that inhabit the renowned and
delightful Banks of Thermodoon. Yonder, those who so many ways sluice and drain
the Golden Pactolus for its precious Sand. The Numidians, unsteady, and
careless of their Promises. The Persians, excellent Archers. The Medes and
Parthians, who make their Flight a War. The Arabs, who have no fixed
Habitations. The Scythians, Cruel and Savage, though fair Complection'd. The
sooty Ethiopians, that bore their Lips; and a thousand other Nations whose
Countenances I know, though I have forgot their Names. On the other side come
those whose Country is watered with the Crystal Stream of Betis, shaded with
Olive Trees. Those who Bathe their Limbs in the rich Flood of the Golden Tagus.
Those whose Mansions are lav'd by the profitable Stream of the Divine Genile.
Those who range the Verdant Tartesian Meadows. Those who indulge their
luxurious Temper in the delicious Pastures of Xerez. The wealthy Inhabitants of
the Mancha, crowned with Golden Ears of Corn. The ancient Offspring of the
Goths, immured with Iron. Those who wanton in the Lazy Current of Pisverga.
Those who feed their numerous Flocks in the ample Plains where the Guadiana, so
celebrated for its hidden Course, pursues its wandering Race. Those who shiver
with extremity of Cold on the windy Pyrenean Hills, or on the hoary Tops of the
Snowy Appennine. In a word, all that Europe includes within its spacious
Bounds, half a World in an Army. It Is scarce to be imagined how many Countries
he ran over, how many Nations he enumerated, distinguishing every one by what
is peculiar to 'em, with an incredible Vivacity of Mind, and that still in the
puffy Style of his fabulous Books. Sancho listened to all this Romantic
Muster-Roll, as mute as a Fish, with Amazement; all he could do was to stare
with his Goggles, and now and then turn his Jobber-noll, on this side and to
other side, to see if he could discern the Knights and Giants whom his Master
named. But at length not being able to discover any; why, cried he, you had as
good tell me it Snows; the Devil of any Knight, Giant, or Man can I see, of all
those you talk of now; who knows but all this may be Witchcraft and Spirits,
like Yester-night! How, replied Don Quixote! Do thou not hear their Horses
neigh, their Trumpets sound, and the Drums beat? Not I, quoth Sancho. I prick
up my Ears like a Sow in the Beans, and yet I can hear nothing but the Bleating
of Sheep. Sancho might justly say so indeed, for by this time the two Flocks
were got very near 'em. Thy Fears disturb thy Senses, said Don Quixote, and
hinder thee from seeing or hearing right. But it is no matter; withdraw to some
place of Safety, since thou art so terrified; for I alone am sufficient to give
the Victory to that side which I shall favor with my Assistance. With that, he
couched his Lance, clapped Spurs to Rozinante, and rushed like a Thunderbolt
from the Hillock into the Plain. Sancho baul'd after him as loved as he could;
hold, Sir, cried he; for Heaven's sake come back. What d' you mean? As sure as
I Am a Sinner, those you're going to maul are nothing but poor harmless Sheep.
Come back, I say. Woe be to him that begot me! Are you mad, Sir? There are no
Giants, no Knights, no Cats, no Asparagus Gardens, no Golden Quarters, nor what
do you call 'ems. Does the Devil possess you? You're leaping over the Don Quixots
Encounter with the Flock of Sheep. V. 1. Page 176
Hedge before you come at the Style. You're taking the rong Sow by the Ear. Oh
that ever IN was born to see this Day. But Don Quixote still riding on, deaf
and lost to good Advice, outroar'd his expostulating Squire. Courage, brave
Knights, cried he, march up, fall on, all you who fight under the Standard of
the valiant Pentapolin, with the naked Arm. Follow me, and you shall see how
easily I will revenge him on that Infidel Alifanfaron, of Taprobana; and so
saying, he charged the Squadron of Sheep with that Gallantry and Resolution,
that he pierced, broke and put it to Flight, in an instant, charging through
and through, not without a great Slaughter of his mortal Enemies, whom he laid
at his Feet biting the Ground, and wallowing in their Blood. The Shepherds
seeing their Sheep go to Rack, called out to him; till finding fair Means
ineffectual they unlos'd their Slings, and began to ply him with Stones as big
as their Fists. But the Champion disdaining such a distant War, spite of their
Showers of Stones, rushed among the routed Sheep, trampling both the living and
the slain in a most terrible manner, impatient to meet the General of the
Enemy, and end the War at once. Where, where art thou, cried he, proud
Alifanfaron? Appear! See here a single Knight who seeks thee every where, to
try now, hand to hand, the boasted Force of thy strenuous Arm, and deprive thee
of Life, as a due Punishment for the unjust War which thou have audaciously
waged with the valiant Pentapolin. Just as he had said this, while the Stones
flew about his Ears, one unluckily lit upon his small Ribs, and had like to
have buried two of the shortest deep in the middle of his Body. The Knight
thought himself slain, or at least desperately wounded; and therefore calling
to mind his precious Balsam, and pulling out his earthen Jug, he clapped it to
his Mouth: But before he had swallowed a sufficient Dose, souse comes another
of St. Stephen's hard Loaves that spoiled his Draught, and hit him so pat upon
the Jug, Hand and Teeth, that it broke and struck off the first, maimed the
second, and pulled out three or four of the last. These two Blows were so
violent, that the boisterous Knight falling from his Horse, lay upon the Ground
as quiet as the slain; so that the Sheperds fearing he was killed, got their
Flock together with all speed, and carrying away their Dead, which were no less
than seven Sheep, they made what haste they could out of Harm's way, without
looking any farther into the Matter.

All this while, Sancho stood upon the Hill, where he was mortified upon the
light of this brave Adventure. There he stamped and swore, and bann'd his
Master to the bottomless Pit; he tore his Beard for madness, and cursed the
Moment he first knew him. But seeing him at last knocked down, and settled, the
Shepherds being scamper'd, he thought he might venture to come down; and found
him in very ill Plight, though not altogether senseless. Ah Master, quoth he,
this comes of not taking my Counsel. Did not I tell you 'twas a Flock of Sheep,
and no Army? Friend Sancho, replied Don Quixote, know, it is an easy matter for
Negromancers to change the Shapes of Things as they please: Thus that malicious
Enchanter, who is my inveterate Enemy, to deprive me of the Glory which he saw
me ready to acquire, while I was Reaping a full Harvest of Laurels, transformed
in a Moment the routed Squadrons into Sheep. If thou will not believe me,
Sancho, yet do one thing for my sake; do but take thy Ass, and follow those
supposed Sheep at a distance, and I dare engage thou shall soon see 'em resume
their former Shapes, and appear such as I described em. But stay, do not go
yet, for I want thy Assistance: Draw near, and see how many Cheek-Teeth and
others I want, for by the dreadful Pain in my Jaws and Gums, I fear there is a
total Dilapidation in my Mouth. With that, the Knight opened his Mouth as wide
as he could, while the Squire gaped to tell his Grinders, with his Snowt almost
in his Chaps; but just in that fatal Moment the Balsam that lay wambling and
fretting in Don Quixote's Stomach, came up with an unlucky Hickup; and, with
the same violence that the Powder flies out of a Gun, all that he had in his
Stomach, discharged it self upon the Beard, Face, Eyes, and Mouth of the
officious Squire. Oh holy Mother Mary, cried poor Sancho, what w^ll become of
me! My Master is a dead Man; he is Vomitting his very Heart's Blood. But he had
hardly said this, when the Color, Smell and Taste soon undeceived him; and
finding it to be his Master's loathsome Drench, it turned his queasie Stomach,
and caused such a sudden Rumbling in his Maw, that before he could turn his
Head he unladed the whole Cargo of his Gizard, full in his Master's Face, and
put him in as delicate a Pickle as he was himself. Sancho having thus paid him
in his own Coin half blinded as he was, ran to his Ass, to take out something
to clean himself and his Master. But when he came to look for his Wallet, and
found it missing, not remembering till then that he had unhappily left it in the
Inn; oh then he was ready to run quite out of his Wits; he stormed and stamped,
and cursed himself worse than before, and resolved with himself to let his
Master go to the Devil, and even trudge home by himself, though he were sure to
lose his Wages, and his hopes of being Governor of the promised Island.

Thereupon Don Quixote got up with much ado, and clapping his left hand before
his Mouth, that the rest of his loose Teeth might not drop out; he laid his
right on Rozinante's Bridle; (for such was the good Nature of the Creature,
that he had not budg'd a Foot from his Master) then he crept along to Squire
Sancho, that stood lolling on his Asse's Panel, with his Fa^e in the hollow of
both his hands, in a doleful moody melancholic Fit. Friend Sancho. said he,
seeing him thus abandoned to Sorrow, learn of me, that one Man is no more than
another, if he do no more than what another does. All these Storms and
Hurricanes are but Arguments of the approaching Calm; better Success will soon
follow our past Calamities; good and bad Fortune h^ve their Vicissitudes; and
it is a Maxim, That nothing violent can last long. And therefore we may well
prom^se our selves a speedy Change in our Fortune, since our Afflictions have
extended their Reign beyond the usual stint: Besides, thou oughtst not to
afflict thy self so much for Misfortunes, of which thou have no share, but what
Friendship and Humanity bid thee take. How, quoth Sancho? Have I no other share
in 'em? Was not he that was tossed in the Blanket this Morning, the Son of my
Father? And did not the Wallet, and all that was in it, which I have lost,
belong to the Son of my Mother? How, asked Don Quixot, have thou lost the
Wallet? I don't know, quoth Sancho, Whether it is lost or no, but I Am sure I
cannot tell what is become of it. Nay then replied Don Quixote, I find we must
Fast to Day. Ay marry must we, quoth Sancho, unless you take Care to gather in
these Fields some of those Roots and Herbs which I Have heard you say, you know,
and which use to help such unlucky Knights-Errant as your self at a dead Lift.
For all that, cried Don Quixote, I would rather have at this Time a good
Luncheon of Bread, or a Cake and two Pilchards Heads, than all the Roots and
Simples in Dioscorides's Herbal, and Doctor Laguna's Supplement and Commentary;
I pray thee therefore get upon thy Ass, good Sancho, and follow me once more;
for God's Providence that relieves every Creature will not fail us, especially
since we are about a Work so much to his Service: Thou see he even provides
for the little flying Insects in the Air, the Wormlings in the Earth, and the
Spawnlings in the Water, and in his infinite Mercy he makes his Sun shine on
the Righteous, and on the Unjust, and rains upon the Good and the Bad. Many
Words will not fill a Bushel, quoth Sancho, interrupting him; you would make a
better Preacher, than a Knight Errant, or I Am plaguily out. Knights-Errant,
replied Don Quixote, ought to know all Things; There have been such in former
Ages that have delivered as ingenious and learned a Sermon or Oration at the
Head of an Army, as if they had taken their Degrees at the University of Paris:
From which we may infer, that the Lance never dulled the Pen, nor the Pen the
Lance. Well then, quoth Sancho, for once let it be as you would have it; let us
even leave this unlucky Place, and seek out a Lodging; where, I pray God, there
may be neither Blankets, nor Blanket-heavers, nor Hobgoblins, nor Enchanted
Moors; for before I Will be hampered as I Have been, may I be Cursed with Bell,
Book and Candle, if I don't give the Trade to the Devil. Leave all Things to
Providence, replied Don Quixote, and for once lead which way thou pleases, for
I leave it wholly to thy Discretion to provide us a Lodging. But first I pray
thee, feel a little how many Teeth I want in my upper Jaw on the right side,
for there I feel most Pain. With that Sancho feeling with his Finger in the
Knight's Mouth, pray Sir, quoth he, How many Grinders did your Worship use to
have on that side? Four, answered Don Quixote, besides the Eye-Tooth, all of
'em whole and sound. Think well on what you say, cried Sancho. I say Four,
replied Don Quixote, if there were not Five, for I had never lost a Tooth
before this Day. Bless me, quoth Sancho! Why, you have in this nether Jaw on
this side but two Grinders and a Stump; and in that part of your upper Jaw,
just never a Stump, and never a Grinder, alas all is levelled there, as smooth
as the Palm of one's Hand. Oh unfortunate Don Quixote, cried the Knight! I had
rather have lost an Arm, so it were not my Sword Arm; for a Mouth without
Cheek-Teeth, is like a Mill without a Millstone, Sancho; and every Tooth in a
Man's Head is more valuable than a Diamond. But we that profess this strict
Order of Knight-Errantry, are all subject to these Calamities; and therefore
since the Loss is irretrievable, mount, my trusty Sancho, and go thy own Pace;
I Will follow thee. Sancho obeyed, and led the way, still keeping the Road they
were in, which being very much beaten, promised to bring him soonest to a
Lodging. Thus pacing along very softly, for Don Quixote's Gums and Ribs would
not suffer him to go faster, Sancho to divert his uneasy Thoughts, resolved to
talk to him all the while of one thing or other, as the next Chapter will
inform you.

CHAP. V. Of the wise Discourse between Sancho and his Master; as also of the
Adventure of the dead Corpse, and other famous Occurrences.
NOW, Sir, quoth Sancho, I cannot help thinking but that all the Mishaps that
have befallen us of late, are a just Judgment for the grievous Sin you have
committed against the Order of Knighthood, in not keeping the Oath you Swore,
not to eat Bread at Board, nor to have a merry Bout with the Queen, and the
Lord knows what more, till you had won What do you call him's Helmet, Member I
think you named him. Truly, answered Don Quixote, you are much in the right,
Sancho: And to deal Ingenuously with thee, I had wholly forgot that; and now
thou may certainly assure thy self, thou were tossed in a Blanket for not
remembering to put me in Mind of it. However, I will take care to make due
Atonement, for Knight-Errantry has ways to conciliate all sorts of Matters.
Why, quoth Sancho, did I ever Swear to Mind you of your Vow? It Is nothing to
the Purpose, replied Don Quixote, whether thou Swor'st or no. Let it suffice,
that I think thou art not very clear from being accessory to the Breach of my
Vow; and therefore, to prevent the worst, there will be no harm in providing a
Remedy. Hark you then, cried Sancho; Be sure you don't forget your Atonement,
as you did your Oath, lest those confounded Hobthrushes come and mawl me, and
per'anture you too, for being stubborn Sinners.

Insensibly Night overtook 'em before they could discover any Lodging; and
which was worse, they were almost Hunger-starved, all their Provision being in
the Wallet which Sancho had unluckily left behind; and to complete their
Distress, there happened to 'em an Adventure, or something that really looked
like one.

While our benighted Travelers went on dolefully in the Dark, the Knight very
Hungry, and the Squire very sharp set, what should they see moving toward 'em
but a great number of Lights, that appeared like so many wandering Stars. At
this strange Apparition, down sunk Sancho's Heart at once, and even Don Quixote
himself was not without some Symptoms of Surprise. Presently the one pulled to
him his Asse's Halter, the other his Horse's Bridle, and both made a stop. They
soon perceived that the Lights made directly toward 'em, and the nearer they
came, the bigger they appeared. At the terrible Wonder, Sancho shook and
shivered every Jo'nt, like one in a Palsy, and Don Quixote's Hair stood up an
end; however, heroically shaking off the Amazement, which that sight stamped on
his Soul, Sancho, said he, this must doubtless be a great and most perilous
Adventure, where I shall have occasion to exert the whole stock of my Courage
and Strength. Woe's me, quoth Sancho, should this happen to be another
Adventure of enchanted Ghosts, as I fear me it is, where shall we find Ribs to
endure it? Come all the Fiends in Hell, cried Don Quixote, I will not suffer
'em to touch a Hair of thy Head; if they insulted thee lately; know there was
then between them and me a Wall, over which I could not climb; but now we are
in the open Field, where I shall have Liberty to make use of my Sword. Ay,
quoth Sancho, you may Talk, but should they bewitch you as they did before,
What a Devil will it avail us to be in the open Field? Come, Sancho, replied
Don Quixote, be of good Cheer; the Event will soon convince thee of the
greatness of my Valor. Needs must when the Devil Drives, quoth Sancho, I Will do
my best; with that they rode somewhat out of the way, and gazing earnestly
again at the Lights, they soon discovered a great number of Persons all in
White. At the dreadful Sight, all Poor Sancho's shuffling Courage basely
deserted him; his Teeth began to Chatter, as if he d been in an Ague-Fit; and
as the Objects grew nearer, his Chattering increased. And now they could
plainly distinguish about twenty Men on Horseback, all in White, with Torches
in their Hands, follow d by a Hearse covered over with Black, and six Men in
deep Mourning, whose Mules were also in Black, down to their very Heels. Those
in White moved slowly, murmuring from their Lips something in a low and
lamentable Tone. This dismal Spectacle at such a Time of Night, in the midst of
such a vast Solitude, was enough to have Shipwrack'd the Courage of a Stouter
Squire than Sancho, and even of his Master, had he been any other than Don
Quixote. But his Brainsick Imagination suggesting to him that this was one of
those Adventures, of which he had so often read in his Books of Chivalry; the
Hearse appear d to him to be a Litter, where, as he believed, lay the Body of
some Knight, either slain or dangerously wounded, the Revenge of whose
Misfortunes was reserved for his prevailing Arm. And so without any more ado,
couching his Lance, and seating himself firm in his Saddle, he posted himself
in the middle of the Road, where the Company were to pass. As soon as they came
near, Stand, cried he to 'em in a haughty Tone, whoever ye be, and tell me who
ye are, whence ye come, whither ye go, and what you carry in that Litter? For
there is all the reason in the World to believe, that you have either done or
received a great deal of Harm, and it is requisite I should be informed of the
Matter, in order, either to punish you for the Ill you have committed, or else
to revenge you of the Wrong you have suffered. Sir, answered one of the Men in
white, we are in haste, the Inn is very far off, and we cannot stay to answer
so many Questions; and with that spurring his Mule he moved forwards. But Don
Quixote, highly dissatisfied with the Reply, laid hold on the Mule's Bridle,
and stopped him. Stay, cried he, proud discourteous Knight, mend your Behavior,
and give me instantly an Account of what I asked of ye; or here I defy ye all
to mortal Combat. Now the Mule that was shy and skittish, being thus rudely
seized by the Bridle, was presently scared, and rising up on her hinder Legs,
threw her Rider to the Ground. Upon this one of the Footmen that belonged to
the Company gave Don Quixote ill Language, which so incensed him, that being
resolved to be revenged upon 'em all, in a mighty Rage he flew at the next he
met, who happened to be one of the Mourners. Him he threw to the Ground very
much hurt; and then turning to the rest with a wonderful Agility, he fell upon
'em with such a Fury, that he presently put 'em all to Flight; you would have
thought Rozinante had Wings at that Time, so active and so fierce he then
approved himself.

It was not indeed for Men unarmed and naturally fearful to maintain the Field
against such an Enemy, no wonder then if the Gentlemen in White were
immediately dispersed; some ran one way, some another, crossing the Plain with
their lighted Torches, you would now have taken 'em for a parcel of Frolicksome
Masqueraders gamboling and scouring on a Carnaval-Night. As for the Mourners,
they, poor Men, were so muffled up in their long combersome Clokes, that not
being able to make their Party good, nor defend themselves, they were presently
routed, and ran away like the rest: The rather for that they thought 'twas no
mortal Creature, but the Devil himself that was come to fetch away the dead
Body, which they were accompanying to the Grave. All the while Sancho was lost
in Admiration and Astonishment, charmed with the Sight of his Master's Valor,
and now concluded him to be the formidable Champion he boasted himself.

After this the Knight, by the Light of a Torch that lay burning on the Ground,
perceiving the Man who was thrown by his Mule, lying near it, he rode up to
him, and setting his Lance to his Throat, Yield, cried he, and beg thy Life, or
thou dy'st. Alas, Sir, cried the other, what need you ask me to yield? I am not
able to stir; for one of my Legs is broken. And I beseech you, if you're a
Christian, do not kill me; I am in Holy Orders, and a Master of Arts; 'twou'd
be a heinous Sacrilege to take away my Life. What a Devil brought you hither
then, if you're a Clergyman, cried Don Quixote? What else but my ill Fortune,
replied the Supplicant. A worse hovers over thy Head, cried Don Quixote, and
threatens thee, if thou do not answer this moment to every particular
Question I ask. I will, I will, Sir, replied the other; and first I must beg
your Pardon for saying I was a Master of Arts; for I have yet taken but
Batchelor's Degree: My Name's Alonso Lopez, I Am of Alcovendas, and came now
from the Town of Baeca with eleven other Clergymen, the same that now ran away
with the Torches. We were going to Segovia to bury the Corpse of a Gentleman of
that Town who died at Baeca, and lies now in yonder Hearse. And who killed him,
asked Don Quixote? Heaven, with a Pestilential Fever, answered the other. If it
be so, said Don Quixote. I am discharged of revenging his Death. Since Heaven
did it, there is no more to be said; had it been its Pleasure to have taken me
off so, I too must have submitted as I do. All I have now to tell you, Reverend
Sir, is that I am a Knight of La Mancha, my Name Don Quixote; my Employment is
to visit all Parts of the World in quest of Adventures, to right and relieve
injured Innocence, and punish Oppression. Truly, Sir, replied the inferior
Levite, I don't understand how you can call that to right and relieve Men, when
you break their Legs: You Have made that crooked that was right and strait
before, and Heaven knows whether it can ever be set right as long as I live:
Instead of relieving the Injured, I fear you have now injured me past Relief; and
while you seek Adventures, you have made me meet with a very great Misadventure.
All Things, replied Don Quixote, are not blessed alike with a prosperous Event,
good Mr. Bachelor. You should have taken Care not to have thus gone a
Processioning in these Desolate Plains, at this suspicious Time of Night, with
your white Surplices, burning Torches, and Sable Weeds, like Ghosts and Goblins
that went about to scare People out of their Wits. For I could not omit doing
the Duty of my Profession; nor would I have forborne attacking you, though you had
really been all Lucifer's infernal Crew; for such I took you to be, and till
this moment could have no better Opinion of you. Well, Sir, said the Bachelor,
since it is my hard Fortune, I must only desire you, as you're a Knight Errant
and a Reliever of the Oppressed, to help me to get from under my Mule; for it
lies so heavy on me that I cannot get my Foot out of the Stirrup Why did not you
acquaint me sooner with your Grievance, cried Don Quixote? I might have talked
on till to Morrow Morning and never have thought on it. With that, he called
Sancho, who made no great haste for he was much better employed, rifling a Load
of choice Provision which the Holy Men carried along with 'em on a Sumpter
Mule. He had spread his Coat on the Ground; and having laid on it as much Food
as it would hold, he wrapped it up like a Bag, and laid the precious Booty on his
Ass, and then away he ran to his Master, and helped him to set the Bachelor,
upon his Mule. After which he gave him his Torch, and Don Quixote bid him
follow his Company, and excuse him for his Mistake; though, all Things
considered, he could not avoid doing what he had done. And Sir, quoth Sancho,
if the Gentleman would know who 'twas that so well thresh'd their Jackets, you
may tell 'em, 'twas the famous Don Quixote de la Mancha, otherwise called the
Knight of the Woeful Countenance.

When the Bachelor was gone, Don Quixote asked Sancho why he called him the
Knight of the Woeful Countenance? I Will tell you why, quoth Sancho; I have been
staring upon you this pretty while by the Light of that unlucky Priest's Torch,
and may I never stir if ever I sat Eyes on a more Woeful Phiz in my born Days;
and I cannot tell what should be the Cause on it, unless your being tired after
this Fray, or the want of your Worship's Teeth. This is not the Reason, cried
Don Quixote; No, Sancho, I rather conjecture that the Sage who is commissioned
by Fate to register my Achievements, thought it convenient I should assume a
new Appellation as all the Knights of yore. For one was called The Knight of
the Burning Sword; another of the Unicorn; a third of the Phoenix, a fourth the
Knight of the Damsels; another of the Gryphon, and another the Knight of Death.
By which By-names and Distinctions they were known all over the Globe.
Therefore doubtless that Learned Inchanter, my Historian, has inspired thee
with the Thought of giving me that additional Appellation, of the Knight of the
Woeful Countenance. And accordingly I arrogate the Name, and intend
henceforwards to be distinguished by that awful Denomination. And that ^t may
seem the more proper, I will with the first Opportunity have a most Woeful
Countenance painted on my Shield. OF my Word, quoth Sancho, you may even save
the Money; and instead of having a Woeful Face painted, you need do no more but
only show your own: I Am but in Jest, as a Body may say; but, what with the want
of your Teeth, and what with Hunger, you look so queerly and so woefully, that
no Painter can draw you a Face so fit for your purpose as your Worship's. This
merry Conceit of Sancho extorted a Smile from his Master's austere Countenance.
However he persisted in his Resolution about the Name and the Picture; and
after a Pause, a sudden Thought disturbing his Conscience, Sancho, cried he, I
am afraid of being Excommunicated, for having laid violent Hands upon a Man in
Holy Orders: Juxta illud; si quis suadente Diabolo, etc. Can. 7. Distinct. 134.
But yet now I think better on it, I never touched him with my Hands, but only
with my Lance; besides, I did not in the least suspect I had to do with
Priests, whom I honor and revere as every good Catholic and faithful
Christian ought to do; but rather took 'em to be evn Spirits. Well, let the
worst come to the worst, I remember what befell the Cid Ruy-Diaz when he broke
to pieces the Chair of a King's ^mbassador, in the Pope's Presence, for which
he was Excommunicated: Which did not hinder the worthy Rodrigo de Vivar from
behaving himself that Day like a valorous Knight and a Man of Honor.

This said, Don Quixote was for visiting the Hearse, to have seen whether what
was in it were only dead Bones. But Sancho would not let him; Sir, quoth he,
you are come off now with a whole Skin, and much better than you have done
hitherto. Who knows but these same Fellows that are now scamper'd off may
chance to bethink themselves what a shame it is for 'em to have suffered
themselves to be thus routed by a single Man, and so come back and fall upon us
all at once, then we shall have Work enough upon our Hands. The Ass is in good
Case. There Is a Hill not far off, and our Bellies cry Cup-board: Come, let us
even get out of Harms-way, and not let the Plough stand to catch a Mouse, as
the Saying is, To the Grave with the Dead; and them that live, to the Bread.
With that he put on a Dog-Trot with his Ass, and his Master, bethinking himself
that he was in the right, put on after him without replying.

After they had rid a little way, they came to a Valley that lay sculking
between two Hills; there they alighted; and Sancho having opened his Coat and
spread it on the Grass, with the Provision which he had bundled up in it, our
two Adventurers fell on; and their Stomachs being sharpened with the Sauce of
Hunger, they eat their Breakfast, Dinner, Afternoons-Luncheon and Supper, all
at one Time; feasting themselves with variety of cold Meat, which you may be
sure was the best that could be got; the Priests, who had brought it for their
own eating, being like the rest of their Coat, none of the worst Stewards for
their Bellies, and knowing how to make much of themselves.

But now they began to grow sensible of a very great Misfortune, and such a
Misfortune as was bemoaned by poor Sancho as one of the saddest that ever could
befall him. For they found they had not a drop of Wine to wash down their Meat
and quench their Thirst, which now scorched and choakt 'em worse than Hunger
had pinched 'em before. However, Sancho considering they were in a Place where
the Grass was fresh and green, said to his Master -- What you shall find in the
following Chapter.

CHAP. VI. Of a most wonderful Adventure achieved by the valorous Don Quixote
de la Mancha; the like never compassed with less Danger by any of the most
famous Knights in the World.
THE Grass is so fresh (quoth Sancho, half choked with Thirst) that I dare lay
my Life we shall light of some Spring or Stream hereabouts; therefore, Sir,
let us look, I beseech you, that we may quench this confounded Drowth that
plagues our Throats ten times worse than Hunger did our Guts. Thereupon Don
Quixote leading Rozinante by the Bridle, and Sancho his Ass by the Halter,
after he had laid up the Reversion of their Meal, they went feeling about, only
guided by their Guess; for 'twas so dark they scarce could see their Hands.
They had not gone above two hundred Paces before they heard a Noise of a great
Water fall; which was to them the most welcome Sound in the World. But then
listening with great Attention to know on which side the grateful Murmur came,
they on a sudden heard another kind of Noise that strangely allayed the
pleasure of the first, especially in Sancho, who was naturally no Hero, and
sufficiently a Coward. They heard a terrible Din of obstreperous Blows, struck
with Measure, and a more dreadful rattling of Chains and Irons, which together
with the roaring of the Waters, might have filled any other Heart but Don
Quixote's with Terror and Amazement. Add to this the Horrors of dark Night and
Solitude, in an unknown Place, the loud rustling of the Leaves of some lofty
Trees, under which Fortune brought 'em at the same unlucky Moment; and the
whistling of the Wind, which concurred with the other dismaying Sounds; the
fall of the Waters, the thundering Thumps, and the clinking of Chains. The
worst too was, that the Blows were redoubled without ceasing, the Wind blowed
on, and Daylight was far distant. But then it was, that Don Quixote, secured
by Intrepidity his unseparable Companion, mounted his R^zinante, braced his
Shield, brandished his Lance, and showed a Soul unknowing Fear, and Superior to
Danger and Fortune. Know, Sancho, cried he, I was born in this Iron Age, to
restore the Age of Gold, or the Golden Age, as some choose to call it. I am the
Man for whom Fate has reserved the most dangerous and formidable Attempts, the
most stupendous and glorious Adventures, and the most valorous Feats of Arms. I
am the Man who must revive the Order of the Round-Table, the twelve Peers of
France, and the nine Worthies. I am the Man whose ne're-to-be-forgotten
Achievements must efface the Memory of your Platirs, your Tablantes, your
Olivantes, and your Tiranses. Now must your Knights of the Sun, your
Belianis's, and all the numerous Throng of vulgar Heroes, and Knights-Errant of
former Ages, see the Glory of all their most dazzling Actions eclipsed and
darkened by my more illustrious Exploits. Do but observe, O thou my faithful
Squire, what a Multifarious Assemblage of Terrors surrounds us! A horrid
Darkness, a doleful Solitude, a confused rustling of Leaves, a dismal rattling
of Chains, a howling of the Winds, an astonishing noise of Cataracts, that seem
to fall with a boisterous Rapidity, from the steep Mountains of the Moon; a
terrible sound of redoubled Blows, still wounding our Ears like furious
Thunderclaps, and a dead and universal Silence of those Things that might buoy
up the sinking Courage of frail Mortality. In this Extremity of Danger, Mars
himself might tremble with affright. Yet I in the midst of all these
unutterable Alarms, still remain undaunted and unshaken. These are but
Incentives to my Valor, and but animate my Heart the more; it grows too big
and mighty for my Breast, and leaps at the approach of this threatening
Adventure, as formidable as it is like to prove. Come, girt Rozinante
streighter, and then Providence protect thee: Thou may stay for me here; but
if I do not return in three Days, go back to our Village; and from thence, for
my sake, to Toboso, where thou shall say to my incomparable Lady Dulcinea, That
her faithful Knight fell a Sacrifice to Love and Honor, while he attempted
Things that might make him worthy to be called her Adorer.

When Sancho heard his Master talk thus, he fell a weeping in the most pitiful
manner in the World. Pray, Sir, cried he, why will you thus run your self into
Mischief? What need you go about this rueful Misventure? It Is main Dark, and
there is never a living Soul sees us; we have nothing to do but to sheer off,
and get out of Harm's way, though we were not to drink a Drop these three Days.
Who is there to take notice of our Flinching? I Have heard our Parson, whom you
very well know, say in's Pulpit, That he who seeks Danger, perishes therein.
And therefore we should not tempt Heaven, by going about a thing that we cannot
compass but by a Miracle. Is It not enough, think you, that it has preserved you
from being tossed in a Blanket, as I was, and made you come off safe and sound
from among so many Gobblins that went with the dead Man? If all this will not work
upon that hard Heart of yours, do but think of me, and rest your self assured,
that when once you have left your poor Sancho, he will be ready to give up the
Ghost for very Fear, to the next that will come for it: I left my House and
Home, my Wife, Children, and all to follow you, hoping to be the better for it,
and not the worse; but as Covetousness breaks the Jack, so has it broke Me and
my Hopes; for while I thought my self Cock-sure of that unlucky and accursed
Island, which you so often promised me, you mean to drop me here in a strange
Place. Dear Master, don't be so hard hearted; and if you will not be persuaded not
to meddle with this ungracious Adventure, do but put it off till you can see:
It Is but three Hours to Daylight; for, according to my little Skill, the
Muzzle of the lesser Bear is just over our Heads. How can thou see the
Muzzle of the Bear, asked Don Quixote? There Is not a Star to be seen in the
Sky? That Is true, quoth Sancho; but Fear is sharp-sighted, and can see things
under Ground, and much more in the Skies. Let Day come or not come, it is all
one to me, cried the Champion; it shall never be recorded of Don Quixote, that
either Tears or Entreaties could make him neglect the Duty of a Knight. Then,
Sancho, say no more; for Heaven that has inspired me with a Resolution of
attempting this dreadful Adventure, will certainly take Care of me and thee:
Come quickly, girt my Steed, and stay here for me; for you will shortly hear of
me again, either alive or dead.

Sancho finding his Master obstinate, and neither to be moved by Tears nor good
Advice, resolved to try a Trick of Policy to keep him there till Daylight: And
accordingly, while he pretended to fasten the Girts, he slily tied Rozinante's
hinder Legs with his Asse's Halter, without being so much as suspected: So that
when Don Quixote thought to have moved forwards, he found his Horse would not
go a step without leaping, though he spurred him on smartly. Sancho perceiving
his Plot took; look you, Sir, quoth he, Heaven's of my side, and will not let
Rozinante budge a foot forwards; and now if you will still be spurring him, I
dare Pawn my Life 'twill be but striving against the Stream; or, as the Saying
is, But kicking against the Pricks. Don Quixote fretted, and chased, and raved,
and was in a desperate Fury to find his Horse so Stubborn; but at last
observing that the more he spurred and galled his Sides, the more resty he
proved, though unwilling to go, he resolved to have Patience till 'twas Light.
Well, said he, since Rozinante will not leave this Place, I must tarry in it
till the Dawn, though its slowness will cost me some Sighs. You shall not need to
Sigh nor be Melencholy, quoth Sancho, for I Will undertake to tell you Stories
till it be Day, unless your Worship had rather get off of your Horse, and take
a Nap upon the green Grass, as Knights-Errant are wont, that you may be the
fresher and the beterrable in the Morning to go through that monstrous Adventure
that waits for you. What do thou mean with this Alighting and Sleeping,
replied Don Quixote? Think thou I am one of those Carpet-Knights that
abandon themselves to Sleep and lazy Ease, when Danger is at hand? No, Sleep
thou, that a'rt Born to Sleep; or do what thou will. As for my self, I know
what I have to do. Good Sir, quoth Sancho, don't put your self into a Passion,
I meant no such Thing not I: Evil be to them that Evil think. Saying this, he
clapped one of his Hands upon the Pummel of Rozinante's Sadle, and the other upon
the Crupper, and thus he stood embracing his Master's left Thigh, not daring to
budge an Inch, for fear of the Blows that dinn'd continually in his Ears. Don
Quixote then thought fit to claim his Promise, and desired him to tell some of
his Stories to help to pass away the Time. Sir, qouth Sancho, I Am woefully
frighted; and have no Heart to tell Stories, however I Will do my best, and now I
think on it there is one come into my Head, which if I can but hit on it right,
and nothing happen to put me out, is the best Story you ever heard in your
Life: Therefore listen, for I Am going to begin. In the Days of Yore, when it
was as it was, Good betide us all, and Evil to him that Evil seeks. And here,
Sir, you are to take notice that they of old did not begin their Tales with
ordinary Discourse; for it was a saying of a wise Man whom they called Cato
Zonsorin, that said, Evil to him that Evil seeks, which is as Pat for your
purpose, as a Pudding for a Fryer's Mouth; that you may neither meddle nor
make, nor seek Evil and Mischief for the nonce, but rather get out of harm's
way, for no Body forces us to run into the Mouth of all the Devils in Hell that
wait for us yonder, Go on with thy Story, Sancho, cried Don Quixote, and leave
the rest to my Discretion. I say then, quoth Sancho, that in a Country-Town in
Estramadura, there lived a certain Shepherd, Goatherd I should have said. Which
Goatherd, as the Story has it, was called Lope Ruyz, and this Lope Ruyz was in
Love with a Sheperdess, whose name was Toralva, the which Shepherdess whose
name was Toralva, was the Daughter of a wealthy Grazier, and this Grazier -- If
thou go on at this rate, cried Don Quixote, and make so many needless
Repetitions, thou wilt not have told thy Story these two Days. Prithee tell it
concisely, and like a Man of Sense, or let it alone. I tell it you, quoth
Sancho, as all Stories are told in our Country, and I cannot for the Blood of me
tell it any other way, nor is it fit I should alter the Custom. Why then, tell
it how thou will, replied Don Quixote, since my ill Fortune forces me to stay
and hear thee. Well then, Dear Sir of my Soul, quoth Sancho, as I was saying,
this same Shepherd, Goatherd I should have said, was woundily in Love with that
same Shepherdess Toralva, who was a well trussed, round, crummy, strapping
Wench, Coy and Froppish, and somewhat like a Man, for she had a kind of a Beard
on her upper Lip. Methinks I see her now standing before me. Then I suppose
thou knewst her, said Don Quixote. Not I answered Sancho: I nere sat Eyes on
her in my born Days: But he that told me the Story, said, this was so true,
that I might vouch it for a real Truth, and even swear I had seen it all my
self. Well, -- but as you know, Days go and come, and Time and Straw make
Medlars ripe, so it happened that after several Days coming and going, the
Devil who seldom lies Dead in a Ditch, but will have a Finger in every Pie, so
brought it about, that the Shepherd fell out with his Sweetheart, insomuch
that the Love he bore her turned into Dudgeon and ill Will. And the cause was,
by report of some mischievous Tale-Carriers that bare no good Will to either
Party, for that the Shepherd thought her no better than she should be; and
loose in the Hilt and free of her Hips. Thereupon being grievous in the Dumps
about it, and now bitterly hating her, he even resolved to leave that Country
to get out of her Sight: For now, as every Dog has his Day, the Wench
perceiving he came no longer a Suitering to her, but rather tossed his Nose at
her, and shunned her, she began to Love him and dote upon him like any thing,
haunting and following him up and down like a Tanthony-Pig. That Is the Nature
of Women, cried Don Quixote, not to Love when we Love 'em, and to Love when we
Love 'em not. But go on -- The Shepherd then gave her the slip, continued
Sancho, and driving his Goats before him, went trudging through Estramadura, in
his way to Portugal. But Toralva having a long Nose smelt his Design, and then
what does she do, think ye, but come after him Barefoot and bare-Leg'd, with a
Pilgrim's Staff in her Hand, and a Wallet at her Back, wherein they say she
carried a piece of a Looking-Glass, half a Comb, a broken Pot with Paint; and I
don't know what other Trinkum Trankums to prink her self up. But let her carry
what she would, it is no Bread and Butter of mine, the short and the long is,
That they say the Shepherd with his Goats, got at last to the River Guadiana,
which happened to be overflowed at that Time, and what is worse than ill Luck,
there was neither Boat nor Bark to Ferry him over; which vexed him the more
because he perceived Toralva at his Heels, and he feared to be teiz'd and
plagued with her Weeping and Wailing, At last he spied a Fisherman in a little
Boat, but so little it was, that it would carry but one Man and one Goat at a
Time. Well, for all that, he called to the Fisherman, and agreed with him to
carry him and his three hundred Goats over the Water. The Bargain being struck,
the Fisherman came with his Boat and carried over one Goat. Then he rowed back
and fetched another Goat, and after that another Goat. Pray Sir, quoth Sancho,
besure you keep a good Account how many Goats the Fisherman Ferries over, for
if you happen but to miss one, my Tale's at an end, and the Devil a Word more I
have to say. Well then, where abouts was I? -- Ho! I have it -- Now the landing
Place on the other side was very Muddy and Slippery, which made the Fisherman
be a long while in going and coming. Yet for all that, he took Heart of Grace,
and made shift to carry over one Goat, then another, and then another. Come,
cried Don Quixote, we'll suppose he has landed 'em all on the other side of the
River; for as thou go One by One we shall not have done these twelve Months.
Pray, let me go on my own way, quoth Sancho: How many Goats are got over
already? Nay, how the Devil can I tell, replied Don Quixote. There it is, quoth
Sancho! Did not I bid you keep 'Count? On my Word the Tale's at an end, and now
you may go whistle for the rest. Ridiculous, cried Don Quixote: Prithee is
there no going on with the Story unless I know exactly how many Goats are
wafted over? No, marry, is there not, quoth Sancho: For as soon as you
answered, that you could not tell, the rest of the Story quite and clean slipped
out of my Head; and Troth it is a thousand Pities, for 'twas a special one. So
then, cried Don Quixote, the Story's ended. Ay marry is it, quoth Sancho; it is
no more to be fetched to Life than my Dead Mother. Upon my Honor, cried Don
Quixote, a most extraordinary Story, and told and concluded in as extraord nary
a manner. It Is a None such I dare engage; though truly I expected no less from a
Man of such uncommon Parts. Alas! poor Sancho, I am afraid this dreadful Noise
has turned thy Brain: That may well be, quoth Sancho, but as for my Story I Am
sure there is nothing more to be said; for where you lose the Account of the
Goats there it ends. Let it be so, replied Don Quixote, but now let us try
whether Rozinante be in Humor to March; with that he gave Rozinante two Spurs,
and the high mettl'd Jade answered with one Bound, and then stood stock still,
not having the command of his hind Legs.

Much about this Time, whether it were the Coolness of the Night, or that
Sancho had eaten some loosening Food at Supper, or which seems more probable,
that Nature by a regular Impulse gave him notice of her Desire to perform a
certain Function that follows the third Concoction, it seems, honest Sancho
found himself urged to do that which no body could do for him: But such were
his Fears that he durst not for his Life stir the breadth of a Straw from his
Master; yet to think of bearing the intolerable Load that pressed him so, was
to him as great an impossibility: In this perplexing Exigency, with leave be it
spoken) he could find no other Expedient but to take his right Hand from the
Crupper of the Saddle, and softly untying his Breeches, let 'em drop down to
his Heels, having done this, he as silently took up his Shirt, and exposed his
Posteriors, which were none of the least, to the open Air. But the main Point
was how to ease himself of this terrible Burden, without making a Noise. To
which purpose he clutch'd his Teeth close, scru'd up his Face, shrunk up his
Shoulders, and held his Breath as much as possible. Yet see what Misfortunes
attend the best projected Undertakings. When he had almost compassed his
Design, he could not hinder an obstreperous sound very different from those
that caused his Fear from unluckily bursting out. Hark! cried Don Quixote, who
heard it, what Noise is that, Sancho? Some new Adventure, I Will warrant you,
quoth Sancho, for ill Luck, you know, seldom comes alone. Having passed off the
Thing thus, he even ventured the other Strain, and did it so cleverly, that,
without the least Report or Whisper, his Business was done effectually, to the
unspeakable Ease of his Body and Mind.

But Don Quixote having the Sense of Smelling as perfect as that of Hearing,
and Sancho standing so very near or rather joined to him, certain Fumes that
ascended perpendicularly began to regale his Nostrils with a Smell not so
grateful as Amber. No sooner the unwelcome Steams disturbed him but having
Recourse to the common Remedy, he stopped his Nose, and then with a snaffling
Voice, Sancho, said he, thou art certainly in great Bodily Fear. So I am, quoth
Sancho; but what makes your Worship perceive it now more than you did before?
Because, replied Don Quixote, thou smellest now more unsavorily than thou did
before. Hoh, that may be, quoth Sancho. But whose Fault's that? You may even
thank your self for it. Why do you lead me a wild Goose-chace, and bring me at
such unseasonable Hours to such dangerous Places? You know I a'n't used to it.
Prithee, said Don Quixote, still holding his Nose, get thee three or four Steps
from me; and for the future take more Care, and know your Distance; for I find,
thou think my Familiarity with thee may privilege thee to want Respect. I
warrant, quoth Sancho, you think I have been do^ng something I should not have
done. Come, say no more, cried Don Quixote, the more thou'st stir, the worse
'twill be.

This Discourse, such as it was, served them to pass away the Night; and now
Sancho seeing the Morning arise thought it time to unty Rozinante's Feet, and
do up his Breeches; and he did both with so much Caution that his Master
suspected nothing. As for Rozinante he no sooner felt himself at Liberty, but
he seemed to express his Joy by pawing the Ground; for, with his Leave be it
spoken, he was a Stranger to Curvetting and Prancing. Don Quixote also took it
as a good Omen that his Steed was now ready to move, and believed it was a
Signal given him by kind Fortune, to animate him to give Birth to the
approaching Adventure.

Now had Aurora displayed her rosy Mantle over the blushing Skies, and dark
Night withdrawn her Sable Veil; all Objects stood confessed to human Eyes, and
Don Quixote could now perceive he was under some tall Chesnut-Trees, whose
thick spreading Boughs diffused an awful Gloom around the Place, but he could
not yet discover whence proceeded the dismal Sound of those incessant Strokes.
Therefore, being resolved to find it out, once more he took his Leave of
Sancho, with the same Injunctions as before; adding withal, that he should not
trouble himself about the Recompense of his Services, for he had taken Care of
that in his Will, which he had providently made before he left home; but if he
came off victorious from this Adventure, he might most certainly expect to be
gratified with the Promised Island. Sancho could not forbear blubbering again,
to hear these tender Expressions of his Master, and resolved not to leave him
till he had finished this Enterprise. And from that deep Concern, and this
nobler Resolution to attend him, the Author of this History infers, that the
Squire was something of a Gentleman by Descent, or at least the Offspring of
the old Christians. Nor did his good Nature fail to move his Master, more than
he was willing to show it at a Time when it behooved him to shake off all softer
Thoughts. For now he rode toward the Place whence the Noise of the Blows and
the Water seemed to come, while Sancho trudged after him, leading by the Halter
the inseparable Companion of his good and bad Fortune.

After they had gone a pretty way under a pleasing Covert of Chesnut-Trees,
they came into a Meadow adjoining to certain Rocks, from whose Top there was a
great Fall of Waters. At the Foot of those Rocks they discovered certain old
ill-contriv'd Buildings, that rather looked like Ruins than inhabited Houses;
and they perceived that the terrifying Noise of the Blows which yet continued
issued out of that Place. When they came nearer, even patient Rozinante himself
started at the dreadful Sound; but being heartened and pacified by his Master,
he was at last prevailed with to draw nearer and nearer with wary Steps, the
Knight recommending himself all the way most devoutly to his Dulcinea, and now
and then also to Heaven in short Ejaculations. As for Sancho he stuck close to
his Master, peeping all the way through R^zinante's Legs, to see if he could
perceive what he dreaded to find out. When, a little further at the doubling of
the Point of a Rock, they pla^nly discovered (kind Reader, do not take it
amiss) six huge Fulling-Mill-Hammers, which interchangeably thumping several
pieces of Cloths, made the terrible Noise that caused all Don Quixote's
Anxieties, and Sancho's Tribulation that Night.

Don Quixote was struck dumb at this unexpected Sight, and was ready to drop
from his Horse with Shame and Confusion. Sancho star'd upon him, and saw him
hang down his Head, with a desponding dejected Countenance, like a Man quite
dispirited with this cursed Disappointment. At the same Time he looked upon
Sancho, and seeing by his Eyes and his Cheeks, swelled with Laughter, that he
was ready to burst, he could not forbear laughing himself, in spite of all his
Vexation. So that Sancho seeing his Master begin, immediately gave a Loose to
his Mirth, and broke out into such a Fit of Laughing, that he was forced to
hold his Sides with both his Knuckles for fear of bursting his aching Paunch.
Four times he ceased, and four times renewed his obstreperous Laughing; which
Sauciness Don Quixote began to resent with great Indignation; and the more when
Sancho in a jeering Tone presumed to ridicule him with his own Words, repeating
part of the vain Speech he made when first they heard the Noise; Know, Sancho,
I was born in this Iron Age to restore the Age of Gold. I am the Man for whom
Heaven has reserved the most dangerous and glorious Adventures, etc. Thus he
went on, till his Master, dreadfully enraged at his Insolence, hit him two such
Blows on the Shoulders with his Lance, that had they fallen upon his Head they
had saved Don Quixote the trouble of paying him his Wages, whatever he must
have done to his Heirs. Thereupon Sancho, finding his Jest turned to Earnest,
begged Pardon with all Submission: Mercy, good your Worship, cried he, spare my
Bones I beseech you! I meant no harm, I did but joke a little. And because you
joke, I do not, cried Don Quixote. Come hither, good Mr. Jester, you who
pretend to rally, tell me, Had this been a dangerous Adventure, as well as it
proves only a false Alarm, have I not shown Resolution enough to undertake and
finish it? Am I, who am a Knight, bound to know the meaning of every Mechanic
Noise, and distinguish between Sound and Sound? Besides, it might happen, as
really it is, that I had never seen a Fulling-Mill before, though thou, like a
base Scoundrel as thou art, were born and brought up among such mean Implements
of Drudgery. But let the six Fulling-Maces be transformed into so many Giants,
then turn 'em in my Face one by one, or all together; and if I do nor lay 'em
all at my Feet with their Heels upwards, then I Will give thee Leave to exercise
thy ill-bred Raillery as much as thou please.

Good your Worship, quoth Sancho, talk no more on it, I beseech you; I confess I
carried the Jest too far. But now all is hushed and well, pray tell me in sober
Sadness as you hope to speed in all Adventures, and come off safe and sound as
from this, don't you think but that the Fright we were in, I mean that I was
in, would be a good Subject for People to make sport with? I grant it, answered
Don Quixote, but I would not have it told; for all People are not so discreet
as to place Things or look upon 'em in the Position in which they should be
considered. I Will say that for you, quoth Sancho, you have shown you understand
how to place Things in their right Posit^on, when aiming at my Head you hit my
Shoulders, had not I duck'd a little of one side I had been in a fine
Condition. But let that pass, 'twill wear out in the Bucking. I Have heard my
Gran'am say, That Man loves thee well, who makes thee to weep. Good Masters may
be hasty sometimes with a Servant; but presently after a hard Word or two they
commonly give him a pair of cast Breeches. What they give after a Basting,
Heaven knows; all I can tell is that Knights-Errant after Bastinadoes, give you
some cast Island, or some old-fashioned Kingdom upon the main Land.

Fortune, said Don Quixote, will perhaps order every thing thou have said to
come to pass; therefore, Sancho, I prithee think no more of my Severity; thou
know a Man cannot always command the first Impulse of his Passions. On the
other side, let me advise thee not to be so saucy for the future; and not to
assume that strange Familiarity with me which is so unbecoming in a Servant. I
protest, in such a vast number of Books of Knight-Errantry as I have read, I
never found that any Squire was ever allowed so great a Freedom of Speech with
his Master as thou take with me; and truly I look upon it to be a great Fault
in us both; in thee for disrespecting me, and in me for not making my self be
more respected. Gandalin, Amadis de Gaule's Squire, though he was Earl of the
Firm Island, yet he never spoke to his Master, but with Cap in Hand, his Head
bowed and his Body half bent, after the Turkish manner. But what shall we say
of Gasabel, Don Galaor's Squire, who was such a strict observer of Silence,
that to the Honor of this affected Taciturnity, he gave the Author occasion to
mention his Name but once in that voluminous authentic History. From all this
Sancho, I would have thee make this Observation, That there ought to be a
Distance kept between the Master and the Man, the Knight and the Squire.
Therefore once more I tell thee, let us live together for the future more
according to the due Decorum of our respective Degrees, without giving one
another any further Vexation on this Account; for, after all, 'twill always be
the worse for you on whatsoever Occasion we happen to disagree. As for the
Rewards I promised you, they will come in due Time; and should you be
disappointed that way, you have your Salary to trust to, as I have told you.

You say very well, quoth Sancho; but now Sir, suppose no Rewards should come,
and I should be forced to stick to my Wages, I Would fain know how much a
Squire-Errant used to earn in the days of yore? Did they go by the Month or by
the Day like our Laborers? I don't think, replied Don Quixote, they ever went
by the Hire, but rather that they trusted to their Master's Generosity. And if
I have assigned thee Wages in my Will, which I left sealed up at home, 'twas
only to prevent the worst; because I do not know yet what Success I may have in
Chivalry in these miserable Times; and I would not have my Soul suffer in the
other World for such a trifling Matter: For there is no state of Life so
subject to Dangers as that of a Knight Errant. Like enough, quoth Sancho, when
merely the Noise of the Hammers of a Fulling-Mill is able to trouble and
disturb the Heart of such a valiant Knight as your Worship. But you may be sure
I Will not hereafter so much as offer to open my Lips to jibe or joke at your
Doings, but always stand in awe of you, and honor you as my Lord and Master.
By doing so, replied Don Quixote, thou shall live on the Face of the Earth; for
next to our Parents we ought to respect our Masters, as if they were our
Fathers.

CHAP. VII. Of the High and Mighty Adventure and Conquest of Mambrino's Helmet;
with other Events relating to our invincible Knight.
AT the same time it began to Rain, and Sancho would fain have taken Shelter in
the Fulling-Mills. But Don Quixote had conceived such an Antipathy against 'em
for the Shame they had put upon him, that he would by no means be prevailed
with to go in; and turning to the Right Hand he struck into a Highway, where
they had not gone far before he discovered a Horseman, who wore upon his Head
something that glittered like Gold. The Knight had no sooner spied him, but
turning to his Squire, Sancho, cried he, I believe there is no Proverb but what
is true; they are all so many Sentences and Maxims drawn from Experience, the
Universal Mother of Sciences: for Instance that Saying, That where one Door
shuts, another opens. Thus Fortune that last N ght deceived us with the false
Project of an Adventure, this Morning offers us a real one to make us amends:
And such an Adventure, Sancho, that if I do not gloriously succeed in it, I
shall have now no pretense to an Excuse; no Darkness, no unknown Sounds to
impute my Disappointment to. In short, in all probability, yonder comes the Man
who wears on his Head Mambrino's Helmet, and thou know the Vow I have made.
Good Sir, quoth Sancho, mind what you say, and take heed what you do; for I
would willingly keep my Carcass and the Case of my Understanding from being
pounded, mash'd, and crushed with Fulling-Hammers. Hell take thee, Blockhead,
cried Don Quixote! Is there no difference between a Helmet and a Fulling-Mill?
I don't know, quoth Sancho, but I Am sure were I suffered to speak my Mind now,
as I was wont, mayhaps I would give you such main Reasons, that you your self
should see you're wide of the Matter. How can I be mistaken; thou eternal
Misbeliever, cried Don Quixote? Do thou not see that Knight who comes riding
up directly toward us upon a Dapple-grey Steed, with a Helmet of Gold on his
Head? I see what I see, replied Sancho, and the Devil of any thing I can spy,
but a Fellow upon such another gray Ass as mine is, with something that
glisters of top of his Head. I tell thee, that is Mambrino's Helmit, replied Don
Quixote; and therefore stand at a distance, and leave me to deal with him: Thou
shal't see that without trifling away so much as a Moment in needless Talk,
I Will finish this Adventure, and possess my self of the desired Helmet. I shall
stand at a distance you may be sure, quoth Sancho; but I wish this may not prove
another blew Bout, and a worse Job than the Fulling-Mills. I have warned you
already, Fellow, said Don Quixote, not so much as to name the Fulling-Mills;
dare but once more to do it, nay but to think on it, and I vow to -- I say no
more, but I Will full and pound your Dog's-ship into Jelly. These Threats were
more than sufficient to Padlock Sancho's Lips; for he had no mind to have his
Master's Vow fulfilled at the Expense of his Bones.

Now the Truth of the Story was this: There were in that part of the Country
two Villages, one of which was so little that it had not so much as a Shop
in it, nor any Barber. So that the Barber of the greater Village served also the
smaller. And thus a Person happening to have occasion to be let Blood, and
another to be Shaved, the Barber was going thither with his Brass Basin, which
he had clapped upon his Head to keep his Hat, that chanced to be a new one, from
being spoilt by the Rain; and as the Basin was new scowr'd, it made a
glittering show a great way off. As Sancho had well observed he rode upon a
gray Ass, which Don Quixote as easily took for a Dapple gray Steed, as he took
the Barber for a Knight, and his Brass Basin for a Golden Helmet, his
distracted Brain easily applying every Object to his Romantic Ideas. Therefore
when he saw the poor imaginary Knight draw near, he fixed his Lance or Javelin
to his Thigh, and without staying to hold a Parley with his thoughtless
Adversary, flew at him as fiercely as Rozinante would Gallop, resolved to
pierce him through and through; crying out in the midst of his Career, Caitif,
Wretch, defend thy self, or immediately surrender that which is so jus^ly my
due. The Barber, who as he peaceably went along, saw that terrible Apparition
come thundering upon h m at unawares, had no other way to avoid being run
through with the Lance, but to throw himself off from his Ass to the Ground:
And then as hastily getting up, he took up his Heels and ran over the Fields
swift as a hunted Deer, leaving his Ass and his Basin behind him. Don Quixote
finding himself thus Master of the Field and of the Basin: The Miscreant, cried
he, who has left this Helmet, has shown himself as prudent as the Bever, who
finding himself hotly pursued by the Hunters, to save his Life, tears and cuts
off with his Teeth that for which his natural Instinct tells him he was
followed. Then he ordered Sancho to take up the Helmet. On my word, quoth
Sancho, having taken it up, it is a special Basin, and as well worth a Piece of
Eight, as a Thief is worth a Halter. With that he gave it to his Master, who
presently clapped it on his Head, turning it every way to find out the Beaver or
Vizor; and at last seeing it had none, doubtless, said he, the Pagan for whom
this famous Helmet was first made had a Head of a prodigious size; but the
worst is, that there is at least one half of it wanting. Sancho could not
forbear smiling to hear his Master call the Barber's Basin a Helmet, and had
not his Fear dashed his Mirth he had certainly laughed outright. What does the
Fool grin at now, cried Don Quixote? I laugh, said he, to think what a hugeous
Jolt-head he must needs have had who was the Owner of this same Helmet, that
looks for all the World like a Barber's Basin. I fancy, said Don Quixote, this
enchanted Helmet has fallen by some strange Accident into the hands of some
Person, who not, knowing the Value of it, for the Lucre of a little Money,
finding it to be of pure Gold, melted one half, and of the other made this
Head-Peace, which as thou say, has some resemblance of a Barber's Basin. But
to me, who know the Worth of it, the Metamorphosis signifies little; for as
soon as ever I come to some Town where there is an Armorer, I will have it
altered so much for the better, that then even the Helmet which the God of
Smiths made for the God of War, shall not deserve to be compared with it: In
the mean time I Will wear it as it is; it is better than nothing, and will serve
at least to save part of my Head from the violent Encounter of a Stone. Ay,
that i^ will, quoth Sancho, so it is not hurled out of a Sling, as were those at
the Battle between the two Armies, when they hit you that confounded Dowse of
the Chops, that bl ss'd your Worship's Cheek-Teeth, and broke the Pot about
your Ears, in which you kept the blessed Drench that made me bring up my Gots.
True, cried Don Quixote, there I lost my precious B^l^an^ indeed; but I do not
much r^pine at it, for thou know I have the Receipt in my Memory. So have I
too, quoth Sancho, and shall have while I have Breath to draw; but if ever I
make any of that Stuff, or taste it again, may I g ve up the Ghost with it:
Besides I mean never to thrust my self into a bloody Fray that mi^^^ endanger
that sweet Corpse of mine; and I^ labor all that in me lies to hurt no Body,
and let no Body hurt me. As to being toss d in a Bl^^ket again, I Have nothing to
say to it; for there is to Remedy for such an enchanted Jo^ing but Pa^^ence 't
seems. So if it ever be my lord to be serv^ so again, I Will even shrink up my
Shoulders, hold my Breath, and shut my Eyes, and then happy be lucky, let the
Blanket and Fortune even toss on to the end of the Chapter.

Truly, said Don Quixote, I am afraid you are no good Christan, Sancho, thou
never forget'st Injuries. Let me tell thee, it is the part of noble and generous
Spirits to pass by Trifles: Where art thou lame? Which of thy Ribs is broken?
Or what part of thy Skull is bruised, that thou can never think on that Jest
without Malice? For after all, 'twas nothing but a Jest, a harmless Piece of
Pastime; had I looked upon it otherwise, I had returned to that Place before
this Time, and had made more noble Mischief, in Revenge of the Abuse, than ever
the incensed Grecians did at Troy, for the Detension of their Helen; that famed
Beauty of the ancient World, who however had she lived in our Age, or had my
Dulcinea adorned here is, would have found her Charms out-rivall'd by my Cavelier
Mistresse's Perfections. And saying this, he heaved up a deep Sigh. Well then,
quoth Sancho, I Will not rip up old Sores: Let it go for a Jest, since there is no
revenging it in Earnest. But what shall we do with this Dapple-grey Steed,
that is so like an Ass? You see that some poor Devil-Errant has left it to shift
for it self, poor Thing; and by his haste to rub off, I don't think he means to
come back for it, and by my Beard, the gray Beast is a special one. It Is not my
Custom, replied Don Quixote, to plunder those whom I overcome; nor is it usual
among us Knights, for the Victor to take the Horse of his vanquished Enemy, and
let him go a Foot, unless his own Steed be killed or disabled in the Combat.
Therefore Sancho, leave the Horse or the Ass, whatever thou please to call
it; the Owner will be sure to come for it, as soon as he will see us gone. I Have a
huge mind to take him along with us, quoth Sancho, or at least to exchange him
for my own which is not so good. What, are the Laws of Knight-Errantry so
strict, that a Man must not exchange one Ass for another? At least, I hope
they will give me leave to swop one Harness for another? Truly, Sancho, replied
Don Quixote, I am not so very certain as to this last Particular; and
therefore, till I am better informed, I give thee leave to exchange the
Furniture, if thou have absolutely occasion for it. I Have so much occasion for it,
quoth Sancho, that though 'twere for my own very self I could not need it more.
So without any more ado, being authorized by his Master's leave, he made
Mutatio Caprarum, and his own Ass as fine, as if it had had a hundred
Holy-day-Cloaths on its Back. This done, they Breakfasted upon what they left
at Supper, having quenched their Thirst at the Stream that turned the
Fulling-Mills, toward which Don Quixote took care not to cast an Eye, for he
abominated the very Thoughts of 'em. Thus their Spleen being eased, their
choleric and melancholic Humors assuag'd, up they got again, and never minding
their Way, they were all guided by Rozinante's Discretion, the Depository of
his Master's Will, and also of the Ass's, that kindly and sociably always
followed his Steps wherever he went. Their Guide soon brought 'em again into
the high Road, where they kept on a slow Pace, not caring which way they went.

As they jogged on thus, quoth Sancho to his Master, Pray, Sir, will you give
me leave to talk to you a little? For since you have laid that bitter Command
upon me, to hold my Tongue, I Have had four or five quaint Conceits, that have
rotted in my Gizard; and now I Have another at my Tongue's end, that I would not
for any thing should miscarry. Say it, cried Don Quixote, but be short; for no
Discourse can please, when too long.

Well then, quoth Sancho, I Have been thinking to my self of late how little is
to be got by hunting up and down these barren Woods and strange Places, where
though you compass the hardest and most dangerous Jobs of Knight-Errantry, yet no
living Soul sees it, or hears on it, and so it is every whit as good as lost, and
therefore methinks 'twere better (with Submission to your Worship's better
Judgment be it spoken) that we even went to serve some Emperor or other great
Prince that is at War. For there you might show how stout, and how wondrous
strong and wise you be; which being perceived by the Lord we shall serve, he
must needs reward us, every one according to his Deserts, and there you will not
want a learned Scholar to set down all your high Deeds, that they may never be
forgotten: As for mine I say nothing, seeing they are not to be named the same
day with your Worship's; and yet I dare avouch that if any Notice be taken in
Knight-Errantry of the Feats of Squires, mine will be sure to come in for a
Share. Truly, Sancho, replied Don Quixote, there is some Reason in what thou
say. But first of all, it is requisite that a Knight Errant should spend some
Time in various Parts of the World as a Probationer in quest of Adventures,
that by atchieving some extraordinary Exploits, his Renown may diffuse it self
through neighboring Climes and distant Nations. So when he goes to the Court
of some great Monarch, his Fame flying before him as his Harbinger, secures him
such a Reception, that the Knight has scarce reached the Gates of the
Metropolis of the Kingdom, when he finds himself attended and surrounded by
admiring Crowds, pointing and crying out, There rides the Knight of the Sun, or
of the Serpent, or whatever other Title the Knight takes upon him. That Is he,
they will cry, who vanquished in single Combat the huge Giant Brocabruno,
sirnam'd Of the Invincible Strength. This is he that freed the great Sophy of
Persia from the Enchantment that had kept him confined for almost nine hundred
Years together. Thus as they relate his Achievements with loud Acclamations,
the spreading Rumor at last reaches the King's Palace, and the Monarch being
desirous to be informed with his own Eyes will not fail to look out of his
Window. As soon as he sees the Knight, knowing him by his Arms, or the Devise
on his Shield, he will be obliged to say to his Attendants, My Lords and
Gentlemen, haste, all of you, as many as are Knights, go and receive the Flower
of Chivalry that is coming to our Court. At the King's Command away they all run
to introduce him, the King himself meets him half way on the Stairs, where he
embraces his valorous Guest, and kisses his Cheek. Then taking him by the Hand
he leads him directly to the Queen's Apartment; where the Knight finds her
attended by the Princess her Daughter, who ought to be one of the most
beautiful and most accomplished Damsels in the whole compass of the Universe.
At the same time Fate will so dispose every Thing that the Knight shall gaze on
the Princess and the Princess on the Knight, and each shall admire one another
as Persons rather Angelical than Humane; and then by an unaccountable Charm
they shall both find themselves caught and entangled in the inextricable Not of
Love, and wondrously perplexed for want of an opportunity to discover their
amorous Anguish to one another.

After this doubtless the Knight is conducted by the King to one of the richest
Appartments in the Palace, where having taken off his Armor, they will bring
him a rich Scarlet Vestment lined with Ermines; and if he looked so graceful
cased in Steel, how lovely will he appear in all the heightning Ornaments of
Courtiers? Night being come, he shall sup with the King, the Queen, and the
Princess, and shall all the while be Feasting his Eyes with the Sight of his
Charmer, yet so as no Body shall perceive it; and she will repay him his
Glances with as much Discretion; for as I have said, she is a most accomplished
Person. After Supper, a surprising Scene is unexpectedly to appear: Enter first
an ill-favored little Dwarf, and after him a fair Damsel between two Giants,
with the Offer of a certain Adventure so contrived by an ancient Negromancer,
and so difficult to be performed, that he who shall undertake and end it with
Success, shall be esteemed the best Knight in the World. Presently it is the
King's Pleasure that all his Courtiers should attempt it; which they do, but
all of 'em unsuccessfully, for the Honor is reserved for the valorous
Stranger, who effects that with Ease which the rest essayed in vain. And then
the Princess shall be overjoyed, and esteem herself the most happy Creature in
the World, for having bestowed her Affections on so deserving an Object. Now by
the happy appointment of Fate, this King, or this Emperor is at War with one of
his Neighbors as powerful as himself; and the Knight being informed of this,
after he has been some few Days at Court, he offers the King his Service, which
is accepted with Joy, and the Knight courteously kisses the King's Hands in
Acknowledgment of so great a Favor. That Night the Lover takes his Leave of
the Princess at the Iron-grate before her Chamber-Window looking into the
Garden, where he and she have already had several Interviews by means of the
Princess's Confident, a Damsel who carries on the Intriegue between 'em. The
Knight sighs, the Princess swoons, the Damsel runs for cold Water to bring her
to Life again, very uneasy also because the Morning-Light approaches, and she
would not have them discovered, lest it should reflect on her Lady's Honor. At
last the Princess revives, and gives the Knight her lovely Hand to kiss, which
he does a thousand and a thousand Times, bathing it all the while with his
Tears. Then they agree how to transmit their Though^s with Secrecy to each
other, by a mutual Intercourse of Letters during this fatal absence. The
Princess prays him to return with all the speed of a Lover; the Knight promises
it with repeated Vows, and a thousand kind Protestations. At last, the fatal
moment being come that must tear him from all he loves and from his very self,
he seals once more his Leave on her soft, snowy Hand, almost breathing out his
Soul, which mounts to his Lips, and even would leave its Body to dwell there,
and then he is hurried away by the fearful Confident.

After this cruel Separation, he retires to his Chamber, throws himself on his
Bed, but Grief will not suffer Sleep to close his Eyes: Then rising with the
Sun, he goes to take his Leave of the King, and of the Queen; he desires to pay
his Complement of Leave to the Princess, but he is told, she is indisposed; and
as he has reason to believe that his departing is the Cause of her Disorder, he
is so grieved at the News, that he is ready to betray the Secret of his Heart,
which the Princess's Confident observing, she goes and acquaints her with it,
and finds the lovely Mourner bathed in Tears, who tells her, that the greatest
Affliction of her Soul, is, her not knowing whether her charming Knight be of
Royal Blood: But the Damsel pacifies her, assuring her that so much Valor, so
much Gallantry, and such noble Qualifications were unquestionably derived from
an Illustrious and Royal Original. This comforts the afflicted Fair, who does
all she can to compose her Looks, lest the King or the Queen should suspect the
Cause of their Alteration; and so some Days after, she appears in Public as
before.

And now the Knight, having been absent for some Time, meets, fights and
overcomes the King's Enemies, takes I don't know how many Cities, wins I don't
know how many Battles, returns to Court, and appears before his Mistress Jaden
with Honor. He Visits her privately as before, and they agree, that he shall
demand her of the King her Father in Marriage, as the Reward of all his
Services. But the King will not grant his Suit, as being unacquainted with his
Birth: However, whether it be that the Princess suffers her self to be
privately carried away, or that some other Means are used, the Knight Marries
her, and in a little Time the King is very well pleased with the Match, for now
the Knight appears to be the Son of a mighty King of I cannot tell you what
Country, for I think it is not in the Map. Sometime after, the Father dies, the
Princess is Heiress, and thus in a Trice our Knight comes to be King. Having
thus completed his Happiness, his next Thoughts are to gratify his Squire, and
all those who have been instrumental in his advancement to the Throne: Thus he
marries his Squire to one of the Princess's Damsels, and most probably to her
Favorite who had been familiar to their Amors, and who is Daughter to one of
the most considerable Dukes in the Kingdom.

That Is what I Have been looking for all this while, quoth Sancho: Give me but
that, and let the World rub; there I Will stick. For every Tittle of this will
come to pass, and be your Worship's Case as sure as a Gun, if you will but take
upon ye that same Nickname of the Knight of the Woeful Countenance. Most
certainly, Sancho, replied Don Quixote; for by the same Steps, and in that very
manner, Knights-Errant have always proceeded to ascend to the Throne. Therefore
our chief Business is to find out some great Potentate either among the
Christians or the Pagans, that is at War with his Neighbors, and has a fair
Daughter. But we shall have Time enough to enquire after that; for, as I have
told thee, we must first purchase Fame in other Places, before we presume to go
to Court. Another Thing makes me more uneasy; Suppose we have found out a King
and a Princess, and I have filled the World with the Fame of my unparalleled
Achievements, what hopes can I have of ever being discovered to be of Royal
Blood, though it were but second Cousin to an Emperor? For it is not to be
expected that the King will ever consent that I shall wed his Daughter, till I
have made this out by Authentic Proofs, though my Service deserve it never so
much. And thus for want of a Punctilio, I am in danger of losing what my Valor
so justly merits. It Is true indeed I am a Gentleman, and of a noted ancient
Family, nay, perhaps the learned Historiographer who is to write the History of
my Life, will so improve and beautify my Genealogy, that he will find me to be
the fifth or sixth at least in Descent from a King. For, Sancho, there are two
sorts of Originals in the World. Some, who sprung from mighty Kings and
Princes, by little and little have been so lessened and obscured, that the
Estates and Titles of the following Generations have dwindled to nothing, and
ended in a Point like a Pyramid. Others, who from mean and low Beginnings still
rise and rise, till at last they are raised to the very Top of Human Greatness.
So vast the difference is, That those who were Something are now Nothing, and
those that were Nothing, are now Something; and therefore who knows but that I
may be one of those whose Original is so illustrious; which being handsomely
made out, after due Examination, ought undoubtedly to satisfy the King my
Father-in-Law: But even supposing he were still refractory, the Princess is to
be so desperately in Love with me, that she will marry me without his Consent,
though I were the Son of a the meanest Plebeian; and if her tender Honor
scruples to bless me against her Father's Will, then it may not be amiss to put
a pleasing Constraint upon her, by conveying her by Force out of the Reach of
her Father, to whose Persecutions either Time or Death will be sure to put a
Period.

Ay, quoth Sancho, your rakehelly Fellows have a Saying that is pat to your
purpose, Never cringe nor creep for what you by force may reap: Though I think
'twere better said, The Leap of a Shrub is worth more than good Men's Prayers.
No more to be said, if the King your Father-in-Law will not let you have his
Daughter by fair means, never stand Shall I, Shall I, but fairly and squarely
run away with her. All the Mischief that I fear is only, that while you're
making your Peace with him, and waiting after a dead Man's Shoes, as the
Saying is, the poor Dog of a Squire is like to go long barefoot, and may go
hang himself for any good you will be able to do him, unless the Damsel Go
between, who is to be his Wife, run away too with the Princess, and he solace
himself with her, till a better time comes; for I don't see but that the Knight
may clap up the Match between us without any more ado. That Is most certain,
answered Don Quixote. Why then, quoth Sancho, happy be lucky, over Shoes over
Boots; let us even take our Chance, and let the World rub. May Fortune crown our
Wishes, cried Don Quixote, and let him be a Wretch who thinks himself one.
Amen, say I, quoth Sancho; for I Am one of your old Christians, and that is
enough to have me be an Earl. And more than enough, said Don Quixote; for though
thou were not so well descended, being a King I could bestow Nobility on thee,
without putting thee to the trouble of buying it, or of doing me the least
Service; and making thee an Earl, Men must call thee My Lord, though it grieve
'em never so much. And do you think, quoth Sancho, I would become not my
Equality main well? Thou should say Quality, said Don Quixote, and not
Equality. Even as you will, returned Sancho: But, as I was saying, I should
become an Earldom rarely; for I was once Beadle to a Brotherhood, and the
Beadle's Gown did so become me, that every Body said I had the Presence of a
Warden. Then howd you think I Will look with a Duke's Robes on my Back, all
bedawb'd with Gold and Pearl like any Foreign Count? I believe we shall have
Folks come a 100 Leagues to see me. Thou will look well enough, said Don
Quixote; but then thou must shave that rough bushy Beard of thine at least
every other day, or People will read thy Beginning in thy Face as soon as they
see thee. Why then, quoth Sancho, it is but keeping a Barber in my House; and if
needs be, he shall trot after me wherever I go, like a Grandee's Master of
the Horse. How came thou to know, said Don Quixote, that Grandees have their
Masters of the Horse to ride after 'em? I Will tell you, quoth Sancho: Some years
ago I happened to be about a Month among your Court-folks, and there I saw a
little Dandiprat riding about, who, they said, was a hugeous great Lord; there
was a Man a Horseback that followed him close wherever he went, like a little
t'anthony Pig, turning and stopping as he did, you would have thought he had been
tied to his Horse's Tail. With that I asked why that hind-man did not ^ide by
the other, but still come after him thus? And they told me he was Master of his
Horses, and that the Gra^dees have always such kind of Men at their Tail; and I
marked this so well that I have not forgot it since. Thou art in the right, said
Don Quixote, and thou may as reasonably have thy Barber attend thee in this
manner: Customs did not come up all at once, but rather started up and were
improved by Degrees; so thou may be the first Ea^ that rode in state with his
Barber behind him: And this may be said to justify thy Conduct, that it is an
Office of more Trust to shave a Man's Beard than to saddle a Horse. Well, quoth
Sancho, leave the Business of the Cut beard to me, and do but take Care you be
a King, and I an Earl. Never doubt it, replied Don Quixote; and with that
looking about, he discovered -- what the next Chapter will tell you.

CHAP. VII. How Don Quixote set free many miserable Creatures, whom some Men
were driving to a certain Place against their Wills.
CId Hamet Benengeli, an Arabian and Manchegan Author, relates in this most
grave, high sounding, Minute, soft and humorous History, that after this
Discourse between the renowned Don Quixote, and his Squire Sancho Panca, which
we have laid down at the end of the Sixth Chapter; the Knight lifting up his
Eyes, saw about twelve Men a Foot trudging in the Road, all in a row one behind
another, like Beads upon a String, being linked together by the Neck to a huge
Iron Chain, and manacled besides. They were guarded by two Horsemen, armed with
Carabines, and two Men a Foot, with Swords and Javelins. As soon as Sancho
spied 'em, look ye, Sir, cried he, here is a Gang of Criminals hurried away by
main Force to serve the King in the Galleys. How, replied Don Quixote! Is it
possible that the King will force any Body? I don't say so, answered Sancho; I
mean these are Rogues whom the Law has sentenced for their Misdeeds, to row in
the King's Galleys. However, replied Don Quixote, they are forced, because they
do not go of their own free Will. Sure enough, quoth Sancho. If it be so, said
Don Quixote, they come within the Verge of my Office, which is to hinder
Violence and Oppression, and succor all People in Misery. Ay, Sir, quoth
Sancho, but neither the King nor the Law offer any Violence to such wicked
Wretches, they have but their Deserts. By this, the Chain drew near, and then
Don Quixote, in very civil Terms, desired the Guards to inform him why these
poor People were led along in that manner? Sir, answered one of the Horsemen,
they are Criminals condemned to serve the King in his Galleys. That Is all I Have
to say to you, and you need enquire no further. Nevertheless, Sir, replied Don
Quixote, I have a great desire to know in few Words the Cause of their
Misfortune, and I will esteem it an extraordinary Favor if you will let me
have that Satisfaction. We Have here the Copies and Certificates of their several
Sentences, said the other Horseman, but we cannot stand to pull 'em out and read
'em now; you may draw nearer and examine 'em your self: I suppose they
themselves will tell you why they were condemned; for they are such honest
People, they are not ashamed to boast of their Rogueries. With this Permission,
which Don Quixote would have taken of himself had they denied it him, he rode
up to the Chain, and asked the first, For what Crime he was in th^se miserable
Circumstances? The Gally-Slave answered him, That 'twas for being in Love.
What, only for being in Love, cried Don Quixote! Were all those that are in
Love to be thus used, I my self might have been long since in the Galleys. Ay,
but replied the Slave, my Love was not of that sort which you conjecture: I was
so desperately in Love with a Basket of Linen, and embraced it so close, that
had not the Judge taken it from me by Force, I would not have parted with it
willingly. In short, I was taken in the Fact, and so there was no need to put
me to the Rack, 'twas proved so plain upon me. So I was committed, tried,
condemned, had the gentle Lash; and besides that, was sent for three Years to
be an Element-Dasher, and there is an end of the Business. An Element-Dasher,
cried Don Quixote, what do you mean by that? A Gally-Slave, answered the
Criminal, who was a young Fellow, about four and twenty Years old, and said he
was born at Piedra Hita.

Then Don Quixote examined the second, but he was so sad and desponding, that
he would make no answer; however, the first Rogue informed the Knight of his
Affairs: Sir, said he, this Canary Bird keeps us Company for having sung too
much. Is It possible, cried Don Quixote! Are Men sent to the Galleys for
Singing? Ay, marry, are they, quoth the arch Rogue; for there is nothing worse
than to sing in Anguish. How, cried Don Quixote! That contradicts the Saying,
Sing away Sorrow, cast away Care. Ay, but with us, the Case is altered, replied
the Slave, he that Sings in Disaster, Weeps all his Life after. This is a
Riddle which I cannot unfold, cried Don Quixote. Sir, said one of the Guards,
Singing in Anguish, among these Jail-Birds, means to confess upon the Rack:
This Fellow was put to the Torture, and confessed his Crime, which was stealing
of Cattle; and because he tatled or sung, as they call it, he was condemned to
the Galleys for six Years; besides a hundred Jirks with a Cat a'nine Tails,
that have whisk'd and powdered his Shoulders already. Now the Reason why he
goes thus moapish and out of sorts, is only because his Comrogues jeer and
laugh at him continually for not having had the Courage to deny: As if it had
not been as easy for him to have said No as Yes; or as if a Fellow, taken up
on Suspicion, were not a lucky Rogue when there is no positive Evidence can
come in against him but his own Tongue; and in my Opinion they are somewhat in
the right. I think so too, said Don Quixote.

Thence addressing himself to the third, and you, said he, what have you done?
Sir, answered the Fellow readily and pleasantly enough, I must Mow the great
Meadow for five Years together, for want of twice five Ducates. I will give
twenty with all my heart, said Don Quixote, to deliver thee from that Misery.
Thank you for nothing, quoth the Slave; it is just like the Proverb, After Meat
comes Mustard; or, like Money to a starving Man at Sea, where there are no
Victuals to be bought with it: Had I had the twenty Ducates you offer me before
I was tried, to have greased the Clark's [or the Recorder's] Fist, and have
whetted my Lawyer's Wit, I might have been now at Toledo in the Place of
Zocodover, and not have been thus led along like a Dog in a String. But Heaven
is powerful, Basta; I say no more.

Then passing to the fourth, who was a venerable old Don, with a gray Beard
that reached to his Bosom, he put the same Question to him; whereupon the poor
Creature fell a weeping, and was not able to give him an answer: So the next
behind him lent him a Tongue. Sir, said he, this honest Person goes to the
Galleys for four Years, having already taken his Progress through the Town in
state, and rested at the usual Stations. I Will be whipped, quoth Sancho, if that
ben't to do Penance at the Cross, and wear the wooden Ruff at the Pillo^y.
Right, Gaffor, quoth the Slave; and all this he is condemned to for being a
Broker of Human Flesh; for to tell you the truth, the Gentleman is a Pimp, and
besides that; he has a smack of Conjuring. If it were not for that addition of
Conjuring, cried Don Quixote, he ought not to have been sent to the Galleys,
purely for being a Pimp, unless it were to be General of the Galleys. For the
Profession of a Bawd, Pimp or Messenger of Love, is not like other common
Employments, but an Office that requires a great deal of Prudence and Sagacity;
an Office of Trust and Weight, and most highly necessary in a well regulated
Commonwealth; nor should it be executed but by civil well descended Persons of
good natural Parts, and of a liberal Education. Nay, 'twere requisite there
should be a Controuler and Surveyor of the Profession, as there are of others;
and a certain and settled number of 'em as there is of Exchange-Brokers. This
would be a means to prevent an infinite number of Mischiefs that happen every
day, because the Trade or Profession is followed by poor ignorant Pretenders,
silly waiting Women, young giddy brained Pages, shallow Footmen, and such raw
unexperienced sort of People, who in unexpected Turns and Emergencies suffer
themselves to be surpised and spoil all for want of quickness of Invention
either to conceal, carry on, or bring off a Thing artificially. Had I but time
I would point out what sort of Persons are best qualified to be chosen
Professors of this most necessary Employment in the Commonwealth; however, at
some fitter Season I will inform those of it who may remedy this Disorder. All
I have to say now, is, That the Grief I had to see these venerable gray Hairs
in such Distress, for having followed that no less useful than ingenious
Vocation of Pimping, is now lost in my abhorrence of his additional Character
of a Conjurer; though I very well know that no Sorcory in the World can affect or
force the Will, as some ignorant credulous Persons fondly imagine. For our Will
is a free Agent, and no Herb nor Charms can constrain it. As for the Philtres
and such like Compositions, which some silly Women and designing Pretenders
make, they are nothing but certain Mixtures and poisonous Preparations, that
make those who take them run mad; though the Deceivers labor to persuade us they
can make one Person love another; which, as I Have said, is an impossible thing,
our Will being a free uncontrollable Power. You say very well, Sir, cried the
old Coupler; and upon my Honor, I protest I am wholly innocent, as to the
Imputation of Witchcraft. As for the Business of Pimping, I cannot deny it; but
I never took it to be a Criminal Function; for my Intention was, that all
Mankind should taste the Sweets of Love, and enjoy each other's Society, living
together in Friendship and in Peace, free from those Griefs and Jars that
unpeople the World. But my harmless Design has not been so happy as to prevent
my being sent now to a place whence I never expect to return, stooping as I do
under the heavy Burden of old Age, and being grievously afflicted with the
Strangary, which scarce affords me a Moment's respite from Pain. This said, the
reverend Procurer burst out afresh into Tears and Lamentations, which melted
Sancho's Heart so much, that he pulled a piece of Money out of his Bosom and
gave it to him as an Alms.

Then Don Quixote turned to the fifth, who seemed to be nothing at all
concerned. I go to serve his Majesty, said he, for having been somewhat too
familiar with two of my Cozen-Germans, and two other kind-hearted Virgins that
were Sisters: By which means I have multiplied my Kind, and begot so odd and
intricate a Medley of Kindred, that 'twould puzzle a Convocation of Casuists to
resolve their Degrees of Consanguinity. All this was proved upon me. I had no
Friends, and what was worse, no Money, and so was like to have swung for it:
However, I was only condemned to the Galleys for six Years, and patiently
submitted to it. I feel my self yet young, to my Comfort; so if my Life does but
hold out, all will be well in time. If you will be pleased to bestow something
upon poor Sinners, Heaven will reward you; and when we Pray, we will be sure to
remember you, that your Life may be as long and prosperous as your Presence is
goodly and noble. This brisk Spark appeared to be a Student and was a great
Talker, and a good Latinist.

After him came a Man about thirty Years old, a clever, well set, handsome
Fellow, only he squinted horribly with one Eye; he was strangely loaded with
Irons: A heavy Chain clogged his Leg, and was so long that he twisted it about
his Waste like a Girdle; he had a couple of Collars about his Neck, the one to
link him to the rest of the Slaves; and the other, one of those Iron Ruffs
which they call a Keep-Friend, or a Friend's Foot; from whence two Irons went
down to his Middle, and to their two Bars were rivitted a pair of Manacles that
gripped him by the Fists, and were secured with a large Pad-lock; so that he
could neither lift his Hands to his Mouth, nor bend down his Head toward his
Hands. Don Quixote enquiring why he was worse hampered with Irons than the
rest? Because he alone has done more Rogueries than all the rest, answered one
of the Guards. This is such a Reprobate, such a Devil of a Fellow, that no Goal
nor Fetters will hold him; we are not sure he is fast enough, for all he is
chained so. What sort of Crimes then has be been guiltty of, asked Don Quixote,
that he is only sent to the Galleys? Why, answered the Keeper, he is condemned
to ten Years Slavery, which is no better than a Civil Death. But I need not
stand to tell you any more of him, but that he is that notorious Rogue Gines de
Passamonte, alias Genesillo de Parapilla. Hark you, Sir, cried the Slave, fair
and softly; what a pox makes you give a Gentleman more Names than he has? Gines
is my Christian-name, and Passamonte my Surname; and not Ginesillo, nor
Parapilla as you say. Blood, let every Man mind what he says, or it may prove
the worst for him. Don't you be so saucy, Mr. Crack-rope, cried the Officer to
him, or I may chance to make you keep a better Tongue in your Head. It Is a
sign, cried the Slave, that a Man's fast and under the Lash, but one day or
other some body shall know whether I Am called Parapilla or no. Why, Mr.
Slip-string, replied the Officer, do not People call you by that Name? They do,
answered Gines, but I Will make 'em call me otherwise, or I Will fleece and bite
'em worse than I care to tell you now. But, you, Sir, who are so inquisitive,
added he, turning to Don Quixote, if you have a mind to g^ve us any thing, pray
do it quickly, and go your ways; for I don't like to stand here answering
Questions, broil me. I am Gines de Passamonte, I am not ashamed of my Name. As
for my Life and Conversation, there is an Account of 'em in Black and White,
written with this numerical H ^d of mine. There he tells you true, said the
Officer; for he has written his own History himself, without omitting a Tittle
of his Roguish Pranks; and he has left the Manuscript in Pawn in the Prison for
two Hundred Reals. Ay, said Gines, and will redeem it, burn me, 'tho' it lay
there for as many Ducats. Then it must be an extraoadinary Piece, cried Don
Quixote. So extraordinary, replied Gines, that it far out-does not only
Lazarillo de Tormes, but whatever has been and shall be written in that kind.
For mine is true every Word, and no invented Stories can compare with it for
variety of Tricks and Accidents. What Is the Title of the Book, asked Don
Quixote? The Life of Gines de Passamonte, answered the other. Is it quite
finished, asked the Knight? How the Devil can it be finished and I yet living,
replied the Slave? There Is in it every material Point from my Cradle, to this
my last going to the Galleys. Then it seems you have been there before, said
Don Quixote. I was only some four Years there once before, replied Gines: I
already know how the Biscuit and the Bull's Pizzle agree with my Carcass: It
does not grieve me much to go there again, for there I shall have leisure to
give a finishing Stroke to my Book. I have the Devil knows what to add; and in
our Spanish Galleys there is always Leisure and idle Time enough of Conscience:
Neither shall I want so much for what I Have to insert, for I know it all by
Heart.

Thou seemst to be a witty Fellow, said Don Quixote. You should have said
unfortunate too, replied the Slave; for the Bitch Fortune is still unkind to
Men of Wit. You mean to such wicked Wretches as your self, cried the Officer.
Look you, Mr. Commissary, said Gines, I have already desired you to use good
Language; the Law did not give us to your keeping for you to abuse us, but only
to conduct us where the King has occasion for us. Let every Man mind his own
Business, and give good Words or hold his Tongue; for by the Blood -- I Will say
no more; Murder will out; there will be a Time when some People's Rogueries
may come to Light, as well as those of other Folks. With that the Officer,
provoked by the Slave's Threats, held up his Staff to strike him. But Don
Quixote stepped between 'em, and desired him not to do it, and to consider that
the Slave was the more to be excused for being too free of his Tongue, since he
had never another Member at Liberty. Then addressing himself to all the Slaves,
My dearest Brethren, cried he, I find, by what I gather from your own Words,
that though you deserve Punishment for the several Crimes of which you stand
convicted, yet you suffer Execution of the Sentence by Constraint, and merely
because you cannot help it. Besides, it is not unlikely but that this Man's want
of Resolution upon the Rack, the other's want of Money, the third's want of
Friends and Favor, and in short the Judges perverting and wresting the Law to
your great Prejudice, may have been the cause of your Misery. Now, as Heaven
has sent me into the World to relieve the Distressed, and free suffering
Weakness from the Tyranny of Oppression, according to the Duty of my Profession
of Knight-Errantry, these Considerations induce me to take you under my
Protection -- But because it is the part of a prudent Man not to use Violence
where fair Means may be effectual, I desire you, Gentlemen of the Guard, to
release these poor Men, there being People enough to serve his Majesty in their
rooms; for it is a hard Case to make Slaves of Men that were born free; and you
have the less Reason to use these Wretches with Severity, seeing they never did
you any wrong. Let 'em answer for their Sins in the other World; Heaven is
just, you know, and will besure to punish the Wicked as 'twill certainly reward
the Good. Consider besides Gentlemen, that it is neither a Christian like nor an
honorable Action for Men to be the Butchers and Tormentors of one another;
principally when no Advantage can arise from it. I choose to desire this of you,
with so much Mildness and in so peaceable a manner, Gentlemen, that I may have
occasion to pay you a thankful Acknowledgment, if you will be pleased to grant
so reasonable a Request. But if you provoke me by Refusal, I must be obliged to
tell ye, that this Lance and this Sword, guided by this invincible Arm, shall
force you to yield that to my Valor which you deny to my civil Entreaties.

A very good Jest indeed, cried the Officer, what a Devil, can you dote at such
a Rate? Would you have us set at Liberty the King's Prisoners when we are
leading 'em to due Punishment according to Law. Go, go about your Business,
good Sir Errant, and set your Basin right upon your empty Pate; and pray don't
meddle any further in what does not concern you, for those who will play with
Cats must expect to be scratched.

Thou art a Cat, and a Rat, and a Coward to boot, cried Don Quixote; and with
that he attacked the Officer with such a sudden and surprising Fury, that
before he had any Time to put himself into a posture of Defense, he struck him
down dangerously wounded with his Lance, and as Fortune had ordered it, this
happen d to be the Horseman who was armed with a Carabine. His Companions stood
astonished at such a bold and unlooked for Action, then fell upon the Champion
with their Swords and Darts, which night have proved fatal to him, had not the
Slaves laid hold of this Opportunity to break the Chain in order to regain
their Liberty. For the Guards perceiving their Endeavors to get loose, thought
it more material to prevent 'em, than to be sighting a Madman. But as he pressed
'em vigorously on one side, and the Slaves were opposing them and freeing
themselves on the other, the hurly-burly was so great, and the Guards so
perplexed that they did nothing to the purpose. In the mean time Sancho was
helping Gines de Passamonte to get off his Gives, which he did sooner than can
be imagined, and then that active Desperado having seized the wounded Officer's
Sword and Carabine, he joined with Don Quixote, and sometimes aiming at the one
and sometimes at the other, as if he had been ready to shoot 'em, yet still
without letting off the Piece, the other Slaves at the same time pouring
Vollies of Stone-shot at the Guards, they betook themselves to their Heels,
leaving Don Quixote and the Criminals Masters of the Field. Sancho, who was
always for taking Care of the main Chance, was not at all pleased with this
Victory; for he guessed that the Guards who were fled, would raise a Hue and
Cry and soon be at their Heels with the whole Posse of the Holy Brotherhood,
and lay 'em up for a Rescue and Rebellion. This made him advise his Master to
get out of the way as fast as he could, and hide himself in the neighboring
Mountains. I hear you, answered Don Quixote to this motion of his Squire, and I
know what I have to do. Then calling to him all the Slaves, who by this time
had uncas'd the Keeper to his Skin, they gathered about him to know his
Pleasure, and he spoke to them in this manner. It Is the part of generous
Spirits to have a grateful Sense of the Benefits they receive, no Crime being
more odious than Ingratitude. You see, Gentlemen, what I have done for your
sakes, and you cannot but be sensible how highly you're obliged to me. Now all
the Recompense I require is only that every one of you, laden with that Don
Quixot releases the ^ally-Slaves. V. 1. Page 238
Chain from which I have freed your Necks, do instantly repair to the City of
Toboso; and there, presenting your selves before the Lady Dulcinea del Toboso,
tell her that her faithful Votary, the Knight of the Woeful Countenance,
commanded you to wait on her, and assure her of his profound Veneration. Then
you shall give her an exact Account of every Particular relating to this famous
Achievement, by which you once more taste the Sweets of Liberty; which done, I
give you leave to seek your Fortunes where you please.

To this the Ringleader and Master-thief Gines de Passamonte made Answer for
all the rest, What you would have us do, said he, our noble Deliverer, is
absolutely impracticable and impossible; for we dare not be seen altogether for
the World. We must rather part and sculk some one way, some another, and lie
snug in Creeks and Corners under Ground, for fear of these damned Manhounds
that will be after us with a Hue and Cry; therefore all we can and ought to do
in this Case is to change this Complement and Homage which you would have us pay to
the Lady Dulcinea del Toboso into a certain number of Ave Mary's and Creeds,
which we will say for your Benefit; and this may be done by Night or by Day,
walking or standing, and in War as well as in Peace. But to imagine we shall
take up our Chains again, and lug 'em the Devil knows whither, is as
unreasonable as to think it is Night now at ten a Clock in the Morning. God's Death,
to expect this from us is to expect Pears from an Elm-Tree. Now, by my Sword,
Sir Son of a Whore, Sir Genesillo de Parapilla, or whatever be your Name, you
shall go alone, creeping like a Dog under a Door, with all the Chain about your
Shoulders. Gines, who was naturally very choleric, judging by Don Quixote's
Talk and last Exploit that he was not very wise, winked on his Companions, who,
like Men that understood Signs, presently fell back to the right and left, and
pelted Don Quixote with such a Shower of Stones, that all his Dexterity to
cover himself with his Shield was now ineffectual, and poor Rozinante no more
obeyed the Spur, than if he had been only the Statue of a Horse. As for Sancho,
he got behind his Ass, and there sheltered himself from the Vollies of Flints
that threatened his Bones, while his Master was so battered, that in a little
time he was thrown out of his Saddle to the Ground. He was no sooner down, but
the Student leaped on him, took off the Basin from his Head, gave him 3 or 4
Thumps of the Shoulders with it, and then gave it so many knocks against the
Stones that he almost broke it to pieces. After this, they stripped him of his
Coat; and had robbed him of his Hose too, but that his Greaves hindered them.
They also eased Sancho of his upper Coat, and left him in Cuerpo; then having
divided the Spoils, they shifted every one for himself, thinking more how to
avoid being taken up and linked again in the Chain, than of trudging with it to
my Lady Dulcinea del Toboso. Thus the Ass, Rozinante, Sancho and Don Quixote,
remained indeed Masters of the Field, but in an ill Condition. The Ass hanging
his Head and pensive, shaking his Ears now and then, as if the Vollies of
Stones had still whizz'd about 'em: Rozinante lying in a desponding manner, for
he had been knocked down as well as his unhappy Rider; Sancho uncas'd to his
Doublet, and trembling for fear of the Holy Brotherhood; and Don Quixote filled
with sullen Regret to find himself so barbarously used by those whom he had so
highly obliged.

CHAP. IX. What befell the Renowned Don Quixote in the Sierra Morena; being one
of the rarest Adventures in this most Authentic History.
DON Quixote finding himself so ungratefully requited, Sancho, said he to his
Squire, I have often heard it said, save a Thief from the Gallows, and he will be
the first shall hang you. Had I given ear to thy advice, I had been excused
this Misfortune. But since the thing is done, it is needless to repine. This
shall be a warning to me for the future: That is, quoth Sancho, when the
Devil's blind. But since you say you had escaped this Mischief had you believed
me, good Sir, believe me now and you will escape a greater; for I must tell you,
that those of the Holy Brotherhood don't stand in awe of your Chivalry, nor do
they care a straw for all the Knights-Errant in the world. Methinks I have 'em
at my heels already, and their rusty Weapons about my Ears. Thou art naturally
a Coward, Sancho, cried Don Quixote; nevertheless that thou may not say I am
obstinate, and never follow thy advice, I will take thy Counsel, and for once
convey my self out of the reach of this dreadful Brotherhood that so strangely
alarms thee; but upon this condition, that thou never tell to any mortal
Creature neither while I live, nor after my death, that I withdrew my self out
of this Danger through fear, but merely to comply with thy Entreaties: For if thou
ever presume to say otherwise, thou will be lie me; and from this time to that
time, and from that time to the World's end, I give thee the Lie, and thou
lie, and shall lie in thy Throat as often as thou say, or but think to
the contrary. Therefore do not offer to reply; for shoud'st thou but surmise
that I would avoid any danger, and especially this which seems to give some
occasion or color for fear, I would certainly stay here, tho unattended and
alone, and expect and face not only the Holy Brotherhood which thou dread'st so
much, but also the Fraternity, or twelve Heads of the Tribes of Israel, the
seven Macchabees, Castor and Pollux, and all the Brothers and Brotherhoods in
the Universe. An't please your Worship, quoth Sancho, to withdraw is not to run
away, and to stay is no wise action when there is more reason to fear than to
hope; ^ods bores, it is the part of a wise Man to keep himself to day for to
morrow, and not venture all his Eggs in one Basket: And for all I'^ but a Clown
or a Bumpkin as you may say, yet I Would have you to know, I know what is what, and
have always taken care of the main Chance; therefore don't be ashamed of being
ruled by me; but even get you of Horseback, an you're able: come I Will help
you, and then follow me; for my mind plaguily misgives me, that now one pair of
Heels will stand us in more stead than two pair of Hands.

Don Quixote without any Reply made shift to mount Rozinante, and Sancho on his
Ass led the way to the neighboring mountainous Desert called Sierra Morena,
which the crafty Squire had a design to cross over, and get out at the farthest
end, either at Viso, or Almadovar del Campo, and in the mean time to lurk in
the craggy and almost inaccessible Retreats of that vast Wilderness, for fear
of falling into the hands of the Holy Brotherhood. He was the more eager to
stee^ this Course, finding that the Provision which he had laid on his Ass had
escaped plundering, which was a kind of a Miracle, considering how narrowly the
Gally-slaves had searched every where for Booty. 'Twas night before our two
Travelers got to the middle and most desert part of the Mountain, where Sancho
advised his Master to stay some days, at least as long as their Provisions
lasted; and accordingly that night they took up their Lodging between two Rocks
among a great number of Cork-trees. But fatal Fortune, which, according to the
opinion of those that have not the Light of Faith, guides, appoints, and
contrives all things as it pleases, directed Gines de Passamonte (that
Master-Rogue, who, thanks be to Don Quixot's Force and Folly, had been put in a
condition to do him a Mischief) to this very part of the Mountain, in order to
hide himself till the Heat of the Pursuit, which he had just cause to fear,
were over. He discovered our Adventurers much about the time that they fell
asleep; and as wicked Men are always ungrateful, and urgent necessity prompts
many to do things at the very thoughts of which they perhaps would start at
other times, Gines who was a stranger both to Gratitude and Humanity, resolved
to ride away with Sancho's Ass;; for as for Rozinante he ^ook'd upon him as a
thing that would neither sell nor pawn: so while poor Sancho lay snoaring, he
spi^ited away his darling Beast, and made such haste that before day he thought
himself and his Prize secure from the unhappy owner's pursuit.

Now Aurora with her smiling Face returned to inliven and cheer the Earth, but
alas to grieve and affright Sancho with a dismal Discovery: For he no sooner
opened his Eyes but he missed his Ass, and finding himself deprived of that
dear Partner of his Fortunes, and best Comfort in his Peregrinations, he broke
out into the most pitiful and sad Lamentations in the World, insomuch that he
waked Don Quixote with his moans. O dear Child of my Bowels, cried he, born and
bred under my roof, my Childrens Play-fellow! The Comfort of my Wife, the Envy
of my Neighbors, the Ease of my Burdens, the Staff of my Life, and in a word
half my Maintenance; for with six and twenty Marvedis which were daily earned
by thee, I made shift to keep half my Family. Don Quixote, who easily guest the
Cause of these Complaints, strove to comfort him with kind condoling Words, and
learned Discourses upon the uncertainty of human Happiness. But nothing proved
so effectual to assuage his sorrow, as the promise which his Master made him of
drawing a Bill of Exchange on his Niece for three Asses out of five which he
had at home, payable to Sancho Pancha or his Order; which prevailing Argument
soon dried up his Tears, hushed his Sighs and Moans, and turned his Complaints
into thanks to his generous Master for so unexpected a Favor.

And now as they wandered further in these Mountains, Don Quixote was
transported with joy, to find himself where he might flatter his Ambition with
the hopes of fresh Adventures to signalize his Valor; for these vast Deserts
made him call to mind the wonderful Exploits of other Knights-Errant performed
in such Solitudes. Filled with those airy Notions, he thought on nothing else:
But Sancho was for more substantial Food; and now thinking himself quite out of
the reach of the holy Brotherhoods pursuit, his only care was to fill his Belly
with the Relics of the Clerical Booty, which Rozinante was now forced to
carry; and so trudging on after his Master, he slily took out, now one piece of
Meat, then another, and kept his Grinders going faster than his Feet: Thus
plodding on, he would not have given a Rush to have met with any other
Adventure.

While he was thus employed, he observed that his Master endeavored to take up
something that lay on the ground with the end of his Lance; this made him run
to help him to lift up the Bundle, which proved to be a Portmanteau, and the
Seat of a Saddle, that were half, or rather quite, rotted with lying exposed to
the Weather. The Portmanteau was somewhat heavy; and Don Quixote having ordered
Sancho to see what it contained, tho it was shut with a Chain and a Padlock, he
easily saw what was in it through the Cracks, and pulled out four fine Holland
Shirts, and other clean and fashionable Linen, besides a considerable quantity
of Gold tied up in a Hankerchief: Bless my Eyesight, quoth Sancho, and now
Heaven I thank thee for sending us a lucky Adventure once ^n our Lives. With
that, groping further in the Portmanteau, he found a Table Book richly bound:
Give me this, said Don Quixote, and do thou keep the Gold. Heaven reward your
Worship, quoth Sancho, kissing his Master's hand, and at the same time clapping
up the Linen and the other Things into the Bag where he kept the Victuals. I
fancy, said Don Quixote, that some Person having lost his way in these
Mountains has been met by Robbers, who have murdered him and buried his Body
somewhere hereabouts. Sure your Worship's mistaken, answered Sancho; for had
they been Highway-men, they would never have left such a Booty behind 'em.
You Are in the right, replied Don Quixote; and therefore I cannot imagine what
it must be. But stay, I will examine the Table Book, perhaps we shall find
something written in it that will help us to discover what I would know. With
that he opened it, and the first thing he found was the following rough draught
of a Sonnet, fairly enough written to be read with ease. So he read it aloud,
that Sancho might know what it was as well as himself.

The RESOLVE. A Sonnet.
Love's God sure never knows our Pain,
Or Cruelty's his darling Attribute:
Else he would never force me to complain,
And to his Spite my raging Pains impute.
But sure if Love's a God, he must
Have knowledge equal to his Power;
And it is a Crime to think a God unjust.
Whence then the Pains that now my Heart devour?
From Phillis? No: Why do I pause?
Such cruel Ills never boast so sweet a Cause.
Nor from the Gods such Torments do we bear.
Let Death then quickly be my Cure:
When thus we Ills unknown endure,
It Is shortest to despair.
The De'il of any thing can be pic'kd out of this, quoth Sancho, unless you can
tell who that same Phill is. I did not read Phill, but Phillis, said Don
Quixote. O then mayhap the Man has lost his Philly-foal. Phillis, said Don
Quixote, is the Name of a Lady that is beloved by the Author of this Sonnet, who
truly seems to be a pretty good Poet, or I Have but little Judgment. Why then,
quoth Sancho, belike your Worship understands how to make Varses too? That I
do, answered Don Quixote, and better than thou imagin'st, as thou shall see
when I shall give thee a Letter written all in Verse, to carry to my Lady
Dulcinea del Toboso: For I must tell thee, Friend Sancho, all the
Knights-Errant, or at least the greatest part of 'em, in former times were
great Poets, and as great Musicians; those two Qualifications, or to speak
better, those two Gifts or Accomplishments being almost inseparable from
amorous Adventurers: Tho I must confess, the Verses of the Knights in former
Ages are not altogether so polite, nor so adorned with Words, as with Thoughts
and Invention.

Good Sir, quoth Sancho, look again in the Pocketbook, mayhap you will find
somewhat that will inform you of what you would know. With that Don Quixote
turning over-leaf, There Is some Prose, cried he, and I think it is the sketch of
a Love-Letter. O good your Worship, quoth Sancho, read it out by all means; for
I mightily delight in hearing of Love-Stories.

Don Quixote read it aloud, and found what follows.

THE Falsehood of your Promises, and my Despair, hurry me from you for ever; and
you shall sooner hear the News of my Death, than the Cause of my Complaints.
You have forsaken me, ungrateful Fair, for one more wealthy indeed, but not
more deserving than your abandoned Slave. Were Virtue a Treasure esteemed equal
to its worth by your unthinking Sex, I must presume to say I should have no
reason to envy the Wealth of others, and no Misfortune to bewail. What your
Beauty had raised, your Infidelity has destroyed. The first made me mistake you
for an Angel, but the last has convinced me you are a very Woman. However, O too
lovely disturber of my Peace, may uninterrupted Rest and downy Ease engross
your happy Hours, and may forgiving Heaven still keep your Husband's
Perfidiousness concealed, lest it should cause your repenting Heart a Sigh, for
the Injustice you have done to so faithful a Lover: and so I should be prompted
to a Revenge, which I do not desire to take. Farewell.


This Letter, said Don Quixote, does not give us any further insight into the
Things we would know; all I can infer from it is, that the Person that wrote it
was a betrayed Lover. And so turning over the remaining Leaves, he found
several other Letters and Verses, some of which were legible, and some so
scribbled that he could not well peruse 'em. As for those he read, he could
meet with nothing in 'em, but Accusations, Complaints and Expostulations,
Distrusts and Jealousies, Pleasures and Discontents, Favors and Disdain. And
while the Knight was poring in the Table Book, Sancho was romaging the
Portmanteau, and the Seat of the Saddle, with that exactness that he did not
leave a Corner unsearch'd, nor a Seam unript, nor a single Lock of Wool
unpickt; for the Gold he had found, which was above a hundred Ducats, had but
whetted his greedy Appetite, and made him wild for more. Yet tho this was all
he could find, he thought himself well paid for the more than Herculean Labors
he had undergone: nor could he now repine at his being tossed in a Blanket; the
straining and griping Operation of the Balsam; the Benedictions of the
Packslaves and Leavers; the Fisticuffs of the lewd Carrier; the Loss of his
dear Wallet, of his Cloak, and of his dearer Ass; and all the Hunger, Thirst,
and Fatigue which he had suffered in his kind Master's Service. On the other
side, the Knight of the woeful Countenance strangely desired to know who was the
Owner of the Portmanteau, guessing by the Verses, the Letter, the Linen and the
Gold, that he was a Person of Worth, whom the Disdain and Infidelity of his
Mistress had driven to despair. At length however he gave over the thoughts of
it, discovering no Body through that vast Desert; and so he rode on, wholly guided
by Rozinante's Direction, which always made the grave sagacious Creature choose
the plainest smoothest Way; the Master still firmly believing that in those
woody uncultivated Fields, he should infallibly start some wonderful Adventure.

And indeed while these hopes possessed him, he spied, upon the top of a stony
Crag just before him, a Man that skip'd from Rock to Rock, over Briars and
Bushes, with wonderful agility; he seemed to him naked from the Waste upwards,
with a thick black Beard, his Hair long and strangely tangled, his Head, Legs
and Feet bare; on his Hips a pair of Breeches, that seemed to be of
sad-colour'd Velvet, but so tattered and torn that they discovered his Skin in
many places. These Particulars were observed by Don Quixote while he past by;
and he followed him, endeavoring to overtake him, for he presently guessed
this was the Owner of the Portmanteau. But Rozinante, who was naturally slow
and flegmatic, was in too weak a case besides to run Races with so swift an
Apparition: Yet the Knight of the woeful Countenance resolved to find out that
unhappy Creature, tho he were to bestow a whole year in the search. And to that
intent he ordered Sancho to beat one side of the Mountain while he hunted on
the other. In good sooth, quoth Sancho, your Worship must excuse me as to that;
for if I but offer to stir an inch from you, I Am almost frighted out of my
seven Senses: and let this serve you hereafter for a warning, that you may not
send me a Nail's breadth from your presence. Well, said the Knight, I will take
thy Case into consideration: and it does not displease me, Sancho, to see thee
thus rely upon my Valor; which, I dare assure thee, shall never fail thee, tho
thy very Soul were scared out of thy Body. Follow me therefore step by step,
with as much haste as is consistent with good speed. And let thy Eyes pry every
where, while we search every part of this Rock, where it is probable we may meet
with that wretched Mortal, who doubt^ess is the owner of the Portmanteau.

Odsnigs, Sir, quoth Sancho, I had rather get out of his way; for should we
chance to meet him, and he lay claim to the Portmanteau, it is a plain Case I
shall be forced to part with the Money: and therefore I think it is much better,
without making so much ado, to let me keep it bony fide, till we can light on
the right Owner some more easy way, and without dancing after him, which mayhap
may not happen till we have spent all the Money, and in that Case I Am free from
the Law, and he may go whistle for it. Thou art mistaken, Sancho, cried Don
Quixote; for, seeing we have some reason to think that we know who is the
Owner, we are bound in Conscience to endeavor to find him out, and restore it
to him; the rather because, should we not now strive to meet him, yet the
strong presumption we have that the Goods belong to him, would make us
possessors of 'em mala fide, and make us as guilty, as if the Party whom we
suspect to have lost the Things were really the right Owner. Therefore, Friend
Sancho, do not think much of searching for him, since if we find him out 'twill
extremely ease my mind. With that he spurred Rozinante; and Sancho, not very
well pleased, followed him, comforting himself however with the hopes of the
three Asses which his Master had promised him. So when they had rode over the
greatest part of the Mountain, they came to a Brook where they found a Mule
lying dead, with her Saddle and Bridle about her, and her self half devoured by
Beasts and Birds of Prey: Which Discovery further confirmed 'em in their
suspicion, that the Man who fled so nimbly from 'em was the Owner of the Mule
and Portmanteau. Now as they paused and pondered upon this, they heard a
whistling like that of some Shepherd keeping his Flocks; and presently after,
upon their left hand, they spied a great number of Goats, with an old Herdsman
after 'em on the top of the Mountain. Don Quixote called out to him, and
desired him to come down: But the Goatherd instead of answering him, asked 'em
in as loud a Tone, how they came thither into those Deserts, where scarce any
living Creatures resorted except Goats, Wolves, and other wild Beasts? Sancho
told him they would satisfy him as to that point, if he would come where they
were. With that the Goatherd came down to 'em; and seeing them look upon the
dead Mule, That Mule, said the old Fellow, has lain in that very place this six
months. But pray tell me, good People, have you not met the Master on it by the
way? We have met no Body, answered Don Quixote; but we found a Portmanteau, and
a Saddle-Cushion not far from this place. I have seen it too, quoth the
Goatherd, but I never durst meddle with it, nor so much as come anear it, for
fear of some Misdemeanor, lest I should be charged with having stolen somewhat
out of it. For who knows what might happen? the Devil is subtle, and sometimes
lays Baits in our way to tempt us, or Blocks to make us stumble. It Is just so
with me, Gaffer, quoth Sancho, for I saw the Portmanteau too, d'ye' see; but
the Devil a bit would I come within a stone's throw of it. No, there I found it
and there I left it e'faith. It shall even lie there still for me: He that
keeps another man's Dog, shall have nothing left him but the string: and I Will
be none of those that shall hang the Bell about the Cat's Neck. Tell me, honest
Friend, asked Don Quixote, do thou know who is the owner of those things? All
I know of the matter, answered the Goatherd, is that it is now some six months,
little more or less, since to a certain Sheepfold, some three Leagues off,
there came a young well-featur'd proper Gentleman in good Clothes, and under
him this same Mule that now lies dead here, with the Cushion and Cloke-bag
which you say you met, but touched not. He asked us which was the most desert
and least frequented part of these Mountains; and we told him, This where we
are now. And in that we spoke the plain Truth; for should you venture to go but
half a League further, you would hardly be able to get back again in haste; and
I marvel how you could get even thus far, for there is neither Highway nor
Foot-path that may direct a Man this way. Now as soon as the young Gentleman
had heard our Answer, he turned about his Mule, and made to the place we showed
him, leaving us all with a hugeous liking of his Comeliness, and strangely
marvelling at his Demand, and at the haste he made toward the middle of the
Mountain. After that we heard no more of him in a good while, till one day by
chance one of the Shepherds coming by, he fell upon him without saying why or
wherefore, and beat him well-favour'dly: After that he went to the Ass that
carried our Victuals, and taking away all the Bread and Cheese that was there,
he tripp'd back again to the Mountain with wondrous speed. Hearing this, a good
number of us together resolved to find him out; and when we had spent the best
part of two days in the thickest of the Forest, we found him at last lurking in
the hollow of a huge Cork-Tree, from whence he came forth to meet us as mild as
could be. But then he was so altered, his Face was so disfigured, wan, and Sun
burnt, that had it not been for his Attire, which we made shift to know again,
tho 'twas all in Rags and Tatters, we could not have thought it had been the
same Man. He saluted us courteously, and told us in few words, mighty handsomely
put together, that we were not to marvel to see him in that manner, for that it
behooved him so to do, that he might fulfill a certain Penance enjoined him for
the great Sins he had committed. We prayed him to tell us who he was, but he
would by no means do it. We likewise desired him to let us know where we might
find him, that whenever he wanted Victuals we might bring him some, which we
told him we would be sure to do, for otherwise he would be starved in that
barren place; requesting him that if he did not like of that Motion neither, he
would at leastwise come and ask us for what he wanted, and not take it by force
as he had done. He thank d us heartily for our Offer, and begged pardon for
that Injury, and promised to ask it henceforwards as an Alms, without setting
upon any one. As for his place of abode, he told us he had none certain, but
wherever night caught him, there he lay. And he ended his Discourse with such
bitter Moans, that we must have had hearts of Flint had we not had a feeling of
'em, and kept him company therein; chiefly considering we beheld him so
strangely altered from what we had seen him before: for as I said, he was a
very fine comely young Man, and by his Speech and Behavior we could guess him
to be well born, and a Court-like sort of a Body. Now as he was talking to us,
he stopped of a sudden as if he had been struck dumb, fixing his Eyes steadfastly
on the ground; whereat we all stood in a maze. After he had thus star'd a good
while, he shut his Eyes, then opened 'em again, bit his Lips, knit his Brows,
clutch'd his Fists; and then rising from the ground, whereon he had thrown
himself a little before, he flew at the Man that stood next to him with such a
fury, that if we had not pulled him off by main force, he would have bit and
thump'd him to death. And all the while he cried out; Ah, Traitor, Ferdinand,
here, here thou shall pay for the Wrong thou have done me; I must rip up that
false Heart of thine; and a deal more he added, all in the dispraise of that
same Ferdinand. After that he flung from us without saying a word, leaping over
the Bushes and Brambles at such a strange rate, that 'twas impossible for us to
come at him. From which we gathered that his Madness comes on him by fits, and
that some one called Ferdinand had done him an ill Turn, that had brought the
poor young Man to this pass. And this has been confirmed since that many and
many times; for when he is in his right Senses, he will come and beg for Victuals,
and thank us for 'em with Tears: But when he is in his mad Fit, he will beat us tho
we proffer him Meat civilly. And to tell you the Truth, Sirs, added the
Goatherd, I and four others, of whom two are my Men, and the other two my
Friends, yesterday agreed to look for him till we should find him out, and
either by fair means or by force, to carry him to Almodovar Town, that is but
eight Leagues off; and there we'll have him cured if possible, or at least we
shall learn what he is when he comes to his Wits, and whether he has any
Friends to whom he may be sent back. This is all I know of the Matter, and I
dare assure you that the owner of those things which you saw in the way, is the
self-same Body that went so nimbly by you; for Don Quixote had by this time
acquainted the Goatherd with his having seen that Man skipping among the Rocks.

The Knight was wonderfully concerned when he had heard the Goatherd's Story,
and renewed his Resolution of finding out that distracted Wretch, whatever Time
and Pains it might cost him. But Fortune was more propitious to his Desires
than he could reasonably have expected; for just as they were speaking they
spied him right against the place where they stood, coming toward 'em out of
the Cleft of a Rock, muttering somewhat to himself which they could not well
have understood had they stood close by him, much less could they guess his
meaning at that distance. His Apparel was such as has already been said, only
Don Quixote observed, when he drew nearer, that he had on a Shamoy Wastcoat
torn in many places, which yet the Knight knew to be perfumed with Amber; and
by this, as also by the rest of his Clothes, and other Conjectures, he judged
him to be a Man of some Quality. As soon as the unhappy Creature came near 'em,
he saluted 'em very civilly, but with a hoarse Voice. Don Quixote returned his
Civilities, and alighting from Rozinante, he accosted him in a very graceful
manner, and hugged him close in his Arms, as if he had been one of his intimate
Acquaintance. The other, whom we may venture to call The ragged Knight of the
Rock, as well as Don Quixote, The Knight of the Woeful Countenance, having got
loose from that Embrace, could not forbear stepping back a little; and laying
his hands on the Champion's Shoulders, he stood staring in his Face as if he
had been striving to call to mind whether he had known him before; probably
wondering as much to behold Don Quixote's Countenance, Armor and strange
Figure, as Don Quixote did to see his tattered Condition. But the first that
opened his Mouth after this Pause was the ragged Knight, as you shall find by
the sequel of the Story.

CHAP. X. The Adventure in the Sierra Morena continued.
THE History relates that the Knight of the Woeful Countenance listened with
great attention to the disastrous Knight of the Rock, who made him the
following Complement. Truly, Sir, whoever you be (for I have not the honor to
know you) I Am much obliged to you for your Expressions of Civility and
Friendship; and I could wish I were in a condition to convince you otherwise
than by words of the deep sense I have of 'em: but my bad Fortune leaves
nothing to return for so many Favors but unprofitable Wishes. Sir, answered
Don Quixote, I Have so hearty a desire to serve you, that I was fully resolved
not to depart from this Wilderness till I had found you out, that I might know
from your self, whether the Discontents that have urged you to make choice of
this unusual Course of Life might not admit of a Remedy; for if they do, assure
your self I will leave no means untried, till I have purchased you that ease
which I heartily wish you. Or if your Disasters are of that fatal kind that
excludes you for ever from the hopes of Comfort or Relief, then will I mingle
Sorrows with you, and by sharing your load of Grief, help you to bear the
oppressing weight of Affliction. For it is the only comfort of the Miserable to
have Partners in their Woes. If then good Intentions may plead Merit, or a
grateful Requital, let me entreat you Sir, by that generous Nature that shoots
through the Gloom with which Adversity has clouded your graceful Outside; nay let
me conjure you by the darling Object of your wishes, to let me know who you
are, and what strange Misfortunes have urged you to withdraw from the Converse
of your fellow Creatures, to bury your self alive in this horrid Solitude,
where you linger out a wretched Being, a Stranger to Ease, to all Mankind, and
even to your very self. And I solemnly swear, added Don Quixote, by the Order
of Knighthood, of which I am an unworthy Professor, that if you so far gratify
my desires, I will assist you to the utmost of my capacity, either by remedying
your Disaster, if it is not past redress; or at least I will become your Partner
in sorrow, and strive to ease it by a Society in sadness.

The Knight of the Rock hearing the Knight of the Woeful Countenance talk at
that rate, looked upon him steadfastly for a long time, and viewed and reviewed
him from head to foot; and when he had gazed a great while upon him, Sir, cried
he, if you have any thing to eat, for Heaven's sake give it me, and when my
Hunger is abated, I shall be better able to comply with your Desires, which
your great Civilities and undeserved Offers oblige me to satisfy. Sancho and
the Goatherd hearing this, presently took out some Victuals, the one out of his
Bag, the other out of his Scrip, and gave it to the Knight of the Rock to allay
his hunger: and immediately the famished Forester fell on with that greedy
haste, that he seemed rather to devour than feed, for he used no intermission
between bit and bit, so greedily he chopped them up. When he had assuag'd his
voracious Appetite, he beckoned to Don Quixote and the rest to follow him; and
after he had brought 'em to a neighboring Meadow, he laid himself at his ease
on the Grass, where the rest of the Company sitting down by him, neither he nor
they having yet spoke a word since he fell to eating, he began in this manner.

Sir, said he, If you intend to be informed of my Misfortunes, you must promise
me beforehand, not to cut off the thread of my doleful Narration with any
Questions, or any other Interruption; for in the very instant that any of you
do it, I shall leave off abruptly, and will not afterward go on with the
Story. This Preamble put Don Quixote in mind of Sancho's ridiculous Tale, which
by his neglect in not telling the Goats, was brought to an untimely Conclusion.
I only use this precaution, added the Knight of the ^ock, because I would be
quick in my Relation; for the very remembrance of my former Misfortunes proves
a new one to me, and yet I promise you I Will endeavor to omit nothing that is
material, that you may have as full an account of my Disasters as I am sensible
you desire. Thereupon Don Quixote for himself and the rest having promised him
uninterrupted attention, he proceeded in this manner. My Name is Cardenio, the
place of my Birth one of the best Cities in Andaluzia; my Descent noble, and my
Parents wealthy. But my Misfortunes are so great, that they are not to be
remedied with Wealth, and have doubtless filled my Relations with the deepest
Sorrow. In the same Town dwelt the charming Lucinda, the most beautiful
Creature that ever Nature framed, equal in Descent and Fortune to my self, but
more happy and less constant. I loved, nay adored her almost from her Infancy;
and from her tender years she blessed me with as kind a Return as is suitable with
the innocent Freedom of that Age. Our Parents were conscious of that early
Friendship; nor did they oppose the growth of this inoffensive Passion, which
they perceived could have no other Consequences than a happy Union of our
Families by Marriage; a thing which the equality of our Births and Fortunes did
indeed of it self almost invite us to. Afterward our Loves so grew up with our
Years, that Lucinda's Father either judging our usual Familiarity prejudicial
to his Daughter's Honor, or for some other Reasons, sent to desire me to
discontinue my frequent visits to his House. But this restraint proved but like
that which was used by the Parents of that loving Thisbe so celebrated by the
Poets, and but added Flames to Flames, and Impatience to Desires. As our
Tongues were now debarred their former Privilege, we had recourse to our Pens,
which assumed the greater Freedom to disclose the most hidden Secrets of our
Hearts; for the presence of the beloved Object often heightens a certain awe
and bashfulness that disorders, confounds, and strikes dumb even the most
passionate Lover. How many Letters have I writ to that lovely Charmer! How many
soft moving Verses have I not addressed to her! What kind yet honorable
Returns have I not received from her! the mutual Pledges of our secret Love,
and the innocent Consolations of a violent Passion! At length languishing and
wasting with Desire, deprived of that reviving Comfort of my Soul, I resolved
to remove those Bars with which her Father's Care and decent Caution obstructed
my only happiness, by demanding her of him in Marriage. He very civilly told
me, that he thanked me for the Honor I did him, but that I had a Father alive,
whose Consent was to be obtained as well as his, and who was the most proper
Person to make such a Proposal. Thereupon going to my Father with a design to
beg his Approbation and Assistance, I found him in his Chamber with a Letter
opened in his hand, which, as soon as he saw me, he put into my hand, before I
could have time to acquaint him with my Business. Cardenio, said he, you will see
by this Letter the extraordinary kindness that Duke Ricardo has for you. I
suppose I need not tell you, Gentlemen, that this Duke Ricardo is a Grandee of
Spain, most of whose Estate lies in the best part of Andaluzia. I read the
Letter, and found it contained so kind and advantageous an Offer, that my
Father could not but accept of it with thankfulness: For the Duke entreated him
to send me to him with all speed, that I might be the Companion of his eldest
Son, promising withal to advance me to a Post answerable to the good Opinion he
had of me. This unexpected News struck me dumb; but my Surprise and
Disappointment were much greater, when I heard my Father say to me, Cardenio,
you must get ready to be gone in two days; in the mean time give Heaven thanks
for opening you a way to that Preferment, which I am sensible you deserve.
After this he gave me several wise Admonitions both as a Father and a Man of
business, and then he left me. The Day fixed for my Journey quickly came;
however the night that preceded it, I spoke to Lucinda at her Window, and told
her what had happened. I also gave her Father a visit, and informed him of it
too; beseeching him to preserve his good Opinion of me, and defer the bestowing
of his Daughter till I had been with Duke Ricardo, which he kindly promised me:
and then Lucinda and I after an exchange of Vows and Protestations of eternal
Fidelity, took our leaves of one another, with all the Grief which two tender
and passionate Lovers can feel at a separation.

I left the Town, and went to wait upon the Duke, who received and entertained
me with that extraordinary Kindness and Civility that soon raised the envy of
his greatest Favorites. But he that most endearingly caressed me, was Don
Ferdinand, the Duke's second Son, a young, airy, handsome, generous Gentleman,
and of a very amorous Disposition; he seemed to be overjoyed at my coming, and
in a most obliging manner told me he would have me be one of his most intimate
Friends. In short, he so really convinced me of his Affection, that tho his
elder Brother gave me many Testimonies of Love and Esteem, yet could I easily
distinguish between their Favors. Now, as it is common for Bosom-Friends to keep
nothing secret from each other, Don Ferdinand relying as much on my Fidelity,
as I had reason to depend on his, revealed to me his most private thoughts, and
among the rest his being in love with the Daughter of a very rich Farmer who
was his Father's Vassal. The Beauty of that lovely Country Maid, her Virtue,
her Discretion, and the other Graces of her Mind, gained her the admiration of
all those who approached her; and those uncommon Endowments had so charmed the
Soul of Don Ferdinand, that finding it absolutely impossible to corrupt her
Chastity, since she would not yield to his Embraces as a Mistress, he resolved
to marry her. I thought my self obliged by all the Ties of Gratitude and
Friendship, to dissuade him from so unsuitable a Match; and therefore I made use
of such Arguments as might have diverted any one but so confirmed a Lover from
such an unequal Choice. At last finding 'em all ineffectual, I resolved to
inform the Duke his Father with his Intentions: But Don Ferdinand was too
clear-sighted not to read my Design in my great Dislike of his Resolutions, and
dreading such a Discovery, which he knew my Duty to his Father might well
warrant, in spite of our Intimacy, since I looked upon such a Marriage as
highly prejudicial to 'em both, he made it his Business to hinder me from
betraying his Passion to his Father's Knowledge, assuring me there would be no
need to reveal it to him. To blind me effectually, he told me he was willing to
try the power of Absence, that common Cure of Love, thus to wear out and lose
his unhappy Passion; and that in order to this, he would take a Journey with me
to my Father's house, pretending to buy Horses in our Town, where the best in
the world are bred. No sooner had I heard this plausible Proposal, but I
approved it, swayed by the Interest of my own Love, that made me fond of an
opportunity to see my absent Lucinda. I have heard since that Don Ferdinand had
then already been blessed by his Mistress with all that boundless Love allows, in
the quality of a Husband, and that he only waited an opportunity to discover it
with safety, being afraid of incurring his Father's Indignation. But as that
which we call Love in young People is too often only an irregular Passion and
boiling Desire, that has no other Object than sensual Pleasure, and vanishes
with Enjoyment, while real Love fixing it self on the Perfections of the Mind
is still improving and permanent; as soon as Don Ferdinand had reaped the
Fruits of his Desires, his strong Affection slackened, and his hot Love grew
cold: So that if at first his proposing to try the power of Absence, was only a
Pretense that he might possess his wishes, there was nothing now which he more
heartily coveted, that he might avoid their former Object. And therefore having
obtained the Duke's leave, away we posted to my Father's House, where Don
Ferdinand was entertained according to his Quality; and I went to visit my
Lucinda, who by a thousand innocent Endearments, made me sensible that her
Love, like mine, was rather heightened than weakened by absence, if any thing
could heighten a Love so great and so perfect. I then thought my self obliged
by the Laws of Friendship not to conceal the Secrets of my heart from so kind
and intimate a Friend, who had so generously entrusted me with his; and
therefore, to my eternal Ruin, I unhappily discovered to him my Passion. I
praised Lucinda's Beauty, her Wit, her Virtue, and praised 'em so like a Lover,
so often and so highly, that I raised in him a great Desire to see so
accomplished a Lady; and to gratify his Curiosity, I showed her to him by the
help of a Light, one Evening at a low Window, where we used to hold our amorous
Interviews. She proved but too charming, and too strong a Temptation to Don
Ferdinand; and her prevailing Image made so deep an Impression on his Soul,
that 'twas sufficient to blot out of his mind all those daily Beauties that had
till then employed his wanton Thoughts, he was struck dumb with Wonder and
Delight at the sight of the ravishing Apparition; and in short, to see her and
to love her proved with him the same thing: and when I say to love her, I need
not add to desperation, for there is no loving her but to an Extreme. If her
Face made him so soon take fire, her Wit quickly set him all in a Flame. He
often importuned me to communicate to him some of her Letters, which I indeed
would never expose to any eyes but my own; but unhappily one day he found one,
wherein she desired me to demand her of her Father, and to hasten the Marriage.
It was penned with that tenderness and discretion, that when he had red it, he
presently cried out, that the amorous Charms that were scattered and divided
among other Beauties, were all divinely centered in Lucinda, and in Lucinda
alone. Shall I confess a shameful Truth? Lucinda's Praises, tho never so
deserved, did not sound pleasantly to my Ears out of Don Ferdinand's Mouth. I
began to entertain I know not what Distrusts and jealous Fears, the ^ather
because he would still be improving the least opportunity of talking of her,
and still of insensibly turning the Discourse we had of other matters to make
her the Subject, tho never so far fetched, of our constant Talk. Not that I was
apprehensive of the least Infidelity from Lucinda: ^ar from it; she gave me
daily fresh assurances of her inviolable Affection: but I feared every thing
from my malignant Stars, and Lovers are ^ommonly industrious to make themselves
un^asy.

It happened one day that Lucinda, who ^ook great delight in reading Books of
Knight Errantry, desired me to lend her the Romance of Amadis de Gaul --

Scarce had Cardenio mentioned Knight-Errantry, when Don Quixote interrupted
him; Sir, said he, had you but told me when you first mentioned the Lady
Lucinda, that she was an Admirer of Books of Knight-Errantry, there had been no
need of using any Amplification to convince me of her being a Person of
uncommon Sense: yet, Sir, had she not used those mighty Helps, those infallible
Guides to Sense, tho indulgent Nature had strove to bless her with the richest
Gifts she can bestow, I might justly enough have doubted whether her
Perfections could have gained her the Love of a Person of your Merit. But now
you need not employ your Eloquence to set forth the greatness of her Beauty,
the excellence of her Worth, or the depth of her Sense; for, from this account
which I have of her taking great Delight in reading Books of Chivalry, I dare
pronounce her to be the most beautiful, nay the most accomplished Lady in the
Universe: and I heartily could have wished that with Amadis de Gaul you had
sent her the worthy Don Rugel of Greece; for I am certain the Lady Lucinda
would have been extremely delighted with Darayda and Garaya, as also with the
discreet Shepherd Darinel, and those admirable Verses of his Bucolics, which he
sung and repeated with so good a Grace. But a time may yet be found to give her
the satisfaction of reading those Masterpieces if you will do me the Honor to
come to my House; for there I may supply you with above three hundred Volumes,
whch are my Soul's greatest Delight, and the darling Comfort of my Life; tho
now I remember my self, I have just reason to fear there is not one of 'em left
in my Study, thanks to the malicious Envy of wicked Enchanters. I beg your
pardon for giving you this interruption, contrary to my promise; but when I
hear the least mention made of Knight-Errantry, it is no more in my power to
forbear speaking, than it is in the Sun Beams not to warm, or in those of the
Moon not to impart her natural humidity; and therefore, Sir, I beseech you to
go on.

While Don Quixote was running on with this impertinent Digression, Cardenio
hung down his Head on his Breast with all the Signs of a Man lost in sorrow:
Nor could Don Quixote with repeated entreaties persuade him to look up, or
answer a Word. At last, after he had stood thus a considerable while, he raised
his head, and suddenly breaking silence, I am positively convinced, cried he,
nor shall any Man in the world ever persuade me to the contrary; and he is a
Blockhead who says, that great Villain, Mr. Elizabat the Barber, never lay with
Queen Madasima.

It Is false, cried Don Quixote, in a mighty heat, By all the Devils, (and with
that he raped out three or four round Oaths, as he would often do) it is all
scandal and base Detraction to say this of Queen Madasima. She was a most noble
and virtuous Lady; nor is it to be presumed that so great a Princess would ever
debase her If so far as to fall in love with a Quack. Whoever dares say she
did, lies like an errant Villain, and I Will make him acknowledge it, either a
foot or a Horseback, armed or unarm d, by Night or by Day, or how he pleases.
Cardenio very earnestly fixed his Eyes on Don Quixote while he was thus defying
him, and taking Queen Madasima's part as if she had been his true and lawful
Princess; and being provoked by these Abuses into one of his mad Fits, he took
up a great Stone that lay by him, and hit Don Quixote such a blow with it that
it beat him on his back. Sancho seeing his Lord and Master so roughly handled,
fell upon, the mad Knight of the Rock with his clench'd Fists; but he beat him
back at the first Onset, and laid him at his Feet with a single blow; and then
he fell a trampling his Guts, like a Baker in a Doughtrough. Nay the Goatherd,
who was offering to take Sancho's part, had like to have been served in the
same manner. So the ragged Knight having tumbled 'em one over another, and
beaten 'em handsomely, he left 'em, and ran into the Woods without the least
opposition.

Sancho got up when he saw him gone, and being very much out of humor to find
himself so roughly handled without any manner of reason, he began to pick a
quarrel with the Goatherd, railing at him for not forewarning 'em of the ragged
Knight's mad Fits, that they might have stood upon their Guard. The Goatherd
answered, he had given 'em warning at first, and if he could not hear, 'twas no
fault of his. To this Sancho replied, and the Goatherd made a Rejoinder, till
from Pro's and Con's they fell to a warmer way of disputing, and went to
Fisticuffs together, catching one another by the Beards, and tugging, halling,
and belabouring one another so unmercifully, that had not Don Quixote parted
'em, they would have pulled one another Chins off. Sancho in great wrath still
keeping his hold, cried to his Master, Let me alone, Sir Knight of the Woeful
Countenance. This is no dubbed Knight, but an ordinary Fellow like my self; I
may be revenged on him for the wrong he has done me; let me box it out, and
fight him fairly hand to fist like a Man. Thou may fight him as he is thy
Equal, answered Don Quixote, but thou ought not to do it since he has done
us no wrong. After this he pacified 'em, and then addressing himself to the
Goatherd, he asked him whether it were not possible to find out Cardenio again,
that he might hear the end of his Story. The Goatherd answered, that, as he had
already told him, he knew of no settled place that he used, but that if they
made any stay thereabouts he might be sure to meet with him, mad or sober, some
time or other.

CHAP. XI. Of the strange Things that happened to the valiant Knight of La
Mancha in the Mountain; and of the Penance which he did there, in imitation of
the Lovely Obscure.
DON Quixote took leave of the Goatherd, and having mounted Rozinante,
commanded Sancho to follow him, which he did, but with no very good will, his
Master leading him into the roughest and most craggy part of the Mountain. Thus
they traveled for a while without speaking a word to each other; Sancho almost
dead and ready to burst for want of a little Chat, waited with great Impatience
till his Master should begin, not daring to speak first since his strict
injunction of Silence. But at last not being able to keep his words any longer,
Good your Worship, quoth he, give me your Blessing and Leave to be gone, I
beseech you, that I may go home to my Wife and Children, where I may talk till
I Am weary, and no body can hinder me; for I must needs tell you, that for you
to think to lead me a jaunt like a Jack-a-Lanthorn, over Hedge and Ditch, through
Hills and Dales, by Night and by Day, without daring to open my Lips, is but to
bury me alive. Could Beasts speak, as they did in Giasopet's Time, it had not
been half so bad with me, for then I had had one here to have talked with: but
to trot on this fashion all the days of my Life after Adventures, and to light
on nothing but Thumps, Kicks, and Cuffs, to be one time at Leapfrog in a
Blanket, and to have the Cawl of my Belly even almost burst, as just now, and
after all forsooth to have a man's Mouth sowed up, without daring to speak
one's Mind, I say it again, no living Soul can endure it. I understand thee,
Sancho, answered Don Quixote, thou linger'st with Impatience to exercise thy
talking Faculty. Well, I am willing to free thy Tongue from this Restraint that
so cruelly pains thee, upon condition, that the time of this License shall not
extend beyond that of our continuance in these Mountains. A match, quoth
Sancho, let us make Hay while the Sun shines. I Will talk while I may; what I may
do hereafter Heaven knows best. And so beginning to take the Benefit of his
Privilege, pray Sir, quoth he, what Occasion had you to take so hotly the part
of Queen Magimasa, or what d' ye call her? What a Devil was it to you, whether
that same Master Abbot were her Friend in a Corner, or no? Had you taken no
notice of what was said, as you might well have done, seeing 'twas no business
of yours, the Madman would have gone on with his Story; you had missed a good
Thump on the Breast, and I had escaped some five or six good dowses on the
Chaps, besides the trampling of my Puddings. Upon my honor, friend Sancho,
replied Don Quixote, did thou but know, as well as I do, what a virtuous and
eminent Lady Queen Madasima was, thou would say I had a great deal of
Patience, seeing I did not strike that profane Wretch on the Mouth out of which
such Blasphemies proceeded: For in short, 'twas the highest piece of Detraction
to say, That a Queen was scandalously familiar with a Barber-Surgeon: For the
truth of the story is, that this Master Elizabat, of whom the Madman spoke, was
a Person of extraordinary Prudence, and Sagacity, and was Physician to that
Queen, who also made use of his Advice in matters of Importance; but to say she
gave him up her Honor, and prostituted her self to the Embraces of a man of an
inferior Order, was an impudent, groundless, and slanderous Accusation, worthy
the severest Punishment: neither can I believe that Cardenio knew what he said,
when he charged the Queen with that debasing Guilt; for it is plain that his
raving Fit had disordered the seat of his Understanding. Why, there it is,
quoth Sancho; who but a Madman would have minded what a Madman said? What if
the Flint that had hit you in the Breast had pash'd your Brains? We had been in
a dainty pickle for taking the part of that same Lady, with a peascod on her.
Nay and Cardenio would have come off too had he knocked you on the Head, for
the Law has nothing to do with Madmen. Sancho, replied Don Quixote, we
Knights-Errant are obliged to vindicate the honor of Women of all Quality
soever, as well against Madmen as against men in their Senses; much more of
Queens of that Magnitude and extraordinary Worth as was Queen Madasima, for
whose rare Endowments I have a peculiar Veneration; for she was a most
beautiful Lady, Discreet and Prudent to admiration, and behaved her self with
an exemplary Patience in all her Misfortunes: 'Twas then that the Company and
wholesome Counsels of Master Elizabat proved very useful to alleviate the
burden of her Afflictions; from which the ignorant and ill meaning Vulgar took
occasion to suspect and rumor, that she was guilty of an unlawful Commerce
with him. But I say once more, they lie and lie a thousand times, whoever they
be, that shall presumptuously report, or hint, or so much as think or surmise
so base a Calumny.

Why, quoth Sancho, I neither say nor think one way nor the other not I: Let them
that say it eat the Lie, and swallow it with their Bread. If they lay together,
they have answered for it before now. I never thrust my Nose into other men's
Porrige. I don't love to tell a Lie, and find the Truth; that were as bad as to
buy and sell, and live by the Loss. Let him that owns the Cow take her by the
Tail. Naked I came into the World, and naked must I go out. Many go out for
Wool, that come home shorn themselves. Little said is soon amended. It Is a Sin
to belie the Devil. But misunderstanding brings lies to Town, and there is no
padlocking of People's Mouths; for a close Mouth catches no flies.

Good Heaven, cried Don Quixote, what a Catalogue of musty Proverbs have thou
run through! What a heap of frippery Ware have thou threaded together, and how
wide from the purpose! Prithee have done, and for the Future let thy whole
Study be to serve thy Master; nor do thou concern thy self with things that are
out of thy Sphere: And remember this, That whatsoever I do, have done, and
shall do, is no more than what is the result of mature Consideration, and
strictly conformable to the Laws of Chivalry, which I understand better than
all the Knights that ever professed Knight-Errantry. Ay, ay Sir, quoth Sancho;
but pray, is it a good Law of Chivalry that says we should wander up and down,
over Bushes and Briars, in this rocky Wilderness, where there is neither
Foot-path nor Way, running a Wildgoose Chase after a Madman, who, if we light
on him again, may chance to make an end of what he has begun; not of his Tale
of a roasted Horse I mean, but of be laboring you and me thoroughly, and
squeezing out my Guts at both ends. Once more I prithee have done, said Don
Quixote: I have Business of greater Moment than the finding this frantic man;
it is not so much that Business that detains me in this barren and desolate
Wild, as a desire I have to perform a certain heroic Deed that shall
immortalize my Fame; and make it fly to the remotest Regions of the habitable
Globe; nay it shall seal and confirm me the most complete and absolute
Knight Errant in the World. But is not this same Adventure very dangerous,
asked Sancho? Not at all, replied Don Quixote, tho as Fortune may order it, our
Expectations may be baffled by disappointing Accidents: but the main thing
consists in thy Diligence. The Devil it does, quoth Sancho! I mean, said Don
Quixote, that if thou return'st with all the speed imaginable from the place
whither I design to send thee, my Pain will soon be at an end, and my Glory
will begin. And because I do not doubt thy Zeal for advancing thy Master's
Interest, I will no longer conceal my Designs from thee. Know then, my most
faithful Squire, that Amadis de Gaul was one of the most accomplished
Knights-Errant; nay I should not have said he was one of 'em, but the most
Perfect, the Chief, and Prince of 'em all. And let not the Belianises nor any
others pretend to stand in competition with him for the honor of Priority;
for, to my knowledge, should they attempt it, they would be egregiously in the
Wrong. I must also inform thee, that when a Painter studies to excel and grow
famous in his Art, he takes Care to imitate the best Originals; which Rule
ought likewise to be observed in all other Arts and Sciences that serve for the
Ornament of well regulated Commonwealths. Thus he that is ambitious of gaining
the Reputation of a Prudent and Patient Man, ought to propose to himself to
imitate Ulysses, in whose Person Homer has admirably delineated a perfect
pattern and prototype of Wisdom and heroic Patience. So Virgil in his Aeneas
has given the World a rare Example of filial Piety, and of the Sagacity of a
valiant and experienced General; both the Greek and the Roman Poets
representing their Heroes not such as they really were, but such as they should
be, to remain examples of Virtue to ensuing Ages. In the same manner, Amadis
having been the Polar Star and Sun of valiant and amorous Knights, it is him we
ought to set before our Eye as our great Exemplar, all of us that fight under
the Banner of Love and Chivalry; for it is certain that the Adventurer who shall
emulate him best, shall consequently arrive nearest to the Perfection of
Knight-Errantry. Now Sancho, I find that among other Things which most
displayed that Champion's Prudence, and Fortitude, his Constancy and Love, and
his other heroic Virtues, none was more remarkable than his retiring from his
disdainful Oriana, to do Penance on the poor Rock, changing his Name into that
of The Lovely Obscure, a Title certainly most significant, and adapted to the
Life which he then intended to lead. So I am resolved to imitate him in this,
the rather because I think it a more easy Task than it would be to copy his
other Achievements, such as cleaving the Bodies of Giants, cutting off the
heads of Dragons, killing dreadful Monsters, routing whole Armies, dispersing
Navies, and breaking the Force of Magic Spells. And since these mountainous
Wilds offer me so fair an Opportunity, I see no reason why I should neglect it,
and therefore I Will lay hold on it now. Very well, quoth Sancho; but pray, Sir,
what is it you mean to do in this Fag-end of the World? Have I not already told
thee, answered Don Quixote, that I intend to copy Amadis in his Madness,
Despair, and Fury? At the same Time I will imitate the valiant Orlando
Furioso's Extravagance, when he ran Mad, after he had found the unhappy Tokens
of the Fair Angelica's dishonorable Commerce with Medor at the Fountain; at
which Time in his frantic Despair, he tore up Trees by the Roots, troubled the
Waters of the clear Fountains, slew the Shepherds, destroyed their Flocks,
fired their Huts, demolished Houses, drove their Horses before him, and
committed a hundred thousand other Extravagancies worthy to be recorded in the
eternal Register of Fame. Not that I intend however in all things to imitate
Roldan, or Orlando, or Rotoland, (for he had all those names) but only to make
choice of such frantic Effects of his amorous Despair as I shall think most
essential, and worthy Imitation. Nay perhaps I shall wholly follow Amadis, who
without launching out into such destructive and fatal Ravings, and only
expressing his Anguish in Complaints and Lamentations, gained nevertheless a
Renown equal, if not superior to that of the greatest Heroes. Sir, quoth
Sancho, I dare say, the Knights who did these Penances had some reason to be
mad; but what need have you to be mad too? What Lady has sent you a packing, or
so much as tossed up her Snout at you? When did you ever find that my Lady
Dulcinea del Toboso, did otherwise than she should do with either Turk or
Christian? Why, there is the point cried Don Quixote, in this consists the
singular perfection of my Undertaking; for mark me Sancho, for a Knight Errant
to run mad upon any just Occasion, is neither strange nor meritorious; no, the
rarity is to run mad without a Cause, without the least Constraint or
Necessity, Sancho; there is a refined and exquisite Passion for you: for thus my
Mistress must needs have a vast Idea of my Love, since if it drove me to such a
state without any provocation, it must undoubtedly have carried me to the
strangest Extremities, had I labored under any amorous Misfortune. But
besides, I have but too just a Motive to give a loose to my raving Grief,
considering the long date of my Absence from my ever supreme Lady Dulcinea del
Toboso; for as the Shepherd in Mathias Ambrosio has it, Poor Lovers absent from
the Darling Fair,
All Ills not only dread, but bear.
Then do not lavish any more Time in striving to divert me from so rare, so
happy, and so singular an Imitation. I am mad, and will be mad, till thy return
with an answer to the Letter which thou must carry from me to the Lady
Dulcinea; and if it be as favorable as my unshaken Constancy deserves, then my
Madness and my Penance shall end; but if I find she repays my Vows and Services
with ungrateful Disdain, then will I be emphatically Mad, and scrue up my
Thoughts to such an excess of Distraction that I shall be insensible of the
rigor of my relentless Fair. Thus, what return soever she makes to my Passion,
I shall be eased one way or other of the anxious Thoughts that now divide my
Soul; either entertaining the welcome News of her reviving Pity with
demonstrations of Sense, or else showing my insensibility of her Cruelty by the
height of my Distraction. But in the mean time, Sancho, tell me, have thou
carefully preserved Mambrino's Helmet? I saw thee take it up the other Day, after
that Monster of Ingratitude had spent his Rage in vain endeavors to break it,
which by the way, argues the most excellent Temper of the Metal. Body of me,
quoth Sancho, Sir Knight of the woeful Countenance, I can no longer bear to hear
you run on at this rate: Why, this were enough to make any man believe that all
your bragging and bouncing of your Knight-Errantry, your winning of Kingdoms
with a wet Finger, and your bestowing of Islands, and Heaven knows what upon
your Squire, are mere flim flam Stories, and nothing but shams and lies: For
who the Devil can hear a man call a Barber's Basin a Helmet, nay and stand
to it, and vouch it for four days together, and not think him that says it to be
stark Mad, or without Guts in his Brains? I have the Basin safe enough here in
my Pouch, and I Will get it mended for my own Use, if ever I Have the luck to get
home to my Wife and Children. Now as I love bright Arms, cried Don Quixote, I
swear thou art the shallowest, silliest, and most stupid Fellow of a Squire
that ever I heard or read of in my Life. How is it possible for thee to be so
dull of Apprehension, as not to have learnt in all this Time that thou have
been in my Service, that all the Actions and Adventures of us Knights-errant
seem to be mere Chimeras, Follies, and Impertinences? Not that they are so
indeed, but either through the officious Care, or else through the Malice and Envy of
those Enchanters that always assist or persecute us unseen, and by their
fascinations change the appearances of our Actions into what they please,
according to their love or hate. This is the very reason why that which I
plainly perceive to be Mambrino's Helmet seems to thee to be only a Barber's
Basin, and perhaps another Man may take it to be something else. And in this I
can never too much admire the Prudence of the Sage who espouses my Interests,
in making that inestimable Helmet seem a Basin; for did it appear in its proper
Shape, its tempting Value would raise me as many Enemies as there are Men in
the Universe, all eager to snatch from me so desirable a Prize. Keep it safe
then, Sancho, for I have no need of it at present; far from it, I think to put
off my Armor, and strip my self as naked as I came out of my Mother's Womb, in
case I determine to imitate Orlando's Fury rather than the Penance of Amadis.

This Discourse brought 'em to the foot of a high Rock that stood by it self,
as if it had been hewn out and divided from the rest; by the skirt of it glided
a purling Stream that softly took its winding Course through an adjacent Meadow.
The verdant freshness of the Grass, the number of wild Trees, Plants, and
Flowers that feasted the Eye in that pleasant Solitude, invited the Knight of
the woeful Countenance to make choice of it to perform his amorous Penance; and
therefore as soon as he had let his ravished Sight rove a while over the
scattered beauties of the Place, he took possession of it with the following
Speech, as if he had utterly lost the small share of Reason he had left.
Behold, O Heavens, cried he, the place which an unhappy Lover has chosen to
bemoan the deplorable State to which you have reduced him; here shall my
flowing Tears swell the liquid Veins of this Crystal Rill, and my deep Sighs
perpetually move the Leaves of these shady Trees, the ever-renew'd Instances of
the Torments which my throbbing Heart endures. Ye Rural Deities, whoever ye be,
that make these unfrequented Deserts your Abode, hear the Complaints of an
unfortunate Lover, whom a tedious Absence, and some slight impressions of
jealous Mistrust have driven to these regions of Despair, to bewail his
rigorous Destiny, and deplore the distracting Cruelty of that ungrateful Fair
who is the perfection of all humane Beauty. Ye pitying Napaean Nymphs and
Dryades, silent Inhabitants of the Woods and Groves, assist me to lament my
Fate, or at least attend the mournful Story of my Woes; so may no designing
beastly Satyrs, those just Objects of your hate, ever have power to interrupt
your Rest. -- Oh Dulcinea del Toboso! Thou Sun that turn'st my gloomy Nights to
Day! Glory of my Pain! North-Star of my Travels, and reigning Planet that
controul'st my Heart! Pity I conjure thee the unparalled Distress to which
thy Absence has reduced the faithfullest of Lovers, and grant to my Fidelity
that kind Return which it so justly claims! So may indulgent Fate shower on
thee all the Blessings thou ever can desire, or Heavens grant! -- Ye
lonesome Trees, under whose spreading Branches I come to linger out the gloomy
shadow of a tedious Being; let the soft Language of your rustling Leaves, and
the kind nodding of your springing Boughs satisfy me that I am welcome to your
shady Harbors. O thou my trusty Squire, the inseparable Companion of my
Adventures, diligently observe what thou shall see me do in this lonely
Retreat, that thou may inform the dear Cause of my Ruin with every
particular. As he said this, he alighted, and presently taking of his Horse's
Bridle and Saddle, go, Rozinante, said he, giving the Horse a clap on the
Posteriors; he that has lost his Freedom gives thee thine, thou Steed as
renowned for thy extraordinary Actions as for thy Misfortunes: go rear thy
awful Front where e're thou please, secure that neither the Hippogriphon of
Astolpho, nor the renowned Frontino which Bradamante purchased at so high a
Price, could ever be thought thy Equals.

Now cried Sancho, a sliding knot choke him that saved me the trouble of
sending my Ass to Grass too; poor thing, had I him here he should not want two
or three claps over the Buttocks, nor a fine Speech in his praise neither,
while I took off his Panel. But stay, were he here, what need would there be
to strip him of his Harness? Alas, poor Creature, he never had any thing to do
with these mad pranks of Love no more than my self, who was his Master, when
Fortune pleased. But do you hear me, now I think on it, Sir Knight of the woeful
Countenance, if your Worship is resolved to be Mad and send me away in good
earnest, we must even clap the Saddle again on Rozinante's Back; for to tell
you the Truth I Am but a sorry Footman, and if I don't ride home I don't know
when I shall be able to come to you again. Do as thou think fit for that,
Sancho, answered Don Quixote, for I design thou shall set forward about three
Days hence. In the mean while thou shall be a witness of what I will do for my
Lady's sake, that thou may give her an account of it. Bless my Eyesight,
quoth Sancho, what can I see more than I Have seen already? Thou have seen
nothing yet, answered Don Quixote, thou must see me throw away my Armor, tear
my Cloths, knock my Head against the Rocks, and do a thousand other Things of
that kind that will fill thee with Astonishment. For goodness sake, Sir, quoth
Sancho, take heed how you quarrel with these ungracious Rocks, you may chance
to get such a crack of the Crown at the very first Rap as may spoil a rare
Madman, and a special Penitent to boot, all at one dash. No, I don't like that
way by no means; if you must needs be knocking your Noddle, to go through stitch
with this ugly Job, seeing it is all but a mock, or as it were between Jest and
Earnest, why cannot you as well play your Tricks on something that is softer than
these unconscionable Stones? you may run your Head against the Water, or rather
against Cotton, or the stuffing of Rozinante's Saddle, and then let me alone
with the rest: I Will be sure to tell my Lady Dulcinea that you bebump'd your
Poll against the point of a Rock that is harder than a Diamond.

I thank thee for thy good Will, dear Sancho, replied Don Quixote. But I assure
thee that all these seeming Extravagancies which I must run through are no Jests.
Far from it, they must be all performed seriously and solemnly; for otherwise
we should transgress the Laws of Chivalry, that forbid us to tell Lies upon
pain of Degradation: now to pretend to do one thing, and effect another, is an
Evasion which I esteem to be as bad as Lying. Therefore the Blows which I must
give my self on the Head ought to be real, substantial, sound ones, without any
Trick or mental Reservation; for which reason I would have thee leave me some
Lint and Salve, since Fortune has deprived us of the sovereign Balsam which we
lost. 'Twas a worse Loss to lose the Ass, quoth Sancho, for with him we have lost
Bag and Baggage, Lint and all. But no more of your damned Drench, if you love
me; the very thoughts on 't are enough not only to turn my Stomach, but my
Soul, such a rumbling I feel in my Wemb at the name on it. Then as for the three
Days you would have me loyter here to mind your mad Tricks, you had as good make
account they are already over; for I hold 'em for done, unsight unseen, and will
tell Wonders to my Lady: wherefore write you your Letter, and send me going
with all haste; for let me be hanged if I don't long already to be back to take
you out of this Purgatory wherein I leave you.

Do thou only call it Purgatory, Sancho, cried Don Quixote? call it Hell
rather, or something worse, if there be in Nature a term expressive of a more
wretched state. Nay, not so neither, quoth Sancho, I would not call it Hell;
because as I heard our Parson say, There Is no Retention out of Hell. Retention,
cried Don Quixot! what do thou mean by that word? Why, quoth Sancho,
Retention is Retention, it is, that whosoever is in Hell never comes, nor can
come out of it. Which shall not be your Case this Bout, if I can stir my Heels,
and have but Spurs to tickle Rozinante's Flank, till I come to my Lady
Dulcinea; for I will tell her such strange things of your Maggotty Tricks, your
Folly and your Madness, for indeed they are no better, that I Will lay my Head to
a hazel Nut, I Will make her as supple as a Glove, tho I found her at first as
tough hearted as Cork; and when I Have wheedled an Answer out of her all full of
sweet honey Words, away will I whisk it back to you cutting the Air, as swift as
a Witch upon a Broomstick, and free you out of your Purgatory; for a Purgatory
I will have it to be, in spite of Hell; nor shall you gainsay me in that I
fancy; for, as I Have told you before, there is some hopes of your Retention out
of this place.

Well, be it so, said the Knight of the Woeful Countenance; but how shall I do
to write this Letter? And the Order for the three Asses, added Sancho? I Will not
forget it, answered Don Quixote; But since we have here no Paper, I must be
obliged to write on the Leaves or Bark of Trees, or on Wax, as they did in
ancient Times; yet now I consider on it, we are here as ill provided with Wax
as with Paper. But stay, now I remember, I have Cardenio's Pocketbook, which
will supply that want in this Exigence, and then thou shall get the Letter
fairly transcribed at the first Village where thou can meet with a
Schoolmaster; or for want of a Schoolmaster, thou may get the Clark of the
Parish to do it: but by no means give it to any Notary or Lawyer to be written
out, for they commonly write such confounded hands, that the Devil himself
would scarce be able to read it. Well, quoth Sancho, but what shall I do for
want of your Name to it? Why, answered Don Quixote, Amadis never used to
subscribe his Letters. Ay, replied Sancho, but the Bill of Exchange for the
three Asses must be signed, and should I get it copied out afterward, they would
say it is not your hand, and so I shall go without the Asses. I Will write and
sign the Order for 'em in the Table Book, answered Don Quixote; and as soon as
my Niece shall see the hand, she will never scruple the delivery of the Asses:
And as for the Love-Letter, when thou get'st it transcribed, thou must get it
thus underwritten; Yours till Death, The Knight of the Woeful Countenance. It Is
no matter whether the Letter and the Subscription be written by the same hand
or no; for as I remember, Dulcinea can neither read nor write, nor did she ever
see any of my Letters, nay not so much as any of my Writing in her life: For my
Love and here is have always been purely Platonic, never extending beyond the
lawful Bounds of a modest Look; and that too so very seldom, that I dare safely
swear, that tho for these twelve Years she has been dearer to my Soul than
Light to my Eyes, yet I never saw her four times in my life, and perhaps of
those few times that I have seen her, she has scarce perceived once that I
beheld her. So strictly and so discreetly Lorenzo Corchuelo her Father, and
Aldonza Nogales her Mother have kept and educated her. Heigh-day, quoth Sancho!
Did you ever hear the like! And is my Lady Dulcinea del Toboso, at last the
Daughter of Lorenzo Corchuelo, she that is otherwise called Aldonza Lorenzo? The
same, answered Don Quixote; and it is she that merits to be the Sovereign of the
Universe. U^sdiggers quoth Sancho, I know her full well; it is a strapping Wench
y' Faith, and pitches the Bar with e're a lusty young Fellow in our Parish. By
^he Mass it is a notable strong-built, sizable, stur^y, manly Lass, and one that
will keep her Chin ^ut of the Mire I vvarrant her; nay and hold the best
Knight Errant to it that vvears a head, if ever he venture upon her. Body of me,
what a Voice she has when she sets up her Throat! I saw her one day pearch'd
up of top of our Steeple to call to some Plough-jobbers that labored in a
fallow Field; and tho they were half a League off, they heard her as plain as
if they had been in the Churchyard under her. The best of her is, that she is
neither coy nor frumpish; she is a tractable Lass and fit for a Courtier, for
she will play with you like a Kitten, and jibes and jokes at every body. And now
in good truth, Sir Knight of the Woeful Countenance, you may even play as many
Gambols as you please; you may run mad, you may hang your self for her sake,
there is no body but will say you even took the wisest course, tho the Devil
himself should carry you away a pickapack. Now am I even wild to be gone, tho
'twere for nothing else but to see her, for I have not seen her this many a
day; I fancy I shall hardly know her again, for a Woman's Face strangely alters
by being always in the Sun, and drudging and moiling in the open Fields. Well,
I must needs own I Have been mightily mistaken all along: for I durst have sworn
this Lady Dulcinea had been some great Princess with whom you were in love, and
such a one as deserved those rare Gifts you bestowed on her, as the Biscayan,
the Gally-slaves, and many others that for ought I know you may have sent her
before I was your Squire. I cannot choose but laugh to think how my Lady Aldonza
Lorenzo (my Lady Dulcinea del Toboso, I should have said) would behave her self
should any of those Men which you have sent, or may send to her, chance to go
and fall down of their Marrow-bones before her: For it is ten to one they may
happen to find her a combing of Flax. or threshing in the Barn, and then how
finely balk'd they will be; as sure as I Am alive they must needs think the Devil
owed 'em a shame, and she her self will but flout 'em, and mayhap be somewhat
netled at it.

I have often told thee, Sancho, said Don Quixote, and I tell thee again, that
thou ought to bridle or immure thy saucy prating Tongue; for tho thou art
but a dull-headed Dunce, yet now and then thy ill-manner'd Jests bite too
sharp. But that I may at once make thee sensible of thy Folly and my
Discretion, I will tell thee a short Story. A handsome, brisk, young rich Widow,
happened to fall in Love with a well-set, lusty Motillon, a Lay-Brother, or
Servant in a Convent or College.
Lay-Brother. His Superior hearing of it, took occasion to go to her, and said
to her, by way of charitable Admonition, I mightily wonder, Madam, how a Lady
of your Merit, so admired for Beauty and for Sense, and withal so Rich, could
make so ill a choice, and dote on a mean, silly, despicable Fellow, as I hear
you do, while we have in our House so many Masters of Art, Batchelors and
Doctors of Divinity, among whom your Ladyship might pick and choose. But she
soon answered the officious grave Gentleman, Sir, said she with a smile, you
are much mistaken, and think altogether after the old out-of-fashion-way, if
you imagine I have made so ill a choice; for tho you fancy the Man's a Fool,
yet as to what I take him for, he knows as much, or rather more Philosophy than
Aristotle. So, Sancho, as to the use which I make of the Lady Dulcinea, she is
equal to the greatest Princesses in the World. Prithee tell me, Do thou think
the Poets, who every one of 'em celebrate the Praises of some Lady or other,
had all real Mistresses? Or that the Amarillis's, the Phillis's, the Sylvia's,
the Diana's, the Galatea's, and the like, which you shall find in so many
Poems, Romances, Songs and Ballads, upon every Stage, and even in every
Barber's Shop, were Creatures of Flesh and Blood? No, no, never think it, for I
dare assure thee, the greatest part of 'em were nothing but the mere
Imaginations of the Poets, for a groundwork to exercise their Wits upon, and
to give the World occasion to look on the Authors as Men of an amorous and
gallant Disposition: and so it is sufficient for me to imagine that Aldonza
Lorenzo is beautiful and chaste; as for her Birth and Parentage, they concern me
but little; for there is no need to make an enquiry about a Woman's Pedigree, as
there is of us Men when some Badg of Honor is bestowed on us. And so she is to
me the greatest Princess in the World: For thou ought to know, Sancho, if
thou know it not already, that there are but two things that chiefly excite
us to love a Woman, an attractive Beauty, and an unspotted Fame. Now those two
Endowments are happily reconciled in Dulcinea; for as for the one, she has not
her equal, and few can vie with her in the other: But to cut off all Objections
at once, I imagine that all I say of her is really so, without the least
addition or diminution: I fancy her to be just such as I would have her for
Beauty and Quality. Helen cannot stand in competition with her; Lucretia cannot
rival her, and all the Heroins which Antiquity has to boast, whether Greeks,
Romans, or Barbarians, are at once outdone by her incomparable Perfections.
Therefore let the World say what it will; should the ignorant and vulgar
foolishly censure me, I please my self with the assurances I have of the
approbation of Men of the strictest Morals, and the nicest Judgment. Sir, quoth
Sancho, I knock under: You Have Reason of your side in all you say, and I own my
self an Ass. Nay, I Am an Ass to talk of an Ass; for it is ill talking of Halters
in the House of a Man that was hanged. But where is the Letter all this while,
that I may be jogging? With that Don Quixote pulled out the Table Book, and
retiring a little aside, he very seriously began to write the Letter; which he
had no sooner finished but he called Sancho, and ordered him to listen while he
read it over to him, that he might carry it as well in his Memory as in the
Pocketbook, in case he should have the ill luck to lose it by the way; for he
feared the worse of his malignant Fortune. But, Sir, quoth Sancho, tear the
Book, and give me two or three Copies, and then I Will be sure to deliver my
Message safe enough I warrant ye. For it is a folly to think I can ever get it
by heart; alas my memory is so bad, that many times I forget my own Name. But
yet for all that read it out to me, I beseech you, for I Have a hugeous mind to
hear it, I dare say it is as fine as tho 'twere in print. Well then listen, said
Don Quixote.

Don Quixote de la Mancha, to Dulcinea del Toboso.
High and Sovereign Lady!
HE that is stabbed to the quick with the Poignard of Absence, and wounded to
the heart with Love's most piercing Darts, sends you that Health which he wants
himself, Dulcissima Dulcinea.
sweetest Dulcinea del Toboso. If your Beauty reject me, if your Virtue refuse
to raise my fainting hopes, if your Disdain exclude me from Relief, I must at
last sink under the pressure of my Woes, tho much enured to Sufferings; for my
Pains are not only too violent, but too lasting. My trusty Squire Sancho will
give you an exact account of the Condition to which Love and you have reduced
me, too beautiful Ingratitude. If you relent at last, and pity my Distress,
then I may say, I live, and you preserve what is yours. But if you abandon me to
Despair, I must patiently submit, and by ceasing to breath, satisfy your
Cruelty and my Desire.

Yours till Death, The Knight of the Woeful Countenance.


Now may I never stir, quoth Sancho, if ever heard a finer Thing in my born
days! how neatly and roundly you tell her your mind, and how cleverly you
brought in at last, The Knight of the Woeful Countenance. Well, I say it again in
good earnest, you're a Devil at every thing; there is no kind of thing in the
varsal World but what you can turn your hand to. A Man ought to have some
knowledge of every thing, answered Don Quixote, if he would be duly qualified
for the Employment I profess. Well then, quoth Sancho, do so much as write the
Warrant for the three Asses, on the other side of that leaf; and pray write it
mighty plain, that they may know it is your hand at first sight. I will, said
Don Quixote, and with that he wrote it accordingly, and then read it in this
form.

My dear Niece,
UPON sight of this my first Bill of Asses, be pleased to deliver three of the
five which I left at home in your Custody, to Sancho Panca, my Esquire, for the
value received of him here; and this, together with his Receipt, shall be your
Discharge. Given in the very Bowels of Sierra Morena, the 22d of August in the
present Year.


It Is as it should be, quoth Sancho, there only wants your Name at the bottom.
There Is no need to set my name, answered Don Quixote; I Will only set the two
first Letters of it, and 'twill be as valid as if 'twere written at length, tho
'twere not only for three Asses, but for three hundred. I dare take your
Worship's word, quoth Sancho; and now I Am going to saddle Rozinante, and then
you shall give me your Blessing; for I intend to set out presently, without
seeing any of your mad Tricks; for I am so sure of your going thorow-stitch
with your Penance, that I dare swear to more than will serve your turn. Nay,
said Don Quixote, I will have thee stay a while Sancho, and see me stark naked;
it is also absolutely necessary thou should see me practice some twenty or
thirty mad Gambols; I shall have dispatched 'em in less than half an hour: and
when thou have been an Eyewitness of that Essay, thou may with a safe
Conscience swear thou have seen me play a thousand raving Tricks; for I dare
assure thee for thy encouragement, thou never can exceed the number of those
I shall perform. Good Sir, quoth Sancho, as you love me don't let me stay to
see you naked, 'twill grieve me so to the heart, that I shall cry my eyes out,
and I have blubbered and howled but too much since yesternight for the loss of
my poor Ass; my Head's so sore with it, I a'n't able to cry any longer: But if
you will needs have me see some of your Anticks, pray do 'em in your Clothes out
of hand, and the first that come into your Head; for the sooner I go, the
sooner I shall come back, and the way to be gone is not to stay here. I long to
bring you an Answer to your Heart's content: and I Will be sure to do it, or let
the Lady Dulcinea look to it; for if she dos not do as she should do, may old
Nick toss me in his Blanket, if I don't make her give up an answer to my mind,
with good kicks of the Guts, and swinging Fisticuffs on her Jobbernol: For it is
not to be endured, that such a notable Knight Errant as your Worship is should
thus run out of his Wits without Rhyme or Reason for such a -- Odsbobs, I know
what I know, she had not best provoke me to say the rest: if she dos, I shall
out with it, and tell her a piece of my mind. In troth, murder will out. I Will
make her know her Driver with a wannion. I Will handle her without Mittius: She
shall find me as crusty as she is hard baked: She must not think to put tricks
upon Travelers.

I protest Sancho, said Don Quixote, I think thou art grown as mad as my self.
Nay, not so mad neither, replied Sancho, but somewhat more angry. But talk no
more of that: let us see, how will you do for Victuals when I Am gone? Do you mean
to do like to other Madman yonder, rob upon the high way, and snatch the
Goatherds Victuals from 'em by main force? Never let that trouble thy
unmannerly Brain, replied Don Quixote; for tho I had here all the Dainties that
can feast a luxurious Palate, I would feed upon nothing but the Herbs and Fruits
which this Wilderness will afford me; for the singularity of my present Task
consists in fasting and half starving my self, and in the performance of some
other Discipline. But there is another thing come into my head, quoth Sancho:
how shall I do to find the way hither again, it is such a by-place? Take good
notice of it beforehand, said Don Quixote, and I Will endeavor to keep
hereabouts till thy return. Besides, about the time when I may reasonably
expect thee back, I Will be sure to watch on the top of yonder high Rock for thy
coming. But now I bethink my self of a better Expedient; thou shall cut down a
good number of Boughs, and strew 'em in the way as thou rid'st along, till thou
get'st to the Plains, and this will serve thee to find me again at thy return,
like Perseus's Clue to get out of the Labyrinth of Crete.

I Will go about it out of hand, quoth Sancho; with that he went and cut down a
Bundle of Boughs, then came and asked his Master's Blessing, and after a shower
of Tears shed on both sides, mounted Rozinante, which Don Quixote very
seriously recommended to his care, charging him to be as tender of that
excellent Steed as of his own Person. After that he set forward toward the
Plains, strewing several Boughs as he rid according to order. His Master had
importuned him to stay and see him do two or three of his antic Postures before
he went, but he could not prevail with him: However before he was got out of
sight he considered of it, and rode back. Sir, quoth he, I Have thought better of
it, and I believe I had best take your advice, that I may swear with a safe
conscience I Have seen you play your mad tricks; therefore I would see you do one
of 'em at least, tho I think I Have seen you do a very great one already, I mean
your staying by your self in this Desert.

I had advised thee right, said Don Quixote, and therefore stay but while a Man
may repeat the Creed, and I will show thee what thou would see. With that,
slipping off his Breeches, and stripping himself naked to the waste, he gave
two or three frisks in the Air, and then pitching on his hands, he fetched his
heels over his head twice together; and, as he tumbled with his Legs aloft,
discovered such Rarities, that Sancho even made haste to turn his Horse's Head,
that he might no longer see 'em, and rode away fully satisfied that he might
swear his Master was mad; and so we will leave him to make the best of his way,
till his return, which will be more speedy than might be imagined.

CHAP. XII. A Continuation of the refined Extravagancies by which the Gallant
Knight of La Mancha chose to express his Love in the Sierra Morena.
THE History relates that as soon as the Knight of the Woeful Countenance saw
himself alone, after this first exercise of frisking and tumbling, the merry
Prelude to his amorous Penance, he ascended to the top of a high Rock, and
there began seriously to consider with himself what Resolution to take in that
nice Dilemma which had already so perplexed his mind; that is, whether he
should imitate Orlando in his extraordinary Fury, or Amadis in his melancholic
Extravagancies. To which purpose, discoursing with himself, I do not much
wonder, said he, at Orlando's being so very valiant, considering he was
enchanted in such a manner, that he could not be slain but by the thrust of a
Pin through the bottom of his Foot, which he sufficiently secured, always wearing
seven iron Soles to his Shoes: and yet this avail d him nothing against
Bernardo del Carpio, who understanding his Enchantment, squeezed him to death
between his arms at Ronce valles. But setting aside his Valor, let us examine
his madness; for that he was mad, is an unquestionable truth, nor is it less
certain that his Frenzy was occasioned by the assurances he had that the fair
Angelica had resigned her self up to the unlawful Embraces of Medor, that young
Moor with curled Locks, who was Page to Agramant. Now after all, seeing he was
too well convinced of his Lady's Infidelity, it is not to be admired he should
run mad. But how can I imitate him in his Furys, if I cannot imitate him in
their occasion? For I dare swear, my Dulcinea del Toboso never saw such a Moor
since she first beheld the Light, and she is now the very same she was when her
Mother blessed the World with her Birth: So that I should do her a great Injury
should I entertain any dishonorable Thoughts of her Behavior, and launch into
that wild Ocean of madness that tossed Orlando's Soul. On the other side, I
find that Amadis de Gaul, without punishing himself with such a Distraction,
or expressing his Resentments in so boisterous and raving a manner, got a,
great a Reputation for being a Lover as any one whatsoever: For what I find in
History as to his abandoning himself to sorrow is only this: He found himself
disdained, his Lady Oriana having charged him to get out of her sight, and not
presume to appear in her presence till she gave him leave; and this was the
true Reason why he retired to the poor Rock with the Hermit, where he gave up
himself wholly to grief, and wept a Deluge of Tears, till pitying Heaven at
last commiserating his Affliction sent him relief in the height of his Anguish.
Now then since this is true, as I know it is, what need have I to tear off my
Clothes, to rend and root up these harmless Trees, or trouble the clear Water
of these Brooks, that must give me Drink when I am thirsty? No, long live the
Memory of Amadis de Gaul, and let him be the great Exemplar which Don Quixote
de la Mancha chooses to imitate in all things that will admit of a Parallel. So
may it be said of the living Copy as was said of the dead Original, that if he
did not perform great things, yet no Man was more ambitious of undertaking 'em
than he: And tho I am not disdained nor discarded by my Dulcinea, yet it is
sufficient that I am absent from her. Then it is resolved! And now ye famous
Actions of the great Amadis, occur to my remembrance, and be my trusty guides
to follow his Example. This said, he called to mind that the chief exercise of
that Hero in his Retreat was Prayer: To which purpose our modern Amadis
presently went and made himself a Rosary of Gauls or Acorns instead of Beads;
but he was extremely troubled for want of an Hermit to hear his Confession, and
comfort him in his Affliction. However he entertained himself with his amorous
Contemplations, walking up and down the Meadow, and writing some Poetical
Conceptions in the smooth Sand, and upon the Bark of Trees, all of 'em
expressive of his Sorrows, and the Praises of Dulcinea. But unhappily none were
found entire and legible but these STANZA'S that follow.

Ye lofty Trees, with spreading Arms,
The Pride and Shelter of the Plain;
Ye humbler Shrubs, and flowery Charms
Which here in springing Glory reign!
If my Complaints may Pity move,
Hear the sad Story of my Love!
While with me here you pass your Hours,
Should you grow faded with my Cares,
I Will bribe you with refreshing Showers;
You shall be watered with my Tears.
Distant, tho present in Idea,
I mourn my absent Dulcinea
Del Toboso.
Love's truest Slave, despairing, chose
This lonely Wild, this desert Plain,
The silent witness of the Woes
Which he, tho guiltless, must sustain.
Unknowing why these Pains he bears,
He Groans, he Raves, and he Despairs.
With lingering Fires Love racks my Soul:
In vain I grieve, in vain lament:
Like tortured Fiends, I weep, I howl,
And burn, yet never can Repent.
Distant, tho present in Idea,
I mourn my absent Dulcinea
Del Toboso.
While I through Honor's thorny Ways
In search of distant Glory rove,
Malignant Fate my Toyls repays
With endless Woes, and hopeless Love.
Thus I on barren Rocks despair,
And curse my Stars, yet bless my Fair.
Love armed with Snakes has left his Dart,
And now does like a Fury rave,
And scourge, and sting on every Part,
And into Madness lash his Slave.
Distant, tho present in Idea,
I mourn my absent Dulcinea
Del Toboso.
This ridiculous Addition of del Toboso made those who had found those Verses
afterward laugh heartily; and they imagined that when Don Quixote made them,
he was afraid that those who should happen to read 'em would not understand on
whom they were made, should he omit to mention the Place of his Mistress's
Birth and Residence: and this was indeed the true Reason, as he himself
afterward confessed. With this Employment did our disconsolate Knight beguile
some tedious hours. Sometimes also he expressed his Sorrows in Prose, sighed to
the Winds, and called upon the Sylvan Gods, the Fauns, the Naiades, the Nymphs
of adjoining Groves, and the mournful Echo, imploring their Attention and
Condolement with repeated Supplications: at other Times he employed himself in
gathering Herbs for the support of languishing Nature, which decayed so fast,
what with this slender Diet, and what with his studied anxiety and intenseness
of Thinking, that had Sancho stayed but three Weeks from him, whereas by good
Fortune he staid but three Days, the Knight of the woeful Countenance would have
been reduced to that meager and dismal Condition, that his very Mother would
never have known the Child of her own Womb.

But now it is necessary we should leave him awhile to his Sighs, his Sobs, and
his amorous Expostulations, and see how Sancho Panca behaved himself in his
Embassy. He made all the haste he could to get out of the Mountain, and then
taking the direct Road to Toboso, the next Day he arrived near the Inn where he
had been tossed in a Blanket. Scarce had he descried the fatal Walls, but a
sudden shivering seized his Bones, and he fancied himself to be again dancing
in the Air; so that he had a good mind to have rode further before he baited,
tho 'twere Dinner time, and his Mouth watered strangely at the thoughts of a
hot bit of Meat, the rather as he had lived altogether upon cold Victuals for a
long while. This greedy longing drew him near the Inn in spite of his aversion
to the Place; but yet when he came to the Gate, he had not the Courage to go
in, but stopped there, not knowing whether he had best enter or no. While he
sat musing, two men happened to come out, and believing they knew him, look,
cried one to the other, is not that Sancho Panca, whom the Housekeeper told us
her Master had inveigled to go along with him? The same, answered the other;
and more than that, he rides on Don Quixote's Horse. Now these two happened to
be the Curate and the Barber, who had brought his Books to a Trial, and passed
Sentence on 'em: Therefore they had no sooner said this, but they called to
Sancho, and asked him where he had left his Master? The trusty Squire presently
knew 'em, and having no mind to discover his Master's Condition, told 'em his
Master was taken up with Business of great Consequence at a certain Place,
which he durst not discover for his Life. No, no, Sancho Panca, cried the
Barber, you must not think to put us off with a flim flam. Story; if you will not
tell us where he is, we shall believe you have murdered him and robbed him of
his Horse; therefore either satisfy us where you have left him, or we'll have you
laid by the Heels. Look you Neighbor, quoth Sancho, I a'n't afraid of Words
do you see; I am neither a Thief nor a Manslayer; I kill no Body, so no Body kill
me; I leave every man to fall by his own Fortune, or by the hand of him that
made him. As for my Master, I left him a frisking and doing Penance in the
midst of you Mountain to his heart's Content. After this, without any further
entreaty, he gave 'em a full Account of that Business, and of all their
Adventures, how he was then going from his Master to carry a Letter to my Lady
Dulcinea del Toboso, Lorenzo Corchuelo's Daughter, with whom he was up to the
ears in Love. The Curate and the Barber stood amazed hearing all these
particulars; and tho they already knew Don Quixote's madness but too well, they
wondered more and more at the increase of it, and at so strange a Cast and
variety of Extravagance. Then they desired Sancho to show 'em the Letter: He
told 'em 'twas written in a Pocketbook, and that his Master had ordered him to
get it fairly transcribed upon Paper at the next Village he should come at.
Whereupon the Curate promising to write it out very fairly himself, Sancho put
his Hand in his Bosom to give him the Table Book; but tho he fumbled a great
while for it, he could not find it there, he looked, and looked again, but it
had been all in vain, tho he had searched till Doom's-day; for he came away
from Don Quixote without it. This put him into a cold Sweat, and made him turn
as pale as Death; he fell a searching all his Clothes, turned his Pockets
inside outward, fumbled in his Bosom again: but being at last convinced he had
it not about him, he fell a raving and stamping, and cursing himself like a
Madman; he rent his Beard from his Chin with both hands, befisted his own
forgetful Scull, and his blubber Cheeks, and gave himself a bloody Nose in a
Moment. The Curate and the Barber asked him what was the matter with him, and
why he punished himself at that strange rate? I deserve it all, quoth Sancho,
like a buffle headed, cockle brained Moon-calf as I am, for losing at one Cast
no less than three Asses, whereof the least was worth a Castle. How so, quoth
the Barber? Why, cried Sancho, I Have lost that same Table Book, wherein was
written Dulcinea's Letter, and a Bill of Exchange drawn by my Master upon his
Niece for three of the five Asses which he has at home; and with that he told
'em how he had lost his own. But the Vicar cheered him up, and promised him to
get him another Bill of Exchange from his Master, written upon Paper, whereas
that in the Table Book not being in due form, would not have been accepted.
With that Sancho took Courage, and told 'em if it were so, he cared not a straw
for the loss of Dulcinea's Letter, for he knew it almost all by Rote. Then
prithee let us hear it, said the Barber, and we'll see and write it. In order to
this Sancho paused and began to study for the words; presently he fell a
scratching his thick Scull, he stood first upon one Leg, then upon another,
gaped upon the Skies, scowl'd upon the Ground, knit his Brows, rubbed his
Forehead, laid one hand upon his Eyes, and bit his Nails with the other; and
at last after he had gnawed almost half of 'em, and kept the Curate and the
Barber a long while waiting to hear this rare Letter repeated; odsnigs, cried
he, good Mr. Doctor, the Devil's in it! May I be choked if I can remember a
word of this confounded Letter, but only that there was at the beginning, High
and subterrane Lady; Sovereign or superhuman Lady, you would say, quoth the
Barber. Ay Gaffer, quoth Sancho, you're in the right -- But stay now, I think I
can remember some of that which followed; ho! I have it, I have it now -- He that
is wounded, and wants Sleep, sends you the Dagger -- which he wants himself --
that stabbed him to the Heart -- and the Hurtman does kiss your Worship's Hands
-- with my Desire -- sweetest Dulcinea del Toboso; and thus he went on rambling
a good while with I don't know what more of fainting and Relief, and sinking,
till at last he ended with Yours till Death, The Knight of the Woeful
Countenance. The Curate and the Barber were mightily pleased with Sancho's
excellent Memory, insomuch that they desired him to repeat the Letter twice or
thrice more, that they might also get it by heart, and write it down, which
Sancho did very freely; but, every time, he made many odd Alterations and
Additions, as pleasant as the first. Then he told 'em many other Things of his
Master, but spoke not a word of his own being tossed in a Blanket at that very
Inn: He also told 'em that if he brought a kind Answer from the Lady Dulcinea,
his Master would forthwith set out to see and make himself an Emperor, or at
least a King; for so they two had agreed between themselves, he said, and that
after all 'twas a mighty easy matter for his Master to become one, such was his
Prowess and the strength of his Arm. Which being done, his Master would marry
him to one of the Empresse's Damsels, and that fine Lady was to be Heiress to a
large County on the main Land, but not to any Island or Islands, for he was
weary of 'em. Poor Sancho spoke all this so seriously, and so feelingly, ever
and anon rubbing his Nose, and stroking his Beard, that now the Curate and the
Barber were more surpised than they were before, considering the prevalent
Influences of Don Quixote's Folly upon that silly credulous Fellow. However
they did not think it worth their while to undeceive him yet, seeing this was
only a harmless Delusion that might divert 'em a while; and therefore they
exhorted him to pray for his Master's Health and long Life, seeing it was no
impossible thing but that he might in time become an Emperor by his Valor, a
Cardinal, or an Archbishop at least by his Prudence.

But pray, good Mr. Doctor, asked Sancho, should my Master have no mind to be
an Emperor, and take a fancy to be an Archbishop, I would fain know what your
Archbishops-Errant are wont to give their Squires? Why, answered the Curate,
they use to give 'em some Parsonage, or Prebendary, or some such other Benefice
or Church-Living: which, with the profits of the Altar, and other Fees, brings
'em in a handsome Revenue. Ay, but says Sancho, to put in for that, the Squire
must be a single man, and know how to answer and assist at Mass at least; and
how shall I do then, seeing I have the ill luck to be sped? nay and besides I
don't so much as know the first Letter of my Christ-cross-row? What will become
of me should it come into my Master's Head to make himself an Archbishop, and
not an Emperor, as it is the Custom of Knights-Errant? Don't let that trouble
thee, friend Sancho, said the Barber, we'll talk to him about it, and advise
him, nay urge it to him as a point of Conscience to be an Emperor, and not an
Archbishop, which will be better for him, by reason he has more Courage than
Learning.

Troth, I Am of your Mind, quoth Sancho, tho he is such a Headpiece that I dare
say he can turn himself to any thing. Ne'ertheless I mean to make it the burden
of my Prayers, that Heaven may direct him to that which is best for him, and
what may enable him to reward me most. You speak like a wise man, and a good
Christian, said the Curate: But all we have to do at present, is to see how we
shall do to get your Master to give over that severe unprofitable Penance which
he has undertaken. And therefore let us go in to consider about it, and also to
eat our Dinner, for I fancy it is ready by this Time. Do you two go in, if you
please, quoth Sancho, but as for me I had rather stay without, and anon I Will
tell you why I don't care to go in a Doors: however pray send me out a bit of
hot Victuals to eat here, and some Provender for Rozinante. With that they went
in, and a while after the Barber brought him out his Dinner, and returning to
the Curate they consulted how to compass their Design. At last the latter
luckily bethought himself of an Expedient that seemed most likely to take, as
exactly fitting Don Quixote's Humor; which was, that he should disguise
himself in the habit of a Damsel-Errant, and the Barber should alter his Dress
as well as he could, so as to pass for his Squire, or Gentleman Usher. In that
Equipage, added he, we will go to Don Quixote; and feigning my self to be a
distressed Lamsel, I will beg a Boon of him, which he as a valorous
Knight Errant, will not fail to promise me. By this means I will engage him to
go with me to redress a very great Injury done me by a false and discourteous
Knight; beseeching him not to desire to see my Face, nor to ask me any thing
about my Circumstances till he has revenged me on that wicked Knight. This bait
will take, I dare engage, and by this Stratagem we'll decoy him back to his own
House, where we'll try to cure him of his romantic Frenzy.

CHAP. XIII. How the Curat and the Barber put their Design in execution: With
other things worthy to be recorded in this Important History.
THE Curat's Project was so well liked by the Barber, that they instantly put
it into practice. First, They borrowed a complete Woman's Apparel of the
Hostess, leaving her in Pawn a new Cassock of the Curat's; and the Barber made
himself a long Beard with a grizled Ox's Tail, in which the Innkeeper used to
hang his Combs. The Hostess being desirous to know what they intended to do
with those things, the Curat gave her a short account of Don Quixote's
Distraction, and their Design: Whereupon the Innkeeper and his Wife presently
guest this was their Romantic Knight that made the precious Balsam; and
accordingly they told 'em the whole story of Don Quixote's lodging there, and
of Sancho's being tossed in a Blanket: Which done, the Hostess readily fitted
out the Curat at such a rate, that 'twou'd have pleased any one to have seen
him; for she dressed him up in a Cloth Gown trimmed with Borders of black
Velvet, every, one the breadth of a Span, all pink'd and jagg'd, and a pair of
green Velvet Bodice, with Sleeves of the same, and faced with white Satin;
which Accoutrem^nts probably had been in fashion in old Queen Bamba's Days. The
Curat would not let her encomber his Head with Woman's Headgeer, but only
clapped upon his Crown a white quilted Cap which he used to wear anights, and
bound his Forehead with one of his Garters that was of black Taffety, making
himself a kind of a Muffler and Vizard-Mask with the other. Then he half buried
his Head under his Hat, pulling it down to squeeze in his Ears; and as the
broad Brim flapp'd down over his Eyes, it seemed a kind of Umbrella. This done,
he wrapped himself up in his long Cloak, and up he got upon his Side-Saddle
like a Woman. Then the Barber clapped on his Ox-tail Beard, half red, half
grizzled, which hung from his Chin down to his Waste: and having mounted his
Mule, they took leave of their Host and Hostess, as also of the good,
conditioned. Maritornes, who vowed, tho she was a Sinner, to tumble her Beads
and say a Rosary to their Intention.

But scarce were they got out of the Inn, when the Curat began to be troubled
with a Scruple of Conscience about his putting on Woman's Apparel, being
apprehensive of the Indecency of the Disguise in a Priest, tho the goodness of
his Intent might well warrant a Dispensation from the strictness of Decorum:
Therefore he desired the Barber that they might change Dresses, thinking that
in his Habit of a Squire he should less profane his own Dignity and Character,
to which after all he ought to have a greater regard than to Don Quixote,
withal assuring the Barber, that unless he consented to this exchange, he was
absolutely resolved to go no further. Sancho came up with 'em just upon this
Demur, and was ready to split his sides with laughing at the sight of those
strange Masqueraders. In short, the Barber consented to be the Damosel, and to
let the Curat be the Squire. Now while they were thus changing Sexes, the Curat
offered to tutor him how to behave himself in that Female Attire, so as to be
able to wheedle Don Quixote out of his Penance. But the Barber desired him not
to trouble himself about that matter, assuring him that he was well enough
versed in Female Affairs to be able to act a Damosel without any directions.
However, he said he would not now stand fiddling and managing his Pins to prink
himself up, seeing 'twou'd be time enough to do that when they came near Don
Quixote's Hermitage; and therefore having folded up his Clothes, and the Curat
his Beard, they spurred on, while their Guide Sancho entertained 'em with a
Relation of the mad tattered Gentleman whom they had met in the Mountain;
however without mentioning a word of the Portmanteau, or the Gold: For as much
a Fool as he was, he loved to keep Money when he had it, and was wise enough to
keep his own Counsel.

They got next day to the place where Sancho had strewn the Boughs to direct
him to Don Quixote, and therefore he advised 'em to put on their Disguises, if
'twere as they told him, that their Design was only to make his Master leave
that wretched kind of Life in order to become an Emperor. Thereupon they
charged him on his Life not to take the least notice who they were. As for
Dulcinea's Letter, if Don Quixote asked him about it, they ordered him to say
he had delivered it; but that by reason she could neither write nor read, she
had sent him her answer by word of Mouth, which was, that on pain of her
Indignation he should immediately put an end to his severe Penance, and repair
to her Presence. This they told Sancho, together with what they themselves
designed to say, was the only way to oblige his Master to leave the Desert,
that he might prosecute his Design of making himself an Emperor, assuring him
they would take care he should not entertain the least thought of an
Archbishopric.

Sancho listened with great attention to all these Instructions, and treasured
'em up in his mind, giving the Curat and the Barber a world of Thanks for their
good Intention, of advising his Master to become an Emperor, and not an
Archbishop; for, as he said, he imagined, in his simple Judgment, that an
Emperor-Errant was ten times better than a sneaking Archbishop-Errant, and
could reward his Squire a great deal better.

He likewise added, that he thought it would be better for him to go to his
Master somewhat before 'em, and give him an account of his Lady's kind Answer;
for perhaps that alone would be sufficient to fetch him out of that place,
without putting 'em to any further trouble. They liked this Proposal very well,
and therefore agreed to let him go, and wait there till he came back to give
'em an account of his Success. With that Sancho rode away, and struck into the
Clefts of the Rocks in order to seek out his Master, leaving the Curat and the
Barber by the side of a Brook, where the neighboring Hills, and some Trees
that grew along its Banks, combined to make a cool and pleasant Shade. There
they sheltered themselves from the scorching Beams of the Sun that commonly
shines intolerably hot in those parts at that time, being about the middle of
Aug^st, and hardly three a Clock in the Afternoon. While they quietly refreshed
themselves in that delightful place, where they had agreed to stay till
Sancho's return, they heard a Voice, which tho unattended with any Instrument,
ravished their Ears with its melodious sound. And what increased their surprise
and their admiration was, to hear such artful Notes, and such delicate Music,
in so unfrequented and wild a place, where scarce any Rustics ever straggled,
much less such skilful Songsters as the Person whom they heard unquestionably
was. For tho the Poets are pleased to fill the Fields and Woods with Swains and
Shepherdesses that sing with all the sweetness and delicacy imaginable, yet
it is well enough known that those Gentlemen deal more in Fiction than in Truth,
and love to embellish the Descriptions they make. Nor could our two listening
Travelers think it the Voice of a Peasant when they began to distinguish the
Words of the Song; for they seemed to relish more of a Courtly Style than of a
Rural Composition. These were the Verses.

A SONG.
I.
WHAT makes me languish and complain?
O it is disdain!
What yet more fiercely Tortures me?
It Is Jealousy.
How have I all my Patience lost?
By Absence crossed.
Then hopes farewell; there is no Relief:
I sink beneath oppressing Grief.
Nor can a Wretch without despair,
Scorn Jealousy, and Absence bear.
II.
What in my Breast this Anguish drove?
Intruding Love.
What could such mighty ills create?
Blind Fortune's hate.
What cruel Powers my Fate approve?
The Powers above.
Then let me bear and cease to moan:
It Is glorious thus to be undone.
When these invade, who dares oppose?
Heaven, Love, and Fortune are my Foes.
III.
Where shall I find a speedy Cure?
Death is a sure.
No milder Means to set me free?
Inconstancy.
Can nothing else my Pains assuage?
Distracting Rage.
What dye or change? Lucinda lose?
O let me rather Madness choose!
But judge, ye Gods, what we endure
When Death or Madness are a Cure!
The Time, the Hour, the solitariness of the Place, the Voice and agreeable
manner with which the unseen Musician sung, so filled the Hearers Minds with
Wonder and Delight, that they were all attention; and when the Voice was
silent, they continued so too a pretty while, watching with listening Ears to
catch the expected Sounds, and expressing their satisfaction best by that dumb
Applause. At last suspecting it would sing no more, they resolved to find out
the charming Songster; but as they were going to attempt it, they heard the
wished for Voice begin another Air, which fixed 'em where they stood, till it
had sung the following Sonnet.

A SONNET.
O Sacred Friendship, Heaven's Delight,
Which tired with Man's unequal Mind,
Took to thy Native Skies thy Flight,
While scarce thy Shadow's left behind!
From thee, diffusive Good, below
Peace and her Train of Joys we trace:
But Falsehood with dissembled show
Too often usurps thy sacred Face.
Blessed Genius, then resume thy Seat!
Destroy Imposture and Deceit,
Which in thy Dress confound the Ball!
Harmonious Peace and Truth renew,
Show the false Friendship from the true,
Or Nature must to Chaos fall.
This Sonnet concluded with a deep Sigh, and such ^oleful Throbs that the
Curate and the Barber now out of Pity, as well as Curiosity before, resolved
instantly to find out who this mournful Songs^er was. They had not gone far,
when by the side of a Rock they discovered a Man whose Shape and Aspect
answered exactly to the Description which Sancho had given 'em of Cardenio.
They observed that he stopped short as soon as he spied 'em, yet without any
signs of fear; only he hung down his ^^ad, like one abandoned to Sorrow, never
so much a^ lifting up his Eyes to mind what they did. The Curate who was a good
and a well spoken Man, ^^esently guessing him to be the same of whom Sancho had
given them an account, went toward him, and addressing himself to him with
great Civility and Discretion, earnestly entreated him t^ forsake this Desert,
and a course of Life so wretched and forlorn which endangered his Title to a
better, and from a wilful Misery might make him fall into greater and
everlasting Woes. Cardenio was then free from the Distraction that so often
disturbed his Senses; yet seeing two Persons in a Garb wholly different from
that of those few Rusticks who frequented these Deserts, and hearing 'em talk
as if they were no Strangers to his Concerns, he was somewhat surprised at
first; however having looked upon 'em earnestly for some time, Gentlemen, said
he, whoever ye be, I find Heaven pitying my Misfortunes has brought ye to these
Solitary Regions to retrieve me from this afrightful Retirement, and recover me
to the Society of Men. But because you do not know how unhappy a Fate attends
me, and that I never am freed from one Affliction, but to fall into a greater,
you perhaps take me for a Man naturally endowed with a very small stock of
Sense, and what is worse for one of those Wretches who are altogether deprived
of Reason: and indeed I cannot blame any one that entertains such thoughts of
me; for even I my self am convinced that the bare remembrance of my Disasters
often distracts me to that degree, that losing all Sense of Reason and Knowledge
I unman my self for the time, and launch into those Extravagances which nothing
but the height of Frenzy and Madness would commit. And I am the more sensible
of my being troubled with this Distemper, when People tell me what I have done
during the Violence of that terrible Accident, and give me too certa^^ Proofs
of it. And after all I can alledg no oth^^ Excuse but the Cause of my
Misfortune which o^casion'd that frantic Rage, and therefore tell the story of
my hard Fate to as many as have the patience to hear it; for Men of Sense,
perceiving the Cause, will not wonder at the Effects, and though they can give me
no Relief, yet at least they will cease to condemn me; for a bare Relation of
my Wrongs must needs make 'em lose their Resentments of the Effects of my
Disorder into a Compassion of my miserable Fate. Therefore, Gentlemen, if you
come here with that design, I beg that before you give your selves the trouble
of reproving or advising me, you will be pleased to attend to the Relation of
my Calamities. For perhaps when you have heard it you will think 'em past
Redress, and so will save your selves the labor you would take. The Curate and
the Barber who desired nothing more than to hear the Story from his own Mouth,
were extremely glad of his Proffer; and having assured him, they had no design
to aggravate his Miseries with pretending to remedy 'em, nor would they cross
his Inclinations in the least, they entreated him to begin his Relation.

The unfortunate Cardenio then began his Story, and went on with the first part
of it, almost in the same Words as far as when he related it to Don Quixote and
the Goatherd, when the Knight out of his superstitious Niceness to observe the
Decorum of Chivalry gave an Interruption to the Relation by quarrelling about
Master Elizabat, as we have already said. Then he went on with that Passage
concerning the Letter sent him by Lucinda, which Don Ferdinand had unluckily
found, happening to be by, and to open the Book of Amadis de G^ule first when
Lucinda sent it back to Cardenio with that Letter in it between the Leaves;
which Cardenio told 'em was as follows.

Lucinda to Cardenio.
I discover in you every Day so much Merit, that I am obliged or rather forced
to esteem you more and more. If you think this Acknowledgment to your
Advantage, make that use of it which is most consistent with your Honor and
mine. I have a Father that knows you, and is too kind a Parent ever to obstruct
my Designs when he shall be satisfied with their being just and honorable: So
that it is now your part to show you love me as you pretend, and I believe.


This Letter, continued Cardenio, made me resolve once more to demand Lucinda
of her Father in Marriage, and was the same that increased Don Ferdinand's
Esteem for her, by that discovery of her Sense and Discretion, which so
enflamed his Soul, that from that Moment he secretly resolved to destroy my
Hopes e're I could be so happy as to crown 'em with Success. I told that
perfidious Friend what Lucinda's Father had advised me to do, when I rashly had
asked her for my Wife before, and that I durst not now impart this to my
Father, left he should not willingly consent I should marry yet Not but that he
knew, that her Quality, Beauty and Virtue were sufficient to make her an
Ornament to the noblest House in Spain, but because I was apprehensive he would
not let me marry till h^ saw what the Duke would do for me. Don Ferdinand with
a pretended officiousness proffered me to speak to my Father, and persuade him
to treat with Lucinda's. Ungrateful Man! deceitful Friend ambitious Marius!
cruel Catiline! wicked Sylla perfidious Galalon! faithless Vellido! malicious
Julian! treacherous miserable Judas! Thou all those fatal hated, Men in one,
false Ferdinand! What Wrongs had that fond confiding Wretch done thee, who thus
to thee unbosom'd all his Cares, all the Delights and Secrets of his Soul? Why
shoud'st thou injure me who still endeavored to discharge the Duty of a
Friend, and scru'd up Friendship almost to the pitch of Love? But oh! I rave
unhappy Wretch, I should rather accuse the Cruelty of my Stars, whose fatal
Influence pours Mischiefs on me, which no Earthly Force can resist, nor human
Art prevent. Who would have thought that Don Ferdinand, whose Quality and Merit
entitled him to the lawful Possession of Beauties of the highest Rank, and whom
I had engaged by a thousand endearing marks of Friendship and Services, should
forfeit thus his Honor and his Truth, and lay such a treacherous Design to
deprive me of all the Happiness of my Life? But I must leave expostulating to
end my Story. The Traitor Ferdinand, thinking his Project unpracticable while I
stayed near Lucinda, bargained for six fine Horses the same day that he
promised to speak to my Father, and presently desired me to ride away to his
Brother for Money to pay for 'em. Alas I was so far from suspecting his
Treachery, that I was glad of doing him that piece of Service. Accordingly I
went that very Evening to take my leave of Lucinda, and to tell her what Don
Ferdinand had promised to do. She bid me return with all the haste of an
expecting Lover, not doubting but our lawful Wishes might be crowned as soon as
my Father had spoke for me ^o here is. When she said this, I marked her trick^ing
Tears, and a sudden Grief so obstructed her ^peech, that, tho she seemed to
strive to tell me ^omething more, she could not give it utterance. This unusual
Scene of Sorrow strangely amazed and moved me; yet because I would not murder
hope, I chose to attribute this to the tenderness of her Affection, and
unwillingness to part with me. In short away I went, buried in deep Melancholy,
and full of Fears and Imaginations, for which I could give no manner of Reason.
I delivered Don Ferdinand's Letter to his Brother, who received me with all the
Kindness imaginable, but did not dispatch me as I expected. For to my Sorrow he
enjoined me to tarry a whole Week, and to take care the Duke might not see me,
his Brother having sent for Money unknown to his Father. But this was only a
Device of false Ferdinand's; for his Brother did not want Money, and might have
dispatched me immediately, had he not been privately desired to defer my Return.

This was so displeasing an Injunction that I was ready to have come away
without the Money, not being able to live so long absent from my Lucinda,
principally considering in what Condition I had left her. Yet at last I forced
my self to stay, and my respect for my Friend prevailed over my Impatience. But
e're four tedious Days were expired, a Messenger brought me a Letter which I
presently knew to be Lucinda's Hand. I opened it with trembling Hands and an
aching Heart, justly imagining it was no ordinary Concern that could urge her to
send thither to me. And before I read it I asked the Messenger who had given't
him; he answered me that, going by accidentally in the Street about Noo^ in our
Town, a very handsome Lady, all in Tears had called him to her Window, and with
great Precipitation, Friend, said she, if you be a Christian, as you seem to
be, for Heaven's sake take this Letter and deliver it with all speed into the
Person's own Hand, to whom it is directed: I assure you, in this you will do a very
good Action; and, that you may not want Means to do it, take what is wrapped up
in this; and saying this, she threw me a Handkerchief wherein I found a hundred
Reals, this Gold Ring which you see, and the Letter I now brought you: which
done, I having made her signs to let her know I would do as she desired,
without so much as staying for an Answer, she went from the Grate. This Reward,
but much more that beautiful Lady's Tears and earnest Prayers, made me post
away to you that very Minute, and so in sixteen hours, I have traveled
Eighteen long Leagues. While the Messenger spoke, I was seized with sad
Apprehensions of some fatal News, and such a trembling shook my Limbs, that I
could scarce support my fainting Body. However, taking Courage, at last I read
the Letter; the Contents of which were these.

Don Ferdinand, according to his promise, has desired your Father to speak to
mine; but he has done that for himself which you had engaged him to do for you;
for he has demanded me for his Wife; and my Father, allured by the Advantages
which he expects from such an Alliance, has so far consented, that two Days
hence the Marriage is to be performed; and with such privacy that only Heaven
and some of the Family are to be Witnesses. Judge of the Affliction of my Soul
by that concern which I guess fills your own; and therefore haste to me, my
dear Cardenio. The Issue of this business will show how much I love you. And
grant propicious Heaven, this may reach your Hands e're mine is in danger of
being joined with his who keeps his Promises so ill.


I had no sooner read the Letter, added Cardenio, but away I flew, without
waiting for my Dispatch; for then I too plainly discovered Don Ferdinand's
Treachery, and that he had only sent me to his Brother to take the advantage of
my Absence. Revenge, Love and Impatience gave me Wings, so that I got home
privately the next Day just when it grew duskish, in good time to speak with
Lucinda; and leaving my Mule at the honest Man's House who brought me the
Letter, I went to wait upon my Mistress whom I luckily found at the A la rexa,
at the Iron-gate. In Spain the Lovers make their Courtship at a low Window that
has a Grate before it, having seldom Admission into the House till the old
People and they have agreed.
Window, the only Witness of our Loves. She presently knew me, and I her, but
she did not welcome me as I expected, nor did I find her in such a dress as I
thought suitable to our Circumstances. But what Man of Assurance dares but
pretend to know thoroughly the Riddle of a Woman's Mind, and who could ever hope
to fix her mutable Nature? Cardenio, said Lucinda to me, my Wedding Clothes are
on, and the perfidious Ferdinand with my covetous Father, and the rest stay for
me in the Hall, to perform the Marriage Rites; but they shall sooner be
Witnesses of my Death than of my Nuptials. Be not troubled, my Dear Cardenio;
but rather strive to be present at that Sacrifice. I promise thee, if
Entreaties and Words cannot prevent it, I have a Dagger that shall do me
Justice; and my Death at least shall give thee undeniable Assurances of my Love
and Fidelity. Do Madam, cried I to her with Precipitation, and so disordered
that I did not know what I said, let your Actions verify your Words. Let us
leave nothing unattempted that may serve our common Interests; and I assure
you, if my Sword does not defend 'em well, I will turn it upon my own Breast,
rather than outlive my Disappointment. I cannot tell whether Lucinda heard me,
for she was called away in great haste, the Bridegroom impatiently expecting
her. My Spirit forsook me when she left me, and my Sorrow and Confusion cannot
be expressed. Methought I saw the Sun set for ever; and my Eyes and my Senses
partaking of my Distraction, I could not so much as spy the Door to go into the
House, and seemed rooted to the place where I stood. But at last the
Consideration of my Love having roused me out of this stupifying Astonishment,
I got into the House without being discovered, every thing being there in a
hurry; and going into the Hall I hid my self behind the Hangings, where two
pieces of Tapstry met, and gave me liberty to see without being seen. Who can
describe the various Thoughts, the Doubts, the Fears, the Anguish, that
perplexed and tossed my Soul while I stood waiting there! Don Ferdinand entered
the Hall not like a Bridegroom, but in his usual Habit, with only a Cousin
German of Lucinda's, the rest were the People of the House. Some time after
came Lucinda her self, with her Mother, and two waiting Women. I perceived she
was as richly dressed as was consistent with her Quality, and the solemnity of
the Ceremony; but the Distraction that possessed my Soul lent me no time to
note particularly the Apparel she had on. I only marked the Colors that were
Carnation and White, and the splendour of the Jewels that enriched her Dress in
many places; but nothing equaled the luster of her Beauty that adorned her
Person much more than all those Ornaments. Oh Memory, thou fatal Enemy of my
Ease, why do thou now so faithfully represent to the Eyes of my Mind
Lucinda's incomparable Charms? Why do thou not rather show me what she did
then, that moved by so provoking a Wrong, I may endeavor to revenge it, or at
least to dye! Forgive me these tedious Digressions, Gentlemen! Alas, my Woes
are none of those that can or ought to be related with Brevity; for to me every
Circumstance seems worthy to be enlarg d upon.

The Curate assured Cardenio, that they attended every word with a mournful
Pleasure that made 'em greedy of hearing the least Passage. With that, Cardenio
went on. All Parties being met, said he, the Priest entered, and taking the
young Couple by the Hands, he asked Lucinda whether she were willing to take
Don Ferdinand for her Wedded Husband? With that, I thrust out my Head from
between the two pieces of Tapstry, listening with anxious Heart to hear her
answer, upon which depended my Life and Happiness. Dull heartless Wretch that I
was! Why did I not then show my self! why did I not call to her aloud, Consider
what thou do Lucinda, thou art mine, and can not be another Man's: Nor
can thou speak now the fatal Yes, without injuring Heaven, thy self and me,
and murdering thy Cardenio. And thou, perfidious Ferdinand, who dare to
violate all Rights, both human and divine, to rob me of my Treasure: Can
thou hope to deprive me with impunity of the comfort of my Life? Or think
thou that any Consideration can stifle my Resentments when my Honor and my
Love lie at stake? Fool that I am! now that it is too late, and danger is far
distant, I say what I should have done, and not what I did then: After I Have
suffered the Treasure of my Soul to be stolen, I exclaim against the Thief whom
I might have punished for the base Attempt, had I had but so much Resolution to
revenge, as I have now to complain. Then let me rather accuse my faint Heart
that durst not do me right, and let me dye here like a Wretch void both of
Sense and Honor, the outcast of Society and Nature. The Priest stood waiting
for Lucinda's Answer a good while before she gave it; and all that time I
expected she would have pulled out her Dagger, or unloos'd her Tongue to plead
her former Engagement to me. But alas to my eternal Disappointment I heard her
at last with a feeble Voice pronounce the fatal Yes; and then Don Ferdinand
saying the same, and giving her the Ring, the sacred Knot was tied, which Death
alone can dissolve. Then did the faithless Bridegroom advance to embrace his
Bride, but she laying her Hand upon her Heart, in that very Moment swoon'd away
in her Mother's Arms. Oh what Confusion seized me, what Pangs, what Torments
racked my Soul, seeing the Falsehood of Lucinda's Promises, all my hopes
shipwrack'd, and the only thing that made me wish to live, for ever ravished
from me! Confounded and despairing, I looked upon my self as abandoned by
Heaven to the Cruelty of my Destiny; and the Violence of my Grief stifling my
Sighs, and denying a passage to my Tears, I felt my self transfixed with
killing Anguish, and burning with jealous Rage and Vengeance. In the mean time
the whole Company was troubled at Lucinda's swooning; and as her Mother
unclasp'd her Gown before, to give her Air, a folded Paper was found in her
Bosom, which Don Ferdinand immediately snatched, then stepping a little aside,
he opened it and read it by the light of one of the Tapers. And as soon as he
had done, he as it were, let himself fall upon a Chair, and there he sat with
his Hand upon the side of his Face, with all the signs of Melancholy and
Discontent, as unmindful of his Bride as if he had been insensible of her
Accident. For my own part, seeing all the House thus in an uproar, I resolved
to leave the hated Place without caring whether I were seen or not, and, in
case I were perceived to act such a desperate part in punishing the Traitor
Ferdinand, that the World should at once be informed of his Perfidiousness, and
the Severity of my just Resentment. But my Destiny that reserved me for more
lasting Woes, allowed me then the use of that small remainder of my Senses,
which afterward quite forsook me: So that I left the House without revenging
my self on my Enemies, whom I could have easily sacrificed to my Rage in this
unexpected Disorder; and I chose to inflict upon my self for my Credulity, the
Punishment which their Infidelity deserved. I went to the Messengers House
where I had left my Mule, and without so much as bidding him adieu, I mounted
and left the Town like another Lot without turning to give it a parting look;
and as I rode along the Fields, Darkness and Silence round me, I vented my
Passion in Execrations against the treacherous Ferdinand, and in as loud
Complaints of Lucinda's breach of Vows and Ingratitude. Thus abandoning my self
to these tempestuous Thoughts, I rode on all that Night, and about break of Day
I struck into one of the Passes that lead into these Mountains; where I
wandered for three Days together without keeping any Road, till at last coming
to a certain Valley that lies somewhere where hereabouts, I met some Shepherds
of whom I inquired the way to the most craggy and inaccessible part of these
Rocks. They directed me, and I made all the haste I could to get thither,
resolved to linger out my hated Life far from the Converse of false ungrateful
Mankind. When I came among those Deserts, my Mule through weariness and hunger
fell down dead, and I my self was so weak, so tired and dejected, being almost
famished, and withal destitute and careless of Relief, that I soon laid my
self down, or rather fainted on the Ground, where I lay a considerable while, I
don't know how long, extended like a Corpse. When I came to my self again, I got
up, and could not perceive I had any Appetite to eat: I found some Goatherds by
me who, I suppose, had given me some Sustenance, tho I were not sensible of
their Relief. For they told me in what a wretched Condition they found me,
staring and talking so strangely, that they judged I had quite lost my Senses.
I have indeed since that had but too much cause to think that my Reason
sometimes leaves me, and that I commit those Extravagances which are only the
Effects of senseless Rage and Frenzy, tearing my Clothes, howling through these
Deserts, filling the Air with Curses and Lamentations, and idly repeating a
thousand times Lucinda's Name, all my Wishes at that time being to breath out
my Soul with the dear Word upon my Lips; and when I come to my self, I am
commonly so weak and so weary, that I am scarce able to stir. As for my place
of Abode, it is usually some hollow Cork-Tree, into which I creep at Night; and
there those few Goatherds whose Cattle browse on the neighboring Mountains out
of pity and Christian Charity, sometimes leave some Victuals for the support of
my miserable Life. For even when my Reason is absent, Nature performs its
animal Functions, and Instinct guides me to satisfy it. Sometimes these good
People meet me in my lucid Intervals, and chide me for taking that from 'em by
force and by surprise, which they are always so ready to give me willingly; for
which Violence I can make no other excuse but the Extremity of my Distraction.
Thus must I drag a miserable Being, till Heaven, pitying my Afflictions, will
either put a Period to my Life, or blot out of my Memory perjured Lucinda's
Beauty and Ingratitude, and Ferdinand's Perfidiousness. Could I but be so happy
e're I dye, I might then hope to be able in time to compose my frantic
Thoughts: but if I must despair of such a Favor, I have no other way but to
recommend my Soul to Heaven's Mercy; for I am not able to extricate my Body nor
my Mind out of that Misery, in which I have unhappily plunged my self.

Thus, Gentlemen, I have given you a faithful account of my Misfortunes. Judge
now whether 'twas possible I should relate 'em with less Concern. And pray do
not lose time to prescribe Remedies to a Patient who will make use of none. I
will and can have no health without Lucinda: Since she forsakes me, I must dye:
She has convinced me by her Infidelity that she desires my ruin; and, by my
unparalled Sufferings, to the last I will strive to convince her I deserved a
better Fate. Let me then suffer on, and may I be the only unhappy Creature whom
Despair could not relieve, while the Impossibility of receiving. Comfort moves
a Cure to so many other Wretches.

Here Cardenio made an end of his mournful Story, and just as the Curate was
preparing to give him some proper Consolation, he was prevented by the doleful
Accents of another Complaint that engaged 'em to new Attention. That the
account of that Adventure is reserved for the fourth Book of this History; for
our Wise and Judicious Historian Cid Hamet Benengeli puts here a Period to the
third.

The End of the Third Book.
ADVERTISEMENT.
TVlly's Morals; being his three Books of Offices, newly Englished, with Notes
explaining the Method and Meaning of the Author. In 12 Printed for Sam. Buckley
in St. Paul's Churchyard.

THE HISTORY Of the RENOWNED DON QUIXOTE De la MANCHA.

Written in Spanish by Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra.

Translated from the Original by several Hands:

And published by Mr. Motteux.

VOL. II.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1712.

To the Honorable Edward Coke, Esquire;
SIR,
IT was the Practice of most Authors in the last Age, to prefix their own
Pictures to their Books; but our present Writers, much happier in their
Politics, have chosen to set off their Productions with nobler Frontispieces,
prefixing the Effigies of Persons of Quality and Merit to recommend their Works
to the World. This Practice, Sir, though very prudent, is in many Cases very
presumptuous. To draw in the Wit and Perfections of a fine Gentleman to
patronize the Impertinence and Folly of some insipid Piece, may bring the
Patron's Merit, and the Author's Modesty, very much in Question. But here, Sir,
I make bold to say, that I have suited my Book to my Patron. The great
Cervantes begs the Protection of the Noble Mr. Coke. The finest Flowers,
principally those of Foreign Growth, require the highest Shelter and the
warmest Sun. Then where should Wit fly in these tempestuous Times, but where
the Nobility and Greatness of a House may protect it from the Storm; where a
generous Hospitality emboldens it to intrude, and the Warmth of Fortune may
cherish and enliven it? The Blessing of a plentiful Estate sets you above all
Anxieties in this Life, and the Riches of your Mind secure your Happiness in
the future. To double your Fortune, you have a charming and virtuous Partner to
share it: She makes your Life truly happy, for your Desires are at home. There
Cervantes expects a candid Reception; he knows that where the Mind is easy,
the Sentiments will be mild; he chooses to be entertained where he shall find no
Diversions but what are innocent and ingenious, like his own.

Your youthful Thoughts have been so improved by conversing with the best
Authors, that what is the Study of others, is now your Recreation; and those
Years, which among many are thrown away in superficial Vanities, were by you
employed in admiring the authentic Worthies of History, and in modelling your
Life by their great Examples. Among other Observations that you have made on
this Subject, you found, that the greatest Men have still been the greatest
Patrons. Hence flows your Candor and indulgent Favor to Wit and Learning; and
from hence the declining Stage finds the Benefit of your generous Support. Your
Judgment in Dramatick Poetry can separate the Improvement and Morality of the
Scene from the Viciousness of an Exposed Character; and you can receive the
true Diversion of a well-wrought Play; for wherever Virtue is rewarded, your
Merit is justly complimented.

On this Consideration D. Quixote, being in a manner a dramatick Piece, lays a
Claim to your Protection; and those who have the Honor of your Conversation,
must draw this Remark from your nice Taste, and judicious Sentiments on that
Subject and other polite Studies, That the Beauties of Cervantes are properly
your own; Instruction without Severity, Learning without Pedantry, and the
Sense of Philosophy in the Words of a Gentleman.

These Motives, Sir, were sufficient of themselves to make me beg your
Acceptance of this Work, sure of the Approbation of those ingenious Gentlemen
who have done me the Favor to join with me in the Translation of this Volume.
But I had still a further Engagement to this Address, my own private Ambition
of owning to the World how much I have been obliged to your Generosity. And I
cannot forbear complimenting my self upon the Countenance of a Person of your
Merit, for whom I have so great a Respect. This Occasion, Sir, might engage me
to make you an Author's Acknowledgment, were not your Virtues so far above the
Reach of my Pen. Yet, as long as this Work shall endure, your Favors shall be
found upon Record, and that I am,

SIR, Your most Humble and most Obliged Servant, P. Motteux.

THE Life and Achievements Of the Renowned Don Quixote de la Mancha. PART I.
BOOK IV.
CHAP. I. The pleasant new Adventure which the Curate and the Barber met in
Sierra Morena.
MOST fortunate and happy was the Age that ushered into the World that most
daring Knight Don Quixote de la Mancha! For from his generous Resolution to
revive and restore the ancient Order of Knight-Errantry, that was not only
wholly neglected, but almost lost and abolished, our Age barren in it self of
pleasant Recreations, derives the pleasure we reap from his true History, and
the various Tales and Novels with which it is intermixed, in some Respects as
entertaining, as artful, and authentic. We told you, that as the Curate was
preparing to give Cardenio some seasonable Consolation, he was prevented by a
Voice whose doleful Complaints reached his Ears. O Heavens! cried the unseen
Mourner, is it possible I have at last found out a place that will afford a
private Grave to this miserable Body, whose Load I so repine to bear? Yes, if
the silence and solitude of these Deserts do not deceive me, here I may dye
concealed from human Eyes. Ah me! Ah wretched Creature! To what Extremity has
Affliction driven me, reduced to think these hideous Woods and Rocks a kind
Retreat! It Is true indeed, I may here freely complain to Heaven, and beg for
that Relief which I might ask in vain of false Mankind; for it is vain, I find,
to seek below either Counsel Ease, or Remedy. The Curate and his Company who
heard all this distinctly, justly conjectured they were very near the Person
who thus expressed his Grief, and therefore rose to find him out. They had not
gone above twenty Paces, before they spied a Youth in a Country Habit sitting
at the Foot of a Rock behind an Ash-tree; but they could not well see his Face,
being bowed almost upon his Knees, as he sat washing his Feet in a Rivulet that
glided by. They approached him so softly that he did not perceive 'em: And, as
he was gently paddling in the clear Water, they had time to discern that his
Legs were as white as Alabaster, and so taper, so curiously proportioned; and
so fine, that nothing of the kind could appear more beautiful. Our observers
were amazed at this Discovery, rightly imagining that such tender Feet were not
used to trudge in rugged ways, or measure the steps of Oxen at the Plough, the
common Employments of People in such Apparel; and therefore the Curate who went
before the rest, whose Curiosity was heightened by this sight, beckoned to 'em
to step aside, and hide themselves behind some of the little Rocks that were
by; Which they did, and from thence making a stricter Observation, they found
he had on a short Jerkin of coarse russet Cloth tied about his Waste, with a
kind of Linen Scarf, and a pair of Breeches of the same, together with a Thrum
cap under which his hair was turned up. After he had washed his Feet, to dry
'em he pulled out from under his Cap a Handkerchief that partly hid his Cheeks;
and with that looking up, he discovered so charming a Face, so accomplished a
Beauty, that Cardenio could not forbear saying to the Curate, that since this
was not Lucinda, 'twas certainly no human Form, but an Angel. And then the
Youth taking off his Cap, and shaking his Head, an incredible quantity of
lovely Hair flowed down upon his Shoulders, and not only covered 'em, but
almost all his Body; by which they were now convinced, that what they at first
took to be a Country Lad, was a young Woman, and one of the most beautiful
Creatures in the World. Cardenio was not less surpised than the other two, and
once more declared, that no Face could vie with hers but Lucinda's. To part her
deshevel'd Tresses, she only used her slender Fingers, and at the same time
discovered so fine a pair of Arms and Hands, so white and lovely, that our
three admiring Gazers grew more impatient to know who she was, and moved
forwards to accost her. At the noise they made, the pretty Creature started;
and peeping through her Hair which she hastily removed from before her Eyes with
both her Hands, she no sooner saw three Men coming toward her, but in a mighty
fright she snatched up a little Bundle that lay by her, and fled as fast as she
could, without so much as staying to put on her Shoes, or do up her Hair. But
alas! scarce had she gone six steps, when her tender Feet not being able to
endure the rough Encounter of the Stones, the poor affrighted Fair fell on the
hard Ground; so that those from whom she fled, hastening to help her, Stay,
Madam, cried the Curate, whoever you be, you have no reason to fly: We have no
other Design but to do you Service. With that, approaching her, he took her by
the hand, and perceiving she was so disordered with Fear and Confusion that she
could not answer a word, he strove to compose her mind with kind Expressions.
Be not afraid, Madam, continued he; though your Hair has betrayed what your
Disguise concealed from us, we are but the more disposed to assist you, and do
you all manner of Service. Then pray tell us how we may best do it. I imagine
it was no slight occasion that made you obscure your singular Beauty under so
unworthy a Disguise, and venture into this Desert, where it was the greatest
Chance in the World that ever you met with us. However, we hope it is not
impossible to find a Remedy for your Misfortunes, since there are none which
reason and time will not at last surmount: And therefore, Madam, if you have
not absolutely renounced all human Comfort, I beseech you tell us the Cause of
your Affliction, and assure your self we do not ask this out of mere Curiosity,
but a real Desire to serve you, and either to condole or assuage your Grief.

While the Curate endeavored thus to remove the trembling fair one's
Apprehension, she stood amazed, staring, without speaking a Word, sometimes
upon one, sometimes upon another, like one scarce well awake, or like an
ignorant Clown who happens to see some strange sight. But at last the Curate
having given her time to recollect her self, and persisting in his earnest and
civil Entreaties, she fetched a deep Sigh, and then disclosing her Lips, broke
silence in this manner. Since this Desert has not been able to conceal me, and
my Hair has betrayed me, 'twou'd be needless now for me to dissemble with you;
and since you desire to hear the Story of my Misfortunes, I cannot in Civility
deny you, after all the obliging Offers you have been pleased to make me: But
yet, Gentlemen, I am much afraid, what I Have to say will but make you sad, and
afford you little Satisfaction; for you will find my disasters are not to be
remedied. There Is one thing that troubles me yet more; it shocks my Nature to
think I must be forced to reveal to you some Secrets which I had designed to
have buried in my Grave: But yet considering the Garb and the Place you have
found me in, I fancy 'twill be better for me to tell you all, than to give you
occasion to doubt of my past Conduct and my present Designs by an affected
Reservedness. The disguised Lady having made this Answer, with a modest Blush
and extraordinary Discretion, the Curate and his Company, who now admired her
the more for her Sense, renewed their kind Offers and pressing Solicitations;
and then they modestly let her retire a Moment to some distance to put her self
in decent Order. Which done, she returned, and being all seated on the Grass,
after she had used no small Violence to smother her Tears, she thus began her
Story.

I was born in a certain Town of Andaluzia, from which a Duke takes his Title,
that makes him a Grandee of Spain. This Duke has two Sons, the Eldest Heir to
his Estate and Virtues, the Younger Heir to nothing I know of but the Deceit
and Perfidiousness of the greatest Traitors that ever lived. My Father, who is
one of his Vassals, is but of low degree; but so very rich, that, had Fortune
equaled his Birth to his Estate, he could have wanted nothing more, and I
perhaps had never been so miserable; for I verily believe, my not being of
noble Blood is the chief occasion of my Ruin. And yet my Parents are not so
meanly born neither, as to have any cause to be ashamed of their Original. It Is
true, they have been Farmers from Father to Son, yet without any mixture or
stain of infamous or scandalous Blood. They are good old Christians (as we call
our true primitive Spaniards) and the Antiquity of their Family, together with
their large Possessions, and the Port they live in, raises 'em much above their
Profession, and has by little and little almost universally gained 'em the name
of Gentlemen, setting 'em in a manner equal to many such in the World's Esteem.
As I am their only Child, they ever loved me with all the tenderness of
indulgent Parents; and their great Affection made 'em esteem themselves happier
in their Daughter, than in the peaceable Enjoyment of their large Estate. Now
as it was my good Fortune to be possessed of their Love, they were pleased to
entrust me with their Wealth. The whole House was left to my Management, and I
took such Care not to abuse the Trust they reposed in me, that I never
forfeited their good opinion of my Discretion. The time I had to spare from the
Care of the Family, I commonly employed in the usual Exercises of young Women,
sometimes making Lace, or at my Needle, and now and then reading some good
Book, or playing on the Spanish Harp; having experienced that Music was very
proper to recreate the wearied Mind: And this was the innocent Life I led. I
have not descended to these Particulars out of vain Ostentation, but merely
that when I come to relate my Misfortunes, you may observe I do not owe 'em to
my ill Conduct. While I thus lived the Life of a Nun, unseen as I thought by
any body but our own Family, and never leaving the House but to go to Church,
which was commonly betimes in the Morning, and always with my Mother, and so
close hid in a Veil that I could scarce find my way; notwithstanding all the
Care that was taken to keep me from being seen, 'twas unhappily rumored abroad
that I was handsome, and to my eternal Disquiet Love intruded into my peaceful
Retirement. Don Ferdinand, second Son to the Duke I Have mentioned, had a sight
of me -- Scarce had Cardenio heard Don Ferdinand named, but he changed Color,
and betrayed such a Disorder of Body and Mind, that the Curate and the Barber
were afraid he would have fallen into one of those frantic Fits that often
used to take him. But by good Fortune it did not come to that, and he only set
himself to look steadfastly on the Country Maid, presently guessing who she was;
while she continued her Story, without taking any notice of the alteration of
his Countenance.

No sooner had he seen me, said she, but, as he since told me, he felt in his
Breast that violent Passion of which he afterward gave me so many Proofs. But
not to tire you with a needless Relation of every Particular, I will pass over
all the Means he used to inform me of his Love: He purchased the good Will of
all our Servants with private Gifts: He made my Father a thousand kind Offers
of Service: Every Day seemed a day of Rejoicing in our Neighborhood, every
Evening ushered in some Serenade, and the continual Music was even a
Disturbance in the Night. He got an infinite number of Love Letters transmitted
to me, I don't know by what means, every one full of the tenderest Expressions,
Promises, Vows, and Protestations. But all this assiduous Courtship was so far
from inclining my Heart to a kind Return, that it rather moved my Indignation;
insomuch that I looked upon Don Ferdinand as my greatest Enemy, and one wholly
bent on my Ruin: Not but that I was well enough pleased with his Gallantry, and
took a secret Delight in seeing my self thus courted by a Person of his
Quality. Such demonstrations of Love are never altogether displeasing to Women,
and the most disdainful, in spite of all their Coyness, reserve a little
Complaisance in their Hearts for their Admirers. But the disproportion between
our Qualities was too great to suffer me to entertain any reasonable Hopes, and
his Gallantry too singular not to offend me. Besides, my Father, who soon made
a right Construction of Don Ferdinand's Pretensions, with his prudent
Admonitions concurred with the Sense I ever had of my Honor, and banished from
my Mind all favorable Thoughts of his Addresses. However, like a kind Parent,
perceiving I was somewhat uneasy, and imagining the flattering Prospect of so
advantageous a Match might still amuse me, he told me one day he reposed the
utmost Trust in my Virtue, esteeming it the strongest Obstacle he could oppose
to Don Ferdinand's dishonorable Designs; yet if I would Marry, to rid me at
once of his unjust Pursuit, and prevent the ruin of my Reputation, I should
have Liberty to make my own choice of a suitable Match, either in our own Town
or the Neighborhood; and that he would do for me whatever could be expected
from a loving Father. I humbly thanked him for his Kindness, and told him, that
as I had never yet had any Thoughts of Marriage, I would try to rid my self of
Don Ferdinand some other way. Accordingly I resolved to shun him with so much
Precaution, that he should never have the Opportunity to speak to me: But all
my reserv'dness, far from tiring out his Passion, strengthened it the more. In
short, Don Ferdinand, either hearing or suspecting I was to be married, thought
of a contrivance to cross a Design that was likely to cut off all his Hopes.
One Night therefore when I was in my Chamber, no Body with me but my Maid, and
the Door double-lock'd and bolted, that I might be secured against the Attempts
of Don Ferdinand, whom I took to be a Man who would stick at nothing to compass
his Designs, unexpectedly I saw him just before me; which amazing sight so
surpised me, that I was struck dumb, and fainted away with Fear. So I had not
power to call for help, nor do I believe he would have given me time to have
done it, had I attempted it; for he presently ran to me, and taking me in his
Arms, while I was sinking with the Fright, he spoke to me in such endearing
Terms, and with so much Address, and pretended Tenderness and Sincerity, that I
did not dare to cry out when I came to my self. His Sighs, and yet more his
Tears, seemed to me undeniable proofs of his vowed Integrity; and I being but
young, bred up in perpetual Retirement from all Society but my virtuous
Parents, and unexperienced in those Affairs in which even the most knowing are
apt to be mistaken, my reluctance abated by Degrees, and I began to have some
sense of Compassion, yet none but what was consistent with my Honor. However,
when I was pretty well recovered from my first Fright, my former Resolution
returned; and then, with more Courage than I thought I should have had, My
Lord, said Love, I, if at the same time that you offer me your Love, and give
me such strange Demonstration of it, you would also offer me Poison, and Leave
to take my choice, I would soon resolve which to accept, and convince you by my
Death that my Honor is dearer to me than my Life. To be plain, I can have no
good opinion of a Presumption that endangers my Reputation; and unless you
leave me this Moment, I will so effectually make you know how much you're
mistaken in me, that if you have but the least sense of Honor left, you will
repent the driving me to that Extremity as long as you live. I was born your
Vassal, but not your Slave; nor does the greatness of your Birth privilege you
to injure your Inferiors, or exact from me more than the Duties which all
Vassals pay: That excepted, I do not esteem my self less in my low Degree, than
you have reason to value your self in your high Rank. Do not then think to awe
or dazzle me with your Grandeur, or fright or force me into a base Compliance;
I am not to be tempted with Titles, Pomp, and Equipage, nor weak enough to be
moved with vain Sighs, and false Tears. In short, my Will is wholly at my
Father's Disposal, and I will not entertain any Man as a Lover but by his
Appointment. Therefore, my Lord, if you would have me believe you so sincerely
love me, give over your vain and injurious Pursuit; suffer me peaceably to
enjoy the benefits of Life in the free possession of my Honor, the loss of
which for ever imbitters all Life's Sweets; and since you cannot be my Husband,
do not expect from me that Affection which I cannot pay to any other. What do
you mean, charming Dorothea? cried the perfidious Lord. Cannot I be yours by
the sacred Title of Husband? Who can hinder me, if you will but consent to bless
me on those Terms? Too happy if I have no other Obstacle to surmount. I am
yours this Moment, beautiful Dorothea; see, I give you here my Hand to be
yours, and yours alone for ever: And let all-seeing Heaven, and this Holy Image
here on your Oratory, witness the solemn Truth.

Cardenio hearing her call her self Dorothea, was now fully satisfied she was
the Person whom he took her to be: However he would not interrupt her Story,
being impatient to hear the End of it; only addressing himself to her, Is then
your Name Dorothea, Madam? cried he: I have heard of a Lady of that Name whose
Misfortunes have a great Resemblance with yours. But proceed, I beseech you,
and when you have done, I may perhaps surprise you with an Account of things
that have some Affinity with those you relate. With that Dorothea made a stop
to study Cardenio's Face, and his wretched Attire; and then earnestly desired
him, if he knew any thing that concerned her, to let her know it presently;
telling him that all the Happiness she had left, was only the Courage to bear
with Resignation all the Disasters that might befall her, well assured that no
new one could make her more unfortunate then she was already. Truly, Madam,
replied Cardenio, I would tell you all I know, were I sure my Conjectures were
true; but so far as I may judge by what I Have heard hitherto, I don't think it
material to tell it you yet, and I shall find a more proper time to do it. Then
Dorothea resuming her Discourse, Don Ferdinand, said she, repeated his Vows of
Marriage in the most serious manner; and giving me his Hand, plighted me his
Faith with the most binding Words, and sacred Oaths. But before I would let him
engage himself thus, I advised him to have a Care how he suffered an unruly
Passion to get the Ascendant over his Reason, to the endangering of his future
Happiness. My Lord, said I, let not a few transitory and imaginary Charms,
which could never excuse such an excess of Love, hurry you to your Ruin: Spare
your noble Father the Shame and Displeasure of seeing you married to a Person
so much below your Birth; and do not rashly do a thing of which you may repent,
and that may make my Life uncomfortable. I added several other Reasons to
dissuade him from that hasty Match, but they were all unregarded. Don
Ferdinand, deaf to every thing but to his Desires, engaged and bound himself
like an inconsiderate Lover, who sacrifices all things to his Passion, or
rather like a Cheat, who does not value a Breach of Vows. When I saw him so
obstinate, I began to consider what I had to do. I am not the first, thought I
to my self, whom Marriage has raised to unhop'd for Greatness, and whose Beauty
alone has supplied her want of Birth and Merit: Thousands besides Don Ferdinand
have married merely for Love, without any regard to the inequality of Wealth or
Birth. The opportunity was fair and tempting; and as Fortune is not always
favorable, I thought it an imprudent thing to let it slip. Thought I to my
self, while she kindly offers me a Husband who assures me of an inviolable
Affection, why should I by an unreasonable Denial make my self an Enemy of such
a Friend? And then there was one thing more; I apprehended it would be
dangerous to drive him to Despair by an ill-timed Refusal: Nor could I think my
self safe alone in his Hands, lest he should resolve to satisfy his Passion by
Force; which done, he might think himself free from performing a Promise which
I would not accept, and then I should be left without either Honor or an
Excuse; for it would be no easy matter to persuade my Father, and the
censorious World, that this Nobleman was admitted into my Chamber without my
Consent. All these Reasons, which in a Moment offered themselves in my Mind,
shook my former Resolves; and Don Ferdinand's Sighs, his Tears, his Vows, and
the sacred Witnesses by which he swore, together with his graceful Mien, his
extraordinary Accomplishments, and the Love which I fancied I read in all his
Actions, helped to bring on my Ruin, as I believe they would have prevailed
with any one's Heart as free and as well guarded as was mine. Then I called my
Maid to be Witness of Don Ferdinand's Vows and sacred Engagements, which he
reiterated to me, and confirmed with new Oaths and solemn Promises; he called
again on Heaven, and on many particular Saints, to witness his Sincerity,
wishing a thousand Curses might fall on him, in case he ever violated his Word.
Again he sighed, again he wept, and moved me more and more with fresh Marks of
Affection; and the treacherous Maid having left the Room, the perfidious Lord
presuming on my Weakness, completed his pernicious Design. The Day which
succeeded that unhappy Night had not yet begun to dawn, when Don Ferdinand,
impatient to be gone, made all the haste he could to leave me, and told me,
though not with so great a show of Affection, nor so warmly as before, that I
might rely on his Honor and on the sincerity of his Vows and Promises; and as
a further Pledge, he pulled off a Ring of great Value from his Finger, and put
it upon mine. In short he went away, and my Maid, who, as she confessed it to
me, had let him in privately, took care to let him out into the Street by Break
of Day, while I remained so strangely concerned at the thoughts of all these
Passages, that I cannot well tell whether I was sorry or pleased. I was in a
manner quite distracted, and either forgot, or had not the Heart to chide my
Maid for her Treachery, not knowing yet whether she had done me Good or Harm. I
had told Don Ferdinand before he went, that seeing I was now his own, he might
make use of the same means to come again to see me, till he found it convenient
to do me the Honor of owning, me publicly for his Wife: But he came to me
only the next Night, and from that time I never could see him more, neither at
Church nor in the Street, though for a whole Month together I tired my self
endeavoring to find him out; being credibly informed he was still near us, and
went a Hunting almost every Day. I leave you to think with what uneasiness I
passed those tedious Hours, when I perceived his Neglect, and had reason to
suspect his Breach of Faith. So unexpected a Slight, which I looked upon as the
most sensible Affliction that could befall me, had like to have quite
overwhelmed me. Then it was that I found my Maid had betrayed me; I broke out
into severe Complaints of her Presumption, which I had smothered till that
time. I exclaimed against Don Ferdinand, and exhausted my Sighs and Tears
without asswaging my Sorrow. What was worse, I found my self obliged to set a
guard upon my very Looks, for fear my Father and Mother should inquire into the
cause of my Discontent, and so occasion my being guilty of shameful Lies and
Evasions to conceal my more shameful Disaster. But at last I perceived 'twas in
vain to dissemble, and I gave a Loose to my Resentments; for I could no longer
hold when I heard that Don Ferdinand was married in a neighboring Town to a
young Lady of rich and noble Parentage, and extremely handsome, whose Name is
Lucinda. Cardenio hearing Lucinda named, felt his former Disorder, but by good
Fortune it was not so violent as it used to be, and he only shrugg'd up his
Shoulders, bit his Lips, knit his Brows, and a little while after let fall a
shower of Tears, which did not hinder Dorothea from going on. This News,
continued she, instead of freezing up my Blood with Grief and Astonishment,
filled me with burning Rage. Despair took possession of my Soul, and in the
transports of my Fury I was ready to run raving through the Streets, and publish
Don Ferdinand's Disloyalty, though at the expense of my Reputation. I don't know
whether a remainder of Reason stopped these violent Motions, but I found my self
mightily eased as soon as I had pitched upon a Design that presently came into
my Head. I discovered the Cause of my Grief to a young country Fellow that
served my Father, and desired him to lend me a Suit of Man's Apparel, and to go
along with me to the Town where I heard Don Ferdinand was. The Fellow used the
best Arguments he had to hinder me from so strange an Undertaking; but finding
I was inflexible in my Resolution, he assured me he was ready to serve me.
Thereupon I put on this Habit which you see, and taking with me some of my own
Clothes, together with some Gold and Jewels, not knowing but I might have
occasion for 'em, I set out that very Night, attended with that Servant and
many anxious thoughts, without so much as acquainting my Maid with my Design.
To tell you the truth, I did not well know my self what I went about; for as
there could be no remedy, Don Ferdinand being actually married to another, what
could I hope to get by seeing him, unless it were the wretched satisfaction of
upbraiding him with his Infidelity? In two days and a half we got to the Town;
where the first thing I did was to inquire where Lucinda's Father lived. That
single question produced a great deal more than I desired to hear; for the
first Man I addressed my self to, showed me the House, and informed me of all
that had happened at Lucinda's Marriage; which it seems was grown so public,
that it 'was the talk of the whole Town. He told me how Lucinda swoon'd away as
soon as she had answered the Priest, that she was contented to be Don
Ferdinand's Wife; and how, after he had approached to open her Stays to give
her more room to breath, he found a Letter under her own hand, wherein she
declared she could not be Don Ferdinand's Wife, because she was already
contracted to a considerable Gentleman of the same Town, whose Name was
Cardenio; and that she had only consented to that Marriage in obedience to her
Father. He also told me, that it appeared by the Letter, and a Dagger which was
found about her, that she designed to have killed her self after the Ceremony
was over; and that Don Ferdinand, enraged to see himself thus deluded, would
have killed her himself with that very Dagger, had he not been prevented by
those that were present. He added, 'twas reported, that upon this Don Ferdinand
immediately left the Town; and that Lucinda did not come to her self till the
next Day, and then she told her Parents, that she was really Cardenio's Wife,
and that he and she were contracted before she had seen Don Ferdinand. I heard
also that this Cardenio was present at the Wedding; and that as soon as he saw
her married, which was a thing he could never have believed, he left the Town
in despair, leaving a Letter behind him full of Complaints of Lucinda's Breach
of Faith, and to inform his Friends of his Resolution to go to some place where
they should never hear of him more. This was all the Discourse of the Town when
I came thither, and soon after we heard that Lucinda also was missing, and that
her Father and Mother were grieving almost to Distraction, not being able to
learn what was become of her. For my part, this News revived my hopes, having
Reason to be pleased to find Don Ferdinand unmarry'd. I flattered my self that
Heaven had perhaps prevented his second Marriage to make him sensible of his
violating the first, and to touch his Conscience, in order to his acquitting
himself of his Duty like a Christian, and a Man of Honor. So I strove to
beguile my Cares with an imaginary prospect of a far distant Change of Fortune,
amusing my self with vain hopes that I might not sink under the load of
Affliction, but prolong my Life; though this was only a lengthning of my Sorrows,
since I have now but the more reason to wish to be eased of the trouble of
living. But while I staid in that Town, not knowing what I had best to do,
seeing I could not find Don Ferdinand, I heard a Crier publicly describe my
Person, my Clothes, and my Age, in the open Street, promising a considerable
Reward to any that could bring Tidings of Dorothea. I also heard that 'twas
rumored I was run away from my Father's House with the Servant who attended
me; and that Report touched my Soul as much as Don Ferdinand's Perfidiousness;
for thus I saw my Reputation wholly lost, and that too for a Subject so base
and so unworthy of my nobler Thoughts. Thereupon I made all the haste I could
to get out of the Town with my Servant, who even then, to my thinking, began by
some Tokens to betray his faultering in the Fidelity he had promised me.
Dreading to be discovered, we reached the most despart part of this Mountain
that Night: But, as it is a common Saying, that Misfortunes seldom come alone,
and the end of one Disaster is often the beginning of a greater, I was no
sooner got to that Place, where I thought my self safe, but the Fellow, whom I
had hitherto found to be modest and respectful, now rather incited by his own
Villainy, and the Opportunity which that place offered, than by any thing else,
had the impudence to talk to me of Love; and seeing I answered him with Anger
and Contempt, he would no longer lose time in clownish Courtship, but resolved
to use violence to compass his wicked Design. But just Heaven, with a happy
presence of Mind, assisted me in that Distress; and his brutish Passion so
blinded him, that not perceiving he was on the brink of a steep Rock, I easily
pushed him down; and then without looking to see what was become of him, I ran
as fast I could into the thickest part of the Desert to secure my self. The
next Day I met a Countryman, who took me to his House amidst these Mountains,
and employed me ever since in the nature of his Shepherd. There I have
continued some Months, making it my business to be as much as possible in the
Fields, the better to conceal my Sex: But notwithstanding all my Care and
Industry, he at last discovered I was a Woman; which made him presume to
importune me with beastly Offers: So that Fortune not favoring me with the
former opportunity of freeing my self, I left his House, and chose to seek a
Sanctuary among these Woods and Rocks, there with Sighs and Tears to beseech
Heaven to pity me, and to direct and relieve me in this forlorn Condition; or
at least to put an end to my miserable Life, and bury in this Desert the very
Memory of an unhappy Creature, who more through ill Fortune than ill Intent, has
given the idle World occasion to be too busy with her Fame.

CHAP. II. An Account of the beautiful Dorothea's Discretion, with other
pleasant Passages.
THIS, Gentlemen, continued Dorothea, is the true Story of my tragical
Adventures; and now be you Judges whether I had Reason to make the Complaint
you overheard, and whether so unfortunate and hopeless a Creature be in a
Condition to admit of Comfort. I have only one Favor to beg of you; be pleased
to direct me to some Place where I may pass the rest of my Life secure from the
Search and Inquiry of my Parents; not but their former Affection is a
sufficient Warrant for my kind Reception, could the Sense I have of the
Thoughts they must have of my past Conduct permit me to return to 'em; but when
I think they must believe me guilty, and can now have nothing but my bare Word
to assure 'em of my Innocence, I can never resolve to stand their Sight. Here
Dorothea stopped, and the Blushes that overspread her Cheeks were certain Signs
of the Discomposure of her Thoughts, and the unfeigned Modesty of her Soul.
Those who had heard her Story were deeply moved with Compassion for her hard
Fate, and the Curate would not delay any longer to give her some charitable
Comfort and Advice; but scarce had he begun to speak, when Cardenio addressing
himself to her interrupted him, How Madam, said he, taking her by the Hand, are
you then the beautiful Dorothea, the only Daughter of the rich Cleonardo?
Dorothea was strangely surpised to hear her Father named, and by one in so
tattered a Garb. And pray who are you Friend, said she to him, that know so
well my Father's Name? for I think I did not mention it once throughout the
whole Relation of my Afflictions. I am Cardenio, replied the other, that
unfortunate Gentleman, whom Lucinda, as you told us, declared to be her
Husband: I am that miserable Cardenio, whom the Perfidiousness of the Man who
has reduced you to this deplorable Condition, has also brought to this wretched
State, to Rags, to Nakedness, to Despair, nay to Madness it self, and all
Hardships and Want of human Comforts; only enjoying the Privilege of Reason by
short Intervals, to feel and bemoan my Miseries the more. I am the Man, fair
Dorothea, who was the unhappy Eyewitness of Don Ferdinand's unjust Nuptials,
and who heard my Lucinda give her Consent to be his Wife; that heartless
Wretch, who unable to bear so strange a Disappointment, lost in Amazement and
Trouble, flung out of the House, without staying to know what would follow her
Trance, and what the Paper that was taken out of her Bosom would produce. I
abandoned my self to Despair; and having left a Letter with a Person whom I
charged to deliver it into Lucinda's own Hands, I hastened to hide my self from
the World in this Desert, resolved to end there a Life which from that Moment I
abhorred as my greatest Enemy. But Fortune has preserved me I see that I may
venture it upon a better Cause; for from what you have told us now, which I
have no Reason to doubt, I am emboldened to hope that Providence may yet
reserve us to a better Fate than we durst have expected; Heaven will restore
you Don Ferdinand, who cannot be Lucinda's, and to me Lucinda, who cannot be
Don Ferdinand's. For my Part, though my Interests were not linked with yours, as
they are, I have so deep a Sense of your Misfortunes, that I would expose my
self to any Dangers to see you righted by Don Ferdinand: And here, on the Word
of a Gentleman and a Christian, I vow and promise not to forsake you till he
has done you Justice, and to oblige him to do it at the Hazard of my Life,
should Reason and Generosity prove ineffectual to force him to be blessed with
you. Dorothea ravished with Joy, and not knowing how to express a due Sense of
Cardenio's obliging Offers, would have thrown her self at his Feet had he not
civilly hindered it. At the same Time the Curate discreetly speaking for 'em
both, highly applauded Cardenio for his generous Resolution, and comforted
Dorothea: He also very heartily invited 'em to his House, where they might
furnish themselves with Necessaries, and consult together how to find out Don
Ferdinand, and bring Dorothea home to her Father; which kind Offer they
thankfully accepted. Then the Barber, who had been silent all this while, put
in for a Share, and handsomely assured them he would be very ready to do 'em all
the Service that might lie in his Power. After these Civilities he acquainted
'em with the Design that had brought the Curate and him to that Place; and gave
'em an Account of Don Quixote's strange kind of Madness, and of their staying
there for his Squire. Cardenio hearing him mentioned, remembered something of
the Scuffle he had with them both, but only as if it had been a Dream; so that
though he told the Company of it, he could not let them know the Occasion. By
this Time they heard some Body call, and by the Voice they knew it was Sancho
Panca, who not finding 'em where he had left 'em, tore his very Lungs with
hollowing. With that they all went to meet him; which done, they asked him what
was become of Don Quixote? Alas, answered Sancho, I left him yonder in an ill
Plight: I found him in his Shirt, lean, pale, and almost starved, sighing and
whining for his Lady Dulcinea: I told him how that she would have him come to her
presently to Toboso, where she looked for him out of Hand; yet for all this he
would not budge a Foot, but even told me he was resolved he would never set
Eyes on her sweet Face again till he had done some Feats that might make him
worthy of her Goodness: So that, added Sancho, if he leads this Life any
longer, I fear me my poor Master is never like to be an Emperor, as he is bound
in Honor to be, nay not so much as an Archbishop, which is the least thing he
can come off with; therefore, good Sir, see and get him away by all Means I
beseech you. The Curate bid him be of good Cheer, for they would take Care to
make him leave that Place whether he would or not; and then turning to Cardenio
and Dorothea, he informed 'em of the Design which he and the Barber had laid in
order to his Cure, or at least to get him home to his House. Dorothea, whose
Mind was much eased with the Prospect of better Fortune, kindly undertook to
act the distressed Lady her self, which she said she thought would become her
better than the Barber, having a Dress very proper for that Purpose, besides
she had read many Books of Chivalry, and knew how the distressed Ladies used to
express themselves when they came to beg some Knight-Errant's Assistance. This
is obliging, Madam, said the Curate, and we want nothing more: So let us to work
as fast as we can; we may now hope to succeed since you thus happily facilitate
the Design. Presently Dorothea took out of her Bundle a Petticoat of very rich
Stuff, and a Gown of very fine green Silk, also a Necklace, and several other
Jewels out of a Box; and with these in an Instant she so ado^^d her self, and
appeared so beautiful and glorious, that they all stood in Admiration that Don
Ferdinand should be so injudicious to slight so accomplished a Beauty. But he
that admired her most was Sancho Panca; for he thought he had never set Eyes on
so fine a Creature, and perhaps he thought right: Which made him earnestly ask
the Curate who that fine Dame was, and what Wind had blown her thither among
the Woods and Rocks? Who that fine Lady Sancho? answered the Curate; she is the
only Heiress in a direct Line to the vast Kingdom of Micomicon: Moved by the
Fame of your Master's great Exploits, that spreads it self over all Guinea, she
comes to seek him out, and beg a Boon of him; that is, to redress a Wrong which
a wicked Giant has done her. Why that is well, quoth Sancho; a happy Seeking and
a happy Finding. Now if my Master be but so lucky as to right that Wrong, by
killing that Son of a Whore of a Giant you tell me of, I Am a made Man: Yes he
will kill him, that he will, if he can but come at him, and he ben't a
Hobgoblin; for my Master can do no Good with Hobgoblins. But Mr. Curate, an't
please you, I have a Favor to ask of you: I beseech you put my Master out of
Conceit with all Archbishopricks, for that is what I dread; and therefore to rid
me of my Fears, put it into his Head to clap up a Match with this same
Princess; for by that Means 'twill be past his Power to make himself
Archbishop, and he will come to be Emperor and I a great Man as sure as a Gun. I
have thought well of the Matter, and I find it is not at all sitting he should
be an Archbishop for my Good; for what should I get by it? I an't fit for
Church Preferment, I am a married Man; and now for me to go to trouble my Head
with getting a License to hold Church Livings, 'twould be an endless Piece of
Business: Therefore 'twill be better for him to marry out of hand this same
Princess, whose Name I cannot tell, for I never heard it. They call her the
Princess Micomicona, said the Curate; for her Kingdom being called Micomicon,
it is a clear Case she must be called so. Like enough, quoth Sancho; for I have
known several Men in my Time go by the Names of the Places where they were
born, as Pedro de Alcala, Juan de Ubeda, Diego de Valladolid; and mayhap the
like is done in Guinea, and the Queens go by the Name of their Kingdoms. It Is
well observed, replied the Curate: As for the Match, I Will promote it to the
utmost of my Power. Sancho was heartily pleased with this Promise; and on the
other Side, the Curate was amazed to find the poor Fellow so strangely infected
with his Master's mad Notions, as to rely on his becoming an Emperor. By this
Time Dorothea being mounted on the Curate's Mule, and the Barber having clapped
on his Ox-tail Beard, nothing remained but to order Sancho to show 'em the Way,
and to renew their Admonitions to him, lest he should seem to know 'em, and so
spoil the Plot, which if he did, they told him 'twould be the Ruin of all his
Hopes and his Master's Empire. As for Cardenio, he did not think fit to go with
'em, having no Business there; besides, he could not tell but that Don Quixote
might remember their late Fray. The Curate likewise, not thinking his Presence
necessary, resolved to stay to keep Cardenio Company; so after he had once more
given Dorothea her Cue, she and the Barber went before with Sancho, while the
two others followed on foot at a Distance.

Thus they went on for about three Quarters of a League, and then among the
Rocks they spied Don Quixote, who had by this Time put on his Clothes though not
his Armor. Immediately Dorothea understanding he was the Person, whipped her
Palfry, and when she drew near Don Quixote, her Squire alighted and took her
from her Saddle. When she was upon her Feet she gracefully advanced toward the
Knight, and with her Squire falling on her Knees before him, in spite of his
Endeavors to the contrary, Thrice valorous and invincible Knight, said she,
never will I rise from this Place till your Generosity has granted me a Boon,
which shall redound to your Honor, and the Relief of the most disconsolate and
most injured Damsel that the Sun ever saw: And indeed if your Valor and the
Strength of your formidable Arm be answerable to the Extent of your immortal
Renown, you are bound by the Laws of Honor and the Knighthood which you
profess, to succor a distressed Princess, who led by the resounding Fame of
your mavelous and redoubted Feats of Arms, comes from the remotest Regions to
implore your Protection. I cannot, said Don Quixote, make you any Answer, most
beautiful Lady, nor will I hear a Word more unless you vouchsafe to rise.
Pardon me, noble Knight, replied the petitioning Damsel; my Knees shall first
be rooted here, unless you will courteously condescend to grant me the Boon
which I humbly request. I grant it then, Lady, said Don Quixote, provided it be
nothing to the Disservice of my King, my Country, and that Beauty who keeps the
Key of my Heart and Liberty. It shall not tend to the Prejudice or Detriment of
any of these, cried the Lady. With that Sancho closing up to his Master, and
whispering him in the Ear, Grant it Sir, quoth he, grant it I tell ye; it is but
a Trifle next to nothing, only to kill a great Looby of a Giant; and she that
asks this is the high and mighty Princess Micomicona, Queen of the huge Kingdom
of Micomicon in Ethiopia. Let her be what she will, replied Don Quixote, I will
discharge my Duty and obey the Dictates of my Conscience according to the Rules
of my Profession. With that turning to the Damsel, Rise Lady, I beseech you,
cried he; I grant you the Boon which your singular Beauty demands. Sir, said
the Lady, the Boon I have to beg of your magnanimous Valor is, that you will
be pleased to go with me instantly whither I shall conduct you, and promise me
not to engage in any other Adventure till you have revenged me on a Traitor who
usurps my Kingdom, contrary to the Laws both Human and Divine. I grant you all
this, Lady, quoth Don Quixote; and therefore from this Moment shake off all
desponding Thoughts that sit heavy upon your Mind, and study to revive your
drooping Hopes; for by the Assistance of Heaven and my strenuous Arm, you shall
see your self restored to your Kingdom, and seated on the Throne of your
Ancestors, in spite of all the Traitors that dare oppose your Right. Let us
then hasten our Performance; Delay always breeds Danger; and to protract a
great Design is often to ruin it. The thankful Princess, to speak her grateful
Sense of his Generosity, strove to kiss the Knight's Hand; however he who was
in every thing the most gallant and courteous of all Knights, would by no Means
admit of such a Submission; but having gently raised her up, he embraced her
with an awful Grace and Civility, and then called to Sancho for his Arms.
Sancho went immediately, and having fetched 'em from a Tree, where they hung
like Trophies, armed his Master in a Moment And now the Champion being
completely accoutred, Come on, said he, let us go and vindicate the Rights of
this dispossessed Princess. The Barber was all this while upon his Knees, and
had enough to do to keep himself from laughing, and his Beard from falling,
which, if it had dropped off, as it threatened, would have betrayed his Face and
their whole Plot at once. But being relieved by Don Quixote's haste to put on
his Armor, he rose up, and taking the Princess by the Hand, they both together
set her upon her Mule. Then the Knight mounted his Rozinante, and the Barber
got on his Beast. Only poor Sancho was forced to foot it, which made him fetch
many a heavy Sigh, for the loss of his dear Dapple: However, he bore his
Crosses patiently, seeing his Master in so fair a way of being next door to an
Emperor; for he did not question but he would marry that Princess, and so be at
least King of Micomicon. But yet it grieved him to think his Master's Dominions
were to be in the Land of the Negroes, and that consequently the People over
whom he was to be Governor were all to be black. But he presently bethought
himself of a good Remedy for that: What care I, quoth he, though they be Blacks?
Best of all; it is but loading a Ship with them and having 'em into Spain, where
I shall find Chapmen enough to take 'em off my Hands, and pay me ready Money for
'em; and so I Will raise a good round Sum, and buy me a Title or an Office to
live upon frank and easy all the Days of my Life. Hang him that has no Shifts,
say I; it is a sorry Goose that will not baste her self. Why what if I am not so
Book-learn'd as other Folks, sure I Have a Headpiece good enough to know how to
sell ten, twenty, or thirty thousand Slaves. It Is as easy as jumping over a
Straw. Let 'em even go higgledy-piggledy, little and great. What though they be
as black as the Devil in Hell, let me alone to turn 'em into white and yellow
Boys: I think I know how to lick my own Fingers. Big with these Imaginations,
Sancho trudged along so pleased and light-hearted that he forgot his Pain of
traveling afoot. Cardenio and the Curate had beheld the pleasant Scene through
the Bushes, and were at a Loss what they should do to join Companies: But the
Curate, who had a contriving Head, at last bethought himself of an Expedient;
and pulling out a Pair of Scissars which he used to carry in his Pocket, he
snipp'd off Cardenio's Beard in a Trice; and having pulled off his black Cloak
and a sad-colour'd Riding hood which he had on, he equipped Cardenio with 'em,
while he himself remained in his Doublet and Breeches. In which new Garb
Cardenio was so strangely altered, that he would not have known himself in a
Looking-glass. This done they made to the Highway, and there stayed till Don
Quixote and his Company were got clear of the Rocks and bad Ways, which did not
permit Horsemen to go so fast as those on foot. When they came near, the Curate
looked very earnestly upon Don Quixote, as one that was in a Study whether he
might not know him; and then, like one that had made a Discovery, he ran
toward the Knight with open Arms, crying out, Mirror of Chivalry, my noble
Countryman Don Quixote de la Mancha! the Cream and Flower of Gentility! the
Shelter and Relief of the Afflicted, and Quintessence of Knight-Errantry! How
overjoyed am I to have found you! At the same Time he embraced his left Leg.
Don Quixote admiring what Adorer of his heroic Worth this should be, looked on
him earnestly; and at last calling him to Mind, would have alighted to have
paid him his Respects, not a little amazed to meet him there. But the Curate
hindering him, Reverend Sir, cried the Knight, I beseech you let me not be so
rude as to sit on Horseback, while a Person of your Worth and Character is on
foot. Sir, replied the Curate, you shall by no Means alight: Let your
Excellency be pleased to keep your Saddle, since thus mounted you every Day
atchieve the most stupendous Feats of Arms and Adventures that were ever seen
in our Age. 'Twill be Honor enough for an unworthy Priest, like me, to get up
behind some of your Company, if they will permit me; and I will esteem it as
great a Happiness, as to be mounted upon Pegasus, or the Zebra or Elephant of
the famous Moor Musaraque, who to this Hour lies enchanted in the dreary Cavern
of Zulema, not far distant from the great Compluto. Truly, good Sir, I did not
think of this, answered Don Quixote; but I suppose my Lady the Princess will be
so kind as to command her Squire to lend you his Saddle, and to ride behind
himself, if his Mule be but used to carry double. I believe it will, cried the
Princess; and my Squire, I suppose, will not stay for my Commands to offer his
Saddle, for he is too courteous and well-bred to suffer an Ecclesiastical
Person to go afoot, when we may help him to a Mule. Most certainly, cried the
Barber; and with that dismounting, he offered the Curate his Saddle, which was
accepted without much Entreaty. By ill Fortune the Mule was a hired Beast, and
consequently unlucky; so as the Barber was getting up behind the Curate; the
resty Jade gave two or three Jerks with her hinder Legs, that had they met with
Master Nicholas's Scull or Ribs, he would have bequeathed his Rambling after
Don Quixote to the Devil. However he flung himself nimbly off, and was more
afraid than hurt; but yet as he fell his Beard dropped off, and being presently
sensible of that Accident, he could not think of any better Shift than to clap
both his Hands before his Cheeks, and cry out he had broken his Jaw Bone. Don
Quixote was amazed to see such an overgrown Bush of Beard lie on the Ground
without Jaws and bloodless. Bless me, cried he, what an amazing Miracle is
this! Here Is a Beard as cleverly taken off by Accident, as if a Barber had
mowed it. The Curate perceiving the Danger they were in of being discovered,
hastily caught up the Beard, and running to the Barber, who lay all the while
roaring and complaining, he pulled his Head close to his own Breast, and then
muttering certain Words, which he said were a Charm appropriated to the
fast'ning on of fallen Beards, he fixed it on again so handsomely, that the
Squire was presently as bearded and as well as ever he was before; which raised
Don Quixote's Admiration, and made him engage the Curate to teach him the Charm
at his Leisure, not doubting but its Virtue extended further than to the
fast'ning on of Beards, since 'twas impossible that such a one could be torn
off without fetching away Flesh and all; and consequently such a sudden Cure
might be beneficial to him upon Occasion. And now every thing being set to
rights, they agreed that the Curate should ride first by himself, and then the
other two by Turns relieving one another, sometimes riding sometimes walking,
till they came to their Inn, which was about two Leagues off. So Don Quixote,
the Princess, and the Curate being mounted, and Cardenio, the Barber, and
Sancho ready to move forwards on foot, the Knight addressing himself to the
distressed Damsel, Now Lady, said he, let me entreat your Greatness to tell me
which Way we must go to do you Service. The Curate, before she could answer,
thought fit to ask her a Question that might the better enable her to make a
proper Reply. Pray Madam, said he, toward what Country is it your Pleasure to
take your Progress? Is it not toward the Kingdom of Micomicon? I am very much
mistaken if that be not the Part of the World whither you desire to go. The
Lady having her Cue, presently understood the Curate, and answered that he was
in the Right. Then, said the Curate, your Way lies directly through the Village
where I live, from whence we have a strait Road to Carthagena, where you may
conveniently take Shipping; and if you have a fair Wind and good Weather, you
may in something less than nine Years reach the vast Lake Me^na, I mean the
Palus Moeotis, which lies somewhat more than a hundred Days Journey from your
Kingdom. Surely, Sir, replied the Lady, you are under a Mistake; for it is not
quite two Years since I left the Place, and besides we have had very little
fair Weather all the while, and yet I am already got hither, and have so far
succeeded in my Designs, as to have obtained the Sight of the renowned Don
Quixote de la Mancha, the Fame of whose Achievements reached my Ears as soon
as I landed in Spain, and moved me to find him out to throw my self under his
Protection, and commit the Justice of my Cause to his invincible Valor. No
more Madam, I beseech you, cried Don Quixote; spare me the Trouble of hearing
my self praised, for I mortally hate whatever may look like Adulation; and though
your Compliments may deserve a better Name, my Ears are too modest to be
pleased with any such Discourse; it is my Study to deserve and to avoid
Applause. All I will venture to say, is, that whether I have any Valor or no,
I am wholly at your Service, even at the Expense of the last Drop of my Blood;
and therefore waving all these Matters till a fit Opportunity, I would gladly
know of this reverend Clergyman what brought him hither, unattended by any of
his Servants, alone, and so slenderly clothed, for I must confess I am not a
little surpised to meet him in this Condition. To tell you the Reason in few
Words, answered the Curate, you must know that Mr. Nicholas our Friend (...)
Barber went with me to Sevil, to receive some Money which a Relation of mine
sent me from the Indies, where he has been settled these many Years; neither
was it a small Sum, for 'twas no less than twenty thousand Pieces of Eight, and
all of due Weight, which is no common thing you may well judge: But upon the
Road hereabouts we met four Highwaymen that robbed us of all we had, even to our
very Beards, so that the poor Barber was forced to get him a Chin-Perriwig. And
for that young Gentleman whom you see there (continued he, pointing to
Cardenio) after they had stripped him to his Shirt, they transfigur'd him as
you see. Now every Body hereabouts says, that those who robbed us were certainly
a Pack of Rogues condemned to the Galleys, who, as they were going to
Punishment, were rescued by a single Man not far from this Place, and that with
so much Courage, that in spite of the King's Officer and his Guards he alone
set 'em all at Liberty. Certainly that Man was either mad, or as great a Rogue
as any of 'em; for would any one that had a Grain of Sense or Honesty have let
loose a Company of Wolves among Sheep, Foxes among innocent Poultry, and Wasps
among the Honey-pots? He has hindered public Justice from taking its Course,
broke his Allegiance to his lawful Sovereign, disabl'd the Strength of his
Galleys, rebelled against him, and opposed his Officers in Contempt of the Law,
and set in an Uproar the holy Brotherhood, those honest Thief-catchers, that
had lain quiet so long; nay, what is yet worse, he has endangered his Life upon
Earth and his Salvation hereafter. Sancho had given the Curate an Account of
the Adventure of the Gally-Slaves, and this made him inveigh against it so
severely, to try how Don Quixote would bear i^. The Knight changed Color at
every Word, (...) daring to confess he was the pious Knight Errant who had
delivered those worthy Gentlemen out of Bondage. These, said the Curate, by way
of Conclusion, were the Men that reduced us to this Condition; and may Heaven
in Mercy forgive him that freed 'em from the Punishment they so well deserved.

CHAP. III. The pleasant Stratagems used to free the enamored Knight from the
rigorous Penance which he had undertaken.
SCARCE had the Curate made an end, when Sancho addressing himself to him,
Faith and Troth, quoth he, Master Curate, he that did that rare Job was my
Master his nown self, and that not for want of fair Warning; for I bid him have
a Care what he did, and told him over and over, 'twould be a grievous Sin to
put such a gang of wicked Wretches out of Durance, and that they all went to
the Galleys for their Roguery. You buffleheaded Clown, cried Don Quixote, Is it
for a Knight Errant when he meets with People laden with Chains, and under
Oppression, to examine whether they are in those Circumstances for their
Crimes, or only through Misfortune? We are only to relieve the Afflicted, to look
on their Distress, and not on their Crimes. I met a Company of poor Wretches,
who went along sorrowful, dejected, and linked together like the Beads of a
Rosary; thereupon I did what my Conscience and my Profession obliged me to. And
what has any Man to say to this? If any one dares say otherwise, saving this
reverend Clergyman's Presence and the holy Character he bears, I say, he knows
little of Knight Errantry, and lies like a Son of a Whore, and a base-born
Villain; and this I will make him know more effectually with the convincing
edge of my Sword! This said with a grim Look, he fixed himself in his Stirrups,
and pulled his Helmet over his Brows; for the Basin, which he took to be
Mambrino's Helmet, hung at his Saddle-bow, in order to have the Damage repaired
which it had received from the Gally-Slaves. Thereupon Dorothea, by this time
well acquainted with his Temper, seeing him in such a Passion, and that every
Body except Sancho Panca made a Jest of him, resolved with her Native
Sprightliness and Address to carry on the Humor. I beseech you, Sir, cried
she, remember the Promise you have made me, and that you cannot engage in any
Adventure whatsoever till you have performed that we are going about. Therefore
pray assuage your Anger; for had Master Curate known the Gally-Slaves were
rescued by your invincible Arm, I Am sure he would rather have stitched up his
Lips, or bit off his Tongue, than have spoken a word that should make him incur
your Displeasure. Ney, I assure you, cried the Curate, I would sooner have
twitch'd off one of my Mustachoes into the Bargain. I am satisfied, Madam,
cr'yd Don Quixote, and for your sake the flame of my just Indignation is
quenched; nor will I be induced to engage in any Quarrel till I have fulfilled
my Promise to your Highness. Only in recompense of my good Intentions, I beg
you will give us the Story of your Misfortunes, if this will not be too great a
Trouble to you; and let me know who and what, and how many are the Persons of
whom I must have due and full Satisfaction on your behalf. I am very willing to
do it, replied Dorothea, but yet I fear a Story like mine, consisting wholly of
Afflictions and Disasters, will prove but a tedious Entertainment. Never fear
that, Madam, cried Don Quixote. Since then it must be so, said Dorothea, be
pleased to lend me your Attention. With that Cardenio and the Barber gathered
up to her, to hear what kind of Story she had provided so soon: Sancho also
hung his Ears upon her Side-Saddle, being no less deceived in her than his
Master; and the Lady having seated herself well on her Mule, after a hem or
two, and other Preparations, very gracefully began her Story.

First, Gentlemen, said she, You must know my Name is -- here she stopped, and
could not call to mind the Name the Curate had given her; whereupon finding her
at a nonpluss, he made haste to help her out. It Is not at all strange, said he,
Madam, that you should be so discomposed by your Disasters, as to stumble at
the very beginning of the Account you are going to give of 'em; extreme
Affliction often distracts the Mind to that degree, and so deprives us of
Memory, that sometimes we for a while can scarce think on our very Names: No
wonder then, that the Princess Micomicona, Lawful Heiress to the vast Kingdom
of Micomicon, disordered with so many Misfortunes, and perplexed with so many
various Thoughts for the recovery of her Crown, should have her Imagination and
Memory so encumbered; but I hope you will now recollect your self, and be able
to proceed. I hope so too, said the Lady, and I will try to go through with my
Story without any further Hesitation. Know then, Gentlemen, that the King my
Father, who was called Tinacrio the Sage, having great Skill in the Magic Art,
understood by his profound knowledge in that Science, that Queen Xaramilla my
Mother should dye before him, that he himself should not survive her long, and
I should be left an Orphan. But he often said, that this did not so much
trouble him, as the foresight he had by his Speculations, of my being
threatened with great Misfortunes, which would be occasioned by a certain
Giant, Lord of a great Island near the Confines of my Kingdom; his Name
Pandafilando, sirnam'd of the gloomy Sight; because though his Eye Balls are
seated in their due place, yet he affects to squint and look askew on purpose
to fright those on whom he stares. My Father, I say, knew that this Giant
hearing of his Death would one Day invade my Kingdom with a powerful Army, and
drive me out of my Territories, without leaving me so much as the least Village
for a Retreat; though he knew withal that I might avoid that Extremity, if I
would but consent to marry him; but, as he found out by his Art, he had reason
to think I never would incline to such a Match. And indeed I never had any
thoughts of marrying this Giant, nor really any other Giant in the World, how
unmeasurably Great and Mighty soever he were. My Father therefore charged me
patiently to bear my Misfortunes, and abandon my Kingdom to Pandafilando for a
time, without offering to keep him out by force of Arms, since this would be
the best means to prevent my own Death, and the ruin of my Subjects;
considering the impossibility of withstanding the devilish Force of the Giant.
But withal he ordered me to direct my Course toward Spain, where I should be
sure to meet with a powerful Champion, in the Person of a Knight Errant, whose
Fame should at that time be spread over all the Kingdom; and his Name, my
Father said, should be, if I forget not, Don Azote, or Don Gigote. An't please
you, forsooth, quoth Sancho, you would say Don Quixote, otherwise called the
Knight of the woeful Figure. You are right, answered Dorothea, and my Father
also described him, and said, he should be a tall thin faced Man, and that on
his right Side, under the left Shoulder, or somewhere thereabouts, he should
have a tawny Mole overgrown with a tuft of Hair not much unlike that of a
Horse's Main. With that Don Quixote calling for his Squire to come to him,
here, said he, Sancho, help me off with my Clothes, for I Am resolved to see
whether I be the Knight of whom the Negromantick King has prophesied. Pray,
Sir, why would you pull off your Clothes, cried Dorothea? To see whether I have
such a Mole about me as your Father mentioned, replied the Knight. Your Worship
need not strip to know that, quoth Sancho, for to my knowledge yo've just such
a mark as my Lady says, on the small of your Back, which betokens you to be a
strong body'd Man. That Is enough, said Dorothea; Friends may believe one
another without such a strict Examination; and whether it be on the Shoulder or
on the Backbone, it is not very material. In short, I find my Father aimed right
in all his Predictions, and so do I in recommending my self to Don Quixote,
whose Stature and Appearance so well agree with my Father's Description, and
whose Renown is so far spread, not only in Spain, but over all La Mancha, that
I had no sooner landed at Ossuna, but the Fame of his Prowess reached my Ears;
so that I was satisfied in my self he was the Person in quest of whom I came.
But pray, Madam, cried Don Quixote, how did you do to land at Ossuna, since
it is no Sea-port-Town? Doubtless, Sir, (said the Curate, before Dorothea could
answer for her self,) the Princess would say, that after she landed at Malaga,
the first place where she heard of your feats of Arms, was Ossuna. That Is what
I would have said, replied Dorothea. It Is easily understood, said the Curate;
then pray let your Majesty be pleased to go on with your Story. I Have nothing
more to add, answered Dorothea, but that Fortune has at last so far favored me
as to make me find the noble Don Quixote, by whose Valor I look upon my self
as already restored to the Throne of my Ancestors; since he has so courteously,
and magnanimously vouchsafed to grant me the Boon I begged, to go with me
wheresoever I shall guide him. For all I have to do is, to show him this
Pandafilando of the gloomy Sight, that he may slay him, and restore that to me
of which he has so unjustly deprived me. For all this will certainly be done
with the greatest ease in the World, since 'twas foretold by Tinacrio the Sage,
my good and Royal Father, who has also left a Prediction written either in
Chaldaean or Greek Characters (for I cannot read 'em) which denotes, That after
the Knight of the Prophesy has cut off the Giant's Head, and restored me to the
Possession of my Kingdom, if he should ask me to marry him, I should by no
means refuse him, but instantly put him in possession of my Person and Kingdom.
Well, Friend Sancho (said Don Quixote hearing this, and turning to the Squire,)
what think thou now? Do thou not hear how matters go? Did not I tell thee
as much before? See now, whether we have not a Kingdom which we may command,
and a Queen whom we may espouse. Ay marry have you, replied Sancho, and a pox
take the Son of a Whore, say I, that will not wed and bed her Majesty's Grace
as soon as Master Pandafilando's Windpipes are slit. Look what a dainty bit she
is! ha! would I never had a worse Flea in my Bed! With that to show his Joy, he
gave two or three frisks in the Air; and turning to Dorothea, laid hold on her
Mule by the Bridle, and flinging himself down on his Knees, begged she would be
graciously pleased to let him kiss her Hand in token of his owning her for his
Sovereign Lady. There was none of the beholders, but was ready to burst for
Laughter, having a sight of the Master's Madness, and the Servant's Simplicity.
In short, Dorothea was obliged to comply with his Entreaties, and promised to
make him a Grandee when Fortune should favor her with the recovery of her lost
Kingdom. Whereupon Sancho gave her his thanks, in such a manner as obliged the
Company to a fresh Laughter. Then going on with her Relation, Gentlemen, said
she, this is my History; and among all my Misfortunes, this only has escaped a
recital, That not one of the numerous Attendants I brought from my Kingdom has
survived the Ruins of my Fortune, but this good Squire with the long Beard: The
rest ended their Days in a great Storm which dashed our Ship to pieces in the
very sight of the Harbor; and he and I had been sharers in their Destiny, had
we not laid hold of two Planks, by whose Assistance we were driven to Land, in
a manner altogether miraculous, and agreeable to the whole Series of my Life,
which seems indeed but one continued Miracle. And if in any part of my Relation
I have been tedious, and not so exact as I should have been, you must impute it
to what Master Curate observed to you, in the beginning of my Story, that
continual Troubles oppress the Senses, and weaken the Memory. Those Pains and
Afflictions, be they ever so intense and difficult, said Don Quixote, shall
never deter me (most virtuous and highborn Lady) from adventuring for your
Service, and enduring whatever I shall suffer in it: And therefore I again
ratify the assurances I Have given you, and swear that I will bear you Company,
though to the end of the World, in search of this implacable Enemy of yours, till
I shall find him; whose insulting Head, by the help of Heaven, and my own
invincible Arm, I am resolved to cut off with the Edge of this (I will not say
good) Sword; a curse on Gines de Passamonte, who took away my own! This he
spoke murmuring to himself, and then prosecuted his Discourse in this manner:
And after I have divided it from the Body, and left you quietly possessed of
your Throne, it shall be left at your own choice to dispose of your Person, as
you shall think convenient: For as long as I shall have my Memory full of her
Image, my Will captivated, and my Understanding wholly subjected to Her, whom I
now forbear to name, it is impossible I should in the least deviate from the
Affection I bear to her, or be induced to think of marrying another, though she
were a Phoenix in her kind.

The Close of Don Quixote's Speech, which related to his not marrying, touched
Sancho so to the quick, that he could not forbear bawling out his Resentments:
Body of me, Sir Don Quixote, cried he, you are certainly out of your Wits, or
how is it possible you should stick at striking a bargain with so great a Lady
as this is? D' you think, Sir, Fortune will put such dainty Bits in your way at
every corner? Is my Lady Dulcinea handsomer, d' you think? No marry is she not
half so handsome: I could almost say she is not worthy to tie this Woman's
Shoes. I am likely indeed to get the Earldom I have fed my self with hopes of,
if you spend your time in fishing for Mushrooms in the bottom of the Sea.
Marry, marry out of hand, or Old Nick take you for me: Lay hold of the Kingdom
which is ready to leap into your hands; and as soon as you are a King even make
me a Marquess, or a Peer of the Land; and afterward let things go at sixes and
sevens, 'twill be all a Case to Sancho. Don Quixote, quite divested of all
Patience at the Blasphemies which were spoken against his Lady Dulcinea, could
bear with him no longer; and therefore, without so much as a word to give him
notice of his Displeasure, gave him two such Blows with his Lance, that poor
Sancho measured his length on the Ground, and had certainly there breathed his
last, had not the Knight desisted through the Persuasions of Dorothea. Think
thou (said he after a considerable Pause) most infamous Peasant, that I shall
always have leisure and disposition to put up thy Affronts; and that thy whole
business shall be to study new Offenses, and mine to give thee new Pardons?
Do thou not know, excommunicated Traitor, (for certainly Excommunication is
the least Punishment can fall upon thee, after such Profanations of the
peerless Dulcinea's Name,) and art thou not assured, vile Slave and ignominious
Vagabond, that I should not have strength sufficient to kill a Flea, did not
she give strength to my Nerves, and infuse Vigor into my Sinews? Speak, thou
Villain with the Viper's Tongue; who do thou imagine has restored the Queen
to her Kingdom, cut off the Head of the Giant, and made thee a Marquess (for I
count all this as done already,) but the Power of Dulcinea, who makes use of my
Arm, as the instrument of her Act in me? She fights and overcomes in me; and I
live and breath in her, holding Life and Being from her. Thou base born Wretch!
art thou not possessed of the utmost Ingratitude, thou who see thy self
exalted from the very Dregs of the Earth to Nobility and Honor, and yet do
repay so great a Benefit with Obloquies against the Person of thy Benefactress?

Sancho was not so mightily hurt, but he could hear what his Master said well
enough; wherefore getting upon his Legs in all haste, he ran for shelter behind
Dorothea's Palfry, and being got thither, hark you, Sir, cried he to him, if
you have no thoughts of marrying this same Lady, it is a clear case that the
Kingdom will never be yours; and if it be not, what good can you be able to do
me? Then let any one judge whether I have not cause to complain. Therefore,
good your Worship, marry her once for all, now we have her here rained down as
it were from Heaven to us, and you may after keep Company with my Lady
Dulcinea; for I guess you will not be the only King in the World, that has kept a
Miss or two in a corner. As for Beauty, d' you see, I Will not meddle nor make;
for (if I must say the truth) I like both the Gentlewomen well enough in
Conscience; though, now I think on it, I have never seen the Lady Dulcinea. How,
not seen her, blasphemous Traitor, replied Don Quixote, when just now thou
brought me a Message from her! I say, answered Sancho, I have not seen her
so leisurely as to take notice of her Features and good Parts one by one; but
yet, as I saw 'em at a blush and all at once, me thought I had no reason to
find fault with 'em. Well, I pardon thee now, said Don Quixote, and thou must
excuse me for the Displeasure I have given thee; for the first Motions are not
in our Power. I perceive that well enough, quoth Sancho, and that is the reason
my first Motions are always in my Tongue; and I cannot for my life help speaking
what comes uppermost. However, Friend Sancho, said Don Quixote, thou had best
think before thou speak; for the Pitcher never goes so often to the Well -- I
need say no more. Well, what must be must be, answered Sancho; there is somebody
above who sees all, and will one day judge which has most to answer for,
whether I for speaking amiss, or you for doing so. No more of this, Sancho,
said Dorothea, but run, and kiss your Lord's Hands, and beg his Pardon; and,
for the time to come, be more advised and cautious how you run into the Praise
or Dispraise of any Person; but especially take care you do not speak ill of
that Lady of Toboso, whom I do not know, though I am ready to do her any Service;
and for your own Part, trust in Heaven; for you shall infallibly have a
Lordship, which shall enable you to live like a Prince. Sancho shrug'd up his
Sholders, and in a sneaking Posture went and asked his Master for his Hand,
which he held out to him with a grave Countenance; and after the Squire had
kissed the back of it, the Knight gave him his Blessing, and told him he had a
word or two with him, bidding him come nearer, that he might have the better
convenience of speaking to him. Sancho did as his Master commanded, and going a
little from the Company with him; since thy Return, said Don Quixote,
addressing himself to him, I have neither had time nor opportunity to inquire
into the particulars of thy Embassy, and the Answer thou have brought; and
therefore since Fortune has now befriended us with Convenience and Leisure,
deny me not the satisfaction thou may give me by the rehearsal of thy News.
Ask what you will, cried Sancho, and you shall not want for a^ Answer; but,
good your Worship, for the time to come I beseech you don't be too hasty. What
occasion have thou, Sancho, to make this request, replied Don Quixote? Reason
good enough truly, said Sancho; for the Blows you gave me even now, were rather
given me on Account of the Quarrel which the Devil stirred up between your
Worship and me the other Night, than for your Dislike of any thing which was
spoken against my Lady Dulcinea. Prithee, Sancho, cried Don Quixote, be careful
of falling again into such irreverent Expressions; for they provoke me to
anger, and are highly offensive. I pardoned thee then for being a Delinquent,
but thou are sensible that a new Offense must be attended with a new
Punishment. As they were going on in such discourse as this, they saw at a
distance a Person riding up to 'em on an Ass, who, as he came near enough to be
distinguished, seemed to be a Gipsy by his Habit. But Sancho Panca, who,
whenever he got sight of any Asses, followed them with his Eyes and his Heart,
as one whose Thoughts were ever fixed on his own, had scarce given him half an
Eye, but he knew him to be Gines de Passamonte, and by the Looks of the Gipsy
found out the Visage of his Ass; as really it was the very same which Gines had
got under him; who to conceal himself from the knowledge of the Public, and
have the better opportunity of making a good Market of his Beast, had clothed
himself like a Gipsy; the Cant of that sort of People, as well as the Languages
of other Countries, being as natural and familiar to him as his own. Sancho saw
him, and knew him; and scarce had he seen and taken notice of him, when he
cried out as loud as his Tongue would permit him: Ah! thou Thief Genesillo,
leave my Goods and Chattels behind thee; get off from the back of my own dear
Life: Thou have nothing to do with my poor Beast, without whom I cannot enjoy a
moment's Ease: Away from my Dapple, away from my Comfort; take to thy heels
thou Villain; hence thou Hedge-bird, leave what is none of thine. He had no
occassion to use so many, Words; for Gines dismounted as soon as he heard him
speak, and taking to his heels, got from 'em, and was out of sight in an
instant. Sancho ran immediately to his Ass, and embraced him: How have thou
done, cried he, since I saw thee, my Darling and Treasure, my dear Dapple, the
Delight of my Eyes, and my dearest Companion? And then he stroak'd and
slabber'd him with Kisses, as if the Beast had been a rational Creature. The
Ass for his part was as silent as could be, and gave Sancho the Liberty of as
many Kisses as he pleased, without the return of so much as one word to the
many Questions he had put to him. At sight of this the rest of the Company came
up with him, and paid their Complements of Congratulation to Sancho for the
recovery of his Ass, especially Don Quixote, who told him that though he had
found his Ass again, yet would not he revoke the Warrant he had given him for
the three Asses; for which favor Sancho returned him a multitude of Thanks.

While they were traveling together, and discoursing after this manner, the
Curate addressed himself to Dorothea, and gave her to understand, that she had
excellently discharged her self of what she had undertaken, as well in the
Management of the History it self, as in her Brevity, and adapting her Style to
the particular Terms made use of in Books of Knight-Errantry. She returned for
answer, that she had frequently conversed with such Romances, but that she was
ignorant of the Situation of the Provinces, and the Sea Ports, which occasioned
the Blunder she had made, by saying that she landed at Ossuna. I perceived it,
replied the Curare, and therefore I put in what you heard which brought matters
to rights again. But is it not an amazing thing to see how ready this
unfortunate Gentleman is to give credit to these fictitious Reports, only
because they have the Air of the extravagant Stories in Books of
Knight-Errantry? Cardenio said, that he thought this so strange a Madness, that
he did not believe the Wit of Man could devise any thing like it, should any
one ever start the thought of such another. The Gentleman, replied the Curate,
has some Qualities in him, even as surprising in a Madman, as his unparalled
Frenzy: For, take him but off from his Romantic Humor, to discourse with him
of any other Subject, you will find him to handle it with a great deal of
Reason, and show himself by his Conversation to have very clear and
entertaining Conceptions: Insomuch, that if Knight-Errantry bears no relation
to his Discourse, there is no Man but will esteem him for his vivacity of Wit,
and strength of Judgment. While they were thus discoursing, Don Quixote
prosecuting his Converse with his Squire, Sancho, said he, let us lay aside all
manner of Animosity, and tell me as speedily as thou can, without any remains
of thy last displeasure, how, when, and where did thou find my Lady Dulcinea?
What was she doing when thou first pay'st thy respects to her? How did thou
express thy self to her? What Answer was she pleased to make thee? What
Countenance did she put on at the perusal of my Letter? Who transcribed it
fairly for thee? and every thing else which has any relation to this Affair,
without Addition, Lies, or Flattery. On the other side take care thou losest
not a Tittle of the whole matter, by abbreviating it, lest thou rob me of part
of that delight which I propose to my self from it. Sir, answered Sancho, if I
must speak the truth, and nothing but the truth, no body copied out the Letter
for me; for I carried none at all. That Is right, cried Don Quixote, for I found
the Pocketbook, in which it was written, two days after thy departure, which
occasioned exceeding grief in me, because I knew not what thou could do, when
thou found'st thy self without the Letter; and I could not but be induced to
believe that thou would have returned in order to take it with Thee. I had
certainly done so, replied Sancho, were it not for this Head of mine, which
kept it in Remembrance ever since your Worship read it to me, and helped me to
say it over to a Parish-Clerk, who writ it out for me word for word so purely,
that he swore, though he had written out many a Letter of Excommunication in his
time, he never in all the days of his life had read or seen any thing so well
spoken as it was. And do thou still retain the Memory of it, my dear Sancho,
cried Don Quixote? Not I, quoth Sancho; for as soon as I had given it her, and
your turn was served, I was very willing to forget it. But if I remember any
thing, it is what was on the top; and it was thus: High and Subterrene, I would
say, Sovereign Lady; and at the bottom, Yours until Death, The Knight of the
Woeful Figure; and I put between these two things, three hundred Souls, and
Lives, and Pigsnyes.

CHAP. IV. The pleasant Dialogue between Don Quixote and his Squire continued,
with other Adventures.
ALL this is mighty well, said Don Quixote, proceed therefore: You arrived, and
how was that Queen of Beauty then employed? On my Conscience thou found'st her
stringing of Orient Pearls, or imbroideing some curious Device in Gold for me
her Captive Knight; was it not so, my Sancho? No faith, answered the Squire, I
found her winnowing a parcel of Wheat very seriously, in the back Yard. Then
said the Don, you may rest assured that every Corn of that Wheat was a Grain of
Pearl, since she did it the honor of touching it with her Divine Hand. Did
thou observe the quality of the Wheat, was it not of the finest sort? Very
indifferent I thought, said the Squire. Well, this, it least, you must allow;
it must make the finest whitest Bread, if sifted by her white Hands: but go on;
when you delivered my Letter, did she kiss it? Did she treasure it in her
Bosom, or what Ceremony did she use worthy such a Letter? How did she behave
her self? Why truly Sir, answered Sancho, when I offered her the Letter, she
was very busy handling her Sieve; and, prithee honest Friend, said she, do so
much as lay that Letter down upon the Sack there; I cannot read it till I have
winnow'd out what is in my hands. O unparalled Discretion, cried Don Quixote!
she knew that a Perusal required leisure, and therefore deferred it for her
more pleasing and private Hours. But on, my Squire; while she was thus
employed, what Conferences past? what did she ask about her Knight, and what
did you reply? Say all, say all, my dearest Sancho, let not the smallest
Circumstance escape thy Tongue; speak all that Thought can frame, or Pen
describe. Her Questions were easily answered, Sir, said Sancho, for she asked
me none at all: I told her indeed in what a sad pickle I had left you for her
sake, naked to the Waste; that you eat and slept like the Brute Beasts; that
you would let a Rasor as soon touch your Throat as your Beard; that you were
still blubbering and crying, or swearing and cursing your Fortune. There you
mistook, replied Don Quixote, I rather, bless my Fortune, and always shall,
while Life affords me Breath, since I am thought to merit the esteem of so high
a Lady as Dulcinea del Toboso. There you hit it, said Sancho, she is a high
Lady indeed Sir, for she is taller than I am by a Foot and a half. Why, how now,
Sancho, said the Knight, have thou measured thy length with her! Ay marry did
I, Sir, said the Squire; for you must know, that she desired me to lend her a
hand in lifting a Sack of Wheat on an Ass; so we buckl'd about it, and I came
so close to her, that I found she was taller than I by a full span at least.
Right, answered Don Quixote, but thou art also conscious that the uncommon
Stature of her Person is adorned with innumerable Graces and Endowments of
Soul; but Sancho, when you approached the charming She, did not an Aromatic
Smell strike thy Sense, a Scent so Odoriferous, pleasing, and sweet, as I want
a Name for it; sweet as -- you understand me, as the richest Fragrancy diffused
around a Perfumer's Magazine of Odours? this at least you must grant me. I did
indeed feel a sort of Scent a little unsavory, said Sancho, somewhat vigorous
or so; for I suppose she had wrought hard, and sweat somewhat plentifully. It Is
false, answered the Knight, thy smelling has been debauched by thy own Scent,
or some Canker in thy Nose; if thou could tell the Scent of opening Roses,
fragrant Lillies, or the choicest Amber, then thou might guess at here is. Cry
mercy, Sir, said Sancho, it may be so indeed, for I remember that I my self
have smelt very often just as Madam Dulcinea did then; and that she should smell
like me is no such wondrous thing neither, since there is never a Barrel the
better Herring of us. But now, said the Knight, supposing the Corn winnow'd and
dispatched to the Mill; what did she after she had read my Letter? Your Letter,
Sir! answered Sancho, your Letter was not read at all, Sir; as for her part,
she said, she could neither read nor write, and she would trust no body else,
lest they should tell tales; and so she cunningly tore your Letter. She said
that what I told her by Word of Mouth of your Love and Penance, was enough: To
make short now, she gave her Service to you, and said she had rather see you
than hear from you; and she prayed you, if ever you loved her, upon sight of me
forthwith to leave your Madness among the Bushes here, and come strait to
Toboso (if you be at leisure,) for she has something to say to you, and has a
huge Mind to see you: She had like to burst with laughing, when I called you
the Knight of the Woeful Figure. She told me the Biscayan whom you mauled so was
there, and that he was a very honest Fellow, but that she heard no News at all
of the Gally-Slaves.

Thus far all goes well, said Don Quixote; but tell me pray, what Jewel did she
present you at your departure, as a reward for the News you brought? for it is a
Custom of ancient standing among Knights and Ladies-Errant, to bestow on
Squires, Dwarfs, or Damsels, who bring them good News of their Ladies or
Servants, some precious Jewel as a grateful Reward of their welcome Tidings. Ay,
Sir, said Sancho, that was the Fashion in the days of yore; and a very good
Fashion, I take it: But all the Jewels Sancho got, was a Luncheon of Bread and
a piece of Cheese, which she handed to me over the Wall, when I was taking my
Leave; by the same Token (I hope there is no Ill Luck in it) the Cheese was made
of Sheep's Milk. It Is strange, said Don Quixote, for she is Liberal, even to
Profuseness; and if she presented thee not a Jewel, she certainly had none
about her at that time; but what is deferred is not lost, I shall see her, and
Matters shall be accommodated. Know thou Sancho, what raises my
Astonishment; it is thy sudden return; for proportioning thy short Absence to
the length of thy Journey, Toboso being at least thirty Leagues distant, thou
must have ridden on the Wind; certainly the sagacious Inchanter who is my
Guardian and Friend, (for doubtless such a one there is and ought to be, or I
should not be a true Knight Errant,) certainly I say, that wise Magician has
furthered thee on thy Journey unawares; for there are Sages of such incredible
Power, as to take up a Knight Errant sleeping in his Bed, and waken him next
Morning a Thousand Leagues from the place where he fell asleep. By this Power
Knight-Errants succor one another in their most dangerous Exigents, when, and
where they please; for Instance, suppose me Fighting in the Mountains of
Armenia with some hellish Monster, some dreadful Spright, or fierce Gigantick
Knight, where perhaps I am like to be worsted, (such a thing may happen,) when
just in the very Crisis of my Fate, when I least expect it, behold on the top
of a flying Cloud, or riding in a flaming Chariot, another Knight my Friend,
who but a Minute before was in England perhaps; he sustains me, delivers me
from Death, and returns that Night to his own Lodging, where he Sups with a
very good Appetite after his Journey, having Rid you two or three thousand
Leagues that Day: And all this performed by the Industry and Wisdom of these
knowing Magicians, whose only Business and Charge is glorious Knight-Errantry.
Some such Expeditious Power, I believe Sancho, though hidden from you, has
promoted so great a dispatch in your late Journey. I believe indeed (answered
Sancho) that there was Witchcrafr in the Case, for Rozinante rid without a Spur
all the way, and was as mettlesom as though he had been a Gipsy's Ass with
Quicksilver in his Ears. Quicksilver! You Coxcomb, said the Knight, ay, and a
Troop of Devils besides; and they are the best Horse-coursers in Nature you
must know, for they must needs go whom the Devil drives; but no more of that.
What is thy Advice as to my Lady's Commands to visit her? I know her Power
should regulate my Will; but then my Honor, Sancho, my solemn Promise has
engaged me to the Princess's Service that comes with us, and the Law of Arms
confines me to my Word: Love draws me one, and Glory the other way; on this side
Dulcinea's strict Commands, on the other my promised Faith; but -- it is
resolved. I Will travel Night and Day, cut off this Giant's Head, and having
settled the Princess in her Dominions, will presently return to see that Sun
which enlightens my Senses: She will easily condescend to excuse my Absence,
when I convince her 'twas for her Fame and Glory; since the past, present, and
future Success of my Victorious Arms depends wholly on the gracious Influences
of her Favor, and the Honor of being her Knight. Oh sad, oh sad! said Sancho,
I doubt your Worship's Head is much the worse for wearing: Are you Head, Sir,
to take so long a Voyage for nothing? Why don't you catch at this Perferment
that now offers, where a fine Kingdom is the Portion, twenty thousand Leagues
round, they say; nay, bigger than Portugal and Castile both together -- Good
your Worship! hold your Tongue, I wonder you are not ashamed -- take a Fool's
Counsel for once, Marry her by the first Priest you meet, here is our own Curate
can do the Job most curiously: Come Master. I have Hair enough in my Beard to
make a Councellor, and my Advice is as fit for you, as your Shoe for your
Foot; a Bird in Hand is worth two in the Bush, and He that will not when he may,
When he would, he shall have nay.


Thou advisest me thus, answered Don Quixote, that I may be able to Promote
thee according to my Promise; but that I can do without Marrying this Lady: For
I shall make this the Condition of entering into Battle; that after my Victory,
without Marrying the Princess, she shall leave part of her Kingdom at my
disposal, to gratify whom I please; and who can claim any such Gratuity but thy
self? That Is plain, answered Sancho, but pray Sir, take care that you reserve
some part near the Seaside for me; that if the Air does not agree with me, I
may transport my Black Slaves, make my Profit of them, and go live somewhere
else; so that I would have you resolve upon it presently, leave the Lady
Dulcinea for the present, and go kill this same Giant, and make an end of that
Business first, for I dare swear 'twill yield you a good Market. I am fixed in
thy Opinion (said Don Quixote) but I admonish thee not to whisper to any Person
the least hint of our Conference; for since Dulcinea is so cautious and secret,
it is proper that I and mine should follow her Example. Why the Devil then, said
Sancho, should you send every Body you overcome packing to Madam Dulcinea, to
fall down before her, and tell her they came from you to pay their Obedience,
when this tells all the World that she is your Mistress as much as if they had
it under your own Hand? How dull of Apprehension and Stupid thou art, said the
Knight; have thou not Sense to find that all this redounds to her greater
Glory? Know that in proceedings of Chivalry, a Lady's Honor is Calculated from
the number of her Servants, whose Services must not tend to any reward, but the
Favor of her Acceptance, and the pure Honor of performing them for her sake,
and being called her Servants. I have heard our Curate, answered Sancho, Preach
up this Doctrine of loving for Love's-sake, and that we ought to love our Maker
so for his own-sake, without either hope of Good, or fear of Pain; though for
my part I would love and serve him for what I could get. Thou art an
unaccountable Fellow, cried Don Quixote; thou talk sometimes with so much
Sense, that one would imagine thee to be something of a Scholar. A Schollard,
Sir, answered Sancho, lack a day, I don't know, as I Am an honest Man, a Letter
in the Book. Master Nicholas seeing them so deep in Discourse, called to them
to stop and drink at a little Fountain by the Road: Don Quixote halted, and
Sancho was very glad of the Interruption, his Stock of Lies being almost spent,
and he stood in Danger besides of being trapp'd in his Words, for he had never
seen Dulcinea, though he knew she lived at Toboso. Cardenio by this had changed
his Clothes for those Dorothea wore, when they found her in the Mountains; and
though they made but an ordinary Figure, they looked much better than his own.
They all stopped at the Fountain, and fell aboard the Curate's Provision, which
was but a Snap among so many, for they were all very hungry. While they sat
refreshing themselves, a young Lad traveling that way, observed them, and
looking earnestly on the whole Company, ran suddenly and fell down before Don
Quixote, addressing him in a very doleful Manner. Alas, good Sir, said he,
don't you know me? don't you remember poor Andrew whom you caused to be untied
from the Tree? With that the Knight knew him; and raising him up, turned to the
Company, That you may all know, said he, of how great Importance to the
Redressing of Injuries, Punishing Vice, and the universal Benefit of Mankind
the Business of Knight-Errantry may be, you must understand, that riding
through a Desert some days ago, I heard certain lamentable Screekes and
Outcries: Prompted by the Misery of the Afflicted, and born away by the Zeal
of my Profession, I followed the Voice, and found this Boy whom you all see,
bound to a great Oak; I Am glad he is present, because he can attest the Truth of
my Relation. I found him as I told you, bound to an Oak, naked from the Waste
upwards, and a bloudy-minded Peasant scourging his Back unmercifully with the
Reins of a Bridle. I presently demanded the cause of his severe Chastisement?
The rude Fellow answered, That he had liberty to punish his own Servant, whom
he thus used for some Faults that argued him more Knave than Fool. Good Sir,
said the Boy, he can lay nothing to my Charge, but demanding my Wages. His
Master made some reply, which I would not allow as a just Excuse; and ordered
him immediately to unbind the Youth, and took his Oath that he would take him
home and pay him all his Wages upon the Nail, in good and lawful Coin. Is not
this literally true Andrew? Did you not mark besides with what Face of
Authority I Commanded, and with how much Humility he promised to obey all I
imposed, commanded, and desired? Answer me, Boy, and tell boldly all that
passed to this worthy Company, that it may appear how necessary the Vocation of
Knight-Errants is upon the Roads.

All you have said is true enough, answered Andrew, but the Business did not
end after that manner you and I hoped it would. How? said the Knight, has not
the Peasant paid you? Ay, he has paid me with a Vengeance, said the Boy; for no
sooner was your Back turned, but he tied me again to the same Tree, and lashed
me so cursedly, that I looked like St. Bartholomew flayed alive; and at every
blow he had some Joke or another to laugh at you; and had he not laid me on as
he did, I fancy I could not have helped laughing my self. At last he left me in
so pitiful a Case, that I was for'd to crawl to an Hospital, where I have lain
ever since to get cured, so woefully the Tyrant had lashed me. And now I may
thank you for this, for had you rid on your Journey, and neither meddl'd nor
made, seeing no Body sent for you, and 'twas none of your Business, my Master
perhaps had been satisfied with giving me ten or twenty Lashes, and after that
would have paid me what he owed me; but you was so huffy, and called him so
many Names, that it made him mad, and so he vented all his Spite against you
upon my poor Back as soon as yours was turned, insomuch that I fear I shall
never be my own Man again. The Miscarriage, answered the Knight, is only
chargeable on my departure before I saw my Orders executed; for I might by
Experience have remembered, that the Word of a Peasant is regulated, not by
Honor, but Profit. But you remember, Andrew, how I swore if he disobeyed, that
I would return and seek him through the Universe, and find him though hid in the
Whale's Belly. Ay, Sir answered Andrew, but that is no cure for my sore
Shoulders. You shall be redressed, answered the Knight, starting fiercely up,
and commanding Sancho immediately to bridle Rozinante, who was Baiting as fast
as the rest of the Company. Dorothea asked what he intended to do? he answered
that he intended to find out the Villain and punish him severely for his
Crimes, then force him to pay Andrew his Wages to the last Near the value of a
Farthing.
Maravedi, in spite of all the Peasants in the Universe. She then desired him
to remember his Engagement to her, which withheld him from any new Achievement
till that was finished; that he must therefore suspend his Resentments till his
Return from her Kingdom. It Is but just and reasonable, said the Knight, and
therefore Andrew must wait with Patience my Return; but when I do return, I do
hereby Ratify my former Oath and Promise, never to rest till he be fully
satisfied and paid. I dare not trust to that, answered Andrew; but if you will
bestow on me as much Money as will bear my Charges to Sevill, I shall thank
your Worship more than for all the Revenge you tell me of: Give me a snap to
eat, and a bit in my Pocket, and so Heaven be wi'ye and all other
Knight-Errants, and may they prove as arrant Fools in their own Business as
they have been in mine.

Sancho took a Crust of Bread, and a slice of Cheese; and reaching it to
Andrew, there Friend, said he, there is something for thee; on my Word, we have
all of us a share of thy Mischance. What share, said Andrew? Why, the cursed
mischance of parting with this Bread and Cheese to thee; for my Head to a
Halfpenny, I may live to want it; for thou must know, Friend of mine, that we
the Squires of Knight-Errants often pick our Teeth without a Dinner, and are
subject to many other things which are better felt than told. Andrew snatched
at the Provender, and seeing no likelihood of any more, he made his Leg and
went off. But looking over his Shoulder at Don Quixote, hark ye, you Sir
Knight Errant, cried he, if ever you meet me again in your Travels, which I
hope you never shall; though I were torn in pieces, do'nt trouble me with your
plaguey help, but mind your own Business; and so fare you well, with a Curse
upon you and all the Knight-Errants that ever were born. The Knight thought to
Chastise him, but the Lad was too nimble for any there, and his Heels carried
him off; leaving Don Quixote highly incensed at his Story, which moved the
Company to hold their Laughter, lest they should raise his Anger to a dangerous
height.

CHAP. V. What befell Don Quixote and his Company, at the Inn.
WHEN they had eaten plentifully, they left that Place, and traveled all that
Day and the next without meeting any thing worth notice, till they came to the
Inn, which was so frightful a Sight to poor Sancho, that he would willingly not
have gone in, but could by no means avoid it. The Innkeeper, the Hostess, h^^
Daughter, and Mari^ornes, met Don Quixote and (...) Squire with a very hearty
Welcome: The Knight received them with a Face of Gravity and Approbation,
bidding them prepare him a better Bed than their last Entertainment afforded
him. Si^, said the Hostess, pay us better than you did then, and you shall have
a Bed for a Prince; and upon the Knight's Promise that he would, she provided
him a tolerable Bed in the large Room where he lay before: He presently
undressed, and being heartily crazed in Body as well as in Mind, he went to
Bed; he was scarcely got to his Chamber, when the Hostess flew suddenly at the
Barber, and catching him by the Beard; on my life; said she, you shall use my
Tail no longer for a Beard, pray Sir give me my Tail, my Husband wants it to
stick his thing into, his Comb I mean, and my Tail I will have, Sir. The Barber
held tugg with her till the Curate advised him to return it, telling him that
he might now undisguise himself, and tell Don Quixote that after the
Gally-Slaves had pillaged him, he fled to that Inn; and if he should ask for
the Princess's Squire, he should pretend that he was dispatched to her Kingdom
before her, to give her Subjects an Account of her arrival, and of the Power
she brought to free them all from Slavery. The Barber thus schooled, gave the
Hostess her Tail, with the other Trinkets which he had borrowed to decoy Don
Quixote out of the Desert. Dorothea's Beauty, and Cardenio's handsome Shape
surpised every Body. The Curate bespoke Supper, and the Host being pretty
secure of his Reckoning, soon got them a tolerable Entertainment. They would
not disturb the Knight, who slept very soundly, for his Distemper wanted Rest
more than Meat; but they diverted themselves with the Hostess's Account of his
Encounter with the Carriers, and of Sancho's being tossed in a Blanket. Don
Quixote's unaccountable Madness was the principal Subject of their Discourse,
upon which the Curate insisting, and arguing it to proceed from his reading
Romances, the Innkeeper took him up. Sir, said he, you cannot make me of your
Opinion; for in my Mind, it is the pleasantest Reading that ever was. I have
now in the House two or three Books of that kind, and some other Pieces, that
really have kept me and many others alive. In Harvest-time a great many of the
Reapers come to drink here in the heat of the Day, and he that can read best
among us takes up one of these Books; and all the rest of us, sometimes thirty
or more, sit round about him, and listen with such pleasure, that we think
neither of Sorrow nor Care; as for my own Part, when I hear the mighty Blows
and dreadful Battles of these Knight-Errants, I have half a mind to be one my
self, and am raised to such a life and briskness, that I frighten away Old Age;
I could sit and hear them from Morning till Night. I wish you would Husband,
said the Hostess, for then we should have some rest; for at all other times you
are so out of humor and so snappish, that we lead a hellish life with you.
That Is true enough, said Maritornes; and for my part I think there are mighty
pretty Stories in those Books, especially that one about the young Lady who is
hugged so sweetly by her Knight under the Orange-Tree, when the Damsel watches
lest some Body comes, and stands with her Mouth watering all the while; and a
thousand such Stories, which I would often forgot my Dinner and Supper to hear.
And what think you of this Matter young Miss, said the Curate to the
Innkeepers Daughter? Alack a day, Sir, said she, I don't understand those
things, and yet I love to hear 'em; but I don't like that frightful ugly
fighting that so pleases my Father. Indeed the sad Lamentations of the poor
Knights for the Loss of their Mistresses, sometimes makes me cry like any
thing. I suppose then young Gentlewoman, said Dorothea, you will be
tenderhearted, and will never let a Lover die for you. I don't know what may
happen as to that, said the Girl; but this I know, that I will never give any
Body reason to call me Tygress and Lionness, and I don't know how many other
ugly Names, as those Ladies are often called, and I think they deserve yet
worse, so they do; for they can have neither Soul or Conscience to let such
fine Gentlemen die or run mad for a sight of them? What signifies all their
fiddling and coyness? If they are civil Women, why don't they Marry 'em, for
that is all their Knights would be at? Hold your prating Mistress, said the
Hostess, how came you to know all this? It Is not for such as you to talk of
these Matters. The Gentleman only asked me a Question, said she, and it would
be uncivil not to answer him. Well, said the Curate, do me the favor, good
Landlord, to bring out these Books that I may have a sight of them.

With all my Heart, said the Innkeeper; and with that stepping to his Chamber,
he opened a little Portmantle that shut with a Chain, and took out three large
Volumes with a parcel of Manuscripts in a fair legible Letter: The Title of the
first was Don Cirongilio of Thrace, the second Felixmarte of Hircania, and the
third was the History of the Great Captain Goncalo Hernandez de Corduba, and
the Life of Diego Garcia de Paredes, bound together. The Curate reading the
Titles, turned to the Barber, and told him, they wanted now Don Quixote's
Housekeeper and his Niece; I shall do as well with the Books said the Barber,
for I can find the way to the Back-yard, or the Chimney, there is a good Fire
that will do their Business. Business! said the Innkeeper, I hope you would
not burn my Books. Only two of them, said the Curate, this same Don Cirongilio
and his Friend Felixmarte. I hope Sir, said the Host, they are neither
Heretics nor Flegmaticks, Schismatics you mean, said the Barber; I mean so
said the Innkeeper, and if you must burn any, let it be this of Goncalo
Hernandez and Diego Garcia, for you should sooner burn one of my Children than
the others. These Books honest Friend, said the Curate, that you appear so
concerned for, are senseless Rhapsodies of Falsehoods and Folly; and this which
you so despise is a true History, and contains a true Account of two celebrated
Men; the first by his Bravery and Courage purchased immortal Fame, and the Name
of the Great General, by the universal Consent of Mankind. The other, Diego
Garcia de Paredes, was of Noble Extraction, and born in Truxillo a Town of
Estremadura, and was a Man of singular Courage, and such mighty Strength, that
with one of his Hands he could stop a Mill-wheell in its most rapid Motion; and
with his single Force defended the Passage of a Bridge against a great Army.
Several other great Actions are related in the Memoirs of his Life, but all
with so much Modesty and unbiased Truth, that they easily pronounce him his
own Historiographer; and had they been written by any one else, with Freedom
and Impartiality, they might have eclipsed your Hector's, Achilloses, and
Orlando's with all their Heroic Exploits. That Is a fine Jest, faith, said the
Innkeeper, my Father could have told you another Tale, Sir. Holding a
Mill-wheel! why, is that such a mighty Matter! one's fish, do but turn over a
Leaf of Felixmarte there; you will find how with one single Back-stroke he cut
five swinging Giants off by the middle, like so many Bean-stalks; and read how
at other time he Charged a most Mighty and Powerful Army of above a Million and
Six hundred thousand fighting Men, all Armed Cap-a-pee, and Routed them all
like so many Sheep. And what can you say of the Worthy Cirongilio of Thrace,
who, as you may read there, going by Water one Day, was assaulted by a fiery
Serpent in the middle of the River; he presently leaped nimbly upon her Back,
and hanging by her Scaly Neck grasped her Throat fast with both his Arms, so
that the Serpent finding her self almost strangled, was forced to dive into the
Water to save her self, and carried the Knight who would not quit his hold, to
the very bottom, where he found a Stately Palace and such pleasant Gardens,
that 'twas a wonder; and strait the Serpent turned into a very old Man, and
told him such things as were never heard nor spoken. -- Now a Fig for your
great Captain, and your Diego Garcia. Cardenio and Dorothea hearing the
vehemence of his Discourse, imagined that he would make another Don Quixote; I
tell thee Friend, (said the Curate) there were never any such Persons as your
Books of Chivalry mention, upon the Face of the Earth; your Felixmarte of
Hircania, and your Cirongilio of Thrace, are all but Chimeras and Fictions of
idle and luxuriant Wits, who wrote them for the same Reason that you read them,
because they had nothing else to do. Sir, (said the Innkeeper) you must Angle
with another Bait, or you will catch no Fish. I know what is what, as well as
another; I can tell where my own Shoe pinches me; and you must not think Sir,
to catch old Birds with Chaff; it is a pleasant Jest, faith, that you should
pretend to persuade me now that these notable Books are Lies and Stories; why
Sir, are they not in Print? Are they not Published according to Order? Licensed
by Authority from the Privy Council? And do you think that they would permit so
many Lies to be Printed at once, and such a Number of Battles and Enchantments
to set us all a madding? I have told you already (Friend) replied the Curate,
that this is Licensed for our Amusement in our idle Hours; for the same Reason
that Tennis, Billiards, Chess, and other Recreations are tolerated, that Men
may find a Pastime for those hours they cannot find Employment for. Neither
could the Government foresee this Inconvenience from such Books, that you urge,
because they could not reasonably suppose any Rational Person would believe
their Absurdities. And were this a proper time, I could say a great deal in
Favor of such Writings, and how with some Regulations they might be made both
instructive and diverting; but I design upon the first Opportunity to
communicate my thoughts on this Head to some that may Redress it: In the mean
time, honest Landlord, you may put up your Books, and believe them true if you
please, and much good may do you. And I wish you may never have the same blind
side with your Guest Don Quixote. There Is no fea^ of that, said the Innkeeper,
for I never design to turn Knight Errant, because I find the Customs that
supported that Noble Order are quite out of Doors.

About the middle of their Discourse, entered Sancho, whom their Conversation,
especially on the Curate's side, made very uneasy; he resolved however (in
spite of all their Contempt of Chivalry) still to stick by his Master; and if
his intended Expedition failed of Success, then to return to his Family and
Plough. As the Innkeeper was carrying away the Books, the Curate desired his
leave to look over those Manuscripts which appeared in so fair a Character; he
reached them to him, to the number of eight Sheets, on one of which there was
written in a large Hand, The Novel of the curious Impertinent. The Title, said
the Curate, promises something, perhaps it may be worth reading through; your
Reverence, said the Innkeeper, may be worse employed; for those Papers have
received the Approbation of several ingenious Guests of mine that read them,
and who would have begged them of me; but I would by no means part with them,
till I deliver them to the Owner of this Portmantle who forgot it here with
these Books and Papers; I may perhaps see him again, and restore them honestly,
for I am as much a Christian as my Neighbors, though I am an Innkeeper. But I
hope (said the Curate) if it pleases me you will not deny a Copy of it. Nay, as to
that Matter, said the Host) we shall not fall out. Cardenio having by this perused
it a little, recommended it to the Curate, and entreated him to read it for the
Entertainment of the Company. The Curate would have excused himself by urging
the unseasonable time of Night, and that sleep was then more proper, especially
for the Lady; a pleasant Story, said Dorothea, will prove the best Repose for
some hours to me, for my Spirits are not composed enough to allow me to rest
though I want it. Mr. Nicholas and Sancho joined in the Request. To please ye
then, and satisfy my own Curiosity, said the Curate, I Will begin, if you will but
give your Attention.

CHAP. VI. The Novel of the Curious Impertinent.
ANselmo, and Lothario, Considerable Gentlemen of Florence, the Capital City of
Tuscany, in Italy, were so eminent for their Friendship, that they were called
nothing but the Two Friends. They were both Young and Unmarry'd, of the same
Age and Humor, which did not a little concur to the continuance of their
mutual Affection, though, of the two, Anselmo was the most Amorously inclined,
and Lothario the greater lover of Hunting; yet they loved one another above all
other Considerations, and mutually quitted their own Pleasure for their
Friend's; and their very Wills, like the different Motions of a well regulated
Watch, were always subservient to their Unity, and still kept time with one
another. Anselmo at last, fell desperately in love with a Beautiful Lady of the
same City; so Eminent for her Fortune and Family, that he resolved by the
Consent of his Friend (for he did nothing without his Advice) to demand her in
Marriage. Lothario was the Person employed in this Affair, which he managed
with that Address, that in a few days he put his Friend into Possession of
Camilla, for that was the Lady's Name; and this so much to their Satisfaction,
that he received a thousand Acknowledgments from both, for the equal Happiness
they derived from his endeavors. Lothario, as long as the Nuptials lasted, was
every day at Anselmo's, and did all he could to add to the Sports and
Diversions of the Occasion. But as soon as the new married Pair had received
the Congratulation of their Friends, and the Nuptial Ceremonies were over,
Lothario retired with the rest of their Acquaintance, and forbore his Visits,
because he prudently imagined, that it was not at all proper to be so frequent
at his Friend's House after Marriage as before; for though true Friendship
entirely Banishes all Suspicion and Jealousy, yet the Honor of a Married Man
is of so Nice and tender a Nature, that it has been sometimes sullied by the
Conversation of the nearest Relations, and therefore more liable to suffer from
that of a Friend. Anselmo observed this Remissness of Lothario, and, fond as he
was of his Wife, showed by his tender Complaints how much it affected him. He
told him, that if he could have believed he must have lost so dear a
Correspondence by Marriage; as much as he loved, he would never have paid so
great a price for the Satisfaction of his Passion; and that he would never for
the idle Reputation of a cautious Husband, suffer so tender and agreeable a
Name to be lost as that of The two Friends, which before his Marriage they had
so happily obtained; and therefore he begged him, if that were a Term Lawful to
be used betwixt them two, to return to his former Familiarity and Freedom of
Conversation; assuring him that his Wife's Will and Pleasure were entirely
formed by his, and that being acquainted with their ancient and strict
Friendship, she was equally surpised at so unexpected a Change. Lothario
replied to these endearing Persuasions of his Friend, with such Prudence and
Discretion, that he convinced him of the sincerity of his intentions in what he
had done; and so in conclusion they agreed that Lothario should Dine twice a
Week at his House besides Holy Days. Yet Lothario's Compliance with this
Resolution being only not to disoblige his Friend, he designed to observe it no
farther then he should find it consistent with Anselmo's Honor, whose
Reputation was as dear to him as his own; and he used to tell him, that the
Husband of a beautiful Wife ought to be as cautious of the Friends whom he
carried home to her himself, as other female Acquaintance, and Visitants. For a
Friend's, or Relation's House, often renders the contrivance of those things
easy, and not suspected, which could not be compassed either in the Church,
the Markets, or at public Entertainments and Places of Resort, which no Man
can entirely keep a Woman from frequenting. To this Anselmo replied, that for
that very Reason every Married Man ought to have some Friend to put him in mind
of the defects of his Conduct; for a Husband's Fondness many times makes him
either not see, or at least for fear of displeasing his Wife, not command or
forbid her what may be advantageous or prejudicial to his Reputation. In all
which, a Friend's Warning and Advice might supply him with a proper Remedy. But
where shall we find a Friend, so qualified with Wisdom and Truth as Anselmo
demands? I must confess I cannot tell, unless it were Lothario, whose Care of
his Friend's Honor made him so cautious as not to comply with his promised
visiting Days, lest the Malicious Observers should give a Scandalous Censure of
the frequent Admission of so well qualified a Gentleman, both for his Wit,
Fortune, Youth, and Address, to the House of a Lady of so celebrated a Beauty
as Camilla. For though his Virtue was sufficiently known, to check the Growth
of any malignant Report, yet he would not suffer his Friend's Honor nor his
own to run the hazard of being called in Question; which made him spend the
greatest part of those Days he had by Promise devoted to his Friend's
Conversation, in other Places and Employments; yet excusing his Absence so
agreeably, that Anselmo could not deny the Reasonableness of what he alleged.
And thus the time passed away in pathetick Accusations, of want of Love and
Friendship on one side, and plausible Excuses on the other.

I know very well, said Anselmo, walking one Day in the Fields with his Friend,
that of all the Favors and Benefits for which Heaven commands my Gratitude, as
the Advantage of my Brith, Fortune, and Nature; the greatest and most obliging
is the Gift of such a Wife, and such a Friend; being both of you Pledges of so
great value, that though it is impossible for me to raise my Esteem and Love equal
to your Deserts, yet is no Man capable of having a greater. And yet while I am
in Possession of all that can or usually does make a Man happy, I live the most
discontented life in the World. I am not able to tell you when my Misery began,
which now inwardly torments me with so strange, extravagant, and singular a
Desire, that I never reflect on it, but I wonder at my self, and condemn and
curb my Folly, and would fain hide my Desires even from my self: And yet I have
received no more advantage from this private Confusion, then if I had published
my Extravagance to all the World. Since therefore it is evident that it will at
last break out, dear Lothario, I would have it go no farther than thy known
Fidelity and Secresy; for that and my own Industry (which as my Friend thou will turn to my Assistance) will quickly I hope free me from the Anguish it now
gives me, and restore me that Tranquillity of which my own Folly has now
deprived me.

Lothario stood in great suspense, unable to guess at the Consequence of so
strange and prolix an Introduction. In vain he racked his Imagination for the
Causes of his Friend's Affliction, the Truth was the last thing he could think
of; but no longer to remain in doubt, he told Anselmo, that he did his
Friendship a particular Injury, in not coming directly to the Point in the
discovery of his Thoughts to him, since his Counsels might enable him to
support, and perhaps to lose or compass such importunate Desires.

It Is very true, replied Anselmo, and with that Assurance I must inform you,
that the Desire that gives me so much Pain, is to know whether Camilla be
really as Virtuous as I think her. Nor can this be made evident but by such a
Trial, that like Gold by the Fire the Standard and Degree of her Worth be
discovered. For in my Opinion, no Woman has more Virtue than she retains after
the force of the most earnest Solicitations* Casta est quam nemo rogavit: And
she only may be said to be Chaste who has withstood the Force of Tears, Vows,
Promises, Gifts, and all the Importunities of a Lover that is not easily
denied: For where is the Praise of a Woman's Virtue whom no Body has ever
endeavored to corrupt? Where is the Wonder if a Wife be Reserved, when she has
no Temptation nor Opportunity of being otherwise; especially if she have a
jealous Husband with whom the least Suspicion goes for a Reality, and who
therefore punishes the least Appearances with Death. Now I can never so much
esteem her, who owes her Virtue merely to Fear or want of Opportunity of being
False, as I would one who Victoriously surmounts all the Assaults of a vigorous
and watchful Lover, and yet retains her Virtue entire and unshaken. These, and
many others Reason, which I could urge to strengthen my Opinion, make me desire
that my Camilla's Virtue may pass through the fiery Trial of vigorous
Solicitations and Addresses, and these offered by a Gallant, who may have Merit
enough to deserve her good Opinion; and if, as I am confident she will, she be
able to resist so agreeable a Temptation, I shall think my self the most happy
Man in the World, and attain to the height and utmost aim of my Desires; and
shall say, that a Virtuous Woman is fallen to my Lot, of whom the Wise Man
says, Who can find her? If she yields, I shall at least have the Satisfaction
of finding my Opinion of Women justified; and not be imposed on by a foolish
Confidence, that abuses most Men; which Consideration will be sufficient to
make me support the Grief I shall derive from so expensive an Experiment. And,
assuring my self that nothing which you can say can dissuade me from my
Resolution, I desire that you your self, my dear Friend, would be the Person to
put my Design in Execution. I will furnish you with Opportunities enough of
making your Addresses, in which I would have you omit nothing you may suppose
likely to prevail, and mollify a Woman of Quality, without Passion, and
reserved, and discreet by Nature. The most prevailing Reason that makes me
choose you for this Affair above all others; is, because if she should prove so
frail as to be overcome by Address and Importunities, the Victory will not cost
me so dear, since I am secured from your taking that Advantage of which another
might make no Scruple. And so my Honor will remain untouched, and the intended
Injury a Secret, in the Virtue of thy Silence; for I know my Friend so well,
that Death and the Grave will as soon divulge my Affairs. Wherefore if you
would give me Life indeed, and deliver me from the most perplexing Torment of
Doubt, you will immediately begin this Amorous Assault, with all that Vigor,
Assiduity, and Courage, I expect from that Confidence I put in your Friendship.

Lothario gave so great an Attention to Anselmo's Reasons, that he gave him no
other Interruption, than what we mentioned. But, now finding his Discourse was
at an end, full of Amazement at the Extravagance of the Proposal, he thus
replied. Could I, my dear Anselmo, persuade my self that what you have said
were any more than a piece of Raillery, I should not have been so long silent;
no, I should have interrupted you at the beginning of your Speech. Sure you
know neither your self nor me, Anselmo, or you would never have employed me in
such an Affair, if you had not thought me as much altered from what I was, as
you seem to be; for as the Poet has it, usque ad aras; A true Friend ought to
desire nothing of his Friend that is offensive to Heaven. But should a Man so
far exert his Friendship, as to deviate a little from the Severity of Religion
in Complaisance to his Friend, no trifling Motive can excuse the Transgression,
and only his Honor and Life can make any tolerable Apology. Which therefore of
these Anselmo is in danger, to warrant my undertaking so detestable a thing as
you desire? Neither, I dare engage: On the contrary, you would make me the
Assaultter of both, in which my own is included; for, to rob you of your
Reputation, is to take away your Life, since an Infamous Life is worse than
Death; and by making me the guilty Instrument of this, as you would have me,
you make me worse than a dead Man by the Murder of my Reputation. Therefore I
desire you would hear with Patience what I have to urge against your
extravagant Desire, and I shall afterward hear your Reply without
Interrpution. Anselmo having promised his Attention, Lothario proceeded in this
manner. In my Opinion you are not unlike the Moors, who are incapable of being
convinced of the Error of their Religion, by Scripture, speculative Reasons, or
those drawn immediately from the Articles of our Faith; and will yield to
nothing but Demonstrations as evident as those of the Mathematics, and which
can as little be denied, as when we say, If from two equal Parts we take away
two equal Parts, the Parts that remain are also equal. And when they do not
understand this Proposition, which they seldom do, we are obliged by our Hands,
to make it yet more plain and obvious to their Senses; and yet all this labor
will at last prove ineffectual to the convincing them of the Verities of our
Religion. The same must be my Method with you, since your strange desire is so
very foreign to all manner of Reason, that I very much fear I shall spend my
Time and Labor in vain, in endeavoring to convince you of your own Folly, for
I can afford it no other Name. Nay, did I not love you as I do, I should leave
you to the Prosecution of your own odd Humor, which certainly tends to your
Ruin. But to lay your Folly a little more open, you bid me Anselmo attempt a
Woman of Honor, cautious of her Reputation, and one who is not much inclined
to Love; for all these good Qualifications you allow her. If therefore you
already know your Wife is possessed of all these Advantages of Prudence,
Discretion, Honor, and Reservedness, what have you more to enquire after? And
if you believe, as I my self do, that she will be impregnable to all my
Assaults, what greater and better Names will you give her, than she already
deserves? Either you pretend to think better of her, than really you do, or
else you desire you know not what your self. But then if you do not believe her
as Virtuous as you pretend, why would you put it to the Trial, why do you not
rather use her as you think she deserves? On the other hand, if she be as good
as you profess you believe her, why would you go to tempt Truth and Goodness it
self, without any reasonable prospect of Advantage? For when the Trial is over,
she will be but the same Virtuous Woman she was before. Wherefore it is allowed
that it is the effect of Temerity, and want of Reason, to attempt what is
likely to produce nothing but Danger and Detriment to the Undertaker,
especially when there is no Necessity for it, and when we may easily foresee
the Folly of the Undertaking. There are but these Motives to incite us to
difficult Attempts, Religion, Interest, or both together. The first makes the
Saints endeavor to lead Angelick Lives in these frail Bodies, the second makes
us expose our selves to the hazards of long Voyages and Travels in pursuit of
Riches. The third Motive is compounded of both, and prompts us to act as well
for the honor of God as for our own particular Glory and Interests; as for
Example, the daring Adventures of the Valiant Soldier, who urged by his duty to
God, his Prince, and his Country, fiercely runs into the midst of a dreadful
Breach, unterrifi'd with any Considerations of the Danger that threatens him.
These are things done every Day, and let them be never so dangerous, they give
Honor, Glory, and Profit to those that attempt them. But by the Project you
design to reduce to an Experiment; you will never obtain, either the Glory of
Heaven, Profit, or Reputation: For should the Experiment answer your
expectation, it will make no Addition either to your Content, Honor, or
Riches; but if it disappoint your Hopes, it makes you the most miserable Man
alive. And the imaginary Advantage of no Man's knowing your Disgrace, will soon
vanish when you consider, that to know it your self will be enough to supply
you perpetually with all the tormenting Thoughts in the World. A Proof of this,
is what the famous Poet Ludovico Tansilo at the end of his first Part of This
Poem written Originally in Italian, is translated into Spanish by Juan Sedeno,
and into French by Malherbe.
St. Peter's Tears, says in these Words.

Shame, Grief, Remorse in Peter's Breast increase,
Soon as the blushing Morn his Crime betrays.
When most unseen, then most himself he sees,
And with due Horror all his Soul surveys.
For a great Spirit needs no cens'ring Eyes
To wound his Soul, when conscious of a Fault;
But self-condemned, and even self-punish'd lies,
And dreads no Witness like upbraiding Thought*
So that your boasted Secresy, far from alleviating your Grief, will only serve
to increase it; and if your Eyes do not express it by outward Tears, they will
flow from your very Heart in Blood. So wept that simple Doctor, who, as our
Poet tells us, made that Experiment on the brittle Vessel, which the more
prudent Reynoldos excused himself from doing. This indeed is but a Poetical
Fiction, but yet the Moral which it enforces is worthy being observed and
imitated. And accordingly I hope you will discover the strange Mistake into
which you would run, principally when you have heard what I have farther to say
to you.

Suppose, Anselmo, you had a Diamond, as valuable in the Judgment of the best
Jewellers as such a Stone could be, would you not be satisfied with their
Opinion without trying its hardness on the Anvil? you must own, that should it
be proof against your blows, it would not be one jot the more valuable, than
really it was before your foolish Trial; but should it happen to break, as well
it might, the Jewel were then entirely lost, as well as the Sense and
Reputation of the Owner. This precious Diamond my Friend, is your Camilla, for
so she ought to be esteemed in all Men's Opinions as well as your own; why then
would you imprudently put her in danger of failing, since your Trial will add
no greater value to her than she has already? But if she should prove frail,
reflect with your self on the unhappiness of your Condition, and how justly you
might complain of your being the Cause of both her Ruin and your own.
Consider, that as a modest and honest Woman is the most valuable Jewel in the
World, so does all Women's Virtue and Honor consist in the Opinion and
Reputation they maintain with other People. And since that of your Wife is
perfect, both in your own and all other Men's Opinion, why will you go, to no
purpose, to call the reality of it in Question? You must remember, my Friend,
that the Nature of Women is at best but weak and imperfect; and for that Reason
we should be so far from casting Rubs in its way, that we ought with all
imaginable Care to remove every Appearance that might hinder its Course to that
Perfection it wants, which is Virtue.

If we believe the Naturalists, the Ermine is a very white little Creature;
when the Hunters have found its Haunts, they surround it almost with Dirt and
Mire, toward which the Ermine being forced to fly, rather than sully its
native White with Dirt, it suffers it self to be taken, preferring its Color
to its Liberty and Life. The Virtuous Woman is our Ermine, whose Chastity is
whiter than Snow; but to preserve its Color unsullied, you must observe just a
contrary Method: The Addresses and Services of an importunate Lover, are the
Mire into which you should never drive a Woman, for it is ten to one she will
not be able to free her self and avoid it, being but too apt to stumble into
it; and therefore that should be always removed, and only the Candor and
Beauty of Virtue, and the Charms of a good Fame and Reputation placed before
her. A good Woman is also not unlike a Mirror of Crystal, which will
infallibly be dimmed and stained by breathing too much upon it: She must rather
be used like the Relics of Saints, adored but not touched; or like a Garden
of curious tender Flowers, that may at a distance gratify the Eye, but are not
permitted by the Master to be trampled on or touched by every Beholder. I shall
add but a few Verses out of a late new Play, very fit for our present purpose,
where a prudent old Man advised his Neighbor that had a Daughter, to lock her
up close; and gives these Reasons for it, besides several others.

Since nothing is frailer than Woman and Glass,
He that would expose 'em to fall is an Ass;
And sure the rash Mortal is yet more unwise,
Who on Bodies so ticklish Experiments tries.
With Ease both are damaged; then keep that with Care
Which no Art can restore, nor no Soder repair.
Fond Man take my Counsel, watch what is so frail;
For, where Danaes lie, Golden Showers will prevail.
All I have hitherto urged relates only to you, I may now at last be allowed to
consider what regards my self; and if I am tedious I hope you will pardon me;
for, to draw you out of the Labyrinth into which you have run your self, I am
forced on that Prolixity. You call me Friend, yet, what is absoluetly
inconsistent with Friendship, you would rob me of my Honor; Nay, you stop not
here, but would oblige me to destroy yours. First, that you would rob me of
mine is evident; for what will Camilla think when I make a Declaration of Love
to her, but that I am a perfidious Villain, that make no scruple of violating
the most sacred Laws of Friendship, and who sacrifice the Honor and Reputation
of my Friend to a Criminal Passion? Secondly, that I destroy yours is as
evident; for when she sees me take such a Liberty with her, she will imagine
that I have discovered some Weakness in her that has given me assurance to make
her so guilty a Discovery, by which she esteeming her self injured in her
Honor, you being the principal part of her, must of necessity be affected with
the Affronts she receives. For this is the Reason why the Husband, though never
so deserving, cautious, and careful, suffers the Infamy of a scandalous Name if
his Wife goes astray; whereas in Reason he ought rather to be an Object of
Compassion than Contempt, seeing the Misfortune proceeds from the Vice and
Folly of his Wife, not his own Defects. But since the Reason and Justice of the
Man's Suffering for his Wife's Transgression, may be serviceable to you, I Will
give you the best account of it I can; and pray do not think me tedious, since
this is meant for your good. When Woman was given to Man, and Marriage first
Ordained in Paradise, Man and Wife were made and pronounced one Flesh; the
Husband therefore being of a piece with the Wife, whatever affects her affects
him, as a part of her; though, as I have said, he has been no Occasion of it: For
as the whole Body is affected by the pain of any part, as the Head will share
the pain of the Foot, though it never caused that Pain, so is the Husband touched
with his Wife's Infamy, because she is a part of him. And since all Worldly
Honors and Dishonours are derived from Flesh and Blood, and the scandalous
Baseness of an unfaithful Wife proceeds from the same Principle, it necessarily
follows that the Husband, though no Party in the Offense, and entirely ignorant,
and innocent of it, must have his share of the Infamy. Let what I have said, my
dear Anselmo, make you sensible of the Danger into which you would run, by
endeavoring thus to disturb the happy Tranquillity and Repose that your Wife at
present enjoys; and for how vain a Curiosity, and extravagant a Caprice, you
would rouse, and awake those peccant Humors which are now lulled asleep by the
Power of an unattempted Chastity. Reflect farther, how small a Return you can
expect from so hazardous a Voyage, and such valuable Commodities as you
venture; for the Treasure you will lose is so great, and ought to be so dear,
that all Words are too inexpressive to show how much you ought to esteem it.
But if all I have said be too weak to destroy your foolish Resolve, employ some
other Instrument of your Disgrace and Ruin; for, though I should lose your
Friendship, a Loss which I must esteem the greatest in the World, I will have
no hand in an Affair so prejudicial to your Honor.

Lothario said no more, and Anselmo discovering a desponding Melancholy in his
Face, remained a great while silent and confounded. At last, I have, said he,
my Friend, listened to your Discourse, as you might observe, with all the
Attention in Nature, and every part of what you have said convinces me of the
greatness of your Wisdom and Friendship; and I must own, that, if I suffer my
Desires to prevail over your Reasons, I shun the Good and pursue the Evil. But
yet, my Friend, you ought, on the other side, to reflect, that my Distemper is
not much unlike that of those Women who sometimes long for Coals, Lime, nay,
some things that are loathsome to the very sight; and therefore some little
Arts should be used to endeavor my Cure, which might easily be affected if you
would but consent to solicit Camilla, though it were but weakly and remisly;
for I am sure she will not be so frail to surrender at the first Assault, which
yet will be sufficient to give me the satisfaction I desire: And in this you
will fulfill the Duty of our Friendship, in restoring me to Life, and securing
my Honor by your powerful and persuasive Reasons. And you are indeed bound as
my Friend to do thus much to secure me from betraying my. Defects and Follies
to a Stranger, which would certainly shock their Reputation, which you have
taken so much pains to preserve; since I am so bent on this Experiment, that if
you refuse me, I shall certainly apply my self elsewhere: And though a while
your Reputation may suffer in Camilla's Opinion, yet when she has once proved
Triumphant, you may cure that Wound, and recover her good Opinion by a sincere
discovery of your Design. Wherefore I conjure you to comply with my
Importunity, in spite of all the Obstacles that may present themselves to you,
since what I desire is so little, and the Pleasure I shall derive from it so
great: For as I have promised, your very first Attempt shall satisfy me as much
as if you had gone through the whole Experiment.

Lothario plainly saw that Anselmo's Resolution was too much fixed for any
thing he could say to alter it, and finding that he threatened to betray his
Folly to a Stranger if he persisted in a Refusal, to avoid greater
inconveniences, he resolved to seem to comply with his Desires; privately
designing to satisfy Anselmo's Caprice, without giving Camilla any trouble,
and therefore he desired him to break the Matter to no body else, since he
would himself undertake it, and begin as soon as he pleased. Anselmo embraced
him with all the Love and Tenderness imaginable, and was as prodigal of his
Thanks as if the very Promise had been the greatest Obligation that could be
laid on him. They immediately agreed on the next Day for the Trial, at which
time Anselmo should give him the Opportunity of being alone with her, and Gold
and Jewels to present her with. He advised him to omit no Point of Gallantry,
as Serenades, and Songs, and Verses in her Praise; offering to make 'em
himself, if Lothario would not be at the trouble. But Lothario promised him to
do all himself, though his design was far different from Anselmo's.

Matters being thus adjusted, they returned to Anselmo's House, where they
found the Beautiful Camilla, sad with Concern for the absence of her Husband
beyond his usual bout. Lothario left him there, and retired home, as pensive
how to come off handsomely in this Ridiculous Affair, as he had left Anselmo
pleased and contented with his undertaking it. But that Night, he contrived a
way of imposing on Anselmo to his Satisfaction, without offending Camilla. So
next day he goes to Anselmo's, and was received by Camilla with a Civility and
Respect answerable to the uncommon Friendship she knew was between him and her
Husband. Dinner being over, Anselmo desired his Friend to keep his Lady Company
till his return from an extraordinary Affair, that would require his Absence
about an hour and half. Camilla desired him not to go; Lothario offered to go
with him; but he pleaded peculiar Business, entreated his Friend to stay, and
enjoined his Wife not to leave him alone till his return; and so he left them
together, without any one to observe their Actions, all the Servants being
retired to Dinner.

Thus Lothario found himself entered the Lists, his Adversary before him,
terribly armed with a thousand piercing Beauties, sufficient to overcome all
the Men she should Encounter, which gave him cause enough to fear his own Fate.
The first thing he did in this first Onset, was to lean his Head carelessly on
his Hand, and beg her leave to take a Nap in his Chair till his Friend came
back: Camilla told him she thought he might rest with more ease on the Couch in
the next Room; he declared himself satisfied with the Place where he was, and
so slept till his Friend came back. Anselmo finding his Wife in her Chamber,
and Lothario asleep at his return, concluded that he had given them time enough
both for Discourse, and Repose; and therefore waited with a great deal of
impatience for his Friend's awaking, that they might retire and he might
acquaint him with his success. Lothario at last awaked, and going out with his
Friend, he answered his Enquiry to this purpose, That he did not think it
convenient to proceed farther at that time than some general Praise of her Wit
and Beauty, which would best prepare his way for what he might do hereafter;
and dispose her to give a more easy and willing Ear to what he should say to
her: As the Devil, by laying a pleasing and apparent Good at first before us,
insinuates himself into our Inclinations; so that he generally gains his Point
before we discover the Cloven-Foot, if his Disguise pass on us in the
beignning. Anselmo was extremely satisfied with what Lothario said, and
promised him every day as good an Opportunity; and though he could not go every
Day abroad, yet he would manage his Conduct so well, that Camilla should have
no cause of Suspicion. He took care to do as he said. But Lothario wilfully
lost the frequent Opportunities he gave him; however, he soothed him still with
Assurances, that his Lady was inflexible, her Virtue not to be surmounted, and
that she had threatened to discover his Attempts to her Husband, if he ever
presumed to be so Insolent again; so far was she from giving him the least Hope
or Encouragement. Thus far it is well, said Anselmo, but yet Camilla has
resisted nothing but Words, we must now see what Proof she is against more
substantial Temptations. To morrow I will furnish you with two thousand Crowns
in Gold to present her with, and as a farther Bait you shall have as much more
in Jewels. For Women, especially if they are handsome, naturally love to go
gaily and richly dressed, be they never so chaste and virtuous; and if she have
power to overcome this Temptation, I Will give you no farther Trouble. Since I
have begun this Adventure, replied Lothario, I will make an end of it; though I
am sure her Repulses will tire out my Patience, and her Virtue overcome any
Temptation, and baffle my Endeavors.

The next Day Anselmo delivered him the four thousand Crowns, and with them as
many perplexing Thoughts, not knowing how to supply his Invention with some new
Story to amuse his Friend. However, at last he resolved to return the Money,
with Assurance that Camilla was unmoved with Presents, as with Praise, and as
untouched with Promises, as with Vows and sighs of Love; and therefore all
farther Attempts would be but a fruitless Labor. This was his Intention; but
Fortune that medl'd too much in these Affairs disappointed his Designs. For
Anselmo having left him alone with his Wife one day as he used to do; privately
conveyed himself into the Closet, and through the Chinks of the Door set himself
to observe what they did; he found that for one half hour Lothario said not one
word to Camilla, from whence he conluded that all the Addresses, Importunities,
and Repulses with which he had amused him, were pure Fictions. But, that he
might be fully satisfied in the truth of his Surmise, coming from his Covert he
took his Friend aside, and inquired of him what Camilla had then said to him,
and how he now found her inclined? Lothario replied, that he would make no
farther trial of her, since her answer had now been so severe and awful, that
he durst not for the future venture upon a Discourse so evidently her Aversion.

Ah! Lothario! Lothario! cried Anselmo, is it thus that you keep your Promises?
Is this what I should expect from your Friendship? I observed you through that
door, and found that you said not a Word to Camilla; and from thence I am very
well satisfied, that you have only imposed on me all the Answers and Relations
you have made me. Why did you hinder me from employing some other, if you never
intended to satisfy my Desire? Anselmo said no more, but this was enough to
confound Lothario, and cover him with Shame for being found in a Lie.
Therefore, to appease his Friend, he swore to him from that time forward to set
in good Earnest about the Matter, and that so effectually, that he himself if
he would again give himself the trouble of observing him, should find proof
enough of his Sincerity. Anselmo believed him; and to give him the better
opportunity, he engaged a Friend of his to send for him with a great deal of
Importunity to come to his House at a Village near the City, where he meant to
spend eight Days, to take away all Apprehension and Fear from both his Friend
and his Wife.

Was ever Man so unhappy as Anselmo, who industriously contrived the Plot of
his own Ruin and Dishonor! He had a very good Wife, and possessed her in
Quiet, without any other Man's mingling in his Pleasures; her Thoughts were
bounded with her own House, and her Husband, the only Earthly Good she hoped or
thought on, and her only Pleasure, and Desire; his Will the Rule of here is and
measure of her Conduct. When he possessed Love, Honor, Beauty, and Discretion,
without Pain or Toil, what should provoke him to seek with so much danger, and
hazard of what he had already, that which was not to be found in Nature! He
that aims at things impossible, ought justly to lose those Advantages which are
within the Bounds of Possibility, as the Poet sings.

I.
In Death I seek for Life,
In a Disease for Health,
For Quietness in Strife,
In Poverty for Wealth,
And constant Truth in an inconstant Wise.
II.
But sure the Fates disdain
My mad Desires to please,
Nor shall I ever obtain
What others get with Ease,
Since I demand what no Man ever could gain.
The next Day Anselmo went out of Town; having first informed Camilla, that his
Friend Lothario would look after his Affairs, and keep her Company in his
Absence, and desired her to make as much of him as of himself. His Lady like a
discreet Women, begged him to consider how improper a thing it was for any
other to take his Place in his Absence; and told him, that if he doubted her
Ability in managing her House, he should try her but this time, and she
questioned not but he would find she had Capacity to acquit her self to his
satisfaction in greater Matters. Anselmo replied that it was her Duty not to
dispute but obey his Command: To which she returned, that she would comply,
though much against her Will. In short, her Husband left the Town: Lothario the
next Day was received at her House with all the respect that could be paid a
Friend so dear to her Husband; but yet with so much Caution, that she never
permitted her self to be left alone with him, but kept perpetually some of her
Maids in the Room, and chiefly Leonela, for whom she had a particular Love, as
having been bred in her Father's House with her from her Infancy.

Lothario said nothing to her the three first Days, notwithstanding he might
have found an opportunity when the Servants were gone to Dinner; for though the
prudent Camilla had ordered Leonela to dine before her, that she might have no
occasion to go out of the Room; yet she who had other Affairs to employ her
thoughts more agreeably to her Inclinations (to gratify which, that was usually
the only convenient time she could find) was not so very punctually obedient to
her Lady's Commands, but that she sometimes left them together. Lothario did
not yet make use of these advantages, as I have said, being awed by the Virtue
and Modesty of Camilla. But this silence which she thus imposed on Lothario,
had at last a quite contrary Effect. For, though he said nothing, his Thoughts
were active, his Eyes were employed to see and survey the outward Charms of a
Form so perfect, that 'twas enough to fire the most cold, and soften the most
obdurate Heart. In these Intervals of silence, he considered how much she
deserved to be beloved, and these Considerations by little and little
undermined and assaulted the Faith which he owed to his Friend. A thousand
times he resolved to leave the City and retire where Anselmo should never see
him, and where he should never more behold the dangerous Face of Camilla; but
the extreme Pleasure he found in seeing her, soon destroyed so feeble a
Resolve. When he was alone, he would accuse his want of Friendship and
Religion, and run into frequent Comparisons betwixt himself and Anselmo, which
generally concluded that Anselmo's Folly and Madness was greater than hit
Infidelity; and that, would Heaven as easily excuse his Intentions, as Man, he
had no cause to fear any Punishment for the Crime he was going to commit. In
fine, Camilla's Beauty, and the opportunity given him by the Husband himself,
wholly vanquished his Faith and Friendship. And now having an Eye only to the
means of obtaining that Pleasure, to which he was prompted with so much
Violence; after he had spent the three first Days of Anselmo's Absence in a
conflict betwixt Love and Virtue, he attempted by all means possible to prevail
with Camilla; and discovered so much Passion in his Words and Actions, that
Camilla surpised with the unexpected Assault, flung from him out of the Room
and retired with haste to her Chamber. Hope is always born with Love, nor did
this Repulse in the least discourage Lothario from farther Attempts on Camilla,
who by this appeared more charming, and more worthy his Pursuit. She on the
other hand, knew not what to do upon the discovery of that in Lothario, which
she never could have imagined. The Result of her Reflections was this, that
since she could not give him any opportunity of speaking to her again, without
the hazard of her Reputation and Honor, she would send a Letter to her Husband
to solicit his Return to his House. The Letter she sent by a Messenger that
very Night, and it was to this purpose.

CHAP. VII. In which the History of the Curious Impertinent is pursued.
AS it is very improper to leave an Army without a General, and a Garrison
without a Governor, so to me it seems much more imprudent to leave a young
married Woman without her Husband, especially when there are no Affairs of
Consequence to plead for his Absence. I find my self so all in yours, and so
impatient, and unable to endure it any longer, that if you come not home very
quickly I shall be obliged to return to my Father's, though I leave your House
without any one to look after it: For the Person to whom you have entrusted the
Care of your Family, has I believe more Regard to his own Pleasure than your
Concerns. You are wise and prudent, and therefore I shall say no more, nor is
it convenient I should.

Anselmo was not a little satisfied at the Receipt of this Letter, which
assured him that Lothario had begun the Attempt, which she had repelled
according to his Hopes; and therefore he sent her Word not to leave his House,
assuring her it should not be long before he returned. Camilla was surpised
with his Answer, and more perplexed than before, being equally afraid of going
to her Father and of staying at home; in the First she disobeyed her Husband,
in the Latter ran the Risque of her Honor. The worst Resolution prevailed,
which was to stay at her own House, and not avoid Lothario's Company, least it
should give some Cause of Suspicion to her Servants. And now she repented her
writing to Anselmo, least he should suspect that Lothario had observed some
Indiscretion in her, that made him lose the Respect due to her, and gave him
Assurance to offer at the corrupting her Honesty: But confiding in Heaven and
her own Innocence, which she thought Proof against all Lothario's Attempts, she
resolved to make no Answer to whatever he should say to her, and never more to
trouble her Husband with Complaints, for Fear of engaging him in Disputes and
Quarrels with his Friend. For that Reason she considered how she might best
excuse him to Anselmo, when he should examine the Cause of her writing to him
in that Manner. With a Resolution so innocent and dangerous, the next Day she
gave Ear to all that Lothario said; and he gave the Assault with such Force and
Vigor, that Camilla's Constancy could not stand the Shock unmoved, and her
Virtue could do no more than guard her Eyes from betraying that tender
Compassion, of which his Vows and Entreaties, and all his Sighs and Tears had
made her Heart sensible. Lothario discovered this with an infinite
Satisfaction, and no less Addition to his Flame; and found that he ought to
make use of this Opportunity of Anselmo's Absence, with all his Force and
Importunity to win so valuable a Fortress. He began with the powerful Battery
of the Praise of her Beauty, which being directly pointed on the weakest Part
of Woman, her Vanity, with the greatest Ease and Facility in the World makes a
Breach as great as a Lover would desire. Lothario was not unskilful or remiss
in the Attack, but followed his Fire so close, that let Camilla's Integrity be
built on never so obdurate a Rock, it must at last have fallen. He wept,
prayed, flattered, promised, swore, vowed, and showed so much Passion and Truth
in what he said, that bearing down the Care of her Honor, he at last triumphed
over what he scarce durst hope, though what he most of all desired; for she at
last surrendered, even Camilla surrendered. Nor ought we to wonder if she
yielded, since even Lothario's Friendship and Virtue were not able to withstand
the terrible Assault; an evident Proof that Love is a Power too strong to be
overcome by any thing but flying, and that no mortal Creature ought to be so
presumptuous as to stand the Encounter, since there is Need of something more
than human, and indeed a heavenly Force, to confront and vanquish that human
Passion. Leonela was the only Confident of this Amor, which these new Lovers
and faithless Friends could not by any Means conceal from her Knowledge.
Lothario would not discover to Camilla, that her Husband for her Trial had
designedly given him this Opportunity, to which he owed so extreme a Happiness;
because she should not think he wanted Love to solicit her himself with
Importunity, or that she was gained on too easy Terms.

Anselmo came home in a few Days, but discovered not what he had lost, though it
was what he most valued and esteemed: From thence he went to Lothario, and
embracing him, begged of him to let him know his Fate. All I can tell you, my
Friend, answered Lothario, is, that you may boast your self the Husband of the
best Wife in the World, the Ornament of her Sex, and the Pattern which all
virtuous Women ought to follow. Words, Offers, Presents, all is ineffectual;
the Tears I pretended to shed, moved only her Laughter. Camilla is not only
Mistress of the greatest Beauty, but of Modesty, Discretion, Sweetness of
Temper, and every other Virtue and Perfection that add to the Charms of a Woman
of Honor. Therefore, my Friend, here take back your Money, I have had no
Occasion to lay it out, for Camilla's Integrity cannot be corrupted by such
base and mercenary things as Gifts and Promises. And now Anselmo be at last
content with the Trial you have already made, and having so luckily got over
the dangerous Quicksands of Doubts and Suspicions that are to be met with in
the Ocean of Matrimony, do not venture out again with another Pilot that Vessel
whose Strength you have sufficiently experienced; but believe your self as you
are, securely anchored in a safe Harbor, at Pleasure and Ease, till Death,
from whose Force no Title, Power, nor Dignity can secure us, does come and cut
the Cable. Anselmo was extremely satisfied with Lothario's Discourse, and
believed it as firmly as if it had been an Oracle; yet desired him to continue
his Pursuit, if it were but to pass away the Time: He did not require he should
press Camilla with those Importunities he had used, but only make some Verses
in her Praise under the Name of Cloris, and he would make Camilla believe he
celebrated a Lady he loved under that Name, to secure her Honor and Reputation
from the Censure which a more open Declaration would incur: He added, that if
Lothario would not be at the Expense of so much Trouble and Time as to compose
them himself, he would do it for him with a great deal of Pleasure. Lothario
told him there was no Need of that, since he himself was sometimes poetically
given; do you but tell Camilla of my Love according to your own Design, and
I Will make the Verses as well as I can, though not so well as the Excellency of
the Subject requires. The Curious Impertinent and his treacherous Friend having
thus agreed the Matter, Anselmo went home, and then asked Camilla on what
Occasion she sent him the Letter? Camilla, who wondered that this Question had
not been asked her before, replied, That the Motive that prevailed with her to
write in that Manner to him, was a Jealousy she had entertained that Lothario
in his Absence looked on her with more criminal and desiring Eyes than he used
to do when he was at home; but that since she had Reason to believe that
Suspicion but weakly grounded, seeing he discovered rather an Aversion than
Love, as avoiding all Occasions of being alone with her. Anselmo told her she
had nothing to apprehend from Lothario on that Account, since he knew his
Affections engaged on one of the noblest young Ladies of the City, whose Praise
he writ under the Name of Cloris; but were he not thus engaged, there was no
Reason to suspect Lothario's Virtue and Friendship. Camilla at this Discourse,
without Doubt, would have been very jealous of Lothario, had he not told her
his Design of abusing her Husband with the Pretense of another Love, that he
might with the greater Liberty and Security express her Praise and his Passion.
The next Day at Dinner Anselmo desired him to read some of the Verses he had
made on his beloved Cloris, telling him he might say any thing of her before
Camilla, since she did not know who the Lady was. Did Camilla know her, replied
Lothario, that should not make me pass over in Silence my Part of that Praise
which was her Due; or if a Lover complains of his Mistress's Cruelty while he
is praising her Perfections, she can never suffer in her Reputation: Therefore
without any Fear I shall repeat a Sonnet which I made Yesterday on the
Ingratitude of Cloris.

A SONNET.
AT Dead of Night, when every troubled Breast
By balmy Sleep is eased of anxious Pain,
When Slaves themselves in pleasing Dreams are blessed.
Of Heaven and Cloris restless I complain.
The rosy Morn dispells the Shades of Night,
The Sun, the Pleasures, and the Day return;
All Nature's cheered with the reviving Light;
I, only I, can never cease to mourn.
At Noon in vain I bid my Sorrow cease,
The Heat increases, and my Pains increase,
And still my Soul in the mild Evening grieves:
The Night returns, and my Complaints renew,
No Moment sees me free; in vain I sue,
Heaven never relents, and Cloris never relieves.
Camilla was mightily pleased with the Sonnet, but Anselmo transported; he was
lavish of his Commendation, and added that the Lady must be barbarously cruel
that made no Return to so much Truth and so violent a Passion. What, must we
then believe all that a Poet in Love tells us for Truth? said Camilla. Madam,
replied Lothario, though the Poet may exceed, yet the Lover corrects his Fondness
for Fiction, and makes him speak Truth. Anselmo, to advance Lothario's Credit
with Camilla, confirmed whatever he said; but she not minding her Husband's
Confirmations, was sufficiently persuaded by her Passion for Lothario to an
implicit Faith in all he said; and therefore pleased with this Composition, and
more satisfied in the Knowledge she had that all was addressed to her self as
the true Cloris, she desired him to repeat some other Verses he had made on
that Subject if he could remember any. I remember some, replied Lothario, but
Madam, in my Opinion, they are not so tolerable as the former; but you shall be
Judge your self.

A SONNET.
I.
I Die your Victim, cruel Fair,
And die without Reprieve,
If you can think your Slave can bear
Your Cruelty and live.
II.
Since all my Hopes of Ease are vain,
To die I now submit;
And that you may not think I feign,
It must be at your Feet.
III.
Yet when my bleeding Heart you view,
Bright Nymph, forbear to grieve;
For I had rather die for you,
Than for another live.
IV.
In Death and dark Oblivion's Grave
Oh! let me lie forlorn,
For my poor Ghost would pine and rave,
Should you relent and mourn.
Anselmo was not less profuse in his Praise of this Sonnet than he had been of
the other, and so added new Fuel to that Fire that was to consume his
Reputation. He contributed to his own Abuse in commending his false Friend's
Attempts on his Honor, as the most important Service he could do it; and this
made him believe that every Step Camilla made down to Contempt and Disgrace,
was a Degree she mounted toward that Perfection of Virtue which he desired she
should attain.

Some Time after, Camilla being alone with her Maid, I am ashamed, said she, my
Leonela, that I gave Lothario so easy a Conquest over me, and did not know my
own Worth enough to make him undergo some greater Fatigues before I made so
entire a Surrender. I am afraid he will think my hasty Consent the Effect of
the Looseness of my Temper, and not at all consider that the Force and Violence
he used deprived me of the Power of resisting. Ah! Madam, returned Leonela, let
not that disquiet you; for the speedy bestowing a Benefit of an intrinsic
Value, and which you design to bestow at last, can never lessen the Favor; for
according to the old Proverb, He that gives quickly gives twice. To answer your
Proverb with another, replied Camilla, That which costs little is less valued.
But this has nothing to do with you, answered Leonela, since it is said of Love
that it sometimes goes, sometimes flies; runs with one, walks gravely with
another; turns a third into Ice, and sets a fourth in a Flame: It wounds one,
another it kills; like Lightning it begins and ends in the same Moment: It
makes that Fort yield at Night which it besieged but in the Morning, for there
is no Force able to resist it. Since this is evident, what Cause have you to be
surprised at your own Frailty? And why should you apprehend any thing from
Lothario, who has felt the same irresistible Power, and yielded to it as soon?
For Love, to gain a Conquest, took the short Opportunity of my Lord's Absence,
which being so short and uncertain, Love, that had before determined this
should be done, added Force and Vigor to the Lover, not to leave any thing to
Time and Chance, which might by Anselmo's Return cut off all Opportunities of
accomplishing so agreeable a Work. The best and most officious Servant of
Love's Retinue, is Occasion or Opportunity: This it is that Love improves in
all its Progress, but most in the Beginning and first Rise of an Amor. I trust
not in what I have said to the Uncertainty of Report, but to Experience, which
affords the most certain and most valuable Knowledge, as I will inform you,
Madam, some Day or other; for I am like you, made of frail Flesh and Blood,
fired by Youth and youthful Desires. But, Madam, you did not surrender to
Lothario till you had sufficient Proof of his Love from his Eyes, his Vows, his
Promises, and Gifts; till you had seen the Merit of his Person and the Beauty
of his Mind; all which convinced you how much he deserved to be loved. Then
trouble your self no more, Madam, with these Fears and Jealousies, but thank
your Stars that, since you were doomed a Victim to Love, you fell by the Force
of such Valor and Merit that cannot be doubted. You yielded to one who has not
only the four S's, which are required in every good Lover, but even the whole
Alphabet; as for Example, he is in my Opinion Agreeable, Bountiful, Constant,
Dutiful, Easy, Faithful, Gallant, Honorable, Ingenious, Kind, Loyal, Mild,
Noble, Officious, Prudent, Quiet, Rich, Secret, True, Valiant, Wise, the X
indeed is too harsh a Letter to agree with him, he is Young, and Zealous for
your Honor and Service. Camilla laughed at her Woman's Alphabet, and thought
her (as indeed she was) more learned in the practical Part of Love than she had
confessed, She then informed her Mistress of an Affair that had been betwixt
her and a young Man of the Town. Camilla was not a little concerned at what she
said, being apprehensive that her Honor might suffer by her Woman's
Indiscretion, and therefore asked her if the Amor had passed any farther than
Words? Leonela, without any Fear or Shame, owned her guilty Correspondence with
all the Freedom in the World; for the Mistress's Guilt gives the Servant
Impudence, and generally they imitate their Ladies Frailties without any Fear
of the public Censure.

Camilla finding her Error past Remedy, could only beg Leonela to disclose
nothing of her Affair to her Lover, and manage her Amor with Secresy and
Discretion, for fear Lothario or Anselmo should hear of it. Leonela promised to
obey her. but she did it in such a Manner, that Camilla was perpetually in fear
of the Loss of her Reputation by her Folly; for she grew so confident on her
Knowledge of her Lady's Transgression, that she admitted her Gallant into the
House, not caring if her Lady knew it, being certain that she durst not make
any Discovery to her Master: For when once a Mistress has suffered her Virtue
to be vanquished, and admits of any criminal Correspondence, it subjects her to
her own Servants, and makes her subservient to their Rogueries, which she is
slavishly bound to conceal. Thus it was with Camilla, who was forced to wink at
the visible Rendezvous which Leonela had with her Lover in a certain Chamber of
the House which she thought proper for the Occasion; nor was that all, she was
constrained to give her the opportunity of hiding him, by blinding her Husband.

But all this Caution did not secure him from being seen by Lothario, one
Morning as he was getting out of the House by break of Day. His Surprise had
made him think it a Spirit, had not his Haste away, and his muffling himself up
in his Cloak, that he might not be known, convinced him of his Error, and
thrown him into a new Jealousy, that had certainly undone them all, had not
Camilla's Wit and Address prevented it. For Lothario concluded that Camilla,
that had made no very obstinate Resistance to him, had as easily surrendered to
some other, and he fancied that the Person he saw come from her House was the
new-favour'd Lover; never remembering that there was any such Person as Leonela
in the House. For when once a Woman parts with her Virtue, she loses the Esteem
even of the Man whose Vows and Tears won her to abandon it; and he believes she
will with as little, if not less Difficulty, yield to another; he perverts the
least Suspicions into Reality, and takes the lightest Appearance for the most
evident Matter of Fact.

Thus Lothario distracted by the most violent Jealousy in the World, without
allowing himself time to consider, gave way to the Transports of his Rage and
desire of Revenge on Camilla, who had not injured him; he goes immediately to
Anselmo, and having found him abed, I have, my Friend, said he to him, these
several Days undergone a most severe Conflict within my Mind, and used all the
Force and Violence I was capable of to conceal an Affair from you, which I can
no longer forbear discovering, without an apparent Wrong to Justice, and my
Friendship. Know then that Camilla is now ready to do whatsoever I shall desire
of her, and the Reason that most prevailed with me to delay this Discovery,
was, that I would be satisfied whether she were in earnest, or only pretended
this Compliance to try me; but had she been so Virtuous as you and I believed
her, she would by this time have informed you of that Importunity which by your
Desire I used; but finding that she is silent, and takes no notice of that to
you, I have reason to believe that she is but too sincere in those guilty
Promises she has made me, of meeting me to my Satisfaction in the Wardrobe the
next time your Absence from the Town should furnish her with an Opportunity.
(This was true indeed, for that was the Place of their common Rendezvous) Yet I
would not have you, continued he, take a rash and inconsiderate Revenge, since
it is possible before the time of Assignation her Virtue may Rally, and she
repent her Folly. Therefore, as you have hitherto taken my Advice, be ruled by
me now, that you may not be imposed on, but have a sufficient Conviction before
you put your Resolves into Execution; pretend two or three Days Absence, and
then privately convey your self behind the Hangings in the Wardrobe, as you
easily may, whence you may without difficulty be an Eye Witness with me of
Camilla's Conduct; and if it be as Criminal as we may justly fear, then you may
with secrecy and speed punish her, as the Injury deserves.

Anselmo was extremely surpised at so unexpected a Misfortune, to find himself
deceived in those imaginary Tiumphs he pleased himself with in Camilla's
supposed Victory over all Lothario's Assaults. A great while he was in a silent
suspense, with his Eyes dejected, without Force, and without Spirit; but
turning at last to his Friend, you have done all, said he, Lothario, that I
could expect from so perfect a Friendship, I will therefore be entirely guided
by your Advice; do therefore what you please, but use all the secresy a Thing
of this Nature requires. Lothario, assuring him of that, left him; but full of
Repentance for the Rashness he had been guilty of in telling him so much as he
had, since he might have taken a sufficient Revenge by a less cruel, and
dishonorable way. He cursed his want of Sense, and the weakness of his
Resolution, but could not find out any way to produce a less fatal event of his
Treachery, than he could justly expect from the Experiment. But at last he
concluded to inform Camilla of all he had done; which his Freedom of Access
gave him opportunity to do that very day, when he found her alone; and she
began thus to him. I am so oppressed my Lothario, with a Misfortune which I lie
under, that it will certainly for ever destroy my Quiet and Happiness, if there
be not some speedy Remedy found for it: Leonela is grown so presumptuous, on
her knowledge of my Affairs, that she admits her Lover all Night to her
Chamber, and so exposes my Reputation to the Censure of any that shall see him
go out at unseasonable Hours from my House; and the greatest, and most
remediless part of my grief is, that I dare not correct or chide her for her
Imprudence and Impudence; for being conscious of our Correspondence, she
obliges me to conceal her Failings, which I am extremely apprehensive will in
the end be very fatal to my Happiness. Lothario was at last jealous that
Camilla designed cunningly thus to impose her own Privado on him for Leonela's;
but being convinced by her Tears, and the apparent Concern in her Face, he
began to believe her, and at the same time to be infinitely confounded and
grieved for what he had done. Yet he comforted Camilla, assuring her he would
take effectual Care for the future, that Leonela's Impudence should do her no
Prejudice, and therefore begged her not to torment her self any more about it.
Then he told all the unhappy Effect of his Jealous Rage, and that her Husband
had agreed behind the Arras to be witness of her Weakness. He asked her Pardon
for the Folly, and her Counsel how to redress and prevent the ill Effect of it,
and bring them out of those Difficulties into which his Madness had plunged
them.

Camilla expressed her Resentment; and her Fears, in accusing his Treachey,
Baseness, and want of Consideration; yet her Anger and Fears being appeased,
and a Woman's wit being always more pregnant in Difficulties than a Man's, she
immediately thought of a way to deliver them from Dangers that bore so dismal
and helpless a Face. She therefore bid him engage Anselmo to be there the next
Day, assuring him she did not question but by that means to get a more
frequent, and secure Opportunity of enjoying one another than they hitherto
ever had. She would not make him privy to her whole Design, but bid him be sure
to come after her Husband was hid, as soon as Leonela should call him, and that
he should answer as directly to whatsoever she should ask him, as if Anselmo
were not within hearing. Lothario spared no Importunity to get from her her
whole Design, that he might Act his Part with the greater Assurance, and the
better contribute to the Imposing on her Husband. All you have to do, replied
Camilla, is to answer me directly what I shall demand; nor would she discover
any more, for fear he should not acquiesce in her Opinion, which she was so
well satisfied in, but raise Difficulties, and by Consequence Obstacles, that
might hinder her Design from having the desired Event, or run her upon some
less successful Project. Lothario complied, and Anselmo in appearance left the
Town to retire to his Friend in the Country, but secretly returned to hide
himself in the Wardrobe, which he did with the greater Ease, because Camilla
and Leonela wilfully gave him opportunity. We may easily imagine the Grief with
which Anselmo hid himself, since it was to be a Spectator of his own Dishonor,
and the loss of all that Happiness he possessed in the Embraces of his
beautiful and beloved Camilla. On the other hand, she being now certain that
Anselmo was hid, entered the Wardrobe with Leonela, and fetching a deep and
piteous Sight, thus addressed her self to her: Ah! my Leonela! would it not be
much better that thou pierce this infamous Bosom with Anselmo's Dagger, before
I Execute what I design, which I have kept from thee that thou might not
endeavor to disappoint me? Yet not so; for, where is the Justice that I should
suffer for another's Offense? No, I will first know of Lothario what Action of
mine has given him assurance to make me a discovery of a Passion so injurious
to his Friend, and my Honor. Go to the Window Leonela, and call the wicked Man
to me, who doubtless is waiting in the Street the Signal for his Admission to
accomplish his Villainous Design; yet first my Resolution shall be performed,
which though it be cruel, is what my Honor strictly demands of me. Alas! my dear
Lady, cried the cunning Leonela, alas! What do you intend to do with that
Dagger? Is your fatal Design against your self or Lothario? Alas! you can
Attack neither without the Ruin of your Fame and Reputation. You had better
give no Opportunity to that bad Man by admitting him while we are thus alone in
the House. Consider, Madam, we are but two weak, and helpless Women, he a
strong and resolute Man, whose Force is redoubled by the Passion and Desire
that possess him; so that before you may be able to accomplish what you design,
he may commit a Crime that will be more injurious to you than the loss of your
Life. We have reason to curse my Master Anselmo, who gives such frequent
Opportunites to Impudence and Dishonesty to pollute our House. But, Madam,
suppose you should kill him, as I believe you design, what shall we do with his
dead Body? What! said Camilla, why we would leave him in this place to be
buried by Anselmo; for it must be a grateful Trouble to him to bury with his
own Hand his own Infamy and Dishonor. Call him therefore quickly, for methinks
every Moment my Revenge is deferred, I Injure that Loyalty I owe to my Husband.

Anselmo gave great attention to all that was said, and every Word of Camilla's
made a strange alteration in his Sentiments, so that he could scarce forbear
coming out to prevent his Friend's Death, when he heard her desperate
Resolution against his Life; but his desire of seeing the end of so brave a
Resolve withheld him, till he saw an absolute necessity of discovering himself
to hinder the Mischief. Now Camilla put on a fear and weakness which resembl'd
a Swoon; and having thrown her self on a Bed in the Room, Leonela began a most
doleful Lamentation over her: Alas! said she, how unfortunate should I be, if
my Lady, so eminent for Virtue and Chastity as well as Beauty, should thus
perish in my Arms? This, and much more she uttered with that force of perfect
Dissimulation, that whoever had seen her would have concluded her one of the
most innocent Virgins in the World, and her Lady a mere persecuted Penelope.
Camilla soon came to her self, and cried to Leonela, why don't you call the
most Treacherous and Unfaithful of Friends? Go, fly, and let not thy delays
waste my Revenge and Anger in mere Words and idle Threats and Curses. Madam,
replied Leonela, I will go, but you must first give me that Dagger, lest you
commit some outrage upon your self in my absence, which may give an eternal
Cause of sorrow to all your Friends that love and value you. Let not those
Fears detain you, said Camilla, but assure your self I will not do any thing
till you return; for though I shall not fear to punish my self in the highest
degree, yet I shall not, like Lucretia, punish my self without killing him that
was the principal cause of my Dishonor. If I must die, I shall not refuse it;
but I will first satisfy my Revenge on him that has tempted me to come to this
guilty Assignation, to make him lament his Crime without being guilty of any my
self.

Camilla could scarce prevail with Leonela to leave her alone, but at last she
obeyed her and withdrew, when Camilla entertained her self and her Husband with
this following Soliloquy: Good Heaven said she, had I not better have continued
my Repulses, than by this seeming Consent suffer Lothario to think Scandalously
of me, till my Actions shall convince him of his Error? That indeed might have
been better in some respects, but then I should have wanted this opportunity of
Revenge, and the Satisfaction of my Husband's injured Honor, if he were
permitted without any Correction to go off with the Insolence of offering such
Criminal Assaults to my Virtue. No, no, let the Traitor's Life atone for the
guilt of his false and unfaithful Attempts; and his Blood quench that lewd Fire
he was not content should burn in his own Breast. Let the World be witness, if
it ever comes to know my Story, that Camilla thought it not enough to preserve
her Virtue and Loyalty to her Husband entire, but also revenged the hateful
affront and the intended destruction of it. But it might be most convenient
perhaps to let Anselmo know of this before I put my Revenge in Execution; yet
on the first Attempt I sent him word of it to the Village, and I can attribute
his not resenting so notorious an Abuse to nothing but his Generous Temper, and
Confidence in his Friend, incapable of believing so tried a Friend could be
guilty of so much as a Thought against his Honor and Reputation; nor is this
incredulity so strange, since I for so long together could not persuade my self
of the truth of what my Eyes and Ears conveyed to me; and nothing could have
convinced me of my generous Error, had his Insolency kept within any Bounds,
and not dared to proceed to large Gifts, large Promises, and a flood of Tears,
which he shed as the undissembl'd Testimony of his Passion. But to what purpose
are these Considerations? Or is there indeed any need of considering to
persuade me to a brave Resolve? Av^un^ false thoughts. Revenge is now my Task,
let the Treacherous Man approach, let him come, let him die, let him perish;
let him but perish, no matter what is the fatal Consequence. My dear Anselmo
received me to his Bosom spotless and Chaste, and so shall the Grave receive me
from his Arms. Let the Event be as unlucky as it will, the worst Sollution I
can this way suffer is of mingling my own Chaste Blood with the impure and
corrupted Blood of the most False and Treacherous of Friends. Having said this,
she traversed the Room in so passionate a manner, with the drawn Dagger in her
Hand, and showed such an Agitation of Spirit in her Looks and Motion, that she
appeared like one distracted, or more like a Murderer, than a tender and
delicate Lady.

Anselmo, not a little to his satisfaction, very plainly saw and heard all this
from behind the Arras, which with the greatest Reason and Evidence in the World
removed all his past Doubts and Jealousies, and he with abundance of concern
wished that Lothario would not come, that he might by that means escape the
Danger that so apparently threatened him; to prevent which he had discovered
himself, had he not seen Leonela at that Instant bring Lothario into the Room.
As soon as Camilla saw him enter, she described a Line with the Poniard on the
Ground, and told him the Minuit he presumed to pas^ that, she would strike the
Dagger to his Heart: Hear me, said she, and observe what I say without
Interruption; when I have done, you shall have liberty to make what Reply you
please. Tell me first, Lothario, do you know my Husband, and do you know me?
The Question is not so difficult but you may give me immediate Answer; there is
no need of considering, speak therefore without delay. Lothario was not so dull
as not to guess at her Design in having her Husband hid behind the Hangings,
and therefore adapted his Answers so well to her Questions, that the Fiction
was lost in the appearance of Reality. I did never imagine, fair Camilla, said
Lothario, that you would make this Assignation to ask Questions so distant from
the dear End of my Coming. If you had a mind still to delay my promised
Happiness, you should have prepared me for the Disappointment; for, the nearer
the Hope of Possession brings us to the Good we desire, the greater is the Pain
to have those Hopes destroyed. But to answer your Demands, I must own, Madam,
that I do know your Husband, and he me; that this Knowledge has grown up with
us from our Childhood; and that I may be a witness against my self of the
Injury I am compelled by Love to do him, I do also own, Divine Camilla, that
you too well know the tenderness of our mutual Friendship; yet Love is a
sufficient excuse for all my Errors, if they were much more Criminal than they
are. And, Madam, that I know you is evident, and love you equal to him, for
nothing but your Charms could have Power enough to make me forget what I owe to
my own Honor, and what to the holy Laws of Friendship, all which I have been
forced to break by the resistless Tyranny of Love. Ah! had I known you less, I
had been more Innocent. If you confess all this, said Camilla, if you know us
both, how dare you violate so Sacred a Friendship, injure so true a Friend, and
appear thus confidently before me, whom you know to be esteemed by him the
Mirror of his Love, in which that Love so often views it self with Pleasure and
Satisfaction; and in which you ought to have surveyed your self so far, as to
have seen how small the Temptation is, that has prevailed on you to wrong him.
But alas! this points me to the cause of your Transgression, some suspicious
Action of mine when I have been least on my Guard, as thinking my self alone;
but assure your self, whatever it was, it proceeds not from Looseness or Levity
of Principle, but a Negligence and Liberty which the Sex sometimes innocently
fall into when they think themselves unobserved. If this were not the Cause,
say, Traitor, when did I listen to your Prayers, or in the least regard your
Tears and Vows, so that you might derive from thence the smallest hope of
accomplishing your infamous Desires? Did I not always with the last Aversion
and Disdain reject your Criminal Passion? Did I ever betray a Belief in thy
lavish Promises? or admit of thy prodigal Gifts? But since without some Hope no
Love can long subsist, I will lay that hateful guilt on some unhappy
inadvertency of mine, and therefore will inflict the same punishment on my self
that your Crimes deserves. And to show you that I cannot but be cruel to you,
who will not spare my self, I sent for you to be a Witness of that just
Sacrifice I shall make to my dear Husband's Injured Honor, on which you have
fixed the blackest Mark of Infamy that your Malice could inspire, and which I
alas! have sullied too by my thoughtless neglect of depriving you of the
occasion, if indeed I gave any, of nourishing your wicked Intentions. Once more
I tell you, that the bare suspicion that my want of Caution, and setting so
severe a Guard on my Actions as I ought, has made you harbor such wild and
infamous Intentions, is the sharpest of my Afflictions, and what with my own
Hands I resolve to punish with the utmost Severity. For, should I leave that
Punishment to another, it would but increase my guilt. Yet I will die; but
first to satisfy my Revenge, and impartial Justice, I will unmoved and
unrelenting destory the fatal Cause that has reduced me to this desperate
Condition.

At these Words she flew with such Violence, and so well acted a Fury on
Lothario with her naked Dagger, that he could scarce think it feigned, and
therefore secured himself from her Blow by avoiding it, and holding her Hand.
Thereupon, to give more Life to the Fiction, as in a Rage at her disappointed
Revenge on Lothario, she cried out, since my malicious Fortune denies a
complete Satisfaction to my just Desires, at least it shall not be in its Power
entirely to defeat my Resolution. With that, drawing back her Dagger-Hand from
Lothario who held it, she struck it into that part of her Body where it might
do her the least damage, and then fell down, as fainting away with the Wound.
Lothario and Leonela surpised at the unexpected Event, knew not yet what to
think, seeing her still lie all bloody on the Ground; Lothario pale and
trembling ran to her to take out the Dagger, but was delivered of his Fears
when he saw so little Blood follow it, and more than ever admired the cunning
and wit of the Beautiful Camilla. Yet to play his part as well, and show
himself a Friend, he lamented over Camilla's Body in the most pathetick manner
in the World, as if she had been really dead; he cursed himself, and cursed his
Friend that had put him on that fatal Experiment; and knowing that Anselmo
heard him, he said such things as were able to draw a greater pity for him than
even for Camilla, though she seemed to have lost her Life in the unfortunate
Adventure. Leonela removed her Body to the Bed, and begged Lothario to go seek
some Surgeon, that might with all the secrecy in the World cure her Lady's
Wound* She also asked his Advice, how to excuse to her Master, if he should
return before it was perfectly cured. He replied, they might say what they
pleased, That he was not in a humor of advising, but bid her endeavor to
stanch her Mistress's Blood, for he would go where they should never hear more
of him; and so he left them, with all the appearance of Grief and Concern that
the Occasion required. He was no sooner gone, but he had leisure to reflect
with the greatest wonder imaginable, on Camilla's and her Woman's Conduct in
this Affair; and on the Assurance which this Scene had given Anselmo of his
Wife's Virtue; since now he could not but believe he had a second Portia, and
he longed to meet him, to rejoice over the best dissembled Imposture that ever
bore away the Opinion of Truth. Leonela stanch'd the Blood, which was no more
than was necessary for covering the Cheat, and washing the Wound with Wine only
as she bound it up, her discourse was so moving, and so well acted, that it had
been alone sufficient to have convinced Anselmo that he had the most virtuous
Wife in the World. Camilla was not silent, but added fresh Confirmations; in
every word she spoke, she complained of her Cowardice and Baseness of Spirit,
that denied her time and force to dispatch that Life, which was now so hateful
to her. She asked her too, whether she should inform her Husband of what had
passed, or not? Leonela was for her concealing it, since the discovery must
infallibly engage her Husband in a Revenge on Lothario, which must as certainly
expose him too; for those things were never accomplished without the greatest
danger; and that a good Wife ought to the best of her Power prevent involving
her Husband in Quarrels. Camilla yielded to her Reasons; but added, that they
must find out some pretended cause of her Wound, which he would certainly see
at his return. Leonela replied, that it was a difficult task, since she was
incapable even in Jest to dissemble the Truth. Am I not, answered Camilla,
under the same difficulty, who cannot save my Life by the odious Refuge of a
falsehood? Had we not better than confess the real Truth, than be caught in a
Lie? Well, Madam, returned Leonela, let this give you no further Trouble, by to
morrow Morning I shall find out some expedient or other; though I hope the
place where the Wound is, may conceal it enough from his observation to secure
us from all apprehension; leave therefore the whole event to Heaven, which
always favors and assists the Innocent.

Anselmo saw and heard this formal Tragedy of his ruined Honor, with all the
Attention imaginable, in which all the Actors performed their Parts so to the
Life, that they seemed the Truth they represented; he wished with the last
impatience for the Night, that he might convey himself from his hiding place,
to his Friend's House, and there rejoice for this happy discovery of his Wife's
experienced Virtue. Camilla and her Maid took care to furnish him with an
opportunity of departing, of which he soon took hold, for fear of losing it.
It Is impossible to tell you all the Embraces he gave Lothario, and the joy and
extreme satisfaction he expressed at his good Fortue, or the extravagant
Praises he gave Camilla. Lothario heard all this without taking a Friend's
share in the Pleasure, for he was shocked with the concern he had to see his
Friend so grossly imposed on, and the guilt of his own Infidelity in injuring
his Honor. Though Anselmo easily perceived that Lothario was not touched with
any pleasure at his Relation, yet he believed Camilla's Wound caused by him,
was the true motive of his not sharing his joy, and therefore assured him, he
need not too much trouble himself for it, since it could not be dangerous, she
and her Woman having agreed to conceal it from him. This cause of his fear
being removed, he desired him to put on a face of Joy, since by his means he
should now possess a perfect happiness and content, and therefore he would
spend the rest of his Life in conveying Camilla's Virtue to Posterity, by
writing her Praise in Verse. Lotharia approved his Resolution, and promised to
do the same. Thus Anselmo remained the most delightfully deceived of any Man
alive. He therefore carried Lothario immediately to his House, as the
Instrument of his Glory, though he was indeed the only cause of his Infamy and
Dishonor. Camilla received him with a face, that ill expressed the satisfacton
of her Mind, being forced to put on Frowns in her looks, while her Heart
prompted nothing but smiles of Joy for his presence.

For some Months the Fraud was concealed, but then Fortune turning her Wheel,
discovered to the World the Wickedness they had so long and artificially
disguised, and Anselmo's impertinent Curiosity cost him his Life.

CHAP. VIII. The Conclusion of the Novel of the Curious Impertinent.
THE Novel was come near a Conclusion, when Sancho Panca came running out of
Don Quixote's Chamber in a terrible Fright, and crying out help, help, good
People, help my Master, he is just now at it, Tooth and Nail, with that same
Giant, the Princess Micomicona's Foe: I never saw a more dreadful Battle in my
born days. He has lent him such a Sliver, that whip, off went the Giant's Head,
as round as a Turnip. You're mad, Sancho, said the Curate interrupted in his
Reading; is thy Master such a Devil of a Hero, as to fight a Giant at two
thousand Leagues distance? Upon this, they presently heard a noise and bustle
in the Chamber, and Don Quixote bawling out, Stay Villain, Robber, stay; since
I have thee here, thy Scimitar shall but little avail thee; and with this, they
heard him strike with his Sword with all his force against the Walls. Good
folks, said Sancho, my Master does not want your harkening; why don't you run
in, and help him; though I believe it is after Meat Mustard, for sure the Giant
is by this time gone to Pot, and giving an Account of his ill Life: For I saw
his Blood run all about the House, and his Head sailing in the middle on it: But
such a Head! It Is bigger than any Wine-bagg in Spain. Death and Hell (cries the
Innkeeper) I Will be cut like a Cucumber, if this Don Quixote, or Don Devil, has
not been hacking my Wine-baggs that stood filled at his Bed's head, and this
Coxcomb has taken the spilt Liquor for Blood. Then running with the whole
Company into the Room, they found the poor Knight in the most comical posture
imaginable.

He was standing in his Shirt, the fore part of it scarcely reaching to the
bottom of his Belly, and about a span shorter behind; this added a very
peculiar Air to his long, lean Legs, as dirty and hairy as a Beasts. To make
him all of a piece, he wore on his Head a little red greasy cast Nightcap of
the Inn-keeper's; he had wrapped one of the Bed-Blankets about his left Arm for
a Shield; and weilded his drawn Sword in the Right, laying about him pell mell;
with now and then a start of some military Expression, as if he had been really
engaged with some Giant. But the best jest of all, he was all this time fast
asleep; for the thoughts of the Adventure he had undertaken, had so wrought on
his Imagitation, that his depraved fancy had in his sleep represented to him
the Kingdom of Micomicon and the Giant; and dreaming that he was then fighting
him, he Assaulted the Wine-bags so desperately, that he set the whole Chamber
a-float with good Wine. The Innkeeper, enraged to see the havoc, flew at Don
Quixote with his Fists; and had not Cardenio and the Curate taken him off, he
had proved a Giant indeed against the Knight. All this could not wake the poor
Don, till the Barber throwing a Bucket of cold Water upon him, wakened him from
his sleep, though not from his dream.

The shortness of her Champion's Shirt gave Dorothea a Surfeit of the Battle.
Sancho ran up and down the Room searching for the Giant's Head, till finding
his labor fruitless; Well, well, said he, now I see plainly that this House is
haunted, for when I was here before, in this very Room was I beaten like any
Stock Fish, but knew no more than the Man in the Moon who struck me; and now
the Giant's Head, that I saw cut off with these Eyes, is vanished; and I Am sure
I saw the Body spout Blood like a Pump. What a prating and a nonsense does this
damned Son of a Whore keep about Blood, and a Pump, and I know not what, said
the Innkeeper, I tell you, Rascal, it is my Wine-baggs that are flashed, and my
Wine that runs about the Floor here, and I hope to see the Soul of him that
spilt it swimming in Hell for his Pains. Well, well, (said Sancho) don't
trouble me; I only tell ye, that I cannot find the Giant's Head, and my Earldom
is gone after it, and so I Am undone, as a Man would undo an Oister: And truly
Sancho's waking Dream was as pleasant as his Master's when asleep; the
Innkeeper was almost mad too, to see the foolish Squire harp so on the same
string with his frantic Master, and swore they should not come off now as
before; that their Chivalry should be no satisfaction for his Wine, but that
they should pay him sauce for the damage, and for the very Leathern Patches
which the wounded Wine-baggs would want.

Don Quixote in the mean time, believing he had finished his Adventure, and
mistaking the Curate, that held him by the Arms, for the Princess Micomicona,
fell on his knees before him, and with a respect due to a Royal Presence; Now
may your Highness, said he, great, and illustrious Princess, live secure, free
from any further apprehensions from your Conquered Enemy, and now am I
acquitted of my Engagement, since by the assistance of Heaven, and the
Influence of her Favor by whom I live and Conquer, your Adventure is so
happily achieved. Did not I tell you so, Gentlefolks, (said Sancho) who is
Drunk or Mad now? Did not I say, that he had paid off the Giant; the Battle is
over, and I am an Earl. The whole Company, (except the Innkeeper, who gave
himself to the Devil) were like to split at the Extravagancies of Master and
Man: at last Cardenio and the Curate, having with much ado got Don Quixote to
Bed, he presently fell asleep, being heartily tired; and then they left him, to
comfort Sancho Panca for the loss of the Giant's Head, and the Innkeeper for
the unexpected and sudden Fate of his Wine-bags.

The Hostess in the mean time ran up and down the House grumbling and whining:
In an ill hour, said she, did this unlucky Knight Errant come into my House, I
wish for my part I had never seen him, for he has been a dear Guest to me. He
and his Man, his Horse and his Ass, went away last time without paying me a
cross for their Supper, their Bed, their Litter and Provender; and all,
forsooth, because he was seeking Adventures, I say: What the Plague have I to
do with his Statutes of Chivalry? if they oblige him not to pay, they must
oblige him not to eat neither. 'Twas upon this Score that the the other Fellow
took away my good Tail; it is clear spoiled, the Hair is all fallen off, and my
Husband can never use it again. And now to come upon me again with destroying
my Wine Bags and spilling my Liquor, may some Body spill his Heart's Blood
for it for me: But I will be paid, so I will, and that handsomely too; I will
have Satisfaction, Jill by Jill, every Piece, for what I have lost. Her honest
Maid Maritornes seconded her Fury; but Mr. Curate stopped their Mouths, by
promising that he would see them satisfied for their Wine and their Bags, but
especially for the Tail which they kept such a Clutter about. Dorothea
comforted Sancho, assuring him that whenever it appeared that his Master had
killed the Giant, and restored her to her Dominions, he should be sure of the
best Earldom in her Disposal. With this he huckl'd up again, and swore that he
himself had seen the Giant's Head, by the same Token that it had a Beard that
reached down to his Middle; and if it could not be found it must be hid by
Witchcraft, for every thing went by Enchantment in that House, as he had tried
it to his Cost when he was there before. Dorothea answered, that she believed
him; and desired him to pluck up his Spirits, for all things would be well. All
Parties being quieted, Cardenio, Dorothea, and the rest, entreated the Curate
to finish the Novel, which was so near a Conclusion; and he, in Obedience to
their Commands, took up the Book and read on.

Anselmo grew so satisfied in Camilla's Virtue, that he lived with all the
Content and Security in the World; to confirm which, Camilla ever in her Looks
seemed to discover her Aversion to Lothario, which made him desire Anselmo to
dispense with his coming to his House, since he found how averse his Wife was
to him, and how great a Disgust she had to his Company; but Anselmo would not
be persuaded to yield to his Request, and was so blind, that seeking his
Content, he perpetually promoted his Dishonor. He was not the only Person
pleased with the Condition he lived in; Leonela was so transported by her
Amor, that, secured by her Lady's Connivance, she perfectly abandoned her self
to the indiscreet Enjoyment of her Gallant: So that one Night her Master heard
some body in her Chamber, and coming to the Door to discover who it was, he
found it held fast against him; but at last forcing it open, he saw one leap
out of the Window the Instant he entered the Room: He would have pursued him,
but Leonela clinging about him, begged him to appease his Anger and Concern,
since the Person that made his Escape was her Husband. Anselmo would not
believe her, but drawing his Dagger, threatened to kill her if she did not
immediately make full Discovery of the Matter. Distracted with Fear, she begged
him to spare her Life, and she would discover things that more nearly related
to him than he imagined. Speak quickly then, replied Anselmo, or you die. It Is
impossible, returned she, that in this Confusion and Fright I should say any
thing that can be understood; but give me but till to Morrow Morning, and I
will lay such things before you, as will sufficiently surprise and amaze you;
but believe me, Sir, the Person that leapt out of the Window is a young Man of
this City who is contracted to me. This something appeased Anselmo, and
prevailed with him to allow her till the next Morning to make her Confession;
for he was too well assured of Camilla's Virtue by the past Trial, to suspect
that there could be any thing relating to her in what Leonela had to tell him:
Wherefore fastening her in her Room, and threatening that she should never come
out till she had done what she had promised, he returned to his Chamber to
Camilla, and told her all that had passed, without omitting the Promise she had
given to make some strange Discovery to him the next Morning. You may easily
imagine the Concern this gave Camilla; she made no Doubt but that the Discovery
Leonela had promised was of her Disloyalty; and without waiting to know whether
it were so or not, that very Night, as soon as Anselmo was asleep, taking with
her all her Jewels and some Money, she got undiscovered out of the House, and
went to Lothario, informed him of all that had passed, and desired him either
to put her into some Place of Safety, or to go with her where they might enjoy
each other secure from the Fears of Anselmo. This surprising Relation so
confounded Lothario, that for some Time he knew not what he did, or what
Resolution to take; but at last, with Camilla's Consent, he put her into a
Monastery where his Sister was Abbess; and immediately, without acquainting any
Body with his Departure, left the City.

Anselmo as soon as it was Day got up, without missing his Wife, and made Haste
to Leonela's Chamber to hear what she had to say to him; but he found no body
there, only the Sheets tied together, and fastened to the Window, showed which
Way she had made her Escape; on which he returned very sad to tell Camilla the
Adventure, but was extremely surpised when he found her not in the whole
House, nor could hear any News of her from his Servants: But, finding in his
Search her Trunks open, and most of her Jewels gone, he no longer doubted of
his Dishonor: so, pensive and half dressed as he was, he went to Lothario's
Lodging to tell him his Misfortune; but when his Servants informed him that he
was gone that very Night with all his Money and Jewels, his Pangs were
redoubled, and his Grief increased almost to Madness. To conclude, he returned
home, found his House empty, for Fear had driven away all his Servants. He knew
not what to think, say, or do; he saw himself forsaken by his Friend, his Wife,
and his very Servants, with whom he imagined that Heaven it self had abandoned
him; but his greatest Trouble was to find himself robbed of his Honor and
Reputation, for Camilla's Crime was but too evident from all these concurring
Circumstances. After a thousand distracting Thoughts, he resolved to retreat to
that Village whither he formerly retired to give Lothario an Opportunity to
ruin him; wherefore fastening up his Doors, he took Horse, full of Despair and
languishing Sorrow, the Violence of which was so great, that he had scarce rid
half Way when he was forced to alight, and tying his Horse to a Tree, he threw
himself beneath it, and spent in that melancholy Posture a thousand racking
Reflections, most Part of the Day, till a little before Night he discovered a
Passenger coming the same Road, of whom he inquired what News at Florence? The
Traveller replied, that the most surprising News that had been heard of late,
was now all the Talk of the City, which was, that Lothario had that very Night
carried away the wealthy Anselmo's Wife Camilla; which is all confessed by
Camilla's Woman, who was apprehended that Night as she slipped from the Window of
Anselmo's House by a Pair of Sheets. The Truth of the Story I cannot affirm,
continued the Traveller; but every Body is astonished at the Accident; for no
Man could ever suspect such a Crime from a Person engaged in so strict a
Friendship with Anselmo as Lothario was, for they were called the Two Friends.
Is it yet known, replied Anselmo, which way Lothario and Camilla are gone? No,
Sir, returned the Traveller, though the Governor has made as strict a Search
after 'em as is possible. Anselmo asked no more Questions, but, after they had
taken their Leaves of each other, the Traveller left him and pursued his
Journey.

This mournful News so affected the unfortunate Anselmo, that he was struck
with Death almost that very Moment; getting therefore on his Horse as well as
he could, he arrived at his Friend's House. He knew nothing yet of his
Disgrace, but seeing him so pale and melancholy, concluded that some great
Misfortune had befallen him. Anselmo desired to be immediately led to his
Chamber, and furnished with Pen, Ink, and Paper, and to be left alone with his
Door locked: When, finding that his End approached, he resolved to leave in
Writing the Cause of his sudden and unexpected Death. Taking therefore the Pen,
he began to write; but, unable to finish what he designed, he died a Martyr to
his impertinent Curiosity. The Gentleman finding he did not call, and that it
grew late, resolved to enter his Chamber, and see whether his Friend were
better or worse; he found him half out of Bed, lying on his Face, with the Pen
in his Hand, and a Paper open before him. Seeing him in this Posture he drew
near him, called and moved him, but soon found he was dead; which made him call
his Servants to behold the unhappy Event, and then took up the Paper, which he
saw was written in Anselmo's own Hand, and was to this Effect.

A Foolish and impertinent Desire has robbed me of Life. If Camilla hear of my
Death, let her know that I forgive her; for she was not obliged to do Miracles,
nor was there any Reason I should have desired or expected it; and since I
contrived my own Dishonor, there is no Cause --

Thus far Anselmo writ, but Life would not hold out till he could give the
Reasons he designed. The next Day the Gentleman of the House sent Word of
Anselmo's Death to his Relations, who already knew his Misfortune, as well as
the Monastery whither Camilla was retired. She her self was indeed very near
that Death which her Husband had passed, though not for the Loss of him but
Lothario, of which she had lately heard a flying Report. But though she was a
Widow now, she would neither take the Veil, nor leave the Monastery, till in a
few Days the News was confirmed of his being slain in a Battle betwixt Monsieur
de Lautrec and that great General Gonzalo Fernandez de Cordoua, in the Kingdom
of Naples. This was the End of the offending, and too late penitent Friend; the
News of which made Camilla immediately profess her self, and soon after
overwhelmed with Grief and Melancholy, pay for her Transgression with the Loss
of her Life. This was the unhappy End of them all, proceeding from so
impertinent a Beginning.

I like this Novel well enough, said the Curate; yet after all I cannot
persuade my self, that there is any thing of Truth in it; and if it be purely
Invention, the Author was in the Wrong, for it is not to be imagined there can
ever be a Husband so foolish, as to venture on so dangerous an Experiment. Had
he made his Husband and Wife, a Gallant and a Mistress, the Fable had appeared
more probable; but, as it is, it is next to impossible. However, I must confess,
I have nothing to object against his manner of telling it.

CHAP. IX. Containing an Account of many surprising Accidents in the Inn.
AT the same Time the Innkeeper, who stood at the Door, seeing Company coming,
More Guests, cried he, a brave jolly Troop, on my Word. If they stop here, we
may sing O be joyful. What are they, said Cardenio? Four Men, said the Host
gallantly Mounted, with black Masks on their Faces, and Armed with Lances and
Targets; a Lady too all in white, that rides single and Masked; and two running
Foot men. Are they near, said the Curate? Just at the Door, replied the
Innkeeper. Hearing this, Dorothea veiled her self, and Cardenio had just time
enough to step into the next Room, where Don Quixote lay, when the Strangers
came into the Yard. The four Horsemen, who made a very genteel Appearance
dismounted, and went to help down the Lady, whom one of them taking in his
Arms, carried into the House; where he seated her in a Chair by the
Chamber Door, into which Cardenio had withdrawn. All this was done without
discovering their Faces, or speaking a Word; only the Lady as she sat down in
the Chair, breathed out a deep Sigh, and let her Arms sink down in a weak and
fainting Posture. The Curate, marking their odd Behavior, which raised in him
a Curiosity to know who they were, went to their Servants in the Stable, and
asked what their Masters were? Indeed Sir, said one of them, that is more than I
can tell you; they seem of no mean Quality, especially that Gentleman who
carried the Lady into the House, for the rest pay him great Respect, and his
Word is a Law to them. Who is the Lady, said the Curate? We know no more of her
than of the rest answered the Fellow, for we could never see her Face all the
time, and it is impossible we should know her or them any otherwise. They picked
us up on the Road, my Comrade and my self, and prevailed with us to wait on
them to Andalusia, promising to pay us well for our Trouble; so that, bating
the two days Traveling in their Company, they are utter Strangers to us. Could
you not hear them name one another all this time, asked the Curate? No, truly,
Sir, answered the Footman, for we heard them not speak a Syllable all the way:
The poor Lady indeed used to sigh and grieve so pitifully, that we are
persuaded she has no Stomach to this Journey: Whatever may be the Cause we know
not; by her Garb she seems to be a Nun, but by her Grief and Melancholy one
might guess they are going to make her one, when perhaps the poor Girl has no
Fancy to live in a Nunnery. Very likely, said the Curate; and with that leaving
them, he returned to the Place where he left Dorothea, who, hearing the Masked
Lady sigh so frequently, moved by the natural Pity of the soft Sex, could not
forbear enquiring the Cause of her Sorrow. Pardon me, Madam, said she, if I beg
to know your Grief; and assure your self, that my Request does not proceed from
mere Curiosity, but an earnest Inclination to serve and assist you, if your
Misfortune be any such as our Sex is naturally subject to, and in the Power of
a Woman to cure. The melancholy Lady made no return to her Compliment, and
Dorothea pressed her in vain with new Reasons, when the Gentleman, whom the
Footboy signified to be the chief of the Company, interposed: Madam, said he,
don't trouble your self to throw away any generous Offer on that ungrateful
Woman, whose Nature cannot return an Obligation; neither expect any Answer to
your Demands, for her Tongue is a Stranger to Truth. Sir, said the disconsolate
Lady, my Truth and Honor have made me thus miserable, and my Sufferings are
sufficient to prove you the falsest and most base of Men. Cardenio being only
parted from the Company by Don Quixote's Chamber Door, overheard these last
Words very distinctly, and immediately cried out, Good Heaven, what do I hear!
what Voice struck my Ear just now? The Lady startled at his Exclamation, sprung
from the Chair, and would have bolted into the Chamber whence the Voice came;
but the Gentleman perceiving it, laid hold on her, to prevent her, which so
disordered the Lady that her Mask fell off, and discovered an incomparable
Face, Beautiful as an Angel's, though very pale, and strangely discomposed, her
Eyes eagerly rolling on every side, which made her appear distracted. Dorothea
and the rest, not guessing what her Eyes sought by their violent motion, beheld
her with Grief and Wonder. She struggled so hard, and the Gentleman was so
disordered by holding her, that his Mask dropped off, and discovered to Dorothea,
who was assisting to hold the Lady, the Face of her Husband Don Ferdinand:
Scarce had she known him, when with a long and dismal Oh! she fell in a Swoon,
and would have reached the Floor with all her Weight, had not the Barber by
good Fortune stood behind, and supported her. The Curate ran presently to help
her, and pulling off her Veil to throw Water in her Face, Don Ferdinand
presently knew her, and was struck almost as dead as she at the Sight;
nevertheless he did not quit Lucinda, who was the Lady that struggled so hard
to get out of his Hands. Cardenio hearing Dorothea's Exclamation, and imagining
it to be Lucinda's Voice, flew into the Chamber in great Disorder, and the
first Object he met was Don Ferdinand holding Lucinda, who presently knew him.
They were all struck dumb with Amazement: Dorothea gazed on Don Ferdinand; Don
Ferdinand on Cardenio; and Cardenio and Lucinda on one another. At last Lucinda
broke Silence, and addressing Don Ferdinand, Let me go, said she; unloose your
hold, my Lord; by the Generosity you should have, or by your Inhumanity, since
it must be so, I conjure you, leave me, that I may cling like Ivy to my only
Support; and from whom neither your Threats, nor Prayers, nor Gifts, nor
Promises, could ever alienate my Love. Contend not against Heaven, whose Power
alone could bring me to my dear Husband's Sight, by such strange and unexpected
means: You have a thousand Instances to convince you, that nothing but Death
can make me ever forget him: Let this at least turn your Love into Rage, which
may prompt you to end my Miseries with my Life, here before my dear Husband,
where I shall be proud to lose it, since my Death may convince him of my
unshaken Love and Honor, till the last Minute of my Life. Dorothea by this
time had recovered, and finding by Lucinda's Discourse, who she was, and that
Don Ferdinand would not unhand her, she made a Virtue of Necessity and falling
at his Feet, my Lord, cried she, all bathed in Tears, if that Beauty which you
hold in your Arms has not altogether dazzled your Eyes, you may behold at your
Feet, the once happy, but now miserable Dorothea. I am that poor and humble
Villager, whom your generous Bounty, I dare not say your Love, did condescend
to raise to the honor of calling you her own: I am she, who, once confined to
peaceful Innocence, led a contented Life, till your Importunity, your Show of
Honor, and deluding Words, charmed me from my Retreat; and made me resign my
Freedom to your Power: How I am recompensed may be guessed by my Grief; and my
being found here in this strange Place, whither I was led, not through any
dishonorable Ends, but purely by Despair and Grief to be forsaken of You.
'Twas at your Desire I was bound to you by the strictest Tie, and whatever you
do, you can never cease to be mine. Consider, my dear Lord, that my matchless
Love may balance the Beauty and Nobility of the Person for whom you would
forsake me; she cannot share your Love, for it is only mine; and Cardenio's
Interest in her will not admit a Partner. It Is easier far, my Lord, to re-call
your wandering Desires, and fix them upon her that adores you, than to draw her
to love who hates you. Remember how you did solicit my humble State, and
conscious of my Meanness, yet paid a Veneration to my Innocence, which joined
with the honorable Condition of my yielding to your Desires, pronounce me free
from ill Design or Dishonor. Consider these undeniable Truths: Have some
Regard to your Honor! Remember you're a Christian! Why should you then make
her Life end so miserably, whose Beginning your Favor made so happy; If I must
not expect the Usage and Respect of a Wife, let me but serve you as a Slave; so
I belong to you, though in the meanest Rank, I never shall complain: Let me not
be exposed to the slandring Reflections of the Censorious World, by so cruel a
Separation from my Lord: Afflict not the declining Years of my poor Parents,
whose faithful Services to you and yours have merited a more suitable Return.
If you imagine the Current of your Noble Blood should be defiled by mixing with
mine, consider how many Noble Houses have run in such a Channel; besides, the
Woman's Side is not essentially requisite to ennoble Descent! but chiefly think
on this, that Virtue is the truest Nobility, which if you stain by basely
wronging me, you bring a greater Blot upon your Family than Marrying me could
cause. In fine, my Lord, you cannot, must not disown me for your Wife; to
attest which Truth, I call your own Words, which must be true, if you prize
your self for Honor, and that Nobility, whose want you so despise in me;
witness your Oaths and Vows, witness that Heaven which you so often invoked to
ratify your Promises; and if all these should fail, I make my last Appeal to
your own Conscience, whose Sting will always represent my Wrongs fresh to your
Thoughts, and disturb your Joys amidst your greatest Pleasures.

These, with many such Arguments, did the mournful Dorothea urge, appearing so
lovely in her Sorrow, that Don Ferdinand's Friends as well as all the rest,
sympathiz'd with her; Lucinda particularly, as much admiring her Wit and
Beauty, as moved by the Tears, the piercing Sighs and Moans that followed her
Entreaties; and she would have gone nearer to have comforted her, had not
Ferdinand's Arms, that still held her, prevented it. He stood full of
Confusion, with his Eyes fixed attentively on Dorothea a great while; at last
opening his Arms, he quitted Lucinda, Thou have Conquered cried he, Charming
Dorothea, thou have Conquered me, it is impossible to resist so many united
Truths and Charms. Lucinda was still so disordered and weak, that she would
have fallen when Ferdinand quitted her, had not Cardenio, without regard to his
Safety, leaped forward and caught her in his Arms, and embracing her with
Eagerness and Joy; Thanks Gracious Heaven, cried he aloud, my dear, my faithful
Wife, thy Sorrows now are ended; for where can thou rest more safe than in my
Arms, which now support thee, as once they did when my blessed Fortune first
made thee mine. Lucinda then opening her Eyes, and finding her self in the Arms
of her Cardenio, without regard to Ceremony or Decency, threw her Arms about
his Neck, and laying her Face to his, Yes, said she, thou art he, thou art my
Lord indeed! It Is even you your self, the right Owner of this poor harrass'd
Captive. Now Fortune act thy worst, nor Fears nor Threats shall ever part me
more, from the sole Support and Comfort of my Life. This Sight was very
surprising to Don Ferdinand and the other Spectators. Dorothea perceiving by
Don Ferdinand's Change of Countenance, and laying his Hand to his Sword, that
he prepared to assault Cardenio, fell suddenly on her Knees; and with an
endearing Embrace, held Don Ferdinand's Legs so fast, that he could not stir.
What means, cried she, all in Tears, the only Refuge of my Hope? see here thy
own and dearest Wife at thy Feet, and her you would enjoy in her true Husband's
Arms. Think then, my Lord, how unjust is your Attempt, to dissolve that Knot
which Heaven has tied so fast. Can you ever think or hope Success in your
Design on her, who, contemning all Dangers, and confirmed in strictest
Constancy and Honor, before your Face lies bathed in Tears of Joy and Passion
in her true Lover's Bosom. For Heaven's sake I entreat you, by your own Words I
conjure you to mitigate your Anger, and permit that faithful Pair to consummate
their Joys, and spend their remaining Days in Peace: Thus may you make it
appear that you are Generous and truly Noble, giving the World so strong a
Proof that you have your Reason at Command, and your Passion in Subjection. All
this while, Cardenio, though he still held Lucinda in his Arms, had a watchful
Eye on Don Ferdinand; resolving, if he had made the least Offer to his
Prejudice, to make him repent it and all his Party, if possible, though at the
Expense of his Life. But Don Ferdinand's Friends, the Curate, the Barber, and
all the Company, (not forgetting honest Sancho Panca) got together about Don
Ferdinand, and entreated him to pity the Beautiful Dorothea's Tears; that
considering what she had said, the Truth of which was apparent, it would be the
highest Injustice to frustrate her lawful Hopes; that their strange and
wonderful meeting could not be attributed to Chance, but the peculiar and
directing Providence of Heaven; that nothing, (as Mr. Curate very well urged)
but Death could part Cardenio from Lucinda; and that though the Edge of the Sword
might separate them, he would make them happier by Death than he could hope to
be by surviving; that in irrecoverable Accidents, a Submission to Fate, and a
Resignation of our Wills, showed not only the greatest Prudence, but also the
highest Courage and Generosity; that he should not envy those happy Lovers what
the Bounty of Heaven had conferred on them, but that he should turn his Eyes on
Dorothea's Grief, view her incomparable Beauty, which, with her true and
unfeigned Love, made large Amends for the Meanness of her Parentage; but
Principally it lay upon him, if he gloried in the Titles of Nobility and
Christianity, to keep his Promise unviolated: That the more reasonable Part of
Mankind could not otherwise be satisfied, or have any esteem for him: Also that
it was the special Prerogative of Beauty (if heightn'd by Virtue, and adorned
with Modesty) to lay claim to any Dignity, without Disparagement or Scandal to
the Person that raises it; and that the strong Dictates of Delight having been
once indulged, we are not to be blamed for following them afterward, provided
they be not unlawful. In short, To these Reasons they added so many enforcing
Arguments, that Don Ferdinand, who was truly a Gentleman, could no longer
resist Reason, but stooped down, and embracing Dorothea, Rise, Madam, said he,
it is not proper that she should lie prostrate at my Feet who triumphs over my
Soul: If I have not hitherto paid you all the respect I ought, 'twas perhaps so
ordered by Heaven, that having by this a stronger conviction of your Constancy
and Goodness, I may henceforth set the greater value on your Merit: Let the
future Respects and Services I shall pay you, plead a Pardon for my past
Transgressions; and let the violent Passions of my Love, that first made me
yours, be an excuse for that which caused me to forsake you: View the happy
Lucinda's Eyes, and there read a thousand farther Excuses; but I promise
henceforth never to disturb her Quiet; and may she live long and contented with
her dear Cardenio; as I hope to do with my dearest Dorothea. Thus concluding,
he embraced her again so lovingly, that it was with no small difficulty that he
kept in his Tears, which he endeavored to conceal, being ashamed to discover
so Effemitate a proof of his Remorse.

Cardenio, Lucinda, and the greatest part of the Company could not so well
command their Passions, but all wept for joy; even Sancho Panca himself shed
Tears, though, as he afterward confessed, it was not for downright Grief, but
because he found not Dorothea to be the Queen of Micomicona, as he supposed,
and of whom he expected so many Favors and Preferments. Cardenio and Lucinda
fell at Don Ferdinand's Feet, giving him thanks, with the strongest expressions
which Gratitude could suggest; he raised them up, and received their
Acknowledgments with much Modesty; then begged to be informed by Dorothea, how
she came to that Place. She related to him all she had told Cardenio, but with
such a Grace, that what were misfortunes to her, proved an unaccountable
pleasure to those that heard her Relation. Afterward Don Ferdinand told all
that had befallen him in the City, after he found the Paper in Lucinda's Bosom,
which declared Cardenio to be her Husband; how he would have killed her, had
not her Parents prevented him; how afterward, mad with Shame and Anger, he
left the City, to wait a more commodious Opportunity of Revenge; how in a short
time he learnt that Lucinda was fled to a Monastery, resolving to end her Days
there, if she could not spend them with Cardenio; that, having desired those
three Gentlemen to go with him, they went to the Monastery, and waiting till
they found the Gate open, he left two of the Gentlemen to secure the Door,
while he with the other entered the House, where they found Lucinda, talking
with a Nun in the Cloister; they forcibly brought her thence to a Village,
where they disguised themselves, for their more convenient flight, which they
more easily brought about, the Monastery being situate in the Fields, distant a
good way from any Town. He likewise added, how Lucinda finding her self in his
Power, fell in a Swoon, and that after she came to her self, she continually
wept and sighed, but would not speak a Syllable; and that accompanied with
Silence only and Tears, they had Traveled, till they came to the Inn, which
proved to him as his arrival at Heaven, having put a happy conclusion to all
his earthly Misfortunes.

CHAP. X. The History of the Famous Princess Micomicona continued, with other
pleasant Adventures.
THE Joy of the whole Company was unspeakable by the happy conclusion of this
dangerous business; Dorothea, Cardenio, and Lucinda thought the sudden change
of their Affairs too surprising to be real; and through a disuse of good
Fortune, could hardly be induced to believe their happiness: Don Ferdinand
thanked Heaven a thousand times for its propitious Conduct, in leading him out
of a Labyrinth, in which his Honor and Virtue were like to have been lost. The
Curate, as he was very instrumental in the general Reconciliation, had likewise
no small share in the general Joy; and that no Discontent might sour their
universal Satisfaction, Cardenio and the Curate engaged to see the Hostess
satisfied for all Damages committed by Don Quixote: only poor Sancho drooped
pitifully; he found his Lordship and his hopes vanished into Smoke, the
Princess Micomicona was changed to Dorothea, and the Giant to Don Ferdinand;
thus very musty and melancholy he slipped into his Master's Chamber, who was
just wakened.

I hope your early rising will do you no hurt, said he, Sir Knight of the woeful
Figure; but you may now sleep on till Doom's-day if you will; nor need you
trouble your head any longer about killing any Giant, or restoring the
Princess, for all that is done to your hand. That Is more than probable,
answered the Knight, for I have had the most extraordinary and prodigious
engagement with the Giant, that I ever did, or shall maintain during the whole
Course of my Life; yes, with one cross stroke I laid his Head thwack on the
Ground, whence the great effusion of Blood seemed like a violent stream of
Water. Of Wine you mean, said Sancho, for you must know (if you know it not
already) that your Worship's dead Giant is a broached Wine-bag, and the Blood
some thirty Gallons of Tent which it held in its Belly, and your Head so
cleverly struck off, is the Whore my Mother; and so the Devil take both Giant
and Head, and altogether, for Sancho. What say thou, mad Man, said the Don,
you are frantic sure. Rise, rise, Sir, said Sancho, and see what fine Work you
have cut out for your self; here is the Devil-and-all to pay for, and your great
Queen is changed into a private Gentlewoman, called Dorothea, with some other
such odd Matters, that you will wonder with a Vengeance. I can wonder at
nothing here, said Don Quixote, where you may remember I told you all things
are ruled by Enchantment. I believe it, quoth Sancho, had my tossing in a
Blanket been of that kind; but sure 'twas the likest a tossing in a Blanket of
any think I ever knew in my Life. And this same Innkeeper, I remember very
well, was one of those that tossed me into the Air, and as cleverly and
heartily he did it as a Man could wish, I Will say that for him; so that after
all, I begin to smell a Rat, and do per'lously suspect, that all our
Enchantments will end in nothing but Bruises and broken Bones. Heaven will
retrieve all, said the Knight; I will therefore dress and march to the
discovery of these wonderful transformations. While Sancho made him ready, the
Curate gave Don Ferdinand and the rest an account of Don Quixot's Madness, and
of the device he used to draw him from the Poor Rock, to which the supposed
disdain of his Mistress had banished him in Imagination. Sancho's Adventure made
also a part in the Story, which proved very diverting to the Strangers. He
added, that since Dorothea's change of Fortune had baulkt their design that
way, some other trick should be found to decoy him home: Cardenio offered his
Service in the Affair, and that Lucinda should personate Dorothea: No, no,
(answered Don Ferdinand,) Dorothea shall humor the Jest still, if this honest
Gentleman's Habitation be not very far off. Only two days Journey said the
Curate; I would ride twice as far (said Don Ferdinand) for the pleasure of so
good and charitable an Action. By this Don Quixote had Sallied out Armed
Cap-a-pee, Mambrino's Helmet, (with a great Hole in it,) on his Head; his
Shield on his left Arm, and with his right he leaned on his Lance. The dun
Complexion of his meagre and weather-beaten Face, the unaccountable medley of
his unsuitable Arms, together with his grave and solemn Port, struck Don
Ferdinand and his Companions dumb with Admiration, while the Champion casting
his Eyes on Dorothea, with great Gravity and Solidity, broke silence with these
Words.

I am informed by this my Squire, beautiful Lady, that your Greatness is
annihilated, and your Majesty reduced to nothing; for of a Queen and mighty
Princess, as you used to be, you are become a private Damsel. If any express
Order from the Negromantic King your Father (doubting the Ability and Success
of my Arm in the reinstating you) has occasioned this change, I must tell him,
that he is no Conjurer in these Matters; nor is he skilled in the Revolutions
of Chivalry: For had he been conversant in the Study of Knight-Errantry as I
have been, he might have found, that in every Age, Champions of less Fame than
Don Quixote de la Mancha, have finished more desperate Adventures; since the
killing of a pitiful Giant, how Arrogant soever he may be, is no such great
Achievement; for, not many Hours past, I encountered one my self; the Success
I will not mention, lest the Incredulity of some People might distrust the
reality; but Time, the discoverer of all things, will disclose it, when we
least expect. Hold there, said the Host, 'twas with two Wine-bags, but no Giant
that you fought. Don Ferdinand silenced the Innkeeper, and bid him by no means
interrupt Don Quixote, who thus went on. To conclude, most High and
Disinherited Lady, if your Father for the Causes already mentioned, has caused
this Metamorphosis in your Person, believe him not; for there is no Peril on
Earth, through which my Sword shall not open a way; and assure your self, that in
a few Days, by the overthrow of your Enemy's Head, it shall six on yours that
Crown, which is your lawful Inheritance. Here Don Quixote stopped, waiting the
Princess's Answer; she assured of Don Ferdinand's Consent to carry on the Jest,
till Don Quixote was carried home, and assuming a Face of Gravity, Whosoever
(answered she) has informed you, Valorous Knight of the woeful Figure, that I
have altered or changed my Condition, has imposed upon you; for I am just the
same to Day as Yesterday; it is true some unexpected, but fortunate Accidents
have varied some circumstances of my Fortune, much to my Advantage, and far
beyond my Hopes; but I am neither changed in my Person, nor altered in my
Resolution of employing the Force of your redoubtable and invincible Arm in my
Favor. I therefore apply my self to your usual Generosity; to have those Words
spoken to my Father's Dishonor recalled; and believe these easy and
infallible means to redress my Wrongs, the pure effects of his Wisdom and
Policy; as the good Fortune I now enjoy, has been the consequence of your
surprising Deeds, as this Noble presence can testify; what should hinder us
then from setting forward to morrow Morning, depending for a happy and
successful conclusion, on the Will of Heaven, and the Power of your
unparalleled Courage.

The ingenious Dorothea having concluded, Don Quixote turning to Sancho, with
all the Signs of Fury imaginable; now must I tell thee, poor paultry hangdog
(said he) thou art the veryest Rascal in all Spain; tell me, Rogue, Scoundrel,
did not you just now inform me, that this Princess was changed into a little
private Damsel, called Dorothea; and the Head which I lopped from the Giant's
Shoulders, was the Whore your Mother, with a thousand other Absurdities: Now by
all the Powers of Heaven, (looking up, and grinding his Teeth together) I have
a mind so to use thee, as to make thee appear a miserable example to all
succeeding Squires, that shall dare to tell a Knight Errant a Lie. Good your
Worship, cried Sancho, have patience, I beseech you: Mayhap I am mistaken or
so, about my Lady Princess Micomicona's Concern there; but that the Giant's
Head came off the Wine-bags Shoulders, and that the Blood was as good Tent as
ever was tipped over Tongue, I Will take my corporal Oath on it; Gadzookers Sir, are
not the Baggs all hacked and slashed within there at your Bed's-head, and the
Wine all in a puddle in your Chamber? But you will guess at the Meat presently by
the Sauce; the proof of the Pudding is in the eating, Master; and if my
Landlord here don't let you know it to your cost, he is a very honest and civil
Fellow, that is all. Sancho, said the Don, I pronounce thee non Compos, I
therefore pardon thee, and have done. It Is enough, said Don Ferdinand, we
therefore in pursuance of the Princess's Orders will this Night refresh our
selves, and to morrow's Sun sets us out to attend the Lord Don Quixote, in
prosecution of this important Enterprise he has undertaken, being all impatient
to be Eyewitnesses of his celebrated and matchless Courage. I shall be proud
of the honor of serving and waiting upon you, my good Lord, replied Don
Quixote, and reckon my self infinitely obliged by the favor and good opinion
of so honorable a Company; which I shall endeavor to improve and confirm,
though at the expense of the last drop of my Blood.

Many other Compliments had passed between Don Quixote and Don Ferdinand, when
the arrival of a Stranger interrupted them. His Dress represented him a
Christian newly returned from Barbary: He was clad in a short-skirted Coat of
blue Cloth, with short Sleeves and no Collar, his Breeches were of blue
Linen, with a Cap of the same Color, a pair of Date-colour'd Stockings, and a
Turkish Scimitar hung by a Scarf, in manner of a Shoulder-Belt. There rid a
Woman in his Company, clad in a Moorish Dress, with her Face covered by her
Veil; she had on a little Cap of Gold-Tissue, and a Turkish Mantle that reached
from her Shoulders to her Feet. The Man was well shaped and strong, his Age
about Forty, his Face somewhat Tanned, his Mustachoes long, and his Beard
handsome: In short, his Genteel mien and Person were too distinguishable, to
let the Gentleman be hid by the meanness of his Habit. He called presently for
a Room, and being answered that all were full, seemed a little troubled;
however, he went to the Woman who came along with him, and took her down from
her Ass. The Ladies being all surpised at the oddness of the Moorish Dress,
had the curiosity to flock about the Stranger, and Dorothea very discreetly
imagining that both she and her Conductor were tired, and took it ill that they
could not have a Chamber; I hope, Madam, you will bear your ill Fortune
patiently, said she, for want of room is an inconvenience incident to all
public Inns: But if you please, Madam, to favor us with your Company, you may
perhaps find that you have met with worse Entertainment on the Road, than what
this place affords. The unknown Lady made her no answer, but rising up, laid
her hands across her Breast, bowed her Head and bended her Body, as a sign that
she acknowledged the Favor. By her silence they conjectured her to be
undoubtedly a Moor, and that she could not speak Spanish. Her Companion was now
come back from the Stable, and told them; Ladies, I hope you will excuse this
Gentlewoman from answering any Questions, for she is very much a stranger to
our Language. We are only, Sir, answered Lucinda, making her an offer, which
Civility obliges us to make all Strangers, especially of our own Sex; that she
would make us happy in her Company all Night, and fare as we do; we will make
very much of her, Sir, and she shall want for nothing that the House affords. I
return you humble thanks, dear Madam, answered the Stranger, in the Lady's
behalf and my own; and I infinitely prize the favor which the present
exigence, and the worth of the Donors, make doubly engaging. Is the Lady, pray
Sir, a Christian or a Moor, asked Dorothea? Our Charity would make us hope she
were the former; but by her attire and silence we are afraid she is the latter.
Outwardly, Madam, answers he, she appears and is a Moor, but in her heart a
zealous Christian, which her longing desires of being Baptized have expressly
testifiy'd. I have had no opportunity of having her Christened since she left
Algiers, which was her Habitation and Native Country; nor has any imminent
danger of death obliged her to be brought to the Font, till she be better
instructed in the Principles of our Religion; but, I hope, by Heavens
assistance, to have her shortly Baptized with decency suiting her Quality,
which is much above what her Equipage or mine seem to promise.

These words raised in them all a Curiosity to be farther informed who the Moor
and her Conductor were; but they thought it improper then to put them to any
more particular relation of their fortunes, because they wanted rest and
refreshment after their Journey. Dorothea placing the Lady by her, begged her
to take off her Veil. She looked on her Companion, as if she required him to
let her know what she said; which, when he had let her understand in the
Arabian Tongue, joining his own request also, she discovered so charming a
Face, that Dorothea imagined her more Beautiful than Lucinda; she on the other
hand, fancied her handsomer than Dorothea; and most of the Company believed her
more Beautiful than both of 'em. As Beauty has always a Prerogative, or rather
Charm, to attract Men's inclinations, the whole Company dedicated their desires
to serve the lovely Moor. Don Ferdinand asked the Stranger her Name, he
answered Lela Zoraida; she heard him, and guessing what they asked, suddenly
replied with great concern, though very gracefully, No, no Zoraida, Maria,
Maria; giving them to understand, that her Name was Maria and not Zoraida.
These Words, spoken with so much eagerness, raised a concern in every Body, the
Ladies especially, whose natural tenderness showed it self by their Tears; and
Lucinda embracing her very lovingly, Ay, ay, said she, Maria, Maria, which
words the Moorish Lady repeated by way of Answer. Zoraida Macange, added she;
as much as to say, not Zoraida. The Night coming on, and the Innkeeper by
order of Don Ferdinand's Friends, having made haste to provide them the best
Supper he could, the Cloth was laid on a long Table, there being neither round
nor square in the House. Don Quixote after much Ceremony, was prevailed upon to
sit at the Head, he desired the Lady Micomicona to sit next to him, and the
rest of the Company having placed themselves according to their Rank and
Convenience, they eat their Supper very plentifully. Don Quixote, to raise the
diversion, never minded his Meat, but inspired with the same Spirit that moved
him to preach so much to the Goat-herds, he began to hold forth in this manner.
Certainly, Gentlemen, if we rightly consider it, those who make Knight-Errantry
their Profession, often meet with most surprising and stupendous Adventures.
For what Mortal in the World, at this time entering within this Castle, and
seeing us sit together as we do, will imagine and believe us to be the same
Persons which in reality we are? Who is there that can judge, that this Lady by
my side, is the Great Queen we all know her to be, and that I am that Knight of
the woefol Figure so universally made known by Fame? It is then no longer to be
doubted, but that this Exercise and Profession surpasses all others that have
been invented by Man, and is so much the more honorable, as it is more exposed
to Dangers. Let none presume to tell me that the Pen is preferable to the
Sword; for be they who they will, I shall tell them they know not what they
say. For the reason they give, and on which chiefly they rely, is, that the
labor of the Mind exceeds that of the Body, and that the Exercise of Arms
depends only on the Body; as if the use of them were the Business of Porters,
which requires nothing but much strength. Or as if this, which we who profess
it call Chivalry, did not include the Acts of Fortitude, which depend very much
upon the Understanding. Or else, as if that Warrior, who Commands an Army, or
defends a City besieged, did not labor as much with the Mind as with the Body.
If this be not so, let Experience teach us, whether it be possible by bodily
strength to discover or guess the intentions of an Enemy. The forming Designs,
laying of Stratagems, overcoming of Difficulties, and shunning of Dangers, are
all Works of the Understanding, wherein the Body has no share. It being
therefore evident, that the Exercise of Arms requires the help of the Mind as
well as Learning, let us see in the next place, whether the Scholar or the
Soldier's Mind undergoes the greatest labor. Now this may be the better known,
by regarding the End and Object each of them aims at; for that intention is to
be most valued, which makes the noblest end its Object. The scope and end of
Learning, I mean, humane Learning, (in this place I speak not of Divinity,
whose aim is to guide Souls to Heaven, for no other can equal a design so
infinite as this) is to give a perfection to distributive Justice, bestowing
upon every one his due, and to procure and cause good Laws to be observed; an
End really Generous, Great, and worthy of high Commendation; but yet not equal
to that which Knight-Errantry tends to, whose Object and End is Peace, which is
the greatest blessing Men can wish for in this Life. And therefore the first
good News the World received, were those the Angels brought that Night, which
was the beginning of our Day, when they sang in the Air, Glory on high, and
Peace upon Earth to Men of Good Will. And the only manner of Salutation taught
by the best Master in Heaven or upon Earth to his Friends and Favorites, was,
that entering any House they should say, Peace be in this House. And at other
times he said to them, My Peace I give to you, My Peace I leave to you, Peace
be among you. A Jewel and Legacy worthy of such a Donor, a Jewel so Precious,
that without it there can be no happiness either in Earth or Heaven. This Peace
is the true end of War; for Arms and War are one and the same thing. Allowing
then this Truth, that the End of War is Peace, and that in this it excells the
End of Learning, let us now weigh the Bodily labors the Scholar undergoes,
against those the Warrior suffers; and then see which are greatest. The Method
and Language Don Quixote used in delivering himself were such, that none of his
Hearers at that time looked upon him as a Madman. But on the contrary, most of
them being Gentlemen, to whom the use of Arms properly appertains, they gave
him a willing Attention; and he proceeded in this manner. These, then, I say,
are the sufferings and hardships a Scholar endures. First, Poverty, (not that
they are all Poor, but to urge the worst that may be in this case;) and having
said he endures Poverty, methinks nothing more need be urged to express his
Misery; for he that is poor enjoys no happiness, but labors under this Poverty
in all its parts, at one time in Hunger, at another in Cold, another in
Nakedness, and sometimes in all of them together; yet his Poverty is not so
great, but still he Eats, though it be later than the usual Hour, and of the
scraps of the Rich, which is the greatest of a Scholar's Misfortunes; neither
can the Learned wholly want another Man's Fire or Chimney-corner, where, though
they be not thoroughly heated, yet they gather warmth, and at last they lie at
Night under Covert. I will not touch upon other less material Circumstances, as
the want of Linen, and scarcity of Shoes, the thinness and baldness of their
Clothes, and their Surfeiting when good Fortune throws a Feast in their way.
This is the difficult and uncouth path they tread, often stumbling and falling,
yet rising again and pushing on, till they attain the Preferment they aim at;
whither being arrived, we have seen many of them, who having been carried by a
Fortunate Gale through all these Quicksands, from a Chair Govern the World;
their Hunger being changed into Satiety, their Cold into comfortable Warmth,
their Nakedness into Magnificence of Apparel; and the Mat they used to lie
upon, into stately Beds of costly Silks and softest Linen, a Reward due to
their Virtue. But yet their sufferings being compared with those the Soldier
endures, appear much inferior, as I shall in the next place make out.

CHAP. XI. A Continuation of Don Quixote's curious Discourse upon Arms and
Learning.
SInce, speaking of the Scholar, we began by his Poverty, and its several
parts, continued Don Quixote, let us now observe whether the Soldier be any
thing richer than he; and we shall find that Poverty it self is not poorer; for
he depends on his miserable Pay, which he receives but seldom, or perhaps
never; or else in that he makes by Marauding, with the hazard of his Life, and
trouble of his Conscience. Such is sometimes his want of Apparel, that a
slashed Buff-Coat is all his Holiday Raiment and Shirt; and in the depth of
Winter, being in the open Field, he has nothing to cherish him against the
sharpness of the Season, but the breath of his Mouth, which issuing from an
empty place, I am persuaded is it self cold, though contrary to the Rules of
Nature. But now see how he expects Night to make amends for all these hardships
in the Bed prepared for him, which, unless it be his own fault, never proves
too narrow; for he may freely lay out as much of the ground as he pleases, and
tumble to his content, without danger of losing the Sheets. But above all, when
the day shall come, wherein be is to put in practice the Exercise of his
Profession, and strive to gain some new degree, when the day of Battle shall
come, then as a Mark of his Honor, shall his Head be dignified with a Cap made
of Lint, to stop a hole made by a Bullet, or he perhaps carried off maimed, at
the expense of a Leg or an Arm. And if this do not happen, but that merciful
Heaven preserve his Life and Limbs, it may fall out that he shall remain as
poor as before, and must run through many Rencounters and Battles, and always
come off Victorious, to obtain some little Preferment; and these Miracles too
are rare: But, I pray tell me, Gentlemen, if ever you made it your Observation,
how few are those who obtain due rewards in War, in comparison of those Numbers
that Perish? Doubtless you will answer, that there is no parity between them;
that the slain are without number, that three numeral Figures will serve to
make the sum of those that live to be rewarded. It is quite otherwise with
Scholars, not only those who follow the Law, but others also, who all either by
hook or by crook get a livelihood, so that though the Soldier's Sufferings be
much greater, yet his Reward is much less. To this it may be answered, that it
is easier to reward two thousand Scholars, than thirty thousand Soldiers,
because the former are recompensed at the Expense of the Public, by giving
them Employments, which of necessity must be bestowed on those of their
Profession, but the latter cannot be gratified otherwise than at the Cost of
the Master that employs them; yet this very difficulty makes good my Argument.
But let us lay this Matter aside, as a Point difficult to be decided, and let
us return to the preference due to Arms above Learning, a Subject as yet in
Debate, each Party bringing stronger Reasons to make out their Pretensions.
Among others, Learning urges, that without it Warfare it self could not
subsist; because War, as other things, has its Laws, and is Governed by them,
and Laws are the Province of Learning and Scholars. To this Objection the
Soldiers make Answer, that without them the Laws cannot be maintained, for it
is by Arms that Commonwealths are defended, Kingdoms supported, Cities
secured, the Highways made safe, and the Sea delivered from Pirates. In short,
were it not for them, Commonwealths, Kingdoms, Monarchies, Cities, the Roads
by Land, and the Waters of the Sea, would be subject to the Ravages and
Confusion that attends War while it lasts and is at liberty to make use of its
unbounded privileges and strength. Besides, it is past all Controversy, that
what costs dearest, is, and ought most to be valued. Now for a Man to attain to
an eminent degree in Learning, costs him time, watching, hunger, nakedness,
dizziness in the Head, weakness in the Stomach, and other inconveniences, which
are the consequences of these, of which I have already in part made mention But
the rising gradually to be a good Soldier, is purchased at the whole expense of
all that is required for Learning, and that in so surpassing a degree, that
there is no comparison betwixt them; because he is every moment in danger of
his Life. To what danger or distress can a Scholar be reduced equal to that of
a Soldier, who, being Besieged in some strong place, and at his post, or upon
Guard, in some Ravelin or Bastion, perceives the Enemy carrying on a Mine under
him, and yet must upon no account remove from thence, or shun the danger which
threatens him so near? All he can do is to give Advice to his Commander, that
he may countermine; and he must stand still fearing and expecting when on a
sudden he shall soar to the Clouds without Wings, and be again cast down
headlong against his Will. If this danger seem inconsiderable, let us see
whether that be not greater when two Galleys shock one another with their
Prows, in the midst of the spacious Sea. When they have thus grappl'd, and are
clinging together, the Soldier is confined to the narrow Beak, being a Board
not above two Foot wide; and yet though he sees before him so many Ministers of
Death threatening, as there are Pieces of Cannon on the other side pointed
against him, and not half a Pike's length from his Body, and being sensible
that the first slip of his Feet sends him to the bottom of Neptune's Dominions,
still, for all this, inspired by Honor, with an undaunted Heart, he stands a
mark to so much Fire, and endeavors to make his way by that narrow passage
into the Enemy's Vessel. But what is most to be admired is, that no sooner one
falls, where he shall never rise till the end of the World, than another steps
into the same place; and if he also drops into the Sea, which lies in wait for
him like an Enemy, another, and after him another still fills up the place,
without suffering any interval of time to separate their Deaths; a resolution
and boldness scarce to be paralleled in any other Trials of War. Blessed be
those happy Ages that were strangers to the dreadful fury of these devilish
Instruments of Artillery, whose Inventor I am satisfied is now in Hell,
receiving the reward of his cursed Invention, which is the cause that very
often a Cowardly base hand takes away the Life of the bravest Gentleman; and
that in the midst of that vigor and resolution which animates and inflames the
bold, a chance Bullet (shot perhaps by one that fled, and was frighted at the
very flash the mischievous Piece gave, when it went off,) coming, no body knows
how, or from whence, in a Moment puts a period to the brave designs, and the
life of one, that deserved to have survived many Years. This considered I could
almost say, I am sorry at my Heart for having taken upon me this Profession of
a Knight Errant, in so detestable an Age; for though no Danger daunts me, yet it
affects me to think, whether Powder and Lead may not deprive me of the
opportunity of becoming Famous, and making my self known throughout the World,
by the strength of my Arm, and dint of my Sword. But let Heaven order Matters
as it pleases, for if I compass my Designs, I shall be so much the more
Honored, by how much the Dangers I have exposed my self to, are greater than
those the Knights-Errant of former Ages escaped. All this long preamble Don
Quixote made, whilst the Company Supped, never minding to eat a mouthful,
though Sancho Panca had several times advised him to Sup, telling him there
would be time enough afterward to say what he thought fit. Those who heard him
were afresh moved with Compassion, to see a Man, who seemed in all other
respects to have a sound judgment and clear understanding, so absolutely mad
and distracted, when any mention was made of his cursed Knight-Errantry. The
Curate told him, he was much in the right, in all he had said for the honor of
Arms, and that he, though a Scholar, and a Graduate, was of the same Opinion.
Supper being ended, and the Cloth taken away, whilst the Innkeeper, his Wife,
his Daughter, and Maritornes, fitted up Don Quixote's Loft for the Ladies, that
they might lie by themselves that Night, Don Ferdinand entreated the Slave to
give them an Account of his Life; conscious the Relation could not choose but
be very delightful and surprising, as might be guessed by his coming with
Zoraida. The Slave Answered, He would most willingly comply with their Desires,
and that he only feared the Relation would not give them all the satisfaction
he could wish, but that however, rather than disobey, he would do it as well as
he could. The Curate and all the Company thanked him, and made fresh instances
to the same Effect. Seeing himself courted by so many, There is no need of
entreaties, said he, for what you may command; therefore, continued he, give me
your Attention, and you shall hear a true Relation, perhaps not to be
paralleled by those fabulous Stories which are composed with much Art and
Study. This caused all the Company to seat themselves, and observe a very
strict silence, and then with an agreeable and sedate Voice, he began in this
manner.

CHAP. XII. Where the Captive relates his Life and Adventures.
IN the Mountains of Leon my Family had its first Original, and was more kindly
dealt withal by Nature than by Fortune, though my Father might pass for Rich
among the Inhabitants of those Parts, who are but poorly provided for; to say
truth, he had been so, had he had as much Industry to preserve, as he had
Inclination to dissipate his Income; but he had been a Soldier, and the Years
of his Youth spent in that Employment, had left him in his Old Age a propensity
to spend, under the Name of Liberality. War is a School where the Covetous grow
free, and the free Prodigal: To see a Soldier a Miser, is a kind of Prodigy
which happens but seldom. My Father was far from being one of them; for he
passed the Bounds of Liberality, and came very near the excesses of
Prodigality: A thing which cannot suit well with a married Life, where the
Children ought to succeed to the Estate, as well as Name of the Family. We were
three of us, all at Man's Estate, and my Father, finding that the only way (as
he said) to curb his squandring Inclination, was resolved to dispossess himself
of that which maintained it, his Estate; without which Alexander himself must
have appeared poor. He called us one day all three to him in his Chamber, and
spoke to us in the following manner.

My Sons, to persuade you that I love you, I need only tell you I am your
Father, and you my Children; and on the other side, you have reason to think me
unkind, considering how careless I am in preserving what should one Day be
yours; but to convince you, however, that I have the Bowels of a Parent, I have
taken a resolution, which I have well weighed and considered for many Days. You
are all now of an Age to choose the kind of Life you each of you incline to, or
at least to enter upon some Employment that may one Day procure you both Honor
and Profit: Therefore I design to divide all I have into four Parts, of which I
will give three among you, and retain the fourth for my self, to maintain me in
my Old Age, as long as it shall please Heaven to continue me in this Life.
After that each of you shall have received his part, I could wish you would
follow one of the Employments I shall mention to you, every one as he finds
himself inclined. There is a Proverb in our vulgar Tongue, which I take to
contain a great deal of Truth, as generally those sorts of sayings do; being
short Sentences framed upon Observation and long Experience. This Proverb runs
thus, Either the Church, the Sea, or the Court. As if it should plainly say,
that whoever desires to thrive, must follow one of these three; either be a
Churchman, or a Merchant and try his Fortune at Sea, or enter into the Service
of his Prince in the Court: For another Proverb says, that King's Chaff is
better than other Men's Corn. I say this, because I would have one of you follow
his Studies, another I desire should be a Merchant, and the third should serve
the King in his Wars; because it is a thing of some difficulty to get an
entrance at Court; and though War does not immediately procure Riches, yet it
seldom fails of giving Honor and Reputation. Within eight days time I will
give each of you your Portion, and not wrong you of a farthing of it, as you
shall see by Experience. Now therefore tell me if you are resolved to follow my
Advice about your settling into the World. And turning to me as the Eldest, he
bid me Answer first. I told him, that he ought not upon our Account to divide,
or lessen his Estate, or way of Living; that we were young Men, and could shift
in the World; and at last I concluded, that for my part I would be a Soldier,
and serve God and the King in that Honorable Profession. My second Brother
made the same regardful Offer, and chose to go to the Indies; resolving to lay
out in Goods the share that should be given him here. The youngest, and I
believe, the wisest of us all, said he would be a Churchman; and in order to
it go to Salamanca, and there finish his Studies. After this, my Father
embraced us all three, and in a few days performed what he had promised, and,
as I remember, it was three thousand Ducats a piece, which he shared among us;
for we had an Uncle who bought all the Estate, and paid for it in ready Money,
that it might not go out of the Family. A little after, we all took leave of my
Father, and at parting I could not forbear thinking it a kind of Inhumanity to
leave the old Gentleman in so straight a Condition: I prevailed with him
therefore to accept of two thousand of my three, the remainder being sufficient
to make up a Soldier's Equipage. My Example worked upon my other Brothers, and
they each of them presented him with a thousand Ducats; so that my Father
remained with four thousand Ducats in ready Money, and three thousand more in
Land, which he chose to keep, and not sell outright. To be short, we took our
last leave of my Father and the Uncle I have mentioned, not without much Grief
and Tears on all sides. They particularly recommendeding to us to let them know
by all Opportunities our good or ill Fortunes: We promised so to do, and having
received the Blessing of our old Father, one of us went strait to Salamanca,
the other to Sevill, and I to Alicant, where I was was informed of a Genoese
Ship, which loaded Wool for Genoa.

This year makes two and twenty since I first left my Father's House, and in
all that time, though I have writ several Letters, I have not had the least News
either of him, or of my Brothers. And now I will relate in few Words my own
Adventures, in all that course of Years. I took Shipping at Alicant, arrived
safe and with a good passage at Genova, from thence I went to Milan, where I
bought my Equipage, resolving to go and enter my self in the Army in Piedmont;
but being come as far as Alexandria de la Paille, I was informed that the Great
Duke of Alva was passing into Flanders with an Army; this made me alter my
first Resolution. I followed him, and was present at all his Engagements, as
well as at the Deaths of the Counts Egmont and Horn; and at last I had a
Colors under a famous Captain of Guadalajara, whose Name was Diego d' Urbina.
Some time after my arrival in Flanders, there came News of the Holy League
concluded by Pope Pius V. of happy Memory, in Conjunction with Spain, against
the common Enemy the Turk, who at that time had taken the Island of Cyprus from
the Venetians; which was an unfortunate and lamentable loss to Christendom. It
was also certain, that the General of this Holy League was the most Serene Don
Juan of Austria, Natural Brother to our good King Don Philip. The great Fame of
the Preparations for this War, incited me with a vehement desire of being
present at the Engagement which was expected to follow these Preparations; and
although I had certain Assurance, and as it were an earnest of my being
Advanced to be a Captain upon the first vacancy, yet I resolved to leave all
those expectations, and return, as I did, to Italy. My good Fortune was such,
that I arrived just about the same time that Don Juan of Austria landed at
Genova, in order to go to Naples, and join the Venetian Fleet, as he did at
Messina. In short, I was at that great Action of the Battle of Lepanto, being a
Captain of Foot, to which post my good Fortune more than my Desert had now
advanced me; and that Day, which was so happy to all Christendom (because the
World was then disabus'd of the Error they had entertained, that the Turk was
Invincible by Sea;) that Day I say, in which the Pride of the Ottomans was
first broke, and which was so happy to all Christians, even to those who died
in the Fight, who were more so than those who remained alive and Conquerors, I
alone was the unhappy Man; since, instead of a Naval Crown, which I might have
hoped for in the time of the Romans, I found my self that very Night a Slave,
with Irons on my Feet, and Manacles on my Hands. The thing happened thus:
Vehali, King of Algiers, a brave and bold Pyrate, having boarded and taken the
Capitana Galley of Malta, in which only three Knights were left alive, and
those desperately wounded, the Galley of John Andrea Doria made haste to
Succor them; in this Galley I was Embarked with my Company, and doing my duty
in this Occasion, I leaped into the Enemy's Galley, which getting loose from
ours, that intended to board the Algerine, my Soldiers were hindered from
following me, and I remained alone among a great number of Enemies; whom not
being able to resist, I was taken, after having received several Wounds; and as
you have heard already, Vehali having escaped with all his Squadron, I found my
self his Prisoner; and was the only afflicted Man among so many joyful ones,
and the only Captive among so many free; for on that Day above 15000
Christians, who rowed in the Turkish Galleys, obtained their long wished for
Liberty. I was carried to Constantinople, where the Grand Signior Selim, made
Vehali my Master General of the Sea, he having behaved himself very well in the
Battle, and brought away with him the great Flag of the Order of Malta, as a
proof of his Valor.

The second year of my Captivity, I was a Slave in the Capitana Galley at
Navarrino; and I took notice of the Christians Fault, in letting slip the
Opportunity they had of taking the whole Turkish Fleet in that Port; and all
the Janifaries and Algerine Pirates, did so expect to be attacked, that they
had all in readiness to escape on Shore without Fighting, so great was the
terror they had of our Fleet; but it pleased God to order it otherwise not by
any fault of the Christian General, but for the Sins of Christendom, and
because it is his Will we should always have some Enemies to Chastize us.
Vehali saved himself at Modon, which is an Island, not far from Navarrino, and
these Landing his Men, fortified the Entrance of the Harbor, remaining in
safety there till Don Juan was forced to return home with his Fleet. In this
Expedition, the Galley called La Presa, of which Barbarossa's own Son was
Captain, was taken by the Admiral Gally of Naples, called the Woolf, which was
Commanded by that Thunderbolt of War, that Father of the Soldiers, that happy
and never conquered Captain, Don Alvaro de Bacan, Marquis of Santa Cruz; and I
cannot omit the manner of taking this Galley. The Son of Barbarossa was very
cruel, and used his Slaves with great Inhumanity; they perceiving that the
Woolf-Galley got of them in the Chase, all of a sudden laid by their Oars, and
seizing on their Commander, as he was walking between them on the Deck, and
calling to them to Row hard; they passed him on from Hand to Hand to one
another, from one end of the Galley to the other, and gave him such Blows in
the handing him, that before he got to the Mainmast, his Soul had left his
Body, and was fled to Hell. This, as I said, was the effect of his Cruelty, and
their Hatred.

Afrer this, we returned to Constantinople, and the next Year, which was 1573,
it was known how Don Juan of Austria had taken Tunis and its Kingdom from the
Turks, and given the Possession of it to Muley Hamed, having thereby defeated
all the hopes of Reigning of Muley Hamida, one of the cruellest and withal one
of the bravest Moors that was in the World. The Grand Signior was troubled at
this loss, and using his wonted Artifices with the Christians, he struck up a
Peace with the Venetians, who were much more desirous than he of it.

The year after, which was 1574, he attacked the Goletta, and the Fort which
Don Juan had begun, but not above half finished, before Tunis. All this while I
was a Galley-Slave, without any hopes of Liberty; at least I could not promise
my self to obtain it by way of Ransom; for I was resolved not to write my
Father the News of my Misfortune. La Goletta and the Fort were both taken after
some Resistance; the Turkish Army consisting of 75000 Turks in Pay, and above
400000 Moors and Arabs out of all Africa near the Sea; with such Provisions of
War of all kinds, and so many Pioneers, that they might have covered the
Goletta and the Fort with Earth by Handfuls. The Goletta was first taken,
though always before reputed impregnable; and it was not lost by any fault of
its Defenders, who did all that could be expected from them, but because it was
found by experience, that it was practicable to make Trenches in that Sandy
Soil, which was thought to have Water under it within two Foot, and the Turks
dug above two Yards before they came at any, by which means filling Sacks
with Sand, and laying them on one another, they raised them so high, that they
commanded from that Fortification the Fort, in which none could be safe, nor
show themselves upon the Walls. It has been the Opinion of most Men, that we
did ill to shut our selves up in the Goletta; and that we ought to have been
drawn out to hinder their Landing; but they who say so, talk without
Experience, and at a distance, of such things; for if in all there were not
above 7000 Men in the Goletta and the Fort, how could so small a Number, though
never so brave, take the open Field against such Forces as those of the
Enemies? And how is it possible that a Place can avoid being taken which can
have no Relief, particularly being besieged by such Numbers, and those in their
own Country: But it seemed to many others, and that is also my Opinion, that
God Almighty favored Spain most particularly, in suffering that sink of
Iniquity and Misery, as well as that Sponge and perpetual drain of Treasure to
be destroyed. For infinite Sums of Money were spent there to no purpose,
without any other design than to preserve the Memory of one of the Emperor's,
Charles the Vth's, Conquests; as if it had been necessary to support the
Eternity of his Glory, (which will be Permanent) that those Stones should
remain in being. The Fort was likewise lost, but the Turks got it Foot by Foot;
for the Soldiers who defended it, sustained two and twenty Assaults, and in
them killed above 25000 of those Barbarians; and when it was taken, of 300
which were left alive, there was not one Man unwounded; a certain sign of the
Bravery of the Garrison, and of their Skill in defending Places. There was
likewise taken by Composition, a small Fort in the midst of a Lake, which was
under the Command of Don John Zanoguerra, a Gentleman of Valencia, and a
Soldier of great Renown. Don Pedro Puerto Carrero, General of the Goletta was
taken Prisoner, and was so afflicted at the loss of the Place, that he died of
Grief by the Way, before he got to Constantinople, whither they were carrying
him. They took also Prisoner the Commander of the Fort, whose Name was Gabriel
Cerbellon, a Milanese, and a great Ingineer, as well as a valiant Soldier.
Several Persons of Quality were killed in those two Fortresses, and amongst the
rest was Pagan Doria, the Brother of the Famous John Andrea Doria, a Generous
and Noble-hearted Gentleman, as well appeared by his Liberality to that
Brother; and that which made his Death more worthy of Compassion, was, that he
received it from some Arabs, to whom he had committed his Safety after the loss
of the Fort, they having promised to carry him disguised in a Moor's Habit to
Tabarea, which is a small Fort held on that Coast by the Genoeses, for the
diving for Coral; but they cut off his Head; and brought it to the Turkish
General, who made good to them our Spanish Proverb, That the Treason pleases,
but the Traitors are odious; for he ordered them to be hanged up immediately,
for not having brought him alive. Amongst the Christians which were taken in
the Fort, there was one Don Pedro de Aguilar, of some place in Andalusia, and
who was an Ensign in the Place; a very brave, and a very ingenious Man, and one
who had a rare Talent in Poetry. I mention him, because it was his fortune to
be a Slave in the same Galley with me, and chained to the same Bench. Before we
left the Port he made two Sonnets by way of Epitaph for the Goletta and the
Fort, which I must beg leave to repeat here, having learned them by Heart, and
I believe they will rather divert than tire the Company. When the Captive named
Don Pedro de Aguilar, Don Ferdinand looked upon his Comrades, and they all
smiled; and when he talked of the Sonnets, one of them said, before you go on
to repeat the Sonnets, I desire, Sir, you would tell me what became of that Don
Pedro d' Aguilar whom you have mentioned. All that I know of him, answered the
Slave, is, that after having been two years in Constantinople, he made his
escape, disguised like an Arnaut, and in company of a Greek Spy; but I cannot
tell whether he obtained his Liberty or no, though I believe he did, because
about a year after, I saw the same Greek in Constantinople, but had not an
Opportunity to ask him about the Success of his Journey. Then I can tell you,
replied the Gentleman, That the Don Pedro you speak of is my Brother, and is at
present at home, Married, Rich, and has three Children. God be thanked, said
the Slave, for the Favors he has bestowed on him, for in my mind there is no
felicity equal to that of recovering ones lost Liberty; and moreover, added the
same Gentleman, I can say the Sonnets you mentioned, which my Brother made.
Pray say them then replied the Slave, for I question not but you can repeat
them better than I. With all my Heart, answered the Gentleman. That upon the
Goletta was thus.

CHAP. XIII. The Story of the Captive Continued.
A SONNET.
Blessed Souls, discharged of Life's oppressive weight,
Whose Virtue proved your Passport to the Skies:
You there procured a more propitious Fate,
When for your Faith you bravely fell, to rise.
When Pious Rage diffused through every Vein,
On this ungrateful Shore inflamed your Blood:
Each drop you lost was bought with Crowds of slain,
Whose vital Purple swelled the neighboring Flood.
Though crushed by Ruins and by Odds, you claim
That perfect Glory, that immortal Fame,
Which like true Heroes nobly you pursued;
On these you seized, even when of Life deprived,
For still your Courage even your Lives survived,
And sure it is Conquest thus to be subdued.
I know it is just as you repeat it, said the Captive: Well then, said the
Gentleman, I Will give you now that which was made upon the Fort, if I can
remember it.

A SONNET.
A Midst these barren Fields and ruined Towers,
Tho Bed of Honor of the falling Brave,
Three thousand Champions of the Christian Powers,
Found a new Life, and triumph in the Grave.
Long did their Arms their haughty Foes repel,
Yet strewn the Fields with slaughtered Heaps in vain,
Overcome by Toils, the pious Heroes fell,
Or but survived more nobly to be slain.
This dismal Soil, so famed in Ills of old,
In every Age was fatal to the Bold,
The Seat of Horror, and the Warrior's Tomb!
Yet hence to Heaven more Worth was never resigned,
Than these displayed, nor has the Earth combined,
Resumed more noble Bodies in her Womb.
The Sonnets were applauded, and the Captive was pleased to hear such good News
of his Friend and Companion: After that he pursued his Relation in these Terms;
The Turks ordered the dismantling of the Goletta, the Fort being razed to their
Hand by the Siege; and yet the Mines they made could not blow up the old Walls,
which nevertheless were always thought the weakest Part of the Place; but the
new Fortifications made by the Ingineer Fratin came easily down. In fine, the
Turkish Fleet returned in Triumph to Constantinople, where not long after my
Master Vehali died, whom the Turks used to call Vehali Furtare, which in
Turkish signifies the Scabby Renegade, as indeed he was; and the Turks give
Names among themselves, either from some Virtue or some Defect that is in them;
and this happens, because there are but four Families descended from the
Ottoman Family, all the rest, as I have said, take their Names from some Defect
of the Body, or some good Quality of the Mind. This scabby Slave was at the Oar
in one of the Grand Signior's Galleys for fourteen Years, till he was four and
thirty Years old; at which Time he turned Renegade, to be revenged of a Turk
who gave him a Box on the Ear as he was chained to the Oar, forsaking his
Religion for his Revenge; after which he showed so much Valor and Conduct,
that he came to be King of Algiers, and Admiral of the Turkish Fleet, which is
the third Command in the whole Empire. He was a Calabrian by Birth, and of a
mild Disposition toward his Slaves, as also of good Morals to the rest of the
World. He had above three thousand Slaves of his own, all which after his Death
were divided, as he had ordered by his Will, between the Grand Signior, his
Sons, and his Renegades. I fell to the Share of a Venetian Renegade, who was a
Cabbin-boy in a Venetian Ship which was taken by Vehali, who loved him so that
he was one of his favorite Boys; and he came at last to prove one of the
cruell'st Renegades that ever was known. His Name was Azanaga, and he obtained
such Riches as to rise by them to be King of Algiers; and with him I left
Constantinople, with some Satisfaction to think at least that I was in a Place
so near Spain, not because I could give Advice to any Friend of my Misfortunes,
but because I hoped to try whether I should succeed better in Algiers than I
had done in Constantinople, where I had tried a thousand Ways of running away,
but could never execute any of them, which I hoped I should compass better in
Algiers, for Hopes never forsook me upon all the Disappointments I met with in
the Design of recovering my Liberty. By this Means I kept my self alive, shut
up in a Prison or House, which the Turks call a Bagnio, where they keep their
Christian Slaves, as well those of the King, as those who belong to private
Persons, and also those who are called El Almacen, that is, who belong to the
Public, and are employed by the City in Works that belong to it. These Latter
do very difficultly obtain their Liberty; for having no particular Master, but
belonging to the Public, they can find no Body to treat with about their
Ransom, though they have Money to pay it. The King's Slaves, which are
ransomable, are not obliged to go out to Works as the others do, except their
Ransom stays too long before it comes; for then to hasten it, they make them
work, and fetch Wood with the rest, which is no small Labor. I was one of
those who were to be ransomed, for when they knew I had been a Captain, though
I told them the Impossibility I was in of being redeemed because of my Poverty,
yet they put me among the Gentlemen that were to be ransomed, and to that End
they put me on a slight Chain, rather as a Mark of Distinction than to restrain
me by it; and so I passed my Life in that Bagnio, with several other Gentlemen
of Quality, who expected their Ransom; and though Hunger and Nakedness might, as
it did often, trouble us, yet nothing gave us such Affliction, as to hear and
see the excessive Cruelties with which our Master used the other Christian
Slaves; he would hang one one Day, then impale another, cut off the Ears of
another, and this upon such slight Occasions, that often the Turks would own
that he did it only for the Pleasure of doing it, and because he was naturally
an Enemy to Mankind. Only one Spanish Soldier knew how to deal with him, his
Name was Saavedra; and because he did such things as will not easily be
forgotten by the Turks, and all to gain his Liberty, his Master never gave him
a Blow, nor used him ill either in Word or Deed; and yet we were always afraid
that the least of his Pranks would make him be impaled, nay, he himself
sometimes was afraid of it too; and if it were not for Fear of taking up too
much of our Time, I could tell such Passages of him as would divert the Company
much better than the Relation of my Adventures, and cause more Wonder in them.
But to go on; I say that the Windows of a very rich Moor's House looked upon
the Court of our Prison; which indeed, according to the Custom of the Country,
were rather Peeping-holes than Windows, and yet they had also Lettices or
Jealousies on the Inside. It happened one Day, that being upon a kind of
Terrace of our Prison, with only three of my Comrades, diverting our selves as
well as we could, by trying who could leap farthest in his Chains, all the
other Christians being gone out to work; I chanced to look up to those Windows,
and saw that out of one of them there appeared a long Cane, and to it was a Bit
of Linen tied, and the Cane was moved up and down, as if it had expected that
some of us should lay hold of it. We all took Notice of it, and one of us went
and stood just under it to see if they would let it fall; but just as he came
to it the Cane was drawn up, and shak'd too and fro Sideways, as if they had
made the same Sign as People do with their Head when they deny. He retired upon
that, and the same Motion was made with it as before. Another of my Comrades
advanced, and had the same Success as the former; the third Man was used just
as the rest; which I seeing, resolved to try the Adventure, and as I came under
the Cane it fell at my Feet: Immediately I untied the Linen, within which was
a Knot, which being opened, showed us about ten Zianins, which is a sort of
Gold of base Allay, used by the Moors, each of which is worth about two Crowns
of our Money. It Is not to be much questioned, whether the Discovery were not as
pleasant as surprising; we were in Admiration, and I more particularly, not
being able to guess from what Part these Favors proceeded; for 'twas apparent
that I was more meant than any of my Comrades, since the Cane was let go to me
alone when it was refused to them. I took my Money, broke the Cane, and going
upon the Terrace saw that a very fine white Hand did open and shut the Window
with Haste; by this we imagined that some Woman that lived in that House had
done us the Charity, and to return our Thanks, we bowed our selves after the
Moorish Fashion with our Arms across our Breasts. A little after there appeared
out of the same Window a little Cross made of Cane, which immediately was
pulled in again. This confirmed us in our Opinion, that some Christian Woman
was a Slave in that House, and that it was she that took Pity of us; but the
Whiteness of the Hand, and the Richness of the Bracelets upon the Arm, which we
had a Glimpse of, seemed to destroy that Thought again; and then we believed it
was some Christian Woman turned Mohammedan, whom their Masters very often marry,
and take it for a great good Fortune, for they are more valued by them than the
Women of the Country. But in all this Guessing we were far enough from finding
out the Truth of the Case; however we resolved to be very diligent in observing
the Window, which was our North-Star. There passed above fifteen Days before we
saw either the Hand, or Cane, or any other Sign whatsoever; though in all that
Time we endeavored to find out who lived in that House, and if there were in
it any Christian Woman who was a Renegade; yet all we could discover amounted
to only this, that the House belonged to one of the chief Moors, a very rich
Man called Agimorato, who had been Alcayde of the Pata, which is an Office much
valued among them. But when we least hoped that our Golden Shower should
continue, out of that Window we saw on a sudden the Cane appear again, with
another Piece of Linen, and a bigger Knot; and this was just at a Time when
the Bagnio was without any other of the Slaves in it. We all tried our Fortunes
as the first Time, and it succeeded accordingly, for the Cane was let go to
none but me. I untied the Knot, and found in it forty Crowns in Spanish Gold,
with a Paper written in Arabic, and at the Top of the Paper was a great Cross.
I kissed the Cross, took the Crowns, and returning to the Terrace, we all made
our Moorish Reverences; the Hand appeared again, and I having made Signs that I
would read the Paper, the Window was shut. We remained all overjoyed and
astonished at what had happened; and were extreme desirous to know the Contents
of the Paper; but none of us understood Arabic, and it was yet more difficult
to find out a proper Interpreter. At last I resolved to trust a Renegade of
Murcia, who had showed me great Proofs of his Kindness. We gave one another
mutual Assurances, and on his Side he was obliged to keep secret all that I
should reveal to him. The Renegades, who have some Thoughts of returning one
Day to their own Country, use to get Certificates from the Persons of Quality
who are Slaves in Barbary; in which they make a sort of an Affidavit, that such
an one, a Renegade, is an honest Man, and has always been kind to the
Christians, and has a mind to make his Escape on the first Occasion. Some there
are who procure these Certificates with an honest Design; but others get them
on purpose to make use of them when they go a Pirating on the Christian Shores;
for then if they are Shipwrecked or taken, they show these Certificates, and
say, that thereby may be seen the Intention with which they came in the Turks
Company; to wit, to get an Opportunity of returning to Christendom: By this
means they escape the first Fury of the Christians, and are Reconciled to the
Church without having been hurt; afterward they take their time, and return to
Barbary, to be what they were before.

One of these Renegades was my Friend, and he had Certificates from us all, by
which we gave him much Commmendation: but if the Moors had caught him with
those Papers about him, they would have burnt him alive. I knew that not only
he understood the Arabic Tongue, but also that he could both speak and write it
currently. But yet before I resolved to trust him entirely, I bid him read me
that Paper which I had found by chance; he opened it, and was a good while
looking upon it, and construing it to himself. I asked him if he understood it;
He said yes, very well; and that if I would give him Pen and Ink and Paper, he
would translate it Word for Word. We furnished him with what he desired, and he
went to work; having finished his Translation, he said, all that I have here
put into Spanish is Word for Word what is in the Arabic; only observe that
wherever the Paper says Lela Marien, it means our Lady the Virgin Mary. The
Contents were thus.

When I was a Child, my Father had a Slave, who taught me in my Tongue the
Christian Worship, and told me a great many things of Lela Marien: The
Christian Slave died, and I am sure she went not to the Fire, but is with Alla,
for I have seen her twice; and she bid me go to the Land of the Christians to
see Lela Marien, who had a great Kindness for me. I do not know what is the
matter; but though I have seen many Christians out of this Window, none has
appeared to me so much a Gentleman as thy self. I am very handsome and young,
and can carry with me a great deal of Money, and other Riches; consider whether
thou can bring it to pass that we may escape together, and thou shall be my
Husband in thy own Country, if thou art willing; but if thou art not, it is all
one, Lela Marien will provide me a Husband. I have writ this, have a Care whom
thou give it to read to, do not trust any Moor, because they are all
Treacherous; and in this I am much perplexed, and could wish there were not a
necessity of trusting any, one; because if my Father should come to know it, he
would certainly throw me into a Well, and cover me over with Stones. I will tie
a Thread to the Cane, and with that thou may fasten thy Answer; and if thou
can not find any one to write in Arabic, make me understand thy meaning by
Signs, for Lela Marien will help me to guess it. She and Alla keep thee, as
well as this Cross, which I often kiss, as the Christian Slave bid me.

You may imagine, Gentlemen, that we were in admiration at the Contents of this
Paper, and withal o'erjoy'd at them, which we expressed so openly, that the
Renegade came to understand that the Paper was not found by chance, but that it
was really writ to some one among us, and accordingly he told us his Suspicion,
but desired us to trust him entirely, and that he would venture his Life with
us to procure us our Liberty. Having said this, he pulled a Crucifix of Metal
out of his Bosom, and with many Tears, swore by the God which it represented,
and in whom he, though a wicked Sinner, did firmly believe, to be true and
faithful to us with all Secresy in what we should impart to him; for he guessed
that by the means of the Woman who had writ that Letter, we might all of us
recover our lost Liberty, and he in particular might obtain what he had so long
wished for, to be received again into the Bosom of his Mother the Church. The
Renegade pronounced all this with so many Tears, and such Signs of Repentance,
that we were all of Opinion to trust him, and tell him the whole Truth of the
Business. We showed him the little Window out of which the Cane used to appear,
and he from thence took good notice of the House, in order to inform himself
who lived in it. We next agreed that it would be necessary to answer the
Moorish Ladies Note, so immediately the Renegade writ down what I dictated to
him; which was exactly as I shall relate, for I have not forgot the least
material Circumstance of this Adventure, nor can forget them in all my Life.
The Words then were these.

The true Alla keep thee, my dear Lady, and that blessed Virgin, which is the
true Mother of God, and has inspired thee with the design of going to the Land
of the Christians. Do thou ask her that she would be pleased to make thee
understand how thou shall execute what she has commanded thee, for she is so
good that she will do it. On my part, and on that of the Christians who are
with me, I offer to do for thee all we are able, even to the hazard of our
Lives. Fail not to write to me, and give me notice of thy resolution, for I
will aways answer thee: The Great Alla having given us a Christian Slave, who
can read and write thy Language, as thou may perceive by this Letter; so
that thou may without fear give us notice of all thy Intentions. As for what
thou say, that as soon as thou shall arrive in the Land of the Christians,
thou design'st to be my Wife; I promise thee on the word of a good Christian to
take thee for my Wife, and thou may know that Christians do perform their
Promises better than the Moors. Alla, and his Mother Mary be thy Guard, my dear
Lady.

Having writ and closed this Note, I expected two Days till the Bagnio was
empty, and then I went upon the Terrace, the ordinary place of our
Conversation, to see if the Cane was abroad, and it was not long before it was
stirring. As soon as it appeared I showed my Note, that the Thread might be put
to the Cane, but I found that was done to my Hand; and the Cane being let down
I fastn'd the Note to it. Not long after the Knot was let fall, and I having
taken it up, found in it several Pieces of Gold and Silver, above fifty Crowns,
which gave us infinite content, and fortified our Hopes of obtaining at last
our Liberty. That Evening our Renegade came to us, and told us he had found out
that the Master of that House was the same Moor we had been told of, called
Agimorato, extremely rich, and who had one only Daughter to inherit all his
Estate. That it was the Report of all the City, that she was the handsomest
Maid in all Barbary, having been demanded in Marriage by several Bassas and
Viceroys, but that she had always refused to Marry; He also told us, that he
had learnt she had had a Christian Slave who was dead, all which agreed with
the Contents of the Letter. We immediately held a Council with the Renegade,
about the manner we might use to carry off the Moorish Lady, and go all
together to Christendom; but all we agreed was to expect the Answer of Zoraida,
for that was the Name of the Lady, who now desires to be called Mary; as well
knowing she could best advise the overcoming all the Difficulties that were in
our Way; and after this Resolution the Renegade assured us again, that he would
lose his Life, or deliver us out of Captivity.

The Bagnio was Four Days together full of People, and all that Time the Cane
was invisible; but as soon as it returned to its Solitude, the Cane appeared,
with a Knot much bigger than ordinary: Having untied it, I found in it a
Letter, and a Hundred Crowns in Gold. The Renegade happened that Day to be with
us, and we gave him the Letter to read, which he said contained these Words.

I cannot tell, Sir, how to contrive that we may go together for Spain; neither
has Lela Marien told it me, though I have earnestly asked it of her: all I can
do, is to furnish you out of this Window with a great deal of Riches, buy your
Ransom and your Friends with that; and let one of you go to Spain, and buy a
Bark there, and come and fetch the rest: As for me, you shall find me in my
Father's Garden out of Town, by the Seaside, not far from Babasso Gate; where
I am to pass all the Summer with my Father and my Maids, from which you may
take me without Fear in the Night time, and carry me to your Bark; but remember
thou art to be my Husband; and if thou failest in that, I will desire Lela
Marien to Chastise thee. If thou can not trust one of thy Friends to go for
the Bark, pay thy own Ransom, and go thy self; for I trust thou will return
sooner than another, since thou art a Gentleman and a Christian. Find out my
Father's Garden, and I will take care to watch when the Bagnio is empty, and
let thee have more Money. Alla keep my dear Lord.

These were the Contents of the second Letter we received. Upon the reading of
it, every one of us offered to be the Man that should go and buy the Barque,
promising to return with all Punctuality; but the Renegade opposed that
Proposition, and said, he would never consent any one of us should obtain his
Liberty before the rest, because Experience had taught him, that People once
Free do not perform what they promise when Captives; and that often some Slaves
of Quality had used that Remedy, to send one either to Valencia or Majorca,
with Money to buy a Barque, and come back and fetch the rest; but that they
never returned, because the Joy of having obtained their Liberty, and the Fear
of losing it again, made them forget whatever they had promised, and all the
Obligations in the World. To confirm which, he related to us a strange Story,
which had happened in those Parts, as there often does among the Slaves. After
this, he said that all that could be done, was for him to buy a Barque with the
Money which should redeem one of us; that he could buy one in Algiers, and
pretend to turn Merchant, and deal between Algiers and Tetuan; by which means,
he being Master of the Vessel, might easily find out some ways of getting us
out of the Bagnio, and taking us on Board; and the rather, if the Moorish Lady
did what she promised, and gave us Money to pay our Ransoms; for being free, we
might Embark even at Noonday. That the only Difficulty would be, that the
Moors do not permit Renegades to keep any Barques, but great ones fit to Cruize
upon Christians; for they believe that a Renegade, particularly a Spaniard,
seldom buys a Barque, but with a Design of returning to his own Country. That
however, he knew how to obviate that Difficulty, by taking a Tagarin Moor for
his Partner in the Gains of the Barque and Trade, by which means he should
still be Master of her, and then all the rest would be easy. We durst not
oppose this Opinion, though we had more Inclination every one of us to go to
Spain for a Barque, as the Lady had advised; but we were afraid that if we
contradicted him we might be at his Mercy, and he might betray us, and bring
our Lives in Danger; particularly, if the Business of Zoraida should be
discovered, for whose Liberty and Life we would have given all ours; so we
determined to put our selves under the Protection of God and the Renegade. At
the same time we answered Zoraida, telling her, that we would do all she
advised, which was very well, and just as if Lela Marien her self had
instructed her; and that it now depended on her alone to give us the means of
bringing this Design to pass. I promised her once more to be her Husband. After
this in two Days that the Bagnio happened to be empty, she gave us by the means
of the Cane two thousand Crowns of Gold; and withal a Letter, in which she let
us know, that the next Jum^, which is their Friday, she was to go to her
Father's Garden, and that before she went she would give us more Money; and if
we had not enough, she would upon our letting her know it, give us what we
should think sufficient; for her Father was so rich, he would hardly miss it;
and so much the less, because he entrusted her with the Keys of all his
Treasure. We presently gave the Renegade Fifteen hundred Crowns to buy the
Barque, and I paid my own Ransom with Eight hundred Crowns, which I put into
the Hands of a Merchant of Valencia, then in Algiers, who made the Bargain with
the King, and had me to his House upon Parole, to pay the Money upon the
Arrival of the first Barque from Valencia; for if he had paid down the Money
immediately, the King might have suspected the Money had been ready, and lain
some time in Algiers, and that the Merchant for his own Profit had concealed
it; and in short, I durst not trust my Master with ready Money, knowing his
distrustful and malicious Nature. The Thursday preceding that Friday that
Zoraida was to go to the Garden, she let us have a thousand Crowns more;
desiring me at the same Time, that if I paid my Ransom, I would find out her
Father's Garden, and contrive some way of seeing her there. I answered in few
Words, that I would do as she desired, and she should only take Care to
recommend us to Lela Marien, by those Prayers which the Christian Slave had
taught her. Having done this, order was taken to have the Ransom of my three
Friends paid also; lest they seeing me at Liberty, and themselves not so,
though there was Money to set them free, should be troubled in Mind, and give
way to the Temptation of the Devil, in doing something that might redound to
the Prejudice of Zoraida; for though the Consideration of their Quality ought
to have given me Security of their Honor, yet I did not think it proper to run
the least hazard in the matter: So they were redeemed in the same manner, and
by the same Merchant that I was, who had the Money beforehand; but we never
discovered to him the Remainder of our Intrigue, as not being willing to run
the Danger there was in doing it.

CHAP. XIV. The Adventures of the Captive continued.
OUR Renegade had in a Fortnight's Time bought a very good Barque, capable of
carcarrying above thirty People; and to give no Suspicion of any other Design,
he undertook a Voyage to a Place upon the Coast called Sargel, about thirty
Leagues to the Eastward of Algiers toward Oran, where there is a great Trade
for dried Figs. He made this Voyage two or three Times, in Company with the
Tagarin Moor his Partner. Those Moors are called in Barbary, Tagarins, who were
driven out of Aragon; as they call those of Granada, Mudajares; and the same in
the Kingdom of Fez are called Elches, and are the best Soldiers that Prince has.

Every Time he passed with his Barque along the Coast, he used to cast Anchor
in a little Bay that was not above two Bow-shot from the Garden where Zoraida
expected us; and there he used to exercise the Moors that rowed, either in
making the Sala, which is a Ceremony among them, or in some other Employment;
by which he practiced in Jest what he was resolved to execute in Earnest. So
sometimes he would go to the Garden of Zoraida and beg some Fruit, and her
Father would give him some though he did not know him. He had a Mind to find an
Occasion to speak to Zoraida, and tell her, as he since owned to me, that he
was the Man who by my Order was to carry her to the Land of the Christians, and
that she might depend upon it; but he could never get an Opportunity of doing
it, because the Moorish and Turkish Women never suffer themselves to be seen by
any of their own Nation, but by their Husband, or by his or their Father's
Command; but as for the Christian Slaves, they let them see them, and that more
familiarly than perhaps could be wished. I should have been very sorry that the
Renegade had seen or spoke to Zoraida, for it must needs have troubled her
infinitely to see that her Business was trusted to a Renegade; and God
Almighty, who governed our Design, ordered it so, that the Renegade was
disappointed. He in the mean Time seeing how securely, and without Suspicion,
he went and came along the Coast, staying where and when he pleased by the Way,
and that his Partner the Tagarin Moor was of his Mind in all things; that I was
at Liberty, and that there wanted nothing but some Christians to help us to
row; he bid me consider whom I intended to carry with me besides those who were
ransomed, and that I should make sure of them for the first Friday, because he
had pitched on that Day for our Departure. Upon Notice of this Resolution, I
spoke to twelve lusty Spaniards, good Rowers, and those who might easiliest get
out of the City. It was a great Fortune that we got so many in such a
Conjuncture, because there were above twenty Sail of Rovers gone out, who had
taken aboard most of the Slaves fit for the Oar; and we had not had these but
that their Master happened to stay at home that Summer, to finish a Galley he
was building to cruize with, and was then upon the Stocks. I said no more to
them, than only they should steal out of the Town in the Evening upon the next
Friday, and stay for me upon the Way that led to Agimorato's Garden. I spoke to
every one by himself, and gave each of them Order to say no more to any other
Christian they should see, than that they said for me there. Having done this,
I had another thing of the greatest Importance to bring to pass, which was to
give Zoraida Notice of our Design, and how far we had carried it; that she
might be ready at a short Warning, and not be surpised if we came on the House
on a Sudden, and even before she could think that the Christian Barque could be
come. This made me resolve to go to the Garden, to try if it were possible to
speak to her: So one Day, upon Pretense of gathering a few Herbs, I entered the
Garden, and the first Person I met was her Father, who spoke to me in the
Language used all over the Turkish Dominions, which is a Mixture of all the
Christian and Moorish Languages, by which we understand one another from
Constantinople to Algier, and asked me what I looked for in his Garden, and who
I belonged to? I told him I was a Slave of Arnaute Mami, (this Man I knew was
his intimate Friend) and that I wanted a few Herbs to make up a Sallad. He then
asked me if I were a Man to be redeemed or no, and how much my Master asked for
me? During these Questions the beautiful Zoraida came out of a Garden-house
hard by, having descried me a good while before; and as the Moorish Women make
no Difficulty of showing themselves to the Christian Slaves, she drew near
without Scruple to the Place where her Father and I were talking; neither did
her Father show any Dislike of her coming, but called to her to come nearer. It
would be hard for me to express here the wonderful Surprise and Astonishment
that the Beauty, the rich Dress, and the charming Air of my beloved Zoraida put
me in: She was all bedecked with Pearls, which hung thick upon her Head and
about her Neck and Arms. Her Feet and Legs were naked after the Custom of that
Country, and she had upon them a kind of Bracelet of Gold, and set with such
rich Diamonds, that her Father valued them, as she since told me, at ten
thousand Pistoles a Pair, and those upon her Wrists were of the same Value. The
Pearls were of the best Sort, for the Moorish Women delight much in them, and
have more Pearls of all Sorts than any Nation. Her Father was reputed to have
the finest in Algiers, and to be worth besides above two hundred thousand
Spanish Crowns; of all which the Lady you here see was then Mistress, but now
is only so of me. What she yet retains of Beauty in all her Sufferings, may
well help you to guess at her wonderful Appearance in the Midst of all her
Prosperity. The Handsomness of most Ladies has Days and Times, and is more or
less according to Accidents or Passions, which naturally raise or diminish the
Luster of it, and sometimes quite extinguish it. All that I can say is, that at
that Time she appeared to me the most ravishing Object I had ever seen; to
which, adding the Obligations I had to her, she passed with me for a Goddess
from Heaven, descended upon Earth for my Relief and Satisfaction. As she drew
near, her Father told her in his Country Language that I was a Slave of his
Friend Arnaute Mami, and came to pick a Sallad in his Garden. She presently
took the Hint, and asked me in Lingua Franca whether I was a Gentleman, and if
I was, why I did not ransom my self. I told her I was already ransomed, and
that by the Price she might guess the Value my Master set upon me, since he had
bought me for 1500 Pieces of Eight: To which she replied, if thou had been
my Father's Slave I would not have let him part with thee for twice as much;
for, said she, you Christians never speak Truth in any thing you say, and make
your selves poor to deceive the Moors. That may be, Madam, said I, but in truth
I have dealt by my Master, and do intend to deal by all those I shall have to
deal with, sincerely and honorably. And when do thou go home, said she? To
morrow, Madam, said I, for here is a French Barque that Sails to Morrow, and I
intend not to lose that Opportunity. Is it not better, replied Zoraida, to stay
till there come some Spanish Barque, and go with them, and not with the French,
who, I am told, are no Friends of yours? No, said I, yet if the report of a
Spanish Barque's coming should prove true, I would perhaps stay for it, though
it is more certain to take the Opportunity of the French; and besides, the
desire I have of being at home, and with those Persons I love, will hardly let
me wait for a better convenience. Without doubt, said Zoraida, thou art Married
in Spain, and impatient to be with thy Wife. I am not, said I, Married, but I
have given my Word to a Lady to be so as soon as I can reach my own Country.
And is the Lady handsome that has your Promises said Zoraida? She is so
handsome, said I, that to describe her rightly, and tell truth, I can only say
she is like you. At this her Father laughed heartily, and said, thou art much
to be pitied if she be like my Daughter, who is the greatest Beauty of all this
Kingdom: Look upon her well, and thou will say I speak Truth. Zoraida's Father
was our Interpreter for the most of what we talked, for though she understood
the Lingua Franca, yet she was not used to speak it, and so explained her self
more by Signs than Words. While we were in this Conversation there came a Moor
running hastily, and cried aloud that four Turks had leaped over the Fence of
the Garden, and were gathering the Fruit though it was not ripe. The old Man
started at that, and so did Zoraida, for the Moors do naturally stand in great
Awe of the Turks, particularly of the Soldiers, who are so insolent on their
Side, that they treat the Moors as if they were their Slaves. This made the
Father bid his Daughter go home, and shut her self up close, whilst, said he, I
go and talk with those Dogs; and for thee, Christian, gather the Herbs thou
want, and go thy ways in Peace, and God conduct thee safe to thy own
Country. I bowed to him, and he left me with Zoraida to go and find out the
Turks: She made also as if she were going away, as her Father had bid her, but
she was no sooner hid from his Sight by the Trees of the Garden, but she turned
toward me with her Eyes full of Tears, and said in her Language, Amexi
Christiano Amexi, which is, Thou are going away, Christian, thou are going: To
which I answered, Yes, Madam, I am, but by no Means without you; you may expect
me the first Friday, and be not surpised, for we will most certainly go to the
Land of the Christians. I said this so passionately, that she understood me;
and throwing one of her Arms about my Neck, she began to walk softly and with
trembling toward the House It pleased Fortune, that as we were in this Posture
walking together, (which might have proved very unlucky to us) we met Agimorato
coming back from the Turks, and we perceived he had seen us as we were; but
Zoraida, very readily and discreetly, was so far from taking away her Arm from
about my Neck, that drawing still nearer to me, she leaned her Head upon my
Breast, and letting her Knees give Way, was in the Posture of one that swoons;
I at the same Time made as if I had much ado to bear her up against my Will.
Her Father came hastily to me, and seeing his Daughter in this Condition, asked
her what was the Matter? But she not answering readily, he presently said,
Without Doubt these Turks have frighted her, and she faints away; at which he
took her in his Arms. She as it were coming to her self, fetched a deep Sigh,
and with her Eyes not yet dried from Tears, she said, Amexi Christiano Amexi,
Be gone, Christian, be gone; to which her Father replied, It Is no Matter,
Child, whether he go or no, he has done thee no Hurt, and the Turks are already
gone away. It Is they who frighted her, Sir, said I; but since she desires I
should be gone, I Will come another Time for my Sallad, by your Leave; for my
Master says the Herbs of your Garden are the best of any he can have. Thou
may have what, and when thou will, said the Father; for my Daughter does not
think the Christians troublesome, she only wished the Turks away, and by
Mistake bid thee be gone too, or put thee in Mind to gather thy Herbs. With
this I immediately took Leave of 'em both, and Zoraida showing great Trouble in
her Looks went with her Father. I in the mean Time, upon Pretense of gathering
my Herbs here and there, walked all over the Garden, observing exactly all the
Places of coming in and going out, and every Corner fit for my Purpose, as well
as what Strength there was in the House, with all other Conveniences to
facilitate our Business. Having done this I went my ways, and gave an exact
Account of all that had happened to the Renegade and the rest of my Friends,
longing earnestly for the Time in which I might promise my self my dear
Zoraida's Company without any Fear of Disturbance. At last that happy Hour
came, and we had all the good Success we could promise our selves of a Design
so well laid; for the Friday after my Discourse with Zoraida, toward the
Evening we came to an Anchor with our Bark, almost over against the place where
my lovely Mistress lived; the Christians who were to be employed at the Oar,
were already at the Rendezvous, and hid up and down thereabouts. They were all
in expectation of my coming, and very desirous to seize the Bark which they saw
before their Eyes, for they did not know our agreement with the Renegade, but
thought they were by main force to gain their conveyance and their Liberty, by
killing the Moors on board. As soon as I and my Friends appeared, all the rest
came from their hiding places to us. By this time the City-Gates were shut, and
no Soul appeared in all the Country near us. When we were all together, it was
a question whether we should first fetch Zoraida, or make our selves Masters of
those few Moors in the Bark. As we were in this consultation, the Renegade came
to us, and asking what we meant to stand idle, told us his Moors were all gone
to rest, and most of them asleep. We told him our difficulty, and he
immediately said, that the most important thing was to secure the Bark, which
might easily be done, and without danger, and then me might go for Zoraida.

We were all of his mind, and so without more ado, he marched in the Head of us
to the Bark, and leaping into it, he first drew a Scimitar, and cried aloud in
the Moorish Language, let not a Man of you stir, except he means it should cost
him his Life; and while he said this, all the other Christians were got on
board; the Moors, who are naturally timorous, hearing the Master use this
Language, were frighted, and without any resistance suffered themselves to be
Manacl'd, which was done with great expedition by the Christians, who told them
at the same time, that if they made the least noise, they would immediately cut
their Throats: This being done, and half of our number left to guard them; the
remainder with the Renegade, went to the Garden of Agimorato; and our good
Fortune was such, that coming to force the Gate, we found it open with so much
facility as if it had not been shut at all. So we marched on with great silence
to the House, without being perceived by any body. The lovely Zoraida, who was
at the Window, asked softly, upon hearing us tread, whether we were Nizarani,
that is, Christians? I answered, Yes; and desired her to come down. As soon as
she knew my voice, she staid not a Minute; but, without saying a Word, came
down, and opened the door, appearing to us all like a Goddess, her Beauty and
the richness of her Dress not being to be described. As soon as I saw her, I
seized her by one hand, which I kissed, the Renegade did the same, and then my
Friends; the rest of the company followed the same Ceremony; so that we all
paid her a kind of homage for our Liberty. The Renegade asked her in Morisco
whether her Father were in the Garden? She said Yes, and that he was asleep.
Then, said he, we must wake him, and take him with us, as also all that is
valuable in the House: No, no, said Zoraida, my Father must not be touched, and
in the House there is nothing so rich as what I shall carry with me, which is
enough to make you all rich and content. Having said this, she stepped into the
House, bid us be quiet, and she would soon return. I asked the Renegade what had
passed between them, and he told me what he had said; to which I replied, that
by no means any thing was to be done otherwise than Zoraida should please. She
was already coming back with a small Trunk so full of Gold, that she could
hardly carry it: When, to our great Misfortunes, while this was doing her
Father awaked; and having heard some noise in the Garden, opened a Window and
look out: Having perceived that there were Christians in it, he began to cry
out in Arabic, Thieves, Thieves, Christians, Christians. These Cries of his
put us all into a terrible disorder and fear; but the Renegade seeing our
danger, and how much it imported us to accomplish our Enterpize before we were
perceived, he ran up to the place where Agimorato was, and took with him some
of our Company; for I durst by no means leave Zoraida, who had swoon'd away in
my Arms; those who went up bestirred themselves so well, that they brought down
Agimorato with his hands tied behind him, and his Mouth stopped with a Cloth,
which hindered him from so much as speaking a Word; and threatening him besides,
that if he made the least attempt to speak, it should cost him his Life. When
his Daughter, who was come to her self, saw him, she covered her Eyes to avoid
the sight, and her Father remained the more astonished, for he knew not how
willingly she had put her self into our hands. Diligence on our side being the
chief thing required, we used it so as we got to our Barque, where our Men
began to be in pain for us, as fearing we had met with some ill Accident: We
got on board about two hours after 'twas dark, where the first thing we did was
to unty the hands of Zoraida's Father, and to unstop his Mouth, but still with
the same threatenings of the Renegade, in case he made any noise. When he saw
his Daughter there he began to sigh most passionately, and more when he saw me
embrace her with tenderness, and that she without any resistance or struggling
seemed to endure it; he for all this was silent, for fear the threatenings of
the Renegade should be put in Execution. Zoraida seeing us aboard, and that we
were ready to handle our Oars to be gone, she bid the Renegade tell me, she
desired I would set her Father and the other Moors our Prisoners on shore; for
else she would throw her self into the Sea, rather than see a Father, who had
used her so tenderly, be carried away Captive for hersake before her Eyes. The
Renegade told me what she said, to which I agreed; but the Renegade was of
another Opinion; saying, that if we set them on shore there, they would raise
the Country, and give the Alarm to the City, by which some light Frigates might
be dispatched in quest of us, and getting between us and the Sea, it would be
impossible for us to make our Escape; and that all that could be done, was to
set them at liberty in the first Christian Land we could reach. This seemed so
reasonable to us all, that Zoraida her self being informed of the Motives we
had not to Obey her at present, agreed to it. Immediately with great silence
and content we began to ply our Oars, recommending our selves to Providence
with all our hearts, and endeavored to make for Majorca, which is the nearest
Christian Land; but the North wind rising a little, and the Sea with it, we
could not hold that Course, but were forced to drive along-shore toward Oran,
not without great fear of being discovered from Sargel, upon the Coast, about
thirty Leagues from Algier^. We were likewise apprehensive of meeting some of
those Galliots which come from Tetuan with Merchandise. Though, to say Truth,
we did not so much fear these last; for except it were a cruizing Galliot, we
all of us wished to meet one well laden with Merchandise, for then we might so
get a better Vessel to transport us in. Zoraida had her Head hid between my
Hands, that she might not see her Father, and I could hear her call upon Lela
Marien to help us. By that time we had got about 30 Miles the Day broke, and we
found our selves within a Mile of the Shore, which appeared to us a Desert
Solitary Place, but yet we rowed hard to get off to Sea, for fear of being
discovered by some body. When we were got about two Leagues out to Sea, we
proposed to take turns in Rowing, that some might refresh themselves; but the
Men at the Oar said it was not time yet to rest, and that they could eat and
row too if those who did not row would assist them, and give them Meat and
Drink; this we did, and a little while after the Wind rising at large from Sea,
we set Sail for Oran, not being able to hold any other Course. We made above
eight Miles an Hour, being in no fear of any thing but meeting some Cruizers.
We gave Victuals to our Moorish Prisoners, and the Renegade comforted them, and
told them they were not Slaves, but that they should be set at liberty upon the
first Opportunity. The same thing was said to the Father of Zoraida; who
answered, I might expect from your Courtesy other things perhaps, O
Christians, but that you should give me my Liberty I am not simple enough to
believe; for you never would have run the hazard of taking it from me, if you
intend to restore it so easily; particularly since you know who I am, and what
you may get for my Ransom, which if you will but name, I will from this moment
offer you all that you can desire for me, and for that unfortunate Daughter of
mine, or for her alone, since she is the better part of me. When he had said
this, he burst out into Tears so violently, that Zoraida could not forbear
looking up at him, and indeed he moved Compassion in us all, but in her
particularly; insomuch, as starting from my Arms, she flew to her Father's, and
putting her head to his, they began again so passionate and tender a Scene,
that most of us could not forbear accompanying their Grief with our Tears; but
her Father seeing her so richly Dressed, and so many Jewels about her, said to
her in his Language, What is the meaning of this, Daughter; for last night
before this terrible misfortune befell us, thou were in thy ordinary Dress; and
now, without scarce having had the time to put on such things, I see thee
adorned with all the fineries that I could give thee, if we were at Liberty and
designed to be Merry? This gives me more Wonder and Trouble than even our sad
Misfortune; therefore answer me. The Renegade interpreted all that the Moor
said, and we saw that Zoraida answered not one Word; but on a Sudden, he spying
the little Casket in which she was used to put her Jewels, which he thought had
been left in Algiers, remained yet more astonished, and asked her how that
Trunk could come into our hands, and what was in it? to which the Renegade,
without expecting Zoraida's Answer, replied, Do not trouble thy self to ask thy
Daughter so many Questions, for with one Word I can satisfy them all. Know then
that she is a Christian, and it is she that has filled off our Chains, and given
us Liberty; she is with us by her own consent, and I hope well pleased, as
People should be, who come from Darkness to Light, and from Death to Life. Is
this true, Daughter, said the Moor? It is so, replied Zoraida. How then, said
the Old Man, art thou really a Christian, and art thou she that has put thy
Father into the power of his Enemies? to which Zoraida replied, I am she that
is a Christian, but not she that has brought thee into this Condition; for my
design never was to injure my Father, but only to do my self good, And what
good have thou done thy self, said the Moor? Ask that of Lela Marien, replied
Zoraida, for she can tell thee best. The Old Man had no sooner heard this, but
he threw himself with incredible Fury into the Sea, and without Doubt he had
been drowned in it, had not his Garments, which were somewhat large, kept him
some time above Water. Zoraida cried out to us to help him, which we all did so
readily, that we pulled him out by his Vest, but half drowned, and without any
feeling. This so troubled Zoraida, that she threw her self upon her Father, and
began to lament and take on as if her Father had been really dead. We turned
him on his Belly, and by the much Water that came out of him he recovered a
little in about two hours time. The Wind in the mean while was come about and
forced us ashore, so that we were obliged to ply our Oars not to be driven upon
the Land. It was our Fortune that we got into a small Bay, which is made by a
Promontory, called the Cape of the Caba Rumia, which in our Tongue is the Cape
of the wicked Christian Woman; and it is a Tradition among the Moors, that
there lies buried Caba the Daughter of Count Julian, who was the cause of the
loss of Spain; and they think it Ominous to be forced into that Bay, for they
never go in otherwise than by Necessity; but to us it was no unlucky Harbor,
but a safe Retreat, considering how high the Sea went by this time. We posted
our Centries on Shore, but kept our Oars ready to be plied upon occasion,
taking in the mean time some refreshment of what the Renegade had provided,
praying heartily to God and the Virgin Mary, to protect us, and help us to
bring our design to a happy conclusion. Here at the desire of Zoraida we
resolved to set her Father on Shore, with all the other Moors, whom we kept
fast tied; for she had not Courage, nor could her tender Heart suffer any
longer, to see her Father and her Countrymen ill used before her Eyes; but we
did not think to do it before we were just ready to depart, and then they could
not much hurt us, the Place being a Solitary one, and no Habitations near it.
Our Prayers were not in vain, the Wind fell, and the Sea became Calm, inviting
us thereby to pursue our intended Voyage: We untied our Prisoners, and set them
on Shore one by one, which they were mightily astonished at: When we came to
put Zoraida's Father on Shore, who by this time was come to himself, he said,
Why do you think Christians, that this wicked Woman desires I should be set at
Liberty; do you think it is for any Pity she takes of me? No certainly, but it
is because she is not able to bear my presence which hinders the prosecution of
her ill Desires: I would not have you think neither that she has embraced your
Religion, because she knows the difference between yours and ours, but because
she has heard that she may live more loosely in your Country than at Home: And
then turning himself to Zoraida, while I and another held him fast by the Arms,
that he might commit no Extravagance, he said, O infamous and blind young
Woman, where art thou going in the power of these Dogs our natural Enemies?
cursed be the Hour in which I begot thee, and the Care and Affection with which
I bred thee. But I, seeing he was not like to make an end of his Exclamations
soon, made haste to set him on Shore, from whence he continued to give us his
Curses and Complaints; begging on his Knees of Mah^met to beg of God Almighty
to confound and destroy us; and when, being under Sail, we could no longer hear
him, we saw his Actions, which were to tear his Hair and his Beard, and roll
himself upon the Ground; but he once strained his Voice so high, that we heard
what he said, which was, Come back, my dear Daughter, for I forgive thee all;
Let those Men have the Treasure which is already in their Possession, and do
thou return to comfort thy disconsolate Father, who must else lose his Life in
these Sandy Deserts. All this Zoraida heard, and shed abundance of Tears, but
could answer nothing, but beg that Lela Marien, who had made her a Christian,
would comfort him. God knows, said she, I could not avoid doing what I have
done, and that these Christians are not obliged to me, for I could not be at
rest till I had done this, which to thee, dear Father, seems so ill a thing.
All this she said, when we were got so far out of his hearing, that we could
scarce see him. So I comforted Zoraida as well as I could, and we all minded
our Voyage. The Wind was now so right for our purpose, that we made no doubt of
being the next Morning upon the Spanish Shore; but as it seldom happens, that
any Felicity comes so pure as not to be tempered and allayed by some mixture of
Sorrow; either our ill Fortune, or the Moor's Curses had such an effect (for a
Father's Curses are to be dreaded, let the Father be what he will,) that about
Midnight, when we were under full Sail, with our Oars laid by, we saw by the
light of the Moon hard by us a round Vessel, with all her Sails out, coming
ahead of us, which she did so close to us, that we were forced to strike our
Sail not to run foul of her; and the Vessel likewise seemed to endeavor to let
us go by; they had come so near us, to ask from whence we came, and whither we
were going? But doing it in French, the Renegade forbid us to answer, saying,
Without doubt these are French Pirates, to whom every thing is Prize. This made
us all be silent; and as we sailed on, they being under the Wind, let fly two
Guns, both as it appeared, with Chain-shot, for one brought our Mast by the
Board, and the other went through us, without killing any Body; but we,
perceiving we were sinking, called to them to come and take us, for we were
going to be drowned; they then struck their own Sails, and putting out their
Boat, there came about a dozen French on Board us, all well armed, and their
Matches lighted. When they were close to us, seeing we were but few, they took
us aboard their Boat, saying, that this had happened to us for not answering
their Questions. The Renegade had time to take the little Coffer or Trunk, full
of Zoraida's Treasure, and heave it overboard, without being perceived by any
Body, When we were on board their Vessel, after having learnt from us all they
could, they began to strip us, as if we had been their mortal Enemies: They
plundered Zoraida of all the Jewels and Bracelets she had on her Hands and
Feet; and that did not so much trouble me, as the apprehension I was in for
that rich Jewel of her Chastity, which she valued above all the rest. But that
sort of People seldom have any desires above the ordinary gains of Riches,
which they saw in abundance before their Eyes; and their Covetousness was so
sharpened by it, that even our Slaves Habits tempted them. They consulted what
to do with us; and some were of opinion to throw us overboard, wrapped up in a
Sail, because they intended to put into some of the Spanish Ports, under the
notion of being of Britany; and if they carried us with them, they might be
punished, and their Roguery come to light: But the Captain, who thought himself
rich with Zoraida's Plunder, said he would not touch in any Port of Spain, but
make his way through the Streights by Night, or as he could, for Rochel, from
whence he came. This being resolved, they found out the expedient of giving us
their Longboat, and all we might want of Provision for our short Navigation.
As soon as it was Day, and that we descried the Spanish Shore, (at which sight,
so desirable a thing is Liberty, all our Miseries vanished from our Thoughts in
a Moment,) they began to prepare things, and about Noon they put us on Board,
giving us two Barrels of Water, and a small quantity of Biscuit; and the
Captain, touched with some remorse for the lovely Zoraida, gave her at parting
about 40 Crowns in Gold, and would not suffer his Soldiers to take from her
those very Clothes which now she has on. We went aboard, showing our selves
rather thankful than complaining. They got out to Sea, making for the
Streights, and we having the Land before us for our North Star, plied our Oars,
so that about Sunset we were near enough to have Landed before it was quite
dark; but considering the Moon was hid in Clouds, and the Heavens were growing
Dark, and we ignorant of the Shore, we did not think it safe to venture on it,
though many among us were so desirous of Liberty, and to be out of all Danger,
that they would have landed, though on a desert Rock; and by that means at least
we might avoid all little Barks of the Pirates of the Barbary Coast, such as
those of Tetuan, who come from home when it is dark, and by Morning are early
upon the Spanish Coast; where they often make a Prize, and go home to Bed the
same Day. But the other opinion prevailed, which was to Row gently on, and if
the Sea and Shore gave leave, to Land quietly where we could. We did
accordingly, and about Midnight we came under a great Hill, which had a sandy
Shore, convenient enough for our Landing. Here we run our Boat in as far as we
could; and being got on Land, we all kissed it for joy, and thanked God with
Tears for our Deliverance. This done, we took out the little Provision we had
left, and climbed up the Mountain, thinking our selves more in surety, for we
could hardly persuade our selves, nor believe that the Land we were upon was
the Christian Shore. We thought the Day long a coming, and then we got to the
top of the Hill, to see if we could discover any Habitations; but we could no
where descry either House or Person, or Path. We resolved however to go further
in, as thinking we could not miss at last of some Body to inform us where we
were; that which troubled me most was, to see my poor Zoraida go on Foot among
the sharp Rocks, and I would sometimes have carried her on my Shoulders; but
she was as much concerned at the pains I took, as she could be at what she
endured; so leaning on me, she went on with much patience and content. When we
had gone about a quarter of a League we heard the sound of a little Pipe, which
we took to be a certain sign of some Flock near us; and looking well about, we
perceived at last at the foot of a Cork-Tree a young Shepherd, who was cutting
a Stick with his Knife with great Attention and Repose. We called to him, and
he having looked up, ran away as hard as he could. It seems, as we afterward
heard, the first he saw were the Renegade and Zoraida, who being in the Moorish
Dress, he thought all the Moors in Barbary were upon him; and running into the
Wood, cried all the way as loud he could, Moors, Moors, Arm, Arm, the Moors are
Landed. We hearing this outcry, did not well know what to do? But considering
that the Shepherd's outcries could only raise the Country, and that the
Horse-guard of the Coast would be upon us, we agreed that the Renegade should
pull off his Turkish Habit, and should put on a Slave's Coat, which one of us
lent him, though he that lent it him, remained in his Shirt. Thus, recommending
our selves to God, we went on by the same way that the Shepherd ran, still
expecting when the Horse would come upon us; and we were not deceived, for in
less than two Hours, as we came down the Hills into a Plain, we discovered
about fifty Horse coming upon a half Gallop toward us; when we saw that, we
stood still, expecting of them; when they came up, and instead of so many
Moors, saw so many poor Christian Captives they were astonished, one of them
asked us if we were the occasion that a young Shepherd had given the Alarm to
the Country? Yes, said I, and upon that began to tell him who we were, and
whence we came; but one of our Company knew the Horseman that had asked us the
Question, and without letting me go on said, God be praised, Gentlemen, for
bringing us to so good a part of the Country, for if I mistake not, we are near
the Velez de Malaga, and if the many Years of my Captivity have not taken my
Memory from me too, I think, that you, Sir, who ask us these Questions, are my
Uncle Don Pedro Bustamante. The Christian Slave had hardly said this, but the
Gentleman lighting from his Horse, came hastily to embrace the young Slave,
saying dear Nephew, my Joy, my Life, I know thee, and have often lamented thy
Loss, with thy dear Mother and thy other Relations, whom thou will yet find
alive. God has preserved them, that they may have the pleasure of seeing thee.
We had heard thou were in Algiers, and by what I see of thy Dress, and that of
all this Company, you must all have had some Miraculous Deliverance. It is so,
replied the young Man, and we shall have time enough now to tell all our
Adventures. The rest of the Horsemen hearing we were Christians escaped from
Slavery, lighted likewise from their Horses, offering them to us to carry us to
the Town of Velez de Malaga, which was about a League and a half off. Some of
them went where we had left our Boat, and got it into the Port. We got behind
some of them, and Zoraida behind the Gentleman, Uncle to our Captive. All the
People, who had already heard something of our Adventure, came out to meet us;
they did not wonder to see Captives at Liberty, nor Moors Prisoners; for in all
that Coast they are used to it; but they were astonished at the Beauty of
Zoraida, which at that Instant seemed to be in its point of Perfection; for, as
well with the agitation of traveling, as with the joy of being safe in
Christendom, without the terrible thought of being re-taken, she had such a
beautiful Color in her Countenance, that were it not for fear of being too
partial, I durst say there was not a more beautiful Creature in the World, at
least that I had seen. We went straight to the Church, to thank God for his
great Mercy to us; and as we came into it, and that Zoraida had looked upon the
Pictures, she said there were several Faces there that were like Lela Marien's;
we told her they were her Pictures, and the Renegade explained to her as well
as he could the Story of them, that she might adore them, as if in reality each
of them had been the true Lela Marien, who had spoke to her; and she, who has a
good and clear Understanding, comprehended immediately all that was said about
the Pictures and Images. After this, we were dispersed, and lodged in different
Houses of the Town, but the young Christian Slave of Velez carried me, Zoraida,
and the Renegade to his Father's House, where we were Accommodated pretty well,
according to their Fortune, and used with as much kindness as their own Son.
After six Days stay at Velez, the Renegade having made Proofs of his Honesty,
went to Granada, there to be received by the holy Inquisition into the Bosom of
the Church. Zoraida and I remained without other help than the forty Crowns
which the Pirate gave her, with which I bought this Ass on which she rides; and
hitherto have been to her a Father and a Friend, but not a Husband: We go with
an Intention of seeing whether my Father be alive, or any of my Brothers has
had better Fortune than I; though since it has pleased Heaven to give me Zoraida,
and make me her Partner, I reckon no better Fortune could befall me. The
Patience with which she bears the inconvenience of Poverty, the desire she
shows of being made a Christian, do give me Subject of continual Admiration,
and oblige me to serve and love her all the Days of my Life. I confess, the
expectation of being Hers is not a little allayed with the uncertainties of
knowing whether I shall find in my Country any one to receive us, or a Corner
to pass my Life with her; and perhaps Time will have so altered the Affairs of
our Family, that I shall not find any Body that will know me, if my Father and
Brothers are Dead.

This is, Gentlemen, the sum of my Adventures, which if it has any thing
entertaining, you are best Judges. I wish I had told them more compendiously;
and yet, I assure you, the fear of being tedious has made me cut short many
Circumstances of my Story.

CHAP. XV. An Account of what happened afterward in the Inn, with several
other Occurrences worth Notice.
HERE the Stranger ended his Story, and Don Ferdinand making him a Compliment
in the behalf of the whole Company, Truly, Captain, said he, the wonderful and
surprising turns of your Fortune are not only entertaining, but the pleasing
and graceful manner of your Relation is as extraordinary as the Adventures
themselves; we are all bound to pay you our Acknowledgements; and I believe we
could be delighted with a second recital, though 'twere to last till to Morrow,
provided it were made by you. Cardenio and the rest of the Company joined with
him in offering their utmost Service in the re-establishment of his Fortune,
and that with so much sincerity and earnestness, that the Captain had reason to
be satisfied of their Affection. Don Ferdinand particularly proposed to engage
the Marquess his Brother to stand Godfather to Zoraida, if he would return
with him; and farther, promised to provide him with all things necessary to
support his Figure and Quality in Town; but the Captain making them a very
handsome Compliment for their obliging Favors, excused himself from accepting
those kind offers at that time. By this time it grew toward the dark of the
Evening, when a Coach stopped at the Inn, and with it some Horsemen, who asked
for a Lodging. The Hostess answered, that they were as full as they could pack.
Were you ten times fuller, answered one of the Horsemen, here must be room made
for my Lord Judge, who is in this Coach. The Hostess hearing this was very much
concerned; said she, as ill luck will have it, we have not one Bed empty in the
House; but if his Lordship brings a Bed with him, as perhaps he may, he shall
command my House with all my Heart, and I and my Husband will quit our own
Chamber to serve him; do so then, said the Man: And by this time a Gentleman
alighted from the Coach, easily distinguishable for a Man of Dignity and Office
by his long Gown and great Sleeves. He led a young Lady by the Hand, about
sixteen Years of Age, dressed in a riding Suit; her Beauty and charming Air
attracted the Eyes of every Body with Admiration, and had not the other Ladies
been present, any one might have thought it difficult to have matched her
outward Graces.

Don Quixote seeing them come near the Door. Sir, said he, you may enter
undismayed, and refresh your self in this Castle, which though little, and
indifferently provided, must nevertheless allow room, and afford accommodation
to Arms and Learning, and more especially to Arms and Learning, that like
yours, bring Beauty for their Guide and Conductor. For certainly at the
approach of this lovely Damsel, not only Castles ought to open and expand their
Gates; but even Rocks divide their solid Bodies, and Mountains bow their
Ambitious Crests, to make her entrance, and afford her a Retreat. Enter
therefore, Sir, this Paradise, where you shall find a bright Constellation,
worthy to shine in conjunction with that Heaven of Beauty which you bring: Here
shall you find Arms in their height, and Beauty in Perfection. Don Quixote's
Speech, Mien, and Garb, put the Judge to a strange Nonplus; and he was not a
little surpised on the other Hand at the sudden appearance of the Three Ladies,
who being informed of the Judge's coming, and the young Lady's Beauty, were
come out to see and entertain her. But Don Ferdinand, Cardenio, and the Curate,
addressing him in a Style very different from the Knight, soon convinced him
that he had to do with Gentlemen, and Persons of Note, though Don Quixote's
Figure and Behavior put him to a stand, not being able to make any reasonable
conjecture of his Extravagance. After the usual Civilities passed on both
Sides, they found upon examination that the Women must all lie together in Don
Quixote's Apartment, and the Men remain without to guard them. The Judge
consenting that his Daughter should wait on the Ladies, he remained contented
with his own Bed, and part of the Inn-keeper's for himself and the Gentlemen,
and so made a shift to pass the Night.

The Captain, upon the first sight of the Judge, had a strong presumption that
he was one of his Brothers, and presently asked one of his Servants his Name
and Country. The Fellow told him, his Name was Juan Perez de Viedma, and that,
as he was informed, he was born in the Highlands of Leon. This, with his own
Observations, confirmed his Opinion, that this was the Brother who had made
Study his Choice; whereupon calling aside Don Ferdinand, Cardenio, and the
Curate, he told them with great Joy what he had learned, with what the Servant
further told him, that his Master being made a Judge of the Court of Mexico,
was then upon his Journey to the Indies; that the young Lady was his only
Daughter, whose Mother died in Childbirth, settled her Dowry upon her Daughter
for a Portion, and that the Father had still lived a Widower, and was very
Rich. Upon the whole Matter, he asked their Advice, whether they thought it
proper for him to discover himself presently to his Brother, or by some means
try how his Pulse beat first in relation to his loss, by which he might guess
at his Reception. Why should you doubt of a kind one, Sir, said the Curate?
Because I am poor, Sir, said the Captain, and would therefore by some device
fathom his Affections; for should he prove ashamed to own me, I should be more
ashamed to discover my self. Then leave the Management to me, said the Curate;
the Affable and courteous Behavior of the Judge seems to me so very far from
Pride, that you need not doubt a Welcome; but however, because you desire it, I
engage to find a way to found him. Supper was now upon the Table, and all the
Gentlemen sat down, but the Captain, who eat with the Ladies in the next Room;
when the Company had half Supped, My Lord Judge, said the Curate, I remember
about some years ago I was happy in the acquaintance and friendship of a
Gentleman of your Name when I was Prisoner in Constantinople; he was a Captain
of as much Worth and Courage as any in the Spanish Infantry, but as unfortunate
as brave. What was his Name, pray Sir, said the Judge? Ruy Perez de Viedma,
answered the Curate, of a Town in the Mountains of Leon. I remember he told me
a very odd Passage, between his Father, his two Brothers, and himself; and
truly had it come from any Man below his unsuspected Credit and Reputation, I
should have thought it no more than a Story: He said, that his Father made an
equal dividend of his Estate among his three Sons, giving them such Advice as
might have fitted the Mouth of Cato; that he made Arms his choice, and with
such success, that within a few Years (by the pure Merit of his Bravery) he was
made Captain of a Foot-Company, and had a fair prospect of being advanced to a
Colonel; but his Fortune forsook him, where he had most reason to expect her
Favor; for, in the memorable Battle of Lepanto, where so many Christians
recovered their Liberty, he unfortunately lost his. I was taken at Goletta, and
after different turns of Fortune we became Companions at Constantinople; thence
we were carried to Algiers, where one of the most strange Adventures in the
World befell this Gentleman. The Curate then briefly ran through the whole
Story of the Captain and Zoraida, (the Judge sitting all the time more
attentive than he ever did on the Bench) to their being taken and stripped by
the French; and that he had heard nothing of them after that, nor could ever
learn whether they came into Spain, or were carried Prisoners into France.

The Captain stood listening in a Corner, and observed the Motions of his
Brother's Countenance, while the Curate told his Story: Which, when he had
finished, the Judge breathing out a deep sigh, and the Tears standing in his
Eyes: O Sir, said he, if you knew how nearly your Relation touches me, you
would easily excuse the violent Eruption of these Tears. The Captain you spoke
of is my eldest Brother, who, being of a stronger Constitution of Body, and
more elevated Soul, made the Glory and Fame of War his Choice, which was one of
the three Proposals made by my Father, as your Companion told you. I applied my
self to Study, and my younger Brother has purchased a vast Estate in Peru, out
of which he has transmitted to my Father, enough to support his liberal
Disposition, and to me wherewithal to continue my Studies, and advance my self
to the Rank and Authority which now I maintain. My Father is still alive, but
dies daily for grief he can learn nothing of his eldest Care; and importunes
Heaven incessantly that he may once more see him before Death close his Eyes.
It Is very strange, considering his discretion in other Matters, that neither
Prosperity nor Adversity could draw one Line from him, to give his Father an
account of his Fortunes. For had he or we had the least hint of his Captivity,
he needed not have staid for the Miracle of the Moorish Lady's Cane for his
Deliveance. Now am I in the greatest uneasiness in the World, least the French,
the better to conceal their Robbery, may have killed him; the thoughts of this
will damp the pleasure of my Voyage, which I thought to prosecute so
pleasantly. Could I but guess, dear Brother, continued he, where you might be
found, I would hazard Life and Fortune for your Deliverance. Could our aged
Father once understand you were alive, though hidden in the deepest and darkest
Dungeon in Barbary, his Estate, mine, and my Brother's, all should fly for your
Ransom. And for the Fair and Liberal Zoraida, what thanks, what recompense
could we provide? O, might I see the happy Day of her Spiritual Birth and
Baptism, to see her joined to him in Faith and Marriage, how should we all
rejoice! These and such like Expressions the Judge uttered with so much passion
and vehemence, that he moved a concern in every body.

The Curate, foreseeing the hapyy Success of his Design, resolved to prolong
the discovery no farther; and to free the Company from suspense, he went to the
Lady's Room, and leading out Zoraida, followed by the rest, he took the Captain
by the other hand, and presenting them to the Judge; suppress your Grief, my
Lord, said he, and glut your Heart with Joy, behold what you so passionately
desired, your dear Brother, and his fair Deliverer; this Gentleman is Captain
Viedma, and this the Beautiful Algerine; the French have only reduced them to
this low Condition, to make Room for your Generous Sentiments and Liberality.
The Captain then approaching to embrace, the Judge held him off with both his
hands, to view him well; but once knowing him, he flew into his Arms with such
Affection, and such abundance of Tears, that all the Spectators sympathiz'd in
his Passions. The Brothers spoke so feelingly, and their mutual Affection was
so moving, the surprise so wonderful, and their Joy so transporting, that it
must be left purely to imagination to conceive. Now they tell one another the
strange turns and mazes of their Fortunes, then renew their Caresses to the
height of Brotherly tenderness. Now the Judge embraces Zoraida, then makes her
an Offer of his whole Fortune; next makes his Daughter embrace her; then the
sweet and innocent converse of the beautiful Christian, and the lovely Moor, so
touched the whole Company, that they all wept for Joy. In the mean time Don
Quixote was very solidly attentive, and wondering at these strange Occurrences,
attributed them purely to something answerable to the Chimerical Notions which
are incident to Chivalry. The Captain and Zoraida in concert with the whole
Company, resolved to return with their Brother to Sevil, and thence to advise
their Father of his Arrival and Liberty, that the old Gentleman should make the
best shift he could to get so far to see the Baptism and Marriage of Zoraida,
while the Judge took his Voyage to the Indies, being obliged to make no delay,
because the Indian Fleet were ready at Sevil, to set Sail in a Month for
New-Spain.

Every thing being now settled, to the universal satisfaction of the Company,
and being very late, they all agreed for Bed, only Don Quixote, who must
necessarily Guard the Castle whilst they slept, lest some Tyrant or Giant,
covetous of the great Treasure of Beauty which it enclosed, should make some
dangerous Attempt. He had the Thanks of the House, and the Judge being farther
informed of his Humor, laughed very heartily. Sancho Panca was very uneasy
and waspish for want of sleep, though the best provided with a Bed, bestowing
himself on his Pack-Saddle; but he paid dearly for it, as we shall hear
presently. The Ladies being retired to their Chamber, and every body else
withdrawn to rest, and Don Quixote planted Sentinel at the Castle-Gate, the
Ladies heard of a sudden, some body singing so sweetly, that he allured all
their Attentions, but chiefly Dorothea's with whom the Judge's Daughter Donna
Clara de Viedma lay. None could imagine, who could make such pretty Music
without an Instrument; sometimes it sounded as from the Yard, sometimes as from
the Stable. With this Cardenio knocked softly at their Door, Ladies, Ladies,
said he, are you awake; Can you sleep when so charmingly Serenaded? Don't you
hear how sweetly one of the Footmen sings? Yes, Sir, said Dorothea, we hear
him plainly. Then Dorothea harkening as attentively as she could, heard this
Song.

CHAP. XVI. The Story of the young Muleteer, with other strange Adventures that
happened in the Inn.
A Song.
I.
Tossed in Doubts and Fears I rove
On the stormy Seas of Love;
Far from Comfort, far from Port,
Beauty's Prize, and Fortune's Sport:
Yet my heart disclaims Despair,
While I trace my leading Star.
II.
But Reserv'dness, like a Cloud,
Does too often her Glories shroud:
Pierce the gloom, reviving sight,
Be auspicious as you're bright.
As you hide or dart your Beams,
Your Adorer sinks or swims.
Dorothea thought it would not be much amiss to give Donna Clara the
opportunity of hearing so excellent a Voice, wherefore jogging her gently,
first on one side and then on to'ther, and the young Lady waking, I ask your
Pardon, my Dear, cried Dorothea, for thus interrupting your repose; and I hope
you will easily forgive me, since I only wake you that you may have the pleasure
of hearing one of the most charming Voices, that possibly you ever heard in
your Life. Donna Clara, who was hardly awake, did not perfectly understand what
Dorothea said, and therefore desired her to repeat what she spoke to her
before; Dorothea did so; which then obliged Donna Clara, also to listen, but
scarce had she heard the early Musician sing two Verses, ever she was taken
with a strange trembling, as if she had been seized with a violent sit of a
Quartan Ague, and then closely embracing Dorothea, Ah! dear Madam, cried she,
with a sigh, why did you wake me? Alas! the greatest happiness I could now
have expected, had been to have stopped my Ears. That unhappy Musician! How Is
this, my dear, cried Dorothea have you not heard, that the young Lad who sung
now, is but a Muleteer? Oh no, he is no such thing, replied Clara, but a young
Lord, heir to a great Estate, and has such a full possession of my Heart, that
if he does not slight it, it must be his for ever. Dorothea was strangely
surpised at the young Lady's passionate Expressions, that seemed far to exceed
those of Persons of her tender Years: You speak so mysteriously, Madam, replied
she, that I cannot rightly understand you, unless you will please to let me know
more plainly, what you would say of Hearts and Sighs, and this young Musician,
whose Voice has caused so great an alteration in you. However speak no more of
'em now; for I Am resolved I Will not lose the pleasure of hearing him sing. Hold,
continued she, I fancy he is going to entertain us with another Song. With all
my Heart, returned Clara, and with that she stopped her Ears, that she might not
hear him; at which again Dorothea could not choose but admire; but listening to
his Voice, she heard the following Song.

HOPE.
I.
Unconquered Hope, thou Bane of Fear,
And last deserter of the Brave;
Thou soothing Ease of Mortal Care,
Thou Traveller beyond the Grave.
Thou Soul of Patience, airy Food,
Bold Warrant of a distant Good,
Reviving Cordial, kind Decoy:
Though Fortune frowns, and Friends depart,
Though Sylvia flies me, flattering Joy,
Nor Thou, nor Love, shall leave my doting heart.
II.
The Phoenix Hope can wing her flight
Through the vast Deserts of the Skies,
And still defying Fortune's spite,
Revive, and from her ashes rise.
Then soar, and promise, though in vain,
What Reason's self despairs to gain,
Thou only, O presuming Trust,
Can feed us still, yet never cloy:
And even a Virtue when unjust,
Postpone our Pain, and antedate our Joy.
III.
No Slave, to lazy Ease resigned,
Ever triumphed over noble Fees.
The Monarch Fortune most is kind
To him who bravely dares oppose.
They say, Love sets his Blessings high,
But who would prize an easy Joy!
Then I Will my scornful Fair pursue,
Though the coy Beauty still denies,
I grovel now on Earth, it is true,
But raised by her the humble Slave may rise.
Here the Voice ended, and Donna Clara's Sighs began; which caused the greatest
curiosity imaginable in Dorothea, to know the occasion of so moving a Song, and
of so sad a Complaint; wherefore she then entreated her to pursue the discourse
she had begun before. Then Clara, fearing Lucinda would over-hear her, getting
as near Dorothea as was possible, laid her Mouth so close to Dorothea's Ear,
that she was out of danger of being understood by any other, and began in this
manner. He who sung is a Gentleman's Son of Aragon, his Father is a great Lord,
and dwelt just over against my Father's at Court, and though our Windows in the
Winter were, covered with Oil'd-cloath, and in the Summer shaded with Latice,
yet (I cannot tell by what accident) this young Gentleman, who then went to
School, had a sight of me, and whether it were at Church, or at some other
place, I cannot justly tell you; but, (in short) he fell in love with me, and
made me sensible of his Passion from his own Windows, which were opposite to
mine, with so many signs, and such showers of Tears, that at once forced me
both to believe and to love him, not knowing how great his Passion was for me.
Amongst the usual signs that he made me, one was that of joining his Hands
together, intimating by that his desire to Marry me; which, though I heartily
wished, I could not communicate to any one, being Motherless, and having none
near me whom I might trust with the management of such an Affair; and was
therefore constrained to bear it in silence, without permitting him any other
favor, more than to let him gaze on me, by lifting up the Latice or Oil'd
Cloth a little when my Father and his were abroad. At which he would be so
transported with joy, that you would certainly have thought he had been
distracted. At last, my Father's business called him away; yet not so soon, but
that the young Gentleman had notice of it some time before his departure;
whence he had it I know not, for 'twas impossible for me to acquaint him with
it. This so sensibly afflicted him, as far as I understand, that he fell sick;
so that I could not get a sight of him all that day of our departure, so much
as to look a Farewell on him. But after Two days travel, just as we came into an
Inn, in a Village a days journey hence, I saw him at the Lodging-door, dressed
so exactly like a Muleteer, that it had been utterly impossible for me to have
known him, had not his perfect Image been stamped in my Soul. Yes, yes, dear
Madam, I knew him, and was amazed and overjoyed at his sight; and he saw me
unknown to my Father, whose sight he carefully avoids, when we cross the ways
in our Journey, and when we come to any Inn: And now, since I know what he is,
and what pain and fatigue it must necessarily be to him to travel thus far
a-foot, I am ready to dye my self with the apprehension of what he suffers; and
wherever he sets his Feet there I set my Eyes. I cannot imagine what he proposes
to himself in this attempt; nor by what means he could thus make his escape
from his Father, who loves him beyond Expression; both because he has no other
Son to inherit, and because the young Gentleman's Merits oblige him to it;
which you must needs confess when you see him: And I dare affirm beside, that
all he has sung was his own immediate thought; for, as I have heard, he is an
excellent Scholar, and a great Poet. And now, whenever I see him, or hear him
sing, I start and tremble, as at the sight of a Ghost, lest my Father should
know him, and so be informed of our mutual affection. I never spoke one word to
him in my Life; yet I love him so dearly, that it is impossible I should live
without him. This, dear Madam, is all the account I can give you of this
Musician, with whose voice you have been so well entertained, and which alone
might convince you that he is no Muleteer, as you were pleased to say, but one
who is Master of a great Estate, and of my poor Heart, as I have already told
you.

Enough, dear Madam, replied Dorothea, kissing her a thousand times: It Is very
well, compose your self till daylight; and then I trust in Heaven I shall so
manage your Affairs, that the end of them shall be as fortunate as the
beginning is innocent. Alas! Madam, returned Clara, what end can I propose to
my self; since his Father is so rich, and of so Noble a Family, that he will
hardly think me worthy to be his Son's Servant, much less his Wife? And then
again, I would not Mary without my Father's Consent for the Universe. All I can
desire is, that the young Gentleman would return home, and leave his pursuit of
me: Happily, by a long absence, and the great distance of Place, the pain which
now so much afflicts me, may be somewhat mitigated; though, I fear what I now
propose as a Remedy, would rather increase my Distemper: Though I cannot imagine
whence, or by what means this Passion for him seized me, since we are both so
young, being much about the same Age, I believe, and my Father says I shall not be
sixteen till next Michaelmas. Dorothea could not forbear laughing to hear the
young Lady talk so innocently. My Dear, (said Dorothea) let us repose our self
the little remaining part of the Night, and when Day appears, we will put a
happy period to your Sorrows; or my Judgment fails me. Then they addressed
themselves again to sleep, and there was a deep silence throughout all the Inn;
only the Inn-keeper's Daughter and Maritornes were awake, who knowing Don
Quixote's peccant Humor very well, and that he sat Armed on Horseback,
keeping Guard without doors, a fancy took 'em, and they agreed to have a little
pastime with him, and hear some of his fine raving Speeches.

You must know then, that there was but one Window in all the Inn that looked
out into the Field, and that was only a hole, out of which they used to throw
their Straw: To this same hole then came these two demi Ladies, whence they saw
Don Quixote Mounted, and leaning on his Javelin, and often fetching such
mournful and deep sighs, that his very Soul seemed to be torn from him at each
of them: They observed besides, that he said in a soft amorous tone, O, my
Divine Dulcinea of Toboso^ The Heaven of all Perfections! The End and
Quintessence of Discretion! The Treasury of sweet Aspect and Behavior! The
Magazine of Virtue! And, in a Word, The Idea of all that is Profitable, Modest,
or Delightful in the Universe! What noble thing employs thy Excellency at this
present? May I presume to hope that thy Soul is entertained with the thoughts
of thy Captive-Knight, who voluntarily exposes himself to so many Dangers for
thy sake? O thou Triformed Luminary, give me some account of her! perhaps thou
art now gazing with Envy on her as she is walking either through some stately
Gallery of her sumptuous Palaces, or leaning on her happy Window, there
meditating how, with safety of her Honor and Grandeur, she may sweeten and
alleviate the Torture which my poor afflicted Heart suffers for love of her;
with what Glories she shall Crown my Pains, what Rest she shall give to my
Cares, what Life to my Death, and what Reward to my Services? And thou, more
glorious Planet, which, by this time I presume, art harnessing thy Horses to
pay thy earliest Visit to my Adorable Dulcinea; I entreat thee, as soon as thou
do see her, to Salute her with my most profound Respects: But take heed, that
when thou look on her, and addressest thy self to her, that thou do not
kiss her Face; for if thou do, I shall grow more Jealous of thee, than ever
thou were of the swift Ingrate, who made thee run and sweat so over the Plains
of Thessaly, or the Banks of Peneus: I have forgotten through which of them
thou ran'st so raging with Love and Jealousy. At these Words the Inn-keeper's
Daughter began to call to him softly: Sir Knight, said she, come a little
nearer this way, if you please. At these Words Don Quixote turned his head, and
the Moon shining then very bright, he perceived some body called him from the
hole, which he fancied was a large Window full of Iron-Bars, all richly gilt,
suitable to the stately Castle, for which he mistook the Inn; and all on a
sudden, he imagined that the Beautiful Damsel, Daughter to the Lady of the
Castle, overcome by the Charms of his Person, returned to court him, as she did
once before. In this thought, that he might not appear uncivil or ungrateful,
he turned Rozinante and came to the Hole, where seeing the two Lasses, Fair
Damsels, said he, I cannot but pity you in your misplaced Affection, since it
is altogether impossible you should meet with any return from the object of
your Wishes proportionable to your great Merits and Beauty; but yet you ought
not by any means to condemn this unhappy Knight Errant for this Coldness, since
Love has utterly incapacitated him to become a Captive to any other but to her,
who, at first sight, made her self absolute Mistress of his Soul. Pardon me
therefore, excellent Lady, and retire to your Apartment. Let not, I beseech
you, any farther Arguments of Love force me to be less Grateful or Civil than I
would: But if in your Passion you have for me, you can bethink your self of any
thing else wherein I may do you any Service, Love alone excepted, Command it
freely; and I swear to you by my absent, yet most charming Enemy, to sacrifice
it to you immediately; though it be a Lock of Medusa's Hair, which are all
Snakes, or the very Sunbeams enclosed in a Glass-vial.

My Lady needs none of those things, Sir Knight, replied Maritornes. What then
would she command, asked Don Quixote? Only the honor of one of your fair
Hands, returned Maritornes, to satisfy, in some measure, that violent Passion
which has obliged her to come hither with the great hazard of her Honor: For
if, my Lord, her Father should know it, one of her beautiful Ears were the
least part he would take off her. Oh! that he durst attempt it, cried Don
Quixote; but I know he dare not, unless he has a mind to die the most unhappy
Death that ever Father suffered, for sacrilegiously depriving his amorous
Daughter of one of her delicate Members. Maritornes made no doubt that he would
comply with her Desire, and having already laid her Design, got in a trice to
the Stable, and brought Sancho Panca's Ass's Halter to the hole, just as Don
Quixote, standing upon Rozinante's Saddle, more easily to reach the barricado'd
Window, where he imagined the enamored Lady staid; and lifting up his Hand to
her, said, Here, Madam, take the Hand, or rather, as I may say, the Executioner
of all earthly Miscreants! Take, I say, that Hand, which never Woman touched
before: No, not even she her self who has entire possession of my whole Body:
Nor do I hold it up to you, that you may kiss it; but that you may observe the
contexture of the Sinews, the Ligament of the Muscles, and the largeness and
dilatation of the Veins; whence you may conclude, how strong that Arm must be,
to which such a Hand is joined. We shall take notice of that presently, replied
Maritornes, and cast the Noose she had made in the Halter on his Wrist; and
then descending from the Hole, she tied the other end of the Halter very fast
to the Lock of the Door. Don Quixote, being sensible that the Bracelet she had
bestowed on him was very rough, cried, You seem rather to abuse than compliment
my Hand; but I beseech you treat it not so unkindly, since that is not the
cause that I do not entertain a Passion for you: Nor is it just or equal, you
should discharge the whole Tempest of your Vengeance on so small a part.
Consider, those who love truly, can never be so cruel in their Revenge. But not
Don Quixot's Enchantment; page 563. V. II.
a Soul regarded what he said: For, as soon as Maritornes had fastened him, she
and her Confederate, almost dead with laughing, ran away, and left him so
strongly obliged, that 'twas impossible he should disengage himself.

He stood then as I said on Rozinante's Saddle, with all his Arm drawn into the
Hole, and the Rope fastened to the Lock, being under a fearful apprehension,
that if Rozinante moved but never so little on any side, he should slip and
hang by the Arm, and therefore durst not use the least motion in the World,
though he might reasonably have expected from Rozinante's Patience and gentle
Temper, that if he were not urged, he would never have moved for a whole Age
together of his own accord. In short, the Knight perceiving himself fast, and
that the Ladies had forsaken him, immediately concluded that all this was done
by way of Enchantment, as in the last Adventure in the very same Castle, when
the Enchanted Moor (the Carrier) did so damnably mawl him. Then he began alone
to curse his want of Discretion and Conduct, since, having once made his escape
out of that Castle in so miserable a condition, he should venture into it a
second time: For, by the way, 'twas an Observation among all Knights-Errant,
That if they were once foiled in an Adventure, 'twas a certain sign it was not
reserved for them, but for some other to finish; wherefore they would never
prove it again. Yet for all this, he ventured to draw back his Arm, to try if
he could free himself; but he was so fast bound, that his attempt proved
fruitless. It Is true, 'twas with care and deliberation he drew it, for fear
Rozinante should stir: And then fain would he have seated himself in the
Saddle, but he found he must either stand, or leave his Arm for a Ransom. A
hundred times he wished for Amadis's Sword, on which no Enchantment had power;
then he fell a cursing his Stars; then reflected on the great loss the World
would sustain all the time he should continue under this Enchantment, as he
really believed it: Then his Adorable Dulcinea came afresh into his thoughts:
Many a time did he call to his Trusty Squire Sancho Panca; who, buried in a
profound Sleep, lay stretched at length on his Ass's Panel, never so much as
dreaming of the pangs his Mother felt when she bore him: Then the Aid of the
Necromancers Lirgandeo and Aquife was Invoked by the unhappy Knight. And, in
fine, the Morning surpised him, racked with Despair and Confusion, bellowing
like a Bull; for he could not hope from Daylight any Cure, or mitigation of
his Pain, which he believed would be eternal, being absolutely persuaded he was
Enchanted, since he perceived that Rozinante moved no more than a Mountain; and
therefore he was of Opinion, that neither he nor his Horse should eat, drink,
or sleep, but remain in that State, till the Malignancy of the Stars were
o'erpast, or till some more powerful Magician should break the Charm.

But 'twas an erroneous Opinion; for it was scarce Daybreak, when Four
Horsemen, very well accoutred, their Firelocks hanging at the Pummels of
their Saddles, came thither, and finding the Inn-gate shut, called and knocked
very loud and hard; which Don Quixote perceiving from the Post where he stood
Sentinel, cried out, with a rough Voice and a haughty Mien, Knights or Squires,
or of whatsoever other Degree you are, knock no more at the Gates of this
Castle! Since you may assure your selves, that those who are within at such an
Hour as this, are either taking their repose, or are not accustomed to open
their Fortress, till Phoebus has displayed himself upon the Globe: Retire
therefore, and wait till it is clear Day, and then we will see whether it is
just or no, that they should open their Gates to you. What a Devil (cried one
of 'em) what Castle or Fortress is this, that we should be obliged to so long a
Ceremony? Prithee, Friend, if thou art the Innkeeper, bid them open the Door
to us: For we ride Post, and can stay no longer than just to bait our Horses.
Gentlemen, said Don Quixote, do I look like an Innkeeper then? I cannot tell
what you are like, replied another, but I am sure, thou talkest like a Madman,
to call this Inn a Castle. It is a Castle, returned Don Quixote, ay, and one of
the best in the Province; and contains one who has held a Scepter in her Hand,
and a Crown on her Head. It might more properly have been said exactly
contrary, replied the Traveller, a Scepter in her Tail, and a Crown in her
Hand: Yet it is not unlikely that there may be a Company of Strollers within;
and those do frequently hold such Scepters, and wear such Crowns as thou
pratest of: For certainly no Person worthy to sway a Scepter, or wear a Crown,
would condescend to take up a Lodging in such a paultry Inn as this, where I
hear so little Noise. Thou have not been much conversant in the World (said Don
Quixote) since thou art so miserably Ignorant of Accidents so frequently met
with in Knight-Errantry. The Companions of him that held this tedious Discourse
with Don Quixote were tired with their foolish Prattle so long together, and
therefore they returned with greater fury to the Gate, where they knocked so
violently and loud, that they waked both the Innkeeper and his Guests; and so
the Host rose to attend 'em.

In the mean time, Rozinante, pensive and sad, with Ears hanging down, and
motionless, bore up his out-stretch'd Lord; when one of the Horses of those
Four that came thither last, walked toward Rozinante to smell him, and he
truly being real Flesh and Blood, though very like a Wooden Block, could not
choose but be sensible of it, nor forbear turning to smell the other, which so
seasonably came to comfort and divert him; but he had hardly stirred one inch
from his place, when Don Quixote's Feet that were close together, slipped
asunder, and tumbling from the Saddle he had inevitably fallen to the Ground,
had not his Wrist been securely fastened to the Rope; which put him to so great
a Torture, that he could not imagine but that his Hand was cutting off, or his
Arm tearing from his Body; yet he hung so near the Ground, that he could just
reach it with the tips of his Toes, which added to his torment; for perceiving
how little he wanted to the setting his Feet wholly on the Ground, he strove
and tugged as much as he could to effect it; not much unlike those that have
the Strapado, who put themselves to greater pain in striving to stretch their
Limbs, deluded by the hopes of touching the Ground, if they could but inch
themselves out a little longer.

CHAP. XVII. A Continuation of the strange Adventures in the Inn.
THE miserable Clamours of Don Quixote presently drew the Innkeeper to the
Door, which he hastily opening, was strangely affrighted to hear such
lamentable shouts, and the Strangers stood no less surpised. Maritornes, whom
the Cries had also roused, guessing the Cause, ran straight to the Barn, and
slipping the Halter, released the Don, who made her a very prostrate
Acknowledgement by an unmerciful fall on the Ground. The Innkeeper and
Strangers crowded immediately round him to know the cause of his Misfortune.
He, without regard to their Demands, unmanacles his Wrist, bounces from the
Ground, Mounts Rozinante, braces his Target, couches his Lance; and taking a
large Circumference in the Field, came up with a hand-Gallop: Whoever, said he,
dare deny the late wonderful Posture of my Affairs, the just Title of
Enchantment, (by the gracious permission of my Lady the Princess Micomicona) I
affirm, he lies, and will maintain my Assertion by immediate Combat. The
Travelers stood amazed at Don Quixote's Words, till the Host removed their
Wonder by informing them of his usual Extravagancies in this kind, and that his
Behavior was not to be minded. They then asked the Innkeeper if a certain
Youth, near the Age of Fifteen, had set up at his House, Mounted like a
Muleteer; adding withal some farther Marks and Tokens denoting Donna Clara's
Lover: He told them that among the number of his Guests, such a Person might
pass him undistinguished; but one of them accidentally spying the Coach which
the Judge rid in, called to his Companions, O! Gentlemen, Gentlemen, here
stands the Coach which we were told my young Master followed, and here he must
be, that is certain: Let Us lose no time, one Guard the Door, the rest enter the
House to Ferret him -- hold -- stay -- (continued he) ride one about to the
other side of the House, lest he 'scape us through the back Yard; agreed says
another; and they Posted themselves accordingly. The Innkeeper, though he
might guess that they sought the young Gentleman whom they had described, was
nevertheless puzzled in the cause of their so diligent Search. By this time,
fair Daylight and the Outcries of Don Quixote had raised the whole House; the
two Ladies, Clara and Dorothea, having rested ill, being otherwise disturbed,
one through concern of being so near her Lover, and the other by grief of being
distanc'd from hers. Don Quixote seeing the Travelers neither regard him nor
his Challenge, was ready to burst with Fury and Indignation; and could he have
dispensed with the Rules of Chivalry, which oblige a Knight Errant to the
finishing one Adventure before his Embarking in another, he had assaulted them
all, and forced them to answer him to their Cost; but being unfortunately
engaged to re-instate the Princess Micomicona, his Hands were tied up, and he
was compelled to desist, and expect where the Search and Diligence of the four
Travelers would terminate: One of them found the young Gentleman fast asleep
by a Footman, little dreaming of being followed or discovered: The Fellow
lugging him by the Arm, cries out, Ay, Ay, Don Lewis, these are very fine
Clothes you have got on, and very becoming a Gentleman of your Quality indeed;
this scurvy Bed too is very suitable to the care and tenderness your Mother
brought you up with. The Youth having rubbed his drowsy Eyes, and fixing them
steadfastly on the Man, knew him presently for one of his Father's Servants,
which struck him Speechless with Surprise. The Fellow went on; there is but one
way, Sir, pluck up your Spirits, and return with us to your Father, who is
certainly a dead Man unless you be recovered. How came my Father to know,
answered Don Lewis, that I took this Way and this Disguise? One of your
Fellow-Students, replied the Servant, whom you communicated your Design to,
moved by your Father's Lamentation for your Loss, discovered it; the good old
Gentleman dispatched away four of his Men in search of you; and here we are all
at your Service, Sir, and the joyfullest Men alive, for our old Master will
give us a hearty Welcome, having so soon restored him what he loved so much.
That next to Heaven, is as I please, said Don Lewis. What would you or Heaven
either, please, Sir, but return to your Father? Come, come, Sir, talk no more
on it, home you must go, and home you shall go. The Footboy that lay with Don
Lewis hearing this Dispute rose, and related the Business to Don Ferdinand,
Cardenio, and the rest that were now Dressed, adding withal how the Man gave
him the Title of Don, with other Circumstances of their Conference. They being
already Charmed by the sweetness of his Voice, were curious to be informed more
particularly of his Circumstances, resolving to assist him, in case of any
Violence offered, went presently to the Place where he stood contending with
the Servant.

By this Dorothea had left her Chamber, and with her Donna Clara in great
Disorder. Dorothea beckning Cardenio aside, gave him a short Account of the
Musician and Donna Clara; and he told her how the Servants that purfu'd him
were arrived: Donna Clara over-hearing him, suffered such Alterations, that had
not Dorothea run and supported her, she had sunk to the Ground. Cardenio
promising to bring the Matter to a fair and successful End, advised Dorothea to
retire with the indisposed Lady to her Chamber. All the four that pursued Don
Lewis were now come about him, pressing his Return without Delay to comfort his
poor Father; he answered, 'Twas impossible, being engaged to put a Business in
Execution first, on which depended no less than his Honor, and his present and
future Happiness: They urged, that since they had found him, there was no
returning for them without him, and if he would not go, he should be carried;
not, unless you kill me, answered the young Gentleman; upon which all the
Company were joined in the Dispute, Cardenio, Don Ferdinand and his Companions,
the Judge, the Curate, the Barber, and Don Quixote, who thought it needless now
to Guard the Castle any longer. Cardenio, who knew the young Gentleman's
History, asked the Fellows upon what Pretense, or by what Authority they could
carry the Lad away against his Will: Sir, answered one of them, we have Reason
good for what we do; no less than his Father's Life depends upon his Return.
Gentlemen, said Don Lewis, it is not proper perhaps to trouble you with a
particular Relation of my Affairs; only thus much, I am a Gentleman, and have
no Dependence that should force me to any thing beside my Inclination: Nay, but
Sir, answered the Servant, Reason, I hope, will force you; and though it cannot
move you, it must govern us, who must execute our Orders, and force you back;
we only act as we are ordered, Sir. Hold, said the Judge, and let us know the
whole state of the Case. O Lord, Sir, answered one of the Servants that knew
him, my Lord Judge, does not your Worship know your next Neighbor's Child? See
here, Sir, he has run away from his Father's House, and has put on these dirty
tattered Rags to the Scandal of his Family, as your Worship may see. The Judge
then viewing him more attentively knew him, and saluting him, What Jest is
this, Don Lewis, cried he? What mighty Intrigue are you carrying on, young Sir,
to occasion this Metamorphosis, so unbecoming your Quality? The young Gentleman
could not answer a Word, and the Tears stood in his Eyes; the Judge perceiving
his Disorder, desired the four Servants to trouble themselves no farther, but
leave the Youth to his Management, engaging his Word to act to their
Satisfaction; and retiring with Don Lewis, he begged to know the Occasion of
his Flight.

During their Conference, they heard a great Noise at the Inn-Door, occasioned
by two Strangers, who, having lodged there over Night, and seeing the whole
Family so busied in a curious Enquiry into the Four Horsemen's Business,
thought to have made off without paying their Shot; but the Innkeeper, who
minded no Man's Business more than his own, stopped them in the Nick, and
demanding his Money, upbraided their ungenteel Design very sharply: They
returned the Compliment with Kick and Cuff so roundly, that the poor Host cried
out for Help; his Wife and Daughter saw none so idle as Don Quixote, whom the
Daughter addressing, I conjure you, Sir Knight, said she, by that Virtue
delivered to you from Heaven, to succor my distressed Father, whom two
Villains are beating to Jelly. Beautiful Damsel, answered Don Quixote, with a
slow Tone and profound Gravity, your Petition cannot at the present Juncture
prevail, I being withheld from undertaking any new Adventure by an engaging
Promise first to finish another; and all the Service you can expect, is only my
Counsel in this important Affair; go with all speed to your Father, with Advice
to continue and maintain the Battle with his utmost Resolution, till I obtain
Permission from the Princess Micomicona to reinforce him, which once granted,
you need make no doubt of his Safety. Unfortunate Wretch that I am, said
Maritornes, who overheard him; before you can have this Leave, my Master will
be sent to the other World. Then, Madam, said he, procure me the Permission I
mentioned, and though he were sent into the other World, I Will bring him back in
spite of Hell and the Devil, or at least so revenge his Fall on his Enemies,
as shall give ample Satisfaction to his surviving Friends; whereupon breaking
off the Discourse, he went and threw himself prostrate before Dorothea,
imploring her, in Romantic Style, to grant him a Commission to march and
sustain the Governor of that Castle, who was just fainting in a dangerous
Engagement. The Princess dispatched him very willingly; whereupon presently
buckling on his Target, and taking up his Sword, he ran to the Inn-Door, where
the two Guests stood handling their Landlord very unmercifully: He there made a
sudden Stop, though Maritornes and the Hostess pressed him twice or thrice to
tell the Cause of his Delay in his promised Assistance to his Host. I make a
Pause, said Don Quixote, because I am commanded by the Law of Arms to use my
Sword against none under the Order of Knighthood; but let my Squire be called,
this Affair is altogether his Province. In the mean time Drubs and Bruises were
interchangeably given and taken, and the poor Host soundly beaten. His Wife,
Daughter and Maid, who stood by, were like to run mad at Don Quixote's hanging
back, and the Inn-keeper's unequal Combat; where we shall leave him, with a
Design to return to his Assistance presently, though his Fool-hardiness deserves
a sound beating, for attempting a thing he was not likely to compass. We now
return to what Don Lewis answered the Judge, whom we left retired with him; and
demanding the Reason of his Traveling on Foot, and in so mean a Disguise. The
young Gentleman pressing his Hands very passionately, made this Reply, not
without giving a Proof of the Greatness of his Sorrow by his Tears.

Without Ceremony or Preamble, I must tell you, dear Sir, that from the Instant
that Heaven made us Neighbors, and I saw Donna Clara, your Daughter and my
Mistress, I resigned to her the whole Command of my Affections; and if you,
whom I most truly call my Father don't prevent me, I shall this Day be happy in
her Embraces; for her sake have I abandoned my Father's House; for her have I
thus disguised my Quality; her would I thus have followed through the World: She
was the North-Star to guide my wandering Course, and the Mark at which my
Wishes flew. Her Ears indeed are utter Strangers to my Passion; but yet her
Eyes may guess, by the Tears she saw distilled from mine. You know my Fortune
and my Quality, if these can plead Sir, I lay them at her Feet; then make me
this Instant your happy Son; and if my Father, biased by contrary Designs,
should not approve my Choice, yet Time may work some favorable Change, and
alter his Mind. The Amorous Gentleman thus concluded. The Judge was much
surprised at the handsome Discovery he made of his Affections, and was not a
little puzzled how to behave himself in so sudden and unexpected a Matter; he
therefore without any positive Answer, advised him only to compose his
Thoughts, to divert himself with his Servants, and to prevail with them to
allow him that Day to consider on what was proper to be done. Don Lewis
expressed his Gratitude by forcibly kissing the Judge's Hands, and bathing them
in his Tears, enough to move the Heart of a Rock, much more a Judge's, who
(being a Man of the World) had presently the Advantage of the Match and
Preferment of his Daughter in the Wind; though he much doubted the Consent of Don
Lewis's Father, who he knew designed to match his Son into the Nobility.

By this Time Don Quixote's Entreaties more than Threats, had parted the Fray
at the Inn Door; the Strangers paying their Reckoning went off, and Don Lewis's
Servants stood expecting the Result of the Judge's Discourse with their young
Master: When (as the Devil would have it) who should come into the Inn but the
Barber whom Don Quixote had robbed of Mambrino's Helmet, and Sancho of the
Pack-Saddle. As he was leading his Beast very gravely to the Stable, he spies
Sancho mending something about the Panel; he knew him presently, and setting
upon him very roughly, Ah, Mr. Thief, Mr. Rogue, said he, have I caught you at
last, and all my Ass's Furniture in your Hands too. Sancho finding himself so
unexpectedly assaulted, and nettled at the dishonorable Terms of his Language,
laying fast hold on the Panel with one Hand, gave the Barber such a Douse on
the Chops with the other, as made his Mouth overrun with Blood; for all this the
Barber stuck by his Hold, and cried out so loud, that the whole House was
alarmed at the Noise and Scuffle: I command you, Gentlemen, continued he, to
assist me in the King's Name; for this Rogue has robbed me on the King's
Highway, and would now murder me because I seize upon my Goods. That Is a Lie,
cried Sancho, 'twas no Robbery on the King's Highway; but lawful Plunder won
by my Lord Don Quixote fairly in the Field. The Don himself was now come up,
very proud of his Squire's Behavior on this Occasion, accounting him
thenceforth a Man of Courage, and designing him the Honor of Knighthood on the
first Opportunity, thinking his Courage might prove a future Ornament to the
Order. Among other things which the Barber urged to prove his Claim, Gentlemen,
said he, this Pack-Saddle is as certainly my Pack-Saddle as I hope to die in my
Bed; I know it as well as if it had been bred and born with me; nay, my very
Ass will witness for me; do but try the Saddle on him, and if it does not fit
him as close as close can be, then call me a Liar -- Nay, more than that,
Gentlemen, that very Day when they robbed me of my Pack-Saddle, they took away
a special new Basin which was never used, and which cost me a Crown. Here Don
Quixote could no longer contain himself; but, thrusting between them, he parted
them; and having caused the Pack-Saddle to be deposited on the Ground to open
View, till the mighty Truth came to a final Decision; That this honorable
Company may know, cried he, in what a manifest Error this good Squire
persists, take notice how he degrades that with the Name of Basin, which was,
is, and shall be the Helmet of Mambrino, which I fairly won from him in the
Field, and lawfully made my self Lord of by Force of Arms. As to the
Pack-Saddle, it is a Concern that is beneath my Regard; all I have to urge in
that Affair, is, That my Squire begged my Permission to strip that vanquished
Coward's Horse of his Trappings to adorn his own; he had my Authority for the
Deed, and he took them: And now for his converting it from a Horse's Furniture
to a Pack-Saddle, no other Reason can be brought, but that such Transformations
frequently occur in the Affairs of Chivalry. For a Confirmation of this,
dispatch, my Sancho, and produce the Helmet which this Squire would maintain to
be a Basin. OF my Faith, Sir, said Sancho, if this be all you can say for your
self, Mambrino's Helmet will prove as arrant a Basin, as this same Man's
Furniture is a mere Pack-Saddle. Obey my Orders, said Don Quixote, I cannot
believe that every thing in this Castle will be guided by Enchantment. Sancho
brought the Basin, which Don Quixote holding up in his Hands, behold Gentlemen,
continued he, with what Face can this impudent Squire affirm this to be a
Basin, and not the Helmet I mentioned: Now I swear before you all, by the Order
of Knighthood, which I profess, That this is the same individual Helmet which I
won from him, without the least Addition or Diminution. That I Will swear, said
Sancho; for since my Lord won it, he never fought but once in it, and that was
the Battle wherein he freed those ungracious Gally-Slaves, who by the same
Token would have knocked out his Brains with a Shower of Stones, had not this
same honest Bason-Helmet saved his Skull.

CHAP. XVIII. The Controversy upon Mambrino's Helmet and the Pack-Saddle,
disputed and decided; with other Accidents, not more strange than true.
PRAY good Gentlemen (said the Barber) let us have your Opinion in this Matter,
I suppose you will grant this same Helmet to be a Basin. He that dares grant
any such thing (said Don Quixote) must know that he lies plainly, if a Knight;
but if a Squire, he lies abominably. Our Barber (who was privy to the whole
Matter) to humor the Jest, and carry the Diversion a little higher took up
the other Shaver. Mr. Barber, (you must pardon me, Sir, if I don't give you your
Titles) I must let you understand (said he) that I served an Apprenticeship to
your Trade, and have been a Freeman in the Company these thirty Years, and
therefore am not to learn what belongs to Shaving. You must likewise know, that
I have been a Soldier too in my younger Days, and consequently understand the
Differences between a Helmet, a Morion, and a Close-Helmet, with all other
Accoutrements belonging to a Man of Arms. Yet I say (with Submission still to
better Judgment) that this Piece, here in Dispute before us, is as far from
being a Basin, as Light is from Darkness. Withal I affirm, on the other Hand,
that although it be a Helmet, it is not a complete one: Right, (said the Don) for
the lower Part and the Beaver are wanting. A clear Case, a clear Case, said the
Curate, Cardenio, Don Ferdinand, and his Companions, and the Judge himself (had
not Lewis's Concern made him thoughtful) would have humored the Matter. Lord
have Mercy upon us now, (said the poor Barber half distracted) is it possible
that so many sine honorable Gentlemen should know a Basin or a Helmet no
better than this comes to. Gadzookers, I defy the wisest University in all
Spain with their Scholarship, to show me the like again. Well -- if it must be
a Helmet, it must be a Helmet, that is all. -- And by the same Rule my
Pack-Saddle must troop too; as this Gentleman says. I must confess, said Don
Quixote, as to outward Appearance it is a Pack-Saddle, but as I have already
said, I will not pretend to determine the Dispute of this Point. Nay, said the
Curate, if Don Quixote speak not, the Matter will never come to a Decision;
because in all Affairs of Chivalry we must all give him the Preference. I
Swear, worthy Gentlemen, said Don Quixote, that the Adventures I have
encountered in this Castle are so strange and supernatural, that I must
infallibly conclude them the Effects of pure Magic and Enchantment. The first
Time I ever entered its Gates I was strangely embarrass'd by an enchanted Moor
that Inhabited it, and Sancho himself had no better Entertainment from his
Attendants; and last Night I hung suspended almost two Hours by this Arm,
without the Power of helping my self, or of assigning any reasonable Cause of
my Misfortune. So that for me to meddle or give my Opinion in so confused and
intricate Events, would appear Presumption; I have already given my final
Determination as to the Helmet-Controversy, but dare pronounce no definitive
Sentence on the Pack-Saddle, but shall remit it to the discerning Judgment of
the Company; perhaps the Power of Enchantment may not prevail on you that are
not dubbed Knights, so that your Understandings may be free, and your judicial
Faculties more piercing to enter into the true Nature of these Events, and not
conclude upon them from their Appearances. Undoubtedly, answered Don Ferdinand,
the Decision of this Process depends upon our Sentiments, according to Don
Quixote's Opinion; that the Matter therefore may be fairly discussed, and that
we may proceed upon solid and firm Grounds, we'll put it to the Vote. Let every
one give me his Suffrage in my Ear, and I will oblige my self to report them
faithfully to the Board.

To those that knew Don Quixote this proved excellent Sport; but to others
unacquainted with his Humor, as Don Lewis and his four Servants, it appeared
the most ridiculous Stuff in Nature; three Travelers too that happened to call
in by the Way, and were found to be Officers of the Holy Brotherhood, or
Pursivants, thought the People were all bewitched in good Earnest. Every Body
laughed very heartily to see Don Ferdinand whispering each particular Person
very gravely to have his Vote upon the important Contention of the Pack-Saddle.
When he had gone the Rounds among his own Faction, that were all privy to the
Jest; Honest Fellow, said he very loudly, I grow weary of asking so many
impertinent Questions; every Man has his Answer at his Tongue's End, that it is
mere Madness to call this a Pack-Saddle, and that it is positively, nemine
contradicente, right Horse-Furniture, and great Horse-Furniture too; besides,
Friend, your Allegations and Proofs are of no Force, therefore in spite of
your Ass and you, we will give it for the Defendant, that this is, and will
continue the Furniture of a Horse, nay, and of a great Horse too. Now the Devil
take me, said the Barber, if you be not all damnably deceived; and may I be
hanged if my Conscience does not plainly tell me it is a downright Pack-Saddle:
but I have lost it according to Law, and so fare it well. -- But I am neither
mad nor drunk sure, for I am fresh and fasting this Morning from every thing
but Sin.

The Barber's Raving was no less diverting than Don Quixote's Clamours;
Sentence is passed, cried he, and let every Man take Livery of his Goods and
Chattels, and Heaven give him Joy. This is a Jest, a mere Jest, said one of the
four Servants; certainly, Gentlemen, you cannot be in Earnest, you're too wise
to talk at this Rate: For my Part, I say, and will maintain it, for there is no
Reason the Barber should be wronged, that this is a Basin, and that the
Pack-Saddle of a He-Ass. May Not it be a She-Ass's Pack-Saddle, Friend, said the
Curate? That Is all one, Sir, said the Fellow; the Question is not whether it be
a He or a She-Ass's Pack-Saddle, but whether it be a Pack-Saddle or not, that is
the Matter, Sir. One of the Officers of the Holy Brotherhood, who had heard the
whole Controversy, very angry to hear such an Error maintained: Gentlemen, said
he, this is no more a Horse's Saddle than it is my Father, and he that says the
contrary is drunk or mad. You lie like an unmannerly Rascal, said the Knight;
and at the same Time with his Lance, which he had always ready for such
Occasions, he discharged such a Blow on the Officer's Head, that had not the
Fellow leaped aside it would have laid him flat. The Lance by the Force of the
Stroke flew to Pieces, and the rest of the Officers seeing their Comrade so
abused cried out for Help, charging every one to aid and assist the Holy
Brotherhood. The Innkeeper, being one of the Fraternity, ran for his Sword and
Staff, and then joined his Fellows. Don Lewis's Servants got round their Master
to defend him from Harm, and secure him lest he should make his Escape in the
Scuffle. The Barber seeing the whole House turned topsy turvy, laid Hold again
on his Pack-Saddle; but Sancho who watched his Motions was as ready as he, and
secured the other End of it.

Don Quixote drew, and assaulted the Officers Pell-mell, Don Lewis called to
his Servants to join Don Quixote, and the Gentlemen that sided with him; for
Cardenio, Don Ferdinand and his Friends had engaged on his Side. The Curate
cried out, the Landlady shrieked, her Daughter wept, Maritornes howled,
Dorothea was distracted with Fear, Lucinda could not tell what to do, and Donna
Clara was strangely frighted; the Barber pummell'd Sancho, and Sancho
belabour'd the Barber. One of Don Lewis's Servants went to hold him, but he
gave him such a Rebuke on his Jaws, that his Teeth had like to have forsook
their Station; and then the Judge took him into his Protection. Don Ferdinand
had got one of the Officers down, and laid him on Back and Side. The Innkeeper
still cried our, Help the Holy Brotherhood; so that the whole House was a
Medley of Wailings, Cries, Shrieks, Confusions, Fears, Terrors, Disasters,
Slashes, Buffets, Blows, Kicks, Cuffs, Battery, and Bloodshed.

In the greatest Heat of this Hurly-burly it came into Don Quixote's Head, that
he was certainly involved in the Disorder and Confusion of King Agramant's
Camp; and calling out, with a Voice that shook the whole House, Hold valorous
Knights, said he, all hold your furious Hands, sheath all your Swords, let none
presume to stribe on Pain of Death, but hear me speak. The loud and monstrous
Voice surpised every Body into Obedience, and the Don proceeded: I told you
before, Gentlemen, that this Castle was enchanted, and that some Legion of
Devils did inhabit it; now let your own Eyes confirm my Words: Don't you behold
the strange and horrid Confusion of King Agramant's Army removed hither, and
put in Execution among us? See, see how there they fight for the Sword, and
yonder for the Horse; behold how some contend for the Helmet, and here others
battle it for the Standard; and all fight we don't know how, nor can tell why.
Let therefore my Lord Judge, and his Reverence Mr. Curate represent, one, King
Agramant, and the other, King Sobrino; and by their Wisdom and Conduct, appease
this Tumult; for, by the Powers Divine, 'twere a wrong to Honor, and a blot on
Chivalry, to let so many Worthies, as here engage, fall on so slight a Cause.

Don Quixote's words were Hebrew to the Officers, who having been roughly
handled by Cardenio, Ferdinand, and his Friends, would not give it over so. But
the Barber was content, for Sancho had demolished his Beard and Pack-saddle
both in the Scuffle: The Squire dutifully retreated at the first sound of his
Master's Voice; Don Lewis's Servants were calm, finding it their best way to be
quiet; but the Innkeeper was refractory. He swore that Madman ought to be
punished for his ill-behaviour, and that every Hour he was making some
Disturbance or another in his House. But at last, the Matter was made up, the
Pack-saddle was agreed to be Horse-Furniture, the Basin a Helmet, and the Inn a
Castle, till the Day of Judgment, if Don Quixote would have it so. Don Lewis's
Business came next in play. The Judge, in concert with Don Ferdinand, Cardenio,
and the Curate, resolved, That Don Ferdinand should interpose his Authority on
Don Lewis's behalf, and let his Servants know, That he would carry him to
Andalusia, where he should be entertained according to his Quality by his
Brother the Marquess, and they should not oppose this Design, seeing Don Lewis
was positively resolved not to be forced to go back to his Father yet. Don
Ferdinand's Quality, and Don Lewis's Resolution prevailed on the Fellows to
order Matters so, that three of them might return, to acquaint their old
Master, and the fourth wait on Don Lewis. Thus this monstrous heap of Confusion
and Disorder was digested into Form by the Authority of Agramant, and Wisdom of
King Sobrino.

But the Enemy of Peace, finding his Project of setting them all by the Ears so
elluded, resolved once again to have another Trial of Skill, and play the Devil
with them all the second bout: For though the Officers understanding the
Quality of their Adversaries were willing to desist, yet one of them, whom Don
Ferdinand had kicked most unmercifully, remembering that among other Warrants,
he had one to apprehend Don Quixote for setting free the Galley-Slaves (which
Sancho was sadly afraid would come about,) he resolved to examine if the Marks
and Tokens given of Don Quixote agreed with this Person; then drawing out a
Parchment, and opening his Warrant, he made a shift to read it, at every other
word looking cunningly on Don Quixote's Face; whereupon, having folded up the
Parchment, and taking his Warrant in the Left Hand, he clapped his Right hand
fast in the Knight's Collar, crying you're the King's Prisoner: Gentlemen, I am
an Officer, here is my Warrant. I charge you all to aid and assist the Holy
Brotherhood. Don Quixote finding himself used so rudely by one whom he took to
be a pitiful Scoundrel, kindled up into such a Rage, that he shook with
Indignation; and catching the Fellow by the Neck, with both his Hands,
throttl'd him so eagerly, that if his Companions had not presently freed him,
the Knight would have squeezed out his Life before he had quitted his hold.

The Innkeeper being obliged to assist his Brother-Officer, presently joined
him: The Hostess seeing her Husband engaging a second time, raised a new
Outcry, her Daughter and Maritornes bore the burden of the Song, sometimes
praying, sometimes crying, sometimes scolding: Sancho seeing what passed, By
the Lord, said he, my Master is in the right; this Place is Haunted, that is
certain; there is no living quietly an Hour together. At last Don Ferdinand
parted Don Quixote and the Officer, who were both pretty well pleased to quit
their Bargain. However, the Officers still demanded their Prisoner, and to have
him delivered bound into their Hands, commanding all the Company a second Time
to help and assist them, in securing that public Robber upon the King's high
Road.

Don Quixote smiled at the supposed Simplicity of the Fellows; at last with
solemn Gravity, Come hither, said he, you Offspring of Filth, and Extraction
of Dunghills, dare you call loosing the Fettered, freeing the Captived, helping
the Miserable, raising the Fallen, and supplying the Indigent dare you, I say,
base-spirited Rascals, call these Actions Robbery? Your Thoughts indeed are too
grovelling and servile to understand, or reach the Pitch of Chivalry, otherwise
you had understood that even the Shadow of a Knight Errant had Claim to your
Adoration. You a Band of Officers; you're a Pack of Rogues indeed, and Robbers
on the Highway by Authority. What Blockhead of a Magistrate durst issue out a
Warrant to Apprehend a Knight Errant like me? Could not his Ignorance find out
that we are exempt from all Courts of Judicature? That our Valor is the Bench,
our Will the Common Law, and our Sword the Executioner of Justice. Could not
his Dullness inform him that no Rank of Nobility or Peerage enjoys more
Immunities and Privileges? Has he any President that a Knight Errant ever paid
Taxes, Subsidy, Poll-Money, or so much as Fare or Ferry? What Tailor ever had
Money for his Clothes, or what Constable ever made him pay a Reckoning for his
Lodging in his Castle? What Kings are not proud of his Company, and what
Damsels of his Love? And lastly, did you ever read of any Knight Errant that
ever was, is, or shall be, that could not with his single Force Cudgel four
hundred such Rogues as you to pieces, if they have the Impudence to Oppose him?

CHAP. XIX. The notable Adventure of the Officers of the Holy Brotherhood, with
Don Quixote's great Ferocity and Enchantment.
WHilst Don Quixote talked at this rate, the Curate endeavored to persuade the
Officers that he was distracted, as they might easily gather from his Words and
Actions, and therefore though they should carry him before a Magistrate, he
would be presently acquitted, as being a Madman: He that had the Warrant made
Answer, That 'twas not his Business to examine whether he were mad or not; he
was an Officer in Commission, and must obey Orders; but if the Superior Power
would acquit him, with all his Heart. But for all that the Curate persisted,
assuring them, that they should not be suffered to carry Don Quixote away this
Time; and in short, said so much, and the Knight did so much; that they had
been greater Fools than he, could they not have plainly seen his Madness. They
therefore not only desisted, but offered their Service in compounding the
Difference between Sancho and the Barber; their Mediation was accepted, they
being Officers of Justice, and succeeded so well, that both Parties stood to
their Arbitration, though not entirely satisfied with their Award, which
ordered them to change their Pannels, but not their Halters, nor the Girths.
The Curate made up the Business of the Basin, paying the Barber underhand
eight Reals for his Interest, and getting a general Release under his Hand of
all Claims or Actions concerning it. These two important Differences being so
happily decided, the only Obstacle to a General Peace were Don Lewis's
Servants, and the Innkeeper; the first were at last prevailed upon to accept
the Proposals offered, which were, that three of them should go home, and the
fourth attend Don Lewis, where Don Ferdinand should appoint. Thus this
Difference was also made up, to the unspeakable Joy of Donna Clara. The
Innkeeper made a hideous Bawling; having discovered that the Barber had
received Money for his Basin; he knew no Reason, he said, why he should not be
paid as well as other Folks, and swore that Rozinante and Sancho's Ass, should
pay for their Master's Extravagance before they should leave his Stable: The
Curate pacified him, and Don Ferdinand paid him his Bill. Zoraida not well
understanding how Matters passed, was interchangeably merry or sad, according
to the Show made by the rest, but the Motions of her Spaniard (on whom her Eyes
were always fixed) chiefly influenced her Affections. All things thus
accommodated, the Inn no longer resembled the Confusion of Agramant's Camp; but
appeared hushed in the general Calm of Peace; upon which the Curate and Don
Ferdinand, by universal Consent, had the Thanks of the House; as a just
Acknowledgment for their so effectual Mediation.

Don Quixote being now free from the Difficulties and Delays that lately
embarrass'd him, held it high time to prosecute his Voyage, and bring to some
Decision the general Enterprise which he had the Voice and Election for. He
therefore fully resolved to press his Departure, and fell on his Knees before
Dorothea, but she would not hear him in that Posture, but prevailed upon him to
rise: He then addressing her in his usual Forms; Most beautiful Lady, said he,
it is a known Proverb, That Diligence is the Mother of Success; and we have
found the greatest Successes in War still to depend on Expedition and Dispatch,
by preventing the Enemy's Design, and forcing a Victory before an Assault is
expected. My Inference from this, most high and illustrious Lady, is, that our
Residence in this Castle appears nothing conducive to our Designs, but may
prove dangerous; for we may reasonably suppose that our Enemy the Giant may
learn by Spies or some other secret Intelligence, the Scheme of our Intentions,
and consequntly fortify himself in some inexpugnable Fortress against the Power
of our most prevailing Force, where the Strength of my invincible Arm may be
uneffectual. Let us therefore, dear Madam, by our Diligence and sudden
Departure hence, prevent any such his Designs, and force our good Fortune, by
missing no Opportunity that we may lay hold of. Here he stopped waiting the
Princess's Answer. She with a grave Aspect, and Style suiting his Extravagance,
replied, The great Inclination and indefatigable Desire you show, worthy
Knight, in redressing the injured and restoring the oppressed, lay a fair Claim
to the Praises and universal Thanks of Mankind; but your singular Concern, and
industrious Application in assisting me, deserve my particular Acknowledgments
and Gratification; and I shall make it my peculiar Request to Heaven, that your
generous Designs, in my favor, may be soon accomplished, that I may be enabled
to convince you of the Honor and Gratitude that may be found in some of our
Sex. As to our Departure, I shall depend upon your Pleasure, to whose
Management I have not only committed the Care of my Person, but also resigned
the whole Power of Command. Then, by the Assistance of the Divine Power,
answered he, I will lose no Opportunity of exalting your Highness, which you
thus condescend to humble to my Orders; let our March be sudden, for the
Eagerness of my Desires, the Length of the Journey, and the Dangers of Delay,
are great Spurs to my Dispatch; depending therefore on the Vigor of my
Courage, which neither Danger nor Hell can daunt, fly, Sancho, saddle
Rozinante, harness your Ass, and make ready the Lady's Palfrey; let us take
leave of the Governor here, and these other Lords, and set out from hence
immediately.

Poor Sancho hearing all that passed, shook his Head. Lord, Lord, Master, said
he, there is always more Tricks in a Town than are talked of (with Reverence be
it spoken.) Ho! Villain, cried Don Quixote; What Tricks can any Town or City
show to impair my Credit? Nay, Sir, quoth Sancho, if you grow Angry, I can hold
my Tongue, if that be all; but there are some things which you ought to hear,
and I should tell as becomes a trusty Squire and honest Servant. Say what thou will, said the Knight, so it tend not to Cowardice; for if thou art afraid,
keep it to thy self, and trouble not me with the mention of Fear which my Soul
abhors. Pshaw, hang Fear, Sir, answered Sancho, that is not the Matter; but I
must tell you, Sir, that which is as certain and plain as the Nose on your
Face. This same Madam here that calls her self the Queen of the great Kingdom
of Micomicon, is no more a Queen than my Grandame. For, do but consider, Sir,
if she were such a fine Queen, as you believe, can you imagine she would always
be kissing and slabbering a certain Person that shall be nameless in this
Company? Dorothea blushed at Sancho's Words, for Don Ferdinand had indeed,
sometimes and in private, taken the Freedom with his Lips, to reap some part of
the Reward his Affection deserved; which Sancho spying by chance, made some
Constructions upon it, very much to the Disadvantage of her Royalty; for in
short he concluded her no better than a Woman of Pleasure: She nevertheless
would take no Notice of his Aspersion, but let him go on. I say this, Sir,
continued he, because after our trudging through all Weathers, fair after foul,
Day after Night, and Night after Day, this same Person in the Inn here, is like
to divert himself at our Expense, and to gather the Fruit of our Labors? I
think therefore, Master, there is no Reason, do you see, for Saddling Rozinante,
Harnessing my Ass, or making ready the Lady's Palfrey; for we had better stay
where we are; and let every Whore Brew as she Bakes, and every Man that is
Hungry go to Dinner?

Heavens! Into what a Fury did these disrespectful Words of Sancho put the
Knight? his whole Body shook, his Tongue faultr'd, his Eyes glowed. Thou
Villainous, Ignorant, Rash, Unmannerly Blasphemous Detractor, said he, how
dare thou entertain such Base and Dishonorable Thoughts, much more utter thy
Rude and Contemptible Suspicions before me and this Honorable Presence? away
from my Sight, thou Monster of Nature, Magazine of Lies and Deceits, Publisher
of Follies, Foe of all Honor! Away, and never let me see thy Face again, on
Pain of my most furious Indignation. Then bending his sour Brows, pussing his
Cheeks, and stamping on the Ground, he gave Sancho such a Look as almost
frighted the poor Fellow to Annihilation.

In the height of this Consternation, all that the poor Squire could do, was to
turn his Back, and sneak out of the Room. But Dorothea knowing the Knight's
Temper, undertook to mitigate his Anger: Sir Knight of the Woeful Figure, said
she, assuage your Wrath, I beseech you; it is below your Dignity to be offended
at these idle Words of your Squire; and I dare not affirm, but that he has some
Color of Reason for what he said; for it were uncharitable to suspect his
sincere Understanding and honest Principles, of any false or malicious Slanders
or Accusation. We must therefore search deeper into this Affair, and believe,
That as you have found all Transactions in this Castle Governed by
Enchantments, so some diabolical Illusion has appeared to Sancho, and
represented to his Enchanted Sight what he asserts to my Dishonor. Now by the
Powers supreme, said the Knight, your Highness has cut the Knot. The
Misdemeanour of that poor Fellow must be attributed purely to Enchantment, and
the Power of some malicious Apparition; for the good Nature and Simplicity of
the poor Wretch could never invent a Lie, or be guilty of an Aspersion to any
one's Disadvantage. It Is evident, said Don Ferdinand, we therefore all
intercede in behalf of honest Sancho, that he may be again restored to your
Favor, Sicut erat in Principio, before these Illusions had imposed upon his
Sense. Don Quixote complied, and the Curate brought in poor Sancho trembling,
who on his Knees made an humble Acknowledgment of his Crime, and begged to have
his Pardon confirmed by a gracious Kiss of his Master's Hand. Don Quixote gave
him his Hand and his Blessing. Now Sancho, said he, will you hereafter believe
what I so often have told you, that the Power of Enchantment overrules every
thing in this Castle? I will, and like your Worship, quoth Sancho, all but my
tossing in a Blanket; for really, Sir, that happened according to the ordinary
Course of things. Believe it not, Sancho, replied Don Quixote, for were I not
convinced of the contrary, you should have plentiful Revenge; but neither then,
nor now, could I ever find any Object to reek my Fury or Resentment on. Every
one desired to know what was the Business in Question; whereupon the Innkeeper
gave them an Account of Sancho's Tossing, which set them all a Laughing, and
would have made Sancho angry, had not his Master afresh assured him that 'twas
only a mere Illusion, which, though the Squire believed not, he held his
Tongue. The whole Company having passed two Days in the Inn, bethought
themselves of departing; and the Curate and Barber found out a Device to carry
home Don Quixote, without putting Don Ferdinand and Dorothea to the Trouble of
humouring his Impertinence any longer. They first agreed with a Waggoner that
went by with his Team of Oxen, to carry him home: Then had a kind of a Wooden
Cage made, so large that the Knight might conveniently sit, or lie in it.
Presently after, all the Company of the Inn disguised themselves, some with
Masks, others by disfiguring their Faces, and the rest by Change of Apparel, so
that Don Quixote should not take them to be the same Persons. This done, they
all silently entr'd his Chamber, where he slept very soundly after his late
Fatigues: They immediately laid hold on him so forcibly, and held his Arms and
Legs so hard, that he was not able to stir, or do any thing but stare on those
strange Shapes which stood round him. This instantly confirmed him in the
strange Fancy that had so long disturbed his crazed Understanding, and made him
believe himself undoubtedly Enchanted; and those frightful Figures to be the
Spirits and Demons of the Enchanted Castle. So far the Curate's Invention
succeeded to his Expectation. Sancho, being the only Person there in his right
Shape and Senses, beheld all this very patiently, and though he knew them all
very well, yet was resolved to see the end on it e're he ventured to speak his
Mind. His Master likewise said nothing, patiently expecting his Fate, and
waiting the Event of his Misfortune. They had by this, lifted him out of Bed,
and placing him in the Cage, they shut him in, and Nailed the Bars of it so
fast, that no small Strength could force them open. Then mounting him on their
Shoulders, as they conveyed Don Quixote Arrested, and carried home in a Cage.
page. 596. V. II.
him out of the Chamber Door, they heard as dreadful a Voice as the Barber's
Lungs could bellow, speak these Words.

Be not impatient, O Knight of the Woeful Figure, at your Imprisonment, since
it is ordained by the Fates, for the more speedy Accomplishment of that most
noble Adventure, which your incomparable Valor has intended. For accomplished
it shall be, when the rampant Manchegan Lion, and the white Tobosian Dove shall
be united, by humbling their lofty and erected Crests to the soft Yoke of
Wedlock, from whose wonderful Coition shall spring, to light the World, fierce
Whelps which shall imitate the ravaging Paws of their valorous Sire. And this
shall happen before the bright Pursuer of the fugitive Nymph shall by his rapid
and natural Course take a double Circumference in Visitation of the Luminous
Signs. And thou, the most noble and faithful Squire that ever had Sword on
Thigh, Beard on Face, or Sense of Smell in Nose, be not dispirited or
discontented at this Captivity of the Flower of all Chivalry; for very
speedily, by the eternal Will of the World's Creator, thou shall find thy self
ennobl'd and exalted beyond the Knowledge of thy Greatness. And I confirm to
thee, from the Sage Mentironiana, that thou shall not be defrauded of the
Promises made by thy noble Lord. I therefore conjure thee to follow closely the
Steps of the courageous and enchanted Knight; for it is necessarily enjoined
that you both go where you both shall stay. The Fates have commanded me no
more, farewell. For I now return, I well know whither.

The Barber managed the Cadence of his Voice so artificially toward the latter
end of his Prophecy that even those who were made acquainted with the Jest, had
almost taken it for Supernatural.

Don Quixote was much comforted at the Prophecy, apprehending presently the
Sense of it, and applying it to his Marriage with Dulcinea del Toboso, from
whose happy Womb should issue the Cubbs, (signifying his Sons) to the eternal
Glory of La Mancha; upon the Strength of which Belief raising his Voice, and
heaving a profound Sigh. Whatsoever thou art, said he, whose happy
Prognostication I own and acknowledge, I desire thee to implore (in my Name)
the wise Magician, whose Charge I am, that his Power may protect me in this
Captivity, and not permit me to perish before the Fruition of these grateful
and incomparable Promises made to me; for the Confirmation of such Hopes, I
would think my Prison a Palace, my Fetters Freedom, and this hard Field-Bed on
which I lie, more easy than the softest Down, or most luxurious Lodgings. And
as to the Consolation offered my Squire Sancho Panca, I am so convinced of his
Honesty, and he has proved his Honor in so many Adventures, that I mistrust
not his deserting me through any Change of Fortune. And though his or my harder
Stars should disable me from bestowing on him the Island I have promised, or
some Equivalent; his Wages at least are secured to him by my last Will and
Testament, though what he will receive, is more answerable, I confess to my
Estate and Ability, than to his Services and great Deserts. Sancho Panca made
him three or four very respectful Bows, and kissed both his Hands; (for one
alone he could not, being both tied together) and in an Instant the Demons
hoisted up the Cage, and yoked it very handsomely to the Team of Oxen.

CHAP. XX. Prosecuting the Course of Don Quixote's Enchantment, with other
Memorable Occurrences.
DON Quixote was not so much amazed at his Enchantment, as the Manner of it:
Among all the Volumes of Chivalry that I have turned over, said he, I never
read before of Knight-Errants drawn in Carts, or tugged along so leasurely by
such sloathful Animals as Oxen. For they used to be hurried along with
prodigious speed, invelop'd in some dark and dusky Cloud; or in some Fiery
Chariot drawn by Winged Griffins, or some such expeditious Creatures; though
perhaps the Enchantments of our Times, take a different Method from those in
former Ages. Or rather the Wise Magicians have invented some new Course in
their Proceedings for me, being the first reviver and restorer of Arms, which
have so long been lost in Oblivion, and rusted through the disuse of Chivalry.
What is thy Opinion, my dear Sancho? Why truly, Sir, said Sancho, I cannot tell
what to think, being not so well read in these Matters as your Worship, yet for
all that I Am positive and can take my Oath on it, that these same Visions that
run up and down here are not Orthodox. Orthodox, my Friend, said Don Quixote,
how can they be Orthodox, when they are Devils, and have only assumed these
Fantastical Bodies to surprise us into this Condition? To convince you,
endeavor to touch them, and you will find, their Substances are not material,
but only subtle Air, and outward Appearance. Gadzookers, Sir, said Sancho, I
have touched them, and touched them again, Sir; and I find this same busy
Devil here, that is fidling about, is as plump and fat as a Capon: Besides, he
has another property, very different from a Devil; for the Devils, they say,
smell of Brimstone and other filthy Things, and this Spark has such a fine
scent of Essence about him, that you may feel him at least half a League.
(Meaning Don Ferdinand, who in all probability, like other Gentlemen of his
Quality, had his Clothes Perfumed.)

Alas, honest Sancho, answered Don Quixote, the Cunning of these Fiends is
above the reach of thy Simplicity; for you must know, that Spirits, as Spirits,
have no Scent at all; and if they should, it must necessarily be some Unsavory
Stench, because they still carry their Hell about them, and the least of a
Perfume or grateful Odor were inconsistent with their Torments; so that this
Mistake of yours must be attributed to some farther Delusion of your Sense. Don
Ferdinand, and Cardenio, upon these Discourses between Master and Man, were
afraid that Sancho would spoil all, and therefore ordered the Innkeeper
privately to get ready Rozinante and Sancho's Ass; while the Curate agreed with
the Officers for so much a Day to Conduct them home. Cardenio having hung Don
Quixote's Target on the Pummel of Rozinante's Saddle, and the Basin on the other
side, he signified to Sancho by Signs that he should mount his Ass, and lead
Rozinante by the Bridle, and lastly placed two Officers with their Firelocks
on each side of the Cart.

Being just ready to March, the Hostess, her Daughter, and Maritornes, came to
the Door to take their leave of the Knight, pretending unsupportable Grief for
his Misfortune. Restrain your Tears, most Honorable Ladies, said Don Quixote,
for these Mischances are incident to those of my Profession; and from these
Misfortunes it is, we Date the greatness of our Glory and Renown; they are the
Effects of Envy, which still attend Virtuous and great Actions, and brought
upon us by the indirect means of such Princes and Knights as are emulous of our
Dignity and Fame; but spite of all Oppression, spite of all the Magic that
ever its first Inventor Z^roaster understood, Virtue will come off victorious;
and triumphing over every Danger, will at last shine out in its proper Luster
like the Sun to inlighten the World. Pardon me, fair Ladies, if (through
Ignorance or Omission of the Respects due to your Qualities) I have not behaved
my self to please you; for to the best of my knowledge I never committed a
wilful Wrong. And I crave the assistance of your Prayers toward my enlargement
from this Prison, which some malicious Magician has confined me to; and the
first Business of my Freedom, shall be a grateful Acknowledgment for the many
and obliging Favors conferred upon me in this your Castle. Whilst the Ladies
were thus entertained by Don Quixote; the Curate and Barber, were busy taking
their leaves of their Company, and after mutual Complements and Embraces they
engaged to acquaint one another with their succeeding Fortunes. Don Ferdinand
entreated the Curate to give him a particular Relation of Don Quixote's
Adventures, assuring him, That nothing would be a greater Obligation; and in
Return, he engaged to inform him of all Occurrences in his own and Lucinda's
Return; with an Account of Zoraida's Baptism, and Don Lewis's Success in his
Amor.

The Curate having given his Word and Honor to satisfy Don Ferdinand; And the
last Complements being past, was just going, when the Innkeeper made him a
proffer of a bundle of Papers found in the folds of the same Cloak-Bag, where
he got the Curious Impertinent, telling him withal, That they were all at his
Service; because since the Owner was not like to come and demand them, and he
could not Read, they could not better be disposed of. The Curate thanked him
heartily, and opening the Papers found them Entitled, The Story of Rinconete,
and Cortadillo; the Title showing it to be a Novel, and probably written by the
Author of the Curious Impertinent, because found in the same Wallet, he put it
in his Pocket, with a Resolution to peruse it the very first Opportunity: Then
mounting with his Friend the Barber, and both putting on their Masks, they
followed the Procession, which marched in this Order. The Carter led the Van,
and next his Cart, slank'd on right and left with two Officers and their
Firelocks, then followed Sancho on his Ass, leading Rozinante, and lastly the
Curate and Barber on their mighty Mules brought up the Rear of the Body, all
with a grave and profound Air, marching no faster than their heavy Oxen
allowed. Don Quixote sat leaning against the back of the Cage with his Hands
tied, and his Legs at length; but so silent and motionless, that he seemed
rather a Statue than a Man.

They had Traveled about two Leagues this slow and leisurely pace, when their
Conductor stopping in a little Valley, proposed it as a sit Place to Bait in;
but he was prevailed upon to defer halting a little longer, being informed by
the Barber of a certain Valley beyond a little Hill in their View, better
stored with Grass, and more convenient for their purpose: They had not
Traveled much farther, when the Curate spied coming a round Pace after them
six or seven Men very well mounted; they appeared by their haste to endeavor
before the Heat of the Day to reach their Inn, which was about a League
farther. In short, they soon came up with our slow Itinerants; and one of them
that was Canon of Toledo, and Master of those that came along with him, marking
the formal Procession of the Cart, Guards, Sancho, Rozinante, the Curate, and
the Barber; but chiefly the incag'd Don Quixote, could not forbear asking what
meant their strange Method of securing that Man; though he already believed
(having observed the Guards) that he was some notorious Criminal in custody of
the Holy Brotherhood. One of the Fraternity told him, That he could not tell
the Cause of that Knight's Imprisonment, but that he might answer for himself,
because he best could tell.

Don Quixote over-hearing their Discourse, Gentlemen, said he, if you are
conversant and skilled in Matters of Knight-Errantry, I will communicate my
Misfortunes to you; if you are not, I have no reason to give myself the
trouble. Truly Friend, answered the Canon, I am better acquainted with Books of
Chivalry than with Villalpando's Summulae; and if that be all your Objection,
you may safely impart to me what you please. With Heaven's permission be it so,
said Don Quixote; you must then understand, Sir Knight, that I am born away in
this Cage by the force of Enchantments through the envious Spite and Malice of
some cursed Magicians; for Virtue is more zealously persecuted by ill Men, than
it is beloved by the Good. I am, by Profession, a Knight Errant, and none of
those, I assure you, whose Deeds never merited a place in the Records of Fame;
but one who in spite of Envy's self, in spite of all the Magi of Persia, the
Brachmans of India, or the Gymnosophists of Ethiopia, shall secure to his Name
a place in the Temple of Immortality, as a Pattern and Model to following Ages;
that ensuing Knight-Errants following my Steps, may be guided to the top and
highest pitch of Heroic Honor: The noble Don Quixote de la Mancha speaks
truth, said the Curate coming up to the Company, he is indeed enchanted in this
Cart, not through his own Demerits or Offenses, but the malicious Treachery of
those whom Virtue displeases and Valor offends. This is, Sir, the Knight of
the woeful Figure, of whom you have undoubtedly heard, whose mighty Deeds shall
stand engraved in lasting Brass and time-surviving Marble, till Envy grows
tired with Laboring to deface his Fame, and Malice to conceal 'em.

The Canon hearing the Prisoner and his Guard talk thus in the same Style, was
in amaze, and blessed himself for wonder, as did the rest of the Company; till
Sancho Panca coming up, to mend the Matter, Look ye, Sirs, said he, I will
speak the truth, take it well, or take it ill. My Master here, is no more
enchanted than my Mother: He Is in his sober Senses, he eats and drinks, and
does his Needs, like other Folks, and as he used to do; and yet you will persuade
me that a Man, who can do all this, is enchanted forsooth; he can speak too,
for if you will let him alone, he will prattle you more than thirty Attorneys. Then
turning toward the Curate, O Mr. Curate, Mr. Curate, continued he, do you
think I don't know you, and that I don't guess what all these new Enchantments
drive at! Yes I do know you well enough, for all you hide your Face; and
understand your Design, for all your sly Tricks, Sir. But it is an old Saying,
There Is no striving against the Stream; and the Weakest still goes to the Wall.
The Devil take the luck on it; had not your Reverence spoiled our sport, my
Master had been married before now to the Princess Micomicona, and I had been
an Earl at least; nay that I was sure of, had the worst come to the worst; but
the old Proverb is true again, Fortune turns round like a Mill Wheel, and he
that was yesterday at the top, lies to day at the bottom. I wonder, Mr. Curate,
you that are a Clergyman should not have more Conscience; consider, Sir, that I
have a Wife and Family who expect all to be great Folks, and my Master here is
to do a World of good Deeds; and don't you think, Sir, that you will not be made
to answer for all this one day. Snuff me those Candles said the Barber, hearing
Sancho talk at this rate, What, Fool! are you brainsick of your Master's
Disease too? if you be, you're like to bear him Company in his Cage I Will assure
you Friend. What enchanted Island is this that floats in your Scull, or what
Succubus has been riding thy Fancy, and got it with Child of these Hopes? With
Child! Sir, what dy'e mean Sir, said Sancho, I scorn your Words, Sir; the best
Lord in the Land should not get me with Child, no, not the King himself, Heaven
bless him. For though I Am a poor Man, yet I Am an honest Man, and an old
Christian, and don't owe any Man a Farthing; and though I desire Islands, there
are other Folks, not far off, that desire worse things. Every one is the Son of
his own Works; I am a Man and may be Pope of Rome, much sooner Governor of an
Island, especially considering my Master may gain so many as he may want
Persons to bestow 'em on. Therefore pray Mr. Barber take heed what you say; for
all consists not in shaving of Beards, and there is some difference between a
Hawk and a Hand-saw. I say so, because we all know one another, and no Body
shall put a false Card upon me. As to my Master's Enchantment let it stand, as
it is, Heaven knows best; and a Stink is still worse for the stirring. The
Barber thought Silence the best way to quiet Sancho's Impertience; and the
Curate, doubting that he might spoil all, entreated the Canon to put on a
little before, and he would unfold the Mystery of the encag'd Knight, which
perhaps he would find one of the pleasantest Stories he had ever heard: The
Canon rid forward with him, and his Men followed, while the Curate made them a
Relation of Don Quixote's Life and Quality, and Madness and Adventures, with
the original Cause of his Distraction, and the whole Progress of his Adventures
till his being shut up in the Cage, to get him home in order to have him cured.
They all admired at this strange Account, and then the Canon turning to the
Curate.

Believe me, Mr. Curate, said he, I am fully convinced that these they call
Books of Knight-Errantry, are very prejudicial to the Public. And though I have
been led away by an idle and false Pleasure, to read the beginnings of almost
as many of 'em as have been Printed, I could never yet persuade my self to go
through with any one to the end; for to me they all seem to contain one and the
same thing, and there is as much in one of them as in all the rest. The whole
Composition and Style resemble that of the Milesian Fables, which are a sort of
idle Stories, designed only for Diversion, and not for Instruction. It is not
so with those Fables which are called Apologues, that at once delight and
instruct. But though the main design of such Books is to please, yet I cannot
conceive how it is possible they should perform it, being filled with such a
multitude of unaccountable Extravagancies. For the Pleasure which strikes the
Soul must be derived from the Beauty and Congruity it sees or conceives in
those things the Sight or Imagination lays before it; and nothing in it self
deformed or incongruous, can give us any real Satisfaction. Now what Beauty can
there be, or what Proportion of the Parts to the whole, or of the whole to the
several Parts, in a Book, or Fable, where a Stripling at Sixteen Years of Age,
at one Cut of a Sword, cleaves a Giant as tall as a Steeple through the middle,
as easily as if he were made of Pastboard? Or when they give us the Relation of
a Battle, having said the Enemy's Power consisted of a Million of Combatants;
yet provided the Hero of the Book be against them, we must of necessity, though
never so much against our Inclination, conceive that the said Knight obtained
the Victory only by his own Valor and the Strength of his powerful Arm? And
what shall we say of the great ease and facility with which an absolute Queen
or Empress casts her self into the Arms of an Errant and unknown Knight? What
Mortal not altogether barbarous and unpolished can be pleased to read, that a
great Tower full of armed Knights cuts through the Sea like a Ship before the
Wind; and setting out in the Evening from the Coast of Italy, lands by break of
Day in Prester John's Country, or in some other never known to Ptolomy or
discovered by Columbus? If it should be answered, That those Persons who
Compose these Books, write them as confessed Lies; and therefore are not
obliged to observe Niceties, or have regard to Truth; I shall make this Reply,
That False-hood is so much the more commendable, by how much it more resembles
Truth, and is the more pleasing, the more it is doubtful and possible. Fabulous
Tales ought to be suited to the Reader's Understanding, being so contrived that
all Impossibilities ceasing, all great Accidents appearing easy, and the Mind
wholly hanging in suspense, they may at once surprise, astonish, please and
divert; so that Pleasure and Admiration may go Hand in Hand. This cannot be
performed by him that flies from Probability and Imitation, which is the
Perfection of what is written. I have not yet seen any Book of Knight-Errantry,
that composes an entire Body of a Fable with all its Parts, so that the middle
is answerable to the beginning, and the end to the beginning and middle; but on
the contrary, they form them of so many Limbs, that they rather seem to design
a Chimera or Monster, than a well proportioned Figure. Besides all this, their
Style is uncouth, their Exploits incredible, their Love immodest, their
Civility impertinent, their Battles tedious, their Language absurd, their
Voyages preposterous; and in short, they are altogether void of solid
Ingenuity, and therefore fit to be banished a Christian Commonwealth, as
useless and prejudicial. The Curate was very attentive, and believed him a Man
of a sound Judgment and much in the right in all he had urged; and therefore
told him, That he being of the same Opinion, and an Enemy to Books of
Knight-Errantry, had burnt all that belonged to Don Quixote, which were a
considerable number. Then he recounted to him the scrutiny he had made among
them, what he had condemned to the Flames, and what spared; at which the Canon
laughed heartily, and said, That notwithstanding all the harm he had spoken of
those Books, yet he found one good thing in them, which was the Subject they
furnished a Man of Understanding with to exercise his Parts, because they allow
a large Scope for the Pen to dilate without any check, describing Shipwrecks,
Storms, Skirmishes and Battles; representing to us a brave Commander, with all
the Qualifications requisite in such a one, showing his Prudence in
disappointing the Designs of the Enemy, his Eloquence in persuading or
dissuading his Soldiers, his Judgment in Council, his Celerity in Execution,
and his Valor in assailing or repulsing an Assault; laying before us sometimes
a dismal and melancholy Accident, sometimes a delightful and unexpected
Adventure; in one place, a beautiful, modest, discreet and reserved Lady; in
another, a Christian-like, brave and courteous Gentleman; here a boisterous,
inhuman boasting Ruffian, there an affable warlike and wise Prince; lively
expressing the Fidelity and Loyalty of Subjects, Generosity and Bounty of
Sovereigns. He may no less at times make kown his Skill in Astrology,
Cosmography, Music and Policy; and if he pleases, he cannot want an
Opportunity of appearing knowing even in Necromancy. He may describe the
Subtilty of Ulysses, the Piety of Aeneas, the Valor of Achilles, the
Misfortunes of Hector, the Treachery of Sinon, the Friendship of Euryalus, the
Liberality of Alexander, the Valor of Caesar, the Clemency and Sincerity of
Trajan, the Fidelity of Zopyrus, the Prudence of Cato; and in fine, all those
Actions that may make up a complete Hero, sometimes attributing them all to one
Person, and at other times dividing them among many. This being so performed in
a grateful Style, and with ingenious Invention, approaching as much as possible
to Truth, will doubtless compose so beautiful and various a Work, that, when
finished, its Excellency and Perfection must attain the best end of Writing,
which is at once to delight and instruct, as I have said before: For the loose
Method practiced in these Books, gives the Author liberty to play the Epick,
the Lyrick, and the Dramatick Poet, and to run through all the other parts of
Poetry and Rhetoric; for Epicks may be as well writ in Prose as in Verse.

CHAP. XXI. Containing a Continuation of the Canon's Discourse upon Books of
Knight-Errantry, and other curious Matters.
YOU are much in the right, Sir, replied the Curate; and therefore those who
have hitherto published Books of that Kind, are the more to be blamed, for
having had no Regard to good Sense, Art or Rules; by the Observation of which
they might have made themselves as famous in Prose, as the two Princes of the
Greek and Latin Poetry are in Verse. I must confess, said the Canon, I was once
tempted to write a Book of Knight-Errantry my self, observing all those Rules;
and to speak the Truth, I writ above an hundred Pages, which, for a better
Trial, whether they answered my Expectation, I communicated to some Learned and
Judicious Men fond of those Subjects, as well as to some of those ignorant
Persons, who only are delighted with Extravagancies; and they all gave me a
satisfactory Approbation. And yet I made no farther Progress, as well in regard
I look upon it to be a thing no way agreeable with my Profession, as because I
am sensible the Illiterate are much more numerous than the Learned; and though it
is better to be commended by the small Number of the Wise, than scorned by the
ignorant Multitude, yet I will not expose my self to the Censure of the giddy
Vulgar, whose principal Business it is to read such Books. But the greatest
Motive I had to lay aside, and think no more of finishing it, was an Argument I
formed to my self, deduced from the Plays now usually acted: For, thought I, if
Plays now in use, as well those which are altogether of the Poet's Invention,
as those that are grounded upon History, be all of them, or at least the
greatest part, made up of most absurd Extravagancies and Incoherences; and yet
the Multitude sees them with Satisfaction, esteems and approves them, though they
are so far from being good; if the Poets who write, and the Players who act
them, say they must be so contrived and no otherwise, because they please the
Generality of the Audience; and if those which are regular and according to
Art, serve only to please half a score judicious Persons who understand them,
whilst the rest of the Company cannot reach the Contrivance; and therefore the
Poets and Actors say, they had rather get their Bread by the greater Number,
than the Applause of the less: Then may I conclude the same will be the Success
of this Book; so that when I have racked my Brain to observe the Rules, I shall
reap no other Advantage than to be laughed at for my Pains. I have sometimes
endeavored to convince the Actors that they are deceived in their Opinion, and
that they will draw more Company and get better Credit by regular Plays, than
by those preposterous Representations now in use; but they are so positive in
their Humor, that no Strength of Reason, nor even Demonstration, can divert
them from their Conceit. I remember I once was talking to one of those
obstinate Fellows; Do you not remember, said I, that within these few Years
three Tragedies were acted in Spain, written by a famous Poet of ours, which
were so excellent, that they surpised, delighted, and raised the Admiration of
all that saw them, as well the Ignorant as the Judicious; and the Actors got
more by those three, than by thirty of the best that have been writ since?
Doubtless, Sir, said the Actor, you mean the Tragedies of Isabella, Phillis,
and Alexandra? The very same, I replied, and do you judge whether they observed
the Rules of the Drama, and whether by doing so they lost any thing of their
Esteem, or failed of pleasing all sorts of People? So that the Fault lies not
in the Audience's desiring Absurdities, but in those who know not how to give
'em any thing else. Nor was there any thing preposterous in several other
Plays, as for Example, Ingratitude revenged, Numancia, the amorouss Merchant,
and the favorable Enemy, nor in some others, composed by judicious Poets to
their Honor and Credit, and to the Advantage of those that acted them. Much
more I added, which in my Opinion, somewhat confounded, but no way satisfied or
convinced him, so as to change his Opinion. You have touched upon a Subject,
Sir, said the Curate, which has stirred up in me an old Aversion I have for the
Plays now in use, which is not inferior to that I bear to Books of
Knight-Errantry. For whereas Plays, according to the Opinion of Cicero, ought
to be Mirrors of Humane Life, Patterns of good Manners, and the very
Representatives of Truth; those now acted are Mirrors of Absurdities, Patterns
of Follies, and Images of Lewdness. For instance, What can be more absurd than
for the same Person to be brought on the Stage a Child in Swadling-bands, in
the first Scene of the first Act, and to appear in the second grown a Man? What
can be more ridiculous than to represent to us a fighting old Fellow, a
cowardly Youth, a rhetorical Footman, a politic Page, a churlish King, and an
unpolished Princess. What shall I say of their Regard to the Time in which
those Actions they represent either might or ought to have happened, having
seen a Play, in which the first Act began in Europe, the second in Asia, It Is
to be observed, that the Spanish Plays have only three Jornadas or Acts.
and the third ended in Africa? Probably, if there had been another Act, they
would have carried it into America; and thus it would have been acted in the
four Parts of the World. But if Imitation be a principal part of the Drama, how
can any tolerable Judgment be pleased, when, representing an Action that
happened in the time of King Pepin or Charlemaign, they shall attribute it to
the Emperor Heraclius, and bring him in carrying the Cross into Jerusalem, and
recovering the Holy Sepulcher, like Godfrey of Bouillon, there being a vast
distance of time betwixt these Actions? Thus they will clap together Pieces of
History in a Play of their own framing, mixing in it Relations of things that
have happened to different People and in several Ages. This they do without any
Contrivance that might make it the more probable, and with such visible
Mistakes as are altogether inexcusable; but the worst of it is, that there are
Idiots who look upon this as Perfection, and think every thing else to be mere
Pedantry. But if we look into the pious Plays, what a multitude of false
Miracles shall we find in them, how many Errors and Contradictions, how often
the Miracles wrought by one Saint attributed to another? Nay even in the
profane Plays, they presume to work Miracles upon the bare Imagination, and
conceit that such a Supernatural Work, or a Machine, as they call it, will be
Ornamental, and draw the common sort to see the Play.

These things are a reflection upon Truth it self, a lessening of History, and
a Reproach to all Spanish Wits; because Strangers, who are very exact in
observing the Rules of the Drama, look upon us as an ignorant and barbarous
People, when they see the Absurdities and Extravagancies of our Plays. Nor
would it be any Excuse to allege, that the principal Design of all good
Governments in permitting Plays to be publicly acted, is to amuse the
Commonalty with some lawful Recreation, and so to divert those ill Humors
which Idleness is apt to breed: And that since this end is attained by any sort
of Plays, whether good or bad, it is needless to prescribe Laws to them, or
oblige the Poets or Actors to compose and represent such as are approved by
them. I say that this end proposed would be infinitely better answered by good
Plays, than by bad ones. He who sees a Play that is regular and answerable to
the Rules of Poetry, is pleased with the Comedy, informed by the serious part,
surpised at the variety of Accidents, improved by the Language, warned by
Frauds, instructed by Examples, incensed against Vice, and enamored with
Virtue; for a good Play must cause all these Emotions in the Soul of him that
sees it, though he were never so insensible and unpolished. And it is absolutely
impossible that a Play which has all these Qualifications, should not
infinitely divert, satisfy and please, beyond another that wants them, as most
of them do which are now usually acted. Neither are the Poets who write them in
Fault, for some of them are very sensible of their Errors, and capable of
performing their Duty; but Plays being now altogether become Venial, they say,
and with reason, that the Actors would not purchase them, unless they were of
that Stamp; and therefore the Poet endeavors to suit the Humor of the Actor,
who is to pay him for his Labor. For proof of this, let any Man observe that
infinite number of Plays composed by an exuberant Spanish Wit, Lope de Vega,
who writ an incredible number of Plays.
so full of Gaity and Humor, in such lofty Verse and Language, so sententious,
and to conclude, in such a majestic Style, that his Fame is spread through the
Universe. Yet because he suited himself to the Fancy of the Actors, many of
them have fallen short of their due Perfection, though some have reached it.
Others write Plays so inconsiderately, that after they have appeared on the
Stage, the Actors have been forced to fly and abscond for fear of being
punished, as it has often happened, for having affronted Kings and dishonored
whole Families. These and many other ill Consequences I omit would cease, by
appointing an intelligent and judicious Person at Court to examine all Plays
before they were acted, that is, not only those which are represented at Court,
but throughout all Spain; So that without his License no Magistrate should
suffer any Play to appear in public. Thus Players would be careful to send
their Plays to Court, and might then act them with safety, and those who write
would be more circumspect, as standing in Awe of an Examiner that could judge
of their Works. By these means we should be furnished with good Plays, and the
end they are designed for would be attained, the People diverted, the Spanish
Wits esteemed, the Actors secured, and the Government saved the trouble of
punishing them. And if the same Person, or another, were entrusted to examine
all new Books of Knight-Errantry, there is no doubt but some might be published
with all that Perfection you, Sir, have mentioned, to the increase of Eloquence
in our Language, to the utter extirpation of the old Books which would be born
down by the new; and for the innocent Pastime, not only of idle Persons, but of
those who have most Employment; for the Bow cannot always stand bent, nor can
humane Frailty subsist without some lawful Recreation.

The Canon and Curate were come to this period, when the Barber, overtaking
them, told the latter that this was the place he had pitched on for baiting,
during the Heat of the Day. The Canon induced by the pleasantness of the
Valley, and the satisfaction he found in the Curate's Conversation, as well as
to be farther informed of Don Quixote's Adventures, bore them Company, giving
order to some of his Men to ride to the next Inn; and if his Sumpter-mule were
arrived, to send him down all Provisions to that Valley, where the coolness of
the Shade, and the beauty of the Prospect gave him a fair invitation to Dine;
and that they should make much of themselves and their Mules with what the Inn
could afford.

In the mean time, Sancho having disengaged himself from the Curate and Barber,
and finding an opportunity to speak to his Master alone, he brushed up to the
Cage where the Knight sat. That I may clear my Conscience, Sir, said he, it is
fitting that I tell you the plain truth of your Enchantment here: Who, would
you think now, are those two Fellows that ride with their Faces covered? Even
the Parson of our Parish, and the Barber; none else I Will assure you, Sir. And
they are in a Plot against you, out of mere spite, because your Deeds will be
greater than theirs: This being presupposed, it follows, that you are not
enchanted, but only cozened and abused; and if you will but answer me one
Question fairly and squarely, you shall find this out to be a palpable Cheat,
and that there is no Enchantment in the Case, but merely your Senses turned
topsy turvy.

Ask me what Questions you please, dear Sancho, said the Knight, and I will as
willingly resolve them. But for thy Assertion, that those who guard us, are my
old Companions the Curate and Barber, it is Illusion all. The power of Magic
indeed, as it has an Art to cloth any thing in any Shape, may have dressed
these Demons in their Appearances to infatuate thy Sense, and draw thee into
such a labyrinth of Confusion, that even Theseus's Clue could not extricate
thee out of it; and this with a design perhaps to plunge me deeper into Doubts,
and make me endanger my Understanding in searching into the strange Contrivance
of my Enchantment, which in every Circumstance is so different from all I ever
read. Therefore rest satisfied that these are no more what thou imagin'st, than
I am a Turk. But now to thy Questions, propose them, and I will endeavor to
answer.

Bless me, said Sancho, this is Madness upon Madness; but since it is so, answer
me one Question. Tell me; as you hope to be delivered out of this Cage here,
and as you hope to find your self in my Lady Dulcinea's Arms when you least
think on it; as you -- Conjure me no more, answered Don Quixote, but ask freely,
for I have promised to answer punctually. That Is what I want, said Sancho, and
you must tell me the truth, and the whole truth, neither more nor less, upon
the Honor of your Knighthood. Prithee no more of your Preliminaries or
Preambles, cried Don Quixote, I tell thee I will Answer to a tittle. Then, said
Sancho, I ask, with reverence be it spoken, whether your Worship since your
being Cag'd up, or enchanted, if you will have it so, has not had a Motion,
more or less, as a Man may say? I understand not that Phrase, answered the
Knight. Heighday! quoth Sancho, don't you know what I mean? Why there is never a
Child in our Country, that understands the Christ-cross-Row, but can tell you.
I mean, have you a mind to do what another cannot do for you. O now I understand
thee, Sancho, said the Knight; and to answer directly to thy Question,
positively yes, very often; and therefore prithee help me out of this straight;
for, to be free with you, I am not altogether so sweet and clean as I could
wish.

CHAP. XXII. A Relation of the wise Conference between Sancho and his Master.
AH! Sir, said Sancho, have I caught you at last? This is what I wanted to know
from my Heart and Soul. Come, Sir, you cannot deny, that when any Body is out of
sorts, so as not to eat, or drink, or sleep, or do any natural Occasions that
you guess, then we say commonly they are bewitched or so: From whence may be
gathered, that those who can eat their Meat, drink their Drink, speak when
they are spoken to, and go to the Backside when they have Occasion for it, are
not bewitched nor enchanted. Your Conclusion is good, answered Don Quixote, as
to one sort of Enchantment; but, as I said to thee, there is Variety of
Enchantments, and the Changes in them through the Alteration of Times and Customs
branch them into so many Parts, that it is impossible to fix them under the
Force of any single Conclusion. In my own Conscience I am verily persuaded of
my Enchantment, and this suppresses any Uneasiness in my Temper, which might
arise upon any Suggestion to the contrary. To think my self thus idly and
dishonourably born about in a Cage, and with held like a lazy idle Coward from
the great Offices of my Function, when at this Hour perhaps hundreds of
Wretches may want my Assistance, would be unsupportable. Then your Worship's
only Way, is to endeavor to get your Heels at Liberty, said Sancho. Come, Sir,
let me alone, I Will get you out I warrant you; and then get you on your trusty
Rozinante's Back, and a Fig for them all. The poor thing here jogs on as
drooping and heartless, as if he were enchanted too. Take my Advice for once
now, and if things don't go as your Heart could wish, we have Time enough to
creep into our Cage again, and on the Word of a loyal Squire I Will go in with
you, and be content to be enchanted as long as you please.

I commit the Care of my Freedom to thy Management, said Don Quixote: Lay Hold
on the Opportunity, Friend Sancho, and thou shall find me ready to be governed
in all Particulars; though I am still afraid thou will find thy Cunning strangely
over-reached in thy pretended Discovery. The Knight and Squire had laid their
Plot, when they reached the Place that the Canon, Curate, and Barber had
pitched upon to alight in. The Cage was taken down, and the Oxen unyoak'd to
graze; when Sancho addressing the Curate, Pray, said he, will you do so much as
let my Lord and Master come out a little to slack a Point, or else the Prison
will not be so clean as the Presence of so worthy a Knight as my Master
requires. The Curate understanding him, answered that he would comply, but that
he feared Don Quixote finding himself once at Liberty, would give them the
Slip. I Will be Bail for him, said Sancho, Body for Body, Sir; and I, said the
Canon, upon his bare Parole of Honor. That you shall have, said the Knight;
besides, you need no Security beyond the Power of Art, for enchanted Bodies
have no Free Will to dispose of themselves, nor to move from one Place to
another, without Permission of the Necromancer in whose Charge they are. The
magical Charms might rivet 'em for three whole Centuries to one Place, and
fetch 'em back swift as the Wind, should the enchanted have fled to some other
Region. Lastly, as a most convincing Argument for his Release, he urged, That
unless they would free him, or get farther off, he would be necessitated to
offend their Sense of Smelling. They guessed his Meaning presently, and gave
him his Liberty; and the first use he made of it was to stretch his benumbed
Limbs three or four times; then marching up to Rozinante, he slapp'd him twice
or thrice on the Buttocks: I trust in Heaven, thou Flower and Glory of
Horseflesh, said he, that we shall soon be restored to our former
Circumstances; I, mounted on thy Back, and Thou between my Legs, while I
exercise the Function for which Heaven has bestowed me on the World. Then
walking a little aside with Sancho, he returned, after a convenient Stay, much
lighter in Body and Mind, and very full of his Squire's Project.

The Canon gazed on him, admiring his unparalleled sort of Madness, the rather,
because in all his Words and Answers he displayed an excellent Judgment, and,
as we have already observed, he only raved when the Discourse fell upon
Knight-Errantry: Which moving the Canon to Compassion, when they had all seated
themselves on the Grass, expecting the coming up of his Sumpter-Mule; Is it
possible, Sir, said he, addressing himself to Don Quixote, that the unhappy
reading of Books of Knight-Errantry should have such an Influence over you as
to destroy your Reason, making you believe you are now enchanted, and many
other such Extravagancies, as remote from Truth as Truth it self is from
Falsehood? How is it possible that human Sense should conceive there ever were
in the World such Multitudes of famous Knights-Errant, so many Emperors of
Trebizond, so many Amadis's, Felixmartes of Hircania, Palfreys, rambling
Damsels, Serpents, Monsters, Giants, unheard of Adventures, so many sorts of
Enchantments, so many Battles, terrible Encounters, pompous Habits and
Tournaments, amorous Princesses, Earls, Squires, and jesting Dwarfs, so many
Love Letters and Gallantries, so many Amazonian Ladies, and, in short, such an
incredible Number of extravagant Passages, as are contained in Books of
Knight-Errantry? As for my own Particular, I confess, that while I read 'em,
and do not reflect that they are nothing but Falsehood and Folly, they give me
some Satisfaction; but I no sooner remember what they are, but I cast the best
of them from me, and would deliver them up to the Flames if I had a Fire near
me; as well deserving that Fate, like false Impostors that act contrary to the
common Course of Nature; and Inventors of new Sects, and a new Manner of
Living, that seduce the ignorant Vulgar to give Credit to all their
Absurdities: Nay, they presume to disturb the Brains of ingenious and well-bred
Gentlemen, as appears by the Effect they have wrought on your Judgment, having
reduced you to such a Condition, that it is necessary to shut you up in a Cage,
and carry you on a Cart drawn by Oxen, like some Lion or Tiger that is carried
about from Town to Town to be shown. Have Pity on your self, good Don Quixote,
retrieve your lost Judgment, and make use of those Abilities Heaven has blessed
you with, applying your excellent Talent to some other Study, which may be
safer for your Conscience, and more for your Honor: But if led away by your
natural Inclination, you will read Books of Chivalry and great Exploits; read
in the Holy Scripture the Book of Judges, where you will find wonderful Truths
and glorious Actions not to be questioned. Lusitania had a Viriatus, Rome a
Caesar, Carthage an Hannibal, Greece an Alexander, Castile a Count Fernan
Gonzalez, Valentia a Cid, Andaluzia a Gonzalo Fernandes, Estremadura a Diego
Garcia de Peredes, Xerez a Garcia Perez de Vergas, Toledo a Garcilasso, and
Sevil Don Manuel de Leon; the reading of whose brave Actions diverts,
instructs, pleases, and surprises the most judicious Readers. This will be a
Study worthy your Talent, and by which you will become well read in History, in
love with Virtue, knowing in Goodness, improved in Manners, brave without
Rashness, and cautious without Cowardice; all which will redound to the Glory
of God, your own Advancement, and the Honor of the Province of La Mancha,
whence I understand you derive your Original. Don Quixote listened with great
Attention to the Canon's Discourse, and perceiving he had done, after he had
fixed his Eyes on him for a considerable Space, Sir, said he, all your
Discourse, I find, tends to signify to me, there never were any Knights-Errant,
that all the Books of Knight-Errantry are false, fabulous, useless, and
prejudicial to the Public; that I have done ill in reading, erred in
believing, and been much to blame in imitating them, by taking upon me the most
painful Profession of Chivalry. And you deny that ever there were any Amadises
of Gaul or Greece, or any of those Knights mentioned in those Books. Even as
you have said, Sir, said the Canon. You also were pleased to add, continued Don
Quixote, that those Books had been very hurtful to me, having deprived me of my
Reason, and reduced me to be carried in a Cage; that therefore it would be for
my Advantage to take up in Time, and apply my self to the reading of other
Books, where I might find more Truth, more Pleasure, and better Instruction.
You are in the Right, said the Canon. Then I am satisfied, replied Don Quixote,
you your self are the Man that raves and is enchanted, since you have thus
boldly blasphemed against a Truth so universally received, that whosoever
presumes to contradict it, as you have done, deserves the Punishment you would
inflict on the Books, when in reading them they offend you. For it were as easy
to persuade the World that the Sun does not enlighten, the Frost cool, and the
Earth bear us, as that there never was an Amadis, or any of the other
adventurous Knights, whose Actions are the Subject of so many Histories. What
Mortal can persuade another, that there is no Truth in what is recorded of the
Princess Floripes, and Guy of Burgundy, and of Fierabras at the Bridge of
Martible in the Reign of Charlemaign? which Passages, I dare swear, are as true
as that now it is Day. But if this be false, you may as well say there was no
Hector, nor Achilles, nor a Trojan War, nor Twelve Peers of France, nor a King
Arthur of Britain, who is now converted into a Crow, and hourly expected in his
Kingdom. Some also may presume to say, that the History of Guerino Meschino,
and that of the Search after the Sangrial are both false, that the Amors of
Sir Tristan and Queen Iseo are Apocryphal, as well as those of Queen Guiniver
and Sir Lancelot du Lake; and yet there are People living who can almost
remember they have seen the old Lady Quintanona, who had the best Hand at
filling a Glass of Wine of any Woman in all Britain. This I am so well assured
of, that I can remember my Grandmother by my Father's Side, whenever she saw an
old Governante in her long Gown, used to tell me, Look yonder, Grandson,
there is an old Woman looks like Dame Quintanona; whence I infer, she knew her,
or at least had seen her Picture. Now, who can deny the Veracity of the History
of Pierres and the lovely Magalona, when to this Day the Pin with which the
brave Pierres turned his wooden Horse that carried him through the Air, is to
be seen in the King's Armory; which Pin is somewhat bigger than the Thill of a
Wagon, by the same Token it stands just by Babieca's Saddle. At Roncesvalles
they keep Orlando's Horn, that is as big as a great Beam; whence it follows
that there were Twelve Peers, that there were such Men as Pierres, and the
famous Cid, besides many other adventurous Knights, whose Names are in the
Mouths of all People. You may as well tell me, that the brave Portugues, John
de Merlo, was no Knight Errant; that he did not go into Burgundy, where, in the
City of Ras, he fought the famous Moses Pierre, Lord of Chargny, and in the
City of Basil, Moses Henry de Ramestan, coming off in both Places victorious,
and loaded with Honor. You may deny the Adventures and Combats of the two
heroic Spaniards, Pedro Barba and Gutierre Quixada, (from whose Male Line I am
lineally descended) who in Burgundy overcame the Sons of the Earl of St. Paul.
You may tell that Don Ferdinand de Guevara never went into Germany to seek
Adventures, where he fought Sir George, a Knight of the Duke of Austria's
Court. You may say the Tilting of Suero de Quinnones del Passo, and the
Exploits of Moses Lewis de Falses against Don Gonzalo de Guzman a Castilian
Knight, are mere Fables; and so of many other brave Actions performed by
Christian Knights, as well Spaniards as Foreigners, which are so authentic and
true, that, I say it over again, he who denies them has neither Sense nor
Reason. The Canon was astonished at the Medley Don Quixote made of Truths and
Fables, and no less to see how well-read he was in all things relating to the
Achievements of Knights-Errant; and therefore, I cannot deny, Sir, answered
he, but that there is some Truth in what you have said especially in what
relates to the Spanish Knights-Errant; and I will grant there were Twelve Peers
of France, yet I will not believe they performed all those Actions Archbishop
Turpin ascribes to them: I rather imagine they were brave Gentlemen made Choice
of by the Kings of France, and called Peers, as being all equal in Valor and
Quality; or if they were not, at least they ought to have been so; and these
composed a sort of military Order, like those of Sant Jago or Calatrava among
us, into which all that are admitted are supposed, or ought to be, Gentlemen of
Birth and known Valor. And as now we say a Knight of St. John or of Alcantara,
so in those Times they said, A Knight who is one of the Twelve Peers, because
they were but Twelve of this military Order. Nor is it to be doubted but that
there were such Men as Bernardo del Carpio and the Cid, yet we have Reason to
question whether ever they performed those great Exploits that are ascribed to
them. As to the Pin, Count Plerre^'s Pin which you spoke of, and which you say
stands by Babieca's Saddle, I own my Ignorance, and confess I am so
short-sighted, that though I saw the Saddle yet I did not perceive the Pin, which
is somewhat strange if it be so large as you described it. It Is there without
Doubt, replied Don Quixote, by the same Token they say it is kept in a Leathern
Case to keep it from rusting. That may very well be, said the Canon, but upon
the Word of a Priest I do not remember I ever saw it: Yet grant it were there,
that does not enforce the Belief of so many Amadises, nor of such a Multitude
of Knights-Errant as the World talks of; nor is there any Reason so worthy a
Person, so judicious, and so well qualified as you are, should imagine there is
any Truth in the wild Extravagancies contained in all the fabulous nonsensical
Books of Knight-Errantry.

CHAP. XXIII. The notable Dispute between the Canon and Don Quixote; with other
Matters.
VERY well, cried Don Quixote, then all those Books must be Fabulous, though
licensed by Kings, approved by the Examiners, read with general Satisfaction,
and applauded by the better sort and the meaner, rich and poor, learned and
unlearned, gentry and commonalty, and in short, by all sorts of Persons of what
State and Condition soever; and though they carry such an Appearance of Truth,
setting down the Father, Mother, Country, Kindred, Age, Place, and Actions to a
tittle, and day by day, of the Knight and Knights of whom they treat? For shame
Sir, continued he, forbear uttering such Blasphemies; and believe me, I advise
you to behave your self as becomes a Man of Sense, or else read them and see
what Satisfaction you will receive. As for Instance, pray tell me, can there be
any thing more delightful, than to read a lively Description, which as it were
brings before your Eyes the following Adventure. A vast Lake of boiling Pitch,
in which an infinite multitude of Serpents, Snakes, Crocodiles, and other sorts
of fierce and terrible Creatures, are swimming and traversing backwards and
forwards, appears to a Knight-Errant's Sight. Then from the midst of the Lake a
most doleful Voice is heard to say these Words: O Knight, whoever thou art, who
gazest on the dreadful Lake, if thou will purchase the Bliss concealed under
these mournful Waters, make known thy Valor by casting thy self into the midst
of these black burning Surges; for unless thou do so, thou art not worthy to
behold the mighty Wonders enclosed in the seven Castles of the seven Fairies,
that are seated under these gloomy Waves. And no sooner have the last Accents
of the Voice reached the Knight's Ears, but be, without making any further
Reflection, or considering the Danger to which he exposes himself, and even
without laying aside ponderous Armor; only recommending himself to Heaven and
to his Lady, plunges himself into the middle of the burning Lake; and when
least he imagines it, or can guess where he shall stop, he finds himself on a
sudden in the midst of verdant Fields, to which the Elisian bear no Comparison.
There the Sky appears to him more transparent, and the Sun seems to shine with
a redoubled Brightness. Next he discovers a most delightful Grove made up of
beautiful shady Trees, whose Verdure and Variety regale his Sight, while his
Ears are ravished with the wild and yet melodious Notes of an infinite Number
of pretty painted Birds, that hop and bill and sport themselves on the twining
Boughs. Here he spies a pleasing Rivulet, which, through its slowry Banks,
glides along over the brightest Sand, and remurmurs over the whitest Pebbles
that bedimple its smooth Surface, while that, through its Liquid Crystal,
feasts the Eye with a Prospect of Gold and Orient Pearl. There he perceives an
artificial Fountain formed of party-colored Jasper and polished Marble; and
hard by another, contrived in Grotesque, where the small Cockle-shells placed
in orderly Confusion among the white and yellow Shells, and mixed with pieces
of bright Crystal and counterfeit Emeralds, yield an agreeable Sight; so that
Art imitating Nature, seems here to out do her. At a distance, on a sudden, he
casts his Eyes upon a strong Castle, or stately Palace, whose Walls are of
massy Gold, the Battlements of Diamonds, and the Gates of Hyacinths; in short,
its Structure is so wonderful, that though all the Materials are no other than
Diamonds, Carbuncles, Rubies, Pearls, Gold, and Emeralds, yet the Workmanship
exceeds them in Value. But having seen all this, can any thing be so charming
as to behold a numerous Train of beautiful Damsels come out of the Castle in
such glorious and costly Apparel, as would be endless for me to describe, were
I to relate these things as they are to be found in History. Then to see the
Beauty that seems the Chief of all the Damsels, take the bold Knight, who cast
himself into the burning Lake, by the Hand, and without speaking one Word, lead
him into the sumptuous Palace, where he is caused to strip as naked as he was
born; then put into a delicious Bath, and perfumed with precious Essences and
odoriferous Oils; after which he puts on a fine Shirt, deliciously scented; and
this done, another Damsel throws over his Shoulders a magnificent Robe worth at
least a whole City, if not more. What a Sight is it, when in the next place
they lead him into another Room of State, where he finds the Tables so orderly
covered, that he is surpised and astonished? There they pour over his Hands,
Water distilled from Amber and odoriferous Flowers: He is seated in an Ivory
Chair; and while all the Damsels that attend him observe a profound Silence,
such Variety of Dainties is served up, and all so incomparably dressed, that
Appetite is at a stand, doubting on which to satisfy its Desire; at the same
time his Ears are sweetly entertained with Variety of excellent Music, none
perceiving who makes it, or from whence it comes. But above all, what shall we
say to see, after the Dinner is ended, and Tables taken away, the Knight left
leaning back in his Chair, perhaps picking his Teeth, as is usual, and then
another Damsel, much more beautiful than any of the former, comes unexpectedly
into the Room, and sitting down by the Knight, begins to inform him what Castle
that is, and how she is enchanted in it; with many other Particulars, which
surprise the Knight, and astonish those that read his History. I will enlarge
no more upon this Matter, since from what has been said, it may sufficiently be
inferred, that the reading of any Passage in any History of Knight-Errantry,
must be very delightful and surprising to the Reader. And do you, good Sir,
believe me, and as I said to you before, read these Books, which you may find
will banish all Melancholy, if you are troubled with it, and sweeten your
Disposition if it be harsh. This I can say for my self, that since my being a
Knight Errant, I am brave, courteous, bountiful, well bred, generous, civil,
bold, affable, patient, a Sufferer of Hardships, Imprisonment and Enchantments:
And though I have so lately been shut up in a Cage, like a Madman, I expect
through the Valor of my Arm, Heaven favoring, and Fortune not opposing my
Designs, to be a King within the compass of very few Days, that so I may give
Proofs of my innate Gratitude and Liberality. For, on my Word, Sir, a poor Man
is incapable of exerting his Liberality, though he be naturally never so well
inclined. Now that Gratitude which only consists in Wishes, may be said to be
dead, as Faith without good Works is dead. Therefore it is, I wish Fortune
would soon offer some Opportunity for me to become an Emperor, that I might
give Proofs of my Generosity, by advancing my Friends, but especially this poor
Sancho Panca my Squire, who is the harmlessest Fellow in the World; and I would
willingly give him an Earldom, which I have long since promised him, but that I
fear he has not Judgment enough to govern his Estate.

Sancho hearing his Master's last Words; Well, well, Sir, said he, never do you
trouble your Head about that Matter; all you have to do is to get me this same
Earldom, and let me alone to govern it: I can do as my Betters have done before
me, I can put in a Deputy, or a Servant, that shall take all the Trouble off my
Hands, while I, as a Great Man, should loll at my Ease, receive my Rents, mind
no Business, live merrily, and so let the World rub for Sancho. As to the
Management of your Revenue, said the Canon, a Deputy or Steward, may do well,
Friend; but the Lord himself is obliged to stir in the Administration of
Justice, to which there is not only a Sufficiency to govern required, but a
judicious Head also to distinguish nicely, conclude justly, and choose wisely. I
don't understand your Philosophy, quoth Sancho; all I said, and I Will say it
again, is, That I wish I had as good an Earldom as I could govern; for I have
as great a Soul as another Man, and as great a Body as most Men: And the first
thing I would do in my Government, I would have no Body to control me, I would
be absolute; and who but I: Now, he that is absolute, can do what he likes; he
that can do what he likes, can take his Pleasure; he that can take his
Pleasure, can be content; and he that can be content, has no more to desire; so
the Matter's over, and come what will come I Am satisfied: If an Island,
welcome; if no Island, fare it well; we shall see our selves in no worse a
Condition, as one blind Man said to another. This is no ill Reasoning of yours,
Friend, said the Canon, though there is much more to be said upon this Topic of
Earldoms, than you imagine. Undoubtedly, said Don Quixote, but I suit my
Actions to the Example of Amadis de Gaul, who made his Squire Gandalin Earl of
the Firm-Island; which is a fair Precedent for preferring Sancho to the same
Dignity, to which his Merit also lays an unquestionable Claim. The Canon stood
amazed at Don Quixote's methodical and orderly Madness: And Sancho's Simplicity
in so eagerly contending for his Earldom, made the whole Company very good
Sport.

By this Time the Canon's Servants had brought the Provision, and spreading a
Carpet on the Grass under the shady Trees, they sat down to Dinner; when
presently they heard the Tinkling of a little Bell among the Copses close by
them, and immediately afterward they saw bolt out of the Thicket a very pretty
She-Goat, speckled all over with black, white, and brown Spots, and a Goatherd
running after it, who in his familiar Dialect called to it to stay and return
to the Fold; but the Fugitive ran toward the Company frighted and panting, and
stopped close by them, as if it had begged their Protection. The Goatherd
overtaking it, caught it by the Horns, and in a chiding way, as if the Goat
understood his Resentments, you little wanton Nanny, said he, you spotted Elf,
what has made you trip so much of late? What Wolf has scared you thus, Huzzy!
Tell me, little Fool, what is the matter? But the Cause is plain; thou art a
Female, and therefore never can be quiet: Curse on your freakish Humors,
and all theirs whom you so much resemble; turn back, my Love, turn back, and
though thou can not be content with thy Fold, yet there you may be safe among
the rest of your Fellows; for if you, that should guide and direct the Flock,
love wandering thus, what must they do, what will become of them? The Goatherd's
Talk to his Goat was entertaining enough to the Company, especially to the
Canon, who calling to him, Prithee honest Fellow, said he, have a little
Patience, and let your Goat take its Liberty a while; for, since it is a
Female, as you say, she will follow her natural Inclination the more you would
confine it: Come then, and take a Bit, and a Glass of Wine with us, you may be
better humored after that. He then reached him the Leg of a cold Rabbet, and
ordering him a Glass of Wine; the Goat-herd drank it off, and returning the
Thanks, was pacified. Gentlemen, said he, I would not have you think me a Fool,
because I talk so seriously to this senseless Animal, for my Words bear a
mysterious Meaning; I am indeed, as you see, Rustic and Unpolished; though not
so ignorant, but that I can converse with Men, as well as Brutes. That is no
Miracle, said the Curate, for I have known the Woods breed Learned Men, and
simple Sheepcotts contain Philosophers. At least, said the Goat-herd, they
harbor Men that have some Knowledge of the World; and to make good this Truth,
if I thought not the Offer impertinent, or my Company troublesome, you should
hear an Accident which but too well confirms what you have said. For my part,
answered Don Quixote. I will hear you attentively, because methinks your coming
has something in it that looks like an Adventure of Knight-Errantry; and I dare
answer, the whole Company will not so much bring their Parts in question, as to
refuse to hear a Story so pleasing, surprising and amusing, as I fancy yours
will prove. Then prithee Friend begin, for we will all give you our Attention.
You must excuse me for one, said Sancho, I must have a Word or two in private
with this same Pasty at you little Brook; for I design to fill my Belly for to
Morrow and next Day. We Squires of Knight-Errants should always lay up for a
rainy Day, and when we want Meat, chew the Cud upon what we laid in before
hand. You're in the right, Sancho, said the Knight; but I have, for my part,
satisfied my Bodily Appetite, and now want only Refreshment for my Mind, which
I hope this honest Fellow's Story will afford me. All the Company agreed with
Don Quixote, the Goatherd then stroaking his pretty Goat once or twice; Lie
down thou speckl'd Fool, said he, lie by me here; for we shall have Time enough
to return home. The Creature seemed to understand him, for as soon as her
Master sat down, she stretched her self quietly by his side, and looked up in
his Face, as if she would let him know that she minded what he said; and then
he began thus.

CHAP. XXIV. The Goatherd's Tale.
ABout three Leagues from this Valley, there is a Village, which though small,
yet is one of the Richest hereabouts. In it there lives a Farmer in very great
Esteem, and though its common for the Rich to be respected, yet is this Person
more considered for the Virtue, than for the Wealth he possesses. But what he
accounted himself happiest in, was a Daughter of such extraordinary Beauty,
Prudence, Wit and Virtue, that all who knew or beheld her, could not but admire
to see how Heaven and Nature had done their utmost to Embellish her. When she
was but little she was Handsome, and as she grew she still grew more Handsome,
till at the Age of Sixteen she was most completely Beautiful. The Fame of her
Beauty began to extend to the neighboring Villages; but why say I Villages, it
extended to the remotest Cities, and entered the Palaces of Kings, and the Ears
of all manner of Persons, who from all Parts flocked to see her, as something
rare, or as a sort of Prodigy. Her Father was strictly careful of her, nor was
she less careful of her self; for there are no Guards, Bolts or Locks, which
preserve a young Woman like her own Care and Caution -- The Father's Riches and
the Daughter's Beauty drew a great many, as well Strangers as Inhabitants of
that Country, to sue for her in Marriage; but such was the vast number of the
Pretenders, as did but the more confound and divide the old Man in his Choice,
upon whom to bestow so valuable a Treasure. Among the Crowd of her Admirers,
was I; and good Reason I had to hope for Success from the Knowledge her Father
had of me, being a Native of the same Place, of a good Family, and in the
Flower of my Years, of a considerable Estate, and not to be despised for my
Understanding. With the very same Advantages, there was another Person of our
Village who made Court to her at the same Time. This seemed to hold all
Inclination of the Father in suspense, till his Daughter should declare in
favor of one of us: To bring this Affair therefore to the speedier Issue, he
resolved to acquaint Leandra, for so was this Fair One called, that since we
were Equals in all things, he left her entirely free to choose, which of us was
most agreeable to herself. An Example worthy of being imitated by all Parents,
who have any regard for their Children. I don't mean that they should be
allowed to choose in things Ill or Mischievous; but only that proposing to 'em
ever those things which are good, they should be allowed in them to gratify
their Inclination. I don't know how Leandra approved this Proposal; this I only
know, that her Father put us both off with the excuse of his Daughter's being
too young to be yet disposed of; and that he treated us both in such general
Terms, as neither could well please nor displease us -- My Rival's Name is
Anselmo, mine Eugenio, for it is necessary you should know the Names of the
Persons concerned in this Tragedy, the Conclusion of which, though depending, yet
may easily be perceived likewise to be unfortunate. About that time there came
to our Village one Vicente de la Rosa, the Son of a poor laboring Man of the
Neighborhood. This Vicente came out of Italy, having been a Soldier there, and
in foreign Parts. He was but a Boy of twelve Years old, when a Captain that
happened to pass by here, with his Company, took him out of this Country, and
at the end of other twelve Years he returned hither, habited like a Soldier,
all gay and glorious in a thousand various Colors, bedecked with a thousand
Toys of Crystal, and Chains of Steel. To Day he put on one piece of Finery, to
Morrow another; but all false, counterfeit and worthless. The Country People,
who by Nature are malicious, and who living in Idleness are still more inclined
to Malice, observed this presently, and counting all his fine things, they
found that indeed he had but three Suits of Clothes, which were of a different
color with the Stockings and Garters belonging to 'em, yet did he manage 'em
with so many Tricks and Inventions, that if one had not counted 'em, one would
have sworn he had had above ten Suits, and above twenty Plumes of Feathers. --
Let it not seem Impertinent that I mention this particular of his Clothes and
Habit, since so much of the Story depends upon it. Seating himself upon a Bench
under a large spreading Alder-Tree, which grows in our Street, he used to
entertain us all with his Exploits, while we stood gaping and listening at the
Wonders he recounted: There was not that Country, as he said, upon the face of
the Earth, which he had not seen, nor Battle which he had not been engaged in;
he had killed more Moors, for his own share, than either Tunis or Argier could
hold, and had fought more Duels than Gante, Luna, Diego Garcia de Paredes, or a
thousand others that he named, yet in all of 'em had the better, and never got
a Scratch, or lost a drop of Blood. Then again he showed us the Scars of Wounds
he had received, which though they were not to be perceived, yet he gave us to
understand they were so many Musket-shots, which he had got in several
Skirmishes and Rencounters. In short, he treated all his Equals with an
unparalled Arrogance, and even to those who knew the Meanness of his Birth,
he did not stick to affirm, after his manner, that his own Arm was his Father,
his Achievements were his Pedigree, and that, bating his carrying Arms, he was
as good a Man as the King.

Besides all these Accomplishments, he was a piece of a Musician, and could
thrumb a little upon the Guitarr; but what his Excellency chiefly lay in, was
Poetry; and so fond was he of showing his Parts that way, that upon every
trifling Occasion, he was sure to make a Copy of Verses of a Mile or two in
length. This Soldier, whom I have described, this Vicente de la Rosa, this
Hero, this Gallant, this Musician, this Poet, was often seen and viewed by
Leandra, from a Window of her House which looked into the Street; she was
struck with the Tinsel of his Dress; she was charmed with his Verses, of which
he took care to disperse a great many Copies; her Ears were pleased with the
Exploits he related of himself; and in short, as the Devil would have it, she
fell in Love with him before ever he had the Confidence to make his Addresses
to her: And as in all Affairs of Love, that is the most easily managed, where
the Lady's Affection is pre-ingag'd; so was it here no hard thing for Leandra
and Vicente to have frequent meetings to concert their Matters; and before ever
any one of her many Suitors had the least surmise of her Inclination, she had
gratified it; and leaving her Father's House, had run away with this Soldier,
who came off with greater Triumph in this Enterprise than in any of the rest he
made his boasts of. The whole Village was surprised at this accident, as was
every one that heard it. I was amazed, Anselmo distracted, her Father in Tears,
her Relations outrageous, Justice is demanded; a party with Officers is sent
out, who traverse the Roads, search every Wood, and at the end of three Days
find the poor fond Leandra in a Cave of one of the Mountains, naked to her
Shift, despoiled of all the Money and rich Jewels which she took from home.
They bring and present her to her Father; upon enquiry made into the cause of
her Misfortune, she confessed ingenuously that Vicente de la Rosa had deceived
her, and upon promise of Marriage had prevailed with her to leave her Father's
House, with the assurance of carrying her to the richest, but indeed the most
debauched City of the World, which was Naples; that she foolishly had given
credit to him, and robbing her Father, had delivered the Treasure into his
Hands the first Night; that he carried her up a steep Mountain, and there
confined her in that Cave where she was found. In fine, she said, that though he
had rifl'd her of all she had, yet he had never attempted her Honor; but
leaving her in that manner he fled. It was no easy matter to make any of us
entertain a good opinion of the Soldiers Continence; but she affirmed it with
so many repeated Asseverations, that in some measure it served to comfort her
Father in his Affliction, who valued nothing so much as his Daughter's
Reputation. The very same Day that Leandra appeared again, she also disappeared
from us, for her Father immediately clapped her up in a Monastry in a Town not
far off, in hopes that Time might wear off something of her Disgrace. Those who
were not interested in Leandra, excused her upon the account of her Youth. But
those who were acquainted with her Wit and Sense, did not attribute her
Miscarriage to her Ignorance, but to the Levity and Vanity of Mind natural to
Womankind. Since the Confinement of Leandra, Anselmo's Eyes could never meet
with an Object which could give him either Ease or Pleasure; I too could find
nothing but what looked sad and gloomy to me in the Absence of Leandra. Our
Melancholy increased, as our Patience decreased: We cursed a thousand times the
Soldier's finery and Trinkets, and railed at the Father's want of Precaution:
At last we agreed, Anselmo and I, to leave the Village, and to retire to this
Valley, where he feeding a large flock of Sheep, and I as large a herd of
Goats, all our own, we pass our time under the Trees, giving vent to our
Passions, singing in Consort the Praises or Reproaches of the beauteous
Leandra, or else sighing alone make our Complaints to Heaven on our Misfortune.
In imitation of us, a great many more of Leandra's Lovers have come hither into
these steep and craggy Mountains, and are alike emplov'd; and so many there are
of 'em, that the Place seems to be turned to the old Arcadia we read of By the
top of that Hill there is a number of the Shepherds and their Cottages; there
is not a part of it in which is not to be heard the n^ (...) Leandra. This Man
curses and calls her Wa^ (...) ^vious, another calls her Light and (...)
Acquits and Forgives her, another A^ (...) Condemns her; one celebrates her
Beauty, (...) ^ther rails at her ill Qualities; in short, all blame, but all
adore her: Nay, so far does this Humor prevail, that here are those who
complain of her Disdain, who never spoke to her; and others who make their
boasts of Favors which she never granted to any; for as I intimated before,
her Inclination was not known before her Disgrace. There is not a hollow place
of a Rock, a Bank of a Brook, or a shady Grove, where there is not some or
other of these amorous Shepherds telling their doleful Stories to the Air and
Winds. Echo has learnt to repeat the name of Leandra, Leandra all the Hills
resound, the Brooks murmur Leandra, and it is Leandra that holds us all
Enchanted, hoping without hope, and fearing without knowing what we fear. Of
all these foolish People, the Person who shows the least, and yet has the most
Sense, is my Rival Anselmo, who forgetting all other causes of Complaint,
complains only of her Absence; and to his Lute, which he touches to Admiration,
he joins his Voice in Verses of his own composing, which declare the greatness
of his Genius. For my part I take another Course, I think a better, I Am sure an
easier, which is, to say all the ill things I can of Women's Levity,
Inconstancy, their broken Vows and Promises, of their Fondness of Show and
Disregard of Merit. This, Gentlemen, was the Occasion of those Words, which at
my coming hither I addressed to this Goat: for being a she, I hate her, though she
is the best of my Herd. This is the Story which I promised to tell you; if you
have thought it too long, I shall endeavor to requite your Patience in any
thing I can serve you. Hard by is my Cottage, where I have some good fresh Milk
and excellent Cheese, with several sorts of Fruits, which I hope you will find
agreeable both to the Sight and Taste.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Combat between Don Quixote and the Goatherd: With the rare
Adventure of the Penitents, which the Knight happily accomplished with the
sweat of his Brows.
THE Goatherd's Story was mightily liked by the whole Company, especially by
the Canon, who particularly minded the manner of his relating it, that had more
of a Scholar and Gentleman, than of a rude Goatherd; which made him conclude
the Curate had reason to say, that even the Mountains breed Scholars and Men of
Sense. They all made large proffers of their Friendship and Service to Eugenio,
but Don Quixote exceeded 'em all, and addressing himself to him, Were I, said
he, at this time in a capacity of undertaking any Adventure, I would certainly
begin from this very Moment to serve you; I would soon release Leandra out of
the Nunnery, where undoubtedly she is detained against her will; and in spite
of all the opposition could be made by the Lady Abbess and all her Adherents, I
would return her to your Hands, that you might have the sole disposal of her,
so far, I mean, as is consistent with the Laws of Knighthood, which expressly
forbid that any Man should offer the least violence to a Damsel; yet (I trust
in Heaven) that the Power of a friendly Magician will prevail against the force
of a malicious Inchanter; and whenever this shall happen, you may assure your
self of my Favor and Assistance, to which I am obliged by my Profession, that
injoins me to relieve the Oppressed.

The Goatherd, who till then had not taken the least notice of him, now looking
earnestly on him, and finding his dismal Countenance and wretched Habit were no
great encouragement for him to expect a performance of such mighty matters,
whispered the Barber who sat next him. Pray Sir, said he, who is this Man that
talks so extravagantly? For I protest I never saw so strange a Figure in all my
Life. Whom can you imagine it should be, replied the Barber, but the famous Don
Quixote de la Mancha, the Establisher of Justice, The Avenger of Injuries, The
Protector of Damsels, The Terror of Giants, and the Invincible in Combats? The
account you give of this Person, returned the Goatherd, is much like what we
read in Romances and Books of Chivalry of those doughty Dons, who for their
mighty Prowess and Achievements, were called Knight-Errants; and therefore I
dare say you do but jest, and that this Gentleman's Brains have deserted their
Quarters.

Thou art an impudent insolent Varlet, cried Don Quixote, it is thy Paper-scull
that is unfit to hold a rational Soul; I have more Brains than the Prostitute
thy Mother had about her when she carried thy Lump of Nonsense in her Womb.
With that, snatching up a Loaf that was near him, he struck the Goatherd so
furious a Blow with it, that he almost levelled his Nose with his Face. The Other
not accustomed to such Salutations, no sooner perceived how scurvily he was
treated, but without any Respect to the Table-cloth, Napkins, or to those who
were eating, he leaped furiously on Don Quixote, and taking Hold on his Collar
with both his Hands, had certainly strangled him, had not Sancho Panca come in
that very Nick of Time, and griping him fast behind, thrown him back on the
Table, bruising Dishes, breaking Glasses, spilling and overturning all that lay
upon it. Don Quixote seeing himself freed, fell violently again upon the
Goatherd, who, all besmeared with Blood, and trampled to Pieces under Sancho's
Feet, grop'd here and there for some Knife or Fork to take a fatal Revenge; but
the Canon and Curate took Care to prevent his Purpose, and in the mean while,
by the Barber's Assistance, the Goatherd got Don Quixote under him, on whom he
let fall such a Tempest of Blows, as caused as great a Shower of Blood to pour
from the poor Knight's Face as had streamed from his own. The Canon and Curate
were ready to burst with laughing, the Officers danced and jumped at the Sport,
every one cried Halloo! as Men use to do when two Dogs are snarling or
fighting; Sancho Panca alone was vexed, and raved because he could not quit
himself from the strict Embraces of one of the Canon's Servingmen, who kept him
from assisting his Master. In short, all were exceedingly merry, except the
bloody Combatants, who had mawl'd one another most miserably, when on a Sudden
they heard the Sound of a Trumpet so doleful, that it made 'em turn to listen
toward that Part from whence it seemed to come: But he who was most troubled
at this dismal Alarm was Don Quixote; therefore though he lay under the Goatherd
full sore against his Will, and was most lamentably bruised and battered,
Friend Devil, cried he to him, (for sure nothing less could have so much Valor
and Strength as to subdue my Forces) let us have a Cessation of Arms but for a
single Hour, for the dolorous Sound of that Trumpet strikes my Soul with more
Horror, than thy hard Fists do my Ears with Pain, and methinks excite me to
some new Adventure. With that the Goatherd, who was as weary of beating as of
being beaten, immediately gave him a Truce; and the Knight once more getting on
his Feet, directed his then not hasty Steps to the Place whence the mournful
Sound seemed to come, and presently saw a Number of Men all in White, like
Penitents, descending from a rising Ground. The real Matter was this: The
People had wanted Rain for a whole Year together, wherefore they appointed
Rogations, Processions, and Disciplines throughout all that Country, to implore
Heaven to open its Treasury, and shower down Plenty upon 'em; and to this End
the Inhabitants of a Village near that Place came in Procession to a devout
Hermitage built on one of the Hills which surrounded that Valley.

Don Quixote taking Notice of the strange Habit of the Penitents, and never
reminding himself that he had often seen the like before, fancied immediately
it was some new Adventure, and he alone was to engage in it, as he was obliged
by the Laws of Knight-Errantry; and that which the more increased his Frenzy,
was his mistaking an Image which they carried (all covered with Black) for some
great Lady, whom these miscreant and discourteous Knights, he thought, were
carrying away against her Will. As soon as this Whimsy took him in the Head, he
moved with what Expedition he could toward Rozinante, who was feeding up and
down upon the Plains and dismounting his Bridle from the Pummel, and his Target
which hung on that, he bridled him in an Instant; then taking his Sword from
Sancho, he got in a Trice on Rozinante's Back; where embracing his Target, and
addressing himself aloud to all there present, O valorous Company, cried he,
you shall now perceive of how great Importance it is to Mankind, that such
illustrious Persons as those who profess the Order of Knight-Errantry should
exist in the World; now, I say, you shall see by my freeing that noble Lady,
who is there basely and barbarously carried away Captive, that
Knights-Adventurers ought to be held in the highest and greatest Estimation. So
saying, he struck Rozinante with his Heels for want of Spurs; and forcing him
to a Hand-gallop (for 'twas never read in any Part of this true History that
Rozinante did ever run full Speed) he posted to encounter the Penitents, in
Spite of all the Curate, Canon, and Barber could do to hinder him; much less
could Sancho Panca's Outcries detain him, Master! Sir! Don Quixote! bawled out
the poor Squire, whither are you posting? are you bewitched? does the Devil
drive and set you on, thus to run against the Church? Ah Wretch that I am! --
See, Sir! That is a Procession of Penitents, and the Lady they carry is the
Image of the immaculate Virgin, our blessed Lady. Take Heed what you do, for at
this Time it may be certainly said you are out of your Wits --. But Sancho
might as well have kept his Breath for another use, for the Knight was urged
with so vehement a Desire to encounter the white Men and release the mourning
Lady, that he heard not a Syllable of it, or if he had, he would not have
turned back at the King's express Command. At last being come near the
Procession, and stopping Rozinante, that already had a great Desire to rest a
little, in a dismal Tone and with a hoarse Voice, Ho! cried he, you there, who
cover your Faces, perhaps because you are ashamed of your selves, and of the
Crime you are now committing, give Heed and Attention to what I have to say! --
The first who stopped at this Alarm were those who carried the Image; when one of
the four Priests that sung the Litanies, seeing the strange Figure that Don
Quixote made, and the Leanness of Rozinante, with other Circumstances which he
observed in the Knight sufficient to have forced Laughter, presently made him
this Answer; Good Sir! if you have any thing to say to us speak it quickly; for
these poor Men whom you see are very much tired, therefore we neither can, nor
is it reasonable we should, stand thus in Pain to hear any thing that cannot be
delivered in two Words. I will say it in one, replied Don Quixote, which is
this; I charge you immediately to release that beautiful Lady, whose Tears and
Looks full of Sorrow evidently show you carry her away by Violence, and have
done her some unheard of Injury. This do, or I who was born to punish such
Outrages, will not suffer you to advance one Step with her, till she is
entirely possessed of that Liberty she so earnestly desires and so justly
deserves. This last Speech made 'em all conclude that the Knight was certainly
distracted, and caused a general Laughter: But this proved like Oil to Fire,
and so inflamed Don Quixote, that laying his Hand on his Sword, without more
Words, he presently assaulted those who carried the Image. At the same Time one
of them quitting his Post, came to encounter our Hero with a wooden Fork, on
which he supported the Bier whenever they made a Stand, and warding with it a
weighty Blow which Don Quixote designed and discharged at him, the Fork was
cleft in two; but he who had the remaining Piece in his Hand returned the
Knight such a Thwack on his left Shoulder, that his Target not being able to
resist such rustic Force, the poor unfortunate Don Quixote was struck to the
Ground and miserably bruised.

Sancho Panca, who had followed him as fast as his Breath and Legs would
permit, seeing him fall, cried out to his Adversary to forbear striking him,
urging that he was a poor enchanted Knight, and one who in his whole Life had
never done any Man Harm. But 'twas not Sancho's Arguments that held the
Country-fellow's Hands, the only Motive was, that he feared he had killed him,
since he could not perceive he stirred either Hand or Foot; wherefore tucking
his Coat up to his Girdle with all possible Expedition, he scoured over the
Fields like a Greyhound. Mean while Don Quixote's Companions hastened to the
Place where he lay, and those of the Procession, who saw 'em come running
toward them, attended by the Officers of the Holy Brotherhood with their
Cross-bows, began to have Apprehensions of some ill Design against 'em from the
approaching Party; wherefore drawing up in a Body about the Image, the
Disciplinants lifting up their Hoods, and grasping fast their Whips, as the
Priests did their Tapers, they expected the Assault with the greatest Bravery,
resolving to defend themselves and offend their Enemy as long and as much as
possible: But Providence had ordered the Matter much better than they could
hope; for while Sancho who had thrown himself on his Master's Body was
lamenting his Loss, and the supposed Death of so noble and generous a Lord, in
the most ridiculous Manner that ever was heard, the Curate of the Knight's
Party was come up with the other who came in the Procession, and was
immediately known by him, so that their Acquaintance put an End to the Fears
which both Sides were in of an Engagement. Don Quixote's Curate in few Words
acquainted the other with the Knight's Circumstances; whereupon he and the
whole Squadron of Penitents went over to see whether the unfortunate Knight
were living or dead, and heard Sancho Panca with Tears in his Eyes bewailing
over his Master: O Flower of Knighthood, cried he, that with one single perlous
Knock art come to an untimely End! Thou Honor of thy Family, and Glory of all
La Mancha! nay, and of the whole varsal World beside; which, now it has lost
thee, will be overrun by Miscreants and Outlaws, who will no longer be afraid
to be mauld for their Misdeeds. O bountiful above all the Alexanders in the
World! thou who have rewarded me but for poor eight Months Service with the
best Island that is washed by Salt Water! Thou who were humble to the Proud and
haughty to the Humble! Thou who durst undertake Perils, and patiently endure
Affronts! Thou who were in Love, no Body knows why! True Pattern of good Men,
and Scourge of the wicked, sworn Foe to all Reprobates! and to say all at once
that Man can say, thou Knight Errant!

The woeful Accents of the Squire's Voice at last recalled Don Quixote to
himself; when after a deep Sigh, the first thing he thought of was his absent
Dulcinea, O charming Dulcinea, cried he, the Wretch that lingers banished from
your sight indures far greater Miseries than this! And then looking on his
faithful Squire, Good Sancho, said he, help me once more into the Enchanted
Chariot; for I am not in a condition to mount at present; this Shoulder is all
broke to pieces. With all my heart, my good Lord, replied Sancho, and pray let
me advise you to go back to our Village with those Gentlemen who are your
special Friends. At home we may think of some other Journey that may be more to
the purpose than this. With reason have thou spoken, Sancho, replied Don
Quixote: It will become our Wisdom to be unactive till the malevolent Aspects
of the Planets which now reign be over. This grave Resolution was highly
commended by the Canon, Curate, and Barber, who had been sufficiently diverted
by Sancho Panca's ridiculous Lamentation. Don Quixote was placed in the Wagon
as before, The Processioners recovered their former Order, and past on about
their Business. The Goatherd took his leave of the whole Company. The Curate
satisfied the Officers for their Attendance, since they would stir no farther.
The Canon desired the Curate to send him an account of Don Quixote's Condition
from that time forward, having a mind to know whether his Phrenzy abated or
increased; and then took his leave to continue his Journey. Thus the Curate, the
Barber, Don Quixote, and Sancho Panca were left together; as also the good
Rozinante, that bore all these Passages as patiently as his Master. The
Waggoner then yoked his Oxen, and having set Don Quixote on a Truss of Hay,
jogged on after his slow accustomed pace that way the Curate had directed. In
six days time they reached the Knight's Village: 'Twas about noon when they
entered the Town; and as this happened to be on a Sunday, all the People were
in the Marketplace, through the middle of which Don Quixote's Cart must of
necessity pass. Every body was curious to know what was in it; and the People
were strangely surpised when they saw and knew their Townsman. While they were
gaping and wondering, a little Boy ran to the Knight's House, and gave
intelligence to the Housekeeper and Niece, that their Master was returned, and
very lean, pale, and frightful as a Ghost, stretched out at length on a Bundle
of Hay in a Wagon, and drawn along by a Team of Oxen.

'Twas a piteous Sight to see the wailing of those two poor Creatures; the
Blows too which they gave themselves, with the Curses and Execrations they
thundered out against all Books of Chivalry, were almost as numerous as their
Sighs and Tears: But the height of their lamenting was when Don Quixote entr'd
the Door. Upon the noise of his Arrival Sancho Panca's Wife made haste thither
to inquire after her good Man, who, she was informed, went a Squiring with the
Knight. As soon as ever she set Eyes on him, the question she asked him was
this: Is the Ass in health, or no? Sancho answered, he was come back in better
health than his Master Well, said she, Heaven be praised for the good News. But
hark you, my Friend! continued she; what have you got by this new Squireship?
Have you brought me home ever a Gown or Petticoat, or Shoes for my little
Boys? In troth, sweet Wife, replied Sancho, I have brought thee none of these
things; I am loaded with better things. Ay? said his Wife, that is well; Prithee
let me see some of them fine things; for I vow I Have a hugeous mind to she 'em;
the sight of 'em will comfort my poor Heart, which has been like to burst with
Sorrow and Grief ever since you went away. I Will show 'em thee when we come
home, returned Sancho; in the mean time rest satsfy'd; for, if Heaven see good
that we shall once again come abroad in search of other Adventures, within a
little time after, at my return, thou shall find me some Earl, or the Governor
of some Island; ay, of one of the very best in the whole World. I wish with all
my heart this may come to pass, replied the good Wife; for, by my troth,
Husband, we want it sorely. But what do you mean by that same word Islands? for
believe me I don't understand it. All in good time, Wife, said Sancho; Honey is
not made for an Asse's Mouth: I Will tell thee what it is hereafter. Thou will be
amazed to hear all thy Servants and Vassals never speak a word to thee without
an't please you Madam, an't like your Ladyship, and your Honor. What do thou
mean, Sancho, by Ladyship, Islands, and Vassals, asked Joan Panca? For so she
was called, tho her Husband and she were nothing akin, only it is a Custom in
La Mancha that the Wives are there called by their Husbands Sirnames. Prithee
Joan, said Sancho, dont't trouble thy head to know these Matters all at once,
and in a heap, as a body may say. Yet, by the way, one thing I will assure
thee, That nothing in the varsal World is better for an honest Man, than to be
Squire to a Knight Errant while he is hunting of Adventures. It Is true, most
Adventures he goes about do not answer a Man's Expectation so much as he could
wish; for of a hundred that are met with, ninety and nine are wont to be
crabbed and unlucky ones. This I know to my cost: I my self have got well
kicked and tossed in some of 'em, and soundly drub'd and belabour'd in others;
yet, for all that, it is rare sport to be a watching for strange Chances, to
cross Forests, to search and beat up and down in Woods, to scramble over Rocks,
to visit Castles, and take up Quarters in an Inn at pleasure, and all the while
the Devil a Cross to pay.

These were the Discourses with which Sancho Panca and his Wife Joan
entertained one another, while the Housekeeper and Niece undrest Don Quixote,
and put him into his Bed; where he lay looking very earnestly on 'em, but could
not imagine where he was. The Curate charged the Niece to be very careful and
tender of her Uncle, and to be very watchful, lest he should make a third
Sally; telling 'em what difficulty he had to get him home again. Here the Women
began their Out-crys again: Here the Books of Knight-Errantry were again
execrated and damned to the bottomless Pit. Here they begged those cursed
bewitching Chimeras and Lies might be thrown down into the very Center, to the
Hellish Father of 'em: For, they were still almost distracted with the fear of
losing their Master and Uncle afresh, immediately upon his Recovery; which
indeed succeeded according to their Fear. But, tho the Author of this History
has been very curious and diligent in his inquiry after Don Quixote's
Achievements in his third Expedition in quest of Adventures, yet he could
never learn a perfect account of 'em, at least from any Author of Credit. Fame
and Tradition alone have preserved some particulars of 'em in the Memoirs of
several Inhabitants of La Mancha; as, that after the Knight's third Sally, he
was present at certain famous Tilts and Tournaments made in the City of
Saragosa, where he met with Occasions worthy the exercise of his Sense and
Valor: But how the Knight died, our Author neither could nor ever should have
learned, if by good Fortune he had not met with an ancient Physician, who had a
Leaden Box in his possession, which, as he assured me, was found in the Ruins
of an old Hermitage, as it was rebuilding. In this Box were certain Scrolls of
Parchment written in Gothic Characters, but containing Verses in the Spanish
Tongue, in which many of his noble Acts were sung, and Dulcinea del Toboso's
Beauty celebrated, Rozinante's Figure described, and Sancho Panca's Fidelity
applauded. They likewise gave an account of Don Quixote's Sepulcher, with
several Epitaphs and Elogies on his Life and Manners. Those that could be
thoroughly read and transcribed, are here added by the faithful Author of this
New and Incomparable History; desiring no other Recompense or Reward of the
Readers for all his Labor and Pains in searching all the large and old Records
of La Mancha to perfect this matchless Piece, but that they will be pleased to
give it as much credit as judicious Men use to give to Books of
Knight-Errantry, which are now a days are so generally taking. This is the
utmost of his Ambition, and will be his Satisfaction, and will likewise
encourage him to furnish 'em with other matter of Entertainment; which, tho
possibly not altogether so true as this, yet it may be as fancyful and
diverting. The first Words in the Parchment found in the Leaden Box are these:

Cachidiablo, Academick of Argamasilla, on Don Quixote's Monument.

EPITAPH.
HERE lies a doughty Knight,
Who bruised, and ill in plight,
Jogged over many a Track
On Rosinante's Back.
Close by him Sancho's laid,
Whereat let none admire:
He was a Clown it is said,
But never the worse a Squire.
Tictoc, Academick of Argamasilla, on Dulcinea del Toboso's Monument.

EPITAPH.
HERE DULCINEA lies,
Once brawny, plump and lusty;
But now to Death a Prize,
And somewhat lean and musty.
For her the Country Fry,
Like Quixote, long stood steady.
Well might she carry't high;
Far less has made a Lady.
These were the Verses that could be read: As for the rest, the Characters
being defaced, and almost eaten away, they were delivered to a University
Student, in order that he might give us his Conjectures concerning their
meaning. And we are informed, that after many Lucubrations, and much Pains, he
has effected the Work; and intends to oblige the World with it, giving us at
the same time some hopes of Don Quixote's third Sally.

Por si altro cantera con miglior pletro. The End of the first Part, and of the
second Volume.
THE HISTORY Of the RENOWNED DON QUIXOTE De la MANCHA.

Written in Spanish, By Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra.

Translated from the Original by several Hands: And Published by Mr. Motteux.

VOL. III.

LONDON: Printed for Sam. Buckley at the Dolphin in Little Britain, 1712.

To the Right Honorable HENRY BOIL, Esquire; Chancellor of Her Majesty's
Exchequer, etc.
SIR,
IT IS a Hardship that I am destitute of other Means to acknowledge my
Obligations, than by hazarding the Forfeiture of my Pretenses to your Favor;
and that I am forced to repay your Acts of Generosity in this manner, by an
Imposition on your Humanity: But the Muses are of that Sex, which, if once
obliged, think they have a Right still to persecute their Benefactor.

The Encouragement You are pleased to give my Attempt upon Don Quixote was one
great Motive to my Prosecution of the Design; and, to crown my Endeavors with
a Success answerable, I must beg you to Patronize what you so generously
promoted. But abating these Apologies for my Presumption, I have one
unanswerable Plea, as I am a Translator: I must do my Author Justice; and if I
have learned any thing of the Humor of the Writer, by examining his Work, the
Great Cervantes, were he now alive, would have laid the Original where I
deposite the Copy: He would have chosen a Person, whose Illustrious Birth might
blazon his Book with Honor, whose Knowledge in polite Learning might silence
the Tongues of Criticism, and whose Personal Virtues might stop even the Mouth
of Envy. He would certainly have called for Protection to some Influence
superior to his own; and where could the Great Cervantes find it, but in the
Name of BOIL, a Name that Philosophy, Poetry and Literature have dressed with
all their Charms, that the World might know it for their Darling! I need nor,
Sir, particularize the Branches of your Illustrious House that are dignified
that way. Fame has them upon Record, and they may be found in all the private
Studies of England, all the Public Libraries in Europe; but most of all, Sir,
in your Self.

It Is a Reflection, Sir, upon Epistles Dedicatory, that all Writers address
their Patrons much after the same manner: But Men should consider that there is
a Transmigration of Virtue from one Illustrious Person to another, and that
whatever has been said of Maecenas, should for the same Reason be said of You.
His Capacity for arduous Affairs was highly evident, from his great Share in
the Management of Public Business. Your Employments in the State, with Your
Assiduity in the Senate, make you an Ornament to your Station, and a Benefit to
your Country. He was famous for his countenancing of Parts and Learning, and
you are no less eminent for your Encouragement of Arts and Ingenuity. The
Subject of our Praise is the same, the Roman is every way here, but there wants
a Virgil or a Horace to make the Parallel complete. Had I the Spirit of the
Poet, as you have the Qualifications of the Patron, I would with less Blushing,
and more Assurance, have ventured to own my self,

SIR, Your most Humble and most Obedient Servant, Peter Motteux.

THE Author's PREFACE.
BLess me! Reader, gentle or simple, or whatever you be, how impatiently by
this time must you expect this Preface, supposing it to be nothing but
revengeful Invectives against the Author of the A Person who wrote himself a
Native of Tordesillas, Published an Impertinent Book by that Name, Printed at
Tarragona, while our Author was preparing his second Part for the Press.
second Don Quixote. But I must beg your Pardon; for I shall say no more of him
than every body says, that Tordesillas is the Place where he was begotten, and
Tarragona the Place where he was Born; and thought it be universally said, that
even a Worm, when trod upon, will turn again, yet I Am resolved for once to
cross the Proverb. You perhaps now would have me call him Coxcomb, Fool, and
Madman; but I Am of another Mind; and so let his Folly be its own Punishment.
But there is something which I cannot so silently pass over: He is pleased to
upbraid me with my Age: Indeed had it been in the Power of Man to stop the
Career of Time, I would not have suffered the Old Gentleman to have laid his
Fingers on me. Then he reflectingly tells me of the Loss of one of my Hands; as
if that Maim had been got in a scandalous or drunken Quarrel in some Tavern,
and not upon the most memorable The Battle of Lepanto.
Occasion that either past, or present Ages have beheld, and which perhaps
Futurity will never parallel. If my Wounds do not redound to my Honor in the
thoughts of some of those that look upon 'em, they will at least secure me the
Esteem of those that know how they were gotten. A Soldier makes a nobler Figure
as he lies Bleeding in the Bed of Honor, than in an Inglorious Flight; and I
am so far from being ashamed of the loss of my Hand, that were it possible to
recall the same Opportunity, I should think my Wounds but a small Price for the
Glory of sharing in that Prodigious Action. The Scars in a Soldier's Face and
Breast, are the Stars that by a Laudable Imitation guide others to the Port of
Honor and Glory. Besides, it is not the Hand, but the Understanding of a Man,
that may be said to Write; and those Years that he is pleased to quarrel with,
always improve the latter.

I am not wholly insensible of his Epithets of Ignorant and Envious; but I take
Heaven to Witness, I never was acquainted with any Branch of Envy beyond a
sacred, generous, and ingenuous Emulation, which could never engage me to abuse
a Clergyman, especially if made the more Reverend by a Post in the
Inquisition: And if any such Person thinks himself affronted, as that Author
seems to hint, he is mightily mistaken; for I have a Veneration for his Parts,
admire his Works, and have an awful Regard for the Efficacious Virtue of his
Office.

I must return this fine Dogmatical Gentleman my hearty Thanks for his
Criticism upon my Novels: He is pleased very Judiciously to say, that they have
more of Satyr than of Morality; and yet owns that the Novels are good. Now I
thought that if a Thing was good, it must be so in every respect.

Methinks, Reader, I hear you blame me for showing so little Resentment, and
using him so gently; but pray consider, it is not good to bear too hard upon a
Man that is so over-modest, and so much in Affliction; for certainly this must
needs be a Miserable Soul: He has not the Face, poor Man, to appear in Public;
but, conscious of his wretched Circumstances, conceals his Name, and
counterfeits his Country, as if he had committed Treason, or some other
punishable Crime: Well then, if ever you should happen to fall into his
Company, pray in Pity tell him from me, that I have not the least Quarrel in
the World with him: For I am not Ignorant of the Temptations of Satan; and of
all his Imps, the Scribbling Devil is the most Irresistible. When that Demon is
got into a Man's Head, he takes the Possession for Inspiration, and full of his
false Ability, falls slap dash to Writing and Publishing, which gets him as
much Fame from the World, as he has Money from the Booksellers, and as little
Money from the Booksellers as he has Fame from the World. But if he will not
believe what you say, and you be disposed to be merry, pray tell him this Story.

Once upon a time, there was a Madman in Sevil that hit upon one of the
prettiest out-of-the-way Whims that ever Madman in this World was Possessed
withal. He gets him a hollow Cane, small at one end, and catching hold of a Dog
in the Street, or any where else, he clapped his Foot on one of the Cur's Legs,
and holding up his Hind-Leg in his Hand, he fitted his Cane to the Dog's
Backside, and blew him up as round as a Ball; then giving him a Thump or two
on the Guts, and turning to the Bystanders, who are always a great many upon
such Occasions: Well, Gentlemen, said he, What do you think? Is it such an ease
Matter to blow up a Dog? And what think you, Sir, Is it such an easy matter to
Write a Book? But if this Picture be not like him, pray, Honest Reader, tell
him this other Story of a Dog and a Madman.

There was a Madman at Cordova, who made it his Business to carry about the
Streets upon his Head a huge Stone of a pretty Conscionable Weight; and
whenever he met with a Dog without a Master, especially such a surly Cur as
would stalk up to his Nose, he very fairly dropped his Load all at once, souse,
upon him: The poor Beast would howl, and growl, and clapping his Tail between
his Legs, limp'd away without so much as looking behind him, for two or three
Streets length at least. The Madman, mightily pleased with his new Device,
served every Dog that had Courage to look him in the Face, with the same Sauce;
till one Day it was his Fortune to meet with a Sportsman's Dog, a Capmaker's by
Trade, though that is neither here nor there. The Dog was mightily valued by his
Master, but that was more than the Madman knew; for slap went the Stone upon
the poor Dog. The Animal being almost crushed to Death, set up his Throat, and
yelp'd most piteously; insomuch that his Master knowing 'twas his Dog by the
Howl, runs out, and touched with the Injury, whips up a Stick that was at Hand,
lets drive at the Madman, and belabours him to some Purpose, crying out at
every Blow, you Son of a Bitch, abuse my Spaniel! You Inhumane Rascal, did not
you know that my Dog was a Spaniel? And so thwack'd the poor Lunatic, till he
had not a whole Bone in his Skin. At last he crawled from under his Clutches,
and it was a whole Month before he could lick himself whole again.
Nevertheless, out he came once more with his Invention, and heavier it was than
the former; but coming by the same Dog again, though he had Month's Mind to
give him the other Dab; yet recollecting himself, and shrugging up his Shoulders:
No, quoth he, I must have a care, this Dog's a Spaniel. In short, all Dogs he
met, whether Mastiffs or Hounds, were downright Spaniels to him ever after. Now
the Moral of the Fable is this, this Author's Wit is the Mad-man's Stone, and
it is likely he will be cautious how he lets it fall for the future.

One Word more, and I have done with him. Pray tell the mighty Man, That as to
his Menaces of taking the Bread out of my Mouth, I shall only Answer him with a
piece of an Old Song, God Prosper long our Noble King, our Lives and Safeties
all, -- and so Peace be with him. Long live the great Conde de Lemos, whose
Humanity, and celebrated Liberality sustain me under the most severe Blows of
Fortune! And may the eminent Charity of the Cardinal of Toledo, make an Eternal
Monument to his Fame! Had I never Published a Word, and were as many Books
Published against me, as there are Letters in Mingo Revulgo's Poems; yet the
Bounty of these two Princes that has taken Charge of me, without any
Soliciting, or Adulation, were sufficient in my Favor: And I think my self
Richer and Greater in their Esteem, than I would of any Profitable Honor that
can be Purchased at the ordinary rate of Advancement. The Indigent Man may
attain their Favor, but the Vicious cannot. Poverty may partly Eclipse a
Gentleman, but cannot totally Obscure him; and those Glimmerings of Ingenuity
that peep through the Chinks of a narrow Fortune, have always gained the Esteem
of the truly Noble and Generous Spirits.

Now, Reader, I have done with him and you, only give me leave to tell you,
that this second Part of Don Quixote, which I now present you, is cut by the
same Hand, and of the same Piece with the first. Here you have the Knight once
more fitted out, and at last brought to his Death, and fairly laid in his
Grave; that no Body may presume to raise any more Stories of him. He has
committed Extravagancies enough already, he is sorry for it, and that is enough.
Too much of one thing clogs the Appetite, but Scarcity makes every thing go
down.

I forgot to tell you, that my Persiles is almost finished, and expects to kiss
your Hands in a little time, and the second Part of the Galatea will shortly
put in for the same Honor.

THE SECOND PART OF THE HISTORY Of the Renowned DON QUIXOTE DE LA MANCHA.
Part II. Vol. III.
CHAP. I. What passed between the Curate, the Barber, and Don Quixote;
concerning his Indisposition.
CID HAMET Benengeli relates in the Second Part of this History, and Don
Quixote's third Salley, that the Curate and the Barber were almost a whole
Month without giving him a Visit; lest calling to mind his former
Extravagancies, he might take occasion to renew 'em. However, they failed not
every Day to see his Niece, and his Housekeeper, whom they charged to treat
and cherish him with great Care, and to give him such Diet as might be most
proper to cheer his Heart, and comfort his Brain, whence in all likelihood his
Disorder wholly proceeded. They answered, that they did so, and would continue
it to their utmost power; the rather because they observed, that sometimes he
seemed to be in his right Senses. This News was very welcome to the Curate and
the Barber, who looked on this Amendment as an Effect of their contrivance, in
bringing him home in the Enchanted Wagon, as it is Recorded in the last Chapter
of the first Part of this most important, and no less punctual History.
Thereupon they resolved to give him a Visit, and make trial themselves of the
progress of a Cure, which they thought almost impossible. They also agreed not
to speak a Word of Knight-Errantry, lest they should endanger a Wound so lately
closed and so tender. In short, they went to see him, and found him sitting up
in his Bed in a Waste-coat of green Bays, and a red Toledo-Cap on his Head: But
the poor Gentleman was so withered and wasted, that he looked like a mere
Mummy. He received 'em very civilly, and when they inquired of his Health, gave
'em an account of his Condition, expressing himself very handsomely, and with a
great deal of Judgment. After they had discoursed a while of several Matters,
they fell at last on State Affairs and Forms of Government, Correcting this
Grievance, and Condemning that, Reforming one Custom, Rejecting another, and
Establishing new Laws, as if they had been the Lycurgus's or Solon's of the
Age; till they had refined and new modeled the Commonwealth at such a rate,
that they seemed to have clapped it into a Forge, and drawn it out wholly
different from what it was before. Don Quixote reasoned with so much Discretion
on every Subject, that his two Visitants now undoubtedly believed him in his
right Senses.

His Niece and Housekeeper were present at these Discourses; and hearing him
give so many marks of a sound Understanding, thought they could never return
Heaven sufficient thanks, for so extraordinary a Blessing. But the Curate, who
wondered at this strange amendment, being resolved to try whether Don Quixote
was perfectly recovered, thought fit to alter the Resolution he had taken to
avoid entering into any Discourse of Knight-Errantry; and therefore began to
talk to him of News, and among the rest, that it was credibly reported at
Court, that the Grand Seignior was advancing with a vast Army, and no Body knew
where the Tempest would fall; that all Christendom was alarmed, as it used to
be almost every Year; and that the King was providing for the Security of the
Coasts of Sicily and Naples, and the Island of Malta. His Majesty, said Don
Quixote, acts the part of a most prudent Warrior, in putting his Dominions
betimes in a Posture of Defense; for by that Precaution he prevents the
surprises of the Enemy: But yet if my Counsel were to be taken in this Matter,
I would advise another sort of Preparation which I fancy his Majesty little
thinks of at present. Now Heaven assist thee, poor Don Quixote, (said the
Curate to himself, hearing this) I am afraid thou art now tumbling from the top
of thy Madness, to the very bottom of Simplicity. Thereupon the Barber, who had
presently made the same Reflection, desired Don Quixote to Communicate to 'em
this mighty Project of his; for, said he, who knows but after all, it may be
one of those that are only to find a Place in the List of impertinent
Admonitions usually given to Princes. No, good Mr. Trimmer, answered Don
Quixote, my Project is not impertinent, but highly advisable. I meant no harm
in what I said, Sir, replied the Barber, only we generally find, most of these
Projects that are offered to the King, are either Impracticable or Whimsical,
or tend to the detriment of the King or Kingdom. But mine, said Don Quixote, is
neither impossible nor Ridiculous; far from that, it is the most easy, the most
thoroughly weighed, and the most concise, that ever can be devised by Man.
Methinks you are too long before you let us know it, Sir, said the Curate. To
deal freely with you, replied Don Quixote, I should be loath to tell it you
here now, and have it reach the Ear of some Privy-Counsellor to morrow, and so
afterward see the fruit of my Invention reaped by some Body else. As for me,
said the Barber, I give you my Word here, and in the Face of Heaven, never to
tell it, either to King, Queen, Rook, Pawn, or Knight, or any earthly Man: An
Oath I learned out of the Romance of the Curate, in the Preface to which he
tells the King who it was that Robbed him of his hundred Doublons, and his
Ambling Mule. I know nothing of the Story, said Don Quixote; but I have reason
to be satisfied with the Oath, because I Am confident Master Barber is an honest
Man. Though he were not, said the Curate, I Will be his Surety in this matter, and
will engage for him, that he shall no more speak of it, than if he were dumb,
under what Penalty you please. And who shall answer for you, Mr. Curate,
answered Don Quixote? My Profession, replied the Curate, which binds me to
Secrecy. Body of me then! cried Don Quixote, what has the King to do more but
to cause public Proclamation to be made, enjoining all the Knight-Errants that
are dispersed in this Kingdom, to make their Personal appearance at Court upon
a certain Day. For though but half a dozen should meet, there may be some one
among 'em, who even alone might be able to destroy the whole united Force of
Turkey. For pray observe well what I say, Gentlemen, and take me along with ye.
Do you look upon it as a new thing for one Knight Errant alone to Rout an Army
of two hundred thousand Men, with as much ease as if all of 'em joined together
had but one Throat, or were made of Sugar-paste? You know how many Histories
are full of these Wonders. Were but the Renowned Don Bellianis living now, with
a Vengeance on me, (for I Will Curse no Body else) or some Knight of the
innumerable Race of Amadis de Gaul, and he met with these Turks, what a^ woeful
Condition would they be in! However, I hope Providence will in Pity look down
upon his People, and raise up, if not so prevalent a Champion as those of
former Ages, at least, some one who may perhaps rival them in Courage; Heaven
knows my meaning; I say no more. Alas! said the Niece, bearing this, I Will lay
my Life, my Uncle has still a hankering after Knight-Errantry. I will die a
Knight Errant, cried Don Quixote, and so let the Turks Land where they please,
how they please, and when they please, and with all the Forces they can Muster;
once more I say, Heaven knows my meaning. Gentlemen, said the Barber, I beg
leave to tell you a short Story of somewhat that happened at Sevil: Indeed it
falls out as pat as if it had been made for our present purpose, and so I have
a great mind to tell it. Don Quixote gave Consent, the Curate and the rest of
the Company were willing to hear; and thus the Barber began.

A certain Person being Distracted, was put into the Mad-house at Sevil by his
Relations. He had Studied the Civil-Law, and taken his Degrees at Ossuna;
though, had he taken 'em at Salamanca, many are of opinion he would have been
mad too. After he had lived some Years in this Confinement, he was pleased to
fancy himself in his right Senses, and upon this conceit wrote to the
Archbishop, beseeching him with great earnestness, and all the color of Reason
imaginable, to release him out of his Misery by his Authority, since by the
Mercy of Heaven he was wholly freed from any disorder in his Mind; only his
Relations, he said, kept him in still to enjoy his Estate, and designed, in
spite of Truth, to have him Mad to his dying Day. The Archbishop, persuaded by
many Letters, which he wrote to him on that Subject, all Penned with Sense and
Judgment, ordered one of his Chaplains to enquire of the Governor of the House
into the truth of the matter, and also to Discourse with the Party, that he
might set him at large, in case he found him free from Distraction. Thereupon
the Chaplain went, and having asked the Governor what condition the Graduate
was in? Was answered, that he was still Mad, that sometimes indeed he would
talk like a Man of excellent Sense, but presently after he would relapse into
his former Extravagancies, which at least balanced all his rational Talk, as
he himself might find, if he pleased to Discourse him. The Chaplain being
resolved to make the Experiment, went to the Madman, and conversed with him
above an Hour, and in all that time could not perceive the least disorder in
his Brain; far from that, he delivered himself with so much sedateness, and
gave such direct and pertinent Answers to every Question, that the Chaplain was
obliged to believe him sound in his Understanding; nay, he went so far, as to
make a plausible Complaint against his Keeper, alleging, that, for the lucre
of those Presents which his Relations sent him, he represented him to those who
came to see him, as one who was still distracted, and had only now and then
lucid Intervals; but that after all, his greatest Enemy was his Estate, the
Possession of which his Relations being unwilling to resign, they would not
acknowledge the Mercy of Heaven, that had once more made him a rational
Creature. In short, he pleaded in such a manner, that the Keeper was suspected,
his Relations were censured as Covetous and Unnatural, and he himself was
thought Master of so much Sense, that the Chaplain resolved to take him along
with him, that the Archbishop might be able to satisfy himself of the Truth of
the whole Business. In order to this, the Credulous Chaplain desired the
Governor to give the Graduate the Habit which he had brought with him at his
first coming. The Governor used all the Arguments which he thought might
dissuade the Chaplain from his Design, assuring him, that the Man was still
Frantic and disordered in his Brain. But he could not prevail with him to
leave the Madman there any longer, and therefore was forced to comply with the
Archbishop's Order, and returned the Man his Habit, which was neat and decent.

Having now Put off his Madman's Weeds, and finding himself in the Garb of
rational Creatures, he begged of the Chaplain, for Charity's sake, to permit
him to take leave of his late Companions in Affliction. The Chaplain told him
he would bear him Company, having a mind to see the Mad-folks in the House. So
they went up Stairs, and with them some other People that stood by. Presently
the Graduate came to a kind of a Cage, where lay a Man that was outrageously
Mad, though at that Instant still and quiet; and addressing himself to him,
Brother, said he, have you any Service to command me? I am just going to my own
House, thanks be to Heaven, which, of its infinite Goodness and Mercy, has
restored me to my Senses. Be of good Comfort, and put your Trust in the Father
of Wisdom, who will, I hope, be as Merciful to you as he has been to me. I Will
be sure to send you some choice Victuals, which I would have you eat by all
means; for I must needs tell you, that I have Reason to imagine, from my own
Experience, that all our Madness proceeds from keeping our Stomachs empty of
Food, and our Brains full of Wind. Take heart then, my Friend, and be cheerful;
for, this desponding in Misfortunes impairs our Health, and hurries us to the
Grave. Just over against that Room lay another Madman, who having listened
with an envious Attention to all this Discourse, starts up from an old Mat on
which he lay stark naked; Who Is that, cried he aloud, that is going away so well
recovered, and so wise? It Is I, Brother, that am going, replied the Graduate; I
have now no need to stay here any longer; for which Blessing I can never cease
to return my humble and hearty Thanks to the infinite Goodness of Heaven. Dr.
quoth the Madman, have a Care what you say, and let not the Devil delude you.
Stir not a Foot, but keep snug in your old Lodging, and save your self the
cursed Vexation of being brought back to your Kennel. Nay, answered the other,
I Will warrant you there will be no Occasion for my coming hither again; I know I
am perfectly Well. You Well! cried the Madman, we shall soon see that. --
Farewell, but, by the Sovereign Jupiter, whose Majesty I represent on Earth,
for this very Crime alone, for setting thee at large, I say, and presumptuously
affirming that thou art sound in thy Intellects, I will take such a severe
Revenge on this whole City, that it shall be remembered with Terror from Age to
Age, and for ever and aye. Do thou not know, my poor Brainless Thing in a
Gown, that this is in my Power? I that am the Thundering Jove, that grasp in my
Hands the red-hot Bolts of Heaven, with which I keep the threatened World in
awe, and might reduce it all to Ashes. But stay, I will commute the fiery
Punishment, which this ignorant Town deserves, into another: I will only shut
up the Floodgates of the Skies, so that there shall not fall a Drop of Rain
upon this City, nor on all the neighboring Country round about it for three
Years together; to begin from the very Moment that gives Date to this my
inviolable Execration. Thou free! thou well, and in thy Senses! and I here,
mad, distempered, and confined! By my Thunder, I will no more indulge the Town
with Rain, than I would hang my self. As every one there was attentive to these
loud and frantic Threats, the Graduate turned to the Chaplain, and taking him
by the Hand, Sir, said he, let not that Mad-man's Threats trouble you. Never
mind him; for, if he be Jupiter, and will not let it Rain, I am Neptune the
Parent and God of the Waters, and it shall Rain as often as I please, where
ever Necessity shall require it. However, answered the Chaplain, good Mr.
Neptune, it is not convenient to provoke Mr. Jupiter: Therefore be pleased to
stay here a little longer, and some other Time at convenient Leisure, I may
chance to find a better Opportunity to wait on you, and bring you away. The
Keeper and the rest of the Company could not forbear Laughing, which put the
Chaplain almost out of Countenance. In short, Mr. Neptune was disrobed again,
stayed where he was, and there is an end of the Story.

Well, Mr. Barber, said Don Quixote, and this is your Tale which you said came
so pat to the present purpose, that you could not forbear telling it! Ah,
Good Man Cut-beard, Good Man Cut-beard! How blind must he be that cannot see
through a Sieve! Is it possible your pragmatical Worship should not know that
Comparisons made between Wit and Wit, Courage and Courage, Beauty and Beauty,
Birth and Birth, are always Odious and ill taken. I am not Neptune the God of
the Waters, good Mr. Barber; neither do I pretend to set up for a wise Man when
I am not so. All I aim at, is only to make the World sensible how much they are
to blame, in not laboring to revive those most happy Times, in which the Order
of Knight-Errantry was in its full Glory. But indeed, this degenerate Age of
ours is unworthy the Enjoyment of so great a Happiness, which former Ages could
boast, when Knights-Errant took upon themselves the Defense of Kingdoms, the
Protection of Damsels, the Relief of Orphans, the Punishment of Pride and
Oppression, and the Reward of Humility. Most of your Knights nowadays keep a
greater Rustling with their Sumptuous Garments of Damask, Gold-Brocade, and
other costly Stuffs, than with the Coats of Mail, which they should glory to
wear. No Knight now will lie on the hard Ground in the open Field, exposed to
the injurious Air, from Head to Foot enclosed in ponderous Armor: Where are
those now, who without taking their Feet out of the Stirrups, and only leaning
on their Lances, like the Knights-Errant of Old, strive to disappoint invading
Sleep, rather than indulge it? Where is that Knight, who having first traversed
a spacious Forest, climbed up a steep Mountain, and journey'd over a dismal
barren Shore, washed by a turbulent tempestuous Sea, and finding on the Brink a
little Skiff destitute of Sails, Oars, Mast, or any kind of Tackling, is yet so
bold as to throw himself into the Boat with an undaunted Resolution, and
resigns himself to the implacable Billows of the Main, that now mount him to
the Skies, and then hurry him down to the most profound Recesses of the Waters;
till, with his insuperable Courage, surmounting at last the Hurricane, even in
its greatest Fury, he finds himself above three thousand Leagues from the Place
where he first embarked, and leaping ashore in a remote and unknown Region,
meets with Adventures that deserve to be recorded, not only on Parchment, but
on Corinthian Brass. But now, alas! Sloth and Effeminacy triumph over Vigilance
and Labor, Idleness over Industry, Vice over Virtue, Arrogance over Valor,
and the Theory of Arms over the Practice, that true Practice, which only lived
and flourished in those Golden Days, and among those Professors of Chivalry.
For, where shall we hear of a Knight more Valiant and more Honorable than the
Renowned Amadis de Gaul? Who more discreet than Palmerin of England? Who more
Affable and Complaisant than Tirante the White? Who more Gallant than Lisuarte
of Greece? Who more Cut and Hacked, or a greater Cutter and Hacker than Don
Bellianis? Who more intrepid than Perion of Gaul? Who more Daring than
Felixmarte of Hyrcania? Who more Sincere than Esplandian? Who more Courteous
than Ciriongilio of Thrace? Who more Brave than Rodomont? Who more Prudent than
King Sobrino? Who more Desperate than Rinaldo? Who more Invincible than
Orlando? And who more Agreeable or more Courteous than Rogero? from whom,
(according to Turpin in his Geography) the Dukes of Ferrara are Descended? All
these Champions, Mr. Curate, and a great many more that I could mention, were
Knights-Errant, and the very Light and Glory of Chivalry; now, such as these
are the Men I would advise the King to employ; by which means his Majesty would
be effectually served, and freed from a vast Expense, and the Turk would tear
his very Beard for Madness. For my part, I don't design to stay where I am,
because the Chaplain will not fetch me out; though, if Jupiter, as Mr. Barber
said, will send no Rain, here stands one that will, and can Rain, when he
pleases. This I say, that Good Man Basin here may know I understand his
meaning. Truly, good Sir, said the Barber, I meant no ill, Heaven is my
Witness, my Intent was good; and therefore I hope your Worship will take
nothing amiss. Whether I ought to take it amiss or no, replied Don Quixote, is
best known to my self. Well, said the Curate, I have hardly spoken a Word yet;
and before I go, I would gladly be eased of a Scruple, which Don Quixote's
Words started within me, and which grates and gnaws my Conscience. Mr. Curate
may be free with me in greater Matters, said Don Quixote, and so may well tell
his Scruple; for it is no Pleasure to have a Burden upon one's Conscience. With
your leave then, Sir, said the Curate, I must tell you, that I can by no means
prevail with my self to believe, that all this Multitude of Knights-Errant,
which your Worship has mentioned, were ever real Men of this World, and true
substantial Flesh and Blood; but rather, that whatever is said of 'em is all
Fable and Fiction, Lies and Dreams, related by Men rather half asleep than
awake. This is indeed another Mistake, said Don Quixote, into which many have
been led, who do not believe there ever were any of those Knights in the World.
And in several Companies, I have many Times had occasion to vindicate that
manifest Truth from the almost universal Error, that is entertained to its
Prejudice, Sometimes my Success has not been answerable to the Goodness of my
Cause, though at others is has; being supported on the Shoulders of Truth,
which is so apparent, that I dare almost say, I have seen Amadis de Gaul with
these very Eyes. He was a tall comely Personage, of a good and lively.
Complexion, his Beard well shaped and black, his Aspect at once awful and
affable: A Man of few Words, slowly provoked, and quickly pacified. And, as I
have given you the Picture of Amadis, I fancy I could readily delineate all the
Knights-Errant that are to be met with in History: For once apprehending, as I
do, that they were just such as their Histories report 'em, it is an easy matter
to guess their Features, Statures and Complexions, by the Rules of ordinary
Philosophy, and the Account we have of their Achievements, and various
Humors. Pray, good Sir, quoth the Barber, how tall then might the Giant
Morgante be? Whether there ever were Giants or no, answered Don Quixote, is a
Point much controverted among the Learned. However, the Holy Writ, that cannot
deviate an Atom from Truth, informs us there, were some, of which we have an
Instance in the account it gives us of that huge Philistine, Goliath, who was
seven Cubit^ and a half high; which is a prodigious Stature. Besides, in Sicily
Thigh-bones and Shoulder-bones have been found of so immense a Size, that from
thence of Necessity we must conclude by the certain Rules of Geometry, that the
Men to whom they belonged were Giants, as big as huge Steeples. But, for all
this, I cannot positively tell you how big Morgante was; though I am apt to
believe he was not very tall, and that which makes me inclinable to believe so,
is, that in the History which gives us a particular account of his Exploits, we
read, that he often used to lie under a Roof. Now if there were any House that
could hold him, it is evident he could not be of an extraordinary bigness. That
must be granted, said the Curate, who took some Pleasure in hearing him talk at
that strange Rate, and therefore asked him what his Sentiments were of the
Faces of Rinaldo of Montalbon, Orlando, and the rest of the twelve Peers of
France, who had all of 'em been Knights-Errant? As for Rinaldo, answered Don
Quixote, I dare venture to say, he was broad-fac'd, of a ruddy Complexion, his
Eyes sparkling and large, very Captious, extremely Choleric, and a Favourer of
Robbers and profligate Fellows. As for Rolando, Rotolando, or Orlando (for all
these several Names are given him in History) I am of Opinion and assure my
self, that he was of a mean Stature, broad-shoulder'd, somewhat bandy-legg'd,
brown-visag'd, red-bearded, very hairy on his Body, surly-look'd, no Talker,
but yet very civil and good-humored. If Orlando was no handsomer than you tell
us, said the Curate, no wonder if the fair Angelica slighted him, and preferred
the brisk, pretty, charming, downy-chinn'd young Moor before him; neither was
she to blame to neglect the Roughness of the one for the soft Embraces of the
other. That Angelica, Mr Curate, said Don Quixote, was a dissolute Damsel, a
wild flirting wanton Creature, and somewhat capricious to boot. She left the
World as full of her Impertinences as of the Fame of her Beauty. She despised a
thousand Princes, a thousand of the most valiant and discreet Knights in the
whole World, and took up with a paultry beardless Page, that had neither Estate
nor Honor, and who could lay Claim to no other Reputation, but that of being
grateful, when he gave a Proof of his Affection to his Friend Dardinel. And
indeed, even that great Extoller of her Beauty, the celebrated Ariosto, either
not daring, or rather not desiring to rehearse what happened to Angelica, after
she had so basely Prostituted her self (which Passages doubtless could not be
very much to her Reputation) that very Ariosto, I say, dropped her Character
quite, and left her with these Verses.

Perhaps some better Lyre shall sing,
How Love and she made him Cataya's King.
And without doubt this was a kind of a Prophecy; for the Denomination of
Vates, which signifies a Prophet, is common to those whom we otherwise call
Poets. Accordingly indeed this Truth has been made evident; for in Process of
Time, a famous Andalusian Poet wept for her, and celebrated her Tears in Verse;
and another eminent and choice Poet of Castile, made her Beauty his Theme. But,
pray Sir, said the Barber, among so many Poets that have written in that Lady
Angelica's Praise, did none of 'em ever write a Satyr upon her? Had Sacripante,
or Orlando been Poets, answered Don Quixote, I make no Question but they would
have handled her to some purpose; for there is nothing more common than for cast
Poets, when disdained by their feigned or false Mistresses, to revenge
themselves with Satyrs and Lampoons; a Proceeding certainly unworthy a generous
Spirit. However, I never yet did hear of any Defamatory Verses on the Lady
Angelica, though she made to much Mischief in the World. That Is a Miracle indeed,
cried the Curate. But here they were interrupted by a Noise below in the Yard,
where the Niece and the Housekeeper, who had left 'em some Time before, were
very Obstreperous, which made 'em all hasten to know what was the Matter.

CHAP. II. Of the memorable Quarrel between Sancho Panca, and Don Quixote's
Niece and Housekeeper; with other pleasant Passages.
THE History informs us, that the Occasion of the Noise which the Niece and
Housekeeper made, was Sancho Panca's endeavoring to force his way into the
House, while they at the same Time held the Door against him to keep him out.
What have you to do in this House, ye Paunch gutted Squob, cried one of 'em?
Go, go, keep to your own home, Friend. It Is all along of you, and no body else,
that my poor Master is Distracted; Debauched, and carried a Rambling all the
Country over. Thou Housekeeper for the Devil, replied Sancho, It Is I that am
Distracted, Debauched, and carried a Rambling, and not your Master. 'Twas ^he
led me the Jaunt; for you are wide of the Matter. 'Twas he that inveigled me
from my House and Home with his Colloguing, and saying he would give me an
Island, which is not come yet, and I still wait for. May thou be Choked
with thy Plaguey Islands, cried the Niece, thou cursed Paunch! And what are your
Islands? Any thing to Eat, Good Man Greedy-gut, ha? Hold you there, answered
Sancho! They are not to Eat, but to Govern; and better Governments than any
four Cities. or as many Heads of the King's best Corporations. For all that,
quoth the Housekeeper, thou come not within these Doors, thou Bundle of
Wickedness, and Sack-full of Roguery! Go, govern your own House, Work you lazy
Rogue! To the Plough, and never trouble your Jolter-head about Islands or
Oylets. The Curate and the Barber took a great deal of Pleasure to hear this
Dialogue. But Don Quixote fearing lest Sancho should not keep within Bounds,
but blunder-out some Discoveries prejudicial to his Reputation, while he ripp'd
up a pack of little foolish Slander, called him in, and enjoined the Women to
be silent Sancho entered, and the Curate and the Barber took leave of Don
Quixote, despairing of his Cure, considering how deep his folly was rooted in
his Brain, and how bewitched he was with his silly Knight-Errantry. Well,
Neighbor, said the Curate to the Barber, now do I expect nothing better of our
Gentleman, than to hear shortly he is gone upon another Ramble. Nor I neither,
answered the Barber; but I don't wonder so much at the Knight's Madness, as at
the Silliness of the Squire, who thinks himself so sure of the Island, that I
fancy all the Art of Man could never beat it out of his Scull. Heaven mend 'em,
said the Curate! In the mean time let us observe 'em; we shall find what will
be the Event of ^ao Extravagance of the Knight, and the foolishess of the
Squire. One would think they had been cast in one Mould; and indeed the
Master's Madness without the Man's Impertinence, were not worth a Rush. It Is
so, said the Barber, and now they are together, methinks I long to know what
passes between 'em. I don't doubt but the two Women will be able to give an
account of that, for they are not of a Temper to withstand the Temptation of
Listening. Mean while Don Quixote having Locked himself up with his Squre, they
had the following Colloquy. I take it very ill, said he, Sancho, that you
should report, as you do, that I enticed you out of your paltry Hut, when you
know, that I my self, left my own Mansion House. We set out together, continued
together, and traveled together. We ran the same Fortune, and the same Hazards
together. If thou have been tossed in a Blanket once, I have been battered and
bruised a hundred Times, and that is all the Advantage I have had above thee.
And reason good, answered Sancho; for you your self use to say, that Ill-luck
and Cross-Bitings are oftener to light on the Knights than on their Squires.
Thou art mistaken, Sancho, replied Don Quixote; for the Proverb will tell thee,
that Quando caput dolet, etc. Nay, quoth Sancho, I understand no Language but
my own. I mean, said Don Quixote, that when the Head aches, all the Members
partake of the Pain: So then, as I am thy Master, I am also thy Head; and as
thou art my Servant, thou art one of my Members; it follows therefore, that I
cannot be sensible of Pain, but thou too ought to be affected with it; and
likewise that nothing of ill can befall thee, but I must bear a Share. Right,
quoth Sancho; but yet when I, as a Limb of you, was tossed in a Blanket, my
Head was pleased to stay a' the other side the Wall, and saw me frisking in the
Air, without going Snacks in my Bodily Trouble. Thou art greatly mistaken,
Sancho, answered Don Quixote, if thou think I was not sensible of thy
Sufferings: For I was then more Tortured in Mind, than thou wast tormented in
Body; but let us adjourn this Discourse till some other Time, which doubtless
will afford us an Opportunity to redress past Grievances I pray thee tell me
now what does the Town say of me? What do the Neighbors, what do the People
think of me? What say the Gentry, and the better sort? How do the Knights
discourse of my Valor, my high Feats of Arms, and my courteous Behavior? What
Thoughts do they entertain of my Design to raise from the Grave of Oblivion the
Order of Knight-Errantry, and restore it to the World? In short, tell me freely
and sincerely whatever thou have heard; neither enlarged with flattering
Commendations, nor lessened by any Omission of my Dispraise; for it is the Duty
of Faithful Servants to lay Truth before their Masters in its Honorable
Nakedness. And I would have thee know, Sancho, that if it were to appear before
Princes, in its Native Simplicity, and disrobed of the odious Disguise of
Flattery, we should see happier Days; this Age would be changed into an Age of
Gold, and former Times compared to this, would be called the Iron Age. Remember
this, and be advised, that I may hear thee impart a faithful Account of these
Matters. That I will, with all my Heart, answered Sancho, so your Worship will
not take it amiss, if I tell what I have heard, just as I heard it, and neither
better nor worse. Nothing shall provoke me to Anger, answered Don Quixote;
speak freely, and without any Circumlocution. Why then, quoth Sancho, first and
foremost you are to know, that the common People take you for a downright
Madman, and me for one that has not much Guts in his Brains. The Gentry say,
that not being content to keep within the Bounds of Gentility, you have taken
upon you to be a Don, and set up for a Knight, and Right Worshipful, with a
small Vineyard, and two Acres of Land, a Tatter before, and another behind. The
Knights forsooth, take Pepper in the Nose, and say, they don't like to have your
small Gentry think themselves as good as they, especially your Old-fashioned
Country Squires that mend and Lamp-black their own Shoes, and darn ye their old
black Stockings themselves with a Needleful of Green Silk. All this does not
affect me, said Don Quixote, for I always wear good Clothes, and never have 'em
patched. It Is true, they may be a little torn sometimes, but that is more with
my Armor than my long Wearing. As for what relates to your Prowess, (said
Sancho proceeding) together with your Feats of Arms, your courteous Behavior,
and your Undertaking, there are several Opinions about it. Some say he is Mad,
but a pleasant sort of a Madman; others say he is Valiant, but his Luck is
naught; others, he is Courteous, but damned Impertinent. And thus they spend so
many Verdicts upon you, and take us both so to pieces, that they leave neither
you nor me a sound Bone in our Skins. Consider Sancho, said Don Quixote, that
the more eminently Virtue shines, the more it is exposed to the Persecution of
Envy. Few or none of those Famous Heroes of Antiquity, could escape the
Venomous Arrows of Calumny. Julius Caesar, that most Courageous, Prudent and
Valiant Captain, was marked, as being Ambitious, and neither so clean in his
Apparel, nor in his Manners as he ought to have been. Alexander, whose mighty
Deeds gained him the Title of the Great, was charged with being addicted to
Drunkenness. Hercules, after his many Heroic Labors was-accus'd of
Voluptuousness and Effeminacy. Don Galaor, the Brother of Amadis de Gaul, was
taxed with being Quarrelsome, and his Brother himself with being a Whining,
Blubbering Lover. And therefore, my Sancho, since so many Worthies have not
been free from the Attacks of Detraction, well may I be content to bear my
Share of that Epidemical Calamity, if it be no more than thou have told me now.
Body of my Father! quoth Sancho, there is the Business; you say well, if this
were all: But they don't stop here. Why, said Don Quixote, what can they say
more? More, cried Sancho, Oddsnigs! we are still to flea the Cat's Tail. You
have had nothing yet but Apple-Pies and Sugar-Plumbs. But if you have a Mind to
hear all those Slanders and Back-bitings that are about Town concerning your
Worship, I Will bring you one anon that shall tell you every kind of thing that is
said of you, without bating you an Ace on it; Bartholomew Carrasco's Son I mean,
who has been a Scholard at the Versity of Salamanca, and is got to be a
Bachelor of Arts. He came last Night, you must know, and as I went to bid him
welcome home, he told me, that your Worship's History is already in Books, by
the Name of the most Renowned Don Quixote de la Mancha. He says I am in too, by
my own Name of Sancho Panca, and eke also my Lady Dulcinea del Toboso; nay, and
many things that passed betwixt no body but us two, which I was amazed to hear,
and could not for my Soul imagine, how the Devil he that set 'em down could
come by the Knowledge of 'em. I dare assure thee, Sancho, said Don Quixote,
that the Author of our History must be some Sage Inchantor, and one of those,
from whose universal Knowledge, none of the things which they have a Mind to
Record can be concealed. How should he be a Sage and an Inchanter, quoth
Sancho? The Bachelor Sampson Carrasco, for that is the Name of my Tale's
Master, tells me, he that wrote the History, is called Cid Hamet, A sort of
Fruit in Spain, which they boil with their Beef and Mutton, as we do Carrots,
etc.
Berengenas. That Is a Moorish Name, said Don Quixote. Like enough, quoth
Sancho; your Moors are main Lovers of Berengenas. Certainly, Sancho, said Don
Quixote, thou art mistaken in the Surname of that Cid, that Lord, I mean; for
Cid in Arabic, signifies Lord. That may very well be, answered Sancho. But if
you will have me fetch you the young Scholard, I Will fly to bring him hither.
Truly, Friend, said Don Quixote, thou will do me a particular Kindness; for
what thou have already told me, has so sill'd me with Doubts and Expectations,
that I shall not eat a Bit that will do me good till I am informed of the whole
Matter. I Will go and fetch him, said Sancho. With that, leaving his Master, he
went to look for the Bachelor, and having brought him along with him a while
after, they all had a very pleasant Dialogue.

CHAP. III. The pleasant Discourse between Don Quixote, Sancho Panca, and the
Bachelor Sampson Carrasco.
DON Quixote remained strangely pensive, expecting the Bachelor Carrasco, from
whom he hoped to hear News of himself, Recorded and Printed in a Book, as
Sancho had informed him: He could not be persuaded that there was such a
History extant, while yet the Blood of those Enemies he had cut off had scarce
done reeking on the Blade of his Sword; so that they could not have already
finished and printed the History of his Mighty Feats of Arms. However, at last
he concluded, that some Learned Sage had, by the way of Enchantment, been able
to commit them to the Press, either as a Friend, to extol his Heroic
Achievements above the Noblest Performances of the most Famous Knights-Errant,
or as an Enemy, to fully and annihilate the Luster of his great Exploits, and
debase 'em below the most inferior Actions that ever were mentioned of any of
the meanest Squires. Though (thought he to himself) the Actions of Squires were
never yet Recorded; and after all, if there were such a Book Printed, since it
was the History of a Knight Errant, it could not choose but be Pompous, Lofty,
Magnificent and Authentic. This Thought yielded him a while some small
Consolation; but then he relapsed into Melancholic Doubts and Anxieties, when
he considered that the Author had given himself the Title of Cid, and
consequently must be a Moor: A Nation from whom no Truth could be expected,
they all being given to impose on others with Lies and fabulous Stories, to
Falsify and Counterfeit, and very fond of their own Chimera's. He was not less
uneasy, lest that Writer should have been too lavish in treating of his
Amors, to the Prejudice of his Lady Dulcinea del Toboso's Honor. He earnestly
wished, that he might find his own inviolable Fidelity celebrated in the
History, and the Reservedness and Decency which he had always so Religiously
observed in his Passion for her; slighting Queens, Empresses, and Damsels of
every degree for her sake, and suppressing the dangerous impulses of natural
Desire. Sancho and Carrasco found him thus agitated and perplexed with a
thousand melancholic Fancies, which yet did not hinder him from receiving the
Stranger with a great deal of Civility.

This Batchelour, though his Name were Sampson, was none of the biggest in
Body, but a very great Man at all manner of Drollery; he had a Pale and bad
Complexion, but good Sense. He was about four and twenty years of Age, round
Visag'd, flat Nosed, and wide Mouthed, all signs of a malicious Disposition,
and of one that would delight in nothing more than in making Sport for himself,
by Ridiculing others; as he plainly discovered when he saw Don Quixote. For,
falling on his Knees before him, admit me to kiss your Honor's Hand, cried he,
most Noble Don Quixote; for by the Habit of St. Peter, which I wear, (though
indeed I have as yet taken but the four first of the Holy Orders) you are
certainly one of the most Renowned Knights-Errant that ever was, or ever will
be through the whole extent of the habitable Globe. Blessed, may the Sage Cid
Hamet Benengeli be, for enriching the World with the History of your mighty
Deeds; and more than Blessed, that curious Virtuoso, who took care to have it
Translated out of the Arabic into our vulgar Tongue, for the universal
Entertainment of Mankind! Sir, said Don Quixote, making him rise, is it then
possible that my History is extant, and that it was a Moor, and one of the
Sages that Penned it? It Is so notorious a Truth, said the Batchelour, that I do
not in the least doubt but at this Day there have already been Published above
twelve thousand Copies of it. Portugal, Barcelona, and Valencia, where they
have been Printed, can Witness that, if there were occasion. It Is said, that
it is also now in the Press at Antwerp. And I verily believe there is scarce a
Language into which it is not to be Translated. Truly, Sir, said Don Quixote,
one of the things that ought to yield the greatest Satisfaction to a Person of
eminent Virtue, is to live to see himself in good Reputation in the World, and
his Actions published in Print. I say in good Reputation, for otherwise there is
no Death but would be preferable to such a Life. As for a good Name and
Reputation, replied Carrasco, your Worship has gained the Palm from all the
Knight-Errants that ever lived: For, both the Arabian in his History, and the
Christian in his Version, have been very Industrious to do Justice to your
Character; your peculiar Gallantry, your Intrepidity and greatness of Spirit in
affronting Danger; your Constancy in Adversities, your Patience in suffering
Wounds and Afflictions; your Modesty and Continence in that Amor, so very
Platonic, between your Worship and my Lady Donna Dulcinea del Toboso. Odsbobs!
cried Sancho, I never heard her called so before, that Donna is a new kick; for
she used to be called only my Lady Dulcinea del Toboso; in that, the History is
out already. That Is no material Objection, said Carrasco. No, certainly, added
Don Quixote; But pray, good Mr. Bachelor, on which of all my Adventures does
the History seem to lay the greatest stress of Remark? As to that, answered
Carrasco, the Opinions of Men are divided according to their Tastes: Some cry
up the Adventure of the Wind-mills, which appeared to your Worship so many
Briareus's and Giants. Some are for that of the Fulling-mills: Others stand up
for the Description of the two Armies, that afterward proved two Flocks of
Sheep. Others prize most the Adventure of the dead Corpse that was carrying to
Segovia. One says that none of them can compare with that of the Galley-Slaves;
another, that none can stand in Competition with the Adventure of the
Benedictine Giants and the Valorous Biscayner. Pray, Mr. Bachelor, quoth
Sancho, is there nothing said of that of the Yanguesians, an't please you, when
our precious Rozinante was so Mawl'd for offering to take a little Carnal
Recreation with their Mares? There Is not the least thing omitted, answered
Carrasco; the Sage has inserted all with the nicest punctuality imaginable; so
much as the Capers which honest Sancho fetched in the Blanket. I fetched none
in the Blanket quoth Sancho, but in the Air; and that too, oftener than I could
have wished, the more my Sorrow. In my Opinion, said Don Quixote, there is no
manner of History in the World, where you shall not find variety of Fortune;
much less any Story of Knight-Errantry, where a Man cannot always be sure of
good Success. However, said Carrasco, some who have read your History, wish
that the Author had spared himself the pains of Regist'ring some of that
infinite number of Drubs which the Noble Don Quixote received. There lies the
Truth of the History, quoth Sancho. Those things in human Equity, said Don
Quixote, might very well have been omitted; for Actions that neither impair nor
alter the History, ought rather to be buried in Silence than related, if they
redound to the Discredit of the chief Person. Certainly Aeneas was never so
Pious as Virgil represents him, nor Ulysses so Prudent as he is made by Homer.
I am of your Opinion said Carrasco; but it is one thing to write like a Poet,
and another thing to write like an Historian. It Is sufficient for the first to
deliver matters as they ought to have been, whereas the last must relate 'em as
they were really transacted, without adding or omitting any thing, upon any
pretense whatever. Well, quoth Sancho, if this same Moorish Lord be once got
into the Road of Truth, a hundred to one but among my Master's Rib-roastings he
has not forgot mine; for they never took Measure of his Worship's Shoulders,
but they were pleased to do as much for my whole Body: But 'twas no Wonder; for
it is his own Rule, that if once his Head aches, every Limb must suffer too.
Sancho, said Don Quixote, you are an arch unlucky Knave; upon my Honor you can
find Memory when you have a mind to have it. Nay, quoth Sancho, though I were
minded to forget the Rubs and Drubs I have suffered, the Bumps and Tokens that
are yet fresh on my Ribs would not let me. Hold your Tongue, said Don Quixote,
and let the Learned Bachelor proceed, that I may know what the History says of
me. And of me too, quoth Sancho, for they tell me I am one of the top Parsons
in it. Persons, you should say, Sancho, said Carrasco, and not Parsons. Hey-day!
quoth Sancho, have we got another Corrector of hard Words. If this be the
Trade, we shall never have done. May I be cursed, said Carrasco, if you be not
the second Person in the History, honest Sancho; nay, and some there are who
had rather hear you talk than the best there; though some there are again that
will say, you were horribly Credulous to flatter your self with having the
Government of that Island, which your Master here present promised you. While
there is Life there is Hope, said Don Quixote; when Sancho is grown Mature with
Time and Experience, he may be better qualified for a Government, than he is
yet. Odsbodikins! Sir, quoth Sancho, if I been't fit to Govern an Island at
these Years, I shall never be a Governor, though I live to the Years of
Methusalah; but there the Mischief lies, we have Brains enough, but we want the
Island. Come, Sancho, said Don Quixote, hope for the best; trust in Providence;
all will be well, and perhaps better than you imagine: But know, there is not a
Leaf on any Tree that can be moved without the permission of Heaven. That Is
very true, said Carrasco; and I dare say, Sancho shall not want a thousand
Islands to Govern, much less one, that is, if it be Heaven's Will. Why not,
quoth Sancho? I have seen Governors in my time, who, to my thinking, could not
come up to me passing the Sole of my Shoes, and yet forsooth, they called them
your Honor, and they eat their Victuals all in Silver. Ay, said Carrasco, but
these were none of your Governors of Islands, but of other easy Governments:
Why, Man, these ought at least to know their Grammar. Ay, ay, quoth Sancho,
give me but a gray Mare once, and I shall know her well enough, I Will warrant
ye. But leaving the Government in the Hands of him that will best provide for
me, I must tell you, Master Bachelor Sampson Carrasco, I am huge glad that as
your Author has not forgot me, so he has not given an Ill Character of me; for
by the Faith of a trusty Squire, had he said any thing that did not become A
Name the Spaniards desire to be distinguished from the Jews and Moors by.
an Old Christian as I am, I had rung him such a Peal, that the Deaf should
have heard me. That were a Miracle, said Carrasco. Miracle me no more Miracles,
cried Sancho, let every Man take care how he talks, or how he writes of other
Men, and not set down at Random, Higgle-de-piggledy, what ever comes into his
Noddle. One of the faults found with this History, said Carrasco, is, that the
Author has thrust into it a Novel, which he calls The Curious Impertinent; not
that it is ill Writ; or the Design of it to be mislik'd; but because it is not
in its right place, and has no coherence with the Story of Don Quixote. I Will
lay my Life, quoth Sancho, the Son of a Mungrel has made a Gallimawfry of it
all. Now, said Don Quixote, I perceive that he who attempted to write my
History, is not one of the Sages, but some ignorant prating Fool, who would
needs be meddling and set up for a Scribbler, without the least grain of
Judgment to help him out; and so he has done like Orbaneja, the Painter of
Ubeda, who being asked what he Painted, answered, as it may hit; and when he
had scrawl'd out a Misshapen Cock, was forced to write underneath it in
Gothic Letters, This is a Cock. At this rate, I believe he has performed in my
History, so that it will require a Commentary to explain it. Not at all,
answered Carrasco, for he has made every thing so plain, that there is not the
least thing in it but what any one may understand. Children handle it,
Youngsters read it, Men understand it, and Old People Applaud it. In short,
it is universally so thumb'd, so gleaned, so studi'd, and so known, that if the
People do but see a Lean Horse, they presently cry, there goes Rozinante. But
none apply themselves to the reading it more than your Pages: There Is never a
Nobleman's Antichamber where you shall not find a Don Quixote. No sooner has one
laid it down, but another takes it up. One asks for it here, and there it is
snatched up by another. In a Word, it is esteemed the most Pleasant and least
Dangerous Diversion that ever was seen, as being a Book that does not betray
the least indecent Expression, nor so much as a profane Thought. To write after
another manner, said Don Quixote, were not to write Truth but Falsehood; and
those Historians who are guilty of that, should be punished like those who
Counterfeit the Lawful Coin. But I cannot conceive what could move the Author
to stuff his History with Foreign Novels and Adventures, not at all to the
Purpose, while there was a sufficient Number of my own to have exercised his
Pen. Without doubt they should observe the Proverb. Never stuff the Cushion
with Straw, if you have Down enough. And certainly, had he altogether confined
himself to my Thoughts, my Sighs, my Tears, my laudable Designs, my Adventures,
he might yet have swelled his Book to as great a Bulk at least as all
Tostatus's Works. I have also reason to believe, Mr Bachelor, that to compile
a History or write any Book whatsoever, is a more difficult Task than Men
imagine. There Is need of a vast Judgment and a ripe Understanding. It belongs
to none but great Genius's to express themselves with Grace and Elegance, and
draw the Manners and Actions of others to the Life. The most Artful Part in a
Play is the Fool's, and therefore a Fool must not pretend to write it. On the
other side, History is in a manner a sacred thing, so far as it contains Truth;
for where Truth is, the Supreme Father of it may also be said to be, at least
in as much as concerns Truth. However there are Men, that will make you Books
and turn 'em loose into the World, with as much dispatch as they would do a
Dish of Fritters. There Is no Book so bad, said the Bachelor, but some good
thing may be found in it. That Is true, said Don Quixote, yet it is a common
thing for Men, who had gained a very great Reputation by their Writings, before
they Printed them, to lose it afterward quite, or at least the greatest part.
The Reason's plain, said Carrasco, their Faults are more easily discovered
after their Books are Printed, as being then more read, and more narrowly
examined; the rather if the Author has been much cried up before, the severity
of the scrutiny is so much the greater. All those that have raised themselves a
Name by their Ingenuity, great Poets and Celebrated Historians, are most
commonly, if not always, envied by a sort of Men, who delight in Censuring the
Writings of others, though they never Published any of their own. That Is no
Wonder, said Don Quixote, for there are many Divines, that could make but very
dull Preachers, and yet are very quick at finding faults and superfluities in
other Men's Sermons. All this is truth, replied Carrasco; and therefore I could
wish these Censurers would be more merciful and less scrupulous, and not dwell
ungenerously upon small Spots, that are in a manner but so many Atoms on the
Face of the clear Sun which they murmur at. Si aliquando bonus dormitat
Homerus, let 'em consider how many Nights he kept himself awake to bring his
Noble Works to light as little darkened with Defects as might be. Nay, many
times it may happen that what is Censured for a Fault is rather an Ornament,
like Moles that sometimes add to the Beauty of the Face. And when all is said,
he that Publishes a Book runs a very great Hazard, since nothing can be more
impossible than to compose one that may secure the Approbation of every Reader.
Sure, said Don Quixote, that which treats of me can have pleased but few. Quite
contrary, said Carrasco, for as Stultorum infinitus est numerus, so an infinite
Number has admired your History. Only some there are who have taxed the Author
with want of Memory or Sincerity; because he has forgot to give an account, who
it was that stole Sancho's Dapple; for that Particular is not mentioned there;
only we find by the Story that it was stolen; and yet by and by we find him
riding the same Ass again, without any previous light given us into the matter.
Then they say, that the Author forgot to tell the Reader, what Sancho did with
those hundred pieces of Gold he found in the Portmanteau in Sierra Morena; for
there is not a Word said of 'em more; and many People have a great mind to know
what he did with 'em, and how he spent 'em; which is one of the most material
Points, in which the Work is defective. Master Sampson, quoth Sancho, I an't
now in a condition to cast up my Accounts, for I Am taken ill of a sudden with
such a wambling in the Stomach, and find my self so maukish, that if I don't
see and fetch it up with a sup or two of good old Bub, I shall waste like the
snuff of a farthing Candle. I have that Cordial at home, and my Chuck stays for
me. When I have had my Dinner, I am for you, and will satisfy you, or any Man
that wears a Head, about any thing in the World, either as to the Loss of the
Ass, or the laying out of those same Pieces of Gold. This said, without a Word
more, or waiting for a Reply, away he went. Don Quixote desired and entreated
the Bachelor to stay and do Penance with him. The Bachelor accepted his
Invitation, and stayed. A Couple of Pigeons were got ready to mend their
Commons. All Dinnertime they discoursed about Knight-Errantry, Carrasco
humouring him all the while. After they had slept out the Heat of the Day,
Sancho came back, and they renewed their former Discourse.

CHAP. IV. Sancho Panca satisfies the Bachelor Sampson Carrasco in his Doubts
and Queries, With other Passages fit to be known and related.
SAncho returned to Don Quixote's House, and beginning again where he left off;
Now, quoth he, as to what Master Sampson wanted to know, that is, when, where,
and by whom my Ass was stolen? I answer, That the very Night that we marched
off to the Sierra Morena, to avoid the Hue and Cry of the Holy Brotherhood,
after the rueful Adventure of the Galley-Slaves, and that of the dead Body that
was carrying to Segovia, my Master and I slunk into a Wood; where he leaning on
his Lance, and I, without alighting from Dapple, both saddly bruised and tired
with our late Skirmishes, fell fast asleep, and slept as soundly as if we had
had four Feather-beds under us; but I especially was as serious at it as any
Dormouse; so that the Thief, whoever he was, had Leisure enough to clap four
Stakes under the four Corners of the Pack-Saddle, and then leading away the Ass
from between my Legs, without being perceived by me in the least, there he
fairly left me mounted. This is no new thing, said Don Quixote, nor is it
difficult to be done: With the same Stratagem Sacripante had his Steed stolen
from under him by that notorious Thief Brunelo at the Siege of Albraca. It was
broad Day, said Sancho, going on, when I, half awake and half asleep, began to
stretch my self in my Pack-saddle; but with my Stirring down came the Stakes,
and down came I souse, with a confounded Squelch on the Ground. Presently I
looked for my Ass, but no Ass was to be found. Oh how thick the Tears trickl'd
from my Eyes, and what a piteous Moan I made! If he that made our History has
forgot to set it down Word for Word, I would not give a Rush for his Book, I Will
tell him that. Some Time after, I cannot just tell you how long it was, as we
were going with my Lady the Princess Micomicona, I knew my Ass again, and he
that rid him, though he went like a Gypsy; and who should it be, do you think,
but Gines de Passamonte, that Son of Mischief, that Crack-Rope, whom my Master
and I saved from the Galleys. The Mistake does not lie there, said Carrasco;
but only that the Author sets you upon the same Ass that was lost, before he
gives an Account of his being found. As to that, replied Sancho, I don't know
very well what to say. If the Man made a Blunder who can help it? But mayhaps
'twas a Fault of the Printer. I make no Question of that, said Carrasco; but
pray what became of the hundred Pieces? were they sunk? I fairly spent 'em on
my self, quoth Sancho, and on my Wife and Children; they helped me to lay my
Spouse's Clack, and made her take so patiently my rambling and trotting after
my Master Don Quixote; for had I come back with empty Pockets, and without my
Ass, I must have looked for a rueful Greeting. And now if you have any more to
say to me, here am I, ready to answer the King himself; for what has any Body
to meddle or make whether I found or found not, or spent or spent not? If the
Knocks and Swadlings that have been bestowed on my Carcass in our Jaunts, were
to be rated but at three Maravedis apiece, and I to be satisfied Ready-Cash for
every one, a hundred Pieces of Gold more would not pay for half of them; and
therefore let every Man lay his Finger on his Mouth, and not run Hand over
Head, and mistake Black for White and White for Black; for every Man is as
Heaven made him, and sometimes a great deal worse. Well, said the Bachelor, if
the Author prints another Edition of the History, I Will take special Care he
shall not forget to insert what honest Sancho has said, which will make the Book
as good again. Pray, good Mr. Bachelor, asked Don Quixote, are there any other
Emendations requisite to be made in this History? Some there are, answered
Carrasco, but none of so much Importance as those already mentioned. Perhaps
the Author promises a Second Part, said Don Quixote? He does, said Carrasco;
but he says he cannot find it, neither can he discover who has it: So that we
doubt whether it will come out or no; as well for this Reason, as because some
People say that Second Parts are never worth any thing, others cry there is
enough of Don Quixote already: However many of those that love Mirth better
than Melancholy, cry out, Give us more Quixotery; let but Don Quixote appear,
and Sancho talk, be it what it will, we are satisfied. And how stands the
Author affected? said the Knight. Truly, answered Carrasco, as soon as ever he
can find out the History, which he is now looking for with all imaginable
Industry, he is resolved to send it immediately to the Press, though more for
his own Profit than through any Ambition of Applause. What, quoth Sancho, does
he design to do it to get a Penny by it? nay, then we are like to have a rare
History indeed, we shall have him botch and whip it up, like your Tailors on
Easter-Eve, and give us a Huddle of Flim-flams that will never hang together;
for your hasty Work can never be done as it should be. Let Mr. Moor take Care
how he goes to work; for, my Life for his, I and my Master will stock him with
such a Heap of Stuff in Matter of Adventures and odd Chances, that he will have
enough not only to write a Second Part but an hundred. The poor Fellow, belike,
thinks we do nothing but sleep on a Hay-mow; but let us once put Foot into the
Stirrup, and he will see what we are about: This at least I Will be bold to say,
that if my Master would be ruled by me, we had been in the Field by this Time,
undoing of Misdeeds and righting of Wrongs, as good Knights-Errant use to do.
Scarce had Sancho made an End of his Discourse, when Rozinante's Neighing
reached their Ears. Don Quixote took it for a lucky Omen, and resolved to take
another Turn within three or four Days. He discovered his Resolutions to the
Bachelor, and consulted him to know which Way he should steer his Course. The
Bachelor advised him to take the Road of Saragosa in the Kingdom of Arragon, a
solemn Tournament being shortly to be performed at that City on St. George's
Festival; where by worsting all the Arragonian Champions he might win immortal
Honor, since to out-tilt them would be to out-rival all the Knights in the
Universe. He also applauded his Design, but withal admonished him not to be so
desperate in exposing himself to Dangers, since his Life was not his own, but
theirs who in Distress stood in want of his Assistance and Protection. That Is
it now, quoth Sancho, that makes me sometimes ready to run mad, Mr. Bachelor;
for my Master makes no more to set upon an hundred armed Men, than a young
hungry Tailor to guttle down half a Dozen of Cucumbers. Body of me! Master
Bachelor, there is a Time to retreat as well as a Time to assail; Sant Jago and
hey for the Honor of Spain must not always be the Cry: For I Have heard Somebody
say, and, if I an't mistaken, 'twas my Master himself, that Valor lies just
halfway between Rashness and Cowheartedness; and if it be so, I would not have
him run away without there is a Reason for it, nor would I have him fall on when
there is no Good to be got by it. But above all things I would have him to know,
if he has a Mind I should go with him, that the Bargain is he shall fight for
us both, and that I am tied to nothing but to look after him and his Victuals
and Clothes: So far as this comes to, I will fetch and carry like any
Water-Spaniel; but to think I Will lug out my Sword, though it be but against
poor Rogues, and sorry Shirks, and Hedge-birds, y'troth I must beg his
Diversion. For my Part, Mr. Bachelor, it is not the Fame of being thought
valiant that I aim at, but that of being deemed the very best and trustiest
Squire that ever followed the Heels of a Knight Errant: And if, after all my
Services, my Master Don Quixote will be so kind as to give me one of those many
Islands which his Worship says he shall light on, I shall be much beholding to
him; but if he does not, why then I am born, do you see, and one Man must not
live to rely on another, but on his Maker. Mayhaps the Bread I shall eat
without Government, will go down more savourily than if I were a Governor; and
what do I know but that the Devil is providing me one of these Governments for
a Stumbling Block, that I may stumble and fall, and so break my Jaws, and ding
out my Butter-Teeth. I was born Sancho, and Sancho I mean to die; and yet for
all that, if fairly and squarely, with little Trouble and less Danger, Heaven
would bestow on me an Island, or some suchlike Matter, I Am no such Fool
neither, do you see, as to refuse a good thing when it is offered me. No, I
remember the old Saying, When the Ass is given thee, run and take him by the
Halter; and when good Luck knocks at thy Door, let him in, and keep him there.
My Friend Sancho, said Carrasco, you have spoken like any University-Professor:
However trust in Heavens Bounty, and the noble Don Quixote, and he may not only
give thee an Island, but even a Kingdom. One as likely as the other, quoth
Sancho; and yet let me tell you, Mr. Bachelor, the Kingdom which my Master is
to give me, you shall not find it thrown into an old Sack; for I have felt my own
Pulse, and find my self sound enough to rule Kingdoms and govern Islands; I have
told my Master as much before now. Have a Care Sancho, said Carrasco, Honors
change Manners; perhaps when you come to be a Governor you will scarce know
your own Mother. This, said Sancho, may happen to those that were born in a
Ditch, but not to those whose Souls are covered, as mine is, four Fingers thick
with good old Christian Fat. No, do but think how good-condition'd I be, and
then you need not fear I should do dirtily by any one. Grant it good Heaven,
said Don Quixote! we shall see when the Government comes, and methinks I have
it already before my Eyes. After this he desired the Bachelor, if he were a
Poet, to oblige him with some Verses on his designed Departure from his
Mistress Dulcinea del Toboso, every Verse to begin with one of the Letters of
her Name, so that joining every first Letter of every Verse together, they
might make Dulcinea del Toboso. The Bachelor told him, that though he were
none of the famous Poets of Spain, who, they say, were but three and a half, he
would endeavor to make that Acrostick; though he was sensible this would be no
easy Task, there being seventeen Letters in the Name; so that if he made four
Stanzas of four Verses apiece, there would be a Letter too much; and if he made
his Stanzas of five Lines, so as to make a double Decima or a Redondilla, there
would be three Letters too little; however he would strive to drown a Letter,
and so take in the whole Name in sixteen Verses. Let it be so by any Means,
said Don Quixote, for no Woman will believe that those Verses were made for her
where her Name is not plainly to be discerned. After this 'twas agreed they
should set out within a Week. Don Quixote charged the Bachelor not to speak a
Word of all this, especially to the Curate, Mr. Nicholas the Barber, his Niece,
and his Housekeeper, lest they should obstruct his honorable and valorous
Design. Carrasco gave him his Word, and having desired Don Quixote to send an
Account of his good or bad Success at his Convenience, took his Leave, and left
him; and Sancho went to get every thing ready for his Journey.

CHAP. V. The Wise and Pleasant Dialogue between Sancho Panca, and Teresa Panca
his Wife: Together with other Passages worthy of Happy Memory.
THE Translator of this History, being come to this fifth Chapter, thinks fit
to inform the Reader, that he holds it to be Apocryphal; because it introduces
Sancho speaking in another Style than could be expected from his slender
Capacity, and saying things of so refined a Nature, that it seems impossible he
could know 'em. However, he thought himself obliged to render it in our Tongue,
to maintain the Character of a faithful Translator, and therefore he goes on in
this manner.

Sancho came home so Cheerful and so Merry, that his Wife read his Joy in his
Looks as far as she could see him. Being impatient to know the Cause, My Dear,
cried she, what makes you so Merry? I should be more Merry, my Chuck, quoth
Sancho, would but Heaven so order it, that I were not so well pleased as I seem
to be. You speak Riddles Husband quoth she; I don't know what you mean by
saying, you should be more merry if you were not so well pleased; for, though I
am silly enough, I cannot think a Man can take Pleasure in not being Pleased.
Look ye, Teresa, quoth Sancho, I am Merry, because, I am once more going to
serve my Master Don Quixote, who is resolved to have the other Frolic, and go a
hunting after Adventures, and I must go with him; for he needs must, whom the
Devil drives. What should I lie starving at home for? The Hopes of finding
another Parcel of Gold like that we spent, rejoices the Cockles of my Heart:
But then it grieves me to leave thee, and those sweet Babes of ours; and would
Heaven but be pleased to let me live at home dry-shod, in Peace and Quietness,
without gadding over Hill and Dale, through Brambles and Briars (as Heaven
might well do with small Cost, if it would, and with no manner of Trouble, but
only to be wiling it should be so) why then it is a clear case that my Mirth
would be more firm and sound, since my present Gladness is mingled with a
Sorrow to part with thee. And so I think I have made out what I have said, that
I should be Merrier if I did not seem so well pleased. Look you, Sancho, quoth
the Wife, ever since you have been a Member of a Knight Errant, you talk so
round about the Bush, that no body can understand you. It Is enough, quoth
Sancho, that he understands me who understands all things; and so scatter no
more Words about it, Spouse. But be sure you look carefully after Dapple for
these three Days, that he may be in good Case, and fit to bear Arms; double his
Pittance, look out his Panel and all his Harness, and let every thing be set
to rights; for we are not going to a Wedding, but to roam about the World, and
to make our Party good with Giants, and Dragons, and Hobgoblins, and to hear
nothing but hissing, and yelling, and roaring, and howling, and bellowing; all
which would yet be but Sugar-Plumbs, if we were not to meet with Yanguesian
Carriers, and Enchanted Moors. Nay, as for that, Husband, quoth Teresa, I am
apt enough to think you Squires-Errant don't eat their Master's Bread for
nothing, and therefore it shall be my daily Prayer that you may quickly be
freed from that plaguey Trouble. Troth, Wife, quoth Sancho, were not I in hopes
to see my self ever it be long, Governor of an Island, of my Conscience I
should drop down Dead on the Spot. Not so, my Chicken, quoth the Wife, Let the
Hen live, though it be with Pip. Do thou live, and let all the Governments in
the World go to the Devil. Thou came out of thy Mother's Belly without
Government, thou have lived hitherto without Government, and thou may be
carried to thy long Home without Government, when it shall please the Lord. How
many People in this World live without Government, yet do well enough, and are
well looked upon? There Is no Sauce in the World like Hunger, and as the Poor
never want that, they always eat with a good Stomach. But look ye, my Precious,
if it should be thy good Luck to get a Government, prithee don't forget your
Wife and Children. Take notice that little Sancho is already full fifteen, and
it is thought fit he go to School, if his Uncle the Abbot mean to leave him
something in the Church. Then there is Mary Sancha, your Daughter; I dare say
the Burden of Wedlock will never be the Death of her, for I shrewdly guess, she
longs as much for a Husband, as you do for a Government; and when all comes to
all, better my Daughter ill Married, than well kept. I good footh! Wife, quoth
Sancho, if it be Heaven's blessed Will that I get any thing by Government, I Will
see and Match Mary Sancha so well, that she shall, at least, be called my Lady.
By no means, Husband, cried the Wife, let her Match with her Match: If from
clouted Shoes you set her upon high Heels, and from her Coarse Russet Coat you
put her into a Fardingale, and from plain Moll and Thee and Thou, go to call
her Madam, and your Ladyship, the poor Girl will not know how to behave herself,
but will every foot make a Thousand Blunders, and show her homespun
Country-Breeding. Tush! Fool, answered Sancho, 'twill be but two or three Years
Prenticeship; and then you will see how strangely she will alter, your Ladyship and
keeping of State will become her, as if they had been made for her; and suppose
they should not, what is it to any Body? Let her but be a Lady, and let what
will happen. Good Sancho, quoth the Wife, don't look above your self; I say,
keep to the Proverb, that says, Birds of a Feather flock together. 'Twould be a
fine thing, e'trow! for us to go and throw away our Child on one of your
Lordlings, or Right Worshipfuls, who, when the Toy should take him in the Head,
would find new Names for her, and call her Country Joan, Plough-Jobber's Bearn,
and Spinster's Web. No, no, Husband, I have not bred the Girl up as I have done, to
throw her away at that rate, I Will warrant ye. Do thee but bring home Money, and
leave me to get her a Husband. Why, there is Lope Tocho, old John Tocho's Son, a
hale jolly young Fellow, and one whom we all know, I have observed he casts a
Sheep's Eye at the Wench, he is one of our Inches, and will be a good Match for
her; then we shall always have her under our Wings, and be all as one, Father
and Mother, Children and Grandchildren, and Heaven's Peace and Blessing will
always be with us. But never talk to me of Marrying her at your Courts, and
Great Men's Houses, where she will understand no body, and no body will
understand her. Why, thou Beast, cried Sancho, thou Wife for Barrabas, why do
thou hinder me from Marrying my Daughter to one that will get me Grandchildren
that may he called your Honor and your Lordship? Have NOT I always heard my
Betters say, That he who will not when he may, when he will he shall have nay?
When good Luck is knocking at our Door, is it fit to shut him out? No, no, let
us make Hay while the Sun shines, and spread our Sails before this prosperous
Gale. [This Mode of Locution, and the following Huddle of Reflections and
Apophthegms, said to have been spoken by Sancho, made the Translator of this
History say, he held this Chapter Apocryphal.] Can thou not perceive, thou
senseless Animal, said Sancho going on, that I shall venture over Head and Ears
to light on some good gainful Government, that may free our Ancles from the
Clog of Necessity, and Marry Mary Sancha to whom I please? Then thou wilt see how
Folks will call thee my Lady Teresa Panca, and thou wilt sit in the Church with
thy Carpets and Cushions, and lean and loll in State, though the best
Gentlewoman in the Town burst with Spite and Envy. No, no, remain as you are,
still in the same Posture, neither higher nor lower, like a Picture in the
Hangings Go to, let us have no more of this, little Sancha shall be a Countess
in spite of thy Teeth, I say. Well, well, Husband, quoth the Wife, have a Care
what you say, for I fear me these high Kicks will be my Molly's undoing. Yet do
what you will, make her a Duchess or a Princess, but I Will never give my
Consent. Look ye, Yoke Fellow, for my part, I ever loved to see every thing
upon the square, and cannot abide to see Folks take upon them when they should
not. I was Christened plain Teresa, without any Fiddle-faddle, or Addition of
Madam, or your Ladyship. My Father's Name was Cascajo; and because I Married
you, they call me Teresa Panca, though indeed by right I should have been
called Teresa Cascajo: But where the Kings are, there are the Laws; and I am
even contented with that Name without a Flourish before it, to make it longer
and more tedious than it is already; neither will I make my self any body's
Laughing Stock. I Will give 'em no Cause to cry, (when they see me go like a
Countess, or a Governor's Madam,) Look, look, how Madam Hog-wash struts along!
'Twas but the other Day she would tug ye a Distaff, capp'd with Hemp, from Morning
till Night, and would go to Mass with her Coat over her Head for want of a
Hood; yet now look how she goes in her Fardingale; and her rich Trimmings and
Fallals, no less than a whole Tradesman's Shop about her mangy Back, as if
every body did not know her. No, Husband, if it please Heaven but to keep me in
my seven Senses, or my five, or as many as I have, I Will take Care to tie up
People's Tongues from setting me out at this rate. You may go, and be a
Governor, or an Islander, and look as big as Bull-Beef an you will; but by my
Grand-mother's Daughter, neither I nor my Girl will budge a Foot from our
Thatched House. Better a broken Leg than a Crack in my Credit; and let them
seek for Jointures who cannot work with their ten Fingers. March you and your
Don Quixote together, to your Islands and Adventures, and leave us here to our
sorry Fortune: I Will warrant you Heaven will better it, if we live as we ought
to do. I wonder though who made him a Don; neither his Father nor his Grandsire
ever had that Feather in their Caps. The Lord help thee, Woman! quoth Sancho,
what a heap of Stuff have thou twisted together without Head or Tail! What have
thy Cascajo's, thy Fardingales and Fallals, thy old Saws, and all this Tale of
a roasted Horse, to do with what I have said? Hark thee me, Gammer Addlepate,
(for I can find no better Name for thee, since you are such a blind Buzzard as
to miss my Meaning, and stand in thy own Light) should I have told thee that my
Girl was to throw herself Head foremost from the top of some Steeple, or to
trot about the World like a Gypsy, or, as the Infanta Donna Urraca did, then
thou might have some Reason not to be of my Mind. But if in the twinkling of
an Eye, and while one might toss a Pan-cake, I clap you a Don and a Ladyship
upon the back of her; if I fetch her out of her Straw, to sit under a Stately
Bed's-Teaster; and squat her down on more Velvet-Cushions, then all the
Almohada's of Morocco had Moors in their Generation, why should thou be
against it, and not be pleased with what pleases me? Shall I tell you why,
Husband, answered Teresa; it is because of the Proverb, He that covers thee,
discovers thee. A poor Man is scarce minded, but every one's Eyes will stare
upon the Rich; and if that rich Man has formerly been Poor, this sets others a
grumbling and backbiting; and your evil Tongues will never have done, but swarm
about the Streets like Bees, and buz their Stories into People's Ears. Look
you, Teresa, said Sancho, mind what I say to thee, I Will tell thee things that
perhaps thou never heard'st of in thy Life: Nor do I speak of my own Head, but
what I heard from that good Father who Preached in our Town all last Lent. He
told us, if I an't mistaken, that all those things which we see before our Eyes
do appear, hold and exist in our Memories much better, and with a greater
stress than things passed. [All these Reasons which are here offered by Sancho,
are another Argument to persuade the Translator to hold this Chapter for
Apocryphal, as exceeding the Capacity of Sancho.] From thence it arises, said
Sancho, going on, that when we happen to see a Person well Dressed, richly
Equipped, and with a great Train of Servants, we find our selves moved and
prompted to pay him Respect, in a manner, in spite of our Teeth, though at that
very moment our Memory makes us call to remembrance some low Circumstances, in
which we had seen that Person before. Now this Ignominy, be it either by reason
of his Poverty, or mean Parentage, as it is already passed, is no more, and only
that which we see before our Eyes remains. So then, if this Person, whom
Fortune has raised to that height out of his former Obscurity, by his Father's
means, be well-bred, Generous and Civil to all Men, and does not affect to vye
with those that are of noble Descent, assure thy self, Teresa, no body will
remember what he was, but look upon him as what he is, unless it be your
envious Spirits, from whose Taunts no prosperous Fortune can be free. I don't
understand you, Husband, quoth Teresa; even follow your own Inventions, and
don't puzzle my Brains with your Harangues and Retricks. If you are so devolved
to do as ye say -- Resolved, you should say, Wife, quoth Sancho, and not
devolved. Prithee, Husband, said Teresa, let us have no Words about that Matter:
I speak as Heaven's pleased I should; and for hard Words, I give my share to
the Curate. All I have to say now, is this; if you hold still in the Mind of
being a Governor, pray even take your Son Sancho, along with you; and
henceforth train him up to your Trade of Governing; for it is but fitting that
the Son should be brought up to the Father's Calling. When once I am a
Governor, quoth Sancho, I Will send for him by the Post, and I Will send thee
Money withal; for I dare say, I shall want none; there never wants those that
will lend Governors Money when they have none. But ^hen be sure you Cloth the
Boy so, that he may ^ook, not like what he is, but like what he is to ^e. Send
you but Money, quoth Teresa, and I Will ^ake him as fine as a May Day Garland. So
then, Wife, quoth Sancho, I suppose we are agreed that our Moll shall be a
Countess. The Day I see her a Countess, quoth Teresa, I reckon I lay her in her
Grave. However, I tell you again, even follow your own Inventions; you Men will
be Masters, and we poor Women are born to bear the clog of Obedience, though our
Husbands have no more Sense than a Cuckoo. Here she fell a Weeping as heartily
as if she had seen her Daughter already Dead and Buried. Sancho comforted her,
and promised her, that though he was to make her a Countess, yet he would see and
put it off as long as he could. Thus ended their Dialogue, and he went back to
Don Quixote, to dispose every thing for a March.

CHAP. VI. What passed between Don Quixote, his Niece, and the Housekeeper:
being one of the most important Chapters in the whole History.
WHile Sancho Panca, and his Wife Teresa Cascajo, had the foregoing impertinent
Dialogue, Don Quixote's Niece and Housekeeper were not idle, guessing by a
thousand Signs that the Knight intended a Third Sally. Therefore they
endeavored by all possible means to divert him from his foolish Design; but
all to no purpose, for this was but Preaching to a Rock, and Hammering cold
stubborn Steel. But among other Arguments, in short, Sir, quoth the
Housekeeper, if you will not be Ruled, but will needs run wandering over Hill
and Dale, like a stray Soul between Heaven and Hell, seeking for Mischief, for
so I may well call the hopeful Adventures which you go about, I Will never leave
complaining to Heaven and the King, till there is a stop put to it some way or
other. What Answer Heaven will vouchsafe to give thee, I know not, answered Don
Quixote; neither can I tell what return his Majesty will make to thy Petition;
this I know, that were I King, I would excuse my self from answering the
infinite Number of impertinent Memorials that disturb the Repose of Princes. I
tell thee, Woman, among the many other Fatigues which Royalty sustains, it is
one of the greatest to be obliged to hear every one, and to give Answer to all
People. Therefore pray trouble not his Majesty with any thing concerning me.
But, pray Sir, tell me, replied she, are there not a many Knights in the King's
Court? I must confess, said Don Quixote, that for the Ornament, the Grandeur,
and the Pomp of Royalty, many Knights are, and ought to be maintained there.
Why then, said the Woman, would it not be better for your Worship to be one of
those brave Knights, who serve the King their Master on Foot in his Court. Hear
me, Sweetheart, answered Don Quixote, all Knights cannot be Courtiers, nor can
all Courtiers be Knight-Errants. There must be of all sorts in the World; and
though we were all to agree in the common Appellation of Knights, yet there
would be a great difference between the one and the other. For your Courtiers,
without so much as stirring out of their Chambers, or the Shade and Shelter of
the Court, can journey over all the Universe in a Map, without the Expense and
Fatigue of Traveling, the Heat, the Cold, the Hunger and the Thirst; while we,
who are the true Knight-Errants, Exposed to those Extremities, and all the
Inclemencies of Heaven, by Night and by Day, on Foot as well as on Horseback,
measure the whole surface of the Earth with our own Feet. Nor are we only
acquainted with the Pictures of our Enemies, but with their very Persons, ready
upon all Occasions and at all Times to engage 'em, without standing upon
Trifles, or the Ceremony of measuring Weapons, stripping, or examining whether
our Opponents have any holy Relics or other secret Charms about 'em, whether
the Sun be duly divided, or any other punctilios and circumstances observed
among private Duelists; things which thou understandest not, but I do; And must
further let thee know, that the true Knight Errant, though he meet ten Giants,
whose tall aspiring Heads not only touch but overtop the Clouds, each of 'em
stalking with prodigious Legs like huge Towers, their sweeping Arms like Masts
of Mighty Ships, their staring Eyes like large Mill-wheels, and glowing like
Fiery Furnaces; yet is he so far from being afraid to meet them, that he must
Encounter them with a Gentle Countenance, and an undaunted Courage, Assail
them, Close with them, and if possible, Vanquish and Destroy 'em all in an
instant; nay, though they came armed with the Scales of a certain Fish, which
they say is harder then Adamant, and instead of Swords had dreadful Sabres of
keen Damask or Steel, or mighty Maces with Points of the same Metal, as I have
seen them more than twice I have condescended to tell thee thus much, that thou
may see the vast difference between Knights and Knights; and I think 'twere
to be wished that all Princes knew so far how to make the Distinction, as to
give the Pre-eminence to this first species of Knight-Errants, among whom there
have been some whose Fortitude has not only been the Defense of our Kingdom,
but of many more, as we read in their Histories. Ah! Sir, said the Niece, have
a care what you say; all the Stories of Knight-Errants are nothing but a pack
of Lies and Fables, and if they are not burnt, they ought at least to wear a
Sanbenito, the Badge of Heresy, or some other mark of Infamy, that the World
may know 'em to be wicked, and perverters of good Manners. Now by the powerful
sustainer of my Being, cried Don Quixote, were thou not so nearly related to
me, were thou not my own Sister's Daughter, I would take such Revenge for the
Blasphemy thou have uttered, as would resound through the whole Universe. Who
ever heard of the like Impudence! That a young Baggage, who scarce knows her
Bobbins from a Bodkin, should presume to put in her Wood, and Censure the
Histories of Knight-Errants! What would Sir Amadis have said, had he heard
this! But he undoubtedly would have forgiven thee, for he was the most
Courteous and Complaisant Knight of his Time, especially to the fair Sex, being
a great Protector of Damsels; but thy Words might have reached the Ears of
some, that would have Sacrificed thee to their Indignation; for all Knights are
not possessed of Civility or good Nature, some are Rough and Revengeful; and
neither are all those that assume the Name, of a Disposition suitable to the
Function; some indeed were of the right Stamp, but others are either
Counterfeit, or of such an Allay as cannot bear the Touchstone, though they
deceive the Sight. Inferior Mortals there are, who aim at Knighthood, and
strain to reach the height of Honor; and Highborn Knights there are, who seem
fond of grovelling in the Dust, and being lost in the Crowd of inferior
Mortals. The first raise themselves by Ambition or by Virtue, the last debase
themselves by Negligence or by Vice; so that there is need of a distinguishing
Understanding to judge between these two sorts of Knights, so near allied in
Name, and so different in Actions. Bless me! dear Uncle, cried the Niece, that
you should know so much, as to be able if there was Occasion to get up into a
Pulpit, or Preach A common thing in Spain for the Friars, in an extraordinary
fit of Zeal, to preach in any part of the Street or Marketplace.
in the Streets, and yet be so strangely mistaken, so grossly blind of
Understanding, as to fancy a Man of your Years and Infirmity can be strong and
Valiant, that you can set every thing right, and force stubborn Malice to bend,
when you your self stoop beneath the Burden of Age, and what is yet more odd,
that you are a Knight, when it is well known, you are none? For though Gentlemen
may be Knights, a poor Gentleman cannot purchase a Knighthood. Therefore you
say well, Niece, answered Don Quixote; and as to to this last Observation, I
could tell you things that you would admire at concerning Families; but because
I will not mix Sacred things with Profane, I wave the Discourse. However,
listen both of you, and for your further Instruction know, that all the
Lineages and Descents of Mankind, are reduceable to these four Heads; First, of
those, who like a Pyramid reversed, from a very small and obscure beginning,
have raised themselves to a spreading and prodigious Magnitude, of which the
Family of the Ottomans is an Instance, while they derive the greatness of their
present Power and Empire from the base and grovelling beginning of a poor
grovelling Shepherd. A Second, are the Counter-part to this, whose Honors from
large Foundations, have dwindl'd into less compass, and at last been extenuated
till vanished into nothing, of which there is an infinite number of Examples;
for all your Egyptian Monarchs, your Pharaohs and Ptolemies, your Caesar's of
Rome, and all the Swarm (if I may use that Name) of Monarchs, Princes and
Potentates, Medes, Assyrians, Persians, Greeks and Barbarians, and all these
mighty things are ended in a Point; the shadow of their greatness serves now
only to obscure their mean Successors, who are lost in the ignoble Crowd of
vulgar Mortals. A third sort there are, who, deriving their greatness from a
Noble Spring, still preserve the Dignity and Character of their original
Splendor. The last is, of those whose Beginning, Continuance and Ending, are
Mean, and altogether Obscure, such are the common People, which I hate to
mention, being only the Lumber and Ballast of the World, and only thrown in as
Ciphers to increase the general Sum, their utmost Attempts deserving no
further Renown nor Elogy. Now, my good natured Souls, you may at least draw
this reasonable Inference from what I have said of this promiscuous
dispensation of Honors, and this uncertainty and confusion of Descent, That
Virtue, Wealth, and Liberality in the present Possessor, are the most just and
undisputable Titles to Nobility; for the advantages of Pedigree without these
qualifications, serve only to make Vice more conspicuous. The great Man that is
Vicious, will be greatly Vicious, and the rich Miser is only a covetous Beggar;
for, not he who possesses, but that spends and enjoys his Wealth, is the rich
and the happy Man; nor he neither who barely spends, but who does it with
Discretion. The poor Knight indeed, cannot show he is one by his Magnificence,
but yet by his Virtue, Affability, Civility, and courteous Behavior, he may
display the chief Ingredients that enter into the Compositions of Knighthood;
and though he cannot claim Liberality, wanting Riches to support it, his
Charity may recompense that Defect; for an Alms of two Maravedis cheerfully
bestowed upon an indigent Beggar, by a Man in poor Circumstances, speaks him as
Liberal as the larger Donative of a Vainglorious Rich-man before a Fawning
Crowd. These Accomplishments will always shine through the Clouds of Fortune, and
at last break through 'em with Splendour and Applause. There are two paths to
Dignity and Wealth, Arts and Arms. Arms I have chosen, and the Influence of the
Planet Mars that presided at my Nativity, led me to that adventurous Road. So
that all your Attempts to shake my Resolution are in vain; for in spite of all
Mankind, I will pursue what Heaven has fated, Fortune ordained, what Reason
requires, and (which is more) what my Inclination demands. I am sensible of the
many Troubles and Dangers that attend the prosecution of Knight-Errantly, but I
also know what infinite Honors and Rewards are the consequence of the
Performance. The path of Virtue is narrow, and the way of Vice easy and open;
but the difference in the end is as considerable. The latter is a broad Road
indeed, and down-hill all the way, but Death and Contempt are always met at the
end of the Journey; whereas the former leads to Glory and Life, not a Life that
soon must have an end, but an immortal Being. For I know, as our great Boscan,
one of the first Reformers of the Spanish Poetry.
Castilian Poet expresses it, that Through steep Ascents, through straight and
rugged Ways,
Our selves to Glory's lofty Seats we raise:
In vain he hopes to reach the blessed Abode,
Who leaves the narrow path, for the more easy road.


Alack aday! cried the Niece, my Uncle is a Poet too! He knows every thing.
I Will lay my Life he might turn Mason in case of Necessity. If he would but
undertake it, he could build a House as easy as a Bird-cage. Why truly, Niece,
said Don Quixote, were not my Understanding wholly involved in Thoughts
relating to the exercise of Knight-Errantry, there is nothing which I durst not
engage to perform, no Curiosity should escape my Hands, especially Cages and
Tooth-pickers. By this some body knocked at the Door, and being asked who it
was, Sancho answered, 'twas he. Whereupon the Housekeeper slipped out of the
way, not willing to see him, and the Niece let him in. Don Quixote received him
with open Arms; and locking themselves both in the Closet, they had another
Dialogue as pleasant as the former.

CHAP. VII. An Account of Don Quixote's Conference with his Squire, and other
most famous Passages.
THE Housekeeper no sooner saw her Master and Sancho locked up together, but
she presently surmis'd the Drift of their close Conference, and concluding that
no less than Villainous Knight-Errantry would prove the Result of this private
Interview, she flung her Veil over her Head, and quite cast down with Sorrow
and Vexation, trudged away to seek Sampson Carrasco, the Bachelor of Arts;
depending on his Wit and Eloquence, to dissuade his Friend Don Quixote from his
frantic Resolution. She found him walking in the Yard of his House, and fell
presently on her Knees before him in a cold Sweat, and with all the Marks of a
disordered Mind. What Is the Matter, Woman, said he, (somewhat surpised at her
Posture and Confusion) what has befallen you, that you look as if you were
ready to give up the Ghost? Nothing said she, dear Sir, but that my Master's
departing, he is departing, that is most certain. How! cried Carrasco. What do you
mean? Is his Soul departing out of his Body? No, answered the Woman, but all
his Wits are quite and clean departing. He means to be Gadding again into the
wide World, and is upon the Spur now the third Time to hunt after Ventures, as
he calls 'em, though I don't know why he calls those Chances so. The first time
he was brought home was athwart an Ass, and almost cudgel'd to pieces. The Other
Bout he was forced to ride home in a Wagon, cooped up in a Cage, where he
would make us believe he was Enchanted; and the poor Soul looked so dismal,
that the Mother that bore him would not have known the Child of her Bowels; so
meager, wan, and withered, and his Eyes so sunk and hid in the utmost nook and
corner of his Brain, that I am sure I spent about six hundred Eggs to cocker
him up again; ay, and more too, as Heaven and all the World's my Witness, and
the Hens that laid 'em cannot deny it. That I believe said the Bachelor, for
your Hens are so well bred, so fat and so good, that they will not say one thing
and think another for the World. But is this all? Has no other ill Luck befaln
you, besides this of your Master's intended Ramble? No other, Sir, quoth she.
Then trouble your Head no farther, said he, but get you home, and as you go,
say me the Prayer of St Apollonia, if you know it, then get me some warm Bit
for Breakfast, and I Will come to you presently, and you shall see Wonders. Dear
me, quoth she, the Prayer of St. Polonia! Why, it is only good for the
Toothache, but his Ailing lies in his Skull. Gammer, said he, don't dispute
with me: I know what I say. Have I not commenced Batchelour of Arts at
Salamanca, and do you think I have my Degree for nothing? With that away she
goes, and he went presently to find the Curate, to consult with him about what
shall be declared in due Time.

When Sancho and his Master were locked up together in the Room, there passed
some Discourse between them, of which the History gives a very punctual and
impartial Account. Sir, quoth Sancho to his Master, I have at last reluc'd my
Wife, to let me go with your Worship wherever you will have me. Reduced, you
would say, Sancho, said Don Quixote, and not reluc'd. Look you, Sir, quoth
Sancho, if I an't mistaken, I have wished you once or twice not to stand
correcting my Words, if you understand my Meaning: If you don't, why then do
but say to me, Sancho, Devil, or what you please, I understand thee not; and if
I don't make out my Meaning plainly, then take me up; for I am so forcible -- I
understand you not, said Don Quixote interrupting him, for I cannot guess the
Meaning of your Forcible. Why, so Forcible, quoth Sancho, is as much as to say,
Forcible. That is, I am so and so as it were. Less and less do I understand
thee, said the Knight. Why then, quoth Sancho, there is an end of the Matter, it
must even stick there for me, for I can speak no better. Oh! now, quoth Don
Quixote, I fancy I guess your Meaning, you mean Docible, I suppose, implying
that you are so ready and apprehensive, that you will presently observe what I
shall teach you. I Will lay an even Wager now, said the Squire, you understood me
well enough at first, but you had a Mind to put me out, merely to hear me put
your fine Words out-a-joint. That may be, said Don Quixote, but prithee tell
me, what says Teresa? Why, an't please you, quoth Sancho, Teresa bids me make
sure Work with your Worship, and that we may have less Talking and more Doing;
that it is good to be certain; that Paper speaks when Beards never wag; that a
Bird in Hand is worth two in the Bush. One Hold-fast is better than two I Will
give thee; and I say a Woman's Counsel is not worth much, yet he that despises
it, is no wiser than he should be -- I believe so too, said Don Quixote; but
pray good Sancho, proceed; for thou art in an excellent Strain; thou talk
most sententiously to Day. I say, quoth Sancho, as you better know your-self
than I do, that we are all mortal Men, here to Day and gone to Morrow; as soon
goes the young Lamb to the Spit, as the old Weather; no Man can tell the Length
of his Days; for Death is deaf, and when he knocks at the Door, Mercy on the
Porter. He Is in Post haste, neither fair Words nor foul, Crowns, nor Mitres can
stay him, as the Report goes, and as we are told from the Pulpit. All this I
grant, said Don Quixote: But what would you infer from hence? Why, Sir, quoth
Sancho, all I would be at is, that your Worship allow me so much a The Custom
of Spain is to pay their Servants Wages by the Month.
Month for my Wages, whilst I stay with you, and that the aforesaid Wages be
paid me out of your Estate. For I Will trust no longer to Rewards, that mayhaps
may come late, and mayhaps not at all. I Would be glad to know what I get, be 't
more or less. A little in one's own Pocket, is better than much in another
Man's Purse. It Is good to keep a Nest-Egg. Every little makes a mickle; while a
Man gets he never can lose. Should it happen indeed, that your Worship should
give me this same Island, which you promised me, though it is what I dare not so
much as hope for, why then I an't such an ungrateful, nor so unconscionable a
Muck-worm, but that I am willing to strike off upon the Income, for what Wages
I receive, Cantity for Cantity. Would not Quantity have been better than
Cantity, asked Don Quixote? ho! I understand you now, cried Sancho? I dare lay
a Wager I should have said Quantity and not Cantity; but no matter for that,
since you knew what I meant. Yes, Sancho, quoth the Knight, I have dived to the
very bottom of your Thought, and understand now the aim of all your numerous
shot of Proverbs. Look you, Friend Sancho, I should never scruple to pay thee
Wages, had I any Example to warrant such a Practice. Nay, could I find the
least glimmering of a Precedent through all the Books of Chivalry that ever I
read, for any Yearly or Monthly Stipend, your Request should be granted. But I
have read all, or the greatest part of the Histories of Knight-Errants, and
find that all their Squires depended purely on the Favor of their Masters, for
a Subsistence; till by some surprising turn in the Knight's Fortune, the
Servants were advanced to the Government of some Island, or some equivalent
Gratuity, at least they had Honor and a Title conferred on 'em as a Reward.
Now Friend Sancho, if you will depend upon these hopes of Preferment, and
return to my Service, it is well; if not, get you home, and tell your
Impertinent Wife, that I will not break through all the Rules and Customs of
Chivalry, to satisfy her sordid Diffidence and yours; and so let there be no
more words about the Matter, but let us part Friends; and remember this, that
if there be Vetches in my Dove-house, 'twill want no Pigeons. Good Arrears are
better than ill Pay; and a Fee in Reversion is better than a Farm in
Possession. Take notice too, there is Proverb for Proverb, to let you know that
I can pour out a Volley of 'em as well as you. In short, if you will not go
along with me upon Courtesy, and run the same Fortune with me, Heaven be with
you and make you a Saint; I do not question but I shall get me a Squire, more
Obedient, more Careful, and less Saucy and Talkative than you.

Sancho hearing his Master's firm Resolution, 'twas cloudy weather with him in
an instant, he was struck dumb with Disappointment, and down sunk at once his
Heart to his Girdle, for he verily thought he could have brought him to any
terms, through a vain opinion that the Knight would not for the World go
without him. While he was thus dolefully buried in Thought, in came Sampson
Carrasco and the Niece, very eager to hear the Batchelor's Arguments, to
dissuade Don Quixote from his intended Sally. But Sampson, who was a rare
Comedian, presently embracing the Knight, and beginning in a high strain, soon
disappointed her. O Flower of Chivalry, cried he, refulgent glory of Arms,
living Honor and Mirror of our Spanish Nation, may all those who prevent the
third Expedition which thy Heroic Spirit meditates, he lost the Labyrinth of
their perverse Desires, and find no thread to lead 'em to their Wishes. Then
turning to the Housekeeper, you have no need now to say the Prayer of St.
Apollonia, said he, for I find it written in the Stars, that the Illustrious
Champion must no longer delay the prosecution of Glory; and I should injure my
Conscience, should I presume to dissuade him from the Benefits that shall
redound to Mankind by exerting the strength of his formidable Arm, and the
innate Virtues of his Heroic Soul. Alas! his Stay deprives the oppressed
Orphans of a Protector, Damsels of a Deliverer, Champions of their Honor,
Widows of an obliging Patron, and Married Women of a vigorous Comforter; and
delays a thousand other important Exploits and Achievements, which are the
Duty, and necessary Consequences of the honorable Order of Knight-Errantry. Go
on then, my Graceful, my Valorous Don Quixote, rather this very Day than the
next, let your Greatness be upon the Wing, and if any thing be wanting toward
the completing of your Equipage, I stand forth to supply you with my Life and
Fortune, and ready, if it be thought expedient, to attend your Excellence as a
Squire, an Honor which I am ambitious to attain. Well, Sancho, (said Don
Quixote, hearing this, and turning to his Squire) did I not tell thee I should
not want Squires; behold who offers me his Service, the most excellent
Bachelor of Arts, Sampson Carrasco, the perpetual Darling of the Muses and
Glory of the Salamanca-Schools, sound and active of Body, patient of Labor,
inured to Abstinence, silent in Misfortune, and in short, endowed with all the
Accomplishments that constitute a Squire. But forbid it Heaven, that to indulge
my private Inclinations I should presume to weaken the whole Body of Learning,
by removing from it so substantial a Pillar, so vast a Repository of Sciences,
and so eminent a Branch of the Liberal Arts. No, my Friend, remain thou another
Sampson in thy Country, be the honor of Spain, and the delight of thy ancient
Parents; I shall content my self with any Squire, since Sancho does not
vouchsafe to go with me. I do, I do, (cried Sancho relenting with Tears in his
Eyes) I do vouchsafe; it shall never be said of Sancho Panca, no longer Pipe no
longer Dance. Nor have I a heart of Flint, Sir; for all the World knows, and
especially our Town, what the whole Generation of the Panca's has ever been:
Besides, I well know, and have already found by a many good Turns, and more
good Words, that your Worship has had a good will toward me all along; and if
I have done otherwise than I should, in standing upon Wages, or so, it was
merely to humor my Wife, who, when once she is set upon a thing, stands digging
and hammering at a Man like a Cooper at a Tub, till she clinches the Point. But
hang it, I am the Husband, and will be her Husband, and she is but a Wife, and
shall be a Wife. None can deny but I am a Man every Inch of me, wherever I
am, and I will be a Man at home in spite of any Body; so that you have no more
to do, but to make your Will and Testament; but be sure you make the Conveyance
so firm, that it cannot be rebuked, and then let us be gone as soon as you
please, that Master Sampson's Soul may be at Rest; for he says his Conscience
will not let him be quiet, till he has set you upon another Journey through the
World; and I here again offer my self to follow your Worship, and promise to be
Faithful and Loyal, as well, nay, and better than all the Squires that ever
waited on Knight-Errants. The Bachelor was amazed to hear Sancho Panca express
himself after that manner; and though he had read much of him in the first part
of his History, he could not believe him to be so pleasant a Fellow as he is
there represented. But hearing him now talk of rebuking instead of revoking
Testaments and Conveyances, he was induced to Credit all that was said of him,
and to conclude him one of the most solemn Madmen of the Age, nor could he
imagine that the World ever saw before so extravagant a Couple as the Master
and the Man.

Don Quixote and Sancho embraced, becoming as good Friends as ever, and so with
the approbation of the Grand Carrasco, who was then the Knight's Oracle, it was
decreed, that they should set out at the expiration of three Days, in which
time all Necessaries should be provided, especially a whole Helmet, which Don
Quixote said he was resolved by all means to purchase. Sampson offered him one
which he knew he could easily get of a Friend, and which looked more dull with
the Mold and Rust, than bright with the luster of the Steel. The Niece and the
Housekeeper made a woeful Outcry, they tore their Hair, scratched their Faces,
and howled like common Mourners at Funerals, lamenting the Knight's departure,
as it had been his real Death, and Cursing Carrasco most unmercifully, though
his Behavior was the result of a contrivance Plotted between the Curate the
Barber and himself. In short, Don Quixote and his Squire having got all things
in a readiness, the one having pacified his Wife, and the other his Niece and
Housekeeper, toward the Evening, without being seen by any Body but the
Bachelor, who would needs accompany them about half a League from the Village,
they set forward for Toboso. The Knight mounted his Rozinante, and Sancho his
trusty Dapple, his Wallet well stuffed with Provisions, and his Purse with
Money, which Don Quixote gave him to defray Expenses. At last Sampson took his
Leave, desiring the Champion to give him from time to time an Account of his
Success, that according to the Laws of Friendship, he might sympathize in his
good or evil Fortune. Don Quixote made him a Promise, and then they parted;
Sampson went home, and the Knight and Squire continued their Journey for the
great City of Toboso.

CHAP. VIII. Don Quixote's Success in his Journey to visit the Lady Dulcinea
del Toboso.
BBessed be the mighty Alla, says Hamet Benengeli, at the beginning of his
eighth Chapter; blessed be Alla. Which Ejaculation he thrice repeated, in
consideration of the Blessing, that Don Quixote and Sancho had once more taken
the Field again, and that from this Period the Readers of their delightful
History may date the Knight's Achievements, and the Squire's Pleasantries; and
he entreats 'em to forget the former heroical Transactions of the wonderful
Knight, and six their Eyes upon his future Exploits, which take Birth from his
setting out for Toboso, as the former began in the Fields of Montiel. Nor can
so small a Request be thought unreasonable, considering his performance in
prospect, which begins in this manner.

Don Quixote and his Squire were no sooner parted from the Bachelor, but
Rozinante began to neigh, and Dapple to bray; which both the Knight and the
Squire interpreted as good Omens, and most fortunate Presages of their success;
though the truth of the Story is, that as Dapple's braying exceeded Rozinante's
neighing, Sancho concluded that his Fortune should out-rival and eclipse his
Master's; which inference I will not say he drew from some Principles in
Judicial Astrology, in which he was undoubtedly well grounded, though the History
is silent in that particular; however it is recorded of him, that oftentimes
upon the falling or stumbling of his Ass, he wished he had not gone abroad that
Day, and from such accidents prognosticated nothing but dislocation of Joints,
and breaking of Ribs, and notwithstanding his foolish Character, this was no
bad Observation. Friend Sancho, said Don Quixote to him, I find the approaching
Night will overtake us, ever we can reach Toboso, where before I enter upon any
Expedition, I am resolved to pay my Vows, receive my Benediction, and take my
Leave of the Peerless Dulcinea; being assured after that of happy Events, in
the most dangerous Adventures; for nothing in this World inspires a
Knight Errant with so much Valor, as the Smiles and favorable Aspects of his
Mistress. I am of your Mind, quoth Sancho, but I am afraid, Sir, you will
hardly come at her, to speak with her, at least not meet her in a place where
she may give you her Blessing, unless she throw it you over the Mud-Wall of the
Yard, where I first saw her, when I carried her the news of your Mad Pranks, in
the midst of Sierra Morena. Mud-Wall, do thou say, cried Don Quixote!
Mistaken Fool, the Wall could have no existence but in thy muddy Understanding:
It Is a mere Creature of thy dirty Fancy; for that never duly celebrated Paragon
of Beauty and Gentility, was then undoubtedly in some Court, in some stately
Gallery, or Walk, or as it is properly called in some sumptuous and Royal
Palace. It may be so, said Sancho, though so far as I can remember, it seemed to
me neither better nor worse than a Mud-Wall. It Is no matter, replied the
Knight, let us go thither; I will visit my dear Dulcinea; let me but see her*
though it be over a Mud-Wall, through a Chink of a Cottage, or the Pales of a
Garden, at a Lettice, or any where; which way soever the least Beam from her
bright Eyes reaches mine, it will so enlighten my Mind, so fortify my Heart,
and invigorate every faculty of my Being, that no Mortal will be able to rival
me in Prudence and Valor. Troth! Sir, quoth Sancho, when I beheld that same
Sun of a Lady, methought it did not shine so bright, as to cast forth any Beams
at all; but mayhaps the reason was, that the Dust of the Grain she was
winnowing, raised a Cloud about her Face, and made her look somewhat dull. I
tell thee again, Fool, said Don Quixote, thy Imagination is dusty and foul;
will it never be beaten out of thy stupid Brain, that my Lady Dulcinea was
winnowing? Are such Exercises used by Persons of her Quality, whose Recreations
are always noble, and such as display an air of greatness suitable to their
Birth and Dignity? Can thou not remember the Verses of our Poet, when he
recounts the Employments of the four Nymphs at their Chrystal-Mansions, when
they advanced their Heads above the Streams of the lovely Tagus, and sat upon
the Grass, working those rich Embroideries, where Silk and Gold, and Pearl
embossed, were so curiously interwoven, and which that ingenious Bard so
Artfully describes? So was my Princess employed when she blessed thee with her
sight, but the envious malice of some base Necromancer fascinated thy Sight, as
it represents whatever is most grateful to me in different and displeasing
Shapes. And this makes me fear, that if the History of my Achievements, which
they tell me is in Print, has been written by some Magician who is no
well-wisher to my Glory, he has undoubtedly delivered many things with
Partiality, misrepresented my Life, inserting a hundred falsehoods for one
truth, and diverting himself with the relation of idle Stories, foreign from
the purpose; and obnoxious to the continuation of a true History. Oh Envy,
Envy! Thou gnawing worm of Virtue, and Spring of infinite Mischiefs! There is
no other Vice, my Sancho, but pleads some pleasure in its excuse; but Envy is
always attended by Disgust, Rancour, and distracting Rage. I am much of your
Mind, said Sancho, and I think, in the same Book which Neighbor Carrasco told
us he had read of our Lives, the Story makes bold with my Credit, and has
handled it at a strange rate, and has dragged it about the Kennels, as a body
may say. Well, now as I Am an honest Man, I never spoke an ill Word of a
Magician in my born Days; and I think they need not envy my Condition so much.
The truth is, I am somewhat malicious; I have my roguish Tricks now and then;
but I was ever counted more Fool than Knave for all that, and so indeed I was
bred and born; and if there were nothing else in me but my Religion (for I
firmly believe whatever our holy Roman Catholic Church believes, and I hate
the Jews mortally) these same Historians should take pity of me, and spare me a
little in their Books. But let 'em say on to the end of the Chapter, naked I
came into the World, and naked must go out. It Is all a case to Sancho, I can
neither win nor lose; and so they put me in their Books, and toss my Name from
Post to Pillar. I care not a Fig for the worst they can say. What thou say,
Sancho, answered Don Quixote, puts me in mind of a Story. A celebrated Poet of
our time wrote a very scurrilous and abusive Lampoon upon all the Intriguing
Ladies of the Court, forbearing to name one, as not being sure whether she
deserved to be put into the Catalogue or no; but the Lady not finding herself
there, was not a little affronted at the Omission, and made a great Complaint
to the Poet, asking him what he had seen in her, that he should leave her out
of his List; desiring him at the same time to enlarge his Satire and put her
in, or expect to hear further from her. The Author obeyed her Commands, and
gave her a Character with a vengeance, and, to her great satisfaction, made her
as famous for Infamy as any Woman about the Town. Such another story is that of
Diana's Temple, one of the seven Wonders of the World, burnt by an ignoble
Fellow merely to eternize his Name; which, in spite of an Edict that enjoined
all People never to mention it, either by word of Mouth or in Writing, yet is
still known to have been Erostratus. The Story of the great Emperor Charles the
Fifth and a Roman Knight, upon a certain occasion, is much the same. The
Emperor had a great desire to see the famous Temple once called the Pantheon,
but now more happily, the Church of All Saints. It Is the only entire Edifice
remaining of Heathen Rome, and that which best gives an Idea of the Glory and
Magnificence of its great Founders. It Is built in the shape of a half Orange,
of a vast Extent and very lightsom, though it admits no Light, but at one Window,
or to speak more properly at a round Aperture on the top of the Roof. The
Emperor being got up thither, and looking down from the Brink upon the Fabric,
with a Roman Knight by him, who showed all the Beauties of that vast edifice;
after they were gone from the place, says the Knight, addressing the Emperor,
It came into my Head a thousand Times, Sacred Sir, to embrace your Majesty, and
cast my self with you from the top of the Church to the bottom, that I might
thus purchase an immortal Name. I thank you, said the Emperor, for not doing
it; and for the future I will give you no opportunity to put your Loyalty to
such a Test. Therefore I banish you my Presence for ever, which done, he
bestowed some mighty Favor on him. I tell thee, Sancho, this desire of Honor
is a strange bewitching thing. What do thou think made Horatius, armed at all
points, plunge headlong from the Bridge into the Rapid Tyber? What prompted
Curtius to leap into the profound flaming Gulf? What made Mutius burn his
Hand? What forced Coesar over the Rubicon, spite of all the Omens that
dissuaded his Passage? And to instance a more modern Example, what made the
undaunted Spaniards sink their Ships, when under the most Courteous Cortez, but
that scorning the stale Honor of this so often Conquered World, they sought a
Maiden Glory in a new Scene of Victory? These, and a multiplicity of other
great Actions, are owing to the immediate thirst and desire of Fame, which
Mortals expect as the proper Price and immortal Recompense of their great
Actions. But we that are Christian Catholic Knight-Errants, must fix our hopes
upon a higher Reward, placed in the Eternal and Celestial Regions, where we may
expect a permanent Honor and complete Happiness; not like the vanity of Fame,
which at best is but the shadow of great Actions, and must necessarily vanish
when destructive Time has eat away the Substance which it followed. So, my
Sancho, since we expect a Christian Reward, we must suit our Actions to the
Rules of Christianity. In Giants we must kill Pride and Arrogance: But our
greatest Foes, and whom we must chiefly combare, are within. Envy we must
overcome by generosity and nobleness of Soul: Anger by a reposed and easy Mind;
Riot and Drowsiness, by Vigilance and Temperance; Lasciviousness, by our
inviolable Fidelity to those who are Mistresses of our Thoughts; and Sloth, by
our indefatigable Peregrinations through the Universe, to seek occasions of
Military, as well as Christian Honors. This, Sancho, is the Road to lasting
Fame, and a good and honorable Renown. I understand passing well every Tittle
you have said, answered Sancho; but pray now, Sir, will you dissolve me of one
doubt, that is just come into my Head. Resolve thou would say, Sancho,
replied Don Quixote: Well, speak, and I will endeavor to satisfy thee. Why
then, quoth Sancho, pray tell me, these same Julys, and these Augusts, and all
the rest of the famous Knights you talk of that are dead, where are they now?
Without doubt, answered Don Quixote, the Heathens are in Hell. The Christians,
if their Lives were answerable to their Profession, are either in Purgatory or
in Heaven. So far so good, said Sancho; but pray tell me, the Tombs of these
Lordlings, have they any Silver-Lamps still burning before 'em, and are their
Chappel-walls hung about with Crutches, Winding-sheets, old Perriwigs, Legs and
Wax-eyes, or with what are they hung? The Monuments of the dead Heathens, said
Don Quixote, were for the most part sumptuous pieces of Architecture. The Ashes
of Julius Caesar were deposited on the top of an Obelisque, all of one Stone of
a prodigious bigness, which is now called Aguglia di San Pietro. The Emperor
Adrian's Sepulcher was a vast Structure as big as an ordinary Village, and
called Moles Adriani, and now the Castle of St. Angelo in Rome. Queen Artemisia
buried her Husband Mausolus in so curious and magnificent a Pile, that his
Monument was reputed one of the seven Wonders of the World. But none of these,
nor any other of the Heathen Sepulchers, had any Winding-sheets, or other
Offering that might imply the Persons interred were Saints. Thus far we are
right, quoth Sancho; now, Sir, pray tell me, which is the greatest wonder, to
raise a dead Man, or kill a Giant? The answer is obvious, said Don Quixote, to
raise a dead Man certainly. Then; Master, I have nicked you, says Sancho, for
he that raises the Dead, makes the Blind see, the Lame walk, and the Sick
healthy, who has Lamps burning Night and Day before his Sepulcher, and whose
Chapel is full of Pilgrims, who adore his Relics on their Knees; that Man I
say has more Fame in this World and in the next, than any of your Heathenish
Emperors or Knight-Errants ever had, or will ever have. I grant it, said Don
Quixote. Very good, quoth Sancho, I Will be with you anon. This Fame, these
Gifts, these Rights, Pivileges, and what do you call 'em, the Bodies and Relics
of these Saints have; so that by the consent and good liking of our Holy Mother
the Church they have their Lamps, their Lights, their Winding-sheets, their
Crutches, their Pictures, their Heads of Hair, their Legs, their Eyes, and the
Lord knows what, by which they stir up People's Devotion, and spread their
Christian Fame. Kings will vouchsafe to carry the Bodies of Saints or their
Relics on their Shoulders, they will kiss you the pieces of their Bones, and
spare no cost to set off and deck their Shrines and Chapels. And what of all
this, said Don Quixote? What Is your Inference? Why, truly, Sir, quoth Sancho,
that we turn Saints as fast as we can, and that is the readiest and cheapest way
to get this same Honor you talk of. 'Twas but yesterday or the other day, or I
cannot tell when, I Am sure 'twas not long since, that two poor barefooted
Friars were Sainted, and you cannot think what a crowd of People there is to
kiss the Iron-Chains they wore about their Wastes instead of Girdles, to humble
the Flesh. I dare say they are more reverenced than Orlandosa's Sword, that
hangs in the Armory of our Sovereign Lord the King, whom Heaven grant long to
Reign! So that for ought I see, better it is to be a Friar, though but of a
beggarly Order, than a valiant Errant Knight; and a dozen or two of sound
Lashes, well meant, and as well laid on, will obtain more of Heaven than two
thousand thrusts with a Lance; though they be given to Giants, Dragons, or
Hobgoblins. All this is very true, replied Don Quixote; but all Men cannot he
Friars; we have different Paths allotted us, to mount to the high Seat of
Eternal Felicity. Chivalry is a Religious Order, and there are Knights in the
fraternity of Saints in Heaven. However, quoth Sancho, I have heard say there
are more Friars there than Knight-Errants. That is, said Don Quixote, because
there is a greater number of Friars than of Knights. But are there not a great
many Knights-Errant too? said Sancho. There are many indeed, answered Don
Quixote, but very few that deserve the Name. In such Discourses as these, the
Knight and Squire passed the night and the whole succeeding day, without
encountering any occasion to signalize themselves, at which Don Quixote was
very much disgusted. At last, toward evening the next day, they discovered the
goodly City of Toboso, which revived the Knight's Spirits Wonderfully, but had
a quite contrary Effect on his Squire, because he did not know the House where
Dulcinea lived, no more than his Master. So that the one was mad till he saw
her, and the other very melancholic and disturbed in Mind because he had never
seen her; nor did he know what to do, should his Master send him to Toboso.
However, as Don Quixote would not make his Entry in the Daytime, they spent
the Evening among some Oaks not far distant from the place, till the prefixed
moment came; then they entered the City, where they met with Adventures indeed.

CHAP. IX. That gives an Account of Things which you will know when you read it.
THE sable Night had spun out half her Course, when Don Quixote and Sancho
descended from a Hill, and entered Toboso. A profound Silence reigned over all
the Town, and all the Inhabitants were fast asleep and stretched out at their
Ease. The Night was somewhat clear, though Sancho wished it dark, to hide his
Master's Folly and his own. Nothing disturbed the general Tranquillity, but now
and then the Barking of Dogs, that wounded Don Quixote's Ears, but more poor
Sancho's Heart. Sometimes an Ass brayed, Hogs grunted, Cats mewed; which
jarring Mixture of Sounds was not a little augmented by the Stillness and
Serenity of the Night, and filled the enamored Champion's Head with a thousand
inauspicious Chimera's. However, turning to his Squire, My dear Sancho, said
he, show me the Way to Dulcinea's Palace, perhaps we shall find her still
awake. Body of me, cried Sancho, what Palace do you mean? When I saw her
Highness she was in a little paltry Cot. Perhaps, replied the Knight, she was
then retired into some Corner of the Palace, to divert her self in Private with
her Damsels, as great Ladies and Princesses sometimes do. Well Sir, said
Sancho, since it must be a Palace whether I will or no, yet can you think this
is a Time of Night to find the Gates open, or a seasonable Hour to thunder at
the Door, till we raise the House and alarm the whole Town? Are we going to a
Bawdy House, think you, like your Wenchers, that can rap at a Door any Hour of
the Night, and knock People up when they list? Let us once find the Palace,
said the Knight, and then I Will tell thee what we ought to do: But stay, either
my Eyes delude me, or that lofty gloomy Structure which I discover yonder, is
Dulcinea's Palace. Well, lead on Sir, said the Squire; and yet though I were to
see it with my Eyes and feel it with my ten Fingers, I shall believe it even as
much as I believe it is now Noonday. The Knight led on, and having rode about
two hundred Paces, came at last to the Building which he took for Dulcinea's
Palace; but found it to be the great Church of the Town. We are mistaken
Sancho, said he, I find this is a Church. I see it is, said the Squire; and I
pray the Lord we have not found our Graves; for it is a plaguey ill Sign to haunt
Churchyards at this Time of Night, especially when I told you, if I an't
mistaken, that this Lady's House stands in a little blind Alley, without any
Thorough-fair. A Curse on thy distempered Brain! cried Don Quixote; where,
Blockhead, where did thou ever see royal Edifices and Palaces built in a
blind Alley without a Thorough-fair? Sir, said Sancho, every Country has its
several Fashions; and for ought you know they may build their great Houses and
Palaces in blind Alleys at Toboso: And therefore, good your Worship, let me
alone to hunt up and down in what By-Lanes and Alleys I may strike into; may
hap in some Nook or Corner we may light upon this same Palace: Would Old-Nick
had it for me, for leading us such a Jaunt, and plaguing a Body at this Rate.
Sancho, said Don Quixote, speak with greater Respect of my Mistress's Concerns;
be merry and wise, and do not throw the Helve after the Hachet. Cry Mercy Sir,
quoth Sancho; but would it not make any Man mad, to have you put me upon
finding readily our Dame's House at all times, which I never saw but once in my
Life? nay, and to find it at Midnight, when you your self cannot find it that
have seen it a thousand times? Thou will make me desperately angry, said the
Knight: Hark you, Heretic, have I not repeated it a thousand times that I
never saw the peerless Dulcinea, nor ever entered the Portals of her Palace;
but that I am in Love with her purely by Hearsay, and upon the great Fame of
her Beauty and rare Accomplishments? I hear you say so now, quoth Sancho; and
since you say you never saw her, I must needs tell you I never saw her neither.
That Is impossible, said Don Quixote; at least you told me you saw her winnowing
Wheat, when you brought me an Answer to the Letter which I sent by you. That Is
neither here nor there Sir, replied Sancho; for to be plain with you, I saw her
but by Hearsay too, and the Answer I brought you was by Hearsay as well as
the rest, and I know the Lady Dulcinea no more than the Man in the Moon.
Sancho, Sancho, said Don Quixote, there is a Time for all things; unseasonable
Mirth always turns to Sorrow. What, because I declare that I have never seen
nor spoken to the Mistress of my Soul, is it for you to trifle and say so too,
when you're so sensible of the contrary?

Here their Discourse was interrupted; a Fellow with two Mules happening to
pass by them, and by the Noise of the Plough which they drew along, they
guessed it might be some Country-Labourer going out before Day to his
Husbandry; and so indeed it was. He went singing the doleful Ditty of the
Defeat of the French at Roncesvalles; Ye Frenchmen all must rue the woeful Day.
Let me die (said Don Quixote, hearing what the Fellow sung) if we have any good
Success to Night; do thou hear what this Peasant sings Sancho? Ay marry do I,
quoth the Squire; but what is the Rout at Roncesvalles to us? it concerns us no
more than if he had sung the Ballad of Colly my Cow; we shall speed neither the
better nor worse for it. By this Time the Plough-man being come up to them, Good
Morrow honest Friend, cried Don Quixote to him; pray can you inform me which is
the Palace of the peerless Princess the Lady Dulcinea del Toboso. Sir, said the
Fellow, I am a Stranger, and but lately come into this Town; I Am Plough-man to
a rich Farmer: But here right over against you lives the Curate and the Sexton,
they are the likeliest to give you some Account of that Lady-Princess, as having
a List of all the Folks in Town, though I fancy there is no Princess at all lives
here; there be indeed a Power of Gentle-folk, and each of them may be a
Princess in her own House for ought I know. Perhaps Friend, said Don Quixote,
we shall find the Lady for whom I enquire among those. Why truly Master,
answered the Plough-man, as you say, such a thing may be, and so speed you
well! It Is Break of Day. With that switching his Mules, he stayed for no more
Questions.

Sancho perceiving his Master in Suspense, and not very well satisfied, Sir,
said he, the Day comes on apace, and I think 'twill not be very handsome for us
to stay to be star'd at, and sit sunning our selves in the Street. We had
better slip out of Town again, and betake our selves to some Wood hard by, and
then I will come back, and search every Hole and Corner in Town for this same
House, Castle, or Palace of my Lady's, and 'twill go hard if I don't find it
out at long run; then will I talk to her Highness, and tell her how you do, and
how I left you hard by waiting her Orders and Instructions about talking with
her in Private, without bringing her Name in question. Dear Sancho, said the
Knight, thou have spoke, and included a thousand Sentences in the Compass of a
few Words; I approve and lovingly accept thy Advice. Come, my Child, let us go,
and in some neighboring Grove find out a convenient Retreat; then, as thou
say, thou shall return to seek, to see, and to deliver my Embassy to my
Lady, from whose Discretion and most courteous Mind I hope for a thousand
Favors, that may be counted more than wonderful. Sancho sat upon Thorns till
he had got his Master out of Town, lest he should discover the Falsehood of the
Account he brought him in Sierra Morena of Dulcinea's answering his Letter: So
hastening to be gone, they were presently got two Miles from the Town into a
Wood, where Don Quixote took Covert, and Sancho was dispatched to Dulcinea. In
which Negotiation some ^ccidents fell out, that require new Attention and a
fresh Belief.

CHAP. X. How Sancho cunningly found out a Way to inchant the Lady Dulcinea,
with other Passages no less certain than ridiculous.
THE Author of this important History being come to the Matters which he
relates in this Chapter, says he would willingly have left 'em buried in
Oblivion, in a Manner despairing of his Reader's Belief: For Don Quixote's
Madness flies here to so extravagant a Pitch, that it may be said to have
out-stripp'd by two Bow-shots all imaginable Credulity. However,
notwithstanding this Mistrust, he has set down every Particular, just as the
same was transacted, without adding or diminishing the least Atom of Truth
through the whole History; not valuing in the least such Objections as may be
raised to impeach him of Breach of Veracity. A Proceeding which ought to be
commended; for Truth indeed rather alleviates than hurts, and will always bear
up against Falsehood, as Oil does above Water. And so continuing his Narration,
he tells us, That when Don Quixote was retired into the Wood or Forest, or
rather into the Grove of Oaks near the Grand Toboso, he ordered Sancho to go
back to the City, and not to return to his Presence till he had had Audience of
his Lady, beseeching her that it might please her to be seen by her Captive
Knight, and vouchsafe to bestow her Benediction on him, that by the Virtue of
that Blessing he might hope for a prosperous Event in all his Onsets and
perilous Attempts and Adventures. Sancho undertook the Charge, engaging him as
successful a Return of this as of his former Message.

Go then, Child, said the Knight, and have a Care of being daunted when thou
approachest the Beams of that refulgent Sun of Beauty. Happy, thou, above all
the Squires of the Universe! Observe and engrave in thy Memory the Manner of
thy Reception; mark whether her Color changes upon the Delivery of thy
Commission; whether her Looks betray any Emotion or Concern when she hears my
Name; whether she does not seem to sit on her Cushion with a strange
Uneasiness, in case thou happen'st to find her seated on the pompous Throne of
her Authority. And if she be standing, mind whether she stands sometimes upon
one Leg, and sometimes on another; whether she repeats three or four times the
Answer which she gives thee, or changes it from kind to cruel, and then again
from cruel to kind; whether she does not seem to adjust her Hair, though every
Lock appears in perfect Order. In short, observe all her Actions, every Motion,
every Gesture; for by the accurate Relation which thou giv'st of these things,
I shall divine the Secrets of her Breast, and draw just Inferences in Relation
to my Amor. For I must tell thee, Sancho, if thou do not know it already,
that the outward Motions of Lovers are the surest Indications of their inward
Affections, they are the most faithful Intelligencers in an amorous
Negotiation. Go then, my trusty Squire, thy own better Stars, not mine, attend
thee; and meet with a more prosperous Event, than that which in this doleful
Desert, tossed between Hopes and Fears, I dare expect. I Will go Sir, quoth
Sancho, and I Will be back in a Trice: Mean while cheer up, I beseech you; come,
Sir, comfort that little Heart of yours, no bigger than a Hazle-Nut: Don't be
cast down I say; remember the old Saying, Faint Heart never won fair Lady;
Where there is no Hook, to be sure there will hang no Bacon; The Hare leaps out
of the Bush where we least look for her. I speak this, to give you to
understand, that though we could not find my Lady's Castle in the Night, I may
light on it when I least think on it now it is Day; and when I have found it,
let me alone to deal with her. Well Sancho, said the Knight, thou have a rare
Talent in applying thy Proverbs; Heaven give me better Success in my Designs!
This said, Sancho turned his Back, and switching his Dapple, left the Don on
Horseback, leaning on his Lance, and resting on his Stirrups, full of
melancholy and confused Imaginations. Let us leave him too, to go along with
Sancho, who was no less uneasy in his Mind. No sooner was he got out of the
Grove, but turning about, and perceiving his Master quite out of Sight, he
dismounted, and laying himself down at the Foot of a Tree, thus began to hold a
Parley with himself. Friend Sancho, quoth he, pray let me ask you whither your
Worship is a going? Is it to seek some Ass you have lost? No by my Troth. What
is it then thou art hunting after? Why I am looking, you must know, for a thing
of nothing, only a Princess, and in her the Sun of Beauty, forsooth, and all
Heaven together. Well, and where do thou think to find all this, Friend of
mine? Where! why in the great City of Toboso, And pray Sir, who set you to
work? Who set me to work! There Is a Question! Why who but the most renowned
Knight Don Quixote de la Mancha, he that rights the Wronged, that gives Drink
to the Hungry, and Meat to those that are adry. Very good Sir; but pray do
know where she lives? Not I, efackins! but my Master says it is somewhere in a
King's Palace or stately Castle. And have thou ever seen her trow? No marry
have NOT I: Why my Master himself never sat Eyes on her in his Life. But tell me,
Sancho, what if the People of Toboso should know that you are come to inveagle
their Princesses, and make their Ladies run astray, and should baste your
Carcass handsomely, and leave you never a sound Rib, do you not think they
would be mightily in the Right on it? Why, troth, they would not be much in the
Wrong; though methinks they should consider too that I am but a Servant, and sent
on another Body's Errand, and so I am not at all in Fault. Nay, never trust to
that, Sancho, for your People of La Mancha are plaguey hot and toucheous, and
will endure no Tricks to be put upon 'em: Body of me! if they but smoke thee,
they will mawl thee after a strange Rate. No, no, fore-warned fore-arm'd: Why do
I go about to look for more Feet than a Cat has, for another Man's Maggot!
Besides, when all is done, I may perhaps as well look for a Needle in a Bottle
of Hay, or for a Scholar at Salamanca, as for Dulcinea all over the Town of
Toboso. Well it is the Devil, and nothing but the Devil, has put me upon this
troublesome Piece of Work. This was the Dialogue Sancho had with himself; and
the Consequence of it was the following Soliloquy. Well, there is a Remedy for
all things but Death, which will be sure to lay us flat one Time or other. This
Master of mine, by a thousand Tokens I have seen, is a downright Madman, and I
think I come within an Inch of him; nay, I am the greater Codshead of the two,
to serve and follow him as I do, if the Proverb ben't a Liar, Show me thy
Company I Will tell thee what thou art; and the other old Saw, Birds of a Feather
flock together. Now then my Master, being mad, and so very mad as to mistake
sometimes one thing for another, Black for White, and White for Black, as when
he took the Wind-mills for Giants, the Friar's Mules for Dromedaries, and the
Flocks of Sheep for Armies, and much more to the same Tune, I guess 't will be
no hard Matter to pass upon him the first Country-Wench I shall meet with, for
the Lady Dulcinea. If he will not believe, I Will swear it; if he swear again, I Will
out-swear him; and if he be positive, I Will be more positive than he; and stand
to it, and outface him in it, come what will on it: So that when he finds I will not
flinch, he will either resolve never to send me more of his sleeveless Errands,
seeing what a lame Account I bring him, or he will think some one of those wicked
Wizards, who, he says, owes him a Grudge, has transmogrify'd her into some
other Shape out of Spite. This happy Contrivance helped to compose Sancho's
Mind, and now he looked on his grand Affair to be as good as done. Having
therefore stayed till the Evening, that his Master might not think he had
employed so much Time in Going and Coming, things fell out very luckily for
him; for as he arose to mount his Dapple, he spied three Country-Wenches coming
toward him from Toboso, upon three young Asses, whether Male or Female the
Author has left undetermined, though we may reasonably suppose they were
She-Asses, such being most frequently used to ride on by Country-Lasses in
those Parts. But this being no very material Circumstance, we need not dwell
any longer upon the Decision of that Point: It Is sufficient they were Asses,
and discovered by Sancho; who thereupon made all the Haste he could to get to
his Master, and found him breathing out a thousand. Sighs and amorous
Lamentations. Well my Sancho, said the Knight immediately upon his Approach,
what News? are we to mark this Day with a white or a black Stone? Even mark it
rather with Red-Oker, answered Sancho, as they do Church-Chairs, that every
Body may know who they belong to. Why then, said Don Quixote, I suppose thou
bring'st good News. Ay marry do I, quoth Sancho; you have no more to do but to
clap Spurs to Rozinante, and get into the open Fields, and you will see my Lady
Dulcinae del Toboso, with a Brace of her Damsels, coming to see your Worship.
Blessed Heaven! cried Don Quixote, what art thou saying, my dear Sancho? Take
Heed, and do not presume to beguile my real Grief with a delusive Joy.
Adsookers! Sir, said Sancho, what should I get by putting a Trick upon you, and
being found out the next Moment? Seeing is Believing all the World over. Come
Sir, put on, put on, and you will see our Lady Princess coming, dressed up and
bedecked like her own sweet self indeed. Her Damsels and she are all one Spark
of Gold, all Pearls, all Diamonds, all Rubies, all Cloth of Gold above ten
Inches high. Their Hair spread over their Shoulders like so many Sunbeams, and
dangling and dancing in the Wind; and what is more, they ride upon three
Flea-bitten gambling Hags; there is not a Piece of Horseflesh can match 'em in
three Kingdoms. Ambling Nags thou meanest Sancho, said Don Quixote. Gambling
Hags or ambling Nags, quoth Sancho, there is no such Difference methinks; but be
they what they will, I Am sure I never sat Eyes on finer Creatures than those
that ride upon their Backs, especially my Lady Dulcinea; 'twould make one swoon
away but to look upon her. Let us move then, my Sancho, said Don Quixote, and
as a Gratification for these unexpected happy Tidings, I freely bestow on thee
the best Spoils the next Adventure we meet with shall afford; and if that
content thee not, take the Colts which my three Mares thou know of, are now
ready to Foal on our Town-Common. Thank you for the Colts, said Sancho; but as
for the Spoils, I am not sure they will be worth any thing. They were now got out
of the Wood, and discovered the three Country-Lasses at a small distance. Don
Quixote casting his Eyes toward Toboso, and seeing no Body on the Road but the
three Wenches, was strangely troubled in Mind, and turning to Sancho, asked him
whether the Princess and her Damsels were come out of the City when he left
'em? Out of the City, cried Sancho! Why where are your Eyes? Are they in your
Heels, in the name of Wonder, that you cannot see 'em coming toward us, shining
as bright as the Sun at Noonday? I see nothing, returned Don Quixote, but
three Wenches upon as many Asses. Now Heaven deliver me from the Devil, quoth
Sancho! Is It possible your Worship should mistake three what-d'ye-call-ems,
three Ambling Nags. I mean, as white as driven Snow, for three ragged
Ass-Colts. Body of me! I Will even peell off my Beard by the Roots an't be so.
Take it from me, Friend Sancho, said the Knight, they are either He, or
She-Asses, as sure as I am Don Quixote, and thou Sancho Panca; at least, they
appear to be such. Come, Sir, quoth the Squire, don't talk at that rate, but
snuff your Eyes, and go pay your Homage to the Mistress of your Soul; for she is
near at Hand; and so saying, Sancho hastens up to the three Country-Wenches,
and alighting from Dapple, took hold of one of the Asses by the Halter, and
falling on his Knees, Queen, and Princess, and Duchess of Beauty, quoth he,
an't please your Haughtiness, and Greatness, vouchsafe to take into your good
Grace and liking, yonder Knight, your Prisoner and Captive, who is turned of a
sudden into cold Marble-Stone, and struck all of a heap, to see himself before
your High and Mightiness. I am Sancho Panca, his Squire, and he himself the
wandering Weather-beaten Knight, Don Quixote de la Mancha, otherwise called the
Knight of the Woeful Figure. By this time, Don Quixote having placed himself
down on his Knees by Sancho, gazed with dubious and disconsolate Eyes on the
Creature, whom Sancho called Queen and Lady; and perceiving her to be no more
than a plain Country-Wench, so far from being well-favour'd, that she was
blubber-cheek'd, and flat-nos'd, he was lost in Astonishment, and could not
utter one Word. On the other side, the Wenches were no less surpised, to see
themselves stopped by two Men in such different outsides, and on their Knees.
But at last, she whose Ass was held by Sancho, took Courage, and broke Silence
in an angry Tone. Come, cried she, get out of our way with a Murrain, and let
us go about our Business; for we are in haste. Oh Princess! and Universal Lady
of Toboso, answered Sancho, why does not that great Heart of yours melt, to see
the Post and Pillar of Knight-Errantry fall down before your high and mighty
Presence! Hoy day (quoth another of the Females, hearing this) What Is here to
do! Look how your small Gentry come to jeer and flout poor Country-Girls, as if
we could not give 'em as good as they bring. Go, get about your Business, and
let us go about ours, and speed you well. Rise, Sancho, said Don Quixote,
hearing this, for I am now convinced, that my malicious Stars, not yet
satisfied with my passed Misfortunes, still shed their baleful Influence, and
have barred all the Passages that could convey Relief to my miserable Soul, in
this frail Habitation of Animated Clay. Oh! thou Extremity of all that is
valuable, Masterpiece of all humane Perfection, and only Comfort of this
afflicted Heart, thy Adorer; though now a spightful Inchanter persecutes me, ad
fascinates my Sight, hiding with Mists and Cataracts from me, and me alone,
those Peerless Beauties, under the foul disguise of rural Deformity, if he has
not transformed thy faithful Knight into some ugly Shape to make me loathsome
to thy Eyes, look on me with a smiling Amorous Eye; and in the Submission and
Genuflection which I pay to thy Beauty, even under the fatal Cloud that
obscures it, read the Humility with which my Soul adores thee. Tittle-tattle,
quoth the Country-Wench. Spare your Breath to cool your Porridge, and rid me of
your idle Gibberish. Get you on, Sir, and let us go; and we shall think it a
Kindness. This said, Sancho made way for her, and let her pass, overjoyed his
Plot had succeeded so well. The Imaginary Dulcinea was no sooner at Liberty,
but Punching her Ass with the end of a Staff which she had in her Hand, she
began to scour along the Plain: But the angry Beast not being used to such
smart Instigations, fell a Kicking and Wincing at such a rate, that down came
my Lady Dulcinea. Presently Don Quixote ran to help her up, and Sancho to
re-settle and gird her Pack-Saddle, that hung under the Ass's Belly. Which
being done, the Knight very courteously was going to take his Enchanted
Mistress in his Arms, to set her on her Saddle; but she being now got on her
Legs, took a run, and clapping her Hands upon the Ass's Crupper, at one Jump
leaped into her Panel, as swift as a Hawk, and there she sat with her Legs
astride, like a Man. By St. Roque! quoth Sancho, our Lady Mistress is as nimble
as an Eel. Let me be Hanged, if I don't think she might teach the best Jockey
in Cordova or Mexico to get a Horseback. At one Jump she was vaulted into the
Saddle, and without Spurs makes her Nag smoke it away, like a Gray-hound; her
Damsels are notable Whipsters too; adad! they don't come much short of her, for
they fly like the Wind. Indeed, he said true, for when Dulcinea was once
Mounted, they all made after her full speed, without so much as looking behind
'em, for above half a League. Don Quixote followed 'em as far as he could with
his Eyes; and when they were quite out of sight, turning to his Squire, now
Sancho, said he, What think thou of this matter? Are not these base
Inchanters. Inexorable! How extensive is their Spite, thus to deprive me of
the Happiness of seeing the Object of my Wishes in her natural Shape and Glory.
Sure I was doomed to be an Example of Misfortunes, and the Mark against which
those Caitiffs are employed to shoot all the Arrows of their Hatred. Note,
Sancho, that these Traitors were not content to turn and Transform my Dulcinea,
but they must do it into the vile and Deformed Resemblance of that
Country-Wench; nay, they even took from her that sweet Scent of Fragrant
Flowers and Amber, those grateful Odours, so essential to Ladies of her Rank;
for, to tell the Truth, when I went to help her upon her Nag, as thou call'st
it, (for to me it seemed nothing but an Ass) such a Whiff, such a rank Hogo of
hot Garlic Invaded my Nostrils, as had like to have overcome me, and put me
into a Convulsion. Oh ye vile Wretches, cried Sancho! Oh ye wicked, and
ill-minded Enchanters! Oh that I might but once see the whole Nest of ye
threaded together on one String, and hung up a smoking by the Gills like so
many Pilchers! You know a deal, you can do a deal, and you make a deal of
Mischief. One would have thought you might have been contented, like a pack of
Rogues as you are, with having changed the Pearls of my Lady's Eyes into
Acorns, and her most pure Golden Locks into a Red Cow's Tail; but you must be
meddling with her Breath, by which we might have guessed what lay hid under that
course Disguise; though for my part I must needs own, she did not appear to me
Deformed at all; but rather Fair and Beautiful; by the same Token that she had
a Mole on the right side of her Upper Lip, like a Whisker, whence sprouted
seven or eight red Hairs, each about a Span in length, looking like so many
strings of Gold-wire. As the Moles on the Body, said Don Quixote, are generally
answerable to those on the Face, Dulcinea should have such another Mole on that
Thigh, which is opposite to that side of her Face where that Beauty-spot is
seated; but methinks, Sancho, the Hairs thou talk of are of a length
somewhat extraordinary for Moles. That Is neither here nor there, quoth Sancho,
there they were I Will assure you, and they looked too as if she had brought 'em
with her into the World. That I believe, said Don Quixote, for every part of
Dulcinea must be naturally perfect and complete; so that though a hundred Moles
were scattered over her fair outside, and as conspicuous too as that which thou
did see, they would be no Deformities in her; but so many Moons and Stars, an
additional Luster to her Beauty. But tell me, Sancho, that Saddle which
appeared to me to be the Panel of an Ass, was it a Pillion or a Side-Saddle?
It was a Side-Saddle, answered Sancho, with a Field-covering, and so rich that
it might purchase half a Kingdom. And could not I see all this, cried Don
Quixote. Well, I have said it, and must repeat it a thousand times, I am the
most unfortunate Man in the Universe. The cunning Rogue of a Squire, hearing
his Master talk at that rate, could hardly keep his Countenance, and refrain
from Laughing to see how admirably he had fooled him. At last, after a great
deal of Discourse of the same Nature, they both Mounted again, and took the
Road for Saragossa, designing to be present at the most celebrated Festivals
and Sports that are Solemnized every Year in that Noble City. But they met with
many Accidents by the Way, and those so extraordinary, and worthy the Reader's
Information, that they must not be passed over unrecorded nor unread; as shall
appear from what follows.

CHAP. XI. Of the Stupendous Adventure that befell the Valorous Don Quixote,
with the Chariot or Cart of the Court or Parliament of Death.
DON Quixote rode on very melancholic; the Malice of the Magicians in
transforming his Lady Dulcinea perplexed him strangely, and set his Thoughts
upon the Rack, how to dissolve the Enchantment, and restore her to her former
Beauty. In this disconsolate Condition, he went on abandoned to Distraction,
carelessly giving Rozinante the Reins: And the Horse finding himself at liberty,
and tempted by the goodness of the Grass, took the opportunity to feed very
heartily. Which Sancho perceiving, Sir, (said he, rouzing him from his waking
Dream) Sorrow was never designed for Beasts, but Men; but yet let me tell you,
if Men give way to it too much, they make Beasts of themselves. Come, Sir,
awake, awake by any means, pull up the Reins and ride like a Man; cheer up, and
show your self a Knight Errant. What the Devil ails you; Was ever a Man so
Mop'd? Are we here or are we in France, as the Saying is? Let all the
Dulcinea's in the World, be doomed to the Pit of Hell, rather than one single
Knight Errant be cast down at this rate. Hold, Sancho, cried Don Quixote, with
more Spirit than one would have expected; hold, I say; not a Blasphemous Word
against that Beauteous Enchanted Lady; for all her Misfortunes are chargeable
on the unhappy Don Quixote, and flow from the Envy which those Necromancers
bear to me. So say I, Sir, replied the Squire, for would it not vex any one
that had seen her before, to see her now as you saw her! Ay, Sancho, said the
Knight, thy Eyes were blessed with a View of her Perfections in their entire
Luster, thou have reason to say so. Against me, against my Eyes only is the
Malice of her Transformation directed. But now I think on it Sancho, thy
Description of her Beauty was a little absurd in that particular of comparing
her Eyes to Pearls; sure such Eyes are more like those of a Whiting or a
Sea-Bream, than those of a fair Lady; and in my Opinion Dulcinea's Eyes are
rather like two verdant Emeralds railed in with two Celestial Arches, which
signify her Eyebrows. Therefore, Sancho, you must take your Pearls from her
Eyes, and apply 'em to her Teeth, for I verily believe you mistook the one for
the other. Troth! Sir, it might be so, replied Sancho, for her Beauty
confounded me, as much as her Ugliness did you. But let us leave all to Heaven,
that knows all things that befall us in this Vale of Misery, this wicked
troublesome World, where we can be sure of nothing without some Spice of
Knavery or Roguery. In the mean time, there is a thing come into my Head that
puzzles me plaguily. Pray Sir, when you get the better of any Giant or Knight,
and send 'em to pay Homage to the Beauty of your Lady and Mistress, how the
Devil will the poor Knight or Giant be able to find this same Dulcinea. I cannot
but think how they will be to seek, how they will saunter about, gaping and staring
all over Toboso Town, and if they should meet her full butt in the middle of
the King's Highway, yet they will know her no more than they knew the Father
that begot me. Perhaps, Sancho, answered Don Quixote, the Force of her
Enchantment does not extend so far as to debar Vanquished Knights and Giants
from the Privilege of seeing her in her unclouded Beauties: I will try the
Experiment on the first I conquer, and will command them to return immediately
to me, to inform me of their Success. I like what you say main well, quoth
Sancho, we may chance to find out the Truth by this means; and if so be my Lady
is only hid from your Worship, she has not so much reason to complain as you
may have; but when all comes to all, so our Mistress be safe and sound, let us
make the best of a bad Market, and even go seek Adventures. The rest we'll
leave to Time, which is the best Doctor in such Cases, nay, in worse Diseases.
Don Quixote was going to return an Answer, but was interrupted by a Cart that
was crossing the Road. He that drove it was a hideous Devil, and the Cart being
open, without either Tilt or Boughs, exposed a Parcel of the most surprising
and different Shapes imaginable. The first Figure that appeared to Don Quixote
was no less than Death it self, though with a Humane Countenance; on the one
side of Death stood an Angel with large Wings of different Colors; on the
other side was placed an Emperor with a Crown that seemed to be of Gold, at the
Feet of Death lay Cupid with his Bow, Quiver and Arrows, but not blindfold.
Next to these a Knight appeared completely Armed, except his Head, on which
instead of a Helmet he, wore a Hat; whereon was mounted a large Plume of
Party-colored Feathers. There were also several other Persons in strange and
various Dresses. This strange Appearance at first somewhat surpised Don
Quixote, and frighted the poor Squire out of his Wits; but presently the Knight
cleared up on second Thoughts, imagining it some rare and hazardous Adventure
that called on his Courage. Pleased with this Conceit, and armed with a
Resolution able to affront any Danger, he placed himself in the middle of the
Road, and with a loud and menacing Voice, You Carter, Coachman, or Devil, cried
he, or whatever you be, let me know immediately whence you come, and whither
you go, and what strange Figures are those which load that Carriage, which by
the Freight rather seems to be Charon's Boat, than any terrestrial Vehicle.
Sir, answered the Devil very civilly, stopping his Cart; we are strolling
Players, that belong to Angulo's Company, and it being Corpus-Christi-tide we
have this Morning Acted a Tragedy called the Parliament of Death, in a Town
yonder behind the Mountain, and this Afternoon we are to Play it again in the
Town you see before us, which being so near, we travel to it in the same
Clothes we Act in, to save the trouble of new Dressing our selves. That young
Man plays Death, that other an Angel: This Woman, Sir, our Poet's Bedfellow,
plays the Queen; there is one acts a Soldier, he next to him an Emperor; and I
my self play the Devil, and you must know, the Devil is the best Part in the
Play. If you desire to be satisfied in any thing else, do but ask and I Will
resolve you, for the Devil knows every thing. Now by the Faith of my Function,
said Don Quixote, I find we ought not to give Credit to Appearances, before we
have made the Experiment of feeling them; for at the Discovery of such a Scene,
I would have sworn some strange Adventure had been approaching. I wish you
well, good People; drive on to Act your Play, and if I can be serviceable to
you in any Particular, believe me ready to assist you with all my Heart; for in
my very Childhood I loved Shows, and have been a great Admirer of Dramatick
Representations from any Youthful Days. During this Friendly Conversation, it
unluckily fell out, that one of the Company antickly dressed, being the Fool of
the Play, came up frisking with his Morrice-Bells, and three full-blown
Cow's-Bladders fastened to the end of a Stick. In this odd Appearance he began
to flourish his Stick in the Air, and bounce his Bladders against the Ground
just at Rozinante's Nose. The Jingling of the Bells, and the rattling Noise of
the Bladders so startled and affrighted the quiet Creature, that Don Quixote
could not hold him in; and having got the Curb betwixt his Teeth, away the
Horse hurried his unwilling Rider up and down the Plain, with much more
Swiftness than his feeble Bones seemed to promise. Sancho considering the
Danger of his Master's being thrown, presently alighted, and ran as fast as he
could to his Assistance; but before he could come up to him, Rozinante had made
a false Step, and laid his Master and himself on the Ground; which was indeed
the common end of Rozinante's mad Tricks and presumptuous Racing. On the other
side, the Fool no sooner saw Sancho slide off to help his Master, but he leaped
upon poor Dapple, and rattling his Bladders over the terrified Animal's Hide,
made him fly through the Field toward the Town where they were to play. Sancho
beheld his Master's Fall, and his Ass's Flight at the same time, and stood
strangely divided in himself, not knowing which to assist first, his Master or
his Beast. At length, the Duty of a good Servant and a faithful Squire
prevailing, he ran to his Master, though every obstreperous Bounce with the
Bladders upon Dapple's Hind-quarters, struck him to the very Soul, and he would
have wished every Blow upon his own Eye Balls, rather than on the least Hair of
his Ass's Tail. In this Agony of Spirit, he came to Don Quixote, whom he found
in far worse Circumstances than the poor Knight could have wished, and helping
him to remount, Oh! Sir, cried he, the Devil is run away with Dapple. What
Devil, asked Don Quixote? The Devil with the Bladders, answered Sancho. No
matter, said Don Quixote. I Will force the Traitor to restore him, though he were
to lock him up in the most profound and gloomy Caverns of Hell. Follow me,
Sancho, We may easily overtake the Wagon, and the Mules shall atone for the
Loss of the Ass. You need not be in such haste now, quoth Sancho, for I
perceive the Devil has left Dapple already, and is gone his ways. What Sancho
said was true, for both Ass and Devil tumbled for Company, in imitation of Don
Quixote and Rozinante; and Dapple having left his new Rider to walk on Foot to
the Town, now came himself running back to his Master. All this, said Don
Quixote, shall not hinder me from revenging the Affront put upon us by that
unmannerly Devil, at the Expense of some of his Companions, though it were the
Emperor himself. Oh good your Worship! cried Sancho, never mind it; I beseech
you take my Counsel, Sir; never meddle with Players, there is never any thing to
be got by it; they are a sort of People that always find a many Friends. I have
known one of 'em taken up for two Murders, yet 'scape the Gallows. You must
know, that as they are a Parcel of merry Wags, and make Sport wherever they
come, every Body is fond of 'em, and is ready to stand their Friend, especially
if they be the King's Players, or some of the noted Gangs, who go at such a
taring Rate, that one might mistake some of 'em for Gentlemen or Lords. I care
not, said Don Quixote, though all Mankind united to assist 'em, that buffooning
Devil shall never 'scape unpunished, to ma^e his Boast that he has affronted
me. Whereupon riding up to the Wagon, which was now got pretty near the Town,
Hold, hold, he cried, stay my merry Sparks, I Will teach you to be civil to the
Beasts that are entrusted with the honorable Burden of a Squire to a
Knight Errant. This loud Salutation having reached the Ears of the strolling
Company, though at a good Distance, they presently understood what it imported;
and resolving to be ready to entertain him, Death presently leaped out of the
Cart; the Emperor, the Devil-driver, and the Angel immediately followed; and
even the Queen, and the God Cupid, as well as the rest, having taken up their
share of Flints, stood ranged in Battle-Array ready to receive their Enemy, as
soon as he should come within Stone-shot. Don Quixote seeing them drawn up in
such excellent Don Quixote Encounter with the Players page. 707.
Order, with their Arms lifted up, and ready to let fly at him a furious Volley
of Shot, made a Halt, to consider in what Quarter he might attack this Dreadful
Battalion, with least Danger to his Person. Thus pausing, Sancho overtook him,
and seeing him ready to charge, For Goodness sake, Sir, cried he what do you
mean! Are you mad, Sir? There Is no Fence against the Beggar's Bullets, unless
you could fight with a Brazen Bell over you. Is it not rather Rashness than
true Courage, think you, for one Man to offer to set upon a whole Army? Where
Death is too, and where Emperors fight in Person; nay, and where good and bad
Angels are against you? But if all this weighs nothing with you, consider, I
beseech you, that though they seem to be Kings, Princes and Emperors, yet
there is not so much one Knight Errant among 'em all. Now thou have hit upon the
only Point, said Don Quixote, that could stop the Fury of my Arm: For indeed,
as I have often told thee, Sancho, I am bound up from drawing my Sword against
any below the Order of Knighthood. It Is thy Business to fight in this Cause, if
thou have a just Resentment of the Indignities offered to thy Ass; and I from
this Post will encourage and assist thee with salutary. Orders and
Instructions. No, I thank you, Sir, quoth Sancho, I hate Revenge; a true
Christian must forgive and forget; and as for Dapple, I don't doubt but to find
him willing to leave the Matter to me, and stand to my Verdict in the Case,
which is to live peaceably and quietly as long as Heaven is pleased to let me.
Nay then, said Don Quixote, if that be thy Resolution, Good Sancho, Prudent
Sancho, Christian Sancho, downright Sancho, let us leave these idle
Apparitions, and proceed in search of more substantial and honorable
Adventures, of which, in all Probability, this part of the World will afford us
a wonderful Variety. So saying, he wheeled off, and Sancho followed him. On the
other side, Death with all his flying Squadron, returned to their Cart, and
went on their Journey. Thus ended the most dreadful Adventure of the Chariot of
Death, much more happily than could have been expected, thanks to the laudable
Counsels which Sancho Panca gave his Master; who the Day following had another
Adventure no less remarkable, with one that was a Knight Errant and a Lover too.

CHAP. XII. The Valorous Don Quixote's Strange Adventure with the Knight of the
Mirrors.
DON Quixote passed the Night, that succeeded his Encounter with Death, under
the Covert of some lofty Trees; where, at Sancho's persuasion, he refreshed
himself with some of the Provisions which Dapple carried. As they were at
Supper, Well, Sir, quoth the Squire, what a rare Fool I had been, had I chosen
for my good News the Spoils of your first Venture, instead of the Breed of the
three Mares! Troth! commend me to the saying, A Bird in Hand is worth two in
the Busb. However, answered Don Quixote, had thou let me fall on, as I would
have done, thou might have shared at least the Emperor's Golden Crown, and
Cupid's Painted Wings; for I would have plucked 'em off, and put 'em into thy
power. Ay, but, says Sancho, your Strolling Emperor's Crowns and Scepters are
not of pure Gold, but Tinsel and Copper. I grant it, said Don Quixote, nor is
it fit the Decorations of the Stage should be real, but rather Imitations, and
the resemblance of Realities, as the Plays themselves must be; which, by the
way, I would have you love and esteem, Sancho, and consequently those that
write, and also those that act 'em; for they are all instrumental to the good
of the Commonwealth, and set before our Eyes those Looking-glasses that
reflect a lively Representation of Humane Life; nothing being able to give us a
more just Idea of Nature, and what we are or ought to be, than Comedians and
Comedies. Prithee tell me, have thou never seen a Play acted, where Kings,
Emperors, Prelates, Knights, Ladies, and other Characters are introduced on the
Stage? One acts a Ruffian, another a Soldier; this Man a Cheat, and that a
Merchant; one plays a designing Fool, and another a Foolish Lover: But the Play
done, and the Actors undressed, they are all equal, and as they were before.
All this I have seen, quoth Sancho. Just such Comedy, said Don Quixote, is
acted on the great Stage of the World, where some play the Emperors, others the
Prelates, and, in short, all the Parts that can be brought into a Dramatick
Piece; till Death, which is the Catastrophe and End of the Action, strips the
Actors of all their Marks of Distinction, and levels their quality in the
Grave. A rare Comparison, quoth Sancho, though not so new, but that I have heard
it over and over. Just such another is that of a Game at Chess, where while the
Play lasts every Piece has it particular Office; but when the Game's over, they
are all mingled and huddl'd together, and clapped into a Bag, just as when
Life's ended we are laid up in the Grave. Truly, Sancho, said Don Quixote, thy
Simplicity lessens, and thy Sense improves every day. And good reason why,
quoth Sancho; some of your Worship's Wit must needs stick to me; for your dry
unkindly Land, with good dunging and tilling, will in time yield a good Crop. I
mean, Sir, that the Dung and Muck of your Conversation being thrown on the
barren ground of my Wit, together with the Time I have served your Worship, and
kept you Company; which is, as a body may say, the Tillage; I must needs bring
forth blessed Fruit at last, so as not to shame my Master, but keep in the
Paths of good Manners, which you have beaten into my sodden Understanding.
Sancho's affected Style made Don Quixote laugh, though he thought his words true
in the main; and he could not but admire at his Improvement. But the Fellow
never discovered his weakness so much as by endeavoring to hide it, being most
apt to tumble when he strove to soar too high. His excellence lay chiefly in a
knack at drawing Proverbs into his Discourse, whether to the purpose or not, as
any one that has observed his manner of speaking in this History, must have
perceived.

In such Discourses they passed a great part of the Night, till Sancho wanted
to drop the Portcullices of his Eyes, which was his way of saying he had a mind
to go to sleep: Thereupon he unharness'd Dapple* and set him a grazing: But
poor Rozinante was condemned to stand Saddl'd all Night, by his Master's
Injunction and Prescription, used of old by all Knight-Errants, who never
unsaddl'd their Steeds in the Field, but took off their Bridles, and hung 'em
at the Pummel of the Saddle. However he was not forsaken by faithful Dapple,
whose Friendship was so unparalleled and inviolable, that unquestioned
Tradition has handed it down from Father to Son, that the Author of this true
History composed particular Chapters of the united Affection of these two
Beasts; though, to preserve the Decorum due to so heroic a History, he would not
insert 'em in the Work. Yet sometimes he cannot forbear giving us some few
Touches on that Subject; as when he writes, That the two friendly Creatures
took a mighty Pleasure in being together to scrub and lick one another; and
when they had had enough of that sport, Rozinante would gently lean his Head at
least half a yard over Dapple's Neck, and so they would stand very lovingly
together, looking wistly on the ground for two or three Days; except some body
made 'em leave that Contemplative Posture, or Hunger compelled them to a
Separation. Nay, I cannot pass by what is reported of the Author, how he left
in writing, That he had compared their Friendship to that of Nysus and
Euryalus, and that of Pylades and Orestes, which if it were so, deserves
universal Admiration; the sincere affection of these quiet Animals being a just
Reflection on Men, who are so guilty of breaking their Friendship to one
another. From hence came the saying, There Is no Friend; all Friendship's gone:
Now Men hug, then fight anon. And that other, Where you see your Friend, trust
to your self. Neither should the World take it ill, that the cordial affection
of these Animals was compared by our Author to that of Men; since many
important Principles of Prudence and Morality have been learned from irrational
Creatures; as, The use of Clysters from the Stork, and the Benefit of Vomiting
from the Dog. The Crane gave Mankind an Example of Vigilance, the Ant of
Providence, the Elephant of Honesty, and the Horse of Loyalty. At last Sancho
fell asleep at the Root of a Cork-Tree, and his Master fetched a slumber under
a spacious Oak. But it was not long ever he was disturbed by a Noise behind
him, and starting up, he looked and hearkened on the side whence he thought the
Voice came, and discovered two Men on Horseback; one of whom letting himself
carelessly slide down from the Saddle, and calling to the other, Alight Friend,
said he, and unbridle the Horse; for methinks this place will supply them
plentifully with Pasture, and me with Silence and Solitude to indulge my
amorous Thoughts. While he said this, he laid himself down on the Grass; in
doing which the Armor he had on made a Noise, a sure sign, that gave Don
Quixote to understand he was some Knight Errant. Thereupon going to Sancho, who
slept on, he plucked him by the Arm, and having waked him with much ado, Friend
Sancho, said he, whispering him in his Ear, here is an Adventure. Heaven grant
it be a good one! quoth Sancho. But where is that same Master Adventure's
Worship? Where! do thou ask, Sancho? Why, turn thy Head, Man, and look
yonder. Do thou not see a Knight Errant there lying on the Ground? I have
reason to think he is in Melancholic Circumstances, for I saw him fling
himself off from his Horse, and stretch himself on the Ground in a disconsolate
manner, and his Armor clash'd as he fell. What of all that, quoth Sancho? How
do you make this to be an Adventure? I will not yet affirm, answered Don
Quixote, that it is an Adventure; but a very fair Rise to one as ever was seen.
But hark! he is tuning some Instrument, and by his coughing and spitting he is
clearing his Throat to sing. Troth now, Sir, quoth Sancho, it is even so in good
earnest; and I fancy it is some Knight that is in Love. All Knight-Errants must
be so, answered Don Quixote. But lets us hearken, and if he sings, we shall
know more of his Circumstances presently; for out of the Abundance of the Heart
the Mouth speaks. Sancho would have answered, but that the Knight of the Wood's
Voice, which was but indifferent, interrupted him with the following SONG.
1.
BRight Queen, how shall your Loving Slave
Be sure not to displease?
Some Rule of Duty let him crave,
He begs no other Ease.
2.
Say, must I die, or hopeless live?
I Will Act as you Ordain:
Despair a silent Death shall give,
Or Love himself complain.
3.
My Heart, though soft as Wax, will prov^
Like Diamonds firm and true:
For, what the Impression can remove
That Is stamped by Love and you?


The Knight of the Wood concluded his Song with a Sigh, that seemed to be
fetched from the very bottom of his Heart; and after some pause, with a
mournful and disconsolate Voice: Oh the most Beautiful, but most Ungrateful of
Womankind, cried he, how is it possible, most Serene Casildea de Vandalia,
your Heart should consent that a Knight who idolizes your Charms, should waste
the Flower of his Youth, and kill himself with continual Wanderings and hard
Fatigues? Is it not enough, that I have made you to be acknowledged the
greatest Beauty in the World, by all the Knights of Navarre, all the Knights of
Leon, all the Tartesians, all the Castilians, and, in fine, by all the Knights
of La Mancha? Not so neither, said Don Quixote then; for I my self am of La
Mancha, and never acknowledged nor ever could, nor ought to acknowledge a Thing
so injurious to the Beauty of my Mistress; therefore, Sancho, it is a plain
case, this Knight is out of his Senses. But let us hearken; perhaps we shall
discover something more. That you will, I Will warrant you, quoth Sancho, for he
seems in Tune to hoan a Month together. But it happened otherwise; for the
Knight of the Wood over-hearing them, ceased his Lamentation, and raising
himself on his Feet, in a loud but courteous Tone called to them, Who Is there?
What are ye? Are ye of the Number of the Happy or the Miserable? Of the
Miserable, answered Don Quixote. Repair to me then, said the Knight of the
Wood, and be assured you have met Misery and Affliction it self. Upon so moving
and civil an Invitation, Don Quixote and Sancho drew near him; and the Mournful
Knight taking Don Quixote by the Hand, Sit down, said he, Sir Knight, for that
your Profession is Chivalry I need no other Conviction than to have found you
in this Retirement, where Solitude and the cold Night-dews are your Companions,
and the proper Stations and reposing places of Knight-Errants. I am a Knight,
answered Don Quixote, and of the Order you mention; and though my Sorrows, and
Disasters, and Misfortunes usurp the Seat of my Mind, I have still a Heart
disposed to entertain the afflictions of others. Yours, as I gather by your
Complaints, is derived from Love, and, I suppose, owing to the Ingratitude of
that Beauty you now mentioned. While they were thus parleying together, they
sat close by one another on the hard-Ground, very peaceably and lovingly, and
not like Men that by Break of Day were to break one another's Heads. And is it
your Fortune to be in Love, asked the Knight of the Wood? It Is my Misfortune,
answered Don Quixote; though the pleasant Reflection of having placed our
affections Worthily, sufficiently balances the Weight of our Disasters, and
turns them to a Blessing. This might be true, replied the Knight of the Wood,
if the Disdain of some Mistresses were not often so galling to our Tempers, as
to inspire us with something like the Spirit of Revenge. For my part, said Don
Quixote, I never felt my Mistress's Disdain. No truly, quoth Sancho, who was
near them, for my Lady is as gentle as a Lamb, and as soft as Butter. Is that
your Squire, said the Knight of the Wood? It is, answered Don Quixote. I never
saw a Squire, said the Knight of the Wood, that durst presume to interrupt his
Master, when he was speaking himself. There Is my Fellow yonder; he is as big as
his Father, and yet no Man can say he was ever so saucy as to open his Lips
when I spoke. Well, well, quoth Sancho, I have talked, and may talk again, and
before as, and perhaps -- but I have done -- The more ye stir, the more 'twill
stink. At the same time the Squire of the Wood pulling Sancho by the Arm, come
Brother, said he, let us two go where we may chat freely by our selves, like
downright Squires as we are, and let our Masters get over Head and Ears in the
Stories of their Loves: I Will warrant ye they will be at it all Night, and will not
have done by that time it is Day. With all my Heart, quoth Sancho; and then I Will
tell you who I am, and what I am, and you shall judge if I am not fit to make
one among the talking Squires. With that the two Squires withdrew, and had a
Dialogue, as Comical as that of their Masters was Serious.

CHAP. XIII. The Adventure with the Knight of the Wood continued; with the
Wise, Rare and Pleasant Discourse that passed between the two Squires.
THE Knights and their Squires thus divided, the latter to tell their Lives,
and the former to relate their Amors; the Story begins with the Squire of the
Wood. Sir, said he to Sancho, this is a troublesome kind of Life, that we
Squires of Knight-Errants lead: Well may we say, we eat our Bread with the
sweat of our Brows; which is one of the Curses laid on our first Parents. Well
may we say too, quoth Sancho, we eat it with a cold Shivering of our Bodies;
for there are no poor Creatures that suffer more by heat or cold than we do.
Nay, if we could but eat at all, 'twou'd never vex one; for good Fare lessens
Care; but sometimes we shall go ye a Day or two, and never so much as
breakfast, unless it be upon the Wind that blows. After all, said the Squire of
the Wood; we may bear with this, when we think of the reward we are to expect;
for that same Knight Errant must be excessively Unfortunate, that has not some
time or other the Government of some Island, or some good handsome Earldom, to
bestow on his Squire. As for me, quoth Sancho, I have often told my Master, I
would be contented with the Government of any Island; and he is so Noble and
Free-hearted, that he has promised it me over and over. For my part, quoth the
other Squire, I should think my self well paid for my Services with some good
Canonry, and I have my Master's Word for it too. Why then, quoth Sancho, belike
your Master is some Church-Knight, and may bestow such Living^ on his good
Squires. But mine is purely Laick; some of his wise Friends indeed (no thanks
to them for it) once upon a time counseled him to be an Archbishop: I fancy
they wished him no good, but he would not; for he will be nothing but an Emperor.
I was plaguily afraid he might have had a hankering after the Church, and so
have spoiled my Preferment, I not being gifted that way; for between you and I,
though I look like a Man in a Doublet* I should make but an Ass in a Cassock. Let
me tell you, Friend, quoth the Squire of the Wood, that you are out in your
Politics; for these Island-Governments bring more Cost than Worship; there is a
great Cry, but little Wool; the best will bring more Trouble and Care than they
are worth, and those that take 'em on their Shoulders are ready to sink under
'em. I think it were better for us to quit this confounded Slavery, and even
jog home, where me may have better Pastimes. There we may have Fishing, and
Hunting, and the lik^; for he is a sorry Country-Squire indeed, that wants his
Horse, his couple of Hounds, or his Fishing-Tackle, to live pleasantly at Home.
All this I can have at Will, quoth Sancho: Indeed I have never a Nag; but I
have an honest Ass here worth two of my Master's Horses any Day in the Year. A
bad Christmas be my Lot, and may it be the next, if I would swop Beasts with
him, though he gave me four Bushels of Barley to boot, no marry would not I:
Laugh as much as you will at the value I set on my Dapple; for Dapple you must
know is his Color. Now as for Hounds we have enough to spare in our Town; and
there is no Sport like Hunting at another Man's Cost. Faith and Troth! Brother
Squire, quoth the Squire of the Wood, I am fully set upon it. These Vagrant
Knights may even seek their mad Adventures by themselves for me. I Will Home, and
breed up my Children as it behooves me; for I have three, as Precious as three
Orient Pearls. I have but two, quoth Sancho; but they might be presented to the
Pope himself, especially my Girl, that I breed up to be a Countess (Heaven
bless her) in spite of her Mother's Teeth. And how old, pray, said the Squire
of the Wood, may this same Young Lady Countess be? Why, she is about Fifteen,
answered Sancho, a little over or a little under; but she is as ^all as a Pike,
as fresh as an April-Morning, and as strong as a Porter. With these parts,
quoth the other, she may set up not only for a Countess, but for one of the
Wood-Nymphs! Ah, the Young Buxsome Whore's Brood! What a Spring the Met^lesom
Queen will have with her! My Daughter's no Whore, quoth Sancho in a grumbling
Tone, and her Mother was an honest Woman before her; and they shall be Honest,
by Heaven's blessing, while I live and do well: So, Sir, pray keep your Tongue
between your Teeth, or speak as you ought. Methinks your Master should have
taught you better Manners; for Knight-Errants are the very pink of Courtesy.
Alas, quoth the Squire of the Wood, how you're mistaken! how little you know
the way of praising People now adays! Have you never observed when any
Gentleman at a Bull-Feast gives the Bull a home Thrust with his Lance, or when
any Body behaves himself cleverly upon any Occasion; The People will Cry out,
What a brisk Son of a Whore that is! a clever Dog, I Will warrant him. So what
seems to be Slander, in that Sense is notable Commendation: And be advised by
me, don't think those Children worth the owning, who will not do that which may
make their Parents be commended in that Fashion. Nay, if it be so, quoth
Sancho, I Will disown 'em if they don't; and henceforth you may call my Wife and
Daughter all the Whores and Bawds you can think on, and welcome; for they do a
thousand things that deserve all these fine Names. Heaven send me once more to
see them, and deliver me out of this Mortal Sin of Squire-Erranting, which I
have been drawn into a second time, by the wicked Bait of a hundred Ducats,
which the Devil threw in my own way in Sierra Morena, and which he still Haunts
me with, and brings before my Eyes here and there and every where. Oh that
plaguey Purse, it is still running in my Head, methinks I am counting such
another over and over! Now I hug it, now I carry it home, now I Am buying Land
with it; now I let Leases, now I Am receiving my Rents, and live like a Prince!
Thus I pass away the time, and this lulls me on to drudge on to the end of the
Chapter, with this Dunder-headed Master of mine, who to my knowledge is more a
Madman than a Knight. Truly, said the Squire of the Wood, this makes the
Proverb true, Covetousness breaks the Sack. And now you talk of Madmen, I think
my Master is worse than yours; for he is one of those, of whom the Proverb
says, Fools will be meddling; and, who meddles with another Man's Business,
Milks his Cow into a Sieve. In searching after another Knight's Wits, he loses
his own; and Hunts up and down for that, which may make him rue the finding.
And is not the Poor Man in Love, quoth Sancho? I marry, said the other, and with
one Casildea de Vandalia, one of the oddest Pieces in the World; she will neither
Roast nor Boil, and is neither Fish Flesh nor good Red Herring. But that is not
the Thing that Plagues his Noddle now. He has some other Crotchets in his
Crown, and you will hear more of it ever long. There is no way so smooth, quoth
Sancho, but it has some hole or rub in it to make a Body stumble. In some Houses
they Boil Beans, and in mine are whole Kettles full. So Madness has more need
of good Attendants than Wisdom. But if the old Saying be true, that it lightens
Sorrow to have Companions in our Grief, you are the fittest to comfort me; you
serve one Fool and I another. My Master, quoth the Squire of the Wood, is more
stout than foolish, but more Knave than either. Mine is not like yours then,
quoth Sancho, he has not one grain of Knavery in him; he is as dull as an old
cracked Pitcher, hurts no Body, does all the good he can to every Body, a Child
may persuade him it is Night at Noonday, and he is so simple, that I cannot
help loving him with all my Heart and Soul, and cannot leave him, in spite of
all his Follies. Have a care, Brother, said the Squire of the Wood, when the
Blind leads the Blind, both may fall into the Ditch. It Is better to wheel about
fair and softly, and steal home again to our own Fire-sides; for those who
follow their Nose are often led into a stink: Here the Squire of the Wood
observing that Sancho spit very often and very dry, I fancy, Brother, said he,
that our Tongues stick to the Palats of our Mouths with Talking; but to cure
that Disease I have something that hangs to the Pummel of my Saddle, as good as
ever was tipp'd over Tongue. Then he went and took down a Leather-Bottle of
Wine, and a cold Pie at least half a Yard long; which is no Fiction, for Sancho
himself, when he laid his Hands on it, took it rather for a baked Goat than a
Kid; though it was indeed but an overgrown Rabbit. What! said Sancho at the
sight, did you bring this too abroad with you? What do you think, said the other?
Do you take me for one of your Fresh Water Squires? I Would have you know I carry
as good Provision at my Horse's Crupper, as any General upon his March. Sancho
did not stay for an Invitation, but fell to in the Dark, cramming down Morsels
as big as his Fifth. Ay marry, Sir, said he, you are a Squire every Inch of you,
a true and trusty, round and sound, noble and free-hearted Squire. This good
Cheer is a proof of it, which I don't say jumped hither by Witchcraft; but one
would almost think so. Now here sits poor wretched I, that have nothing in my
Knapsack but a Crust of Cheese, so hard, a Giant might break his Grinders in it,
and a few Acorns, Walnuts and Filberds; a shame on my Master's Niggardly
Temper, and his Cursed Maggot, in fancying that all Knight-Errants must live on
a little dried Fruit and Sallets. Well, well, Brother, replied the Squire of
the Wood, our Masters may Diet themselves, by rules of Chivalry, if they
please; your Thistles, and your Herbs and Roots don't well agree with my
Stomach: I must have good Meat, in faith! and this Bottle here still at Hand at
the Pummel of my Saddle. It Is my Joy, my Life, the Comfort of my Soul, I hug
and kiss it every Moment, and now recommend it to you as the best Friend in the
World. Sancho took the Bottle, and rearing it to his thirsty Lips, with his
Eyes fixed upon the Stars, kept himself in that happy Contemplation for a
quarter of an Hour together. At last, when he had taken his Draught, with a
deep Groan, a Nod on one side and a cunning Leer, Oh! the Son of a Whore! What
rare and Catholic Bub it is! Oh ho! quoth the Squire of the Wood, have I
caught you at your Son of a Whores! I told you so now that it was a way of
commending a thing. I knock under, quoth Sancho, and own it is no dishonor to
call one a Son of a Whore when we mean to praise him. But now, by the
Remembrance of her you Love best, prithee tell me, is not this your right
Ciudad-Real Wine? Thou have a rare Palate, answered the Squire of the Wood,
it is the very same, and of a good standing too. I knew it faith! said Sancho,
is not this strange now? Turn me loose among a parcel of Wines to find the
Difference: Adad! Sir, I no sooner clap my Nose to a Taster of Wine, but I can
tell the Place, the Grape, the Flavor, the Age, the Strength, and all the
Qualities of the Parcel: And all this is natural to me, Sir; for I had two
Relations by the Father's-side that were the nicest Tasters that were known of
a long time in La Mancha; of which two I Will relate you a Story that makes good
what I said. It fell out on a time, that some Wine was drawn fresh out of a
Hogshead, and given to these same Friends of mine to Taste; and they were asked
their Opinions of the Condition, the Quality, the Goodness, the Badness of the
Wine, and all that. The one tried it with the tip of his Tongue, the other only
smelled it; the first said the Wine tasted of Iron; the second said it rather
had a Tang of Goat's Leather. The Vintner swore his Vessel was clean, and the
Wine Neat, and so Pure that it could have no Taste of any such thing. Well,
Time ran on, the Wine was Sold, and when the Vessel came to be emptied, what do
you think, Sir, was found in the Cask? A little Key, with a bit of Leathern
Thong tied to it: Now, judge you by this, whether he that comes of such a
Generation has not reason to understand Wine? More reason than to understand
Adventures, answered the other: Therefore since we have enough, let us not
trouble our selves to look after more, but even jog home to our little Cots,
where Heaven will find us, if it be its Will. I intend, said Sancho, to wait on
my Master till we come to Saragossa, but then I Will turn over a new Leaf. To
conclude: The two friendly Squires having talked and drank, and held out almost
as long as their Bottle, it was high time that Sleep should lay their Tongues,
and assuage their Thirst, for to quench it was impossible. Accordingly they had
no sooner filled their Bellies, but they fell fast asleep, both keeping their
hold on their almost empty Bottle. Where we shall for a while leave 'em to
their rest, and see what passed between their Masters.

CHAP. XIV. A Continuation of the Adventure of the Knight of the Mirrors.
MANY were the Discourses that passed between Don Quixote and the Knight of the
Wood: Amongst the rest, You must know, Sir Knight, said the latter, that by the
appointment of Fate, or rather by my own Choice, I became Enamored of the
Peerless Casildea de Vandalia. I call her Peerless, because she is singular in
the greatness of her Stature, as well as in that of her State and Beauty. But
this Lady has been pleased to take no other notice of my honorable Passion,
than in employing me in many Perilous Adventures, like Hercules's Stepmother;
still promising me, after I had put an happy end to one, that the performance
of the next should put me in possession of my Desires. But after a Succession
of numberless Labors, I do not know which of her Commands will be the last,
and will crown my Lawful Wishes. Once by her particular Injunction, I
Challenged that famous Giantess La Giralda of Sevill, who is as strong and
undaunted as one that is made of Brass, and who, without changing Place; is the
most changeable and unconstant Woman in the World; I went, I saw, and overcame:
I made her stand still, and fixed her in a constant Point, for the space of a
whole Week; no Wind having blown in the Skies during all that time but the
North. Another time she enjoined me to remove the ancient Stones of the sturdy
Bulls of Guisando; a Task more suitable to the Arms of Porters than those of
Knights; then she commanded me to descend and dive into the Cave of Cabra, (a
terrible and unheard of Attempt) and to bring her an account of all the Wonders
in that dismal Profundity. I stopped the Motion of La Giralda, I weighed the
Bulls of Guisando; and with a precipitated Fall plunged to the distant bottom
of the Den, and brought to light the d^rkest secrets of that black Abyss. But
still, an^ still my hopes are dead. How dead? How, because her Disdain still
lives, lives to enjoin me new Labors, new Exploits. For, lastly she has
ordered me to traverse the remotest Provinces of Spain, and exact a Confession
from all the Knight-Errants that Roam about the Land, that her Beauty alone
excells that of all other. Women, and that I am the most valiant and most
enamored Knight in the World. I have already journey'd over the greatest part
of Spain on this Expedition, and overcome many Knights who had the Temerity to
contradict my Assertion: But the perfection of my Glory, is the Result of my
Victory over the renowned Don Quixote de la Mancha, whom I Conquered in single
Combat, and compelled to submit his Dulcinea's to my Casildea's Beauty. And now
I reckon the wandering Knights of the whole Universe all vanquished by my
Prowess: Their Fame, their Glory and their Honors being all vested in this
great Don Quixote, who had before made them the Spoils of his Valorous Arm;
though now they must attend the Triumphs of my Victory, which is the greater,
since the Reputation of the Conqueror rises in proportion to that of the
Vanquished; and all the latter's Laurels are transferred to me.

Don Quixote was amazed to hear the Knight run on at this rate, and had the Lie
ready at his Tongue's-end to give him a thousand times; but designing to make
him own his Falsity with his own Mouth, he strove to contain his Choler; and
arguing the Matter very calmly, Sir Knight, said he, That your Victories have
extended over all the Knights in Spain, and perhaps over the whole World, I
will not dispute; but that you have vanquished Don Quixote de la Mancha, you
must give me leave to doubt: It might be some body like him; though he is a
Person whom but very few can resemble. What do you mean? Answered the Knight of
the Wood: By yond spangled Canopy of the Skies, I fought Don Quixote hand to
hand, vanquished him, and made him submit; he is a tall wither-fac'd,
leathern-jaw'd Fellow, scragged, grizzle-hair'd, Hawk-nos'd, and wears long,
black, lank Mustachio's: He is distinguished in the Field by the Title of the
Knight of the Woeful Figure: He bestrides and manages that far-fam'd Courser
Rozinante; and has for the Mistress of his Affections, one Dulcinea del Toboso,
sometimes called Aldonsa Lorenzo; as mine, whose Name was Casildea, and who is
of Andalusia, is now distinguished by the Denomination of Casildea de Vandalia:
and if all these convincing Marks be not sufficient to prove this Truth, I wear
a Sword that shall force even Incredulity to Credit it. Not so fast good Sir
Knight, said Don Quixote; pray attend to what I shall deliver upon this Head:
you must know that this same Don Quixote is the greatest Friend I have in the
World; insomuch that I may say I love him as well as I do my self. Now the
Tokens that you have described him by, are so agreeable to his Person and
Circumstances, that one would think he should be the Person you Subdued. On the
other hand, I am convinced by the more powerful Argument of undeniable Sense,
that it cannot be he. But thus far I will allow you, as there are many
Inchanters that are his Enemies, especially one whose Malice hourly persecutes
him, perhaps one of them has assumed his Likeness, thus by a Counterfeit
Conquest to defraud him of the Glory contracted by his signal Chivalry over
all-the Universe. In confirmation of which I can further tell you, it is but two
Days ago that these envious Magicians transformed the Figure and Person of the
Beautiful Dulcinea del Toboso into the base and sordid likeness of a Rustic
Wench. And if this will not convince you of your Error, behold Don Quixote
himself in Person, that here stands ready to maintain his Words with his Arms,
either a Foot or on Horseback, or in what other manner you may think
convenient. As he said this, up he started, and laid his Hand to his Sword,
expecting the Motions and Resolutions of the Knight of the Wood. But with a
great deal of Calmness, Sir, said he, a good Play Master grudges no Surety: He
that could once vanquish Don Quixote when transformed, needs not fear him in
his proper Shape. But since Darkness is not proper for the Achievements of
Knights, but rather for Robbers and Ruffians, let us expect the Morning-light,
that the Sun may be a Witness of our Valor. The Conditions of our Combat shall
be, That the Conquered shall be wholly at the Mercy of the Conqueror, who
shall dispose of him at Discretion; provided always he abuses not his Power, by
commanding any thing unworthy the Honor of Knighthood. Content, said Don
Quixote, I like these Terms very well. With that they both went to look out
their Squires, whom they found snoaring very soundly in the very same posture
as when they first fell asleep. They roused them up; and ordered them to get
their Steeds ready; for, the first Rays of the rising Sun must behold them
engage in a Bloody and unparalleled single Combat. This News Thunderstruck
Sancho, and put him to his Wits-end for his Master's Danger; having heard the
Knight of the Wood's Courage strangely magnified by his Squire. However,
without the least reply he went with his Companion to seek their Beasts, who by
this time had smelled out one another and were got lovingly all together. Well
Friend, said the Squire to Sancho as they went, I find our Master's are to
fight; so you and I are like to have a Brush too; for it is the way among us
Andalusians, not to let the Seconds stand idly by, with Arms across, while
their Friends are at it. This, said Sancho, may be a Custom in your Country;
but let me tell you, it is a damned Custom, Sir Squire, and none but Ruffians
and Bloody-minded Fellows would stand up for it: But there is no such Practice
among Squires Errant, else my Master would have minded me of it ever this; for
he has all the Laws of Knight-Errantry by Heart. But suppose there be such a
Law, I will not obey it, that is flat: I Will rather pay the Penalty that is laid
on such Peaceable Squires: I don't think the Fine can be above two pounds of
Wax, and that will cost me less than the Lint would to make Tents for my Scull,
which methinks is already cleft down to my Chin. Besides, how would you have me
Fight? I have never a Sword, nor ever wore any. No matter, quoth the Squire of
the Wood, I Have a Cure for that Sore. I have got here a couple of Linnen-Bags,
both of a size, you shall take one, and I the other, and so we'll let drive one
at one another with these equal Weapons. Ay, ay, with all my Heart, quoth
Sancho; this will dust our Jackets purely, and will not hurt our Skins. Not so
neither, replied the Squire of the Wood; for we'll put half a dozen of smooth
Stones into each Bag, that the Wind may not blow 'em to and fro, and they may
play the better, and so we may brush one another's Coats cleverly, and yet do
our selves no great hurt. Body of my Father! quoth Sancho, what soft Sable-Fur,
what dainty carded Cotton and Lambs-wool he crams into the Bags, to hinder our
making Pap of our Brains, and Touch-wood of our Bones! But I say again and
again, I am not in a humor to Fight, though they were only full of Silk-balls.
Let our Masters Fight, and hear on it in another World; but let us drink and
live while we may, for why should we strive to end our Lives before their Time
and Season; and be so eager to gather the Plums that will drop of themselves,
when they are ripe? Well, said the Squire of the Wood, for all that, we must
Fight half an Hour or so. Not a Minute, replied Sancho: I have not the Heart to
quarrel with a Gentleman with whom I have been eating and drinking. I an'c
angry with you in the least, and were I to be hanged for it, I could never fight
in cold Blood. Nay, if that be all, said the Squire of the Wood, you shall be
angry enough, I Will warrant you; for, before we go to it, do you see, I Will walk up
very handsomely to you, and lend your Worship three or four sound slaps of the
Chaps, and knock you down; which will be sure to awaken your Choler, though it
slept as sound as a Dormouse. Nay then, quoth Sancho, I have a Trick for your
Trick, if that be all, and you shall have as good as you bring; for I will take
me a pretty middling Leaver (you understand me) and before you can waken my
Choler, will I lay yours asleep so fast, that it shall never wake more, unless
in the other World; where it is well known, I am one will let no Man's Fist dust
my Nose. Let every Man look before he Leaps. Many come for Wool, that go home
shorn. No Man knows what another can do: So, Friend, let every Man's Choler
sleep with him; Blessed are the Peacemakers, and Cursed are the
Peace-breakers. A Baited Cat may turn as fierce as a Lion. Who knows then what
I that am a Man may turn to, if I Am provoked. Take it therefore for a Warning
from me, Sir Squire, that all the Mischief you may be hatching in this manner
shall lie at your Door. Well, said the other, 'twill be Day anon, and then we
shall see what is to be done.

And now a thousand sorts of pretty Birds began to warble in the Trees, and
with their various cheerful Notes seemed to salute the fresh Aurora, who then
displayed her rising Beauties through the Gates and Arches of the East, and
gently shook from her dewy Locks a Shower of liquid Pearls, sprinkling and
enriching the verdant Meads with that reviving Treasure, which seemed to spring
and drop from the bending Leaves. The Willows distilled their delicious Manna,
the Rivulets fondly murmured, the Fountains smiled, the Woods were cheered, and
Fields enriched at her Approach. But no sooner the dawning Light recalled
Distinction, than the first thing that presented it self to Sancho's View, was
the Squire of the Wood's Nose, which was so big that it over-shadow'd almost
his whole Body. In short, it is said to have been of a monstrous size, crooked
in the middle, studded with Warts and Carbuncles, tawny as a Russet-Pippin, and
hanging down some two Fingers below his Mouth. The unreasonable Bulk, dismal
Hue-Protuberancy, and Crookedness of that Nose, so disfigured the Squire, that
Sancho was seized with a Trembling at the Sight, and resolved now to take two
hundred Cuffs, before his Choler should awaken to encounter such a Hobgoblin.
As for Don Quixote, he fixed his Eyes upon his Antagonist; but as his Helmet
was on, and he had pulled down the Bever, his Face could not be seen; however,
he observed him to be strong-limb'd, though not very tall. Over his Armor he
wore a Coat that looked like Cloth of Gold, overspread with Looking-glasses cut
into the Shape of Half-Moons, which made a very glittering Show: A large Plume
of yellow green and white Feathers waved about his Helmet; and his Lance, which
he had set up against a Tree, was very thick and long, with a Steel-Head a Foot
in length. Don Quixote surveyed every particular, and from his Observations
judged him to be a Man of great Strength. But all this was so far from daunting
his Courage, like Sancho, that, with a gallant Deportment, Sir Knight of the
Mirrours, said he, if your eager Desire of Combat has not made you deaf to the
Entreaties of Civility, be pleased to lift up your Bever a while, that I may
see whether the Gracefulness of your Face equals that of your Body. Whether you
be Vanquished or Victorious in this Enterprise, answered the Knight of the
Mirrours, you shall have Leisure enough to see my Face: I cannot at present
satisfy your Curiosity; for every Moment of Delay from Combat is, in my
Thoughts, a Wrong done to the Beautiful Casildea de Vandalia. However, replied
Don Quixote, while we get a Horseback, you may tell me whether I be the same
Don Quixote whom you pretend to have overcome? To this I answer you, said the
Knight of the Mirrours, you are as like the Knight I vanquished as one Egg is
like another. But considering what you tell me, that you are persecuted by
Inchanters, I dare not affirm that you are the same. It Is enough for me, said
Don Quixote, that you believe you may be in Error; but that I may entirely
prove your Doubts, let us to Horse; for, if Providence, my Mistress, and my Arm
assist me, I will see your Face in less time than it would have cost you to
have lifted up your Bever, and make you know that I am not that Don Quixote
whom you talked of having Vanquished. This said, without any more Words they
Mounted. Don Quixote wheeled about with Rozinante, to take Ground for the
Career: The Knight of the Mirrours did the like. But before Don Quixote had rid
twenty Paces he heard him call to him: So meeting each other half way,
Remember, Sir Knight, cried he, the Conditions on which we Fight; The
Vanquished as I told you before, shall be at the Mercy of the Conqueror. I
grant it answered Don Quixote, provided the Victor imposes nothing on him that
derogates from the Laws of Chivalry. I mean no otherwise, replied the Knight of
the Mirrours. At the same time Don Quixote happened to cast his Eye on the
Squire's strange Nose, and wondered no less at the Sight of it than Sancho,
taking him to be rather a Monster than a Man. Sancho seeing his Master set out
to take so much Distance as was fit to return on his Enemy with greater Force,
would not trust himself alone with Squire Nose, fearing the greater should be
too hard for the less, and either that or Fear should strike him to the Ground.
This made him run after his Master, till he had taken hold of Rozinante's
Stirrup* Leathers; and when he thought him ready to turn back to take his
Career; good your Worship, cried he, before you run upon your Enemy help me to
get up into yon Cork-Tree, where I may better, and much more to my liking, see
your brave Battle with the Knight. I rather believe, said Don Quixote, thou
want to be pearch'd up yonder as on a Scaffold, to see the Bull-baiting
without Danger. To tell you the Truth, quoth Sancho, that Fellow's
unconscionable Nose has so frighted me, that I dare not stay within his reach.
It is indeed such a Sight, said Don Quixote, as might affect with Fear any
other but my self; and therefore come, I Will help thee up. Now while Sancho was
climbing up the Tree, with his Master's Assistance, the Knight of the Mirrors
took as much Ground as he thought proper for his Career; and imagining Don
Quixote had done the same, he faced about, without expecting the Trumpet's
Sound or any other Signal for a Charge, and with his Horse's full Speed, which
was no more than a middling Trot, (for he was neither more promising nor a
better Performer than Rozinante) he went to encounter his Enemy. But seeing him
busy in helping up his Squire, he held in his Steed, and stopped in the middle
of the Career, for which the Horse was mightily obliged to him, being already
scarceable to stir a foot farther. Don Quixote, who thought his Enemy was
flying upon him, set Spurs to Rozinante's hinder Flank vigorously, and so
wakened his Mettle, that the Story says, this was the only Time he was known to
Gallop a little, for at all others, downright Trotting was his best. With this
unusual Fury he soon got to the Place where his Opponent was striking his Spurs
into his Horse's Sides up to the very Rowels, without being able to make him
stir an Inch from the Spot. Now while he was thus Goading him on, and at the
same time encumbr'd with his Lance, either not knowing how to set it in the
Rest, or wanting Tim^ to do it; Don Quixote, who took no notice of his
Disorder, Encountered him without Danger, so furiously, that the Knight of the
Mirrors was hurried in spite of his Teeth over his Horse's Crupper; and was so
hurt with falling to the Ground, that he lay without Motion, or any Sign of
Life. Sancho no sooner saw him fallen, but down he comes sliding from the Tree,
and runs to his Master, who having dismounted, was got upon the Knight of the
Mirrors, and was unlacing his Helmet, to see if he were dead or alive, and give
him Air. But who can relate what he saw, when he saw the Face of the Knight of
the Mirrors, without raising Wonder, Amazement or Astonishment in those that
shall hear it? He saw, says the History, in that Face, the very Visage, the
very Aspect, the very Physiognomy, the very Make, the very Features, the very
Effigy of the Bachelor Sampson Carrasco. Come Sancho, cried he as he saw it,
come hither, look and admire what thou may see, yet not believe. Haste, my
Friend, and mark the Power of Magic; What Sorcerers and Inchanters can do!
Sancho drew near, and seeing the Bachelor Sampson Carrasco's Face, began to
Cross himself a thousand times, and Bless himself as many more. The poor
defeated Knight all this while gave no Sign of Life: Sir, quoth Sancho to his
Master, if you will be ruled by me, make sure work: Right or wrong, even thrust
your Sword down this Fellow's Throat that is so like the Batchelour Sampson
Carrasco; and so mayhaps in him you may chance to murder one of those bitter
Dogs those Inchanters that haunt you so. That Thought's not amiss, said Don
Quixote; and with that drawing his Sword, he was going to put Sancho's Advice
in Execution, when the Knight's Squire came running without the Nose that so
disguised him before; and calling to Don Quixote; Hold, Noble Don Quixote cried
he! Take heed! Beware! It Is your Friend Sampson Carrasco that now lies at your
Worship's Mercy, and I am his Squire. And where is your Nose, quoth Sancho,
seeing him now without his Disguise? Here in my Pocket, answered the Squire;
and so saying he pulled out the Nose of a Varnished Paste-board Vizzard, such
as it has been described. Sancho having more and more star'd him in the Face
with great Earnestness, Blessed Virgin defend me, quoth he! Who Is this? Thomas
Cecial, my Friend and Neighbor? The same Friend Sancho, quoth the Squire? I Will
tell you anon by what Tricks and Wheadles he was inveagl'd to come hither. Mean
while desire your Master not to misuse, nor slay, nor meddle in the least with
the Knight of the Mirrors, that now lies at his Mercy; for there is nothing more
sure than that it is our ill-advis'd Countryman Sampson Carrasco, and no body
else.

By this time the Knight of the Mirrors began to come to himself; which when
Don Quixote observed, setting the Point of his Sword to his Throat, Thou dy'st,
Knight, cried he, if thou refuse to confess that the peerless Dulcinea del
Toboso excells thy Casildea de Vandalia in Beauty. Besides this, thou shall
promise (if thou escape with Life from this Combat) to go to the City of
Toboso; where, as from me, thou shall present thy self before the Mistress of
my Desires, and resign thy Person to her Disposal: If she leaves thee to thy
own, then thou shall come back to me, (for the Track of my Exploits will be thy
Guide) and thou shall give me an Account of the Transactions between her and
thee. These Conditions are conformable to our Agreement before the Combat, and
do not transgress the Rules of Knight-Errantry. I do confess, said the
discomfited Knight, that the Lady Dulcinea del Toboso's ripp'd and dirty Shoe
is preferable to the clean, though ill-comb'd Locks of Casildea; and I promise
to go to her, and come from her Presence to yours, and bring you a full and
true Relation of all you have enjoined me. You shall also confess and believe,
added Don Quixote, that the Knight you vanquished neither was nor could be Don
Quixote de la Mancha, but some body else in his likeness; as I on the other
side do confess and believe, that though you seem to be the Bachelor Sampson
Carrasco, you are not he, but some other whom my Enemies have transformed into
his Resemblance, to assuage the Violence of my Wrath, and make me entertain
with Moderation the Glory of my Victory. All this I confess, believe and allow,
said the Knight; and now I beseech you let me rise, if the Hurt I have received
by my Fall will give me leave; for I find my self very much bruised. Don
Quixote helped him to rise by the Aid of his Squire Thomas Cecial, on whom
Sancho fixed his Eyes all the while, asking him a thousand Questions; the
Answers to which convinced him, that he was the real Thomas Cecial, as he said,
though the Conceit of what was told him by his Master, that the Magicians had
transformed the Knight of the Mirrors into Sampson Carrasco, had made such an
Impression on his Fancy, that he could not believe the Testimony of his own
Eyes. In short, the Master and the Man persisted in their Error. The Knight of
the Mirrors and his Squire, much out of Humor, and much out of Order, left Don
Quixote to go to some Town where he might get some Ointments and Plasters for
his Ribs. Don Quixote and Sancho continued their Progress for Saragosa; where
the History leaves them, to relate who the Knight of the Mirrors and his Squire
were.

CHAP. XV. Giving an Account who the Knight of the Mirrors and his Squire were.
DON Quixote went on extremely pleased, and joyful, priding himself and
glorying in the Victory he had got over so valiant a Knight, as the Knight of
the Mirrors, and relying on his Parole of Honor, which he could not violate,
without forfeiting his Title to Chivalry, that he would return to give him an
Account of his Reception, by which means he expected to hear whether his
Mistress continued under the Bonds of Enchantment. But Don Quixote dreamed of
one thing, and the Knight of the Mirrors thought of another. His only Care for
the present, was how to get Cured of his Bruises.

Here the History relates, That when the Bachelor Carrasco advised Don Quixote
to proceed in his former Profession of Knight-Errantry, it was the Result of a
Conference which he had with the Curate and the Barber, about the best means to
prevail with Don Quixote to stay quietly at Home, and desist from rambling
after his unlucky Adventures. For Carrasco thought, and so did the rest, that
'twas in vain to pretend to hinder him from going abroad again, and therefore
the best way would be let him go, and that he should meet him by the way,
equipped like a Knight Errant, and should take an Opportunity to Fight, and
overcome him, which he might easily do, first making an Agreement with him,
that the Vanquished should submit to the Victor's Discretion. So that after the
Bachelor had Vanquished him, he should command him to return to his House and
Village, and not offer to depart thence in two Years, without Permission; which
'twas not doubted but Don Quixote would religiously observe, for fear of
infringing the Laws of Chivalry; and in this Time they hoped he might be weaned
of his Frantic Imaginations, or they might find some means to Cure him of his
Madness. Carrasco undertook this Task, and Thomas Cecial, a brisk, pleasant
Fellow, Sancho's Neighbor and Gossip, proffered to be his Squire. Sampson
equipped himself, as you have heard, and Thomas Cecial fitted a huge
Pasteboard-Nose to his own, that his Gossip Sancho might not know him when they
met. Then they followed Don Quixote so close, that they had like to have
overtaken him in the midst of his Adventure with the Chariot of Death, and at
last they found him in the Wood, that happened to be the Scene of their
Encounter, which might have proved more fatal to the Bachelor, and had spoiled
him for ever from taking another Degree, had not Don Quixote been so obstinate,
in not believing him to be the same Man.

And now Thomas Cecial, seeing the ill Success of their Journey; by my Troth!
said he, Master Carrasco, we have been served well enough. It Is easy to begin a
Business, but a hard matter to go through. Don Quixote is Mad, and we think our
selves Wise; yet he is gone away sound, and laughing in his Sleeve; and your
Worship's left here well banged, and in the Dumps. Now pray who is the greatest
Madman, he that is so because he cannot help it, or he that is so for his
Pleasure? The Difference is, answered the Bachelor, that he that cannot help
being Mad, will always be so; but he that only plays the Fool for his Fancy,
may give over when he pleases. Well then, quoth Cecial, I, who was pleased to
play the Fool in going a Squire-Erranting with your Worship, for the self-same
Reason will give it over now, and even make the best of my way home again. Do
as you will, replied Carrasco, but it is a Folly to think I ever will go home,
till I have swingingly paid that unaccountable Madman. It Is not that he may
recover his Wits neither: No, it is pure Revenge now, for the Pain in my Bones
will not give me leave to have any manner of Charity for him. Thus they went on
Discoursing, till at last they got to a Town, where, by good Fortune, they met
with a Bone-setter, who gave the Bruised Bachelor some Ease. Thomas Cecial
left him, and went Home, while the other stayed to meditate Revenge. In due
time the History will speak of him again, but must not now forget to entertain
you with Don Quixote's Joy.

CHAP. XVI. What happened to Don Quixote, with a sober Gentleman of la Mancha.
DON Quixote pursued his Journey, full, as we said before, of Joy and
Satisfaction; his late Victory made him esteem himself the most Valiant
Knight Errant of the Age. He counted all his future Adventures as already
finished and happily achieved. He defied all Enchantments and Enchanters. No
longer did he remember the innumerable Blows he had received in the Course of
his Errantry; nor the shower of Stones that had dashed out half of his Teeth,
nor the Ingratitude of the Galley-Slaves, nor the Insolence of the Tanguesian
Carriers, that had so abominably battered his Ribs with their Pack-staves. In
short, he concluded with himself, that if he could but by any manner of means
dissolve the Enchantment of his adored Dulcinea, he should have no need to envy
the greatest Felicity that ever was, or ever could be attained by the most
fortunate Knight in the habitable Globe. While he was wholly employed in these
pleasing Imaginations; Sir, quoth Sancho to him, is it not a pleasant thing
that I cannot for the Blood of me put out of my Mind that huge unconscionable
Nose, and whapping Nostrils of Tomas Cecial, my Gossip? How, Sancho, answered
Don Quixote, do thou still believe, that the Knight of the Mirrours was the
Bachelor Carrasco, and that Thomas Cecial was his Squire; I don't know what to
say to it, quoth Sancho, but this I Am sure, that no body but he could give me
those Items of my House, and of my Wife and Children as he did. Besides, when
his hugeous Nose was off, he had Tom Cecial's Face to a Hair. I ought to know
it I think: I have seen it a hundred and a hundred times, for we are but
next-door Neighbors; and then he had his Speech to a Tittle. Come, on,
returned Don Quixote; let us reason upon this Business. How can it enter into
any one's Imagination, that the Bachelor Sampson Carrasco should come Armed at
all Points, like a Knight Errant, on purpose to Fight with me? Have I ever been
his Enemy, or given him any occasion to be mine? Am I his Rival? Or has he
taken up the Profession of Arms, in Envy of the Glory which I have purchased by
my Sword? Ay, but then, replied Sancho, what shall we say to the Resemblance
between this same Knight, whoever he be, and the Bachelor Carrasco, and the
Likeness between his Squire and my Gossip? If it is an Enchantment, as your
Worship says, were there no other People in the World but they two, to make 'em
like? All, all, cried Don Quixote, is the Artifice and Delusion of those
malevolent Magicians that Persecute me, who, foreseeing that I should get the
Victory, disguised their Vanquished Property under the Resemblance of my
Friend, the Bachelor; that at the Sight, my Friendship might interpose between
the Edge of my Sword, and moderate my just Resentment, and so rescue him from
Death, who basely had attempted on my Life. But thou, Sancho, by Experience,
which could not Deceive thee, know how easy a Matter it is for Magicians to
Transmute the Face of any one into another Resemblance, fair into foul, and
foul again into fair; since not two Days ago, with thy own Eyes thou beheld'st
the Peerless Dulcinea in her natural state of Beauty and Proportion; when I,
the Object of their Envy, saw her in the homely disguise of a Blear-eyed,
Fetid, Ugly Country-Wench. Why then should thou wonder so much at the
frightful Transformation of the Bachelor and thy Neighbor Cecial? But
however, this is a Comfort to me, that I got the better of my Enemy, whatsoever
Shape he assumed. Well, quoth Sancho, Heaven knows the Truth of all things.
This was all the Answer he thought fit to make; for, as he knew that the
Transformation of Dulcinea was only a Trick of his own, he was willing to wave
the Discourse, though he was the less satisfied in his Master's Chimera's; but
feared to drop some Word that might have betrayed his Roguery.

While they were in this Conversation; they were overtaken by a Gentleman,
mounted on a very fine Flea-bitten Mare. He had on a Riding-Coat of fine Green
Cloth, faced with Murry-colour'd Velvet, a Hunter's Cap of the same. The
Furniture of his Mare was Country-like, and after the Jennet-fashion, and also
Murry and Green. By his Side hung a Moorish Scimiter, in a large Belt of Green
and Gold. His Buskins were of the same Work with his Belt: His Spurs were not
Gilt, but Burnished so well with a certain green Varnish, that they looked
better, to suit with the rest of his Equipage, than if they had been of pure
Gold. As he came up with them, he very civilly saluted them, and clapping Spurs
to his Mare, began to leave 'em behind him. Thereupon Don Quixote called to
him: Sir, cried he, if you are not in too much haste, we should be glad of the
favor of your Company so far as you Travel this Road. Indeed, answered the
Gentleman, I had not thus Rid by you, but that I Am afraid your Horse may prove
unruly with my Mare. If that be all, Sir, quoth Sancho, you may hold in your
Mare; for our Horse here is the Honestest and Soberest Horse in the World; he
is not in the least given to do any naughty thing on such Occasions. Once upon
a time indeed, he happened to forget himself, and go astray; but then he, and
I, and my Master ru'd for it, with a Vengeance. I tell you again, Sir, you may
safely stay if you please, for if your Mare were to be served up to him in a
Dish, I Will lay my Life he would not so much as touch her. Upon this, the
Traveller stopped his Mare, and did not a little gaze at the Figure and
Countenance of our Knight, who rodo without his Helmet, which, like a Wallet,
hung at the Saddle-bow of Sancho's Ass. If the Gentleman in Green gazed on Don
Quixote, Don Quixote looked no less upon him, judging him to be some Man of
Consequence. His Age seemed about fifty; he had some gray Hairs, a sharp Look,
and a grave, yet Pleasing Aspect. In short, his Mein and Appearance spoke him a
Man of Quality. When he looked on Don Quixote, he thought he had never beheld
before such a strange appearance of a Man: He could not but admire at the
lankness of his Horse; he considered then the Long-back'd, Raw-bon'd Thing that
bestrid him: His wan, meager Face, his Air, his Gravity, his Arms and Equipage;
such a Figure, as perhaps had not been seen in that Country time out of Mind.
Don Quixote observed how intent the traveling Gentleman had been in surveying
him, and reading his Desire in his Surprise, as he was the very Pink of
Courtesy, and fond of pleasing every one, without staying till he should
question him, he thought fit to prevent him. Sir, said he, that you are
surpised at this Figure of mine, which appears so new and exotic, I do not
wonder in the least; but your Admiration will cease when I have informed you,
that I am one of those Knights who go in quest of Adventures. I have left my
Country, Mortgaged my Estate, quitted my Pleasures, and thrown my self into the
Arms of Fortune. My design was to give a new Life to Knight Errantry, that so
long has been lost to the World; and thus, after infinite toils and hardship;
sometimes stumbling, sometimes falling; casting my self headlong in one place,
and rising again in another, I have compassed a great part of my Desire,
relieving Widows, protecting Damsels, assisting Married Women and Orphans, the
proper and natural Office of Knight-Errants; and so by many Valorous and
Christian-like Achievements, I have merited the Honor of the Press in almost
all the Nations of the World. Thirty thousand Volumes of my History have been
printed already, and thirty thousand Millions more are like to be printed, if
Heaven prevent not. In short, to sum up all in one Word, know, I am Don
Quixote de la Mancha, otherwise called, The Knight of the woeful Figure; I own
it lessens the value of Praise to be the Publisher of it one's self; yet it is
what I am sometimes forced to, when there is none present to do me Justice. And
now, good Sir, no longer let this Steed, this Lance, this Shield, this Armor,
nor this Squire, nor the Paleness of my Looks, nor my exhausted Body, move your
Admiration, since you know who I am, and the Profession I follow. Having said
thus, Don Quixote was silent, and the Gentleman in Green, by his delaying to
answer him, seemed as if he did not intend to make any Return. But at last,
after some pause; Sir Knight, said he, you were sensible of my Curiosity by my
Looks, and were pleased to say my Wonder would cease when you had informed me
who you was; but I must confess, since you have done that, I remain no less
surpised and amazed than ever. For, is it possible there should be at this
time any Knight-Errants in the World, and there should be a true History of a
living Knight Errant in Print? I cannot persuade my self there is any body now
upon Earth that relieves Widows, protects Damsels, or assists Married Women and
Orphans; and I should still be of the same mind, had not my Eyes afforded me a
sight of such a Person as your self. Now Heaven be praised, for this History of
your true and noble Feats of Arms, which you say is in Print, will blot out the
Memory of all those Idle Romances of pretended Knight-Errants that have so
filled and pestered the World, to the detriment of good Education, and the
Prejudice and Dishonor of true History. There is a great deal to be said,
answered Don Quixote, for the Truth of Histories of Knight-Errantry, as well as
against it. How, returned the Gentleman in Green! Is there any body living who
makes the least scruple but that they are false. Yes, Sir, my self for one said
Don Quixote; But let that pass: If we continue any time together on the Road, I
hope to convince you that you have been to blame in suffering your self to be
carried away with the Stream of Mankind that generally disbelieves 'em. The
Traveller at this discourse began to have a suspicion that Don Quixote was
distracted, and expected the next words would confirm him in that Opinion: But
before they entered into any further Conversation, Don Quixote begged him to
acquaint him who he was, since he had given him some account of his own Life
and Condition. Sir Knight of the Woeful Figure, answered the other, I am a
Gentleman, born at a Village, where, God willing, we shall dine by and by. My
Name is Don Diego de Miranda. I have a reasonable Competency. I pass my time
contentedly with my Wife, my Children and my Friends. My usual Diversions are
Hunting and Fishing; yet I keep neither Hawks nor Hounds, but some tame
Partridges and a Ferret. I have about three or fourscore Books, some Spanish,
some Latin; some of History, and others of Divinity. But for Books of
Knight-Errantry, none ever came within my Doors. I am more inclinable to read
those that are Profane than those of Devotion, if they be such as yield an
innocent Amusement, and are agreeable for their Style, and surprising for their
Invention, though we have but few of 'em in our own Language. Sometimes I eat
with my Neighbors and Friends, and often I invite 'em to do the like with me.
My Treats are clean and handsome, neither penurious nor superfluous. I am not
given to murmur and backbite, nor do I love to hear others do it. I am no
curious Inquirer into the Lives and Actions of other People. Every Day I hear
Divine Service, and give to the Poor; without making a show of it, or presuming
on my good deeds, least I should give way to Hypocrisy and Vainglory, Enemies
that too easily possess themselves of the best guarded Hearts. I endeavor to
reconcile those that are at Variance. I pay my Devotions to the Blessed Virgin,
and ever trust in Heaven's infinite Mercy. Sancho listened with great attention
to this Relation of the Gentleman's way of Living; and believing that a Person
who led so good and pious a Life, was able to work Miracles, he jumped in haste
from his Ass, and catching hold of his right Stirrup, with Tears in his Eyes
and Devotion in his Heart, fell a kissing his Foot. What Is the matter, Friend,
cried the Gentleman, wondering at his proceeding? What Is the meaning of this
Kissing? Oh! good Sir, quoth Sancho, Let me kiss that dear Foot of yours, I
beseech you; for you are certainly the first Saint on Horseback I ever saw in
my born Days Alas! replied the Gentleman, I am no Saint, but a great Sinner:
You indeed, Friend, I believe are a good Soul, as appears by your Simplicity.
With that, Sancho returned to his Pack-Saddle, having by this Action provoked
the Profound Gravity of his Master to smile, and caused new Admiration in Don
Diego. And now Don Quixote enquires of him how many Children he had; telling
him at the same time, that among the things in which the Ancient Philosophers
who had not the true Knowledge of God, made Happiness consist, as the
Advantages of Nature and Fortune, one was, to have many Friends and a numerous
and Virtuous Offspring. I have a Son, Sir Knight, answered the Gentleman; and
perhaps if I had him not, I should not think my self the more unhappy; not that
he is so bad neither, but because he is not so good as I would have him. He is
Eighteen Years of Age; the last six he has spent at Salamanca, to perfect
himself in his Latin and Greek. But, when I would have had him to have
proceeded to the Study of other Sciences, I found him so engaged in that of
Poetry, if it may be called a Science, that 'twas impossible to make him look
either to the Study of the Law, which I intended him for, or of Divinity, the
noblest Part of all Learning. I was in hopes he might have become an honor to
his Family, living in an Age in which good and virtuous Literature is highly
favored and rewarded by Princes; for Learning without Virtue, is like a Pearl
upon a Dunghill. He now spends whole Days in examining whether Homer in such a
Verse of his Iliads says well or no? Whether such an Epigram in Martial ought
not to be expunged for Obscenity? And whether such and such Verses in Virgil
are to be taken in such a Sense, or otherwise. In short, his whole Converse is
with the Celebrated Poets, with Horace and Persius, Juvenal, and Tibullus. But
as for Modern Rhimers, he has but an indifferent Opinion of 'm. And yet for all
this Disgust of Spanish Poetry, he is now breaking his Brain upon a Paraphrase
or Gloss on four Verses that were sent him from the University, and which I
think are designed for a Prize. Sir, replied Don Quixote, Children are the
Flesh and Blood of their Parents, and, whether good or bad, are to be cherished
as part of our selves. It Is the Duty of a Father to train 'em up from their
tenderest Years in the Paths of Virtue, in good Discipline and Christian
Principles, that when they advance in Years they may become the staff and
support of their Parents Age, and the glory of their Posterity. But as for
forcing them to this or that Study, it is a thing I don't so well approve.
Persuasion is all, I think, that is proper in such a case. Especially when they
are so Fortunate as to be above studying for Bread, as having Parents that can
provide for their future Subsistence, they ought in my Opinion to be indulged
in the pursuit of that Science to which their own Genius gives them the most
Inclination. For though the Art of Poetry is not so profitable as delightful, yet
it is none of those that disgrace the ingenious Professor. Poetry, Sir, in my
Judgment, is like a tender Virgin in her Bloom, Beautiful and Charming to
Amazement: All the other Sciences are so many Virgins, whose Care it is to
Enrich, Polish and Adorn her; and as she is to make use of them all, so are
they all to have from her a grateful acknowledgment. But this Virgin must not
be roughly handled, nor dragged along the Streets, nor exposed in every
Marketplace, and corner of Great Men's Houses. A good Poet is a kind of an
Alchymist, who can turn the Matter he prepares into the purest Gold and an
inestimable Treasure. But he must keep his Muse within the Rules of Decency,
and not let her prostitute her Excellency in lewd Satires and Lampoons, nor in
licentious Sonnets. She must not be Mercenary, though she need not give away the
Profits she may claim from Heroic Poems, deep Tragedies, and Pleasant and
Artful Comedies. She is not to be attempted by Buffoons, nor by the Ignorant
Vulgar, whose Capacity can never reach to a due Sense of the Treasures that are
locked up in her. And know, Sir, that when I mention the Vulgar, I don't mean
only the common Rabble; for whoever is ignorant, be he Lord or Prince, is to be
listed in the Number of the Vulgar. But whoever shall apply himself to the
Muses with those Qualifications, which, as I said, are Essential to the
Character of a good Poet, his Name shall be Famous, and valued in all the
polished Nations of the World. And as to what you say, Sir, that your Son does
not much esteem our Modern Poetry; in my Opinion, he is somewhat to blame; and
my Reason is this: Homer never wrote in Latin, because he was a Grecian; nor
did Virgil write in Greek, because Latin was the Language of his Country. In
short, all your Ancient Poets wrote in their Mother Tongue, and did not seek
other Languages to express their lofty Thoughts. And thus, it would be well
that Custom should extend to every Nation; there being no Reason that a German
Poet should be despised because he writes in his own Tongue; or a Castilian or
Biscayner, because they write in theirs. But, I suppose, your Son does not
mislike Modern Poetry, but such Modern Poets as have no Tincture of any other
Language or Science, that may adorn, awaken, and assist their Natural Impulse.
Though even in this too there may be Error. For, it is believed, and not without
Reason, that a Poet is naturally a Poet from his Mother's Womb, and that, with
the Talent which Heaven has infused into him, without the help of Study or Art,
he may produce those Compositions that verify that Saying, Est Deus in nobis,
etc. Not but that a natural Poet that improves himself by Art, shall be much
more accomplished, and have the Advantage of him that has no Title to Poetry
but by his Knowledge in the Art; because Art cannot go beyond Nature but only
adds to its Perfection. From which it' appears, that the most perfect Poet is
he whom Nature and Art combine to qualify. Let then your Son proceed and follow
the Guidance of his Stars, for being so good a Student as I understand he is,
and already got up the first step of the Sciences, the knowledge of the Learned
Tongues, he will easily ascend to the Pinnacle of Learning, which is no less an
Honor and an Ornament to a Gentleman than a Mitre is to a Bishop, or the Long
Robe to the Civilian. Should your Son write Satires to lessen the Reputation of
any Person, you would do well to take him to Task, and tear his defamatory
Rhimes; but if he Studies to write such Discourses in Verse, to ridicule and
explode Vice in general, as Horace so Elegantly did, then encourage him: For a
Poet's Pen is allowed to inveigh against Envy and Envious Men, and so against
other Vices, provided it aim not at particular Persons. But there are Poets so
abandoned to the Itch of Scurrility, that rather than lose a villainous Jest,
they will venture being banished to the Island of Pontus. If a Poet is modest in
his Manners, he will be so in his Verses. The Pen is the Tongue of the Mind;
the Thoughts that are formed in the one, and those that are traced by the
other, will bear a near Resemblance. And when Kings and Princes see the
wonderful Art of Poetry shine in Prudent, Virtuous, and Solid Subjects, they
honor, esteem and enrich them, and even crown them with Leaves of that Tree,
which is never offended by the Thunderbolt, as a Token that nothing shall
offend those whose Brows are honored and adorned with such Crowns. The
Gentleman, hearing Don Quixote express himself in this manner, was struck with
so much Admiration, that he began to lose the bad Opinion he had conceived of
his Understanding. As for Sancho, who did not much relish this fine Talk, he
took an opportunity to slink aside in the middle of it, and went to get a
little Milk of some Shepherds that were hard by keeping their Sheep. Now when
the Gentleman was going to renew his Discourse, mightily pleased with these
judicious Observations, Don Quixote lifting up his Eyes, perceived a Wagon on
the Road, set round with little Flags, that appeared to be the King's Colors;
and believing it to be some new Adventure, he called out to Sancho to bring him
his Helmet. Sancho, hearing him call aloud, left the Shepherds, and clapping
his Heels vigorously to Dapple's sides, came trotting up to his Master, to whom
there happened a most terrifying and desperate Adventure.

CHAP. XV. Wherein you will find set forth the highest and utmost Proof that
the great Don Quixote ever gave, or could give of his incredible Courage, with
the successful issue of the Adventure of the Lions.
THE History relates that Sancho was chaffering with the Shepherds for some
Curds, when Don Quixote called to him; and finding that his Master was in
haste, he did not know what to do with 'em, nor what to bring 'em in; yet loath
to lose his Purchase (for he had already paid for 'em) he bethought himself at
last of clapping 'em into the Helmet, where having 'em safe, he went to know
his Master's Pleasure. As soon as he came up to him, Give me that Helmet,
Friend, said the Knight, for if I understand any thing of Adventures, I descry
one yonder that obliges me to Arm: The Gentleman in Green hearing this, looked
about him to see what was the Matter, but could perceive nothing but a Wagon,
which made toward 'em, and by the little Flags about it he judged it to be one
of the King's Carriages, and so he told Don Quixote. But his Head was too much
possessed with Notions of Adventures to give any Credit to what the Gentleman
said; Sir, answered he, Fore-warned, fore-arm'd, a Man loses nothing by
standing on his Guard. I know by Experience, that I have Enemies visible and
invisible, and I cannot tell when, nor where, nor in what Shapes they may
attack me. At the same time he snatched the Helmet out of Sancho's Hands,
before he could discharge it of the Curds, and clapped it on his Head, without
examining the Contents. Now the Curds being squeezed between his bare Crown and
the Iron, the Whey began to run all about his Face and Beard; which so
surpised him, that calling to Sancho in great disorder, What Is this, cried he,
Sancho! What Is the matter with me! sure my Scull is growing soft, or my Brains
are melting, or else I sweat from Head to Foot! But if I do, I Am sure it is not
for Fear. This certainly must be a very dreadful Adventure that is approaching.
Give me something to wipe me if thou can, for I Am almost blinded with the
Torrent of Sweat. Sancho did not dare to say a Word, but giving him a Cloth,
blessed his Stars that his Master had not found him out. Don Quixote dried
himself, and taking off the Helmet to see what it should be that felt so cold
on his Head, perceiving some white stuff, and putting it to his Nose, soon
found what it was. Now, by the Life of my Lady Dulcinea del Toboso, cried he,
thou have put Curds in my Helmet, vile Traitor and unmannerly Squire. Nay,
replied Sancho cunningly, and keeping his Countenance, if they be Curds, good
your Worship give 'em me hither and I Will eat 'em: But hold, now I think on it,
the Devil eat 'em for me; for he himself must have put 'em there. What! I offer
to do so beastly a Trick! Do you think I have no more Manners? As sure as I Am
alive, Sir, I have got my Inchanters too that owe me a Grudge, and Plague me as
a Limb of your Worship; and I warrant have put that nasty stuff there on
purpose to set you against me, and make you fall foul on my Bones. But I hope
they have missed their aim this time, i'troth! My Master is a wise Man, and must
needs know that I had neither Curds nor Milk, nor any thing of that kind; and
if I had met with Curds, I should sooner have put 'em in my Belly than his
Helmet. Well, said Don Quixote, there may be something in that. The Gentleman
had observed these Passages, and stood amazed, but especially at what
immediately followed; for the Knight Errant having put on the Helmet again,
fixed himself well in the Stirrups, tried whether his Sword were loose enough
in his Scabbard, and rested his Lance. Now, cried he, come what will come; here
am I who dare encounter the Devil himself in propria Persona. By this time the
Wagon was come up with them, attended only by the Carter, mounted on one of
the Mules, and another Man that sat on the forepart of the Wagon. Don Quixote
making up to 'em, Whither go ye, Friends, said he? What Wagon is this? What do
ye convey in it? And what is the meaning of these Colors? The Wagon is mine,
answered the Waggoner: I have there two brave Lions, which the General of Oran
is sending to the King our Master, and these Colors are to let People
understand that what goes here belongs to him. And are these Lions large,
inquired Don Quixote? Very large, answered the Man in the forepart of the
Wagon: There never came bigger from Africa into Spain. I am their Keeper,
added he, and have had charge of several others, but I never saw the like of
these before. In the furthermost Cage is a He-lion, and in the other behind, a
Lioness. By this time they are cruel hungry, for they have not eaten to Day;
therefore pray, good Sir, ride out of the Way, for we must make haste to get to
the place where we intend to feed 'em. What! said Don Quixote, with a scornful
Smile, Lion-Whelps against me! Against me those puny Beasts! And at this time
of Day! Well, I Will make those Gentlemen that sent their Lions this way, know
whether I am a Man to be scared with Lions: Get off honest Fellow, and since
you are the Keeper, open their Cages, and let 'em both out; for maugre and in
despite of those Inchanters that have sent 'em to try me, I Will make the
Creatures know in the midst of this very Field, who Don Quixote de la Mancha
is. So, thought the Gentleman to himself, now has our poor Knight discovered
what he is; the Curds, I find, have softened his Scull, and mellow'd his
Brains. While he was making this Reflection, Sancho came up to him, and begged
him to dissuade his Master from his rash Attempt. Oh good dear Sir! cried he,
for Pity-sake hinder my Master from falling upon these Lions, by all means, or
we shall be torn a-pieces. Why, said the Gentleman, is your Master so arrant a
Madman then, that you should fear he would set upon such furious Beasts. Ah
Sir! said Sancho, he is not mad, but woundy ventersome. Well, replied the
Gentleman, I Will take care there shall be no harm done; and with that advancing
up to Don Quixote, who was urging the Lion-keeper to open the Cage; Sir, said
he, Knight-Errants ought to engage in Adventures, from which there may be some
hopes of coming off with Safety; but not in such as are altogether Desperate;
for that Courage which borders on Temerity, is more like Madness than true
Fortitude. Besides, these Lions are not come against you, but sent as a Present
to the King, and therefore it is not the best way to detain 'em, or stop the
Wagon. Pray, sweet Sir, replied Don Quixote, go and amuse your self with your
tame Partridges and your Ferrets, and leave every one to his own Business. This
is mine, and I know best whether these worthy Lions are sent against me or no.
Then turning about to the Keeper, Sirrah! you Rascal you, said he, either open
the Cages immediately, or by Heaven I Will pin thee to the Wagon with this
Lance. Good Sir, (cried the Waggoner, seeing this strange Apparition in Armor
so Resolute) for Mercy's sake do but let me take out our Mules first, and get
out of harm's-way with 'em as fast as I can, before the Lions get out; for if
they should once set upon the poor Beasts, I should be undone for ever; for
alas! that Cart and they are all I have in the World to get a living with.
Incredulous Wretch, said Don Quixote, take 'em out quickly then, and go with
'em where thou will; though thou shall presently see that thy Pre-caution was
needless, and thou might have spared thy Pains. The Waggoner upon this made
all the haste he could to take out his Mules, while the Keeper cried out as
loud as he was able, Bear Witness, all ye that are here present, that it is
against my Will I Am forced to open the Cages and let loose the Lions, and that
I protest to this Gentleman here, that he shall be answerable for all the
Mischief and Damage they may do; together with the loss of my Salary and Fees.
And now, Sirs, shift for your selves as fast as you can, before I open the
Cages: For, as for my self, I know the Lions will do me no harm. Once more the
Gentleman tried to dissuade Don Quixote from doing so mad a thing; telling him,
that he tempted Heaven, in exposing himself without Reason to so great a
Danger. To this Don Quixote made no other answer, but that he knew what he had
to do. Consider however what you do, replied the Gentleman, for it is most
certain that you are very much mistaken. Well, Sir, said Don Quixote if you
care not to be Spectator of an Action, which you think is like to be Tragical,
even set Spurs to your Mare, and provide for your Safety. Sancho hearing this,
came up to his Master with Tears in his Eyes, and begged him not to go about
this fearful Undertaking, to which the Adventure of the Wind-mills, and the
Fulling-mills, and all the Brunts he had ever born in his Life, were but
Childrens Play. Good your Worship, cried he, do but mind, here'e no Enchantment
in the Case, nor any thing like it. A lack a day! Sir, I peeped even now
through the Grates of the Cage, and I Am sure I saw the Claw of a true Lion, and
such a Claw as makes me think the Lion that owns it must be as big as a
Mountain. Alas poor Fellow! said Don Quixote, thy Fear will make him as big as
half the World. Retire, Sancho, and leave me, and if I chance to fall here,
thou know our old Agreement; repair to Dulcinea, I say no more. To this he
added some Expressions, which cut off all Hopes of his giving over his mad
Design. The Gentleman in the Green would have opposed him, but considering the
other was much better Armed, and that it was not Prudence to encounter a
Madman, he even took the Opportunity while Don Quixote was storming at the
Keeper, to march off with his Mare, as Sancho did with Dapple, and the Carter
with his Mules, every one making the best of their way to get as far as they
could from the Wagon before the Lions were let loose. Poor Sancho at the same
time made sad Lamentations for his Master's Death; for he gave him for lost,
not questioning but the Lions had already got him into their Clutches. He
cursed his ill-fortune and the hour he came again to his Service; but for all
his Wailing and Lamenting, he punch'd on poor Dapple, to get as far as he could
from the Lions. The Keeper perceiving the Persons who fled to be at a good
distance, fell to arguing and entreating Don Quixote as he had done before. But
the Knight told him again, that all his Reasons and Entreaties were but in
vain, and bid him say no more, but immediately dispatch. Now while the Keeper
took time to open the foremost Cage, Don Quixote stood debating with himself,
whether he had best make his attack on Foot or on Horseback, and upon mature
Deliberation, he resolved to do it on Foot, lest Rozinante, not used to Lions,
should be put into disorder. Accordingly he quitted his Horse, threw aside his
Lance, grasped his Shield, and drew his Sword; then advancing with a deliberate
Motion, and an undaunted Heart, he posted himself just before the door of the
Cage, commending himself to Heaven, and afterward to his Lady Dulcinea. Here
the Author of this faithful History could not forbear breaking the Thread of
his Narration, and raised by Wonder to a Rapture and Enthusiasm, makes the
following Exclamation. Oh thou most magnanimous Hero! Brave and unutterably
Bold Don Quixote de la Mancha. Thou Mirror and grand Exemplar of Valor. Thou
second, and thou new Don Manuel de Leon, the late Glory and Honor of all
Spanish Cavaliers! What Words, what Colors shall I use to express, to paint in
equal Lines this astonishing Deed of thine! What Language shall I employ to
convince Posterity of the Truth of this thy more than Humane Enterprise! What
Praises can be Coined, what Elogies invented, that will not be out-vy'd by thy
superior Merit, though Hyperboles were pil'd on Hyperboles! Thou alone on Foot,
Intrepid and Magnanimous, with nothing but a Sword, and that none of the
sharpest, with thy single Shield, and that none of the brightest, stood'st
ready to receive and encounter the Savage force of two vast Lions, as fierce as
ever roared within the Lybian Deserts. Then let thy own unrivaled Deeds, that
best can speak thy Praise, amaze the World, and fill the mouth of Fame, brave
Champion of la Mancha: while I Am obliged to leave off the high Theme, for want
of vigor to maintain the Flight. Here ended the Author's Exclamation, and the
History goes on.

The Keeper observing the Posture Don Quixote had put himself in, and that it
was not possible for him to prevent letting out the Lions, without incurring
the Resentment of the desperate Knight; set the Door of the foremost Cage wide
open, where, as I have said, that Lion lay, who then appeared of a Monstrous
Bigness, and of a hideous frightful Aspect. The first thing Don Quixots
Adventure of the Lions page. 162.
he did was to roll and turn himself round in his Cage; in the next place he
stretched out one of his Paws, put forth his Claws, and roused himself. After
that he gaped and yawn'd for a good while, and showed his dreadful Fangs, and
then thrust out half a Yard of broad Tongue, and with it licked the Dust out of
his Eyes and Face. Having done this he thrust his Head quite out of the Cage,
and star'd about with his Eyes that looked like two live Coals of Fire; a Sight
and Motion, enough to have struck Terror into Temerity it self. But Don Quixote
only regarded it with Attention, wishing his grim Adversary would leap out of
his Hold, and come within his reach, that he might exercise his Valor, and cut
the Monster Piecemeal. To this height of Extravagance had his Folly
transported him; but the generous Lion, more Gentle than Arrogant, taking no
notice of his Vapouring and Bravadoes, after he had looked about him a while,
turned his Tail, and having showed Don Quixote his Posteriors, very contentedly
lay down again in his Apartment. Don Quixote seeing this, commanded the Keeper
to roufe him with his Pole, and force him out whether he would or no. Not I,
indeed Sir, answered the Keeper; I dare not do it for my Life; for if I provoke
him, I Am sure to be the first he will tear to Pieces. Let me advise you, Sir, to
be satisfied with what you have done. It Is as much as the bravest He that wears
a Head ought to do. Then pray go no further, I beseech you. The Door stands
open, the Lion is at his Choice, whether he will come out or no. You have
waited for him; you see he does not care to look you in the Face, and since he
did not come out at the first, I dare engage he will not stir out this Day. You
have shown enough the Greatness of your Courage. No Man is obliged to do more
than Challenge his Enemy, and wait for him in the Field. If he comes not that is
his own Fault, and the Scandal is his, as the Honor the Challenger's. It Is
true, replied Don Quixote. Come, shut the Cage-Door, Honest Friend, and give me
a Certificate under thy Hand in the amplest Form thou can devise, of what
thou have seen me perform; how thou did open the Cage for the Lion; how I
expected his coming, and he did not come out. How, upon his not coming out
then, I stayed his own Time, and instead of meeting me, he turned Tail and lay
down. I am obliged to do no more. So, Enchantments avaunt! and Heaven prosper
Truth, Justice, and Knight-Errantry! shut the Door, as I bid thee, while I make
Signs to those that ran away from us, and get 'em to come back, that they may
have an Account of this Exploit from thy own Mouth. The Keeper obeyed, and Don
Quixote clapping on the Point of his Lance the Handkerchief, with which he had
wiped off the Curds from his Face, waved it in the Air, and called as loud as
he was able to the Fugitives, who fled nevertheless, looking behind 'em all the
way, and troop'd on in a Body with the Gentleman in Green at the Head of 'em.
At last Sancho observed the Signal of the white Flag, and calling out to the
rest; Hold, cried he, my Master calls to us, I Will be hanged if he has not got
the better of the Lions. At this they all faced about, and perceived Don
Quixote flourishing his Ensign; whereupon recovering a little from their
Fright, they leisurely rode back, till they could plainly distinguish Don
Quixote's Voice; and then they came up to the Wagon. As soon as they were got
near it, come on Friend, said he to the Carter, put thy Mules into the Wagon
again, and pursue thy Journey; and Sancho do thou give him two Ducats for the
Lion-keeper and himself, to make them amends for the Time I have detained them.
Ay, that I will with all my Heart, quoth Sancho, but what is become of the
Lions? Are they dead or alive? Then the Keeper very formally related the whole
Action, not failing to exaggerate, to the best of his Skill, Don Quixote's
Courage; how at his Sight alone, the Lion was so terrified, that he neither
would nor durst quit his strong Hold, though for that end his Cage-door was kept
open for a considerable Time; and how at length upon his remonstrating to the
Knight, who would have had the Lion forced out, that it was presuming too much
upon Heaven, he had permitted, though with great Reluctance, that the Lion should
be shut up again. Well, Sancho, said Don Quixote, to his Squire, what do thou
think of this? Can Enchantment prevail over true Fortitude? No, these Magicians
may perhaps rob me of Success, but never of my invincible Greatness of Mind. In
short, Sancho gave the Waggoner and the Keeper the two Pieces. The first
harnessed his Mules, and the last thanked Don Quixote for his Noble Bounty, and
promised to acquaint the King himself with this Heroic Action when he came to
Court. Well, said Don Quixote, if his Majesty should chance to enquire who the
Person was that did this thing, tell him 'twas The Knight of the Lions; a Name
I intend henceforth to take up, in lieu of that which I hitherto assumed, of
the Knight of the woeful Figure; in which proceeding I do but conform to the
ancient Custom of Knights-Errant, who changed their Names as often as they
pleased, or as it suited with their Advantage. After this, the Wagon made the
best of its way, as Don Quixote, Sancho and the Gentleman in Green did of
theirs. The latter for a great while was so taken up with making his
Observations upon Don Quixote, that he had not Time to speak a Syllable; not
knowing what Opinion to have of a Person, in whom he discovered such a Mixture
of good Sense and Extravagance. He was a Stranger to the first Part of his
History; for, had he read it, he could not have wondered either at his Words or
Actions: But not knowing the Nature of his Madness, he took him to be wise and
distracted by Fits; since in his Discourse he still expressed himself justly
and handsomely enough; but in his Actions all was Wild, Extravagant and
Unaccountable. For, said the Gentleman to himself, can there be any thing more
foolish than for this Man to put on his Helmet full of Curds, and then believe
'em conveyed there by Inchanters; or any thing more extravagant than forcibly
to endeavor to Fight with Lions? In the midst of this Soliloquy, Don Quixote
interrupted him. Without doubt, Sir, said he, you take me for a downright
Madman, and indeed my Actions may seem to speak me no less. But for all that,
give me leave to tell you, I am not so mad, nor is my Understanding so
defective, as I suppose you may fancy. What a Noble Figure does the gallant
Knight make, who in the midst of some spacious Place transfixes a furious Bull
with his Lance in the View of his Prince! What a Noble Figure makes the Knight,
who before the Ladies at a harmless Tournament, comes prancing through the Lists
enclosed in shining Steel; or those Court Champions, who in Exercises of
Martial kind, or that at least are such in Appearance, show their Activity; and
though all they do is nothing but for Recreation, are thought the Ornament of a
Prince's Court! But a much Nobler Figure is the Knight Errant, who, fired with
the Thirst of a glorious Fame, wanders through Deserts, through solitary
Wildernesses, through Woods, through Cross-ways, over Mountains and Valleys, in
quest of perilous Adventures, resolved to bring them to a happy Conclusion.
Yes, I say, a Nobler Figure is a Knight Errant succouring a Widow in some
depopulated Place, than the Court-Knight making his Addresses to the
City-Dames. Every Knight has his particular Employment. Let the Courtier wait
on the Ladies, let him with splendid Equipage adorn his Prince's Court, and
with a magnificent Table support his poor Companions. Let him give Birth to
Feasts and Tournaments, and show his Grandeur, Liberality and Munificence, and
especially his Piety; in all these things he fulfils the Duties of his Station.
But as for the Knight Errant, let him search into all the Corners of the World,
enter into the most intricate Labyrinths, and every Hour be ready to attempt
Impossibility it self. Let him in desolate Wilds baffle the Rigor of the
Weather, the Scorching Heat of the Sun's fiercest Beams, and the Inclemency of
Winds and Snow; Let Lions never fright him, Dragons daunt him, nor Evil Spirits
deterr him. To go in quest of these, to meet, to dare, to conflict, and to
overcome 'em all, is his principal and proper Office. Since then my Stars have
decreed me to be one of those Adventurous Knights, I think my self obliged to
attempt every thing that seems to come within the Verge of my Profession. This,
Sir, engaged me to Encounter those Lions just now, judging it to be my
immediate Business, though I was sensible of the extreme Rashness of the
Undertaking. For well I know, that Valor is a Virtue situate between the two
Vicious Extremes of Cowardice and Temerity. But certainly it is not so ill for a
Valiant Man to rise to a Degree of Rashness, as it is to fall short and border
upon Cowardice. As it is easier for a Prodigal to become Liberal, than a Miser;
so it is easier for the hardy and rash Person to be reduced to true Bravery,
than for the Coward ever rise to that Virtue: And therefore in thus attempting
Adventures, believe me, Signior Don Diego, it is better to exceed the Bounds a
little, and over-do, rather than under-do the thing; because it sounds better
in People's Ears to hear it said, how that such a Knight is Rash and Hardy,
than such a Knight is Dastardly and Timorous. For my part, Sir, answered Don
Diego, I think all you have said and done is agreeable to the exactest Rules of
Reason; and I believe if the Laws and Ordinances of Knight-Errantry were lost,
they might be all recovered from you, your Breast seeming to be the safe
Repository and Archive where they lodged. But it grows late; let us make a
little more haste to get to our Village, and to my Habitation, where you may
rest your self after the Fatigues, which doubtless you have sustained, if not
in Body, at least in Mind, whose Pains often afflict the Body too. Sir,
answered Don Quixote, I esteem your Offer as a singular Favor; and so putting
on a little faster than they had done before, about two in the Afternoon they
reached the Village, and got to the House of Don Diego, whom now Don Quixote
called the Knight of the Green Coat.

CHAP. XVIII. How Don Quixote was Entertained at the Castle or House of the
Knight of the Green Coat, with other Extravagant Passages.
DON Quixote found, that Don Diego de Miranda's House was spacious after the
Country manner, the Arms of the Family were over the Gate in rough Stone, the
Buttery in the Fore-yard, the Cellar under the Porch, and all around several
great Jars of that sort commonly made at Toboso; the Sight of which bringing to
his Remembrance his Enchanted and Transformed Dulcinea, he heaved a deep Sigh,
and neither minding what he said, nor who was by, broke out into the following
Exclamation.

O dulces prendas, the Beginning of a Sonnet in the Diana of Montemayor.
Oh! Pledges, once my Comfort and Relief,
Though Pleasing still, discovered now with Grief.
Oh ye Tobosian Urns, that awaken in my Mind the Thoughts of the sweet Pledge
of my most bitter Sorrows! Don Diego's Son, who, as it has been said, was a
Student, and Poetically inclined, heard these Words as he came with his Mother
to welcome him home; and, as well as she, was not a little surpised to see
what a strange Creature his Father had brought with him. Don Quixote alighted
from Rozinante, and very courteously desiring to Kiss her Ladyship's Hands:
Madam, said Don Diego, this Gentleman is the Noble Don Quixote de la Mancha,
the Wisest, and most Valiant Knight Errant in the World; pray let him find a
Welcome suitable to his Merit, and your usual Civility. Thereupon Donna
Christina (for this was the Lady's Name) received him very kindly, and with
great Marks of Respect; to which Don Quixote made a proper and handsome Return,
and then almost the same Compliments passed between him and the young
Gentleman, whom Don Quixote judged by his Discourse to be a Man of Wit and
Sense.

Here the Author inserts a long Description of every Particular in Don Diego's
House, giving us an Inventory of all the Goods and Chattels, and every
Circumstance peculiar to the House of a Rich Country Gentleman: But the
Translator presumed that it would be better to omit these little things, and
such like insignificant Matters, being foreign to the main Subject of this
History, which ought to be more grounded on material Truth, than cold and
insipid Digressions.

Don Quixote was brought into a fair Room, where Sancho took off his Armor,
and then the Knight appeared in a pair of close Breeches, and a Doublet of
Shamoy-Leather, all besmeared with the Rust of his Armor. About his Neck he
wore a plain Band, unstarch'd, after the manner of a Student; about his Legs
sad-colour'd Spatter-dashes, and on his Feet a pair of Wax-leather Shoes. He
hung his trusty Sword by his Side in a Belt of Sea-Wolf's Skin; which makes
many of Opinion he had been long troubled with a Pain in the Kidneys. Over all
this he clapped on a long Cloak of good Russet-Cloth: But first of all he
washed his Head and Face in five Kettle-fuls of Water, if not in six, for as to
the exact Number there is some Dispute. And it is observable, that the Water
still retained a Tincture of Whey: Thanks to Sancho's Gluttony, that had made
him clap into his Master's Helmet those dismal Curds, that so contaminated his
awful Head and Face. In this Dress the Knight with a graceful and sprightly
Air, walked into another Room, where Don Lorenzo, the young Gentleman whom we
have already mentioned, waited his coming, to keep him Company till the Cloth
was laid; the Mistress of the House being gone in the mean time to provide a
handsome Entertainment, that might convince her Guest she understood how to
make those welcome that came to her House. But before the Knight was ready, Don
Lorenzo had Leisure to discourse his Father about him. Pray, Sir, said he, who
is this Gentleman you have brought with you? Considering his Name, his Aspect,
and the Title of Knight Errant, which you give him, neither my Mother nor I can
tell what to think of him. Truly, Son, answered Don Diego, I don't know what to
say to you; all that I can inform you of, is, that I have seen him do the
greatest Follies in the World, and yet say a thousand sensible things that
contradict his Actions. But discourse him your self, and feel the Pulse of his
Understanding; make use of your Sense to judge of his; though to tell you the
Truth, I believe his Folly exceeds his Discretion. Don Lorenzo then went to
entertain Don Quixote, and after some Discourse had passed between 'em. Sir,
said the Knight, I am not wholly a Stranger to your Merit; Don Diego de Miranda
your Father has given me to understand you are a Person of excellent Parts, and
especially a great Poet. Sir, answered the young Gentleman, I may perhaps
pretend to Poetry, but never to be a great Poet: It Is true I am somewhat given
to Rhiming, and love to read good Authors; but I am very far from deserving to
be thought one of their Number. I do not mislike your Modesty, replied Don
Quixote; it is a Virtue not often found among Poets, for every one of them
commonly thinks himself the greatest in the World. There is no Rule without an
Exception, said Don Lorenzo; and it is not impossible but there may be one who
may deserve the Name, though he does not think so himself. That Is very unlikely,
replied Don Quixote. But pray, Sir, tell me what Verses are those that your
Father says you are so puzzled about? If it should be what we call a Gloss or a
Paraphrase, I understand something of that Way of Writing, and should be glad
to see it. If the Composition be designed for a Poetical Prize, I would advise
you only to put in for the second; for the first always goes by Favor, and is
rather granted to the great Quality of the Author than to his Merit; but as to
the next, it is adjudg'd to the most deserving; so that the third may in a
Manner be esteemed the second, and the first no more than the third, according
to the Method used in our Universities: And yet, after all, it is no small
Matter to gain the Honor of being called the first. Hitherto all is well,
thought Don Lorenzo to himself, I cannot think thee mad yet; let us go on -- With
that addressing himself to Don Quixote, Sir, said he, you seem to me to have
frequented the Schools, pray what Science has been your particular Study? That
of Knight-Errantry, answered Don Quixote, which is as good as that of Poetry,
and somewhat better too. I don't know what sort of Science that is, said Don
Lorenzo, nor indeed did I ever hear of it before. It Is a Science, answered Don
Quixote, that includes in it self all the other Sciences in the World, or at
least the greatest Part of them: Whoever professes it ought to be learned in
the Laws, and understand distributive and commutative Justice, in order to
right all Mankind. He ought to be a Divine, to give a Reason of his Faith, and
vindicate his Religion by Dint of Argument. He ought to be skilled in Physic,
especially in the botanick Part of it, that he may know the Nature of Simples,
and have Recourse to those Herbs that can cure Wounds; for a Knight Errant must
not expect to find Surgeons in the Woods and Deserts. He must be an Astronomer,
to understand the Motions of the Celestial Orbs, and find out by the Stars the
Hour of the Night, and the Longitude and Latitude of the Climate on which
Fortune throws him; and he ought to be as well instructed in all the other
Parts of the Mathematics, that Science being of constant use to a Professor of
Arms on many Accounts too numerous to be related. I need not tell you that all
the divine and moral Virtues must center in his Mind. To descend to less
material Qualifications; he must be able to swim like a Fish, shoe a Horse,
mend a Saddle or a Harness: And returning to higher Matters, he ought to be
inviolably devoted to Heaven and his Mistress, Chaste in his Thoughts, Modest
in Words, and Liberal and Valiant in Deeds; Patient in Afflictions, Charitable
to the Poor, and finally, a Maintainer of Truth, though it cost him his Life to
defend it. These are the Endowments that constitute a good Knight Errant; and
now, Sir, be you a Judge, whether the Professors of Chivalry have an easy Task
to perform, and whether such a Science may not stand in Competition with the
most Celebrated and best of those that are taught in Colleges? If it be so,
answered Don Lorenzo, I say it deserves the Pre-eminence over all other
Sciences. What do you mean, Sir, by that, If it be so, cried Don Quixote? I
mean, Sir, replied Don Lorenzo, that I doubt whether there are now, or ever
were, any Knights-Errant, especially with so many rare Accomplishments. This
makes good what I have often said, answered Don Quixote: most People will not
be persuaded there ever were any Knights-Errant in the World. Now, Sir, because
I verily believe, that unless Heaven will work some Miracle to convince them
that there have been, and still are Knights-Errant, those incredulous Persons
are too much Wedded to their Opinion to admit such a Belief; I will not now
lose Time to endeavor to let you see how much you and they are mistaken; all I
design to do, is only to beseech Heaven to convince you of your being in an
Error, that you may see how useful Knights-Errant were in former Ages, and the
vast Advantages that would result in ours from the Assistance of Men of that
Profession. But now Effeminacy, Sloth, Luxury and ignoble Pleasures, triumph
for the Punishment of our Sins. Now, said Don Lorenzo to himself, our Gentleman
has already betrayed his Blind-side; but yet he gives a Color of Reason to his
Extravagance, and I were a Fool should I think otherwise. Here they were called
to Dinner, which ended their Discourse: And at that time Don Diego taking his
Son aside, asked him what he thought of the Stranger? I think, Sir, said Don
Lorenzo, that it is not in the Power of all the Physicians in the World to Cure
his Distemper. He is Mad past Recovery, but yet he has pleasant lucid
Intervals. In short, they Dined, and their Entertainment proved such as the old
Gentleman had told the Knight he used to give his Guests, neat, plentiful, and
well ordered. But that which Don Quixote most admired, was, the extraordinary
Silence he observed through the whole House, as if it had been a Monastery of
mute Carthusians. The Cloth being removed, Grace said, and Hands washed, Don
Quixote earnestly desired Don Lorenzo to show him the Verses he had wrote for
the Poetical Prize. Well, Sir, answered he, because I will not be like those
Poets that are unwilling to show their Verses when entreated to do it, but will
tire you with them when no body desires it; I Will show you my Gloss or
Paraphrase, which I did not Write with a Design to get a Prize, but only to
exercise my Muse. I remember, said Don Quixote, a Friend of mine, a Man of good
Sense, once told me, he would not advise any one to break his Brains about that
sort of Composition; and he gave me this Reason for it, that the Gloss or
Comment could never exactly agree with the Theme; so far from it that most
commonly it left it altogether, and ran contrary to the Thought of the Author
of the Text. Besides, he said, that the Rules to which Custom ties up the
Composers of those elaborate Amusements are too strict, allowing no
Interrogations, no such Interjection as said he, or shall I say; no changing of
Nouns into Verbs; nor any altering of the Sense: Besides several other
Confinements that cramp up those who puzzle their Brains with such a crabbed
way of Glossing, as you your self, Sir, without doubt must know. Really,
Signior Don Quixote, said Don Lorenzo, I would fain catch you Tripping, but you
still slip from me like an Eel. I don't know, Sir, replied Don Quixote, what
you mean by your slipping? I Will tell you another Time, answered the young
Gentleman; in the mean while be pleased to hear the Theme and Paraphrase, which
is this.

The THEME.
Could I recall departed Joy,
Though barred the Hopes of greater Gain,
Or now the future Hours employ,
That must succeed my pleasant Pain.
The Gloss or Paraphrase.
I.
ALL Fortune's Blessings disappear,
She Is Fickle as the Wind;
And now I find her as severe,
As once I thought her kind,
How soon the fleeting Pleasure's past!
How long the lingering Sorrows last!
Unconstant Goddess, through thy Hate,
Do not thy prostrate Slave Destroy,
I Would never complain, but bless my Fate,
Could I recall departed Joy.
II.
Of all thy Gifts I beg but this,
Glut all Mankind with more;
Transport 'em with redoubled Bliss,
But only mine restore.
With thought of Pleasure once possessed,
I Am now as cursed as I was blessed:
Oh would the charming Hours return,
How pleased I Would live, how free from Pain!
I never would pine, I never would mourn,
Though barred the Hopes of greater Gain.
III.
But oh the Blessing I implore:
Not Fate it self can give!
Since Time elapsed exists no more,
No Power can bid it live.
Our Days soon vanish into naught,
And have no Being but in Thought.
Whatever began must end at last,
In vain we twice would Youth enjoy;
In vain would we recall the past,
Or now the future Hours employ.
IV.
Deceived by Hope, and Racked by Fear,
No longer Life can please.
I Will then no more its Torments bear,
Since Death so soon can ease.
This Hour I Will die -- But let me Pause --
A rising Doubt my Courage awes.
Assist ye Powers, that rule my Fate;
Alarm my Thoughts, my Rage refrain,
Convince my Soul, there is yet a State
That must succeed my present Pain.
As soon as Don Lorenzo had read over his Paraphrase, Don Quixote rose from his
Seat, and taking him by the Hand, By the highest Mansions in the Skies, cried
the Knight aloud, Noble Youth, you're the best Poet in the World, and deserve
to be Crowned with Laurel, not at Cyprus or Gaeta, as a certain Poet said, whom
Heaven forgive, but at the University of Athens, were it still in being, and at
those of Paris, Bologna and Salamanca. May those Judges that deny you the
Honor of the first Prize, be shot with Arrows by the God of Verse, and may the
Muses abhor to come within their Houses. Pray, Sir, if I may beg that Favor,
let me hear you read one of your loftiest Productions, for I desire to have a
full Taste of your admirable Genius. I need not tell you that Don Lorenzo was
mightily pleased to hear himself praised by Don Quixote, though he believed him
to be Mad. So bewitching and welcome a thing is Adulation, even from those we
at other times despise. Don Lorenzo verified this Truth, by his ready
Compliance with Don Quixote's Request, and recited to him the following Sonnet,
on the Story of Pyramus and Thisbe.

Pyramus and Thisbe. A Sonnet.
SEE how, to bless the lovely loving Boy,
The Nymph for whom he burns with equal Fires,
Pierces the Wall that parts 'em from their Joy,
While hovering Love prompts, gazes, and admires.
The trembling Maid in Whispers and in Sighs
Dares hardly breathe the Passion she betrays:
But Silence speaks, and Love through ravished Eyes,
Their Thoughts, their Flames, their very Souls conveys,
Wild with Desire, they Sally out at last.
But quickly find their Ruin in their Haste;
And rashly lose all Pleasure in Despair.
Oh strange Mischance! But do not Fortune blame;
Love joined 'em first, then Death, the Grave, and Fame;
What loving Wretch a Nobler Fate would share!
Now Heaven be praised! said Don Quixote, when Don Lorenzo had made an end:
Among the infinite Number of insipid Men of Rhyme, I have at last found a Man
of Rhyme and Reason, and, in a Word, an absolute Poet.

Don Quixote stayed four Days at Don Diego's House, and during all that time,
met with a very generous Entertainment. However, he then des^r'd his leave to
go, and returned him a Thousand Thanks for his kind Reception; letting him
know, that the Duty of his Profession did not admit of his staying any longer
out of Action; and therefore he designed to go in quest of Adventures, which he
knew were plentifully to be ^ound in that part of Spain; and that he would
employ his Time in that, till the Tilts and Tournaments began at Saragossa, to
which Place 'twas now his chief Intent to go. However, he would first go to
Montesino's Cave, about which so many wonderful Stories were told in those
Parts; and there he would endeavor to explore and discover the source and
original Springs of the seven Lakes, commonly called the Lakes of Ruydera. Don
Diego and his Son highly commended his noble Resolution, and desired him to
command whatever their House afforded, assuring him he was sincerely Welcome to
do it, the Respect they had for his Honorable Profession, and his particular
Merit, obliging them to do him all manner of Service. In short, the Day of his
departure came, a Day of Joy and Gladness to Don Quixote, but of Grief and
Sadness to poor Sancho, who had no mind to change his Quarters, and liked the
good Cheer and Plenty at Don Diego's House, much better than his short hungry
Commons in Forests and Deserts, the sorry Pittance of his ill-stor'd Wallet,
which ^e however Crammed and Stuffed with what he ^hought could best make the
change of his Condition tolerable. And now Don Quixote taking ^is leave of Don
Lorenzo, Sir, said he, I don't know whether I have already said it to you, but
if I have, give me leave to repeat it once more, that if you are Ambitious of
climbing up to the difficult, and in a manner, inaccessible summit of the
Temple of Fame, your surest way is to leave on one hand the narrow Path of
Poetry, and follow the narrower Tack of Knight-Errantry, which in a trice may
raise you to an Imperial Throne. With these Words, Don Quixote seemed to have
Summed up the whole Evidence of his Madness. However, he could not conclude
without adding something more. Heaven knows, said he, how willingly I would
take Don Lorenzo with me, to instruct him in those Virtues that are annexed to
the Employment I profess, to spare the humble and crush the Proud and Haughty.
But since his tender Years do not yet qualify him for the Hardships of that
Life, and his Laudable Exercises detain him; I must rest Contented with letting
you know, That one way to acquire Fame in Poetry, is, to be governed by other
Men's Judgment more than your own: For it is natural to Fathers and Mothers not
to think their own Children ugly; and this Error is no where so common as in
the Offspring of the Mind. Don Diego and his Son were again surpised to hear
this Medley of good Sense and Extravagance, and to find the poor Gentleman so
strongly bent on the quest of his unlucky Adventures, the only Aim and Object
of his Desires. After this, and many Compliments, and mutual Reiterations of
Offers of Service; Don Quixote having taken leave of the Lady of the Castle, he
on Rozinante, and Sancho on Dapple, set out, and pursued their Journey.

CHAP. XIX. The Adventure of the Amorous Shepherd, and other truly comical
Passages.
DON Quixote had not Traveled far, when he was overtaken by two Men that
looked like Students or Ecclesiastics, with two Farmers, all mounted upon
Asses. One of the Scholars had behind him a small bundle of Linen, and two
pair of Stockings, trussed up in green Buckram like a Portmanteau; the other had
no other Luggage but a couple of Foils and a pair of Fencing-Pumps. And the
Husbandmen had a parcel of other things, which showed that having made their
Market at some adjacent Town, they were now returning home with their Ware.
They all admired (as indeed all others did that ever beheld him) what kind of
Fellow Don Quixote was, seeing him make a Figure so very different from any
thing they had ever seen. The Knight saluted them, and perceiving their Road
lay the same way, offered them his Company, entreating them however to move an
easier Pace, because their Asses went faster than his Horse; and to engage them
the more, he gave them a hint of his Circumstances and Profession; that he was
a Knight Errant, traveling round the World in quest of Adventures, that his
proper Name was Don Quixote de la Mancha; but his Titular Denomination, The
Knight of the Lions. All this was Greek, or Pedlar's French to the Countrymen;
but the Students presently found out his Blind-side. However, with a respectful
distance, Sir Knight, said one of them, if you are not fixed to any set Stage,
as Persons of your Function seldom are, let us beg the Honor of your Company;
and you shall be entertained with one of the finest and most sumptuous Weddings
that ever was seen, either in la Mancha, or many Leagues round it. The Nuptials
of some young Prince, I presume, said Don Quixote? No, Sir, answered the other,
but of a Yeoman's Son, and a Neighbor's Daughter, he the richest in all this
Country, and she the handsomest you ever saw. The Entertainment at the Wedding
will be New and Extraordinary, it is to be kept in a Meadow near the Village
where the Bride lives. They call her Quiteria the Handsome by reason of her
Beauty, and the Bridegroom no less deservedly Camacho the Rich. They are well
Matched as to Age, for she draws toward Eighteen, and he is about Two and
Twenty, though some nice Folks, that have all the Pedigrees in the World in
their Heads, will tell ye, that the Bride comes of a better Family than he; but
that is not minded nowadays, for Money you know will hide many Faults. And
indeed, this same Camacho is as free as a Prince, and designs to spare no Cost
upon his Wedding. He has taken a Fancy to get the Meadow shaded with Boughs,
that are to cover it like an Arbor, so that the Sun will have much ado to peep
through, and visit the green Grass underneath. There are also provided for the
Diversion of the Company several sorts of Anticks and Morrice-dancers, some
with Swords, and some with Bells; for there are young Fellows in his Village
can manage 'em cleverly. I say nothing of those that play Tricks with the Soles
of their Shoes when they Dance, leaving that to the Judgment of the Guests.
But nothing that I Have told, or might tell you of this Wedding, is like to make
it so remarkable as those which I imagine poor Basil's Despair will do. This
Basil is a young Fellow, that lives next door to Quiteria's Father. Hence Love
took occasion to give Birth to an Amor, like that of old between Pyramus and
Thisbe; for Basil's Love grew up with him from a Child, and she encouraged his
Passion with all the kind return that Modesty could grant; insomuch, that the
Mutual Affection of the two little ones, was the common talk of the Village.
But Quiteria coming to Years of Maturity, her Father began to deny Basil the
usual access to his House; and to cut off his farther Pretenses, declared his
Resolution of Marrying her to Camacho, who is indeed his Superior in Estate,
though far short of him in all other Qualifications; for Basil, to give the
Devil his due, is the cleverest Fellow we have, he will pitch ye a Bar, Wrestle,
or play at Tennis with the best He in the Country; he runs like a Stag, leaps
like a Buck, plays at Nine-pins so well, you would think he tips 'em down by
Witchcraft, sings like a Lark, touches a Guitar so rarely, he even makes it
speak; and to complete his Perfections, he handles a Sword like a Fencer. For
that very single Qualification, said Don Quixote, he deserves not only Quiteria
the handsome, but a Princess; nay, Queen Guinever her self, where she now
living, in spite of Sir Lancelot and all that would oppose it. Well, quoth
Sancho, who had been silent, and listening all the while, my Wife used to tell
me, she would have every one Marry with their Match. Like to like, quoth the
Devil to the Collier, and every Sow to her own Trough, as the other Saying is: As
for my part, all I would have is, that honest Basil even Marry her; for
methinks I have a huge liking to the young Man, and so Heaven bless them
together, say I, and a Murrain seize those that will spoil a good Match between
those that love one another! Nay, said Don Quixote, if Marriage should be
always the consequent of mutual Love, what would become of the Prerogative of
Parents, and their Authority over their Children? If young Girls might always
choose their own Husbands, we should have the best Families intermarry with
Coachmen and Grooms; and young Heiresses would throw themselves away upon the
first young wild Fellows, whose promising outsides and assurance makes 'em set
up for Fortunes, though all their Stock consists in Impudence. For, the
Understanding, which alone should distinguish and choose in these Cases as in
all others, is apt to be blinded or biased by Love and Affection; and
Matrimony is so nice and critical a point, that it requires not only our own
cautious Management, but even the Direction of a superior Power to choose
right. Whoever undertakes a Voyage, if he be Wise, makes it his business to
find out an agreeable Companion. How Cautious then should he be, who must take
a Journey for Life, whose Fellow-Traveller must be as inseparable from him as
himself; his Companion at Bed and Board, and sharer of all the Pleasures and
Fatigues of his Journey; as the Wife must be to the Husband! She is no such
sort of Ware, that a Man can be rid of when he pleases: When once that is
purchased, no Exchange, no Sale, no Alienation can be made: She is an
inseparable Acident to Man: Marriage is a Noose, which, fastened about the
Neck, runs the closer, and sits more uneasy by our struggling to get loose;
it is a Gordian Knot which none can untie, and being twisted with our Thread of
Life, nothing but the Scythe of Death can cut it. I could dwell longer on this
Subject, but that I long to know from the Gentleman, whether he can tell us any
thing more of Basil? All I can tell you, said the Student, is, that he is in the
Case of all Desperate Lovers; since the moment he heard of this intended
Marriage, he has never been seen to smile or talk rationally, he is in a deep
Melancholy, that might indeed rather be called a dozing Frenzy; he talks to
himself, and seems out of his Senses, he hardly Eats or Sleeps, and lives like
a Salvage in the open Fields; his only Sustenance a little Fruit, and his only
Bed the hard Ground; sometimes he lifts up his Eyes to Heaven, then fixes them
on the Ground, and in either Posture stands like a Statue. In short, he is
reduced to that Condition, that we who are his Acquaintance verily believe,
that the Consummation of this Wedding to Morrow will be attended by his Death.
Heaven forbid, Marry and Amen, cried Sancho! Who can tell what may happen? He
that gives a broken Head can give a Plaster. This is one day, but to morrow is
another, and strange things may fall in the roasting of an Egg. After a Storm
comes a Calm. Many a Man that went to Bed well, has found himself dead in the
Morning when he awaked. Who can put a Spoke in Fortune's Wheel? No Body here
I Am sure. Between a Woman's yea and nay, I would not engage to put a
Pin's-point, so close they be one to another. If Mrs. Quiteria love Master
Basil, she will give Camacho the Bag to hold; for this same Love, they say, looks
through Spectacles, that make Copper look like Gold, a Cart like a Coach, and a
Shrimp like a Lobster. Whether in the name of Ill-luck, art thou running now
Sancho, said Don Quixote? When thou fall'st to threading thy Proverbs, and old
Women's Sayings, the Devil cannot cut thee short. What do thou know, poor
Animal, of Fortune, or her Wheel, or any thing else? Why, truly Sir, quoth
Sancho, if you don't understand me, no wonder if my Sentences be thought
Nonsense. But let that pass, I understand my self; and I Am sure I have not talked
so much like a Ninny. But you forsooth are so sharp a Cricket. A Critic,
Blockhead, said Don Quixote, thou confounded Corrupter of humane Speech! By
yea, and by nay, quoth Sancho, what makes you so Angry, Sir? I was never
brought up at School nor Varsity to know when I murder a hard Word. I was never
at Court to learn to Spell Sir. Some are born in one Town, some in another; one
at St. Jago, another at Toledo, and even there all are not so nicely spoken.
You are in the right, Friend, said the Student; Those Natives of that City, who
live among the Tanners, or about the Market of Zocodover, and are confined to
mean Conversation, cannot speak so well as those that frequent the polite part
of the Town, and yet they are all of Toledo. But Propriety, Purity and Elegance
of Style, may be found among the Gentry, and Men of Breeding and Judgment; and
it is the Spring and Grammar of good Language, though Practice and Example will
go a great way. As for my part, I have had the happiness of good Education; it
has been my Fortune to study the Civil Law at Salamanca, and I have made it my
Business all along to express my self properly, neither like a Rustic nor a
Pedant. Ay, ay, Sir, said the other Student, your Parts might have qualified
you for a Master of Arts Degree, had you not mis-employ'd 'em in minding so
much those foolish Foils you carry about with you, and that make you lag behind
your Juniors. Look you, good Sir Bachelor, said the other, your mean Opinion
of these Foils is Erroneous and Absurd; for I can deduce the usefulness of the
Art of Fencing from several undeniable Axioms: Pshaw, said Corchuelo, for so
was the other called, don't tell me of Axioms: I Will fight you, Sir, at your own
Weapons. Here am I that understand neither Quart, nor Tierce; but I have an
Arm, I have Strength, and I have Courage. Give me one of your Foils, and in
spite of all your Distances, Circles, Falsifies, Angles, and all other Terms
of your Art, I Will show you there is nothing in it, and will make Reason glitter
in your Eyes. That Man breaths not Vital Air, that I will turn my Back on. And
he must have more than human Force, that can stand his Ground against me. As
for standing Ground, said the Artist, I will not be obliged to it. But have a care,
Sir, how you press upon a Man of Skill, for ten to one at the very first
advance, but he is in your Body up to the Hilt. I Will try that presently, said
Corchuelo, and springing briskly from his Ass, snatched one of the Foils which
the Student carried; Hold, hold, Sir, said Don Quixote, I will stand Judge of
the Field, and see fair Play on both sides; and interposing with his Lance, he
alighted, and gave the Artist time to put himself in his Posture, and take his
distance. Then Corchuelo slew at him like a Fury, helter skelter, Cut and
Thrust, back-stroke and fore-stroke, single and double, and laid on like any
Lion. But the Student stopped him in the middle of his Career with such a dab
in the Teeth, that he made Corchuelo foam at the Mouth. He made him kiss the
Button of his Foil, as if it had been a Relick, though not altogether with so
much Devotion. In short, he told all the Buttons of his short Cassock with pure
clean Stockadoes, and made the skirts of it hang about him in Rags like
Fish-tails. Twice he struck off his Hat, and in fine, so mawl'd and tired him,
that through perfect Vexation Corchuelo took the Foil by the Hilt, and hurled
it from him with such Violence, that one of the Countrymen that were by,
happening to be a Notary Public, has it upon Record to this Day, that he threw
it almost three quarters of a League; which Testimony has served, and yet
serves to let Posterity know that Strength is overcome by Art. At last
Corchuelo puffing and blowing sat down to rest himself, and Sancho coming up to
him: Mr. Batchelour, quoth he, henceforwards take a Fool's Advice, and never
challenge a Man to Fence, but to Wrestle or pitch the Bar; you seem cut out for
those Sports: But this Fencing is a ticklish point, Sir, meddle no more with
it; for I have heard some of your Masters of the Science say, they can hit the
Eye of a Needle with the Point of a Sword. Corchuelo acknowledged himself
convinced of an Error by Experience, and embracing the Artist, they became
better Friends than before. So, without staying for the Notary that went for
the Foil, and could not be back in a great while, they put on to the Town where
Quiteria lived, they all dwelling in the same Village. By the Way the Student
held forth upon the Excellency of the Noble Science of Defense, with so many
plain and convincing Reasons, drawn from expressive Figures and Mathematical
Demonstrations, that all were satisfied of the Excellency of the Art, and
Corchuelo was reduced from his Incredulity. 'Twas now pretty dark, but before
they got to the Village, it appeared entirely a blazing Constellation: Their
Ears were entertained with the pleasing, but confused sounds of several sorts
of Music, Drums, Fiddles, Pipes, Tabors and Bells; and as they approached
nearer still, they found a large Arbor at the entrance of the Town, stuck full
of Lights, which burnt undisturbed by the least breeze of Wind. The Musicians,
which are the Life and Soul of Diversion at a Wedding, went up and down in
Bands about the Meadow. In short, some Danced, some Sung, some Played, and
Mirth and Jollity Revell'd through that delicious Seat of Pleasure. Others were
employed in raising Scaffolds for the better view of the Shows and
Entertainments prepair'd for the happy Camacho's Wedding, and likewise to
Solemnize poor Basil's Funeral. All the Persuasions and Endeavors of the
Students and Countrymen could not move Don Quixote to enter the Town; urging
for his Reason, the Custom of Knight-Errants, who chose to Lodge in Fields and
Forests under the Canopy of Heaven, rather than in soft Beds under a gilded
Roof; and therefore he left 'em, and went a little out of the Road, full sore
against Sancho's Will, who had not yet forgot the good Lodging and
Entertainment he had at Don Diego's House or Castle.

CHAP. XX. An Account of Rich Camacho's Wedding, and what befell poor Basil.
SCarce had the fair Aurora given place to the refulgent Ruler of the Day, and
given him time with the heat of his prevailing Rays to dry the liquid Pearls on
his Golden Locks; when Don Quixote, shaking off sluggish sleep from his drowsy
Limbs, arose and called his Squire: But finding him still Snoring, oh thou the
most happy Mortal upon Earth, said he, how sweet is thy Repose; Envied by none,
and Envying no Man's Greatness, secure thou sleep'st, thy Soul composed and
calm! No Power of Magic persecutes thee, nor are thy Thoughts affrighted by
Enchantments. Sleep on, sleep on, a hundred times, sleep on. Those Jealous
Cares that break a Lover's Heart do not extend to thee; neither the dread of
craving Creditors, nor the dismal foresight of inevitable Want, or care of
finding Bread for a helpless starving Family, keep thee waking. Ambition does
not make thee uneasy, the Pomp and Vanity of this World do not perplex thy
Mind, for all thy Care's extent reaches but to thy Ass. Thy Person and thy
Welfare thou have committed to my Charge, a Burden imposed on Masters by Nature
and Custom, to weigh and counterpoise the Offices of Servants. Which is the
greatest Slave? The Servant's Business is performed by a few Manual Duties,
which only reconcile him more to Rest, and make him sleep more sound; while the
anxious Master has not leisure to close his Eyes, but must Labor Day and Night
to make Provision for the Subsistence of his Servant; not only in time of
Abundance, but even when the Heavens deny those kindly Showers that must supply
his want. To all this fine Expostulation Sancho answered not a Word; but slept
on, and was not to be waked by his Master's calling or otherwise, till he
pricked him in the Buttocks with the sharp end of his Lance. At length opening
his Eyelids half way, and rubbing them, after he had gaped and yawn'd, and
stretched his drowsy Limbs; he looked about him, and snuffing up his Nose, I Am
much mistaken, quoth he, if from this same Arbor there come not a pure steam
of good broiled Rashers, that comforts my Nostrils, more than all the Herbs and
Rushes hereabouts. And by my Holy Dame, a Wedding that begins so savourly, must
be a dainty one. Away Cormorant, said Don Quixote, rouse and let us go see it,
and learn how it fares with the Disdained Basil. Fare? quoth Sancho, why if he
be poor, he must even be so still, and not think to Marry Quiteria. It Is a
pretty Fancy, in faith! For a Fellow who has not a Cross, to run Madding after
what is Meat for his Betters. I Will lay my Neck that Camacho covers this same
Basil from Head to Foot with white Six pences, and will spend ye more at a
Breakfast than t'other's worth, and be never the worse. And do you think that
Madam Quiteria will quit her fine rich Gowns and Petticoats, her Necklaces of
Pearl, her Jewels, her Finery and Bravery, and all that Camacho has given her,
or may afford to give her, to Marry a Fellow with whom she must Knit or Spin
for her Living? What signifies his Bar-pitching and Fencing? Will that pay for
a Pint of Wine at the Tavern? If all those rare Parts will not go to Market and
make the Pot boil, the duce take 'em for me: Though where they light on a Man
that has wherewithal, may I ever live thus, if they don't set him off rarely.
With good Materials on a good Foundation, a Man may Build a good House, and
Money is the best Foundation in the World. For Heaven's sake Sancho, said Don
Quixote, prithee bring thy tedious Harangue to a Conclusion. For my part, I
believe, were thou let alone, when thy Clack is once set a going, thou
would scarce allow thy self time to eat or sleep, but would prate on to
the end of the Chapter. Troth Master! replied Sancho, your Memory must be very
short, not to remember the Articles of our Agreement before I came this last
Journey with you. I was to speak what I would, and when I would, provided I
said nothing against my Neighbor, or your Worship's Authority; and I don't see
that I have broken my Indentures yet. I remember no such Article, said Don
Quixote, and though it were so, it is my Pleasure you now be silent and attend
me; for the Instruments we heard last Night begin to cheer the Valleys, and
doubtless the Marriage will be Solemnized this Morning, ever the heat of the
Day prevent the Diversion. Thereupon Sancho said no more but Saddl'd Rozinante,
and clapped his Pack-Saddle on Dapple's Back; then both mounting, away they
rode fair and softly into the Arbor. The first thing that blessed Sancho's
Sight there, was a whole Steer Spitted on a large Elm, before a mighty Fire
made of a Pile of Wood, that seemed a flaming Mountain. Round this Bonfire were
placed six capacious Pots, cast in no common Mould, or rather six ample
Coppers, every one containing a whole Shamble of Meat, and entire Sheep were
sunk and lost in them, and soaked as conveniently as Pigeons. The Branches of
the Trees round were all garnished with an infinite number of Cased Hares, and
plucked Fowl of several sorts: And then for Drink, Sancho told above threescore
Skins of Wine, holding each of 'em seven Gallons at least, and as it afterward
proved, sprightly Liquor. A goodly pile of white Loaves made a large Rampart on
the one side, and a stately Wall of Cheeses set up like Bricks made a comely
Bulwark on the other. Two Pans of Oil, each bigger than a Dyer's Fat, served to
fry their Pancakes, which they lifted out with two strong Peels when they were
fried enough, and then they dipped 'em in as large a Kettle of Honey prepared
for that purpose. To dress all this Provision, there were above fifty Cooks,
Men and Women, all cleanly, diligent and cheerful: In the ample Belly of the
Steer they had sewed up twelve little sucking Piggs embowell'd, to give it the
more savoury Taste. Spices of all sorts lay about in such Plenty, that they
appeared to be bought by wholesale. In short, the whole Provision was indeed
Country-like, but plentiful enough to feast an Army. Sancho beheld all this
with wonder and delight. The first Temptation that captivated his Senses was
the goodly Pots; his Bowels yearn'd, and his Mouth watered at the dainty
Contents: By and by he falls desperately in Love with the Skins of Wine; and
lastly, his affections were fixed on the Fryingpans, if such honorable Kettles
may accept of the Name. The scent of the fried Meat put him into such a
commotion of Spirit that he could hold out no longer, but accosting one of the
busy Cooks, with all the smooth and hungry Reasons he was Master of, he begged
his leave to sop a Luncheon of Bread in one of the Pans. Friend, quoth the
Cook, no hunger must be felt near us to Day (thanks to the Founder) Light,
light Man, and if thou can find ever a Ladle there, skim out a Pullet or two,
and much good may do you. Alack a day, quoth Sancho, I see no Ladle, Sir. Blood
and Suet cried the Cook, what a silly helpless Fellow thou art! Let me see:
With that he took a Kettle, and sowsing into one of the Pots, he fished out
three Hens and a couple of Geese at one heave. Here, Friend, said he to Sancho,
take this, and make shift to stay your Stomach with that Scum till Dinner be
ready. Heaven reward you, cried Sancho, but where shall I put it? Here,
answered the Cook, take Ladle and all, and thank the Founder, once more I say;
no Body will grudge it thee. While Sancho was thus employed, Don Quixote saw
twelve young Farmers Sons all Dressed very Gay, enter upon stately Mares, as
richly and gaudily equipped as the Country could afford, with little Bells
fastened to their Furniture. These in a close Body made several Careers up and
down the Meadow, merrily shouting and crying out, long live Camacho, and
Quiteria, he as rich as she Fair, and she the fairest in the World. Poor
Ignorants (thought Don Quixote over-hearing them) you speak as you know; but
had you ever seen my Dulcinea del Toboso, you would not be so lavish of your
Praises here. In a little while, at several other parts of the spacious Arbor
entered a great Number of Dancers, and among the rest twenty four young active
Country-Lads in their fine Holland-Shirts, with their Handkerchiefs wrought
with several Colors of fine Silk, wound about their Heads, each of 'em with
Sword in Hand. These Danced a Military Dance, and skirmish'd with one another,
mixing and intermixing with their naked Swords, with wonderful slight and
activity, without hurting each other in the least. This Dance pleased Don
Quixote mightily, and though he was no stranger to such sort of Dances, he
thought it the best he had ever seen. There was another he also liked very
well, performed all by most Beautiful young Maids, between fourteen and
eighteen years of Age, clad in slight green, with their Hair partly filletted
up with Ribbons, and partly hanging loose about their Shoulders, as bright and
lovely as the Sun's Golden Beams. Above all, they wore Garlands of Roses,
Jasmine, Amaranth, and Honey-suckles. They were led up by a Reverend Old Man,
and a Matronly Woman, both much more Light and Active than their years seemed
to promise. They Danced to the Music of Zamora Bagpipes, and such was the
Modesty of their Looks, and the agility of their Feet, that they appeared the
prettiest Dancers in the World. After these came in an artificial Dance or
Masque, consisting of eight Nymphs, cast into two Divisions, of which Love led
one, and Wealth the other; one with his Wings, his Bow, his Arrows, and his
Quiver; the other arrayed in several gaudy Colors of Gold and Silk. The Nymphs
of Cupid's Party had their Names inscribed in large Characters behind their
Backs. The first was Poesy, Prudence was the next, the third Nobility, and
Valor was the fourth. Those that attended Wealth were Liberality, Reward,
Treasure, and Peaceable Possession. Bedrawn by four Savages, clad in green,
covered over with Ivy, and grim surly Vizzards on their Faces, so to the Life
that they had almost frighted Sancho. On the Frontispiece and on every quarter
of the Edifice was inscribed, the Castle of Reservedness. Four expert Musicians
played to them on Pipe and Tabor. Cupid began the Dance, and after two
Movements, he cast up his Eyes, and bent his Bow against a Virgin that stood
upon the Battlements of the Castle, addressing himself in this manner.

The MASQUE.
LOVE.
MY Name is Love, supreme my Sway,
The greatest Good and greatest Pain.
Air, Earth, and Seas my Power obey,
And Gods themselves must drag my Chain.
In every Heart my Throne I keep,
Fear never could daunt my daring Soul:
I fir^ the Bosom of the Deep,
And the profoundest Hell control.
Having spoken these Verses, Cupid shot an Arrow over the Castle and retired to
his Station. Then Wealth advanced, and performed two Movements, after which the
Music stopped, and he expressed himself thus,

WEALTH.
LOve's my Incentive and my End,
But I Am a greater Power than Love;
Though Earthly Born, I Earth transcend,
For Wealth's a Blessing from above.
Bright Maid, with me receive and bless
The surest pledge of all Success;
Desired by All, used right by Few,
But best bestowed, when graced by you.
Wealth withdrew, and Poesy came forward, and after she had performed her
Movements like the rest, fixing her Eyes upon the Lady of the Castle, repeated
these Lines.

POESY.
Sweet Poesy in moving Lays
Love into Hearts, Sense into Souls conveys;
With Sacred Rage can tune to Bliss or Woe,
Sways all the Man, and gives him Heaven below.
Bright Nymph, with every Grace adorned,
Shall noble Verse by Thee be scorned?
It Is Wit can best thy Beauty prize;
Then raise the Muse, and thou by her shall rise:
Poesy retired, and Liberality advanced from Wealth's side, and after the
Dance, spoke this,

LIBERALITY.
Behold that noble golden Mean
Betwixt the Sparing and Profuse!
Good Sense and Merit must be seen,
Where Liberality's in Use.
But I for Thee will lavish seem;
For Thee Profuseness I Will approve:
For, where the Merit is extreme,
Who'd not be prodigal of Love?
In this Manner all the Persons of each Party advanced and spoke their Verses,
of which some were pretty and some foolish enough. Among the rest, Don Quixote,
who had a very good Memory, remembered only these. After this, the two
Divisions joined into a very pretty Country-Dance; and still as Cupid passed by
the Castle he shot a Flight of Arrows, and Wealth battered it with golden
Balls; then drawing out a great Purse of Roman Cat's-Skin that seemed full of
Money, he threw it against the Castle, the Boards of which were presently
disjointed, and fell down, leaving the Virgin discovered without any Defense.
Thereupon Wealth immediately entered with his Party, and throwing a Gold Chain
about her Neck, made a Show of leading her Prisoner: But then Cupid with his
Attendants came to her Rescue; and both Parties engaging, were parted by the
Savages, who joining the Boards together, enclosed the Virgin as before; and
all was performed with Measure, and to the Music, that played all the while;
and so the Show ended to the great Content of the Spectators. When all was
over, Don Quixote asked one of the Nymphs who it was that composed the
Entertainment? She answered that it was a certain Clergyman who lived in their
Town that had a rare Talent that way. I dare lay a Wager, said Don Quixote, he
was more a Friend to Basil than to Camacho, and knows better what belongs to a
Play than a Prayer Book: He has expressed Basil's Parts and Camacho's Estate
very naturally in the Design of your Dance. God bless the King and Camacho say
I, quoth Sancho, who heard this. Well! Sancho, says Don Quixote, thou art a
white-liver'd Rogue to change Parties this Way; you are like the Rabble, which
always cry, Long live the Conqueror. I know not what I Am like, replied Sancho;
but this I know, that this Kettle full of Geese and Hens is a Bribe for a
Prince. Camacho has filled my Belly, and therefore has won my Heart. When shall
I ladle out such dainty Scum out of Basil's Porridge-Pots (added he, showing
his Master the Meat, and falling on lustily); therefore a Fig for his Abilities
say I. As he sows so let him reap, and as he reaps so let him sow. My old
Grannam (rest her Soul) was wont to say, there were but two Families in the
World, Have much and Have little; and she had ever a great Kindness for the
Family of the Have much. A Doctor gives his Advice by the Pulse of your Pocket;
and an Ass covered with Gold, looks better than an Horse with a Pack-Saddle; so
once more I say Camacho for my Money. Have thou not done yet? said Don Quixote.
I must have done, answered Sancho; because I find you begin to be in a Passion,
else I had Work cut out for three Days and a Half. Well! said Don Quixote, thou will never be silent till thy Mouth's full of Clay; when you are dead I hope I
shall have some Rest. Faith and Troth now Master, quoth Sancho, you did ill to
talk of Death; Heaven bless us, it is no Child's Play; you have even spoiled my
Dinner; the very Thought of raw Bones and lanthorn Jaws makes me sick. Death
eats up all things, both the young Lamb and old Sheep; and I have heard our
Parson say he values a Prince no more than a Clown; all is Fish that comes to
his Net; he throws at all, and sweeps Stakes; he is no Mower that takes a Nap at
Noonday, but drives on, fair Weather or foul, and cuts down the green Grass as
well as the ripe Corn: He Is neither squeamish nor queasy-stomach'd, for he
swallows without chewing, and crams down all things into his ungracious Maw;
and though you can see no Belly he has, he has a confounded Dropsy, and thirsts
after Men's Lives, which he guggles down like Mother's Milk. Hold, hold, cried
the Knight, go no further, for thou art come to a very handsome Period; thou
have said as much of Death in thy homespun Cant, as a good Preacher could have
done: Thou have got the Knack of Preaching, Man; I must get thee a Pulpit and
Benefice I think. He preaches well that lives well, quoth Sancho; that is all
the Divinity I understand. Thou have enough, said Don Quixote; only I wonder at
one thing, it is said the Beginning of Wisdom proceeds from the Fear of Heaven;
how happens it then, that thou who fear a Lizard more than Omnipotence
should be so wise? Come, Sir, replied Sancho, judge you of your
Knight-Errantry, and don't meddle with other Men's Fears; for I am as pretty a
Fearer of Heaven as any of my Neighbors; and so let me dispatch this Scum,
(and much Good may't do thee honest Sancho;) Consider, Sir, we must give an
Account for our idle Words another Day; I must have the other Pluck at the
Kettle. With that he attacked it with so courageous an Appetite that he
sharpened his Master's, who would certainly have kept him Company, had he not
been prevented by that which Necessity obliges me to relate this Instant.

CHAP. XXI. The Progress of Camacho's Wedding, with other delightful Accidents.
WHILE Don Quixote and Sancho were discoursing, as the former Chapter has told
you, they were interrupted by a great Noise of Joy and Acclamations raised by
the Horsemen, who shouting and galloping went to meet the young Couple, who,
surrounded by a thousand Instruments and Devices, were coming to the Arbor,
accompanied by the Curate, their Relations, and all the better sort of the
Neighborhood, set out in their Holiday-Cloaths. Hey-day! quoth Sancho, as soon
as he saw the Bride, what have we here? Adzuckers this is no Country-Lass, but
a fine City-Dame, all in her Silks and Sattins, by the Mass! Look, look ye
Master, see if instead of Glass Necklaces, she have not on Fillets of rich
Coral; and instead of green Serge of Cuenca, a thirty-pil'd Velvet. I Will
warrant her Lacing is white Linen; but hold, may I never squint if it ben't
Satin. Bless us! see what Rings she has on her Fingers, no Jet, no pewter
Bawbles, pure beaten Gold, as I Am a Sinner, and set with Pearls too! If every
Pearl ben't as white as a Syllabub, and each of them as precious as an Eye! How
she is bedizon'd, and glistens from Top to Toe! And now yonder again, what fine
long Locks the young Slut has got! If they ben't false, I never saw longer in
my born Days. Ah Jade! what a fine stately Person she is! What a many Trinkets
and glaring Gugaws are dangling in her Hair and about her Neck! Cudz-niggers!
she puts me in mind of an over-loaden Date-tree. I'my Conscience! she is a juicy
bit, a Mettl'd Wench, and might well pass Muster in Flanders. Well! I say no
more, but happy is the Man that has thee! Don Quixote could not help smiling to
hear Sancho set forth the Bride after his Rustic way, though at the same time
he beheld her with admiration, thinking her the most Beautiful Woman he had
ever seen, except his Mistress Dulcinea: However, the fair Quiteria appeared
somewhat pale, probably with the ill Rest which Brides commonly have the Night
before their Marriage, in order to Dress themselves to Advantage. There was a
large Scaffold erected on one side of the Meadow, and adorned with Carpets and
Boughs for the Marriage-Ceremony, and the more convenient Prospect of the Shows
and Entertainments. The Procession was just arrived to this Place, when they
heard a piercing outcry, and a voice calling out, Stay, rash and hasty People,
stay; upon which all turning about, they saw a Person coming after them in a
black Coat bordered with Crimson, powdered with Flames of Fire. On his Head he
wore a Garland of mournful Cypress, and a large Truncheon in his Hand, headed
with an Iron Spike. As soon as he drew near they knew him to be the gallant
Basil, and the whole Assembly began to fear some Mischief would ensue, seeing
him come thus unlooked for, and with such an Outcry and Behavior. He came up
tired and panting before the Bride and Bridegoom; then leaning on his
Truncheon, he fixed his Eyes on Quiteria, turning pale and trembling at the
same time, and with a fearful hollow Voice, Too well you know, cried he, unkind
Quiteria, that by the Ties of Truth, and Law of that Heaven which we all
revere, while I have Life you cannot be married to another. You may remember
too, that all the while I stayed, hoping that Time and Industry might better my
Fortune, and render me a Match more equal for you, I never offered to transcend
the Bounds of honorable Love, by soliciting Favors to the Prejudice of your
Virtue. But you, forgetting all the Ties between us, are going now to break
'em, and give my Right to another, whose large Possessions, though they can
procure him all other Blessings, I had never envied, could they not have
purchased you. But no more, the Fates have ordained it, and I will further
their Design, by removing this unhappy Obstacle out of your Way. Live, rich
Camacho, live happy with the ungrateful Quiteria many Years, and let the poor,
the miserable Basil die, whose Poverty has clipped the Wings of his Felicity,
and laid him in the Grave. Saying these last Words, he drew out of his supposed
Truncheon a short Tuck that was concealed in it, and setting the Hilt of it to
the Ground, he fell upon the Point in such a Manner that it came out all bloody
at his Back, the poor Wretch weltring on the Ground in Blood. His Friends
strangely confounded by this sad Accident, ran to help him, and Don Quixote
forsaking Rozinante, made Haste to his Assistance, and taking him up in his
Arms, found there was still Life in him. They would fain have drawn the Sword
out of his Body, but the Curate urged it was not convenient till he had made
his Confession, and prepared himself for Death, which would immediately attend
the Effusion of Blood upon pulling the Tuck out of his Body. While they were
debating this Point, Basil seemed to come a little to himself, and calling on
the Bride. Oh.! Quiteria, (said he, with a faint and doleful Voice) now, now in
this last and departing Minute of my Life, even in this dreadful Agony of
Death, would you but vouchsafe to give me your Hand, and own your self my Wife,
I should think my self rewarded for the Torments I endure; and pleased to think
this desparate Deed made me yours, though but for a Moment, I would die
contented. The Curate hearing this, very earnestly recommended to him the Care
of his Soul's Health, which at the present Juncture was more proper than any
Gratification of his outward Man; that his Time was but short, and he ought to
be very earnest with Heaven, in imploring its Mercy and Forgiveness for all his
Sins, but especially for his last desperate Action. To which Basil answered,
That he could think of no Happiness till Quiteria yielded to be his; but if she
would do it, that Satisfaction would calm his Spirits, and dispose him to
confess himself heartily. Don Quixote hearing this, cried out aloud, That
Basil's Demand was just and reasonable, and that Signior Camacho might as
honorably receive her as the worthy Basil's Widow, as if he had received her
at her Father's Hands. Say but the Word, Madam, continued he, pronounce it once
to save a Man from Despair and Damnation; you will not be long bound to it,
since the nuptial Bed of this Bridegroom must be the Grave. Camacho stood all
this while strangely confounded, till at last he was prevailed on by the
repeated Importunities of Basil's Friends to consent that Quiteria should
humor the dying Man, knowing her own Happiness would be deferred but some few
Minutes longer. Then they all bent their Entreaties to Quiteria, some with
Tears in their Eyes, others with all the engaging Arguments their Pity could
suggest. She stood a long Time inexorable, and did not return any Answer; till
(...) last the Curate came to her, and bid her resol^^ what she would do; for
Basil was just ready to (...) up the Ghost. But then the poor Virgin trembling
and dismayed, without speaking a Word, came to poor Basil, who lay gasping for
Breath, with his Eyes fixed in his Head as if he were just expiring; she
kneeled down by him, and with the most manifest Signs of Grief beckoned to him
for his Hand. Then Basil opening his Eyes, and fixing them in a languishing
Posture on hers, Oh Quiteria, said he, your Heart at last relents when your
Pity comes too late. Thy Arms are now extended to relieve me, when those of
Death draw me to their Embraces, and they alas! are much too strong for thine.
All I desire of thee, O fatal Beauty, (...) this, let not that fair Hand
deceive me now, as (...) has done before, but confess, that what you do i^ free
and voluntary, without Constraint, or in Compliance to any one's Commands;
declare me openly thy true and lawful Husband: Thou will no^ sure dissemble
with one in Death, and deal fals^^ with his departing Soul that all his Life
has bee^ true to thee. In the Midst of all this Discourse (...) fainted away,
and all the Bystanders thought hi^ gone. The poor Quiteria with a blushing
Modes^^ a kind of Violence upon her self, took him by (...) Hand, and with a
great deal of Emotion, (...) Force, said she, could ever work upon my Will
(...) this Degree, therefore I believe it purely my ow^ free Will and
Inclination, that I here publicly d^clare you my only lawful Husband: Here Is
(...) Hand in Pledge, and I expect yours as freely (...) return, if your Pains
and this sudden Accide^^ have not yet bereft you of all Sense. I give it you,
said Basil, with all the Presence of Mind imaginable, and here I own my self
thy Husband. And I thy Wife, said she, whether thy Life be ^ong, or whether
from my Arms they bear thee this Instant to the Grave. Methinks, quoth Sancho,
this young Man talks too much for a Man in his Condition; pray advise him to
leave off his Wooing, and mind his Soul's Health. I Am afraid his Death is more
in his Tongue than in his Teeth. Now when Basil and Quiteria had thus plighted
their Faith to each other, while yet their Hands were joined together, the
tenderhearted Curate, with Tears in his Eyes, poured on 'em both the nuptial
Blessing, beseeching Heaven at the same Time to have Mercy on the new-marry'd
Man's Soul, and in a Manner mixing the Burial-Service with the Matrimonial. As
soon as the Benediction was pronounced, up starts Basil briskly from the
Ground, and with an unexpected Activity whips the Sword out of his Body, and
caught his dear Quiteria close in his Arms. All the Spectators stood amazed,
and some of the simpler sort stuck not to cry out, A Miracle, a Miracle! No,
no, cried Basil, no Miracle, no Miracle, but a Stratagem, a Stratagem. The
Curate, more astonished and concerned than all the rest, came with both his
Hands to feel the Wound, and discovered that the Sword had no where passed
through the cunning Basil's Body, but only through a Tin Pipe full of Blood
artfully fitted to his Body, and, as it was afterward known, so prepared that
the Blood could not congeal. In short, the Curate, Camacho, and the Company
found they had all been egregiously imposed upon. As for the Bride, she was so
far from being displeased, that hearing it urged that the Marriage could not
stand good in Law because the Contrivance was deceitful, she publicly declared
that she again confirmed it to be just, and by the free Consent of both
Parties: Camacho and his Friends judging by this that the Trick was
premeditated, and that she was privy to the Plot, enraged at this horrid
Disappointment, had Recourse to a stronger Argument, and drawing their Swords,
set furiously on Basil, in whose Defense almost as many were immediately
unsheathed. Don Quixote immediately mounting, with his Lance couched, and
covered with his Shield, led the Van of Basil's Party, and falling in with the
Enemy, charged clear through the Gross of their Battalia. Sancho, who never liked
any dangerous Work, resolved to stand Neuter, and so retired under the Walls of
the mighty Pot whence he had got the precious Skimmings, thinking that would be
respected whatever Side gained the Battle. Don Quixote addressing himself to
Camacho's Party, Hold Gentlemen, cried he, it is not just thus with Arms to
redress the Injuries of Love. Love and War are the same thing, and Stratagems
and Policy are as allowable in the one as in the other. Quiteria was designed
for Basil, and he for her by the unalterable Decrees of Heaven. Camacho's
Riches may purchase him a Bride and more Content elsewhere, and those whom
Heaven has joined let no Man put asunder. Basil had but this one Lamb, and the
Lamb of his Bosom, let none therefore offer to take his single Delight from
him, though presuming on his Power; for here I solemnly declare, that he who
first attempts it must pass through me, and this Lance through him. At which he
shook his Lance in the Air with so much Vigor and Dexterity, that he cast a
sudden Terror into those that beheld him, who did not know the threatening
Champion. In short, Don Quixote's Words, the good Curate's diligent Mediation,
together with Quiteria's Inconstancy, brought Camacho to a Truce; and he then
discreetly considered, that since Quiteria loved Basil before Marriage, 'twas
probable she would love him afterward, and that therefore he had more Reason
to thank Heaven for so good a Riddance, than to repine at her Loss. This
Thought, improved by some other Considerations, brought both Parties to a fair
Accommodation; and Camacho, to show he did not resent the Disappointment,
blaming rather Quiteria's Levity than Basil's Policy, invited the whole Company
to stay, and take Share of what he had provided. But Basil, whose Virtues, in
spite of his Poverty, had secured him many Friends, drew away Part of the
Company to attend him and his Bride to her own Town; and among the rest Don
Quixote, whom they all honored as a Person of extraordinary Worth and Bravery.
Poor Sancho followed his Master with a heavy Heart; he could not be reconciled
to the Thoughts of turning his Back so soon upon the good Cheer and Jollity at
Camacho's Feast, that lasted till Night, and had a strange Hankering after
those dear Fleshpots of Egypt, which though he left behind in Reality, he yet
carried along with him in Mind. The beloved Scum which he had, that was nigh
guttl'd already, made him view with Sorrow the almost empty Kettle, the dear
Casket where his Treasure lay: So that stomaching mightily his Master's
Defection from Camacho's Feast, he sullenly paced on after Rozinante, very much
out of Humor, though he had just filled his Belly.

CHAP. XXII. An Account of the great Adventure of Montesino's Cave, situated in
the Heart of la Mancha, which the Valorus Don Quixote successfully Achieved.
THE new Married Couple Entertained Don Quixote very Nobly, in Acknowledgment
of his readiness to defend their Cause; they esteemed his Wisdom equal to his
Valor, and thought him both a Cid in Arms, and a Cicero in Arts. Honest Sancho
too recruited to the Purpose, during the three Days his Master stayed, and so
came to his good Humor again. Basil then informed them, that Quiteria knew
nothing of his Stratagems, but being a pure Device of his own, he had made some
of his nearest Friends acquainted with it, that they should stand by him if
occasion were, and bring him off upon the Discovery of the Deceit. It deserves
a handsomer Name, said Don Quixote, since conducive to so good and honorable
an End, as the Marriage of a Loving Couple. By the way, Sir, you must know,
that the greatest Obstacle to Love, is Want, and a narrow Fortune: For the
continual Bands and Cements of mutual Affection are Mirth, Content,
Satisfaction, and Jollity. These managed by skilful Hands can make Variety in
the Pleasures of Wedlock, preparing the same thing always with some additional
Circumstance, to render it new and delightful. But when pressing Necessity and
Indigence deprive us of these Pleasures that prevent Satiety, the Yoke of
Matrimony is often found very galling; and the Burden intolerable. These Words
were chiefly directed by Don Quixote to Basil, to advise him by the way to give
over those airy Sports and Exercises, which indeed might feed his Youth with
Praise, but not his Old Age with Bread, and to bethink himself of some grave
and substantial Employment that might afford him a Competency, and something of
a Stock for his declining Years. Then pursuing his Discourse: The Honorable
Poor Man, said he, (if the Poor deserves that Epithet) when he has a Beautiful
Wife, is blessed with a Jewel: He that deprives him of her, robs him of his
Honor, and may be said to deprive him of his Life. The Woman that is
Beautiful, and keeps her Honesty when her Husband is Poor, deserves to be
Crowned with Laurel, as the Conquerors were of Old. Beauty is a tempting Bait,
that attracts the Eyes of all Beholders, and the Princely Eagles, and the most
high-flown Birds stoop to its pleasing Lure. But when they find it in
Necessity, then Kites and Crows, and other ravenous Birds will all be grapling
with the alluring Prey. She that can withstand these dangerous Attacks, does
merit to be the Crown of her Husband. However, Sir, take this along with you,
as the Opinion of a Wise Man, whose Name I have forgot; he said, there was but
one good Woman in the World, and his Advice was, that every Married Man should
think his own Wife was she, as being the only way to live contented. For my own
part, I need not make the Application to my self, for I am not Married, nor
have I as yet any Thoughts that way; but if I had, 'twou'd not be a Woman's
Fortune, but her Character should recommend her; for public Reputation is the
Life of a Lady's Virtue, and the outward Appearance of Modesty is in one Sense
as good as the Reality; since a private Sin is not so prejudicial in this
World, as a public Indecency. If you bring a Woman honest to your Bosom, it is
easy keeping her so, and perhaps you may improve her Virtues. If you take an
unchaste Partner to your Bed, it is hard mending her; for the Extremes of Vice
and Virtue are so great in a Woman, and their Points so far asunder, that it is
very improbable, I will not say impossible, they should ever be reconciled.
Sancho, who had patiently Listened so far, could not forbear making some
Remarks on his Master's Talk. This Master of mine, thought he to himself, when
I am talking some good Things, full of Pith and Marrow, as he may be now, was
wont to tell me, that I should tie a Pulpit at my Back, and stroll with it
about the World to retail my Rarities; but I might as well tell him, that when
once he begins to tack his Sentences together, a single Pulpit is too little
for him, he had need have two for every Finger, and go Peddling about the
Market, and cry, who buys my Ware? Old Nick take him for a Knight Errant! I
think he is one of the seven Wise Masters. I thought he knew nothing but his
Knight-Errantry, but now I see the Devil a thing can 'scape him, he has an Oar
in every Man's Boat, and a Finger in every Pie. As he muttered somewhat loud,
his Master overheard him. What Is that you are Grumbling there, Sancho, said
he? Nothing. Sir, nothing, quoth Sancho. I was only wishing I had heard your
Worship Preach this Doctrine before I Married, then mayhaps I might have said
the old Proverb, A sound Man needs no Physician. What, is Teresa so bad then,
asked Don Quixoie? Not so very bad neither, answered Sancho; nor yet so good as
I would have her. Fie, Sancho, said Don Quixote, thou do not do well to
speak ill of thy Wife, who is a good Mother to thy Children. There Is no Love
lost, Sir, quoth Sancho, for she speaks as ill of me, when the Fit takes her,
especially when she is in one of her Jealous Moods, for then Old Nick himself
could not bear her Maundring.

Don Quixote having tarried three Days with the young Couple, and been
entertained like a Prince, he entreated the Student, who fenced so well, to
help him to a Guide that might conduct him to Montesino's Cave, resolving to go
down into it, and prove by his own Eyesight the Wonders that were reported of
it round the Country. The Student recommended a Cousin-German of his for his
Conductor, who, he said, was an Ingenious Lad, a pretty Scholar, and a great
Admirer of Books of Knight-Errantry, and could show him the famous Lake of
Ruydera too; adding, that he would be very good Company for the Knight, as
being one that wrote Books for the Booksellers, in order to Dedicate 'em to
Great Men. Accordingly the Learned Cousin came mounted on an Ass with Foal; his
Pack-saddle covered with an old Carpet, or coarse Packing-Cloth. Thereupon
Sancho having got ready Rozinante and Dapple, well stuffed his Wallet, and the
Student's Knap-sack to boot, they all took their Leave, steering the nearest
Course to Montesino's Cave. To pass the Time on the Road, Don Quixote asked the
Guide to what Course of Study he chiefly applied himself. Sir, answered the
Scholar, my Business is Writing, and Copy-Money my chief Study. I have
published some Things with the general Approbation of the World, and much to my
own Advantage. Perhaps, Sir, you may have heard of one of my Books, called, The
Treatise of Liveries and Devices; in which I have obliged the Public with no
less than seven Hundred and three sorts of Liveries and Devices, with their
Colors, Mottos, and Ciphers; so that any Courtier may furnish himself there
upon any extraordinary Appearance, with what may suit his Fancy or
Circumstances, without racking his own Invention to find what is agreeable to
his Inclinanations. I can furnish the Jealous, the Forsaken, the Disdained, the
Absent, with what will fit 'em to a Hair. Another Piece, which I now have on
the Anvil, I design to call the Metamorphosis, or The Spanish Ovid; an
Invention very new and extraordinary. It Is in short, Ovid Burlesqu'd; wherein I
discover who the Several Rarities of Spain.
Giralda of Sevil was; who the Angel of the Magdalen; I tell ye what was the
Pipe of Vecinguerra of ^^^eua, what the Bulls of Guisando, the Sierra Morena,
the Fountains of Laganitos, and Lavapies at Ma^rid; not forgetting that of
Piojo, nor those of the Golden Pipe, and the Abbey; and I embellish the Fables
with Allegories, Metaphors, and Translations, that will delight and instruct.
Another Work, which I soon design for the Press, I call a Supplement to
Polydore Virgil, concerning the Inventions of Things: A Piece, I Will assure you,
Sir, that shows the great Pains and Learning of the Compiler, and perhaps in a
better Style than the old Author. For Example, he has forgot to tell us who was
the First that was troubl^d with a Catarrh in the World; and who was the first
that was Flux'd for the French Disease. Now, Sir, I immediately resolve it, and
confirm my Assertion by the Testimony of at least four and twenty Authentic
Writers; By which Quotations alone, you may guess, Sir, at what Pains I have
been to instruct and benefit the Public.

Sancho having hearkened with great Attention all this while, Pray, Sir, quoth
he to him, so Heaven guide your Right Hand in all you Write, let me ask you,
Who was the first Man that scratched his Head? Scratched his Head, Friend,
answered the Author? Ay, Sir, scratched his Head, quoth Sancho: Sure you that
know all things, can tell me that, or the Devil's in it! What think you of old
Father Adam? Old Father Adam, answered the Scholar! Let me se^ -- Father Adam
had a Head, he had Hair, he had Hands, and he could scratch: But Father Adam
was the first Man; Ergo, Father Adam was the first Man that scratched his Head.
It Is plain you're in the right. O ho, am I so, Sir, quoth Sancho? Another
Question, by your Leave, Sir, Who was the first Tumbler in the World? Truly,
Friend, answered the Student, that is a Point I cannot resolve you without
consulting my Books; but as soon as ever I get home, I will study Night and Day
to find it out. For two fair Words, quoth Sancho, I Will save you that Trouble.
Can you resolve that Doubt, asked the Author? Ay, marry can I, said Sancho: The
first Tumbler in the World was Lucifer, when he was cast out of Heaven he
tumbled into Hell. You are positively in the right, said the Scholar. Where did
you get that, Sancho, said Don Quixote? For I dare swear it is none of your own.
Mum! quoth Sancho. In asking of foolish Questions, and selling of Bargains, let
Sancho alone, quo I; I don't want the help of my Neighbors. Truly, said Don
Quixote, thou have given thy Question a better Epithet than thou art aware of:
For there are some Men who busy their Heads, and lose a World of Time in making
Discoveries, the Knowledge of which is good for nothing in Nature, unless it be
to make the Discoveries Laughed at.

With these, and such diverting Discourses they passed their Journey, till they
came to the Cave the next Day, having lain the Night before in a considerable
Village on the Road. There they brought a hundred Fathom of Cordage to hang Don
Quixote by, and let him down to the lowest part of the Cave; he being resolved
to go to the very Bottom, were it as deep as Hell. The Mouth of it was
inaccessible, being quite stopped up with Weeds, Bushes, Brambles, and wild
Fig Trees, though the Entrance was wide and spacious. Don Quixote was no sooner
come to the Place, but he prepared for his Expedition into that Under-World,
telling the Scholar, that he was resolved to reach the Bottom, though as deep as
the profound Abyss; and all having alighted, his Squire and his Guide
accordingly girt him fast with the Rope. While this was doing; good sweet Sir,
quoth Sancho, consider what you do. Don't venture into such a cursed Black
Hole! Look before ye Leap, Sir, and be not so wilful as to Bury your self
Alive. Don't hang your self like a Bottle or a Bucket, that is let down to be
sous'd in a Well. Alack a day, Sir, it is none of your Business to pry thus into
every Hole, and go down to the Pit of Hell for the nonce! Peace Coward, said
the Knight, and bind me fast, for purely for me such an Enterprise as this is
reserved. Pray Sir, said the Student, when you are in, be very Vigilant in
exploring and observing all the Rarities in the Place. Let nothing 'scape you
Eyes, perhaps you may discover there some things worthy to be inserted in my
Metamorphosis. Let him alone, quoth Sancho, he will go through stich with it. He Will
make a Hog or a Dog of it, I Will warrant you. Don Quixote being well bound, not
over his Armor, but his Doublet, bethought himself of one thing they had
forgot. We did ill, said he, not to provide our selves of a little Bell, that I
should have carried down with me, to Ring for more or less Rope as I may have
occasion for, and inform you of my being Alive. But since there is no Remedy,
Heaven Prosper me. Then Kneeling down, he in a low Voice recommended himself to
the Divine Providence for Assistance and Success in an Adventure so strange,
and in all appearance so Dangerous. Then raising his Voice, O thou Mistress of
my Life and Motions, cried he, most Illustrious and Peerless Dulcinea Del
Toboso, if the Prayers of an adventurous absent Lover may reach the Ears of the
far distant object of his Wishes, by the Power of thy unspeakable Beauty, I
conjure thee to grant me thy Favor and Protection, in this Plunge and
Precipice of my Fortune. I am now going to Ingulph, and cast my self into this
dismal Profundity, that the World may know, nothing can be impossible to him,
who influenced by thy Smiles, attempts under the Banner of thy Beauty, the most
difficult Tasks. This said, he got up again, and approaching the Entrance of
the Cave, he found it stopped up with Brakes and Bushes, so that he must be
obliged to make his Way by Force. Whereupon drawing his Sword, he began to cut
and slash the Weeds that stopped up the Mouth of the Cave, when presently an
infinite number of overgrown Crows and Daws came rushing and fluttering out of
the Cave about his Ears, so thick, and with such an Impetuosity, as
overwhelmed him to the Ground. He was not Superstitious enough to draw any ill
Omen from the Flight of the Birds; besides, 'twas no small Encouragement to
him, that he spied no Batts nor Owls; nor other ill-boding Birds of Night among
them: He therefore rose again with an undaunted Heart, and committed himself to
the black and dreadful Abyss. But Sancho first gave him his Benediction, and
making a Thousand Crosses over him, Heaven be thy Guide, quoth he, and our
Several Places of Devotion.
Lady of the Rock in France, with the Trinity of Gaeta, thou Flower and Cream,
and Scum of all Knight-Errants. Go thy Ways, thou Hacker of the World, Heart of
Steel, and Arms of Brass! And may thou come back Sound, Wind and Limb, out
of this dreadful Hole, which thou art running into, once more to see the warm
Sun, which thou art leaving.

The Scholar too Prayed to the same Effect for the Knight's Happy Return. Don
Quixote then called for more Rope, which they gave him by degrees, till his
Voice was drowned in the windings of the Cave, and their Cordage was run out.
That done, they began to consider whether they should hoist him up again
immediately or no; however, they resolved to stay half an Hour, and then they
began to draw up the Rope, but were strangely surpised to find no Weight upon
it; which made 'em conclude, the poor Gentleman was certainly lost. Sancho
bursting out into Tears, made a heavy Lamentation, and fell a haling up the
Rope as fast as he could, to be thoroughly satisfied. But after they had drawn
up about fourscoure Fathoms, they felt a Weight again, which made 'em take
Heart; and at length they plainly saw Don Quixote. Welcome, cried Sancho to
him, as soon as he came in Sight, Welcome dear Master, I Am glad you're come
again; we were afraid you had been Pawned for the Reckoning. But Sancho had no
Answer to his Compliment; and when they had pulled the Knight quite up, they
found that his Eyes were closed, as if he had been fast asleep. They laid him
on the Ground, and unbound him: Yet he made no sign of Waking, and all their
turning and shaking was little enough to make him come to himself. At last he
began to stretch his Limbs, as if he had wakened out of the most profound
Sleep, and staring wildly about him, Heavens forgive you, Friends, cried he;
for you have raised me now from one of the sweetest Lives, that ever Mortal
led, and most delightful Sights that ever Eyes beheld. Now I perceive how
fleeting are all the Joys of this Transitory Life: They are but an imperfect
Dream, they fade like a Flower, and vanish like a Shadow. Oh ill-fated
Montesinos! Oh Durandart unfortunately Wounded! Oh unhappy Belerma! Oh
deplorable Guadiana! And you the distressed Daughters of Ruydera, whose flowing
Waters show what streams of Tears once trickl'd from your Lovely Eyes! These
Expressions, uttered with great Passion and Concern, surpised the Scholar and
Sancho, and they desired to know his Meaning, and what he had seen in that Hell
upon Earth? Call it not Hell, answered Don Quixote, for it deserves a better
Name, as I shall soon let you know. But first give me something to Eat, for I
am prodigiously hungry. They then spread the Scholar's course Saddle-Cloth for
a Carpet; and Examining their old Cup-board, the Knap-sack, they all three sat
down on the Grass, and Eat heartily together, like Men that were a Meal or two
behind-hand. When they had done, Let no Man stir, said Don Quixote, sit still,
and hear me with Attention.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Wonderful things which the Unparalleled Don Quixote
declared he had seen in the deep Cave of Montesinos, the Greatness and
Impossibility of which makes this Adventure pass for Apocryphal.
IT was now past four in the Afternoon, and the Sun was opportunely hid behind
the Clouds, which, interposing between his Rays, invited Don Quixote without
heat or trouble to relate to his Illustrious Auditors the Wonders he had seen
in Montesino's Cave.

About twelve or fourteen Men's depth, said he, in the profundity of this
Cavern, on the right Hand, there is a Concavity wide enough to contain a large
Wagon, Mules and all. This place is not wholly dark, for through some chinks and
narrow holes, that reach to the distant surface of the Earth, there comes a
glimmering Light. I discovered this Recess, being already weary of hanging by
the Loins, discouraged by the profound Darkness of the Region below me,
destitute of a Guide, and not knowing whither I went: Resolving therefore to
rest my self there a while, I called to you to give me no more Rope, but it
seems you did not hear me. I therefore entered, and coiling up the Cord, sat
upon it very melancholic, and thinking what way I should most conveniently get
down to the Bottom, having no body to bear me up. While thus I sat pensive,
and lost in thought, insensibly without any previous Drowsiness, I found my
self surpised by Sleep; and after that, not knowing how, nor which way I
wakened, I unexpectedly found my self in the finest, the sweetest, and most
delightful Meadow, that ever Nature adorned with her Beauties, or the most
inventive Fancy could ever imagine. Now, that I might be sure this was neither
a Dream nor an Illusion, I rubbed my Eyes, blowed my Nose, and felt several
parts of my Body, and convinced my self that I was really awake, with the use
of all my Senses, and all the Faculties of my Understanding sound and active as
at this Moment.

Presently I discovered a Royal and Sumptuous Palace, of which the Walls and
Battlements seemed all of clear and transparent Crystal. At the same time, the
Spacious Gates opening, there came out toward me a venerable old Man, clad in
a sad-colour'd Robe, so long that it swept the Ground; on his Breast and
Shoulders he had a Green-Sattin-Tippet after the manner of those worn in
Colleges. On his Head he wore a black Milan-Cap, and his broad hoary Beard
reached down below his Middle. He had no kind of Weapon in his Hands, but a
Rosary of Beads about the bigness of Walnuts, and his Credo-Beads appeared as
large as ordinary Ostrich-Eggs. The Awful and Grave Aspect, the Pace, the Port
and goodly Presence of this old Man, each of 'em apart, and much more all
together, struck me with veneration and astonishment. He came up to me, and
without any previous Ceremony, embracing me close: It Is a long time said he,
most Renowned Knight, Don Quixote de la Mancha, that we who dwell in this
enchanted Solitude have hoped to see thee here; that thou may inform the
upper World of the surprising Prodigies concealed from Humane Knowledge in this
Subterranean Hollow, called the Cave of Montesinos: An Enterprise reserved
alone for thy insuperable Heart, and stupendous Resolution. Go with me then,
thou most Illustrious Knight, and behold the Wonders enclosed within this
transparent Castle, of which I am the perpetual Governor and chief Warden,
being the same individual Montesinos, from whom this Cavern took its Name.

No sooner had the reverend old Man let me know who he was, but I entreated him
to tell me, whether it was true or no, that at his Friend Durandarte's Dying
Request he had taken out his Heart with a small Dagger, the very moment he
expired, and carried it to his Mistress Belerma, as the Story was current in
the World? It Is Literally true, answered the Old Gentleman, except that single
Circumstance of the Dagger; for I used neither a small nor a large Dagger on
this occasion, but a well polished Poniard, as sharp as an Awl. I Will be hanged,
quoth Sancho, if it was not one of your Sevil Ponyards, of Raymond de Hoze's
making. That cannot be, said Don Quixote, for that Cutler lived but the other Day,
and the Battle of Roncesvalles, where this accident happened, was fought many
Ages ago: But this is of no importance to the Story. You are in the right, Sir,
said the Student, and pray go on, for I hearken to your Relation with the
greatest satisfacton imaginable. That, Sir, said the Knight, increases my
Pleasure in telling it. But to proceed: The Venerable Montesinos having
conducted me into the Crystal-Palace, led me into a spacious Ground-Room,
exceeding cool, and all of Alabaster. In the middle of it stood a stately
Marble Tomb, that seemed a Masterpiece of Art; upon which lay a Knight
extended all at length, not of Stone, or Brass, as on other Monuments, but pure
Flesh and Bones. He covered the Region of his Heart with his Right Hand, which
seemed to me somewhat hairy, and very full of Sinews, a sign of the great
strength of the Body to which it belonged. Montesinos observing that I viewed
this Spectacle with surprise? Behold, said he, the Flower and Mirror of all
the amorous and valiant Knights of his Age, my Friend Durandarte, who, together
with me and many others of both Sexes, are kept here enchanted by Merlin that
British Magician, who, they say, was the Son of the Devil; though I cannot
believe it, only his knowledge was so great, that he might be said to know more
than the Devil. Here I say we are enchanted, but how and for what cause no Man
can tell, though time I hope will shortly reveal it. But the most wonderful part
of my Fortune is this, I am as certain, as that the Sun now shines, that
Durandarte died in my Arms, and that with these Hands I took out his Heart, by
the same Token that it weighed above two Pounds, a sure mark of his Courage;
for, by the Rules of Natural Philosophy, the most Valiant Men have still the
greatest Hearts. Nevertheless, though this Knight really died, he still complains
and sighs sometimes as if he were alive. Scarce had Montesinos spoke these
Words, but the miserable Durandarte cried out aloud, Oh! Cousin Montesinos, the
last and dying Request of your departing Friend was to take my Heart out of my
Breast with a Poniard or a Dagger, and carry it to Belerma. The Venerable
Montesinos hearing this, fell on his Knees before the afflicted Knight, and
with Tears in his Eyes, Long, long ago, said he, O Durandarte, thou dearest of
my Kinsmen, have I obeyed what you enjoined me on that bitter fatal Day when
you expired. I took out your Heart with all imaginable Care not leaving the
least Particle of it in your Breast, I gently wiped it with a Laced
Handkerchief, and posted away with it to France, as soon as I had committed
your dear Remains to the Bosom of the Earth, having shed Tears enough to have
washed my Hands clear of the Blood they had gathered by plunging in your
Entrails. To confirm this Truth yet farther, at the first place where I stopped
from Roncesvalles, I laid a little Salt upon your Heart, to preserve it from
Putrefaction, and keep it, if not fresh, at least free from any ill Smell, till
I presented it into the Hands of Belerma, who with you and me, and Guadiana
your Squire, as also Ruydera (the Lady's Woman) with her seven Daughters, her
two Nieces, and many others, of your Friends and Acquaintance, is here confined
by the Necromantick Charms of the Magician Merlin; and though it be now above
five hundred Years since we were first conveyed to this Enchanted Castle, we
are all still alive, except Ruydera, her Daughters and Nieces, who by the
favor of Merlin, that pitied their Tears, were turned into so many Lakes,
still extant in the World of the Living, and in the Province of La-Mancha,
distinguished by the Names of the Lakes of Ruydera; seven of 'em belonging to
the Kings of Spain; and the two Nieces to the Knights of the most Holy Order of
St. John. Your Squire Guadiana, lamenting his hard Fate, was in like manner
Metamorphos'd into a River that bears his Name; yet still so sensible of your
Disaster, that when he first arose out of the Bowels of the Earth to flow along
its surface, and saw the Sun in a strange Hemisphere, he plunged again under
Ground, striving to hide his melting sorrows from the World; but the natural
Current of his Waters forcing a Passage up again, he is compelled to appear
where the Sun and Mortals may see him. Those Lakes mixing their Waters in his
Bosom, he swells, and glides along in sullen state to Portugal, often
expressing his deep Melancholy by the muddy and turbid Color of his Streams,
which, as they refuse to please the sight, so likewise deny to indulge mortal
Appetite, by breeding such fair and savoury Fish as may be found in the Golden
Tagus. All this I have often told you, my dearest Durandarte; and since you
return me no Answer, I must conclude you believe me not, or that you do not
hear me; for which (Witness it Heaven) I am extremely grieved. But now I have
other News to tell ye, which, though perhaps it may not assuage your Sorrows, yet
I am sure it will not increase 'em. Open your Eyes, and behold in your Presence
that mighty Knight, of whom Merlin the Sage has foretold so many Wonders: That
Don Quixote de la Mancha, I mean, who has not only restored to the World the
Function of Knight-Errantry, that has lain so long in Oblivion, out advanced it
to greater Fame than it could boast in the Days of yore, the nonage of the
World. It Is by his Power we may expect to see the fatal Charm disolv'd, that
keeps us here confined, for great Performances are properly reserved for great
Personages. And should it not be so; answered the grieving Durandarte with a
faint and languishing Voice, Should it not be so, I say, Oh Cousin! Patience,
and Shuffle the Cards -- Then turning on one side, without speaking a Word
more, he relapsed into his usual silence. After this, I was alarmed with a
piteous howling and crying, which, mixed with lamentable Sighs and Groans,
obliged me to turn about, to see whence it proceeded. Then through the
Crystal-Wall I saw a mournful Procession of most Beautiful Damsels, all in
black, marching in two Ranks, with Turbans on their Heads after the Turkish
Fashion; and last of all came a Majestic Lady, dressed also in Mourning, with
a long White Veil, that reached from her Head down to the Ground. Her Turban
was twice as big as the biggest of the rest: She was somewhat beetle-brow'd,
her Nose was flattish, her Mouth-wide, but her Lips Red; her Teeth, which she
sometimes discovered, seemed to be thin and snaggy, but indeed as White as
blanched Almonds. She held a fine Handkerchief, and within it I could perceive
a Heart of Flesh, so dry and withered that it looked like Mummy. Montesinos
informed me, that the Procession consisted of Durandarte's and Belerma's
Servants, who were enchanted there with their Master and Mistress; but that the
last was Belerma herself, who with her Attendants used four Days in the Week
constantly thus to sing, or rather howl their Dirges over the Heart and Body of
his Cousin; and that though Belerma appeared a little haggard at that juncture,
occasioned by the Grief she bore in her own Heart, for that which she carried
in her Hand, yet had I seen her before her Misfortunes had sunk her Eyes and
tarnish'd her Complexion, worse than the Diseases of her Sex, from which she
was free, I must have owned, that even the celebrated Dulcinea del Toboso, so
famous in La Mancha, and over the whole Universe, could scarce have vy'd with
her in Gracefulness and Beauty. Hold there, good Signior Don Montesinos, said
I. You know that Comparisons are odious, therefore no more comparing, I beseech
you; but go on with your Story. The peerless Dulcinea del Toboso is what she
is, and the Lady Belerma is what she is, and has been; so no more upon that
Subject. I beg your Pardon, answered Montesinos, Signior Don Quixote, I might
have guessed indeed that you were the Lady Dulc nea's Knight, and therefore I
ought to have bit my Tongue off, sooner than to have compared her to any thing
lower than Heaven it self. This satisfaction, which I thought sufficient from
the great Montesinos, stifled the Resentment I else had shown for hearing my
Mistress compared to Belerma. Nay, marry, quoth Sancho, I wonder you did not
catch the old Doting Huncks by the Weasond, and mawl, and thresh him thick and
threefold. How could you leave one Hair upon his Chin! No, no, Sancho answered
Don Quixote, there is always a Respect due to our Seniors, though they be no
Knights; but most when they are such, and under the Oppression of Enchantment.
However, I am satisfied that in what Discourse passed between us, I took care
not to have any thing that looked like an Affront six'd upon me. But Sir, asked
the Scholar, how could you see and hear so many strange things in so little
Time? I cannot conceive how you could do it. How long, said Don Quixote, do you
reckon that I have been in the Cave? A little above an Hour, answered Sancho.
That Is impossible, said Don Quixote; for I saw Morning and Evening, and Evening
and Morning three times since; so that I could not be absent less than three
Days from this upper World. Ay, ay, quoth Sancho, my Master's in the Right; for
these Enchantments, that have the greatest Hand in all his Concerns, may make
that seem three Days and three Nights to him, which is but an Hour to other
People. It must be so, said Don Quixote. I hope, Sir, said the Scholar, you
have eaten something in all that time. Not one morsel, replied Don Quixote;
neither have I had the least Desire to Eat, or so much as thought of it all the
while. Do they that are Enchanted ever Eat? asked the Scholar. They never do,
answered Don Quixote, and consequ^ ly they are never troubled with exonerating
the Dregs of Food; tho it is not unlikely that their Nails, their Beards and
Hair still grow. Do they never sleep neither, said Sancho? Never, said Don
Quixote, at least they never closed their Eyes while I was among 'em, nor I
neither. This makes good the saying, quoth Sancho, Tell me thy Company, and
I Will tell thee what thou art. Troth! you have all been enchanted together. No
wonder if you neither eat nor slept, since you were in the Land of those that
always watch and fast. But Sir, would you have me speak as I think; and pray
don't take it in ill part, for if I believe one Word of all you have said. --
What do you mean, Friend, said the Student? Do you think the Noble Don Quixote
would be guilty of a Lie; and if he had a mind to stretch a little, could he,
think you, have had leisure to frame such a number of Stories in so short a
time? I don't think that my Master would lie neither, said Sancho. What do you
think then Sir, said Don Quixote? Why truly, Sir, quoth Sancho, I do believe
that this same cunning Man' this Merlin, that bewitched, or Enchanted, as you
call it, all that Rabble of People you talk of, may have crammed and enchanted
some way or other all that you have told us, and have yet to tell us, into your
Noddle. It Is not impossible but such a thing may happen, said Don Quixote, though
I Am convinced 'twas otherwise with me; for I am positive that I saw with these
Eyes, and felt with these Hands all I have mentioned. But what will you think
when I tell you, among many wonderful things, that I saw three Country-Wenches
leaping and skipping about those pleasant Fields like so many Wild Goats, and
at first sight knew one of 'em to be the Peerless Dulcinea, and the other two
the very same we spoke to not far from Toboso. I asked Montesinos if he knew
'em? He answered in the Negative; but imagined them some Enchanted Ladies who
were newly come, and that the Appearance of strange Faces was no rarity among
'em, for many of passed Ages and the present were enchanted there, under
several Disguises; and that, among the rest, he knew Queen Guinever and her
Woman Quintaniona, that officiated as Sir Lancelot's Cup Bearer, as he came
from Britain. Sancho, hearing his Master talk at that Rate, had like to have
forgot himself, and burst out a laughing; for he well knew that Dulcinea's
Enchantment was a Lie, and that he himself was the chief Magician, and raiser
of the Story; and thence concluding his Master stark-mad, In an ill hour, quoth
he, dear Master of mine, and in a woeful Day went your Worship down to the
other World, and in a worse hour met you with that plaguey Montesinos, that has
sent you back in this rueful Pickle. You went hence in your right Senses, could
talk prettily enough now and then, had your handsome Proverbs and Wise Sayings
every Foot, and would give wholesome Counsel to all that would take it; but now,
bless me! you talk as if you had left your Brains in the Devil's Cellar. I know
thee, Sancho, said Don Quixote, and therefore I regard thy Words as little as I
ought. And I yours replied Sancho. Nay, you may cripple, lame, or kill me if
you please, either for what I Have said, or mean to say: I must speak my Mind
though I die for it. But before your Blood's up, pray, Sir, tell me, how did you
know it was your Mistress? Did you speak to her? What did she say to you? And
what did you say to her? I knew her again, said Don Quixote, by the same
Clothes she wore when thou shewd'st her to me. I spoke to her, but she made no
Answer, but suddenly turned away, and fled from me like a Whirlwind. I intended
to have followed her, had not Montesinos told me 'twou'd be to no purpose;
warning me besides, that 'twas high time to return to the upper Air. And
changing the Discourse, he told me that I should hereafter be made acquainted
with the means of disinchanting them all. But while Montesinos and I were thus
talking together, a very odd Accident, the Thoughts of which trouble me still,
broke off our Conversation. For as we were in the height of our Discourse, who
should come to me but one of the unfortunate Dulcinea's Companions, and before
I was aware, with a faint and doleful Voice, Sir, said she, my Lady Dulcinea
del Toboso gives her Service to you, and desires to know how you do, and being
a little short of Money at present, she desires you of all love and kindness to
lend her six Reals upon this New Fustian-Petticoat, or more or less as you can
spare it, Sir, and she will take care to redeem it very honestly in a little
time. The Message surpised me strangely, and therefore turning to Montesinos,
Is it possible, Sir, said I, that Persons of Quality, when enchanted, are in
want? Oh! very possible, Sir, said he: Poverty ranges every where, and spares
neither Quality enchanted nor uninchanted; and therefore, since the Lady
Dulcinea desires you to lend her these six Reals, and the Pawn is a good Pawn,
let her have the Money; for sure it is very low with her at this time. I scorn
to take Pawns, said I, but my misfortune is, that I cannot answer the full
Request; for I have but four Reals about me, and that was the Money thou gave
me the the other Day, Sancho, to distribute among the Poor. However, I gave her
all I had, and desired her to tell her Mistress, I was very sorry for her
wants; and that if I had all the Treasures which Croesus possessed, they should
be at her Service; and withal, that I died every hour for want of her reviving
Company; and made it my humble and earnest Request, that she would vouchsafe to
see and converse with her Captive Servant, and weather-beaten Knight. Tell her,
continued I, when she least expects it, she will come to hear how I have made
an Oath, as the Marquess of Mantua did when he found his Nephew Baldwin ready
to expire on the Mountain, never to eat upon a Table-cloath, and several other
particulars which he swore to observe, till he had revenged his Death. So in
the like solemn manner will I Swear, never to desist from traversing the
habitable Globe, and ranging through all the seven Parts of the World, more
indefatigably than ever was done by Prince Pedro of Portugal, till I have freed
her from her Enchantment. All this and more you owe my Mistress said the
Damsel; and then, having got the four Reals, instead of dropping me a Curtsie,
she cut me a Caper in the Air two yards high. Now Heaven defend us, cried
Sancho, who could ever have believed that these Devilish Inchanters and
Enchantments should have so much power in this World, as to bewitch my Master
at that rate, and craze his sound Understanding in that manner. Alas! Sir, for
Heaven's sake take care of your self. What will the World say of you? Rouse up
your dozing Senses, and don't dote upon those Whimsies, that have so wickedly
cracked that rare Headpiece of yours. Well, said Don Quixote, I cannot be
angry at thy ignorant Tittle-tattle, because it proceeds from thy Love toward
me. Thou think, poor Fellow, that whatever is beyond the Sphere of thy
Narrow Comprehension must be impossible: But, as I have already said, there
will come a time, when I shall give thee an account of some Things I have seen
below, that will convince thee of the Reality of those I told thee now, the
Truth of which admits of no Dispute.

CHAP. XXIV. Which is very Foolish and Impertinent, though very necessary for the
better understanding of this grand History.
THE Translator of this great History, declares, that at the beginning of the
Chapter, which Treats of the Adventure of Montesinos's Cave, he found a
Marginal Annotation, written with the Arabian Author's own Hand, in these Words.

I cannot be persuaded, nor believe, that all the wonderful Accidents said to
have happened to the Valorous Don Quixote in the Cave, so punctually befell him
as he relates 'em: For, the Course of his Adventures hitherto has been very
Natural, and bore the Face of Probability; but in this there appears no
Coherence with Reason, and nothing but monstrous Incongruities. But on the
other Hand, if we consider the Honor, Worth, and Integrity of the Noble Don
Quixote, we have not the least reason to suspect he would be guilty of a Lie;
but rather that he would sooner have been Transfixed with Arrows. Besides, he
has been so particular in his Relation of that Adventure, and given so many
Circumstances, that I dare not declare it absolutely Apocryphal; especially
when I consider that he had not time enough to invent such a Cluster of Fables.
I therefore insert it among the rest, without offering to Determine whether it
is true or false; leaving it to the Discretion of the Judicious Reader. Though I
must acquaint him by the way, that Don Quixote upon his Deathbed utterly
disowned this Adventure, as a perfect Fable, which he said he had invented
purely to please his Humor, being suitable to such as he had formerly read in
Romances: And so much by way of Digression.

The Scholar thought Sancho the most saucy Servant, and his Master the calmest
Madman that ever he saw; though he attributed the Patience of the latter to a
certain good Humor and easiness of Temper infused into him by the sight ^f his
Mistress Dulcinea, even under Enchantment. Otherwise he would have though this
not checking Sancho a greater sign of Madness than his Discourse. Noble Don
Quixote, said he, for four principal Reasons, I am extremely pleased with
having taken this Journey with you. First, it has procured me the Honor of
your Acquaintance, which I shall always esteem a singular Happiness. In the
second Place, Sir, the Secrets of Montesinos's Cave, and the Transformations of
Guadiana, and Ruydera's Lakes, have been revealed to me, which may look very
great in my Spanish Ovid. My third Advantage is, to have discovered the
Antiquity of Card-playing, which I find to have been a Pastime in use even in
the Emperor Charles the Great's time, as may be Collected from the Words of
Durandarte, who, after a long Speech of Montesinos's, said as he waked,
Patience and shuffle the Cards; which vulgar Expression he could never have
learned in his Enchantment: It follows therefore that he must have heard it
when he lived in France, which was in the Reign of that Emperor; which
Observation is nicked, I think, very opportunely for my Supplement to Polydore
Virgil, who, as I remember, has not touched upon Card-playing: I will insert it
into my Work, I Will assure you, Sir, as a matter of great Importance, having the
Testimony of so Authentic and Ancient an Author as Sir Durandarte. The fourth
part of my good Fortune, is to know the certain and true source of the River
Guadiana, which has hitherto disappointed all Humane Enquiries. There is a
great deal of Reason in what you say, answered Don Quixote: But, under favor,
Sir, pray tell me, should you happen to get a License to Publish your Books,
which I somewhat doubt, whom will you pitch upon for your Patrons? Oh, Sir,
answered the Author, there are Lords and Grandees enough in Spain, sure, that I
may Dedicate to. Truly, not many, said Don Quixote; there are indeed, several
whose Merits deserve the Praise of a Dedication, but very few whose Purses will
reward the Pains and Civility of the Author. I must confess, I know a Prince
whose Generosity may make amends for what is wanting in the rest; and that to
such a Degree, that should I make bold to come to Particulars, and speak of his
great Merits, 'twould be enough to stir up a noble Emulation in above four
generous Breasts. But more of this some other time; it is late now, and
therefore convenient to think of a Lodging. Hard by us here, Sir, said the
Author, is an Hermitage, the Retirement of a Devout Person, who, as they say,
was once a Soldier, and is looked upon as a good Christian, and so charitable,
that he has built there a little House at his own expense, purely for the
Entertainment of Strangers. But does he keep Hens there trow! asked Sancho? Few
Hermits in this Age want 'em, said Don Quixote; for their way of Living now
falls short of the Strictness and Austerity of those in the Deserts of Egypt,
who went Clad only with Palm-leaves, and fed on the Roots of the Earth. Now,
because I speak well of those of old, I would not have you think I reflect on
the others. No, I only mean that their Penances are not so severe as in former
Days; yet this does not hinder but that the Hermits of the present Age may be
good Men. I look upon 'em to be such; at least, their Dissimulation secures 'em
from Scandal; and the Hypocrite that puts on the Form of Holiness, does
certainly less harm than the barefaced Sinner. As they went on in their
Discourse, they saw a Man following them a great pace on Foot, and switching up
a Mule laden with Lances and Halbards. He presently overtook 'em, gave 'em the
time of the Day, and passed by. Stay, honest Fellow, cried Don Quixote, seeing
him go so fast, make no more haste than is consistent with good speed. I cannot
stay, Sir, said the Man, for these Weapons that you see, must be used to morrow
Morning; so, Sir, I am in haste; good b'y. I shall Lodge to Night at the Inn
beyond the Hermitage; if you chance to go that way, there you may find me, and
I Will tell you strange News. So fare ye well. Then whipping his Mule, away he
moved forwards, so fast that Don Quixote had not Leisure to ask him any more
Questions. The Knight, who had always an Itching Ear after Novelties, to
satisfy his Curiosity immediately proposed their holding straight on to the
Inn, without stopping at the Hermitage, where the Scholar designed to have
stayed all Night. Well, they all consented, and made the best of their Way;
however, when they came near the Hermitage, the Scholar desired Don Quixote to
call with him for a Moment, and drink a Glass of Wine at the Door. Sancho no
sooner heard this proposed, but he turned Dapple that way, and rode thither
before; but to his great Grief, the hospitable Hermit was abroad, and no body
at home but the Hermit's Companion, who being asked whether he had any strong
Liquor within, made answer, that he could not come at any, but as for small
Water he might have his Belly-full. Body of me! quoth Sancho, were mine a
Water-Thirst, or had I liking to your cold Comfort, there are Wells enough upon
the Road, where I might have swill'd my Skin full: Oh the good Cheer at Don
Diego's House, and the savory Scum at Camacho's Wedding, when shall I find your
Fellow! They now spurred on toward the Inn, and soon overtook on the Road a
young Fellow beating it on the Hoof pretty leisurely. He carried his Sword over
his Shoulder, with a Bundle of Clothes hanging upon it, which, to all outward
Appearance consisted of a pair of Breeches, a Cloak, and a Shirt or two. He had
on a tattered Velvet-Jerkin, with a ragged Sattin-Lining; his Shirt hung out,
his Stockings were of Silk, and his Shoes square at the Toes, after the
Court-Fashion. He seemed about Eighteen or Nineteen Years of Age, a good
pleasant-look'd Lad, and of a lively and active Disposition. To pass the
Fatigue of his Journey the best he could, he Sung all the way, and as they came
near him, was got to the end of a Ballad, which the Scholar got by Heart.

A Plague on ill Luck! Now my Ready's all gone;
To the Wars poor Pilgarlick must trudge:
Though had I but Money, to Rake as I Have done,
The Devil a Foot would I budge.
So, young Gentleman, said Don Quixote to him, methinks you go very light and
airy. Whither are you bound, I pray you, if a Man may be so bold? I Am going to
the Wars, Sir, answe'r'd the Youth; and for my Traveling thus, Heat and
Poverty will excuse it. I admit the Heat, replied Don Quixote, but why Poverty,
I beseech you? Because I have no Clothes to put on, replied the Lad, but what I
carry in this Bundle; and if I should wear 'em out upon the Road, I should have
nothing to make a handsome Figure with in any Town; for I have no Money to buy
new ones, till I overtake a Regiment of Foot that lies about some twelve
Leagues off, where I design to List my self, and then I shall not want a
Convenience to ride with the Baggage till we come to Carthagena, where, I here
they are to Embark; for I had rather serve the King abroad, than any beggarly
Courtier at home. But pray, said the Scholar, have not you laid up something
while you were there? Had I served any of your Grandees or great Persons, said
the young Man, I might have done well enough, and have had a Commission by this
time; for their Foot-boys are presently advanced to Captains and Lieutenants,
or some other good Post: But a Plague on it, Sir, 'twas always my ill Fortune to
serve pitiful Upstarts and Younger Brothers, and my Allowance was commonly so
ill paid, and so small, that the better half was scarce enough to wash my
Linen; how then should a poor Devil of a Page, who would make his Fortune,
come to any good in such a miserable Service! But, said Don Quixote, how comes
it about that in all this time you could not get your self a whole Livery?
Alack-a-day, Sir, answered the Lad, I had a couple; but my Masters dealt with
me as they do with Novices in Monasteries, if they go off before they Profess,
the fresh Habit is taken from them, and they return them their old Clothes. For
you must know, that such as I served, only buy Liveries for a little
Ostentation; so when they have made their Appearance at Court, they sneak down
into the Country, and then the poor Servants are stripped, and must even betake
themselves to their Rags again. A sordid Trick, said Don Quixote, or, as the
Italians call it, a notorious Espilocheria. Well, you need not repine at
leaving the Court, since you do it with so good a Design; for there is nothing
in the World more commendable than to serve God in the first Place, and the
King in the next, especially in the Profession of Arms, which if it does not
procure a Man so much Riches as Learning, may at least entitle him to more
Honor. It Is true, that more Families have been advanced by the Gown; but yet
your Gentlemen of the Sword, whatever the Reason of it is, have always I know
not what Advantage above the Men of Learning, and something of Glory and
Splendor attends 'em, that makes them outshine the rest of Mankind. But take
my Advice along with you, Child; if you intend to raise your self by a Military
Employment, I would not have you be uneasy with the Thoughts of what
Misfortunes may befall you; the worst can be but to Die, and if it be a good
Honorable Death, your Fortune's made; and you're certainly happy. Julius
Caesar, that Valiant Roman Emperor, being asked what kind of Death was best?
That which is sudden and unexpected, said he; and though his Answer had a relish
of Paganism, yet with respect to Humane Infirmities, 'twas very Judicious: for,
suppose you should be cut off at the very first Engagement by a Canon-Ball, or
the springing of a Mine; what imports it? It Is all but Dying, and there is an
end of the Business. As Terence says, a Soldier makes a better Figure Dead in
the Field of Battle, than Alive and safe in Flight. The more likely he is to
rise in Fame and Preferment, the better Discipline he keeps; the better he
Obeys, the better he will know how to Command. And pray observe, my Friend,
that it is more Honorable for a Soldier to smell of Gunpowder than of Musk and
Amber; or if Old Age overtakes you in this noble Employment, though all over
Scars, though Maimed and Lame, you will still have Honor to support you, and
secure you from the Contempt of Poverty; nay, from Poverty it self; for there
is Care taken, that Veteran and disabled Soldiers may not want: Neither are
they to be used as some Men do their Negro-Slaves, who, when they are Old, and
past Service, are turned Naked out of Doors, under pretense of Freedom, to be
made greater Slaves in Cold and Hunger, a Slavery from which nothing but Death
can set the Wretches free. But I Will say no more to you on this Subject at this
time. Get up behind me, and I Will carry you to the Inn, where you shall Sup with
me, and to morrow Morning make the best of your way; and may Heaven Prosper
your good Designs.

The Page excused himself from riding behind the Knight, but accepted of his
Invitation to Supper very willingly. Sancho, who had all the while given Ear to
his Master's Discourse, is said to have been more than usually surpised,
hearing him now talk so wisely. Now Blessing on thee, Master of mine, thought
he to himself; how comes it about that a Man who says so many good things,
should tell such damned Cracks, and Whimsies, as he would have us believe of
Montesinos's Cave. Well, Heaven knows best, and the Proof of the Pudding's in
the Eating. By this time, it began to grow Dark, and they arrived at the Inn,
where Don Quixote, alighting, asked presently for the Man with the Lances and
Halbards. The Innkeeper answered, that he was rubbing down his Mule in the
Stable. Sancho was very well pleased to be at his Journey's End, and the more
that his Master took the House for a real Inn, and not for a Castle, as he used
to do. He and the Scholar then set up the Asses, giving Rozinante the best
Manger and Standing in the Stable.

CHAP. XXV. Where you will find the Grounds of the Braying Adventure, that of
the Puppet-Player, and the memorable Divining of the Fortune-telling Ape.
DON Quixote was on Thorns to know the strange Story that the Fellow upon the
Road engaged to tell him; so that going into the Stable he minded him of his
Promise, and pressed him to relate the whole matter to him that Moment. My
Story will take up some time, quoth the Man, and is not to be told standing;
have a little Patience, Master of mine, let me make an end of serving my Mule,
then I Will serve your Worship, and tell you such things as will make you stare.
Don't let that hinder, replied Don Quixote, for I Will help you my self; and so
saying, he lent him a helping Hand, cleansing the Manger, and sifting the
Barley, which humble compliance obliged the Fellow to tell his Tale the more
willingly: So that seating himself upon a Bench with Don Quixote, the Scholar,
the Page, Sancho, and the Innkeeper about him for his full Auditory, he began
in this manner.

It happened on a time, that in a Borough about some four Leagues and a half
from this place, one of the Regidor.
Aldermen lost his Ass: They say 'twas by the Roguery of a waggish Jade that
was his Maid; but that is neither here nor there, the Ass was lost and gone,
that is certain; and what is more, it could not be found neither high nor low.
This same Ass had been missing about a fortnight, Some say more, some less,
when another Alderman of the same Town meeting this same losing Alderman in the
Marketplace, Brother, quoth he, pay me well, and I Will tell you news of your
Ass. Troth! quoth the other, that I will; but then let me know where the poor
Beast is? Why, answered the other, this Morning what should I meet upon the
Mountains yonder but he, without either Pack-Saddle or Furniture, and so lean
that it grieved my Heart to see him; but yet so wild and skittish, that when I
would have driven him home before me, he ran away as the Devil were in him, and
got into the thickest of the Wood. Now if you please, we'll both go together
and look for him; I Will but step home first and put up this Ass, then I Will come
back to you, and we'll about it out of hand. Truly, Brother, said the other,
I Am mightily beholden to you, and will do as much for you another time. The
Story happened neither more nor less, but such as I tell you, for so all that
know it relate it word for word. In short, the two Aldermen hand in hand, a
foot, trudged up the Hills, and hunted up and down; but after many a weary
Step, no Ass was to be found. Upon which, quoth the Alderman that had seen him
to the other, hark you me, Brother, I have a Device in my Noddle to find out this
same Ass of yours, though he were under Ground, as you shall hear. You must
know I can Bray to Admiration, and if you can but Bray never so little, the
Job's done. Never so little, cried the other, Body of me! I will not vail my Bonanet
at Braying to ever an Ass or Alderman in the Land. Well, we shall try that,
quoth the other; for my Contrivance is that you shall go on one side of the
Hill, and I on the other; sometimes you shall Bray, and sometimes I; so that,
if your Ass be but thereabouts, my Life for yours, he will be sure to answer his
Kind, and Bray again. Gra'mercy, Brother, quoth the other! A rare Device,
i'fack! let you alone for Plotting. At the same time they parted according to
agreement, and when they were far enough off, they both fell a Braying so
perfectly well, that they cheated one another; and meeting, each in hopes to
find the Ass, is it possible, Brother, said the owner of the Ass, that it was
not my Ass that Brayed? No, marry, that it was n't, 'twas I, answered the other
Alderman. Well, Brother, cried the Owner, then there is no manner of difference
between you and an Ass, as to matter of Braying, I never heard any thing so
natural in my Life. Oh fie! Sir, quoth the other, I am nothing to you: You
shall lay two to one against the best Brayer in the Kingdom, and I Will go your
halves. Your Voice is lofty, and of a great Compass; you keep excellent Time,
and hold out a Note rarely, and your Cadence is full and Ravishing. In short,
Sir, I knock under the Table, and yield you the Bays: Well then, Brother,
answered the Owner, I shall always have the better Opinion of my self for this
one good Quality; for though I knew I Brayed pretty well, I never thought my
self so great a Master before: Well, quoth the other, thus you see what rare
Parts may be lost for want of being known, and a Man never knows his own
Strength, till he puts it to a Trial. Right, Brother, quoth the Owner, for I
should never have found out this wonderful Gift of mine, had it not been for
this business in hand, and may we speed in it I pray? After these Compliments
they parted again, and went Braying, this a'one side of the Hill, and that on
the other. But all to no purpose, for they still deceived one another with their
Braying, and running to the noise, met one another as before.

At last they agreed to Bray twice together, that by that token they might be
sure 'twas not the Ass, but they, that Brayed. But all in vain, they almost
Brayed their Hearts out, but no answer from the Ass. And indeed how could it,
poor Creature? when they found him at last in the Wood half eaten by the
Wolves. Alack-a day poor Grizzle, cried the Owner, I don't wonder now he took
so little notice of his loving Master! Had he been alive, as sure as he was an
Ass he would have Brayed again. But let him go, this Comfort I have at least,
Brother; though I Have lost him, I Have found out that rare Talent of yours, that
has hugely solac'd me under this Affliction. The Glass is in a good Hand, Mr.
Alderman, quoth the other, and if the Abbot sings well, the young Monk is not
much behind him.

With this, these same Aldermen, very much down in the Mouth, and very hoarse,
went home and told all their Neighbors the whole Story word for word; one
praising t'other's Skill in Braying, and the other returning the Compliment. In
short, one got it by the end, and the other got it by the end; the Boys got it,
and all the idle Fellows got it, and there was such a Brawling, and such a
Braying in our Town, that one would have thought Hell broke loose among us. But
to let you see now how the Devil never lies dead in a Ditch, but catches at
every foolish thing to set People by the Ears; our Neighboring Towns had it
up, and when they saw any of our Townsfolks, they fell a Braying, hitting us in
the Teeth with the Braying of our Aldermen. This made ill Blood between us; for
we took it in mighty Dudgeon, as well we might, and came to Words upon it, and
from Words to Blows; for the People of our Town are as well known by this, as
the Beggar knows his Dish, and are apt to be jeered wheresoever they go; and
then to it they go ding dong, hand over head, in spite of Law or Gospel. And
they have carried the Jest so far, that I believe to morrow or next day, the Men
of our Town, to wit, the Brayers, will be in the Field against those of another
Town about two Leagues off, that are always plaguing us. Now, that we should be
well provided, I have brought these Lances and Halbards that ye saw me carry.
So this is my Story, Gentlefolks, and if it ben't a strange one I Am woundily
mistaken.

Here the honest Man ended; when presently enters a Fellow dressed in Trousses
and Doublet all of Shamoy-Leather, and calling out, as if he were somebody.
Landlord, cried he, have you any Lodgings? For here comes the Fortune-telling
Ape, and the Puppet-shew of Melisandra's Deliverance. Body of me! cried the
Inkeeper, who is here? Master Peter, we shall have a merry Nigh't, Faith! Honest
Master Peter, you're welcome with all my Heart! But where is the Ape, and the
Show, that I cannot see 'em. They Will be here presently, said Peter, I only came
before to see if you had any Lodgings. Lodging, Man, said the Innkeeper,
Zookers! I would turn out the Duke of Alva himself, rather than Master Peter
should want room. Come, come, bring in your things, for here are Guests in the
House to Night that will be good Customers to you, I warrant you. That Is a good
hearing, said Peter; and to encourage 'em I Will lower my Prizes, and if I can
but get my Charges to night, I Will look for no more; so I will hasten forward
the Cart. This said, he ran out of the Door again.

I had forgot to tell you, that this same Master Peter wore over his left Eye
and half his Cheeck a Patch of Green Taffata, by which 'twas to be supposed
that something ailed that side of his Face. Don Quixote inquired who this
Master Peter was, and what his Ape and his Show? Why Sir, answered the
Innkeeper, he has strolled about the Country here this great while with a
curious Puppet-show, which represents the Play of Melisandra and Don Gayferos,
one of the best Shows that has been Acted time out of mind in this Kingdom.
Then he has an Ape! Bless us, Sir, it is such an Ape! But I Will say no more; you
shall see, Sir: 'Twill tell you every thing you ever did in your Life. The like
was never seen before. Ask him a Question, 'twill listen to you and then, whip,
up it leaps on its Master's Shoulder, and whispers first in his Ear what it
knows, and then Master Peter tells you. He tells you what is to come, as well as
what is passed; it is true, he does not always hit so pat as to what is to come;
but after all, he is seldom in the wrong; which makes us apt to think, the Devil
helps him at a dead lift. Two Reals is the price for every Question he answers,
or his Master for him, which is all one, you know; and that will mount to Money
at the Year's end, so that it is thought the Rogue is well to pass; and indeed
much good may't do him, for he is a notable Fellow, and a boon Companion, and
leads the merriest life in the World, talks for six Men, and drinks for a
dozen, and all this he gets by his Tongue, his Ape, and his Show.

By this time, Master Peter came back with his Puppet-Show and his Ape in a
Cart. The Ape was pretty lusty, without any Tail, and his Buttocks bare like a
Felt. Yet he was hot very ugly neither. Don Quixote no sooner saw him, but
coming up to him, Mr. Fortune Tellers, said he, will you be pleased to tell us
what Fish we catch, and what will become of us, and here is your Fee? saying
this, he ordered Sancho to deliver Mr. Peter two Reals. Sir, answered Peter,
this Animal gives no Account of Things to come; he knows something indeed of
matters past, and a little of the present Odds bobs! quoth Sancho, I would not
give a brass Jack to know what is past; for who knows that better than my self?
I Am not so Foolish as to pay for what I know already: But since you say he has
such a knack at guessing the present, let good man Ape tell me what my Wife
Teresa is doing, and what she is about, and here is my two Reals. I Will have
nothing of you beforehand said Master Peter; so clapping himself on his left
Shoulder, up skipp'd the Ape thither at one frisk, and laying his Mouth to his
Ear grated his Teeth, and having made Apish Grimaces and a chattering noise for
a minute or two, with another skip down he leaped on the Ground. Immediately
upon this, Master Peter ran to Don Quixote, and fell on his Knees, and
embracing his Legs, Oh glorious Restorer of Knight-Errantry, cried he, I
embrace these Legs, as I would the Pillars of Hercules. Who can sufficiently
extol the great Don Quixote de la Mancha, the reviver of drooping Hearts, the
Prop and Stay of the Falling, the Raiser of the Fallen, and the Staff of
Comfort to the Weak and Afflicted! At these Words Don Quixote stood amazed,
Sancho, quaked, the Page wondered, the Brayer blessed himself, the Innkeeper
star'd, and the Scholar was in a brown Study, all astonished at Master Peter's
Speech; who then turning to Sancho, And thou, honest Sancho Panca, said he, the
best Squire to the best Knight in the World, bless thy kind Stars; for thy good
Spouse Teresa is a good House-wife, and is at this instant dressing a pound of
Flax; by the same token, she has standing by her, on her left hand, a large
broken-mouth Jug, which holds a pretty scantling of Wine, to cheer up her
Spirits.

By yea and nay, quoth Sancho, that is likely enough, for she is a true Soul, and
a jolly Soul, and were it not for a Spice of Jealousy that she has now and
then, I would not change her for the Giantess Andondona herself, who as my
Master says, was as clever a piece of Woman's-Flesh as ever went upon two Legs.
Well, much good may't do thee, honest Teresa; you are resolved to provide for
one, I find, though your Heirs starve for it. Well! said Don Quixote, great is
the Knowledge procured by Reading, Travel and Experience! What on Earth but the
Testimony of my own Eyes could have persuaded me that Apes had the Gift of
Divination! I am indeed the same Don Quixote de la Mancha mentioned by this
ingenious Animal! though I must confess somewhat undeserving of so great a
Character as it has pleased him to bestow on me: But nevertheless I am not
sorry to have Charity and Compassion bear so great a Part in my Commendation,
since my Nature has always disposed me to do good to all Men, and hurt to none.

Now had I but Money, said the Page, I would know of Mr. Ape what Luck I shall
have in the Wars. I have told you already, (said Master Peter, who was got up
from before Don Quixote) that this Ape does not meddle with what is to come,
but if he could, it should cost you nothing, for Don Quixote's sake, whom to
oblige I would Sacrifice all the Interest I have in the World; and as a Mark of
it, Gentlemen, I freely set up my Show, and give all the Company in the House
some Diversion gratis. The Innkeeper hearing this, was overjoyed, and ordered
Master Peter a convenient Room to set up his Motion, and he immediately went
about it.

In the mean time, Don Quixote, who could not bring himself to believe that an
Ape could do all this, taking Sancho to a Corner of the Stable, Look ye,
Sancho, said he, I have been weighing and considering the wonderful Gifts of
this Ape, and find, in short, Master Peter must have made a secret compact with
the Devil. Nay, quoth Sancho, (misunderstanding the word Compact) If the Devil
and he have packed any thing together in hugger-mugger, it is a pack of Roguery
to be sure, and they are a pack of Knaves for their pains, and let 'em even
pack together say I. Thou do not apprehend me, said Don Quixote, I mean, the
Devil and he must have made an Agreement together, that Satan should infuse
this knowledge into the Ape, to purchase the owner an Estate; and in return,
the last has certainly engaged his Soul to this destructive Seducer of Mankind.
For the Ape's Knowledge is exactly of the same proportion with the Devil's,
which only extends to the Discovery of things past and present, having no
Insight into Futurity, but by such probable Conjectures and Conclusions as may
be deduced from the former working of antecedent Causes; true Prescience and
Prediction being the Sacred Prerogative of God, to whose all-seeing Eyes, all
Ages, past, present, and to come, without the distinction of Succession and
Termination, are always present. From this, I say, it is apparent this Ape is
but the Organ through which the Devil delivers his Answers to those that ask it
Questions; and this same Rogue should be put into the Inquisition, and have the
Truth pressed out of his Bones. For sure neither the Master nor his Ape can lay
any pretense to Judicial Astrology, nor is the Ape so conversant in the
Mathematics, I suppose, as to erect a Scheme. Though I must confess that
Creatures of less parts, as foolish-illiterate Women, Footmen and Cobblers,
pretend now adays to draw Certainties from the Stars, as easily and readily as
they shuffle a Pack of Cards, to the Disgrace of the Sublime Science, which
they have the Impudence to Profess I knew a Lady that asked one of these
Figure-casters, if a little foisting Bitch she had should have Puppies, and how
many, and of what Color? My Conjurer, after he had scrawl'd out his Scheme,
very judiciously pronounced, that the pretty Creature should have three
delicate Puppies, one Green, one Red, and another Mix'd-colour'd; provided she
should take Dog between eleven and twelve at Night or Noon, either on a Monday
or a Saturday; and the success happened as exactly as could be expected from
his Art; for the Bitch some Days after, died very fairly of a Surfeit, and
Master Figure-slinger was reputed a special Conjurer all the Town over, as most
of these Fellows are. For all that, said Sancho, I would have you ask Master
Peter's Ape, whether the Passages you told us concerning Montesinos's Cave be
true or no; for saving the respect I owe your Worship, I take them to be no
better than Fibbs, and idle Stories or Dreams at least. You may think what you
will, answered Don Quixote, however I Will do as you would have me, though I
confess my Conscience somewhat scruples to do such a thing. While they were
thus engaged in Discourse, Master Peter came and told Don Quixote, the Show was
ready to begin, and desired him to come and see it, for he was sure his Worship
would like it. The Knight told him he had a Question to put to his Ape first,
and desired he might tell him, whether certain things that happened to him in
Montesinos's Cave were Dreams or Realities, for he doubted they had something
of both in them. Master Peter fetched his Ape immediately, and placing him just
before the Knight and his Squire; look you, says he, Mr. Ape, this worthy
Knight would have you tell him whether some things which happened to him in
Montesinos's Cave were true or no? Then upon the usual Signal, the Ape jumping
upon Master Peter's Shoulder, chatter'd his answer into his Ear, which the
Interpreter delivered thus to the Enquirer. The Ape, Sir, Says, that part of
those things are false, and part of them true, which is all he can resolve ye,
as to this Question; and now his Virtue has left him, and will not return till
Friday next. If you would know any more, you must stay till then, and he will
answer as many Questions as you please. Law you there now, quoth Sancho, did
not I tell you, that all you told us of Montesinos's Cave would not hold Water?
That the Event will determine, replied the Knight, which we must leave to
process of Time to produce; for it brings every thing to light, though buried
in the Bowels of the Earth. No more of this at present; let us now see the
Puppet-show; I fancy we shall find something in it worth seeing. Something!
said Master Peter, Sir you shall see a thousand things worth your Sight. I tell
you, Sir, I defy the World to show such another. I say no more. Operibus
credit and non verbis. But now let us begin, for it grows late, and we have
much to do say and show. Don Quixote and Sancho complied, and went into the
Room where the Show stood with a good number of small Wax-Lights glimmering
round about, that made it shine gloriously. Master Peter got to his Station
within, being the Man that was to move the Puppets; and his Boy stood before to
tell what the Puppets said, and with a white Wand in his Hand to point at the
several Figures as they came in and out, and explain the Mystery of the Show.
Then all the Audience having taken their Places, Don Quixote, Sancho, the
Scholar, and the Page, being preferred to the best; the Boy, who was the Mouth
of the Motion, began a Story, that shall be heard or seen by those who will
take the pains to read or hear the next Chapter.

CHAP. XXVI. A Pleasant Account of the Puppet-Play, with other very good
things, truly.
THE Tyrians and the Trojans were all silent; that is, the Ears of all the
Spectators hung on the Mouth of the Interpreter of the Show, when in the first
place they had a loud flourish of Kettle-Drums and Trumpets within the Machine,
and then several discharges of Artillery; which prelude being soon over,
Gentlemen, cried the Boy raising his Voice, We present you here with a true
History taken out of the Chronicles of France, and the Spanish Ballads, sung
even by the Boys about the Streets, and in every Body's Mouth; it tells you how
Don Gayferos delivered his Wife Melisandra, that was a Prisoner among the Moors
in Spain, in the City of Sansuena, now called Saragossa. Now, Gallants, the
first Figure we present you with, is Don Gayferos playing at Tables according
to the Ballad.

Now Gayferos the live-long-day,
Oh errant shame! at Draughts does play;
And, as at Court most Husbands do,
Forget^ his Lady Fair and True.
Gentlemen, in the next place mark that Personage that peeps out there with a
Crown on his Head and a Scepter in his Hand. It Is the Emperor Charlemain, the
fair Melisandra's reputed Father, who, vexed at the idleness and negligence of
his Son-in-Law, comes to chide him; and pray observe with what Passion and
Earnestness he rates him, as if he had a mind to lend him half a dozen sound
raps over the Pate with his Scepter. Nay, some Authors don't stick to tell ye,
he gave him as many, and well laid on too; and after he had told him how his
Honor lay a bleeding, till he had delivered his Wife out of Durance, among
many other pithy Sayings, look to it (quoth he to him as he went) I Will say no
more. Mind how the Emperor turns his Back upon him, and how he leaves Don
Gayferos nettl'd and in the Dumps. Now see how he starts up, and in a rage
dings the Tables one way, and Whirls the Men another, and calling for his Arms
with all haste, borrows his Cousin-German Orlando's Sword Durindana. He offers
to go along with him in this difficult Adventure; but the valorous enraged
Knight will not let him; and says he is able to deliver his Wife himself,
without his help, though they kept her down in the very Center of the Earth. And
now he is going to put on his Armor, in order to begin his Journey.

Now Gentlemen, cast your Eyes upon you Tower; you are to suppose it one of the
Towers of the Castle of Saragossa, now called the Aljaferia. That Lady, whom
you see in the Balcony there in a Moorish Habit, is the Peerless Melisandra,
that casts many a heavy look toward France, thinking of Paris and her Husband,
the only Comfort in her Imprisonment. But now! (Silence, Gentlemen, pray
Silence!) here is an Accident wholly new, the like perhaps never heard of
before: Don't you see that Moor who comes a tiptoes, creeping and stealing
along with his Finger in his Mouth behind Melisandra? Here what a smack he
gives on her sweet Lips, and see how she spits and wipes her Mouth with her
white Smock-Sleeve! See how she takes on, and Tears her lovely Hair for very
madness, as if 'twere to blame for this Affront. Next pray observe that grave
Moor that stands in the open Gallery! That Is Marsilius the King of Sansuena,
who having been an Eyewitness of the sauciness of the Moor, ordered him
immediately to be apprehended, (though his Kinsman and great Favorite) to have
two hundred Lashes given him, then to be carried through the City, with Criers
before to proclaim his Crime, and Rods of Justice behind. And look how all this
is put in Execution sooner almost than the Fact is committed. For your Moors,
ye must know, don't use any form of Indictment as we do, neither have they any
Legal Trials. Child, Child, said Don Quixote, go on directly with your Story,
and don't keep us here with your Excursions and Ramblings out of the Road: I
tell you there had need be a formal Process and Legal Trial to prove matter of
Fact. Boy, said the Master from behind the Show, do as the Gentleman bids you.
Don't run so much upon Flourishes, but follow your plain Cant, without
venturing on the high Ropes, for fear of spoiling all. I will, Sir, quoth the
Boy, and so proceeding, Now, Sirs, he that you see there a Horseback wrapped up
in the Gascoign-Cloak, is Don Gayferos himself, whom his Wife (now revenged on
the Moor for his Impudence) seeing from the Battlements of the Tower, takes him
for a Stranger, and talks with him as such, according to the Ballad.

Quoth Melisandra, if per Chance
Sir Traveller, you go for France;
For Pity's sake, ask when you're there,
For Gayferos, my Husband dear.
I omit the rest, not to tire you with a long Story. It Is sufficient that he
makes himself known to her, as you may guess by the Joy she shows; and
accordingly now see how she lets herself down from the Balcony, to come at her
loving Husband, and get behind him. But unhappily alas! one of the skirts of
her Gown is caught upon one of the Spikes of the Balcony, and there she hangs
and hovers in the Air miserably, without being able to get down. But see how
Heaven is merciful, and sends relief in the greatest Distress! Now Don Gayferos
rides up to her, and never minding the Richness of her Gown, lays hold on it,
and at one pull brings her down, and then at one lift sets her astride upon his
Horse's Crupper, bidding her to sit fast, and clap her Arms about him, that she
might not fall; for the Lady Melisandra was not used to that kind of Riding.

Observe now, Gallants, how the Horse neighs, and shows how proud he is of the
burden of his brave Master, and fair Mistress. Look now, how they turn their
Backs, and leave the City, and gallop it merrily away toward Paris. Peace be
with you, for a peerless Couple of true Lovers! May ye get safe and sound into
your own Country, without any Let or ill Chance in your Journey, and live as
long as Nestor in Peace and Quietness among your Friends and Relations.
Plainness. Boy, cried Master Peter, none of your Flights I beseech you, for
Affectation is the Devil. The Boy answered nothing, but going on; Now, Sirs,
quoth he, some of those idle People that love to pry into every thing, happened
to spy Melisandra as she was making her Escape, and ran presently and gave
Marsilius notice of it; whereupon he straight commanded to sound an Alarm, and
now mind what a Din and Hurly-burly there is, and how the City shakes with the
ringing of the Bells backwards in all the Mosques! There you are out, Boy, said
Don Quixote: The Moors have no Bells, they only use Kettle-Drums, and a kind of
Shaulms like our Waits or Hautboys; so that your ringing of Bells in Sansuena
is a mere absurdity, good Master Peter. Nay, Sir, (said Master Peter giving
over Ringing) if you stand upon these Trifles, with us, we shall never please
you. Don't be so severe a Critic! Are there not a thousand Plays that pass
with great Success and Applause, though they have many greater Absurdities, and
Nonsense in abundance! On, Boy, on; let there be as many Impertinencies as
Moats in the Sun; no matter, so I get but Money. Well said, answered Don
Quixote. And now Sirs, quoth the Boy, observe what a vast Company of glittering
Horse come pouring out of the City in pursuit of the Christian Lovers; what a
dreadful sound of Trumpets and Clarions and Drums and Kettle-drums there is in
the Air. I fear they will overtake 'em, and then will the poor Wretches be
dragged along most barbarously at the Tails of their Horses, which would be sad
indeed. Don Quixote seeing such a number of Moors, and hearing such an alarm,
thought it high time to assist the flying Lovers, and starting up, It shall
never be said while I live, cried he aloud, that I suffered such a wrong to be
done to so famous a Knight, and so daring a Lover as Don Gayferos. Forbear
then, your unjust Pursuit, ye base born Rascals; Stop, or prepare to meet my
furious Resentment. Then drawing out his Sword, to make good his Threats, at
one Spring he gets to the Show, and with a Don Quixots Encounter with the
puppits. page. ^59
violent Fury lays at the Moorish Puppets, cutting and slashing in a most
terrible manner; some he overthrows, and beheads others; maims this, and
cleaves that in pieces. Among the rest of his merciless Strokes, he thundered
one down with such a mighty force, that had not Master Peter luckily duck'd and
squatted down, it had certainly chopp'd off his Head as easily as one might cut
an Apple. Hold, hold, Sir, (cried the Puppet-Player, after the narrow escape)
hold, for pity's sake. What do you mean, Sir? These are no real Moors that you
cut and hack so, but poor harmless Puppets made of Pasteboard. Think of what
you do, you ruin me for ever. Oh that ever I was born! you have broke me quite.
But Don Quixote, without minding his Words, doubled and redoubled his blows so
thick, and laid about him so outrageously, that in less than two Minutes he had
cut all the Strings and Wires, mangled the Puppets, and spoiled and demolished
the whole Motion. King Marsilius was in a grievous Condition. The Emperor
Charlemain's Head and Crown were cleft in two. The whole Audience was in a sad
Consternation. The Ape scamper'd off to the top of the House. The Scholar was
frighted out of his Wits, the Page was very uneasy, and Sancho himself was in
a terrible Fright; for, as he swore after the Hurricane was over, he had never
seen his Master in such a Rage before.

The general Rout of the Puppets being over, Don Quixote's Fury began to abate,
and with a more pacified Countenance turning to the Company, Now, said he,
could I wish all those incredulous Persons here who slight Knight-Errantry
might receive Conviction of their Error, and behold undeniable Proofs of the
Benefit of that Function: For how miserable had been the Condition of poor Don
Gayferos and the fair Melisandra by this Time, had I not been here and stood up
in their Defense! I make no Question but those Infidels would have apprehended
'em, and used 'em barbarously. Well, when all is done, long live
Knight-Errantry, long let it live, I say, above all things whatsoever in this
World. Ay, ay, said Master Peter in a doleful Tone, let it live long for me, so
I may die; for why should I live so unhappy, as to say with King The last King
of the Goths that reigned in Spain, conquered by the Moors.
Rodrigo, Yesterday I was Lord of Spain, to Day have not a Foot of Land I can
call mine? It Is not Half an Hour, nay scarce a Moment, since I had Kings and
Emperors at Command. I had Horses in Abundance, and Chests and Bags full of
fine things; but now you see me a poor sorry undone Man, quite and clean broke
and cast down, and in short a mere Beggar. What Is worst of all, I Have lost my
Ape too, who I Am sure will make me sweat ever I catch him again; and all
through the rash Fury of this Sir Knight here, who they say protects the
Fatherless, redresses Wrongs, and does other charitable Deeds, but has failed
in all these good Offices to miserable me, Heaven be praised for it! Well may I
call him the Knight of the Woeful Figure, for he has put me and all that
belongs to me in a woeful Case. The Puppet-player's Lamentations moving
Sancho's Pity, Come, quoth he, don't cry Master Peter, thou break'st my Heart
to hear thee take on so: Don't be cast down M^n, for my Master's a better
Christian I Am sure, than to let any poor Man come to Loss by him; when he comes
to know he is done you Wrong, he will pay you for every Farthing of Damage I
warrant you. Truly, said Master Peter, if his Worship would but make good at
least some of the Damage he has done me, I Will ask no more, and he will discharge
a good Conscience; for he that wrongs his Neighbor, and does not make
Restitution, can never hope to be saved, that is certain. I grant it, said Don
Quixote; but I am not sensible how I have in the least injured you, good Master
Peter. No Sir! not injured me, cried Master Peter! Why these poor Relics that
lie here on the cold Ground, cry out for Vengeance against you. Was it not the
invincible Force of that powerful Arm of yours that has scattered and
dismembered 'em so? And whose were those Bodies, Sir, but mine? and by whom was
I maintained, but by them? Well, said Don Quixote, now I am thoroughly
convinced of a Truth, which I have had Reason to believe before, that those
cursed Magicians that daily persecute me do nothing but delude me, first
drawing me into dangerous Adventures by the Appearances of them as really they
are, and then presently after changing the Face of things as they please.
Really and truly Gentlemen, I vow and protest before ye all that hear me, that
all that was acted here, seemed to me to be really transacted ipso facto as it
appeared. To me Melisandra appeared to be Melisandra, Don Gayferos was Don
Gayferos, Marsilius Marsilius, and Charlemain was the real Charlemain: Which
being so, I could not contain my Fury, and acted according to the Duties of my
Function, which obliges me to take the injured Side. Now, though what I have done
proves to be quite contrary to my good Design, the Fault ought not to be
imputed to me, but to my persecuting Foes; yet I own my self sorry for the
Mischance, and will condemn my self to pay the Costs. Let Master Peter see what
he must have for the Figures that are damaged, and I will pay it him now in
good and lawful Money on the Nail. Heaven bless your Worship, cried Master
Peter with a profound Gringe; I could expect no less from the wonderful
Christianity of the valorous Don Quixote de la Mancha, the sure Relief and
Bulwark of all miserable Wanderers. Now let my Landlord and the great Sancho be
Mediators and Appraisers between your Worship and my self, and I Will stand to
their Award. They agreed; and presently Master Peter taking up Marsilius King
of Saragossa, that lay by on the Ground with his Head off; You see Gentlemen,
said he, it is impossible to restore this King to his former Dignity, and
therefore, with Submission to your better Judgments, I think that for his
Destruction, and to get him a Successor, Four Reals and a Half.
seven and twenty Pence is little enough of Conscience. Proceed, said Don
Quixote. Then for this that is cleft in two (said Master Peter, taking up the
Emperor Charlemain) I think he is richly worth Five Reals and a Quarter.
one and thirty Pence Halfpenny. Not so richly neither, quoth Sancho. Truly,
said the Innkeeper, I think it is pretty reasonable; but we'll make it even
Money, let the poor Fellow have Half a Crown. Come, said Don Quixote, let him
have his full Price; we'll not stand haggling for so small a Matter in a Case
like this: So make Haste Master Peter, for it is near Supper-time, and I have
some strong Presumptions that I shall eat heartily. Now, said Master Peter, for
this Figure here that is without a Nose and blind of one Eye, being the fair
Melisandra, I Will be reasonable with you; give me Two Reals and twelve Maravedis.
fourteen Pence. I would not take less from my Brother. Nay, said Don Quixote,
the Devil's in it if Melisandra been't by this Time with her Husband upon the
Frontiers of France at least; for the Horse that carried 'em seemed to me
rather to fly than to gallop; and now you tell me of a Melisandra here without
a Nose forsooth! when it is ten to one but she is now in her Husband's Arms in a
good Bed in France. Come come Friend, God help every Man to his own; let us
have fair Dealing, and so proceed. Master Peter finding that the Knight began
to harp upon the old String, was afraid he would fly off; and making as if he
had better considered of it, Cry y'Mercy Sir, said he; I was mistaken; this
could not be Melisandra indeed, but one of the Damsels that waited on her; and
so I think five Pence will be fair enough for her. In this Manner he went on,
setting his Price upon the Dead and Wounded, which the Arbitrators moderated to
the Content of both Parties; and the whole Sum amounted to forty Reals and
three Quarters, which Sancho paid him down; and then Master Peter demanded two
Reals more, for the Trouble of catching his Ape. Give it him, said Don Quixote,
and set the Monkey to catch the Ape; and now would I give two hundred more to
be assured that Don Gayferos and the Lady Melisnd^a were safely arrived in
France among their Friends. No Body can better tell than my Ape, said Master
Peter; though the Devil himself will hardly catch him, if Hunger, or his Kindness
for me, don't bring us together again to Night. However, to Morrow will be a
new Day, and when it is light we'll see what is to be done.

The whole Disturbance being appeased, to Supper they went lovingly together;
and Don Quixote treated the whole Company, for he was Liberality it self.
Before Day the Man with the Lances and Halbards left the Inn; and some Time
after the Scholar and the Page came to take Leave of the Knight, the first to
return Home, and the second to continue his Journey, toward whose Charges Don
Quixote gave him twelve Reals. As for Master Peter, he knew too much of the
Knight's Humor to desire to have any thing to do with him, and therefore
having picked up the Ruins of the Puppet-Show, and got his Ape again, by Break
of Day he packed off to seek his Fortune. The Innkeeper, who did not know Don
Quixote, was as much surpised at his Liberality as at his Madness. In fine,
Sancho paid him very honestly by his Master's Order; and mounting a little
before eight a Clock, they left the Inn, and proceeded on their Journey; where
we will leave 'em, that we may have an Opportunity to relate some other Matters
very requisite for the better understanding of this famous History.

CHAP. XXVII. Wherein is discovered who Master Peter was; as also Don Quixote's
ill Success in the Braying Adventure, which did not end so happily as he
desired and expected.
CID Hamet, the Author of this celebrated History, begins this Chapter with
this Asseveration, I swear as a true Catholic; which the Translator
illustrates and explains in this Manner: That Historian's making use of a
Christian Oath, though he was a Mohammedan Moor, ought to be received in no other
Sense, than that, as a true Catholic, when he affirms any thing with an Oath,
does or ought to swear Truth; so would he relate the Truth, as impartially as a
Christian would do, if he had taken such an Oath, in what he designed to write
of Don Quixote; especially as to the Account that is to be given us of the
Person who was known by the Name of Master Peter, and the Fortune-telling Ape,
whose Answers occasioned such a Noise, and created such an Amazement all over
the Country. He says then, that any one who has read the foregoing Part of this
History, cannot but remember one Gines de Passamonte, whom Don Quixote had
rescued, with several other Galley-Slaves in Sierra Morena; a Piece of Service
for which the Knight was not over-burden'd with Thanks, and which that
ungrateful Pack of Rogues repaid with a Treatment altogether unworthy such a
Deliverance. This Gines de Passamonte, or, as Don Quixote called him, Ginesillo
de Parapilla, was the very Man that stole Sancho's Ass; the Manner of which
Robbery, and the Time when it was committed, being not inserted in the first
Part, has been the Reason that some People have laid that which was caused by
the Printer's Neglect to the Inadvertency of the Author. But it is beyond all
question that Gines stole the Ass while Sancho slept on his Back, making use of
the same Trick and Artifice which Brunello practiced when he carried off
Sacripante's Horse from under his Legs at the Siege of Albraca. However Sancho
got Possession again, as has been told you before.

Gines it seems being obnoxious to the Law, was apprehensive of the strict
Search that was made after him, in order to bring him to Justice for his
repeated Villainies, which were so great and numerous, that he himself had wrote
a large Book of 'em; and therefore he thought it advisable to make the best of
his Way into the Kingdom of Arragon; and having clapped a Plaster over his
Left Eye, resolved in that Disguise to set up a Puppet-Show, and stroll with it
about the Country; for you must know he had not his Fellow at any thing that
could be done by Slight of Hand. Now it happened, that in his Way he fell into
the Company of some Christian Slaves who came from Barbary, and struck a
Bargain with 'em for this Ape, whom he taught to leap on his Shoulder at a
certain Sign, and to make as if he whispered something in his Ear. Having
brought his Ape to this, before he entered into any Town he informed himself in
the adjacent Parts, as well as he could, of what particular Accidents had
happened to this or that Person; and having a very retentive Memory, the first
thing he did was to give 'em a Sight of his Show, that represented sometimes
one Story and sometimes another, which were generally well known and taking
among the Vulgar. The next thing he had to do was to commend the wonderful
Qualities of his Ape, and tell the Company, That the Animal had the Gift of
revealing things passed and present, but that in things to come he was
altogether uninstructed. He asked About a Shilling.
two Reals for every Answer, though sometimes he lowered his Price as he felt the
Pulse of his Customers. Sometimes when he came to the Houses of People of whose
Concerns he had some Account, and who would ask the Ape no Questions because
they did not care to part with their Money, he would notwithstanding be making
Signs to his Ape, and tell 'em the Animal had acquainted him with this or that
Story, according to the Information he had before; and by that Means he got a
great Credit among the common People, and drew a mighty Crowd after him. At
other Times, though he knew nothing of the Person, the Subtilty of his Wit
supplied his want of Knowledge, and brought him off with Credit; and no Body
being so inquisitive or pressing as to make him declare by what Means his Ape
attained to this Gift of Divination, he imposed on every one's Understanding,
and got almost what Money he pleased.

He was no sooner come to the Inn, but he knew Don Quixote, Sancho, and the
rest of the Company: But he had like to have paid dear for his Knowledge; had
the Knight's Sword fallen but a little lower when he made King Marsilius's Head
fly and routed all his Moorish Horse, as the Reader may have observed in the
foregoing Chapter. And this may suffice in relation to Mr. Peter and his Ape.

Now let us overtake our Champion of la Mancha. After he had left the Inn, he
resolved to take a Sight of the River Ebro, and the Country about it, before he
went to Saragossa, since he was not streighten'd for Time, but might do that,
and yet arrive soon enough to make one at the Jousts and Tournaments at that
City. Two Days he traveled without meeting with any thing worth his Notice or
the Reader's, when on the third, as he was riding up a Hill, he heard a great
Noise of Drums, Trumpets, and Guns. At first he thought some Regiment of
Soldiers was on its March that Way, which made him spur up Rozinante to the
Brow of the Hill that he might see 'em pass by; and then he saw in a Bottom
above two hundred Men, as near as he could guess, armed with various Weapons,
as Lances, Cross-bows, Partisans, Halbards, Pikes, some few Firelocks, and a
great many Targets. Thereupon he descended into the Vale, and made his
Approaches toward the Battallion so near, as to be able to distinguish their
Banners, judge of their Colors, and observe their Devices; more especially one
that was to be seen on a Standard of white Satin, on which was represented to
the Life a masculine Ass, much like a Sardinian Ass Colt, holding up his Head,
stretching out his Neck, and thrusting out his Tongue in the very Posture of an
Ass that is braying, with this Distich written in fair Characters about it;
'Twas something more than Nothing which one Day
Made one and the other Bailiff bray.


Don Quixote drew this Inference from the Motto, That those were the
Inhabitants of the braying Town; and he acquainted Sancho with what he had
observed, giving him also to understand, that the Man who told 'em the Story of
the two braying Aldermen was apparently in the Wrong, since, according to the
Verses on the Standard, they were two Bailiffs and not two Aldermen. It matters
not one Rush what you call 'em, quoth Sancho; for those very Aldermen that
brayed might in Time come to be made Bailiffs of the Town, and so both those
Titles might have been given 'em well enough. But what is it to you, or me, or
the Story, whether the two Brayers were Aldermen or Bailiffs, so they but
brayed as we are told? As if a Bailiff were not as likely to bray as an
Alderman!

In short, both Master and Man plainly understood, that the Men who were thus
up in Arms, were those that were jeered for Braying, got together to Fight the
People of another Town, who indeed abus'd' them more than was the part of good
Neighbors; thereupon Don Quixote advanced toward them, to Sancho's great
Grief, who had no manner of liking to such kind of Adventures. The Multitude
soon got about the Knight, taking him for some Champion, who was come to their
Assistance. But Don Quixote lifting up his Vizor, with a graceful Deportment,
rode up to the Standard, and there all the chief Leaders of the Army got
together about him, in order to take a Survey of his Person, no less amazed at
this strange Appearance than the rest. Don Quixote seeing 'em look so earnestly
on him, and no Man offer so much as a Word or Question, took Occasion from
their Silence to break his own; and raising his Voice, Good Gentlemen, cried
he, I beseech you with all the Endearments imaginable, to give no Interruption
to the Discourse I am now delivering to you, unless you find it distasteful or
tedious; which if I am unhappy enough to occasion, at the least hint you shall
give me, I will clap a Seal on my Lips, and a Padlock on my Tongue. They all
cried, that he might speak what he pleased, and they would hear him with all
their Hearts. Having this License, Don Quixote proceeded. Gentlemen, said he, I
am a Knight Errant: Arms are my Exercise; and my Profession is to show Favor
to those that are in Necessity of Favor, and to give Assistance to those that
are in Distress. I have for some Time been no Stranger to the Cause of your
Uneasiness, which excites you to take Arms to be revenged on your Insulting
Neighbors; and having often busied my Intellectuals, in making Reflections on
the Motives which have brought you together, I have drawn this Inference from
it, That according to the Laws of Arms, you really injure your selves, in
thinking your selves affronted; for no particular Person can give an Affront to
a whole Town and Society of Men, except it be by accusing 'em all of High
Treason in general, for want of knowing on which of them to fix some
Treasonable Action, of which he supposes some of them to be guilty. We have an
Instance of this Nature in Don Diego Ordonnez, de Lara; who sent a Challenge to
all the Inhabitants of Zamora, not knowing that Vellido de Oifo^ had
Assassinated the King his Master in that Town, without any Accomplices, and so
accusing and defying 'em all, the Defense and Revenge belonged to 'em all in
general. Though it must be owned, that Don Diego was somewhat unreasonable in
his Defiance, and strained the Point too far: For, it it was very little to the
Purpose to defy the Dead, the Waters, the Bread, those that were yet Unborn,
with many other ludicrous matters mentioned in the Challenge. But it signifies
not much; for when the Choler boils over, the Tongue grows as unruly, and knows
no Moderation. Taking it for granted then, that no particular Person can
affront a whole Kingdom, Province, City, Commonwealth, or Body Politic; it is
but just to conclude, That it is needless to revenge such a pretended Affront;
since such an Abuse is no sufficient Provocation, and indeed, positively no
Affront. It would be a pretty Piece of Wisdom, truly, should those out of the
Town of Reloxa sally out every Day on those, who spend their ill-natured
Breaths miscalling 'em every while. 'Twould be a fine Business indeed, if the
Inhabitants of those several famous Towns that are nick-nam'd by our Rabble,
and called the one Cheese-mongers, the other Coster-mongers, these
Fish-mongers, and those Soap-boilers, should know no better than to think
themselves Dishonored, and in Revenge, be always drawing out their Swords at
the least Word, for every idle insignificant Quarrel. No, no, Heaven forbid.
Men of Sagacity and Wisdom, and well-governed Commonwealths are never induced
to take up Arms, nor endanger their Persons and Estates, but on the four
following Occasions. In the first Place, to defend the Holy Catholic Faith.
Secondly, for the Security of their Lives, which they are commanded to preserve
by the Laws of God and Nature. Thirdly, the Preservation of their good Name,
the Reputation of their Family, and the Conservation of their Estates.
Fourthly, the Service due to their Prince in a just War; and if we please, we
may add a Fifth, which indeed may be referred to the second, the Defense of our
Country. To these five Capital Causes may be subjoined several others, which
may persuade Men to vindicate themselves, and have Recourse even to the way of
Arms: But to take 'em up for mere Trifles, and such Occasions as rather
challenge our Mirth and contemptuous Laughter, than Revenge, shows the Person
who is guilty of such Proceedings, to labor under a Scarcity of Sense.
Besides, to seeK after an unjust Revenge (and indeed no Humane Revenge can be
just) is directly against the Holy Law we profess, which commands us to forgive
our Enemies, and to do good to those that Hate us. An Injunction, which, though
it seems difficult in the Implicit Obedience we should pay to it; yet is only
such to those who have less of Heaven than of the World, and more of the Flesh
than of the Spirit. For, the Redeemer of Mankind, whose Words never could
deceive, said, That his Yoke was easy, and his Burden light; and according to
that, he could prescribe nothing to our Practice which was impossible to be
done. Therefore, Gentlemen, since Reason and Religion recommend Love and Peace
to you, I hope you will not render your selves Obnoxious to all Laws, both
Humane and Divine, by a Breach of the public Tranquillity -- The Devil fetch
me, quoth Sancho to himself, if this Master of mine must not have been bred a
Parson; if not, he is as like one as one Egg's like another. Don Quixote paused
a while, to take Breath; and perceiving his Auditory still willing to give him
Attention, had proceeded in his Harangue, had not Sancho's good Opinion of his
Parts, made him lay hold on this Opportunity to talk in his Turn. Gentlemen,
quoth he, my Master Don Quixote de la Mancha, once called the Knight of the
woeful Figure, and now the Knight of the Lions, is a very judicious Gentleman,
and talks Latin and his own Mother Tongue as well as any one of your
Varsity-Doctors. Whatever Discourse he takes in hand, he speaks ye to the
Purpose, and like a Man of Metal; he has ye all the Laws and Rules of that same
thing you call Duel and Punctilio of Honor, at his Fingers Ends; so that you
have no more to do but to do as he says, and if in taking his Counsel you ever
tread awry, let the Blame be laid on my Shoulders. And indeed, as you have
already been told, it is a very silly Fancy to hear one Bray; for I remember
when I was a Boy, I could Bray as often as I listed, and no body went about to
hinder me; and I could do it so rarely, and to the Life, without Vanity be it
spoken, that all the Asses i'our Town would fall a Braying when they heard me
Bray; yet for all this, I was an honest Body's Child, and came of a good
Parentage, do you see; it is true, indeed, four of the best young Men in our
Parish envied me for this great Ability of mine; but I cared not a Rush for
their Spite. Now, that you may not think I tell you a Flam, do but hear me, and
then judge; for this rare Art is like Swimming, which, when once learned, is
never to be forgotten. This said, he clapped both the Palms of his Hands to his
Nose, and fell a Braying so obstreperously, that it made the Neighboring
Valleys ring again. But while he was thus Braying, one of those that stood next
him, believing he did it to Mock 'em, gave him such a hearty Blow with a
Quarter Staff, that down he brought him Neck and Shoulders to the Ground. Don
Quixote seeing what a rough Entertainment had been given to his Squire, moved
with his Lance in a threatening Posture toward the Man that had used poor
Sancho thus; but the Crowd thrust themselves in such a manner between them,
that the Knight found it impracticable to pursue the Revenge he designed. At
the same time, finding that a Shower of Stones began to Rain about his Ears,
and a great Number of Cross-Bows and Muskets were getting ready for his
Reception, he turned Rozinante's Reins, and Galloped from 'em as fast as four
Legs would carry him, sending up his hearty Prayers to Heaven to deliver him
from this Danger, and, being under grievous Apprehensions at every Step, that
he should be shot through the Back, and have the Bullet come out at his Breast,
he still went fetching his Breath, to try if it did any ways fail him. But the
Country-Battalion were satisfied with seeing him fly, and did not offer to
shoot at him.

As for Sancho, he was set upon his Ass before he had well recovered his Senses
which the Blow had taken from him, and then they suffered him to move off; not
that the poor Fellow had Strength enough to guide him; but Dapple naturally
followed Rozinante of his own accord, not being able to be a Moment from him.
The Don being at a good Distance from the Armed Multitude, faced about, and
seeing Sancho Pacing after him without any troublesome Attendants, stayed for
his coming up. As for the Rabble, they kept their Posts till it grew dark, and
their Enemies having not taken the Field to give 'em Battle, they Marched Home,
so overjoyed to have shown their Courage without Danger, that had they been so
well bred, as to have known the ancient Custom of the Greeks, they would have
erected a Trophy in that Place.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of some Things which Benengeli tells us he that Reads shall
know, if he Reads 'em with Attention.
WHen the Valiant flies, he must have discocover'd some foul Play, and it is the
part of prudent Persons to reserve themselves for more favorable
Opportunities. This Truth is verified in Don Quixote, who, rather than expose
himself to the Fury of an incensed and ill-designing Multitude, betook himself
to Flight, without any Thoughts of Sancho, till he found himself beyond the
reach of those Dangers in which he had left his trusty Squire involved. Sancho
came after him, as we have told you before, laid across his Ass, and having
recovered his Senses, overtook him at last, and let himself drop from his
Pack-saddle at Rozinante's Feet, all Battered and Bruised, and in a sorrowful
Condition. Don Quixote presently dismounted to search his Wounds, and finding
no Bones broken, but his Skin whole from Head to Foot; You must Bray, (cried he
angrily) you must Bray, with a Pox, must you! It Is a piece of excellent
Discretion to talk of Halters in the House of a Man whose Father was Hanged.
What Counter-part could you expect to your Music, Blockhead, but a
Thorough-Bass of Bastinadoes? Thank Providence, Sirrah! that as they gave you a
dry Benediction with a Quarter-Staff, they did not cross you with a Cutlass. I have not Breath to answer you at present, quoth Sancho, but my Back and Shoulders
speak enough for me. Pray let us make the best of our way from this Cursed
Place, and whenever I Bray again, may I get such another Polt on the Kidneys.
Yet I cannot help saying, that your Knights-Errant can betake themselves to
their Heels to save one upon Occasion, and leave their trusty Squires to be
beaten like Stock Fish, in the midst of their Enemies. A Retreat is not to be
accounted a Flight, replied Don Quixote; for know, Sancho, that Courage that
has not Wisdom for its Guide, falls under the Name of Temerity; and the rash
Man's successful Actions are rather owing to his good Fortune, than to his
Bravery. I own I did Retire, but I deny that I fled; and in such a Retreat I
did but imitate many Valiant Men, who, not to hazard their Persons
indiscreetly, reserved themselves for a more fortunate Hour. Histories are full
of Examples of this nature, which I do not care to relate at present, because
this would be more tedious to me, than profitable to thee.

By this time Don Quixote had helped Sancho to bestride his Ass, and being
himself Mounted on Rozinante, they Paced softly along, and got into a Grove of
Poplar Trees, about a Quarter of a League from the Place where they Mounted.
Yet as softly as they rode, Sancho could not help now and then heaving up deep
Sighs and lamentable Groans. Don Quixote asked him, why he made such a heavy
Moan? Sancho told him, That from his Rump to his Pole, he felt such grievous
Pains, that he was ready to sink. Without doubt, said Don Quixote, the
Intenseness of thy Torment, is by reason the Staff with which thou were struck,
was broad and long, and so having fallen on those parts of thy Back, caused a
Contusion there, and affects them all with Pain, and had it been of a greater
Magnitude, thy Grievances had been so much the greater. Truly quoth Sancho!
you have cleared that in very pithy Words, of which no body made any doubt. Body
of me! was the Cause of my ailing so hard to be guessed, that you must tell me
that so much of me was sore as was hit by the Weapon? Should my Ankle-bone ach,
and you scratch your Head till you had found out the Cause of it, I would think
that something. But for you to tell me that Place is sore where I was Bruised,
every Fool could do as much. Faith and Troth, Sir Master of mine, I grow Wiser
and Wiser every Day: I find you're like all the World, that lay to Heart no
body's Harms but their own. I find where abouts we are, and what I Am like to
get by you; for even as you left me now in the Lurch to be well belabour'd and
Rib-roasted, and the other Day to dance the Carp-Galliard in the Blanket you wot
of; so I must expect a hundred and a hundred more of these good Vails in your
Service; and as the Mischief has now lighted on my Shoulders, next Bout I look
for it to fly at my Eyes. A Plague of my Jolter-head, I have been a Fool and
Set all along, and am never like to be Wiser while I live. Would it not be
better for me to trudge home to my Wife and Children, and look after my House
with that little Wit that Heaven has given me, without galloping after your
Tail high and low, through confounded cross Roads and By-ways, and wicked and
crooked Paths, that the Ungodly themselves cannot find out! And then most
commonly to have nothing to moisten one's Weasand that is fitting for a
Christian to drink, nothing but mere Element and Dog's Porridge! And nothing to
stuff one's Puddings that is worthy of a Catholic Stomach! Then after a Man has
tired himself off his Legs, when he would be glad of a good Bed, to have a Master
cry, Here, are you sleepy? Lie down M^ Squire, your Bed's made: Take six Foot
of good hard Ground, and measure your Corpse there; and if that will not serve,
take as much more and welcome: You're at Rack and Manger, spare not, I beseech
your Dogship; there is Room enough. Old Nick roast and burn to a Cinder that
unlucky Son of Mischief that first set People a madding after this Whim of
Knight-Errantry; or at least the first Ninny-hammer that had so little Forecast
as to turn Squire to such a Parcel of Madmen as were your Knights-Errant -- in
the Days of Yore I mean; I am better bred than to speak ill of those in our
Time; no I honor them, since your Worship has taken up this blessed Calling;
for you have a long Nose, the Devil himself could not outreach you, you can see
farther into a Millstone than he. I durst lay a Wager, said Don Quixote, that
now thou art suffered to prate without Interruption, thou feel'st no manner of
Pain in thy whole Body. Prithee talk on, my Child, say any thing that comes
uppermost to thy Mouth, or is Burdensome to thy Brain; so it but alleviates thy
Pain, thy Impertinencies will rather please than offend me; and if thou have
such a longing Desire to be at home with thy Wife and Children, Heaven forbid I
should be against it. Thou have Money of mine in thy Hands: See how long it is
since we Sallied out last from Home, and cast up the Wages by the Month, and
Pay thy self. An't like your Worship, quoth Sancho, when I served my Master
Carrasco, Father to the Bachelor, your Worship's Acquaintance, I had two
Ducats a Month, besides my Victuals: I don't know what you will give me: though I Am
sure there is more Trouble in being Squire to a Knight Errant, than in being
Servant to a Farmer; for truly we that go to Plough and Cart in a Farmer's
Service, though we moil and sweat so adays as not to have a dry Thread to our
Backs, let the worst come to the worst, are sure of a Bellyful at Night out of
the Pot, and to snore in a Bed. But I don't know when I have had a good Meal's
Meat, or a good Night's Rest in all your whole Service, unless it were that
short time when we were at Don Diego's House, and when I made a Feast on the
savoury Skimming of Camacho's Cauldron, and Eat, Drank, and Lay at Master
Basil's. All the rest of my time I have had my Lodging on the cold Ground, and
in the open Fields, subject to the Inclemency of the Sky, as you call it;
living on the Rinds of Cheese, and Crusts of moldy Bread; drinking sometimes
Ditch-water, sometimes Spring, as we chanced to light upon it in our way. Well,
said Don Quixote, I grant all this, Sancho; then how much more do thou expect
from me, than thou had from thy Master Carrasco? Why, truly, quoth Sancho,
if your Worship will Pay me Twelve-pence a Month more than Thomas Carrasco gave
me, I shall think it very fair, and tolerable Wages; but then instead of the
Island which you know you promised me, I think you cannot in Conscience give me
less than six and thirty Pence a Month more, which will make in all Thirty
Reals, neither more nor less. Very well, said Don Quixote, let us see then, it is
now twenty five Days since we set out from home, reckon what this comes to,
according to the Wages thou have allowed thy self, and be thy own Play Master.
Udsdiggers! quoth Sancho, we are quite out in our Account; for as to the
Governor of an Island's Place, which you promised to help me to, we ought to
reckon from the time you made the Promise, to this very Day. Well, and pray how
long is it, asked Don Quixote? If I remember rightly, quoth Sancho, it is about
some twenty Years ago, two or three Days more or less. With that Don Quixote
hitting himself a good clap on the Forehead, fell a Laughing heartily. Why,
cried he, we have hardly been out two Months from the very beginning of our
first Expedition, and in all the time we were in Sierra Morena, and our whole
Progress. And have thou the Impudence to affirm it is twenty Years since I
promised the Grant of the Island? I am now convinced thou have a Mind to make
all the Money which thou have of mine in thy keeping, go for the Payment of thy
Wages. If this be thy Meaning, well and good, even take it, and much Good may
it do thee; for rather than be troubled any longer with such a Varlet, I would
contentedly see my self without a Penny. But tell me, thou Perverter of the
Laws of Chivalry that relate to Squires, where did thou ever see or read,
that any Squire to a Knight Errant stood capitulating with his Master, as thou
have done with me, for so much or so much a Month? Lanch, unconscionable
Wretch, thou Cutthroat Scoundrel; lanch, thou base Spirit of Mammon, into the
vast Ocean of their Histories; and if thou can show me a Precedent of any
Squire that ever dared to say, or but to think as much as thou have presumed to
tell me, then will I give thee Leave to affix it on my Forehead, and hit me
four Fillips on the Nose. Away then, pack off with thy Ass this Moment, and get
thee home, for thou shall never stay in my Service any longer. Oh how much
Bread, how many Promises have I not ill bestowed on thee! Vile grovelling
Wretch, that have more of the Beast than of the Man! When I was just going to
prefer thee to such a Post, that in spite of thy Wife thou had been called
my Lord, thou sneak'st away from me. You Are leaving me, when I had fully
resolved, without any more Delay, to make thee Lord of the best Island in the
World. Sordid Clod! Well might thou say indeed, that Honey is not for the
Chaps of an Ass. Thou art indeed a very Ass, an Ass thou will live and an Ass
thou will die; for I dare say thou wilt never have Sense enough while thou
liv'st, to know thou art a Brute. While Don Quixote thus upbraided and railed
at Sancho, the poor Fellow, all dismayed, and touched to the Quick, beheld him
with a wistful Look; and the Tears standing in his Eyes for Grief, Good sweet
Sir, cried he, with a doleful and whining Voice, I confess I want nothing but a
Tail to be a perfect Ass; if your Worship will be pleased but to put one to my
Backside, I shall deem it well set on, and be your most faithful Ass all the
Days of my Life: But forgive me, I beseech you, and take Pity on my Youth.
Consider I Have but a dull Headpiece of my own; and if my Tongue runs at random
sometimes, it is because I Am more Fool than Knave, Sir. Who errs and mends, to
Heaven himself commends. I should wonder much, said Don Quixote, if thou
should not interlard thy Discourse with some pretty Proverb. Well, I Will give
thee my Pardon for this once, provided thou correct those Imperfections that
offend me, and show thy self of a less craving Temper. Take Heart then, and
let the Hopes which thou may entertain of the Performance of my Promise
raise in thee a nobler Spirit. The Time will come, do not think it impossible
because delayed. Sancho promised to do his best, though he could not rely on
his own Strength.

Matters Being thus amicably adjusted, they put into the Grove, where the Don
laid himself at the Foot of an Elm, and his Squire at the Foot of a Beach; for
every one of those Trees, and such others, has always a Foot, though never a
Hand. Sancho had but an ill Night's Rest of it, for his Bruises made his Bones
more than ordinarily sensible of the Cold. As for Don Quixote, he entertained
himself with his usual Imaginations. However they both slept, and by Break of
Day continued their Journey toward the River Ebro, where they met -- what
shall be told in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XXIX. The famous Adventure of the enchanted Bark.
FAIR and softly, Step by Step, their Tongues wagging faster than their Horses,
Don Quixote and his Squire got in two Day's Time to the Banks of the River
Ebro, which yielded a very entertaining Prospect to the Knight. The Verdure of
its Banks, and the abounding Plenty of the Water, which, clear like liquid
Crystal, flowed gently along within the spacious Channel, awaked a thousand
amorous Chimera's in his roving Imagination, and more especially the Thoughts
of what he had seen in Montesinos's Cave; for though Master Peter's Ape had
assured him that it was partly false as well as partly true, he was rather
inclined to believe it all true; quite contrary to Sancho, who thought it every
Tittle as false as Hell.

While the Knight went on thus agreeably amused, he spied a little Boat without
any Oars or Tackle, moored by the Riverside to the Stump of a Tree: Thereupon
looking round about him, and discovering no Body, he presently alighted, and
ordered Sancho to do the like, and tie their Beasts fast to some of the Elms or
Willows thereabouts. Sancho asked him what was the Meaning of all this? Thou
art to know, answered Don Quixote, that most certain this Boat lies here for no
other Reason but to invite me to embark in it, for the Relief of some Knight or
other Person of high Degree that is in great Distress: For thus, according to
the Method of Inchanters, in the Books of Chivalry, when any Knight whom they
protect happens to be involved in some very great Danger, from which none but
some other valorous Knight can set him free; then though they be two or three
thousand Leagues at least distant from each other, up the Magician snatches the
auxiliary Champion in a Cloud, or else provides him a Boat, and in the
Twinkling of an Eye, in either Vehicle, through the airy Fluid or the liquid
Plain, he wafts him to the Place where his Assistance is wanted. Just to the
same Intent does this very Bark lie here; it is as clear as the Day, and
therefore, before it be too late, Sancho, tie up Rozinante and Dapple, let us
commit our selves to the Guidance of Providence; for embark I will, though
barefooted Friars should beg me to desist. Well, well, quoth Sancho, if I must
I must. Since you will every Foot run haring into these -- I don't know how to
call them, these confounded Vagaries, I have no more to do but to make a Leg,
and submit my Neck to the Collar; for, as the Saying is, Do as thy Master bids
thee, though it be to sit down at his Table. But for all that, fall Back fall
Edge, I must and will discharge my Conscience, and tell you plainly, that, as
blind as I am, I can see with Half an Eye, that it is no enchanted Bark, but
some Fisherman's Boat; for there are many in this River, whose Waters afford
the best Shads in the World. This Caution did Sancho give his Maste^ while he
was tying the Beasts to a Tree, and going to leave them to the Protection of
Inchanters, full sore against his Will. Don Quixote bid him not be concerned at
leaving them there, for the Sage who was to carry 'em through in a Journey of
such an Extent and Longitude, would be sure to take Care of the Animals. Nay,
nay, as for that Matter, quoth Sancho, I don't understand your Longitude, I
never heard such a cramp Word in my Born-days. Longitude, said Don Quixote, is
the same as Length: I don't wonder that thou do not understand the Word, for
you are not obliged to understand Latin. Yet you shall have some forward
Coxcombs pretend to be knowing, when they are ignorant. Now the Beasts are fast
Sir, quoth Sancho, what is next to be done? Why now, answered Don Quixote, let
us recommend our selves to Providence and weigh Anchor, or to speak plainly,
embark, and cut the Cable. With that, leaping in, and Sancho following, he cut
the Rope, and so by Degrees the Stream carried the Boat from the Shore. Now
when Sancho saw himself toward the Middle of the River, he began to quake for
fear; but nothing grieved his Heart so much as to hear Dapple bray, and to see
Rozinante struggle to get loose. Sir, quoth he, hark how my poor Dapple brays,
to bemoan ou^ leaving of him; and see how poor Rozinante tugs hard to break his
Bridle, and is even wild to throw himself after us. Alack and alack! my poor
dear Friends, Peace be with you where you are, and when this mad Freak, the
Cause of our doleful parting, is ended in Repentance, may we be brought back to
your sweet Company again. This said, he fell a blubbering, aed set up such a
Howl, that Don Quixote had no Patience with him, but looking angrily on him,
What do thou fear, cried he, thou great white-liver'd Calf? What do thou
cry for? Who pursues thee? Who hurts thee, thou dastardly Craven, thou Cowardly
Mouse, thou Soul of a Milk-sop, thou Heart of Butter? Do want for any thing,
base unsatisfied Wretch? What would thou say, were thou to climb barefoot
the rugged Snowy Alps? Thou that sit here in State like an Archduke, Plenty
and Delight on each side of thee, whilst thou glidest gently down the calm
Current of this delightful River, which will soon convey us into the Main
Ocean? We have already flowed down some seven or eight hundred Leagues. Had I
but an Astrolabe here to take the Latitude of the Pole, I could easily tell
thee how far we have proceeded to an Inch: Though either I know but little, or we
have just passed, or shall presently pass the Equinoctial Line, that divides
and sets the two opposite Poles at an equal distance.

And when we come to this same Line you speak of, quoth Sancho, how far have we
gone then? A mighty way, answered Don Quixote. When we come under the Line I
spoke of, we shall have measured the other half of the Terraqueous Globe, which
according to the System and Computation of Ptolomy, who was the greatest
Cosmographer in the World, contains three hundred and sixty Degrees.
Odsbodikins! quoth Sancho, you have brought me now a notable Fellow to be your
Voucher, Goodman T^llme, with his Amputation and Cistern, and the rest of your
gibberish! Don Quixote smiled at Sancho's Blunders, and going on, The
Spaniards, said he, and all those that Embark at Cadiz for the East Indies, to
know whether they have passed the Equinoctial Line, according to an Observation
that has been often experienced, need do no more than look whether there be any
Lice left alive among the Ship's Crew; for if they have passed it, not one is
to be found in the Ship, though they would give his weight in Gold for him.
Look therefore, Sancho, and if thou find'st any such Vermin still creeping
about thee, then we have not yet passed the Line; but if thou do not, then we
have surely passed it. The Devil a Word I believe of all this, quoth Sancho:
However, I Will do as you bid me. But hark you me, Sir, now I think on it again,
where is the need of trying these Quirks! Don't I see with my two Eyes that we
are not five Rods length from the Shore? Look you there stands Rozinante and
Dapple, upon the very spot where we left them; and now I look closely into the
matter, I will take my Corporal Oath that we move no faster than a Snail can
Gallop, or an Ant can Trot. No more words, said Don Quixote, but make the
Experiment as I bid you, and let the rest alone. Thou do not know what
belongs to Colures, Lines, Parallels, Zodiacks, Eclipticks, Poles, Solstices,
Equinoctials, Planets, Signs, Points, and Measures, of which the Spheres
Celestial and Terrestrial are composed; for did thou know all these things,
or some of them at least, thou might plainly perceive what Parallels we have
cut, what Signs we have passed, and what Constellations we have left, and are
now leaving behind us. Therefore I would wish thee once again to search thy
self; for I cannot believe but thou art as clear from Vermin as a Sheet of
white Paper. Thereupon Sancho advancing his Hand very gingerly toward the left
side of his Neck, after he had grop'd a while, lifted up his Head; and staring
in his Master's Face, look you Sir, quoth he, pulling out something, either
your Rule is not worth this, or we are many a fair League from the place you
spoke of. How! answered Don Quixote, have thou found something then, Sancho?
Ay, marry have I, quoth Sancho, and more things than one too, and so saying, he
shook and snap'd his Fingers, and then dipped his whole Hand into the River;
down whose Stream the Boat drove gently along, without being moved by any
secret Influence or hidden Enchantment, but only by the help of the Current,
hitherto calm and smooth.

By this time they descried two great Water-mills in the middle of the River,
which Don Quixote no sooner spied, but calling to his Squire, Look, look, my
Sancho, cried he! see thou you City or Castle there! This is the Place where
some Knight lies in Distress, or some Queen or Princess is detained, for whose
Succor I am conveyed hither. What a Devil do you mean with your City or
Castle, cried Sancho? Body of me! Sir, don't you see as plain as the Nose in
your Face, they are nothing but Water-mills, in the midst of the River, to
grind Corn. Peace, Sancho, replied Don Quixote, they look like Water-mills I
grant you, but they are no such things: How often, have I not told thee
already, do these Magicians change and overturn every thing as they please, not
that they can change their very Being, but they disguise and alter the
appearances of them; in which we have an Instance in the unhappy Transformation
of Dulcinea, the only Refuge of my Hope.

The Boat being now got into the very strength of the Stream, began to move
less slowly than it did before. The People in the Mills perceiving the Boat to
come a-drift full upon the Mill-wheels, came running out with their long Poles
to stop it; and as their Faces and Clothes were Powdered all over with
Meal-dust, they made a very odd Appearance. So-ho! there, cried they, as loud
as they could bawl, is the Devil in the Fellows? Are ye mad in the Boat there?
Hold! You Will be drowned or Ground to pieces by the Mill-wheels. Don Quixote
having cast his Eyes on the Millers, did I not tell thee, Sancho, said he, that
we should arrive where I must exert the strength of my Arm. Look what
Hang-dogs, what horrid Wretches come forth to make Head against me! How many
Hobgoblins oppose my Passage! Do but see what deformed Physiognomies they have,
Mere Bug-bears! But I shall make ye know, Scoundrels, how insignificant all
your Efforts must prove. Then standing up in the Boat, he began to threaten the
Millers in a haughty Tone. Ye paltry Slaves, cried he, base and ill-advis'd
Scum of the World, release instantly the Captive Person who is injuriously
detained and Oppressed within your Castle or Prison, be he of high or low
Degree; for I am Don Quixote de la Mancha, otherwise called the Knight of the
Lions; for whom the happy Achievement of this Adventure is reserved, by the
Decree of Heaven. This said, he unsheathed his Sword, and began to Fence with
the Air, as if he had been already engaging the Millers, who hearing, but not
understanding his mad Words, stood ready with their Poles to stop the Boat,
which was now near the Mill-dam, and falling into the rapid Stream and narrow
Channel of the Wheels.

In the mean time, Sancho was devoutly fallen on his Knees, praying Heaven for
a happy deliverance out of this mighty plunge, but this one time. And indeed
his Prayers met with pretty good success; for the Millers so bestirred
themselves with their Poles that they stopped the Boat, yet not so Don Quixots
Adventure of the Enchanted Bark. page 29^
cleverly but they over-set it, tipping Don Quixote and Sancho over into the
River. 'Twas well for the Knight that he could swim like a Duck; and yet the
weight of his Armor sunk him twice to the Bottom, and had it not been for the
Millers, who jumped into the Water, and made a shift to pull out both the
Master and the Man, in a Manner Craning them up, there had been an end of them
both.

When they were both hawl'd ashore, more over-drench'd than thirsty, Sancho
betook himself to his Knees again, and with up-lifted Hands and Eyes made a
long and hearty Prayer, that Heaven might keep him from this time forwards
clear of his Master's Rash Adventures.

And now came the Fishermen who owned the Boat, and finding it broken to
pieces, fell upon Sancho, and began to strip him, demanding Satisfaction both
of him and his Master for the loss of their Bark. The Knight with a great deal
of Gravity and Unconcern, as if he had done no manner of Harm, told both the
Millers and the Fishermen, that he was ready to pay for the Boat, provided they
would fairly surrender the Persons that were detained unjustly in their Castle.
What Persons, or what Castle, you mad Oaf, said one of the Millers? Marry guep,
would you carry away the Folk that come to grind their Corn at our Mills? So,
said Don Quixote, a Man had as good Preach to a Stone-wall as to expect to
persuade with Entreaties such Dregs of Humane-kind to do a good and generous
Action. Two Sage Inchanters certainly clash in this Adventure; and the one
thwarts the other: One provided me a Bark, the other overwhelmed me in it. Heaven
send us better Times! There is nothing but Plotting and Counter-plotting,
Undermining and Counter-mining in this World. Well, I can do no more. Then
raising his Voice, and casting a fixed Eye on the Millers, Well! my dear
Friends, cried he, whoever you are that are immured in this Prison, Pardon me,
I beseech ye; for so my ill Fate and yours Ordains, that I cannot free you from
Oppression: The Adventure is reserved for some other Knight. This said, he came
to an Agreement with the Fishermen, and ordered Sancho to pay them fifty Reals
for the Boat. Sancho pulled out the Money with a very ill will, and parted with
it with a worse, muttering between his Teeth, that two Voyages like that would
sink their whole Stock.

The Fishermen and the Millers could not forbear admiring at two such Figures
of Humane Offspring, that neither spoke nor acted like the rest of Mankind:
for they could not so much as guess what Don Quixote meant by all his
Extravagant Speeches; so taking them for Madmen, they left 'em, and went, the
Millers to their Mills, and the Fishermen to their Hutts. Don Quixote and
Sancho returned to their Beasts like a couple of as Senseless Animals; and thus
ended the Adventure of the Enchanted Bark.

CHAP. XXX. What happened to Don Quixote with the Fair Huntress.
WITH wet Bodies and Melancholic Minds, the Knight and Squire went back to
Rozinante and Dapple; though Sancho was the more cast down and out of Sorts of
the two; for it grieved him to the very Soul to see the Money dwindle; being as
Chary of that as of his Heart's-Blood, or the Apples of his Eyes. To be short,
to Horse they went without speaking one Word to each other, and left the famous
River: Don Quixote Buried in his Amorous Thoughts, and Sancho in those of his
Preferment, which he thought far enough off yet. For, as much a Fool as he was,
he plainly perceived that all or most of his Master's Actions were idle and
silly: Therefore he but waited an opportunity to give him the Slip, and go home
without coming to any farther Reckoning, or taking a formal Leave. But Fortune
provided for him much better than he expected.

It happened that the next Day about Sunset as they were coming out of a Wood,
Don Quixote cast his Eyes round a Verdant Meadow, and at the farther end of it
descried a Company, whom upon a nearer view he judged to be Persons of Quality
that were taking the Diversion of Hawking; approaching nearer yet, he observed
among 'em a very fine Lady upon a white pacing Mare, in green Trappings, and a
Saddle of Cloth of Silver. The Lady her self was dressed in Green, so Rich and
so Gay, that nothing could be finer. She rode with a Goss-hawk on her left
Fist, by which Don Quixote judged her to be of Quality, and Mistress of the
Train that attended; as indeed she was. Thereupon calling to his Squire, Son
Sancho, cried he, Run and tell that Lady on the Palfrey with the Goss-hawk on
her Fist, that I the Knight of the Lions humbly salute her Highness, and that
if she pleases to give me leave, I should be proud to receive her Commands, and
have the Honor of waiting on her, and kissing her fair Hands. But take special
care, Sancho, how thou deliverest thy Message, and be sure don't Lard my
Compliment with any of your old Saw. Why this to me, quoth Sancho? Marry you
need not talk of Larding, as if I had never went Ambassador before to a High
and Mighty Dame. I don't know that ever thou did, replied Don Quixote, at
least on my Account, unless it were when I sent thee to Dulcinea. It may be so,
quoth Sancho: But a good Play Master needs no Surety; and where there is Plenty,
the Guests cannot be empty. That is to say, I need none of your telling nor
tutoring about that matter; for, as silly as I look, I know something of every
thing. Well, well, I believe it said Don Quixote. Go then in a good Hour, and
Heaven Inspire and Guide thee.

Sancho put on, forcing Dapple from his old Pace to a Gallop; and approaching
the fair Huntress, he alighted, and falling on his Knees; Fair Lady quoth he,
that Knight yonder, called the Knight of the Lions, is my Master, I am his
Squire, Sancho Panca by Name. This same Knight of the Lions, who but the other
day was called the Knight of the Woeful Figure, has sent me to tell you, That
so please your Worship's Grace to give him leave with your good liking to do as
he has a mind, which, as he says, and as I believe, is only to Serve your
high-flown Beauty, and be your ternal Vassal, you may chance to do a thing that
will be for your own good, and he will take it for a hugeous kindness at your
Hands. Indeed, honest Squire, said the Lady, you have acquitted your self of
your Charge with all the graceful Circumstances which such an Embassy requires:
Rise, pray rise, for it is by no means fit the Squire to so great a Knight, as
the Knight of the Woeful Figure, to whose Name and Merits we are no Strangers,
should remain on his Knees. Rise then, and desire your Master by all means to
honor us with his Company, that my Lord Duke and I may pay him our Respects at
a House we have hard by.

Sancho got up, no less amazed at the Lady's Beauty, than at her Affability,
but much more because she told him they were no Strangers to his Master the
Knight of the Woeful Figure. Nor did he wonder why she did not call him by his
Title of Knight of the Lions; considering, he had but lately assumed it.

Pray (said the Duchess, whose particular Title we don't yet know) is not this
Master of yours the Person, whose History came out in Print, by the Name of the
Renowned Don Quixote de la Mancha, the Mistress of whose Affections is a
certain Lady called Dulcinea del Toboso? The very same, an't please your
Worship, said Sancho, and that Squire of his that is, or should be in the Book,
Sancho Panca by Name, is my own self, if I was not changed in my Cradle; I
mean, changed in the Press. I am mighty glad to hear all this, said the
Duchess. Go then, Friend Panca, and tell your Master, That I congratulate him
upon his arrival in our Territories, to which he is welcome, and assure him
from me, that this is the most agreeable News I could possibly have heard.

Sancho, overjoyed with this gracious Answer, returned to his Master, to whom
he repeated all that the great Lady had said to him; praising to the Skies, in
his Clownish Phrase, her great Beauty, and Courteous Nature.

Don Quixote pleased with this good beginning, seated himself handsomely in the
Saddle, fixed his Toes in his Stirrups, set the Bever of his Helmet as he
thought best became his Face, roused up Rozinante's Mettle, and with a graceful
assurance moved forwards to kiss the Dutchess's Hand. As soon as Sancho went
from her, she sent for the Duke her Husband, and gave him an account of Don
Quixote's Embassy. Thereupon they both attended his coming with a pleasant
Impatience; for, having read the first Part of his History, they were no less
desirous to be acquainted with his Person; and resolved, as long as he stayed
with them, to give him his own Way, and Humor him in all things, treating him
still with all the Forms Essential to the Entertainment of a Knight Errant;
which they were the better able to do, having been much conversant with Books
of that kind.

And now Don Quixote drew nigh with his Vizor up; and Sancho seeing him offer
to alight, made all the haste he could to be ready to hold his Stirrup: But, as
Ill-luck would have it, as he was throwing his Leg over his Pack-Saddle to get
off, he entangl'd his Leg so strangely in the Rope, that served him instead of
a Stirrup, that not being able to get his Foot out, he hung by the Heel with
his Nose to the Ground. On the other Side. Don Quixote, who was used to have
his Stirrup held when he dismounted, thinking Sancho had hold of it already,
lifted up his right Leg over the Saddle to alight; but as it happened to be
ill-girt, down he brought it with himself to the Ground, confounded with Shame,
and muttering between his Teeth many a hearty Curse against Sancho, who was all
the while with his Foot in the Stocks. The Duke seeing 'em in that Condition,
ordered some of his People to help 'em; and they raised Don Quixote, who was in
no very good Case with his Fall; however, limping as well as he could, he went
to pay his Duty to the Lady, and would have fallen on his Knees at her Horse's
Feet: But the Duke alighting, would by no means permit it, and embracing Don
Quixote; I am sorry, said he, Sir Knight of the Woeful Figure, that such a
Mischance should happen to you at your first coming on my Ground; but the
Negligence of Squires is often the cause of worse Accidents. Most generous
Prince, said Don Quixote, I can think nothing bad that could befall me here,
since I have had the happiness of seeing your Grace: For though I had fallen
low as the very Center, the Glory of this Interview would raise me up again. My
Squire indeed, a Vengeance seize him for it, is much more apt to give his Saucy
Idle Tongue a Loose, than to gird a Saddle well; but Prostrate or Erect, on
Horseback or on Foot, in any Posture I shall always be at your Grace's
Command, and no less at her Grace's, your worthy Consort's Service. Worthy did
I say, yes, she is worthy to be called the Queen of Beauty and Sovereign Lady
of all Courtesy. Pardon me there, said the Duke, Noble Don Quixote de la
Mancha; where the Peerless Dulcinea is remembr'd, the Praise of all other
Beauties ought to be forgot.

Sancho was now got clear of the Noose, and standing near the Duchess, an't
please your Worship's Highness, quoth he, before his Master could answer, it
cannot be denied, nay, I dare vouch it in any Ground in Spain, that my Lady
Dulcinea del Toboso is woundy Handsome and fair: But where we least think,
there starts the Hare. I Have heard your great Scholards say, That she you call
Dame Nature, is like a Potter, and he that makes one handsome Pipkin may make
two or three hundred. And so, do you see, you may understand by this, that my
Lady Duchess here does not a jot come short of my Lady Dulcinea del Toboso.
Don Quixote upon this addressing himself to the Duchess, Your Grace must know,
said he, that no Knight Errant ever had such an eternal Babbler, such a bundle
of Conceit for a Squire, as I have; and if I have the honor to continue for
some time in your Service, your Grace will find it true. I am glad, answered
the Duchess, that honest Sancho has his Conceits, its a shrewd sign he is
wise; for merry Conceits, you know, Sir, are not the Offsprings of a dull
Brain, and therefore if Sancho be jovial and jocose, I Will warrant him also a
Man of Sense. And a Prater, Madam, added Don Quixote. So much the better, said
the Duke; for a Man that talks well, can never talk too much. But not to lose
our time here, Come on, Sir Knight of the Woeful Figure, -- Knight of the
Lions, your Highness should say, quoth Sancho: The Woeful Figure is out of
date; and so pray let the Lions come in play. Well then, said the Duke, I
entreat the Knight of the Lions to vouchsafe us his Presence at a Castle I have
hard by, where he shall find such Entertainment as is justly due to so eminent
a Personage, such Honors as the Duchess and my self are wont to pay to all
Knight-Errants that travel this Way.

Sancho having by this got Rozinante ready, and girded the Saddle tight, Don
Quixote mounted his Steed, and the Duke a stately Horse of his own; and the
Duchess riding between 'em both, they moved toward the Castle: She desired
that Sancho might always attend near her, for she was extremely taken with his
notable Sayings; Sancho was not hard to be entreated, but crowded in between
'em, and made a fourth in their Conversation. The Duke and the Duchess were
very well satisfied, esteeming themselves very fortunate in having an
Opportunity to entertain at their Castle such a Knight Errant and such an
erring Squire.

CHAP. XXXI. Which Treats of many and great Matters.
SAncho was overjoyed to find himself so much in the Dutchess's Favor,
flattering himself that he should fare no worse at her Castle than he had done
at Don Diego's and Basil's Houses; for he was ever a Cordial Friend to a
plentiful way of Living, and therefore never failed to take Opportunity by the
Fore-top, wherever he met her. Now the History tells us, that before they got
to the Castle, the Duke rode away from them, to instruct his Servants how to
behave themselves toward Don Quixote; so that no sooner did the Knight come
near the Gates, but he was met by two of the Duke's Lacquies or Grooms in long
Vests like Night-Gowns of fine Crimson-Sattin. These suddenly took him in their
Arms, and lifting him from his Horse without any further Ceremony, go great and
mighty Sir, said they, and help my Lady Duchess down. Thereupon Don Quixote
went and offered to do it; and many Compliments, and much Ceremony passed on
both sides; but in Conclusion, the Dutchess's earnestness prevailed; for she
would not alight from her Palfry but in the Arms of her Husband, excusing her
self from incommoding so great a Knight with so insignificant a Burden. With
that the Duke took her down. And now, being entered into a large Courtyard,
there came two Beautiful Damsels who threw a long Mantle of fine Scarlet over
Don Quixote's Shoulders. In an instant all the Galleries about the Courtyard
were crowded with Men and Women, the Domestics of the Duke, who cried out,
Welcome, Welcome, the Flower and Cream of Knight-Errantry! Then most, if not
all of 'em, sprinkled whole Bottles of sweet Water upon Don Quixote, the Duke
and the Duchess. This usage agreeably surpised the Don, and this was indeed
the first Day he knew aad firmly believed himself to be a Real Knight Errant,
and that his Knighthood was more than Fancy; finding himself Treated just as he
had read the Brothers of the Order were entertained in former Ages.

Sancho was so transported, that he even forsook his beloved Dapple, to keep
close to the Duchess, and entered the Castle with the Company. But his
Conscience flying in his Face for leaving that dear Companion of his alone, he
went to a reverend old Duena who was one of the Dutchess's Retinue, and
Whispering her in the Ear, Mrs. Gonsales, or Mrs -- Pray forsooth may I crave
your Name? Donna Rodriguez, de Grijalva is my Name, said the old Waiting Woman,
What is your Business with me, Friend? Pray now, Mistress, quoth Sancho, do so
much as go out at the Castle-Gate, where you will find a Dapple Ass of mine; see
him put into the Stable, or else put him in your self; for, poor thing, it is
main fearful and timersome, and cannot abide to be alone in a strange Place. If
the Master, said she pettishly, has no more Manners than the Man, we shall have
a fine time on it. Get you gone, you saucy Jack, the Devil take thee and him
that brought you hither, to affront me. Go seek somewhere else for Ladies to
look to your Ass, you Lollpoop! I Would have you to know, that Gentlewomen like me
are not used to such Drudgeries. Don't take Pepper in your Nose at it, replied
Sancho, you need not be so frumpish, Mistress. As good as you have don't. I
have heard my Master say (and he knows all the Histories in the World) that
when Sir Lancelot came out of Britain, Damsels looked after him, and
Waiting-women after his Horse. Now by my Troth! whether you believe it or no, I
would not swop my Ass for Sir Lancelot's Horse, I Will tell you that. I think the
Fool rides the Fellow, quoth the Waiting Woman: Hark you, Friend, if you be a
Buffoon, keep your stuff for those Chapmen that will bid you fairer. I would
not give a Fig for all the Jests in your Budget. Well enough yet, quoth Sancho,
and a Fig for you too, an' you go to that: Adad! should I take thee for a Fig.
I might be sure of a ripe one, your Fig's rotten Ripe, forsooth; say no more;
if sixty's the Game, you're a Peep out. You Rascally Son of a Whore, cried the
Waiting Woman in a pelting Chafe, whether I am Old or no, Heaven best knows, I
shall not stand to give an Account to such a Raggamuffin as thou, thou
Garlick-eating Stinkard. She spoke this so loud, that the Duchess overheard
her, and seeing the Woman so altered and as red as Fire, asked what was the
matter? Why, Madam, said the Waiting Woman, here is a Fellow would have me put
his Ass in the Stable, telling me an idle Story of Ladies that looked after one
Lancelot, and Waiting-women after his Horse; and because I will not be his Ostler,
the Rake-shame very civilly calls me Old. Old, said the Duchess, that is an
Affront no Woman can well bear. You are mistaken, honest Sancho, Rodriguez is
very Young, and the long Vail she wears is more for Authority and Fashion-sake
than upon account of her Years. May there be never a good one in all those I Have
to live, quoth Sancho, if I meant her any Harm, only I Have such a natural Love
for my Ass, an't like your Worship, that I thought I could not recommend the
poor Titt to a more Charitable Body than this same Madam Rodriguez. Sancho,
said Don Quixote, with a sower Look, does this talk befit this place? Do You
know where you are? Sir, quoth Sancho, every Man must tell his Wants, be he
where he will. Here I bethought my self of Dapple, and here I spoke of him: Had
I called him to mind in the Stable, I would have spoken of him there.

Sancho has reason on his side, said the Duke; and no Body ought to chide him
for it. But let him take no further care, Dapple shall have as much Provender
as he will eat, and be used as well as Sancho himself.

These small Jars being over, which yielded Diversion to all the Company,
except Don Quixote, he was led up a stately Staircase, and then into a noble
Hall, sumptuously hung with rich Gold-Brocade. There his Armor was taken off
by six Young Damsels, that served him instead of Pages, all of 'em fully
instructed by the Duke and Duchess, how to behave themselves so toward Don
Quixote, that he might look on his Entertainment as conformable to those which
the Famous Knight-Errants received of Old.

When he was unarmed, he appeared in his close Breeches, and Shamoy-doublet,
raw-boned and meagre, tall and lank, with a pair of Lantern-Jaws that met in the
middle of his Mouth; in short, he made so very odd a Figure, that
notwithstanding the strict Injunction the Duke had laid on the Young Females
who waited on him, to stifle their Laughter, they were hardly able to contain.
They desired he would give 'em leave to take off his Clothes, and put him on a
clean Shirt. But he would by no Means permit, giving 'em to understand, That
Modesty was as commendable a Virtue in a Knight as Valor; and therefore he
desired them to leave the Shirt with Sancho, and then retiring to an adjacent
Chamber where there was a rich Bed, he locked himself up with his Squire,
pulled off his Clothes, shifted himself, and then while they were alone he
began to take him to Task.

Now, said he, modern Buffoon and Jolter-head of old, what can thou say for
thy self? Where learned you to abuse such a Venerable Ancient Gentlewoman* one
so worthy of Respect as Donna Rodriguez? Was that a proper time to think of
your Dapple? Or can you think Persons of Quality who nobly Entertain the
Masters, forget to provide for their Beasts? For Heavens sake, Sancho, mend thy
Behavior, and don't betray thy homespun Breeding, lest thou be thought a
scandal to thy Master Do not thou know, saucy Rustic, that the World often
makes an Estimate of the Master's Discretion by that of his Servants, and that
one of the most considerable advantages the Great have over their Inferiors,
is to have Servants as good as themselves? Art thou not sensible, pitiful
Fellow as thou art, the more unhappy I, that if they find thee a gross Clown,
or a Mad Buffoon, they will take me for some Hedge-Knight or palltry shifting
Rook? Prithee, therefore, dear Sancho, shun these Inconveniences; for he that
aims too much at Jests and Drolling, is apt to trip and tumble, and is at last
despised as an insipid ridiculous Buffoon. Then curb thy Tongue, think well,
and ponder thy Words before they get loose; and take notice, we are come to a
place whence by the Assistance of Heaven, and the Force of this puissant Arm,
we may depart bettered five to one in Fortune and Reputation. Sancho promised
him to behave himself better for the future, and to sow up his Mouth or bite
out his Tongue, rather than speak one Word which was not duly considered, and
to the purpose; so that his Master need not fear any one should find out what
they were. Don Quixote then dressed himself, put on his Belt and Sword, threw
his Scarlet-Cloak over his Shoulders, and clapped on a Monteer-Cap of Green
Velvet, which had been left him by the Damsels. Thus accoutr'd he entered the
State-Room, where he found the Damsels ranged in two rows, attending with
Water, and all Necessaries to wash in State; and having done him that Office,
with many humble Court'sies and solemn Ceremonies, immediately twelve Pages
with the Gentleman-Sewer at the Head of 'em, came to conduct him to Supper,
letting him know that the Duke and Duchess expected him. Accordinly, they led
'em in great Pomp, some walking before and some behind, into another Room,
where a Table was magnificently set out for four People.

As soon as he approached, the Duke and the Duchess came as far as the Door to
receive him, and with them a grave Clergyman, one of those that assume to
govern Great Men's Houses, and who, not being nobly born themselves, don't know
how to instruct those that are, but would have the Liberality of the Great
measured by the narrowness of their own Souls, making those whom they govern
stingy, when they pretend to teach 'em Frugality. One of these in all
likelihood, was this grave Ecclesiastic who came with the Duke to receive Don
Quixote.

After a thousand Courtly Compliments on all sides, Don Quixote at last
approached the Table, between the Duke and the Duchess, and here arose a fresh
Contest; for the Knight, being offered the Upper end of the Table, thought
himself obliged to decline it. However, he could not withstand the Duke's
pressing Importunities, but was forced at last to comply. The Parson sat right
against him, and the Duke and the Duchess on each side.

Sancho stood by all the while, gaping with wonder to see the Honor done his
Master; and observing how many Ceremonies passed, and what Entreaties the Duke
used to prevail with him to sit at the Upper end of the Table: With your
Worship's good leave, quoth he, I Will tell you what happened once i'our Town, in
reference to this stir and ado that you have had now about Places. The Words were
scarce out of his Mouth, when Don Quixote began to tremble, as having reason to
believe he was going to throw up some impertinent thing or other. Sancho had
his Eyes upon him, and presently understanding his Motions, Sir, quoth he,
don't fear; I will not be Unmannerly, I warrant you. I Will speak nothing, but what
shall be pat to the purpose: I have not so soon forgot the Lesson you gave me
about talking Sense or Nonsense, little and much. I don't know what thou
mean, said Don Quixote; say what thou will, so thou say it but quickly.
Well, quoth Sancho, what I am going to tell you is every tittle true. Should I
trip never so little in my Story, my Master is here to take me up, and give me
the Lie. Prithee, said Don Quixote, lie as much as thou will, for all me. I
will not be thy hindrance. But take heed what thou say. Nay, nay, quoth Sancho,
let me alone for that: I have heeded it and re-heeded it over and over, and
that you shall see -- I warrant you. Truly, my Lord, said Don Quixote, it were
convenient, that your Grace should order this Fellow to be turned out of the
Room; for he will plague you with a thousand Impertinences. Oh! as for that you
must excuse me, said the Duchess; Sancho must not stir a step from me; I Will
engage for him, he shall say nothing, but what is very proper. Many and many
proper Years, quoth Sancho, may your Holiness live, Madam Duchess, for your
Good Opinion of me; though it is more your Goodness than my Deserts. Now then for
my Tale.

Once upon a time a Gentleman in our Town, of a good Estate, and Family, for he
was of the Blood of the Alamos of Medina del Campo, and married one Donna
Mencia de Quinones, who was the Daughter of Don Alonzo de Maramon, a Knight of
the Order of St. Jago, the very same that was drowned in the Herradura, about
whom that Quarrel happened formerly in our Town, in which I heard say, that my
Master Don Quixote was embroiled, and little Tom, the Mad-Cap, who was the Son
of Old Balvastro the Farrier, happened to be sorely hurt -- Is not all this
true now, Master? Speak the Truth and shame the Devil, that their Worships
Graces may know that I am neither a Prater nor a Liar. Thus far, said the
Clergy man, I think thou are the first rather than the latter; I cannot tell
what I shall make of thee by and by. Thou producest so many Witnesses, Sancho,
said Don Quixote, and mention'st so many Circumstances, that I must needs own,
I believe what thou say to be true. But go on, and shorten the Story; for as
thou beginnest, I Am afraid thou wilt not have done these two Days. Pray don't let
him shorten it, said the Duchess: Let him go his own way, tho he were not to
make an end these six Days: I Will hear him with Pleasure, and think the time as
pleasantly employed as any I ever passed in my Life. -- I say then, my Masters,
quoth Sancho, that this same Gentleman I told you of at first, and I know him
as well as I know my right Hand from my left, for it is not a Bow-shot from my
House to his; this Gentleman invited a Husbandman to Dine with him, who was a
Poor Man, but main Honest -- On, Friend, said the Chaplain, at the rate you
proceed, you will not have made an end before you come to the other World. I shall
stop short of half way, quoth Sancho, and it be Heaven's blessed Will: A little
more of your Christian Patience, good Doctor! Now this same Husbandman, as I
said before, coming to this same Gentleman's House, who had given him the
Invitation, Heaven rest his Soul, Poor Heart! For he is now dead and gone, and
more than that, they say he died the Death of an Angel. For my part, I was not
by him when he died; for I was gone to Harvest-Work, at that very time, to a
place called Trembleque. As you love your Life, Friend, said the Clergyman,
leave your Reaping, come back quickly from Trembleque, without staying to bury
the Gentleman, unless you have a Mind to make more Funerals; and pray make an end
of your Story. -- You must know then, quoth Sancho, that as they two were ready
to sit down at Table -- I mean the Husbandman and the Gentleman -- Methinks I
see them now before my Eyes plainer than ever I did in my born Days. The Duke
and the Duchess were infinitely pleased to find how Sancho spun out his Story,
and how the Clergyman fretted at his Prolixity, and Don Quixote spent himself
with Anger and Vexation. Well, quoth Sancho, to go on with my Story, when they
were going to sit down, the Husbandman would not sit till the Gentleman had
taken his place; but the Gentleman made him a sign to put himself at the
Upper-end. By no means, Sir, quoth the Husbandman. Sit down said the other. Good
your Worship, quoth the Husbandman -- Sit where I bid thee, said the Gentleman.
Still the other excused himself, and would not, and the Gentleman told him, he
should, as meaning to be Master in his own House. But the over-mannerly
Lolpoop, fancying he should be huge well Bred and Civil in it, scraped and
cring'd and refused; till at last the Gentleman, in a great Passion even took
him by the Shoulders and forced him into the Chair. Sit there, Clod-pate, cried
he, for let me sit wherever I will, that still will be the Upper-end, and the
place of Worship to thee. And now you have my Tale, and I think I have spoke
nothing but what is to the purpose.

Don Quixote's Face was in a thousand Colors that speckl'd its natural Brown;
so that the Duke and the Duchess were obliged to Check their Mirth, when they
perceived Sancho's Roguery, that Don Quixote might not be put too much out of
Countenance. And therefore to turn the Discourse, that Sancho might not run
into other Fooleries, the Duchess asked Don Quixote, what News he had of the
Lady Dulcinea, and how long it was since he had sent her any Giants or Robbers
for a Present, not doubting but that he had lately subdued many such? Alas!
Madam, answered he, my Misfortunes have had a beginning, but they will never
have an end. I have vanquished Giants, Elves and Cuthroats, and sent them to
the Mistress of my Soul, but where shall they find her? She is Enchanted,
Madam, and Transformed to the ugliest Piece of Rusticity that can be imagined.
I don't know, Sir, quoth Sancho, when I saw her last, she seemed to be the
finest Creature in the Varsal World; thus far at least I can safely vouch for
her upon my own Knowledge, that for Activity of Body, and leaping, the best
Tumbler of 'em all does not go beyond her. Upon my honest Word, Madam Duchess,
she will Vault from the Ground upon her Ass like a Cat. Have you seen her
Enchanted, said the Duke? Seen her, quoth Sancho! And who the Devil was the
first that hit upon this Trick of her Enchantment, think you, but I? She is as
much Enchanted as my Father.

The Churchman hearing 'em talk of Giants, Elves, and Enchantments, began to
suspect this was Don Quixote de la Mancha, whose History the Duke so often used
to Read, though he had several times reprehended him for it, telling him 'twas a
Folly to Read such Follies. Being confirmed in his Suspicion, he addressed
himself very angrily to the Duke. My Lord, said he, your Grace will have a
large account to give one Day for Pampering this Poor Man's Follies. I suppose
this same Don Quixote, or Don Quite Sot, or whatever you are pleased to call
him, cannot be quite so besotted as you endeavor to make him, by giving him
such Opportunities to run on in his Fantastical Humors. Then directing his
Discourse to Don Quixote, Hark ye, said he, Good Man Addle-pate, who has put it
into your Crown that you are a Knight Errant, that you vanquish Giants and
Robbers? Go, go, get you home again, look after your Children, if you have any,
and what honest Business you have to do, and leave wandering about the World,
building Castles in the Air, and making your self a Laughing Stock, to all that
know you or know you not. Where have you found, in the Name of Mischief, that
there ever has been or are now any such Things as Knight-Errants? Where will
you meet with Giants in Spain, or Monsters in La Mancha? Where shall one find
your enchanted Dulcinea's, and all those Legions of Whimsies and Chimera's that
are talked of on your Account, but in your empty Scull?

Don Quixote gave this reverend Person the hearing, listening with great
Patience to his severe Reproof. At last, seeing him Silent, without minding his
Respect to the Duke and Duchess, up he started with Indignation and Fury in
his Looks, and said -- But his Answer deserves a whole Chapter by it self.

CHAP. XXXII. Don Quixote's Answer to his Reprover, with other grave and merry
Accidents.
DON Quixote being thus suddenly got up, shaking from head to Foot for Madness,
as if he had Quicksilver in his Bones, cast an angry look on his indiscreet
Censor, and with an eager delivery, sputtering and stammering with Choler, This
Place, cried he, the Presence of these Noble Persons, and the Respect I have
always had for your Function, check my just Resentment, and tie up my Hands
from taking the Satisfaction of a Gentleman. For these Reasons, and since every
one knows that you Gown-men, as well as Women, use no other Weapon but your
Tongues, I Will fairly engage you upon equal Terms, and Combat you at your own
Weapon. I should rather have expected sober Admonitions from a Man of your
Character, than infamous Reproaches. Charitable and wholesome Correction ought
to be managed at another rate, and with more Moderation. The least that can be
said of this Reproof which you have given me here so bitterly, and in Public,
is, that it has exceeded the bounds of Christian Correction, and a gentle one
had been much more becoming, Is it fit that without any insight into the
Offense which you reprove, you should without any more ado call the Offender
Fool, Sot, and Addle-pate? Pray Sir, what Foolish Action have you seen me do,
that should provoke you to give me such ill Language, and bid me so
Magistratically go home to look after my Wife and Children, before you knew
whether I have any? Don't you think those deserve as severe a Censure who screw
themselves into other Men's Houses, and pretend to Rule the Master? A fine
World it is truly, when a poor Pedant, who has seen no more of it than lies
within twenty or thirty Leagues about him, shall take upon him to prescribe
Laws to Knight-Errantry, and judge of those who profess it! You, forsooth,
esteem it an idle Undertaking, and Time lost to wander through the World,
though scorning its Pleasures, and sharing the hardships and toils of it, by
which the Virtuous aspire to the high Seat of Immortality. If Persons of
Honor, Knights, Lords, Gentlemen, or Men of any Birth, should take me for a
Fool or a Coxcomb, I should think it an irreparable Affront. But for mere
Scholars that never trod the Paths of Chivalry, to think me mad, I despise and
laugh at it. I am a Knight, and a Knight will I die, if so it please
Omnipotence. Some choose the high Road of haughty Ambition, others the low ways
of base servile Flattery, a third sort take the crooked Path of deceitful
Hypocrisy, and a few, very few, that of true Religion. I for my own part,
guided by my Stars, follow the narrow Track of Knight-Errantry; and for the
Exercise of it, I despise Riches, but not Honor. I have redressed Grievances,
and righted the Injured, chastis'd the Insolent, vanquished Giants, and trod
Elves and Hobgoblins under my Feet! I am in Love, but no more than the
Profession of Knight-Errantry obliges me to be; yet I am none of this Age's
Vicious Lovers, but a chaste Platonic. My Intentions are all directed to
Virtuous Ends, and to do no Man wrong, but good to all the World. And now let
your Graces judge, most excellent Duke and Duchess, whether a Person who makes
it his only Study to practice all this, deserves to be upbraided for a Fool.

Well said, In Faith! quoth Sancho; say no more for your self, my good Lord and
Master; stop when you're well; for there is not the least matter to be added
more on your side, either in Word Thought, or Deed. Besides, since Mr. Parson
has had the Face to say point blank, as one may say, That there neither are,
nor ever were any Knight-Errants in the World, no mar'l he does not know what
he says. What! said the Clergyman, I warrant you are that Sancho Panca, to whom
they say your Master has promised an Island? Ay, marry am I, answered Sancho;
and I am he that deserves it as well as another Body; and I am one of those of
whom they say, keep with good Men and thou shall be one of them; and of those
of whom it is said again, not with whom thou were bred, but with whom thou have
fed; and lean against a good Tree, and it will shelter thee. I have leaned and
stuck close to my good Master, and kept him Company this many a Month; and now
he and I are all one; and I must be as he is, an't be Heaven's blessed Will;
live he, and I shall live. He shall not want Kingdoms to Rule, nor shall I want
Islands to Govern.

That thou shall not, honest Sancho, said the Duke; for I on the great Don
Quixote's Account will now give thee the Government of an odd one of my own of
no small Consequence. Down, down on thy Knees, Sancho, cried Don Quixote, and
kiss his Grace's Feet for this Favor. Sancho did accordingly: But when the
Clergyman saw it, he got up in a great beat. By the Habit which I wear, cried
he, I can scarce forbear telling your Grace, that you are as mad as these
Sinful Wretches. Well may they be mad, when Wise Men Humor and Canonize their
Frenzy; you may keep 'em here and stay with 'em your self, if your Grace
pleases; but for my part I Will leave you and go home, to excuse my self from
reprehending what I cannot remedy. With that, leaving the rest of his Dinner
behind him, away he flung; the Duke and the Duchess not being able to pacify
him: Though indeed the Duke could not say much to him, for laughing at his
impertient Passion. When he had done Laughing, Sir Knight of the Lions, said
he, you have answered so well for your self, and your Profession, that you need
no farther Satisfaction of the Angry Clergyman, especially if you consider,
that whatever he might say, it was not in his power to fix an Affront on a
Person of your Character, since Women and Churchmen cannot give an Affront.
Very true, My Lord, said Don Quixote, and the Reason is, because he that cannot
receive an Affront, consequently can give none. Women, Children and Churchmen,
as they cannot Vindicate themselves when they are Injured, so neither are they
capable of receiving an Affront. For there is this difference betwixt an
Affront and an Injury, as your Grace very well knows; an Affront must come from
a Person that is both able to give it, and maintain it when he has given it. An
Injury may de done by any sort of People whatsoever. For Example, a Man walking
in the Street about his Business is set upon by ten Armed Men, who Cudgel him;
he draws his Sword to revenge the Injury, but the Assailants over powering him
he cannot have the Satisfaction he desired. This Man is Injured but not
Affronted. But to confirm it by another Instance, suppose a Man comes behind
another's back, hits him a box of the Ear, and then runs away; the other follows
him, but cannot overtake him. He that has received the Blow has received an
Injury, it is true, but not an Affront; because to make it an Affront, it should
have been justified. But if he that gave it, though he did it basely, stands
his Ground, and faces his Adversary, then he that received it is both Injured.
and Aff^onted: Injured, because he was struck in a Cowardly manner; Aff^onted,
because he that struck him stood his Ground to maintan what he had done.
Therefore according to the settled Laws of Duelling, I may be Injured, but am
not Affronted; for Children and Women are in no Danger, they need not fly, nor
are they obliged to stand; and it is the same thing with the Clergy, for they
carry no Arms, either Offensive or Defensive. Therefore though they are
naturally bound by the Law of Self-preservation to defend themselves, yet are
they not obliged to offend others. Upon second Thoughts then, though I said
just now, I was Injured, I think now, I am not. For he that can receive no
Affront can give none. Therefore I ought not to have any resentment for what
that good Man said, neither indeed have I any. I only wish he would have staid
a little longer, that I might have convinced him of his Error, in believing
there were never any Knight-Errants in the World. Had Amad^ or any one of his
innumerable Race, but heard him say any thing like this, I can assure his
Reverence, it would have gone hard with him. I Will be sworn it would, quoth
Sancho, they would have undone him, as you would undo an Oister; and have cleft
him from Head to Foot, as one would slice a Pomegranate, or a ripe Muskmelon;
take my Word for it. They were a parcel of tough Blades, and would not have
swallowed such a Pill. By the Mackins I verily believe, had Rinaldo of
Montalban but heard the poor Toad talk at this Rate, he would have laid him on
such a poult over the Chaps with his Shoulder of Mutton Fist, as would have
secured him from prating these three Years. Ay, ay, if he had fallen into their
Clutches, see how he would have got out again!

The Duchess was ready to die with laughing at Sancho, whom she thought a more
pleasent Fool, and a greater Madman than his Master; and she was not the only
Person at that time of this Opinion. In short, Don Quixote being pacified, they
made an end of Dinner; and then while some of the Servants were taking away,
there came in four Damsels, one carrying a Silver-Bason, another an Ewer of the
same Metal; a third two very fine Towels over her Arm, and the fourth, with her
Sleeves tucked above her Elbows, held in her Lilly-white Hand (for doubtless
white it was) a large Wash-ball of Naples-Soap. Presently she that held the
Basin, went very civilly, and clapped it under Don Quixote's Chin, while he,
wondering at this extraordinary Ceremony, yet fancying it was the Custom of the
Country to wash the Face instead of the Hands, thrust out his long Chin,
without speaking a Word; and then the Ewer began to Rain upon his Face, and the
Damsel that brought the Wash-ball fell to Work, and belather'd his Beard so
effectually, that the Suds, like huge Flakes of Snow, flew all over the passive
Knight's Face; insomuch, that he was forced to shut his Eyes.

The Duke and the Duchess, who knew nothing of the matter, stood expecting
where this extraordinary Scouring would end. The Femal^ Barber, having thus
laid the Knight's Face a soaking a handful high in Suds, pretended she wanted
Water, and sent another with the Ewer for more^ telling her the Gentleman would
stay for it. She went and left him in one of the most odd Ridiculous Figures
that can be imagined. There he sat exposed to all the Company, with half a yard
of Neck stretched out, his bristly Beard and Chaps all in a white Foam, which
did not at all mend his Walnut-Complexion, insomuch that it is not a little
strange- how those that had so comical a Spectacle before 'em could forbear
laughing outright. The Malicious Damsels, who had a Hand in the Plot, did not
dare to look up, nor let their Eyes meet those of their Master or Mistress, who
stood strangely divided between Anger and Mirth, not knowing what to do in the
Case, whether they should punish the Girls for their Boldness, or reward 'em
for the Diversion they took in seeing the Knight in that Posture.

At last the Maid came back with the Water, and the other having rins'd off the
Soap, she that held the Linen, gently wiped and dried the Knight's Beard and
Face; after which all four dropping a low Curtsy were going out of the Room.
But the Duke, that Don Quixote might not smell the Jest, called to the Damsel
that carried the Basin, and ordered her to come and Wash him too, but be sure
she had Water enough. The Wench being sharp and cunning, came and put the Basin
under the Duke's Chin, as she had done to Don Quixote, but with a quicker
Dispatch, and then having dried him clean, they all made their Honors, and
went off. It was well they understood their Master's Meaning, in serving him as
they did the Knight; for, as it was afterward known, had they not done it, the
Duke was resolved to have made 'em pay dear for their Frolic.

Sancho took great Notice of all the Ceremonies at this Washing. S'Life! quoth
he, I Would fain know whether it is not the Custom of this Country to scrub the
Squire's Beard, as well as the Knight's. For of my Conscience mine wants it not
a little. Nay, if they would run it over with a Razor too, so much the better.
What art thou talking to thy self, Sancho, said the Duchess? Why, an't like
your Gace's Worship, quoth Sancho, I Am only saying, that I Have been told how in
other great Houses, when the Cloth is taken away, they use to give Folks Water
to wash their Hands, and not Suds to scour their Beards. I see now it is good to
Live and Learn. There Is a Saying indeed, he that Lives long, suffers much. But
I have a huge Fancy, that to suffer one of these same Scourings, is rather a
Pleasure than a Pain. Well, Sancho, said the Duchess, trouble thy self no
farther, I Will see that one of my Maids shall Wash thee, and if there be
occasion, lay thee a Bucking too. My Beard is all I want to have scrubb'd at
present, quoth Sancho: As for the rest, we'll think on it another time. Here,
Steward, said the Duchess, see that Sancho has what he has a Mind to, and be
sure do just as he would have you. The Steward told her Grace, that Signior
Sancho should want for nothing; and so he took Sancho along with him to Dinner.

Mean while Don Quixote stayed with the Duke and Duchess, talking of several
Matters, but all relating to Arms and Knight-Errantry. The Duchess then took
an Opportunity to desire the Knight to give a particular Description of the
Lady Dulcinea del Toboso's Beauty and Accomplishments, not doubting but his
good Memory would enable him to do it well; adding withal, that according to
the Voice of Fame, she must needs be the finest Creature in the whole World,
and consequently in all La Mancha.

With that, Don Quixote, fetching a deep Sigh, Madam, said he, could I rip out
my Heart, and expose it to you Grace's View in a Dish on this Table, I might
save my Tongue the Labor of attempting that which it cannot express, and you
can scarce believe; for there your Grace would see her Beauty depainted to the
Life. But why should I undertake to delineate, and copy one by one each several
Perfection of the Peerless Dulcinea! That Burden must be sustained by stronger
Shoulders than mine: That Task were worthy of the Pencils of Parrhasius,
Timantes, and Apelles, or the Tools of Lysippus. The Hands of the best Painters
and Statuaries should indeed be employed to give in Speaking Paint, in Marble
and Corinthian Brass, an exact Copy of her Beauties; while Ciceronian and
Demosthenian Eloquence labored to reach the Praise of her other Endowments.
Pray, Sir, asked the Duchess, what do you mean by that Word Demosthenian?
Demosthenian Eloquence, Madam, said Don Quixote, is as much as to say, the
Eloquence of Demosthenes, and the Ciceronian that of Cicero, the two greatest
Orators that ever were in the World. It Is true, said the Duke; and you but
showed your Ignorance, my Dear, in asking such a Question. Yet the Noble Don
Quixote would highly oblige us if he would but be pleased to attempt her
Picture now; for even in a rude Draught of her Lineaments, I question not but
she will appear so Charming, as to deserve the Envy of the B^ightest of her
Sex. Ah! my Lord, said Don Quixote, It should be so indeed if the Misfortune
which not long since befell her, had not in a manner razed the Idea out of the
Seat of my Memory; and as it is, I ought rather to be wail her Change, than
describe her Person: For your Grace must know, that as I lately went to Kiss
her Hands, and obtain her Leave for my intended Absence in quest of new
Adventures, I found her quite another Creature than I expected. I found her
Enchanted, Transformed, from a Princess to a Country-Wench, from Beauty to
Ugliness, from Courtliness to Rusticity, from a reserved Lady to a Jumping
Joan, from Sweetness it self to the Stench of a Pole-cat, from Light to
Darkness, from an Angel to a Devil; and, in short, from Dulcinea del Toboso, to
a Peasantess of Sayago. Bless us! cried the Duke, with a loud Voice, What
Villain has done the World such an Injury? Who has robbed it not only of the
Beauty that was its Ornament, but of those charming Graces that were its
Delight, and that Virtue which was its Living Honor? Who should it be, replied
Don Quixote, but one of those Damned Inchanters, one of those numerous Envious
Fiends, that without Cessation Persecute me. That wicked Brood of Hell, Spawned
into the World to Eclipse the Glory of Good and Valiant Men, and Blemish their
Exploits, while they Labor to Exalt and Magnify the Actions of the Wicked.
These Cursed Magicians have Persecuted me, and Persecute me now, and will
continue till they have sunk me and my lofty Deeds of Chivalry into the
Profound Abyss of Oblivion. Yes, yes, they choose to Wound me in that Part which
they well know is most sensible: Well knowing, that to deprive a Knight Errant
of his Lady, is to rob him of those Eyes with which he sees, of the Sun that
Enlightens him, and the Food that Sustains him. For, as I have often said, a
Knight Errant without a Lady, is like a Tree without Leaves, a Building without
Mortar, or a Shadow without a Body that causes it.

I grant all this, said the Duchess; yet if we may believe the History of your
Life, which was lately Published with Universal Applause, it seems to imply, to
the best of my Remembrance, that you never saw the Lady Dulcinea, and that
there is no such Lady in the World; but rather that she it a mere Notional
Creature, engendered and brought forth by the Strength and Heat of your Fancy,
and there Endowed with all the Charms and good Qualifications, which you are
pleased to ascribe to her.

Much may be said upon this Point, said Don Quixote; Heaven knows whether there
be a Dulcinea in the World or not, and whether she be a Notional Creature or
not. These are Mysteries not to be so narrowly inquired into. Neither have I
Engendered, or Begot that Lady. I do indeed make her the Object of my
Contemplations, and, as I ought, look on her as a Lady endowed with all those
Qualifications that may raise the Character of a Person to Universal Fame. She
is to me bautiful without Blemish, reserved without Pride, Amorous with
Modesty, agreeable for her Courteous Temper, and Courteous, as an Effect of her
generous Education; and, in short, of an Illustrious Parentage. For Beauty
Displays its Luster to a higher Degree of Perfection when matched with Noble
Blood, than it can in those that are meanly Descended.

The Observation is just, said the Duke; but give me leave, Sir, to propose to
you a Doubt, which the Reading of that History has started in my Mind: It Is,
that, allowing there be a Dulci^e^ at Toboso, or elsewhere, and as Beautiful as
you describe her, yet I do not find she can any way equal in greatness of Birth
the Oriana's, the Alastrajarea's, the Madasima's, and a thousand others of whom
we read in those Histories, with which you have been so Conversant. To this,
said Don Quixote, I Answer, that Dulcinea is the Daughter of her own Actions,
and that Virtue ennobles the Blood. A virtuous Man of mean Condition, is more
to be Esteemed than a Vicious Person of Quality. Besides, Dulcinea is possessed
of those other Endowments that may entitle her to Crowns and Scepters, since
Beauty alone has raised many of her Sex to the Throne. Where Merit has no
Limits, Hope may well have no Bounds; and to be Fair and Virtuous is so
Extensive an Advantage, that it gives, though not a Formal, at least a Virtual
Claim to larger Fortunes. I must own, Sir, said the Duchess, that in all your
Discourse, you, as we say, proceed with the Plummet of Reason, and Fathom all
the Depths of Controversy. Therefore, I submit, and from this time I am
resolved to believe and maintain, that there is a Dulcinea del Toboso Extant,
and Living at this Day; that she is Beautiful and of good Extraction; and to
sum up all in a Word, altogether de^erving the Services of so great a Knight
as the Noble Don Quixote; which I think is the highest Commendation I can
bestow on her. But yet I must confess, there is still one Scruple that makes me
uneasy, and causes me to have an ill Opinion of Sancho. It Is that the History
tells us, that when Sancho Panca carried your Letter to the Lady Dulcinea, he
found her Winnowing a Sack of Corn, by the same Token that it was the worst
sort of Wheat, which makes me much doubt her Quality.

Your Grace must know, answered Don Quixote, that almost every thing that
relates to me, is managed quite contrary to what the Affairs of other
Knight-Errants used to be. Whether it be the unfathomable Will of Destiny, or
the Implacable Malice of some envious Inchanter orders it so, or no, I cannot
well tell. For it is beyond all doubt, that most of us Knight-Errants still have
had something peculiar in our Fates. One has had the Privilege to be above the
Power of Enchantments, another to be Invulnerable, as the Famous Orlando one of
the twelve Peers of France, whose Flesh, they tell us, was impenetrable every
where but in the Sole of his left Foot, and even there too he could be Wounded
with no other Weapon than the Point of a great Pin; so that when Bernardo del
Carpio deprived him of Life at Roncesvalles, finding he could not Wound him
with his Sword, he lifted him from the Ground, and squeezed him to Death in his
Arms; remembering how Hercules killed Antaeus, that cruel Giant, who was said to
be the Son of the Earth. Hence I infer, that probably I may be secured in the
same manner, under the Protection of some particular Advantage, though it is not
that of being Invulnerable; for I have often found by Experience, that my Flesh
is tender, and not impenetrable. Nor does any private Prerogative free me from
the Power of Enchantment; for I have found my self clapped into a Cage, where
all the World could not have Locked me up, but the force of Necromantick
Incantations. But since I got free again, I believe that even the force of
Magic will never be able to Confine me thus another time. So that these
Magicians finding they cannot work their wicked Ends directly on me, revenge
themselves on what I most esteem, and endeavor to take away my Life by
Persecuting that of Dulcinea, in whom, and for whom I Live. And therefore I
believe, when my Squire delivered my Embassy to her, they Transformed her into
a Count^y-Dowdy, poorly busied in the low and base Employment of Winnowing
Wheat. But I do aver, that it was neither Rye, nor Wheat, but Oriental Pearl;
and to prove this, I must acquaint your Graces, that passing the other Day by
Toboso, I could not so much as find Dulcinea's Palace; whereas my Squire went
the next Day, and saw her in all her Native Charms, the most Beautiful Creature
in the World; yet when I met her presently after, she appeared to me in the
Shape of an Ugly, Course, Country-Mawkin, Boorish, and Ill-bred, though she
really is Discretion it self. And therefore, because I my self cannot be
Enchanted, the unfortunate Lady must be thus Enchanted, Mis-us'd, Disfigured,
chopp'd and changed. Thus my Enemies wreaking their Malice on her, have
Revenged themselves on me; which makes me abandon my self to Sorrow, till she
be restored to her former Perfections.

I have been the more large in this Particular, that no body might insist on
what Sancho said of her sifting of Corn: For if she appeared Changed to me,
what Wonder is it if she seemed so to him. In short, Dulcinea is both
Illustrious and well-born, being descended of the most ancient and best
Families in Toboso, of whose Blood I am positive she has no small share in her
Veins; and now that Town will be no less famous in after-Ages for being the
Place of her Nativity, than Troy for Helen, or Spain for The Nickname of Count
Julian's Daughter, who having been Ravished by King Rodrigo, occasioned the
bringing in of the Moors into Spain.
Cava, though on a more Honorable Account.

As for Sancho Panca's part, I assure your Grace he is one of the most pleasant
Squires that ever waited on a Knight Errant. Sometimes he comes out with such
sharp Simplicities, that one is pleasantly puzzled to judge, whether he be more
Knave or Fool. The Varlet, indeed, is full of Roguery enough to be thought a
Knave; but then he has yet more Ignorance, and may better be thought a Fool. He
doubts of every thing, yet believes every thing; and when one would think he
had entangl'd himself in a piece of downright Folly beyond recovery, he brings
himself off of a sudden so cleverly, that he is applauded to the Skies. In
short, I would not change him for the best Squire that wears a Head, though I
might have a City to boot, and therefore I don't know whether I had best let
him go to the Government which your Grace has been pleased to promise him.
Though, I must confess, his Talent seems to lie pretty much that way: For, give
never so little a whet to his Understanding, he will manage his Government as
well as the King does his Customs. Then Experience convinces us, that neither
Learning nor any other Abilities are very material to a Governor. Have we not
a hundred of 'em that can scarce Read a Letter, and yet they Govern as sharp as
so many Hawks. Their main Business is only to mean well, and to be resolved to
do their best; for they cannot want able Counselors to Instruct 'em. Thus those
Governors who are Men of the Sword, and no Scholars, have their Assessors on
the Bench to direct them. My Counsel to Sancho shall be, that he neither take
Bribes, nor lose his Privileges, with some other little Instructions, which I
have in my Head for him, and which at a proper time I will communicate, both to
his private Advantage, and the public Good of the Island he is to Govern.

So far had the Duke, the Duchess, and Don Quixote been Discoursing together,
when they heard a great Noise in the House; and by and by Sancho came running
in unexpectedly into the Room where they sat, in a terrible Fright, with a
Dish-clout before him instead of a Bib. The Scullions, and other greasy Rabble
of the Kitchen were about him, one of 'em pursuing him with a little
Kneading-Trough full of Dish-water, which he endeavored by any means to put
under his Chin, while another stood ready to have washed the poor Squire with
it. How now, Fellow, said the Duchess! What Is the matter here? What would you
do with this good Man? Don't you consider he is a Governor Elect? Madam, quoth
the Barber-Scullion, the Gentleman will not let us wash him according to Custom,
as my Lord Duke and his Master were. Yes marry but I will, quoth Sancho, in a
mighty Huff, but then it shall be with clearer Sudds, cleaner Towels, and not
quite so stovenly Paws; for there is no such difference between my Master and me
neither, that he must be washed with Angel-Water, and I with the Devil's Lie:
So far the Customs of great Men's Houses are good as they give no Offense. But
this same Beastly washing in a Puddle, is worse Penance than a Frier's
Flogging. My Beard is clean enough, and wants no such refreshing. Stand clear,
you had best; for the first that comes to wash me or touch a Hair of my Head
(my Beard I would say) Sir, Reverence of the Company, I Will take him such a
Dowse of the Ear, he shall feel it a Twelvemonth after: For these kind of
Ceremonies and Soapings, do you see, look more like Flouts and Jeers, than like a
civil Welcome to Strangers! The Duchess was like to have burst her Sides with
Laughing, to see Sancho's Fury, and hear how he argued for himself. But Don
Quixote did not very well like to see him with such a nasty Dish-Clout about
his Neck, and made the sport of the Kitchen-Pensioners. Therefore after he had
made a deep Bow to the Duke, as it were desiring Leave to speak, looking on the
Scullions: Hark ye, Gentlemen, cried he, very gravely, Pray let the Young Man
alone, and get you gone as you came, if you think fit. My Squire is as cleanly
is another Man; your Trough will not do, you might as well have brought him a
Dram-Cup. Away; be advised by me, and leave him: For neither he nor I can abide
such slovenly Jestings. No, no, quoth Sancho, taking the Words out of his
Master's Mouth, let 'em stay, and go on with their Show. I Will pay my Barbers,
I Will warrant ye. They had as good take a Lion by the Beard as meddle with mine.
Let 'em bring a Comb hither, or what they will, and Curry-comb it, and if they
find any thing there that should not be there, I Will give 'em leave to cut and
mince me as small as a Horse. Sancho is in the right, said the Duchess, still
Laughing, and will be in the right, in all he says; he is as clean and neat as
can be, and needs none of your scouring; and if he does not like our way of
Washing, let him do as he pleases. Besides, you who pretend to make others
clean, have shown your selves now very Careless and Idle. I don't know whether
I may not say Impudent too, to offer to bring your Kneading-Trough and your
Dish-clouts to such a Person, and such a Beard, instead of a Golden Basin and
Ewer, and fine Diaper-Towels. But you are a Pack of unmannerly Varlets, and
like saucy Rascals as you are, cannot help showing your Spite to the Squires of
Knight-Errants.

The greasy Regiment, and even the Steward, who was with 'em, thought verily
the Duchess had been in earnest. So they took the Cloth from Sancho's Neck,
and sneaked off quite out of Countenance. Sancho seeing himself delivered from
his Apprehensions of this Danger, ran and threw himself on his Knees before the
Duchess. Heaven bless your Worship's Grace, quoth he, Madam Duchess. Great
Persons are able to do great Kindnesses. For my part, I don't know how to make
your Worship amends for this you have done me now. I can only wish I might see my
my self an Armed Knight Errant for your sake, that I might spend all the Days
of my Life in the Service of so high a Lady. I am a poor Countryman, my Name
is Sancho Panca, Children I have, and serve as a Squire. If in any of these
Matters, I can do you any good, you need but speak; I Will be nimbler in doing
than your Worship shall be in ordering. It Is evident Sancho, said the Duchess,
that you have learned Civility in the School of Courtesy it self, and have been
bred up under the Wings of Don Quixote, who is the very Cream of Compliment,
and the Flower of Ceremonies. All Happiness attend such a Knight and such a
Squire; the one the North-Star of Chivalry-Errant, the other the bright
Luminary of Squire-like Fidelity. Rise, my Friend Sancho, and assure your self,
that for the Recompense of your Civilities. I will persuade my Lord Duke to put
you in Possession of the Government he promised you, as soon as he can. After
this, Don Quixote went to take his Afternoon's Sleep. But the Duchess desired
Sa^cho, if he were not very sleepy, he would pass the Afternoon with her and
her Women in a cool Room. Sancho told her Grace, that indeed he did use to take
a good sound Nap, some four or five hours long in an Afternoon; but to do her
good Honor a Kindness, he would break an old Custom for once, and do his best
to hold up that Day, and wait on her Worship. The Duke on his side, gave fresh
Orders that Don Quixote should be entertained exactly like a Knight Errant,
without deviating the least step from the Road of Chivalry, such as is
observable in Books of that kind.

CHAP. XXXIII. The savoury Conference which the Duchess and her Women held
with Sancho Panca, worth your Reading and Observation.
THE Story afterward informs us, that Sanch^ slept not a Wink all that
Afternoon, but waited on the Duchess as he had promised. Being mightily taken
with his comical Discourse, she ordered him to take a low Chair and sit by her;
but Sancho, who knew better things, absolutely declined it, till she pressed
him again to sit as he was a Governor, and speak as he was a Squire, in both
which Capacities he deserved the very Seat of Cid Ruy Diaz, the famous
Champion. Sancho shrugg'd up his Shoulders and obeyed, and all the Dutchess's
Women standing round about her to give her silent Attention, she began the
Conference.

Now that we are private, said she, and no Body to over-hear us, I would desire
you, my Lord Governor, to resolve me of some Doubts in the printed History of
the great Don Quixote which puzzle me very much. First, I find that the good
Sancho had never seen Dulcinea, (the Lady Dulcinea del Toboso I should have
said) nor carried her his Master's Letter, as having left the Table Book behind
him in Sierra Morena; how then durst he feign an Answer, and pretend he found
her winnowing Wheat? a Fiction and Banter so injurious to the Reputation of the
peerless Dulcinea, and so great a Blemish on the Character of a faithful
Squire. Here Sancho got up without speaking a Word, laid his Finger on his
Lips, and with his Body bent, crept cautiously round the Room, lifting up the
Hangings, and peeping in every Hole and Corner: At last, finding the Coast
clear, he returned to his Seat. Now, quoth he, Madam Duchess, since I find
there is no Body here but our-selves, you shall even hear, without Fear or
Favor, the Truth of the Story, and what else you will ask me; but not a Word of
the Pudding. First and foremost I must ^ell you, I look on my Master Don
Quixote to be no better than a downright Madman, though sometimes he will stumble
on a Parcel of Sayings so quaint and so tightly put together that the Devil
himself could not mend 'em; but in the main, I cannot beat it out of my Noddle
but that he is as mad as a March-Hare. Now, because I Am pretty confident of
knowing his blind Side, whatever Crotchets come into my Crown, though without
either Head or Tall, yet can I make 'em pass upon him for Gospel. Such was the
Answer to his Letter, and another Sham that I put upon him but the other Day, and
is not in Print yet, touching my Lady Dulcinea's Enchantment; for you must
know, between you and I, she is no more enchanted than the Man in the Moon. With
that, at the Dutchess's Request, he related the whole Passage of the late
pretended Enchantment very faithfully, to the great Diversion of the Hearers.
But Sir, said the Duchess, I have another Scruple in this Affair no less
unaccountable than the former; for I think I hear something whisper me in the
Ear, and say* If Don Quixote de la Manch^ be such a Shallow-brains, why does
Sancho Panca, who knows him to be so, wait upon this Madman, and rely thus upon
his vain extravagant Promises? I can only infer from this, that the Man is more
a Fool than the Master; and if so, will not Madam Duchess be thought as mad as
either of 'em, to bestow the Government of an Island, or the Command of others,
on one who cannot govern himself? By'r Lady, quoth Sancho, your Scruple comes in
Pudding-time. But it need not whisper in your Ear, it may even speak plain, and
as loud as it will. I am a Fool that is certain, for if I Would been wise, I had
left my Master many a fair Day since; but it was my Luck and my vile Errantry,
and that is all can be said on it. I must follow him through Thick and Thin. We
are both Towns-born Children; I have eaten his Bread, I love him well, and
there is no Love lost between us. He pays me well, he has given me three Colts,
and I am so very true and trusty to him, that nothing but Death can part us.
And if your High and Mightiness does not think fit to let me have this same
Government, why even do so; with less was I born, and with less shall I die; it
may be for the Good of my Conscience to go without it. I am a Fool it is true,
but yet I understand the Meaning of the Saying, The Pismire had Wings to do her
Hurt; and Sancho the Squire, may sooner get to Heaven than Sancho the
Governor. There Is as good Bread baked here as in France, and Joan's as good as
my Lady in the Dark. Unhapppy's he that wants his Breakfast at two in the
Afternoon. It Is always good Fasting after a good Breakfast. There Is no Man has
a Stomach a Yard bigger than another, but let it be never so big, there will be
Hay and Straw enough to fill it. A Belly full's a Belly full. The Sparrow
speeds as well as the Sparrow-Hawk. Good Serge is fine, but coarse Cloth is
warm; and four Yards of the one are as long as four Yards of the other. When
the Hour is come we must all be packed off; the Prince and the Prick-Louse go
the same Way at last; the Road is no fairer for the one than the other, and the
Pope and the Sexton may peer in the Pit; and so good Den and good Night,
Friends must part, as the King said to his Hounds. And let me tell you again,
if you don't think fit to give me an Island 'cause I Am a Fool, I Will be so wise
as not to care whether you do or no. It Is an old Saying, The Devil lurks behind
the Cross. All is not Gold that glisters. From the Tail of the Plough Bamba was
made King of Spain; and from his Silks and Riches was Rodrigo ^^st to be
devoured by the Snakes, if the old Ballads say true, and sure they are too old
to tell a Lie. That they are indeed, said Donna Rodriguez, the old
Waiting Woman, who listened among the rest; for I remember one of the Ballads
tells us how Don Rodrigo was shut up alive in a Tomb full of Toads, Snakes, and
Lizards; and how after two Days he was heard to cry out of the Tomb in a low
and doleful Voice, now they eat me, now they gnaw me in the Part where I sinned
most, And according to this the Gentleman is in the Right, in saying he had
rather be a poor Labourer, than a King, to be gnawed to Death by Vermin.

Sancho's proverbial Aphorisms, and the simple Waiting-woman's Comment upon the
Text, were no small Diversion to the Duchess. You know, said she, he ^^st
Sancho, that the Promise of a Gentleman or Knight, must be as precious and
sacred to him as his Life; I make no Question then, but that my Lord Duke (who
is also a Knight, though not of your Master's Order) will infallibly keep his
Word with you in Respect of your Government. Take Courage then Sancho, for when
you least dream on it, in spite of all the Envy and Malice of the World, you
will suddenly see your self in full Possession of your Government, and seated
in your Chair of State in your rich Robes, with all your Marks and Ornaments of
Power about you. But be sure to administer true Justice to your Vassals, who by
their Loyalty and Discretion will merit no less at your Hands.

As for the governing Part, quoth Sancho, let me alone. I was ever charitable
and good to the Poor, and scorn to take the Bread out of another Man's Mouth.
On the other Side, by'r Lady, they shall play me no foul Play. I Am an old Cur
at a Crust, and can sleep Dog-sleep when I list. I can look sharp as well as
another, and let me alone to keep the Cobwebs out of my Eyes. I know where the
Shoe wrings me; I Will know who and who is together. Honesty's the best Policy.
I Will stick to that. The Good shall have my Hand and Heart, but the Bad neither
Foot nor Fellowship. And in my Mind, the main Point in this Point of Governing,
is to make a good Beginning. I Will lay my Life, that as simple as Sancho sits
here, in a Fortnight's Time he will manage ye this same Island as tightly as a
Sheaf of Barley. You say well Sancho, said the Duchess, for Time ripens all
things. No Man's born wise; Bishops are made of Men, and not of Stones. But to
return once more to the Lady Dulcinea; I am more than half persuaded that
Sancho's Design of putting the Trick upon his Master, was turned into a greater
Cheat upon himself: For I am well assured that the Creature whom you fancied to
be a Country-Wench, and took so much Pains to persuade your Master that she was
Dulcinea del Toboso, was really the same Dulcinea del Toboso, and really
enchanted, as Don Quixote thought; and the Magicians that persecute your Master
first invented that Story, and put it into your Head. For you must know, that
we have our Inchanters here that have a Kindness for us, and give us an Account
of what happens in the World faithfully and impartially, without any Tricks or
Equivocations; and take my Word for it, the jumping Country-Wench was and is
still Dulcinea del Toboso, who is as certainly enchanted as the Mother that
bore her; and when we least expect it, we shall see her again in her true Shape
and in all her native Luster, and then Sancho will find 'twas he himself was
bubbl'd. Troth Madam, quoth Sancho, all this might well be: And now I am apt to
believe what my Master tells me of Montesino's Cave; where, as he says, he saw
my Lady Dulcinea del Toboso in the self-same Garb, and as handsome as I told
him I had seen her when it came into my Noddle to tell him she was enchanted.
Ay, my Lady, it must be quite contrary to what I ween'd, as your Worship's
Grace well observes; for, Lord bless us! who the Devil can imagine that such a
Numskull as I should have it in him to devise so cunning a Trick of a Sudden?
Besides, who can think that my Master's such a Goose, as to believe so unlikely
a Matter upon the single Vouching of such a dunder-headed Fellow as I? But for
all that, my good Lady, I hope you know better things than to think me a Knave;
alack-a-day, it cannot be expected that such an Ignoramus as I am should be able
to divine into the Tricks and Wiles of wicked Magicians. I invented that Flam
only because my Master would never leave teizing me; but I had no Mind to abuse
him, not I; and if it fell out otherwise than I meant, who can help it? Heaven
knows my Heart. That Is honestly said, answered the Duchess; but pray tell me,
Sancho, What was it you were speaking of Mont^sino's Cave? I Have a great Mind to
know that Story. Thereupon Sancho having related the whole Matter to the
Duchess; Look you, said she, this exactly makes out what I said to you just
now; for since the great Don Quixot^ affirms he saw there the same
Country-Wench that Sancho met coming from Toboso, it is past all Doubt 'twas
Dulcinea; and this shows the Inchanters are a subtle sort of People that will
know every thing, and give a quick and sure Information. Well, quoth Sancho, if
my Lady Dulcinea del Toboso be enchanted, it is the worse for her: What have I
to do to quarrel with all my Master's Enemies? They cannot be few for ought I
see, and they are plag^y Fellows to deal withal. Thus much I dare say, She I
saw was a Country-Wench; a Country-Wench I took her to be, and a Country-Wench
I left her. Now if that same Dowdy was Dulcinea in good Earnest, how can I help
it? I ought not to be called to an Account for it. No, let the Saddle be set
upon the right Horse, or we shall never have done. Sancho told me this, cries
one; Sancho told me that, cries t'ther; Sancho of this Side, Sancho of that
Side; Sancho did this, and Sancho did that* as if Sancho were I don't know who,
and not the same Sancho that goes already far and near through the World in
Books, as Sampson Carrasco tells me, and he is no less than a Bachelor of Arts
at Salamanc^ Varsity, and such Folks as he cannot tell a Lie, unless they be so
disposed, or it stands 'em in good stead. So let no Body meddle or make, nor
offer to pick a Quarrel with me about the Matter, since I Am a Man of
Reputation; and, as my Master says, a good Name is better than Riches. Clap me
but into this same Government once, and you shall see Wonders. He that has been
a good Servant, will make a good Master; a trusty Squire will make a rare
Governor I Will warrant you. Sancho speaks like an Oracle, said the Duchess;
every thing he says is a Sentence like those of Cato, or at least the very
Marrow of Michael V^rino, Florentibus occidit Annis; that is, he died in his
Spring: In short, to speak after his Way, Under a bad Cloak look for a good
Drinker.

Faith and Troth Madam Duchess, quoth Sancho, I never drank out of Malice in
my born Days; for Thirst perhaps I may; for I have not a Bit of Hypocrisy in me.
I drink when I have Occasion, and sometimes when I have no Occasion: I Am no
proud Man do you see, and when the Liquor's offered me I whip it off, that they
may not take me for a Churl or a Sneaksby, or think I don't understand my self
nor good Manners; for when a Friend or a good Fellow drinks and puts the Glass
to one, who can be so hard-hearted as to refuse to pledge him, when it costs
nothing but to open one's Mouth? However I commonly look before I leap* and
take no more than needs must. And truly there is no Fear we poor Squires to
Knights-Errant should be great Trespassers that Way. Alack-a-day! mere Element
must be our daily Beveridge, Ditch-water, for want of better, in Woods and
Deserts, on Rocks and Mountains, without lighting on that Blessing of one
merciful Drop of Wine, though you would give one of your Eyes for a single Gulp.

I believe it Sancho, said the Duchess; but now it grows late, and therefore
go and take some Rest; after that we'll have a longer Conversation, as you're
pleased to word it. Sancho kissed the Dutchess's Hand once more, and begged her
Worship's Grace that special Care might be taken of his Dap^le, for he was as
chary of him as of the Apple of his Eye. What is that Dapple? asked the
Duchess. My Beast, an't like your Honor, answered Sancho; my Ass I would say,
saving your Presence; but because I will not call him Ass, which is so common a
Name among Men, I call him Dapple. It Is the very same Beast I would have given
Charge of to this same Gentlewoman when I came first to this Castle; but her
Back was up presently, and she flew out as if I had called her ugly Face, old
Witch, and what not. However I Will be judged by any one, whether suchlike sober
grave Bodies as she and other Duenas are, be not fitter to look after Asses,
than to sit with a prim Countenance to grace a fine State-Room? Passion of my
Heart! What a deadly Grudge a certain Gentleman of our Town, that shall be
nameless, had to those Creatures! Some filthy Clown I dare engage, said Donna
Rodriguez the Du^na; had he been a Gentleman, or a Person of good Breeding, he
would have praised 'em up to the Skies. Well, said the Duchess, let us have no
more of that; let Donna Rodriguez hold her Tongue, and Signior Sancho Panca go
to his Repose, and leave me to take Care of his Dapple's good Entertainment;
for since I find him to be one of Sancho's Movables, I Will place him in my
Esteem above the Apples of my Eyes. Place him in the Stable, my good Lady,
replied Sancho, that is as much as he deserves; neither he nor I are worthy of
being placed a Minute of an Hour where you said: Odsbobs! I Would sooner be stuck
in the Guts with a Butcher's Knife than you should be served so; I am better
bred than that comes to; for though my Lord and Master has taught me, that in
Point of Haviour one ought rather to over-do than under-do, yet when the Case
lies about an Ass and the Ball of one's Eye, it is best to think twice, and go
warily about the Matter. Well, said the Duchess, your Ass may go with you to
the Government, and there you may feed him, and pamper him, and make as much of
him as you please. Adad! my Lady, quoth Sancho, don't let your Worship think
this will be such a strange Matter neither, I have seen more Asses than one go
to a Government before now; and if mine goes too, 'twill be no new thing e'trow.

Sancho's Words set again the Duchess a laughing; and so sending him to take
his Rest, she went to the Duke, and gave him an Account of the pleasant
Discourse between her and the Squire. After this they resolved to have some
notable Contrivance to make Sport with Don Quixote, and of such a romantic
Cast as should humor his Knight-Errantry. And so successful they were in their
Management of that Interlude, that it may well be thought one of the best
Adventures in this famous History.

The End of the Third Volume.
THE HISTORY Of the RENOWNED DON QUIXOTE De la MANCHA.

Written in Spanish by Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra.

Translated from the Original by several Hands: And published by Mr. Motteux.

VOL. IV.

LONDON: Printed for Sam. Buckley at the Dolphin in Little Britain, 1712.

To the Honorable COLONEL STANHOPE.
SIR,
SOME People may be surpised at my Dedicating any Part of Don Quixote in
English to a Person, who having so true a Taste of his Perfections in his
Native Language, can have little Relish for him under the Disadvantages of a
Translation: But this which might appear to others a Reasonable Objection, was
to me the most Prevalent Inducement to this Address. I must indeed confess that
your Capacity startled my Presumpt on; but then, I considered, that a Person,
who is so truly sensible of the Beauties of the Original, would be most
Conscious of the Great Difficulties that must attend my Undertaking, and
consequently most likely to excuse the Imperfection in the Translating of a
Book that had been thrice attempted in English before; yet so, as not to
discourage a fourth Essay. Expecting therefore to be Attacked by the Critics,
and believing that the most I could pretend to was a Handsome Retreat, I
thought it my best way to secure the Whole, by having the Rear brought up by a
Leader, whose very Reputation, would be sufficient to keep the Enemy in Awe.

My Author, by a Successful Errantry has visited most Parts of Europe, and been
taught to speak all the Polite Languages in the Christian World. But he has
been a whole Century in arriving at a Part of that Accomplishment, which you,
Sir, have gained in so few Years, that if we compare the Perfection you have
attained, with the shortness of the Time, we must conclude, that not only all
these Languages, but a Thousand Noble Endowments have been rather Born with
you, than Acquired.

Learning in Schools, Philosophy in Retirement, and Experience in Gray Heirs,
are but the consequence of their several Constitutions; but to find the Muses
at Court, the Philosopher in the Camp, and the depth of Prudence in Youth, is
one of those Rarities, that should be shown to delight Mankind with Admiration,
and to Improve the World by Example. Could your Character, Sir, be drawn to the
Life, the Good that might be done by setting it in view, might plead an Excuse
even to your self, who appear so great a Lover of your Country, by the whole
Bent of your Studies; for what you seem to have laid out for your Private
Accomplishment, proves indeed Dedicated to the Service of the Public; and You
have so Profited in Your Endeavors, that your Country seems at a Stand,
whether to fix You upon Action in the Field, Council at home, or Negotiation
abroad. If these several Talents, even when divided, illustrate Noble Families,
where, as in Yours, Merit flows down from Father to Son, what shall we say of
the Person, in whom they appear so Happily united.

One of the first Subjects we find treated in Poetry, was the Expedition at
Colchos, and the Illustrious Argonautes found an Orpheus to transmit their Fame
to Futurity. Whether this were not a kind of a Laudable Knight-Errantry in the
Volunteers, or a Fiction of the Poet; You, Sir, can best determine, who are so
Great a Critic in the Greek. But had that very Orpheus lived in this Age, what
Glorious unfeigned Subjects had he not found in the late Adventurers for the
Iberian Golden Fleece! These Papers, Sir, are no small Part of the Treasures of
Spain, and since You had so Great a Share in the Glory of Enriching your
Country with the Wealth of that Nation, You must be content to have a Part in
Impropriating Cervantes to the use of the English. You have humbled the Pride
of the Spaniard, and he throws himself at your Feet for Protection. He, that
was himself a Soldier, knows that the Gallant Man will always give Quarter; and
hopes that You, whom Italy and Flanders have seen so early, and so Eminently
Brave in the Defense of his Country, when it was the Interest of your own, will
now Generously Protect an Honest Spaniard like Cervantes, though you have so
lately been One of the Foremost in an Action, no less Fatal to his Nation, than
Glorious to the Undertakers.

SIR, I feel a warmth within me, that Prompts me to Expatiate upon a Subject of
which I must own my Self particularly Fond; but then a Remainder of Discretion
checks my Zeal, and cautions me against any thing beyond my Strength and your
Patience. I am,

SIR, Your most humble and most Obedient Servant P. Motteux.

THE Life and Achievements Of the Renowned DON QUIXOTE DE LA MANCHA.
VOL. IV.
CHAP. XXXIV. Containing Ways and Means for disinchanting the Peerless Dulcinea
del Toboso, being one of the most famous Adventures in the whole Book.
THE Duke and the Duchess were extremely diverted with the Humors of their
Guests. Resolving therefore to improve their Sport, by carrying on some
pleasant Design, that might bear the Appearance of an Adventure, they took the
Hint from Don Quixote's Account of Montesino's Cave, as a Subject from which
they might raise an extraordinary Entertainment: The rather, since, to the
Dutchess's Amazement, Sancho's Simplicity was so great, as to believe that
Dulcinea del Toboso was really enchanted, though he himself had been the first
Contriver of the Story, and her only Inchanter.

Accordingly, having given Directions to their Servants that nothing might be
wanting, and proposed a Day for Hunting the Wild Boar, in five or six Days they
were ready to set out, with a Train of Huntsmen and other Attendants not
unbecoming the greatest Prince. They presented Don Quixote with a Hunting-Suit,
but he refused it, alleging it superfluous, since he was in a short Time to
return to the hard Exercise of Arms, and could carry no Sumpters or Wardrobes
along with him. But Sancho readily accepted one of fine green Cloth, which was
prepared for him, because he imagined it a good Moveable, which he would
convert into Money upon the first Occasion.

The Day prefixed being come, Don Quixote Armed, and ^ancho equipped himself in
his new Suit, and mounting his Ass, which he would not quit for a good Horse
that was offered him, he crowded in among the Train of Sportsmen. The Duchess
also in a Dress both odd and gay, made one of the Company. The Knight, who was
Courtesy it self, very gallantly would needs hold the Reins of her Palfrey,
though the Duke seemed very unwilling to let him. In short, they came to the
Scene of their Sport, which was in a Wood between two very high Mountains,
where alighting, and taking their several Stands, the Duchess with a pointed
Javelin in her Hand, attended by the Duke and Don Quixote, took a Pass where
the Boar always used to make his way. The Hunters posted themselves in several
Lanes and Paths as they most conveniently could. But as for Sancho, he chose to
stay behind 'em all with his Dapple, whom he would by no means leave a Moment,
for fear the poor Creature should meet with some sad Accident.

And now the Chase began with a full Cry, the Dogs opened, the Horns sounded,
and the Huntsmen hollowed in so loud a Consort, that there was no hearing one
another. Soon after, a hideous Boar, of a monstrous Size, came on, gnashing his
Teeth and Tusks, and foaming at the Mouth; and, being baited hard by the Dogs,
and followed close by the Huntsmen, made furiously toward the Pass which Don
Quixote had taken. Whereupon the Knight grasping his Shield, and drawing his
Sword, moved forward to receive the raging Beast. The Duke joined him with a
Boar-Spear, and the Duchess would have been foremost had not the Duke
prevented her. Sancho alone seeing the furious Animal, resolved to shift for
one, and leaving Dapple, away he scudded as fast as his Legs would carry him
toward an high Oak, to the top of which he endeavored to clamber. But as he
was getting up, one of the Boughs unluckily broke, and down he was tumbling,
when a Snag or Stump of another Bough caught hold of his new Coat, and stopped
his Fall, slinging him in the Air by the Middle, so that he could neither get
up nor down. His fine Green Coat was torn, and he fancied every Moment the wild
Boar was running that way with foaming Chaps and dreadful Tusks to tear him to
pieces. Which so disturbed him, that he roared and bellowed for help, as if
some wild Beast had been devouring him in good earnest.

At last the Tusky Boar was laid at his leng^ with a Number of pointed Spears
fixed in hi^* and Don Quixote being alarmed by Sancho's Noise^ which he could
distinguish easily, looked about* and discovered him swinging in the Tree with
hi^ Head downwards, and close by him poor Dappl^, who like a true Friend never
forsook him in his Adversity: For Cid Hamet observes, that they were such true
and inseparable Friends, that Sancho was seldom seen without Dapple, or Dapple
without Sancho. Don Quixote went and took down his Squire, who, as soon as he
was at Liberty, began to examine the Damage his fine Hunting-Suit had received,
which grieved him to the Soul, for he prized it as much as if it had made him
Heir to an Estate.

Mean while the Boar being laid across a large Mule, and covered with Branches
of Rosemary and Myrtle, was carried in Triumph by the Victorious Huntsmen to a
large Field-Tent, pitched in the middle of the Wood, where an excellent
Entertainment was provided suitable to the Magnificence of the Founder.

Sancho drew near the Duchess, and showing her his torn Coat, had we been
hunting the Hare now, quoth he, my Coat might have slept in a whole Skin. For
my part, I wonder what Pleasure there can be in beating the Bushes for a Beast,
which if it does but come at you, will run its plaguey Tushes in your Guts, and
be the Death of you: I have not forgot an old Song to this Purpose.

May Fate of Fabila be thine,
And make thee Food for Bears or Swine.
That Fabila, said Don Quixote, was a King of the Goths, who going a Hunting
once was devour^ The Duke, Duchess, and Don Quixot hunting the wild Boar*
Sancho Pancha falling out of a Tree is caught by the B^^^^ page. 339.
by a Bear. That Is it I say, quoth Sancho; and therefore why should Kings and
other great Folks run themselves into Harms-way, when they may have Sport
enough without it; Mercy on me, what Pleasure can you find, any of ye all, in
killing a poor Beast that never meant any Harm? You are mistaken, Sancho, said
the Duke, Hunting wild Beasts is the most proper Exercise for Knights and
Princes; for in the Chase of a stout noble Beast may be represented the whole
Art of War, Stratagems, Policy and Ambuscades, with all other Devices usually
practiced to overcome an Enemy with Safety. Here we are exposed to the
Extremities of Heat and Cold; Ease and Laziness can have no Room in this
Diversion. By this we are inured to Toil and Hardship, our Limbs are
strengthened, our Joints made supple, and our whole Body hale and active. In
short, it is an Exercise that may be beneficial to many, and can be prejudicial
to none, and the most enticing Property is its Rarity, being placed above the
reach of the Vulgar, who may indeed enjoy the Diversion of other sorts of Game,
but not this nobler kind, nor that of Hawking, a Sport also reserved for Kings
and Persons of Quality. Therefore Sancho, let me advise you to alter your
Opinion, against you become a Governor; for then you will find the great
Advantage of these Sports and Diversions. You're out far wide, Sir, quoth
Sancho; 'twere better that a Governor had his Legs broken, and be laid up at
home, than to be gadding abroad at this Rate. 'Twould be a pretty Business,
forsooth, when poor People come weary and tired to wait on the Governor about
Business, that he should be Rambling about the Woods for his Pleasure! There
would be a sweet Government truly! Good Faith, Sir, I think these Sports and
Pastimes are fitter for those that have nothing to do than for Governors. No,
I intend my Recreation shall be a Game at Whisk at Christmas, and Nine-pins on
Sundays and Holidays; but for your Hunting, as you call it, it goes mightily
against my Calling and Conscience. I wish with all my Heart, said the Duke,
that you prove as good as you promise; but saying and doing are different
things. Well, well, quoth Sancho, be it how it will, I say that an honest Man's
Word is as good as his Bond. Heaven's Help is better than early rising. It Is
the Belly makes the Feet amble, and not the Feet the Belly. My Meaning is, that
with Heaven's Help, and my honest Endeavors, I shall govern better than any
Goshawk. Do but put your Finger in my Mouth and try if I cannot bite. A Curse on
thee and thy impertinent Proverbs, said Don Quixote. Shall I never get thee to
talk Sense without a String of that disagreeable Stuff? I beseech your Graces,
do not countenance this eternal Dunce, or he will teaz your very Souls with a
thousand unseasonable and insignificant old Saws, for which I wish his Mouth
stitched up, and my self a Mischief if I hear him. Oh! Sir, said the Duchess,
Sancho's Proverbs will always please for their Sententious Brevity, though they
were as numerous as a Printed Collection; and I assure you, I relish 'em more
than I would do others, that might be better, and more to the purpose.

After this, and such like diverting Talk, they left the Tent, and walked into
the Wood to see whether any Game had fallen into their Nets. Now, while they
were thus intent upon their Sport the Night drew on apace, and more cloudy and
overcast than was usual at that Time of the Year, which was about Midsummer;
but it happened very critically for the better carrying on the intended
Contrivance. A little while after the close of the Evening, when it grew quite
dark, in a Moment the Wood seemed all on fire, and blazed in every Quarter.
This was attended by an alarming Sound of Trumpets and other Warlike
Instruments, answering one another from all Sides, as if several Parties of
Horse had been hastily marching through the Wood: Then presently was heard a
confused Noise of Moorish Cries, such as are used in joining Battle, which
together with the rattling of the Drums, the loud Sound of the Trumpets, and
other Instruments of War, made such a hideous and dreadful Consort in the Air,
that the Duke was amazed, the Duchess astonished, Don Quixote was surpised,
and Sancho shook like a Leaf, and even those that knew the Occasion of all this
were affrighted.

This Consternation caused a general Silence, and by and by one riding Post,
equipped like a Devil, passed by the Company, winding a huge hollow Horn, that
made a horrible hoarse Noise. Hark you, Post, said the Duke, whither so fast?
What are you? and what Parties of Soldiers are these that march across the
Wood? I am the Devil, cried the Post in a horrible Tone, and go in quest of Don
Quixote de la Mancha; and those that are coming this way, are six Bands of
Necromancers that conduct the Peerless Dulcinea del Toboso, enchanted in a
Triumphant Chariot. She is attended by that Gallant French Knight Montesinos,
who comes to give Information how she may be freed from Enchantment. Were
thou as much a Devil, said the Duke, as thy horrid Shape speaks thee to be,
thou would have known this Knight here before thee to be that Don Quixote de
la Mancha whom thou seek'st. Before Heaven, and on my Conscience, replied the
Devil, I never thought on it; for I have so many Things in my Head, that it
almost distracts me, I had quite and clean forgot my Errand. Surely, quoth
Sancho, this Devil must be a very honest Fellow, and a good Christian, for he
swears as devoutly by Heaven and his Conscience, as I should do; and now I am
apt to believe there be some good People even in Hell. At the same time, the
Devil directing himself to Don Quixote, without dismounting, To thee, O Knight
of the Lions, cried he, (and I wish thee fast in their Claws) To thee am I sent
by the Valiant, but unfortunate Montesinos, to bid thee attend his coming in
this very Place, whither he brings one whom they call Dulcinea del Toboso, in
order to give thee Instructions touching her Disinchantment. Now I have
delivered my Message, I must fly, and the Devils that are like me be with thee,
and Angels guard the rest. This said, he winded his monstrous Horn, and without
staying for an Answer, disappeared.

This increased the general Consternation, but most of all surpised Don
Quixote and Sancho; the latter to find that, in spite of Truth, they still
would have Dulcinea to be Enchanted* and the Knight to think that the
Adventures of Montesino's Cave were turned to reality. While he stood pondering
these things in his Thoughts; Well, Sir, said the Duke to him, what do you
intend to do? Will you stay? Stay! cried Don Quixote, shall I not? I will stay
here, Intrepid and Courageous, though all the Infernal Powers enclosed me
round. So you may if you will, quoth Sancho; but if any more Devils or Horns
come hither, they shall as soon find me in Flanders as here.

Now the Night grew darker and darker, and several shooting Lights were seen
glancing up and down the Wood, like Meteors or glaring Exhalations from the
Earth. Then was heard a horrid Noise, like the creaking of the ungreas'd Wheels
of heavy Wagons, from which piercing ungrateful Sound, Bears and Wolves
themselves are said to fly. This odious Jarring was presently seconded by a
greater, which seemed to be the dreadful Din and Shocks of four several
Engagements in each Quarter of the Wood, with all the Sounds and Hurry of so
many joined Battles. On one side were heard several Peals of Cannon; on the
other the Discharging of numerous Vollies of small Shot; here the Shouts of the
Engaging Parties, that seemed to be near at hand; there Cries of the Moors that
seemed at a greater Distance. In short, the strange confused Intermixture of
Drums, Trumpets, Cornets, Horns, the Thundering of the Cannon, the Rattling of
the Small-Shot, the Creaking of the Wheels, and the Cries of the Combatants,
made the most dismal Noise imaginable, and tried Don Quixote's Courage to the
uttermost. But poor Sancho was annihilated, and fell into a Swoon upon the
Dutchess's Coats, who taking Care of him, and ordering some Water to be
sprinkled in his Face, at last recovered him, just as the foremost of the
creaking Carriages came up, drawn by four heavy Oxen covered with Mourning, and
carrying a large lighted Torch upon each Horn. On the Top of the Cart or Wagon
was an exalted Seat, on which sat a Venerable Old Man, with a Beard as white
as Snow, and so long that it reached down to his Girdle. He was clad in a long
Gown of black Buckram, as were also two Devils that drove the Wagons, both so
very monstrous and ugly, that Sancho having seen 'em once, was forced to shut
his Eyes, and would not venture upon a second Look. The Cart, which was stuck
full of ^ights within, being approached to the Standing, the Reverend old Man
stood up, and cried with a loud Voice, I am the Sage Lirgander, and the Cart
passed on without a Word more being spoken. Then followed another Cart with
another grave old Man, who, making the Cart stop at a convenient Distance, rose
up from his high Seat, and in as deep a Tone as the first, cried, I am the Sage
Alquif, great Friend to Urganda the Unknown, and so went forward. He was
succeeded by a third Cart, that moved in the same solemn Pace, and bore a
Person not so ancient as the rest, but a robust and sturdy, sowr-look'd,
ill-favored Fellow, who rose up from his Throne like the rest, and with a more
hollow and Devil-like Voice cried out, I am Archelaus the Inchanter, the mortal
Enemy of Amadis de Gaul and all his Race; which said, he passed by, like the
other Carts, which taking a short Turn made a Halt, and the grating Noise of
the Wheels ceasing, an excellent Consort of sweet Music was heard, which
migtily comforted poor Sancho; and passing with him for a good Omen, My Lady,
(quoth he to the Duchess, (from whom he would not budge an Inch) There can be
no Mischief sure where there is Music. Very true, said the Duchess, especially
when there is Brightness and Light. Ay, but there is no Light without Fire,
replied Sancho, and Brightness comes most from Flames; who knows but those
about us may burn us? But Music I take to be always a Sign of Feasting and
Merriment. We shall know presently what this will come to, said Don Quixote;
and he said right, for you will find it in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XXXV. Wherein is continued the Information given to Don Quixote how to
disinchant Dulcinea, with other wonderful Passages.
WHen the pleasant Music drew near, there appeared a stately Triumphant
Chariot drawn by six Dun Mules covered with White, upon each of which sat a
Penitent clad also in White, and holding a great lighted Torch in his Hand* The
Carriage was twice or thrice longer than any of the former, twelve other
Penitents being placed at the top and sides, all in White, and bearing likewise
each a lighted Torch, which made a dazzling and surprising Appearance. There
was a high Throne erected at the further end, on which sat a Nymph arrayed in
Cloth of Silver, with many Golden Spangles glittering all about her, which
made her Dress, though not rich, appear very Glorious: Her Face was covered with
transparent Gauze, through the flowing Folds of which might be descried a most
Beautiful Face; and by the great Light which the Torches gave, it was easy to
discern, that, as she was not less than seventeen Years of Age, neither could
she be thought above twenty. Close by her was a Figure clad in a long Gown like
that of a Magistrate, reaching down to its Feet, and its Head covered with a
black Veil. When they came directly opposite to the Company, the Shaulms or
Hautboys that played before immediately ceased, and the Spanish Harps and Lutes
that were in the Chariot did the like; then the Figure in the Gown stood up,
and opening its Garments, and throwing away its Mourning Vail, disover'd a bare
and frightful Skeleton, that represented the deformed Figure of Death; which
startled Don Quixote, made Sancho's Bones rattle in his Skin for fear, and
caused the Duke and the Duchess to seem more than commonly disturbed. This
living Death being thus got up, in a dull heavy sleeping Tone, as if its Tongue
had not been well awake, began in this Manner.

MERLIN'S SPEECH.
BEhold old Merlin, in Romantic Writ
Miscalled the spurious Progeny of Hell;
A Falsehood current with the stamp of Age:
I Reign over Magic, Center of Force,
That often evokes and rates the rigid Powers:
Archive of Fate's dread Records in the Skies,
Coevous with the Chivalry of Yore;
All brave Knight-Errants still I Have deemed my charge.
Heirs of my Love, and Favorites of my Charms.
While other Magic Seers, a verse from Good,
Are dire and baleful like the Seat of Woe,
My nobler Soul, where Power and Pity join,
Diffuses Blessings, as they s^atter Plagues.
Deep in the Nether World, the dreary Caves
Where my retreated Soul in silent State,
Forms Mystic Figures and Tremendous Spells,
I heard the Peerless Dulcinea's Moans.
Appriz'd of her distress, her frightful Change
From Princely State, and Beauty near Divine,
To the vile semblance of a rustic Queen,
The dire Misdeed of Necromantick Hate:
I sympathiz'd, and awfully revolved
Twice fifty thousand scrolls, occult and loathed,
Sum of my Art, Hell's black Philosophy;
Then closed my Soul within this bony Trunk,
This ghastly Form, the Ruins of a Man;
And rise in Pity to reveal a Cure
To Woes so great, and break the cursed Spell:
O Glory thou of all that ever could grace
A Coat of Steel, and Fence of Adamant!
Light, Lanthorn, Path, and Polar Star, and Guide
To all who dare dismiss ignoble Sleep
And downy Sloth, for Exercise of Arms,
For Toils continual, Peril, Wounds and Blood!
Knight of unfathomed Worth, Abyss of Praise,
Who blend'st in one the Prudent and the Brave!
To thee, great Quixote, I this Truth declare;
That to restore to her first State and Form,
Toboso's Pride, the peerless Dulcinea,
It Is Fate's Decree, That Sancho thy good Squire
On his bare brawny Buttocks should bestow
Three thousand lashes, and eke three hundred more,
Each to afflict, and sting, and gall him sore.
So shall relent the Authors of her Woes,
Whose awful Will I for her Ease disclose.
Body of me, quoth Sancho, three thousand Lashes! I will not give my self three;
I Will as soon give my self three Stabs in the Guts. May you and your
disinchanting go to the Devil. What a Plague have my Buttocks to do with the
Black Art? Passion of my Heart, Master Merlin, if you have no better way for
disinchanting the Lady Dulcinea, she may even lie betwitch'd to her dying Day
for me.

How now, opprobrious Rascal, cried Don Quixote! stinking Garlick-eater!
Sirrah, I will take you and tie your Dogship to a Tree, as naked as your Mother
bore you; and there I will not only give you three thousand three hundred
Lashes, but six thousand six hundred, ye Varlet, and so smartly, that you shall
feel 'em still though you rub your Backside three thousand Times, Scoundrel.
Answer me a Word, you Rogue, and I Will tear out your Soul. Hold, hold, cried
Merlin, hearing this, this must not be; the Stripes inflicted on honest Sancho
must be voluntary, without Compulsion, and only laid on when he thinks most
convenient. No set time is for the Task prefixed, and if he has a mind to have
abated one half of this Atonement, it is allowed; provided the remaining Stripes
be struck by a strange Hand, and heavily laid on.

Hold you there, quoth Sancho, neither a strange Hand nor my own, neither heavy
nor light shall touch my Bum. What a Pox, did I bring Madam Dulcinea del Toboso
into the World, that my hind Parts should pay for the harm her Eyes have done?
Let my Master Don Quixote whip himself, he is a part of her, he calls her every
foot my Life, my Soul, my Sustenance, my Comfort, and all that. So even let him
jirk out her Enchantment at his own Bum's cost; but as for any whipping of me,
I deny and prenounce it flat and plain.

No sooner had Sancho thus spoke his Mind, but the Nymph that sat by Merlin's
Ghost in the glittering Apparel, rising, and lifting up her thin Veil,
discovered a very Beautiful Face; and with a Masculine Grace, but no very
agreeable Voice, addressing Sancho, O thou disastrous Squire, said she, thou
Lump with no more Soul than a broken Pitcher, Heart of Cork, and Bowels of
Flint! Had thou been Commanded, base Sheep-stealer, to have thrown thy self
headlong from the top of a high Tower to the Ground; had thou been desired,
Enemy of Mankind, to have swallowed a dozen of Toads, two dozen of Lizards, and
three dozen of Snakes; or had thou been requested to have Butchered thy Wife
and Children, I should not wonder that it had turned thy squeamish Stomach: But
to make such a hesitation at three thousand three hundred Stripes, which every
puny Schoolboy makes nothing of receiving every Month, it is amazing, nay,
astonishing to the tender and commiserating Bowels of all that hear thee, and
will be a Blot in thy Scutcheon to all Futurity: Look up, thou wretched and
Marble-hearted Animal, look up and fix thy huge louring Goggle-Eyes upon the
bright Luminaries of my Sight: Behold those briny Torrents, which streaming
down, furrow the flowery Meadows of my Cheeks: Relent, base and inexorable
Monster, relent, let thy savage Breast confess at last a sense of my Distress;
and moved with the tenderness of my Youth, that consumes and withers in this
vile Transformation, crack this sordid Shell of Rusticity that invelopes my
blooming Charms. In vain has the Goodness of Merlin permitted me to reassume a
while my native Shape, since neither that, nor the Tears of Beauty in
Affliction, which are said to reduce obdurate Rocks to the softness of Cotton,
and Tigers to the tenderness of Lambs, are sufficient to melt thy haggard
Breast. Scourge, scourge that Brawny Hide of thine, Stubborn and unrelenting
Brute, that course enclosure of thy courser Soul, and rouse up thus thy self
from that base Sloth that makes thee live only to eat and pamper thy lazy
Flesh, indulging still thy voracious Appetite. Restore me the Delicacy of my
Skin, the sweetness of my Disposition, and the Beauty of my Face. But if my
Entreaties and Tears cannot work thee into a reasonable compliance, if I am not
yet sufficiently Wretched to move thy Pity, at least let the Anguish of that
miserable Knight, thy tender Master, mollify thy Heart. Alas! I see his very
Soul just at his Throat, and sticking not ten Inches from his Lips, waiting
only thy cruel or kind Answer, either to fly out of his Mouth or return into
his Breast.

Don Quixote hearing this, clapped his Hand upon his Gullet, and turning to the
Duke? By Heavens, my Lord, said he, Dulcinea is in the right; for I find my
Soul traversed in my Windpipe like a Bullet in a Cross-bow. What Is your Answer
now, Sancho, said the Duchess? I say as I said before, quoth Sancho; as for
the flogging, I prenounce it flat and plain. Renounce you mean, said the Duke.
Good your Lordship, quoth Sancho, this is no time for me to mind Niceties, and
spelling of Letters: I have other Fish to fry. This plaguey Whipping-bout makes
me quite distracted, I don't know what I say or do -- But I would fain know of
my Lady Dulcinea del Toboso, where she picked up this kind of Breeding, to beg
thus like a sturdy Beggar? Here she comes to desire me to lash my Backside as
raw as a piece of Beef, and the best Word she can give, is, Soul of a broken
Pitcher, Monster, Brute, Sheep-stealer, with a ribble rabble of saucy
Nicknames that the Devil himself would not bear. Do you think, Mistress of
mine, that my Skin is made of Brass? Or shall I get any thing by your
Dis-inchantment? Beshrew her Heart* Where Is the fine Present she has brought
along with her to soften me? A Basket of fine Linen* Holland-Shirts, Caps and
Socks (though I wear none) had been somewhat like. But to fall upon me, and
bespatter me thus with dirty Names, d'y^ think that will do? No, i'fackins:
Remember the old Sayings, a Golden Load makes the Burden light; Gifts will
enter Stone-Walls; Scratch my Breech, and I Will claw your Elbow; a Bird in Hand
is worth two in the Bush. Nay, my Master too, who, one would think, should tell
me a fine Story, and coaks me up with dainty Sugar plumb Words, talks of tying
me to a Tree forsooth, and of doubling the Whipping. Odsbobs! methinks those
troublesome People should know who they Prate to. It Is not only a Squire Errant
they would have to whip himself, but a Governor, and is there no more to do,
think they, but up and ride? Let 'em even learn Manners, with a Pox. There Is a
time for some things, and a time for all things; a time for great things, and a
time for small things. Am I now in the humor to hear Petitions, do you think?
just when my Heart's ready to burst, for having torn my new Coat; they would
have me tear my own Flesh too, in the Devil's Name, when I have no more Stomach
to it, than I Have to be among the Men-eaters. Upon my Honor Sancho, said the
Duke, if you don't relent, and become as soft as a ripe Fig, you shall have no
Government. 'Twould be a fine thing indeed that I should send among my
Islanders a merciless hard-hearted Tyrant, whom neither the Tears of distressed
Damsels, nor the Admonitions of Wise Ancient and Powerful Inchanters, can move
to Compassion. In short, Sir, no Stripes, no Government. But quoth Sancho,
may not I have a Day or two to Consider on it? Not a Minute, cried Merlin: You
must declare now, and in this very Place what you resolve to do, for Dulcinea
must be again Transformed into a Country-Wench, and carried back immediately to
Montesinos's Cave; or else she shall go as she is now* to the Elysian Fields,
there to remain till the number of the Stripes be made out. Come, come, honest
Sancho, said the Duchess, pluck up a good Courage, and show your Gratitude to
your Master, whose Bread you have eaten, and to whose generous Nature and high
Feats of Chivalry we are all so much obliged: Come, Child, give your Consent,
and make a Fool of the Devil: Hang Fear; faint Heart never won fair Lady;
Fortune favors the Brave, as you know better than I can tell you. Hark you,
Master Merlin, (quoth Sancho, without giving the Duchess an Answer) pray will
you tell me one thing. How comes it about that this same Post-Devil that came
before you, brought my Master Word from Signior Montesinos that he would be
here and give him Directions about this Disinchantment, and yet we hear no News
of Montesinos all this while? Pshaw, answered Merlin, the Devil's an Ass, and a
lying Rascal; he came from me, and not from Montesinos, for he, poor Man, is
still in his Cave expecting the Dissolution of the Spell that confines him
there yet, so that he is not quite ready to be free: But if he owes you any
Money, or you have any Business with him, he shall be forthcoming when, and
where you please. But now pray make an end, and undergo this small Penance,
'twill do you a World of good; for 'twill not only prove beneficial to your
Soul, as an Act of Charity, but also to your Body, as a healthy Exercise; for
you are of a very Sanguine Complexion, Sancho, and losing a little Blood will
do you no harm. Well, quoth Sancho* there is like to be no want of Physicians
in this World, I find; the very Conjurers set up for Doctors too. Well then,
since every body says as much, (though I can hardly believe it) I am content to
give my self the three thousand three hundred Stripes; upon condition that I
may be paying 'em off as long as I please; observe that, though I will be out of
Debt as soon as I can, that the World may not be without the pretty Face of the
Lady Dulcinea del Toboso, which, I must own, I could never have believed to
have been so handsome* Item, I shall not be bound to fetch Blood, that is
certain; and if any Stroke happen to miss me, it shall pass for one however.
Item, Master Merlin, (because he knows all things) shall be obliged to reckon
the Lashes, and take care I don't give my self one over the Tale. There Is no
fear of that, said Merlin; for at the very last Lash the Lady Dulcinea will be
disinchanted, come straight to you, make you a Courtsy, and give you Thanks.
Heaven forbid, I should wrong any Man of the least hair of his Head. Well,
quoth Sancho, what must be, must be. I yield to my hard Luck, and on the
aforesaid Terms, take up with my Penance.

Scarce had Sancho spoke, when the Music struck up again, and a Congratulatory
Volley of small Shot was immediately discharged. Don Quixote fell on Sancho's
Neck, hugging and kissing him a thousand Times. The Duke, the Duchess, and the
whole Company seemed mightily pleased. The Chariot moved on, and, as it passed
by, the fair Dulcinea made the Duke and Duchess a Bow, and Sancho a low
Courtsy.

And now the jolly Morn began to spread her smiling Looks in the Eastern
Quarter of the Skies, and the Flowers of the Field to disclose their bloomy
Folds, and raise their Fragrant Heads. The ^rooks, now cool and clear, in
gentle Murmurs played with the gray Pebbles, and flowed along to pay their
Liquid Crystal-Tribute to the expecting Rivers. The Sky was clear, the Air
serene, swept clean by brushing Winds for the reception of the shining Light,
and every thing, not only jointly, but in its separate gayety, welcomed the
fair Aurora, and like her, foretold a fairer Day. The Duke and Duchess, well
pleased with the management and and success of the Hunting, and the counterfeit
Adventure, returned to the Castle; resolving to make a second Essay of the same
Nature, having received as much Pleasure from the first, as any Reality could
have produced.

CHAP. XXXVI. The strange and never-thought-of Adventure of the disconsolate
Matron, alias the Countess Trifaldi, with Sancho Panca's Letter to his Wife
Teresa Panca.
THE whole Contrivance of the late Adventure was Plotted by the Duke's Steward,
a Man of Wit, and of a facetious and quick Fancy. He made the Verses, acted
Merlin himself, and instructed a Page to personate Dulcinea. And now by his
Master's appointment, he prepared another Scene of Mirth, as pleasant and as
artful, and surprising as can be Imagined.

The next day, the Duchess asked Sancho whether he had begun his Penitential
Task to dis-inchant Dulcinea? Ay marry have I, quoth Sancho; for I have already
lent my self five Lashes on the Buttocks. With what, Friend, asked the
Duchess? With the Palm of my Hand, answered Sancho. Your Hand! said the
Duchess, those are rather Claps than Lashes, Sancho; I doubt Father Merlin
will not be satisfied at so easy a rate; for the Liberty of so great a Lady is not
to be Purchass'd at so mean a Price. No, you should Lash your self with
something that may make you smart: A good Friar's Scourge, a Cat a nine-tails,
or Penitent's Whip, would do well; for Letters written in Blood, stand good;
but works of Charity faintly and coldly done, lose their Merit, and signify
nothing. Then, Madam quoth he, will your Worship's Grace do so much as help me
to a convenient Rod, such as you shall think best; though it must not be too
smarting neither: For Faith, though I am a Clown, my Flesh is as soft as any
Lady's in the Land, no disparagement to any body's Buttocks. Well, well Sancho,
said she, it shall be my Care to provide you a Whip that shall suit your soft
Constitution as if they were Twins. But now, my dear Madam, quoth he, you must
know I have written a Letter here to my Wife Teresa Panca, to give her to
understand how things are with me. I have it in my Bosom, and it is just ready
to send away; it wants nothing but the Deraction on the outside. Now I would
have your Wisdom to read it, and see if it be not written like a Governor; I
mean, in such a Style as Governors should write. And who Penned it, asked the
Duchess? What a Question there is now, quoth Sancho? Who should Pen it but my
self, Sinner as I am? And did you Write it too, said the Duchess? Not I, quoth
Sancho, for I can neither Write nor Read; though I can make my Mark. Let Us see
the Letter, said the Duchess, for I dare say, your Wit is set out in it to
some purpose. Sancho pulled the Letter out of his Bosom unsealed, and the
Duchess having taken it, read what follows.

Sancho Panca to his Wife Teresa Panca.
IF I am well Lashed, yet I am Whipped into a Government: If I Have got a good
Government, it cost me, many a good Lash. Thou must know, my Teresa, that I am
resolved thou shall Ride in a Coach; for now any other way of going, is to me
but creeping on all Fours, like a Kitten. Thou art now a Governor's Wife,
guess whether any one will dare to tread on thy Heels. I have sent thee a Green
Hunting-Suit of Reparel, which my Lady Duchess gave me. Pray see and get it
turned into a Petticoat and Jacket for your Daughter. The Folks in this Country
are very ready to talk little good of my Master, Don Quixote. They say he is a
mad Wiseman, and a pleasant Madman, and that I an't a jot behind-hand with
him. We have been in Montesinos's Cave, and Merlin the Wizzard has pitched on
me to Dis-inchant Dulcinea del Toboso, the same who among ye is called Aldonsa
Lorenzo. When I have given my self three Thousand three Hundred Lashes, lacking
five, she will be as Disinchanted as the Mother that bore her. But not a Word
of the Pudding; for if you tell your Case among a parcel of tattling Gossips,
you will never have done; one will cry it is White, and others it is Black. I am to
go to my Government very suddenly, whither I go with a huge mind to make Money,
as I am told all new Governors do. I Will first see how matters go, and then
send thee Word whether thou had best come or no. Dapple is well, and gives
his humble Service to you. I will not part with him, though I were to be made the
Great Turk. My Lady Duchess Kisses thy Hands a Thousand times over; pray
return her two Thousand for her one; for there is nothing cheaper than fair
Words, as my Master says. Heaven has not been pleased to make me light on
another Cloak-Bag, with a hundred pieces of Gold in it, like those you wot of.
But all in good time: Don't let that vex thee, my Jugg, the Government will
make it up, I Will warrant thee. Though after all, one thing sticks plaguily in
my Ghizzard: They tell me, that when once I have tasted on it, I shall be ready
to eat my very Fingers after it, so savoury is the Sauce. Should it fall out
so, I should make but an ill hand of it; and yet your maimed and crippl'd
Alms-folk; pick up a pretty Livelihood, and make their Begging as good as a
Prebend. So that one way or other, Old Girl, matters will go Swimmingly and
thou wilt be Rich and Happy. Heaven make thee so, as well it may; and keep me for
thy Sake. From this Castle the Twentieth of June, 1614.

Thy Husband the Governor Sancho Panca.


Methinks, Mr. Governor, (said the Duchess, having read the Letter) you are
out in two Particulars; first, when you intimate that this Government was
bestowed on you for the Stripes you are to give your self; whereas you may
remember, it was allotted you before this Dis-inchantment was dreamed of. The
second Branch that you have failed in, is the discovery of your Avarice, which
is the most detestable Quality in Governors; because their Self-Interest is
always Indulged at the Expense of Justice. You know the Saying, Covetousness
breaks the Sack, and that Vice always prompts a Governor to fleece and oppress
the Subject. Truly, my good Lady, quoth Sancho; I meant no harm, I did not well
think of what I wrote, and if your Grace's Worship does not like this Letter,
I Will tear it, and have another; but remember the Old Saying, Seldom comes a
better. I shall make but sad Work on it, if I must pump my Brains for it. No, no,
said the Duchess, this will do well enough, and I must have the Duke see it.

They went then into the Garden, where they were to Dine that Day, and there
she showed the Duke the Learned Epistle, which he read over with a great deal
of Pleasure.

After Dinner, Sancho was Entertaining the Company very pleasantly, with some
of his savoury Discourse, when suddenly they were surpised with the mornful
Sound of a Fife, which played in Consort with a hoarse unbrac'd Drum. All the
Company seemed amazed and discomposed at the unpleasig Noise, but Don Quixote
especially was so alarmed with this solmn Martial Harmony, that he could not
compose his Thoughts. Sancho's Fear undoubtedly wrought the usual Effects, and
carried him to crouch by the Duchess.

During this Consternation, two Men in deep Mourning Cloaks trailing on the
Ground, entered the Garden, each of 'em beating a large Drum covered also with
Black, and with these a third playing on a Fife, in Mourning like the rest.
They ushered in a Person of a Gigantick Stature, to which the long black Garb
in which he was wrapped up, was no small Addition: It had a Train of a
prodigious length, and over the Cassock was girt a broad black Belt, which
slung a Scimiter of a mighty size. His Face was covered with a thin black Vail,
through which might be discerned a Beard of vast length, as white as Snow. The
Solemnity of his Pace kept exact Time to the gravity of the Music: In short,
his Stature, his Motion, his black Hue, and his Attendance, were every way
suprizing and astonishing. With this State and Formality he approached, and
fell on his Knees at a convenient distance, before the Duke; who not suffering
him to speak till he arose, the Monstrous Spectre erected his Bulk, and
throwing off his Veil, discovered the most terrible, hugeous, white, broad,
prominent, bushy Beard, that ever Mortal Eyes were frighted at. Then fixing his
Eyes on the Duke, and with a deep Sonorous Voice roaring out from the ample
Cavern of his spreading Lungs, Most High and Potent Lord, cried he, my Name is
Trifaldin with the White Beard, Squire to the Countess Trifaldi, otherwise
yclep'd the Disconsolate Matron, from whom I am Ambassador to your Grace,
begging Admittance for her Ladyship to come and relate before your Magnificence
the unhappy and wonderful Circumstances of her Misfortune. But first she
desires to be Informed whether the Valorous and Invincible Knight Don Quixote
de la Mancha resides at this time in your Castle; for it is in Quest of him that
my Lady has Traveled without Coach or Palfrey, Hungry and Thirsty, and in
short, without breaking her Fast, from the Kingdom of Candaya, all the way to
these your Grace's Territories: A thing incredibly Miraculous, if not wrought
by Enchantment. She is now without the Gate of this Castle, waiting only for
your Grace's Permission to enter. This said, the Squire Cough'd, and stroak'd
his unweildy Beard from the top to the bottom, and with a formal gravity
expected the Duke's Answer.

Worthy Squire Trifaldin with the white Beard, said the Duke, long since have
we heard the Misfortunes of the Countess Trifaldi, whom Inchant^rs have
occasioned to be called the Disconsolate M^tron; and therefore, most stupendous
Squire, you may tell her that she may make her Entry, and that the Valiant Don
Quixote de la Mancha is here present, on whose Generous Assistance she may
safely rely for Redress. Inform her also from me, That, if she has occasion for
my Aid, she may depend on my readiness to do her Service, being obliged as I Am
a Knight, to be Aiding and Assisting, to the utmost of my Power, to all Persons
of her Sex, in distress, especially Widowed Matrons, like her Ladyship.

Trifaldin hearing this, made his Obeisance with the Knee, and Beckoning to the
Fife and Drums to observe his Motion, they all Marched out in the same Solemn
Procession as they Entered, and left all the Beholders in a deep Admiration of
his Proportion and Deportment.

Then the Duke turning to Don Quixote, Behold, Sir Knight, said he, how the
Light and Glory of Virtue dart their Beams through the Clouds of Malice and
Ignorance, and Shine to the remotest Parts of the Earth: It Is hardly six Days
since you have vouchsafed to Honor this Castle with your Presence, and already
the Afflicted and Distressed flock hither from the uttermost Regions, not in
Coaches, or on Dromedaries, but on Foot, and without Eating by the Way; such is
their Confidence in the Strength of that Arm, the Fame of whose great Exploits
flies and spreads every where, and makes the whole World acquainted with your
Valor.

What would I give, my Lord, said Don Quixote, that the same Holy Pedant were
here now, who the other Day at your Table would have run down Knight-Errantry at
such a Rate; that the Testimony of his own Eyes might convince him of the
Absurdity of his Error, and let him see, that the Comfortless, and Afflicted do
not in Enormous Misfortunes, and uncommon Adversity, repair for Redress to the
Doors of droning Churchmen, or your little Sacristans of Villages; nor to the
Fireside of your Country-Gentleman, who never Travels beyond his Landmark; nor
to the lolling, lazy Courtier, who rather hearkens after News, which he may
relate, than endeavors to perform such Deeds as may deserve to be Recorded and
Related. No, the Protection of Damsels, the Comfort of Widows, the Redress of
the Injured, and the support of the Distressed, are no where so perfectly to be
expected as from the generous Professors of Knight-Errantry. Therefore I thank
Heaven a thousand Times, for having qualified me to Answer the Necessities of
the Miserable by such a Function. As for the hardships and accidents that may
attend me, I look on 'em as no Discouragements, since proceeding from so noble
a Cause. Then let this Matron be admitted to make known her Request, and I will
refer her for Redress to the Force of my Arm, and the Intrepid Resolution of my
Courageous Soul.

CHAP. XXXVII. The famous Adventure of the disconsolate The Spanish is Duena,
which signifies an old Waiting Woman.
Ma^tron continued.
THE Duke and Duchess were mightily pleased to find Don Quixote wrought up to
a Resolution so agreeable to their Design. But Sancho, who made his
Observations, was not so well satisfied. I am in a bodily Fear, quoth he, that
this same Mistress Waiting Woman will be a Baulk to my Preferment. I remember I
once knew a Toledo-Pothe^ary that talked like a Canary-Bird, and used to say,
Wherever come old Waiting-Women, good Luck can happen there to no Man. Body
of me, he knew 'em too well, and therefore valued 'em accordingly. He could
have eaten 'em all with a Grain of Salt. Since then the best of 'em are so
plaguey troublesome and impertinent, what will those be that are in doleful
Dumps, like this same Countess Three Folds, Three Skirts, or Three Tails, what
do you call her? Hold your Tongue Sancho, said Don Quixote. This Matron that
comes so far in Search of me, lives too remote to lie under the Lash of the
Apothecary's Satyr. Besides, you are to remember she is a Countess, and when
Ladies of that Quality become Governantes or Waiting-Women, it is only to Queens
or Empresses; and in their own Houses they are as absolute Ladies as any
others, and attended by other Waiting-Women. Ay, ay, (cried Donna Rodriguez,
who was present) there are some that serve my Lady Duchess here in that
Capacity, that might have been Countesses too had they had better Luck. But we
are not all born to be rich, though we are all born to be honest. Let no Body
then speak ill of Waiting Gentlewomen, especially of those that are ancient and
Maidens; for though I am none of those, I easily conceive the Advantage that a
Waiting Gentlewoman, who is a Maiden, has over one that is a Widow. When all is
said, whoever will offer to meddle with Waiting-Women will get little by it.
Many go out for Wool, and come home shorn themselves. For all that, quoth
Sancho, your Waiting-Women are not so bare but that they may be shorn, if my
Barber spoke Truth: So that they had best not stir the Rice, though it sticks
to the Pot. These Squires forsooth, answered Donna Rodriguez, must be always
cocking up their Noses against us: As they are always haunting the
Anti-Chambers, like a Parcel of evil Sprights as they are, they see us whisk in
and out at all Times; so when they are not tumbling their Beads, which, Heaven
knows, is most Part of the Day, they can find no other Pastime than to abuse
us, and tell idle Stories of us, unburying our Bones, and burying our
Reputation. But their Tongues are no Slander, and I can tell those silly
Rake-shames, that in spite of their Flouts we shall keep the upper Hand of
'em, and live in the World in the better sort of Houses, though we starve
for it; and cover our Flesh, whether delicate or not, with black Gowns, as they
cover a Dunghill with a Piece of Hanging when a Procession goes by. S'Life, Sir,
were this a proper Time, I would convince you and all the World, that there is
no Virtue but is enclosed within the Stays of a Waiting Woman. I fancy, said
the Duchess, that honest Rodriguez is much in the Right: But we must now choose
a fitter Time for this Dispute, to confound the ill Opinion of that wicked
Apothecary, and to root out that which the great Sancho Panca has fixed in his
Breast. For my Part, quoth Sancho, I will not dispute with her; for since the
Thoughts of being a Governor have steam'd up into my Brains, all my Concern
for the Squire is vanished into Smoke; and I care not a wild Fig for all the
Waiting-Women in the World.

This Subject would have engaged 'em longer in Discourse, had they not been cut
short by the Sound of the Fife and Drums, that gave 'em Notice of the
disconsolate Matron's Approach. Thereupon the Duchess asked the Duke how it
might be proper to receive her? and how far Ceremony was due to her Quality as
a Countess? Look you (quoth Sancho, striking in before the Duke could answer) I
would advise ye to meet her Countessship half way, but for the
Waiting-Womanship don't stir a Step. Who bids you trouble your self? said Don
Quixote. Who bid me! answered Sancho; why I my self did. Have Not I been Squire
to your Worship, and thus served a Prenticeship to good Manners? and have not I
had the Flower of Courtesy for my Master, who has often told me, A Man may as
well lose at One and Thirty with a Card too much as a Card too little? Good
Wits jump; a Word to the Wise is enough. Sancho says well, said the Duke* To
decide the Matter, we will first see what kind of a Countess she is, and behave
our selves accordingly.

Now the Fife and the Drums entered as before -- But here the Author ends this
short Chapter, and begins another, prosecuting the same Adventure, which is one
of the most notable in the History.

CHAP. XXXVIII. The Account which the disconsolate Matron gives of her
Misfortune.
THE doleful Drums and Fife were followed by twelve elderly Waiting-Women that
entered the Garden, ranked in Pairs, all clad in large mourning Habits, that
seemed to be of milled Serge, over which they wore Veils of white Callicoe, so
long that nothing could be seen of their black Dress but the very Bottom. After
them came the Countess Trifaldi, handed by her Squire Trifaldin with the White
Beard. The Lady was dressed in a Suit of the finest Bays, which, had it been
napp'd, would have had Tufts as big as Rouncival-Pease. Her Train or Tail,
which you will, was mathematically divided into three equal Skirts or Angles,
and born up by three Pages in Mourning; and from this pleasant triangular
Figure of her Train, as every one conjectured, was she called Trifaldi; as who
should say, the Countess of Three Folds, or Three Skirts. Benengely is of the
same Opinion, though he affirms that her true Title was the Countess Lobuna, or
of Wolf-Land, from the Abundance of Wolves bred in her Country; and had they
been Foxes, she had, by the same Rule, been called the Countess Zorruna, or of
Fox-Land; it being a Custom in those Nations, for great Persons to take their
Denominations from that Commodity with which their Country most abounds.
However, this Countess chose to borrow her Title from this new Fashion of her
own Invention, and leaving her Name of Lobuna, took that of Trifaldi.

Her twelve Female Attendants approached with her in a Procession-pace, with
black Veils over their Faces, not Transparent, like that of Trifaldin, but
thick enough to hinder altogether the sight of their Countenances. As soon as
the whole Train of Waiting-women was come in, the Duke and the Duchess, and
Don Quixote stood up, and so did all those who were with 'em. Then the twelve
Women ranging themselves in two Rows, made a Lane for the Countess to March up
between 'em; which she did, still led by Trifaldin, her Squire. The Duke, the
Duchess, and Don Quixote, advancing about a dozen Paces to meet her, she fell
on her Knees, and with a Voice rather hoarse and rough, than clear and
delicate, may it please your Highnesses, said she, to spare your selves the
trouble of receiving with so much Ceremony and Compliment a Man (Woman I would
say) who is your devoted Servant. Alas! The Sense of my Misfortunes has so
troubled my Intellectuals, that my Responses cannot be supposed able to answer
the critical Opinion of your Presence. My Understanding has forsook me, and is
gone a Wool-gathering, and sure it is far remote; for the more I seek it, the
more unlikely I am to find it again. The greatest Claim, Madam, answered the
Duke, that we can lay to Sense, is a due Respect, and decent Deference to the
Worthiness of your Person, which, without any further View, sufficiently
bespeaks your Merit and excellent Qualifications. Then begging the Honor of
her Hand, he led her up, and placed her in a Chair by his Duchess, who
received her with all the Ceremony suitable to the Occasion.

Don Quixote said nothing all this while, and Sancho was sneaking about, and
peeping under the Vails of the Lady's Women; but to no purpose, for they kept
themselves very close and silent, till she at last thus began: I am confident,
thrice Potent Lord, thrice Beautiful Lady, and thrice Intelligent Auditors,
that my most unfortunate Miserableness shall find in your most generous and
compassionate Bowels, a most Misericordial Sanctuary; my Miserableness, which
is such as would liquify Marble, malleate Steel, and mollify Adam^ntine Rocks.
But before the Rehearsal of my ineffable Misfortunes enters, I will not say your
Ears, but the public Mart of your hearing Faculties, I earnestly request, that
I may have Cognizance, whether the Cabal, Choir, or Conclave of this
Illustrissimous Appearance be not adorned with the Presence of the
Adjutoriferous Don Quixote de la Manchissima, and his Squirissimous Panca?
Panca is at your Elbowissimous (quoth Sancho, before any body else could
answer) and Don Quixotissimo likewise: Therefore, most dolorous Medem, you may
tell out your Teale; for we are all ready to be your Ladiship's
Servitorissimous to the best of our Cepecities, and so forth. Don Quixote then
advanced, and addressing the Countess, if your Misfortunes, Embarrass'd Lady,
said he, may hope any Redress from the Power and Assistance of Knight-Errantry,
I offer you my Force and Courage, and such as they are, I dedicate 'em to your
Service I am Don Quixote de la Mancha; whose Profession is a sufficient
Obligation to Succor the Distressed, without the Formality of Preambles, or
the Elegance of Oratory to circumvent my Favor. Therefore, pray, Madam, let us
know, by a succinct and plain account of your Calamities, what Remedies should
be applied; and if your Griefs are such as do not admit of a Cure, assure your
self at least, that we will Comfort you in your Afflictions, by Sympathizing in
your Sorrow.

The Lady hearing this, threw herself at Don Quixote's Feet, in spite of his
kind Endeavors to the contrary, and striving to embrace 'em, most invincible
Knight, said she, I Prostrate my self at these Feet, the Foundations and
Pillars of Chivalry-Errant, the supporters of my drooping Spirits, whose
Indefatigable Steps alone can hasten my Relief, and the cure of my Afflictions.
O Valorous Errant, whose real Achievements Eclipse and Obscure the Fabulous
Legends of the Amadises, Esplandians, and Belianises! Then turning from Don
Quixote, she laid hold on Sancho, and squeezing his Hands very hard, and thou,
the most Loyal Squire, that ever attended on the Magnanimity of
Knight-Errantry, whose goodness is more Extensive than the Beard of my Usher
Trifaldin! How happily have thy Stars placed thee, under the Discipline of the
whole Martial College of Chivalry Professors, centr'd and Epitomized in the
single Don Quixote! I conjure thee by thy love of Goodness, and thy unspotted
Loyalty to so great a Master, to employ thy moving and Interceding Eloquence in
my behalf, that eftsoons his Favor may shine upon this humble, and most
disconsolate Countess.

Look you, Madam Countess, quoth Sancho, as for measuring my Goodness by your
Squire's Beard, that is neither here nor there; so my Soul go to Heaven when I
depart this Life, I don't matter the rest; for, as for the Beards of this
World, it is not what I stand upon; so that without all this Pawing and
Wheedling, I Will put in a Word for you to my Master. I know he loves me, and
besides at this time he stands in need of me about a certain Business, and he
shall do what he can for you. But pray discharge your burdened Mind; unload,
and let us see what Griefs you bring, and then leave us to take care of the
rest.

The Duke and Duchess were ready to burst with Laughing, to find the Adventure
run in this pleasant Strain; and they admired at the same time, the rare
Cunning and Management of Trifaldi, who re-assuming her Seat, thus began her
Story.

The famous Kingdom of Candaya, Situated between the great Taprobana and the
South Sea, about two Leagues beyond Cape Comorin, had for its Queen, the Lady
Donna Maguntia, whose Husband King Archipielo dying, left the Princess
Antonomasia, their only Child, Heiress to the Crown. This Princess was
Educated, and brought up under my Care and Direction; I being the Eldest, and
first Lady of the Bedchamber to the Queen, her Mother. In Process of time, the
young Princess arrived at the Age of fourteen Years, and appeared so perfectly
Beautiful, that it was not in the Power of Nature to give any Addition to her
Charms. What Is yet more, her Mind was no less adorned than her Body. Wisdom it
self was but a Fool to her: She was no less Discreet than Fair, and the fairest
Creature in the World; and so she is still, unless the fatal Knife, or
unrelenting Sheers of the envious and inflexible Sisters have cut her Thread of
Life. But sure the Heavens would not permit such an Injury to be done to the
Earth, as the untimely Lopping of the loveliest Branch that ever Adorned the
Garden of the World.

Her Beauty, which my unpolished Tongue can never sufficiently Praise,
attracting all Eyes, soon got her a World of Adorers, many of 'em Princes, who
were her Neighbors, and more distant Foreigners. Among the rest, a Private
Knight, who resided at Court, was so Audacious as to raise his Thoughts to that
Heaven of Beauty. This young Gentleman was indeed Master of all Gallantries
that the Air of his Courtly Education could Inspire; and so confiding on his
Youth, his handsome Mein, his agreeable Air, and Dress, his graceful Carriage,
and the Charms of his easy Wit, and other Qualifications, he followed the
Impulse of his Inordinate and most Presumptuous Passion. I must needs say, that
he was an extraordinary Person, he played to a Miracle on the Guittar, and made
it speak not only to the Ears, but to the very Soul. He danced to Admiration,
and had such a rare Knack at making of Bird-Cages, that he might have got an
Estate by that very Art; and to sum up all his Accomplishments, he was a Poet.
So many Parts and Endowments were sufficient to have moved a Mountain, and much
more the Heart of a Young, tender Virgin. But all his fine Arts and soothing
Behavior had proved Ineffectual against the Virtue and Reservedness of my
Beautiful Charge, if the Damned cunning Rogue had not first Conquered me. The
deceitful Villain endeavored to seduce the Keeper, so to secure the Keys of
the Fortress: In short, he so plied me with pleasing Trifles, and so insinuated
himself into my Soul, that at last he perfectly bewitched me, and made me give
way before I was aware, to what I should never have permitted. But that which
first wrought me to his Purpose, and undermined my Virtue, was a cursed Copy of
Verses he sung one Night under my Window, which, if I remember right, began
thus.

A SONG.
A Secret Fire consumes ny Heart;
And, to augment my raging Pain,
The charming Foe that raised the Smart,
Denies me Freedom to Complain.
But sure it is Just, we should conceal
The Bliss and Woe in Love we feel:
For, Oh what Humane Tongue can tell
The Joys of Heaven, or Pains of Hell!
These Words were to me so many Pearls of Eloquence, and his Voice sweeter to
my Ears than Sugar to the Taste. The Reflection on the Misfortune which these
Verses brought on me, has often made me applaud Plato's Design of Banishing all
Poets from a good and well-governed Commonwealth, especially those who write
Wantonly or Lasciviously. For instead of Composing lamentable Verses, like
those of the Marquess of Mantua, that make Women and Children Cry by the
Fireside; they try their utmost Skill on such soft Strokes as enter the Soul,
and Wound it, like that Thunder which hurts and consumes all within, yet leaves
the Garment sound. Another time he entertained me with the following Song.

A SONG.
DEATH, put on some kind Disguise,
And at once my Heart surprise:
For it is such a Curse to Live,
And so great a Bliss to Die:
Should thou any Warning give,
I Would relapse to Life for Joy.
Many other Verses of this kind he plied me with, which charmed when Read, but
Transported when Sung. For you must know, that when our eminent Poets debase
themselves to the Writing a sort of Composure called Love-Madrigals, and
Roundelays, now much in Vogue in Candaya; those Verses are no sooner heard, but
they presently produce a dancing of Souls, tickling of Fancies, emotion of
Spirits, and in short a pleasing Distemper in the whole Body, as if
Quicksilver shoo^ it in every Part.

So that once more I pronounce those Poets very dangerous, and fit to be
Banished to the Isles of Lizards. Though truly I must confess, the Fault is
rather Chargeable on those foolish People that commend, and the silly Wenches
that believe 'em. For had I been as cautious as my Place required, his Amorous
Serenades could never have moved me* nor would I have believed his Poetical
Cant, such as I dying Live, I burn in Ice, I shiver in Flames, I hope in
Despair, I go yet stay, with a thousand such Contradictions, which make up the
greatest part of those kind of Compositions. As ridiculous are their Promises
of the Phoenix of Arabia, Ariadne's Crown, the Coursers of the Sun, the Pearls
of the Southern Ocean, the Gold of Tagus, the Balsom of Panchaya, and Heaven
knows what. By the way, it is observable, that these Poets are very liberal of
their Gifts, which they know they never can make good.

But whither, woe's me, whither do I wander, miserable Woman? What Madness
prompts me to accuse the Faults of others, having so long a score of my own to
answer for! Alas! Not his Verses, but my own Inclination: Not his Music, but
my own Levity; not his Wit, but my own Folly opened a Passage, and levelled the
way for Don Clavijo (for that was the Name of the Knight.) In short, I procured
him Admittance, and by my Connivance, he very often had Natural Familiarity
with Antonomasia, who, poor Lady, was rather deluded by me, than by him. But,
Wicked as I was, 'twas upon the Honorable score of Marriage; for had he not
been engaged to be her Husband, he should not have touched the very shadow of
her Shooe-string. No, no, Matrimony, Matrimony, I say; for without that, I Will
never meddle in any such Concern. The greatest Fault in this Business, was the
Disparity of their Conditions; he being but a private Knight, and she Heiress
to the Crown. Now this Intrigue was kept very close for some time by my
cautious Management, but at last a certain kind of Swelling in Antonomasia's
Belly began to tell Tales; so that consulting upon the Matter, we found there
was but one Way; Don Clavijo should demand the young Lady in Marriage before
the Curate, by Virtue of a Promise under her Hand, which I dictated for the
Purpose, and so binding, that all the Strength of Sampson himself could not
have broke the Tie. The Business was put in Execution, the Note was produced
before the Priest, who examined the Lady, and finding her Confession to agree
with the Tenor of the Contract, put her in Custody of a very honest Sergeant.
Bless us, quoth Sancho, Sergeants too; and Poets, and Songs, and Verses in your
Country! OF my Conscience, I think the World's the same all the World over!
But, go on, Madam Trifaldi, I beseech you, for it is late and I am upon Thorns
till I know the End of this long-winded Story. I will, answered the Countess.

CHAP. XXXIX. Where Trifaldi continues her stupendous and memorable Story.
IF every Word that Sancho spoke gave the Duchess new pleasure, every thing he
said put Don Quixote to as much pain; so that he commanded him silence, and
gave the Matron an opportunity to go on. In short, said she, the Business was
debated a good while, and after many Questions and Answers, the Princess firmly
persisting in her first Declaration, Judgment was given in favor of Don
Clavijo, which Queen Maguntia her Mother took so to Heart, that we buried her
about three Days after. Then without doubt she died, quoth Sancho. That Is a
clear Case, replied Trifaldin, for in Candaya they don't use to Bury the
Living, but the Dead. But with your good Leave, Mr. Squire, answered Sancho,
People that were in a Swoon have been buried alive before now, and methinks
Queen Maguntia should only have swoon'd away, and not have been in such haste
to have died in good earnest; for while there is Life there is Hopes, and there is
a Remedy for all things but Death. I don't find the young Lady was so much out
of the Way neither, that the Mother should lay it so grievously to Heart.
Indeed had she married a Footman or some other Servant in the Family, as I Am
told many others have done, it had been a very bad Business, and past curing;
but for the Queen to make such a heavy outcry when her Daughter married such a
fine-bred young Knight, Faith and Troth I think the Business had better been
made up. 'Twas a slip, but not such a heinous one, as one would think: For as
my Master here says, and he will not let me tell a Lie, as of Scholars they make
Bishops, so of your Knights (chiefly if they be Errant) one may easily make
Kings and Emperors.

That Is most certain, said Don Quixote, turn a Knight Errant loose into the
wide World with two pennyworth of good Fortune, and he is in potentia
propinqua, (proxima I would say) the greatest Emperor in the World. But let
the Lady proceed; for hitherto her Story has been very pleasant, and I doubt
the most bitter part of it is still untold. The most bitter truly, Sir,
answered she; and so bitter, that Wormwood and every bitter Herb, compared to
it, are as sweet as Honey.

The Queen being really dead continued she, and not in a Trance, we buried her,
and scarce had we done her the last Offices, and taken our last leaves, when (
Quis talia fando temperet a Lachrymis? Who can relate such Woes, and not be
drowned in Tears?) The Giant Malambruno, Cousin-german to the deceased Queen,
who, besides his native Cruelty, was also a Magician, appeared upon her Grave
mounted on a Wooden Horse, and by his dreadful angry Looks showed he came
thither to Revenge the Death of his Relation, by Punishing Don Clavijo for his
Presumption, and Antonomasta for her oversight. Accordingly he immediately
Enchanted them both upon the very Tomb, transforming her into a Brazen Female
Monkey, and the young Knight into a hideous Crocodile of an unknown Metal, and
between them both he set an Inscription in the Syriack Tongue, which we have
got since Translated into the Candayan, and then into Spanish to this Effect.

These two presumptuous Lovers shall never recover their Natural Shapes, till
the Valorous Knight of la Mancha enter into a single Combat with me: For by the
irrevocable Decrees of Fate this unheard of Adventure is reserved for his
unheard of Courage.

This done, he drew a broad Scimiter of a monstrous Size, and catching me fast
by the Hair, made an offer to cut my Throat, or to whip off my Head. I was
frighted almost to Death, my Hair stood an end, and my Tongue cleav'd to the
Root of my Mouth. However, recovering my self as well as I could, Trembling and
Weeping I begged Mercy in such a moving Accent, and in such tender melting
Words, that at last my Entreaties prevailed on him to stop the cruel Execution.
In short, be ordered all the Waiting-women at Court to be brought before him,
the same that you see here at present; and after he had aggravated our Breach
of Trust, and railed against the deceitful Practices, mercenary Procuring, and
what else he could urge in Scandal of our Profession, and its very Being,
reviling us for the Fact of which I alone stood guilty; I will not punish you
with instant Death, said he, but inflict a Punishment which shall be a lasting
and eternal Mortification. Now in the very Instant of his denouncing our
Sentence, we felt the Pores of our Faces to open, and all about 'em perceived
an itching Pain, like the pricking of Pins and Needles. Thereupon clapping our
Hands to our Faces, we found 'em as you shall see 'em immediately; saying this,
the Disconsolate Matron and her Attendance throwing off their Veils, exposed
their Faces all rough with bristly Beards, some red, some black, some white,
and others motley. The Duke and Duchess admired, Don Quixote and Sancho were
astonished, and the Standers-by were Thunderstruck. Thus, said the Countess
proceeding, has that murdering and bloody-minded Malambruno served us, and
planted these rough and horrid Bristles on our Faces, otherwise most delicately
smooth. Oh that he had chopp'd off our Heads with his monstrous Scimiter,
rather than to have disgraced our Faces with these Brushes upon 'em! For,
Gentlemen, if you rightly consider it, and truly, what I have to say should be
attended with a Flood of Tears; but such Rivers and Oceans have fallen from me
already upon this doleful Subject, that my Eyes are as dry as Chaff; and
therefore pray let me speak without Tears at this time. Where, alas, shall a
Waiting Woman dare to show her Head with such a Fi^z-bush upon her Chin? What
Charitable Person will entertain her? What Relations will own her? At the best
we can scarcely make our Faces passable, though we torture 'em with a thousand
Slops and Washes, and even thus we have much ado to get the Men to care for us.
What will become of her then that wears a Thicket upon her Face! Oh Ladies and
Companions of my Misery: In an ill hour were we begot, and in a worse came we
into the World! With these words the Disconsolate Matron seemed to faint away.

CHAP. XL. Of some Things that relate to this Adventure, and appertain to this
memorable History.
ALL Persons that love to read Histories of the nature of this, must certainly
be very much obliged to Cid Hamet the original Author, who has taken such Care
in delivering every minute Particular distinctly entire, without concealing the
least Circumstance that might heighten the Humor, or, if omitted, have
obscured the Light and Truth of the Story. He draws lively Pictures of the
Thoughts, discovers the Imaginations, satisfies Curiosity in Secrets, clears
Doubts, resolves Arguments, and in short, makes manifest the least Atoms of the
most inquisitive Desire! O most famous Author! O Fortunate Don Quixote! O
Renowned Dulcinea! O Facetious Sancho! jointly and severally may you live and
continue to the latest Posterity, for the general Delight and Recreation of
Mankind -- but the Story goes on --

Now, on my honest Word, quoth Sancho, when he saw the Matron in a Swoon, and
by the Blood of all the Panca's my Forefathers, I never heard nor saw the
like, neither did my Master ever tell me, or so much as conceit in that working
Headpiece of his, such an Adventure as this. Now all the Devils in Hell (and I
would not curse any Body) run away with thee for an Enchanting Son of a Whore,
thou damned Giant Malambruno! Could thou find no other Punishment for these
poor Sinners, but by clapping Scrubbing-Brushes about their Muzzles, with a Pox
to you? Had it not been much better to slit their Nostrils half way up their
Noses, though they had snuffl'd for it a little, than to have planted these
quick-set Hedges over their Chaps? I Will lay any Man a Wager now, the poor
Devils have not Money enough to pay for their Shaving.

It Is but too true, Sir, said one of them, we have not wherewithal to pay for
taking our Beards off; so that some of us, to save Charges, are forced to lay
on Plasters of Pitch that pull away Roots and all, and leave our Chins as
smooth as the Bottom of a Stone-Mortar. There is indeed a sort of Women in
Candaya, that go about from House to House, to take off the Hairs that grow
about the Face, trim the Eyebrows, and do twenty other little private Jobs for
the Women; but we here that wait on my Lady, never dared to have any thing to
do with them; for they have got ill Names; for though formerly they got free
Access, and passed for Relations, now they are looked upon to be no better than
Bawds. So if my Lord Don Quixote do not relieve us, our Beards will stick by us
as long as we live. I Will have mine plucked off Hair by Hair 'among the Moors,
answered Don Quixote, rather than not free you from yours. Ah Valorous Knight!
(cried the Countess Trifaldi, recovering that Moment from her Fit) the sweet
Sound of your Promise reached my Hearing in the very midst of my Trance, and
has perfectly restored my Senses. I beseech you therefore once again, most
Illustrious Sir, and invincible Errant, that your gracious Promise may soon
have the wished for effect. I Will be guilty of no Neglect, Madam, answered Don
Quixote: Point out the way, and you shall soon be convinced of my readiness to
serve you.

You must know then, Sir, said the Disconsolate Lady, from this Place to the
Kingdom of Candaya by Computation we reckon five thousand Leagues, two or three
more or less. But if you ride through the Air in a direct Line, it is not above
three thousand two hundred and twenty seven. You are likewise to understand,
that Malambruno told me, that when Fortune should make me find out the Knight
who is to dissolve our Enchantment, he would send him a famous Steed, much
easier and less resty and full of Tricks, than those Jades that are commonly
let out to Hire, as being the same wooden Horse that carried the Valorous Peter
of Provence, and the Fair Magalona, when he stole her away. It Is managed by a
wooden Peg in its Forehead, instead of a Bridle, and flies as swiftly through
the Air, as if all the Devils in Hell were switching him, or blowing Fire in
his Tail. This Courser Tradition delivers, to have been the Handiwork of the
Sage Merlin, who never lent him to any but particular Friends, or when he was
paid Sauce for him. Among others, his Friend Peter of Provence borrowed him,
and by the help of his wonderful Speed, stole away the fair Magalona, as I
said, setting her behind on the Crupper (for you must know he carries double),
and so towering up in the Air, he left the People, that stood near the Place
whence he started, gaping, staring, and amazed.

Since that Journey, we have heard of no Body that has Backed him. But this we
know, that Malambruno since that got him by his Art; and has used him ever
since, to post about to all Parts of the World. He Is here to Day, and to Morrow
in France, and the next Day in America: And one of the best Properties of the
Horse is, that he costs not a Farthing in keeping; for he neithet eats not
sleeps, neither needs he any Shooing; besides, be ambles so very easy through
the Air, that you might carry in your Hand a Cup full of Water a thousand
Leagues and not spill a Drop; so that the fair Magalona loved mightily to ride
him.

Nay, quoth Sancho, as for an easy Pacer, commend me to my Dapple. Indeed he is
none of your High-Flyers, he cannot gallop in the Air; but on the King's
Highway, he shall pace ye with the best Ambler that ever went on four Legs.
This set the whole Company a laughing. But then the disconsolate Lady going on;
This Horse, said she, will certainly be here within half an hour after it is
dark, if Malambruno designs to put an end to our Misfortunes, for that was the
Sign by which I should discover my Deliverer. And pray, forsooth, quoth Sancho,
how many will this same Horse carry upon Occasion? Two, answered she, one in
the Saddle, and the other behind on the Crupper; and those two are commonly the
Knight and the Squire, if some stolen Damsel be not to be one. Good
disconsolate Madam, quoth Sancho, I Would fain know the Name of this same Nag. The
Horse's Name, answered she, is neither Pegasus like Bellerophon's; nor
Bucephalus like Alexander's; nor Brilladoro like Orlando's; nor Bayard like
Rinaldo's; nor Frontin like Rogero's; nor Boots, nor Pyrithous like the Horses
of the Sun; neither is he called Orelia, like the Horse which Rodrigo, the last
King of Spain of the Gothic Race, bestrid that unfortunate Day, when he lost
the Battle the Kingdom and his Life. I Will lay you a Wager, quoth Sancho, since
the Horse goes by none of those famous Names, he does not go by that of
Rosinante neither, which is my Masters's Horse, and another-guess Beast than
any you have reckoned up. It Is very right, answered the Bearded Lady. However, he
has a very proper and significant Name; for he is called Clavileno^, or
Wooden-Peg the Swift, from the Wooden Peg in his Forehead; so that for
Significancy of Name at least he may be compared with Rosinante. I find no
Fault with his Name, quoth Sancho, but what kind of Bridle or Halter do you
manage him with? I told you already, replied she, that he is guided with the
Peg, which being turned this way or that way, he moves accordingly, either
mounting aloft in the Air, or almost brushing and sweeping the Ground, or else
flying in the middle Region, the way which ought indeed most to be chosen in
all Affairs of Life. I should be glad to see this notable Tit, quoth Sancho,
but don't design to get on his Back, either before or behind. No, by my Holy
Dame, you may as well expect Pears from an Elm: 'Twere a pretty Jest, I trow,
for me that can hardly sit my own Dapple, with a Pack-Saddle as soft as Silk,
to suffer my self to be horsed upon a hard wooden thing without either Cushion
or Pillow under my Buttocks. Before George! I will not gall my Backside to take
off the best Lady's Beard in the Land. Let them that have Beards wear 'em
still, or get them whipped off as they think best, I Will not take such a long
Jaunt with my Master, not I There Is no need of me in this shaving of Beards, as
there was in Dulcinea's Business. Upon my Word, dear Sir, but there is, replied
Trifaldi, and so much that without you nothing can be done. God save the King!
cried Sancho, what have we Squires to do with our Masters Adventures? We must
bear the Trouble forsooth, and they run away with the Credit! Body of me,
'twere something, would those that write their Stories but give the Squires
their due Share in their Books; as thus, Such a Knight ended such an Adventure;
but it was with the help of such a one his Squire, without which the Devil a
bit could he ever have done it. But, they shall barely tell you in their
Histories, Sir Paralipomenon, Knight of the Three Stars, ended the Adventure of
the Six Hobgoblins. And not a Word all the while of his Squire's Person, as if
there were no such Man, though he was by all the while, poor Devil. In short
good People, I don't like it, and once more I say, my Master may even go by
himself for Sancho, and Joy betide him. I Will stay and keep Madam Duchess
Company here, and mayhap by that time he comes back, he will find his Lady
Dulcinea's Business pretty forward; for I mean to give my bare Breech a jirking
till I brush off the very Hair, at idle Times, that is, and when I Have nothing
else to do.

Nevertheless, honest Sancho, said the Duchess, if your Company be necessary
in this Adventure, you must go; for all good People will make it their Business
to entreat you, and 'twou'd look very ill, that through your vain Fears these
poor Gentlewomen should remain thus with rough and bristly Faces. God save the
King, I cry again, said Sancho, were it a piece of Charity for the Relief of
some good sober Gentlewomen, or poor innocent Hospital-Girls, something might
be said. But to gall my Backside, and venture my Neck to unbeard a Pack of
idling trolloping Chamber-jades, with a Murrain! Not I, let 'em go elsewhere
for a Shaver, I wish I might see the whole Tribe of 'em wear Beards from the
highest to the lowest, from the proudest to the primest, all hairy like so many
She-goats. You are very angry with Waiting-Women, Sancho, said the Duchess:
That Pothecary has inspired you with this bitter Spirit. But you're to blame,
Friend; for I Will assure you there are some in my Family, that may serve for
Patterns of Discretion to all those of their Function; and Donna Rodriguez here
will let me say no loss. Ay, ay, Madam, said Donna Rodriguez; your Grace may
say what you please: This is a censorious World we live in, but Heaven knows
all; and whether good or bad, bearded or unbearded, we Waiting-Gentlewomen had
Mothers as well as the rest of our Sex; and since Providence has made us as we
are, and placed us in the World, it knows wherefore, and so we trust in its
Mercy, and no body's Beard? Enough, Donna Rodriguez, said Don Quixote, as for
you, Lady Trifaldi, and other distressed Matrons, I hope that Heaven will
speedily look with a pitying Eye on your Sorrows, and that Sancho will do as I
shall desire. I only wish Clavileno would once come, that I may encounter
Malambruno; for I am sure no Razor should be more expeditious in shaving your
Ladyship's Beard, than my Sword to shave that Giant's Head from his Shoulders:
Heaven may a while permit the Wicked, but not for ever.

Ah! most valorous Champion, said the Disconsolate Matron, may all the Stars in
the Celestial Regions shed their most propitious Influence on your generous
Valor, which thus supports the Cause of our unfortunate Office, so exposed to
the poisonous Rancour of Apothecaries, and so reviled by saucy Grooms and
Squires. Now all ill Luck attend the low-spirited Queen, who, in the Flower of
her Youth, will not rather choose to turn Nun, than Waiting Woman! Poor forlorn
contemned Creatures as we are! though descended in a direct Line from Father to
Son, from Hector of Troy himself, yet would not our Ladies find a more civil
way to speak to us, than Thee and Thou, though it were to gain 'em a Kingdom. O
Giant Malambruno! thou, who though an Inchanter, art always most faithful to
thy Word, send us the peerless Clavileno, that our Misfortunes may have an end.
For if the Weather grows hotter than it is, and these shaggy Beards still
sprout about our Faces, what a sad pickle will they be in!

The Disconsolate Lady uttered these Lamentations in so pathetick a manner,
that the Tears of all the Spectators waited on her Complaints; and even Sancho
himself began to water his Plants, and condescend at last to share in the
Adventure, and attend his Master to the very fag-end of the World, so he might
contribute to the clearing away the Weeds that overspread those Venerable
Faces.

CHAP. XLI. Of Clavileno's (alias Wooden Peg's) Arrival, with the Conclusion of
this tedious Adventure.
THese Discourses brought on the Night, and with it the appointed Time for the
famous Clavileno's Arrival. Don Quixote, very impatient at his Delay, began to
fear, that either he was not the Knight for whom this Adventure was reserved,
or else that the Giant Malambruno had not Courage to enter into a single Combat
with him. But unexpectedly who should enter the Garden but four Savages covered
with green Ivy, bearing on their Shoulders a large Wooden Horse, which they set
upon his Legs before the Company; and then one of them cried out, Now let him
that has the Courage mount this Engine -- I am not he, quoth Sancho, for I have
no Courage, nor am I a Knight -- And let him take his Squire behind him, if he
has one (continued the Savage) with this Assurance from the valorous
Malambruno, that no foul Play shall be offered, nor will he use any thing but
his Sword to offend him. It Is but only turning the Peg before him, and the
Horse will transport him through the Air to the Place where Malambruno attends
their coming. But let them blindfold their Eyes, lest the dazzling and
stupendous height of their Career should make 'em giddy; and let the Neighing
of the Horse inform 'em that they are arrived to their Journey's end. Thus
having made his Speech, the Savage turned about with his Companions, and
leaving Clavileno, marched out handsomely the same way they came in.

The Disconsolate Matron seeing the Horse, almost with Tears addressed Don
Quixote; Valorous Knight, cried she, Malambruno is a Man of his Word, the Horse
is here, our Beards bud on, therefore I and every one of us conjure you by all
the Hairs on our Chins, to hasten our Deliverance; since there needs no more
but that you and your Squire get up, and give a happy Beginning to your
intended Journey. Madam, answered Don Quixote, I Will do it with all my Heart, I
will not so much as stay for a Cushion, or to put on my Spurs, but mount
instantly; such is my Impatience to disbeard your Ladyship's Face, and restore
ye all your former Gacefulness. That Is more than I shall do, quoth Sancho; I
an't in such plaguey haste, not I; and if the Quick-set Hedges on their Snouts
cannot be lopped off without my riding on that hard Crupper, let my Master
furnish himself with another Squire, and these Gentlewomen get some other
Ba^ber. I Am no Witch sure, to ride through the Air at this rate upon a
Broom-stick! What will my Islanders say, think ye, when they hear their
Governor is flying like a Paper-Kite? Besides, it is three or four thousand
Leagues from hence to Candaya, and what if the Horse should tire upon the Road?
or the Giant grow humoursome? What would become of us then? We may be seven
Years a getting home again; and Heaven knows by that Time what would become of
my Government. Neither Island nor Dryland would know poor Sancho again. No, no,
I know better things! What says the old Proverb? Delays breed Danger; and when
a Cow's given thee, run and catch her by the Halter! I am the Gentlewomens
humble Servant, but they and their Beards must excuse me Faith! it is good
sleeping in a whole Skin; I know when I am well. Here I Am made much of, and by
the Master of the House's Good Will, I hope to see my self a Governor; if I
stir the King shall know it. Friend Sancho, said the Duke, as for your Island
it neither floats nor stirs, so there is no fear it should run away before you
come back; the Foundations of it are fixed and rooted in the profound Abyss of
the Earth. Now because you must needs think I cannot but know, that there is no
kind of Office of any Value, that is not purchased with some sort of Bribe or
Gratification, of one kind or other, all that I expect for advancing you to
this Government, is only that you wait on your Master in this Expedition, that
there may be an End of this memorable Adventure: And I here engage my Honor,
that whether you return on Clavileno with all the speed his Swiftness promis^s,
or that it should be your ill Fortune to be obliged to Foot it back like a
Pilgrim, begging from Inn to Inn, and Door to Door, still whenever you come,
you will find your Island where you left it, and your Islanders as glad to
receive you for their Governor as ever. And for my own Part, Signior Sancho,
I Will assure you, you would very much wrong my Friendship, should you in the least
doubt my Readiness to serve you. Good your Worship say no more, cried Sancho. I
am but a poor Squire, and your Goodness is too great a Load for my Shoulders.
But hang Baseness; Mount, Master, and blindfold me, somebody; wish me a good
Voyage, and pray for me -- But harkee, good Folks, when I am got up, and fly in
the Skies, may not I say my Prayers, and call on the Angels my self to help me,
trow? Yes, yes, answered Trifaldi; for Malumbruno, though an Inchanter, is
nevertheless a Christian, and does all things with a great deal of Sagacity,
having nothing to do with those he should not meddle with. Come on then, quoth
Sancho; let us away, and Heaven prosper us. Thy Fear, Sancho, said Don Quixote,
might by a superstitious Mind be thought ominous: Since the Adventure of the
Fulling-Mills, I have not seen thee possessed with such a panick Terror. But
hark ye, begging this noble Company's Leave, I must have a Word with you in
private. Then withdrawing into a distant Part of the Garden among some Trees;
My dear Sancho, said he, thou feast we are going to take a long Journey; thou
art no less sensible of the Uncertainty of our Return, and Heaven alone can
tell what Leisure or Convenience we may have in all that Time. Let me therefore
beg thee to slip aside to thy Chamber, as if it were to get thy self ready for
our Journey, and there presently dispatch me only some 500 Lashes on the
Account of the 3300 thou stand engaged for; 'twill soon be done, and a
Business once begun, you know, is half ended. Stark mad, before George, cried
Sancho. I wonder you are not ashamed, Sir. This is just as they say, You see me
in Haste, and ask me for a Maidenhead; I am just going to ride the wooden
Horse, and you would have me flea my Backside. Truly, truly, you're plaguily
out this Time. Come, come, Sir, let us do one thing after another; let us get
off these Women's Whiskers, and then I Will feague it away for Dulcinea. I have
no more to say on the Matter at present. Well, honest Sancho, replied Don
Quixote, I Will take thy Word for once, and I hope thou wilt make it good; for I
believe thou art more Fool than Knave. I am what I am, quoth Sancho; but
whatever I be, I Will keep my Word never fear it.

Upon this they returned to the Company; and just as they were going to mount,
Blind thy Eyes Sancho, said Don Quixote, and get up. Sure he that sends so far
for us can have no Design to deceive us, since 'twould never be to his Credit
to delude those that rely on his Word of Honor; and though the Success should
not be answerable to our Desires, still the Glory of so brave an Attempt will
be ours, and it is not in the Power of Malice to eclipse it. To Horse then, Sir,
cried Sancho, to Horse: The Tears of those poor bearded Gentlewomen have melted
my Heart, and methinks I feel their Bristles sticking in it. I shall not eat a Bit
to do me Good, till I see them have as pretty dimpled smooth Chins and soft
Lips as they had before. Mount then I say, and blindfold your self first; for
if I must ride behind, it is a plain Case you must get up before me. That Is
right, said Don Quixote; and with that pulling a Handkerchief out of his
Pocket, he gave it to the disconsolate Matron to hoodwink him close. She did
so; but presently after uncovering himself, If I remember right, said he,
Virgil tells us of the Trojan Palladium, that wooden Horse which the Greeks
offered Pallas, full of armed Knights, who afterward proved the total Ruin of
that famous City. 'Twere Prudence therefore, before we get up, to probe this
Steed, and see what he has in his Guts. You need not, said the Countess
Trifaldi; I dare engage there is no Ground for any such Surmise; for Malambruno
is a Man of Honor, and would not so much as countenance any base or
treacherous Practice; and whatever Accident befalls ye, I dare answer for. Upon
this Don Quixote mounted without any Reply, imagining that what he might
further urge concerning his Security, would be a Reflection on his Valor. He
then began to try the Pin, which was easily turned; and as he sat with his
long Legs stretched at Length for want of Stirrups, he looked like one of those
antique Figures in a Roman Triumph, woven in some old Piece of Arras.

Sancho very leisurely and unwillingly was made to climb up behind him; and
fixing himself as well as he could on the Crupper, felt it somewhat hard and
uneasy. With that, looking on the Duke, Good my Lord, quoth he, will you lend
me something to clap under me, some Pillow from the Page's Bed, or the
Dutchess's Cushion of State, or any thing; for this Horse's Crupper is so
confounded hard, I fancy it is rather Marble than Wood. It Is needless, said the
Countess, for Clavileno will bear no kind of Furniture upon him; so that for
your greater Ease you had best sit side-ways like a Woman. Sancho took her
Advice; and then after he had taken his Leave of the Company, they bound a
Cloth over his Eyes. But presently after uncovering his Face, with a pitiful
Look on all the Spectators, Good tenderhearted Christians, (cried he, with
Tears in his Eyes) bestow a few Pater Nosters and Ave-Marys on a poor departing
Brother, and pray for my Soul, as you expect the like Charirity your selves in
such a Condition. What! you Rascal, said Don Quixote, do you think your self at
the Gallows, and at the Point of Death, that you hold forth in such a
lamentable Strain? Dastardly Wretch without a Soul, do thou not know that the
fair Magalona once sat in thy Place, and alighted from thence, not into the
Grave, thou Chicken-hearted Varlet, but into the Throne of France, if there is
any Truth in History? And do not I sit by thee, that I may vie with the
valorous Peter of Provence, and press the Seat that was once pressed by him?
Come blindfold thy Eyes, poor spiritless Animal, and let me not know thee
betray the least Symptom of Fear, at least not in my Presence. Well, quoth
Sancho, hoodwink me then among ye: But it is no Mar'l one should be afraid, when
you will not let one say his Prayers, nor be prayed for, though for ought I know
we may have a Legion of Imps about our Ears to clap us up in the Devil's Pound
presently.

Now both being hoodwinked, and Don Quixote perceiving every thing ready for
their setting out, began to turn the Pin; and no sooner had he set his Hand to
it, but the Waiting-Women and all the Company set up their Throats, crying out,
Speed you, speed you well, valorous Knight, Heaven be your Guide, undaunted
Squire! Now, now, you fly aloft. See how they cut the Air more swiftly than an
Arrow! Now they mount, and tower, and soar, while the gazing World wonders at
their Course. Sit fast, sit fast, courageous Sancho; you don't sit steady, have
a Care of falling; for should you now drop from that amazing Height, your Fall
would be greater than the aspiring Youth's that misguided the Chariot of the
Sun his Father. All this Sancho heard; and girting his Arms fast about his
Master's Waste, Sir, quoth he, why do they say we are so high, since we can
hear their Voices? Troth I hear 'em so plainly, that one would think they were
close by us. Never mind that, answered Don Quixote; for in these extraordinary
kind of Flights, we must suppose our Hearing and Seeing will be extraordinary
also. But don't hold me so hard, for you will make me tumble off. What makes thee
tremble so? I Am sure I never rid easier in all my Life; our Horse goes as if he
did not move at all. Come then, take Courage; we make swinging Way, and have a
fair and merry Gale. I think so too, quoth Sancho; for I feel the Wind puff as
briskly upon me here, as if I don't know how many Pair of Bellows were blowing
Wind in my Tail. Sancho was not altogether in the Wrong; for some strong Pairs
of Bellows were indeed levelled at him then, which gave Air very plentifully;
so well had the Plot of this Adventure been laid by the Duke, the Duchess, and
their Steward, that nothing was wanting to further the Diversion.

Don Quixote at last feeling the Wind, Sure, said he, we must be risen to the
middle Region of the Air, where the Winds, Hail, Snow, Thunder, Lightning, and
other Meteors are produced; so that if we mount at this Rate, we shall be in
the Region of Fire presently, and what is worst, I don't know how to manage this
Pin, so as to avoid being scorched and roasted alive. At the same Time some
Flax, with other combustible Matter which had been got ready, was clapped at
the End of a long Stick, and set on Fire at a small Distance from their Noses;
and the Heat and Smoke affecting the Knight and the Squire, May I be hanged,
quoth Sancho, if we ben't come to this Fireplace you talk of, or very near it;
for the Half of my Beard is sindg'd already. I have a huge Mind to peep out,
and see whereabouts we are. By no Means, answered Don Quixote; I remember the
strange but true Story of Doctor Torralva, whom the Devils carried to Rome
hoodwinked, and bestriding a Reed, in twelve Hours Time, setting him down on
the Tower of Nona, in one of the Streets of that City. There he saw the
dreadful Tumult, Assault, and Death of the Constable of Bourbon; and the next
Morning he found himself at Madrid, where he related the whole Story. Among
other things, he said, as he went through the Air, the Devil bid him open his
Eyes; which he did, and then he found himself so near the Moon, that he could
touch it with his Finger; but durst not look toward the Earth, lest the
Distance should make his Brains turn round. So, Sancho, we must not unveil our
Eyes, but rather wholly trust to the Care and Providence of him that has Charge
of us; and fear nothing, for we only mount high to come souse down, like a
Hawk, upon the Kingdom of Candaya, which we shall reach presently: For though it
appears not Half an Hour to us since we left the Garden, we have nevertheless
traveled over a vast Tract of Air. I know nothing of the Matter, replied
Sancho; but this I am very certain, that if your Madam Magullane or Magalona
(what do you call her) could sit this damned wooden Crupper without a good
Cushion under her Tail, she must have had a harder Pair of Buttocks than mine.

This Dialogue was certainly very Pleasant all this while to the Duke, the
Duchess, and the rest of the Company; and now at last resolving to put an end
to this extraordinary Adventure, which had so long entertained them
successfully, they ordered one of their Servants to give fire to Clavileno's
Tail; and the Horse being stuffed full of Squibs, Crackers, and other Fireworks,
burst presently into Pieces, with a might Noise, throwing the Knight one way,
and the Squire another, both sufficiently Sindg'd. By this time, the
Disconsolate Matron, and Bearded Regiment were Vanished out of the Garden, and
all the rest counterfeiting a Trance, lay flat upon the Ground. Don Quixote and
Sancho sorely Bruised, made shift to get up, and looking about, were amazed to
find themselves in the same Garden whence they took Horse, and to see such a
number of People lie Dead, as they thought, on the Ground. But their Wonder was
diverted by the appearance of a large Lance stuck in the Ground, and a Scroll
of white Parchment fastened to it by two green silken Strings, with the
following Inscription upon it in Golden Characters.

The Renowned Knight, Don Quixote de la Mancha, achieved the Adventure of the
Countess Trifaldi, otherwise called the Disconsolate Matron, and her Companions
in Distress, by barely attempting it. Malambruno is fully satisfied. The
Waiting-Gentlewomen have lost their Beards: King Clavijo, and Queen Antonomasia
have resumed their pristine Shapes; and when the Squire's Penance shall be
finished, the White Dove shall escape the Pounces of the Pernicious Hawks that
pursue her, and her Pining Lover shall lull her in his Arms. This is
preordain'd by the Sage Merlin Proto-Inchanter of Inchanters.

Don Quixote having read this Oracle, and Construing it to refer to Dulcinea's
Dis-inchantment, rendered Thanks to Heaven for so great a Deliverance; and
approaching the Duke and Duchess, who seemed as yet in a Swoon, he took the
Duke by the Hand: Courage, Courage, Noble Sir, cried he, there is no Danger; the
Adventure is finished without Bloodshed, as you may read it Registr'd in that
Record.

The Duke, Yawning and Stretching, as if he had been waked out of a sound
Sleep, recovered himself by degrees, as did the Duchess and the rest of the
Company; all of them acting the Surprise so naturally, that the Jest could not be
discovered. The Duke rubbing his Eyes, made a shift to read the Scroll, then
Embracing Don Quixote, he extolled his Valor to the Skies, assuring him, he
was the bravest Knight the Earth had ever Possessed: As for Sancho, he was
looking up and down the Garden for the Disconsolate Matron, to see what sort of
a Face she had got, now her Firz-bush was off. But he was informed, that, as
Clavileno came down Flaming in the Air, the Countess, with her Women, Vanished
immediately, but not one of 'em Chinbristl'd, nor so much as a Hair upon their
Faces.

Then the Duchess asked Sancho, how he had fared in his long Voyage? Why truly
Madam, answered he, I have seen Wonders; for you must know, that, though my
Master would not suffer me to pull the Cloth from my Eyes, yet as I have a
kind of an Itch to know every thing, and a Spice of the Spirit of
Contradiction, still hankering after what is forbidden me; so when, as my Master
told me, we were Flying through the Legion of Fire, I should my Handkerchief a
little above my Nose, and looked down; and what do you think I saw? I spied the
Earth a hugeous way a far off below me (Heaven bless us!) no bigger than a
Mustard Seed; and the Men walking to and fro upon it, not much larger than
Hazle-Nuts. Judge now if we were not got up wounded high! Have a Care what you
say, my Friend, said the Duchess; for if the Men were bigger than Hazle-Nuts,
and the Earth no bigger than a Mustard Seed, one Man must be bigger than the
whole Earth, and cover it so that you could not see it. Like enough, answered
Sancho; but for all that, do you see, I saw it with a kind of a side-Look upon
one Part of it, or so. Look you, Sancho, replied the Duchess, that will not bear;
for no Thing can be wholly seen by any Part of it. Well, well, Madam, quoth
Sancho, I don't understand your Parts and Wholes! I saw it, and there is an end
of the Story. Only you must think that as we flew by Enchantment, so we saw by
Enchantment, and thus I might see the Earth, and all the Men, which way soever
I looked: I Will warrant, you will not believe me neither when I tell you, that when
I thrust up the Kerchief above my Brows, I saw my self so near Heaven, that
between the top of my Cap. and the main Sky, there was not a Span and a half.
And Heaven bless us, forsooth, what a hugeous great Place it is! And we
happened to Travel that Road where the The Pleiades, vulgarly called in Spanish
the Seven young She-Goats.
seven She-Goat-Stars were: And Faith and Troth, I had such a Mind to Play with
'em (having been once a Goat-herd my self) that I fancy I Would have cried my self
to Death had I not done it. So soon as I spied 'em, what does me I, but sneaks
down very soberly from behind my Master, without telling any living Soul, and
played, and leaped about for three quarters of an Hour by the Clock, with the
pretty Nanny-Goats, who are as sweet and fine as so many Marigolds or
Gilly-Flowers. And honest Wooden Peg stirred not one Step all the while. And
while Sancho employed himself with the Goats, asked the Duke, how was Don
Quixote employed? Truly, answered the Knight, I am sensible all things were
altered from their Natural Course, therefore what Sancho says seems the less
strange to me. But for my own part, I neither saw Heaven nor Hell, Sea nor
Shore. I perceived indeed we passed through the middle Region of the Air, and
were pretty near that of Fire, but that we came so near Heaven, as Sancho says,
is altogether incredible; because we then must have passed quite through the
Fiery Region, which lies between the Sphere of the Moon and the upper Region of
the Air. Now it was impossible for us to reach that part, where are the
Pleiades, or the Seven Goats, as Sancho calls 'em, without being Consumed in
the Elemental Fire, and therefore since we escaped those Flames, certainly we
did not soar so high, and Sancho either Lies or Dreams. I neither Lie nor
Dream, replied Sancho. Uds Precious! I can tell you the Marks and Color of
every Goat among 'em, if you don't believe me. Do but ask and try me: You Will
easily see whether I speak Truth or no. Well, said the Duchess, prithee tell
us, good Sancho. Look you, answered Sancho, there were two of 'em Green, two
Carnation, two Blue, and one party-colored. Truly, said the Duke, that is a new
kind of Goats you have found out, Sancho, we have none of those Colors upon
Earth. Sure, Sir, replied Sancho, you will make some short difference between
Heavenly She-Goats, and the Goats of this World? But, Sancho, said the Duke,
among those She-Goats did you see never a He? Not one Horned Beast of the
Masculine Gender? Not one, Sir; I saw no other Horned thing but the Moon; and I
have been told, that neither He-Goats, nor any other Cornuted Tups are suffered
to lift their Horns beyond those of the Moon.

They did not think fit to ask Sancho any more Questions about his Airy Voyage,
for, in the Humor he was in, they judged he would not stick to ramble all over
the Heavens, and tell 'em News of whatever was doing there, though he had not
stirred out of the Garden all the while.

Thus ended, in short, the Adventure of the Disconsolate Matron, which afforded
sufficient Sport to the Duke and Duchess, not only for the present, but for
the rest of their Lives; and might have supplied Sancho with matter of Talk
from Generation to Generation, for many Ages, could he have lived so long.
Sancho (said Don Quixote, whispering him in the Ear) since you will have us
believe what you have seen in Heaven, I desire you to believe me in what I said
I saw in Montesino's Cave. Not a Word more.

CHAP. XLII. The Instructions which Don Quixote gave Sancho Panca, before he
went to the Government of his Island, with other Matters of Moment.
THE Satisfaction which the Duke and Duchess received by the happy Success of
the Adventure of the Disconsolate Matron, encouraged 'em to carry on some other
Pleasant Project, since they could with so much Ease Impose on the Credulity of
Don Quixote, and his Squire. Having therefore given Instructions to their
Servants and Vassals how to behave themselves toward Sancho, in his
Government; the Day after the Scene of the Wooden Horse, the Duke bid Sancho
prepare, and be in a readiness to take Possession of his Government; for now
his Islanders wished as heartily for him, as they did for Rain in a dry Summer.
Sancho made an humble Bow, and looking demurely on the Duke; Sir, quoth he,
since I came down from Heaven, whence I saw the Earth so very small, I a'n't
half so hot as I was for being a Governor. For what Greatness can there be in
being at the Head of a puny Dominion, that is but a little Nook of a tiny
Mustard Seed? And what Dignity and Power can a Man be reckoned to have, in
governing half a dozen Men no bigger than Hazle-Nuts? For I could not think
there were any more in the whole World. No, if your Grace would throw away upon
me never so little a Corner in Heaven, though it were but half a League, or so,
I would take it with better Will than I would the largest Island on Earth.
Friend Sancho, answered the Duke, I cannot dispose of an Inch of Heaven; for
that is the Province of God alone; but what I am able to bestow, I give you;
that is, an Island tight and clever, round and well proportioned, fertile and
plentiful to such a Degree, that, if you have but the Art and Understanding to
manage things right, you may make a Hoard there both of the Treasure of this
World, and the next.

Well then, quoth Sancho, let me have this Island, and I Will do my best to be
such a Governor, that in spite of Rogues I shall not want a small Nook in Heaven
one Day or other. It Is not out of Covetousness neither that I Would leave my little
Cott, and set up for some body, but merely to know what kind of thing it is to
be a Governor. Oh! Sancho, said the Duke, when once youv'e had a Taste of it,
you will never leave licking your Fingers, it is so sweet and bewitching a thing
to Command and be Obeyed. I am confident, when your Master comes to be an
Emperor (as he cannot fail to be, according to the course of his Affairs) he
will never by any Considerations be persuaded to an Abdication; his only Grief
will be, that he was one no sooner.

Troth Sir, replied Sancho, I am of your Mind; it is a dainty thing to Command,
though 'twere but a Flock of Sheep. Oh! Sancho, cried the Duke, let me live and
die with thee; for thou have an Insight into every thing. I hope thou wilt prove
as good a Governor as thy Wisdom bespeaks thee. But no more at this time, --
to Morrow without further Delay you set forward to your Island, and shall be
furnished this Afternoon with Equipage and Dress answerable to your Post, and
all other Necessaries for your Journey.

Let 'em Dress me as they will, quoth Sancho; I shall be the same Sancho Panca
still. That Is true, said the Duke, yet every Man ought to wear Clothes suitable
to his Place and Dignity; for a Lawyer should not go Dressed like a Soldier,
no^ a Soldier like a Priest. As for you, Sancho, you are to wear the Habit both
of a Captain and a Civil Magistrate; so your Dress shall be a Compound of those
two; for in the Government, that I bestow on you, Arms are as necessary as
Learning* and a Man of Letters as requisite as a Swords-man -- Nay, as for
Letters, quoth Sancho, I cannot say much for my self; for as yet I scarce know
my A, B, C; but yet if I can but remember my Christ's-Cross, it is enough to
make me a good Governor: As for my Arms, I Will not quit my Weapon as long as I
can stand, and so Heaven be our Guard. Sancho cannot do amiss, said the Duke,
while he remembers these things.

By this time Don Quixote arrived, and hearing how suddenly Sancho was to go to
his Government, with the Duke's Permission, he took him aside to give him some
good Instructions for his Conduct in the discharge of his Office.

Being entered Don Quixote's Chamber, and the Door shut, he almost forcibly
obliged Sancho to sit by him, and then with a grave deliberate Voice he thus
began.

I give Heaven Infinite Thanks, Friend Sancho, that before I have the happiness
of being put in Possession of my Hopes, I can see thine already Crowned.
Fortune hastening to meet thee with thy Wishes. I, who had assigned the Reward
of thy Services upon my happy Success, am yet but on the way to Preferment; and
thou, beyond all reasonable Expectation, art arrived at the Aim and End of thy
Desires. Some are assiduous, sollicitous, importunate, rise early, bribe,
entreat, press, will take no Denial, obstinately persist in their Suit, and yet
at last never obtain it. Another comes on, and by a lucky hit or chance, bears
away the Prize, and jumps into the Preferment which so many had pursued in
vain; which verifies the saying, The Happy have their Days, and those they
choose; The Unhappy have but Hours, and those they lose. Thou, who seem to me
a very Blockhead, without sitting up late, or rising early, or any manner of
Fatigue or Trouble, only the Air of Knight-Errantry being breathed on thee, art
advanced to the Government of an Island in a Trice, as if it were a thing of no
Moment, a very Trifle. I speak this, my dear Sancho, not to upbraid thee, nor
out of Envy, but only to let thee know, thou art not to attribute all this
Success to thy own Merit, while it is entirely owing to the kind Heavenly
Disposer of Humane Affairs, to whom thy Thanks ought to be returned. But next
to Heaven, thou art to ascribe thy Happiness to the Greatness of the Profession
of Knight-Errantry, which includes within it self such stores of Honor and
Preferment.

Being convinced of what I have already said, be yet attentive, O my Son, to
what I, thy Cato, have further to say: Listen, I say, to my Admonitions, and I
will be thy North-Star, and Pilot to Steer and bring thee safely into the Port
of Honor, out of the Tempestuous Ocean, into which thou art just going to
Launch; for Offices and great Employments are no better than profound Gulphs of
Confusion.

First of all, O my Son, fear God, for the fear of God is the beginning of
Wisdom, and Wisdom will never let thee go astray.

Secondly, Consider what thou were, and make it thy Business to know thy self,
which is the most difficult Lesson in the World. Yet from this Lesson thou will
learn to avoid the Frog's foolish Ambition of Swelling to rival the Bigness of
the Ox; else thou will soon roll down the Wheel of thy mad Presumption, and be
put in Mind that thou were but a Hog-driver.

True, quoth Sancho, but I was then but a little Body; for when I grew up to be
somewhat bigger, I drove Geese, and not Hogs. But methinks that is nothing to
the Purpose; for all Governors cannot come from Kings and Princes.

Very true, pursued Don Quixote; therefore those who want a noble Descent, must
allay the Severity of their Office with Mildness and Civility, which, directed
by Wisdom, may secure 'em from the Murmurs and Malice, from which no State nor
Condition is exempt.

Be well pleased with the Meanness of thy Family, Sancho; nor think it a
Disgrace to own thy self derived from Laboring Men; for, if thou art not
ashamed of it thy self, no body else will strive to make thee so. Endeavor
rather to be esteemed Humble and Virtuous, than Proud and Vicious. The number
is almost Infinite, of those who from low and vulgar Births, have been raised
to the highest Dignities, to the Papal Chair, and the Imperial Throne; and this
I could prove by Examples enough to tire thy Patience.

Make Virtue the Medium of all thy Actions, and thou will have no Cause to envy
those whose Birth gives 'em the Titles of Great Men, and Princes; for Nobility
is inherited, but Virtue acquired. And Virtue is worth more in it self than
Nobleness of Birth.

If any of thy poor Relations come to see thee, never reject nor affront 'em;
but on the contrary, receive and entertain 'em with marks of Favor; in this
thou will display a Generosity of Nature, and please Heaven, that would have no
body despise what it has made.

If thou send'st for thy Wife, as it is not sit a Man in thy Station should be
long without his Wife, and she ought to partake of her Husband's good Fortune,
teach her, instruct her, polish her the best thou can, till her Native
Rusticity is refined to a handsomer Behavior: For often an illbred Wife throws
down all that a good and discreet Husband can build up:

Shoud'st thou come to be a Widower, (which is not impossible) and thy Post
recommend thee to a Bride of a higher degree, take not one that shall, like a
Fishing-Rod, only serve to catch Bribes. For, take it from me, the Judge must
at the general and last Court of Judicature give a strict account of the
discharge of his Duty, and must pay severely at his dying Day for what he has
suffered his Wife to take.

Let never obstinate Self-conceit be thy Guide; it is the Vice of the Ignorant,
who vainly presume on their Understanding.

Let the Tears of the Poor find more Compassion, though not more Justice, than
the Informations of the Rich.

Be equally sollicitous to find out the Truth, where the Offers and Presents of
the Rich, and the Sobs and Importunities of the Poor, are in the Way.

Wherever Equity should, or may take Place, let not the Extent and Rigor of
the Law bear too much on the Delinquent; for it is not a better Character in a
Judge to be Rigorous, than to be Indulgent.

When the Severity of the Law is to be softened, let Pity, not Bribes, be the
Motive.

If thy Enemy has a Cause before thee, turn away thy Eyes from thy Prejudice,
and fix them on the matter of Fact.

In another Man's Cause, be not blinded by thy own Passions, for those Errors
are almost without Remedy, or their Cure will prove Expensive to thy Wealth and
Reputation.

When a Beautiful Woman comes before thee, turn away thy Eyes from her Tears,
and thy Ears from her Lamentations; and take time to consider sedately her
Petition, if thou would not have thy Reason and Honesty lost in her Sighs
and Tears.

Revile not with Words those whom their Crimes oblige thee to Punish in Deed;
for the Punishment is enough to the Wretches, without the Addition of Ill
Language.

In the Trial of Criminals, consider, as much as thou can without Prejudice
to the Plaintiff, how defenseless and open the Miserable are to the Temptations
of our corrupt and depraved Nature; and so far show thy self full of Pity and
Clemency; for though God's Attributes are equal, yet his Mercy is more attractive
and pleasing in our Eyes, than his Justice.

If thou observ'st these Rules, Sancho, thy Days shall be long, thy Fame
eternal, thy Recompense full, and thy Felicity unspeakable. Thou shall marry
thy Children and Grandchildren to thy Heart's Desire; they shall want no
Titles: Beloved of all Men, thy Life shall be peaceable, thy Death in a good
and venerable old Age, and the Off spring of thy Grandchildren, with their
soft Youthful Hands, shall close thy Eyes.

The Precepts I have hitherto given thee, regard the good and ornament of thy
Mind. Now give Attention to those Directions that relate to the adorning of thy
Body.

CHAP. XLIII. The second Part of Don Quixote's Advice to Sancho Panca.
WHO would not have taken Don Quixote for a Man of extraordinary Wisdom and as
excellent Morals, having heard him documentize his Squire in this manner; only
as we have often observed in this History, the least talk of Knight-Errantry
spoiled all, and made his Understanding Muddy: But in every thing else, his
Judgment was very clear, and his Apprehension very nice, so that every moment
his Actions used to discredit his Judgment, and his Judgment his Actions. But
in these Oeconomical Precepts which he gave Sancho, he showed himself Master of
a pleasant Fancy, and mingled his Judgment and Extravagance in equal
proportions. Sancho lent him a great deal of Attention, in hopes to Register
all those good Counsels in his Mind, and put them in practice; not doubting but
by their means he should acquit himself of his Duty like a Man of Honor.

As to the Government of thy Person and Family (pursued Don Quixote) my first
Injunction is Cleanliness. Pare thy Nails, nor let 'em grow as some do, whose
Folly persuades them that long Nails add to the beauty of the Hand; till they
look more like Castril's Claws than a Man's Nails. It Is foul and unsightly.

Keep thy Clothes tight about thee; for a slovenly Looseness is an Argument of
a careless Mind; unless such a Negligence, like that of Julius Caesar, be
affected for some cunning Design.

Prudently examine what thy Income may amount to in a Year. And if sufficient
to afford thy Servants Liveries, let 'em be decent and lasting, rather than
gaudy and for Show; and for the overplus of thy good Husbandry, bestow it on
the Poor. That is, if thou can keep six Footmen, have but three; and let what
would maintain three more, be laid out in Charitable Uses. By that Means thou will have Attendants in Heaven as well as on Earth, which our vainglorious
great ones, who are Strangers to this Practice, are not like to have.

Lest thy Breath betray thy Peasantry, defile it not with Onions and Garlic.

Walk with Gravity, and speak with Deliberation, and yet not as if thou did
hearken to thy own Words; for all Affectation is a Fault.

Eat little at Dinner, and less at Supper; for the Stomach is the Storehouse,
whence Health is to be imparted to the whole Body.

Drink moderately; for Drunkenness neither keeps a Secret, nor observes a
Promise.

Be careful not to chew on both sides, that is, fill not thy Mouth too full,
and take heed not to eruct before Company.

Eruct, quoth Sancho, I don't understand that cramp Word. To eruct, answered
Don Quixote, is as much as to say to Belch; but this being one of the most
disagreeable and beastly Words in our Language, though very expressive and
significant, the more Polite, instead of Belching, say Eructing, which is
borrowed from the Latin. Now though the Vulgar may not understand this, it
matters not much; for Use and Custom will make it familiar and understood. By
such Innovations are Languages enriched, when the Words are adopted by the
Multitude, and Naturalized by Custom.

Faith and Troth, quoth Sancho, of all your Counsels, I Will be sure not to
forget this, for I Have been mightily given to Belching. Say Eructing, replied
Don Quixote, and leave off Belching. Well, quoth Sancho, be it as you say,
Eruct; I Will be sure to remember.

In the next place, Sancho, said the Knight, do not overlard your common
Discourse with that glut of Proverbs, which you mix in it continually; for
though Proverbs are properly concise and pithy Sentences, yet as thou bring'st
'em in, in such a huddle, by the Head and Shoulders, thou make 'em look like
so many Absurdities. Alas! Sir, quoth Sancho, this is a Disease that Heaven
alone can cure; for I Have more Proverbs than will fill a Book, and when I talk,
they crowd so thick and fast to my Mouth, that they quarrel which shall get out
first; so that my Tongue is forced to let 'em out as fast, first come first
served, though nothing to my purpose. But henceforwards I Will set a Watch on my
Mouth, and let none fly out, but such as shall befit the Gravity of my Place.
For in a rich Man's House the Cloth is soon laid; where there is Plenty the
Guests cannot be empty. A Blot's no Blot till it is hit. He Is safe who stands
under the Bells; you cannot eat Cake and have your Cake; and Store's no Sore.

Go on, go on, Friend, said Don Quixote, thread, tack, stitch on, heap Proverb
on Proverb, out with 'em Man, spew 'em out! There Is no Body coming. My Mother
whips me, and I whip the Gigg. I warn thee to forbear foisting in a Rope of
Proverbs every where, and thou blunder'st out a whole Litany of old Saws, as
much to the purpose as the last Year's Snow. Observe me, Sancho, I condemn not
the use of Proverbs: But it is most certain, that such a Confusion and
Hodge-podge of 'em as thou throw'st out and dragg'st in by the Hair together,
make Conversation fulsome and poor.

When thou do ride, cast not thy Body all ^^ the Crupper, nor hold thy Legs
stiff down, and stradling from the Horse's Belly; nor yet so loose as if thou
were still on Dapple; for the Air and Gracefulness of sitting a Horse,
distinguishes sometimes a Gentleman from a Groom. Sleep with Moderation; for he
that rises not with the Sun, loses so much Day. And remember this, Sancho, that
Diligence is the Mother of good Fortune. Sloth, on the contrary, never effected
any thing that sprung from a good and reasonable Desire.

The Advice which I shall conclude with, I would have thee be sure to fix in
thy Memory, though it relate not to the Adorning thy Person; for I am
persuaded, it will redound as much to thy Advantage as any I have yet given
thee: And this it is.

Never undertake to dispute, or decide any Controversies, concerning the
Pre-eminence of Families; since in the Comparison one must be better than the
other; for he that is lessened by thee will hate thee, and the other whom thou
preferrest will not think himself obliged to thee.

As for thy Dress, wear close Breeches and Hose, a long Waste-coat, and a Cloak
a little longer. I don't advise thee to wear wide-knee'd Breeches or Trunk
Hose; for they become neither Swords-men nor Men of Business.

This is all the Advice, Friend Sancho, I have to give thee at present. If thou
take care to let me hear from thee hereafter, I shall give thee more,
according as the Occasions and Emergencies require.

Sir, said Sancho, I see very well that all you have told me is mighty good,
wholesome, and to the purpose: But what am I the better, if I cannot keep it in
my Head? I grant you, I shall not easily forget that about paring my Nails, and
Marrying again, if I should have the luck to bury my Wife. But for all that
other Callimaufry, and heap of Stuff, I can no more remember one syllable of
it, than the shapes of last Year's Clouds. Therefore let me have it in Black
and White, I beseech you. It Is true I can neither write nor read, but I Will give
it to my Father Confessor, that he may beat and hammer it into my Noddle, as
occasion serves. O Heaven, cried Don Quixote, how Infamously it looks in a
Governor not to be able to write or read! I must needs tell thee Sancho, that
for a Man to be so Illiterate, or to be Left Handed, implies that either his
Parents were very poor and mean, or that he was of so perverse a Nature, he
could not receive the Impressions of Learning or any thing that is good. Poor
Soul, I pity thee! That is indeed a very great Defect. I would have thee at
least learn to write thy Name. Oh! as for that quoth Sancho, I can do well
enough. I can set my Name; for when I served Offices in our Parish, I learned
to scrawl a sort of Letters, such as they mark Bundles of Stuff with, which
they told me spelt my Name. Besides, I can pretend my right Hand is lame, and
so another shall sign for me; for there is a Remedy for all things but Death.
And since I Have the Power, I Will do what I list; for as the saying is, he whose
Father is his Judge, may do what he will. And as I am a Governor, I hope I am
somewhat higher than a Judge. New Lords new Laws. Ay, ay, let them come as they
will and play at Bo-peep. Let 'em back-bite me to my Face, I Will bite-back the
Biters. Let 'em come for Wool, and I Will send 'em home shorn. Whom God loves,
his House happy proves. The rich Man's Follies pass for wise Sayings in this
World. So I being Rich, do you see, and a Governor, and free-hearted too into
the Bargain, as I intend to be, I shall have no Faults at all. It Is so, daub
your self with Honey, and you will never want Flies. What a Man has, so much he is
sure of, said my old Grannam; and who shall hang the Bell about the Cat's Neck?

Confound thee, cried Don Quixote, for an eternal Proverb-voiding Swag-belly.
Threescore thousand Belzebubs take thee, and thy damned nauseous Rubbish. Thou
have been this Hour hanging them together, like so many Ropes of Onions, and
poisoning and racking me with 'em. I dare say these wicked Proverbs will one
Day bring thee to the Gallows, they will provoke thy Islanders to pull thee down,
or at least make 'em shun thee like a common Nuisance. Tell me, thou Essence of
Ignorance, where do thou rake 'em up? And how does thy Cods-head apply 'em?
For it makes me sweat, as if I were delving or threshing, to speak but one and
apply it properly.

Udsprecious! My good Master, quoth Sancho, what a small Matter puts you in a
pelting Chafe! Why the Devil should you grudge me the use of my own Goods and
Chattels? I have no other Estate. Proverbs on Proverbs are all my Stock. And
now I have four ready to pop out, as pat to the purpose as Matrimony to a young
Widow. But Mum for that. Now Silence is my Name. No, replied Don Quixote,
rather Prate-roast and Sauce-box we should call thee; for thou art all
Tittle-tattle and Obstinacy. Yet methinks I Would fain hear these four notable
Proverbs that come so pat to the purpose. I thank Heaven I have a pretty good
Memory, and yet I cannot for my Soul call one to mind. Why Sir, quoth Sancho,
what Proverbs would you have better than these? Between two Cheek-Teeth never
clap thy Thumbs. And when a Man says get out of my House, what would you with
my Wife? There Is no answer to be made. And again, whether the Pitcher hit the
Stone, or the Stone the Pitcher, it is bad for the Pitcher. All these fit to a
hair, Sir. That is, let no body meddle with his Governor, or his Betters, or
he will rue for it, as sure as a Gun; as he must expect who runs his Finger
between two Cheek-Teeth, (and though they were not Cheek-teeth, if they be but
Teeth that is enough) In the next place, let the Governor say what he will,
there is no gainsaying him; it is as much as when one says, get out of my House,
what would you with my Wife? And as for the Stone and the Pitcher, a Blind Man
may see through it. And so he that sees a Mote in another Man's Eye, should do
well to take the Beam out of his own; that People may not say, the Pot calls the
Kettle black-arse, and the dead Woman's afraid of her that is flayed. Besides,
your Worship knows, that a Fool knows more in his own House than a wise Body in
another Man's. That Is a Mistake, Sancho, replied Don Quixote; for the Fool
knows nothing, neither in his own House nor in another Man's; for no
substantial Knowledge can be erected on so bad a Foundation as Folly. But let us
break off this Discourse; if thou do not discharge the part of a good
Governor, thine will be the Fault, though the shame and discredit will be mine.
However, this is my Comfort, I Have done my Duty in giving thee the best and most
wholesome Advice I could: And so Heaven prosper and direct thee in thy
Government, and disappoint my Fears of thy turning all things upside down in
that poor Island; which I might indeed prevent by giving the Duke a more
perfect Insight into thee, and discovering to him, that all that gorbelly'd
paunch-gutted little Corpse of thine, is nothing but a Bundle of Proverbs and a
Sack full of Knavery.

Look you Sir, quoth Sancho, if you think me not fit for this Government, I Will
think no more on it. Alas! the least Snip of my Soul's Nails (as a Body may say)
is dearer to me than my whole Body: And I hope I can live plain Sancho still,
upon a Luncheon of Bread and a Clove of Garlic, as contented as Governor
Sancho upon Capons and Partridges. Death and Sleep make us all alike, Rich and
Poor, High and Low. Do but call to Mind who first put this Whim of Government
into my Noddle, you will find 'twas your own self; for as for me, I know no more
what belongs to Islands and Governors than a blind Buzzard.

So if you fancy the Devil will have me for being a Governor, let me be plain
Sancho still, and go to Heaven, rather than my Lord Governor, and go to Hell.

These last Words of thine, Sancho, said Don Quixote, in my Opinion, prove thee
worthy to govern a thousand Islands. Thou have naturally a good Disposition,
without which all Knowledge is insufficient. Recommend thy self to the Divine
Providence, and be sure never to depart from Uprightness of Intention; I mean,
have still a firm Purpose and Design to be thoroughly informed in all the
Business that shall come before thee, and act upon sure Grounds, for Heaven
always favors good Desires: And so let us go to Dinner, for I believe now the
Duke and Duchess expect us.

CHAP. XLIV. How Sancho Panca was carried to his Government, and of the strange
Adventure that befell Don Quixote in the Castle.
WE have it from the traditional Account of this History, that there is a
manifest Difference between the Translation and the Arabic in the Beginning of
this Chapter; Cid Hamet having in the Original taken an Occasion of criticizing
on himself for undertaking so dry and limited a Subject, which must confine him
to the bare History of Don Quixote and Sancho, and debar him the Liberty of
launching into Episodes and Digressions that might be of more Weight and
Entertainment. To have his Fancy, his Hand, and Pen bound up to a single
Design, and his Sentiments confined to the Mouths of so few Persons, he urged
as an insupportable Toil, and of small Credit to the Undertaker; so that, to
avoid this Inconveniency, he has introduced into the first Part some Novels, as
The Curious Impertinent, and that of the Captive, which were in a Manner
distinct from the Design, though the rest of the Stories which he brought in
there fall naturally enough in with Don Quixote's Affairs, and seem of
Necessity to claim a Place in the Work. It was his Opinion likewise, as he has
told us, that the Adventures of Don Quixote requiring so great a Share of the
Reader's Attention, his Novels must expect but an indifferent Reception, or, at
most, but a cursory View, not sufficient to discover their artificial
Contexture, which must have been very obvious had they been published by
themselves, without the Interludes of Don Quixote's Madness or Sancho's
Impertinence. He has therefore in this second Part avoided all distinct and
independent Stories, introducing only such as have the Appearance of Episodes,
yet flow naturally from the Design of the Story; and these but seldom, and with
as much Brevity as they can be expressed. Therefore since he has tied himself
up to such narrow Bounds, and confined his Understanding and Parts, otherwise
capable of the most copious Subjects, to the pure Matter of this present
Undertaking, he begs it may add a Value to his Work; and that he may be
commended, not so much for what he has writ, as for what he has forborne to
write. And then he proceeds in his History as follows.

After Dinner Don Quixote gave Sancho in Writing the Copy of his verbal
Instructions, ordering him to get some Body to read 'em to him. But the Squire
had no sooner got 'em; but he dropped the Paper, which fell into the Duke's
Hands; who communicating the same to the Duchess, they found a fresh Occasion
of admiring the Mixture of Don Quixote's good Sense and Extravagance: And so
carrying on the Humor, they sent Sancho that Afternoon with a suitable
Equipage to the Place he was to govern, which, wherever it lay, was to be an
Island to him.

It happened that the Management of this Affair was committed to a Steward of
the Duke's, a Man of a facetious Humor, and who had not only Wit to start a
pleasant Design, but Discretion to carry it on; two Qualifications which make
an agreeable Consort when they meet; nothing being truly agreeable without good
Sense. He had already personated the Countess Trifaldi very successfully, and,
with his Master's Instructions in relation to his Behavior toward Sancho,
could not but discharge his Trust to a Wonder. Now it fell out, that Sancho no
sooner cast his Eyes on the Steward, but he fancied he saw the very Face of
Trifaldi; and turning to his Master, The Devil fetch me, Sir, quoth he, if you
don't own that this same Steward of the Duke's here has the very Phiz of my
Lady Trifaldi. Don Quixote looked very earnestly on the Steward; and having
perused him from Top to Toe, Sancho, said he, thou need'st not give thy self to
the Devil to confirm this Matter: I see their Faces are the very same; yet for
all that the Steward and the disconsolate Lady cannot be the same Person, for
that would imply a very great Contradiction, and might involve us into more
abstruse and difficult Doubts than we have Convenience now to discuss or
examine. Believe me, Friend, our Devotion cannot be too earnest, that we may be
delivered from the Power of these cursed Enchantments. Adad, Sir, quoth Sancho,
you may think I Am in Jest; but I heard him open just now, and I thought the
very Voice of Madam Trifaldi sounded in my Ears: But Mum's the Word; I say
nothing, though I shall watch his Waters to find out whether I am right or wrong
in my Suspicion. Well do so, said Don Quixote; and fail not to acquaint me with
all the Discoveries thou can make in this Affair, and other Occurrences in
thy Government.

At last Sancho set out, with a numerous Trai^. He was dressed like a Man of
the long Robe, and wore over his other Clothes a wide sad-colour'd Coat or Gown
of watered Camlet, and a Cap of the same Stuff. He was mounted on a He Mule,
and rid short after the Gennet-Fashion. Behind him, by the Duke's Order, was
led his Dapple, bridled and saddl'd like a Horse of State, in gaudy Trappings
of Silk; which so delighted Sancho, that every now and then he turned his Head
about to look upon him, and thought himself so happy, that now he would not
have changed Fortunes with the Emperor of Germany. He kissed the Duke and
Dutchess's Hands at Parting, and received his Master's Benediction, while the
Don wept and Sancho blubbered abundantly.

Now, Reader, let the noble Governor depart in Peace, and speed him well. His
Administration in his Government may perhaps make you laugh to some Purpose
when it comes in Play. But in the mean Time let us observe the Fortune of his
Master the same Night; for though it don't make you laugh outright, it may chance
to make ye draw in your Lips, and show your Teeth like a Monkey; for it is the
Property of his Adventures to create always either Surprise or Merriment.

It Is reported then, that immediately upon Sancho's Departure, Don Quixote
found the wan^ of his Presence, and had it been in his Power, he would have
revoked his Authority, and deprived him of his Commission. The Duchess
perceiving his Disquiet, and desiring to understand the Cause of his
Melancholy, told him, that if it was Sancho's Absence made him uneasy, she had
Squires enough and Damsels in her House, that should supply his Place in any
Service he would be pleased to command 'em. It Is true, Madam, answered Don
Quixote, I am somewhat concerned for the Absence of Sancho; but there is a more
material Cause of my present Uneasiness; and I must beg to be excused, if among
the many Obligations your Grace is pleased to confer on me, I decline all but
the good Intention that has offered 'em. All I have further to crave, is your
Grace's Permission to be alone in my Apartment, and to be my own Servant. Your
Pardon, Sir, replied the Duchess; I cannot consent you should be alone: I have
four Damsels, blooming as so many Roses, that shall attend you. They will be no
Roses to me, returned Don Quixote, but so many Prickles to my Conscience; and
if they come into my Chamber, they must fly in at the Window. If your Grace
would crown the many Favors you have heaped on this worthless Person, I
beseech you leave him to himself, and the Service of his own Hands. No Desires,
Madam, must enter my Doors; for the Walls of my Chamber have always been a
Bulwark to my Chastity, and I shall not infringe my Rule for all the Bounty you
can lavish on me. In fine, rather than think of being undressed by any Mortal,
I would lie rough the whole Night. Enough, enough, noble Sir, said the
Duchess; I desist, and will give Orders that not so much as the Buzzing of a
Fly, much less the Impertinence of a Damsel, shall disturb your Privacy. I am
far from imposing any thing, Sir, that should urge Don Quixote to a
Transgression in Point of Decency; for if I conjecture right, among the many
Virtues that adorn him, his Modesty is the most distinguishable. Dress
therefore and undress by your self, how you please, when you will, and no Body
shall molest you: Nay, that you may not be obliged to open your Doors upon the
Account of any natural Necessity, Care shall be taken that you may find in your
Room whatever you may have Occasion for in the Night. And may the great
Dulcinea del Toboso live a thousand Ages, and her Fame be diffused all over the
habitable Globe, since she has merited the Love of so valorous, so chaste, and
loyal a Knight; and may the indulgent Heavens incline the Heart of our
Governor, Sancho Panca, to put a speedy End to his Discipline, that the
Beauties of so great a Lady may be restored to the View of the admiring World.
Madam, returned Don Quixote, your Grace has spoken like your self; so excellent
a Lady could utter nothing but what denotes the Goodness and Generosity of her
Mind: And certainly 'twill be Dulcinea's peculiar Happiness to have been
praised by you; for 'twill raise her Character more to have had your Grace for
her Panegyrist, than if the best Orators in the World had labored to set it
forth. Sir, said the Duchess, waving this Discourse, it is Supper-time, and my
Lord expects us: Come then, let us to Supper, that you may go to Bed betimes;
for you must needs be weary still with the long Journey you took to Candaya
Yesterday. Indeed, Madam, answered Don Quixote, I feel no Manner of Weariness;
for I can safely swear to your Grace, that I never rid an easier Beast, nor a
better Goer than Clavileno. For my Part, I cannot imagine what could induce
Malambruno to part with so swift and gentle a Horse, nay, and to burn him too
in such a Manner. It Is to be supposed said the Duchess, that being sorry for
the Harm he had done, not only to the Countess Trifaldi and her Attendants, but
to many others, and repenting of the bad Deeds which, as a Wizard and a
Necromancer, he doubtless had committed, he had a Mind to destroy all the
Instruments of his wicked Profession, and accordingly he burned Clavileno as
the chief of 'em, that Engine having served him to rove all over the World: Or
perhaps he did not think any Man worthy of bestriding him after the great Don
Quixote, and so with his Destruction, and the Inscription which he has caused
to be set up, he has eternized your Valor.

Don Quixote returned his Thanks to the Duchess, and after Supper retired to
his Chamber, not suffering any Body to attend him; so much he feared to meet
some Temptation that might endanger the Fidelity which he had consecrated to
his Dulcinea, keeping always the Eyes of his Mind fixed on the Constancy of
Amadis, the Flower and Mirror of Knight-Errantry. He therefore shut the Door of
his Chamber after him, and undressed himself by the Light of two Wax-Candles.
But oh the Misfortune that befell him, unworthy such a Person! As he was
straining to pull off his Hose, there fell -- not any thing that might disgrace
his decent Cleanliness, but about four and twenty Stitches of one of his
Stockings, which made it look like a Lattice-Window. The good Knight was
extremely afflicted, and would have given then an Ounce of Silver for a Dram of
green Silk; green Silk, I say, because his Stockings were green.

Here Benengeli could not forbear exclaiming: O Poverty! Poverty! What could
induce that great Cordova P^et to call thee a holy thankless Gift! Even I that
am a Moor, have learned by the Converse I have had with Christians, that
Holiness consists in Charity, in Humility, in Faith, in Obedience, and in
Poverty: But sure he who can be contented when poor, had need to be
strengthened by God's peculiar Grace, unless the Poverty which is included
among these Virtues, be only that Poorness in Spirit which teaches us to use
the things of this World as if we had 'em not. But thou, second Poverty, fatal
Indigence, of which I now am speaking, why do thou intrude upon Gentlemen,
and affect well born Souls more than other People? Why do thou reduce them to
cobble their Shoes? and wear some Silk, some Hair, and some Glass-Buttons on
the same tattered Wastecoat, as it were only to betray Variety of Wretchedness?
Why must their Ruffs be of such a dismal Hue, in Rags, dirty, rumpl'd, and ill
starched? (and by this you may see how ancient is the use of Starch and Ruffs.)
How miserable is a poor Gentleman, who, to keep up his Honor, starves his
Person, fares sorrily, or fasts unseen within his solitary narrow Apartment;
then putting the best Face he can upon the Matter, comes out picking his Teeth,
though it is but an honorable Hypocrisy, and though he has eaten nothing that
requires that nice Exercise. Unhappy he, whose Honor is in continual Alarms,
who thinks that at a Mile's Distance every one discovers the Patch in his
Shoe, the Sweat of his Forehead soaked through his old rusty Hat, the Bareness
of his Clothes, and the very Hunger of his famished Stomach.

All these melancholy Reflections were renewed on Don Quixote's Mind by the
Rent in his Stocking. However, for his Consolation, he bethought himself that
Sancho had left him a Pair of light Boots, which he designed to put on the next
Day.

In short, to Bed he went, with a pensive heavy Mind, the thoughts of Sancho's
absence, and the irreparable damage that his Stocking had received, made him
uneasy: He would have darn'd it, though it had been with Silk of another
Color, one of the greatest Tokens of want a poor Gentleman can give, during
the course of his tedious Misery.

At last he put out the Lights; but 'twas sultry hot, and he could not compose
himself to Rest. Getting up therefore, he opened a little Shutter of a barred
Window that looked into a fine Garden, and was presently sensible that some
People were walking and talking there: He listened, and as they raised their
Voices, he easily overheard their Discourse.

No more, dear Emereneia, said one to the other: Do not press me to sing; you
know that from the first moment this Stranger came to the Castle, and my
unhappy Eyes gazed on him, I have been too conversant with Tears and Sorrow, to
sing or relish Songs. Alas! all Music jars when the Soul's out of Tune.
Besides, you know the least thing wakens my Lady, and I would not for the World
she should find us here. But grant she might not wake, what will my Singing
signify if this new Aeneas, who is come to our Habitation to make me wretched,
should be asleep, and not hear the sound of my Complaints? Pray, my dear
Altisidora, said the other, do not make your self uneasy with those Thoughts;
for without doubt the Duchess is fast asleep; and every Body in the House but
we and the Lord of thy Desires; he is certainly awake, I heard him open his
Window just now; then sing, my poor grieving Creature, sing, and join the
melting Music of thy Lute to the soft Accents of thy Voice. If my Lady happens
to hear us, we'll pretend we came out for a little Air. The heat within doors
will be our excuse. Alas! my dear, replied Altisidora, it is not that frights me
most. I would not have my Song betray my Thoughts; for those that do not know
the mighty force of Love, will be apt to take me for a light and indiscreet
Creature -- But yet since it must be so, I Will venture: Better shame on the
Face, than sorrow in the Heart! This said, she began to touch her Lute so
sweetly, that Don Quixote was ravished. At the same time an infinite number of
Adventures of this nature, such as he had read of in his idle Books of
Knight-Errantry, Windows, Grates, Gardens, Serenades, amorous Meetings, Parleys
and Fopperiers, all crowded into his Imagination; and he presently fancied,
that one of the Dutchess's Damsels was fallen in Love with him, and struggled
with her Modesty to conceal her Passion. He began to be apprehensive of the
danger to which his Fidelity was exposed, but yet firmly determined to
withstand the powerful Allurement, and so recommending himself with a great
deal of Fervency to his Lady Dulcinea del Toboso, he resolved to hear the
Music; and to let the Serenading Ladies know he was awake, he feigned a kind
of a Sneeze, which did not a little please 'em; for 'twas the only thing they
wanted, to be assured their Jest was not lost. With that, Altisidora having
tuned her Lute afresh, after a Flourish, began the following Song.

The Mock Serenade.
WAKE, Sir Knight, now Love's Invading,
Sleep in Holland-Sheets no more:
When a Nymph is Serenading,
It Is an errant shame to snore.
Hear a Damsel, tall and tender,
Hoaning in most rueful Guise,
With Heart almost burned to Cinder.
By the Sunbeams of thy Eyes.
To free Damsels from disaster,
Is, they say, your daily Care:
Can you then deny a Plaster
To a Wounded Virgin here?
Tell me, Doughty Youth, who Cursed thee
With such Humors and ill Luck?
Was It some sullen Bear dry-nurs'd thee,
Or She-Dragon gave thee suck?
Dulcinea, That Virago,
Well may brag of such a Kid:
Now her Name is up, and may go
From Toledo to Madrid.
Would she but her Prize surrender,
(Judge how on thy Face I d^at!)
In exchange I Would gladly send her
My best Gown and Petticoat.
Happy I, would Fortune doom thee
But to have me near thy Bed,
Stroke thee, Pat thee, Curry-Comb thee,
And hunt over thy solid Head.
But I ask too much sincerely,
And I doubt I never must do it,
I Would but kiss your Toe, and fairly
Get the Length thus of your Foot.
How I Would Rig thee, and what Riches
Sold be heaped upon thy Bones;
Caps and Socks, and Cloaks, and Breeches,
Matchless Pearls, and Precious Stones.
Do not from above, like Nero,
See me burn, and slight my Woe!
But to quench my Fires, my Hero,
Cast a pitying Eye below.
I Am a Virgin Pullet truly;
One more tender never was seen:
A mere Chicken, fledged but newly;
Hang me, if I Am yet fifteen.
Wind and Limb, all is Tight about me:
My Hair dangles to my Feet.
I am straight too, if you doubt me,
Trust your Eyes, come down and see it.
I Have a Bob Nose has no Fellow,
And a Sparrow's Mouth as rare,
T^th like bright Topazes Yellow;
Yet I Am deemed a Beauty here.
You know what a rare Musician,
(if you hearken) courts your Choice:
I dare say my Disposition,
Is as taking as my Voice.
These, and such like Charms I Have Plenty:
I Am a Damsel of this Place:
Let Altisidora tempt ye;
Or she is in a Woeful Case.
Here the Courting Damsel ended her Song, and the Courted Knight began his
Expostulation. Why, (said he, with a Sigh heaved from the bottom of his Heart)
Why must I be so unhappy a Knight, that no Damsel can gaze on me without
falling in Love? Why must the Peerless Dulcinea del Tobos^ be so unfortunate,
as not to be permitted the single Enjoyment of my transcendent Fidelity?
Queens, why do you envy her? Empresses, why do you persecute her? Damsels of
Fifteen, why do you attempt to deprive her of her Right? Leave! Oh leave the
unfortunate Fair! Let her Triumph, Glory, and Rejoice in the quiet Possession
of the Heart which Love has allotted her, and the absolute Sway which she bears
over my yielding Soul. Away, unwelcome crowd of Loving Impertinents; Dulcinea
alone can soften my Manly Temper, and mould me as she pleases. For her I am all
Sweetness, for you I Am Bitterness it self. There is to me no Beauty, no
Prudence, no Modesty, no Gayety, no Nobility among your Sex, but in Dulcinea
alone. All other Women seem to me Deformed, silly, wanton, and base-born, when
compared with her. Nature brought me forth only that I might be devoted to her
Service. Let Altisidora Weep or Sing: Let the Lady despair on whose account I
received so many Blows in the Disastrous Castle of the Enchanted Moor; still I
am Dulcinea's, and hers alone, dead or alive, dutiful, unspotted, and
unchanged, in spite of all the Necromatick Powers in the World. This said, he
hastily clapped to the Window, and flung himself into his Bed, with as high an
Indignation, as if he had received some great Affront. There let us leave him a
while, in regard the great Sancho Panca calls upon us to see him commence his
famous Government.

CHAP. XLV. How the Great Sancho Panca took Possession of his Island, and in
what manner he began to Govern.
O Thou perpetual Surveyor of the Antipode^, bright Luminary of the World, and
Eye of Heaven, sweet Fermentor of Liquors; here Timbrius called, there Phoebus;
in one place an Archer, in another a Physician! Parent of Poesy, and Inventure
of Music, perpetual Mover of the Universe, who, though thou seem sometimes
to set, art always rising! Oh Sun, by whose assistance Man begets Man, on thee
I call for help! Inspire me, I beseech thee, warm and illumine my gloomy
Imagination, that my Narration may keep pace with the great Sancho Panca's
Actions throughout his Government; for, without thy powerful Influence, I feel
my self benumbed, dispirited and confused -- Now I proceed.

Sancho, with all his Attendants, came to a Town that had about a thousand
Inhabitants, and was one of the best where the Duke had any Power: They gave
him to understand that the Name of the Place was the Island of Barataria,
either because the Town was called Baratario, or because the Government cost
him so Barato, signify's cheap.
cheap. As soon as he came to the Gates, (for it was Walled) the chief Officers
and Inhabitants in their Formalities came out to receive him, the Bells rung,
and all the People gave general Demonstrations of their Joy. The new Governor
was then carried in mighty Pomp to the great Church, to give Heaven Thanks; and
after some ridiculous Ceremonies they delivered him the Keys of the Gates, and
received him as perpetual Governor of the Island of Barataria. In the mean
time, the Garb, the Port, the huge Beard, and the short and thick Shape of the
new Governor, made every one who knew nothing of the Jest wonder, and even
those who were privy to the Plot, who were many, were not a little surpised.

In short, from the Church they carried him to the Court of Justice; where when
they had placed him in his Seat, My Lord Governor, said the Duke's Steward to
him, it is an ancient Custom here that he who takes Possession of this famous
Island, must answer to some difficult and intricate Question that is propounded
to him; and by the Return he makes, the People feel the Pulse of his
Understanding, and by an Estimate of his Abilities, judge whether they ought to
rejoice or to be sorry for his coming.

All the while the Steward was speaking, Sanch^ was staring on an Inscription
in large Characte^ on the Wall over against his Seat; and as he could not read,
he asked what was the Meaning of that which he saw painted there upon the Wall?
Sir, said they, It Is an account of the Day when your Lordship took possession
of this Island: And the Inscription runs thus. This Day, being such a day of
this Month, in such a Year, the Lord Don Sancho Panca took Possession of this
Island, which may he long enjoy. And who is he, asked Sancho, whom they call
Don Sancho Panca? Your Lordship, answered the Steward; for we know of no other
Panca in this Island but your self who now sits in this Chair. Well, Friend,
said Sancho, pray take notice, That Don does not belong to me, neither was it
born to me, neither was it born by any of my Family before me. Plain Sancho
Panca is my Name: My Father was called Sancho, my Grandfather Sancho; and all
of us have been Panca's, without any Don or Donna before our Name. Now do I
already guess your Dons are as thick as Stones in this Island. But it is enough
that Heaven knows my Meaning; if my Government happens but to last four Days to
an end, it shall go hard but I Will clear the Island of those swarms of Dons that
must needs be as troublesome as so many Flesh-flies: Come, now for your Queston,
good Mr. Steward, and I Will answer it as well as I can, whether the Town be
sorry or pleased.

At the same instant two Men came into the Court, the one dressed like a
Country Fellow, the other looked like a Tailor, with a pair of Sheers in his
hand. An't please you, my Lord, cried the Tailor, I and this Farmer here are
come before your Worship. This honest Man came to my Shop yesterday; for,
saving your Presence, I am a Tailor, and Heaven be praised free of my Company.
So my Lord, he showed me a piece of Cloth: Sir quoth he, is there enough of
this to make me a Cap? Whereupon I measured the Stuff, and answered him yes,
an't like your Worship. Now as I imagine, do you see, he could not but imagine
(and perhaps he imagined right enough) that I had a mind to cabbage some of his
Cloth; judging hard of us honest Tailors. Prithee, quoth he, look whether
there been't enough for two Caps? Now I smelt him out, and told him there was.
Whereupon the Old Knave (an't like your Worship) going on to the same Tune, bid
me look again, and see whether it would not make three? And at last if it would
not make five? I was resolved to humor my Customer, and said it might. So we
struck a Bargain; just now the Man is come for his Caps, which I gave him, but
when I ask him for my Money, he will have me give him his Cloth again, or pay
him for it. Is this true, honest Man, said Sancho to the Farmer? Yes, an't
please you, answered the Fellow; but pray let him show the five Caps he has
made me. With all my Heart, cried the Tailor; and with that, pulling his hand
from under his Cloak, he held up five little tiny Caps hanging upon his four
Fingers and Thumb, as upon so many Pins. There, quoth he; you see the five Caps
this good Gaffer asks for; and may I never whip a stitch more, if I have
wronged him of the least snip of his Cloth, and let any Workman be Judge. The
sight of the Caps and the oddness of the Cause set the whole Court a laughing.
Only Sancho sat gravely considering a while, and then, Methinks, said he, this
Suit here need not be long depending, but may be decided without any more ado,
with a great deal of Equity; and therefore the Judgment of the Court is, That
the Tailor shall lose his Making, and the Countryman his Cloth, and that the
Caps be given to the poor Prisoners, and so let there be an end of the Business.

If this Sentence provoked the Laughter of the whole Court, the next, no less
raised their Admiration. For after the Governor's Order was executed, two old
Men appeared before him, one of 'em with a large Cane in his Hand, which he
used as a Staff. My Lord, said the other who had none, some time ago I lent
this Man ten Gold-Crowns to do him a kindness; which Money he was to repay me
on Demand. I did not ask him for it again in a good While, lest it should prove
a greater Inconveniency to him to repay me, than he labored under when he
borrowed it: However, perceiving that he took no care to pay me, I have asked
him for my Due; nay, I have been forced to dun him hard for it. But still he
did not only refuse to pay me again, but denied he owed me any Thing, and said,
that if I lent him so much Money, he certainly returned it: Now, because I have
no Witnesses of the Loan, nor he of the pretended Payment, I beseech your
Lordship to put him to his Oath; and if he will swear he has paid me, I Will
freely forgive him before God and the World. What say you to this, old
Gentleman with the Staff, asked Sancho? Sir, answered the old Man, I own he
lent me the Gold; and since he requires my Oath; I beg you will be pleased to
hold down your Rod of Justice, that I may swear upon it, how I have honestly and
truly returned him his Money. Thereupon the Governor held down his Rod, and in
the mean time the Defendant gave his Cane to the Plaintiff to hold as if it
hindered him, while he was to make a Cross, and swear over the Judge's Rod:
This done, he declared, That 'twas true the other had lent him the ten Crowns;
but that he had really returned him the same Sum into his own Hands; and that
because he supposed the Plaintiff had forgot it, he was continually asking him
for it. The great Governor hearing this, asked the Creditor what he had to
reply? He made Answer, that since his Adversary had sworn it, he was satisfied;
for he believed him to be a better Christian than to offer to foreswear
himself, and that perhaps he had forgot he had been repaid. Then the Defendant
took his Cane again, and having made a low Obeisance to the Judge, was
immediately leaving the Court. Which when Sancho perceived, reflectiong on the
Passage of the Cane, and admiring the Creditor's Patience, after he had studied
a while, with his Head leaning over his Stomach, and his Forefinger on his
Nose, on a sudden he ordered the old Man with the Staff to be called back. When
he was returned, honest Man, said Sancho, let me see that Cane a little; I have
a Use for it. With all my Heart, answered the other; Sir, here it is; and with
that he gave it him. Sancho took it; and giving it the other old Man, There,
said he, go your ways, and Heaven be with you; for now you're paid. How so, my
Lord, cried the old Man? Do you judge this Cane to be worth ten Gold-Crowns?
Certainly, said the Governor, or else I am the greatest Dunce in the World.
And now ye shall see whether I have not a Headpiece fit to govern a whole
Kingdom upon a shift. This said, he ordered the Cane to be broken in open
Court, which was no sooner done, but out dropped the ten Crowns. All the
Spectators were amazed, and began to look on their Governor as a second
Solomon. They asked him how he could conjecture that the ten Crowns were in the
Cane? He told 'em, that, having observed how the Defendant gave it to the
Plaintiff to hold while he took his Oath, and then swore he had truly returned
him the Money in his own Hands, after which he took his Cane again from the
Plaintiff; this considered, it came into his Head, that the Money was lodged
within the Reed. From whence may be learned, that though sometimes those that
govern are destitute of Sense, yet it often pleases God to direct 'em in their
Judgments. Besides, he had heard the Curate of his Parish tell of such another
Business; and he had so special a Memory, that were it not that he was so
unlucky as to forget all he had a mind to remember, there could not have been a
better in the whole Island. At last the two old Men went away, the one to his
Satisfaction, the other with eternal Shame and Disgrace, and the Beholders were
astonished: Insomuch that the Person, who was commissioned to Register Sancho's
Words and Actions, and observe his Behavior, was not able to determine whether
he should not give him the Character of a wise Man, instead of that of a Fool,
which he had been thought to deserve.

No sooner was this Trial over, but in came a Woman, haling along a Man that
looked like a good substantial Grazier. Justice, my Lord Governor, Justice,
cried she aloud; and if I cannot have it on Earth, I Will have it from Heaven!
Sweet Lord Governor, this wicked Fellow met me in the Middle of a Field, and
has had the full Use of my Body; he has handled me like a Dishclout. Woe's me,
he has robbed me of that which I had kept these three and twenty Years. Wretch
that I am, I had guarded it safe from Natives and Foreigners, Christians and
Infidels! I have been always as tough as Cork; no Salmander ever kept it self
more entire in Fire, nor no Wool among the Briers, than did poor I, till this
lewd Man with nasty Fists handled me at this rate. Woman, Woman, quoth Sancho,
no Reflections yet; whether your Gallant's Hands were nasty or clean, that is
not to the Purpose. Then turning to the Grazier, Well, Friend, said he, what
have you to say to this Woman's Complaint? My Lord, (answered the Man, looking
as if he had been frighted out his Wits) I am a poor Drover, a Hog-man, and
this Morning I was going home from this Market, where I had sold (under
correction be it spoken) four Hogs, and what with the Duties and the sharping
Tricks of the Officers, I hardly cleared any Thing by the Beasts. Now as I was
trudging home, whom should I pick up by the Way but this Hedge-Madam here; and
the Devil, who has a Finger in every Pie, being powerful, forced us to yoke
together. I gave her that which would have contented any reasonable Woman; but
she was not satisfied, and wanted more Money; and would never leave me, till
she had dragged me hither. She Will tell ye I ravished her; but, by the Oath I Have
taken, or mean to take, she lies like a Drab as she is, and this is every
Tittle true. Fellow, quoth Sancho, have thou any Silver about thee? Yes, an't
like your Worship, answered the Drover, I have some twenty Ducats in Silver in
a leathern Purse here in my Bosom. Give it the Plaintiff, Money and all, quoth
Sancho. The Man with a trembling Hand did as he was commanded: The Woman took
it, and dropped a thousand Curtsies to the Company, wishing on her Knees as
many Blessings to the good Governor, who took such special Care of poor
Fatherless and Motherless Children, and abused Virgins; and then she nimbly
tripp'd out of Court, holding the Purse fast in both her Hands; though first
she took care to Peep into it, to see whether the Silver were there. Scarce was
she gone, when Sancho, turning to the Fellow, who stood with the Tears in his
Eyes, and looked as if he had parted with his Blood as well as his Money:
Friend, said he, run and overtake the Woman, and take the Purse from her,
whether she will or no, and bring it hither. The Drover was neither so deaf nor
so mad as to be twice bid; away he flew like Lightning after his Money. The
whole Court was in mighty Expectation, and could not tell what could be the End
of the Matter. But a while after the Man and the Woman came back, ^he pulling,
and she tugging; she with her Petticoat tucked up, and the Purse in her Bosom,
and he using all the Strength he had to get it from her. But it was to no
purpose; for the Woman defended her Prize so well, that all his Manhood little
availed. Justice, cried she, for Heaven's sake, Justice, Gentlemen! Look you,
my Lord, see this impudent Ruffian, that on the King's Highway, nay, in the
Face of the Court, would rob me of my Purse, the very Purse you condemned him
to give me. And has he got it from you, asked the Governor? Got it, quoth the
Woman! I Will lose my Life before I Will lose my Purse. I were a pretty Baby then,
to let him wipe my Nose thus! No, you must set other Dogs upon me than this
sorry sneaking mangy Whelp; Pincers, Hammers, Mallets, and Chizzels shall not
wrench it out of my Clutches; no, not the Claws of a Lion; they shall sooner
have my Soul than my Money. She says the Truth, my Lord, said the Fellow, for I
am quite spent: The Jade is too strong for me; I cannot grapple with her.
Sancho then called to the Pemale. Here, quoth he, Honesty! You She-Dragon, let
me see the Purse. The Woman delivered it to him; and then he returned it to the
Man; Hark you Mistress, said he to her, had you showed your self as stout and
valiant to defend your Body, (nay, but half so much) as you have done to defend
your Purse, the Strength of Hercules could not have forced you. Hence,
Impudence, get out of my Sight. Away, with a Pox to you; and do not offer to
stay in this Island, nor within six Leagues of it, on pain of two hundred
Lashes. Out, as fast as you can, you tricking, brazen-faced, Brimstone,
Hedge-Drab, away. The Wench was in a terrible fright, and sneaked away, hanging
down her Head as shamefully as if she had been caught in the Deed of Darkness.
Now Friend, (said the Governor to the Man) get you home with your Money, and
Heaven be with you. But another Time, if you have not a mind to come off worse, be
sure you don't yoke with such Cattle. The Drover thanked him as indifferently
as he could, and away he went; and all the People admired afresh their new
Governor's Judgment and Sentences. An Account of which was taken by him that
was appointed to be his Historiographer, and forthwith transmitted to the Duke,
who expected it with Impatience. Now let us leave honest Sancho here; for his
Master with great Earnestness requires our Attendance, Altisidora's Serenade
having strangely discomposed his Mind.

CHAP. XLVI. Of the dreadful Alarms given to Don Quixote by the Bells and Cats,
during the Course of Altisidora's Amors.
WE left the great Don Quixote profoundly buried in the Thoughts into which the
enamored Altisidora's Serenade had plunged him. He threw himself into his Bed;
but the Cares and Anxieties which he brought thither with him, like so many
Fleas, allowed him no Repose, and the Misfortune of his torn Stocking added to
his Affliction. But as Time is swift, and no Bolts nor Chains, can bar his
rapid Progress, posting away on the Wings of the Hours, the Morning soon
revolved. At the Return of Light, Don Quixote, more early than the Sun, forsook
his downy Bed, put on his Shamoy-Apparel, and drawing on his walking Boots,
concealed in one of 'em the Disaster of his Hose; he threw his Scarlet Cloak
over his Shoulder, and clapped on his Valiant Head his Cap of Green Velvet
edged with Silver Lace. Over his right Shoulder he hung his Belt, the Sustainer
of his trusty executing Sword. About his Wrist he wore the Rosary which he
always carried about him; and thus accoutred, with a great deal of State and
Majesty, he moved toward the Antichamber, where the Duke and Duchess were
ready dressed, and in a manner expecting his Coming. As he went through a
Gallery he met Altisidora and her Companion, who waited for him in the Passage;
and no sooner did Altisidora espy him, but she dissembled a swooning Fit, and
immediately dropped into the Arms of her Friend, who presently began to unlace
her Stays. Which Don Quixote perceiving, he approached, and turning to the
Damsel, I know the Meaning of all this, said he, and whence these Accidents
proceed. You know more than I do, answered the assisting Damsel: But this I am
sure of, That hitherto there is not a Damsel in this House, that has enjoyed her
Health better than Altisidora; I never knew her make the least Complaint
before. A Vengeance seize all the Knights-Errant in the World, if they are all
so ungrateful. Pray my Lord Don Quixote retire, for this poor young Creature
will not come to her self as long as you are by. Madam, answered the Knight, I
beg that a Lute may be left in my Chamber this Evening, that I may assuage this
Lady's Grief as well as I can; for in the Beginning of an Amor, a speedy and
free Discovery of our Aversion or Pre-engagement is the most effectual Cure.
This said, he left 'em, that he might not be found alone with them by those
that might happen to go by. He was scarce gone, but Altisidora's counterfeited
Fit was over, and turning to her Companion, By all means, said she, let him
have a Lute; for without doubt the Knight has a Mind to give us some Music,
and we shall have Sport enough. Then they went and acquainted the Duchess with
their Proceedings, and Don Quixote's desiring a Lute; whereupon, being
overjoyed at the Occasion, she plotted with the Duke and her Women a new
Contrivance to have a little harmless Sport with the Don. After this, they
expected with a pleasing Impatience the Return of Night, which stole upon them
as fast as had done the Day, which the Duke and Duchess passed in agreeable
Converse with Don Quixote. The same Day she really sent away a Page of hers,
who had personated Dulcinea in the Wood, to Teresa Panca, with her Husband's
Letter, and the Bundle of Clothes which he had left behind, charging him to
bring her back a faithful Account of every Particular between 'em.

At last, it being eleven a Clock at Night, Don Quixote retired to his
Apartment, and finding a Lute there, he tuned it, opened the Window, and
perceiving there was somebody walking in the Garden, he ran over the Strings of
the Instrument, and having tuned it again as nicely as he could, he cough'd,
and cleared his Throat, and then with a Voice somewhat hoarse, yet not
unmusical, he sung the following Song, which he had composed himself that very
Day.

The ADVICE.
LOve, a strong designing Foe,
Careless Hearts with Ease deceives;
Can that Breast resist hi^ Blow,
Which your Sloth unguarded leaves?
If you're idle, you're destroyed,
All his Art on you he tries;
But be watchful and employed,
Straight the baffled Tempter flies.
Maids, for modest Grace admired,
If they would their Fortunes raise,
Must in Silence live retired,
It Is their Virtue speaks their Praise.
Prudent Men in this agree,
Whether Arms or Courts they use;
They may trifle with the Free,
But for Wives the Virtuous choose.
Wanton Loves, which in their Way
Roving Travelers put on;
In the Morn are fresh and gay,
In the Evening cold and gone.
Loves that come with eager Haste,
Still with equal Haste depart;
For an Image ill impressed,
Soon is vanished from the Heart*
On a Picture fair and true
Who would paint another Face?
Sure no Beauty can subdue,
While a greater holds the Place!
The Divine Tobosan Fair,
Dulcinea, claims me whole;
Nothing can her Image tear,
It Is one Substance with my Soul.
Then let Fortune smile or frown,
Nothing shall my Faith remove;
Constant Truth, the Lover's Crown,
Can work Miracles in Love.
No sooner had Don Quixote made an End of his Song, to which the Duke,
Duchess, Altisidora, and almost all the People in the Castle listened all the
While; but on a sudden from an open Gallery that was directly over the Knight's
Window, they let down a Rope, with at least a hundred little tinkling Bells
hanging about it. After that came down a great Number of Cats, poured out of a
huge Sack, all of 'em with smaller Bells tied to their Tails. The Jangling of
the Bells, and the Meawing of the Cats made such a dismal Noise, that the very
Contrivers of the Jest themselves were scared for the present, and Don Quixote
was strangely amazed and all dismayed. At the same time, as ill Luck would have
it, two or three frighted Cats leaped in through the Bars of his
Chamber-Window, and running up and down the Room like so many evil Spirits; one
would have thought a whole Legion of Devils had been flying about the Chamber.
They put out the Candles that stood lighted there, and endeavored to get out.
Mean while the Rope with the bigger Bells about it was pulled up and down, and
those who knew nothing of the Contrivance were greatly surpised. At last, Don
Quixote, recovering from his Astonishment, drew his Sword, and fenced and laid
about him at the Window, crying aloud, Avaunt ye wicked Inchanters, hence
Infernal Scoundrels! for I am Don Quixote de la Mancha, and all your damned
Devices cannot work their Ends against me. And then running after the Cars that
frisk'd about the Room, he began to thrust and cut at them furiously, while
they strove to get out. At last they made their Escape at the Window, all but
one of 'em, who finding himself hard put to it, flew in his Face, and laying
hold on his Nose with his Claws and Teeth, put him to such Pain, that the Don
began to roar out as loud as he could. Thereupon the Duke and the Duchess,
imagining the Cause of his Outcry, ran to his Assistance immediately; and
having opened the Door of his Chamber with a Master-Key, found the poor Knight
struggling hard with the Cat, that would not quit its Hold. By the Light of the
Candles which they had with them they saw the unequal Combat: The Duke offered
to interpose, and take off the Animal; but Don Quixote would not permit him.
Let no body take him off, cried he; let me alone hand to hand with this Devil,
this Sorcerer, this Necromancer! I Will make him know what it is to deal with Don
Quixote de la Mancha. But the Cat, not minding his Threats, growl'd on, and
still held fast; till at length the Duke got its Claws unhook'd from the
Knight's Flesh, and flung the Beast out at the Window. Don Quixote's Face was
hideously scratched, and his Nose in no very good Condition: Yet nothing vexed
him so much as that they had rescued out of his Hands that villainous
Necromancer. Immediately some Ointment was sent for, and Altisidora her self,
with her own Lilly-white Hands, applied some Plasters to his Sores, and
whispering him in the Ear, as she was dressing him, cruel hard-hearted Knight,
said she, all these Disasters are befallen thee, as a just Punishment for thy
obdurate Stubbornness and Disdain. May thy Squire Sancho forget to whip
himself, that thy Darling Dulcinea may never be delivered from her Enchantment,
nor thou ever be blessed with her Embraces, at least so long as I thy neglected
Adorer live. Don Quixote made no Answer at all to this, only he heaved up a
profound Sigh, and then went to take his Repose, after he had returned the Duke
and Duchess Thanks, not so much for their Assistance against that rascally
Crew of catterwauling and jangling Inchanters, for he defied 'em all, but for
their Kindness and good Intent. Then the Duke and the Duchess left him not a
little troubled at the Miscarriage of their Jest, which they did not think
would have proved so fatal to the Knight, as to oblige him, as it did, to keep
his Chamber five Days. During which Time there happened to him another
Adventure more pleasant than the last; which however cannot be now related; for
the Historian must return to Sancho Panca, who was very busy, and no less
pleasant in his Government.

CHAP. XLVII. A further Account of Sancho Panca's Behavior in his Government.
THE History informs us, that Sancho was conducted from the Court of Justice to
a sumptuous Palace; where, in a spacious Room he found the Cloth laid, and a
most neat and magnificent Entertainment prepared. As soon as he entered, the
Wind-Musick played, and four Pages waited on him, in order to the washing of
his Hands; which he did with a great deal of Gravity. And now the Instruments
ceasing, Sancho sat down at the upper-end of the Table; for there was no Seat
but there, and the Cloth was only laid for one. A certain Personage, who
afterward appeared to be a Physician, came and stood at his Elbow, with a
Whale-bone Wand in his Hand. Then they took off a curious white Cloth that lay
over the Dishes on the Table, and discovered great Variety of Fruit, and other
Eatables. One that looked like a Student, said Grace; a Page put a laced Bib
under Sancho's Chin; and another, who did the Office of Steward, set a Dish of
Fruit before him. But he had hardly put one bit into his Mouth before the
Physician touched the Dish with his Wand, and then it was taken away by a Page
in an Instant. Immediately another with Meat was clapped in the Place; but
Sancho no sooner offered to taste of it, but the Doctor with the Wand conjured
it away as fast as the Fruit. Sancho was amazed at this sudden Removal, and
looking about him on the Company, asked them whether they used to tantalize
People at that rate, feeding their Eyes, and starving their Bellies? My Lord
Governor, answered the Physician, you are to eat here no otherwise than
according to the Use and Custom of other Islands where there are Governors. I
am a Doctor of Physic, my Lord, and have a Salary allowed me in this Island,
for taking Charge of the Governor's Health, and I am more careful of it than
of my own; studying Night and Day his Constitution, that I may the better know
what to prescribe when he falls Sick. Now the chief Thing I do, is to attend
him always at his Meals, to let him Eat what I think convenient for him, and to
prevent his Eating what I imagine to be prejudicial to his Health, and
offensive to his Stomach. Therefore I now ordered the Fruit to be taken away,
because it is exceeding moist, and the other Dish, because it is as much too hot,
and over-season'd with Spices, which are apt to increase Thirst, and he that
drinks much, destroys and consumes the radical Moisture, which is the Fuel of
Life. So then, quoth Sancho, this Dish of roasted Partridges here can do me no
manner of Harm. Hold; said the Physician, the Lord Governor shall not eat of
'em, while I live to prevent it. Why so, cried Sancho? Because, answered the
Doctor, our great Master Hippocrates, the North-Star, and Luminary of Physic,
says in one of his Aphorisms, Omnis Saturatio mala, perdicis autem pessima:
That is, all Repletion is bad, but that of Partridges is worst of all. If it be
so, said Sancho, let Mr. Doctor see which of all these Dishes on the Table will
do me most Good, and least Harm, and let me eat my Belly-ful of that, without
having it whisk'd away with his Wand. For, by my Hopes, and the Pleasures of
Government, as I live, I am ready to die with Hunger; and not to allow me to
eat any Victuals (let Mr. Doctor say what he will) is the way to shorten my
Life, and not to lengthen it. Very true, my Lord, replied the Physician,
however, I am of Opinion, you ought not to eat of these Rabbets, as being a
tough and acute Kind of Food; nor would I have you taste of that Veal: Indeed
if it were neither roasted nor stewed, something might be said; but as it is,
it must not be. Well then, said Sancho, what think you of that huge Dish yonder
that smoaks so? I take it to be an It Is what we corruptly call an Olio, all
Sorts of Meat stewed together.
Olla Podrida; and that being a Hodge-podge of so many Sorts of Victuals, sure
I cannot but light upon Something there that will nick me, and be both wholesome
and toothsome. Absi^, cried the Doctor, far be such an ill Thought from us; no
Diet in the World yields a worse Nutriment than those Mishmashes do. No, leave
that luxurious Compound to your rich Monks and Prebendaries, your Masters of
Colleges, and lusty Feeders at Country-Weddings. But let 'em not incumber the
Tables of Governors, where nothing but delicate unmixed Viands in their Prime
ought to make a Figure. The Reason is, that Simple Medicines are generally
allowed to be better than Compounds; for in a Composition there may happen a
Mistake by the unequal Proportion of the Ingredients; but Simples are not
subject to that Accident. Therefore what I would advise at present, as a fit
Diet for the Governor, for the Preservation and Support of his Health, is a
Hundred of small Wafers, and a few thin Slices of Marmalade to strengthen his
Stomach, and help Digestion. Sancho hearing this, leaned back upon his Chair,
and looking earnestly in the Doctor's Face, very seriously asked him what his
Name was, and where he had studied? My Lord, answered he I am called Doctor
Pedro Rezio de Agu^^. The Name of the Place where I was born, is Tirteafuera,
and lies between Caraquel and Almod^^^^ del Campo, on the Right Hand; and I
took my Degree of Doctor in the University of Osuna. Has you, said Sancho, in
a mighty Chafe, Mr. Dr. Pedro Rezio de Aguero, born at Tirteafuera, that lies
between Caraquel and Almodobar del Campo, on the Right Hand, and who took your
Degree of Doctor at the University of Osuna, and so forth, Be gone! Avoid the
Room this Moment, or by the Life of Pharaoh, I Will get me a good Cudgel, and
beginning with your Carcass, will so be-labour and rib-roast all the
Physick-mongers in the Island, that I Will not leave there one of the Tribe, of
those, I mean, that are Ignorant Quacks; for as for Learned and Wise
Physicians, I Will make much of 'em, and honor 'em like so many Angels. Once
more, Pedro Rezio, I say, get out of my Presence. Avaunt! Or I Will take the
Chair I sit upon, and I Will comb your Head with it to some Purpose; and let me
be called to an Account about it when I give up my Office, I don't care, I Will
clear my self by saying, I did the World good Service, in ridding it of a bad
Physician, the Plague of a Commonwealth. Body of me! let me eat, or let 'em
take their Government again; for an Office that will not afford a Man his Victuals
is not worth two Horse-Beans. The Physician was terrified, seeing the Governor
in such a Heat, and would that Moment have slunk out of the Room, had not the
Sound of a Post-Horn in the Street been heard that Moment; whereupon the
Steward immediately looking out at the Window, turned back, and said, there was
an Express come from the Duke, doubtless with some Dispatch of Importance.

Presently the Messenger entered sweating, with Haste and Concern in his Looks,
and pulling a Packet out of his Bosom, delivered it to the Governor. Sancho
gave it to the Steward, and ordered him to read the Direction, which was this:
To Don Sancho Panca, Governor of the Island Barataria, to be delivered into
his own Hands, or those of his Secretary. Who is my Secretary, cried Sancho?
It Is I, my Lord, (answered one that was by) for I can write and read, and am a
Biscayner. That last Qualification is enough to make thee set up for Secretary
to the Emperor himself, said Sancho. Open the Letter then, and see what it
says. The new Secretary did so, and having perused the Dispatch by himself,
told the Governor, that 'twas a Business that was to be told only in Private:
Sancho ordered every one to leave the Room, except the Steward and the Carver,
and then the Secretary read what follows.

I have received Information, My Lord Don Sancho Panca, that some of our
Enemies intend to attack your Island with great Fury, one of these Nights: You
ought therefore to be watchful, and stand upon your Guard, that you may not be
sound unprovided. I have also had Intelligence from faithful Spies, that there
are four Men got into the Town in Disguise, to murder you; your Abilities being
regarded as a great Obstacle to the Enemy's Designs. Look about you, take heed
how you admit Strangers to speak with you, and eat nothing that is laid before
you. I will take care to send you Assistance, if you stand in need of it: And
in every thing I rely on your Prudence. From our Castle, the 16th of August,
(...) in the Morning.

Your Friend, The Duke.


Sancho was astonished at the News, and those that were with him seemed no less
concerned. But at last, turning to the Steward, I Will tell you, said he, what is
first to be done in this Case, and that with all Speed; Clap me that same
Doctor Rezio in a Dungeon; for if any Body has a Mind to kill me, it must be
he, and that with a lingering Death, the worst of Deaths, Hunger-starving.
However, said the Carver, I am of Opinion, your Honor ought not to eat any of
the Things that stand here before ye; for they were sent in by some of the
Convents, and it is a common Saying, The Devil ^urks behind the Cross. Which no
Body can deny, quoth Sancho; and therefore let me have for the present but a
Luncheon of Bread, and some four Pound of Raisins; there can be no Poison in
that: For, in short, I cannot live without eating; and if we must be in a
Readiness against these Battles, we had need be well victuall'd; for it is the
Belly keeps up the Heart, and not the Heart the Belly. Mean while, Secretary,
do you send my Lord Duke an Answer, and tell him his Order shall be fulfilled
in every Part without fail. Remember me kindly to my Lady Duchess, and beg of
her not to forget to send one on purpose with my Letter and Bundle to Teresa
Panca my Wife; which I shall take as a special Favor, and I will be mindful to
serve her to the best of my Power: And when your Hand's in, you may crowd in my
Service to my Master Don Quixote de la Mancha, that he may see I am neither
forgetful nor ungrateful, The rest I leave to you; put in what you will, and do
your Part like a good Secretary and a stanch Biscayner. Now take away here, and
bring me something to eat; and then you shall see I am able to deal with all
the Spies, Wizzards, and cutthroat Dogs that dare to meddle with me and my
Island.

At that Time a Page entering the Room, My Lord, said he, there is a Countryman
without desires to speak with your Lordship about Business of great
Consequence. It Is a strange Thing, cried Sancho, that one must still be plagued
with these Men of Business! Is it possible they should be such Sots, as not to
understand this is not a Time for Business? Do they fancy, that we Governors
and Distributors of Justice are made of Iron and Marble, and have no need of
Rest and Refreshment like other Creatures of Flesh and Blood. Well, before
Heaven, and of my Conscience, if my Government does but last, as I shrewdly
guess it will not, I Will get one of these Men of Business laid by the Heels
Well, for once let the Fellow come in -- But first take Heed he ben't one of
the Spies or Ruffian-Rogues that would murder me. As for that, said the Page, I
dare say he had no Hand in the Plot; poor Soul, he looks as if he could not
help it; there is no more Harm in him to see to than in a Piece of good Bread
There Is no need to fear, said the Steward, since we are all here by you. But
hark you, quoth Sancho, now Dr. Razio's gone, might not I eat something that
has some Substance in it, though it were but a Crust and an Onion? At Night,
answered the Carver, your Honor shall have no Cause to complain: Supper shall
make Amends for the Want of your Dinner. Heaven grant it may, said Sancho.

Now the Countryman came in, and by his Looks seemed to be a good harmless
silly Soul. As soon as he entered the Room, Which is my Lord Governor, quoth
he? Who but he that sits in the Chair, answered the Secretary! I humble my self
to his Worship's Presence, quoth the Fellow; and with that, falling on his
Knees, begged to kiss his Hand: Which Sancho refused; but bid him rise, and
tell him what he had to say. The Countryman then got up, my Lord, quoth he, I
am a Husbandman of Miguel-Turra, a Town some two Leagues from Ciudad-real.
Here Is another Tirte a fuera, quoth Sancho; Well, go on Friend; I know the
Place full well; it is not far from our Town. An't please you, said the
Countryman, my Business is this. I was married, by Heaven's Mercy, in the Face
of our Holy Mother the Roman Catholic Church; and I have two Boys that take
their Learning at the College; the youngest studies to become a Bachelor, and
the eldest to be a Master of Arts. I am a Widower, because my Wife is dead; she
died, an't please you, or to speak more truly, she was killed, as a Body may
say, by a damned Doctor, that gave her a Purge when she was with Child. Had it
been Heaven's blessed Will that she had been brought to Bed of a Boy, I would
have sent him to study to have been a Doctor, that he might have had no Cause
to envy his Brothers. So then, quoth Sancho, had not your Wife died, or had
they not made her die, you had not been a Widower. Very true, answered the Man.
We are much the nearer, cried Sancho; Go on, honest Friend, and prithee
dispatch; for it is rather Time to take an Afternoons-Nap than to talk of
Business. Now, Sir, I must tell you, continued the Farmer, that that Son of
mine the Bachelor of Art that is to be, fell in Love with a Maiden of our
Town, Clara Perlerina by Name, the Daughter of Andrew Perlerino, a mighty rich
Farmer; and Perlerino is not their right Name neither; but because the whole
Generation of 'em is troubled with the Palsy, they used to be called from the
Name of that Ailing, Perlaticos, but now they go by that of Perlerino; and
truly it fits the young Woman rarely, for she is a precius Pearl for Beauty,
especially if you stand on her right Side and view her; she looks like a Flower
in the Fields On the left indeed she does not look altogether so well; for
there she wants an Eye, which she lost by the Smallpox, that has dug a many
Pits somewhat deep all over her Face; but those that wish her well say, that is
nothing, and that those Pits are but so many Graves to bury Lovers Hearts in.
She is so cleanly, that because she will not have her Nose drop upon her Lips,
she carries it cocked up, and her Nostrils are turned up on each Side, as if
they shunned her Mouth, that is somewhat of the widest, and for all that she
looks exceeding well; and were it not for some ten or dozen of her Butter Teeth
and Grinders which she wants, she might set up for one of the cleverest Lasses
in the Country. As for her Lips, I don't know what to say of 'em, for they are
so thin and so slender, that were it the Fashion to wind Lips as they do Silk,
one might make a Skain of hers. Besides, they are not of the ordinary Hue of
common Lips: No, they are of the most wonderful Color that ever was seen, as
being speckled with Blue, Green, and Orange-Tawny. I hope my Lord Governor
will pardon me, for dwelling thus on the Picture and several rare Features of
her that is one Day to be my Daughter, seeing it is merely out of my hearty Love
and Affection for the Girl. Prithee paint on as long as thou will, said Sancho;
I am mightily taken with this kind of Painting, and if I had but dined, I would
not desire a better Desert than thy Original. Both my self and that are at your
Service, quoth the Fellow, or at least, we may be in time, if we are not now.
But alas! Sir, that is nothing; could I set before your Eyes her pretty
Carriage, and her Shape, you would admire. But that is not to be done; for she
is so crooked and crumpl'd up together, that her Knees and her Chin meet, and
yet any one may perceive that if she could but stand upright, her Head would
touch the very Cieling; and she would have given her Hand to my Son the
Bachelor in the Way of Matrimony before now, but that she is not able to
stretch it forth, the Sinews being quite shrunk up: However the broad
long-gutter'd Nails add no small Grace to it, and may let you know what a
well-made Hand she has.

So far, so good, said Sancho; but let us suppose you have drawn her from Head
to Foot. What is it you would be at now? Come to the Point, Friend, without so many
Windings and Turnings, and going round about the Bush. Sir, said the Farmer, I
would desire your Honor to do me the Kindness to give me a Letter of
Accommodation to the Father of my Daughter-in-Law, beseeching him to be pleased
to let the Marriage be fulfilled; seeing we are not unlike, neither in Estate
nor in bodily Concerns. For to tell you the Truth, my Lord Governor, my Son is
bewitched, and there is not a Day passes over his Head but the foul Fiends
torment him three or four Times; and having once had the ill Luck to fall into
the Fire, the Skin of his Face is shrivelled up like a Piece of Parchment, and
his Eyes are somewhat sore and full of Rheum. But when all is said, he has the
Temper of an Angel, and were he not apt to thump and belabour himself now and
then in his Fits, you would take him to be a Saint.

Have you any Thing else to ask, honest Man, said Sancho? Only one Thing more,
quoth the Farmer; but I am somewhat afraid to speak it. Yet I cannot find in my
Heart to let it rot within me, and therefore, fall Back fall Edge, I must out
with it. I would desire your Worship to bestow on me some three hundred or six
hundred Ducats toward my Batchelor's Portion, I mean to help him to begin the
World, and furnish him a House; for, in short, they will live by themselves,
without being subject to the Impertinencies of a Father-in-Law. Well, said
Sancho, see if you would have any Thing else; if you would, don't let Fear or
Bashfulness be your Hinderance! Out with it Man. No truly, quoth the Farmer;
and he had hardly spoke the Words, when the Governor starting up, and laying
hold of his Chair. You brazen-faced silly impudent Country-Booby, cried he, get
out of my Presence this Moment, or, by the Blood of the Panca's, I Will crack
your Jolter-head with this Chair, you whoreson Raggamuffin, Painter for the
Devil. Do thou come at this Time of Day to ask me for six hundred Ducats?
Where should I have 'em, mangy Clod-pate? And if I had 'em, why should I give
'em thee, thou old doting Scoundrel? What pox care I for Miguel Turra, or all
the Generation of the Perlerinos. Avoid the Room, I say, or by the Life of the
Duke, I Will be as good as my Word; and ding out thy Cookoo-Brains. Thou are no
Native of Miguel-Turra, but some Imp of the Devil, sent on his Master's Errand
to tempt my Patience. It Is not a Day and a Half that I have been Governor, and
thou would have me have six hundred Ducats already, Dunderhead-Sot.

The Steward made Signs to the Farmer to withdraw, and he went out accordingly,
hanging down his Head, and to all Appearance very much afraid lest the
Governor should make good his angry Threats; for the cunning Knave knew very
well how to act his Part. But let us leave Sancho in his angry Mood, and let
there be Peace and Quietness, while we return to Don Quixote, whom we left with
his Face covered over with Plasters, the Scratches which he had got when the
Cat so clapperclaw'd him, having obliged him to no less than eight Days
Retirement; during which Time there happened that to him, which Cid Hamet
promises to relate with the same Punctuality and Veracity with which he
delivers the Particulars of this History, how trivial soever they may be.

CHAP. XLVIII. What happened to Don Quixote with Donna Rodriguez the Dutchess's
Woman; as also other Passages worthy to be recorded, and had in eternal
Remembrance.
DON Quixote thus unhappily hurt, was extremely sullen and melancholy, his Face
wrapped up and marked, not by the Hand of a Superior Being, but the Paws of a
Cat, a Misfortune incident to Knight-Errantry. He was six Days without
appearing in Public; and one Night, when he was thus confined to his
Apartment, (...) lay awake, reflecting on his Misfortunes, and Altisidora's
Importunities, he perceived some Body was opening his Chamber Door with a Key,
and presently imagined that the amorous Damsel was coming to make an Attempt on
his Chastity, and expose him to the Danger of forfeiting that Loyalty which he
had vowed to his Lady Dulcinea del Tobos^. Prepossessed with that Conceit: No,
(said he, loud enough to be heard) the greatest Beauty in the Universe shall
never remove the dear Idea of the charming Fair, that is engraved and stamped
in the very Center of my Heart, and the most secret Recesses of my Breast. No,
thou only Mistress of my Soul, whether transformed into a rank Country Wench,
or into one of the Nymphs of the golden Tagus, that weave Silk and Gold in the
Loom: Whether Merlin or Montesinos detain thee where they please, be where thou will, thou still art mine* and wherever I shall be, I must and will be thine.
Just as he ended his Speech, the Door opened. Up he got in the Bed, wrapped
from Head to Foot in a Yellow Satin Quilt, with a Woollen Cap on his Head, his
Face and his Mustachio's bound up; his Face, to heal its Scratches, and his
Mustachio's, to keep them from hanging down: In which Posture, he looked like
the strangest Apparition that can be imagined. He fixed his Eyes toward the
Door, and when he expected to have seen the yielding and doleful Altisidora, he
beheld a most Reverend Matron approaching in a White Vail, so long that it
covered her from Head to Foot. Betwixt her Left Hand Fingers she carried half a
Candle lighted, and held her Right Hand before her Face to keep the Blaze of
the Taper from her Eyes, which were hidden by a huge Pair of Spectacles. All
the way she trod very softly, and moved a very slow Pace. Don Quixote thus
mounted, watched her Motions, and observing her Garb and her Silence, took her
for some Witch or Inchantress, that came in that Dress to practice her wicked
Sorceries upon him; and began to make the Sign of the Cross as fast as he
could. The Vision advanced all the while, and being got to the Middle of the
Chamber, lifted up its Eyes; and saw Don Quixote thus making a thousand Crosses
on his Breast. But if he was astonished at sight of such a Figure, she was no
less afrighted at his: So that as soon as she spied him thus wrapped up in
Yellow, so lank, be-patch'd, and muffl'd up; Bless me, cried she, what is this!
with the sudden Fright; she dropped her Candle, and now being in the Dark, as
she was running out, the Length of her Coats made her stumble, and down she
fell in the Middle of the Chamber, Don Quixote at the same Time was in great
Anxiety. Phantome, cried he, or whatever thou art, I conjure thee to tell me
who thou art, and what thou requir'st of me? If thou art a Soul in Torment,
tell me, and I will endeavor thy Ease to the utmost of my Power; for I am a
Catholic Christian, and love to do Good to all Mankind; for which Reason I
took upon me the Order of Knight-Errantry, whose extensive Duties engage me to
relieve the Souls in Purgatory. The poor Old Woman hearing her self thus
conjured, judged of Don Quixote's Fears by her own, and therefore with a low
and doleful Voice, My Lord Don Quixote, said she, (if you are he) I am neither
a Phantome nor a Ghost, nor a Soul in Purgatory, as I suppose you fancy; but
Don^^ Rodriguez, my Lady Dutchess's Matron of Honor, who come to you about a
certain Grievance, of the Nature of those which you use to redress. Tell me,
Donna Rodriguez, said Don Quixote, are not you come to manage some
Love-Intrigue? If you are, take it from me, you will lose your Labor: It Is all in
vain, Thanks to the peerless Beauty of my Lady Dulcinea del Toboso. In a Word,
Madam, provided you come not on some such Embassy, you may go light your
Candle, and return, and we will talk of any Thing you please; but remember I
bar all dangerous Insinuations, all amorous Inticements: What! I procure for
others, cried the Matron! I find you don't know me, Sir. I am not so stale yet,
to be reduced to such poor Employments. I have good Flesh still about me,
Heaven be praised, and all my Teeth in my Head, except some few which the
Rheums, so rise, in this Country of Arragon, have robbed me of. But stay a
little, I Will go light my Candle, and then I Will tell you my Misfortunes, for
it is you that set to rights every thing in the World. This said, away she went,
without staying for an Answer.

Don Quixote expected her a While quietly, but his working Brain soon started a
thousand Chimera's concerning this new Adventure; and he fancied he did ill in
giving Way, though but to a Thought of endangering his Faith to his Mistress. Who
knows, said he to himself, but that the Devil is now endeavoring to circumvent
me with an old Governante, though it has not heen in his Power to do it with
Countesses, Marchionesses, Dutchesses, Queens, nor Empresses. I have often
heard say, and that by Persons of great Judgment, that, if he can, he will
rather delude a Man with an ugly Object, than with one that is Beautiful. Who
knows but this Solitude, this Occasion, the Stillness of the Night, may rouse
my sleeping Desires, and cause me in my latter Age to fall, where I never
stumbl'd before? In such Cases it is better to fly, than to stay to face the
Danger. But why do I argue so foolishly? Sure it is impossible that an
antiquated Waiting-Matron, in a long White Vail, like a Winding Sheet, with a
Pair of Spectacles over her Nose, should create or waken an unchaste Thought in
the most abandoned Libertine in the World. Is there any of these Duena's or
Governante's that has good Flesh? Is there one of those Implements of
Antichambers that is not impertinent, affected, and intolerable? Avaunt then,
all ye idle Crowd of wrinkl'd Female-Waiters, unfit for any humane Recreation!
How is that Lady to be commended, who, they tell us, set up only a couple of
Mawkins in her Chamber, exactly representing two Waiting-Matrons, with their
Work before 'em! The State and Decorum of her Room was as well kept with those
Statues as it would have been with real Duena's. So saying, he started from the
Bed, to lock the Door and shut out Donna Rodriguez; but in that very Moment she
happened to come in with a Wax-Candle lighted; at what Time spying the Knight
near her, wrapped in his Quilt his Face bound up, and a woollen Cap on his
Head, she was frighted again, and started two or three Steps back. Sir Knight,
said she, is my Honor safe; for I don't think it looks handsomely in you to
come out of your Bed? I ought to ask you the same Question, Madam, said Don
Quixote; and therefore tell me whether I shall be safe from being assaulted and
ravished? Whom are you afraid of, Sir Knight, cried she? Of you, replied Don
Quixote: for, in short, I am not made of Marble, nor you of Brass; neither is
it now the Noon of Day, but that of Night, and a little later too, if I am not
mistaken; besides we are in a Place, more close and private than the Cave must
have been, where the false and presumptuous Aeneas enjoyed the beautiful and
tenderhearted Dido. However, give me your Hand, Madam; for I desire no greater
Security than that of my own Continence and Circumspection. This said, he
kissed his own Right Hand, and with it took hold of hers, which she gave him
with the same Ceremony.

Here Cid Hamet (making a Parenthesis) swears by Mahomet, he would have given
the best Coat of two that he had, only to have seen the Knight and the Matron
walk thus Hand in Hand from the Chamber Door to the Bedside. To make short,
Don Quixote went to Bed again, and Donna Rodriguez sat down in a Chair at some
Distance, without taking off her Spectacles, or setting down the Candle Don
Quixote crowded up together, and covered himself close, all but the Face, and
after they had both remained a while in Silence, the first that broke it was
the Knight. Now, Madam, said he, you may freely unburden your Heart, sure of
Attention to your Complaints, from chaste Ears, and Assistance in your Distress
from a compassionate Heart. I believe no less, said the Matron, and promised my
self no less charitable an Answer from a Person of so graceful and pleasing a
Presence. The Case then is, Noble Sir, that though you see me sitting in this
Chair, in the Middle of Arragon, in the Habit of an insignificant unhappy
Duena, I am of Asturias de Oviedo, and of one of the best Families in that
Province. But my hard Fortune, and the Neglect of my Parents, who fell to
Decay, too soon, I cannot tell how, brought me to Madrid; where, because they
could do no better, for Fear of the worst, they placed me with a Court-Lady, to
be her Chambermaid. And though I say it, for all manner of Plain-Work, I never
was outdone by any one in all my Life. My Father and Mother left me at Service,
and returned home; and some few Years after, they both died, and went to
Heaven, I hope; for they were very good and religious Catholics. Then was I
left an Orphan, and wholly reduced to the sorrowful Condition of such
Court-Servants, wretched Wages, and a slender Allowance. About the same time
the Gentleman Usher fell in Love with me, before I dreamt of any such Thing,
Heaven knows. He was somewhat stricken in Years, had a fine Beard, was a
personable Man, and what is more, as good a Gentleman as the King; for he was of
the Mountains. We did not carry Matters so close in our Love, but it came to my
Lady's Ears; and so to hinder Peoples Tongues, without any more ado, she caused
us to be married in the Face of our Holy Mother the Catholic Church; which
Matrimony produced a Daughter, that made an End of my good Fortune, if I had
any. Not that I died in Childbed; for I went my full Time, and was safely
delivered; but because my Husband (rest his Soul) died a while after of a
Fright; and had I but Time to tell you how it happened, I dare say you would
wonder. Here she began to weep piteously. Good Sir, cried she, I must beg your
Pardon; for I cannot contain my self. As often as I think of my poor Husband, I
cant forbear shedding of Tears. Bless me, how he looked, and with what
Stateliness he would ride, with my Lady behind him, on a stout Mule as black as
Jet, (for Coaches and Chairs were not used then as they are now adays; but the
Ladies rode behind their Gentlemen-Ushers.) And now my Tongue's in, I cannot
help telling you the whole Story, that you may see what a fine well-bred Man my
dear Husband was, and how nice in every Punctilio.

One Day, at Madrid, as he came into St. James's-Street, which is somewhat
narrow, with my Lady behind him, he met a Judge of the Court, with two Officers
before him: Whereupon, as soon as he saw him, to show his Respect, my Husband
turned about his Mule, as if he designed to have waited on him. But my Lady
whispering him in the Ear, what do you mean, said she, Blockhead? Don't you know
your Way? The Judge on his side was no less civil; and stopping his Horse, Sir,
said he, pray keep your Way; you must not go with me, it becomes me rather to
wait on my Lady Casilda, (for that was the Lady's Name.) However my Husband
with his Hat in his Hand, persisted in his civil Intentions. But at last, my
Lady being very angry with him for it, took a great Pin, or rather, as I am apt
to believe, a Bodkin out of her Case, and run it into his Back; upon which my
Husband suddenly starting, and crying out, fell out of the Saddle, and pulled
down my Lady after him. Immediately two of her Footmen ran to help her, and the
Judge and his Officers did the like. The Gate of Guadalajara was presently in a
Hubbub (the idle People about the Gate I mean.) In short, my Lady returned home
a foot, and my Husband went to a Surgeon, complaining that he was pricked
through the Bowels. And now this Civility of his was talked of every where,
insomuch that the very Boys in the Streets flocked about him; for which Reason,
and because he was somewhat short-sighted, my Lady dismissed him her Service;
which he took so to Heart, poor Man, that I dare say it cost him his Life soon
after. Now was I left a poor helpless Widow, and with a Daughter to keep, who
still increased in Beauty as she grew up, like the Foam of the Sea. At length,
having the Name of an excellent Work-woman at my Needle, my Lady Duchess, who
was newly married to his Grace, took me to live with her here in Arragon, and
my Daughter as well as my self. In time the Girl grew up, and became the most
accomplished Creature in the World. She Sings like a Lark, Dances llke a Fairy,
Trips like a wild Buck, Writes and Reads like a Schoolmaster, and casts
Accounts like an Usurer. I say nothing of her Neatness; but certainly the
purest Spring Water that runs is not more cleanly; and then for her Age, she is
now, if I mistake not, just Sixteen Years, Five Months, and Three Days old. Now
who should happen to fall in Love with this Daughter of mine, but a mighty rich
Farmer's Son, that lives in one of my Lord Duke's Villages not far off; and
indeed, I cannot tell how he managed Matters, but he plied her so close, that
upon a Promise of Marriage he wheedled her into a Consent, and, in short, got
his Will of her, and now refuses to make his Word good. The Duke is no stranger
to the Business; for I have made my Complaint to him about it many and many
times, and begged of him to enjoin the Young Man to Wed my Daughter; but he
turns his deaf Ear to me, and cannot endure I should speak to him of it, because
the Young Knave's Father is rich, and lends the Duke Money, and is bound for
him upon all Occasions, so that he would by no means disoblige him.

Therefore, Sir, I apply my self to your Worship, and beseech you to see my
Daughter righted, either by Entreaties, or by Force; seeing every Body says,
you were sent into this World to redress Grievances, and assist those in
Adversity. Be pleased to cast an Eye of Pity on my Daughter's Orphan-state, her
Beauty, her Youth, and all her other good Parts; for, of my Conscience, of all
the Damsels my Lady has, there is not one can come up to her by a Mile; no, not
she that is cried up as the airiest and finest of 'em all, whom they call
Altisidora: I am sure she is not to be named the same Day: For, let me tell
you, Sir, all is not Gold that glisters: This same Altisidora after all, is a
hoity toity, that has more Vanity than Beauty, and less Modesty than
Confidence. Besides, she is none of the soundest neither, for her Breath is so
strong, that no Body can endure to stand near her for a Moment. Nay, my Lady
Duchess too -- but I must say no more, for as they say, Walls have ^ars. What
of my Lady Duchess, said Don Quixote? By all that is dear to you, Donna
Rodriguez, tell me, I conjure you. Your Entreaties, said the Matron, are too
strong a Charm to be resisted, dear Sir, and I must tell you the Truth. Do you
observe, Sir, that Beauty of my Lady's; that Softness, that Clearness of
Complexion, smooth and shining like a polished Sword. Those Cheeks, all Milk
and Vermilion, fair like the Moon, and glorious like the Sun; that Air when she
treads, as if she disdained to touch the Ground, and in short, that Look of
Health that enlivens all her Charms? Let me tell you, Sir, she may thank Heaven
for it in the first Place, and next to that, two Issues in both her Legs, which
she keeps open to carry off the ill Humors of which the Physicians say her.
Body abounds. Blessed Virgin, cried Don Quixote! Is it possible the Duchess
should have such Drains! I should not have believed it from any Body but you,
though Bare-foot-Friers had sworn it. But yet certainly from so much
Perfection, no ill Humors can flow, but rather Liquid Amber. Well, I am now
persuaded such Sluices may be of Importance to Health.

Scarce had Don Quixote said those Words, when at one Bounce the Chamber Door
slew open; whereupon Donna Rodriguez was seized with such a terrible Fright,
that she let fall her Candle, and while they were thus in the Dark, the poor
Matron felt some Body hold her by the Throat, and squeeze her Weasand so hard,
that it was not in her Power to cry out. And another having pulled up her
Coats, laid her on so unmercifully upon her bare Buttocks with a Slipper or
some such Thing, that it would have moved any one but those that did it, to
Pity. Don Quixote was not without Compassion, yet he did not think fit to stir
from the Bed, but lay snug and silent all the While, not knowing what the
Meaning of this Bustle might be, fearing lest the Tempest that poured on the
Matron's Posteriors might also light upon his own; and not without Reason; for
indeed, after the mute Executioners had well curried the Old Gentlewoman (who
durst not cry out) they came to Don Quixote and turning up the Bed-Cloaths,
pinched him so hard and so long, that in his own Defense, he could not forbear
laying about him with his Fists as well as he could, till at last, after the
Scuffle had lasted about half an Hour, the Invisible Phantomes vanished. Donna
Rodriguez set her Coats to rights, and lamenting her hard Fortune, left the
Room, without speaking a Word to the Knight. As for him, he remained where he
was, sadly pinched and tired, and very moody and thoughtful, not knowing who
this wicked Inchanter should be, that had used him in that manner. But we shall
know that in its proper Time. Now let us leave him, and return to Sancho Panca,
who calls upon us, as the Order of our History requires.

CHAP. XLIX. What happhen'd to Sancho Panca, as he went the Rounds in his
Island.
WE left our mighty Governor much out of Humor, and in a pelting Chafe, with
that saucy Knave of a Countryman, who, according to the Instructions he had
received from the Steward, and the Steward from the Duke, had banter'd his
Worship with his impertinent Description. Yet as much a Dunce and a Fool as he
was, he made his Party good against them all. At last, addressing himself to
those about him, among whom was Doctor Pedro Rezio, who had ventured into the
Room again after the Consult about the Duke's Letter was over; Now, said he, do
I find in good earnest that Judges and Governors must be made of Brass, or
ought to be made of Brass, that they may be Proof against the Importunities of
those that pretend Business, who at all Hours, and at all Seasons would be
heard and dispatched, without any Regard to any Body but themselves, let what
will come of the rest, so their Turn is served. Now if a poor Judge does not
hear and dispatch them presently, either because he is other ways busy and
cannot, or because they don't come at a proper Season, then do they grumble,
and give him their Blessing backwards, rake up the Ashes of his Forefathers,
and would gnaw his very Bones. But with your Leave, good, Mr. Busy-body, with
all your Business you are too hasty, pray have a little Patience, and wait a
fit Time to make your Application. Don't come at Dinnertime, or when a Man is
going to Sleep, for we Judges are Flesh and Blood, and must allow Nature what
she naturally requires; unless it be poor I, who am not to allow mine any Food,
thanks to my Friend, Master Doctor Pedro Rezio Tirteafuera here present, who is
for starving me to Death, and then swears it is for the Preservation of my Life.
Heaven grant him such a Life, I pray, and all the Gang of such Physick-mongers
as he is; for the good Physicians deserve Palms and Laurels.

All that knew Sancho wondered to hear him talk so sensibly, and began to think
that Offices and Places of Trust inspired some Men with Understanding, as they
stupify'd and confounded others. However, Doctor Pedro Rezio aguero de
Tirteafuera promised him he should sup that Night, though he trespassed against
all the Aphorisms of Hippocrates. This pacified the Governor for the present,
and made him wait with a mighty Impatience for the Evening, and Supper. To his
thinking the Hour was so long a coming, that he fancied Time stood still but
yet at last the wished for Moment came, and they served him up some minced Beef
with Onions, and some Calves-feet somewhat stale. The hungry Governor
presently fell to with more Eagerness and Appetite than if they had given him
Milan God wits, Roman Pheasants, Sorrentum Veal, Moron Partridges, or Lavajos
Goslins. And after he had pretty well taken off the sharp Edge of his Stomach,
turning to the Physician, Look you, quoth he, Mr. Doctor, hereafter never
trouble your self to get me Dainties or Tit-bits to humor my Stomach; that
would but take it quite off the Hinges; by Reason it has been used to nothing
but good Beef, Bacon, Pork, Goats-flesh, Turnips and Onions; and if you ply me
with your Kickshaws, your nice Courtiers Fare, 'twill but make my Stomach
squeamish and untoward, and I should perfectly loath them one time or other.
However, I shall not take it amiss, if the Steward will now and then set before
me one of those Olla-P^dridas's, where all Sorts of good Things are
rotten-stew'd, and as it were lost in one another; and the more they are thus
rotten, and like their Name, the better the Smack; and there you may make a
Jumble of what you will, so it be eatable, and I shall remember him, and make
him Amends one of these Days. But let no Body put Tricks upon Travelers, and
make a Fool of me; for either we are, or we are not. Let Us be Merry and Wise,
when God sends his Light he sends it to all, I Will govern this Island fair and
square, without Underhand-dealings or taking of Bribes; but take notice, I
will not bate an Inch of my Right; and therefore let every one carry an even Hand,
and mind their Hits, or else I Would have them to know there is Rods in Piss for
'em. They that urge me too far shall rue for it; make your self Honey, and the
Flies will eat you. Indeed, my Lord Governor, said the Steward, your Lordship
is much in the right in all you have said; and I dare engage for the
Inhabitants of this Island, that they will obey and observe your Commands with
Diligence, Love, and Punctuality; for your gentle Way of Governing in the
Beginning of your Administration does not give them the least Opportunity to
act, or but to design any Thing to your Lordship's Disadvantage. I believe as
much, answered Sancho, and they would be silly Wretches, should they offer to
do or think otherwise. Let me tell you too, it is my Pleasure you take care of
me and my Dapple, that we may both have our Food as we ought, which is the most
material Business. Next, let us think of going the Rounds, when it is time for
me to do it; for I intend to clear this Island of all Filth and Rubbish, of all
Rogues and Vagrants, idle Lusks and sturdy Beggars. For I would have you to
know, my good Friends, that your slothful, lazy, lewd People in a Commonwealth
are like Drones in a Bee-hive, that waste and devour the Honey which the
laboring Bees gather. I design to encourage Husbandmen, preserve the
Privileges of the Gentry, reward virtuous Persons, and above all Things
reverence Religion, and have regard to the Honor Religious Men. What think you
of this my good Friends? do I talk to the Purpose, or do I talk idly? You speak
so well, my Lord Governor, answered the Steward, that I stand in Admiration to
hear a Man so unlettered as you are (for I believe your Lordship cannot read at
all) utter so many notable Things, and in every Word a Sentence; far from what
they who sent you hither, and they who are here present, ever expected from
your Understanding. But every Day produces some new Wonder, Jests are turned
into Earnest, and those who designed to laugh at others, happen to be laughed
at themselves.

It being now Night, and the Governor having supped, with Doctor Rezio's
Leave, he prepared to walk the Rounds, and set forward, attended by the
Steward; the Secretary, the Gentleman-Waiter, the Historiographer who was to
register his Acts, several Sergeants and other Limbs of the Law, so many in
Number that they made a little Battalion, in the Middle of which the great
Sancho marched with his Rod of Justice in his Hand, in a notable manner. They
had not walked far in the Town, before they heard the clashing of Swords, which
made 'em hasten to the Place whence the, Noise came. Being come thither they
found onl^ two Men a fighting, who gave over, perceiving the Officers. What,
(cried one of them at the same Time). Do they suffer Folks to be robbed in this
Town in Defiance to Heaven and the King? Do they let Men be stripped in the
Middle of the Street? Hold, honest Man, said Sancho, have a little Patience,
and let me know the Occasion of this Fray, for I am the Governor. My Lord, said
the other Party, I Will tell you in few Words. Your Lordship must know that this
Gentleman, just now, at a Gaming Ordinary over the Way, won above a thousand
Reals, Heaven knows how. I stood by all the while, and gave Judgment for him in
more than one doubtful Cast, though I could not well tell how to do it in
Conscience. He carried off his Winnings, and when I expected he would have
given me a Piece or Two, as it is a Claim among Gentlemen of my Fashion, who
frequent Ordinaries, from those that play high and win, for preventing
Quarrels, being at their Bac^s, and giving Judgment right or wrong;
nevertheless he went away without giving me any Thing. I ran after him, not
very well pleased with his Proceeding, yet very civilly desired him to consider
I was his Friend, that he knew me to be a Gentleman, though fallen to Decay,
that had nothing to live upon, my Friends having brought me up to no
Employment; and therefore I entreated him to be so kind as to give me eight
Reals: But the stingy Soul, a greater Thief than Cacus, and a worse Sharper
than Andradilla, would give me but sneaking four Reals. And now, my Lord, you
may see how little Shame and Conscience there is in him. But Faith, had not your
Lordship come just in the Nick, I would have made him bring up his Winnings,
and taught him the Difference between a Rook and a Jack-daw. What say you to
this, cried Sancho to the other? The other made Answer, that he could not deny
what his Antagonist had said, that he would give him but four Reals, because he
had given him Money several Times before; and Beggars should not be Chusers,
but be thankful for what is given them, without haggling with those that have
won, unless they know 'em to be common Cheats, and the Money not won fairly;
and that to show he was a fair Gamester, and no Sharper, as the other said,
there needed no better Proof than his Refusal to give him any Thing, since the
Sharpers are always in Fee with these Bully-Rooks who know 'em, and wink at
their Cheats. That Is true, said the Steward: Now what would your Lordship have
us to do with these Men? I Will tell you, said Sancho. First, you that are the
Winner, whether by fair Play or by foul, give your Bully-hack here a hundred
Reals, immediately, and thirty more for the poor Prisoners: And you that have
nothing to live on, and were brought up to no Employment, and go sharping up
and down from Place to Place, pray take your hundred Reals, and be sure by to
Morrow to go out of this Island, and not to set Foot in it again these Ten
Years and a Day, unless you have a Mind to make an End of your Banishment in
another World; for if I find you here I will make you swing on a Gibbet, with
the Help of the Hangman; away, and let no Body offer to reply, or I Will lay him
by the Heels. Thereupon the one disburs'd, and the other received, the first
went Home, and the last went out of the Island; and then the Governor going
on, either I shall want of my Will, said he, or I Will put down these disorderly
Gaming-Houses; for I have a Fancy they are highly prejudicial. As for this
House in Question, said one of the Officers, I suppose it will be a hard Matter
to put it down, for it belongs to a Person of Quality, who loses a great deal
more by Play at the Year's End than he gets by his Cards. You may show your
Authority against other gaming Houses of less Note, that do more Mischief, and
harbor more dangerous People than the Houses of Gentlemen and Persons of
Quality, where your notorious Sharpers dare not use their Slights of Hand. And
since Gaming is a Vice that is become a common Practice, it is better to play in
good Gentlemen's Houses, than in those of under Officers, where they shall draw
you in a poor Bubble, and after they have kept him playing all the Night long,
send him away stripped naked to the Skin. Well, all in good Time, said Sancho:
I know there is a great deal to be said in this Matter. At the same Time one of
the Officers came holding a Youth, and having brought him before the Governor,
an't Please your Worship, said he, this young Man was coming toward us, but
as soon as he perceived it was the Rounds he sheer'd off, and set a running as
fast as his Legs would carry him, a Sign he is no better than he should be. I
ran after him, but had not he happened to fall, I had never come up with him.
What made you run away, Friend, said Sancho? Sir, answered the young Man, 'twas
only to avoid all the Questions one is commonly teiz'd with by the Watch. What
Business do you follow, asked Sancho? I am a Weaver by Trade answered the other.
A Weaver of what, asked the Governor? of Steel Heads for Lances, with your
Worship's good Leave, said the other. Oh hoh, cried Sancho you are an arch Wag I
find, and pretend to pass your Jests upon us: Very well. And pray whither are
you going at this Time of Night? To take the Air, an't like your Worship,
answered the other. Good, said Sancho, and where do they take the Air in this
Island? Where it blows, said the Youth. A very proper Answer, cried Sancho. You
are a very pretty impudent Fellow, that is the Truth on it. But pray make Account
that I am the Air, or the Wind, which you please, and that I blow in your Poop,
and drive you to the Round-house. -- Here -- take him, and carry him away
thither to rights: I Will take Care the Youngster shall sleep out of the Air to
Night; he might catch Cold else by lying abroad. Before George, said the
Young Man, you shall as soon make me a King as make me sleep out of the Air to
Night. Why, you young Slip-string, said Sancho, is it not in my Power to commit
thee to Prison, and fetch thee out again as often as it is my Will and Pleasure?
For all your Power, answered the Fellow, you shall not make me sleep in Prison.
Say you so, cried Sancho? Here, away with him to Prison, and let him see to his
Cost who is mistaken, he or I; and lest the Jailer should be greased in the
Fist to let him out, I Will fine him Two Thousand Ducats if he let thee stir a
Foot out of Prison. All that is a Jest said the other; for I defy all Mankind to
make me sleep this Night in a Prison. Tell me, Devil incarnate, said Sancho,
have thou some Angel to take off the Irons I Will have thee clapped in, and get
thee out? Well, now, my good Lord Governor (said the young Man very prettily)
let us talk Reason and come to the Point. Suppose your Lordship should send me
to Jail, and get me laid by the Heels in the Dungeon, shackl'd and manacl'd,
and lay a heavy Penalty on the Jailer in Case he let me out; and suppose your
Orders be strictly obeyed; yet for all that, if I have no Mind to Sleep, but
will keep awake all Night without so much as shutting my Eyes, pray can you,
with all the Power you have, make me sleep whether I will or no? No certainly,
said the Secretary, and the young Man has made out his Meaning. Well, said
Sancho, but I hope you mean to keep your self awake, only as one would choose to
sleep if he lists himself, and not to thwart my Will. I mean nothing else
indeed, my Lord, said the Lad. Why then go Home and sleep, quoth Sancho, and
Heaven send thee good Rest. I Will not be thy Hind'rance. But have a Care mother
Time of sporting with Justice; for you may meet with some Man in an Office that
may Chance to break your Head while you are breaking your Jest. The Youth went
his Way, and the Governor continued his Rounds.

A while after came two of the Officers, bringing a Person along with them. My
Lord Governor, said one of 'em, we have brought here one that is dressed like a
Man, yet is no Man, but a Female, and no ugly one neither. Thereupon they
lifted up to her Eyes two or three Lanthorns, and by their Light discovered the
Face of a Woman about Sixteen Years of Age, beautiful to Admiration, with her
Hair put up in a Network Cawle of Gold and green Silk. They examined her Dress
from Head to Foot, and found that her Stockings were of Carnation-Silk, and her
Garters of white Taffeta, fringed with Gold and Pearls. Her Breeches were of
Gold Tissue, upon a green Ground, and her Coat of the same Stuff; under which
she wore a Doublet of very fine Stuff gold and white. Her Shoes were white, and
made like Men's. She had no Sword, but only a very rich Dagger, and several
costly Rings on her Fingers. In a Word, the young Creature seemed very lovely
to 'em all, but not one of 'em knew her. Those of the Company who lived in the
Town could not imagine who she was; and those who were privy to all the Tricks
that were to be put upon Sancho, were more at a loss than the rest, well
knowing that this Adventure was not of their own contriving; which made 'em be
in great Expectation of the Event. Sancho was surpised at her Beauty, and
asked her who she was, whither she was going, and upon what Account she had put
on such a Dress? Sir, said she, (fixing her Eyes on the Ground with a decent
Bashfulness) I cannot tell you before so many People what I have so much Reason
to wish may be kept secret. Only this one Thing I do assure you, I am no Thief,
nor evil-minded Person; but an unhappy Maid, whom the Force of Jealousy has
constrained to transgress the Laws of Maiden Decency. The Steward hearing this,
My Lord Governor, said he, be pleased to order your Attendants to retire, that
the Gentlewoman may more freely tell her Mind. The Governor did accordingly,
and all the Company removed at a Distance, except the Steward, the
Gentleman-waiter, and the Secretary; and then the young Lady thus proceeded.

I am the Daughter of Pedro Perez Mazorca, Farmer of the Wool in this Town, who
comes very often to my Father's House. This will hardly pass, Madam, said the
Steward; for I know Pedro Perez very well, and I am sure he has neither Sons
nor Daughters: Besides, you tell us he is your Father, and at the same Time that
he comes very often to your Father's House. I observed as much, said Sancho.
Indeed, Gentlemen, said she, I am now so troubled in Mind, that I know not what
I say. But the Truth is, I am the Daughter of Diego de la Llana, whom I suppose
you all know. Now this may pass, said the Steward, for I know Diego de la
Llana, who is a very considerable Gentleman, has a good Estate, and a Son and a
Daughter. But since his Wife died, no Body in this Town can say he ever saw
that Daughter, for he keeps her so close that he hardly suffers the Sun to look
on her; though indeed the common Report is, that she is an extraordinary
Beauty. You say very true, Sir, replied the young Lady; and I am that very
Daughter; as for my Beauty, if Fame has given a wrong Character of it, you will
now be undeceived, since you have seen my Face; and with this she burst out
into Tears. The Secretary perceiving this, whispered the Gentleman-Waiter in
the Ear: Sure, said he, some extraordinary Matter must have happened to this
poor young Lady, since it could oblige one of her Quality to come out of Doors
in this Disguise, and at this unseasonable Hour. That Is without Question,
answered the other; for her Tears too confirm the Suspicion. Sancho comforted
her with the best Reasons he could think on; and bid her not be afraid, but
tell 'em what had befallen her, for they would all really do whatever lay in
their Powers to make her easy.

You must know, Gentlemen, said she, that it is now Ten Years that my Father has
kept me close, ever since my Mother died. We have a small Chapel richly
adorned, in the House, where we hear Mass; and in all that Time I have seen
nothing but the Sun by Day, and the Moon and Stars by Night; neither do I know
what Streets, Squares, Marketplaces and Churches are; no nor Men, except my
Father, my Brother, and that Pedro Perez the Wool-Farmer, whom I at first would
have passed upon you for my Father, that I might conceal the right. This
Confinement (not being allowed to stir abroad, though but to go to Church) has
made me uneasy this great While, and made me long to see the World, or at
least the Town where I was born, which I thought was no unlawful or unseemly
Desire. When I heard 'em talk of Bull-Feasts, Prizes, acting of Plays, and
other public Sports, I asked my Brother, who is a Year younger than I, what
they meant by those Things, and a World of others, which I have not seen; and
he informed me as well as he could: But that made me but the more eager to be
satisfied by my own Eyes. In short, I begged of my Brother -- I wish I never
had done it -- and here she relapsed into Tears. The Steward perceiving it,
come, Madam, said he, pray proceed, and make an End of telling us what has
happened to you; for your Words and your Tears keep us all in Suspense. I have
but few Words more to add, answered she, but many more Tears to shed; for they
are commonly the Fruit of such imprudent Desires.

That Gentleman of the Duke's, who acted the Part of Sancho's Sewer, or
Gentleman-Waiter, and was smitten with the young Lady's Charms, could not
forbear lifting up his Lanthorn to get another Look; and as he viewed her with
a Lover's Eyes, the Tears that trickl'd down her Cheeks seemed to him so many
Pearls, or some of the heavenly Dew on a fair drooping Flower, precious as
oriental Gems. This made him wish that the Misfortune might not be so great as
her Sighs and Tears bespoke it. As for the Governor, he stood fretting to hear
her hang so long upon her Story; and therefore bid her make an End, and keep
'em no longer thus, for it was late; and they had a great deal^ of Ground to
walk over yet. Thereupon with broken Sobs and half-fetch'd Sighs, Sir, said
she, all my Misfortune is, that I desired my Brother to lend me some of his
Clothes, and that he would take me out some Night or other to see all the Town,
while our Father was asleep. Importuned by my Entreaties, he consented, and
having lent me his Clothes, he put on mine, which fit him as if they had been
made for him; for he has no Beard at all, and makes a mighty handsome Woman. So
this very Night, about an Hour ago, we got out, and being guided by my Father's
Footboy and our own unruly Desires, we took a Ramble over the whole Town; and
as we were going Home, we perceived a great Number of People coming our Way;
whereupon, said my Brother, Sister, this is certainly the Watch; follow me, and
let us not only run, but fly as fast as we can, for if we should be known,
'twould be the worse for us. With that he fell a Running as fast as if he had
Wings to his Feet. I fell a running too, but was so frighted that I fell down
before I had gone half a Dozen Steps; and then a Man overtook me, and brought
me before you, and this Crowd of People, by whom, to my Shame, I am taken for
an ill'Creature; a bold indiscreet Night-walker. And has nothing befallen you
but this, cried Sancho? You talked at first of some Jealousy that had set you
a gadding. Nothing else indeed, answered the Damsel; though I pretended
Jealousy; I ventured out on no other Account but a little to see the World,
and that too no further than the Streets of this Town. All this was afterward
confirmed by her Brother, who now was brought by some of the Watch, one of whom
had at last overtaken him, after he had left his Sister. He had nothing on but
a very rich Petticoat, and a blue Damask Manteau, with a gold Galloon; his Head
without any Ornament but his own Hair, that hung down in natural Curls like so
many Rings of Gold. The Governor, the Steward, and the Gentleman-waiter took
him aside, and after they had examined him apart, why he had put on that
Dress, he gave the same Answer his Sister had done, and with no less
Bashfulness and Concern, much to the Satisfaction of the Gentleman-waiter, who
was much smitten with the young Lady's Charms.

As for the Governor, after he had heard the whole Matter, Truly, Gentlefolks,
said he, here is a little Piece of childish Folly. And to give an Account of
this wild Frolic, and Slip of Youth, there needed not all these Sighs and
Tears, nor these Hems and Haugh's, and long Excuses. Could not you without any
more ado, as well have said, our Names are so and so, and we stole out of our
Father's House for an Hour or Two only, to ramble about the Town, and satisfy a
little Curiosity, and there had been an End of the Story, without all this
Weeping and Wailing? You say very well, said the young Damsel, but you may
imagine that in the Trouble and Fright I was in, I could not behave my self as
I should have done. Well, said Sancho, there is no Harm done; go along with us,
and we'll see you home to your Father's, perhaps you may not yet be missed. But
have a Care how you gad Abroad to see Fashions another Time. Don't be too
venturesome. An honest Maid should be still at Home, as if she had one Leg
broken. A Hen and a Woman are lost by Rambling; and she that longs to see,
longs also to be seen. I need say no more.

The young Gentleman thanked the Governor for his Civility, and then went Home
under his Conduct. Being come to the House, the young Spark threw a little
Stone against one of the Iron-barr'd Windows; and presently a Maidservant who
sat up for 'em came down, opened the Door, and let him and his Sister in.

The Governor with his Company then, continued his Rounds, talking all the Way
they went of the genteel Carriage and Beauty of the Brother and Sister, and the
great Desire these poor Children had to see the World by Night.

As for the Gentleman-waiter, he was so passionately in Love, that he resolved
to go the next Day, and demand her of her Father in Marriage, not doubting but
the old Gentleman would comply with him, as he was one of the Duke's principal
Servants. On the other Side, Sancho had a great Mind to strike a Match between
the young Man and his Daughter Sanchica; and he resolved to bring it about as
soon as possible; believing no Man's Son could think himself too good for a
Governor's Daughter. At last his Round ended for that Night, and his Government
two or three Days after, which also put an End to all his great Designs and
Expectations, as shall be seen hereafter.

CHAP. L. Who the Enchanters and Executioners were that whipped the Duena, and
pinched and scratched Don Quixote; with the Success of the Page that carried
Sancho's Letter to his Wife Teresa Pansa.
CID Hamet, the most punctual Enquirer into the minutest Particles of this
Authentic History, relates, that when Donna Rodriguez was going out of her
Chamber to Don Quixote's Apartment, another old Waiting Woman that lay with her
perceived it: And as one of the chief Pleasures of all those female Implements
consists in enquiring, prying, and running their Noses into every Thing, she
presently watched her Fellow-Servant's Motions, and followed her so cautiously,
that the good Woman did not discover it. Now Donna Rodriguez was no sooner got
into the Knight's Chamber, but the other, lest she should forfeit her
Chatracter of a true tattling Waiting Woman, flew to tell the Duchess in her
Ear, that Donna Rodriguez was in Don Quixote's Chamber. The Duchess told the
Duke, and having got his Leave to take Altisidora with her, and go to satisfy
her Curiosity about this Night-Visit, they very silently crept along in the
Dark, till they came to Don Quixote's Door, and as they stood listening there,
overheard very easily every Word they said within. So that when the Duchess
heard her leaky Woman set the Secret of her Imperfection adrift, she was not
able to contain, nor was Altisidora less provoked. Full of Rage, and greedy of
Revenge, they rushed into the Chamber, and beat the Duena, and clawed the
Knight, as has been related. For those affronting Expressions that are levelled
against the Beauty of Women, or the good Opinion of themselves, raise their
Anger and Indignation to the highest Degree, and incense them to a Desire of
Revenge.

The Duchess diverted the Duke with an Account of what had passed, and having
a mighty Mind to continue the Merriment which Don Quixote's Extravagancies
afforded 'em, the Page that acted the Part of Dulcinea when 'twas proposed to
end her Enchantment, was dispatched away to Teresa Pansa, with a Letter from
her Husband, (for Sancho, having his Head full of his Government, had quite
forgot to do it) and at the same time the Duchess sent another from herself,
with a large costly String of Coral, as a Present.

Now the Story tells us, that the Page was a sharp and ingenious Lad, and being
very desirous to please his Lord and Lady, made the best of his Way to Sancho's
Village. When he came near the Place, he saw a Company of Females washing at a
Brook, and asked 'em, whether they could inform him, if there lived not in that
Town a Woman whose Name was Teresa Pansa, Wife to one Sancho Pansa, Squire to a
Knight called Don Quixote de la Mancha? He had no sooner asked the Question,
but a young Wench, that was washing among the rest, stood up: That Teresa Pansa
is my Mother, quoth she; That Gaffer Sancho is my nown Father, and that same
Knight our Master. Well then, Damsel, said the Page, pray go along with me, and
bring me to your Mother; for I have a Letter and a Token here for her from your
Father. That I will with all my Heart, Sir, said the Girl, who seemed to be
about fourteen Years of Age, little more or less; and with that leaving the
Clothes she was Washing to one of her Companions, without staying to dress her
Head or put on her Shoes, away she sprung before the Page's Horse,
bare-legg'd, and with her Hair about her Ears. Come along, an't please you,
quoth she, our House is hard by; it is but just as you come into the Town, and
my Mothers at Home, but brim full of Sorrow, poor Soul, for she has not heard
from my Father I don't know how long. Well, said the Page, I bring those
Tidings that will cheer her Heart, I warrant her. At last, what with Leaping,
Running, and Jumping, the Girl being come to the House, Mother, Mother, (cried
she as loud as she could, before she went in) come out, Mother, come out;
here is a Gentleman has brought Letters and Tokens from my Father. At that
Summons, out came the Mother, spinning a Lock of course Flax, with a Russet
Petticoat about her, so short that it looked as if it had been cut off at the
Placket; a Wastecoat of the same, and her Smock hanging loose about it. Take
her otherwise, she was none of the oldest, but looked somewhat turned of Forty,
strong built, sinewy, hale, vigorous and in good Case. What Is the Matter, Girl
(quoth she, seeing her Daughter with the Page) What Gentleman is that? A
Servant of your Ladyship's, my Lady Teresa Pansa, answered the Page; and at the
same Time alighting, and throwing himself at her Feet with the most humble
Submission; My Noble Lady Donna Teresa, said he, permit me the Honor to Kiss
your Ladyship's Hand, as you are the only legitimate Wife of my Lord Don Sancho
Pansa, proper Governor of the Island of Barataria. Alack a day, good Sir,
quoth Teresa, what do you do? By no Means. I am none of your Court-Dames, but a
poor silly Country Body, a Plough-man's Daughter, the Wife indeed of a
Squire-Errant, but no Governor. Your Ladyship, replied the Page, is the most
worthy Wife of a thrice-worthy Governor; and for Proof of what I say, be
pleased to receive this Letter, and this Present, with that he took out of his
Pocket a String of Coral Beads set in Gold, and putting it about her Neck, This
Letter, said he, is from his Honor the Governor, and another that I have for
you, together with these Beads, from her Grace the Lady Duchess, that sent me
to your Ladyship.

Teresa stood amazed, and her Daughter was transported. Now I Will be hanged,
quoth the young Baggage, if our Master, Don Quixote, be not at the Bottom of
this. Ay, this is his doing. He has given my Father that same Government or
Earldom he has promised him so many Times. You say right, answered the Page:
It Is for the Lord Don Quixote's sake that the Lord Sancho is now Governor of
the Island of Barataria, as the Letter will inform you. Good Sir quoth Teresa,
read it me, an't like your Worship; for though I can spin, I cannot read a Jot:
Nor I neither e'fackins, cried Sanchica. But do but stay a little, and I Will go
fetch one that shall; either the Batchelour Samson Carrasco, or our Parson
himself, who will come with all their Hearts, to hear News of my Father. You may
spare your self the Trouble, said the Page; for though I cannot spin, yet I can
read; and I Will read it to ye. With that he read the Letter, which is now
omitted, because it has been inserted before. That done, he pulled out another
from the Duchess, which runs as follows.

Friend Teresa,
YOur Husband Sancho's good Parts, his Wit and Honesty, obliged me to desire
the Duke my Husband to bestow on him the Government of one of his Islands. I am
informed he is as sharp as a Hawk in his Office; for which I am very glad, as
well as my Lord Duke, and return Heaven many Thanks, that I have not been
deceived in making Choice of him for that Preferment. For you must know,
Signiora Teresa, it is a difficult Thing to meet with a good Governor in this
World; and may Heaven make me as good as Sancho proves in his Government.

I have sent you, my Dear Friend, a string of Coral Beads, set in Gold; I could
wish they were Oriental Pearls for your Sake; but a small Token may not hinder
a great one. The time will come when we shall be better acquainted, and when we
have conversed together, who knows what may come to pass? Commend me to your
Daughter Sanchica, and bid her from me to be in a Readiness; for I design to
marry her greatly when she least thinks of it.

I understand you have fine large Acorns in your Town; pray send me a Dozen or
two of 'em, I shall set a greater Value upon 'em, as coming from your Hands.
And pray let me have a good long Letter, to let me know how you do; and if you
have Occasion for any Thing, it is but ask and have; I shall even know your
Meaning by your Gaping. So Heaven preserve you.

From this Castle. Your Loving Friend, The Duchess.


Bless me, quoth Teresa, when she had heard the Letter, what a good Lady's
this! Not a Bit of Pride in her! Heaven grant me to be buried with such Ladies,
and not with such proud Madams as we have in our Town, who, because they are
Gentlefolks forsooth, think the Wind must not blow upon 'em, but come flaunting
to Church, as stately as if they were Queens. It seems they think it Scorn to
look on a poor Country Woman: But look you here is a good Lady, who, though she be
Duchess, calls me her Friend, and uses me as if I were as high as her self.
Well, may I see her as high as the highest Steeple in the whole Country! As for
the Acorns she writes for, Master of mine, I Will send her good Ladyship a whole
Peck, and such swinging Acorns, that every Body shall come to admire 'em far
and near. And now, Sanchica, see that the Gentleman be made welcome, and want
for nothing. Take Care of his Horse. Run to the Stable, get some Eggs, cut some
Bacon; he shall fare like a Prince: The rare News he has brought us, and his
good Looks deserve no less. Mean while I Will among my Neighbors; I cannot hold.
I must run and tell 'em the News; our good Curate too shall know it, and Master
Nicholas the Barber; for they have all along been thy Father's Friends. Ay, do,
Mother, said the Daughter; but hark you, you must give me half the Beads; for I
dare say the great Lady knows better Things than to give 'em all to you. It Is
all thy own, Child, cried the Mother; but let me wear it a few Days about my
Neck; for thou can not think how it rejoices the very Heart of me. You will
rejoice more presently, said the Page, when you see what I have got in my
Portmantle; a fine Suit of Green Cloth, which the Governor wore but one Day a
Hunting, and has here sent to my Lady Sanchica. Oh the Lord love him, cried
Sanchica, and the fine Gentleman that brings it me.

Presently, away ran Teresa with the Beads about her Neck, and the Letters in
her Hand, all the while playing with her Fingers on the Papers, (as if they had
been a Timbrel;) and meeting by chance the Curate and the Bachelor Carrasco,
she fell a dancing and frisking about; Faith and Troth, cried she we are all
made now. Not one small Body in all our Kindred. We have got a poor Thing
called a Government. And now let the proudest of 'em all toss up her Nose at
me, and I Will give her as good as she brings, I Will make her know her Distance.
How now, Teresa, said the Curate? What mad Fit is this? What Papers are those
in your Hand? No mad Fit at all, answered Teresa; but these are Letters from
Dutchesses and Governors, and these Beads about my Neck are right Coral, the
Ave-Mary's I mean, and the Pater-Nosters are of beaten Gold, and here is Madam
Governess herself. Verily, said the Curate, there is no understanding you,
Teresa; we don't know what you mean. There Is that will clear the Riddle, quoth
Teresa, and with that she gave 'em the Letters. Thereupon the Curate having
read 'em aloud, that Sampson Carrasco might also be informed, they both stood
and looked on one another, and were more at a Loss than before. The Bachelor
asked her who brought the Letter? Teresa told them they might go home with her
and see; 'twas a sweet handsome young Man, as fine as any Thing; and that he
had brought her another Present worth twice as much. The Curate took the String
of Beads from her Neck, and viewed it several times over, and sinding that it
was a Thing of Value, he could not conceive the Meaning of all this. By the
Habit that I wear, cried he, I cannot tell what to think of this Business. In
the first Place, I am convinced these Beads are right Coral and Gold; and in
the next, here is a Duchess sends to beg a dozen or two of Acorns. Crack that
Nut if you can, said Sampson Carrasco. But come, let us go see the Messenger,
and probably he will clear our Doubts.

Thereupon going with Teresa, they found the Page sifting a little Corn for his
Horse, and Sanchica cutting a Rasher of Bacon to be fried with Eggs for his
Dinner. They both liked the Page's Mien and his Garb, and after the usual
Compliments, Sampson desired him to tell 'em some News of Don Quixote, and
Sancho Pansa; for though they had read a Letter from the latter to his Wife, and
another from the Duchess, they were no better than Riddles to 'em, nor could
they imagine how Sancho should come by a Government, especially of an Island,
well knowing that all the Islands in the Mediterranean, or the greatest Part of
'em, were the King's.

Gentlemen, answered the Page, it is a certain Truth, that Signior Sancho Pansa
is a Governor, but whether it be of an Island or not, I do not pretend to
determine: But this I can assure you, that he commands in a Town that has above
a Thousand Inhabitants. And as for my Lady Dutchess's sending to a
Country-woman for a few Acorns, that is no such Wonder; for she is so free from
Pride, that I have known her send to borrow a Comb of one of her Neighbors.
You must know, our Ladies of Arragon, though they are as noble as those of
Castile, do not stand so much upon Formalities and Punctilio's; neither do they
take so much State upon 'em; but treat People with more Familiarity.

While they were thus discoursing, in came Sanchica skipping, with her Lap full
of Eggs; and turning to the Page, Pray Sir, quoth she by chance does my Father
wear Trunk-Breeches now he is a Governor? Truly, said the Page. I never minded
it, but without doubt he does. Oh Gemini, cried the young Wench, what would not
I give to see my Father in his Trunk Hose? Is it not a strange Thing, that ever
since I can remember my self, I have wished to see my Father in Trunk-Breeches.
You Will see him as you would have him, said the Page, if your Ladyship does but
live. Odssish, if his Government holds but two Months, you will see him go with
an Umbrella over his Head.

The Curate and the Bachelor plainly perceived that the Page did but laugh at
the Mother and the Daughter; but yet the costly String of Beads, and the
Hunting Suit, which by this Time Teresa had let 'em see, confounded 'em again.
In the mean while they could not forbear Smiling at Sanchica's odd Fancy, and
much less at what her Mother said. Good Master Curate, quoth she, do so much as
enquire whether any of our Neighbors are going to Madrid, or Toledo. I Would have
'em buy me a hugeous Farthingale, of the best cut courtly Fashion, and the very
finest that can be got for Money; for by my Holy Dame, I mean to credit my
Husband's Government the best I can; and if they vex me I Will hie me to that
same Court, and ride in my Coach too as well as the best of 'em; for she that
is a Governor's Lady may very well afford to have one. O rare, Mother, cried
Sanchica, would 'twere to Night before to Morrow. May hap, when they saw me
sitting in our Coach by my Lady Mother, they would jeer and flout, Look, look,
would they say, yonder is Goody Trollop, the Plough-jobber's Bearn! How she
flaunts it, and goes ye lolling in her Coach like a little Pope Joan. But what
would I care? Let 'em trudge on in the Dirt, while I ride by in my Coach. Shame
and Ill-luck go along with all your little backbiting Scrubs. Let 'em laugh
that win; the cursed Fox thrives the better. Am I not in the Right, Mother? Ay,
marry art thou, Child, quoth Teresa; and indeed my good Honey Sancho has often
told me, all these good Things and many more would come to pass; and thou shall
see, Daughter, I Will never rest till I get to be a a Countess. There must be a
Beginning in all Things, and as I have heard it said by thy Father, who is also
the Father of Proverbs, when a Cow's given thee, run and take her with a
Halter. When they give thee a Government, take it, when an Earldom, catch it;
and when they Whistle to thee with a good Gift, snap at it. That which is good
to give is good to take, Girl. 'Twere a petty Fancy, trow, to lie snoring a
Bed, and when Good-Luck knocks, not to rise to open the Door. Ay, quoth
Sanchica, what is it to me, though they should say all they have a Mind to say. When
they see me so tearing fine, and so woundy great, let 'em spit their Venom, and
say, set a Beggar a Horseback, and so forth. Who would not think, said the
Curate, hearing this, but that the whole Race of the Pansa's came into the
World with their Paunches stuffed with Proverbs. I never knew one of the Name
but threw 'em out at all Times, let the Discourse be what it would. I think so
too, said the Page; for his Honor the Governor blunders 'em out at every
Turn, many Times indeed wide from the Purpose; however, always to the
Satisfaction of the Company, and with high Applause from my Lord and my Lady.
Then Sir, you assure us still, said Carrasco, that Sancho is really a
Governor; and that a Duchess sends these Presents and Letters upon his
Account; for though we see the Things, and read the Letters, we can scarce
prevail with our selves to believe; but are apt to run into our Friend Don
Quixote's Opinion, and look on all this as the Effect of some Enchantment: So
that I could find in my Heart to feel and try whether you are a visionary
Messenger, or a Creature of Flesh and Blood. For my Part, Gentlemen, answered
the Page, all I can tell ye, is, that I am really the Messenger I appear to be,
that the Lord Sancho Pansa is actually a Governor, and that the Duke and the
Duchess to whom I belong, are able to give, and have given him that
Government, where I am credibly informed he behaves himself most worthily. Now
if there be any Enchantment in the Matter, I leave you to examine that; for by
the Life of my Parents, one of the greatest Oaths I can utter, for they are
both alive, and I love 'em dearly, I know no more of the Business. That may be,
said the Bachelor, but yet dubitat Augustinus. You may doubt if you please,
replied the Page; but I have told you the Truth; which will always prevail over
Falsehood, and rise uppermost, as Oil does above Water. But if you will operibus
credere and non verbis; let one of ye go along with me, and you shall see with
your Eyes what you will not believe by the Help of your Ears. I Will go with all
my Heart, quoth Sanchica; take me up behind ye, Sir; I Have a huge Mind to see my
Father. The Daughters of Governors, said the Page, must not travel thus
unattended, but in Coaches or Litters, and with a handsome Train of Servants.
Cud's my Life, quoth Sanchica, I can go a Journey as well on an Ass as in one
of your Coaches. I am none of your tender squeamish Things, not I. Peace,
Chicken, quoth the Mother, thou do not know what thou say, the Gentleman
is in the right. Times are altered. When 'twas plain Sancho, 'twas plain
Sanchica; but now he is a Governor, you are a Lady. I cannot well tell whether I
am right or no. My Lady Teresa says more than she is aware of, said the Page.
But now, continued he, give me a Mouthful to eat as soon as you will, for I
must go back this Afternoon. Be pleased then, Sir, said the Curate, to go with
me, and partake of a slender Meal at my House, for my Neighbor Teresa is more
willing than able to entertain so good a Guest. The Page excused himself a
While, but at last complied, being persuaded 'twou'd be much for the better;
and the Curate on his Side was glad of his Company, to have an Opportunity to
inform himself at large about Don Quixote, and his Proceedings. The Bachelor
proffered Teresa to write her Answers to her Letters; but as she looked upon
him to be somewhat waggish, she would not permit him to be of her Counsel; so
she gave a Roll, and a couple of Eggs, to a Young Acolite of the Church, who
could write, and he wrote two Letters for her; one to her Husband and the other
to the Duchess, all of her own Indicting, and perhaps not the worst in this
famous History, as hereafter may be seen.

CHAP. LI. A Continuation of Sancho Pansa's Government, with other Passages,
such as they are.
THE Morning of that Day arose, which succeeded the Governor's rounding Night,
the Remainder of which the Gentleman-waiter spent, not in Sleep, but in the
pleasing Thoughts of the lovely Face, and charming Graces of the disguised
Virgin; on the other Side, the Steward bestowed that Time in Writing to his
Lord and Lady what Sancho did and said; wondering no less at his Actions than at
his Expressions, both which displayed a strange Intermixture of Discretion and
Simplicity.

At last the Lord Governor was pleased to rise; and, by Dr. Pedro Rezio's
Order, they brought him for his Breakfast a little Conserve, and a Draught of
Fair Water, which he would have exchanged with all his Heart for a good
Luncheon of Bread, and a Bunch of Grapes, But seeing he could not help himself,
he was forced to make the best of a bad Market, and seem to be content, though
full sore against his Will and Appetite; for the Doctor made him believe, that
to eat but little, and that which was dainty, enlivened the Spirits, and
sharpened the Wit, and consequently such a Sort of Diet was most proper for
Persons in Authority and weighty Employments, wherein there is less Need of the
Strength of the Body than of that of the Mind. This Sophistry served to famish
Sancho, who, half dead with Hunger, cursed in his Heart both the Government and
him that had given it him. However, hungry as he was, by the Strength of his
slender Breakfast, he failed not to give Audience that Day; and the first that
came before him was a Stranger, who put the following Case to him; the Steward
and the rest of the Attendants being present.

My Lord, said he, a large River divides in two Parts one and the same
Lordship. I beg your Honor to lend me your Attention, for it is a Case of great
Importance, and some Difficulty, -- Upon this River there is a Bridge; at one
End of which there stands a Gallows, and a Kind of a Court of Justice, where
Four Judges use to sit, for the Execution of a certain Law made by the Lord of
the Land and River, which runs thus,

Whoever intends to pass from one End of this Bridge to the other, must first
upon his Oath declare whither he goes, and what his Business is. If he swear
Truth, he may go on; but if he swear false, he shall be hanged, and dye without
Remission upon the Gibbet at the End of the Bridge.

After due Promulgation of this Law, many People, notwithstanding its Severity,
adventured to go over this Bridge, and as it appeared they swore Truth, the
Judges permitted 'em to Pass unmolested. It happened one Day that a certain
Passenger being sworn, declared, that by the Oath he had taken, he was come to
dye upon that Gallows, and that was all his Business.

This put the Judges to a Nonplus; for, said they, If we let this Man pass
freely, he is forsworn, and according to the Letter of the Law he ought to dye:
If we hang him, he has sworn Truth, seeing he swore he was to dye on that
Gibbet; and then by the same Law we should let him pass.

Now your Lordship's Judgment is desired what the Judges ought to do with this
Man? For they are still at a stand, not knowing what to determine in this Case;
and having been informed of your sharp Wit, and great Capacity in resolving
difficult Questions, they sent me to beseech your Lordship in their Names, to
give your Opinion in so intricate and knotty a Case.

To deal plainly with you, answered Sancho, Those worshipful Judges that sent
you hither, might as well have spared themselves the Labor; for I am more
inclined to Dullness I assure you than Sharpness: However, let me hear your
Question once more, that I may thoroughly understand it, and perhaps I may at
last hit the Nail of the Head. The Man repeated the Question again and again;
and when he had done, To my thinking, said Sancho, this Question may be
presently answered; as thus: The Man swore he came to dye on the Gibbet, and if
he dies there, he swore Truth, and according to the Law he ought to be free,
and go over the Bridge. On the other Side, if you don't hang him, he swore
false, and by the same Law he ought to be hanged. It Is as your Lordship says,
replied the Stranger, you have stated the Case right. Why then, said Sancho,
even let that Part of the Man that swore true, freely pass; and hang the other
Part of the Man that swore false, and so will the Law be fulfilled. But then,
my Lord, replied the Stranger, the Man must be divided into two Parts, which if
we do, he certainly dies, and the Intent of the Law, which must be observed, is
not put in Execution.

Well, hark you me, honest Man, said Sancho, either I am a Codshead, or there
is as much Reason to put this same Person you talk of to Death, as to let him
live and pass the Bridge; for if the Truth saves him, the Lie casts him as
well. Now the Case stands thus, I would have you tell those Gentlemen that sent
you to me, since there is as much Reason to bring him off, as to condemn him,
that they even let him go free; for it is always more commendable to do Good
than Hurt. And this I would give you under my own Hand, if I could write. Nor
do I speak this of my own Head; but I remember one Precept, among many others
that my Master Don Quixote gave me the Night before I went to govern this
Island, which was, that when the Scale of Justice is even, or a Case is
doubtful, we should prefer Mercy before Rigor; and it has pleased God I should
call it to Mind so luckily in this Instance. For my Part, said the Steward,
this Judgment seems to me so equitable, that I do not believe Lycurgus himself,
who gave Laws to the Lacedaemonians, could ever have decided the Matter better
than the great Sancho has done.

And now, Sir sure there is enough done for this Morning; be pleased to adjourn
the Court, and I Will give Order that the Governor may dine to his Heart's
Content. Well said, cried Sancho, that is all I want, and then a clear Stage,
and no Favor. Feed me well, and then ply me with Cases and Questions thick and
threefold; you shall see me untwist 'em, and lay 'em open as clear as the Sun.

The Steward was as good as his Word, believing it would be a Burden to his
Conscience to famish so wise a Governor; besides he intended the next Night to
put into Practice the last Trick, which he had Commission to pass upon him.

Now Sancho having plentifully dined that Day, in spite of all the Aphorisms
of Doctor Tirte a fuera, when the Cloth was removed, in came an Express with a
Letter from Don Quixote to the Governor. Sancho ordered the Secretary to read
it to himself, and if there were nothing in it for secret Perusal, then to read
it aloud. The Secretary having first run it over accordingly, My Lord, said he,
the Letter may not only be publicly read, but deserves to be engraved in
Characters of Gold; and thus it is.

Don Quixote de la Mancha to Sancho Pansa, Governor of the Island of Barataria.
WHen I expected to have had an Account of thy Carelessness and Impertinences,
Friend Sancho, I was agreeably disappointed with News of thy wise Behavior;
for which I return particular Thanks to Heaven, that can raise the lowest from
their Poverty, and turn the Fool into a Man of Sense. I hear thou governest
with all the Discretion of a Man; and that, while thou approv'st thy self one,
thou retain'st the Humility of the meanest Creatures. But I desire thee to
observe, Sancho, that it is many Times very necessary and convenient to thwart
the Humility of the Heart, for the better Support of the Authority of a Place.
For the Ornament of a Person that is advanced to an eminent Post, must be
answerable to its Greatness, and not debased to the Inclination of his former
Meanness. Let thy Apparel beneat and handsome; even a Stake well dressed does
not look like a Stake. I would not have thee wear foppish, gaudy Things; nor
affect the Garb of a Soldier, in the Circumstances of a Magistrate; but let thy
Dress be suitable to thy Degree, and always clean and decent.

To gain the Hearts of thy People, among other Things, I have two chiefly to
recommend. One is, to be affable, courteous, and fair to all the World; I have
already told thee of that: And the other, to take Care that Plenty of
Provisions be never wanting, for nothing afflicts or urges more the Spirits of
the Poor, than Scarcity and Hunger.

Do not put out many new Orders, and if thou do put out any, see that they be
wholesome and good, and especially that they be strictly observed: For, Laws
not well obeyed, are no better than if they were not made, and only show that
the Prince who had the Wisdom and Authority to make 'em, had not Resolution to
see 'em executed; and Laws that only threaten, and are not kept, become like
the Log that was given to the Frogs to be their King, which they feared at
first, but soon scorned and trampled down.

Be a Father to Virtue, but a Father-in-Law to Vice. Be not always severe, nor
always merciful; choose a Mean between these two Extremes; for in that middle
Point is the Center of Discretion.

Visit the Prisons, the Shambles, and the public Markets, for the Governor's
Presence is highly necessary in such Places.

Comfort the Prisoners that expect to be quickly dispatched.

Be a Terror to the Butchers, that they may be fair in their Weights, and keep
Hucksters and fraudulent Dealers in Awe, for the same Reason.

Should thou unhappily be inclined to be covetous, given to Women, or a
Glutton, as I hope thou art not, avoid showing thy self guilty of those Vices;
for when the Town, and those that come near thee have discovered thy Weakness,
they will be sure to try thee on that Side, and tempt thee to thy everlasting
Ruin.

Read over and over, and seriously consider the Admonitions and Documents I
gave thee in Writing before thou went to thy Government, and thou will find
the Benefit of it, in all those Difficulties and Emergencies that so frequently
attend the Function of a Governor.

Write to thy Lord and Lady, and show thy self grateful; for Ingratitude is the
Offspring of Pride, and one of the worst Corruptions of the Mind; whereas he
that is thankful to his Benefactors, gives a Testimony that he will be so to
God, who has done, and continually does him so much good.

My Lady Duchess dispatched a Messenger on purpose to thy Wife Teresa, with
thy Hunting Suit, and another Present. We expect his Return every Moment.

I have been somewhat out of Order, by a certain Cat Encounter I had lately,
not much to the Advantage of my Nose; but all that is nothing, for if there are
Negromancers that misuse me, there are others ready to defend me.

Send me Word whether the Steward that is with thee had any Hand in the
Business of the Countess of Trifaldi, as thou were once of Opinion; and let me
also have an Account of whatever befalls thee, since the Distance between us is
so small. I have Thoughts of leaving this idle Life ever long; for I was not
born for Luxury and Ease.

A Business has offered, that I believe will make me lose the Duke and the
Dutchess's Favor; but though I am heartily sorry for it, that does not alter my
Resolution; for, after all, I owe more to my Profession than to Complaisance,
and as the Saying is, Amicus Plato, sed megis amica veritas. I send thee this
Scrap of Latin, flattering my self that since thou came to be a Governor thou
may have learned that Language. Farewell, and Heaven keep thee above the Pity
of the World.

Thy Friend, Don Quixote de la Mancha.


Sancho gave great Attention to the Letter, and it was highly applauded both
for Sense and Integrity, by every Body that heard it After that he rose from
Table, and calling the Secretary, went without any further Delay, and locked
himself up with him in his Chamber, to write an Answer to his Master Don
Quixote. He ordered the Scribe to set down Word for Word what he dictated,
without adding or diminishing the least Thing. Which being strictly observed,
this was the Tenor of the Letter.

Sancho Pansa to Don Quixote de la Mancha.
I Am so taken up with Business, that I have not Time to scratch my Head, or pare
my Nails, which is the Reason they are so long. God help me! I tell you this,
dear Master of mine, that you may not marvel, why I have not yet let you know
whether it goes well or ill with me in this same Government, where I am more
hunger-starved than when you and I wandered through Woods and Wildernesses.

My Lord Duke wrote to me the other Day, to inform me of some Spies that were got
into this Island to kill me. But as yet I have discovered none but a certain
Doctor, hired by the Islanders to kill all the Governors that come near it.
They call him Dr. Pedro Rezio de Aguero, and he was born at Tirte a fuera, his
Name is enough to make me fear he will be the Death of me. This same Doctor says
of himself, that he does not cure Diseases when you have 'em; but when you have
'em not; he only pretends to keep 'em from coming. The Physic he uses, is
Fasting upon Fasting, till he turns a Body to a mere Skeleton, as if to be
wasled to Skin and Bones were not as bad as a Fever. In short, he starves me to
Death; so that when I thought, as being a Governor, to have my Belly full of
good hot Victuals, and cool Liquor, and to refresh my Body in Holland Sheets,
and on a soft Feather-bed, I am come to do Penance like a Hermit; and as I do
it unwillingly, I am afraid the Devil will have me at last.

All this While I have not yet so much as fingered the least Penny of Money,
either for Fee^, Bribes, or any Thing; and how it comes to be no better with
me, I cannot for my Soul imagine; for I have heard by the bye, that the
Governors who come to this Island are wont to have a very good Gift, or at
least a very round Sum lent 'em by the Town before they enter: And they say
too, that this is the usual Custom, not only here, but in other Places.

Last Night going my Rounds, I met with a mighty handsome Damsel in Boy's
Clothes, and a Brother of hers in Woman's Apparel. My Gentleman-waiter fell in
Love with the Girl, and intends to make her his Wife, as he says. As for the
Youth I have pitched upon him to be my Son-in-Law. To Day we both design to
discourse the Father, one Diego de la Llana, who is a Gentleman, and an old
Christian every Inch of him.

I Visit the Markets, as you advised me, and Yesterday found one of the
Hucksters selling Hazle-Nuts; she pretended they were all New, but I found she
had mixed a whole Bushel of old, empty, rotten Nuts among the same Quantity of
new. With that I adjudg'd them to be given to the Hospital-Boys, who knew how
to pick the good from the bad, and gave Sentence against her, that she should
not come into the Market in fifteen Days; and People said, I did well. What I
can tell you, is, that if you will believe the Folks of this Town, there is not a
more rascally Sort of People in the World than these Market-Women; for they are
all a saucy, foul-mouthed, impudent hellish Rabble, and I judge 'em to be so,
by those I have seen in other Places.

I am mighty well pleased that my Lady Duchess has writ to my Wife Teresa
Pansa, and sent her the Token you mention. It shall go hard but I will requite
her Kindness one Time or other. Pray give my Service to her, and tell her from
me, she has not cast her Gift in a broken Sack, as something more than Words
shall show.

If I might advise you, and had my Wish, there should be no falling out between
your Worship, and my Lord and Lady; for, if you quarrel with 'em, it is I must
come to the worst on it: And since you mind me of being grateful, it will not look
well in you not to be so to those who have made so much of you at their Castle.

As for your Cat-Affair I can make nothing of it, only I fancy you are still
haunted after the old Rate. You Will tell me more when we meet.

I would fain have sent you a Token, but I do not know what to send, unless it
were some little Glister-Pipes, which they make here very curiously, and fix
most cleaverly to the Bladders. But if I stay in my Place, it shall go hard but
I Will get something worth the sending, be it what it will.

If my Wife Teresa Pansa writes to me, pray pay the Postage, and send me the
Letter; for I mightily long to hear how it is with her, and my House and
Children.

So Heaven preserve you from ill-minded Inchanters, and send me safe and sound
out of this Government, which I am much afraid of, as Doctor Pedro Rezio diets
me.

Your Worship's Servant, Sancho Pansa, the Governor.


The Secretary made up the Letter, and immediately dispatched the Express. Then
those who carried on the Plot against Sancho, combined together, and consulted
how to remove him from the Government: and Sancho passed that Afternoon in
making several Regulations, fot the better Establishment of that which he
imagined to be an Island. He published an Order against the Higglers and
Fore-stallers of the Markets; and another to encourage the bringing in of Wines
from any Part whatever, provided the Owners declared of what Growth they were,
that they might be rated according to their Value and Esteem; and that they who
should adulterate Wine with Water, or give it a wrong Name, should be punished
with Death. He lowered the Price of all Kind of Apparel, and particularly that
of Shoes, as thinking it exorbitant. He regulated Servants Wages, that were
unlimited before, and proportioned 'em to the Merit of their Service. He laid
severe Penalties upon all those that should sing or vend lewd and immoral Songs
and Ballads, either in the open Day, or in the Dusk of the Evening, and also
forbid all blind People the singing about Miracles in Rhimes, unless they
produced authentic Testimonies of their Truth; for it appeared to him, that
most of those that were sung in such Manner were feigned, and a Disparagement
to the true.

He appointed a particular Officer to inspect the Poor, not to persecute, but
to examine 'em, and know whether they were truly such; for under Pretense of
Counterfeit-Lameness, and artificial Sores, many canting Vagabonds impudently
rob the true Poor of Charity, to spend it in Riot and Drunkenness.

In short, he made so many wholesome Ordinances, that to this Day they are
observed in that Place, and called, The Constitutions of the grand Governor
Sancho Pansa.

CHAP. LII. A Relation of the Adventures of the second disconsolate or distressed
Matron, otherwise called Donna Rodriguez.
CID Hamet relates, that Don Quixote's Scratches being healed, he began to
think the Life he led in the Castle not suitable to the Order of Knight
Errantry which he professed; he resolved therefore to take Leave of the Duke
and Duchess, and set forwards for Saragosa; where, at the approaching
Tournament, he hoped to win the Armor, the usual Prize at the Festivals of
that Kind. Accordingly as he sat at Table with the Lord and Lady of the Castle,
he began to acquaint 'em with his Design, when behold two Women entered the
great Hall, clad in deep Mourning from Head to Foot. One of 'em approaching Don
Quixote, threw her self at his Feet, where lying prostrate, and in a manner
kissing 'em, she fetched such deep and doleful Sighs, and made such sorrowful
Lamentations, that all those who were by, were not a little surpised. And though
the Duke and the Duchess imagined it to be some new Device of their Servants
against Don Quixote, yet perceiving with what Earnestness the Woman sighed and
lamented, they were in doubt, and knew not what to think, till the
compassionate Champion, raising her from the Ground, engaged her to lift up her
Veil, and discover, what they least expected, the Face of Donna Rodriguez, the
Duena of the Family; and the other Mourner proved to be her Daughter, whom the
rich Farmer's Son had deluded. All those that knew 'em were in great
Admiration, especially the Duke and the Duchess; for though they knew her
Simplicity, and Indiscretion, they did not believe her to be so far gone in
Madness. At last the sorrowful Matron addressing her self to the Duke and
Duchess; May it please your Graces, said she, to permit me to direct my
Discourse to this Knight, for it concerns me to get out of an unlucky Business,
into which the Impudence of a treacherous Villain has brought us. With that the
Duke gave her Leave to say what she would, then applying her self to Don
Quixote, it is not long, said she, valorous Knight, since I gave your Worship an
Account how basely and treacherously a graceless young Farmer had used my dear
Child, the poor undone Creature here present; and you then promised me to stand
up for her, and see her righted; and now I understand you are about to leave
this Castle, in quest of the good Adventures Heaven shall send you. And
therefore before you are gone no body knows whither, I have this Boon to beg of
your Worship, that you would do so much as challenge this sturdy Clown, and
make him marry my Daughter, according to his Promise before he was concerned
with her. For, as for my Lord Duke, it is a Folly to think he will ever see me
righted, for the Reason I told you in private. And so Heaven preserve your
Worship, and still be our Defense. Worthy Matron (answered Don Quixote, with a
great deal of Gravity and solemn Form) temperate your Tears, or to speak more
properly, dry 'em up, and spare your Sighs; for I take upon me to see your
Daughter's Wrongs redressed; though she had done much better, had not her too
great Credulity made her trust the Protestations of Lovers, which generally are
readily made, but most uneasily performed. Therefore, with my Lord Duke's
Permission, I will instantly depart to find out this ungracious Wretch, and as
soon as he is found, I will challenge him, and kill him if he persists in his
Obstinacy; for the chief End of my Profession is to pardon the Submissive, and
to chastise the Stubborn; to relieve the Miserable, and destroy the Cruel. Sir
Knight, said the Duke, you need not give your self the Trouble of seeking the
Fellow, of whom that good Matron complains; nor need you ask me Leave to
challenge him; for I already engage that he shall meet you in Person to answer
it here in this Castle, where safe Lists shall be set up for you both,
observing all the Laws of Arms that ought to be kept in Affairs of this Kind,
and doing each Party Justice, as all Princes ought to do, that admit of single
Combats within their Territories. Upon that Assurance, said Don Quixote, with
your Grace's Leave, I for this time wave my Punctilio's of Gentility, and
debasing my self to the Meanness of the Offender, qualify him to measure
Lances with me; and so let him be absent or present, I challenge and defy him,
as a Villain that has deluded this poor Creature, that was a Maid, and now
through his Baseness is none, and he shall either perform his Promise of making
her his lawful Wife, or die in the Contest. With that, pulling off his Glove,
he flung it down into the Middle of the Hall, and the Duke took it up,
declaring as he had already done, that he accepted the Challenge in the name of
his Vassal; fixing the Time for Combat to be six Days after, and the Place to
be the Castle-court. The Arms to be such as are usual among Knights, as Lance,
Shield, Armor of Proof, and all other Pieces, without Fraud, Advantage, or
Enchantment, after Search made by the Judges of the Field.

But in the first Place, added the Duke, it is requisite, that this true Matron,
and this false Virgin, commit the Justice of their Cause into the Hands of
their Champion, for otherwise there will be nothing done, and the Challenge is
void in course. I do, answered the Matron; and so do I, added the Daughter, all
ashamed, blubbering, and in a crying Tone. The Preliminaries being adjusted,
and the Duke having resolved with himself what to do in the Matter, the
mourning Petitioners went away, and the Duchess ordered they should no longer
be looked upon as her Domestics, but as Ladies-Errant, that came to demand
Justice in her Castle; and accordingly there was a peculiar Apartment appointed
for 'em, where they were served as Strangers; to the Amazement of the other
Servants, who could not imagine what would be the End of Donna Rodriguez and
her forsaken Daughter's ridiculous and confident Undertaking.

Presently after this, to complete their Mirth, and as it were for the last
Course, in came the Page that had carried the Letters and the Presents to
Teresa Pansa. The Duke and Duchess were overjoyed to see him returned, having
a great Desire to know the Success of his Journey. They inquired of him
accordingly, but he told 'em, that the Account he had to give 'em could not
well be delivered in Public, nor in few Words; and therefore begged their
Graces would be pleased to take it in private, and in the mean time entertain
themselves with those Letters. With that, taking out two, he delivered 'em to
her Grace. The Superscription of the one was, These for my Lady Duchess of I
don't know what Place: And the Direction on the other thus, To my Husband
Sancho Pansa, Governor of the Island of Barataria, whom Heaven prosper as many
or more Years than me.

The Duchess sat upon Thorns till she had read her Letter, so having opened it
and run it over to her self, finding there was nothing of Secrecy in it, she
read it out aloud, that the whole Company might hear what follows.

Teresa Pansa's Letter to the Duchess.
My Lady,
THE Letter your Honor sent me pleased me hugeously; for Troth it is what I
heartily longed for. The String of Coral is a good Thing, and my Husband's
Hunting Suit may come up to it. All our Town takes it mighty kindly, and is
very glad, that your Honor has made my Spouse a Governor, though no Body will
believe it, especially our Curate, Master Nicholas the Barber, and Sampson
Carrasco the Bachelor. But what care I, whether they do or no? So it be true,
as it is, let every one have their Saying. Though it is a Folly to lie, I had
not believed it neither, but for the Coral and the Suit; for every Body here
takes my Husband to be a Dolt, and cannot for the Blood of 'em imagine what he
can be fit to govern, unless it be a Herd of Goats. Well! Heaven be his Guide,
and speed him as he sees best for his Children. As for me, my dear Lady, I am
resolved, with your good liking, to make Hay while the Sun shines, and go to
Court, to loll it along in a Coach, and make a world of my Back-Friends, that
envy me already, stare their Eyes out. And therefore, good your Honor, pray
bid my Husband send me some Stock of Money; for it is dear living at Court; one
can have but little Bread there for Sixpence, and a Pound of Flesh is worth
thirty Maravedies, which would make one stand amazed. And if he is not for my
going let him send me Word in time, for my Feet itch to be jogging; for my
Gossips and Neighbors tell me, that if I and my Daughter go about the Court as
we should, spruce and fine, and at a taring Rate, my Husband will be better
known by me, than I by him; for many cannot choose but ask what Ladies are those
in the Coach? With that, one of my Servants answers, The Wife and Daughter of
Sancho Pansa Governor of the Island of Barataria, and thus shall my Husband be
known, and I honored far and near; and so have at all, Rome has Pardons.

You cannot think how I am troubled that we have gathered no Acorns hereaway
this Year; however, I send your Highness about half a Peck, which I have culled
one by one: I went to the Mountains on purpose, and got the biggest I could
find; I wish they had been as big as Ostrich Eggs.

Pray let not your Pomposity forget to write to me, and I Will be sure to send
you an Answer, and let you know how I do, and send you all the News in our
Village, where I am waiting and praying the Lord to preserve your Highness, and
not to forget me. My Daughter Sanchica, and my Son kiss your Worship's Hands.

She that wishes rather to see you than write to you,

Your Servant Teresa Pansa.


This Letter was very entertaining to all the Company, especially to the Duke
and Duchess; insomuch that her Grace asked Don Quixote whether it would be
amiss to open the Governor's Letter, which she imagined was a very good one;
the Knight told her, that, to satisfy her Curiosity, he would open it; which
being done, he found what follows.

Teresa Pansa's Letter to her Husband Sancho Pansa.
I Received thy Letter, dear Honey Sancho, and I vow and swear to thee, as I am
a Catholic Christian, I was within two Fingers breadth of running Mad for Joy.
Look you, my Chuck, when I heard thou were made a Governor, I was so
transported, I had like to have fallen down dead with mere Gladness; for thou
know sudden Joy is said to kill as soon as great Sorrow. As for thy Daughter
Sanchica, she scattered her Water about, before she was aware, for very
Pleasure. I had the Suit thou sent'st me before my Eyes, and the Lady
Dutchess's Corals about my Neck, held the Letter in my Hands, and had him that
brought 'em standing by me; and for all that, I thought what I saw and felt was
but a Dream. For who could have thought a Goat-herd should ever come to be a
Governor of Islands? But what said my Mother, Who a great deal would see, a
great while must live. I speak this, because if I live longer, I mean to see
more; for I shall never be at Rest till I see thee a Farmer or Receiver of the
Customs: For though they be Offices that send many to the Devil, for all that
they bring Grist to the Mill. My Lady Duchess will tell thee, how I long to go
to Court. Pray think on it, and let me know thy Mind; for I mean to credit thee
there, by going in a Coach.

Neither the Curate, the Barber, the Bachelor, nor the Sexton will believe
thou art a Governor, but say it is all Juggling or Enchantment, as all thy
Master Don Quixotes's Concerns use to be, and Sampson threatens to find thee
out, and put this Maggot of a Government out of thy Pate, and Don Quixote's
Madness out of his Coxcomb. For my Part, I do but laugh at 'em, and look upon
my string of Coral, and contrive how to fit up the Suit thou sent'st me into a
Gown for thy Daughter.

I sent my Lady the Duchess some Acorns; I would they were beaten Gold. I
prithee send me some Strings of Pearl, if they be in fashion in thy Island.

The News here is, that Berrueca has married her Daughter to a sorry Painter
that came hither, pretending to paint any Thing. The Township set him to paint
the King's Arms over the Town Hall: He asked 'em two Ducats for the Job, which
they paid him; so he fell to Work; and was eight Days a daubing, but could make
nothing on it at last; and, said he could not hit upon such piddling Kind of
Work, and so gave 'em their Money again. Yet for all this he married with the
Name of a good Workman. The Truth is, he has left his Pencil upon it, and taken
the Spade, and goes to the Field like a Gentleman. Pedro de Lobo's Son has
taken Orders, and shaved his Crown, meaning to be a Priest. Minguilla, Mingo
Silvato's Granddaughter heard of it, and sues him upon a Promise of Marriage:
Ill Tongues do not stick to say she has been with Child by him* but he stiffly
denies it. We have no Olives this Year, nor is there a Drop of Vinegar to be
got for Love or Money. A Company of Soldiers went through this Place, and
carried along with them three Wenches out of the Town, I don't tell thee their
Names, for mayhaps they will come back, and there will not want some that will
marry 'em, for better for worse Sanchica makes Bone-lace, and gets her three
Halfpence a day clear, which she saves in a Box with a Slit, to go toward
buying Household Stuff. But now she is a Governor's Daughter she has no need to
work, for thou will give her a Portion. The Fountain in the Market is dried up.
A Thunderbolt fell upon the Pillory. There may they all light. I expect thy
Answer to this, and thy Resolution concerning my going to Court; so Heaven send
thee long to live, and longer than my self, or rather, neither more nor less,
for I would not willingly leave thee behind me in this World.

Thy Wife, Teresa Pansa.


These Letters were admired, and caused a great deal of Laughter and Diversion;
and to complete the Mirth, at the same Time the Express returned that brought
Sancho's Answer to Don Quixote, which was likewise publicly Read, and startled
all the Hearers, who took the Governor for a Fool! Afterward the Duchess
withdrew, to know of the Page what he had to relate of his Journey to Sancho's
Village; of which he gave her a full Account without omitting the least
Particular. He also brought her the Acorns, and a Cheese, which Teresa had
given him for a very good one, and better than those of Tronchon, and which the
Duchess gratefully accepted. Now let us leave her, to tell the End of the
Government of Great Sancho Pansa, the Flower and Mirror of all Island-governors.

CHAP. LIII. The Toylsome End and Conclusion of Sancho Pansa's Government.
TO think the Affairs of this Life are always to remain in the same State, is
an erroneous Fancy. The Face of Things rather seems continually to change and
roll with a circular Motion. Summer succeeds the Spring; Autumn the Summer;
Winter the Autumn; and then Spring again: So Time proceeds in this perpetual
Round; only the Life of Man is ever hastening to its End, swifter than Time it
self, without Hopes to be renewed, unless in the next, that is unlimited and
infinite. This says Cid Hamet, the Mohammedan Philosopher. For even by the Light
of Nature, and without that of Faith, many have discovered the Swiftness and
Instability of this present Being, and the Duration of the Eternal Life which
is expected. But this moral Reflection of our Author is not here to be supposed
as meant by him in its full Extent; for he intended it only to show the
Uncertainty of Sancho's Fortune, how soon it vanished like a Dream, and how
from his high Preferment he returned to his former low Station.

It was now but the seventh Night, after so many Days of his Government, when
the careful Governor had betaken himself to his Repose, sated not with Bread
and Wine, but cloyed with hearing Causes, pronouncing Sentences, making
Statutes, and putting out Orders and Proclamations: Scarce was Sleep, in spite
of wakeful Hunger, beginning to close his Eyes, when of a sudden he heard a
great Noise of Bells, and most dreadful Outcries, as if the whole Island had
been sinking. Presently he started, and sat up in his Bed, and listened with
great Attention, to try if he could learn how far this Uproar might concern
him. But while he was thus hearkening in the Dark, a great Number of Drums and
Trumpets were heard, and that Sound being added to the Noise of the Bells and
the Cries, gave so dreadful an Alarm, that his Fear and Terror increased, and
he was in a sad Consternation. Up he leaped out of his Bed, and put on his
Slippers, the Ground being damp, and without any Thing else in the World on but
his Shirt, ran and opened his Chamber Door, and saw above twenty Men come
running along the Galleries with lighted Links in one Hand, and drawn Swords in
the other, all crying out, Arm my Lord Governor, Arm! a World of Enemies are
got into the Island, and we are undone, unless your Valor and Conduct relieve
us. Thus bawling, and running with great Fury and Disorder, they got to the
Door where Sancho stood quite scared out of his Senses. Arm, Arm, this Moment,
my Lord, cried one of 'em, if you have not a mind to be lost with the whole
Island. What would ye have me Arm for, quoth Sancho? Do I know any thing of
Arms or Fighting, think ye? Why don't ye rather send for Don Quixote, my
Master, he will dispatch your Enemies in a trice. Alas, as I am a Sinner to
Heaven, I understand nothing of this hasty Service. For Shame, my Lord
Governor, said another, what a Faint-heartedness is this? See! we bring you
here Arms offensive and defensive; Arm your self, and march to the
Marketplace. Be our Leader and Captain as you ought, and show your self a
Governor. Why then arm me, and good Luck attend me, quoth Sancho; with that
they brought him two large Shields, which they had provided, and without
letting him put on his other Clothes, clapped 'em over his Shirt, and tied the
one behind upon his Back, and the other before upon his Breast, having got his
Arms through some Holes made on purpose. Now the Shields being fastened to his
Body, as hard as Cords could bind 'em, the poor Governor was cased up and
immured as straight as an Arrow, without being able so much as to bend his
Knees, or stir a Step. Then having put a Lance into his Hand for him to lean
upon, and keep himself up, they desired him to march, and lead 'em on, and put
Life into 'em all, telling him that they did not doubt of Victory, since they
had him for their Commander. March! quoth Sancho, how do ye think I am able to
do it, squeezed as I am? These Boards stick so plaguey close to me, I cannot so
much as bend the Joints of my Knees; You must even carry me in your Arms, and
lay me a cross, or set me upright before some Passage, and I Will make good that
Spot of Ground, either with this Lance or my Body. Go to, my Lord Governor,
said another, it is more your Fear than your Armor that stiffens your Legs, and
hinders you from Moving. Move, move, March on, it is high Time, the Enemy grows
stronger, and the Danger presses. The poor Governor thus urged and upbraided,
endeavored to go forwards; but the first Motion he made, threw him to the
Ground at his full Length, so heavily, that he gave over all his Bones for
broken; and there he lay like a huge Tortoise in his Shell, or a Flitch of
Bacon clapped between two Boards, or like a Boat overturned upon a Flat, with
the Keel upwards. Nor had those drolling Companions the least Compassion upon
him as he lay; quite contrary, having put out their Lights, they made a
terrible Noise, and clutter'd with their Swords, and trampled too and again
upon the poor Governor's Body, and laid on furiously with their Swords upon his
Shields, insomuch, that if he had not shrunk his Head into 'em for Shelter, he
had been in a woeful Condition. Shrugg'd up in his narrow Shell, he was in a
grievous Fright, and a terrible Sweat, praying from the Bottom of his Heart for
Deliverance from the cursed Trade of governing Islands. Some kicked him, some
stumbl'd and fell upon him, and one among the rest jumped full upon him, and
there stood for some Time, as on a Watchtower, like a General encouraging his
Soldiers, and giving Orders, crying out, There Boys, there! the Enemies charge
most on that Side, make good that Breach, secure that Gate, down with those
Scaling-Ladders, fetch Fireballs, more Grenadoes, burning Pitch, Rosin, and
Kettles of scalding Oil. Entrench your selves, get Beds, Quilts, Cushions, and
barricadoe the Streets; in short, he called for all the Instruments of Death,
and all the Engines used for the Defense of a City that is besieged and
stormed. Sancho lay snug, though sadly bruised, and while he endured all
quietly, Oh that it would please the Lord, quoth he to himself, that this
Island were but taken, or that I were fairly dead or out of this Peck of
Troubles. At last Heaven heard his Prayers, and when he least expected it, he
heard 'em cry, Victory, Victory! The Enemy's routed. Now my Lord Governor,
rise, come and enjoy the Fruits of Conquest, and divide the Spoils taken from
the Enemy, by the Valor of your invincible Arms. Help me up, cried poor Sancho
in a doleful Tone; and when they had set him on his Legs, let all the Enemy I
have routed, quoth he, be nailed to my Forehead: I Will divide no Spoils of
Enemies. But if I have one Friend here, I only beg he would give me a Draught
of Wine to comfort me, and help to dry up the Sweat that I am in; for I am all
over Water. Thereupon they wiped him, gave him Wine, and took off his Shields:
after that, as he sat upon his Bed, what with his Fright, and what with the
Toil he had endured, he fell into a Swoon, insomuch, that those who acted this
Scene began to repent they had carried it so far. But Sancho recovering from
his Fit in a little Time, they also recovered from their Uneasiness. Being come
to himself, he asked what 'twas a Clock? They answered 'twas now Break of Day.
He said nothing, but, without any Words, began to put on his Clothes. While
this was doing, and he continued seriously silent, all the Eyes of the Company
were fixed upon him, wondering what could be the meaning of his being in such
Haste to put on his Clothes. At last he made an End of dressing himself, and
creeping along softly, (for he was too much bruised to go along very fast) he
got to the Stable, followed by all the Company, and coming to Dapple, he
embraced the quiet Animal, gave him a loving Kiss on the Forehead, and with
Tears in his Eyes, Coms hither, said he, my Friend, thou faithful Companion,
and Fellow-sharer in my Travels and Miseries, when thee and I consorted
together, and all my Cares were but to mend thy Furniture, and feed thy little
Carcass, then happy were my Days, my Months, and Years. But since I forsook
thee, and clamber'd up the Towers of Ambition and Pride, a thousand Woes, a
thousand Torments, and four thousand Tribulations have haunted and worried my
Soul. While he was talking thus, he fitted on his Pack-Saddle, no Body offering
to say any thing to him. This done, with a great deal of Difficulty he mounted
his Ass, and then addressing himself to the Steward, the Secretary, the
Genleman-waiter, and Doctor Pedro Rezio, and many others that stood by, make
Way, Gentlemen, said he, and let me return to my former Liberty. Let me go that
I may seek my old Course of Life, and rise again from that Death that buries me
here alive. I was not born to be a Governor, nor to defend Islands nor Cities
from Enemies that break in upon 'em. I know better what belongs to Ploughing,
Delving, Pruning and Planting of Vineyards, than how to make Laws and defend
Countries and Kingdoms. St. Peter is very well at Rome: That is as good as to
say, let every one stick to the Calling he was born to. A Spade does better in
my Hand than a Governor's Truncheon, and I had rather fill my Belly with a
Mess of plain Porridge, than lie at the Mercy of a coxcombly Physick-monger
that starves me to Death. I had rather solace my self under the Shade of an Oak
in Summer, and wrap my Corpse up in a double Sheep-skin in the Winter at my
Liberty, than lay me down with the Slavery of a Government in fine Holland
Sheets, and case my Hide in Furs and richest Sables. Heaven be with you,
Gentlefolks, and pray tell my Lord the Duke from me, that naked I was born, and
naked I am at present. I have neither won nor lost, which is as much as to say,
without a Penny I came to this Government, and without a Penny I leave it;
quite contrary to what other Governors of Islands use to do when they leave
'em. Clear the Way then, I beseech you, and let me pass; I must get my self
wrapped up all over in Sear-cloath; for I don't think I Have a sound Rib left,
thanks to the Enemies that have walked over me all Night long. This must not
be, my Lord Governor, said Doctor Rezio, for I will give your Honor a
Balsamic Drink, that is a Specific against Falls, Dislocations, Contusions
and all manner of Bruises, and that will presently restore you to your former
Health and Strength. And then for your Diet, I promise to take (...) new Course
with you, and to let you eat abundantly of whatsoever you please. It Is too
late, Mr. Doctor, answered Sancho; You shall as soon make me turn Turk as
hinder me from going. No, no, these Tricks shall not pass upon me again, you shall
as soon make me fly to Heaven without Wings, as get me to stay here, or ever
catch me nibbling at a Government again, though it were served up to me in a
covered Dish. I am of the Blood of the Panca's, and we are all willful and
positive. If once we cry odd, it shall be odd in spite of all Mankind, though it
be even. Go to then, Let the Pismire leave behind him in this Stable those
Wings that lifted him up in the Air to be a Prey to Martlets and Sparrows. Fair
and Softly. Let me now tread again on plain ground, though I may not wear pink'd
Cordovan-Leather-Pumps, I shall not want a coarse Pair of packthread Sandals to my
Feet. Every Sheep to her Mate. Let not the Cobbler go beyond his Last; and so
let me go, for it is late. My Lord Governor, said the Steward, though it
grieves us to part with your Honor, your Sense and Christian Behavior
engaging us to covet your Company, yet we would nor presume to stop you against
your Inclination: But you know that every Governor, before he leaves the Place
he has governed, is bound to give an Account of his Administration. Be pleased
therefore to do so for the ten Days you have been among us, and then Peace be
with you. No Man has Power to call me to an Account, replied Sancho, unless it
be by my Lord Duke's Appointment. Now to him it is that I am going, and to him
I Will give a fair and square Account. And indeed, going away so bare as I do,
there needs no greater Signs that I have governed like an Angel. In truth, said
Dr. Rezio, the great Sancho is in the right; and I am of Opinion, we ought to
let him go; for certainly the Duke will be very glad to see him. Thereupon they
all agreed to let him pass, offering first to attend him, and supply him with
whatever he might want in his Journey, either for Entertainment or Convenience.
Sancho told 'em, that all he desired was a little Corn for his Ass, and half a
Cheese and half a Loaf for himself; having Occasion for no other Provisions in
so short a Journey. With that they all embraced him, and he embraced them all,
not without Tears in his Eyes, leaving 'em in Admiration of the good Sense
which he discovered both in his Discourse and unalterable Resolution.

CHAP. LIVE. Which treats of Matters that relate to this History and no other.
THE Duke and Duchess resolved that Don Quixote's Challenge against their
Vassal should not be ineffectual; and the young Man being fled into Flanders,
to avoid having Donna Rodriguez to his Mother-in-Law, they made choice of a
Gascoin Lacquey, named Tosilos, to supply his Place, and gave him Instructions
how to act his Part. Two Days after, the Duke acquainted Don Quixote that
within four Days his Antagonist would meet him in the Lists, armed at all
Points like a Knight, to maintain that the Damsel ly'd through the Throat, and
through the Beard, to say that he had ever promised her Marriage. Don Quixote
was mightily pleased with this News, promising himself to do Wonders on this
Occasion, and esteeming it an extraordinary Happiness to have such an
Opportunity to show before such Noble Spectators how extensive were his Valor
and his Strength. Cheered and elevated with these Hopes, he waited for the End
of these four Days, which his eager Impatience made him think so many Ages.

Well, now letting them pass, as we do other Matters, let us a while attend
Sancho, who, divided betwixt Joy and Sorrow, was now on his Dapple, making the
best of his Way to his Master, whose Company he valued more than the Government
of all the Islands in the World. He had not gone far from his Island, or City,
or Town (or whatever you will please to call it, for he never troubled himself
to examine what it was) before he met upon the Road six Pilgrims, with their
walking Staves, Foreigners as they proved, and such as used to beg Alms
singing. As they drew near him, they placed themselves in a Row, and fell a
singing all together in their Language something that Sancho could not
understand, unless it were one Word, which plainly signified Alms; by which he
guessed that Charity was the Burden and Intent of their Song. Being exceeding
charitable, as Cid Hamet reports him, he opened his Wallet, and having taken
out half a Loaf and half a Cheese, gave 'em that, making Signs withal, that he
had nothing else to give 'em. They took the Dole with a good will, but yet, not
satisfied, they cried Guelt, Guelt. Good People, quoth Sancho, I don't
understand what you would have. With that, one of 'em pulled out a Purse that
was in his Bosom, and showed it to Sancho, by which he understood that 'twas
Money they wanted. But he, putting his Thumb to his Mouth, and wagging his Hand
with his four Fingers upwards, made a Sign that he had not a Cross; and so
clapping his Heels to Dapple's Sides, he began to make way through the
Pilgrims; but at the same time one of 'em, who had been looking on him very
earnestly, laid hold on him, and throwing his Arms about his Middle, Bless me!
(cried he in very good Spanish) What do I see? Is it possible? Do I hold in my
Arms my dear Friend, my good Neighbor Sancho Panca? Yes, sure, it must be he,
for I am neither drunk nor dreaming. Sancho wondering to hear himself called by
his Name, and to see himself so lovingly hugged by the Pilgrim, star'd upon him
without speaking a Word; but, though he looked seriously in his Face a good
while, he could not guess who he was. The Pilgrim observing his Amazement,
What, said he, Friend Sancho, don't you know your old Acquaintance, your
Neighbor Ricote the Morisco, that kept a Shop in your Town? Then Sancho
looking wistly on him again, began to call him to Mind, at last he knew him
again perfectly, and clipping him about the Neck without alighting, Ricote,
cried he, Who the Devil could ever have hnown thee transmogrify'd in this
Mumming Dress. Prithee who has frenchify'd thee at this rate? and how durst
thou offer to come again into Spain? Should thou come to be known, adad, I
would not be in thy Coat for all the World. If thou do not betray me, said
the Pilgrim, I am safe enough, Sancho; for no Body can know me in this
Disguise. But let us get out of the Road, and make to yonder Elm-Grove, my
Comrades and I have agreed to take a little Refreshment there, and thou shall
dine with us. They are honest Souls I Will assure thee. There I shall have an
Opportunity to tell thee how I have passed my Time since I was forced to leave
the Town in Obedience to the King's Edict, which, as thou know, so severely
threatens those of our unfortunate Nation. Sancho consented, and Ricote having
spoke to the rest of the Pilgrims, they went all together to the Grove, at a
good Distance from the Road. There they laid by their Staves, and taking off
their Pilgrims Weeds remained in Cuerpo; all of 'em young handsome Fellows,
except Ricote, who was somewhat stricken in Years. Every one carried his
Wallet, which seemed well furnished, at least with savoury and high-season'd
Bits, the Provocative to the turning down good Liquor. They sat down on the
Ground, and making the green Grass their Table-cloath, presently there was a
comfortable Appearance of Bread, Salt, Knives, Nuts, Cheese, and some
Bacon-bones, on which there were still some good pickings left, or which at
least might be sucked. They also had a Kind of black meat called Caveer, made
of the Roes of Fish, a certain Charm to keep Thirst awake. They also had good
Store of Olives, though none of the moistest; but the chief Glory of the Feast,
was six Leather Bottles of Wine, every Pilgrim exhibiting one for his Share;
even honest Ricote himself was now transformed from a Morisco, to a German, and
clubb'd his Bottle, his Quota making as good a Figure as the rest. They began
to eat like Men that liked mighty well their savoury Fare; and as it was very
relishing, they went leisurely to work to continue the longer, taking but a
little of every one at a time on the point of a Knife. Then all at once they
lifted up their Arms, and applying their own Mouths to the Mouths of the
Bottles, and turning up their Bottoms in the Air, with their Eyes fixed on
Heaven, like Men in an Ecstasy, they remained in that Posture a good while,
tranfusing the Blood and Spirit of the Vessels into their Stomachs, and shaking
their Heads, as in a Rapture, to express the Pleasure they received. Sancho
admired all this extremely; he could not find the least Fault with it, quite
contrary he was for making good the Proverb, When thou art at Rome, do as they
do at Rome; so he desired Ricote to lend him his Bottle, and taking his Aim as
well as the rest, and with no less Satisfaction, showed 'em he wanted neither
Method nor Breath. Four times they caressed the Bottles in that manner, but
there was no doing it the Fifth; for they were quite exhausted, and the Life
and Soul of 'em departed, which turned their Mirth into Sorrow. But while the
Wine lasted all was well. Now and then one or other of the Pilgrims would take
Sancho by the right hand, Spaniard, and German all one now, and cry Bon
Campagno, Well said, in faith, answered Sancho; Bon Compagno, Perdie. And then
he would burst out a laughing for half an hour together, without the least
Concern for all his late Misfortunes, or the Loss of his Government; for
Anxieties use to have but little Power over the time that Men spend in Eating
or Drinking. In short, as their Bellies were full, their Bones desired to be at
Rest, and so five of 'em dropped asleep, only Sancho and Ricote who had indeed
eat more, but drank less, remained awake, and removed under the Cover of a
Beech at a small Distance, where while the other slept, Ricote in good Spanish
spoke to Sancho to this Purpose.

Thou well know, Friend Sancho Panca, how the late Edict, that enjoined all
those of my Nation to depart the Kingdom, alarmed us all; at least me it did;
insomuch that the Time limited for our going was not yet expired, but I thought
the Law was ready to be executed upon me and my Children. Accordingly I
resolved to provide betime for their Security and mine, as a Man does that
knows his Habitation will be taken away from him, and so secures another before
he is obliged to remove. So I left our Town by my self, and went to seek some
Place beforehand, where I might convey my Family without exposing my self to
the Inconveniency of a Hurry, like the rest that went; for the wisest among us
were justly apprehensive that the Proclamations issued out for the Banishment
of our Moorish Race were not only Threats, as some flattered themselves, but
would certainly take Effect at the Expiration of the limited Time. I was the
rather inclined to believe this, being conscious that our People had very
dangerous Designs, so that I could not but think the King was inspired by
Heaven to take so brave a Resolution, and expel those Snakes out of the Bosom
of the Kingdom: Not that we were all guilty, for there were some sound and real
Christians among us; but their Number was so small, that they could not be
opposed to those that were otherwise, and it was not safe to keep Enemies
within Doors. In short, it was necessary we should be banished, but though some
might think it a mild and pleasant Fate, to us it seems the most dreadful Thing
that could befall us: Wherever we are, we bemoan with Tears our Banishment
from Spain; for, after all, there we were born, and it is our native Country. We
find no where the Entertainment our Misfortune requires, and even in Barbary
and all other Parts of Africa, where we expected to have met with the best
Reception and Relief, we find the greatest Inhumanity and the worst Usage. We
did not know our Happiness till we had lost it; and the Desire which most of us
have to return to Spain, is such, that the greatest Part of those that speak
the Tongue, as I do, who are many, come back hither, and leave their Wives and
Children there in a forlorn Condition; so strong is their Love for their
native Place; and now I know by Experience the Truth of the Saying; sweet is
the Love of one's Country. For my Part, having left our Town, I went into
France, and though we were very well received there, yet I had a mind to see
other Countries; and so passing through it, I traveled into Italy, and from
thence into Germany, where methought one might live with more Freedom, the
Inhabitants being a good humored sociable People that love to live easy with
one another, and every Body follows his own Way; for there is Liberty of
Conscience allowed in the greatest Part of the Country. There after I had taken
a Dwelling in a Village near Augsburgh, I struck into the Company of these
Pilgrims, and got to be one of their Number, finding they were some of those
who make it their Custom to go to Spain, many of 'em every Year, to visit the
Places of Devotion, which they look upon as their Indies, and best Market and
surest Means to get Money. They travel almost the whole Kingdom over, nor is
there a Village where they are not sure to get Meat and Drink, and six Pence at
least in Money. And they manage Matters so well, that at the End of their
Pilgrimage they commonly go off with about a hundred Crowns clear gains, which
they change into Gold, and hide either in the Hollow of their Staves, or the
Patches of their Clothes, and either thus, or some other private Way convey it
usually into their own Country, in spite of all Searches at their going out of
the Kingdom. Now Sancho, my Design in returning hither is to fetch the Treasure
that I left buried when I went away, which I may do with the less
Inconveniency, by reason it lies in a Place quite out of the Town. That done, I
intend to write or go over my self from Valencia to my Wife and Daughter, who I
know are in Algiers, and find one Way or other to get 'em over to some Port of
France, and from thence bring 'em over into Germany, where we will stay, and
see how Providence will dispose of us: For I am sure my Wife Francisca and my
Daughter are good Catholic Christians; and though I cannot say I am as much a
Believer as they are, yet I have more of the Christian than of the Mohammedan,
and make it my constant Prayer to the Almighty to open the Eyes of my
Understanding, and let me know how to serve him. What I wonder at, is, that my
Wife and Daughter should rather choose to go for Barbary than for France, where
they might have lived like Christians.

Look you, Ricote, answered Sancho, may haps that was none of their Fault, for
to my Knowledge John Tiopieyo, thy Wive's Brother took 'em along with him, and
he be like being a rank Moor, would go where he thought best. And I must tell
thee further, Friend, that I doubt thou wilt lose thy Labor in going to look
after thy hidden Treasure; for the Report was hot among us, that thy
Brother-in-law and thy Wife had a great many Pearls, and a deal of Gold taken
away from 'em, which should have been interred. That may be, replied Ricote,
but I am sure, Friend of mine, they have not met with my Hoard. For I never
would tell 'em where I had hid it, for fear of the worst. And therefore if thou will go along with me, and help me carry off this Money, I will give thee two
hundred Crowns, to make thee easier in the World; Thou know I can tell it is
but low with thee. I would do it, answered Sancho; but I an't at all covetous.
Were I in the least given to it, this Morning I quitted an Employment, which
had I but kept, I might have got enough to have made the Walls of my House of
beaten Gold; and before six Months had been at an End, I might have eaten my
Victuals in Plate. So that as well for this Reason, as because I fancy it would
be a Piece of Treason to the King, in abetting his Enemies, I would not go with
thee, though thou would lay me down twice as much. And prithee, said Ricote,
what Sort of an Employment is it thou have left? Why, quoth Sancho, I have left
the Government of an Island, and such an Island as in faith you will scarce meet
with the like in haste within a Mile of an Oak. And where is this Island, said
Ricote? Where, quoth Sancho, why, some two Leagues off, and it is called the
Island of Barataria. Prithee don't talk so, replied Ricote; Islands lie a great
Way off in the Sea; there are none of 'em on the Main Land. Why not, quoth
Sancho? I tell thee, Friend Ricote, I came from thence but this Morning, and
Yesterday I was there governing it at my Will and Pleasure like any Dragon; yet
for all that I even left it for this same Place of a Governor seemed to me but
a ticklish and perilous Kind of an Office. And what did thou get by thy
Government, asked Ricote? Why, answered Sancho, I have got thus much Knowledge,
as to understand that I am not fit to govern any Thing unless it be a Herd of
Cattle; and that the Wealth that is got in these Kind of Governments costs a Man
a deal of Labor and Toil, Watching and Hunger; for in your Islands, Governors
must eat next to nothing, especially if they have Physicians to look after
their Health. I can make neither Head nor Tail of all this, said Ricote; It
seems to me all Madness; for who would be such a Simpleton as to give thee
Islands to govern? Was the World quite bare of abler Men, that they could pick
out no Body else for a Governor? Prithee say no more, Man, but come to thy
Senses, and consider whether thou will go along with me, and help me to carry
off my hidden Wealth, my Treasure, for I may well give it that Name,
considering how much there is of it, and I Will make a Man of thee as I have told
thee. Hark you me, Ricote, answered Sancho, I Have already told thee my Mind. Let
it suffice that I will not betray thee, and so a God's Name go thy Way, and let
me go mine; for full well I wot, That what is honestly got may be lost, but
what is ill got will perish and the Owner too. Well, Sancho, said Ricote, I Will
press thee no further. Only prithee tell me, were thou in the Town when my Wife
and Daughter went away with my Brother-in-law? Ay marry was I, quoth Sancho, by
the same Token, thy Daughter looked so woundy handsome that there was old
Crouding to see her, and every Body said she was the finest Creature of God's
Earth. She wept bitterly all the Way, poor Thing, and embraced all her
She-Friends and Acquaintance, and begged all of those that flocked about her to
pray for her, and that in so earnest and pitious a manner, that, she even made
me shed Tears, though I am none of the greatest Blubberers. Faith and Troth,
many there had a good Mind to have got her away from her Uncle upon the Road,
and have hid her; but the Thoughts of the King's Proclamation kept 'em in Awe.
But he that showed himself the most concerned, was Don Pedro de Gregorio, that
young rich Heir that you know* They say he was up to the Ears in Love with her,
and has never been seen in the Town since she went. We all thought he was gone
after her to steal her away, but hitherto we have heard no more of the Matter.
I have all along had a Jealousy, said Ricote, that this Gentleman loved my
Daughter. But I always had too good Opinion of my Ricota's Virtue, to be
uneasy with his Passion; for thou know Sancho, very few, and hardly any of
our Women of Moorish Race, ever married with the old Christians on the Account
of Love; and so I hope, that my Daughter, who, I believe, minds more the Duties
of a Christian than any Thing of Love, will but little regard this young Heir's
Courtship. Heaven grant she may, quoth Sancho, for else 'twould be the worse
for 'em both; and now honest Neighbor, I must bid thee good b'y, for I have a
Mind to be with my Master Don Quixote this Evening. Then Heaven be with thee,
Friend Sancho, said Ricote: I find my Comrades have fetched out their Naps, and
it is Time we should make the best of our Way. With that, after a kind Embrace,
Sancho mounted his Dapple, Ricote leaned on his Staff, and so they parted.

CHAP. LV. What happened to Sancho by the Way, with other Matters which you
will have no more to do than to see.
SAncho staid so long with Ricote, that the Night overtook him within half a
League of the Duke's Castle. It grew dark; however as it was Summer Time, he
was not much uneasy, and chose to go out of the Road with a Design to stay
there till the Morning. But as ill Luck would have it, while he was seeking
some Place where he might rest himself, he and Dapple tumbled of a sudden into
a very deep Hole, which was among the Ruins of some Old Buildings. As he was
falling, he prayed with all his Heart, fancying himself all the while sinking
down into the bottomless Pit; but he was in no such Danger, for by that time he
had descended somewhat lower than Eighteen Foot, Dapple made a full Stop at the
Bottom, and his Rider found himself still on his Back, without the least Hurt
in the World. Presently Sancho began to consider the Condition of his Bones,
held his Breath, and felt all about him, and finding himself sound Wind and
Limb, and in a whole Skin, he thought he could never give Heaven sufficient
Thanks for his wondrous Preservation; for at first he gave himself over for
lost, and broken into a thousand Pieces. He grop'd with both Hands about the
Walls of the Pit, to try if it were possible to get out without Help; but he
found 'em all so plain, and so steep, that there was not the least Hold or
Footing to get up. This grieved him to the Soul, and to increase his Sorrow
Dapple began to raise his Voice in a very piteous and doleful Manner, which
pierced his Master's very Heart; nor did the poor Beast make such Moan without
Reason, for, to say the Truth, he was but in a woeful Condition. Woe's me,
cried Sancho, what sudden and unthought of Mischances every Foot befall us poor
Wretches that live in this miserable World! Who would have thought that he, who
but Yesterday saw himself seated in the Throne of an Island Governor, and had
Servants and Vassals at his Beck, should to Day find himself buried in a Pit,
without the least Soul to help him, or come to his Relief! Here we are like to
perish with deadly Hunger, I and my Ass, if we don't die before, he of his
Bruises, and I of Grief and Anguish. At least, I shall not be so lucky as was my
Master Don Quixote, when he went down into the Cave of the Inchanter
Montesinos. He found better Fare there than he could have at his own House, the
Cloth was laid, and his Bed made, and he saw nothing but pleasant Visions: But
I am like to see nothing here but Toads and Snakes. Unhappy Creature that I am!
What have my foolish Designs and Whimsies brought me to? If ever it is Heaven's
blessed Will that my Bones be found, they will be taken out of this dismal Place
bare, white and smooth, and those of my poor Dapple with 'em, by which,
perhaps, it will be known who we are, at least, by those who shall have taken
notice that Sancho Panca never stirred from his Ass, nor his Ass from Sancho
Panca. Unhappy Creatures that we are, I say again? Had we died at Home among
our Friends, though we had missed of Relief, we should not have wanted Pity, and
some to close our Eyes at the last Gasp. Oh my dear Companion and Friend, said
he to his Ass, how ill have I requited thy faithful Services. Forgive me, and
Pray to Fortune the best thou can to deliver us out of this Plunge, and I
here promise thee to set a Crown of Laurel on thy Head, that thou may be
taken for no less than a Poet Laureat, and thy Allowance of Provender shall be
doubled. Thus Sancho bewailed his Misfortune, and his Ass hearkened to what he
said, but answered not a Word, so great was the Grief and Anguish which the
poor Creature endured at the same Time.

At length, after a whole Night's Lamenting, and complaining at a miserable
Rate, the Day came on, and its Light having confirmed Sancho in his Doubts of
the Impossibity of getting out of that Place without Help, he set up his Throat
again, and made a vigorous Outcry, to try whether any Body might not hear him.
But alas, all his Calling was in vain, for all a-round there was no Body within
hearing; and then he gave himself over for Dead and Buried. He cast his Eyes on
Dapple, and seeing him extended on the Ground, and sadly down in the Mouth, he
went to him, and tried to get him on his Legs, which with much a-do, by means
of his Assistance, the poor Beast did at last, being hardly able to stand. Then
he took a Luncheon of Bread out of his Wallet, that had run the same Fortune
with 'em, and giving it to the Ass, who took it not at all amiss, and made no
Bones of it, here said Sancho, as if the Beast had understood him, a fat Sorrow
is better than a lean. At length, he perceived on one Side of the Pit a great
Hole wide enough for a Man to creep through stooping: He drew to it, and having
crawled through on all Four, found that it led into a Vault that enlarged it self
the further it extended, which he could easily perceive the Sun shining in
toward the Top of the Concavity. Having made this Discovery, he went back to
his Ass, and like one that knew what belonged to Digging, with a Stone, began
to remove the Earth that was about the Hole, and labored so effectually, that
he soon made a Passage for his Companion. Then taking him by the Halter, he led
him along fair and softly through the Cave, to try if he could not find a Way
to get out on the other Side. Sometimes he went in the Dark, and sometimes
without Light, but never without Fear. Heaven defend me, said he to himself,
what a Heart of a Chicken have I! This now, which to me is a sad Disaster, to
my Master, Don Quixote, would be a rare Adventure. He would look upon these
Caves and Dungeons as lovely Gardens, and glorious Palaces, and hope to be led
out of these dark narrow Cells into some fine Meadow; while I, luckless,
helpless, heartless Wretch that I am, every Step I take, expect to sink into
some deeper Pit than this, and go down I don't know whither. Welcome ill Luck
when it comes alone. Thus he went on, lamenting and despairing, and thought he
had gone somewhat more than half a League, when, at last he perceived a Kind of
a confused Light, like that of Day breaking in at some open Place, but which to
poor Sancho, seemed a Prospect of a Passage into another World.

But here Cid Hamet Benengeli leaves him a while, and returns to Don Quixote,
who entertained and pleased himself with the Hopes of a speedy Combat between
him and the Dishonourer of Donna Rodriguez's Daughter, whose Wrongs he designed
to see redressed on the appointed Day.

It happened one Morning, as he was riding out to prepare and exercise against
the Time of Battle, as he was practicing with Rosinante, the Horse in the
Middle of his Manage pitched his Feet near the Brink of a deep Cave; insomuch
that if Don Quixote had not used the best of his Skill, he must infallibly have
tumbled into it. Having escaped that Danger, he was tempted to look into the
Cave without alighting, and wheeling about, rode up to it. Now while he was
satisfying his Curiosity, and seriously musing, he thought he heard a Noise
within, and there upon listening, he could distinguish these Words, which in a
doleful Tone arose out of the Cavern; Ho! above there! Is there no good
Christian that hears me, no charitable Knight or Gentleman that will take Pity
of a Sinner buried alive, a poor Governor without a Government. Don Quixote
fancied he heard Sancho's Voice, which did not a little surprise him, and for
his better Satisfaction, raising his Voice as much as he could, Who Is that
below, cried he? Who Is that complains? Who should it be, to his Sorrow, cried
Sancho, but the most wretched Soul alive, Sancho Panca, Governor, for his
Sins, and his Ill Errantry, of the Island of Barataria, formerly Squire to the
famous Knight. Don Quixote de la Mancha? These Words redoubled Don Quixote's
Admiration, and increased his Amazement; for he presently imagined that Sancho
was dead, and that his Soul was there doing Penance. Possessed with that Fancy,
I conjure thee, said he, by all that can conjure thee, as I am a Catholic
Christian, to tell me who thou art, and, if thou art a Soul in Pain, let me
know what thou would have me do for thee; for since my Profession obliges me
to assist and succor all that are afflicted in this World, certainly it will
make me relieve and help the needy in the other World, who cannot help
themselves. Surely, Sir, answered he from below, you that speak to me should be
my Master Don Quixote: By the Tone of your Voice it can be no Man else. My Name
is Don Quixote, replied the Knight, and I think it my Duty to assist not only
the Living but the Dead in their Necessities. Tell me then who thou art, thou
who fill'st me with Astonishment; for if thou art my Squire, Sancho Panca, and
dead, if the Devil have not got thee, and through Heaven's Mercy thou art in
Purgatory, our Holy Mother, the Roman Catholic Church, has sufficient
Suffrages to redeem thee from the Pains thou endur'st, and I my self will
solicit her on thy behalf as far as my Estate will go; therefore proceed, and
tell me quickly who thou art? Why then, replied the Voice, by whatever you will
have me swear by, I make Oath that I am Sancho Panca, your Squire, and that I
never was dead yet in my Life. But only having left my Government, for Reasons
and Causes which I have not Leisure yet to tell you, last Night unluckily I fell
into this Cave, where I am still, and Dapple with me, that will not let me tell
a Lie; for as a further Proof of what I say, he is here. Now what is strange,
immediately, as if the Ass had understood what his Master said, to back his
Evidence, he fell a Braying so obstreperously that he made the whole Cave ring
again. A notable Witness, cried Don Quixote! I know this Bray, as if I were the
Parent of it, and I own thy Voice, my Sancho. I see thou art my real Squire;
stay therefore till I go to the Castle, which is hard by, and fetch more
Company to help thee cut of the Pit into which thy Sins doubtless have thrown
thee. Make haste, I beseech you, Sir, quoth Sancho, and for Heaven's sake come
again as fast as you can, for I can no longer endure to be here buried alive,
and I am even dying with Fear.

Don Quixote went with all Speed to the Castle, and gave the Duke and Duchess
an Account of Sancho's Accident, whilst they did not a little wonder at it,
though they conceived he might easily enough fall in at the Mouth of the Cave,
which had been there Time out of Mind. But they were mightily surpised to hear
he had abdicated his Government before they had an Account of his coming away.

In short, they sent Ropes, and other Conveniences by their Servants to draw
him out, and at last with much Trouble and Labor, both he and his Dapple were
restored from that gloomy Pit, to the full Enjoyment of the Light of the Sun.
At the same Time a certain Scholar standing by, and seeing him hois'd up; just
so, said he, should all bad Governors come out of their Governments; just as
this Wretch is dragged out of this profound Abyss, pale, half starved,
famished, and, as I fancy, without a Cross in his Pocket. Hark you, Goodman
Slander, replied Sancho, it is now eight or ten Days since I began to govern the
Island that was given me, and in all that Time I never had my Belly full but
once; Physicians have persecuted me, Enemies have trampled over me, and bruised
my Bones, and I have had neither Leisure to take Bribes, nor to receive my just
Dues. Now all this considered* in my Opinion I did not deserve to come out in
this Fassion? But Man appoints, and God disappoints. Heaven knows best what is
best for us all. We must take Time as it comes, and our Lot as it falls. Let no
Man say, I Will drink no more of this Water; we count our Chickens before they
are hatched, and many go out for Wool and come home shorn. Heaven knows my
Mind, and I say no more, though I might. Never trouble thy self, Sancho, said Don
Quixote, nor mind what some will say, for then thou will never have done. So
thy Conscience be clear, let the World talk at random, as it uses to do. One
may as soon tie up the Winds as the Tongues of Slanderers. If a Governor
returns rich from his Government, they say he has fleeced and robbed the
People; if poor, then they call him idle Fool, and ill Husband. Nothing so
sure, then, quoth Sancho, but this Bout they will call me a shallow Fool, but for
a Fleecer or a Robber I scorn their Words, I defy all the World. Thus
discoursing as they went, with a Rabble of Boys and Idle People about 'em, they
at last got to the Castle, where the Duke and the Duchess waited in the
Gallery for the Knight and Squire. As for Sancho, he would not go up to see the
Duke, till he had seen his Ass in the Stable, and provided for him; for he said
the poor Beast had but sorry Entertainment in his last Night's Lodging: This
done, away he went to wait on his Lord and Lady, and throwing himself on his
Knees, My Lord and Lady, said he, I went to govern your Island of Barataria,
such being your Will and Pleasure, though 'twas your Goodness more than my
Desert. Naked I entered into it, and naked I came away, I neither won nor lost.
Whether I governed well or ill, there are those not far off can tell, and let
them tell, if they please, that can tell better than I. I have resolved
doubtful Cases, determined Lawsuits, and all the while ready to die with
Hunger, such was the Pleasure of Doctor Pedro Rezio of Tirte a fuera, that
Physician in ordinary to Island Governors. Enemies set upon us in the Night,
and after they had put us in great Danger, the People of the Island say they
were delivered, and had the Victory by the Strength of my Arm, and may Heaven
prosper 'em as they speak Truth, say I. In short, in that Time, I experienced
all the Cares and Burdens this Trade of Governing brings along with it, and I
found 'em too heavy for my Shoulders. I was never cut out for a Ruler, and I am
too clumsy to meddle with Edge-Tools, and so before the Government left me, I
even resolved to leave the Government; and accordingly Yesterday Morning I
quitted the Island as I found it, with the same Streets, the same Houses, and
the same Roofs to them as when I came into it. I have asked for nothing by way
of Lone, and made no Hoard against a rainy Day. I designed indeed to have
issued out several wholesome Orders, but did not, for fear they should not be
kept, in which Case it signifies no more to make 'em than if one made 'em not.
So, as I said before, I came away from the Island without any Company but my
Dapple. I fell into a Cave, and went a good Way through it, till this Morning
by the Light of the Sun, I spied the Way out, yet not so easy, but that had not
Heaven sent my Master Don Quixote to help me, there I might have staid till
Doom's day. And now, my Lord Duke, and my Lady Duchess, here is your Governor
Sancho Panca again, who by a ten Days Government has only picked up so much
Experience as to know he would not give a Straw to be Governor, not only of an
Island, but of the versal World. This being allowed, kissing your Honors
Hands, and doing like the Boys when the Play at Trusse or fail, who cry, Leap
you, and then let me Leap; so I leap from the Government to my old Master's
Service again. For after all, though with him I often eat my Bread in bodily
Fear, yet still I fill my Belly; and, for my Part, so I have but that well
stuffed, no matter whether it be with Carrots or with Partridge.

Thus Sancho concluded his long Speech, and Don Quixote, who all the while
dreaded he would have said a Thousand Impertinencies, thanked Heaven in his
Heart, finding him end with so few. The Duke embraced Sancho, and told him, he
was very sorry he had quitted his Government so soon, but that he would give
him some other Employment that should be less troublesome, and more profitable.
The Duchess was no less kind, giving Order he should want for nothing, for he
seemed sadly bruised and out of Order.

CHAP. LVI. Of the extraordinary and unaccountable Combat between Don Quixote
de la Mancha, and the Lacquey Tosilos, in Vindication of the Matron Donna
Rodriguez's Daughter.
THE Duke and Duchess were not sorry that the Interlude of Sancho's Government
had been played, especially when the Steward, who came that very Day, gave 'em
a full and distinct Account of every Thing the Governor had done and said,
during his Administration, using his very Expressions, and repeating almost
every Word he had spoke, concluding with a Description of the Storming of the
Island, and Sancho's Fear and Abdication, which proved no unacceptable
Entertainment.

And now the History relates, that the Day appointed for the Combat was come,
nor had the Duke forgot to give his Lacquey Tosilos all requisite Instructions
how to vanquish Don Quixote, and yet neither kill nor wound him; to which
Purpose he gave order that the Spears or Steelheads of their Lances should be
taken off, making Don Quixote sensible that Christianity, for which he had so
great a Veneration, did not admit that such Conflicts should so much endanger
the Lives of the Combatants, and that it was enough he granted him free Lists
in his Territories, though it was against the Decree of the Holy Council, which
forbids such Challenges; for which Reasons he desired him not to push the Thing
to the utmost Rigor. Don Quixote replied, that his Grace had the sole Diposal
of all Things, and it was only his Duty to obey.

And now the dreadful Day being come, the Duke caused a spacious Scaffold to be
erected for the Judges of the Field of Battle, and for the Matron and her
Daughter, the Plantiffs.

An infinite Number of People flocked from all the Neighboring Towns and
Villages to behold this wonderful new Kind of Combat, the like to which had
never been seen or so much as heard of in those Parts, either by the Living or
the Dead. The first that made his Entrance at the Barriers, was the Marshal of
the Field, who came to survey the Ground, and rode all over it, that there
might be no foul Play, no private Holes, or Contrivance to make one stumble or
fall. After that, entered the Matron and her Daughter, who seated themselves in
their Places, all in deep Mourning, their Vails close to their Eyes, and over
their Breasts, with no small Demonstrations of Sorrow. Presently at one* End of
the listed Field appeared the peerless Champion, Don Quixote de la Mancha: A
while after, at the other entered the grand Lacquey, Tosilos, attended with a
great Number of Trumpets, and mounted on a mighty Steed, that shook the very
Earth. The Visor of his Helmet was down, and he was armed Cap-a-pee, in shining
Armor of Proof. His Courser was a Flea-bitten Horse, that seemed of Friezland
Breed, and had a Quantity of Wool about each of his Fetlocke's. The valorous
Combatant came on, well tutored by the Duke his Master how to behave himself
toward the valorous Don Quixote de la Mancha; being warned to spare his Life
by all Means, and therefore to avoid a Shock in his first Career that might
otherwise prove fatal, should he encounter him directly: Tosilos fetched a
Compass about the Barrier, and at last made a Stop right against the two Women,
casting a leering Eye upon her that had demanded him in Marriage. Then the
Marshal of the Field called to Don Quixote, and in the Presence of Tosilos
asked the Mother and the Daughter whether they consented that Don Quixote de la
Mancha should vindicate their Right, and whether they would stand or fall by
the Fortune of their Champion? They said they did, and allowed of whatever he
should do in their behalf, as good and valid. The Duke and Duchess by this
Time were seated in a Gallery that was over the Barriers, which were surrounded
by a vast Throng of Spectators, all waiting to see the unmerciful and
unparallelled Conflict. The Conditions of the Combat were these, That if Don
Quixote were the Conqueror, his Opponent should marry Donna Rodriguez's
Daughter; but if the Knight were overcome, then the Victor should be discharged
from his Promise, and not bound to give her any other Satisfaction. Then the
Marshal of the Field placed each of them on the Spot whence they should start,
dividing equally between them the Advantage of the Ground, that neither of them
might have the Sun in his Eyes. And now the Drums beat, and the Clangor of the
Trumpets resounded through the Air; the Earth shook under 'em, and the Hearts
of the numerous Spectators were in Suspense, some fearing, others expecting the
good or bad Issue of the Battle. Don Quixote recommending himself with all his
Soul to Heaven and his Lady Dulcinea del Toboso, stood expecting when the
precise Signal for the Onset should be given -- But our Lacquey's Mind was
otherwise employed, and all his Thoughts were upon what I am going to tell you.

It seems, as he stood looking on his Female Enemy, she appeared to him the
most beautiful Woman he had ever seen in his whole Life; which being perceived
by the little blind Archer, to whom the World gives the Name of Love, he took
his Advantage, and fond of improving his Triumphs, though it were but over the
Soul of a Lacquey, he came up to him softly, and without being perceived by any
one, he shot an Arrow two Yards long into the poor Footmans Side so smartly,
that his Heart was pierced through and through. A Thing which the mischievous
Boy could easily do; for Love is invisible, and has free Ingress or Egress
where he pleases, at a most unaccountable Rate. You must know then, that when
the Signal for the Onset was given, our Lacquey was in an Ecstasy, transported
with the Thoughts of the Beauty of his lovely Enemy, insomuch that he took no
manner of Notice of the Trumpet's Sound; quite contrary to Don Quixote, who no
sooner heard it, but clapping Spurs to his Horse, he began to make toward his
Enemy with Rosinante's best Speed At the same Time his good Squire Sancho Panca
seeing him start, Heaven be thy Guide, cried he aloud, thou Cream and Flower of
Chivalry-Errant, Heaven give thee the Victory, since thou have Right on thy
Side. Tosilos saw Don Quixote coming toward him, yet instead of taking his
Career to encounter him; without leaving the Place, he called as loud as he
could to the Marshal of the Field, who thereupon rode up to him to see what he
would have. Sir, said Tosilos, is not this Duel to be fought that I may marry
yonder young Lady, or let it alone? Yes, answered the Marshal. Why then, said
the Lacquey, I feel a Burden upon my Conscience, and am sensible I should have
a great deal to answer for, should I proceed any further in this Combat; and
therefore I yield my self vanquished, and desire I may marry the Lady this
Moment. The Marshal of the Field was surpised, and, as he was privy to the
Duke's Contrivance of that Business, the Lacquey's unexpected Submission put
him to such a Nonplus, that he knew not what to answer. On the other Side, Don
Quixote stopped in the Middle of his Career, seeing his Adversary did not put
himself in a Posture of Defense. The Duke could not imagine why the Business of
the Field was at a Stand, but the Marshal having informed him, he was amazed,
and in a great Passion. In the mean Time, Tosilos approaching Donna Rodriguez,
Madam, cried he, I am willing to marry your Daughter, there is no need of
Lawsuits, nor of Combats in the Matter, I had rather make an End of it
peaceably, and without the Hazard of Body and Soul. Why then, said the valorous
Don Quixote, hearing this, since it is so I am discharged of my Promise; let
them even marry a God's Name, and Heaven bless 'em, and give 'em Joy. At the
same Time the Duke coming down within the Lists, and applying himself to
Tosilos, Tell me Knight, said he, is it true, that you yield without Fighting,
and that at the Instigation of your timorous Conscience, you are resolved to
marry this Damsel? Yes, an't please your Grace, answered Tosilos. Marry, and I
think it is the wisest Course, quoth Sancho; for what says the Proverb, what the
Mouse would get, give the Cat, and keep thy self out of Trouble. In the mean
while Tosilos began to unlace his Helmet, and called out that somebody might
help him off with it quickly, as being so choked with his Armor, that he was
scarce able to breathe. With that, they took off his Helmet with all Speed, and
then the Lacquey's Face was plainly discovered. Donna Rodriguez and her
Daughter perceiving it presently, a Cheat, a Cheat, cried they! They have got
Tosilos, my Lord Duke's Lacquey to counterfeit my lawful Husband, Justice of
Heaven and the King. This is a Piece of Malice and Treachery not to be endured.
Ladies, said Don Quixote, don't vex your selves, there is neither Malice nor
Treachery in the Case, or if there be, the Duke is not in the Fault. No, those
evil minded Negromancers that Persecute me, are the Traitors, who envying the
Glory I should have got by this Combat, have transformed the Face of my
Adversary into this, which you see is the Duke's Lacquey. But take my Advice,
Madam, added he to the Daughter, and in spite of the Baseness of my Enemies,
marry him; for I dare engage it is the very Man you claim as your Husband. The
Duke hearing this, angry as he was, could hardly forbear losing all his
Indignation in Laughter. Truly, said he, so many extraordinary Accidents every
Day befall the great Don Quixote, that I am inclinable to believe this is not my
Lacquey, though he appears to be so. But for our better Satisfaction, let us
defer the Marriage but a Fortnight, and in the mean While keep in close Custody
this Person that has put us into this Confusion; perhaps by that Time he may
resume his former Looks, for doubtless the Malice of these mischievous
Magicians against the Noble Don Quixote cannot last so long, especially when
they find all these Tricks and Transformations so little avail. Alack a day!
Sir, quoth Sancho, those plaguey Imps of the Devil are not so soon tired as you
think for; where my Master is concerned, they used to form and deform, and chop
and change this into that, and that into the other. It Is but a While ago that
they transmography'd the Knight of the Mirrors, whom he had overcome, into a
special Acquaintance of ours, the Bachelor Sampson Carrasco of our Village;
and as for the Lady Dulcinea del Toboso, our Mistress, they have bewitched and
be-devill'd her into the Shape of a mere Country-Blouze, and so I verily think
this saucy Fellow here is like to dye a Footman, and will live a Footman all
the Days of his Life. Well, cried the Daughter, let him be what he will, if
he will have me, I Will have him. I ought to thank him, for I had rather be a
Lacquey's Wife, than a Gentleman's cast-off Mistress; besides, he that deluded
me is no Gentleman neither. To be short, the Sum of the Matter was, that
Tosilos should be confined to see what his Tranformation would come to. Don
Quixote was proclaimed Victor by general Consent; and the People went away,
most of 'em very much out of Humor, because the Combatants had not cut one
another to pieces to make 'em Sport; according to the Custom of the young
Rabble, to be sorry, when, after they have staid in hopes to see a Man hanged,
he happens to be pardoned, either by the Party he had wronged, or the
Magistrate. The Crowd being dispersed, the Duke and Duchess returned with Don
Quixote into the Castle, Tosilos was secured, and kept close: As for Donna
Rodriguez and her Daughter, they were very well pleased to see one Way or other
that Business would end in Marriage; and Tosilos flattered himself with the
like Expectation.

CHAP. LVII. How Don Quixote took his Leave of the Duke, and what passed
between him and the witty wanton Altisidora the Dutchess's Damsel.
DON Quixote thought it now Time to leave the idle Life he led in the Castle,
believing it a mighty Fault, thus to shut himself up, and indulge his sensual
Appetite among the tempting Varieties of Dainties and Delights, which the Lord
and Lady of the Place provided for his Entertainment, as a Knight Errant; and
he thought he was to give a strict Account to Heaven for a Course of Life so
opposite to his active Profession. Accordingly one Day he acquainted the Duke
and Duchess with his Sentiments, and begged their Leave to depart. They both
seemed very unwilling to part with him, but yet at last yielded to his
Entreaties. The Duchess gave Sancho his Wife's Letters, which he could not
hear read without weeping. Who would have thought, cried he, that all the
mighty Hopes with which my Wife swelled her self up at the News of my
Preferment, should come to this at last, and now I should be reduced again to
trot after my Master Don Quixote de la Mancha, in Search of Hunger and broken
Bones! However, I am glad to see my Teresa was like her self, in sending the
Duchess the Acorns; which if she had not done, she had showed her self a dirty
ungrateful Sow, and I should have been confounded mad with her. My Comfort is,
that no Man can say the Present was a Bribe; for I had my Government before she
sent it, and it is fit those who have a Kindness done 'em should show themselves
grateful, though it be with a small Matter. In short, naked I came into the
Government, and naked I went out of it; and so I may say for my Comfort with a
safe Conscience, naked I came into she World, and naked I am still; I neither
won nor lost, and that is no easy Matter as Times go, let me tell you. These
were Sanho's Sentiments at his Departure.

Don Quixote having taken his solemn Leave of the Duke and Duchess over night,
left his Apartment the next Morning, and appeared in his Armor in the
Courtyard, the Galleries all round about being filled at the same Time with
the People of the House; the Duke and Duchess being also got thither to see
him: Sancho was upon his Dapple with his Cloak-bag, his Wallet and his
Provision, very brisk and cheerful; for the Steward that acted the Part of
Trifaldi had given him a Purse with two hundred Crowns in Gold, to defray
Expenses, which was more than Don Quixote knew at that Time. And now while
every Body looked to see 'em set forward, on a sudden the arch and witty
Altisidora started from the rest of the Dutchess's Damsels and Attendance that
stood by among the rest, and in a doleful Tone, addressed her self to him in
the following Doggrel Rhimes.

The Mock Farewell.
I.
STay, cruel Don,
Do not be gone,
Nor give thy Horse the Rowels;
For every Jag
Thou giv'st thy Nag,
Does prick me to the Bowels.
Thou do not shun
Some buttered Bun,
Or Drab without a Rag on:
Alas I am
A very Lamb,
Yet love like any Dragon.
Thou did deceive,
And now do leave
A Lass, as tight as any
That ever stood,
In Hill or Wood
Near Venus and Diana.
Since thou, false Fiend,
When Nymph's thy Friend,
Aeneas like do bob her;
Go rot and die,
Boil, roast, or fry,
With Barrabas the Robber.
II.
Thou take thy Flight,
Like ravenous Kite,
That holds within his Pounces
A tender Bit,
A poor Tom-tit,
Then whist away he flounces.
The Heart of me,
And Night-Coifs three
With Garters twain you plunder,
From Legs of hue,
White, black, and blue,
So marbl'd over you would wonder.
Two thousand Groans,
And warm Ahones,
Are stuffed within thy Pillion*
The least of which,
Like flaming Pitch,
Might have burned down old Ilion.
Since thou, False Fiend,
When Nymph's thy Friend,
Aeneas like do bob her;
Go, rot, and die,
Boil, roast, or fry,
With Barrabas the Robber.
III.
As sour as Crab
Against thy Drab,
May be thy Sancho's Ghizzard:
And he never thrum
His brawny Bum,
To free her from the Wizzard.
May all thy Flouts,
And sullen Doubts,
Be scor'd upon thy Dowdy;
And she never freed,
For thy Misdeed,
From rusty Phiz, and cloudy.
May Fortune's Curse
From bad to worse,
Turn all thy best Adventures;
Thy Joys to Dumps,
Thy Brags to Thumps,
And thy best Hopes to Banters.
Since thou, false Fiend,
When Nymph's thy Friend,
Aeneas like do bob her;
Go, rot, and die,
Boil, roast, and fry,
With Barrabas the Robber.
IV.
May thou Incog.
Sneak like a Dog,
And over the Mountains trudge it;
From Spain to Cales,
From Rome to Wales,
Without a Cross in Budget.
If thour't so brisk
To play at Whisk,
In hopes of winning Riches;
For Want of Trump,
Strip even thy Rump,
And lose thy very Breeches.
May thy Corns ache,
Then Penknife take,
And cut thee to the, Raw-bone:
With Toothache mad,
No Ease be had,
Though Quacks pull out thy Jaw Bone.
Since thou, false Fiend,
When Nymph's thy Friend,
Aeneas like do bob her;
Go, rot, and dye,
Boil, roast, or fry,
With Barrabas the Robber.
Thus Altisidora expressed her Resentments, and Don Quixote, who looked on her
seriously all the while, would not answer a Word; but turning to Sancho, Dear
Sancho, said he, by the Memory of thy Forefathers, I conjure thee to tell me
one Truth. Say, have thou any Night-Coifs or Garters that belong to this
Lovesick Damsel? The three Night-Coifs I have quoth Sancho; but as for the
Garters, I know no more of 'em than the Man in the Moon. The Duchess being
wholly a Stranger to this Part of Altisidora's Frolic, was amazed to see her
proceed so far in it, though she knew her to be of an arch and merry
Disposition. But the Duke being pleased with the Humor, resolved to carry it
on. Thereupon addressing himself to Don Quixote, Truly, Sir Knight, said he, I
do not take it kindly, that after such civil Entertainment as you have had here
in my Castle, you should offer to carry away three Night-Coifs, if not a pair
of Garters besides, the proper Goods and Chattels of this Damsel here present.
This was not done like a Gentleman, and does not make good the Character you
would maintain in the World: Therefore restore her Garters, or I challenge you
to a Mortal Combat, without being afraid that your evil-minded Inchanters
should alter my Face, as they did my Footman's. Heaven forbid, said Don
Quixote, that I should draw my Sword against your most illustrious Person, to
whom I stand indebted for so many Favors. No, my Lord, as for the Night-Coifs
I will cause 'em to be restored, for Sancho tells me he has 'em; but as for the
Garters it is impossible, for neither he nor I ever had 'em; and if this Damsel
of yours will look carefully among her Things, I dare say she will find 'em. I
never was a Pilferer, my Lord* and while Heaven forsakes me not, I never shall
be guilty of such Baseness. But this Damsel, as you may perceive, talks like
one that is in Love, and accuses me of that whereof I am innocent; so that not
regarding her little Revenge, I have no need to ask Pardon either of her or
your Grace. I only beg you will be pleased to entertain a better Opinion of me,
and once more permit me to depart. Farewell, Noble Don Quixote, said the
Duchess; may Providence so direct your Course, that we may always be blessed
with the good News of your Exploits; and so Heaven be with you, for the longer
you stay the more you increase the Flames in the Hearts of the Damsels that
gaze on you. As for this young indiscreet Creature, I Will take her to task so
severely, she shall not misbehave her self so much as in a Word or Look for the
future. One Word more, I beseech you, O valorous Don Quixote, cried Al isidora.
I beg your Pardon for saying you had stolen my Garters, for in my Conscience I
have 'em on: But my Thoughts ran a Wool-gathering; and I did like the
Countryman, who looked for his Ass while he was mounted on his Back. Many come
up, cried Sancho, whom did they take me for, trow? A Concealer of stolen Goods,
no indeed; had I been given that Way, I might have had Opportunities enough in
my Government.

Don Quixote made a Bow, and after he had made his Obeisance to the Duke, the
Duchess, and all the Company, he turned about with Rosinante; and Sancho
following him on Dapple, they left the Castle, and took the Road for Saragossa.

CHAP. LVIII. How Adventures crowded so thick and threefold on Don Quixote,
that they trod upon one another's heels.
DON Quixote no sooner breathed the Air in the open Field, free from
Altisidora's amorous Importunities, but he fancied himself in his own Element;
he thought he felt the Spirit of Knight-Errantry reviving in his Breast; and
turning to Sancho, Liberty, said he, Friend Sancho, is one of the most valuable
Blessings that Heaven has bestowed on Mankind. Not all the Treasures concealed
in the Bowels of the Earth, nor those in the Bosom of the Sea can be compared
with it. For Liberty, a Man may, nay, ought to hazard even his Life, as well as
for Honor, accounting Captivity the greatest Misery he can endure. I tell thee
this, my Sancho, because thou were a Witness of the good Cheer and Plenty which
we met with in the Castle; yet in the midst of those delicious Feasts, among
those tempting Dishes, and those Liquors cooled with Snow, me thought I
suffered the Extremity of Hunger, because I did not enjoy them with that
Freedom as if they had been my own: For the Obligations that lie upon us to
make suitable Returns for Kindnesses received, are Ties that will not let a
generous Mind be free. Happy the Man, whom Heaven has blessed with Bread, for
which he is obliged to thank kind Heaven alone! For all these fine Words, quoth
Sancho, it is not proper for us to be unthankful for two hundred good Crowns in
Gold, which the Duke's Steward gave me in a little Purse, which I have here,
and cherish in my Bosom, as a Relick against Necessity, and a comforting
Cordial next my Heart against all Accidents For we are not like always to meet
with Castles, where we shall be made much of. A Peasecods on it! we are more
like to meet with damned Inns, where we shall be rib-roasted.

As the wandering Knight and Squire went discoursing of this and other Matters,
they had not rid much more than a League, ere they espied about a dozen Men,
who looked like Country-Fellows sitting at their Victuals, with their Cloaks
under them, on the green Grass, in the middle of a Meadow. Near 'em they saw
several white Clothes or Sheets spread out and laid close to one another, that
seemed to cover something. Don Quixote rod up to the People, and after he had
civilly saluted 'em, asked what they had got under that Linen? Sir, answered
one of the Company, they are some carved Images that are to be set up at an
Altar we are erecting in our Town^ We cover 'em, least they should be sullied,
and carry 'em on our Shoulders for fear they should be broken: If you please,
said Don Quixote, I should be glad to see 'em; for, considering the Care you
take of 'em, they should be Pieces of Value. Ay, marry are they, quoth another,
or else we are damnably cheated; for there is never an Image among 'em that does
not stand us in more than fifty Ducats; and, that you may know I Am no Lier, do
but stay, and you shall see with your own Eyes. With that, getting up on his
Legs, and leaving his Victuals, he went and took off the cover from one of the
Figures, that happened to be St. George a Horseback, and under his Feet a
Serpent coil'd up, his Throat transfixed with a Lance, with the Fierceness that
is commonly represented in the Piece; and all, as they use to say, spick and
span new, and shining like beaten Gold. Don Quixote having seen the Image,
This, said he, was one of the best Knight-Errants the Divine Warfare or
Church-Militant ever had: His Name was Don St. George, and he was an
extraordinary Protector of Damsels. What Is the next? The Fellow having
uncovered it, it proved to be St. Martin on Horseback. This Knight too, said
Don Quixote at the first sight, was one of the Christian Adventurers, and I am
apt to think he was more liberal than valiant; and thou may perceive it
Sancho, by his dividing his Cloak with a poor Man; he gave him half, and
doubtless 'twas Wintertime, or else he would have given it him whole, he was
so charitable. Not so neither, I fancy, quoth Sancho, but I guess he stuck to
the Proverb: He that lends his Breech must --, you understand me. Don Quixote
smiled, and desi^'d the Men to show him the next Image; which appeared to be
that of the Patron of Spain a Horseback, with his Sword bloody, trampling down
Moors, and treading over Heads. Ay, this is a Knight indeed, (cried Don
Quixote, when he saw it) one of those that fought in the Squadrons of the
Savior of the World: He is called Don San Jago, Mata-Moros, or Don St. James
the Destroyer of the Moors, and may be thought one of the most valorous Saints
and Professors of Chivalry that the Earth formerly enjoyed, and Heaven now
possesses. Then they uncovered another Piece, which showed St. Paul falling
from his Horse, with all the Circumstances usually expressed in the Story of
his Conversion, and represented so to the Life, that he looked as if he had
been answering the Voice that spoke to him from Heaven. This, said Don Quixote,
was the greatest Enemy the Church Militant had once, and proved afterward the
greatest Defender it will ever have. In his Life a true Knight Errant, and in
his Death a steadfast Saint; an indefatigable Labourer in the Vineyard of the
Lord, a Teacher of the Gentiles, who had Heaven for his School, and the Lord of
Wisdom for his Master and Instructor. Don Quixote perceiving there were no more
Images, desired the Men to cover those he had seen: And then, my good Friends,
said he to 'em, I cannot but esteem the Sight that I have had of these Images
as a happy Omen; for these Saints and Knights were of the same Profession that
I follow, which is that of Arms: The Difference only lies in this Point, that
they were Saints, and fought according to the Rules of holy Discipline; and I
am a Sinner, and fight after the Manner of Men. They conquered Heaven by Force,
for Heaven is taken by Violence; but I alas cannot yet tell what I gain by the
Force of my Labors! Yet were my Dulcinea del Toboso but free from her
Troubles, by a happy Change in my Fortune, and an Improvement in my
Understanding, I might perhaps take a better Course than I do. Heaven grant it,
quoth Sancho, and let the Devil do his worst.

All this while the Men wondered at Don Quixote's Discourse as well as his
Figure; for they could not understand one Half of what he meant. So that after
they had made an End of their Dinner, they got up their Images, took their
Leaves of Don Quixote, and continued their Journey.

Sancho remained full of Admiration, as if he had never known his Master; he
wondered how he should come to know all these Things; and fancied there was not
that History or Adventure in the World, but he had it at his Finger's Ends.
Faith and Troth, Master of mine, quoth he, if what has happened to us to Day
may be called an Adventure, it is one of the sweetest and most pleasant we ever
met with in all our Rambles; for we are come off without a dry-hasting, or the
least bodily Fear. We have not so much as laid our Hands upon our Weapons, nor
have we beaten the Earth with our Carcasses; but here we be safe, and sound,
neither-a-dry nor a-hungry. Heaven be praised, that I have seen all this with
my own Eyes! Thou say well, Sancho, said Don Quixote, but I must tell thee,
that Seasons and Times are not always the same, but often take a different
Course! and what the Vulgar call Forebodings and Omens, for which there are no
rational Grounds in Nature, ought only to be esteemed happy Encounters by the
Wise. One of these superstitious Fools, going out of his House betimes in the
Morning, meets a Friar of the Blessed Order of St. Francis; and starts as if he
had met a Griffin, turns back, and runs home again. Another Wise-acre happens
to throw down the Salt on the Tablecloath, and thereupon is sadly cast down
himself, as if Nature were obliged to give Tokens of ensuing Disasters, by such
slight and inconsiderable Accidents as these. A wise and truly Religious Man
ought never to pry into the Secrets of Heaven Scipio landing in Africa,
stumbl'd and fell down as he leaped ashore: Presently his Soldiers took this
for an ill Omen, but he, embracing the Earth, cried, I have thee fast, Africa,
thou shall not escape me. In this manner, Sancho, I think it a very happy
Accident that I met these Images I think so too, quoth Sancho; but I would fain
know why the Spaniards call upon that same St. James the Destroyer of Moors,
just when they are going to give Battle, they cry, Saint Jago, and close Spain,
Pray is Spain open, that it wants to be closed up? What do you make of that
Ceremony? Thou art a very simple Fellow, Sancho, answered Don Quixote. Thou
must know that Heaven gave to Spain this mighty Champion of the Red-Cross for
its Patron and Protector, especially in the desperate Engagements which the
Spaniards had with the Moors; and therefore they invoke him in all their
martial Encounters, as their Protector; and many times he has been personally
seen cutting and slaying, overthrowing, trampling and destroying the Saracen
Squadrons; of which I could give thee many Examples deduced from authentic
Spanish Histories.

Here Sancho changing the Discourse, Sir, quoth he, I cannot but marvel at the
Impudence of Altisidora the Dutchess's Damsel. I warrant you, that same
Mischief-monger they call Love, has plaguily mawl'd her, and run her through
without Mercy. They say he is a little blind Urchin, and yet the dark Youth,
with no more Eyesight than a Beetle, will hit you a Heart as sure as a Gun,
and bore it through and through with his Dart, if he undertakes to shoot at it.
However, I have heard say, that the Shafts of Love are blunted and beaten back
by the modest and sober Carriage of young Maidens. But upon this Altisidora
their Edge seems rather to be whetted than made blunt. You must observe,
Sancho, said Don Quixote, that Love is void of Consideration and disclaims the
Rules of Reason in his Proceedings. He is like Death, and equally affects the
lofty Palaces of Kings, and the lowly Cottages of Shepherds. Wherever he
takes entire Possession of a Soul, the first Thing he does, is to dismiss all
Bashfulness and Shame. So these being banished from Altisidora's Breast, she
confidently discovered her loose Desires, which alas! rather filled me with
Confusion than Pity. Well, go to, quoth Sancho, you are confoundedly cruel; how
could you be so hard-hearted and ungrateful? had the poor Thing but made Love
to me, I dare say, I should have come to at the first Word, and have been at
her Service. Beshrew my Midriff, what a Heart of Marble, Bowels of Brass, and
Soul of Plaster you have! But I cannot for the Blood of me imagine, what the
poor Creature saw in your Worship, to make her dote on you and play the Fool at
this Rate! Where the Devil was the sparkling Appearance, the Briskness, the
fine Carriage, the sweet Face that betwich'd her? Indeed and indeed, I often
survey your Worship from the Tip of your Toe to the topmost hair on your Crown;
and not to flatter you, I can see nothing in you, but what is more likely to
scare one, than to make one fall in Love. I Have heard that Beauty is the first
and chief Thing that begets Love; now you not having any, an't like your
Worship, I cannot guess what the poor Soul was smitten with. Take notice Sancho,
answered Don Quixote, that there are two Sorts of Beauty, the one of the Soul,
and the other of the Body. That of the Soul lies and displays it self in the
Understanding, in Principles of Honor and Virtue, in a handsome Behavior, in
Generosity and good Breeding; all which Qualities may be found in a Person not
so accomplished in outward Features. And when this Beauty, and not that of the
Body, is the Object of Love, then the Assaults of that Passion are much more
fierce, more surprising and effectual. Now Sancho, though I am sensible I am
not handsome, I know at the same time I Am not deformed; and provided an honest
Man be possessed of the Endowments of the Mind which I have mentioned, and
nothing appears monstrous in him, it is enough to entitle him to the Love of a
reasonable Creature.

Thus discoursing they got into a Wood quite out of the Road, and on a sudden
Don Quixote, before he knew where he was, found himself entangl'd in some Nets
of green Thread, that were spread across among the Trees. Not being able to
imagine what it was, certainly, Sancho, cried he, this Adventure of the Nets
must be one of the most unaccountable that can be imagined. Let me die now if
this be not a Stratagem of the evil-minded Necromancers that haunt me, to
entangle me so that I may not proceed, as it were, to revenge my Contempt of
Altisidora's Addresses. But let 'em know, that though these Nets were Adamantine
Chains, as they are only made of green Thread, and though they were stronger
than those in which the jealous God of Blacksmiths caught Venus and Mars, I
would break them with as much Ease as if they were weak Rushes, or fine
Cotton-Yarn. With that the Knight put briskly forwards, resolved to break
through, and make his Words good; but in the very Moment there sprung from
behind the Trees two most beautiful Shepherdesses, at least they appeared to be
so by their Habits; only with this Difference, that they were richly dressed in
Gold Brocade. Their flowing Hair hung down about their Shoulders in Curls, as
charming as the Sun's Golden Rays, and circl'd on their Brows with Garlands of
green Bays and Red-flower-gentle interwoven. As for their Age, it seemed not
less than fifteen, nor more than eighteen Years. This unexpected Vision dazzl'd
and amazed Sancho, surpised Don Quixote, made even the gazing Sun stop short
in his Career, and held the surpised Parties a while in the same Suspense and
Silence; 'till at last one of the Shepherdesses opening her Coral-Lips, hold
Sir, she cried; pray do not tear those Nets which we have spread here, not to
offend you, but to divert our selves; and because it is likely you will enquire,
why they are spread here, and who we are, I shall tell you in few Words.

About two Leagues from this Place lies a Village, where there are many People
of Quality and good Estates; among these, several have made up a Company, all
of Friends, Neighbors, and Relations, to come and take their Diversion in this
Place, which is one of the most delightful in these Parts. To this purpose we
design to set up a new Arcadia. The young Men have put on the Habit of
Shepherds, and Ladies the Dress of Shepherdesses. We have got two Eclogues by
Heart; one out of the famous Garcilasso, and the other out of Camoen's, that
most excellent Portugueze Poet; though the Truth is, we have not yet repeated
them, for Yesterday was but the first Day of our coming hither. We have pitched
some Tents among the Trees, near the Banks of a large Brook that waters all
these Meadows. And last Night we spread these Nets, to catch such simple Birds
as our Calls should allure into the Snare. Now, Sir, if you please to afford us
your Company, you shall be made very welcome, and handsomely entertained; for
we are all disposed to pass the Time agreeably, and for a while banish
Melancholy from this Place. Truly, fair Lady, answered Don Quixote, Actaeon
could not be more lost in Admiration and Amazement, at the Sight of Diana
Bathing her self, than I was at the Appearance of your Beauty. I applaud the
Design of your Entertainment, and return you. Thanks for your obliging Offers;
assuring you, that if it lies in my Power to serve you, you may depend on my
Obedience to your Commands: For my Profession is the very Reverse of
Ingratitude, and aims at doing Good to all Persons, especially those of your
Merit and Condition; so that were these Nets spread over the Surface of the
whole Earth, I would seek out a Passage through new Worlds, rather than I would
break the smallest Thread that conduces to your Pastime: And that you may give
some Credit to this seeming Exaggeration, know that he who makes this Promise
is no less than Don Quixote de la Mancha, if ever such a Name has reached your
Ears. Oh, my Dear, cried the other Shepherdess, what good Fortune this is! You
see this Gentleman before us: I must tell you, he is the most valiant, the most
amorous, and the most complaisant Person in the World, if the History of his
Exploits already in Print, does not deceive us. I have read it, my Dear, and I
hold a Wager, that honest Fellow there by him is one Sancho Panca, his Squire,
the most comical Creature that ever was. You have nicked it, quoth Sancho, I am
that comical Creature, and that very Squire you wot of, and there is my Lord and
Master, the self-same hist'rify'd, and aforesaid Don Quixote de la Mancha. Oh
pray, my Dear, said the other, let us entreat him to stay, our Father, and our
Brothers will be mightily glad of it; I have heard of his Valor, and his Merit
as much as you now tell me; and what is more, they say he is the most constant
and faithful Lover in the World; and that his Mistress, whom they call Dulcinea
del Toboso, bears the Prize from all the Beauties in Spain. It Is not without
Justice, said Don Quixote; if your Peerless Charms do not dispute her that
Glory. But, Ladies, I beseech ye do not endeavor to detain me; for the
indispensable Duties of my Profession will not suffer me to rest in one Place.

At the same Time came the Brother of one of the Shepherdesses, clad like a
Shepherd, but in a Dress as splendid and gay as those of the young Ladies. They
told him that the Gentleman whom he saw with 'em was the valorous Don Quixote
de la Mancha, and that other, Sancho Panca, his Squire, of whom he had read the
History. The gallant Shepherd having saluted him, begged of him so earnestly to
grant 'em his Company to their Tents, that Don Quixote was forced to comply,
and go with them.

About the same Time the Nets were drawn and filled with diverse little Birds,
who being deceived by the Color of the Snare, fell into the Danger they would
have avoided. Above thirty Persons, all gayly dressed like Shepherds and
Shepherdesses, got together there, and being informed who Don Quixote and his
Squire were, they were not a little pleased, for they were already no Strangers
to his History. In short, they carried 'em to their Tents, where they found a
clean, sumptuous, and plentiful Entertainment ready. They obliged the Knight to
take the Place of Honor, and while they sat at Table, there was not one that
did not gaze on him, and wonder at so strange a Figure. At last, the Cloth
being removed, Don Quixote, with a great deal of Gravity, lifting up his Voice,
Of all the Sins that Men commit, said he, none, in my Opinion, is so great as
Ingratitude, though some think Pride a greater; and I ground my Assertion on
this, That Hell is said to be full of the Ungrateful. Ever since I have had the
Use of Reason, I have used the utmost Endeavors to avoid this Crime; and if I
am not able to repay the Besits I receive in their Kind, at least I am not
wanting in real Intentions of making suitable Returns; and if that be not
sufficient, I make my Acknowledgments as public as I can; for he that
proclaims the Kindnesses he has received, shows his Disposition to repay 'em if
he could; and those that receive are generally inferior to those that give.
The Supreme Being, that is infinitely above all Things, bestows his Blessings
on us so much beyond the Capacity of all other Benefactors, that all the
Acknowledgments we can make, can never hold Proportion with his Goodness.
However, a thankful Mind in some measure supplies its Want of Power with hearty
Desires, and unfeigned Expressions of a Sense of Gratitude and Respect. I am in
this Condition as to the Civilities I have been treated with here; for I am
unable to make an Acknowledgment equal to the Kindnesses I have received. I
shall therefore only offer ye what is within the narrow Limits of my own
Abilities; which is, to maintain, for two whole Days together, in the Middle of
the Road that leads to Saragosa, that these Ladies here disguised in the Habit
of Shepherdesses, are the fairest and most courteous Damsels in the World,
excepting only the peerless Dulcinea del Toboso, sole Mistress of my Thoughts;
without Offense to all that hear me be it spoken.

Here Sancho, who had with an uncommon Attention all the While given Ear to his
Master's Compliment, thought fit to put in a Word or two. Now in the Name of
Wonder, quoth he, can there be any Body in the World so impudent as to offer to
swear, or but to say, this Master of mine is a Madman? Pray tell me, ye
Gentlemen Shepherds, did you ever know any of your Country Parsons, though
never so wise, or so good Scholards, that could deliver themselves so finely?
Or is there any of your Knight-Errants, though never so famed for Prowess, that
can make such an Offer as he here has done. Don Quixote turned toward Sancho,
and beholding him with Eyes full of fiery Indignation: Can there be any Body in
the World, cried he, that can say thou art not an incorrigible Blockhead,
Sancho, a Compound of Folly and Knavery, of whom Malice is no small Ingredient?
Who bids thee meddle with my Concerns, Fellow, or busy thy self with my Folly
or Discretion? Hold your saucy Tongue, Scoundrel! Make no Reply, but go and
saddle Rosinante, if he is unsaddl'd, that I may immediately perform what I
have offered; for in so noble and so just a Cause thou may reckon all those
who shall presume to oppose me, subdued and overthrown. This said, up he
started, in a dreadful Fury, and with Marks of Anger in his Looks, to the
Amazement of all the Company, who were at a loss whether they should esteem him
a Madman or a Man of Sense: They endeavored to prevail with him to lay aside
his Challenges, telling him, they were sufficiently assured of his grateful
Nature, without exposing him to the Danger of such Demonstrations; and as for
his Valor, they were so well informed by the History of his numerous
Achievements, that there was no need of any new Instance to convince 'em of
it. But all these Representations could not dissuade him from his Purpose; and
therefore having mounted Rosinante, braced his Shield, and grasped his Lance,
he went and posted himself in the Middle of the Highway, not far from the
verdant Meadow, followed by Sancho on his Dapple, and all the pastoral Society,
who were desirous to see the Event of that arrogant and unaccountable
Resolution. And now the Champion having taken his Ground, made the
Neighbouring-Air ring with the following Challenge. O ye, whoever you are,
Knights, Squires, a'foot, or o'Horse-back, that now pass, or shall pass this
Road within these two Days, know that Don Quixote de la Mancha, Knight Errant,
stays here, to assert and maintain, that the Nymphs, who inhabit these Groves
and Meadows, surpass in Beauty and courteous Disposition, all those in the
Universe, setting aside the Sovereign of my Soul, the Lady Dulcinea del Toboso.
And he that dares uphold the contrary, let him appear, for here I expect his
coming. Twice he repeated these lofty Words, and twice they were repeated in
vain, not being heard by any Adventurer. But his old Friend Fortune, that had a
strange Hand at managing his Concerns, and always mended upon it, showed him a
jolly Sight, for by and by he discovered on the Road a great Number of People a
Horseback, many of 'em with Lances in their Hands, all trooping together very
fast. The Company that watched Don Quixote's Motions, no sooner spied such a
Squadron, driving the Dust before 'em, but they got out of Harm's Way, not
judging it safe to be so near Danger: And as for Sancho, he sheltered himself
behind Rosinante's Crupper. Only Don Quixote stood fixed with an undaunted
Courage. When the Horsemen came near, one of the foremost bawling to the
Champion, So hey! cried he! get out of the Way, and be hanged. The Devil's in
the Fellow! Stand off, or the Bulls will tread thee to Pieces. Go to, ye
Scoundrels, answered Don Quixote, none of your Bulls can avail with me, though
the fiercest that ever were Fed on the Banks of Xarama. Acknowledge, Hang-dogs,
all in a Body, what I have proclaimed here to be Truth, or else stand Combat
with me. But the Cow-herd had not Time to Answer, neither had Don Quixote any
left to get out of the Way, if he had been inclined to it; for the Herd of Wild
Bulls were presently upon him, as they poured along, with several tame Cows,
and a huge Company of Drivers and People that went to a Town where they were to
be baited the next Day. So bearing down all before 'em, Knight and Squire,
Horse and Man, they trampled 'em under foot at an unmerciful Rate. There lay
Sancho mawl'd, Don Quixote stunned, Dapple bruised, and Rosinante in very
indifferent Circumstances. But for all this, after the whole Rout of Men and
Beasts were gone by, up started Don Quixote, ere he was thoroughly come to
himself; and staggering, and stumbling, falling, and getting up again, as fast
as he could, he began to run after them: Stop, Scoundrels, stop, cried he
aloud, stay, it is a single Knight defies ye all, one who scorns the Humor of
making a Golden Bridge for a Flying Enemy. But the hasty Travelers did not
stop nor slacken their Speed for all his loud Defiance; and minded it no more
than the last Year's Snow.

At last Weariness stopped Don Quixote; so that, with all his Anger, and no
Prospect of Revenge, he was forced to sit down in the Road till Sancho came up
to him with Rosinante and Dapple. Then the Master and Man made a shift to
remount, and ashamed of their bad Success hastened their Journey, without
taking leave of their Friends of the New Arcadia.

CHAP. LIX. Of an extraordinary Accident that happened to Don Quixote, which
way well pass for an Adventure.
A Clear Fountain, which Don Quixote and Sancho found among some verdant Trees,
served to refresh 'em, besmeared with Dust, and tired as they were, after the
rude Encounter of the Bulls. There by the Brink, leaving Rosinante and Dapple
unbridl'd and unhalter'd, to their own Liberty, the two forlorn Adventurers
sat down. Sancho washed his Mouth, and Don Quixote his Face. The Squire then
went to his old Cupboard, the Wallet; and having taken out of it what he used
to call Belly-Timber, laid it before the Knight: But Don Quixote would eat
nothing for pure Vexation, and Sancho durst not begin for pure good Manners,
expecting that he would first show him the Way. However, finding him so wrapped
in his Imaginations as to have no Thoughts of lifting his Hand up to his Mouth,
the Squire, without letting one Word come out of his, laid aside all Kind of
good Breeding, and began to stuff his hungry Maw with what Bread and Cheese he
had before him. Ear, Friend Sancho, cried Don Quixote; repair the Decays of
Nature, and sustain Life, which thou have more Reason to cherish than I; leave
me to dye abandoned to my Sorrows, and the Violence of my Misfortunes. I was
born, Sancho, to Live Dying, and thou to Dye Eating. And that thou may be
convinced I tell thee Truth, do but reflect upon me, famous in Histories,
dignified with the Honor of the Press, renowned for Feats of Arms, courteous
in Behavior, respected by Princes, beloved, and importuned by Damsels; yet
after all this, when I at last flattered my self with Hopes of Laurels,
Triumphs and Crowns, the Reward merited by my valorous Achievements, behold me
trod under Foot, trampled like the Highway Dirt, Kicked and Bruised by the
Hoofs of vile and filthy Beasts. The Thought dulls the Edge of my Teeth, and of
my Appetite; unhinges my Jaws, benums my Hands, and stupifies my Senses; and
fearing more to live than to dye, I am resolved almost to starve my self;
though to dye with Hunger be the most cruel of all Deaths. So that belike,
quoth Sancho, (without losing any Time in Chewing) you will not make good the
Saying, It Is good to dye with a full Belly? For my Part, I am not so simple yet
as to kill my self. No, I am like the Cobbler, that stretches his Leather with
his Teeth: I am for lengthening my Life by Eating, and I Will stretch it with my
Grinders as far as Heaven will let it run. Faith and Troth, Master, there is no
greater Folly in this World than for a Man to despair, and throw the Helve
after the Hatchet. Therefore take my Advice, fall to, and eat as I do, and when
you have done, lie down and take a Nap; the fresh Grass here will do as well as
a Feather-bed. I dare say, by that Time you 'wake, you will find your self better
in Body and Mind.

Don Quixote followed Sancho's Counsel; for he was convinced the Squire spoke
good Natural Philosophy at that time. However, in the mean While a Thought
coming into his Mind, Ah! Sancho, said he, if thou would but do something
that I am now going to desire thee, my Cares would sit more easy on me, and my
Comfort would be more certain. It Is only this; While, according to thy Advice,
I try to compose my Thoughts with Sleep, do thou but step aside a little, and
exposing thy Back-Parts bare in the open Air, take the Reins of Rosinante's
Bridle, and give thy self some three or four Hundred smart Lashes; in Part of
the three Thousand and Odd thou art to receive to dis-enchant Dulcinea; for, in
truth, it is a Shame, and a very great Pity that poor Lady should remain
enchanted all this while, through thy Carelessness and Neglect. There Is a great
deal to be said, as to that, quoth Sancho; but that will keep cold, first let us
go sleep, and then come what will come: Heaven knows what will be done. Do you
think, Sir, it is nothing for a Man to flogg himself in cold Blood? I Would have you
to know, it is a cruel Thing, especially when the Lashes must light upon a Body,
so weak and horribly lined within as mine is. Let my Lady Dulcinea have a
little Patience, one of these Days, when she least dreams on it, she will see my
Skin pink'd and jagg'd like a flashed Doublet with Lashes. There Is nothing lost
that comes at ^^st; whilst there is Life there is Hopes; which is as good as to
say, I live with an Intent to make good my Promise. Don Quixote gave him
Thanks, eat something, and Sancho a great deal; and then both betook themselves
to their Rest; leaving those two constant Friends and Companions, Rosinante and
Dapple, to their own Discretion, to repose or feed at Random on the Pasture
that abounded in that Meadow.

The Day was now far gone when the Knight and the Squire waked; they mounted,
and held on their Journey, making the best of their Way to an Inn, that seemed
to be about a League distant. I call it an Inn, because Don Quixote himself
called it so, contrary to his Custom, it being a common Thing with him to take
Inns for Castles.

Being got thither, they asked the Innkeeper whether he had got any Lodging?
Yes, answered he, and as good Accommodation as you would wish to find in the City
of Saragosa. They alighted, and Sancho laid his Baggage in a Chamber, of which
the Landlord gave him the Key; and after he had seen Rosinante and Dapple well
provided for in the Stable, he went to wait on his Master, whom he found
sitting upon a Seat made in the Wall, the Squire blessing himself more than
once, that the Knight had not taken the Inn for a Castle. Supper-time
approaching, Don Quixote, retired to his Appartment, and Sancho staying with
the Host, asked him what he had to give 'em for Supper? What you will, answered
he, you may pick and choose, Fish or Flesh, Butcher's Meat or Poultry,
Wild-Fowl, and what not? Whatever Land, Sea, and Air afford for Food, it is but
ask and have, every Thing is to be had in this Inn. There Is no need of all
this, quoth Sancho, a couple of roasted Chickens will do our Business; for my
Master has a ni^^ Stomach, and eats but little, and as for me, I am none of
your unreasonable Trencher-Men. As for Chickens, replied the Innkeeper, truly
we have none; for the Kites have devoured 'em. Why then, quoth Sancho, Roast us
a good handsome Pullet with Eggs, so it be young and tender. A Pullet, Master,
answered the Host? Faith and Troth, I sent above fifty Yesterday to the City to
sell; but setting aside Pullets, you may have any Thing else. Why then, quoth
Sancho, even give us a good Joint of Veal or Kid: Cry Mercy, replied the
Innkeeper, now I remember me, we have none left in the House, the last Company
that went, cleared me quite; but by next Week we shall have to spare. We are
finely holp'd up, quoth Sancho! Now will I hold a good Wager, all these Defects
must be made up with a Dish of Eggs and Bacon. Hey day, cried the Host, my
Guest has a rare Knack at guessing e'faith, I told him I had no Hens nor
Pullets in the House, and yet he would have me to have Eggs! Think on something
else, I beseech you, and let us talk no more of that. Body of me, cried Sancho,
let us come to something; tell me what thou have, good Mr. Landlord, and don't
put me to trouble my Brains any longer. Why then, do you see, quoth the Host, to
deal plainly with you, I have a delicate Pair of Cow-heels that look like
Calves-Feet, or a Pair of Calves Feet that look like Cow-heels, dressed with
Onions, Pease and Bacon; a Dish for a Prince, they are just ready to be taken
off, and by this Time they cry, come eat me, come eat me. Cow-heels, cried
Sancho! I set my Mark upon 'em. Let no body touch 'em. I Will give more for 'em
than any other shall. There Is nothing I love better. No body else shall have
'em, answered the Host; you need not fear, for all the Guests I have in the
House besides your selves are Persons of Quality, that carry their Steward,
their Cook, and their Provisions along with 'em. As for Quality, quoth Sancho,
my Master's a Person of as good Quality, as the proudest he of 'em all, an' you
go to that; but his Profession allows of no Larders nor Butteries. We commonly
clap us down in the Midst of a Field, and fill our Bellies with Acorns or
Medlars. This was the Discourse that passed betwixt Sancho and the Innkeeper;
for as to the Host's Interrogatories, concerning his Master's Profession,
Sancho was not then at Leisure to make him any Answer.

In short, Supper-time came, Don Quixote went to his Room, the Host brought the
Dish of Cow-heels, such as it was, and sat him down fairly to Supper. -- But at
the same Time, in the next Room, which was divided from that where they were,
by a slender Partition, the Knight overheard Somebody talking. Dear Don
Jeronimo, said the unseen Person, I beseech you, 'till Supper's brought in, let
us read another Chapter of the Second Part of Don Quixote. The Champion no
sooner heard himself named, but up he started, and listened with attentive Ears
to what was said of him, and then he heard that Don Jeronimo answer, Why would
you have us read Nonsense, Senior Don John? Methinks any one that has read the
first Part of Don Quixote, should take but little Delight in reading the
Second. That may be, replied Don John, however, it may not be amiss to read it;
for there is no Book so bad, as not to have something that is good in it. What
displeases me most in this Part, is, that it represents Don Quixote no longer
in Love with Dulcinea del Toboso. Upon these Words, Don Quixote burning with
Anger and Indignation, cried out, Whoever says that Don Quixote de la Mancha
has forgot, or can forget Dulcinea del Toboso, I will make him know with equal
Arms, that he deviates wholly from the Truth; for the peerless Dulcinea del
Toboso cannot be forgotten, nor can Don Quixote be guilty of Forgetfulness.
Constancy is his Motto; and to preserve his Fidelity with Pleasure, and without
the least Constraint, is his Profession. Who Is that answers us? cries one of
those in the next Room: Who should it be, quoth Sancho, but Don Quixote de la
Mancha his nown self, the same that will make good all he has said, and all
that he has to say, take my Word for it: For a good Play Master never grudges to
give Security.

Sancho had no sooner made that Answer, but in came the two Gentlemen (for they
appeared to be no less) and one of 'em throwing his Arms about Don Quixote's
Neck, Your Presence, Sir Knight, said he, does not belie your Reputation, nor
can your Reputation fail to raise a Respect for your Presence. You are
certainly the true Don Quixote de la Mancha, the North-Star, and Luminary of
Chivalry-Errant, in despite of him that has attempted to usurp your Name, and
annihilate your Achievements, as the An Arragonian published a Book, which he
called the Second Part of Don Quixote, before our Author had printed this. See
the Preface of this Second Part, and the Account of Cervantes's Life.
Author of this Book, which I here deliver into your Hand, has presumed to do.
With that, he took the Book from his Friend, and gave it to Don Quixote. The
Knight took it, and without saying a Word, began to turn over the Leaves; and
then returning it a while after; in the little I have seen, said he, I have
found three Things that deserve Reprehension. First I find fault with some
Words in this Preface. In the second Place, his Language is Arragonian, for
sometimes he writes without Articles; and the third Thing I have observed,
which betrays most his Ignorance, is he is out of the Way in one of the
principal Parts of the History: For there he says, that the Wife of my Squire
Sancho Pansa is called Mary Gutierrez, which is not true; for her Name is
Teresa Pansa; and he that errs in so considerable a Passage, may well be
suspected to have committed many gross Errors through the whole History. A
pretty impudent Fellow, is this same History writer, cried Sancho! Sure he
knows much what belongs to our Concerns, to call my Wife Teresa Pansa, Mary
Gutierrez! Pray take the Book again, an't like your Worship, and see whether he
says any thing of me, and whether he has not changed my Name too. Sure, by what
you have said, honest Man, said Don Jeronimo, you should be Sancho Panca, Squire
to Senior Don Quixote? So I am, quoth Sancho, and I am proud of the Office.
Well, said the Gentleman, to tell you Truth, the last Author does not treat you
so civilly as you seem to deserve. He represents you as a Glutton and a Fool,
without the least Grain of Wit or Humor, and very different from the Sancho we
have in the first Part of your Master's History. Heaven forgive him, quoth
Sancho; he might have left me where I was, without offering to meddle with me.
Every Man's Nose will not make a Shooeing-Horn. Let Us leave the World as it is.
St. Peter is very well at Rome. Presently the two Gentlemen invited Don Quixote
to sup with 'em in their Chamber; for they knew there was nothing to be got in
the Inn fit for his Entertainment. Don Quixote, who was always very
complaisant, could not deny their Request, and went with 'em. So Sancho
remained Lord and Master, with his Flesh-Pot before him, and placed himself at
the Upper-End of the Table, with the Innkeeper for his Mess-Mate; for he was
no less a Lover of Cow-Heels than the Squire.

While Don Quixote was at Supper with the Gentlemen, Don John asked him when he
had heard of the Lady Dulcinea del Toboso? Whether she were married? Whether
she had any Children, or were with Child or no? Or whether continuing still in
her Maiden State, and preserving her Honor and Reputation unstained, she had a
grateful Sense of the Love and Constancy of Signior Don Quixote? Dulcinea is
still a Virgin, answered Don Quixote, and my amorous Thoughts more fixed than
ever; our Correspondence after the old Rate, not frequent, but her Beauty
transformed into the homely Appearance of a Female Rustic. And with that, he
told the Gentlemen the whole Story of her being enchanted, what had befallen
him in the Cave of Montesinos, and the Means that the sage Merlin had
prescribed to free her from Enchantment, which was Sancho's Penance of three
Thousand three Hundred Lashes. The Gentlemen were extremely pleased to hear
ftom Don Quixote's own Mouth the strange Passages of his History, equally
wondering at the Nature of his Extravagancies, and his elegant Manner of
relating 'em. One Minute they looked upon him to be in his Senses, and the
next, they thought he had lost 'em all; so that they could not resolve what
Degree to assign him between Madness and sound Judgment.

By this Time Sancho having eat his Supper, and left his Landlord, moved to the
Room where his Master was with the two Strangers, and as he bolted in, Hang me,
quoth he, Gentlemen, if he that made the Book your Worships have seen, could
have a Mind that he and I should ever take a loving Cup together: I wish, as he
calls me Greedy-gut, he does not set me out for a Drunkard too. Nay, said Don
Jeronimo, he does not use you better as to that Point; though I cannot well
remember his Expressions. Only this I know, they are scandalous and false, as I
perceive by the Physiognomy of sober Sancho here present. Take my Word for it,
Gentlemen, quoth the Squire, the Sancho and the Don Quixote in your Book, I
don't know who they be, but they are not the same Men as those in Cid Hamet
Benengeli's History, for we two are they, just such as Benengeli makes us; my
Master valiant, discreet, and in Love, and I a plain, merry-conceited Fellow,
but neither a Glutton, nor a Drunkard. I believe you, said Don John, and I
could wish, were such a Thing possible, that all other Writers whatsoever were
forbidden to record the Deeds of the great Don Quixote, except Cid Hamet, his
first Author; as Alexander did forbid all other Painters to draw his Picture
except Apelles. Let any one draw mine, if he pleases, said Don Quixote; but let
him not abuse the Original; for when Patience is loaded with Injuries, many
times it sinks under its Burden. No Injury, replied Don John, can be offered to
Signior Don Quixote but what he is able to revenge, or at least, ward off with
the Shield of his Patience, which, in my Opinion, is great and strong.

In such Discourse they spent a good Part of the Night, and though Don John
endeavored to persuade Don Quixote to read more of the Book, to see how the
Author had handled his Subject, he could by no means prevail with him, the
Knight giving him to understand, he had enough of it, and as much as if he had
read it throughout, concluding it to be all of a Piece, and Nonsense all over;
and that he would not encourage the Scribbler's Vanity so far, as to let him
think he had read it, should it ever come to his Ears that the Book had fallen
into his Hands; well knowing we ought to avoid defiling our Imagination, and
with the nicest Care, our Eyes, with vile and obscene Matters.

They asked him which Way he was traveling; he told 'em he was going for
Saragosa, to make one at the Tournaments held in that City once a Year, for the
Prize of Armor. Don John acquainted him, that the pretended second Part of his
History gave an Account how Don Quixote, whoever he was, had been at Saragosa
at a public running at the Ring, the Description of which was wretched and
defective in the Contrivance, mean and low in the Style and Expression, and
miserably poor in Devices, and in other Show, but all made up of foolish idle
Stuff. For that Reason, said Don Quixote, I will not set a Foot in Saragosa,
and so the World shall see what a notorious Lie this new Historian is guilty
of, and all Mankind shall perceive I am not the Don Quixote he speaks of. You
will do very well, said Don Jeronimo; besides there is another Tournament at
Barcelona, where you may signalize your Valor. I design to do so, replied Don
Quixote: And so Gentlemen, give me Leave to bid you good Night, and permit me
to go to Bed (for it is Time;) and pray place me in the Number of your best
Friends, and most faithful Servants. And me too, quoth Sancho; for mayhap you
may find me good for something.

Having taken Leave of one another, Don Quixote and Sancho retired to their
Chamber, leaving the two Strangers in Admiration to think what a Medley the
Knight had made of good Sense and Extravagance: Both fully satisfied however,
that these two Persons were the true Don Quixote and Sancho, and not those
obtruded upon the Public by the Arragonian Author.

Early in the Morning Don Quixote got up, and knocking at the thin Wall that
parted his Chamber from that of the Gentlemen, he took his Leave of 'em Sancho
paid the Host nobly, but advised him either to keep better Provision in his
Inn, or to commend it less.

CHAP. LX. What happened to Don Quixote going to Barcelona.
THE Morning was cool, and seemed to promise a temperate Day, when Don Quixote
left the Inn, having first informed himself, which was the readiest Way to
Barcelona; for he was resolved he would not so much as see Saragosa, that he
might prove that new Author a Lier, who (as he was told) had so misrepresented
him in the pretended second Part of his History. For the Space of six Days he
traveled, without meeting any Adventure worthy of Memory; but the seventh,
having lost his Way, and being overtaken by the Night, he was obliged to stop
in a Thicket, either of Oaks or Cork-trees; for in this Cid Hamet does not
observe the same Punctuality he has kept in other Matters. There both Master
and Man dismounted, and laying themselves down at the Foot of the Trees;
Sancho, who had handsomely filled his Belly that Day, easily resigned himself
into the Arms of Sleep. But Don Quixote, whom his Chimera's kept awake much
more than Hunger, could not so much as close his Eyes; his working Thought
being hurried to a thousand several Places. This Time he fancied himself in
Montesino's Cave, fancied he saw his Dulcinea (perverted as she was into a
Country-Hoyden) jump at a single Leap upon her Ass-Colt. The next Moment he
thought he heard the sage Merlin's Voice, heard him in awful Words relate the
Means required to effect her Dis enchantment. Presently a Fit of Despair seized
him: He was stark mad to think on Sancho's Remisness and Want of Charity; the
Squire having not given himself above five Lashes, a small and inconsiderable
Number in proportion to the Quantity of the Penance still behind. This
Reflection so nettl'd him, and so aggravated his Vexation, that he could not
forbear thinking on some extraordinary Methods. If Alexander the Great, thought
he, when he could not untie the Gordian Knot, said, it is the same Thing to cut,
or to undo, and so slashed it asunder, and yet became the Sovereign of the
World, why may not I free Dulcinea from Enchantment, by whipping Sancho my
self, whether he will or no? For if the Condition of this Remedy consist in
Sancho's receiving three thousand and odd Lashes, what does it signify to me,
whether he gives himself those Blows, or another gives 'em him, since the
Stress lies upon his receiving 'em, by what means soever they are given? Full
of that Conceit he came up to Sancho, having first taken the Reins of
Rosinante's Bridle, and fitted 'em to his Purpose of lashing him with 'em. He
then began to untruss Sancho's Points, and it is a received Opinion, he had but
one that was used before, and held up his Breeches; but he no sooner fell to
work, but Sancho started out of his Sleep, and was thoroughly awake in an
Instant. What Is here, cried he? Who Is that fumbles about me, and untrusses my
Points? It Is I, answered Don Quixote, I am come to repair thy Negligence, and
to seek the Remedy of my Torments. I come to whip thee, Sancho, and to
discharge, in Part at least, that Debt for which thou stand'st engaged.
Dulcinea perishes, while thou live careless of her Fate, and I die with
Desire. Untruss therefore freely and willingly: For I am resolved, while we are
here alone in this Recess, to give thee at least two Thousand Stripes.

Hold you there, quoth Sancho. Pray be quiet, will you. Body of me, let me
alone, or I protest deaf Men shall hear us. The Jirks I Am bound to give my self
are to be voluntary, and not forced; and at this Time I have no Mind to be
whipped at all: Let it suffice that I promise you to firk and scourge my self,
when the Humor takes me. No, said Don Quixote, there is no standing to thy
Courtesy, Sancho; for thou art hard-hearted; and, though a Clown, yet thou art
tender of thy Flesh; and so saying, he strove with all his Force to untie the
Squire's Points. Which, when Sancho perceived, he started up on his Legs, and
setting upon his Master, closed with him, tripp'd up his Heels, threw him
fairly upon his Back; and then set his Knee upon his Breast, and held his Hands
fast, so that he could hardly stir, or fetch his Breath. Don Quixote
overpowered thus, cried, How now Traitor! What, rebel against thy Master,
against thy natural Lord, against him that gives thee Bread! I neither mar
King, nor make King, quoth Sancho, I do but defend my self, that am Lord of my
self. If your Worship will promise to let me alone, and give over the Thoughts
of Whipping me at this Time, I Will let you rise, and will leave you at Liberty;
if not, here thou dy'st, Traitor to Donna Sancha Don Quixote gave his Parole of
Honor, and swore by the life of his best Thoughts, not to touch so much as a
Hair of Sancho's Coat, but entirely to leave it to his Discretion to whip
himself when he thought fit. With that, Sancho got up from him, and removed his
Quarters to another Place at a good Distance, but as he went to lean against
another Tree, he perceived Something bobbing at his Head, and, lifting up his
Hands, found it to be a Man's Feet with Shoes and Stockings on Quaking for
fear, he moved off to another Tree, where the like impending Horror dangl'd
over his Head. Straight he called out to Don Quixote for Help. Don Quixote
came, and inquiring into the Occasion of his Fright, Sancho answered, that all
those Trees were full of Men's Feet and Legs. Don Quixote began to search and
grope about, and falling presently into the Account of the Business, fear
nothing, Sancho, said he, there is no Danger at all; for what thou feel'st in
the dark are certainly the Feet and Legs of some Banditti and Robbers, that
have been hanged up on these Trees; for here the Officers of Justice hang 'em
up by twenties and thirties in Clusters, by which I suppose we cannot be far
from Barcelona; and indeed he guessed right.

And now Day breaking, they looked up, and plainly discerned the Bodies of the
High-way-men hanging on the Trees: But if the dead surpised 'em, how much more
were they disturbed at the Appearance of above forty live Banditti, who poured
upon 'em, and surrounded 'em on a sudden, charging 'em in the Gatalan Tongue,
to stand till their Captain came.

Don Quixote found himself on Foot, his Horse unbridl'd, his Lance against a
Tree at some Distance, and in short, void of all Defense; and therefore he was
forced to put his Arms across, hold down his Head, and sh^^g up his Shoulders,
reserving himself for a better Opportunity. The Robbers presently fell to Work,
and began to rifle Dapple, leaving on his Back nothing of what he carried,
either in the Wallets or the Clo^k bag; and 'twas very well for Sancho, that
the Duke's Pieces of Gold, and those he brought from home, were hid in a Girdle
about his Waste; though for all that, those honest Gentlemen would certainly
have taken the Pains to have searched and surveyed him all over, and would have
had the Gold, though they had stripped him of his Skin to come at it. But by good
Fortune their Captain came in the Interim. He seemed about four and thirty
Years of Age, his Body robust, his Stature tall, his Visage austere, and his
Complexion swarthy. He was mounted on a lusty Horse, wore a Coat of Steel, and
no less than two Pistols on each Side. Perceiving that his Squires (for so they
call Men of that Profession in those Parts) were going to strip Sancho, he
ordered 'em to forbear, and was instantly obeyed, by which means the Girdle
escaped. He wondered to see a Lance reared up against a Tree, a Shield on the
Ground, and Don Quixote in Armor and pensive, with the saddest melancholic
Countenance that Sadness it self could frame Coming up to him, be not so sad,
honest Man, said he; you have not fallen into the Hands of some cruel Bus^^^s,
but into those of Roque Guinart, a Man rather compassionate than severe. I am
not sad, answered Don Quixote, for having fallen into thy Power, valorous
Roque, whose boundless Fame spreads through the Universe, but for having been so
remiss as to be surpised by thy Soldiers with my Horse unbridl'd, whereas,
according to the Order of Chivalry-Errant, which I profess, I am obliged to
live always upon my Guard, and at all Hours be my own Sentinel; for let me tell
thee, great Roque, had they met me mounted on my Steed, armed with my Shield
and Lance, they would have found it no easy Task to make me yield; for, know I
am Don Quixote de la Mancha, the same whose Exploits are celebrated through all
the habitable Globe.

Roque Guinart found out immediately Don Quixote's blind Side, and judged there
was more Madness than Valor in the Case: Now, though he had several Times
heard him mentioned in Discourse, he could never believe what was related of
him to be true, nor could he be persuaded that such a Humor should reign in
any Man; for which Reason he was very glad to have met him, that Experience
might convince him of the Truth. Therefore addressing himself to him, Valorous
Knight, said he, vex not your self, nor tax Fortune with Unkindness, for it may
happen, that what you look upon now as a sad Accident may redound to your
Advantage; for Heaven, by strange and unaccountable Ways, beyond the Reach of
humane Imagination, uses to raise up those that are fallen, and fill the Poor
with Riches, Don Quixote was going to return him Thanks, when from behind 'em
they heard a Noise like the trampling of several Horses, though it was
occasioned but by one, on which came full speed a Person that looked like a
young Gentleman, about twenty Years of Age. He was clad in green Damask edged
with Gold Galloon suitable to his Wastecoat, a Hat turned up behind, straight
Wax'd-leather Boots, his Spurs, Sword and Dagger gilt, a light Birding-piece in
his Hand, and a Case of Pistols before him. Roque having turned his Head at the
Noise, discovered the handsome Apparition, which approaching nearer spoke to
him in this manner.

You are the Gentleman I looked for, valiant Roque; for with you I may perhaps
find some Comfort, though not a Remedy in my Affliction. In short, not to hold
you in Suspense (for I am sensible you don't know me) I Will tell you who I am.
My Name is Claudia Jeronima; I am the Daughter of your particular Friend Simon
Forte, sworn Foe to Clauquel Torrellas, who is also your Enemy, being one of
your adverse Faction. You already know, this Torrellas had a Son whom they call
Don Vincente Torrellas, at least he was called so within these two Hours. That
Son of his, to be short in my sad Story, I Will tell you in four Words what
Sorrow he has brought me to. He saw me, courted me, was heard, and was beloved.
Our Amor was carried on with so much Secrecy that my Father knew nothing of
it; for there is no Woman, though ever so retired and closely looked to, but
can find Time enough to compass and fulfill her unruly Desires. In short, he
made me a Promise of Marriage, and I the like to him, but without proceeding
any further. Now Yesterday I understood, that, forgetting his Engagements to
me, he was going to wed another, and that they were to be married this Morning;
a Piece of News that quite distracted me, and made me lose all Patience.
Therefore, my Father being out of Town, I took the Opportunity of equipping my
self as you see, and by the Speed of this Horse overtook Don Vincente about a
League hence, where, without urging my Wrongs, or staying to hear his Excuses,
I fired at him, not only with this Piece, but with both my Pistols, and, as I
believe, shot him through the Body, thus with his Heart's-Blood washing away
the Stains of my Honor. This done, there I left him to his Servants, who
neither dared nor could prevent the sudden Execution; and came to seek your
Protection, that by your Means I may be conducted into France, where I have
Relations to entertain me; and withal to beg of you to defend my Father from
Don Vincente's Party, who might otherwise revenge his Death upon our Family.

Roque admiring at once the Resolution, agreeable Deportment, and handsome
Figure of the beautiful Claudia; come, Madam, said he, let us first be afford
of your Enemy's Death, and then consider what is to be done for you. Hold,
cried Don Quixote, who had hearkened with great Attention to all this
Discourse, none of ye need trouble your selves with this Affair; the Defense of
the Lady is my Province. Give me my Horse and Arms, and stay for me here, I
will go and find out this Knight, and, dead or alive, force him to perform his
Obligations to so great a Beauty. Ay, ay, quoth Sancho, you may take his Word
for it; my Master has a rare Stroke at making Matches: It Is but the other Day he
made a young Rogue yield to marry a Maid whom he would have left in the Lurch,
after he was promised to her; and had it not been for the Inchanters, that
plague his Worship, who transmogrify'd the Bridegroom into a Footman, and broke
off the Match, the said Maid had been none by this Time.

Roque was so much taken up with the Thoughts of Claudia's Adventure, that he
little minded either Master or Man; but ordering his Squires to restore what
they had taken from Dapple to Sancho, and to retire to the Place where they had
quartered the Night before, he went off upon the Spur with Claudia, to find the
expiring Don Vincente. They got to the Place where Claudia met him, and found
nothing but the Marks of Blood newly spilt; but looking round about 'em; they
discovered a Company of People at a Distance on the Side of a Hill, and
presently judged 'em to be Don Vincente carried by his Servants either to his
Cure or Burial. They hasted to overtake 'em, which they soon effected, the
others going but slowly; and they found the young Gentl^man in the Arms of his
Servants, desiring 'em with a spent and fainting Voice to let him die in that
Place, his Wounds paining him so that he could not bear going any further.
Claudia and Roque dismounting, hastily came up to him. The Servants were
startled at the Appearance of Roque, and Claudia was troubled at the Sight of
Don Vincente, and divided between Anger and Compassion, had you given me this,
and made good your Promise, (said she to him, laying hold of his Hand) you had
never brought this Misfortune upon your self. The wounded Gentleman lifting up
his languishing Eyes, and knowing Claudia, now do I see, said he, my fair
deluded Mistress, it is you that have given me the fatal Blow, a Punishment
never deserved by the innocent unfortunate Vincente, whose Actions and Desires
knew no End, beyond the Service of his Claudia. What, Sir, answered she
presently, can you deny that you went this Morning to marry Leonora, the
Daughter of wealthy B^lvastro? It Is all a false Report, answered he, raised by
my evil Stars to increase your Jealousy against my Life, which since I leave
in your fair Hands, I reckon well disposed of; and to confirm this Truth, give
me your Hand and receive mine, the last Pledge of Love and Life, and take me
for your Husband; it is the only Satisfaction I have to give for the imaginary
Wrong you suspect I have committed. Claudia pressed his Hand, and being pierced
at once to the very Heart, dropped on his bloody Breast into a Swoon, and Don
Vincente fainted away into a deadly Trance.

Roque's Concern struck him senseless, and the Servants ran for Water to throw
in the Faces of the unhappy Couple; by which at last Claudia came to her self
again, but Don Vincente never waked from his Trance, but breathed out the last
Remainder of his Life. When Claudia perceived this, and could no longer doubt
but that her dear Husband was irrecoverably dead, she burst the Air with her
Sighs, and wounded the Heavens with her Complaints. She tore her Hair,
scattered it in the Wind and with her merciless Hands disfigured her Face,
showing all the lively Marks of Grief that the first Sallies of Despair can
discover. O cruel and inconsiderate Woman, cried she, how easily wast thou s^t
on this barbarous Execution! Oh madding Sting of Jealousy, how desperate are
thy Motions, and how tragic the Effects! Oh my unfortunate Husband, whose
sincere Love and Fidelity to me have thus for his nuptial Bed brought him to
the cold Grave! Thus the poor Lady went on in so sad and moving a Strain, that
even Roque's rugged Temper now melted into Tears, which on all Occasions had
still been Strangers to his Eyes. The Servants wept and lamented, Claudia
relapsed into her Swooning as fast as they found means to bring her to Life
again; and the whole Appearance was a most moving Scene of Sorrow. At last
Roque Guinart bid Don Vincente's Servants carry his Body to his Father's House,
which was not far distant, in order to have it buried. Claudia communicated to
Roque her Resolution of retiring into a Monastery, where an Aunt of hers was
Abbess, there to spend the rest of her Life, wedded to a better and an immortal
Bridegroom. He commended her pious Resolution, offering to conduct her whither
she pleased, and to protect her Father and Family from all Assaults and
Practices of their most dangerous Enemies. Claudia made a modest Excuse for
declining his Company, and took Leave of him weeping Don Vincente's Servants
carried off the dead Body, and Roque returned to his Men. Thus ended Claudia
Jeronima's Amor, brought to so lamentable a Catastrophe by the prevailing
Force of a cruel and desperate Jealousy.

Roque Guinart found his Crew where he had appointed, and Don Quixote in the
Middle of 'em, mounted on Rosinante, and declaiming very copiously against
their Way of living, at once dangerous to their Bodies, and destructive to
their Souls; but his Auditory being chiefly composed of Gascoigns, a wild
unruly Kind of People, all his Morality was thrown away upon 'em. Roque upon
his Arrival asked Sancho, if they had restored him all his Things; every Thing,
Sir, answered Sancho, but three Night-Caps, that are worth a King's Ransom.
What says the Fellow, cried one of the Robbers? Here they be, and they are not
worth three Sices. As to the intrinsic Value, replied Don Quixote, they may be
worth no more, but it is the Merit of the Person that gave 'em me that raises
their Value to that Price.

Roque ordered 'em to be restored immediately; and commanding his Men to draw
up in a Line, he caused all the Clothes, Jewels, Money, and all the other Booty
they had got since the last Repartition, to be brought before him; then readily
appraising every particular and reducing into Money what could not be divided,
he casts up the Account of the Whole, and then makes a just Dividend into
Parts, paying to every Man his exact and due Proportion with so much Prudence
and Equity, that he failed not in the least Point of distributive Justice. The
Booty thus shared to the general Satisfaction; if it were not for this punctual
Management (said Roque, turning to Don Quixote) there would be no living among
us. Well, quoth Sancho, Justice must needs be a good Thing, and the old Proverb
still holds good, Thieves are never Rogues among themselves. One of the
Banditti over-hearing him, cocked his Gun, and would certainly have shot him
through the Head, had not the Captain commanded him to hold. Poor Sancho was
struck as mute as a Fish, and resolved not to open his Lips once more, till he
got into better Company.

By this, came one or two of their Scouts that lay perdu on the Road, and
informed their Captain, that they had discovered a great Company of Travelers
on the way to Barcelona. Are they such as we look for, asked Roque, or such as
look for us? Such as we look for, Sir, answered the Fellow: Away then, cried
Roque, all of ye, my Boys, and bring 'em me hither straight, let none escape.
The Squires presently obeyed the Word of Command, and left Don Quixote, Roque
and Sancho to wait their Return. In the mean Time Roque entertained the Knight
with some Remarks on his Way of Living. I should not wonder, said he, Senior
Don Quixote, that our Life should appear to you a restless Complication of
Hazards and Disquiets; for it is no more than what daily Experience has made me
sensible of. You must know, that this Barbarity and austere Behavior which I
affect to show, is a pure Force upon my Nature; being urged to this Extremity
by the Resentment of some severe Injuries, which I could not put up without a
satisfactory Revenge, and now I am in, I must go through; one Sin draws on
another, in spite of my better Designs; and I am now involved in such a Chain
of Wrongs, Factious, Abettors, and Engagements, that no less than the Divine
Power of Providence can free me from this Maze of Confusions. Nevertheless I
despair not still of a successful End of my Misfortunes.

Don Quixote, being surpised to hear such sound Sense and sober Reflection
come from one whose disorderly Profession was so opposite to Discretion and
Politeness; Senior Roque, said he, it is a great Step to Health for a Man to
understand his Distemper, and the Compliance of the Patient to the Rules of
Physic is reckoned half the Cure. You appear sensible of the Malady, and
therefore may reasonably expect a Remedy, though your Disease being fixed by a
long Inveteracy, must subject you (I Am afraid) to a tedious Course The almighty
Physician will apply effectual Medicines: Therefore be of good Heart, and do
your Part toward the Recovery of your sick Conscience. If you have a Mind to
take the shortest Road to Happiness, immediately abandon the fatal Profession
you now follow, and come under my Tuition to be instructed in the Rules of
Knight-Errantry, which will soon expiate your Offenses, and entitle you to
Honor and true Felicity. Roque smiled to hear Don Quixote's serious Advice,
and changing the Discourse, gave him an Account of Claudia Jeronima's tragical
Adventure, which grieved Sancho to the Heart; for the Beauty, Life and Spirit
of the young Damsel had not a little wrought upon his Affections.

By this Time Roque's Party had brought in their Prize, consisting of two
Gentlemen on Horseback, and two Pilgrims on Foot, and a Coach full of Women,
attended by some half a dozen Servants a-foot and a-Horseback, besides two
Muleteers that belonged to the two Gentlemen. They were all conducted in solemn
Order, surrounded by the Victors, both they and the vanquished silent, and
expecting the definitive Sentence of the Grand Roque. He first asked the
Gentlemen who they were? Whither bound? And what Money they had about 'em? They
answered, that they were both Captains of Spanish Foot, that their Companies
were in Naples; and they designed to embark on one of the four Galleys, which
they heard were bound for Sicily, and their whole Stock amounted to two or
three hundred Crowns, which they thought a pretty Sum of Money for Men of their
Profession, who seldom use to hoard up Riches. The Pilgrims being examined in
like manner, said, they intended to embark for Rome, and had about some
threscore Reals between 'em both. Upon examining the Coach, he was informed by
one of the Servants, that my Lady Donna Guiomar de Quinonnes, Wife to a Judge
of Naples, with her little Daughter, a Chambermaid, and Duena, together with
six other Servants, had among 'em all about six hundred Crowns. So then, said
Roque, we have got here in all nine hundred Crowns and sixty Reals; I think I
have got about threescore Soldiers here with me. Now among so many Men how much
will fall to each particular Share? Let me see, for I am none of the best
Accomptants. Cast it up, Gentlemen. The Highway-men hearing this, cried, long
live Roque Guinart, and damn the Dogs that seek his Ruin. The Officers looked
simply, the Lady was sadly dejected, and the Pilgrims were no less cast down,
thinking this a very odd Confiscation of their little Stock. Roque held 'em a
while in suspense to observe their Humors, which he found all very plainly to
agree in that Point, of being melancholic for the Loss of their Money: Then
turning to the Officers, do me the favor, Captains, said he, to lend me
threescore Ducats; and you, Madam, if your Ladyship pleases, shall oblige me
with fourscore, to gratify these honest Gentlemen of my Squadron; it is our
whole Estate and Fortune; and you know, the Abbot dines, of what he Sings for.
Therefore I hope you will excuse our Demands, which will free you from any more
Disturbance of this nature, being secured by a Pass, which I shall give you,
directed to the rest of my Squadrons that are posted in these Parts, and who,
by virtue of my Order, will let you go unmolested; for I scorn to wrong a
Soldier, and I must not fail in my Respects, Madam, to the fair Sex, especially
to Ladies of your Quality.

The Captains with all the Grace they could, thanked him for his great Civility
and Liberality, for so they esteemed his letting them keep their own Money. The
Lady would have thrown her self out of the Coach at his Feet, but Roque would
not suffer it, rather excusing the Presumption of his Demands, which he was
forced to, in pure Compliance with the Necessity of his Fortune. The Lady then
ordered one of her Servants to pay immediately the fourscore Crowns. The
Officers disbursed their Quota, and the Pilgrims made an Oblation of their
Mite; but Roque ordering 'em to wait a little; and turning to his Men,
Gentlemen, said he, here are two Crowns a piece for each of you, and twenty
over and above. Now let us bestow ten of 'em on these poor Pilgrims, and the
other ten on this honest Squire, that he may give us a good Word in his
Travels. So calling for Pen, Ink and Paper, of which he always went provided,
he wrote a Passport for 'em, directed to the Commanders of his several Parties,
and taking his Leave, dismissed 'em, all wondering at his Greatness of Soul that
spoke rather an Alexander than a professed Highway-man. One of his Men began to
mutter in his Catalan Language: This Captain of ours is plaguey charitable, he
would make a better Friar than a Pad; come, come, if he has a Mind to be so
liberal forsooth, let his own Pocket, not ours pay for it. The Wretch spoke not
so low, but he was overheard by Roque, who whipping out his Sword, with one
stroke almost cleft his Skull in two. Thus it is I punish Mutiny, said he. All
the rest stood motionless, and durst not mutter one Word, so great was the Awe
they bore him. Roque then withdrew a little, and wrote a Letter to a Friend of
his in Barcelona, to let him know, that the famous Knight Errant Don Quixote,
of whom so many strange Things were reported, was with him; that he might be
sure to find him on Midsummer-day on the great Key of that City, armed at all
Points, mounted on Rosinante, and his Squire on an Ass; that he was the most
pleasant ingenious Coxcomb in Nature, and might make excellent Diversion to him
and his Friends the Niarros, who he desired might share in the Jest, which he
thought too good for the Cadells his Adversaries to partake of. He delivered
the Letter to one of his Men, who changing his Highway-cloaths to a
Country-man's Habit, went to Barcelona, and gave it as directed.

CHAP. LXI. Don Quixote's Entry, into Barcelona, with other Accidents that have
less Wisdom than Truth in 'em.
DON Quixote stayed three Days and three Nights with Roque, and had he tarried
as many hundred Years, he might have found Subject enough for Admiration in
that Kind of Life. They slept in one Place, and eat in another, sometimes
fearing they knew not what, then laying in wait for they knew not whom.
Sometimes forced to steal a Nap standing, never enjoying a sound Sleep. Now in
this Side the Country, then presently in another Quarter; always upon the
Watch, Spies harkening, Scouts listening, Carabines presenting; though of such
heavy Guns they had but few, being armed generally with Pistols. Roque himself
slept apart from the rest, making no Man privy to his Lodgings; for so many
were the Proclamations against him from the Viceroy of Barcelona, and such were
his Disquiets, and Fears of being betrayed by some of his Men for the Price of
his Head, that he durst trust no Body. A Life most miserable and uneasy.

At length, by Cross-roads, and By-ways, Roque, Don Quixote, and Sancho,
attended by six other Squires, got to the Strand of Barcelona on Midsummer-Eve
at Knight; where Roque, having embraced Don Quixote, and presented Sancho with
the ten Crowns he had promised him, took his Leave of 'em both, after many
Compliments on both Sides. Roque returned to his Company, and Don Quixote
stayed there waiting the Approach of Day, mounted as Roque left him. Not long
after, the fair Aurora began to peep through the Balconies of the East, cheering
the Flowery Fields, while at the same Time a melodious Sound of Hautboys and
Kettle-Drums cheered the Ears, and presently was joined with Jangling of
Morrice-Bells and the trampling of Horse, as if coming from the City. Now
Aurora ushered up the Jolly Sun, who looked big on the Verge of the Horizon,
with his broad Face as ample as a Target. Don Quixote, and Sancho, casting
their Looks abroad, discovered the Sea, which they had never seen before. To
'em it made a noble and spacious Appearance, far bigger than the Lake Ruydera,
which they saw in La Mancha. The Galleys in the Port taking in their Awnings,
made a pleasant Sight with their Flags and Streamers, that waved in the Air,
and sometimes kissed and swept the Water. The Trumpets, Hautboys and other
Warlike Instruments that resounded from on board, filled the Air all around
with a reviving and martial Harmony. A while after, the Galleys moving, began
to join on the calm Sea in a conterfeit Engagement; and at the same Time a vast
Number of Gentlemen marched out of the City nobly equipped, with rich Liveries,
and gallantly mounted, and in like manner did their Part on the Land, to
complete the warlike Entertainment. The Marines discharged numerous Vollies
from the Galleys, which were answered by the great Guns from the Battlements of
the Walls and Forts about the City, and the mighty Noise echoed from the
Galleys again by a Discharge of the long Pieces of Ordnance in their
Fore-castles. The Sea smiled and danced, the Land was gay, and the Sky serene
in every Quarter, but where the Clouds of Smoke dimmed it a while: Fresh Joy
sat smiling in the Looks of Men, and Gladness and Pomp were displayed in all
their Glory. Sancho was mightily puzzel'd though, to discover how these huge
bulky Things that moved on the Sea should have so many Feet.

By this Time the Gentlemen that maintained the Sports on the Shore, gallopping
up to Don Quixote with loud Acclamations, the Knight was not a little
astonished: One of 'em amongst the rest, who was the Person to whom Roque had
written, cried out aloud; Welcome, the Mirror, the Light, and North-Star of
Knight-Errantry! Welcome, I say, Valorous Don Quixote de la Mancha, not the
Counterfeit and Apocryphal, shown us lately in false Histories, but the true,
legitimate, and identick he, described by Cid Hamet, the Flower of
Historoigraphers! Don Quixote made no Answer, nor did the Gentleman stay for
any, but wheeling about with the rest of his Companions, all prancing round him
in token of Joy, they encompassed the Knight and the Squire. Don Quixote
turning about to Sancho, it seems, said he, these Gentlemen know us well. I
dare engage they have read our History, and that which the Arragonian lately
published. The Gentleman that spoke to the Knight, returning, Noble Don
Quixote, said he, we entreat you to come along with the Company, being all your
humble Servants, and Friends of Roque Guinart. Sir, answered Don Quixote, your
Courtesy bears such a Likeness to the great Roque's Generosity, that could
Civility beget Civility, I should take yours for the Daughter or near Relation
of his. I shall wait on you where you please to command, for I am wholly at
your Devotion: The Gentleman returned his Compliment, and so all of 'em
enclosi^g him in the Middle of their Brigade, they conducted him toward the
City, Drums beating, and Haut-boys playing before 'em all the Way. But as the
Devil and ill Luck would have it, or the Boys, who are more unlucky tha^ the
Devil himself, two mischievous young Bastards made a shift to get through the
Crowd of Horsemen, and one of 'em lifting up Resinante's Tail, and the other
that of Dapple, they thrust a Handful of Briers under each of 'em. The poor
Animals feeling such unusual Spurs applied to their Posteriors, clapped their
Tails close, and increased their Pain, and began to wince, and flounce, and
kick so furiously, that at last they threw their Riders, and laid both Master
and Man sprawling in the Street. Don Quixote, out of Countenance, and nettl'd
at his Disgrace, went to dis-engage his Horse from his new Plumage, and Sancho
did as much for Dapple, while the Gentlemen turned to chastise the Boys for
their Rudeness. But the young Rogues were safe enough, being presently lost
among a huge Rabble that followed. The Knight and Squire then mounted again,
and the Music and Procession went on, till they arrived at their Conductor's
House, which, by its Largeness and Beauty, bespoke the Owner Master of a great
Estate; where we leave him for the present, because it is Cid Hamet's Will and
Pleasure it shou d be so.

CHAP. LXII. The Adventure of the Enchanted Head, with other Impertinences not
to be omitted.
THE Person where Don Quixote lodged, was called Don Antonio Moreno, a
Gentleman of good Parts, and plentiful Fortune, loving all those Diversions
that may innocently be obtained without Prejudice to his Neighbors and not of
the Humor of those, who would rather lose their Friend than their Jest. He
therefore resolved to make his Advantage of Don Quixote's Follies without
Detriment to his Person.

In order to this, he persuaded the Knight to take off his Armor, and in his
straight-lac'd Chamois-Cloaths (as we have already shown him) to stand in a
Balcony that looked into one of the principal Streets of the City, where he
stood exposed to the Rabble that were got together; especially the Boys, who
gaped and star'd on him, as if he had been some overgrown Baboon. The several
Brigades of Cavaliers in their Liveries, began afresh to fetch their Careers
about him, as if the Ceremony were rather performed in Honor of Don Quixote
than any Solemnity of the Festival. Sancho was hugely pleased, fancying he had
chopp'd upon another Camachio's Wedding, or another House like that of D^n
Diego at Miranda, or some Castle like the Duke's.

Several of Don Antonio's Friends dined with him that Day, and all of 'em
honoring and respecting Don Quixote as a Knight Errant, they puffed up his
Vanity to such a Degree, that he could scarce conceal the Pleasure he took in
their Adulation. As for Sancho, he made such Sport to the Servants of the
House, and all that heard him, that they watched every Word that came from his
Mouth. Being all very merry at Table, Honest Sancho, said Don Antonio, I am
told, you admire Capons and Sausages so much, that you cannot be satisfied with
a Belly-full, and when you can eat no more, you cram the rest into your
Breeches against the next Morning. No, Sir, an't like you, answered Sancho,
it is all a Story, I am more cleanly than greedy, I Would have you to know; herels
my Master can tell you, that many Times he and I use to live for a Week
together upon a handful of Acorns and Walnuts. Truth is, I am not over nice; in
such a Place as this I eat what is given me; for a Gift-Horse should not be
looked in the Mouth. But whosoever told you I was a Greedy-Gut and a Sloven,
has told you a Fib, and were it not for Respect to the Company, I would tell
him more of my Mind, so I would: Verily, said Don Quixote, the Manner of
Sancho's Feeding ought to be delivered to succeeding Ages on brazen Monuments,
as a future Memorial of his Abstinence and Cleanliness, and an Example to
Posterity. It Is true, when he satisfies the Call of Hunger, he seems to do it
somewhat ravenously; indeed he swallows apace, uses his Grinders very notably,
and chews with both Jaws at once. But in spite of the Charge of Slovenliness
now laid upon him, I must declare he is so nice an Observer of Neatness, that
he ever makes a clear Conveyance of his Food; when he was Governor, his Nicety
in Eating was remarkable, for he used to pick even Grapes and Pomegranate-Seeds
with the Point of his Fork. How, cried Don Antonio, has Sancho then been a
Governor? Ay, marry has he, answered Sancho, Governor of the Island of
Barataria. Ten Day's I governed, and who but I! But I was so broken of my Rest
all the Time, that all I got by it was to learn to hate the Trade of Governing
from the Bottom of my Soul So that I made such Haste to leave it, I fell into a
deep Hole, where I was buried alive, and should have lain till now, had not
Providence pulled me out of it. Don Quixote then related the Circumstances of
Sancho's Government; and the Cloth being taken away, Don Antonio took the
Knight by the Hand, and carried him into a private Chamber, wherein there was
no Kind of Furniture but a Table that appeared to be of Jasper, supported by
Feet of the same, with a brazen Head set upon it, from the Breast upwards like
the Effigies of one of the Roman Emperors. Don Antonio having walked with Don
Quixote several Turns about the Room, Senior Don Quixote, said he, being
assured that we are very private, the Door fast, and no Body listening, I shall
commuicate to you one of the most strange and wonderful Adventures that ever
were known, provided you treasure it up as a Secret in the closest Apartment of
your Breast. I shall be as secret as the Grave, answered the Knight, and will
clap a Tombstone over your Secret for further Security; besides, assure your
self Don Antonio, continued he, (for by this Time he had learned the
Gentleman's Name) you converse with a Person, whose Ears are open to receive
what his Tongue never betrays. So that whatever you commit to my Trust, shall
be buried in the Depth of bottomless Silence, and lie as secure as in your own
Breast.

In Confidence of your Honor said Don Antonio, I doubt not to raise your
Astonishment, and disburden my own Breast of a Secret, which has long lain upon
my Thoughts, having never found hitherto any Person worthy to be made a
Confident in Matters to be concealed. This cautious Proceeding raised Don
Quixote's Curiosity strangely; after which, Don Antonio led him to the Table,
and made him feel and examine all over the Brazen Head, the Table, and the
Jasper Supporters. Now, Sir, said he, know that this Head was made by one of
the greatest Inchanters or Necromancers in the World. If I am not mistaken, he
was a Polander by Birth, and the Disciple of the celebrated Escotillo, of whom
so many Prodigies are related. This wonderful Person was here in my House, and
by the Intercession of a thousand Crowns, was wrought upon to frame me The
Adventure of the (...) page. (...)
this Head, which has the wonderful Property of answering in your Ear to all
Questions. After long Study, erecting of Schemes, casting of Figures,
Consultations with the Stars, and other Mathematical Operations, this Head was
brought to the aforesaid Perfection, and to Morrow (for on Fridays it never
speaks) it shall give you Proof of its Knowledge, 'till when you may consider
of your most puzzling and important Doubts, which will have a full and
satisfactory Solution. Don Quixote was amazed at this strange Virtue of the
Head, and could hardly credit Don Antonio's Account; but considering the
Shortness of the Time that deferred his full Satisfaction in the Point, he was
content to suspend his Opinion till next Day; and only thanked the Gentleman
for making him so great a Discovery. So out of the Chamber they went, and Don
Antonio having locked the Door very carefully, they returned into the Room
where the rest of the Company were diverted by Sancho's relating to 'em some of
his Master's Adventures.

That Afternoon they carried Don Quixote abroad, without his Armor, mounted,
not on Rosinante, but on a large easy going Mule, with genteel Furniture, and
himself dressed after the City-Fashion, with a long Coat of Tawny-colour'd
Cloth, which with the present Heat of the Season, was enough to put Frost it
self into a Sweat. They gave private Orders that Sancho should be entertained
within doors all that Day; lest he should spoil their Sport by going out. The
Knight being mounted, they pinned to his Back without his Knowledge a Piece of
Parchment, with these Words written in large Letters; This is Don Quixote de la
Mancha. As soon as they began their Walk, the Sight of the Parchment drew the
Eyes of every Body to read the Inscription; so that the Knight hearing so many
People repeat the Words, This is Don Quixote de la Mancha, wondered to hear
himself named and known by every one that saw him: Thereupon turning to Don
Antonio that rode by his Side, How great, said he, is this single Prerogative
of Knight-Errantry, by which its Professors are known and distinguished,
through all the Confines of the Universe. Don't you hear, Sir, continued he,
how the very Boys in the Street, who have never seen me before, know me? It Is
very true, Sir, answered Don Antonio, like Fire that always discovers it self
by its own Light, so Virtue has that Luster that never fails to display it
self, especially that Renown which is acquired by the Profession of Arms.

During this Procession of the Knight, and his applauding Followers, a certain
Castilian reading the Scroll at Don Quixote's Back, cried out aloud, Now the
Devil take thee for Don Quixote de la Mancha! who would have thought to have
found thee here, and still alive, after so many hearty Drubbings that have been
laid about thy Shoulders. Cannot you be mad in private, and among your Friends,
with a Pox to you, but you must run about the World at this Rate, and make
every Body that keeps you Company as Errant-Coxcombs as your self? Get you home
to your Wife and Children, Blockhead, look after your House, and leave playing
the Fool and distracting thy Senses at this Rate with a Parcel of nonsensical
Whimseys. Friend, said Don Antonio, go about your Business, and keep your
Advice for them that want it. Senior Don Quixote is a Man of too much Sense not
to be above your Counsel, and we that bear him Company know our Business
without your intermeddling. We only pay the Respect due to Virtue. So, in the
Name of ill-luck, go your Ways, and don't meddle where you have no Business.
Truly now, said the Castilian, you're in the Right, for it is but striving
against the Stream to give him Advice, though it grieves me to think that this
Whim of Knight-Errantry should spoil all the good Parts which they say this
Madman has. But Ill-luck light on me, as you would have it, and all my Generation,
if ever you catch me advising him or any one else again, though I were desired,
and were to live to the Years of Methusalem. So saying, the Adviser went his
Ways, and the Cavalcade continued; but the Rabble pressed so very thick to read
the Inscription, that Don Antonio was forced to pull it off, under Pretense of
doing something else.

Upon the Approach of Night they returned home, where Don Antonio's Wife, a
Lady of Quality, and every way accomplished, had invited several of her Friends
to a Ball, to honor her Guest, and share in the Diversion his Extravagances
afforded. After a noble Supper the Dancing began about ten a Clock at Night.
Among others, were two Ladies of an airy, waggish Disposition, such, as though
virtuous enough at the bottom, would not stick to strain a Part of Modesty for
the Diversion of good Company. These two made their Court chiefly to Don
Quixote, and plied him so with Dancing one after another, that they tired not
only his Body but his very Soul. But the best was to see what an unaccountable
Figure the grave Don made, as he hopp'd and stalked about, a long sway-back'd,
starv'd-look'd, thinflank'd, two-legg'd Thing, Wainscot-Complexion'd, stuck up
in's close Doublet, awkward enough aconscience, and certainly none of the
lightest at a Saraband. The Ladies gave him several private Hints of their
Inclination to his Person, and he was not behind hand in intimating to them as
secretly, that they were very indifferent to him, till at last being almost
teiz'd to Death, Fugite parts adversae, cried he aloud, and avaunt Temptation.
Pray Ladies, play your amorous Pranks with some Body else, and leave me to the
Enjoyment of my own Thoughts, which are all employed and taken up with the
peerless Dulcinea del Toboso, the sole Queen of my Affection; and so saying, he
sat himself down in the Middle of the Room to rest his wearied Bones. Don
Antonio gave Order that he should be taken up and carried to Bed; and the first
who was ready to lend a helping Hand was Sancho, and as he was lifting him up,
By'r Lady, Sir, Master of mine, you have shook your heels most fetiously. Do
you think we who are stout and valiant must be Caperers, and that every
Knight Errant must be a Snapper of Castinets? If you do, you're woundily
deceived, let me tell you. Gadzookers, some would rather undertake the killing
of a Giant, than the Cutting of a Caper. Had you been for an Antic, I Would have
done your Business for you, for I can jigg it and hop it about like any Hawk;
but as for your fine Dancing, the Devil take him that knows any thing of it for
me. This made Diversion for the Company, till Sancho led out his Master, in
order to put him to Bed, where he left him covered over Head and Ears that he
might sweat out the Cold he had caught by Dancing.

The next Day Don Antonio resolving to make his intended Experiment on the
enchanted Head, conducted Don Quixote into the Room where it stood, together
with Sancho, a Couple of his Friends, and the two Ladies that had so teased the
Knight at the Ball, and who had staid all night with his Wife, and having
carefully locked the Door, and enjoined them Secrecy, he told them the Virtue
of the Head, and that this was the first Time he ever made Proof of it; and
except his two Friends, no Body did know the Trick of the Enchantment, and, had
not they been told of it before, they had been drawn into the same Error with
the rest; for the Contrivance of the Machine was so artful and so cunningly
managed, that it was impossible to discover the Cheat. Don Antonio himself was
the first that made his Application to the Ear of the Head, close to which
speaking in a Voice just loud enough to be heard by the Company; tell me, O
Head, said he, by that mysterious Virtue wherewith thou are endu'd, what are my
Thoughts at present? The Head in a distinct and intelligible Voice, though
without moving the Lips, answered, I am no Judge of Thoughts. They were all
astonished at the Voice, being sensible no Body was in the Room to answer. How
many of us are there in the Room said Don Antonio again? The Voice answered in
the same Key, Thou and thy Wife, two of thy Friends, and two of hers, a famous
Knight called Don Quixote de la Mancha, and his Squire Sancho Panca by Name.
Now their Astonishment was greater than before, now they wondered indeed, and
the Hair of some of 'em stood an end with Amazement. It Is enough, said Antonio,
stepping aside from the Head, I am convinced, 'twas no Impostor sold thee to
me, Sage Head, discoursing Head, Oraculous, Miraculous Head! Now let some Body
else try their Fortunes. As Women are generally most curious and inquisitive,
one of the Dancing Ladies venturing up to it, tell me, Head, said she, what
shall I do to be truly beautiful. Be honest, answered the Head. I have done,
replied the Lady. Her Companion then came on, and with the same Curiosity, I
would know, said she, whether my Husband loves me or no? The Head answered,
Observe his Usage, and that will tell thee. Truly (said the married Lady to her
self as she withdrew) that Question was needless; for indeed a Man's Actions
are the surest Tokens of the Disposition of his Mind. Next came on one of Don
Antonio's Friends, and asked, who am I? The Answer was, Thou know; That Is
from the Question, replied the Gentleman; I would have thee tell me whether
thou know me: I do, answered the Head, thou art Don Pedro Noris, It Is enough,
O Head, said the Gentleman, thou have convinced me, that thou know all
Things. So making Room for some Body else, his Friend advanced, and asked the
Head what his eldest Son and Heir desired, I have already told thee, said the
Head, that I was no Judge of Thoughts; however, I will tell thee, that what thy
Heir desires, is to bury thee. It Is so, replied the Gentleman, What, I see with
my Eye, I mark with my Finger, I know enough.

Don Antonio's Lady asked the next Qustion, I don't well know what to ask thee,
said she to the Head, only tell me whether I shall long enjoy my dear Husband.
Thou shall, answered the Head, for his healthy Constitution and Temperance
promise Length of Days, while those who live too fast, are not like to live
long. Next came Don Quixote, tell me thou Oracle said he, was what I reported
of my Adventures in Montesinos's Cave, a Dream or Reality? Will Sancho my
Squire fulfill his Promise, and scourge himself effectually? And shall Dulcinea
be dis-inchanted? As for the Adventures in the Cave, answered the Head; there is
much to be said; they have something of both; Sancho's Whipping shall go on but
leisurely; however, Dulcinea shall at last be really freed from Enchantment
That Is all I desire to know, said Don Quixote, for the whole Stress of my good
Fortune depends on Dulcinea's Disinchantment. Then Sancho made the last
Application; An't please you Mr. Head, quoth he, shall I chance to have another
Government? shall I ever get clear of this starving Squire-Erranting? And shall
I ever see my own Fireside again? The Head answered, thou shall be a Governor
in thine own House; if thou go home, thou may see thy own Fireside
again; and if thou leave off thy Service, thou shall get clear of thy
Squireship. Gadzookers, cried Sancho, that is a very good one, trow! a Horsehead
might h^' told all this; I could have prophesied thus much my self. How now,
Brute, said Don Quixote, what Answers would thou have but what are pertinent
to thy Questions? Nay, quoth Sancho, since you will have it so, it shall be so; I
only wish Mr. Head would have told me a little more concerning the Matter.

Thus the Questions proposed, and the Answers returned were brought to a
Period, but the Amazement contiu'd among all the Company, except Don Antonio's
two. Friends who understood the Mystery, which Benengeli is resolved now to
discover, that the World should be no longer amused with an Erroneous Opinion
of any Magic or Witchcraft operating in the Head. He therefore tells you, that
Don Antonio Moreno, to divert himself, and surprise the Ignorant, had this made
in Imitation of such another Device, which he had seen contrived by a Statuary
at Madrid.

The Manner of it was thus. The Table and the Frame on which it stood, the Feet
of which resembl'd four Eagles Claws, were of Wood, painted and varnished like
Jasper. The Head, which looked like the Bust of a Roman Emperor, and of a Brass
Color, was all hollow and so were the Feet of the Table, which answered
exactly to the Neck and Breast of the Head, the whole so artificially fixed,
that it seemed to be all of a Piece, through this Cavity ran a Tin-Pipe,
conveyed into it by a Passage through the Cieling of the Room under the Table.
He that was to answer set his Mouth to the End of the Pipe in the Chamber
underneath, and by the Hollowness of the Trunk received their Questions, and
delivered his Answers in clear and articulate Words, so that the Imposture
could scarcely be discovered. The Oracle was managed by a young ingenious
Gentleman, Don Antonio's Nephew. who having his Instructions beforehand from
his Uncle, was able to answer readily and directly to the first Questions, and
by Conjectures or Evasions, make a Return handsomely to the rest, with the Help
of his Ingenuity. Cid Hamet informs us further, that, during ten or twelve Days
after this, the wonderful Machine continued in mighty Repute, but at last the
Noise of Don Antonio's having an enchanted Head in his House that gave Answers
to all Questions, began to sly about the City; and as he feared this would
reach the Ears of the watchful Sentinels of our Faith, he thought sit to give
an Account of the whole Matter to the Reverend Inquisitors, who ordered him to
break it to Pieces, lest it should give Occasion of Scandal among the ignorant
Vulgar. But still the Head passed for an Oracle and a Piece of Enchantment with
Don Quixote and Sancho, though the Truth is, the Knight was much better
satisfied in the Matter than the Squire.

The Gentlemen of the Town in Complaisance to Don Antonio, and for Don
Quixote's more splendid Entertainment, or rather to make his Madness more
public Diversion, appointed a ^unning at the Ring about six Days after, but
this was broken off upon an Occasion that afterward happened.

Don Quixote had a Mind to take a Turn in the City on Foot, that he might avoid
the Crowd of Boys that followed him when he rode. He went out with Sancho and
two of Don Antonio's Servants, that attended by their Master's Order; and
passing through a certain Street, Don Quixote looked up, and spied written over a
Door in great Letters these Words. Here is a Printing House. This Discovery
pleased the Knight extremely, having now an Opportunity of seeing a
Printing-Press, a Thing he had never seen before; and therefore to satisfy his
Curiosity, in he went with all his Train. There he saw some working off the
Sheets, others correcting the Forms, some in one Place picking of Letters out
of the Cases, in another some looking over a Proof; in short, all the Variety
that is to be seen in great Printing-Houses. He went from one Workman to
another, and was very inquisitive to know what every Body had in Hand; and they
were not backward to satisfy his Curiosity. At length coming to one of the
Compositors, and asking him what he was about; Sir, said the Printer, this
Gentleman here, (showing a likely sort of a Man, something grave, and not
young) has translated a Book out of Italian into Spanish, and I am setting some
of it here for the Press. What is the Name of it pray? said Don Quixote. Sir,
answered the Author, the Title of it in Italian is Le Bagatele. And pray Sir,
asked Don Quixote, what is the Meaning of that Word in Spanish? Sir, answered
the Gentleman, Le Bagatele is as much as to say Trisles; but though the Title
promises so little, yet the Contents are Matters of Importance. I am a little
conversant in the Italian, said the Knight, and value my self upon singing some
Stanza's of Ariosto; therefore, Sir (without any Offense, and not doubting of
your Skill, but merely to satisfy my Curiosity) pray tell me, have you ever met
with such a Word as Pinnata in Italian? Yes very often, Sir, answered the
Author. And how do you render it pray? said Don Quixote. How should I render
it, Sir, replied the Translator, but by the Word Porridge-Pot? Body of me,
cried Don Quixote, you are Master of the Italian Idiom? I dare hold a good
Wager, that where the Italian says Piaccie, you translate it please; where it
says piu, you render it more; su, above, and giu, beneath. Most certainly Sir,
answered the other, for such are their proper Significations. What rare Parts,
said Don Quixote, are lost to Mankind for Want of their being exerted and
known! I dare swear, Sir, that the World is backward in encouraging your Merit.
But it is the Fate of all ingenious Men: How many of 'em are crampt up and
discountenanced by a narrow Fortune! And how many, in Spite of the most
laborious Industry, discouraged! Though by the Way, Sir, I think this kind of
Version, from one Language to another, (except it be from the noblest of
Tongues, the Greek and Latin) is like viewing a Piece of Flemmish Tapistry on
the wrong Side, where, though the Figures are distinguishable, yet there are so
many Ends and Threads, that the Beauty and Exactness of the Work is obscured,
and not so advantagiously discerned as on the right Side of the Hangings.
Neither can this barren Employment of translating out of easy Languages show
either Wit or Mastery of Style, no more than copying a Piece of Writing by a
Precedent; though still the Business of Translating wants not its
Commendations, since Men very often may be worse employed As a further Proof of
its Merits, we have Doctor Christoval de Figueroa's Translation of Pastor Fido,
and Don Juan de Xaurigui's Aminta, Pieces so excellently well done, that they
have made 'em purely their own and left the Reader in Doubt which is
Translation and which Original. But tell me, pray Sir, do you print your Book
at your own Charge, or have you sold the Copy to a Bookseller? Why truly Sir,
answered the Translator, I publish it upon my own Account, and I hope to clear
at least a thousand Crowns by this first Edition; for I design to print off two
thousand Books, and they will go off at six Reals apiece in a Trice. I Am afraid
you will come short of your Reckoning, said Don Quixote; it is a Sign you are
still a Stranger to the Tricks of these Booksellers and Printers, and the
Juggling there is among them. I dare engage you will find two thousand Books
lie very heavy upon your Hands, especially if the Piece be somewhat tedious,
and wants Spirit. What, Sir, replied the Author, would you have me sell the
Profit of my Labor to a Bookseller for three Maravedis a Sheet? for that is the
most they will bid, nay and expect too I should thank 'em for the Offer. No,
no, Sir, I print not my Works to get Fame in the World, my Name is up already;
Profit, Sir, is my End, and without it what signifies Reputation? Well, Sir, go
on and prosper, said Don Quixote; and with that moving to another Part of the
Room, he saw a Man correcting a Sheet of a Book called, The Light of the Soul.
Ay, now this is something, cried the Knight, these are the Books that ought to
be printed, though there are a great many of that Kind; for the Number of
Sinners is prodigious in this Age, and there is Need of an infinite Quantity of
Lights for so many dark Souls as we have among us Then passing on, and
enquiring the Title of a Book of which another Workman was correcting a Sheet,
they told him 'twas the Second Part of that ingenious Gentleman Don Quixote de
la Mancha, written by a certain Person, a Native of Tordesillas. I have heard
of that Book before, said Don Quixote, and really thought it had been burnt,
and reduced to Ashes for a foolish impertinent Libel; but all in good ^ime,
Execution-day will come at last: For made Stories are only so far good and
agreeable as they are profitable, and bear the Resemblance of Truth; and true
History the more valuable, the farther it keeps from the fabulous. And so
saying he flung out of the Printing House in a Huff.

That very Day Don Antonio would needs show Don Quixote the Galleys in the
Road, much to Sancho's Satisfaction, because he had never seen any in his Life.
Don Antonio therefore gave Notice to the Commander of the Galleys, that in the
Afternoon he would bring his Guest, Don Quixote de la Mancha to see 'em, the
Commander and all the People of the Town being by that Time no Strangers to the
Knight's Character. But what happened in the Galleys must be the Import of the
next Chapter.

CHAP. LXIII. Of Sancho's Misfortune on board the Galleys, with the strange
Adventures of the beautiful Morisca.
MAny and serious were Don Quixote's Reflections on the Answer of the enchanted
Head, though none hit on the Deceit, but centered all in the Promise of
Dulcinea's Disinchantment; and expecting it would speedily be effected, he
rested joyfully satisfied. As for Sancho, though he hated the Trouble of being a
Governor, yet still he had an itching Ambition to rule, to be obeyed, and
appear great; for even Fools love Authority.

In short, that Afternoon Don Antonio, his two Friends, Don Quixote, and
Sancho, set out for the Galleys. The Commander being advertised of their
coming, upon their Appearance on the Key, ordered all the Galleys to strike
Sail; the Music played, and a Pinnace spread with rich Carpets and
Crimson-Velvet Cushions was presently hoisted out, and sent to fetch 'em
aboard. As soon as Don Quixote set his Foot into it, the Admiral-Galley
discharged her Forecastle-Piece, and the rest of the Galleys did the like. When
Don Quixote got over the Gunnel of the Galley on the Starboard-side, the whole
Crew of Slaves, according to their Custom of saluting Persons of Quality,
welcomed him with three hu, hu, huz, or huzzahs. The General (for so we must
call him) by Birth a Valencian, and a Man of Quality, gave him his Hand, and
embraced him. This Day, said he, will I mark as one of the happiest I expect to
see in all my Life, since I have the Honor now to see Senior Don Quixote de la
Mancha; this Day, I say, that sets before my Eyes the Summary of wandering
Chivalry collected in one Person. Don Quixote returned his Compliment with no
less Civility, and appeared overjoyed to see himself so treated like a
Grandee. Presently they all went aft on the Deck, which was handsomely adorned,
and there they took their Places. The Boatswain went to the Forecastle, and
with his Whistle or Call gave the Sign to the Slaves to strip, which was obeyed
in a Moment. Sancho was scared to see so many Fellows in their naked Skins, but
most of all when he saw 'em hoist up the Sails so incredibly fast, as he
thought could never have been done but by so many Devils. He had placed himself
a Mid-ships, next the hindmost Rower on the Starboard-side; who being
instructed what to do, caught Hold of him, and giving him a Hoist, handed him
to the next Man, who tossed him to a third; and so the whole Crew of Slaves,
beginning on the Starboard-side, made him fly so fast from Bench to Bench, that
poor Sancho lost the very Sight of his Eyes, and verily believed all the Devils
in Hell were carrying him away to rights. Nor did the Slaves give over bandying
him about, till they had handed him in the same Manner over all the
Larboard-side; and then they set him down where they had taken him up, but
strangely disordered, out of Breath, in a cold Sweat, and not truly sensible
what it was that had happened to him.

Don Quixote seeing his Squire fly at this Rate without Wings, asked the
General if that were a Ceremony used to all Strangers aboard the Galleys; for,
if it were, he must let him know, that as he did not design to take up his
Residence there, he did not like such Entertainment; and vowed to Heaven, that
if any of 'em came to lay Hold on him to toss him at that Rate, he would spurn
their Souls out of their Bodies; and with this starting up, he laid his Hand
on his Sword.

At the same Time they lowered their Sails, and with a dreadful Noise let down
the Main-yard; which so frighted Sancho, who thought the Sky was off the
Hinges, and falling upon him, that he duck'd and thrust his Head between his
Legs for Fear. Don Quixote was a little Sea-sick too, he began to shiver, and
shrug up his Shoulders, and changed Color. The Slaves hoisted the Main-yard
again with the same Force and Noise that they had lowered it withal. But all
this with such Silence on their Parts, as if they had neither Voice nor Breath.
The Boatswain then gave the Word to weigh Anchor; and leaping a top of the
Fore-castle among the Crew, with his Whip or Bull's-Pizzle, he began to dust
and fly-flap their Shoulders, and by little and little to put off to Sea.

When Sancho saw so many colored Feet moving at once, for he took the Oars to
be such; be shrew my Heart, quoth he, here is Enchantment in good Earnest; all
our Adventures and Witchcrafts have been nothing to this. What h ve these poor
Wretches done, that their Hides must be curry'd at this Rate? And how dares
this plaguey Fellow go whistling about here by himself, and mawl thus so many
People? Well, I say, this is Hell, or Purgatory at least.

Don Quixote observing how earnestly Sancho looked on these Passages; ah! dear
Sancho, said he, what an easy Matter now were it for you to strip to the Waste,
and clap your self among these Gentlemen, and so complete Dulcinea's
Disinchantment; among so many Companions in Affliction, you would not be so
sensible of the Smart; and besides, the sage Merlin perhaps might take every
one of these Lashes, being so well laid on, for ten of those which you must
certainly one Day inflict on your self. The General of the Galleys was going to
ask what he meant by these Lashes, and Dulcinea's Disinchantment; when a
Mariner cried out, they make Signs to us from Monjuy, that there is a Vessel
standing under the Shore to the Westward. With that the General leaping upon
the Coursey, cried, pull away my Hearts, let her not 'scape us; this Brigantine
is an Argiereen, I warrant her. Presently the three other Galleys came up with
the Admiral to receive Orders, and he commanded two of 'em to stand out to Sea,
while he with the other would keep along the Shore, that so they might be sure
of their Prize.

The Row^rs tugged so hard, that the Galleys scudded away like Lightning, and
those that stood to Sea, discovered about two Miles off, a Vessel with fourteen
or fifteen Oars, which, upon Sight of the Galleys, put her self in Chase,
hoping by her Lightness to escape; but all in vain, for the Admiral's Galley
being one of the swiftest Vessels in those Seas, gained so much Way upon her,
that the Master of the Brigantine seeing his Danger, was willing the Crew
should quit their Oars and yield, for Fear of exasperating the General. But
Fate ordered it otherwise; for upon the Admiral's coming up with the Brigantine
so near as to hale her, and bid them strike, two Toraquis, that is, two drunken
Turks, among twelve others that were on board the Vessel, discharged a Couple
of Muskets, and killed two Soldiers that were upon the Wale of the Galley. The
General seeing this, vowed he would not leave a Man of 'em alive; and coming up
with great Fury to grapple with her, she slipped away under the Oars of the
Galley. The Galley ran ahead a good Way, and the little Vessel finding her
self clear for the present, though without Hopes to get off, crowded all the Sail
she could, and with Oars and Sails began to make the best of her Way, while the
Galley tacked round. But all their Diligence did not do 'em so much Good as
their Presumption did 'em Harm; for the Admiral coming up with her after a
short Chase, clapped his Oars in the Vessel, and so took her and every Man in
her alive.

By this Time the other Galleys were come up, and all four returned with their
Prize into the Harbor, where great Numbers of People stood waiting, to know
what Prize they had taken. The General came to an Anchor near the Land, and
perceiving the Viceroy was on the Shore, he manned his Pinnace to fetch him
aboard, and gave Orders to sling up the Main-yard, to hang up the Master of the
Brigantine, with the rest of the Crew, which consisted of about six and thirty
Persons, all proper lusty Fellows, and most of 'em Turkish Musketeers. The
General asked who commanded the Vessel; whereupon one of the Prisoners, who was
afterward known to be a Spaniard, and a Renegado, answered him in Spanish,
This was our Master, my Lord, said he, showing him a young Man not twenty Years
of Age, and one of the handsomest Persons that could be imagined. You
inconsiderate Dog, said the General, what made you kill my Men, when you saw
'twas not possible for you to escape? Is this the Respect due to an Admiral?
Don't you know that Rashness is no Courage? While there is any Hope, we are
allowd to be bold, but not to be desperate. The Master was offering to reply,
but the General could not stay to hear his Answer, being obliged to go
entertain the Viceroy, who was just come aboard with his Retinue, and others of
the Town. You have had a lucky Chase, my Lord, said the Viceroy. What have you
got. Your Excellency shall see presently, answered the General, I Will show 'em
to you immediately hanging at the Main-yard-arm. How so, replied the Viceroy?
Because, said he, they have killed me, contrary to all Law of Arms, Reason, and
Custom of the Sea, two of the best Soldiers I had on board; for which I have
sworn to hang them every Mother's Son, especially this young Rogue, the Master.
Saying thus, he showed him a Person with his Hands already bound, and the
Halter about his Neck, expecting nothing but Death. His Youth, Beauty, and
Resignation began to plead much in his behalf with the Viceroy, and making him
inclinable to save him, Tell me, Captain, said he, Art thou born a Turk, or a
Moor, or art thou a Renegado? None of all these, answered the Youth in as good
Spanish. What then, said the Viceroy? A Christian Woman, replied the Youth. A
Woman, and a Christian, though in these Clothes, and in such a Post; but it is a
Thing rather to be wondered at, than believed. I humbly beseech ye, my Lords,
continued the Youth, to defer my Execution till I give you the History of my
Life, for the Delay of your Revenge will be but short. This Request was urged
so piteously, that no Body could deny it; whereupon the General bade him
proceed, assuring him, nevertheless, that there was no Hopes of Pardon for an
Offense so great as was that of which he was guilty. Then the Youth began.

I am one of that unhappy and imprudent Nation whose Miseries are fresh in your
Memories. My Parents being of the Morisco-Race, the Current of the^
Misfortunes, with the Obstinacy of two Uncles hurried me out of Spain into
Barbary. In vain ^^ professed my self a Christian, being really one, and not
such a secret Mohammedan as too many of us were; this could neither prevail with
my Uncles to leave me in my Native Country, nor with the Severity of those
Officers that had Orders to make us evacuate Spain, to believe it was not a
Pretense. My Mother was a Christian, my Father, a Man of Discretion, professed
the same Belief, and I sucked the Catholic Faith with my Milk. I was handsomely
educated, and never betrayed the least Mark of the Morisco. Breed, either in
Language or Behavior. With these Endowments, as I grew up, that little Beauty
I had, such as it was, began to bloom, and for all my retired Life, and the
Restraint upon my appearing abroad, a young Gentleman, called Don Gaspar
Gregorio got a View of me. He was Son and Heir to a Knight that lived in the
next Town: 'twere tedious to relate, how he got an Opportunity to converse with
me, fell desperately in Love, and affected me with a Sense of his Passion. I
must be short, least this Halter cut me off in the Middle of my Story. I shall
only tell you, that he would needs bear me Company in my Banishment, and
accordingly, by the Help of the Morisco Language, of which he was a perfect
Master, he mingled with the Exiles, and getting acquainted with my two Uncles
that conducted me, we all went together to Barbary, and took up our Residence
at Argiers, or rather Hell it self.

My Father, in the mean time, had very Prudently, upon the first News of the
Proclamation to banish us, withdrawn to seek a Place of Refuge for us in some
Foreign Country, leaving a considerable Stock of Money and Jewels hidden in a
private Place, which he discovered to no Body but me, with Orders not to move
it till his Return.

The King of Argiers, understanding I had some Beauty, and also that I was
Rich, (which afterward turned to my Advantage) sent for me, and was very
inquisitive about my Country, and what Jewels and Gold I had got. I satisfied
him as to the Place of my Nativity, and gave him to understand, that my Riches
were buried in a certain Place where I might easily recover 'em, were I
permitted to return where they lay.

This I told him, that, in Hopes of sharing in my Fortune, his Covetousness
should divert him from Injuring my Person. In the midst of these Questions, the
King was informed, that a certain Youth, the handsomest and loveliest in the
World, had come over in Company with us. I was presently conscious that Don
Gregorio was the Person, his Beauty answering so exactly their Description. The
Sense of the young Gentleman's Danger was now more grievous to me than my own
Misfortunes, having been told that those barbarous Turks are much fonder of a
handsome Youth, than the most beautiful Woman. The King gave immediate Orders
he should be brought into his Presence, asking me whether the Youth deserved
the Commendations they gave him. I told him, inspired by some good Angel, that
the Person they so much commended, was no Man, but of my own Sex, and withal
begged his Permission to have her dressed in a Female Habit, that her Beauty
might shine in its natural Luster, and so prevent her Blushes, if she should
appear before his Majesty in that unbecoming Habit. He consented, promising
withal, to give Order next Morning for my Return to Spain, to recover my
Treasure. I spoke with Don Gaspar, represented to him the Danger of appearing a
Man, and prevailed with him to wait on the King that Evening in the Habit of a
Moorish Woman. The King was so pleased with her Beauty, that he resolved to
reserve her as a Present for the Grand Seignior, and fearing the Malice of his
Wives in the Seraglio, and the Solicitations of his own Desires, he gave her
in Charge to some of the principal Ladies of the City, to whose House she was
immediately conducted.

This Separation was grievous to us both (for I cannot deny that I love him).
Those who have ever felt the Pangs of a parting Love can best imagine the
Affliction of our Souls. Next Morning, by the King's Order, I embarked for
Spain in this Vessel, accompanied by these two Turks that killed your Men, and
this Spanish Renegado that first spoke to you, who is a Christian in his Heart,
and came along with me with a greater Desire to return to Spain than to go back
to Barbary. The rest are all Moors and Turks, who serve for Rowers. Their
Orders were to set me on Shore with this Renegado, in the Habits of Christians,
on the first Spanish Ground they should discover; but these two ravenous and
insolent Turks, must, contrary to their Order, first cruise upon the Coast, in
hopes of taking some Prize; being afraid, that if they should first set us
ashore, some Accident might happen to us, and make us discover that the
Br^gantine was not far off at Sea, and so expose 'em to the Danger of being
taken, if there were Galleys upon the Coast. In the Night we made this Land,
not mistrusting any Galleys lying so near, and so we fell into your Hands.

To conclude, Don Gregorio remains in Women's Habit among the Moors, nor can
the Deceit long Protect him from Destruction; and here I stand expecting, or
rather fearing my Fate, which yet cannot prove unwelcome, I being now weary of
Living. Thus, Gentlemen, you have heard the unhappy Passages of my Life, I have
told you nothing but what is true, and all I have to beg, is that I may die as
a Christian; since I am innocent of the Crimes of which my unhappy Nation is
accused. Here she stopped, and with her Story and her Tears melted the Hearts
of many of the Company.

The Viceroy, being moved with a tender Compassion, was the first to unbind the
Cords that manacl'd her fair Hands, when an ancient Pilgrim, who came on board
with the Viceroy's Attendants, having with a fixed Attention minded the Damsel
during her Relation, came suddenly, and throwing himself at her Feet, Oh Anna
Felix, cried he, my dear unfortunate Daughter! Behold thy Father Ricote, that
returned to seek thee, being unable to live without thee, who art the Joy and
Support of my Age. Upon this, Sancho, who had all this while been sullenly
musing, vexed at the Usage he had met with so lately, lifting up his Head, and
staring the Pilgrim in the Face, knew him to be the same Ricote he had met on
the Road the Day he left his Government, and was likewise fully persuaded, that
this was his Daughter, who being now unbound, embraced her Father, and joined
with him in his Joy and Grief. My Lords, said the old Pilgrim, this is my
Daughter, Anna Felix, more unhappy in Fortune than in Name, and famed as much
for her Beauty, as for her Father's Riches. I left my Country to seek a
Sanctuary for my Age, and having fixed upon a Residence in Germany, returned in
this Habit with other Pilgrims to recover my Wealth, which I have effectually
done, but I little thought thus unexpectedly to have found my greatest
Treasure, my dearest Daughter. My Lords, if it can consist with the Integrity
of your Justice, to pardon our small Offense, I join my Prayers and Tears with
here is, to implore your Mercy on our behalf; since we never designed you any
Injury, and are innocent of those Crimes for which our Nation has justly been
banished. Ay, ay, cried Sancho, (putting in) I know Ricote as well as the
Beggar knows his Dish, and so far as concerns Anna Felix's being his Daughter,
I know that is true too; but for all the Story of his Goings-out and Comings-in,
and his Intentions, whether they were good, or whether they were bad, I Will
neither meddle or make, not I.

So uncommon an Accident filled all the Company with Admiration, so that the
General turning to the fair Captain, Your Tears, said he, are so prevailing,
Madam, that they compel me now to be forsworn. Live, lovely Anna Felix, Live as
many Years as Heaven has decreed you; and let those rash and insolent Slaves,
who alone committed the Crimes bear the Punishment of it. With that he gave
Order to have the two delinquent Turks hanged up at the Yard's-Arm: But, at the
Intercession of the Viceroy, their Fault showing rather Madness than Design,
the fatal Sentence was revoked; the General considering at the same time, that
their Punishment in cold Blood would look more like Cruelty than Justice.

Then they began to consider how they might retrieve Don Gaspar Gregorio from
the Danger he was in; to which purpose Ricote offered to the Value of above a
Thousand Ducats which he had about him in Jewels, to purchase his Ransom. But
the readiest Expedient was thought to be the Proposal of the Spanish Renegado,
who offered with a small Bark and half a dozen Oars manned by Christians to
return to Argiers, and set him at Liberty, as best knowing when and where to
land, and being acquainted with the Place of his Confinement. The General and
the Viceroy demurred to this Motion, through a Distrust of the Renegado's
Fidelity, since he might perhaps betray the Christians that were to go along
with him. But Anna Felix engaging for his Truth, and Ricote obliging himself to
ransom the Christians if they were taken, the Design was resolved upon.

The Viceroy went ashore, committing the Morisca and her Father to Don Antonio
Moreno's Care, desiring him at the same time to command his House for any thing
that might conduce to their Entertainment; such Sentiments of Kindness and good
Nature had the Beauty of Anna Felix infused into his Breast.

CHAP. LXIV. Of an unlucky Adventure which Don Quixote laid most to Heart of
any that had yet befallen him.
DON Antonio's Lady was extremely pleased with the Company of the fair Morisca,
whose Sense being as exquisite as her Beauty, drew all the most considerable
Persons in the City to visit her. Don Quixote told Don Antonio that he could by
no means approve the Method they had taken to release Don Gregorio, it being
full of Danger, and little or no Probability of Success; but that their surest
way would be to have him set ashore in Barbary, with his Horse and Arms, and
leave it to him to deliver the Gentleman in spite of all the Moorish Power, as
Don Gayferos had rescued his Wife Melissandra. Good your Worship, quoth Sancho,
hearing this, look before you leap. Don Gayferos had nothing thing but a fair
Race for it on dry Land, when he carried her to France. But here, an't please
you, though we should deliver Don Gregorio, how the Devil shall we bring him over
to Spain cross the broad Sea. There Is a Remedy for all Things but Death,
answered Don Quixote, it is but having a Bark ready by the Seaside, and then
let me see what can hinder our getting into it. Ah Master, Master, quoth
Sancho, there is more to be done than a Dish to wash, Saying is one Thing, and
Doing is another, and for my Part, I like the Renegade very well, he seems to
me a good honest Fellow, and cut out for the Business. Well, said Don Antonio,
if the Renegado fails, then the Great Don Quixote shall embark for Barbary.

In two Days the Renegado was dispatched away in a fleet Cruiser of six Oars
aside, manned with brisk lusty Fellows, and two days after that, the Galleys
with the General left the Port, and steered their Course Eastwards. The General
having first engaged the Viceroy to give him an Account of Don Gregorio's, and
Anna Felix's Fortune.

Now it happened one Morning that Don Quixote going abroad to take the Air upon
the Seashore, armed at all Points, according to his Custom (his Arms, as he
said, being his best Attire, as Combat was his Refreshment) he spied a Knight
riding toward him, armed like himself from Head to Foot, with a bright Moon
blazoned on his Shield, who coming within his Hearing, called out to him,
Illustrious, and never sufficiently extolled Don Quixote de la Mancha, I am the
Knight of the White Moon, whose incredible Achievements, perhaps, have reached
thy Ears. Lo, I am come to enter into Combat with Thee, and to compel thee by
Dint of Sword, to own and acknowledge my Mistress, (by whatever Name and
Dignity she be distinguished) to be, without any Degree of Comparison, more
beautiful than thy Dulcinea del Toboso. Now if thou will fairly confess this
Truth, thou freest thy self from certain Death, and me from the Trouble of
taking or giving thee thy Life. If not, the Conditions of our Combat are these.
If Victory be on my Side, thou shall be obliged immediately to forsake thy
Arms, and the Quest of Adventures, and to return to thy own Home, where thou
shall be engaged to live quietly and peaceably for the Space of one whole Year,
without laying Hand on thy Sword, to the Improvement of thy Estate, and the
Salvation of thy Soul. But if thou come off Conqueror, my Life is at thy
Mercy, my Horse and Arms shall be thy Trophy, and the Fame of all my former
Exploits, by the lineal Descent of Conquest, be vested in thee as Victor.
Consider what thou have to do, and let thy Answer be quick; for my Dispatch is
limited to this very Day.

Don Quixote was amazed and surpised as much at the Arrogance of the Knight of
the White Moon's Challenge, as at the Subject of it; so with a solemn and
austere Address, Knight of the White Moon, said he, whose Achievements have as
yet been kept from my Knowledge, it is more than probable, that you have never
seen the illustrious Dulcinea; for had you ever viewed her Perfections, you had
there found Arguments enough to convince you that no Beauty, passed, present,
or to come, can parallel hers, and therefore without giving you directly the
Lie, I only tell thee, Knight, thou art mistaken; and this Position I will
maintain by accepting your Challenge, on your Conditions, except that Article
of your Exploits descending to me; for, not knowing what Character your Actions
bear, I shall rest satisfied with the Fame of my own, by which, such as they
are, I am willing to abide. And since your Time is so limited, choose you
Ground, and begin your Career as soon as you will, and expect to be met with: A
fair Field and no Favor.

While the two Knights were thus adjusting the Preliminaries of Combat, the
Viceroy who had been informed of the Knight of the White Moon's Appearance
near the City Walls, and his parlying with Don Quixote, hastened to the Scene
of Battle, not suspecting it to be any thing but some new Device of Don Antonio
Moreno, or some others. Several Gentlemen, and Don Antonio among the rest
accompanied him thither. They arrived just as Don Quixote was wheeling
Resinarde to fetch his Career, and seeing 'em both ready for the Onset, he
interposed, desiring to know the Cause of the sudden Combat. The Knight of the
White Moon told him there was a Lady in the Case, and briefly repeated to his
Excellency what passed between him and Don Quixote. The Viceroy whispered Don
Antonio, and asked him whether he knew that Knight of the White Moon, and
whether their Combat was not some jocular Device to impose upon Don Quixote.
Don Antonio answered positively, that he neither knew the Knight, nor whether
the Combat were in Jest or in Earnest. This put the Viceroy to some Doubt
whether he should not prevent their Engagement, but being at last persuaded
that it must be a Jest at the Bottom, he withdrew. Valorous Knights, said he,
if there be no Medium between Confession and Death, but Don Quixote be still
resolved to deny, and you the Knight of the White Moon as obstinately to urge,
I have no more to say; the Field is free, and the Lord have mercy on ye.

Don Quixote conquered b^ the Knight of the White Moon page. 641.


The Knights made their Compliments to the Viceroy for his gracious Consent;
and Don Quixote, making some short Ejaculations to Heaven and his Mistress, as
he always used upon these Occasions, began his Career, without either Sound of
Trumpet or any other Signal. His Adversary was no less forward; for setting
Spurs to his Horse, which was much the swifter, he met Don Quixote before he
had ran half his Career, so forcibly, that without making use of his Lance,
which it is thought he lifted up on Purpose, he overthrew the Knight of la
Mancha, and Rosinante, both coming to the Ground with a terrible Fall.

The Knight of the White Moon got immediately upon him, and clapping the Point
of his Lance to his Face, Knight, cried he, you are vanquished, and a dead Man,
unless you immediately fulfill the Conditions of your Combat. Don Quixote
bruised and stunned with his Fall, without lifting up his Beaver, answered in a
faint hollow Voice, as if he had spoke out of a Tomb, Dulcinea del Toboso is
the most beautiful Woman in the World, and I the most unfortunate Knight upon
the Earth. 'Twere unjust that such Perfection should suffer through my
Weakness. No, pierce my Body with thy Lance, Knight, and let my Life expire
with my Honor. Not so rigorous neither, replied the Conqueror, let the Fame
of the Lady Dulcinea del Toboso remain entire and unblemished; provided the
Great Don Quixote return home for a Year, as we agreed before the Combat, I am
satisfied. The Viceroy and Don Antonio with many other Gentlemen were
Witnesses to all these Passages, and particularly to this Proposal; to which
Don Quixote answered, that upon Condition he should be enjoined nothing to the
Prejudice of Dulcinea he would, upon the Faith of a true Knight, be punctual in
the Performance of every Thing else. This Acknowledgment being made, the Knight
of the White Moon turned about his Horse, and saluting the Viceroy rode at a
hand-Gallop into the City, whither Don Antonio followed him at the Viceroy's
Request, to find who he was, if possible.

Don Quixote was lifted up, and upon taking off his Helmet, they found him
pale, and in a cold Sweat. As for Rosinante he was in so sad a Flight, that he
could not stir for the present. Then as for Sancho, he was in so heavy a
taking, that he knew not what to do, nor what to say; he was sometimes
persuaded he was in a Dream, sometimes he fancied this rueful Adventure was all
Witchcraft and Enchantment. In short, he found his Master discomsited in the
Face of the World, and bound to good Behavior, and to lay aside his Arms for a
whole Year. Now he thought his Glory eclipsed, his Hopes of Greatness vanished
into Smoke, and his Master's Promises, like his Bones, put out of Joint by that
cursed Fall, which he was afraid had at once crippl'd Rosinante and his Master.
At last the vanquished Knight was put into a Chair, which the Viceroy had sent
for, for that Purpose, and they carried him into Town, accompanied by the
Viceroy, who had a great Curiosity to know who this Knight of the White Moon
was, that had left Don Quixote in so sad a Condition.

CHAP. LXV. An Account of the Knight of the White Moon, Don Gregorio's
Enlargement, and other Passages.
DON Antonio Moreno followed the Knight of the White Moon to his Inn, whither
he was attended by a troublesome Rabble of Boys. The Knight being got to his
Chamber, where his Squire waited to take off his Armor, Don Antonio came in,
declaring that he would not be shook off, till he had discovered who he was.
The Knight finding that the Gentleman would not leave him; Sir, said he, since
I lie under no Obligation of concealing my self, if you please, while my Man
disarms me, you shall hear the whole Truth of the Story.

You must know, Sir, I am called the Bachelor Carrasco, I live in the same
Town with this Don Quixote, whose unaccountable Frenzy has moved all his
Neighbors, and me among the rest, to endeavor some Means to cure his Madness;
in order to which, believing that Rest and Ease would prove the surest Remedy,
I bethought my self of this present Stratagem, and about three Months ago, in
all the Equipage of a Knight Errant, under the Title of the Knight of the
Mirrours, I met him on the Road, fixed a Quarrel upon him, and the Conditions
of our Combat were as you have heard already. But Fortune then declared for
him, for he unhors'd and vanquished me, and so I was disappointed: He
prosecuted his Adventures, and I returned home shamefully, very much hurt with
my Fall. But willing to retrieve my Credit, I made this second Attempt, and now
have succeeded. For I know him to be so nicely punctual in whatever his Word
and Honor is engaged for, that he will undoubtedly perform his Promise. This,
Sir, is the Sum of the whole Story, and I beg the Favor of you to conceal me
from Don Quixote, that my Project may not be ruined the second Time, and that
the honest Gentleman, who is naturally a Man of good Parts, may recover his
Understanding. Oh! Sir, replied Don Antonio, what have you to answer for in
robbing the World of the most diverting Folly, that ever was exposed among
Mankind. Consider, Sir, that his Cure can never benefit the Public half so
much as his Distemper. But I am apt to believe, Sir Bachelor, that his Madness
is too firmly fixed for your Art to remove, and (Heaven forgive me) I cannot
forbear wishing it may be so; for by Don Quixote's Cure we not only lose his
good Company, but the Drolleries and comical Humors of Sancho Panca too, which
are enough to cure Melancholy it self of the Spleen. However, I promise to say
nothing of the Matter; though I confidently believe, Sir, your Pains will be to
no Purpose. Carrasco told him that having succeeded so far, he was obliged to
cherish better Hopes, and asking Don Antonio if he had any farther Service to
command him, he took his Leave, and packing up his Armor on a Carriage-Mule,
presently mounted his Charging-Horse, and leaving the City that very Day,
posted homewards, meeting no Adventure on the Road worth a Place in this
faithful History.

Don Antonio gave an Account of the Discourse he had had with Carrasco to the
Viceroy, who was vexed to think that so much pleasant Diversion was like to be
lost to all those that were acquainted with the Don's Follies.

Six Days did Don Quixote keep his Bed, very dejected, sullen, and out of
Humor, and full of severe and black Reflections on his fatal Overthrow. Sancho
was his Comforter, and among other his Crumbs of Comfort, My dear Master, quoth
he, cheer up, come pluck up a good Heart, and be thankful for coming off no
worse. Why, a Man has broke his Neck with a less Fall, and you have not so much as
a broken Rib. Consider, Sir, that they that win, sometimes must lose; we must
not always look for Bacon, where you see the Ho^ks. Come, Sir, cry a Fig for
the Doctor, since you will not need him this Bout; let us jog home fair and
softly, without thinking any more of sauntring up and down no Body knows
whither in Quest of Adventures and bloody Noses. Why, Sir, I am the greatest
Loser, an you go to that, though it is you that are in the worst Pickle. It Is
true, I was weary of being a Governor, and gave over all Thoughts that Way; but
yet I never parted with my Inclination of being an Earl; and now if you miss
being a King, by casting off your Knight-Errantry, poor I may go whistle for my
Earldom. No more of that, Sancho, said Don Quixote; I shall only retire for a
Year, and then reassume my honorable Profession, which will undoubtedly secure
me a Kingdom, and thee an Earldom. Heaven grant it may, quoth Sancho, and no
Mischief betide us. Hope well and have well, says the Proverb.

Don Antonio coming in, broke off the Discourse, and with great Signs of Joy
calling to Don Quixote, Reward me, Sir, cried he, for my good News; Don
Gregorio and the Renegado are safe arrived, they are now at the Viceroy's
Palace, and will be here this Moment. The Knight was a little revived at this
News; truly, Sir, said he, to Don Antonio, I could almost be sorry for his good
Fortune, since he has forestalled the Glory I should have acquired in releasing
by the Strength of my Arm, not only him, but all the Christian Slaves in
Barbary. But whither am I transported, Wretch that I am? am I not miserably
conquered, shamefully overthrown! forbidden the Paths of Glory for a whole long
tedious Year? What, should I boast, who am fitter for a Distaff than a Sword!
No more of that, quoth Sancho. Better my Hog dirty at home, than no Hog at all.
To Day for thee, and to Morrow for me. Never lay this ill Fortune to Heart; he
that is down to Day, may be up to Morrow, unless he has a Mind to lie a bed.
Hang Bruises, so Rouse, Sir, and bid Don Gregorio welcome to Spain; for by the
Hurry in the House, I believe he is come; and so it happened, for Don Gregorio
having paid his Duty to the Viceroy, and given him an Account of his Delivery,
was just arrived at Don Antonio's with the Renegado, very impatient to see Anna
Felix. He had changed the Female Habit, he wore when he was freed, for one
suitable to his Sex, which he had from a Captive who came along with him in the
Vessel, and appeared a very amiable and handsome Gentleman, though not above
eighteen Years of Age. Ricote and his Daughter went out to meet him, the Father
with Tears, and the Daughter with a joyful Modesty. Their Salutation was
reserved without an Embrace, their Love being too refined for any loose
Behavior: But their Beauties surpised every Body; Silence was emphatical in
their Joys, and their Eyes spoke more Love than their Tongues could express.
The Renegado gave a short Account of the Success of his Voyage, and Don
Gregorio briefly related the Shifts he was put to among the Women in his
Confinement, which showed his Wit and Discretion to be much above his Years.
Ricote gratified the Ship's Crew very nobly, and particularly the Renegado, who
was once more received into the Bosom of the Church, having with due Penance
and sincere Repentance purified himself from all his former Uncleanness.

Some few Days after, the Viceroy, in concert with Don Antonio, took such
Measures as were expedient, to get the Banishment of Ricote and his Daughter
repealed, judging it no Inconvenience to the Nation, that so just and orthodox
Persons should remain among 'em. Don Antonio being obliged to go to Court about
some other Matters, offered to solicit in their behalf, hinting to him, that,
through the Intercession of Friends and more powerful Bribes, many difficult
Matters were brought about there to the Satisfaction of the Parties. There is
no relying upon Favor and Bribes in our Business said Ricote, who was by, for
the great Don Bernardino de Vel^sco, Count de Salazar, to whom the King gave
the Charge of our Expulsion is a Person of too strict and rigid Justice, to be
moved either by Money, Favor, or Affection; and though I cannot deny him the
Character of a merciful Judge in other Matters, yet his piercing and diligent
Policy finds the Body of our Moriscan Race to be so corrupted, that Amputation
is the only Cure. He is an Argus in his Ministry, and by his watchful Eyes has
discovered the most secret Springs of their Machination, and resolving to
prevent the Danger which the whole Kingdom was in, from such a powerful
Multitude of inbred Foes, he took the most effectual Means; for after all,
lopping off the Branches may only prune the Tree, and make the poisonous Fruit
spring faster, but to overthrow it from the Root, proves a sure Deliverance;
nor can the Great Philip the Third be too much extolled; first, for his Heroic
Resolution in so nice and weighty an Affair, and then for his Wisdom in
entrusting Don Bernardino de Velasco with the Execution of this Design. Well,
when I come to Court, said Don Antonio to Ricote, I will however use the most
advisable Means, and leave the rest to Providence. Don Gregorio shall go with
me to comfort his Parents, that have long mourned for his Absence. Anna Felix
shall stay here with my Wife, or in some Monastery; and as for honest Ricote, I
dare engage the Viceroy will be satisfied to let him remain under his
Protection till he sees how I succeed. The Viceroy consented to all this; but
Don Gregorio fearing the worst, was unwilling to leave his fair Misstress;
however, considering that he might return to her after he had seen his Parents,
he yielded to the Proposal, and so Anna Felix remained with Don Antonio's Lady,
and Ricote with the Viceroy.

Two Days after Don Quixote being somewhat recovered, took his Leave of Don
Antonio, and having caused his Armor to be laid on Dapple, he set forwards on
his Journey home. Sancho thus being forced to trudge after him on Foot. On the
other Side, Don Gregorio bid adieu to Anna Felix, and their Separation, though
but for a while, was attended with Floods of Tears, and all the Excess of
passionate Sorrow. Ricote offered him a thousand Crowns, but he refused them,
and only borrowed five of Don Antonio to repay him at Court.

CHAP. LXVI. Which treats of that which shall be seen by him that reads it, and
heard by him that listens when it is read.
DON Quixote as he went out of Barcelona, cast his Eyes on the Spot of Ground
where he was overthrown. Here once Troy stood, said he; here my unhappy Fate,
and not my Cowardice, deprived me of all the Glories I had purchased; here
Fortune, by an unexpected Reverse, made me sensible of her Turns and
Fickleness. Here my Exploits suffered a total Eclipse; and, in short, here fell
my Happiness, never to rise again. Sancho hearing his Master thus dolefully
paraphrasing on his Misfortune, Good Sir, quoth he, it is as much the Part of
great Hearts to have Patience when the World frowns upon 'em, as to be joyful
when all goes well: And I judge of it by my self; for if when I was a Governor
I was merry, now I am but a poor Squire afoot I am not sad. And indeed I have
heard say, that this same Shething they call Fortune, is a whimsical freakish
drunken Queen, and blind into the Bargain; so that she neither sees what she
does, nor knows whom she raises, nor whom she casts down. Thou art very much a
Philosopher, Sancho, said Don Quixote, thou talk very sensibly. I wonder how
thou came by all this; but I must tell thee there is no such Thing as Fortune
in the World; nor does any Thing that happens here below of Good or Ill come by
Chance, but by the particular Providence of Heaven; and this makes good the
Proverb, That every Man may thank himself for his own Fortune. For my Part, I
have been the Artificer of mine, but for Want of using the Discretion I ought
to have used, all my presumptuous Edifice sunk and tumbled down at once. I
might well have considered, that Rosinante was too weak and feeble to withstand
the Knight of the White Moon's huge and strong-built Horse. However, I would
needs adventure, I did the best I could, and was overcome. Yet though it has cost
me my Honor, I have not lost, nor can I lose my Integrity to perform my
Promise: When I was a Knight Errant, valiant and bold, the Strength of my Arms
and my Actions gave a Reputation to my Deeds; and now I am no more than a
dismounted Squire, the Performance of my Promise shall give a Reputation to my
Words. Trudge on then, Friend Sancho, and let us get home to pass the Year of
our Probation. In that Retirement we shall recover new Vigor to return to
that, which is never to be forgotten by me, I mean the Profession of Arms. Sir,
quoth Sancho, it is no such Pleasure to beat the Hoof as I do, that I should be
for large Marches. Let us hang up this Armor of yours upon some Tree, in the
Room of one of those Highway-Men that hang thereabouts in Clusters, and when I
am got upon Dapple's Back, we will ride as fast as you please; for to think I
can mend my Pace, and foot it all the Way, is what you must excuse me in. Thou
have spoken to the Purpose Sancho, said Don Quixote, let my Arms be hung up for
a Trophy, and underneath, or about 'em, we will carve on the Bark of the Trees
the same Inscription, which was written near the Trophy of Orlando's Arms.

Let none but he these Arms displace,
Who dares Orlando's Fury Face.
Why, this is as I Would have it, quoth Sancho; and were it not that we shall want
Rosinante upon the Road, 'twere not amiss to leave him hanging too. Now I think
better on it, said Don Quixote, neither the Armor nor the Horse shall be served
so. It shall never be said of me, For good Service, bad Reward. Why that is well
said, quoth Sancho, for indeed it is a Saying among Wise Men, that the Fault of
the Ass must not be laid on the Pack-saddle, and therefore, since in this last
Job you your self were in Fault, even punish your self, and let not your Fury
wreck it self upon your poor Armor, bruised and battered with doing you
Service, nor upon the Tameness of Rosinante, that good conditioned Beast, nor
yet upon the Tenderness of my Feet, requiring them to travel more than they
ought.

They passed that Day, and four more after that, in such Kind of Discourse,
without meeting any Thing that might interrupt their Journey; but on the fifth
Day, as they entered into a Country-Town, they saw a great Company of People at
an Inn-Door, being got together for Pastime, as being a Holiday. As soon as Don
Quixote drew near, he heard one of the Countrymen cry to the rest, look ye
now, we'll leave it to one of these two Gentlemen that are coming this Way,
they know neither of the Parties. Let either of 'em decide the Matter. That I
will with all my Heart, said Don Quixote, and with all the Equity imaginable;
if you will but state the Case right to me. Why, Sir, said the Countryman, the
Business is this, One of our Neighbors here in this Town, so fat, and so
heavy, that he weighs eleven Arrobas, or eleven Quarters of a Hundred, (for
that is the same Thing) has challenged another Man of this Town, that weighs not
half so much, to run with him a hundred Paces with equal Weight. Now he that
gave the Challenge, being asked how they should make equal Weight, demands that
the other who weighs but five Quarters of a Hundred, should carry a hundred and
a half of Iron, and so the Weight, he says, will be equal. Hold, Sir, cried
Sancho, before Don Quixote could answer, this Business belongs to me, that come
so lately from being a Governor, and a Judge, as all the World knows; I ought
to give Judgment in this doubtful Case. Do then, with all my Heart, Friend
Sancho, said Don Quixote, for I am not sit to give Crumbs to a Cat, my Brain is
so disturbed, and out of order. Sancho having thus got leave, and all the
Countrymen standing about him, gaping to hear him give Sentence. Brothers,
quoth he, I must tell you, that the fat Man is in the wrong Box, there is no
manner of Reason in what he asks; for if, as I always heard say, he that is
challenged may choose his Weapons, there is no Reason that he should choose such
as may encumber him, and hinder him from getting the better of him that defied
him. Therefore it is my Judgment, that he who gave the Challenge, and is so big
and so fat, shall cut, pare, slice, or shave off a hundred and sifty Pounds of
his Flesh, here and there, as he thinks fit; and then being reduced to the
Weight of the the other, both Parties may run their Race upon equal Terms. By
fore George, quoth one of the Country People that had heard the Sentence, this
Gentleman has spoken like one of the Saints in Heaven; he has given Judgment
like a Casuist; but I warrant the Fat Squob loves his Flesh too well to part
with the least Sliver of it, much less will he part with a Hundred and half.
Why then, quoth another Fellow, the best Way will be not to let 'em run at all;
for then Lean need not venture to sprain his Back by running with such a Load;
and Fat need not cut out his pampered sides into Collops: So let half the Wager
be spent in Wine, and lets take these Gentlemen to the Tavern that has the
best, and lay the Cloak upon me when it rains. I return ye Thanks, Gentlmen,
said Don Quixote, but cannot stay a Moment, for dismal Thoughts and Disasters
force me to appear unmannerly, and to travel at an uncommon Rate; and so saying
he clapped Spurs to Rosinante, and moved forwards, leaving the People to
descant on his strange Figure, and the rare Parts of his Groom, for such they
took Sancho to be. If the Man be so wise, quoth another of the Country-Fellows
to the rest, bless us! What shall we think of the Master! 'Ill hold a Wager, if
they be going to study at Salamanca, they will come to be Lord Chief-Justices
in a trice; for there is nothing more easy, it is but Studying and Studying
again, and having a little Favor, and good Luck; and when a Man least Dreams
of it, see, he shall find himself with a Judge's Gown upon his Back, or a
Bishop's Mitre upon his Head.

That Night the Master and the Man took up their Lodging in the Middle of a
Field, under the Roof of the open Sky; and the next Day, as they were on their
Journey, they saw coming toward 'em, a Man a-foot with a Wallet about his
Neck, and a Javelin or Dart in his Hand, just like a Foot-Post: This Man mended
his Pace when he came near Don Quixote, and almost running, came, with a great
deal of Joy in his Looks, and embraced Don Quixote's right Thigh, for he could
reach no higher. My Lord, Don Quixote de la Mancha, cried he, oh! how heartily
glad my Lord Duke will be when he understands you are coming again to his
Castle, for there he is still with my Lady Duchess. I don't know you Friend,
answered Don Quixote, nor can I imagine who you should be, unless you tell me
your self. My Name is Tosilos, an't please your Honor; I am my Lord Duke's
Footman, the same who would not fight with you about Donna Rodriguez's
Daughter. Bless me, cried Don Quixote, is it possible you should be the Man
whom those Enemies of mine, the Magicians, transformed into a Lacquey, to
deprive me of the Honor of that Combat? Softly, good Sir, replied the Footman,
there was neither Enchantment nor Transformation in the Case. I was as much a
Footman when I entered the Lists, as when I went out; and it was because I had
a Mind to marry the young Gentlewoman, that I refused to fight. But I was sadly
disappointed; for when you were gone, my Lord Duke had me soundly banged, for
not doing as he ordered me in that Matter; and the Upshot was this, Donna
Rodriguez is packed away to seek her Fortune, and the Daughter is shut up in a
Nunnery. As for me, I am going to Barcelona, with a Packet of Letters from my
Lord to the Viceroy. However, Sir, if you please to take a Sup, I have a Gourd
full of good Wine at your Service. It Is a little hot, I must own, but it is
pure, and I have some excellent Cheese, that will make it go down, I Will warrant
ye. I take you at your Word, quoth Sancho, I am no proud Man, leave Ceremonies
to the Church, and so drink, honest Tosilos, in spite of all the Inchanters in
the Indies. Well Sancho, said Don Quixote, thou art certainly the veryest
Glutton that ever was, and the silliest Blockhead in the World, else thou
would consider that this Man thou see here, is enchanted, and a
sham-Lacquey. Even stay with him if thou would, and gratify thy voracious
Appetite, for my Part, I Will ride softly on before. Tosilos smiled, and laying
his Bottle and his Cheese upon the Grass, he and Sancho sat down there, and
like sociable Mess-Mates, never stirred till they had quite cleared the Wallet
of all that was in it sit for the Belly; and this with such an Appetite, that
when all was consumed, they licked the very Packet of Letters, because it smelt
of Cheese. While they were thus employed, hang me, quoth Tosilos, if I know
what to make of thy Master; sure the Man's mad, Neither better nor worse,
answered Sancho; for take my Word for it, Old Boy, if Madness were to pass for
current Coin, he has such a Stock of it, he would be the richest Man in the
Kingdom. I see it plain enough, and tell him of it often enough, but what does
it signify? Especially now that he is all in the Dumps, for having been worsted
by the Knight of the White Moon. Tosilos begged of Sancho to tell him that
Story; but Sancho said it would not be handsome to let his Master stay for him,
but that next time they met he would tell him the whole Matter. With that they got
up, and after the Squire had brushed his Clothes, and shaken off the Crumbs
from his Beard, he drove Dapple along; and crying good by to ye, left Tosilos,
in order to overtake his Master; who staid for him under the Covert of a Tree.

CHAP. LXVII. How Don Quixote resolved to turn Shepherd, and lead a rural Life,
for the Year's time he was obliged not to bear Arms; with other Passages truly
good and diverting.
IF Don Quixote was much disturbed in Mind before his Overthrow, he was much
more disquieted after it. While he stayed for his Squire under a Tree, a
thousand Thoughts crowded into his Head, like Flies into a Honey-Pot^;
sometimes he pondered on the Means to free Dulcinea from Enchantment, and at
others, on the Life he was to lead during his involuntary Retirement. In this
brown Study, Sancho, came up to him, crying up Tosilos as the honestest Fellow,
and the most Gentleman-like Footman in the World. Is it possible, Sancho, said
Don Quixote, thou should still take that Man for a real Lacquey? Have thou
forgot how thou saw Dulcinea converted and transformed into the Resemblance
of a rustic Wench, and the Knight of the Mirrours into the Bachelor Ca rasco;
and all this by the Negromantick Arts of those evil-minded Magicians, that
persecute me? But laying this aside, prithee tell me, did thou not ask
Tosilos what became of Altisidora: Whether she bemoaned my Absence, or
dismissed from her Breast those amorous Sentiments that disturbed her when I
was near her? Faith and Troth, quoth Sancho, my Head ran on something else, and
I was too well employed to think of such foolish Stuff. Body of me! Sir, are
you now in a Mood to ask about other Folks Thoughts, especially their
Love-thoughts too? Look you, said Don Quixote, there is a great deal of
Difference between those Actions that proceed from Love, and those that are the
Effect of Gratitude. It is possible a Gentleman should be not at all amorous,
but strictly speaking, he cannot be ungrateful. It Is very likely that
Altisidora loved me well, she presented me, as thou know, with three
Night-Caps; she wept, and took on when I went away; cursed me, abused me, and
in spite of Modesty, gave a Loose to her Passion; all Tokens that she was
deeply in Love with me, for the Anger of Lovers commonly vents it self in
Curses. It was not in my Power to give her any Hopes, nor had I any costly
Present to bestow on her; for all I have reserved, is for Dulcinea, and the
Treasures of a Knight Errant are but Fairy-Gold, and a delusive Good. So all I
can do, is only to remember the unfortunate Fair, without Prejudice however to
the Rights of my Dulcinea, whom thou greatly injur'st Sancho, by delaying the
Accomplishment of the Penance that must free the poor Lady from Misery. And
since thou art so ungenerously sparing of that pampered Hide of thine, may I
see it devoured by Wolves, rather than see it kept so charily for the Wo^ms.
Sir, quoth Sancho, to deal plainly with you, it cannot for the Blood of me,
enter into my Head, that Jirking my Backside will signify a Straw to the
Dis-inchanting of the Enchanted. Sir, it is as if we should say, If your Head
aches, Anoint your Shins. At least, I dare be sworn, that in all the Stories of
Knight-Errantry, you have thumb'd over, you never knew Flogging unbewitch any
Body. However, when I can find my self in the Humor, do you see, I Will about it;
when Time serves I Will chastise my self, never fear. I wish thou would,
answered Don Quixote, and may Heaven give thee Grace at last to understand how
much it is thy Duty to relieve thy Mistress; for as she is mine, by Consequence
she is thine, since thou belong'st to me.

Thus they went on talking, till they came near the Place where the Bulls had
run over 'em, and Don Quixote knowing it again, Sancho, said he, yonder is that
Meadow where we met the fine Shepherdesses, and the gallant Shepherds, who had
a Mind to renew or imitate the pastoral Arcadia. 'Twas certainly a new and
ingenious Conceit. If thou think well of it, we'll follow their Example, and
turn Shepherds too, at least for the Time I am to lay aside the Profession of
Arms, I Will buy a Flock of Sheep, and every Thing that is fit for a pastoral
Life, and so calling my self the Shepherd Quixot^s, and thee the Shepherd
Pansino, we'll range the Woods, the Hills and Meadows, singing and versifying.
We'll drink the liquid Crystal, sometimes out of the Fountains, and sometimes
from the purling Brooks, and the swift gliding Streams The Oaks, the Cork
Trees, and Chesnut-Trees, will afford us both Lodging and Diet. The Willows
will yield us their Melancholic Shade; the Roses present us their inoffensive
Sweets; and the spacious Meads will be our Carpets, diversified with Colors of
all Sorts: Blessed with the purest Air, and unconfined alike, we shall breathe
that and Freedom. The Moon and Stars, our Tapers of the Night, shall light our
Evening Walks. Light Hearts will make us merry, and Mirth will make us sing.
Love will inspire us with a Theme and Wit, and Apollo with harmonious Lays. So
shall we become famous, not only while we live, but make our Loves Eternal as
our Songs. As I live, quoth Sancho, this Sort of Life nicks me to an Hair; and
I fancy that if the Bachelor, Samson Carrasco and Master Nicholas have but
once a Glimpse of it, they will even turn Shepherds too; nay, it is well if the
Curate does not put in for one among the rest, for he is a notable Joaker, and
merrily inclined. That was well thought on, said Don Quixote: And then if the
Bachelor will make one among us, as I doubt not but he will, he may call
himself the Shepherd Samsonio, or Carrascon; and Master Nicholas, Niculoso, as
formerly old Boscan called himself N^moroso: For the Curate, I don't well know
what Name we shall give him, unless we should call him the Shepherd Curiambro.
As for the Shepherdesses with whom we must fall in Love, we cannot be at a loss
to find 'em Names, there are enough for us to pick and choose; and since my
Mistress's Name is not improper for a Shepherdess, any more than for a
Princess, I will not trouble my self to get a better; thou may call thine as
thou please. For my Part, quoth Sancho, I don't think of any other Name for
mine but Teresona, that will fit her fat Sides full well, and is taken from her
Christian Name too, so when I come to mention her in my Verses, every Body will
know her to be my Wife, and commend my Honesty, as being one that is not for
picking another Man's Lock: As for the Curate, he must be contented without a
Sheperdess, for good Example's sake. And for the Bachelor, let him take his
own Choice, if he means to have one. Bless me, said Don Quixote! What a Life
shall we lead! What a Melody of Oaten Reeds, and Zamora Bag-pipes shall we have
resounding in the Air! What Intermixture of Tabors, Morrice-Bells, and Fiddles!
and if to all the different Instruments we add those Kind of Flutes which we
call the Albogues, we shall have all Manner of pastoral Music. What are the
Albogues, quoth Sancho? They, said Don Quixote, are a Sort of Instruments made
of Brass-Plates, rounded like Candlesticks: The one shutting into the other,
there arises through the holes, or stops, and the Trunk or Hollow, an odd
Sound, which, if not very grateful, or harmonious, is however not altogether
disagreeable, but does well enough with the Rusticity of Pipe and Tabor. You
must know, the Word is Moorish or Arabic, as indeed are all those in our
Spanish, that begin with an Al, as Almoaza, Almorzar, Alhombra, Alguasil,
Alucema, Almacen, Alcanzia, and the like, which are not very many. And we have
also three Moorish Words in our Tongue that end in I; and they are Barcequi,
Zaquicami and Maravedi; for as to Alheli and Alsaqui, they are as well known to
be Arabic by their beginning with All, as their ending in I. I could not
forebear telling thee so much by the Bye, thy Quere about Albogue having
brought it into my Head. There is one Thing more that will go a great Way
toward making us complete in our new Kind of Life; and that is Poetry; thou
know I am somewhat given that Way, and the Bachelor Carrasco is a most
accomplished Poet; to say nothing of the Curate; though I Will hold a Wager he is a
Dabbler in it too, and so is Master Nicholas, I dare say; for all your Barbers
are notable Scrapers and Songsters. For my Part, I Will complain of Absence, thou
shall celebrate thy own Loyalty and Constancy, the Shepherd Carrascon shall
expostulate on his Sheperdess's Disdain, and the Pastor Curiambro choose any
other Subject that will fit his Circumstances; and so every Thing will be
managed to our Hearts Content. Alas! quoth Sancho, I am so unlucky, that I
fear me, I shall never live to see these blessed Days. How shall I lick up the
Curds and Cream! I Will never be without a wooden Spoon in my Pocket. Oh, how
many of them will I make! What Garlands, and what pretty pastoral Fancies will
I contrive! which though they may not recommend me for Discretion, will make me
pass for a clever Fellow. My Daughter Sanchica shall bring us our Dinner a
^ield. But hold, have a Care of that! she is a young likely Wench, and some
Shepherds are more Knaves than Fools, and I would not have my Girl go out for
Wool, and come home shorn; for Love, and wicked Doings are to be found in the
Fields, as well as in Cities; and in a Shepherd's Co^, as well as in a King's
Palace. Take away the Cause, and the Effect ceases; what the Eye never sees,
the Heart never rues. One Pair of Heels is worth two Pair of Hands, and we must
watch as well as pray. No more old Saws, Sancho, cried Don Quixote; any one of
these is enough to make us know thy Meaning. I have told thee often enough not
to be so lavish of thy Proverbs; but it is all lost upon thee: I preach in a
Desert, my Mother whips me, and I whip the Top. Faith and Troth, quoth Sancho,
this is just as the Saying is, the Porridge-Pot calls the Kettle Black-Arse. --
You chide me for speaking Proverbs, and yet you bring 'em out two at a Time.
Look you, Sancho, those I speak, are to the Purpose, but thou fetchest thine in
by Head and Shoulders, to their utter Disgrace, and thy own. But no more at
this Time, it grows late, let us leave the Road a little, and take up our
Quarters yonder in the Fields; to Morrow will be a new Day. They did
accordingly, and made a slender Meal, as little to Sancho's liking as his hard
Lodging; which brought the Hardships of Knight-Erranting fresh into his
Thoughts; and made him wish for the better Entertainment he had sometimes
found, as at Don Diego's, Camacho's, and Don Antonio's Houses; but he
considered after all, that it could not be always fair Weather, nor was it
always foul; so he betook himself to his Rest till Morning, and his Master to
the usual Exercise of his roving Imaginations.

CHAP. LXVIII. The Adventure of the Hogs.
THE Night was pretty dark, though the Moon still kept her Place in the Sky; but
it was in such a Part as obliged her to be invisible to us; for now and then
Madam Diana takes a Turn to the Antipodes, and then the Mountains in Black, and
the Valleys in Darkness, mourn her Ladiship's Absence. Don Quixote, after his
first Sleep, thought Nature sufficiently refreshed, and would not yield to the
Temptations of a second. Sancho, indeed did not enjoy a second; but from a
different Reason; for he usually made but one Nap of the whole Night, which was
owing to the Soundness of his Constitution, and his Unexperience of Cares that
lay so heavy upon Don Quixote.

Sancho, said the Knight, after he had pulled the Squire till he had waked him
too, I am amazed at the Insensibility of thy Temper. Thou art certainly made of
Marble or solid Brass, thou lie without either Motion or Feeling. Thou
sleep'st while I wake, thou sing'st while I mourn, and while I am ready to
faint for Want of Sustenance, thou art lazy and unwieldy with mere Gluttony. It
is the Part of a good Servant, to share in the Afflictions of his Master.
Observe the Stillness of the Night, and the solitary Place we are in. It Is Pity
such an Opportunity should be lost in Sloth, and unactive Rest; Rouse for
Shame, step a little aside, and with a good Air, and a cheerful Heart score me
up some three or four Hundred Lashes upon thy Back, toward the Disinchanting
of Dulcinea. This I make my earnest Entreaty, being resolved never to be rough
with thee again upon this Account; for I must confess thou can lay a heavy
Hand on a Man upon Occasion. When that Performance is over, we'll pass the
Remainder of the Night in Singing, I of Absence, and thou of Constancy, and so
begin those pastoral Exercises, which are to be our Employment at Home. Sir,
answered Sancho, do you take me for a Monk or Friar, that I should start up in
the middle of the Night, and discipline my self at this Rate? Or do you think
it such an easy Matter to scourge and clapper-claw my Back one Moment, and
fall a Singing the next? Look you, Sir, say not a Word more of this Whipping;
for as I love my Flesh, you will put me upon making some rash Oath or other that
you will not like, and then if the bare brushing of my Coat would do you any Good,
you should not have it, much less the currying of my Hide, and so let me go to
Sleep again. Oh obdurate Heart, cried Don Quixote! Oh, Impious Squire! Oh
Nourishment and Favors ill bestowed! Is this my Reward for having got thee a
Government, and my good Intentions to get thee an Earldom, or an Equivalent at
least. Which I dare engage to do when this Year of our Obscurity is elapsed;
for in short, Post tenebras spero lucem. That I don't understand, quoth Sancho,
but this I very well know, that while I am asleep. I feel neither Hope nor
Despair; I am free from Pain at least, if not from Pleasure. Now Blessings
light on him that first invented this same Sleep. It covers a Man all over,
Thoughts and all, like a Cloak; it is Meat for the Hungry, Drink for the
Thirsty, Heat for the Cold, and Cold for the Hot. It Is the current Coin that
purchases all the Pleasures of the World cheap; and the Balance that sets the
King and the Shepherd, the Fool and the Wiseman even. There is only one Thing,
which Somebody once put into my Head, that I dislike in Sleep; it is, that it
resembles Death, there is very little Difference between a Man in his first
Sleep, and a Man in his last Sleep. Most elegantly spoken, said Don Quixote!
Thou have much outdone any Thing I ever heard thee say before, which confirms
me in the Truth of one of thy own Proverbs: Birth is much, but Breeding more.
God's me! Master of mine, cried Sancho, I Am not the only he now that threads
Proverbs, for you tack 'em together faster than I do, I think. I see no
Difference but that yours come in Season, and mine out of Season, but for all
that, they are all but Proverbs.

Thus they were employed, when their Ears were alarmed with a Kind of a hoarse
and grunting Noise, that spread it self over all the adjacent Valleys.
Presently Don Quixote started up on his Legs, and laid his Hand to his Sword;
as for Sancho, he immediately set up some Intrenchments about him, clapping the
Bundle of Armor on one Side, and fortifying the other with the Ass's
Pack-saddle, and then he nested himself all up, and squatted under Dapple's
Belly, where he lay snug, and panting, as full of Fears as his Master of
Surprise; and every Moment the Noise grew louder as the Cause of it approached,
to the Terror of the one, at least; for as for the other, it is sufficiently known
what his Valor was.

Now the Occasion was this: Some Fellows were driving a Herd of above six
hundred Swine to a certain Fair; and with their grunting and squeaking, the
filthy Beasts made such a horrible Noise that Don Quixote and Sancho were
almost stunned with it, and could not imagine whence it proceeded. But at
length the Knight and Squire standing in their Way, the rude Swinish Animals
came thronging up all in a Body, and without any Respect of Persons, some
running between the Knight's Legs, and some between the Squire's, threw down
both Master and Man, having not only insulted Sancho's Intrenchments, but also
thrown down Rosinante: And having thus broke in upon 'em, on they went, and
bore down all before 'em, overthrowing Pack-saddle, Armor, Knight, Squire,
Horse and all; crouding, treading and trampling over them all at a horrid rate.
Sancho was the first that made a shift to recover his Legs, and having by this
time found out what the Matter was, he called to his Master to lend him his
Sword, and swore he would stick at least half a dozen of those rude Porkers
immediately. No, no, my Friend, said Don Quixote, let 'em even go; Heaven
inflicts this Disgrace upon my guilty Head, for it is but a just Punishment that
Dogs should devour, Hornets sting, and vile Hogs trample on a vanquished
Knight Errant. And belike, quoth Sancho, that Heaven sends the Fleas to sting,
the Lice to bite, and Hunger to famish us poor Squires, for keeping these
vanquished Knights Company. If we Squires were the Sons of those Knights, or
any ways related to 'em, why then something might be said for our bearing a
Share of their Punishment, though it were to the third and fourth Generation. But
what have the Panca's to do with the Quixotes? Well, let us to our old Places
again, and sleep out the little that is left of the Night. To Morrow is a new
Day. Sleep Sancho, cried Don Quixote, sleep, for thou were born to sleep but I,
who was designed to be still waking, intend before Aurora ushers in the Sun, to
give a Loose to my Thoughts, and vent my Conceptions in a Madrigal that I made
last Night, unknown to thee. Methinks, quoth Sancho, a Man cannot be in great
Affliction, when he can turn his Brain to the making of Verses. Therefore, you
may versify on, as long as you please, and I Will sleep it out as much as I can.
This said, he laid himself down on the Ground, as he thought best, and hunching
himself close together, fell fast asleep, without any Disturbance from either
Debts, Suretiship, or any Care whatsoever. On the other side. Don Quixote
leaning against the Trunk of a Beech, or a Cork-Tree (for it is not determined
by Cid Hamet which it was) sung in Consort with his Sighs, the following
Composition.

A SONG to LOVE.
Whenever I think what a mighty Pain
The Slave must bear who drags thy Chain,
Oh! Love, for Ease to Death I go,
The Cure of Thee, the Cure of Life and Woe.
But when, alas! I think I Am sure
Of that which must by Killing Cure,
The Pleasure that I feel in Death,
Proves a strong Cordial to restore my Breath.
Thus Life each Moment makes me die,
And Death it self new Life can give:
I Hopeless, and Tormented lie,
And neither truly Die nor Live.
The many Tears as well as Sighs that accompanied this musical Complaint, were
a Sign that the Knight had deeply laid to Heart his late Defeat, and the
Absence of his Dulcinea.

Now Day came on, and the Sun darting his Beams on Sancho's Face, at last
awaked him; whereupon, rubbing his Eyes, and yawning, and stretching his drowsy
Limbs, he perceived the Havoc that the Hogs had made in his Baggage, which
made him wish, not only the Herd, but Somebody else at the Devil and further.
In short, the Knight and the Squire both set forward on their Journey, and
about the Close of the Evening they discovered some half a Score Horsemen, and
four or five Fellows on Foot, making directly toward them. Don Quixote at the
Sight, felt a strange Emotion in his Breast, and Sancho fell a shivering from
Head to Foot; for they perceived that these Strangers were provided with Spears
and Shields, and other warlike Implements. Whereupon the Knight turning to the
Squire, Ah! Sancho, said he, were it lawful for me at this Time, to practice
Feats of Arms, and had I my Hand at Liberty from my Promise, what a joyful
Sight should I esteem this Squadron that approaches! But now -- however,
notwithstanding my present Apprehensions, Things may fall out better than we
expect.

By this Time the Horsemen with their Lances advanced, came close up to them
without speaking a Word, and encompassing Don Quixote in a menacing Manner,
with their Points levelled to his Back and Breast, one of the Footmen by laying
his Finger upon his Mouth, signified to Don Quixote, that he must be mute; then
taking Rosinante by the Bridle, he led him out of the Road, while the rest of
the Footmen had secured Sancho and Dapple, and drove 'em silently before 'em.
Don Quixote attempted twice or thrice to ask the Cause of this Usage, but he no
sooner began to open, but they were ready to run the Heads of their Spears down
his Throat. Poor Sancho fared worse yet; for as he offered to speak, one of the
Foot-Guards gave him a Jagg with a Goad, and served Dapple as bad, though the
poor Beast had no Thought of saying a Word.

As it grew Night they mended their Pace, and then the Darkness increased the
Fears of the Captive Knight and Squire; especially when every Minute their Ears
were tormented with these or such like Words. On, on ye Troglodytes; Silence,
ye Barbarian Slaves; Vengeance, ye Anthropophagi; Grumble not, ye Scythians; Be
blind, ye Murdering Polyphemes, ye devouring Lions. Bless us (thought Sancho)
what Names do they calls us here* Trollopites, Barber's Slaves, and Andrew
Hodgepodgy, City-Cans, and Bur-frames I don't like the Sound of 'em. Here Is one
Mischief on the Neck of another. When a Man's down, down with him. I would
compound for a good dry Beating, and glad to 'scape so too. Don Quixote was no
less perplexed, not being able to imagine the Reason either of their hard
Usage, or scurrilous Language, which hitherto promised but little Good. At
last, after they had rode about an Hour in the Dark, they came to the Gates of
a Castle, which Don Quixote presently knowing to be the Duke's, where he had so
lately been, Heaven bless me, cried he, what do I see! Was not this the Mansion
of Civility and Humanity! But thus the Vanquished are doomed to see every Thing
frown upon 'em. With that the two Prisoners were led into the great Court of
the Castle, and found such strange Preparations made there, as increased at
once their Fear, and their Amazement; as we shall find in the next Chapter.

CHAP. LXIX. Of the most singular and strangest Advenventure that befell Don
Quixote, in the whole Course of this famous History.
ALL the Horsemen alighted, and the Footmen snatching up Don Quixote and
Sancho in their Arms hurried 'em into the Courtyard that was illuminated with
above a hundred Torches, six'd in huge Candle-sticks; and about all the
Galleries round the Court, were placed above five hundred Lights, insomuch that
all was Day in the Midst of the Darkness of the Night. In the Middle of the
Court there was a Tomb, raised some two Yards from the Ground, with a large
Pall of black Velvet over it, and round about it a hundred Tapers of
Virgins-Wax, stood burning in Silver-Candlesticks. Upon the Tomb lay the Body
of a young Damsel, who, though to all Appearance, dead, was yet so beautiful,
that Death it self seemed lovely in her Face. Her Head was crowned with a
Garland of fragrant Flowers, and supported by a Pillow of Cloth of Gold, and
in her Hands that laid across her Breast, was seen a Branch of that yellow
Palm, that used of old to adorn the Triumphs of Conquerors. On one Side of the
Court, there was a Kind of a Theater erected, on which two Personages sat in
Chairs, who by the Crowns upon their Heads, and Scepters in their Hands, were,
or at least appeared to be Kings. By the Side of the Theater, at the Foot of
the Steps by which the Kings ascended, two other Chairs were placed, and
thither Don Quixote and Sancho were led, and caused to sit down; the Guards
that conducted 'em continuing silent all the while, and making their Prisoners
understand by awful Signs that they must also be silent. But there was no great
Occasion for that Caution; for their Surprise was so great, that it had tied up
their Tongues with Amazement.

At the same Time, two other Persons of Note ascended the Stage, with a
numerous Retinue, and seated themselves on two stately Chairs by the two
Theatrical Kings. These Don Quixote presently knew to be the Duke and Duchess,
at whose Palace he had been so nobly entertained. But what he discovered as the
greatest Wonder, was that the Corpse upon the Tomb was the Body of the fair
Altisidora.

As Soon as the Duke and Duchess had ascended, Don Quixote and Sancho made 'em
a^ profound Obeisance, which they returned with a short declining of their
Heads. Upon this a certain Officer entered the Court, and coming up to Sancho,
he clapped over him a black Buckram-Frock, all figured over with Flames of
Fire, and taking off his Cap, he put on his Head a Kind of Mitre, such as is
worn by those who undergo public Penance by the Inquisition; whispering him in
the Ear at the same Time, that if he did but offer to open his Lips, they would
put a Gag in his Mouth, or murder him to rights. Sancho viewed himself over
from Head to Foot, and was a little startled to see himself all over in Fire
and Flames, but yet since he did not feel himself burn, he cared not a
Farthing. He pulled off his Mitre, and found it pictured over with Devils, but
he put it on again, and bethought himself, that since neither the Flames burned
him, nor the Devils ran away with him, 'twas well enough. Don Quixote also
steadfastly surveyed him, and in the Midst of all his Apprehensions, could not
forbear smiling to see what a strange Figure he made. And now in the midst of
that profound Silence, while every Thing was mute, and Expectation most
atrentive, a soft and charming Symphony of Flutes, that seemed to issue from
the Hollow of the Tomb, agreeably filled their Ears. Then there appeared at the
Head of the Monument, a young Man extremely handsome, and dressed in a Roman
Habit, who to the Music of a Harp, touched by himself, sung the following
Stanza's with an excellent Voice.

Altisidora's Dirge.
While slain the fair Altisidora lies,
A Victim to Don Quixote's cold Disdain;
Here all Things mourn, all Pleasure with her dies,
And Weeds of Woe disguise the Graces Train.
I Will Sing the Beauties of her Face and Mind,
Her hopeless Passion, her unhappy Fate:
No Orpheus's self in Numbers more refined,
Her Charms, her Love, her Sufferings could relate.
Nor shall the Fair alone in Life be sung,
Her boundless Praise is my immortal Choice:
In the cold Grave, when Death benums my Tongue,
For thee, bright Maid, my Soul shall find a Voice.
When from this narrow Cell my Spirit's free,
And wanders grieving with the Shades below,
Even over Oblivion's Waves I Will sing to thee:
And Hell it self shall sympathize in Woe.
Enough, cried one of the two Kings; no more, Divine Musician; it were an
endless Task to enumerate the Perfections of Altisidora, or give us the Story
of her Fate. Nor is she dead as the ignorant Vulgar surmises: No, in the Mouth
of Fame, she lives and once more shall revive, as soon as Sancho has undergone
the Penance, that is decreed to restore her to the World. Therefore, O
Rhadamanthus, thou who sit in joint Commission with me, in the opacous
Shades of Dis, tremendous Judge of Hell! Thou to whom the Decrees of Fate,
unscrutable to Mortals, are revealed, in order to restore this Damsel to Life,
open and declare 'em immediately, nor delay the promised Felicity of her Return
to comfort the drooping World.

Scarce had Minos finished his Charge, but Rhadamanthus starting up, proceed,
said he, ye Ministers and Officers of the Household, superior and inferior,
high and low; proceed one afrer another, and mark me Sancho's Face with twenty
four Twitches, give him twelve Pinches, and run six Pins into his Arms and
Backside; for Altisidora's Restoration depends on the Performance of this
Ceremony. Sancho hearing this, could hold out no longer, but bawling out, Body
of me! cried he, I Will as soon turn Turk, as give you Leave to do all this. You
shall put no Countenance of mine upon any such Mortification. What the Devil
can the spoiling of my Face signify to the restoring of this Damsel? I may as
soon turn up my broad End, and awaken her with a Gun. Dulcinea is bewitched,
and I forsooth must flogg my self, to free her from Witchcraft. And here is
Altisidora too, drops off of one Distemper or other, and presently poor Sancho
must be pulled by the Handle of his Face, his Skin filled with Oilet-holes, and
his Arms pinched black and blue, to save her from the Worms. No, no, you must
not think to put Tricks upon Travelers. An old Dog will learn no Tricks.
Relent, cried Rhadamanthus aloud, thou Tiger, submit proud Nimrod, suffer and
be silent or thou dy'st. No Impossibility is required from thee; and therefore
pretend nor to expostulate on the Severity of thy Doom. Thy Face shall receive
the Twitches, thy Skin shall be pinched, and groan under the Penance. Begin, I
say, ye Ministers of Justice, execute my Sentence, or upon the Honor of a Man,
ye shall curse the Hour ye were born. At the same Time six old Duena's or
Waiting-women appeared in the Court, marching in a formal Procession one after
another, four of 'em wearing Spectacles, and all with their right Hands held
aloft, and their Wrists, according to the Fashion, about four Inches bare, to
make their Hands seem the longer! Sancho no sooner spied them, but roaring out
like a Bull, do with me what you please, cried he, let a Sackfull of mad Cats
lay their Claws on me, as they did on my Master in this Castle, drill me
through with sharp Daggers, tear the Flesh from my Bones with red-hot Pincers,
I Will bear it with Patience, and serve your Worships. But the Devil shall run
away with me at once, before I Will suffer old waiting-women to lay a Finger upon
me. Don Quixote, upon this broke Silence, have Patience, my Son, cried he, and
resign thy self to these Potentates with Thanks to Heaven, for having endowed
thy Person with such a Gift, as to release the Enchanted, and raise the Dead
from the Grave.

By this the Waiting-women were advanced to Sancho, who after much Persuasion,
was at last wrought upon to settle himself in his Seat, and submit his Face and
Beard to the Female Executioners; the first that approached gave him a clever
Twich, and then dropped him a Curtsie. Less Courtesy and less Sauce, good Mrs.
Governante, cried Sancho; for by the Life of Pharaoh your Fingers stink of
Vinegar. In short, all the Waiting-women, and most of the Servants came and
^witch'd and pinched him decently, and he bore it all with unspeakable
Patience. But when they came to prick him with Pins, he could contain no
longer, but starting up in a pelting Chafe, snatched up one of the Torches that
stood near him, and swinging it round, put all the Women and the rest of his
Tormenters to their Heels. Avaunt, cried he, ye Imps of the Devil, do you think
that my Backside is made of Brass, or I intend to be your Master's Martyr.

At the same Time, Altisidora, who could not but be tired with lying so long
upon her Back, began to turn herself on one Side, which was no sooner perceived
by the Spectators, but they all set up the Cry, She lives, she lives!
Altisidora lives! And then Rhadamanthus addressing himself to Sancho, desired
him to be pacified, for now the wonderful Recovery was effected. On the other
Side, Don Quixote seeing Altisidora stir, went and threw himself on his Knees
before Sancho; my dear Son cried he, for now I will not call thee Squire, now
is the Hour for thee to receive some of the Lashes that are incumbent upon thee
for the Disinchanting of Dulcinea. This, I say, is the auspicious Time, when
the Virtue of thy Skin is most mature and efficacious for working the Wonders
that are expected from it. Out of the Drying Pan into the Fire, quoth Sancho: I
have brought my Hogs to a fair Market truly; after I have been twindg'd and
tweak'd by the Nose and every where, and my Buttocks stuck all over, and made a
Pin-cushion, I must be now whipped like a Top, must I? If you have a Mind to make
an End of me at once, cannot you as well tie a handsome Stone about my Neck, and
tip me over into a Well. Better make an End of me at once, than have me loaded
so every foot like a Pack-horse with other Folks Burdens. Look ye, say but one
Word more to me of any such Thing, and on my Soul, all the Fat shall be in the
Fire.

By this Time, Altisidora sat on the Tomb, and presently the Music struck up,
all the Instruments being joined with the Voices of the Spectators, who cried
aloud, Live, live Altisidora! Altisidora live! The Duke and Duchess got up,
and with Minos and Rhadamanthus accompanied by Don Quixote and Sancho, went all
in a Body to receive Altisidora, and handed her, down from the Tomb. She
pretending to faint, bowed to the Duke and Duchess, and also to the two Kings,
but casting a shy Look upon Don Quixote, Heaven forgive that hard-hearted
lovely Knight, said she, whose Barbarity has made me an Inhabitant of the other
World, for ought I know a thousand Years. But to thee, said she, turning to
Sancho, to thee the most compassionate Squire that the World contains, I return
my Thanks for my Change from Death to Life; in Acknowledgment of which, six of
the best Smocks I have shall be changed into Shirts for thee, and if they are
not spick and span new, yet they are all as clean as a Penny. Sancho pulled off
his Mitre, put his Knee to the Ground, and kissed her Hand. The Duke commanded,
that they should return him his Cap, and instead of his flaming Frock, to give
him his Gaberdine; but Sancho begged of his Grace, that he might keep the Frock
and Mitre, to carry into his own Country, as a Relick of that wonderful
Adventure. The Duchess said, he should have 'em, for he knew she was always
one of his best Friends. Then the Duke ordered the Company to clear the Court,
and retire to their respective Lodgings, and that Don Quixote and Sancho should
be conducted to their Apartments.

CHAP. LXX. Which comes after the sixty ninth, and contains several
Particulars, necessary for the Illustration of this History.
THAT Night Sancho lay in a Truckle-bed in Don Quixote's Chamber, a Lodging not
much to the Squire's liking, being very sensible that his Master would disturb
him with impertinent Chat all Night long; and this Entertainment he found
himself not rightly disposed for, his late Penance having taken him quite off
the talking Pin. And a Hovel with good sound Sleep had been more agreeable to
his Circumstances, than the most stately Apartments in such troublesome
Company; and indeed his Apprehensions proved so right, that his Master was
scarcely laid when he began to open.

Sancho, said he, what is your Opinion of this Night's Adventure? Great and
mighty is the force of Love when heightened by Disdain, as the Testimony of
your own Eyes may convince you in the Death of Altisidora 'Twas neither a Dart,
a Dagger, nor any Poison that brought her to her Fate, but she expired through
the mere Sense of my Disdain of her Affection. I had not cared a Pin, answered
Sancho, though she had died of the Pip, so she had but let me alone. I never
courted her, nor slighted her in my born-days, and for my Part, I must still
think it strange, that the Life and well-doing of Altisidora a whimsical,
maggotty Gentlewoman should depend upon the plaguing of Sancho Panca. But there
are Inchanters and Witchcrafts in this World that is certain, from which good
Heaven deliver me; for it is more than I can do my self. But now, Sir, let me
sleep, I beseech you; for if you trouble me with any more Questions, I Am
resolved to leap out of the Window. I Will not disturb thee, honest Sancho, said
Don Quixote, sleep; if the Smart of thy late Torture will let thee! No Pain
answered Sancho, can be compared to the Abuse my Face suffered, because 'twas
done by the worst of ill-natured Creatures, I mean old Waiting-women: The Devil
take 'em, quo' I, and so good Night! I want a good Nap to set me to righrs, and
so once again, pray let me sleep. Do so, said Don Quixote, and Heaven be with
thee Thereupon they both fell asleep, and while they are asleep Cid Hamet takes
the Opportunity to tell us the Motives that put the Duke and Duchess upon this
odd Compound of Extravagancies, that has been last related. He says, that the
Bachelor Carrasco meditating Revenge for having been defeated by Don Quixote
when he went by the Title of the Knight of the Mirrours, resolved to make
another Attempt in hopes of better Fortune, and therefore having understood
where Don Quixote was by the Page that brought the Letters and Present to
Sanch's Wife, he furnished himself with a fresh Horse and Arms, and had a White
Moon painted on his Shield; his Accoutrements were all packed up on a Mule,
and, lest Thomas Cecial his former Attendant should be known by Don Quixote or
Sancho, he got a Country-Fellow to wait on him as a Squire. Coming to the
Duke's Castle, he was informed that the Knight was gone to the Tournament at
Saragosa; the Duke giving the Bachelor an Account also how pleasantly they had
imposed upon him with the Contrivance for Dulcinea's Disinchantment, to be
effected at the Expense of Sancho's Posteriors. Finally, he told him how Sancho
had made his Master believe that Dulcinea was transformed into a Country-Wench
by the Power of Magic; and how the Duchess had persuaded Sancho that he was
deluded himself, and Dulcinea enchanted in good earnest. The Bachelor, though
he could not forbear laughing, was nevertheless struck with Wonder at this
Mixture of Cunning and Simplicity in the Squire, and the uncommon Madness of
the Master. The Duke then made it his Request that if he met with the Knight,
he should call at the Castle as he returned, and give him an Account of his
Success, whether he vanquished him or not. The Bachelor promised to obey his
Commands, and departing in search of Don Quixote, he found him not at Saragosa,
but traveling farther met him at last, and had his Revenge as we have told
you. Then taking the Duke's Castle in his Way home, he gave him an Account of
the Circumstances and Conditions of the Combat, and how Don Quixote was
repairing homewards, to fulfill his Engagement of returning to his Village for a
Year, as it was incumbent on the Honor of Chivalry to perform, and in this
Space, the Bachelor said he hoped the poor Gentleman might recover his Senses,
declaring withal that the Concern he had upon him to see a Man of his Parts in
such a distracted Condition, was the only Motive that could put him upon such
an Attempt. Upon this he returned home, there to expect Don Quixote who was
coming after him. This Information engaged the Duke, who was never to be tired
with the Humors of the Knight and the Squire, to take this Occasion to make
more Sport with 'em; he ordered all the Roads thereabouts, especially those
that Don Quixote was most likely to take, to be laid by a great many of his
Servants, who had Orders to bring him to the Castle right or wrong.

They met him accordingly, and sent their Master an Account of it, whereupon
all Things being prepared against his coming, the Duke caused the Torches and
Tapers to be all lighted round the Court, and Altisidora's Tragi-comical
Interlude was acted with the Humors of Sancho Panca, the whole so to the Life,
that the Counterfeit was hardly discernible. Cid Hamet adds, that he believed
those that played all these Tricks were as mad as those they were imposed upon:
And that the Duke and Duchess were within a Hair's Breadth of being thought
Fools themselves, for taking so much pains to make Sport with the Weakness of
two poor silly Wretches.

Now to return to our two Adventurers, the Morning found one of 'em fast
asleep, and the other broad awake transported with his wild Imaginations. They
thought it Time to rise, especially the Don, for the Bed of Sloth was never
agreeable to him, whether vanquished or victorious.

Altisidora whom Don Quixote supposed to have been raised from the Dead, did
that Day deck her Head with the same Garland she wore upon the Tomb, and in a
Gown of white Taffety flowered with Gold, thrown carelessly over her, her
disshevel'd Locks flowing negligently on her Shoulders, she entered Don
Quixote's Chamber, supporting her self with an Ebony-Stick.

The Knight was so surpised and amazed at this unexpected Apparition, that he
was struck dumb, and not knowing how to behave himself, he slunk down under the
Bed-Cloaths, and covered himself over Head and Ears. However, Altisidora placed
her self in a Chair close by his Bed's-head, and after a profound Sigh; To what
an Extremity of Misfortune and Distress, said she, in a soft and languishing
Voice, are young Ladies of my Virtue and Quality reduced, when they thus
trample upon the Rule of Modesty, and without Regard to Virgin-Decency are
forced to give their Tongues a Loose, and betray the Secrets of their Hearts!
Alas! Noble Don Quixote de la Mancha, I am one of those unhappy Persons
overruled by my Passion; but yet so reserved and patient in my Sufferings,
that Silence broke my Heart, and my Heart broke in Silence. It Is now two Days,
most inexorable and Marble-hearted Man, since the Sense of your severe Usage
and Cruelty brought me to my Death, or something so like it, that every one
that saw me, judged me to be dead. And had not Love been compassionate, and
assigned my Recovery on the Sufferings of this kind Squire, I had ever remained
in the other World. Truly, quoth Sancho, Love might even as well have made
Choice of my Ass for that Service, and he would have obliged me a great deal
more. But pray, good Mistress, tell me one Thing now, and so Heaven provide you
a better natured Sweetheart than my Master; what did you see in the other
World? What Sort of Folks are there in Hell? For there I suppose you have been;
for those that die of themselves must needs go to that Summer House. To tell
you the Truth, replied Altisidora, I fancy I could not be dead outright,
because I was not got so far as Hell; for, had I got in, I Am sure I should
never have been allowed to have got out again. I got to the Gates indeed, where
I found a round Dozen of Devils in their Breeches and Waste-coats, playing at
Tennis with flaming Rackets; they wore flat Bands with scollop'd Lace, and
Ruffles of the same. Their Arms were naked four Fingers Breadth to give an Air
to their Wrists, and make their Hands look the longer. But what I most wondered
at, was, that instead of Tennis-balls, they made use of Books that were every
whit as light, and stuffed with Wind and Flock, or such Kind of Trumpery. This
was indeed most strange and wonderful, but, what still amazed me more, I found,
that contrary to the Custom of Gamesters, among whom, the gaining Party at
least is in good Humor, and the Losers only angry, these Hellish Tossers of
Books of both sides did nothing but fret, fume, stamp, curse and swear most
horribly as if they had been all Losers.

That Is no Wonder at all, quoth Sancho; for your Devils, whether they play or
no, win or lose, they can never be contented. That may be, said Altisidora; but
another Thing that I admire (I then admired I would say) was, that the Ball
would not bear a second Blow, but at every Stroke they were obliged to change
Books, some of 'em new, some old, which I thought very strange. And one
Accident that happened upon this I cannot forget. They tos'd up a new Book
fairly bound, and gave it such a smart Stroke, that the very Guts flew out of
it, and all the Leaves were scattered about. Then cried one of the Devils to
another, look, look, what Book is that? It Is the Second Part of the History of
Don Quixote, said the other; not that which was composed by Cid Hamet, the
Author of the first, but by a certain Arragonian, who professes himself a
Native of Tordesillas. Away with it, cried the first Devil, down with it,
plunge it to the lowest Pit of Hell, where I may never see it more. Why, is it
such sad stuff, said the other? Such intolerable Stuff, cried the first Devil,
that if I and all the Devils in Hell should set our Heads together to make it
worse, it were past our Skill. The Devils continued their Game, and shattered a
World of other Books, but the Name of Don Quixote that I so passionately
adored, confined my Thoughts only to that Part of the Vision which I told you.
It could be nothing but a Vision to be sure, said Don Quixote, for I am the
only Person of that Name, now in the Universe, and that very Book is tos'd
about here at the very same rate, never resting in a Place, for every Body has
a Fling at it. Nor am I concerned that any Phantom assuming my Name, should
wander in the Shades of Darkness or in the Light of this World, since I am not
the Person of whom that History treats. If it be well writ, faithful and
authentic, it will live Ages; but if it be bad, 'twill have but a bad Journey
from its Birth to the Grave of Oblivion. Altisidora was then going to renew her
Expostulations and Complaints against Don Quixote, had not he thus interrupted
her. I have often cautioned you, Madam, said he, of fixing your Affections upon
a Man who is absolutely incapable of making a suitable Return. It grieves me to
have a Heart obtruded upon me, when I have no Entertainment to give it, but
bare cold Thanks. I was only born for Dulcinea del Toboso, and to her alone the
Destinies (if such there be) have devoted my Affection: So it is ^resumption for
any other Beauty to imagine she can displace her, or but share the Possession
she holds in my Soul. This I hope may suffice to take away all Foundation from
your Hopes, and to recall your Modesty and re-instate it in its proper Bounds,
for nothing is to be expected from a Man in Impossibilities.

Upon hearing this, Death of my Life! Cried Altisidora, putting on a violent
Passion, thou Lump of Lead, thou with a Soul of Mortar, and a Heart as little
and as hard as the Stone of an Olive, more stubborn than a fullen Plough-driver
or a Carrier's Horse that will never go out of his Road, I have a good Mind to
tear your Eyes out, as deep as they are in your Head. Why, thou beaten
Swash-buckler, thou Rib-roasted Knight of the Cudgel, have thou the Impudence
to think that I died for Love of thy Lanthorn-Jaws. No, no Sir Tiffany, all
that you have seen this Night has been Counterfeit, for I would not suffer the
Pain of a Flea-bite, much less that of dying, for such a Dromedary as thou art.
Troth! Lass I believe thee, quoth Sancho; for all these Stories of People dying
for Love are mere Tales of a roasted Horse. They tell you they will dye for Love,
but the Devil a-bit. Trust to that and be laughed at.

Their Discourse was interrupted by the coming in of the Harper, Singer, and
Composer of the Stanza's that were performed in the Court the Night before. Sir
Knight, said he to Don Quixote, making a profound Obeisance, let me beg the
Favor of being numbered among your most humble Servants, it is an Honor which
I have long been ambitious to receive, in regard of your great Renown, and the
Value of your Achievements. Pray Sir, said Don Quixote, let me know who you
are, that I may proportion my Respects to your Merits. The Spark gave him to
understand, he was the Person that made and sung the Verses he heard the last
Night. Truly, Sir, said Don Quixote, you have an excellent Voice; but I think
your Poetry was little to the Purpose; for what Relation pray have the Stanza's
of Garcilasso to this Lady's Death? Oh! Sir, never wonder at that, replied the
Musician, I do but as other Brothers of the Quill: All the upstart Poets of the
Age do the same, and every one writes what he pleases, how he pleases, and from
whom he pleases, whether it be to the Purpose or no; for let 'em write and set
to Music what they will, though never so impertinent and absurd, there is a
Thing called poetical License, that is our Warrant, and a Safeguard, and Refuge
for Nonsense, among all the Men of Jingle and Meter.

Don Quixote was going to answer, but was interrupted by the coming in of the
Duke and Duchess, who improving the Conversation made it very pleasant for
some Hours, and Sancho was so full of his odd Conceits and arch Wipes, that the
Duke and Duchess were at a Stand which to admire most, his Wit or his
Simplicity. After that, Don Quixote begged Leave for his Departure that very
Day, alleging that Knights in his unhappy Circumstances were rather qualified
for an humble Cottage than a Palace. They freely complied with his Request, and
the Duchess desired to know if Altisidora had yet attained to any Share of his
Favor. Madam, answered Don Quixote, I must freely tell your Grace, that I am
confident all this Damsel's Disease proceeds from nothing else in the World but
Idleness. So nothing in Nature can be better Physic for her Distemper than to
be continually employed in some innocent and decent Things. She has been
pleased to inform me, that Bone lace is much worn in Hell; and since without
doubt she knows how to make it, let that be her Task, and I Will engage the
tumbling of her Bobbins to and again, will soon toss her Love out of her Head,
take my Word for it; this is my Opinion, and my Advice. And mine too, quoth
Sancho, for I never knew any of your Bonelace-makers die for Love, nor any
other young Wench that had any Thing else to do; I know it by my self. When I
am hard at Work, with a Spade in my Hand, I no more think of Pig'snyes (my own
dear Wife I mean), than I do of my dead Cow, though I love her as the Apple of
my Eye. You say well, Sancho, answered the Duchess, and I Will take care that
Altisidora shall not want Employment for the future; she understands her
Needle, and I Am resolved she shall make use on it. Madam, said Altisidora, I
shall have no Occasion for any Remedy of that nature; for the Sense of the
Severity and ill Usage that I met with from that Vagabond Monster, will without
any other Means soon raze him out of my Memory. In the mean Time, I beg your
Grace's Leave to retire, that I may no longer behold, I will not say his woeful
Figure, but his ugly and abominable Countenance. These Words, said the Duke,
put me in Mind of the Proverb, After railing comes forgiving. Altisidora
holding her Handkerchief to her Eyes, as it were to dry her Tears, and then
making her Honors to the Duke and Duchess, went out of the Room. Alackaday!
Poor Girl, cried Sancho. I know what will be the End of thee, since thou art
fallen into the Hands of that sad Soul, that merciless Master of mine, with a
Crabtree-Heart, as tough as any Oak. Woe be to thee, a'faith! Had thou
fallen in Love with this sweet Face of mine, Body of me, thou had met with a
Cock of the Game. The Discourse ended here. Don Quixote dressed, dined with the
Duke and Duchess, and departed that Afternoon.

CHAP. LXXI. What happened to Don Quixote and his Squire in their way home.
THE vanquished Knight Errant continued his Journey, equally divided between
Grief and Joy; the Thought of his Overthrow sometimes sunk his Spirits, but
then the Assurance he had of the Virtue lodged in Sancho, by Altisidora's
Resurrection, raised them up again; and yet after all, he had much ado to
persuade himself that the amorous Damsel was really dead. As for Sancho, his
Thoughts were not at all of the pleasing Kind; on the contrary, he was mightily
upon the Sullen, because Altisidora had bilk'd him of the Smocks she promised
him; and his Head running upon that, Faith and Troth, Sir, quoth he, I have the
worst Luck of any Physician under the Cope of Heaven; other Doctors kill their
Patients, and are paid for their Pains; and yet they are at no farther Touble
than scrawling two or three cramp Words for some physical Slip-slop, which the
Pothecaries are at all the Pains to make up. Now here am I, that save People
from the Grave at the Expense of my own Hide, pinched, clapperclaw'd, run
through with Pins, and whipped like a Top, and yet the Devil a Cross I get by
the Bargain. But if ever they catch me a Curing any Body of this Fashion,
unless I have my Fee beforehand, may I be served as I have been for nothing.
Odsdiggers! they shall pay Sauce for it; no Money no Cure; the Monk lives by his
Singing; and I cannot think Heaven would make me a Doctor, without allowing me
my Fees. You're in the right, Sancho, said Don Quixote, and Altisidora has done
unworthily in the disappointing you of the Smocks. Though you must own that the
Virtue by which you work these Wonders was a free Gift, and cost you nothing to
learn, but the Art of Patience. For my Part, had you demanded your Fees for
Disinchanting Dulcinea, you should have received 'em already; but I am afraid
there can be no Gratuity proportionable to the Greatness of the Cure, and
therefore I would not have the Remedy depend upon a Reward; for who knows
whether my proffering it, or thy Acceptance of it, might not hinder the Effect
of the Penance? However, since we have gone so far, we'll put it to a Trial; come
Sancho, name your Price, and down with your Breeches. First pay your Hide, then
pay your self out of the Money of mine that you have in your Custody. Sancho,
opening his Eyes and Ears a Foot wide at this fair Offer, leaped presently at
the Proposal. Ay, ay, Sir, now you say something, quoth he, I Will do it with a
Jirk now, since you speak so feelingly: I have a Wife and Children to maintain,
Sir, and I must mind the main Chance. Come then, how much will you give me by
the Lash? Were your Payment, said Don Quixote, to be answerable to the
Greatness and Merits of the Cure, not all the Wealth of Venice, nor the Indian
Mines were sufficient to reward thee. But see what Cash you have of mine in
your Hands, and set what Price you will on every Stripe. The Lashes, quoth
Sancho, are in all three thousand three hundred and odd, of which I have had
five; The rest are to come, let those five go for the odd ones, and let us come
to the three thousand three hundred. At a Quartillo, or three half Pence a
Piece (and I would not bate a Farthing, if 'twere to my Brother) they will make
three thousand three hundred three Half-pences. Three thousand three
Half-pences make fifteen hundred three Pences, which amounts to seven hundred
and fifty Reals or Six-pences. Now the three hundred remaining three
Half-pences make an hundred and fifty three Pences, and threescore and fifteen
Six-pences; put that together, and it comes just to eight hundred and twenty
five Reals or Six-pences to a Farthing. This Money, Sir, if you please, I Will
deduct from yours that I have in my Hands, and then I Will reckon my self well
paid for my jirking, and go home well pleased, though well whipped; but that is
nothing, Something has some Savor; he must not think to catch Fish, who is
afraid to wet his Feet. I need say no more. Now Blessings on thy Heart, my
dearest Sancho, cried Don Quixote. Oh my Friend, how shall Dulcinea and I be
bound to pray for thee, and serve thee while it shall please Heaven to continue
us on Earth! If she recover her former Shape and Beauty, as now she infallibly
must, her Misfortune will turn to her Felicity, and I shall triumph in my
Defeat. Speak, dear Sancho, when will thou enter upon thy Task, and a hundred
Reals more shall be at thy Service, as a Gratuity for thy being expeditious.
I Will begin this very Night, answered Sancho, do you but order it so that we may
lie in the Fields, and you shall see how I Will lay about me, I shall not be sparing
of my Flesh, I Will assure you.

Don Quixote longed for Night so impatiently, that like all eager expecting
Lovers, he fancied Phoebus had broke his Chariot-wheels, which made the Day of
so unusual a Length; but at last it grew dark, and they went out of the Road
into a shady Wood, where they both alighted, and being sat down upon the Grass,
they went to Supper upon such Provision as Sancho's Wallet afforded.

And now having satisfied himself, he thought it Time to satisfy his Master,
and earn his Money. To which Purpose, he made himself a Whip of Dapple's
Halter, and having stripped himself to the Waste, retired farther up into the
Wood at a small Distance from his Master. Don Quixote observing his Readiness
and Resolution, could not forbear calling after him; Dear Sancho, cried he, be
not too cruel to thy felf neither, have a Care, do not hack thy self to Pieces.
Make not more Haste than good Speed; go more gently to Work, soft and fair goes
farthest; I mean, I would not have thee kill thy self before thou gettest to
the End of the Tally; and that the Reckoning may be fair on both Sides, I will
stand at a Distance, and keep an Account of the Strokes by the Help of my
Beads: And so Heaven prosper thy pious Undertaking. He Is an honest Man, quoth
Sancho, who pays to a Farthing. I only mean to give my self a handsome
Whipping, for I don't think I need kill my self to work Miracles. With that he
began to exercise the Instrument of Penance, and Don Quixote to tell the
Strokes. But by that Time, that Sancho had applied seven or eight Lashes on his
own Back, he felt the Jest bite him so smartly, that he began to repent him of
his Bargain: Whereupon, after a short Pause, he called to his Master, and told
him that he would be off with him, for such Lashes as these, laid on with such
a confounded Lick-back, were modestly worth three Pence a-piece of any Man's
Money; and truly he could not afford to go on at three Halfpence a Lash. Go
on, Friend Sancho, answered Don Quixote, take Courage and proceed, I Will double
thy Pay; if that be all. Say you so, quoth Sancho? then have at all; I Will lay
it on thick and threefold. Do but listen -- With that, Slap went the Scurage;
but the cunning Knave left Presecuting his own Skin, and fell foul of the
Trees, fetching such dismal Groans every now and then, that one would have
thought he had been giving up the Ghost. Don Quixote, who was naturally
tenderhearted, fearing he might make an End of himself before he could finish
his Penance, and so disappoint the happy Effects of it, Hold, cried he, hold my
Friend, as thou love thy Life, hold I conjure thee, no more at this Time.
This seems to me a very sharp Sort of Physic. Therefore pray don't take it all
at once, make two Doses of it. Come, come, all in good Time, Rome was not built
in a Day. If I have told right, thou have given thy self above a thousand
Stripes; that is enough for one Heating; for, to use a homely Phrase, The Ass
will carry his Load, but not a double Load; Ride not a free Horse to Death. No,
no, quoth Sancho, it shall never be said of me, the eaten Bread is forgotten,
or that I thought it working for a dead Horse, because I am paid beforehand.
Therefore stand off I beseech ye; get out of the Reach of my Whip, and let me
lay on the other Thousand, and then the Heart of the Work will be broke. Such
another flogging Bout, and the Jobb will be over. Since thou art in the Humor,
replied Don Quixote, I will withdraw, and Heaven strengthen and reward thee!
With that, Sancho fell to work afresh, and beginning upon a new Score, lashed
the Trees at so unconscionable a Rate, that he fetched off their Skins most
unmercifully. At length, raising his Voice, seemingly resolved to give himself
a sparring Blow, he lets drive at a Beech-Tree with might and main. There,
cried he! down with thee, Sampson, and all that are about thee! This dismal
Cry, with the Sound of the dreadful Stroke that attended it, made Don Quixote
run presently to his Squire, and laying fast hold on the Halter, which Sancho
had twisted about and managed like a Bull's Pizzle, Hold cried he, Friend
Sancho, stay the Fury of thy Arm: Do thou think I will have thy Death and
the Ruin of thy Wife and Children to be laid at my Door? Forbid it Fate! Let
Dulcinea stay a While, till a better Opportunity offers it self. I my self will
be contented to live in Hopes, that when thou have recovered new Strength, the
Business may be accomplished to every Body's Satisfaction. Well, Sir, quoth
Sancho, if it be your Worship's Will and Pleasure it should be so, so let it
be, quo I. But, for Goodness-sake, do so much as throw your Clo^k over my
Shoulders; for I am all in a muck Sweat, and I Have no Mind to catch Cold; We
Novices are somewhat in Danger of that when we first undergo the Discipline of
Flogging. With that, Don Quixote took off his Cloak from his own Shoulders, and
putting it over those of Sancho, chose to remain in Cuerpo, and the crafty
Squire being lapp'd up warm, fell fast asleep, and never stirred till the Sun
waked him.

In the Morning they went on their Journey, and after three Hours riding,
alighted at an Inn, for it was allowed by Don Quixote himself to be an Inn, and
not a Castle with Moats, Towers, Portcullices and Draw-Bridges, as he commonly
fancied; for now the Knight was mightily off the romantic Pin, to what he used
to be, as shall be showed presently more at large. He was lodged in a ground
Room, which instead of Tapistry was hung with a course painted Stuff, such as
is often seen in Villages. One of the Pieces had the Story of Helen of Troy,
when Paris stole her away from her Husband Menelaus, but scrawl'd out after a
bungling Rate by some wretched Dawber or other. Another had the Story of Dido
and Aeneas, the Lady on the Top of a Turret, waving a Sheet to her fugitive
Guest, who was in a Ship at Sea, crouding all the Sails he could to get from
her. Don Quixote made this Observation upon the two Stories, that Helen was not
at all displeased at the Force put upon her but rather leer'd and smiled upon
her Lover: Whereas on the other Side, the fair Dido showed her Grief by her
Tears, which, because they should be seen, the Painter had made as big as
Walnuts. How unfortunate, said Don Quixote, were these two Ladies, that they
lived not in this Age, or rather how much more unhappy am I, for not having
lived in theirs! I would have met and stopped those Gentlemen, and saved both
Troy and Carthage from Destruction; nay, by the Death of Paris alone all these
Miseries had been prevented. I Will lay you a Wager, quoth Sancho, that before we
be much older, there will not be an Inn, a hedge-Tavern, a blind
Victualling-house, nor a Barber's Shop in the Country, but what will have the
Story of our Lives and Deeds pasted and painted along the Walls. But I could
wish with all my Heart though, that they may be done by a better Hand than the
bungling Son of a Whore that drew these. Thou art in the Right, Sancho; for the
Fellow that did these, puts me in Mind of Orbaneja the Painter of Uveda, who as
he sat at Work, being asked what he was about, made Answer, any Thing that
comes uppermost; and if he chanced to draw a Cock, he underwrit, This is a
Cock, lest People should take it for a Fox. Just such a one was he that
painted, or that wrote, (for they are much the same) the History, of this new
Don Quixote that has lately peeped out, and ventured to go a strolling; for his
Painting or Writing is all at Random, and any Thing that comes uppermost. I
fancy he is also not much unlike one Mauleon, a certain Poet, who was at Court
some Years ago, and pretended to give Answer ex tempore to any manner of
Questions; some Body asked him what was the Meaning of Deum de Deo, whereupon
my Gentleman answered very pertly in Spanish, De donde diere, that is, hab nab
at a venture.

But to come to our own Affairs. Have thou an Inclination to have the other Brush
to Night? What think you of a warm House? would it not do better for that
Service than the open Air? Why, truly quoth Sancho, a Whipping is but a
Whipping either abroad or within Doors, and I could like a close Room well
enough, so it were among Trees, for I love Trees hugely, do you see, methinks
they bear me Company, and have a Sort of fellow-feeling of my Sufferings. Now I
think on it, said Don Quixote, it shall not be to Night, honest Sancho, you
shall have more Time to recover, and we'll let the Rest alone till we get home,
'twill not be above two Days at most. Even as your Worship pleases, answered
Sancho, but if I might have my Will, it were best making an End of the Jobb now
my Hand's in, and my Blood up. There Is nothing like striking while the Iron is
hot, for Delay breeds Danger, it is best grinding at the Mill before the Water's
past; ever take while you may have it; a Bird in Hand is worth two in the Bush.
For Heaven's sake, good Sancho, cried Don Quixote, let alone thy Proverbs; if
once thou go back to Sicut erat, or as it was in the Beginning, I must give
thee over. Can thou not speak as other Folks do, and not after such a
tedious and intricate manner. How often have I told thee of this? Mind what I
tell you, I Am sure you will be the better for it. It Is an unlucky Trick I Have got,
replied Sancho, I cannot bring you in three Words to the Purpose without a
Proverb, nor bring you in any Proverb but what I think to the Purpose; but I Will
mend if I can. And so for this time their Conversation broke off.

CHAP. LXXII. How Don Quixote and Sancho got Home^.
THat whole Day Don Quixote, and Sancho continued in the Inn, expecting the
Return of Night, the one to have an Opportunity to make an End of his Penance
in the Fields, and the other to see it fully performed, as being the most
material Preliminary to the Accomplishment of his Desires.

In the mean Time, a Gentleman with three or four Servants, came riding up to
the Inn, and one of 'em calling him that appeared to be the Master, by the Name
of Don Alvaro Tarfe, your Worship, said he, had as good stop here till the Heat
of the Day be over. In my Opinion, the House looks cool and cleanly. Don
Quixote, over-hearing the Name of Tarfe, and presently ^urning to his Squire,
Sancho, said he, I am much mistaken if I had not a Glimpse of this very Name of
Don Alvaro Tarfe, in turning over that pretended second Part of my History. As
likely as not, quoth Sancho, but first let him alight, and then we'll question
him about the Matter.

The Gentleman alighted, and was showed by the Land-lady into a Ground-Room
that faced Don Quixote's Apartment, and was hung with the same Sort of course
painted Stuff. A While after the Stranger had undressed for Coolness, he came
out to take a Turn; and walked into the Porch of the House, that was large and
airy. There he found Don Quixote, to whom addressing himself, Pray, Sir, said
he, which Way do you travel? To a Country-Town not far off, answered Don
Quixote, the Place of my Nativity. And pray, Sir, which Way are you bound? To
Granada, Sir, said the Knight, the Country where I was born. And a fine Country
it is, replied Don Quixote. But pray, Sir, may I beg the Favor to know your
Name, for the Information I am persuaded will be of more Consequence to my
Afairs than I can well tell you. They call me Don Alvaro Tarfe, answered the
Gentleman. Then without Dispute, said Don Quixote, you are the same Don Alvaro
Tarfe, whose Name fills a Place in the second Part of Don Quixote de la
Mancha's History, that was lately published by a New Author? The very Man,
answered the Knight; and that very Don Quixote, who is the principal Subject of
that Book, was my intimate Acquaintance. I am the Person that enticed him from
his Habitation, so far at least, that he had never seen the Tournament at
Saragosa, had it not been through my Persuasions, and in my Company; and
indeed, as it happened, I proved the best Friend he had, and did him a singular
Piece of Service; for had I not stood by him, his intolerable Impudence bad
brought him to some shameful Punishment. But pray, Sir, said Don Quixote, be
pleased to tell me one Thing; Am I any thing like that Don Quixote of yours?
The farthest from it in the World, Sir, replied the other. And had he, said our
Knight, one Sancho Panca for his Squire? Yes, said Don Alvaro, but I was the
most deceived in him that could be; for by common Report that same Squire was a
comical, witty Fellow, but I found him a very great Blockhead. I thought no
less, quoth Sancho, for every Man's Nose will not make a Shoeing-Horn; and that
Sancho you talk of must be some paltry Raggamuffin, some guttling Mumper, or
Pilfering Crack-Rope, I warrant him. For it is I that am the true Sancho Panca;
it is I that am the Merry-conceited Squire, that have always a Tinker's Budget
full of Wit and Waggery, that will make Gravity grin in spite of its Teeth. If
you will not believe me, do but try me; keep me Company but for a Twelvemonth, or
so, you will find what a Shower of Jokes, and notable Things drop from me every
Foot. Adad! I set every Body a Laughing, many times, and yet I wish I may be
hanged if I designed it in the least. And then for the true Don Quixote de la
Mancha, here you have him before you: The Stanch, the Famous, the Valiant, the
Wise, the Loving Don Quixote de la Mancha, the Righter of Wrongs, the Punisher
of Wickedenss, the Father to the Fatherless, the Bully-rock of Widows, the
Murderer of Damsels and Maidens, he whose only Dear and Sweetheart is the
peerless Dulcinea del Toboso; here he is, and here am I his Squire. All other
Don Quixote's, and all Sancho Panca's besides us two, are but Shams, and Tales
of a Tub. Now by the Sword of St. Jago, honest Friend, said Don Alvaro, I
believe as much; for the little thou have uttered now, has more of Humor, than
all I ever heard come from the other. The Blockhead seemed to carry all his
Brains in his Guts, there is nothing a Jest with him but filling his Belly, and
the Rogue's too heavy to be diverting. For my Part, I believe the Inchanters
that persecute the good Don Quixote, have sent the bad one to persecute me too.
I cannot tell what to make of this Matter* for though I can take my Oath I left
one Don Quixote under the Surgeon's Hands at the Nuncio's House in Toledo, yet
here starts up another Don Quixote, quite different from mine. For my Part,
said our Knight, I dare not avow my self the good, but I may venture to say, I
am not the bad one; and as a Proof of it, Sir, be assured, that in the whole
Course of my Life, I never saw the City of Saragosa; and so far from it, that
hearing this Usurper of my Name had appeared there at the Tournament, I
declined coming near it, being resolved to convince the World that he was an
Impostor. I directed my Course to Barcelona, the Seat of Urbanity, the
Sanctuary of Strangers, the Refuge of the Distressed, the Mother of Men of
Valor, the Redresser of the Injured, the Residence of true Friendishp, and the
first City of the World for Beauty and Situation. And though some Accidents
that befell me there, are so far from being grateful to my Thoughts, that they
are a sensible Mortification to me, yet in my Reflections of having seen that
City, I find Pleasure enough to alleviate my Misfortune. In short, Don Alvaro,
I am that Don Quixote de la Mancha, whom Fame has celebrated, and not the
pitiful Wretch who has usurped my Name, and would arrogate to himself the
Honor of my Designs. Sir, you are a Gentleman, and I hope will not deny me the
Favor to depose before the Magistrate of this Place, that you never saw me in
all your Life 'till this Day, and that I am not the Don Quixote mentioned in
this second Part, nor was this Sancho Panca my Squire, the Person you knew
formerly. With all my Heart, said Don Alvaro, though I must own my self not a
little confounded to find at the same Time two Don Quixote's and two Sancho
Panca's as different in Behavior as they are alike in Appellation; for my
Part, I don't know what to think on it, and I Am sometimes apt to fancy my Senses
have been imposed upon. Ay, ay, quoth Sancho, there has been foul Play to be
sure. The same Trick that served to bewitch my Lady Dulcinea del Toboso, has
been played you, and if three Thousand and odd Lashes laid on by me on the hind
Part of my Belly, would dis-inchant your Worship as well as her, they should be
at your Service with all my Heart, and what is more, they should not cost you a
Farthing. I don't understand what you mean by those Lashes, said Don Alvaro.
Thereby hangs a Tale, quoth Sancho, but that is too long at a Minute's Warning;
if it be our Luck to be Fellow-Travellers, you may chance to hear more of the
Matter.

Dinnertime being come, Don Quixote and Don Alvaro dined together; and the
Mayor or Bailiff of the Town happening to come into the Inn with a Public
Notary, Don Quixote desired him to take the Deposition which Don Alvaro Tarfe
was ready to give, where he certify'd, and declared, That the said Deponent had
not any Knowledge of the Don Quixote there present, and that the said Don
Quixote was not the same Person that he this Deponent had seen mentioned in a
certain printed History, intitul'd, or called the second Part of Don Quixote de
la Mancha, written by Abellaneda; a Native of Tordesillas. In short, the
Magistrate drew up and engrossed the Affidavit in due Form, and the Testimonial
wanted nothing to make it answer all the Intentions of Don Quixote and Sancho,
who were as much pleased as if it had been a Matter of the last Consequence,
and that their Words and Behavior had not been enough to make the Distinction
apparent between the two Don Quixote's and the two Sancho's.

The Compliments and Offers of Service that passed after that between Don
Alvaro and Don Quixote were many, and our Knight of La Mancha behaved himself
in that with so much Discretion, that Don Alvaro was convinced he was mistaken;
for he thought there was some Enchantment in the Case, since he had thus met
with two Knights and two Squires of the same Names and Professions, and yet so
very different.

They set out toward the Evening, and about half a League from the Town the
Road parted into two, one Way led to Don Quixote's Habitation, and the other
was that which Don Alvaro was to take. Don Quixote in that little Time let him
understand the Misfortune of his Defeat, with Dulcinea's Enchantment, and the
Remedy prescribed by Merlin; all which was new Matter of Wonder to Don Alvaro,
who having embraced Don Quixote and Sancho, left them in their Way, and he
followed his own.

Don Quixote passed that Night among the Trees, to give Sancho a fair Occasion
to make an End of his Discipline, when the cunning Knave put it in Practice,
just after the same Manner as the Night before. The Bark of the Trees paid for
all, and Sancho took such Care of his Back, that a Fly might have rested there
without any Disturbance.

All the While his abused Master was very punctual in telling the Strokes, and
reckoned that with those of the foregoing Night, they amounted just to the Sum
of Three Thousand and twenty nine. The Rising Sun, that seemed to have made
more than ordinary Haste to view this Humane Sacrifice, gave 'em Light however
to continue their Journey; and as they went on, they discanted at large upon
Don Alvaro's Mistake, and their own Prudence in relation to the Certificate
before the Magistrate, in so full and authentic a Form.

Their Travels all that Day, and the ensuing Night, had no Occurrence worth
mentioning, abating that Sancho that Night put the last hand to his
Whipping-work, to the inexpressible Joy of Don Quixote, who waited for the Day
with as great Impatience, in hopes he might light on his Lady Dulcinea in her
disinchanted State; and all the Way he went, he made up to every Woman he
spied, to see whether she were Dulcinea del Toboso or not; for he so firmly
relied on Merlin's Promises, that he did not doubt of the Performance.

He was altogether taken up with these Hopes and Fancies, when they got to the
Top of a Hill, that gave 'em a Prospect of their Village. Sancho had no sooner
blessed his Eyes with the Sight, but down he fell on his Knees, and O my long,
long wished for Home, cried he, open thy Eyes and here behold thy Child Sancho
Panca come back to thee again, if not very full of Money, yet very full of
Whipping: Open thy Arms, and receive thy Son Don Quixote too, who, though he got
the worst on it with another, he ne'ertheless got the better of himself, and
that is the best Kind of Victory one can wish for; I have his own Word for it.
However, though I have been swingingly flogg'd, yet I have not lost all by the
Bargain, for I have whipped some Money into my Pocket. Forbear thy
Impertinence, said Don Quixote, and let us now in a decent Manner make our
Entry into the Place of our Nativity, where we will give a Loose to our
Imaginations, and lay down the Plan that ought to be followed in our intended
Pastoral Life. With these Words they came down the Hill, and went directly to
their Village.

CHAP. LXXIII. Of the ominous Accidents that crossed Don Quixote as he entered
his Village, with other Transactions that illustrate and adorn this memorable
History.
WHEN they were entering into the Village, as Cid Hamet relates, Don Quixote
observed two little Boys contesting together in an adjoining Field; and says
one to the other, Never fret thy Ghizzard about it, for thou shall never see
her while thou have Breath in thy Body. Don Quixote over-hearing this, Sancho,
said he, did you mind the Boy's Words, Thou shall never see her while thou have
Breath in thy Body. Well, answered Sancho, and what is the great Business though
the Boy did say so? How, replied Don Quixote, do thou not perceive, that
applying the Words to my Affairs, they plainly imply that I shall never see my
Dulcinea. Sancho was about to answer again, when a full Cry of Hounds and
Huntsmen put up a Hare, which they cours'd so hard to her Shifts, that she came
and squatted down for Shelter just between Dapple's Feet. Immediately Sancho
laid Hold of her without Difficulty, and presented her to Don Quixote; but he,
with a dejected Look, refusing the Present, cried out aloud, Malum signum,
Malum signum, An ill Omen. A Hare runs away, Hounds and Coursers pursue her,
and Dulcinea is not started. You are a strange Man, quoth Sancho. Cannot we
suppose now, that poor Puss here is Dulcinea, the Gray-hounds that followed her
are these Dogs the Inchanters, that made her a Country-Puss. She scours away, I
catch her by the Scut, and give her safe and sound into your Worship's Hands;
and pray make much of her now you have her; for my Part, I cannot for the Blood
of me see any Harm nor any ill Luck in this Matter.

By this Time the two Boys that had fallen out came up to see the Hare; and
Sancho having asked the Cause of their Quarrel, he was answered by the Boy that
spoke the ominous Words, that he had snatched from his Play-fellow a little
Cage full of Crickets, which he would not let him have again. Upon that Sancho
put his Hand in his Pocket, and gave the Boy a Three-penny Piece for his Cage,
and giving it to Don Quixote, There, Sir, quoth he, here are all the Signs of
ill Luck come to nothing. You have 'em in your own Hands, and though I am but a
Dunder-head, I dare swear these Things are no more to us than the Rain that
fell at Christmas. I am much mistaken if I have not heard the Parson of our
Parish advise all sober Catholics against heeding these Whim-whams; and I have
heard you your self, my dear Master, say, that any Christian that troubled his
Head with these Fortune-telling Follies, was neither better nor worse than a
Numskull: So let us even leave Things as we found 'em, and get home as fast as
we can.

By this Time the Sports-men were come up, and demanding their Game, Don
Quixote delivered them their Hare. They passed on, and just at their coming
into the Town, they perceived the Curate and the Bachelor Carrasco at their
Devotions in a small Field adjoining. But we must observe by the Way, that
Sancho Panca, to cover his Master's Armor, had by Way of a Sumpter-Cloth, laid
over Dapple's Back the Buckram-Frock figured with Blazes of Fire, which he wore
at the Duke's the Night that Altisidora rose from the Dead, and he had no less
judiciously clapped the Mitre on the Head of the Ass; which made so odd and
whimsical a Figure, that it might be said, never four-footed Ass was so
bedizen'd before. The Curate and the Bachelor presently knowing their old
Friends, ran to meet 'em with open Arms; and while Don Quixote alighted and
returned their Embraces, the Boys, who are ever so quick-sighted that nothing
can 'scape their Eyes, presently spying the mitred Ass, came running and
flocking about 'em; Oh Law! cried they to one another, look a' there Boys!
Here Is Gaffer Sancho Panca's Ass as fine as a Lady! and Don Quixote's Beast as
lean as the new Moon. With that they ran hooping and hallowing about 'em through
the Town, while the two Adventurers, attended by the Curate and the Bachelor,
moved toward Don Quixote's House, where they were received at the Door by his
old Housekeeper and his Niece, that had already had Notice of their Arrival.
The News having also reached Teresa Panca, Sancho's Wife, she came running half
naked, with her Hair about her Ears, to see him; Hand in Hand all the Way with
her Daughter Sanchica, who hardly wanted to be lugg'd along. But when she found
that her Husband looked a little short of the State of a Governor, Mercy of
me, quoth she, what is the Meaning of this, Husband! You look as though you had
come all the Way on Foot, nay, and tired off your Legs too! Why, you come liker
a Shark than like a Governor. Mum, Teresa, quoth Sancho, it is not all Gold
that glisters, and every Man was not born with a silver Spoon in his Mouth.
First let us go home, and then I Will tell thee Wonders. I Have taken Care of the
main Chance. Money I have, old Girl, and I came honestly by it, without
wronging any Body. Have got Money, old Boy, nay then it is well enough, no
Matter which Way, let it come by Hook or by Crook, it is but what your Betters
have done before you. At the same Time Sanchica hugging her Father, asked him
what he had brought her home, for she had gaped for him as the Flowers do for
the Dew in May. Thus Sancho leading Dapple by the Halter on one Side, his Wife
taking him under the Arm on the other, and his Daughter fastening upon the
Waste-band of his Breeches, away they went together to his Cottage, leaving Don
Quixote at his own House, under the Care of his Niece and Housekeeper, with
the Curate and Bachelor to keep him Company.

That very Moment Don Quixote took the two last aside, and without mincing the
Matter, gave 'em a short Account of his Defeat, and the Obligation he lay under
of being confined to his Village for a Year, which, like a true Knight Errant,
he had resolved punctually to observe: He added, that he intended to pass that
Interval of Time in the innocent Functions of a Pastoral Life, and therefore he
would immediately commence Shepherd, and entertain his amorous Passion
solitarily in Fields and Woods; and begged, if Business of greater Importance*
were not an Obstruction, that they would both please to be his Companions,
assuring them he would furnish them with such a Number of Sheep, as might
entitle them to such a Profession. He also told 'em, that he had already in a
Manner fitted them for the Undertaking, for he had provided them all with Names
the most pastoral in the World. The Curate being desirous to know the Names,
Don Quixote told him he would himself be called the Shepherd Quixot is, that
the Bachelor should be called the Shepherd Carrascon, the Curate Pastor
Curiambro, and Sancho Panca, Pansino the Shepherd.

They were struck with Amazement at this new Strain of Folly; but considering
this might be a Means of keeping him at home, and hoping at the same Time, that
within the Year he might be cured of his mad Knight-Errantry, they allowed of
his Pastoral Folly, and with great Applause to his Project, freely offered
their Company in the Design. We shall live the most pleasant Life imaginable,
said Sampson Carrasco; for, as every Body knows, I am a most celebrated Poet,
and I Will write Pastorals in abundance. Sometimes too I may raise my Strain, as
Occasion offers, to divert us as we range the Groves and Plains. But one Thing,
Gentlemen, we must not forget, it is absolutely necessary that each of us choose
a Name for the Shepherdess to be celebrated in his Lays, nor must we forget the
Ceremony used by the amorous Shepherds, of writing, carving, notching, or
engraving on every Tree the Names of Shepherdesses, though the Bark be ever so
hard. You are very much in the Right, replied Don Quixote, though for my Part, I
need not be at the Trouble of devising a Name for an imaginary Shepherdess,
being already captivated by the peerless Dulcinea del Toboso, the Nymph of
these Streams, the Ornament of these Meads, the Primrose of Beauty, the Cream
of Gracefulness, and in short, the Subject that can merit all the Praises that
hyperbolical Eloquence can bestow. We grant all this, said the Curate, but we
who cannot pretend to such Perfections, must make it our Business to find out
some Shepherdesses of a lower Form, that will be good-natured, and meet a Man
Halfway upon Occasion. We shall find enough, I Will warrant you, replied
Carrasco: It Is but giving them Names out of some Book or other, if we can find
no other; there are Phillis, Amarillis, Diana, Florinda, Galatea, Belisarda,
and a thousand more, are to be disposed of publicly in the open Market; and
when we have purchased 'em, they are our own. Besides, if my Mistress (my
Shepherdess I should have said) be called Ann, I will name her in my Verses
Anarda; if Frances, I Will call her Francenia; and if Lucy be her Name, then
Lucinda shall be my Shepherdess, and so forth; and if Sancho Panca makes one of
our Fraternity, he may celebrate his Wife Teresa by the Name of Teresaina. Don
Quixote could not forbear smiling at the Turn given to that Name. The Curate
again applauded his laudable Resolution, and repeated his Offer of bearing him
Company all the Time that his other Employment would allow him; and then they
took their Leaves, giving him all the good Advice that they thought conducing
to his Health and Welfare

No sooner were the Curate and Bachelor gone, but the old House-Maid and
Niece, who, according to Custom, had been listening to all their Discourse,
came both upon Don Quixote: Bless me, Uncle, cried the Niece, what is here to
do! What new Maggot's got into your Head? When we thought you were come to stay
at home, and live like a sober honest Gentleman in your own House, are you
harkening after new Inventions, and running a Wooll-gathering after Sheep,
forsooth! By my truly, Sir, you're somewhat of the latest: The Corn is too old
to make Oaten Pipes of. Lord, Sir, quoth the Housekeeper, how will your
Worship be able to endure the Summer's Sun, and the Winter's Frost in the open
Fields? And then the Howling of the Wolves, Heaven bless us! pray, good Sir,
don't think on it: It Is a Business fit for no Body but those that are bred and
born to it, and as strong as Horses. Let the Worst come to the Worst, better be
a Knight Errant still, than a Keeper of Sheep. Troth, Master, take my Advice; I
am neither drunk nor mad, but fresh and fasting from every Thing but Sin, and I
have fifty Years over my Head, be ruled by me: Stay at nome, look after your
Concerns, go often to Confession, do Good to the Poor, and if ought goes ill
with you, let it lie at my Door. Good Girls, said Don Quixote, hold your
Prating. I know best what I have to do: Only help to get me to Bed, for I find
my self somewhat out of Order. However, don't trouble your Heads; whether I be
a Knight Errant, or an Errant-Shepherd, you shall always find that I will
provide for you. The Niece and Maid, who without Doubt were good-natured
Creatures, undressed him, put him to Bed, brought him something to eat, and
tended him with all imaginable Care.

CHAP. LXXIV. How Don Quixote fell sick, made his last Will, and died.
AS all humane Things, especially the Lives of Men, are transitory, their very
Beginnings being but Steps to their Dissolution; so Don Quixote, who was no way
exempted from the common Fate, was snatched away by Death when he least
expected it. Whether his Sickness was the Effect of his melancholic
Reflections, or pre-ordain'd by the Heavens, I will not determine; but he was
seized with a violent Fever, that confined him to his Bed six Days.

All that Time his good Friends, the Curate, Bachelor, and Barber came often
to see him, and his trusty Squire Sancho Panca never stirred from his Bedside.

They conjectured that his Sickness proceeded from the Regret of his Defeat,
and his being disappointed of Dulcinea's Dis-inchantment, and accordingly they
left nothing unessay'd to divert him. The Bachelor begged him to pluck up a
good Heart, and rise, that they might begin their Pastoral Life, telling him,
that he had already writ an Eclogue to that Purpose, not inferior to those of
Sannazaro, and that he bought with his own Money, of a Shepherd of Quintana,
two tearing Dogs to watch their Flock, the one called Barcino, and the other
Bueron; but this had no Effect on Don Quixote, for he still continued dejected.
A Physician was sent for, who, upon feeling his Pulse, did not very well like
it; and therefore desired him of all Things to provide for his Soul's Health,
for that of his Body was in a dangerous Condition. Don Quixote heard this with
much more Temper than those about him; for his Niece, his Housekeeper, and his
Squire fell a weeping as bitterly as if he had been laid out already; Don
Quixote desired them to leave him a little to himself, because he found himself
inclinable to Rest; they retired, and he had a hearty Sleep of above Six Hours,
which the Maid and Niece were afraid would be his last.

At length he waked, and with a loud Voice, Blessed be the Almighty, cried he,
for this great Benefit he has vouchsafed to do me! Infinite are his Mercies;
they are greater, and more in Number than the Sins of Men. The Niece harkening
very attentively to these Words of her Uncle, and finding more Sense in them
than there was in his usual Talk, at least since he had fallen ill; What do you
say, Sir, said she, has any Thing extraordinary happened? What Mercies are
these you mention? Mercies, answered he, that Heaven has this Moment vouchsafed
to show me, in spite of all my Iniquities. My Judgment is returned clear and
undisturbed, and that Cloud of Ignorance is now removed, which the continual
Reading of those damnable Books of Knight-Errantry had cast over my
Understanding. Now I perceive their Nonsense and Impertinence, and am only
sorry the Discovery happens so late, when I want Time to make Amends by those
Studies that should enlighten my Soul, and prepare me for Futurity. I find,
Niece, my End approaches; but I would have it such, that though my Life has got
me the Character of a Madman, I may deserve a better at my Death. Dear Child,
continued he, send for my honest Friends, the Curate, the Bachelor Carrasco,
and Master Nicholas the Barber, for I intend to make my Confession and my Will.
His Niece was saved the Trouble of sending, for presently they all three came
in; which Don Quixote perceiving, My good Friends, said he, I have happy News
to tell you; I am no longer Don Quixote de la Mancha, but Alonso Quixano, the
same whom the World for his fair Behavior has been pleased to call the Good. I
now declare my self an Enemy to Amadis de Gaul and his whole Generation; all
profane Stories of Knight-Errantry, all Romances I detest. I have a true Sense
of the Danger of reading them, and of all my passed Follies, and through Heaven's
Mercy, and my own Experience, I abhor them. His three Friends were not a little
surprised to hear him talk at this rate, and concluded some new Frenzy had
possessed him. What now, said Sampson to him? What Is all this to the Purpose,
Signior Don Quixote? We have just had the News that the Lady Dulcinea is
dis-inchanted, and now we are upon the point of turning Shepherds, to sing, and
live like Princes; you are dwindl'd down to a Hermit.

No more of that, I beseech you, replied Don Quixote; all the Use I shall make
of these Follies at present is to heighten my Repentance; and though they have
hitherto proved prejudicial, yet by the Assistance of Heaven they may turn to
my Advantage at my Death. I find it comes fast upon me, therefore, pray
Gentlemen, let us be serious. I want a Priest to receive my Confession, and a
Scrivener to draw up my Will. There Is no trifling at a Time like this; I must
take Care of my Soul; and therefore pray let the Scrivener be sent for, while
Mr. Curate prepares me by Confession.

Don Quixote's Words put them all into such Admiration, that they stood gazing
upon one another; they thought they had Reason to doubt of the Return of his
Understanding, and yet they could not help believing him. They were also
apprehensive he was near the Point of Death, considering the sudden Recovery of
his Intellects; and he delivered himself after that with so much Sense,
Discretion and Piety, and showed himself so resigned to the Will of Heaven,
that they made no Scruple to believe him restored to his perfect Judgment at
last. The Curate thereupon cleared the Room of all the Company but himself and
Don Quixote, and then confessed him. In the mean time the Bachelor ran for the
Scrivener, and presently brought him with him; and Sancha Panca being informed
by the Bachelor how ill his Master was, and finding his Niece and Housekeeper
all in Tears, began to make wry Faces, and fall a crying. The Curate having
heard the sick Person's Confession, came out, and told them, that the good
Alonso Quixano was very near his End, and certainly in his Senses; and
therefore they had best go in, that he might make his Will. These dismal
Tidings opened the Sluices of the House-keeper's, the Niece's, and the good
Squire's swollen Eyes, so that a whole Inundation of Tears burst out of those
Floodgates, and a thousand Sighs from their Hearts; for indeed, either as
Alonso Quixano, or as Don Quixote de la Mancha, as it has been observed, the
sick Gentleman had always showed himself such a good-natured Man, and of so
agreeable a Conversation, that he was not only beloved by his Family, but by
every one that knew him.

The Scrivener, with the rest of the Company, then went into the Chamber, and
the Preamble and formal Part of the Will being drawn, and the Testator having
recommended his Soul to Heaven, and bequeathed his Body to the Earth, according
to Custom, he came to the Legacies as follows.

Item, I give and bequeath to Sancha Panca, whom in my Madness I made my
Squire, whatever Money he has, or may have of mine in his Hands; and whereas
there are Reckonings and Accounts to be adjusted between us, for what he has
received and disburs'd; my Will and Pleasure is, That whatever may remain due
to me, which can be but small, be enjoyed by him as my free Gift, without any
Let or Molestation, and much Good may it do him. And as, when I was mad, he
was, through my Means, made Governor of an Island, I would now in my right
Senses give him the Government of a Kingdom, were it in my Power, in
Consideration of his Integrity and Faithfulness. And now, my Friend, said he,
turning to Sancho, pardon me that I have brought upon thee, as well as my self,
the Scandal of Madness, by drawing thee into my own Errors, and persuading thee
there have been, and there are still Knights-Errant in the World. Woe is me, my
dear Master's Worship! cried Sancho, all in Tears, don't die, this Bout, but
even take my Counsel, and live on a many Years; it is the maddest Trick a Man
can ever play in his Life, to let his Breath sneak out of his Body without any
more ado, and without so much as a Rap over the Pate, or a Kick of the Guts; to
go out like the Snuff of a Farthing-Candle, and die merely of the Mulligrubs,
or the Sullens. For Shame, Sir, don't give way to Sluggishness, but get out of
your doleful Dumps, and rise. Is this a Time to lie honing and groaning a Bed,
when we should be abroad in the Fields in our Shepherd's Coats, as we had
resolved? Ten to one but behind some Bush, or under some Hedge, we may find the
Lady Madam Dulcinea, stripped of her enchanted Rags, and as fine as a Queen.
Mayhaps you take it to Heart, that you were unhors'd, and a little
Crupper-scratch'd the other Day; but if that be all, lay the Blame upon me, and
say 'twas my Fault, in not girting Rozinante tight enough. You know too,
there is nothing more common in your Errantry-Books, than for the Knights to be
every Foot justl'd out of the Saddle. There Is nothing but Ups and Downs in this
World, and he that is cast down to Day, may be cock-a-hoop to Morrow. Even so,
said Sampson, honest Sancho has the right Notion of the Matter. Soft and fair,
Gentlemen, replied Don Quixote, never look for Birds of this Year in the Nests
of the last: I was mad, but I am now in my Senses; I was once Don Quixote de la
Mancha, but I am once more the good Alonso Quixano, and I hope the Sincerity of
my Words, and my Repentance, may restore me the same Esteem you have had for me
before, and so Mr. Scrivener pray go on.

Item, I constitute and appoint Antonia Quixano, my Niece here present, sole
Heiress of all my Estate, both Real and Personal, after all my just Debts and
Legacies bequeathed by these Presents, shall have been paid, satisfied, and
deducted out of the best of my Goods and Chattels; and the first of that Kind
to be discharged, shall be the Salary due to my Housekeeper, together with
twenty Ducats over and above her Wages; which said Sum I leave and bequeath her
to buy her Mourning.

Item, I appoint Mr. Curate, and Mr. Sampson Carrasco the Bachelor, here
present, to be the Executors of this my last Will and Testament.

Item, It is my Will, that if my Niece Antonia Quixano be inclinable to marry,
it be with none but a Person, who, upon strict Inquiry, shall be found never to
have read a Book of Knight-Errantry in his Life; and in case it appears, that
he has been conversant in such Books, and that she persists in her Resolution
to marry him, she is then to forfeit all Right and Title to my Inheritance,
which, in such Case, my Executors are hereby empowered to dispose to pious
Uses, as they shall think most convenient.

Item, I entreat the said Executors, that if at any time they happen to meet
with the Author of a Book now extant, entitled, The Second Part of the
Achievements of Don Quixote de la Mancha, they would from me most heartily beg
his Pardon for my being undesignedly the Occasion of his writing such a Parcel
of Impertinences as is contained in that Book; for it is the greatest Burden to
my departing Soul, that ever I was the Cause of his making such a Thing public.

Having finished the Will, he fell into a swooning Fit, and extended his Body
to the full Length in the Bed. All the Company were troubled and alarmed, and
ran to his Assistance: However, he came to himself at last; but relapsed into
the like Fits almost every Hour, for the Space of three Days that he lived
after he had made his Will.

The whole Family was in Grief and Confusion; and yet, after all, the Niece
continued to eat, the Housekeeper drank, and washed down Sorrow; and Sancho
Panca made much of himself: For there is a strange Charm in the Thoughts of a
good Legacy, or the Hopes of an Estate, which wondrously removes, or at least,
alleviates the Sorrow, that Men should otherwise feel for the Death of Friends.

At last Don Quixote's Dying-Day did come, after he had made all those
Preparations for Death which good Christians ought to do; and by many fresh and
weighty Arguments, showed his Abhorrence of Books of Knight-Errantry. The
Scrivener, who was by, protested he had never read in any Books of that kind of
any Knight Errant who ever died in his Bed so quietly, and like a good
Christian, as Don Quixote did. In short, amidst the Tears and Lamentations of
his Friends, he gave up the Ghost, or to speak more plainly, died; which when
the Curate perceived, he desired the Scrivener or Notary to give him a
Certificate, how Alonso Quixano, commonly called The Good, and sometimes known
bp the Name of Don Quixote de la Mancha, was departed out of this Life into
another, and died a natural Death. This, lest any other Author but Cid Hamet
Benengeli should take Occasion to raise him from the Dead, and presume to write
fabulous Histories of his pretended Adventures.

Thus died that ingenious Gentleman Don Quixote de la Mancha, whose Native
Place Cid Hamet has not thought fit directly to mention, that all the Towns and
Villages in La Mancha should contend for the Honor of giving him Birth; as the
Seven Cities of Greece did for Homer. We shall omit Sancho's Lamentations, and
those of the Niece and the Housekeeper, as also several Epitaphs that were
made for his Tomb, and will only give you this, which the Bachelor Carrasco
caused to be put over it.

Don Quixote's Epitaph.
THE Body of a Knight lies here,
So brave, that, to his latest Breath,
Immortal Glory was his Care,
And makes him triumph over Death.
His Looks spread Terror every Hour,
He strove Oppression to control;
Nor could all Hell's United Power
Subdue or daunt his Mighty Soul.
Nor has his Death the World deceived
Less than his wondrous Life surpised;
For if he like a Madman lived,
At least he like a Wise One died.
Here the Sagsacious Cid Hamet addressing himself to his Pen, O thou my slender
Pen, says he, thou, of whose Knib, whether well or ill cut, I dare not speak my
Thoughts! Suspended by this Wire, remain upon this Rack, where I deposite thee.
There may thou claim a Being many Ages, unless presumptuous Scribblers take
thee down to profane thee. But ever they lay their heavy Hands on thee, bid 'em
beware, and, as well as thou can, in their own Style, tell 'em, Avaunt, ye
Scoundrels, all and some!
I Am kept for no such thing.
Defile not me; but hang your selves;
And so, God save the King!
For me alone was the great Quixote born, and I alone for him. Deeds were his
Task; and to record 'em, mine: We two, like Tallies for each other struck, are
nothing when apart. In vain the spurlous Scribe of Tordesellas dared with his
blunt and bungling Ostridge-Quill invade the Deeds of my most Valorous Knight:
The great Attempt derides his feeble Skill, while he betrays a Sense benumbed
and frozen.

And thou, Reader, if ever thou can find him out in his Obscurity, I beseech
thee advise him likewise to let the wearied, mouldring Bones of Don Quixote,
rest quiet in the Earth that covers 'em. Let him not expose 'em in Old Castile,
against the Sanctions of Death, impiously raking him out of the Grave where he
really lies stretched out beyond a Possibility of taking a third Ramble through
the World. The two Sallies that he has made already (which are the Subject of
these two Volumes, and have met with such universal Applause in this and other
Kingdoms) are sufficient to ridicule the pretended Adventures of other
Knights-Errant. Thus advising him for the best, thou shall discharge the Duty
of a Christian, and do good to him that wishes thee Evil. As for me, I must
esteem my self happy, and gain my End in rendering those fabulous, Nonsensical
Stories of Knight-Errantry, the Object of the Public Aversion. They are
already going down, and I do not doubt but they will drop and fall altogether
in good Earnest, never to rise again. Adieu.

FINIS.

