A certain way to prevent POPERY IN ENGLAND, And effectually suppress all
Jesuits and Popish Priests, Without giving them the vainglory of pretending to
be MARTYRS. Published on occasion of some REPRIEVES Lately granted To Condemned
ROMISH PRIESTS. Humbly offered to the CONSIDERATION OF THE Approaching
PARLIAMENT AT OXFORD.

LONDON: Printed for R. W. Anno 1681.

A MODERATE EXPEDIENT FOR Preventing of Popery, AND The more Effectual
Suppression OF JESUITS and PRIESTS, Without giving them the Vainglory OF
PRETENDING TO MARTYRDOM.
By a Person of Quality.
I Am not ignorant that this latter Age has brought forth a swarm of busy
heads, which measure the great Mysteries of State by the Rule of their
self-conceited Wisdom: but if they would consider that the Commonwealth,
governed by grave Counselors, is like unto a Ship directed by a skilful
Pilot, to whom the necessities of occasions, and grounds of Reason why he
steereth the Helm to this or that point of the Compass, are better known, than
to those that stand aloof off; they would perhaps be more sparing, if not more
wary in their Resolutions.

For my own particular, I must confess that I am naturally too much inclined to
his opinion, who once said, Qui been latuit, been vixit; and freshly recalling
to mind the saying of Functius to his Friend at the hour of his untimely Death:
Disce, meo exemplo, mandato munere fungi:
Et fuge ceu Pestem, (...).


I could easily forbear to make my Handwriting the Record of any Opinion;
which nevertheless I protest to maintain rather problematically, than by the
way of a conclusive assertion: therefore, without wasting precious time any
longer with needless Prologue, I will briefly set down the Question in the
Terms following:

Whether it be more expedient to suppress Popish practices against the due
Allegiance to his Majesty, by the strict execution of the present Laws touching
Jesuits and Seminary Priests; or to restrain them to close Prison during life,
if no Reformation following.

The doubt propounded consisting of two Branches, necessarily requires to be
distinctly handled, that by comparing either part, the convenience mentioned in
the Question may be cleared with more facility.

1. In favor of the first Division there are not a few, who grounding
themselves on an ancient Proverb, (...), A dead man bites not, affirm that such
are dangerous to be preserved alive, who being guilty, condemned, and full of
fear, are likely, for purchase of life and liberty, to engage their utmost in
desperate adventures against their King and Country.

2. No less is it to be feared, that while the Sword of Justice is remiss in
cutting off heinous offenders against the dignity of the Crown, the misled
Papal multitude in the interim, may enter into a jealous suspense, whether that
forbearance proceed from the fear of exasperating their desperate humors, or
that it is now become questionable, whether the execution of their Priests be
simply for matter of State, or pretended quarrel for Religion.

3. And whereas in a remediless inconvenience, it is lawful to use the
extremity of Laws against some few, that many by terror of the Example may be
reformed; what hope can there be, that Clemency may tame their hearts, who
interpret his Majesty's grace in transporting their Priests out of this Realm,
to be a mere shift to rid the Prisons of those whom Conscience could not
condemn of any capital Crime?

4. Neither are their vaunting whisperings to be neglected, by which they seek
to confirm the fearful Souls of their Party, and to inveigle the ignorant,
doubtful, or discontented persons: for if the glorious extolling of their
powerful Friends, and the expecting of a golden day be suffered to win credit
with the meaner sort, the relapse cannot be small, or the means easy to reform
the Error, without a general combustion of the State.

5. Let experience speak somewhat in this behalf, which has evidently descried
within the current of few years, That the forbearance of Severity has
multiplied their Roll in such manner, that it remains as a Corrosive to
thousands of his Majesty's well-affected Subjects.

6. To what purpose serves it, to muster the names of the Protestants, or to
vaunt them to be ten for one of the Roman Faction, as if bare figures of
numeration could prevail against an united Party, resolved and advised
aforehand how to turn their faces with assurance unto all dangers, while in the
mean time, the Protestants nestling in vain security, suffer the Weed to grow
up that threatens their bane and merciless ruin?

7. Sometimes the Oath of Supremacy choked their presumptuous imaginations,
and yet could not that infernal Smoke be wholly smothered, nor the Locusts
issuing thereout be cleansed from the face of this Land. Now that the Temporal
power of the King, contained in the Oath of Allegiance, is by the Papal See,
and many of the Adorers thereof, impudently avowed to be unlawful; shall the
broachers of such Doctrine be suffered to live, yea to live and be received of
us, for whose destruction they daily sigh and practice?

8. To be a right Popish Priest, in true English sense, is to bear the
Character of a disloyal Renegade, one that has cast off his natural Obedience
to his Sovereign, by swearing Homage to a Foreign Head. Whom, if by connivance
he shall let slip, or chastise with a light hand, what immunity may not
traitorous Delinquents in lesser degrees expect or challenge after a sort, in
Equity and Justice?

9. If there were no Receivers, there would be no Thieves: Likewise, if there
were no Harbourers of the Jesuits, it is to be presumed that they would not
trouble this Isle with their presence: Therefore Rigor must be extended against
the Receiver, that the Jesuit may be kept out of doors: were it then
indifferent Justice to hang up the Accessory, and let the Principal go free;
namely, to suffer the Priest to draw his breath at length, while the
Entertainer of him under his Roof, submits his body to the Executioners hand?
Without doubt, if it be fit to forbear the chief, it will be necessary to
receive the second Offender into protection: wherewith a mischief must ensue of
continual Expense, and scandalous restraint of so great a number.

10. Reputation is one of the principal Arteries of the Commonwealth; which
Maxim is so well known to the Secretaries of the Papacy, that by private
Forgeries and public impressions of Calumnies, they endeavor to wound us in
that vital part. Howsoever therefore, some few of that stamp being better
tempered than their fellows in defense of our Government, have not spared to
affirm, That Tyranny is unjustly ascribed thereunto, for so much as Freedom of
Conscience, after a sort, may be redeemed for money; Notwithstanding there want
not many Pamphleteers of their side, who opprobriously cast in our teeths the
converting of the Penalty inflicted on Recusants, and refusers of the Oath of
Allegiance, from the Kings Exchequer to a particular Purse. Surely we cannot
presume that these Libellers may be dissuaded from spitting out their Venom
maliciously against us, when they shall see their Priests mewed up without
further process of Law: for either they will attribute this calm dealing to the
Justice of their Cause, the strength of their Party or Patience, or that tract
of time has discovered our Laws importing overmuch sharpness, in good Policy,
to be thought fitter for abrogation by non-usance, than repealed by a public
decree.

11. Moreover, it is forethought by some, that if these Seminaries be only
restrained, that they may prove hereafter like a Snake kept in the bosom, such
as Bonner, Gardener, and others of the same Livery, showed themselves to be
after Liberty obtained in Queen Mary's days; and if the loss of their Ghostly
Fathers agrieve them, it is probable that they will take Arms sooner, and with
more courage, to free the Living, than to set up a Trophy to the Dead.

12. Howsoever the Jesuits Band is known in their Native Soil to be defective
in many respects, which makes them Underlings to the Protestants; as in
Authority, Arms, and the protection of the Laws, which is all in all:
Nevertheless they insinuate themselves to Foreign Princes favoring their
Party, with promises of strange assistance at home, if they may be well backed
from abroad: To which purpose they were wont to divide the Inhabitants of this
Realm into four Sects; whereof ranking their Troops in the first place (as due
to the pretended Catholics) they assumed a full fourth part to their property:
and of that part again they made a Subdivision into two portions; namely, of
those that openly renounced the established Church of England, and others whose
certain number could not be assigned, because they frequented our Service, our
Sacraments, reserving their hearts to their Lord God the Pope. The second Party
they alot to the Protestants; who retain yet, as they say, some Relics of
their Church. The third Rank, and largest, was left unto the Puritans; whom
they hate deadly, in respect that they will hold no indifferent quarter with
Papistry. The fourth and last Maniple, they assign to the Politicians: Huomini
(say they) Senza Dio, and Senz Anima: Men without fear of God, or regard of
their Souls; who busying themselves only with matters of State, retain no
sense of Religion. Without doubt, if the Authors of this Partition have cast
their Account aright, we must confess the latter Brood is to be ascribed
properly unto them: For if the undermining of the Parliament House, the
scandalizing of the King in Print, who is Gods Anointed, and the refusal of
natural Obedience, be works of those that neither stand in awe of God or
Conscience; well may the Papists boast, that they are assured of the first
number; and may presume likewise of the lasts friendship, when occasion shall
be offered. For the preventing of which Combination, it is a sure way to cut
off the Heads that should tie the Knot, or at least to brand them with a mark
in the Forehead, before they be dismissed; or after the opinion of others, and
custom of Sweden, to make them unwelcome to the feminine Sex, which now with
great fervency embraces them.

These are for the most part Arguments vented in ordinary discourse, by many
who suppose a Priest's breath to be contagious in our English Air. Others there
are, who maintain the second part of the Question, with Reasons not unworthy of
observance.

Death is the end of Temporal Woes, but it may in no wise be accounted the
Grave of memory: Therefore howsoever it is in the power of Justice to suppress
the person of a man, the Opinion for which he suffered (conceived truly or
untruly in the hearts of a Multitude) is not subject to the edge of any Sword,
how sharp or keen soever. I confess that the Teeth are soon blunted, that bite
only out of the malice of a singular Faction; but where Poison is diffused
through the veins of a Commonwealth with intermixture of Blood, good and bad,
Separation is to be made rather by Evacuation than by present Incision. The
greatest biter of a State, is Envy, joined with thirst of Revenge; which
seldom declares it self in plain Colors, until a Jealousy conceived of
personal dangers, breaks out into desperate Resolutions. Here comes it to
pass, that when one male-contented Member is grieved, the rest of the body is
sensible thereof: neither can a Priest or Jesuit be cut off without a general
murmur of their Secretaries; which being confident in their number, secretly
arm for opposition; or confirmed with their Martyrs blood (as they are
persuaded) resolve by patience and sufferance to glorify their Cause, and to
merit Heaven. Do we not daily see, that it is easier to confront a private
Enemy, than a Society or Corporation? and that the hatred of a State, is more
immortal than the spleen of a Monarchy? Therefore except it be demonstrated,
that the whole Roman City, which consists not of one brood, but of a succession
of persons, may be cut off at the first stroke as one entire Head, I see no
cause to think our State secured by sitting on the skirts of some few
Seminaries, leaving in the mean time a multitude of Snarlers abroad, who
already show their Teeth, and only wait opportunity to bite fiercely. I will
not deny, that whom we fear, we commonly hate; provided always that no merit
has interceded a Reconciliation: for there is great difference between hatred
conceived against him that will take away the life, and him that may justly do
it, and yet in Clemency forbears to put it in effect; for the latter breeds
reverent awe, whereas the former subjecteth to servile fear, always accompanied
with desire of Innovations. And although it has been affirmed of the Church of
Rome, Quod Pontificium genus semper crudele; nevertheless, out of Charity, let
us hope that all Devils are not so black as they are painted: Some, or perhaps
many of them there are, whom Conscience, or in default thereof, pure shame of
the world will constrain to confess, That his Majesty most graciously
distinguishes the Theory of Popery, from the Active part thereof, as being
naturally inclined, Parvis peccatis veniam, magnis severitatem commodare; nee
poena semper, sed saepius poenitentia contentus esse.

2. Mistaking of punishments legally inflicted, commonly proceeds from fond
pity, or the interest which we have in the same Cause; both which beget blind
partiality. Admit then that the Papal side, affecting merit, by compassion may
be nearly touched with the restraint of their Seminaries; that cannot be
denied, I hope, except they had the hearts of Tigers, that in humanity they
will prefer their ease of durance before the rigor of death: And albeit that
Parsons, Bellarmine, and the Pope himself, constrain their spiritual Children
to thrust their fingers into the fire, by refusing the Oath of Allegiance; yet
we have many Testimonies in Judicial Courts and printed Books, that the greater
part of them are of that Theban Hunters mind, who would rather have seen his
Dogs cruel acts, than have felt them to his own cost.

Garnet himself also, in one of his secret Letters, lamented, that after his
death he should not be enroled amongst the Martyrs, because that no matter of
Religion was objected against him; yet it plainly appears in his demeanor,
that he would gladly have survived the possibility of that glory, if any such
hope had remained: neither is it to be presumed, that being in Prison, he would
ever have conceived that we durst not touch his Reverence, or that the Law was
remiss, which had justly condemned him, and left his life to the Kings mercy.
It was the distance of the place, and not persons, that interpreted the sending
over Seas of the Priests, to be a greater Argument of their innocence, than of
his Majesty's forbearance: for had Father Parsons himself been Coram nobis, his
song would rather have been of Mercy than Justice. It is truly said, that we
are all instructed better by Examples than Precepts: Therefore if the Laws
printed, and Indictments recorded, cannot control the Calumnies of those that
wilfully will mistake Treason for Religion, by the execution of two or three of
that backbiting number, I doubt not but the Question may readily be decided:
Namque immedicabile vulnus ense recidendum est, ne pars sincera trahatur.

To dally with pragmatical Papists, especially with those that by their Example
and Counsel pervert his Majesty's Subjects, I hold it a point of mere
Injustice: for what comfort may the good expect, when the bad are by connivance
freed to speak, and emboldened to put their disloyal thoughts in execution? For
explaining therefore of my meaning, it is necessary to have a regard unto the
nature of the Kings Liege-people that are to be reformed by example of Justice,
and other Forraigners, who, will we, nill we, must be Censurers of our Actions.

It has been truly observed, that the Nations of Europe which are most remote
from Rome, are more superstitiously inclined to the dregs of that place, than
the near Neighbors of Italy. Whether that humor proceed from the complexion
of the Northern bodies, which is naturally more retentive of old Customs than
hotter Regions, or that the vices of the City seated on seven Hills, are by
crafty Ministers of that See concealed from the vulgar sort, I list not now to
discuss; but most certain it is, that the people of this Isle exceed the Romans
in zeal of their Profession: insomuch, that in Rome it self I have heard the
English Fugitives taxed by the name of Pichiapetti Inglesi. Now as our
Countrymen take surer holdfast of Papal Traditions than others, so are they
naturally better fortified with a Courage to endure Death for the maintenance
of that Cause: for this Climate is of that temperature, out of which Vegetius
holds it fittest to choose a valiant Soldier, where the heart finding it self
provided of plenty of Blood to sustain sudden defects, is not so soon
apprehensive of death or dangers, as where the Storehouse of Blood being
small, every hazard makes pale cheeks and trembling hands. (Angli) say ancient
Writers, bello intrepidi, nec mortis sensu deterrentur: And thereunto Botero
the Italian bears witness in his Relations of many Strangers; Therefore
coming out of Foreign parts among the Rarities of England, desired to see
whether Report has not been too lavish in affirming, that our condemned
persons yield their bodies to Death with cheerfulness. And were it not that by
daily experience we can call our selves to witness of this truth, I could
produce the Reverend Judge Fortescue, who in commendation of our English Laws,
made suitable, as he well observes, to the inbred conditions of the
Inhabitants of this Soil, avoweth, that the English people, in trial for
Criminal Causes, are not compelled by Tortures to confess, as in other Nations
it is used, for as much as the quality of the English is known to be less
fearful of Death than of Torments: For which cause, if the Torments of the
Civil Law were offered to an innocent person in England, he would rather yield
himself guilty and suffer death, than endure the horror of lingering Pains.
Insulani plerumque fures (says one) and so true it is, that this Country is
stained with that imputation, notwithstanding that many are put to death, to
the end that others, by their fall, might learn in time to beware. If then it
does appear that Terror prevails not to keep men from Offenses which are
condemned by Law and Conscience, what assurance can there be to scare those who
pretend to be satisfied in their minds, that their Sufferings are either
expressly or by implication, for matter of Religion and health of their Souls?
In such a case to threaten death to English men, Quibus nihil interest humive
sublimive putrescant, is a matter of small consequence. Purpuratis Gallis,
Italis aut Hispanis ista minitari; To a settled resolution of death, menaces to
prolong a wearisome life, prevail much more in such cases. Rightly did Clement
the Eighth consider, that by burning two English men in Rome for supposed
Heresy, he rather impaired his Cause than bettered it; insomuch that many
present at the resolute death of Mr. Marsh, who was brought to dust in Campo di
Santa Fiore, spared not to proclaim him for a Martyr, carried away of his Ashes
for a Relic, and wished their Souls in the same place with his: which News
brought to the Popes ear, caused him (as it was bruted about in Rome) solemnly
to protest, That none of the English Nation should publicly, from that time
forward, be consumed with Fire. On the other side, if we read the Volumes
written of their Priests Constancy, their Martyrologie or Calendar or Martyrs,
and Pathway of Salvation, as it were chalked out unto the Papists, by
sacrificing their lives for the Pope, we shall find that by taking away of
one, we have confirmed and invited many; whereof I could give particular
instances, if I thought any scruple were made in that point.

As for foreign parts which hold with the Papal Supremacy, it is clear, that
they will be severe and partial Judges in this cause: For albeit that here in
England it is well known to all true and loyal Subjects, that for matter of
Roman Doctrine, no man's life is directly called into question, but that their
disobedience in reason of State, is the only motive of their prosecution;
nevertheless where a great Canton of Christendom is rooted in a contrary
opinion, and things in this world are for the most part esteemed by outward
appearance, this Land cannot escape malicious scandals, neither shall there be
want of Colleges to supply their Faction with Seminaries. Therefore again and
again I say, That if the state of the Question were so set, that it were
possible by a general execution of the Priests and their Adherents, to end the
Controversy, I could in some sort with better will subscribe thereunto; but
seeing I find little hope in that course, I hold it safer to be ambitious of
the Victory, which is purchased with less loss of Blood, and to proceed as
Tully teaches his Orator: Who when he cannot wholly overthrow his Adversary,
yet ought he to do it in some part, and with all endeavor to confirm his own
party in the best manner that may be.

4. He that forbeareth to sow his ground in expectance of good Wind, or a
favorable Moon, commonly has a poor Crop, and a lean Purse. So shall it fare
with this State, if private Whisperings of discontented persons, that never
learnt to speak well, be too nicely regarded; yet ought they not to be slightly
set at naught, lest our Credit grow light even in the Balance of our dearest
Friends. The Papistical Libels inform against us, as if we were desirous to
grow fat with sucking of their Blood; the very Walls of their Seminary College
at Rome, are bedawbed with their lying Phansies, and in every corner the
Corner-creepers leave some badge of their malicious Spleen against us, crying
out of Cruelty and Persecution: But if the penalty of Death be changed into a
simple indurance of Prison, what Moat can they find in our Eyes to pull out?
or with what Rhetoric can they defend their obstinate Malipertness, which with
repaying us ill for good, deserve to have Coals of Indignation poured upon
their heads? Visne muliebre consilium, said Livia to Augustus, let Severity
sleep a while, and try what alteration the pardoning of Cinna may procure. The
Emperor hearkened to her Counsel, and thereby found his Enemies mouths stopped,
and the malice abated. Some there are perchance, that will term this Clemency
Innovation, and vouch the Precedent of that City, who permitted none to
propound new Laws, that had not a Cord about their necks ready for Vengeance,
if it were found improfitable. But let such Stoics know, that there is great
difference between the penning of a new Law, and advice given for the manner of
executing it; neither, by their leaves, are all Innovations to be rejected: for
divine Plato teaches us, That in all Commonwealths, upon just grounds, there
ought to be some changes; and that Statesmen therein must behave themselves
like skilful Musicians, Qui artem Musices non mutant, sed Musices modum.

5. That an evil Weed grows fast, by example of the new Catholics increase,
is clearly convinced; But he that will ascribe this Generation simply to his
Majesty's Heroical virtue of Clemency, argues out of the fallacy which is
called Ignoratio Elenchi. Was not the Zeal of many cooled toward the last end
of Queen Elizabeth's Reign? has not the impertinent heat of some of our own
side bereft us of part of our strength? and the Papacy with tract of Time
gotten a hard skin on their Consciences? Parva metu primo, nux sese attollit in
altum. But if we will with a better insight behold how this great quantity of
Spawn is multiplied, we must especially ascribe the cause thereof to their
Priests, who by their Deaths prepare and assure more to their Sect, than by
their Lives they could ever persuade. It were Incivility to distrust a Friend,
or one that has the show of an honest man, if he will frankly give his Word,
or confirm it with a sacred Oath: But when a Protestation is made upon the last
gasp of Life, it is of great effect, and possesses those that cannot gainsay
it upon their own knowledge. The number of these Priests which now adays come
to make a Tragical Conclusion, is not great: Yet as with one Seal many Patents
are sealed, so with the loss of a few Lives, numbers of wavering Spirits may be
gained; Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae: And though these Priests having
indeed a disadvantageous Cause, are in very deed but counterfeit Shadows of
Martyrs unto a true understanding; yet will they be reputed for such, by those
that lay their Souls to pawn unto their Doctrine, with whom if we list to
contend by multitude of Voices, we shall be cried down, without all
peradventure: For the gate of their Church is wide, and many there are that
enter thereinto.

6. By diverse Means it is possible to come to one and the self-same End; seeing
that then the sum of our well-wishings is all one, namely, That Popish Priests
may have no power to do harm; it is not impertinent to try sundry paths, which
may lead us to the perfecting of our Desires, Politicians distinguish Inter
rempub. constitutam and rempub. constituend. according to the several natures
whereof, Statists are to dispose of their Counsels and Ordinances. Were now the
Rhemists and Romulists new-hatched out of the shell, the former course of
Severity might soon bury their Opinions with their Persons: But since the
Disease is inveterated, variety of Medicine is judiciously to to be applied.
The Romans did not punish all Crimes of one and the self-same nature with
extremity of Death; For some they condemned to perpetual Prison, and others
they banished into an Island, or some remote Country: Even in the case of
Religion, they were very tender to dip their fingers in Blood; For when Cato
was Consul, and it seemed good unto the Senate to suppress with violence the
disordered Ceremony of the Bacchanals, brought by a strange Priest into the
City, he withstood that Sentence, alleging, that there was nothing so apt to
deceive men as Religion, which always presents a show of Divinity; and for that
cause it behoved to be very wary in chastizing the Professors thereof, lest any
indignation should enter into the Peoples minds, that somewhat was derogated
from the Majesty of God. Others more freely have not spared to place Religion
(I mean that Religion which is ignorantly zealous) amongst the kinds of
Frenzy, which is not to be cured otherwise, than by time given to divert or
qualify the fury of the Conceit: Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum!

Howsoever in valuing the power of a City, or strength of Arguments, quality
and worth is to be preferred before number: Nevertheless, where the uttermost
of our force is not known, it imports much to have it conceived, that the
Multitude stands for us; for Doubts and Suspicions cast in an Enemies way,
evermore make things seem greater and more difficult, than they are indeed: We
have, by God's Mercy, the Sword of Justice drawn on our behalf, which upon
short warning is able to disunite the secret Underminers of our Quiet; we have
a King zealous for the House of the Lord, who needs not to fear less Success
in shutting up of Priests, than Queen Elizabeth had in restraining them in
Wisbich-Castle; where lest their factious Spirits should grow rusty, they
converted their Canker to fret upon themselves, and vomiting out Gall in
Quodlibets, showed that their Disease was chiefly predominant in the Spleen.
What Tempests they have raised in their College at Rome, their own Books and
many Travelers can witness; the storm whereof was such, that Sextus Quintus
complained seriously of the vexation which he received oftener from the English
Scholars, than all the Vassals of his Triple Crown. And untruely is the
Magistrate noted of Negligence, or overmuch Severity, that lays wait to catch
the Foxes, and the little Foxes which spoil the Vineyard; though afterward,
without further punishment, he reserve them to the day wherein God will take
account of their Stewardship. For if Aristotle's City, defined to be a Society
of men assembled to live well, be the same which in our Law has reference to
the maintenance of the poor in Peace: So long as we taste of the sweet of a
peaceable Government, we cannot say, but that we live well; and that the City
consisting of Men, and not of Walls, is happily guided.

8. An Oath is a weak Band to contain him, that will, for pretended Conscience
sake, hold no Faith with Heretics; or by Absolution from a Priest, thinks
himself at liberty to fly from any Promise or Protestation whatsoever.

Therefore when I remember that Watson the Priest, notwithstanding his
Invectives against the Jesuits, gained liberty to forge his Traitorous
Inventions, and had others of his Society in the Complot; I judge it safer to
make Recluses of them, than to suffer such to dally with us by Books, and some
idle Intelligences, cast abroad only as a Mist to blear our eyes: But how shall
we find means to apprehend those disguised Romanists, that borrow the shapes
of Captains, Merchants, Gentlemen, Citizens, and all sorts of people; and by
Equivocation may deny themselves to be themselves? In Answer to this Question,
I will first show the Reason why they are not pursued and taken, and hereafter
make an Overture how they may be boulted out of their Hutches. The Nature of
Man, howsoever in hot blood it be thirsty of Revenge, in a cooler temper it
has a kind of Nausea, as I may call it, or a distaste of taking away of the
Lives, even of the Nocent: Insomuch that in all Assizes and Sessions, an
Offender can hardly be Condemned, whom the foolish pity of many will not after
a sort excuse, with laying some Imputations on the Judge, part on the Jury, and
much on the Accuser; and such is their blind Affection, that the Prisoner, who
perhaps was never recommended for Handsomness, will be esteemed of them for one
of the properest men in the company: From hence it comes, that the name of a
Sergeant or a Pursevant is odious; and the Executioner, although he be the hand
of Justice, is esteemed no better than an Enemy of Mankind, and one that lost
Honesty and Humanity in his Cradle. Reverend Mr. Fox was wont to say, That
Spies and Accusers were necessary Members in a Commonwealth, and deserved to
be cherished; but for his own part, he would not be of any of that number, or
wish his Friends to affect such Employments: And albeit that the Law permits
and commands every man to apprehend a Felon, do we not commonly see very many
content to stand by and look on, while others perform that Office?

Likewise it is evident, That if such as are tender of their Reputations, be
very scrupulous personally to Arrest men for civil Actions of Debt, they will
be more unwilling Instruments of drawing their Bodies to the Rack or the
Gallows; especially when there is any color of Religion to be pretended in
their defense. The diversity of Men's Faces is great, but the difference of
their Minds in this case is more variable, wherein the meanest have thought as
free as the highest. Besides this, there are too many of the blind Commonalty
altogether Popish, though not reconciled Papists, who in their foolish
Ignorance will say, It is pity any should die for their Conscience, though
indeed they make honorable amends for their Treason: Verily I know not what
misgiving of their mind it is, that makes men forecast the possibility of
Alteration in matters of Religion, and for that respect they are exceeding
backward in discovery and laying hands on Seminaries; yea, and are timorous in
enacting sharp Laws against them, as those that silently say among themselves,
Sors hodierna mihi, eras erit illa tibi. Nay, shall I speak a Bugs word? There
is no small number that stand doubtful, whether it be a grateful work to cross
Popery, or that it may be done safely without a foul aspersion of Puritanisme,
or a shrewd turn for their labors, at some time or other: By which unhappy
ambiguity it comes to pass, that these Animalia amphibia, the Priests, I mean,
that prey on the Souls and Bodies of either Sex, unattached revel where they
list, though they be no more seen, than a man dancing in a net. How much fitter
were it for us courageously to invite them to our Party, by Preaching, or
Confuting them by writing; and unto the state wherein we stand, wisely to apply
the Exhortation of the Assyrian King to his Soldiers, You are fools, (quoth
he) if there be any hope in your hearts to redress Sorrow by flight, rather
endeavor to make them fly that are the causers of your grief; assuring your
selves, that more perish in slight than in the battle. Even as many seeking to
meet the Papists half way, discomfort our own Party.

9. It follows now, according to the Method prescribed before, that an Overture
be made, how to get the Jesuits, and their shadows the Priests, into
possession: It has been heretofore recited, that the unwelcome name of a
Blood-sucker, a Busie-body or a Puritan, has been shrewd Scarecrows unto many
honest minds; by abrogating therefore of those or suchlike imputations, many
will be stirred up to undertake the apprehending of the Adversaries unto the
Truth; especially, when for their pains and time employed, they shall deserve
and have the Titles of good Patriots, dutiful Subjects, and zealous Christians:
How ready is every common person to carry a Malefactor to the Stocks, rather
than to the Goal or Execution? and doubtless, they will be no less forward to
attach a Priest, when they are assured that the worst of his Punishment shall
be a simple Restraint within the Walls of some old Castle. A certain kind of
People there is, with whom Money plays a more forcible Orator's part, than any
persuasion of the dutiful Service, which they owe to their Commonwealth: These
men will not be negligent to give Intelligence, and also to procure it
faithfully, provided that reward may help to line their thredbare Purses, and
exempt them from need to sell Liberty unto Seminaries. And where assurance of
gain is propounded for Discovery, What Master or Housekeeper will trust his
Servant with keeping of his Priest, or sleep quietly, while he is engaged to
the danger of a Mercenary? I remember, that in Italy it was often told me, that
the bountiful hand of Sir Francis Walsingam, made his Intelligencers so active,
that a Seminary could scarcely stir out of the Gates of Rome, without his
privity: which success, by mediation of Gold, may as readily be obtained from
Sivil, Valedolid, Doway, Lovain, Paris, and other places; and by forewarning
given of their approach, they may be waited for at the Ports, and from thence
soon conveyed to a safe Lodging. But whence shall the stream flow that must
feed this Bounty? It is a doubt easily satisfied. If some Thousands of Pounds
out of the Recusants Penalties be reserved in stock, and committed by his
Majesty into the disposition of zealous distributers, who will not be afraid to
conclude, Perdat fiscus ut capiat Christus. Neither need we seek any further
succor to repair decayed Castles, and therein to destray the charge of the
Priests, with a sure Guard to keep them, than the aforesaid Forfeitures, that
by the Justice of the Law may be collected. Which course, if ever it come
happily to be entertained, and that Recusancy cause to be an ignominious prey
to the Subjects, the proceedings for Religion shall be less blamed, and perhaps
altogether unjustly accused by any graceless Gretzerus, or Cacodaemon Johannes,
tincting their Pens in Gall and Vinegar. For besides occasion of Calumniation
given by Suits of that nature, it is evident, that many Recusants that would be
Indicted for the King, and the effecting of the Project aforesaid, shall escape
without punishment, and be born out against the Power of a private person,
begging them to no other purpose, than has heretofore been used: and albeit
the Penalty be rated at 20 l. and Month, yet was it never the Lawmakers
intent, that such as were not able to pay so great a Sum, should go Scotfree;
but that according to the proportion of their Ability, they should do the
penance of their Purses for their Disobedience; whereas now (if the Voice of
the People, which is said to be the Voice of God, is to be credited) the poorer
sort is skipt over, as if they ought no Souls to God, nor Duty to their
Sovereign: a poor man, says one, is to be pitied, if he offend through
necessity; but if he do amiss voluntarily, he is more severely to be chastised;
forasmuch, as wanting Friends and Means to bear him out, it shows that his
Fault proceeds from Presumption.

10. Let us now presuppose, that all the whole Regiment of Jesuits and
Seminaries were lodged in safe custody, may we then persuade our selves, That
Popery will vanish like a dumb Show? I am clearly resolved, that though it
receive a great Eclipse, notwithstanding, without other helps, the Kingdom of
Antichrist will only lie hidden as a weed, that seems withered in Winter, and
is ready to sprout out with the Spring. Temporal Arms are Remedies serving for
a time: but the Spiritual Sword is permanent in Operation, and by an invisible
Blow works more than Mortal Man can imagine. The Word of God carries this
two-edged Weapon in its mouth, which is to be used by faithful Ministers of the
Church, whom pure Zeal, without respect to worldly Promotion or persons, ought
to encourage. Of Judges the Scripture says, Estote fortes; and daily we see,
that sitting in their Judicial Seats, God inspireth them with greater Courage,
than when, as private persons, they are to give their Opinions. No less is the
Power of the Holy Ghost in his Servants that out of the Pulpit are to deliver
his Embassage. Let them therefore not be dismayed to speak out plainly, and tell
the truth, without running a middle course between heat and cold. Unprofitable
descanting upon the Scripture with an old Postel, or for want of better matter,
waste the poor time shut up in an Hourglass, with skirmishing against the
worthy Pillars of our own Profession. Rumor, which is ever ready to take hold
of evil, has raised a secret, though (as I hope) a causeless suspicion, that
there should be some secret combination underhand, by changing the state of
Questions, to put us in our old days, to learn a new Catechism; and when they
have brought us out of conceit with the Reverend Interpreters of the Word, to
use us then, as the Wolves (mentioned in Demosthenes Apology) handled the
Shepherds, when they had delivered up their Dogs. Most sacred was that Speech
of our most gracious King concerning Vorstius; He that will speak of Canaan,
let him speak the Language of Canaan. How can we draw others to our Church, if
we cannot agree where or how to lay our Foundation? Or how may we cleanse the
leprous Disease of Dissension, which the Papists, which are least assured to
themselves, and most doubtful of their Salvation, are not ashamed to ascribe
unto many of us? I would not have Ministers indiscreet, like Dogs, to bark
against all, whether they know or know them not. I like better the opinion of
Aristotle, who advises those that stand in guard of a place, to be cursed only
to such as are about to endamage the City. If Pursevants and other
Civil-Officers would learn to keep this Rule, they might go about their
business with much credit. The imagined fear of inviting the Romish Faction by
force to deliver their Ghostly Fathers out of Prison, moves me not a whit: For
I cannot believe, that they esteem them at so dear a price, that they would run
the hazard, by freeing others out of Hold, to put themselves into their places.
Some will say, That a man of straw is a head good enough for a discontented
Multitude. That the Papists are very Choleric, it appears sufficiently by
their Writings: Yet it has pleased God to send those cursed Cows short horns,
that when they could not find a man of sufficiency to serve their turn, they
were fain to do Homage to Garnet's Straw; forgetful as they are, that such
stubble cannot endure the Trial of Fire. But unto us, that ought to be Doers,
as well as Professors of the Gospel, let this remain as a memorable Theoreme;
Religion is the Mother of good Order, good Order is the cause of prosperous
Fortune and happy Success in all Counsels and Enterprises: Wherefore in what
estate soever there wants good Order, it is an evident Argument that Religion
goes backward.

11. I have ever held it for a kind of Injustice, to omit the execution of
mean Laws, made to prevent the effects of Idleness, and then to apply main
extremity of the Sword, when the proling habit gotten by that Vice comes to
light. No less is the course uncharitable (with pardon for this presumption be
it spoken) when we spare them that have no Religion at all, and censure those
that can give account of somewhat tending to that purpose.

He that is in Misery, must be born withal if he speak miserably; and when the
Child from his Mothers Breast has sucked nothing but Popery, a man had need to
be angry with discretion, if he hear him speak in the voice of a Popish. God
calls some by Miracle; but the ordinary means is his Word: If that means in
many places of this Land be wanting, of what Religion is it likeliest the
people will be? I suppose that few men will gainsay my Assertion, that outward
sense will direct them to Popery, which is fuller of Pageants than of Spiritual
Doctrine. And what is the cause; that after so many years of preaching of the
Gospel, that the common People still retain a scent of the Roman perfume? The
Cause is, For that the formul Obedience of coming to Church, has been more
expected than the Instruction of private Families: public Catechizing is of
great use, but the first elements thereof are to be learnt at home: And these,
which we learn from our Parents, stick most surely in our minds. What was the
cause why the Spartans continued their Government so many Revolutions of times,
without mutations? Histories record, that learning their Country Customs from
their Infancy, they would not be induced to alter them. And in this our Native
Soil we perceive, that the Common Laws, which rely on ancient Customs, are
better observed than late Statutes, of what worth soever they be: So does it
fare with the poor People, who being once seasoned with the old Dregs of
Papisme, will hurdly be drawn from it, till the learning of the true Faith be
grown to a Custom. I will prescribe no order or affairs to effect this, but I
suppose, that the ancient laudable course by the Bishops Confirmation, will not
be sufficient to fulfill so great a task; the Ministers must and ought to be the
principal and immediate hands to give assistance to so gracious a work; and in
case any be defective in their Duty, the Reverend Fathers of the Church may
take notice thereof in their Vnitations.

Perhaps it will be thought a hard task to constrain old People to learn the A,
B, C. of their Christian Belief. But how hard soever it be, I hold it no
incivility to prepare people of all Ages for the Kingdom of Heaven. It was not
the hanging up of the Bull of Plus Quintus on the Bishop of London 's doors, or
the forbearing to hang up Priests; that has wrought this Apostasy: But the
Idleness and Insufficiency of many Teachers, conspiring with the Peoples cold
Zeal, that has been the contriver of this unhappy Web. Until the eleventh year
of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, a Recusants name was scarcely known: The reason
reason was because that the Zeal, begotten in the time of the Marian
Persecution, was yet fresh in memory: And the late Persecutors were so amazed
with the sudden alteration of Religion, that they could not choose but say,
Digitus Dei est hic. In those days there was an emulation between the Clergy
and the Laity; and a strife arose, Whether of them should show themselves most
affectionate to the Gospel: Ministers naunted the Houses of worthiest Men,
where Jesuits now build their Tabernacles; and poor Country-Churches were
frequented with the best in the Shire. The Word of God was precious. Prayer and
Preaching went hand in hand together: Until Archbishop Grindal's disgrace, and
Hatfield's hard conceit of Prophesying, brought the flowing of these good
Graces to a still water: The name of a Papist smelt rank, even in their own
Nostrils; and for pure shame to be accounted such, they resorted duly, both to
our Churches and Exercises: But when they saw their great Coryphaeus Sanders
had slily pinned the name of Puritans upon the sleeves of Protestants that
encountered them with most courage, and perceived that the word was pleasing to
some of our own side, they took heart agrace to set little by the Service of
God, and Duty to their Sovereign: therewith start up from among us, some that
might have been recommended for their Zeal, if it had been tempered with
discretion, who forerunning the Authority of the Magistrate, took upon them in
sundry places, and publicly to censure whatsoever agreed not with their
private conceits; with which cross humors, vented in Pulpits and Pamphlets,
most men grieve to be frozen in zeal, and in such sort benumbed, that whosoever
( as the worthy Lord Keeper Bacon observed in those days) pretended a little
spark of earnestness, he seemed no less than red fire hot, in comparison of the
other. And as some things fare the worse, for an ill Neighbors sake dwelling
beside them; so did it betide the Protestant, who seeking to carb the Papist,
or to reprove an idle Droan, was incontinently branded with the ignominious
note of a Precisian. All which wind brought plenty of Water to the Popes Mill;
and there will most men grind, where they see appearance to be well served.

12. If without great inconvenience the Children of Papists could be brought up
out of their company it were a happy turn: but I find it to be full of
difficulty, there is provision made to avoid Popish Schoolmasters, but there
is no ward against Popish School-unstresses, that infect the silly infants
while they carry them in their Arms; which moves me to suppose, that the
former proposition to examine how Children and Servants are brought up, and
truly to certine the List of the Communicants and Recusants, will be the
readiest means to let His Majesty know the yearly increase or decrease of the
Church in every Diocese; and whosoever shall send his Children, or any of His
Majesty's Subjects, to be placed in Monasteries, or Seminary Colleges, or
Popishly to be brought up in Foreign parts; I think that for punishment, both
the one and the other worthily might be disfranchised of the Privileges due to
natural Englishmen, so far forth as any good by the Laws may descend to them,
but not to be exempted from the penalties thereof, or the Regal Jurisdicton of
the Crown. I know well that contradiction is odious, and makes a man seem
ambitious to be thought more understanding than others: in which case the
Spaniard uses only to term him presumptuous, whom he would call Fool, if
civility would bear it. But in my Defense I hope it shall suffice again to
revive my former protestation, that I discourse by the way of proposition,
rather than arrogance of defining any thing; with pardon therefore may I be
permitted to say, That the first easy Law of Twelve pence inflicted on him
that could not give a reasonable excuse for his absence from Church on Sundays,
was one of the best Ordinances that has hitherto been enacted: but while we
sought to make new Statutes, savouring of more severity, we neglected the old,
and were loath to execute the new: for it is a certain Rule, that whosoever in
policy will give liberty, and yet seem to suppress a Crime, let him procure
sharp Laws to be proclaimed, which are only necessary for some times, and rare
occasions to be put in execution; but not to be an ordinary work for every day
of the week. Daily use likewise teaches us, that it is loss grievous to punish
by an old Law, than by a new; Forasmuch as Truth it self seldom gets credit
without proof, and it is hard to free the people of suspicion that new Laws are
not rather invented against the particular persons and purses of men, than
against the corrupt manners: By force of which reason, I am induced to
conceive, that the old use of the Church, contained in good nurture, and
Ecclesiastical censures, will much more prevail to muzzle Popery, than any
fresh devices whatsoever. Neither do I think it blameworthy to affirm, that
our Cause has taken harm, by relying more on the Temporal than the Spiritual
Arms: for while we trusted that Capital punishments should strike the stroke,
we have neglected the means, which would, for the most part have discharged the
need of such severity. The Oath of Allegiance is not offered generally to
Servants and mean people; who if they had taken the Oath, by Absolution of a
Priest might recoyl from it, or change their opinion at leisure, without any
ready means to discover their Legerdemain: That Oath I fear will not be often
pressed; and to them that shift from place to place, how can it be tendered?
The principal Papists now cover themselves in the crowd of the multitude; but
if we can discover the affection of the multitude, they easily will be
unmasked, and being singled out, rest ashamed of their nakedness; which under
correction of better judgment, may be effected, if every new comer to inhabit
in a Town, and servants newly entertained, within a week or fourteen days be
caused to repair to the Minister, there in presence of the Churchwardens, and
other honest men, to subscribe unto such brief and substantial Articles
concerning Faith and Allegiance, as shall be according to Gods Word and
Justice, ordained to distinguish the Sheep from the Goats. In Foreign
Countries, every Host is bound to bring his Guest before an Officer, there to
certify his name, with the occasion of his coming, and intended time of his
abode in those parts; and in case he stay longer, he must again renew his
License: So curious and vigilant also are they to keep their Cities from
Infection, that without a Certificate, witnessing their coming from wholesome
places, they may not escape the Lazeretto. No less ought we to be watchful to
prevent the contagion of our Souls, than other Nations are of their Bodies.
Every thing is hard and scarcely pleasing in the beginning, but with time, some
such course may be readily put in execution; which I propound rather as matter
for better heads to work on, than peremptorily to be insisted on in the same
Terms.

But lest any charge me with temerity, that when I desire to know the
multitudes inclination by the means aforesaid, I satisfy my self with their
Parrots Language, pronouncing it knows not what; I think it not impertinent to
put them in mind, that heretofore I have required instructions, both precedent
and subsequent, and am ever of the mind, That although all this cannot be done
at once, yet it is necessary always to be doing our best, knowing, that not to
go forwards in Religion, is the ready way to go backwards. It is not the
outward obedience of coming to Church, that discovers the inward thought of the
Heart, it is the confession of the Tongue that must utter these secrets. And
where the Curates are insufficient, or the Parish great, I wish they had
Catechists to assist them, maintained by the Purses of the Recusants; which
Pension being collected for Gods Cause, will free us of scandal, though it
grieve them to pay the Spiritual Army waged against their own Stratagems.
Surely by giving them way in petty matters, they are grown to be very masterful
in their Party. Plato affirms, That the Popular State proceeded from the
License which the people took to make immoderate applauses in the Theaters:
when as by arrogating that immunity without controlement in place of their
Governors; and perceiving the Nobility to join with them in the same passions,
they thought their Heads as worthy to Govern, as any of those that were made
out of the self-same mould. In like manner, while we suffer ignorance openly to
maintain such petty glimpses of Popery, as are thought to be scarce worthy to
be looked at, and in small matters run an indifferent course, which neither
make sure Friends, nor feeble Foes, unawares they take the bridle from us, and
eat out Religion as it were by an insensible Gangrena.

Principiis obsta, sero medicina paratur,
Cum mala per longas convaluere moras.
For by sufferance of breaking smaller Laws, People are emboldned to set the
greater at naught.

To comprehend all things in a Law, which are necessary to the Reformation, I
neither hold it profitable nor expedient; yet it is discretion to provide for
the most important; smaller matters, whereof the Laws speak not, are to be
commended to the discretion of Parents, Masters, and other reverend persons,
who by example and advice, may prepare younglings by Education and Custom to
obey the Laws; especially such as are in high place, ought in this behalf to be
like Caesar's Wife: Non solum crimine, sed etiam criminis suspitione vacare; and
with circumspection to behave themselves, that the world may conceive in
requiring obedience to God and their Sovereign, that they hold the multitude
rather for companions than slaves: if great men take another way, they may
seduce many by example, though by words they express not their concealed
opinions; Tace and loquere, said God to Moses; it is the speech of the heart,
that utters more than words and syllables: and in our Common Laws it is held
Maintenance, when a great Personage only by his presence countenanceth a
Cause. Neither let us secure our selves with this Argument; The Papists are
pliable in small matters, ergo, they will yield in greater; and because they
took no Arms in 88. therefore it were needless curiosity to suspect them now;
for who knows not that small baits are used to take the greatest Fish, Vt cum
esca una etiam hamus devoretur? Wariness is the sinews of wisdom; and nothing
is more dangerous, than to be secure in matters of State: therefore for the
Laws already made, I wish that the most effectual of them, which least concerns
life, may be executed; for better it were not to make them, than by neglect to
set them at liberty, seeing many offenses there are, which men would abstain
from if they were forbidden; but when a strict commandment is avoided without
punishment, thereout springs an unbridled License, hardly to be reformed by any
rigor.

To conclude, I say freely, that whosoever ends his days by a natural death, he
shall be subject to receive many men's dooms for every particular offense; but
when for Religions sake, a man triumphs over the sword, that one eminent
virtue razeth out the memory of other errors, and places him that so dies in
Paradise, if common opinion may be lawfully vouched; which glory having many
followers and admirers, awaketh even dull spirits to affect their footsteps,
and to sell their lives for the maintenance of the same Cause. I need not envy
the name of a Martyr to the Jesuit; for his Cause, if it be rightly weighed,
will blanch that Title; but I desire to have all those lineaments defaced,
which may compound that counterfeit Image: in prosecuting of which purpose, if
I have failed in my advice, and by confused handling intricated the question, I
humbly request, that a wise man's verdict may mitigate the heaviness of that
censure. It is neither good to praise bad Counsels, because of their good
success; nor to condemn good Counsels, if the Events prove not fortunate; lest
many be animated to advise rashly, and others disheartened to counsel gravely.

Illi mors gravis incubat,
Qui notus nimis omnibus,
Ignotus moritur sibi.
Senec. Trag. His death deserves more than common blame,
Whom all men knew too well, and yet alone.
(Alas!) he dies unto himself unknown.
FINIS.

