The Quaker's Prophecy, of the terrible Judgment that will befall this Land,
being Englands sad Estate and Condition lamented, in this Just Complaint, taken
up against the greatest part of her Inhabitants, because of their great
Abominations, and treacherous dealings both with God and Man: For which cause
the terrible and Righteous Judgments of the Lord, are coming upon the Land of
England. Found in Manuscript amongst the Quakers Writings: By Absalon
Chamberlin, a well-wisher to the People of England.
In a Letter to D -- of M --
OH England, England! the Abominations of the greatest part of thy Inhabitants,
who can declare them? they have reached Heaven, so as they are come up before
the Lord, the Jealous God, and woe unto that part of thy Inhabitants, who have
sinned out the day of their Visitation, and have wholly slighted the day of
Gods Patience, and long forbearance; and would have none of his Reproof, but
have altogether rejected the same, and have made a mock at Sin, and have
sported themselves with their own deceivings and lusts, and have gone a
Whoring, from under the God of their Lives. Wherefore thus says the Lord, the
only God, I will make such become a hissing and reproach, and my anger they
shall not be able to escape, because of their provoking abominations, and
treacherous dealings, both with God and Man.

Oh England! England! How have, and yet do, a great part of thy Inhabitants
rush into Idolatry, and all manner of Profaneness, and grievous abominations,
even as the Horse and Mighty rush into the Battle. How do they drink in
iniquity, even as the Ox, or parched ground, drinks in Water. Oh England!
What manner of lamentation shall I make for thee my Native Country?

Oh England! England! What manner of complaint may I take up against a great
part of thine Inhabitants, who have long sought, and yet seek thy Ruin and
Destruction? Verily, their actions have declared them to be like the
Inhabitants of Sodom: Yea, their sins have rendered them to be as bad as those
of Gomorrah. Oh, they have vexed the righteous Soul, yea, and they have grieved
the Spirit of the Lord from day to day, with their unjust Conversations; they
have multiplied their transgressions, and heaped up their iniquities, till they
are become as the Sand on the Seashore, without number. Oh wretched England!
The Lord has long striven with them; Yea, he has also long born their
Iniquities; he would have gathered them to himself out of their abominations:
yea, he would often have healed them, but they would not; but they have stiffned
their necks, and hardened their hearts against the Lord and his Counsel, day
after day, and have chosen their own ways and works, even to their own hurt,
and would by no means be reclaimed. For when the Lord has reproved them, (by
the light of his Son in their own Consciences) and set their sins in order
before their eyes, they have stopped their ears, and closed their eyes, and
wilfully rebelled against the Power of God, and trampled upon his Witness (the
light in them) as a thing of naught, counting it not worth the taking notice
of. And when the Lord has raised up Prophets, Children and Servants, and sent
them out, commanding them to lift up their Voices like Trumpets, and to show
the People their transgressions, and to Preach Repentance and amendment of
Life, yea, to warn and exhort them to turn from their Sins to God, and to lay
before them their great abominations, and to Prophecy what should come upon
them, if they would not turn from the evil of their doing.

Oh England! England! wretched England! How art thou overspread with wasters
and spoilers, who like Catterpillars devour thy pleasant Fruit? Oh Land, (the
whoredoms and idolatries) that are daily committed and acted in thee, who can
declare them? O^ thy (...) City, ^^y enter City, that b^oody City! can its
(abominations) be paralelled in the Earth? Surely it has exceeded Sodom in
wickedness, the Lord is very angry with a great part of its Inhabitants, [and
his Vengeance is nigh to come upon them. Woe unto you Whoremongers, Drunkards,
Gluttons, Swearers, Cursers, Blasphemers, Cheaters and Idolaters! woe unto you
Proud, Wanton, and Profane, vain Persons! woe unto you Mountebanks,
Stage Players, Bear-baiters, Gamesters, and all manner of abominable workers,
and you that build up Towers, Scaffolds, and vain heathenish representations]
and such like, and make and garnish Images, to draw Peoples minds after
Idolatry, and for your cursed gain and lusts, in pretense of honoring your
King. Oh, how are People drawn into gazing and wondering after these
(abominations) it grieveth the Righteous Soul to behold such great wickedness?
Oh you wicked and abominable workers, and devourers of the Creation! the Lord
God will meet with you in a time when ye are little aware of him, he will stain
your Pride, Vainglory, and Idolatry, and give you your portion amongst
devourers, (except you speedily repent) and your abetters, strengthners, and
helpers forward of such ungodliness, (that do it knowingly) and delighters
therein; the Lord will not acquit you, he will smite you for these things, and
that right soon.

Oh, how do you daily provoke the Lord against your selves, you wicked workers!
how dare you make representations of destruction and ruin? how dare you make a
sport of such things? verily your provocations are great, wherewith you provoke
the just God. Verily great is the judgment that is nigh you, and your sins draw
it on you apace: do you think that the Lord cast out Back-sliders, Hypocrites,
and unfaithful Men, to set up and establish Idolaters, and open profane
Persons? nay surely; therefore tremble ye wicked Workers, and howl ye profane
Idolaters, for the mighty and terrible day of the Lord is near to break out
upon you: Thus says the Lord God, I Will scatter, I Will scatter, I Will split,
divide, and separate, I Will break and dash to pieces, and none shall be able to
gather, bind up, or join together; for mine anger is kindled, and my jealousy
shall burn till I have devoured mine Enemies, says the Lord.

Therefore ye People of England (that yet live in Wickedness) who have not
wholly sinned out the day of your Visitation, to you I now speak, you that feel
the Lord yet striving with you. Oh! return, return speedily unto the
manifestation of his Spirit, whereby he strives with you. O! be not still
stiff-necked, but hearken to the Word of the Lord, which shows you the
thoughts and Intents of your Hearts, and hearken and be obedient to the Call
thereof, that so by its power you may hasten out of Babylon, both Young and
Old, Rich and Poor, high and low, noble or ignoble, Professor or profane, who
yet are there; for the Lord's Controversy is great with Babylon, her Merchants
and Inhabitants, and he will not much longer spare, but he will suddenly smite,
and none shall be able to hinder his stroke. Yea, yea, he will wound, and none
shall be able to heal; for the measure of her Iniquities, and Idolatries, and
Whoredoms, are nigh full, and the Wine of her Fornications has caused the
Fatts to overflow, and she is come up into remembrance before the Lord, the
Just God, who will plague her, and all her Merchants, and Inhabitants,
according to their Abominations, whereby they have grievously provoked him;
therefore, come out of her whilst mercy and time is offered, lest you perish
with her in her Judgments, which the Lord is strongly and swiftly bringing upon
her.

POSTSCRIPT.
OH England! England! leave off all thy wickedness, thy Whoring, Drunkenness,
Swearing, Lying, Backbiting and Slandering one another; leave off thy
wickedness, for fear the Lord should cut thee off, for several sad and dreadful
Calamities will befall thee O England! may be before the time called Christmas,
and to day before to morrow, for that we know; therefore O England! Repent, for
the Judgment day is nigh at hand.

London, Printed for the Author, 1682.


