THE CABINET OF THE Jesuits Secrets OPENED. In which there are many things
relating to the Church and Clergy of England.

As also the ways by which they increase the Number and Wealth of their
Society, on the ruins of Kingdoms and Families.

In part began by Dr. Oats from an Italian Copy; But now more largely
discovered, from a French Copy, printed at Colon, 1678.

Made English By a Person of Quality.

Licensed, Feb. 14. 1678/9.

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Robinson, and George Wells, in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1679.

To the READER.
THese Papers were not originally intended for the Press, but for the use of an
intimate Friend, and had possibly never gone further, if they who are the
subject Matter of them, had not made it necessary to give my dear Countrymen
this insight into their designs upon us, and the methods by which they hope to
attain their ends upon us.

There is scarce any sort of Persons in the Nation, to whom the knowledge of
these things may not be useful, the Recusants themselves not excepted; and it
is most certain the Book was first printed by, and for such.

But then it is most necessary for the Country-Gentry, and for them I chiefly
design it, that they may be no longer cheated by the fair Carriage and
insinuating Behavior of these Men, and their Disciples. They are said to be
good Company and civil Men, and which is more, that they seldom spoil the Mirth
and Pleasure of the rest of the Company with Disputations, but rather make
themselves agreeable with Stories and News. But for all that, these Men have a
design, if not upon your Lives and Persons, yet upon your Families and Estates,
and you shall one day pay dearly for their Acquaintance, or else they will miss
what they most intend.

They rarely seek the Acquaintance of any but Persons of great Estate, and of
such as have same Authority in their Country, and these they flatter and
caress with all the little Arts of indearments imaginable; but especially if
they find them ignorant of the World, and not too much verst in, or fixed to the
established Religion: for with these they care not to associate: Except it be
in order to seduce their Children, and herein they often prevail by matching
their Daughters to them; for they will not willingly marry a Son to a
Protestant Woman. And the stopping this Gap, which has seduced many great
Families, is a work as well worthy the thoughts of the Parliament as any other
whatever.

But the use they make of Persons in Authority is yet more pernicious: by their
power they awe and curb the inferior People that they durst not offend them,
and the late Plot had never come so near its execution, had it not been for
this. For their preparation of Arms was clearly enough discovered, to have put
us upon our guard, but that they used the Authority of some Justices of the
Peace to punish those People, who had seen and observed them, and had also
courage enough to report their Knowledge. By this means also they baffle the
execution of all Laws against them; and doubtless in private deride and scorn
those, whom they thus cajole in public.

And here let not the Dissenters flatter themselves, as if they of all others
had least conversation with them. Their new virtue of Toleration has done
these Men more service than is thought of. And Coleman was no Fool when he told
the French King's Confessor, That if they could once obtain an Act of
Parliament, for a general Liberty of Conscience, They should afterward do in
effect what they list; and a little after in the same Letter, The Trial of
Edward Coleman, page 54:
That this would give the greatest blow to the Protestant Religion here that
ever it received since its Birth. They may see by this who are to reap the
benefit of their Labors for a Toleration. And Mr. Oats would infinitely oblige
the World, if he would publish an account of the Cheats of this sort, he has
seen practiced amongst them.

As for the Translation I shall say but this; it is faithfully done, and I have
used as much as I could possibly, the very words of the Original. And now if
God may have Glory, and the Church and Nation Service by it; I shall never wish
for more.

Farewell.
THE SECRETS OF THE JESUITS.
THE Laws and Constitutions upon which the Order. This Author uses; words
indifferently, viz. the Religion, Order and Company of the Jesuits which they
call the Society themselves.
Religion of the Jesuits was established, make it so clearly appear that it was
by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost that Ignatius planted it in the Vineyard
of the Lord that no Man can justly doubt thereof. For whoever had considered
it, in its first rise, would have had great reason to hope that it was the Tree
that should produce the Antidote against the venom of Heresies, and that it
should send forth those blossoms of Christian and Religious Works, which being
once scented by Sinners, should compel them to abandon the stench of Sin, and
follow the odor of Repentance. And truly so long as those good Fathers, from
whom it derived its Birth, bedewed it with their Charity; and that it was
cultivated according to their Intentions, it is certain the Fruits which arose
of it, were fair and large to a Wonder, as well in relation to the excellent
education of Children, as the Conversion of Souls, and the propagation of the
true Faith of the Catholic Religion. But the Devil, who imploys as much
subtilty in the destruction of the works and designs of God, as good men do
labor to advance them, took occasion even from the Grandeur of this Religion,
and the marvelous progress it made in a short time, to pervert the end of its
Institution: for by a subtle Artifice, instead of the first branches of
Charity, which are now almost quite withered, he has ingrafted the two most
pernicious Affections in the World Ambition and Avarice; which cause so great a
mischief to Christianity, that it is scarce possible to imagine a greater; as I
hope I shall demonstrate in this discourse. In the entry of which I protest
before God, that it is neither Interest nor Passion moves my Pen, but simply
the zeal of the public Good; to the Advantage of which I believe my self
obliged to use my utmost endeavors; hoping that their Dissimulations and Arts
being once known by Princes, there shall in time be a remedy provided.

Now the first thing which should be considered is, that the Religion of the
Jesuits being solely provided for the education of Children, of which there is
neither Kingdom nor City which stands not in need, it was at first desired on
all hands, and favored by most Princes, so that it made a greater progress in
a few years, than most others have done in many Ages. But this greatness which
for the most part introduces a change of Manners, kindled in these Children of
Ignatius so great a Love to their Society; that persuading themselves, it was
of greater use to the Church of God then all the rest, and better fitted for
the Reformation of the World, they concluded amongst themselves that they ought
to employ all their care and craft in the enlarging of it; because with it they
augmented the Militia of Jesus Christ, the good of the whole Church, and the
ancient Patrimony of our Lord, if I may thus speak their Language.

And here it is that I shall need the Subtilty of Aristotle, and the Eloquence
of Tully, to unfold the strange manner which these Fathers use in a constant
increase of their Society, which perhaps will seem impossible to many by reason
of its Novelty; but it will be sufficient for me to remark some few things
only, leaving a spacious Field for every one to form such an Idea of it, as
shall appear most reasonable to him; and to this purpose I will content my self
with the proposing some Heads or Points rather, which may serve my design of
affording a certain Foundation to the Reflections and Discourses of those, who
will exercise themselves in the Contemplation of this Subject.

I.
The Jesuits foresaw, they could never raise their Society to that height of
Grandeur they aspired to, by doing nothing but Teach, Preach and Administer the
Sacraments, or by the sole performance of other such like Religious Offices.
For although at first they were entertained by many with a very great
affection, as I have said before; yet at length they perceived, that time
diminished this Love, which made them suspect their Religion had made its
greatest efforts in its infancy; and therefore they were put to the necessity
of inventing two other means to aggrandise it, the first of which was to
discredit with Princes, and in consequence with all others they could, all the
other Orders, pretending great imperfections in them. So that by this malicious
address, having raised their own greatness upon the ruin of others, they
possessed themselves of a great number of Monasteries, and Abbeys, and other
great Revenues, by their Slanders dispossessing the former Owners. The second
was by insinuating themselves into the Affairs of State, engaging in their
Interest the greatest part of the Christian Princes, in such a subtle and
artificious manner, that as it is difficult to penetrate, so it is almost
impossible to explain it perfectly. Their General, to whom all the rest pay a
very exact Obedience, recides continually at Rome; he has made choice of some
Fathers, who because they are always with him, are called Assistants, and there
is at least one of every Nation, from which they take their Name, one calling
himself the Assistant of France, the other of Spain, the third of Italy, the
fourth of England, the fifth of Austrich; and so of all the other Provinces and
Kingdoms. The duty of each Assistant is to give advice to the General of all
those events of State which pass in the Kingdom or Province he represents;
which he is enabled to do by means of the correspondence he holds there, who
making their abode in the chief Town of that Kingdom or Province, inform
themselves carefully of the State, Nature, Inclination and Intentions of
Princes, with which in conclusion they advertise the Assistants every Post,
giving them advice of what has been discovered, or what has lately happened,
so that all these Pacquets arriving at Rome, the General calls to his Counsel
all his Assistants, who present him as it were with an Anatomy of the World;
telling him the Interests and Designs of all the Christian Princes. After
which, having considered all those things were written to them, and having
examined and compared them one with another, at length they raise the
Conclusion, which is, that they ought to favor the affairs of one Prince, and
hinder those of another, according to their own Interest and Profit. So that as
Spectators see the blots better than the Gamesters, so these Fathers having in
view the Interests of all the Princes, apply with the greater facility, the
necessary means to improve the affairs of him that is most desposed to their
Interest.

II.
The second Point which deserves to be chiefly considered after this, is, That
it is extremely mischievous, that Religious Persons should meddle with State
Affairs, their duty obliging them to attend wholly the Salvation of their own
Souls, and those of their Neighbors. So that the Jesuits intrieguing in the
Civil Government, more than the very Seculars themselves, it is absolutely
necessary, for the avoiding many most dangerous Consequences, to provide some
remedy against so great a disorder. For, in the first place, the Jesuits take
the Auricular Confession of a great part of the Nobility of the Catholic
States; so that to get leisure for this, they will no longer admit the Poor
into their These are certain private places in Churches, made for that purpose,
like our Reading-Desks, with Pewes on either side, of the same height.
Confessionals, and very often they are the Confessors of Princes too: So that
by this means it is easy to penetrate into all their Designs, and learn all the
resolutions, as well of the Princes as of their Subjects, of which they
presently give advice to their General, or to the Assistants which remain at
Rome. Now any Man that has the least Judgment, may perceive the damage which
this sort of People bring to Sovereign Princes, who have no other end in any
thing but their own Interest; for all the World knows that there is scarce any
thing more necessary than Secresy for the Preservation of States; so that if
this thing be once lost, they ordinarily fall to ruin; which without doubt is
the reason why all wise Princes are so careful to preserve it, and keep their
Intentions from being known; whereas on the other side, having often observed
that they become the wiser by the knowledge of the designs of others, and that
thereby they govern their own Affairs the better, they endeavor by all ways to
attain the knowledge of them, entertaining for that purpose Ambassadors and
Spies with considerable expenses, though for the most part without a
considerable advantage, because the Reports which are made by their Ministers.
Ambassadors, are for the most part not very faithful. But I can assure any
Man, that the General of the Jesuits, and his Assistants, have this advantage,
that they are truly and very particularly informed of what ever passes in the
most secret Consultations; both by means of Confessions, and of the Inquiries
which their Correspondents make, who live in all the chief places of
Christendom, and also by the aid of their other Adherents, which I will speak
of hereafter: So that they do better understand, as I may say, what are the
Forces, the Revenues, the Expenses, and Designs of Princes, than the Princes
themselves. And all this without any other expense than the charge of Letters,
which in truth amounts to a considerable Charge, seeing that every Post,
according to the account of the Post-masters, they come to 60, 70, 80, and
sometimes 100 Crowns of Gold a Return. By which it is easy to conjecture, that
having so exact a knowledge of the Interests of Princes, it is equally in their
power to diminish their Reputation with other Princes, to make them lose their
Authority with their Subjects, to raise them up what Enemies they please: and
lastly, to raise up their own Subjects against them, with so much the greater
facility, that by means of Confessions, and of their Emissaries, they penetrate
to the bottom of the Souls of their Vassals, and so discover all those that are
well or ill affected. So that by the reports which are made them of the affairs
of State, they may without difficulty sow the Seeds of Enmity amongst Princes,
and involve them in a thousand suspicions; And also of the knowledge which they
have of the Minds of their Subjects, it is no less easy for them to foment in
them Contempt of their Governors, and give birth to all sorts of troubles and
seditions. From all this any Man must conclude, that Interest of State will
never permit any Prince to choose for his Confessors these sorts of Men, who
apply themselves with so much care to pry into the Affairs of State; and which
make use of the knowledge they have thus gotten, as the most effectual means of
insinuating themselves into the favor of other Potentates. And they ought much
less to suffer their Counselors, their Principal Ministers, and their household
Officers, to take them for their Confessors, especially, because we live in an
age abundantly furnished with Persons, who are not inferior to the Jesuits
neither in Knowledge, nor in Virtue, and are as able to serve them in every
respect, without giving them the least umbrage, or intermedling in any thing
but the direction of their Souls, and their Ecclesiastical Functions.

III.
But that what I have hitherto said, and shall say hereafter may be the better
understood, we must consider that there are three sorts of Jesuits.

The First, Are certain Lay Persons of both Sexes, who being associated with
them, live under them in the practice of a certain Blind Obedience, governing
themselves wholly by the Counsel of the Jesuits, and being ready to execute all
their Commands. These for the most part are Gentlemen and Ladies, who pass the
rest of their Lives in Widowhood; Rich Citizens and Merchants, who like good
Fruit Trees, bear the Jesuits a great quantity of precious Fruit, that is to
say of Gold and Silver. Of this Class are those Women who are commonly called
Bigottes, who being induced by these Fathers to despise the World, are in
exchang fleeced by them, who by their smooth Speeches draw from them Clothes,
Movables, and considerable Rents.

The second sort are only Men, of which some are Priests, and others are
Layicks, who although they live in the World, and often by the interposition of
the Jesuits obtain Pensions, Canons, Abbeys, and other Revenues, have yet made
a Vow to take their habit, when ever the General shall require it. For which
cause they are called Jesuits in Voto. And these the Jesuits use with a rare
dexterity to establish their Monarchy, maintaining them in the Kingdoms and
Provinces, in all the Courts of Princes, and in a word, in all the considerable
places of Christendom, to the end they may serve them, as I shall set forth in
the seventh Point.

The third Sort are the Politic Jesuits, in whose hands all the Authority
resides, who manage the Government of their Order, and who having been assailed
with the same temptation Christ was by the Devil in the Wilderness, Haec omnia
tibi dabo, si cadens adoraveris me, have struck the bargain, and accepted the
Condition propounded by Satan, employing all their Industry to reduce their
Society to a perfect Monarchy. And as it is at Rome, where almost all the great
Affairs of Christianity are transacted, and in which place the Head of these
brave Politicians resides, i. e. their General, with a great number of other
Persons of the same Order; so this is the place which they have resolved to
begin their domination in, as any Man may see who observes the manner of their
Conduct. It is scarce possible to propose an Affair in this Court, but the
Jesuits, who are informed of every thing by their Spies, worth the taking
notice of, assemble themselves to conclude on an Issue advantageous to their
Interest; and from thence you shall see them run to the Cardinals, the
Ambassadors, and the Prelates; where having dexterously insinuated themselves
to discourse of the Affair then in agitation, or beginning to be so, they
represent it in that manner which pleases them, having ever a careful respect
to their own Interest, and to that purpose often changing the true Aspect of
things, even to the making (as the saying is) black white, and white black. And
because the first Relations, especially when made by Religious Persons, take a
considerable impression in the Spirits of the Hearers; from hence it proceeds
that very often Affairs of great importance, which are transacted in the Court
of Rome by Ambassadors, and other Persons of Authority, have not had the
success desired by Princes; because the Master-Jesuits having prejudicated with
their interested Reports the Minds of Men, have forestalled their Faith, and
made them suspicious of the Relations of others, though they were more true and
sincere. But it is not at Rome only, and with the Prelates, that they use this
Artifice; they practice it in the same manner, either by themselves, or the
second sort of Jesuits, in the Courts of other Princes. From whence this
consequence will arise, that the greatest part of the Affairs of Christianity
pass through the hands of the Jesuits, and that those only succeed which they
do not oppose. I affirm in the interim, that their dexterity in intrieguing in
Affairs, either to hinder or promote them, being so subtle, that it may be
said to be impenetrable, it is impossible to describe it exactly; but yet it is
easy for all Princes to know it, if they will but take the pains to read what I
have writ of it: For it will cause them to reflect upon what is past, and recall
into their memory the particular Circumstances of Treaties; so that comparing
them with my Remarques, it will be almost impossible not to discover some part
of the Craft of this admirable Society. Now though this Secret and hidden
Artifice be the principal thing they put in practice to attain this Monarchic
Jurisdiction, which is the principal Object of their desires; yet this hinders
them not sometimes (so much does their Passion blind them) to employ other
Expedients, which manifest their ambitious Project. For was it not a pleasant
Petition which they made under pretense of the general good of the Church, to
his Holiness Gregory the 13th, that he would command his Legates, and all his
Apostolic Nuntio's, to take some Jesuit for their Companion and Confident, by
whose Counsel they should govern themselves in all their Actions.

IV.
The fourth thing which deserves to be considered, is, That by these
Intrigues, and by the knowledge of Affairs of State, the principal Jesuits have
acquired the favor of many both Temporal and Spiritual Princes, making them
believe they have done great Services; and from this favor great
inconveniences spring.

First, Abusing the goodness and friendship of these Princes, they fear not to
abuse a great number of private Families, which, though rich, and noble, have
been reduced to an extreme degree of Misery, by the Usurpation which the
Jesuits have made upon the Estates of Widows, and by the unsincere Courses, by
which they have drawn into their Religion a number of those young Gentlemen,
which frequent their Colleges. For how often does it happen, that these young
Men becoming sickly, or finding themselves unfit for the functions of the
Society, are sent away, without restoring either to them or to their Relations
that Wealth they brought thither, and to which the Jesuits made themselves
Heirs at their entering their Profession? This Injustice is far enough from the
Ordinance of St. Ignatius, and from the intentions of those Lords, who having
founded their Houses, did not leave them so much Riches as might fatiate their
thirst after the good things of this World, but rather make them fitter to
serve the Christian World.

The second Inconvenience which follows this access the Jesuits have to
Princes, is, That they boast of it perpetually, and persuade the World, that
their Union and Familiarity with great Men is much greater than indeed it is,
and by this means they make themselves revered by the very Ministers of State,
who by reason of this do all they can to insinuate themselves into their good
opinion; and indeed every one has recourse to them to obtain what they desire.
And their vanity is arrived to that height, that they have dared to boast that
they can make Cardinals, Nuntio's, Lieutenants, Governors, or any other
Officers; yea, some of them have proceeded to that degree of Impudence, as to
affirm that their General could do much more than the Pope; and others have
added, that it is much better to be of this Order which can make Cardinals,
than to be a Cardinal. I fear not that what I write should make me pass for a
Slanderer, for these Fathers speak all these things so openly, that there is
hardly any Person who converseth with them with any degree of Familiarity, who
has not often heard the same things from them.

V.
The fifth Point is, that being thus established in State-practices, one of the
first things they exact from that Prince who favors them, is, that he would
permit them to advance or pull down whoever they please, serving themselves
always here of the pretense of Religion, that they may with the more facility
obtain their ends. And if by misfortune this be granted, as it falls out too
often, expect not that they should fill the vacant places with Persons of
worth, who can best discharge their trust; but on the contrary, if any such
happen to be recommended to that Prince, they oppose them with all their might,
if they be not their intimate Friends, and such as they know are highly
affected to their Interest; but as for them they present and petition for, be
they affected to the Interest of the Prince, or be they not, be they honest Men
or Knaves, be they fit for the employment, or be they not, this is the least
part of their Care. So that it i^ often seen, that the Officers which are
chosen by these Men, are good for nothing but to vex the Prince, and exasperate
the People by Discontents, which end for the most part in dreadful Seditions.

VI.
The sixth Point cannot be better represented than by the similitude of a
Master of a Gally, who observing the Wind for his turn, can no sooner whistle
than all the Rowers are at the Oar, to bring the Gally to the place he had
before appointed: for just after this manner, when the General and his
Assistants have once concluded that it is for their interest that any Person
should be advanced to any dignity, upon the first intimation of his intention
to those that reside in the Provinces, there is a general attempt of all to
elevate the Person so designed by them, into that Charge or Dignity where they
would place him, some lifting at the Head, and some at the Tail, as I may say.
Now he that has received from them a service of this nature, must be very
ungrateful, if he denies them the like assistance when occasion serves. So it
often falls out, that they esteem themselves more obliged to the Jesuits, than
to the Prince himself who has given them their preferment; and so they become
more passionate of the Interest of the Jesuits, than of the Glory and Advantage
of their Masters. Thus Princes are taken for weak Persons; and while they
imagine they have got a faithful Servant, they have let in a Jesuitical Spy, of
whom they make use too often, to the damage of him that has exalted him. This
is as true as the rest I have hitherto set forth; and it is easy to report a
Number of Examples, Experience furnishing us with enough; but to avoid rendering
my self odious to no purpose, I will pass them in silence, satisfying my self
with this Conclusion from what has been said in this Article, That this Address
of the Jesuits to introduce their Partisans into Charges, is (it may be) the
reason why they call their Order a Great Monarchy, because by this means they
govern both the Princes and their Ministers. So that we need not wonder, if one
of their chief Fathers, having a public Speech to make in the name of the
Society to a Prince, let slip these arrogant Words: You know, Sir, that our
Order has ever kept a good correspondence with your Highness; in their
imagination without doubt to be Monarchs as well as you.

VII.
In the seventh place, These Fathers do their utmost to make the World believe,
that all those who receive any Benefits from their Prince in what sort soever,
do yet obtain them by their means, or by the assistance of their Favorites.
And they acquire by this way a more absolute Empire over the minds of Subjects,
than the very Princes themselves; which it may be cannot happen without a great
prejudice to them, no Reason of State permitting that such active and ambitious
Spirits as the Jesuits, should thus dispose of the Wills of their Ministers.
For besides that by this means they can carry on obscurely all sorts of
Treasons and Troubles, they have also a certain way by these Ministers their
Adherents, to introduce into the Services of Princes their Jesuits in Voto,
either as Counselors, or Secretaries of State. And these are no sooner
received, but they fall to importune the Prince to take some Jesuit, either for
his Confessor, or Preacher: whereby both become the Spies of the General, to
whom they give an exact account of the most secret Affairs. And from hence it
comes to pass, that what was thought most secret, is become most public, when
the means of its so being can not be discovered; and Designs of the greatest
import are prevented, when it is impossible to conjecture who has discovered
them; and which is worse, they are most often suspected, who are least guilty.

VIII.
The eighth thing which we should consider here is, That as Subjects do
naturally follow the Inclination of their Princes; so all that pay obedience to
the General, observing his Affection and Application to State Affairs, and that
he uses his utmost endeavor to enlarge and enrich by this means the Society,
they by his example study Politics, that they may be able to serve him in this
glorious Design, as they esteem it. And to this purpose they employ their
Kindred and Friends, to search the Hearts of Kings, to discover their most
secret Intentions, never failing to give advice of them to the General, and his
Assistants, so soon as they can learn the least particular. For as they know
this is the only way to gain the good will of their Superiors, and bring
themselves to preferment, which is never given amongst them to any, but what
are known to be fit to elevate the Society to that Grandeur they aspire to. So
they do what they can to render themselves recommendable by some Politic Act,
and so gain the esteem of being thought capable of the Management of greater
Affairs.

IX.
So that as by the force of Fire the Chemists can draw Oils, which can cure
almost mortal Wounds; and as the industrious Be extracts her Honey from the
Juice of most different Flowers: so the Jesuits, by the force of their Reason,
extract their own Interest out of the assured Relations are made them of all
the Interests of the Princes, no less than from the several Accidents which
happen in the several States; by means of which they not only allay for the
time the Head of their Thirst after Greatness, but gain an exact knowledge of
their own Interest, by the help of which they obtain their end, by the good or
evil Fortune of others. But that which is yet more remarkable is, that having
thus stolen into the heart of any Prince, they have a custom of bringing them
into play, or (as others say) setting them a dancing; telling them they have
excellent Abilities of doing such a thing, or effecting such a Design, or
finishing such an Enterprise. But so soon as they have began to employ
themselves in favor of these Jesuits, in conformity to their Promises, coming
at last to consider that such an increase of Power in that Prince they had thus
encouraged, may be disadvantageous to them, they then retard as much, as they
are able, the Conclusion of that Affair; just like Lawyers, who prolong as much
as they are able the Suits of their Clients, and then on a sudden by a
surprising Artifice, and malicious Address, they perplex the Court, and
entirely ruin those Designs themselves had inspired. Whoever shall reflect on
the League of France, which was treated and concluded by them, and yet was
abandoned when they saw Fortune favored that King; and upon England, which
they have promised so often to the Spaniard; shall be so convinced of the truth
of this, that he shall never need a stronger proof.

May we not then draw hence this Conclusion, That the Intention of the Jesuits
being neither right nor sincere toward any, they serving the World no further
than their own Interest will permit them, neither Princes nor Prelates can
employ them as Counselors without great damage; because pretending themselves
to be equally affected to all, feigning themselves French with the French, and
Spaniards with the Spaniards, and so with all the other Nations, as occasion
serves, and as the hopes of making advantage puts them on, they care not in the
interim to help or hinder the one any more than the other. It is without doubt
their irregular Attention to their private Interest, and the Neglect they have
of the advancement of any other Person, which are the Causes why all those
Enterprises, wherein they are concerned, have rarely succeeded. But then (we
must confess) they have a rare Art in dissembling this Indifference, some
feigning themselves very zealous Partisans of the Crown of France, others of
that of Spain, others of the Empire, and so of all the other Princes whose
favor they seek. But if among these Princes any one makes choice of a Jesuit
for his Confident, this man can no sooner learn a Secret in any Affair, but he
gives the General advice of it, who thereupon sends him order how he shall
proceed, without any regard had to the intention of that Prince, or whether
they be for or against his Service.

Now though all the Inconveniences I have hitherto set forth, be extremely
dammageable to the Public, yet there are others much more so.

As first is, That the Jesuits being thus exactly informed (as I have said) of
the Interest, and what ever else passes in the most secret Counsels of
Princes, those that pretend to be of the Party of France, propose to the King,
or to his principal Ministers, certain Reasons of State of great import, which
have been sent them from Rome by their great Masters of Policy. Those that
pretend to be of the Party of Spain, or in any other Court where they have any
access, propound others there, directly contrary to the first, or at least,
which can serve to no other purpose but to entertain distrust amon^st the
Christian Princes; so that they are kept in perpetual fear of each other, which
disturbs the Public Peace more than can be expressed, and causes great
Miseries in all Christendom; such a Distrust being almost an invincible
Obstacle to the Conclusion of a League against the common Enemy, and rendering
those Treaties of Peace which are made among Princes very uncertain.

The second is, That by their cunning way of acting they have so enlightened the
World, that every Man seems to apply himself mostly to the points of State
Policy; so that now there is no Action which is not poized in this Balance;
nor scarce any ordinary Affair, which is not managed according to the Jesuits
Subtilty. But that which is yet worse, the Heretics perceiving and imbibing
the Maxims of this Society, use them to our great damage, with those Princes
which protect them. So that whereas heretofore there were great hopes the
Lutherans at least should one day acknowledge their Errors, now there are
excellent Statesmen among them, and Politicians, hard to be converted.

And now that I may make it appear that I have said nothing but the Truth, when
I attribute extraordinary Craft and Dissimulations to the Jesuits, especially
when they designed to gain the favor of any Prince, I must not omit what they
did on that account in relation to Great Britain.

One of that Society, called Father Person, the Assistant of that Kingdom,
having wrote a Book against the Succession of the King of Scotland to the Crown
of England; Father Critonic, with others of the same Order, defended the Right
of the said King, by a Book entitled, The Reasons of the King of the Scots,
against the Opinion of Father Person. Now though they seemed to be divided
among themselves, yet they were in truth very well agreed: for this Comedy was
acted by the commandment of the General, to the intent that if the House of
Scotland had been excluded from the Succession, they might have produced to him
or them that had the Government Person's Book; or it on the contrary, that
House happened to be settled upon the Throne, they might yet gain the King's
Affection, by showing him Critonic's Book. And so how ever the matter fell out,
they might quit themselves, and be provided of a fit means to increase their
Society.

By which we may observe also the truth of what I said, when I affirmed that
Princes were the ordinary and usual Objects of the Resolutions and Actions of
the Jesuits; and how much reason they have to say that their Order is a Great
Monarchy. And is not this also a convicting Instance, and proof, of the little
fear they have to discontent Princes, when it is their Interest? Experience
furnishes us with a number of other Examples, which would make this as clear
as the day, but I should be too long and troublesome if I should repeat them
here.

I will therefore instance in one, which is worth a thousand, it being most
remarkable. Every one knows there is no Person in the World whom the Jesuits
are more obliged to serve faithfully and obey than the Pope, and that not only
in respect of that particular vow of obedience which they make to him, but also
for a multitude of other reasons. Yet nevertheless when Pope Pius the fifth,
who can never be enough commended, had by the Inspiration of the Holy Spirit,
commanded them to officiate in the Quire, and make their profession in the same
manner as all the other Orders do, they never would obey him, it seeming to
them that they should thereby receive a considerable prejudice. There were only
some few who yielded their Obedience to his Holiness his Will, and who
consented to accept the profession in that manner which he had propounded: But
how were they treated by the rest? were they not in contempt called Avatins?
And was there ever any one Person of these, who could obtain the least
preferment from the Society? After this manner also they opposed the famous
Charles Borromee, Archbishop of Milan, who in quality of Legate a latere, would
have brought their Company to the observance of a Religious Discipline.

But what is this? They obey not the holy Canons, seeing contrary to their
Decrees, they trade in Pearls, Rubies and Diamonds, which are brought them from
the Indies; and it is a common Opinion that the greatest part of the Jewels of
India, which are sold at Venice, pass through the hands of the Jesuits; and we
cannot imagine this is a meet Report, which has been spread by their Enemies,
the very Posts* themselves whom they use, have taught it us. And I could here
report some other things which would prove as evidently, that they are bad and
unfaithful Servants to the Pope; but because I cannot do it without speaking of
a Prince, who will be offended at it, I will pass it in silence; my design
being to serve the World without offending any Man, no not the Jesuits, whom I
honor otherwise, and pretend not here to make an Invective against them, but
only to abate their Pride, and teach them; if it be possible, a more tolerable
way of acting.

For who is it that has not just cause to complain of the Jesuits? Yet as it
often happens, that sick Persons send up their cries to Heaven, and are beheld
by others in the interim with Wonder, every one perceiving they are afflicted
with this or that Malady, and yet but few discern the true origin and fource of
them. So though almost all the World complain of the Jesuits, some because they
are persecuted by them, others for that they are not served by them with a
Fidelity becoming their Habit, yet the evil continues nevertheless; because
most Men cannot perceive the true cause of so great a disaster. But if they
would examine the thing a little more exactly, they should easily find, that it
is the vast and boundless desire they have to aggrandise themselves, which
makes them think it a thing of no moment to discontent Princes or deceive them;
to oppress the poor, to spoil Widows, and ruin most noble Families, to raise
Jealousies, and make Discords amongst Christian Princes, that by that means
they may insinuate themselves into their greatest Affairs. But would not this
be a strange disorder in Nature, if one of the least Members of the Body, and
that formed to no other end than to serve as an Instrument to the more Noble,
should yet draw to it self the purest Blood, and the greatest part of the Vital
Spirits? the disorder without doubt is not less in the Civil or Ecclesiastical
State, while the Order of Jesuits, which was one of the last that was admitted
into the body of the Church, to the intent that it should serve her in the
Conversion of Infidels, and particularly in exhorting Sinners to repentance, on
the contrary, draws to it self the greatest affairs of Princes and Prelates,
that is, as I may say, the most pure and Vital Spirits of their Interest, to
the end this Order may appropriate and apply them to her self, though she
cannot do this without troubling the repose of Families and Kingdoms, without
oppressing many, whose rise should rather be desired, and raising others, who
deserve rather to be abased; and finally, without thousands of other
inconveniences which arise from hence.

I could easily produce here a great number of other reasons, drawn from
experience, besides those I have already alleged, to manifest That the Jesuits
ambition is of a vast extent, and that they have entertained an Appetite of
Greatness, which can suffer no Limits or Bounds: But because I affect brevity
in these Reflections, it shall suffice to report the Project of Father Person
upon England, in that manner he discovers it in his Book, entitled the
Reformation of England, where having blamed Cardinal Pool (a Prelate worthy of
an eternal memory, not only for his Virtue and Sanctity of Life, but also for
his other merits to the holy Church) and observed certain faults and defects in
the Council of Trent; at last he concludes, That supposing England should
return to the Catholic Faith, he would have it reduced to the form and State of
the Primitive Church, that to that end all the Church Revenue should be held in
common, the Administration of which should be committed to seven Sages, drawn
out of the Society of the Jesuits; that they might distribute it as it seemed
good to them. In the next place, he would have all the other Religious Orders
restrained from returning thither under grievous Penalties, except only those
who live on Alms. But then, as it is ordinary for those who are possessed with
self-love, to be blinded by it, and so fall into the greatest Follics, though
they be otherwise Prudent, I am not at all amazed at what this Father adds:
England (faith he) being once reduced to the true Faith, the Pope ought not to
draw any benefit from the Church Lands for at least five years, but to remit
them without exception into the hands of these seven Sages, who shall manage
them in that sort they shall esteem most advantageous to the Church. To speak
the truth, a Man must be very dull not to perceive, their whole design is to
amuse, or rather abuse his Holiness by such a proposition as this is, hoping at
the end of these five years to make the same be confirmed by other Inventions
(which do not use to fail them at their need) for another five years, and so
consequently till they have entirely excluded his Holiness out of the Kingdom
of England. Are not these thoughts, which point out to the Life, as in a Table,
the Covetousness and Ambition of the Jesuits? Is there any man after this that
can doubt of the ardent desire they have to Monarchy? the Artifices they employ
to attain this, do they not evidently show it too? And do they not make it
appear, so they may obtain this, all the rest is not worth their care, being
unconcerned what profit or damage others may receive by it? But did not they in
the time of Gregory the XIIIth demand the Investiture of all the Churches of
Rome, to begin without doubt their Empire in this Capital of the World? But
that which was denied them as to Rome, has at last been yielded to their
importunity for England; where they have made the Dignity of Archpriest be
given to a Jesuit in voto, who instead of protecting the Clergy, persecutes
them like an enraged Wolf, all those Priests who do not depend on the Jesuits,
even to the forbidding them to have any Communication one with another, or
speak to one another, which reduces them to despair. So that we need not
wonder that almost all the Clergy of England, is at present Jesuits in voto.
Seeing besides the reasons I have already given, no person is now received into
the Colleges, but what have promised to take the habit of the Society. So that
if England should happen to turn to her ancient Faith, it is out of doubt she
will give beginning to a real and perfect Jesuitic Monarchy; because the
Bishoprics, and Dignites, and generally all other Church-Revenues should be
given to none but Jesuits.

We cannot after all this think it strange that so few Heretics are now a days
converted, especially in that Kingdom we have just now mentioned. First,
because the ancient Clergy, which once had there good success, which the
Jesuits falsely attributed to themselves, is almost entirely extinct. For as for
the Jesuits, they had rather attend their own interest, than apply themselves
to the Salvation of Souls. Secondly, because the Heretics perceiving the
oppression which the Catholic Priests suffer on the part of the Jesuits, and
the Artifices which they use in all their undertakings, have so great an
aversion for it, that to avoid the tyranny of such People, they think of
nothing less than Conversion. I will say nothing here of their imaginary
Pretenses to a certain Estate, nor of those discourses they jade the Ears of a
Prince with, touching the Authority they boast of over the Spirits of their
People, by the means of which they pretend to be able to retain them in their
Obedience, and render them well affected to their Governors. I will therefore
content my self for a conclusion of this Discourse, to propound four
Considerations, with which I will conclude these Remarks.

I.
That Men of that Ambition, and of those aspiring Designs which the Jesuits are
of, are always Lovers of Change; so that being able to produce them every
moment, by the help of Arms, in the management of which we have made it appear
they are so expert, it is almost impossible they should abstain from it. From
whence any Man must conclude they ought not to be very dear to any Prince that
loves Peace, and the preservation of his State, seeing they can do him no
Service (as I have before said) which he may not expect from many others, when
they may on the other side cause him a thousand troubles; it being to be feared
that they may hazard his State, if suffering them in his Dominions, he does not
favor them, and govern himself by their direction, in which nevertheless there
is an equal danger attends him, for the reasons we have declared in the present
Points.

II.
If without the least temporal Jurisdiction they cause so great commotions in
the World, what would follow if by misfortune one of them should be chosen
Pope? We cannot doubt but he would fill the Cons^story.
Conclave with Jesuits, which would be a means to perpetuate the Popedom in
that Society. Moreover, governing themselves as they do, according to the Rules
of their own private Interest, and having the Popes power on their side with
all his forces, is it not much to be feared they would endanger the States of
many Princes, especially those that lay next the Ecclesiastic States?

III.
A Pope of their Society would doubtless use his utmost endeavor to put them
in possession of some temporal Jurisdiction, or strong Town, which he could
never do without injuring some other Prince.

IV.
If the Consistory were once filled with Jesuits, all the Patrimony of the
Church, all the Revenues of the Holy Church would be in their hands; and as we
see the more an Hydropick drinks, the more his thirst increases; so it were to
be feared these Fathers, with all their grandeur, being every day worse than
other, corrupted by the Riches and Honors of the World, would cause
innumerable Revolutions. Now every one knows there is nothing more capable of
Change than States, especially if there be People bold enough to attempt it. So
that taking the Case as I have put it, there is great probability the Jesuits
would alter the present Government, and reduce it to their own, that so they
might make it by that means an effectual Monarchy. For though hitherto
notwithstanding all their efforts to attain a real apparent Monarchy, by
alluring to them the Sons of some Sovereign Prince, who might put them in
possession of his State, yet they never could effect it, other Princes, who
knew their Designs, opposing it. But if a Jesuit should happen to be Pope, they
being then without difficulty Masters of the Ecclesiastic State, would
certainly by the means of their subtle Inventions attain the end they have so
long propounded to themselves. But if we were sure the Plot would fail, yet the
Suspicions and Fears of many, especially the neighboring Princes, ought to be
duly considered, and make the Electors of the Pope narrowly watch a point of
that great import.

We may draw this general Conclusion from all that has been said, That it is
necessary for the preservation of the public Peace, and the safety of all
Kingdoms, that his Holiness the Pope, with the assistance of other Christian
Princes, do assign some Bounds to this Society, whose Ambition is now mounted
to an incredible both disorder and excess, for fear the Remedy being delayed,
the Mischief should become incurable.

And when my Advice shall be asked touching the means fit to moderate the
Passions of these Fathers, I hope to acquit my self in that manner, that they
shall be so far from being offended, that they shall have just reason to give
me thanks; my Design being to render them the Monarchs of Souls, which are the
Treasures of Jesus Christ, and not of the World, which is but Dirt. I say, I
offer my self to this Employment out of Charity, with an intent to contribure
to it all those Powers it has pleased God to give me.

FINIS.
Cologne, by Jean le Blanc.
1678.
THE SECRET DIRECTIONS OF THE Society of the JESUITS.
Endeavored to be translated from a French Copy, Printed at COLON, 1678.
There is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; and hid, that shall not
be known.

St. Matthew. 10. 26.
An ADVICE.
SOme Years since, a Duke of Brunswick, who called himself Bishop of
Haverstead; having plundered the Jesuits College at Paderborn, made a Present
of their Library, and of all their Papers to the Capuchins, who found this
secret Instruction, amongst the Memoirs of the Rector of the College: (And many
worthy Persons have assured us, that the like happened to the College of
Jesuits at Prague.) But however this be, how little soever any man's
acquaintance with the Jesuits be, he cannot doubt but that the Heads of this
Order receive from their General these sorts of secret Instructions, seeing
experience tells us their Actions and Practices are consonant and perfectly
agreeable to the Advices and Maxims of this little Book. But which is yet much
more deplorable is, that these private Directions are quite contrary to the
Rules, Constitutions, and Instructions, which this Society professes publicly
in those Books it has printed on this Subject; So that without difficulty we
may believe that the greatest part of their Governors (if a very few be
excepted especially) have a double Rule, as well as a double Habit: one for
their private and particular use, and another to flant with in public before
the World. A Rule like the Devil forwithin, and another like a Saint for
without. In this like the Pharisees, to whom our Savior Jesus Christ gave this
Reproof, Ye are like whited Sepulchers which appear fair to the eyes of men,
and whose outside is full of wonderful Beauty; But yet within are filled with
nothing but dead Men's bones, stench and ill savours; indeed to M^n you seem
honest persons, though all within be nothing but Hypocrisy and Wickedness. But
to the end all the World may be convinced that what I have set forth is no
Calumny, but a solid Truth, I ask but this, that a little reflection might be
made on the Reproaches of Claudius Aquaviva, one of their Generals, so often
repeated, against the Superiors of this Society; which is, that all the base
Crimes committed in great Men's Courts by them, that all their Intrigues, and
the Hypocrisy which is inseparable from them, proceed wholly from hence, that
under pretense of advancing the Glory of God, and the Salvation of Men, they
sought nothing but themselves. And now, dear Reader, this being so, I believe
this little Collection of Rules, and the most secret Maxims of their Society,
ought to be considered as a very precious depositum (and without making
comparisons) of the nature of that which the Apostle recommends to Timothy when
he charges him, Keep that which I have committed to thy trust, and reveal it
not but to faithful and trusty Persons.

CHAP. I. What must be done upon our first entry and settlement in any place?
1. TO render our Religion acceptable and welcome to the Inhabitants of the
places we settle in, it is very necessary to tell them that our Rule and
Constitution have no other aim, but the Salvation of our own Souls and theirs.
And therefore it is fit with great reverence and humility to resort to the
Hospitals, and visit frequently the Sick, and them in Prison, to take their
Confessions, that so by a Charity unknown to other Religious Orders toward the
P^or, and also by means of our new Entry, those that are the best and highest
of the place, may have us in veneration and reverence.

2. We should remember the written Rule, which enjoins us to demand modestly
and religiously a permission to perform our Exercises; and also to seek the
good will as well of great Churchmen, as Seculars, whose Favor and Authority
we stand in need of.

3. Going to places distant from our habitation, or visiting them that are
nearer, they should seek the least Alms which are destinated to the Poor, that
the Inhabitants being thus made acquainted with our Necessity, may be the more
liberal to us.

4. We must have one and the same Spirit and Design as to the external
appearance, that by a seeming very humble Conformity, every one may be brought
to believe our Religion is good. And such of our Order, who observe not this
Maxim, ought to be dismissed for this only reason.

5. It is our Interest to increase our Revenue and Wealth rather by Liberality
than Purchase; and if we buy any Goods, Houses, or other things useful to us,
the Purchase must be in the Name of some third Person, who is well affected to
us, that by that means we may be thought the poorer.

6. Those Revenues which we have near those Places we live in, should be
assigned by our Provincial to other Colleges more distant, that neither the
King, nor the People, may ever know either the quantity or the quality of our
Revenue.

7. Let none of ours settle themselves, but in rich and wealthy places.

8. Let the Intention of the Society be in this an imitation of our Savior
Jesus Christ, who went not to Jerusalem, and other places, but to save Souls;
he knew Judea, because he conversed there frequently with his Disciples.

9. If the Society chiefly intends the Salvation of Souls, the Proverb will be
verified by them, Where People is, Prey is to be had.

10. Not only for our profit, but also to make it appear that we are poor, we
ought to search out, and get whatever is or seems to be superfluous in any
place.

11. Let ours preach according to the manners of the People they converse with,
and whisper it sweetly in their ears, that they are come to catechize the
Children gratis, without exception of any Person, and yet do all according to
the intention of the Order, and not seem in the least a Burden to the People,
as all the other Religious Orders of Mendicants are.

12. Let them not declare themselves of the number of other Religious
Mendicants, till our House be sufficiently endowed, and of this we ought to be
very careful.

CHAP. II. What ought to be done to procure the Ear and Familiarity of Princes
and Great Men.
1. WE ought to be mighty careful here, in gaining the Ear of Princes, quelling
the presumption of them who think they have no need of us, and do our utmost
that all may depend upon us, and that no Person what ever may be so hardy as to
lift up himself against us.

2. Always when Princes know their Actions odious, they desire to have the
Fathers of the Jesuits about them, who never reprove them, but expound them in
the best sense, which may be observed in Marriages contracted with their
Kindred, which are ever ill thought of by the People, quod tales execrantur
Thoros. And therefore when Princes affect such or the like things, we ought to
animate their Spirits, and make them more affected to them, giving hopes that
we can easily obtain from the Pope what ever we will, repeating some Reasons,
Sentences, or Examples, which may augment their desires, seeing such Marriages
have been approved for the common Good, though of greater Consequence; and
lastly, that they are allowed to Princes, for the greater Glory of God.

3. So when a Prince undertaketh any thing, for example, a War, we ought to
spur him on, encouraging him to Constancy, without ever considering the Cause,
for fear the ill event should be imputed to us; and if it falls not out well,
then to tell them that our Rule forbids us to intermeddle in such things.

4. To content Princes, and preserve their Friendship, it is not amiss to go
upon some Ambassies, provided they be advantageous to us; and so make our
selves no less necessary than acceptable, by showing them that we have great
power with the Pope, and other Princes.

5. There is no better way to gain the Affections of Princes, and their
Courtiers, than to make, or cause Presents to be made to them we discover to be
in their favor, to the end that (st alias nequeant) they may acquaint us with
the Affections, Manners, and Delights of the Prince, and those whom he hates;
how he acts, and what his Customs are. And this being known, we shall the
better insinuate our selves into the Spirits of Princes and Great Men; who if
they be not married, we ought in taking their Confessions to speak to them of
Marriages with Noble, Beautiful, and Rich Ladies, which if they be not of the
Kindred of any of our Friends, yet at least let them be of our familiar
acquaintance, pointing out to them, by Commendations conformable to the Designs
and Wills of those Princes and Great Men, the Virgins we recommended. And so by
the Women it may happen, that we shall gain the Love of them who are not of our
Kindred. And this is seen by experience in the House of Austrich, and in the
Kingdoms of Poland and France, and in many other Principalities.

6. If Women who often change their Opinions, freely put themselves into our
hands, we ought seriously to imprint in them a great Love for our Society, and
make them to push it on in that Affection, not only by our own, but those also
of their private Families, that they may the more earnestly seek our
Advancement. And we may gain this Love by diverse little Services, and small
Presents, yea, and discover the greatest Secrets of the Lady, who will not fail
to reveal them to us her self, if we use these means, and then she will remain
always firm to us.

7. In governing the Consciences of great Men, we ought to follow the Opinion
of those who have spoken with the greatest Liberty, contrary to the sentiment
of the Monks, that so they being rejected, Princes may follow our Advice and
Counsels, and so all may be at our discretion, and depend entirely upon us.

8. And to this purpose, to gain the Friendship of Princes, Prelates, and other
great Men, it is very pertinent to render them Partakers of the Merits of our
Order, showing them how considerable we are in all the World, and that our
Powers are great and large to absolve in reserved Cases, which the other Orders
have not; as, (1.) To dispense with fasting: (2.) With restoring what is due to
another: (3.) To dissolve the hindrances of Marriages, and of all sorts of
Vows which lessen our Liberty.

9. We ought to beget Enmities and Quarrels amongst great Men, popular
Commotions, and what ever we believe agreeable to Princes, following their
Wills in every thing.

10. But if any Person of Credit, who possesses the next place to any Monarch,
be against us, and yet the Prince grants him any favor, or confers Honors at
his request, we must wait on him, court him at the greatest height imaginable,
both by Visits, Humility, and Reverence.

CHAP. III. What ought to be done in relation to those Lords which are not
rich, but yet have great Authority in the Commonwealth, that by their Credit
we obtain Profit and Preferment.
1. IF these Lords be Seculars, we ought to have recourse to their Aid and
Friendship against our Adversaries, and to their favor in our own Suits, and
those of our Friends; and to their Authority and Power, in the purchase of
Houses, Manors, and Gardens, and of Stones to build with, especially in those
places which will not endure to hear of our settling in them; because the
Authority of these Lords serves very much for the appeasing of the Populace,
and making our Ill-willers quiet.

2. We ought to take care, that the Prelates and their Diocesans may venerate
and reverence us, that so they may not hinder our Exercises in those places
where they have power. For in Germany, Poland, and France the Bishops have a
great Authority; who with a little trouble* being Patrons, may obtain for us of
the Prince what is necessary for us; as Monasteries, Parishes pr^pr^^te, and
^^p^^priate, Altars, pious Legacies, and other things, after having given some
small satisfaction to those Secular Priests who shall co^^ey to us some
Fou^d^^ions* (...) we may easily accomplish in those places where Catholics
(...) mixed with Heretics and Schismatics.

3. We ought to show these Prelates, that besides the Merit, they shall receive
thereby a great benefit; whereas from the Secular Priests and other Monks they
can expect nothing preter (...).

4. It is fit to commend their Zeal, immortalized by the memory of so great an
Action, if by their means we obtain the Benefits and Foundations of the
Secular Priests and Canons, which they may easily effect by the means and
favor of those Bishops.

5. We ought to be very careful when any Bishop founds a College, that we may
have the power to present a Vicar to the Parish Church, with cure of Souls,
though the Superiors themselves should for some time execute the Function of
Curate, to the end that all the Regiment, and Administration of the Church may
be at our Power and Discretion.

6. We must take care that the Bishops may build us Colleges i^ those Places
where the Universities are against us, and where both Catholics and Heretics
hinder us from having any foundation, and that as well in these places, as in
other noble Towns we may in favor to them have the Liberty of preaching before
all others.

7. When any of our Order are to be Canonized, we ought to obtain the same by
Letters of Recommendation addressed by great Men to the Sea of Rome; if upon
this occasion it happens that it be necessary that these great Men should
solicit the same in Person* we must be careful that they be not attended, nor
necessitated to make use of any Religious Persons with whom we have no
communication, for fear the Affection they have for us should turn on their
side; and that in the Provinces where their Estates are, and where our Colleges
are situate, they should give themselves into the hands of other Religions
Orders, to our loss and damage. And therefore when any Illustrious Person
comes into the places where we have Colleges, we ought to receive them with all
the Modesty and Religion that is possible.

CHAP. IV. The Duty of the Preachers, and Confessors of Princes and Great Men.
1. THat Princes, Lords, and other great Men, may be perfectly instructed by
us, and in that manner, that they may know that our Intention and Aim is the
bringing greater Glory to God, which our Society has chosen for its Badge and
true Symbol, and which we will preserve with all sincerity; viz. If Princes
will follow our Counsel, we must not presently, but by little and little see to
the Government and Administration of their Revenues, Possessions, and Estates;
and that we may obtain this, we must frequently imprint upon their Spirits,
that they ought not to distribute Honors, Charges, Offices, and Dignities, to
any but those that are worthy and capable of them, and who have well deserved
them by their good Services.

2. That whoever does otherwise, commits a great Offense against God. But yet
we must not seem to have any design, that any of ours should intermeddle in the
Administration of the Commonwealth, but rather let them protest the contrary
as solemnly as they can possibly, only that they are obliged to speak the truth
by reason of their Charges.

3. But if the Prince falls into any doubt and fear, then we must set forth
what are the Qualifications and Virtues necessary for them that are to fill
such places, and what their Duty is. And great Care is to be taken, that no
Person be admitted, if he be not one of our intimate Friends. And let Princes
be taught, that the emploiment of Persons of Honesty, and good Life, is very
honorable and requisite for the good of the Church and State, who ought to be
nominated to the Prince, not by those we suspect, but by our intimate and
faithful Friends; for in so doing both of them will have a great obligation to
us, and so will hold themselves more engaged and bound to the Services they at
all times do us.

4. The Confessors and Preachers ought to inform themselves of our Confidents
in all parts of the Kingdom, what is the wealth of the greatest, if they be
endowed with Power and Liberality; keeping an exact List of their Names and
Surnames; recommending them finely and dexterously to Princes, that they may
the more easily, when occasion serves, be provided with Charges, according to
their Dignity and Deserts; and chiefly those, whom the Confessors and Preachers
have in their Confessions and Conversations observed to be much affected to our
Society.

5. Above all, let the Confessors and Preachers remember to treat Princes and
others sweetly and pleasantly, not to extort any thing from them in their
Confessions, be it either at public or private Sermons. Let ours that are in
the Service of Princes, keep but a very little Money, and a few Movables,
contenting themselves with a little Chamber, modestly keeping company with the
most vile and abject Persons, but without Flattery; and so being in good
esteem, they ought prudently to persuade Princes not to do any thing without
their Counsel, whether it be in Spiritual or Temporal Affairs.

6. There must be great care taken, speedily and in good time to know the Names
of the Officers of the Commonwealth, to change them, and presently put others
into their places; which must be so managed, that it may not be thought that
the Change comes by our means, but that it be done in the most secret manner
that can be.

CHAP. V. What is to be done in relation to those Religious Orders, which
agreeing with us in many things, on many occasions draw to themselves that
which should have appertained to us?
1. WE should bear this sort of Men, though against our Wills, and therefore we
should endeavor to imprint upon the Spirits of those Princes who love us, that
our Order is more perfect than all other Orders; and that if others excel in
their Functions, ours do yet appear in a more eminent degree in the Church of
God; that also the Rules of all other Orders are entirely subject to ours.

2. We ought to remark the Defaults of other Orders, and make it appear, that
those who stand in competition with us, cannot succeed so prosperously in their
Affairs as we.

3. We ought to oppose more violently those Orders who intermeddle in the
Education of Youth, in imitation of us, especially in those places where it is
our interest to teach with applause, and in which we gain a considerable profit.

4. We ought to represent to the Prince and his Counsel, that those Orders may
beget Tumults and Seditions in the Commonwealth, seeing they beget Factions in
it. And we ought to represent to the Universities, that the other Orders are
nearer to their ruin than we; and if they have Letters of Recommendation from
the Pope, or any of the Cardinals, which maintain them, we must have recourse
to the favor of Princes with the Pope, remonstrating that our Society is
maintained, established, and fortified by more Authentic Letters and Titles.

5. It is fit that we have a good report in those Towns where we have our
Colleges, who may be induced to certify our Institution, honest Life, and the
Benefit the Youth receive under our tuition.

6. And in the interim we ought to insinuate with great Art, that *
Contrarieties and Tumults are to be feared from the variety of Schools, which
are suffered, and from the Teachers Oppositions.
which are established in them; and that they being Religious Persons, the
Tumults will be the greater.

7. We ought to employ our utmost care that Learning may flourish with great
applause to us, rendering to Princes, our Superiors, and the very People, great
Proofs and Testimonies of virtue.

CHAP. VI. Of the Means to acquire the Friendship of Rich Widows.
1. WE ought for this purpose to choose those Fathers that are of a lively
countenance, and middle Age, who must often visit their Houses; and if they
express any kindness for our Society, make them partakers of the Merits of it.
And then if they begin to frequent our Churches, it is fit to give them
Confessors who may dispose them to perpetuate their Widow-hood, representing to
them the Delights, Pleasures, and Wealth, they shall enjoy, if they continue in
that state; which we must promise, tanquam Obsides, that they shall have an
eternal Reward for it, and that by this sole means they may exempt themselves
from the pains of Purgatory.

2. We ought to stir them up to the getting of an Oratory, and an Altar well
adorned, about which employing all their care, they may banish all thoughts of
them who may seek them in marriage; and if they have a little Chapel, we ought
to celebrate Mass there very frequently, and above all things make some short
Exhortations there.

3. That things may succeed the better, it is fit to persuade them to diminish
their Train and Families, appointing them what Officer they shall have, and
Persons for the management of their Estates, and to introduce artificially and
insensibly those that shall be necessary for the Government of their Houses,
according to the degree of the Person, their Place, Affection, and Devotion to
our Society, changing their Officers to put in others at our Devotion and
Discretion.

4. The first thing the Confessor has to do, is to persuade them to acquiesce
in their Counsel, and to submit themselves entirely to them, as the only
Foundation of all that Spiritual Good they can receive.

5. To propound the frequent use of the Communion, assisting at the Divine
Service, reciting of Letanies, and to make a daily examination of their
Conscience, in which they ought to help them, and persuade them to choose some
Saint for their Tutelar Patron, and especially to recommend to them our holy
Founder.

6. Exhort them to make a general Confession, so that knowing their former
Accusations, Manners, and Inclinations, the whole may serve as a Guide to make
them obey our Wills.

7. To exhort them twice or thrice a week concerning the Tranquillity which
they receive in their Widow-hood, concerning the Troubles, Dangers, and
Charges, that will attend a second Marriage.

8. Being thus disposed to continue in that state, we ought forthwith to
persuade them to enter some Cloister, but then such an one as P^ulina, that
being engaged in a Vow of Chastity, they never marry again, we ought strongly
to persuade them to forsake the Society of younger Women, who are given to
Recreations, Poetry, and Music, and that they should suffer few Persons to see
them, and that they should observe in treating such a moderate Modesty, for
fear such should complain that they are too rudely used, and so ours should be
blamed or reproved.

9. That the Officers of their Manors, Chaplains, Curates, and all others, may
be admitted to their Functions upon our recommendation, and that they may
depend entirely upon our Wills.

10. When we have obtained this, then we are by little and little to dispose
them to give Alms, and do good works, representing to them that without this
they cannot attain the Kingdom of Heaven; which Alms notwithstanding they ought
not to dispose to every one, if it be not by the advice, and with the consent
of their Spiritual Father. And for as much as it is of great import that this
be well managed, as to the Person, that they may receive a recompense from God,
it is necessary to let them know, that Alms ill disposed do rather hurt than
good. And if they understand not that it is a good proficiency, and for the
expiation of their Sins, yet we ought not to allow them so much Liberty and
Liberality.

CHAP. VII. Of the means of keeping in our hands the disposition of the Estates
of Widows.
1. WIdows should be frequently solicited to persevere in their Devotions, and
do good Works, and not to suffer one week to pass without some act of Charity
of their own free will, in imitation of the holy Virgin; and that cutting off
all superfluous Expenses, they should give some considerable thing to the Poor,
and to the Church of Jesus Christ.

2. If after this, they become liberal to our Society, as by giving some
considerable sum of Money; then we ought to make them absolute partakers of the
Merits of our Society; and that every thing may have the greater show, and have
the greater force, this ought to be done by our Provincial, or General.

3. If these Widows have made a Vow of Chastity; Let them renew it betwixt the
hands of their Confessors twice every year, that so they may think themselves,
so much the more strictly bound by the renewing of their Vows to preserve that
friendship they have entertained for our Society; permitting them to rejoice
and recreate themselves conveniently the day of this renewing them.

4. We ought to propound to them a rule of Life, and that if it be acceptable
to themselves, they ought to make their Family and Servants submit to it.

5. Propound a monthly Confession to them on the Feasts which are solemnized in
memory of our Lord, of the holy Virgin, of the Apostles, and of the Patron or
tutelary Saint, which they have chosen, but especially of St. Ignatius, and St.
Xavier. We ought also to give them Sindies; which may have an Eye upon both the
Men and Women of their Family; and observe their defaults, that so we may know
whatever passes, concealing in the interim their Vow of Chastity.

6. We ought to enjoin their Servants, both Men and Women, not to use any
leering or disdainful Looks, or to speak and look another way, which ends for
the most part in contempt; and to see that they who are taken in these faults
be severely chastised, or rather forthwith turned away with the Widows consent.

7. Our next care must be, That they may be served by honest Maids, admitted
upon our recommendation; and that care be taken they may be expert in making
Church Ornaments for us, that so our Widows may live with the greater piety.

8. We must appoint these Maidens a Governess of our own Sort, who may make
them continually to work, and observe their Actions.

9. We ought to visit these Widows frequently, provided these Visits be not
troublesome; entertaining them with pleasant Discourses, and holy Stories;
keeping them always pleasant, according to their several humors, and never
treat them rigorously in Confessions, for fear they become thereby disaffected
to us, except when there is little hope of making any advantage of them.

10. We ought to consolate them, and dispose them to confess often, that by
this consolation they may wholly confide in us, and turn all their Estates into
our hands.

11. It is of great import for the preserving and increasing the friendship of
Widows, to allow them the privilege of entering our Colleges, at the time of the
solemn Acts and Tragedies and other such like, and not to suffer them to go out
of their Houses in the depth of Winter; to dispense with them for Fasting and
Sackcloth, which they compensate by Alms, that so they may see we have no less
care of the health of their Bodies than of their Souls.

12. But if there be any hope that we shall gain any thing more by frighting
them, then we ought to treat them more rudely, and here the Confessor must make
use of great Prudence, when he has first considered of it with the Superior.

13. We ought to keep them as much as is possible, from visiting the Churches
of the other Religious Orders, at the Feasts which they solemnize, and
therefore we ought effectually to represent to them, that all the Indulgences
of all the other Orders are infused and comprised in the Rule of our Society.

14. We ought to permit them all manner of Sensuality; provided they be
liberal, and well affected to our Society, and constant in the same; and that
all things be carried cunningly, and without scandal.

15. When any discourse is concerning their Estates; We ought to set before
them the perfect estate of the Saints, who have parted with their Lives, their
Kindred, and Friends with a cheerful heart, that they might assist the poor;
who are the Members of Jesus Christ, and now is the time to tell them what
glorious Crowns they shall enjoy, if they will resign themselves and their
Estates, into the hands of our Society.

16. To dispose them the more easily to this; we ought to show them the 1, 2, 3
and 4, Articles of our Constitutions, that so they may understand the beginning
of that perfection, which consists in re^ou^cing all irregular affections to
our kindred, and acting so that whatever we do may tend to the glory of God,
being governed by the Counsels of our Spiritual Fathers, and the fears of
Death, which often is inflicted as a punishment of our too great love to our
Blood. We ought to persuade them, that this ought to be a true resignation, and
entire remission of all they have into our hands, which we thus often and
seriously seek; which yet is unknown to all other Orders. We ought to recount
the Examples of others, who by this sole resignation, have acquired the Kingdom
of Heaven; and give them hopes they shall be one day eanonised; if they will
effectually do this: Promising them also under the Seal of Confession, that our
Authority with the S. See of Rome; shall never be wanting to them upon so
glorious an Account.

17. And therefore when the Widows are thus disposed to resign their Estates
into our hands, and to follow the Counsel of their Spiritual Fathers, they
ought presently to avoid murmuring and Contradiction, to confirm this
Resignation, if they may be well brought to it, and if they will believe firmly
that this Counsel is given them by God, the Protector of Widows, who is more
careful of their Souls than of their Bodies.

18. We ought to imprint seriously on their Spirits, that God is greatly
pleased with those good Works and Alms which they give to Religious Persons,
and those who live holily.

19. That this must be by the Advice and Counsel of their Confessors, making
them understand that those pious Works which are free, are always acceptable
before God, when they are accompanied with Obedience, which is the Sister of
Humility; but then they are to tell whom they intend to give to, and they must
give in a bill of them to their Confessor, that he may add, diminish, or change
them, as he sees cause.

20. But above all things, we ought to forbid our Widows the Conversation of
other Religious Persons, for fear they should draw in our devout Women; for the
most part this Sex is inconstant, and to that end we must represent, that our
Order is the greatest, and of the greatest profit to the Church, of the
greatest Credit in all places, and of the greatest Authority with Princes, and
that it is impossible to choose a better; which is not to be expected from
Monks, who take no care of the Salvation of Souls, and are for the most part
ignorant, dull, addicted to their Bellies, and all sorts of pleasures.

21. After we have thus drawn from our Widows a good quantity of Money and
Goods, for fear they should entertain any thoughts of a second Marriage, we
ought to assign them dexterous Confessors, who may take care to procure them to
assign us some annul Pensions or Tributes, or Alms, to enable us to pay the
standing Charges of our Colleges, and professed Houses, especially that of the
City of Rome, and the Cell, where those of our Society, who are poor, study; as
for settling Novitiats, who have been a long time dispersed; and also to
dispose them to bestow yearly a Sum of Money, for the buying of Copes,
Chalices, and other Ornaments for the Altar.

23. Before these Widows come to die, if they have not entirely resigned up all
they have, be it by reason of their fear of their Kindred, or for any other
cause, we ought to acquaint them with our poverty, the quantity of our Colleges
which are not yet endowed, the Devotion and great number of our Religious
Persons, the necessities of our Churches, exhorting them to contribute to the
finishing of our Colleges which are yet imperfect, for the greater glory of
God, giving us Lamps and Pixes, and for the building of other Foundations and
Houses, which we the poor Servants of the Society of Jesus do still want, that
all things may be perfected.

24. Let the same be done with Princes, and our other Benefactors, who build us
any sumptuous Pile, or erect any Foundation, representing to them in the first
place, that the Benefits they thus do us are consecrated to Eternity; that they
shall become thereby perfect Models of Piety; that we will have thereof a very
particular memory; and that in the next World they shall have their Rewards.
But if it be objected, that Jesus Christ was born in a Stable, and had not
where to lay his Head; and that we who are his This very insolent Word is in
the Original.
Companions, ought not to enjoy perishing Goods. We ought to imprint strongly
on their Spirits, that in truth at first the Church was also in the same state,
but now that by the Providence of God she is raised to a Monarchy; and that in
those times the Church was nothing but a broken Rock, which is now become a
great Mountain.

CHAP. VIII. Of the means of drawing to us the Sons and Daughters of our devout
Widows.
1. THat Mothers may the more easily bring this to pass, we ought to imprint
this upon their Spirits, that they ought to be rigorous to those Daughters
which are contrary to their Wills, chastising them with Rods if they be young;
with Mortifications, and threats of worser usage for the future, if they be
grown too big for the former; and so proceed to punish them, by not giving them
the Ornaments befitting their portion and quality. But if they accept our
Religion, then they ought to show them more kindness, and promise them a better
Fortune than if they were married.

2. Their Mothers ought to represent to them the fury of an Husband, which may
be a burden to them in their future Marriage; the difficulties and troubles of
that State of Life, telling them the Anguish and Torments they endured in their
Marriage, which has brought them nothing but sorrow; and that they should have
been very happy, if they had been in the Religion. And the same ought to be
done in relation to those Sons that aspire to Marriage.

3. We ought to converse familiarly with their Daughters, entertaining them in
our Colleges, when we conceive they will enter our Society, leading them to our
Gardens to walk, and to our Country-Houses, in which the Vacations are kept.

4. Represent to them the pleasant Contentment that they shall find here, and
the Honor that Princes of diverse Kingdoms give us. In short, we ought to do
all we can to gain the Youth, conducting them to the Refectory and Chambers,
showing them the Neatness, and delightful Conversation that is amongst us, and
the easiness of observing our Rule, to which is promised the Glory of the
Blessed.

5. And also the Faculties we have, and Powers, not only in Temporal but
Spiritual things, the eloquent Discourses which are made in our Colleges; and
let not the pleasant and delightful Spiritual Entertainments, which were given
us in the Name of the Virgin, as it were by revelation, be omitted, which may
spur them on to embrace our Religion; representing also to them, that it is an
enormous Crime to resist the Divine Vocation. Lastly, we ought to admit them as
Spectators of our Exercises, that thereby we may the more easily dispose them
to become of our Society.

6. Let the Masters which are to instruct the Children of these Widows be
appointed by us, who ought perpetually to exhort them to be of our Society,
with Promises that if they will enter the same, they shall be received gratis;
but if they will not, then we ought to procure their Mothers from time to time
to deny them what is necessary, and make them see the Encumbrances and
Confusions in which the Inheritance of their Famiiy is plunged.

CHAP. IX. Of the means to augment the Revenue of our Colleges.
1. LEt none of our Society be admitted to the fourth Vow, while he expects any
Inheritance, except he has a Brother in our Society, which is younger and
stouter than he, or upon some other very advantageous account. Above and before
all other things, we ought to endeavor our own Greatness, by the direction of
our Superiors, who are the only Judges in this Case, and who should labor that
the Church of God may be in the highest degree of splendour, ad majorem Dei
gloriam. And to attain this, Confessors of Princes, and rich Widows, should
never fail to remonstrate to them, that seeing they receive Spiritual things
from us, it is most just that we should receive Temporal from them, for the
good of our Society.

2. We ought never to let any opportunity of taking any thing slip us, and if
any thing be promised us, and forgotten, we must put them in mind of it, though
this importunity should happen to diminish the favor they may have for us.

3. We ought not to appoint any for Confessors to Princes, and other great Men,
who are not of great ability, and very eloquent, this Charge being of great
import; but if it happens that any do not discharge the same with convenient
vigor, we ought to reprove them, as not being well affected to the general good
of the Society, telling them that we will soon send others into their places,
for we have understood with great regret, that some Persons have died suddenly,
who by the default of their Confessors left no Goods to our Churches of great
value; which came to pass only, because we were not dexterous enough to possess
our selves of them in their Life-times, and yet they would have bestowed them
on us without any difficulty; for the acquiring these things does not depend so
much upon the Time, as the Will of them that give them.

4. We ought to visit the Houses of Noble and Rich Widows, of which ours ought
to inform themselves prudently and dexterously, to see whether they will not,
according to the custom of other Christians, leave something to our Churches,
in order to the obtaining Remission of their Sins, and of the Sins of their
Kindred and Friends: And we should do the like to Prelates, and their
Parishioners, whom we ought especially to render friendly to our Society, for
thereby we may gain much

5. The Confessors ought to examine every Penitent, what are their Names and
Sirnames, what Kindred and Friends they have, what hopes they have of
succeeding in any Inheritance, and how they intend to dispose of what they
have; what Brothers, Sisters, or Heirs they have; how old, of what degree, of
what inclination, or disposition, or education they are of? They should
persnade them that all these Questions do tend much to the clearing of the
State of their Conscience. And if there be any hope of Profit afterward, then
they ought to appoint them a weekly Confession for their Penance, to the intent
that what has been omitted at one time, may be made up at another enquiry; and
so collecting all the Confessions of the Penitent, communicate them to the
Superior, and take good counsel what is to be done.

6. The same which has been prescribed to be done in relation to Widows, ought
to be done also in relation to rich and wealthy Merchants, who are married, and
yet have no Children: to Maids, who are rich and well affected to us. That
having once gotten an entry into their Estates, we may with the greater
facility join them to our own Revenues. But we ought especially to take care,
that we do nothing with too much haste, but slowly by little and little, with
good consideration.

7. We ought to study to acquire the good will of every one according to their
capacity, complying with their manners and inclinations. And our Provincial
ought to send expert Men into all those places, where there is any considerable
number of such rich and wealthy Persons, to the end they may give their
Superiors a true and faithful account of all; and whenever any of ours are in
their savor, they ought to extol very much the greatness of their Benefits,
and of their Merits, which the other Monks, who are poor and needy, seldom do.

8. Let the Stewards of our College, get an exact knowledge of the Houses,
Gardens, Quarries of Stone, Vineyards, Manors, and other Riches of every one,
who lives near the place where they reside, and if it be possible, what degree
of affection they have for us.

9. In the next plac, we should discover every Man's Office, and the Revenue of
it, their Professions, the Articles of their Contracts, which they may surely
do by Confessions, by Meetings and by Entertainments, or by our trusty Friends.
And generally whenever any Confessor lights upon a wealthy Person, from whom he
has good hopes of profit, he is obliged forth with to give notice of it, and
discover it at his return.

10. They should also inform themselves exactly, whether there be no hopes of
obtaining It signifies Leases, Purchases; etc.
Bargains, Goods, Possessions, pious Gifts, and the like, in exchange for the
admission of their Sons into our Society.

11. We ought to endeavor to know, if any Person well affected to us, intends
any thing to our College, and whether he may be brought to purchase on this
Condition, that after a certain time we should have such Rents or Purchases
Gratis; or whether our Society may expect a greater benefit from him, and how
we may come by the same.

12. We ought to let every one know the great need we have, the debts which
oppress us, and the great expenses we are forced to make.

13. If our Society sells any thing to our Devotes, Men or Women, it ought to
be only upon this condition, that within a certain time it shall return gratis
to us, and be reunited to our Revenues.

14. If the rich Widows or married People, who are well affected to us, have
Daughters only, we ought to persuade them with great art to cause them to enter
into the Religion; leaving them a small Portion for that end, and so we may
gain the remainder of their Estate; as Countrey-Houses, Manors, and other
Possessions. And so likewise, on the part of their Sons, to put them on with
great care to embrace our Society; to fright them, and make them obedient to
their Parents, teaching them to despise all low things, and making them know
they are more obliged to follow Jesus Christ, than their Parents, if they will
have a due care of their Souls, for this will be to offer a kind of Sacrifice
to our Society; to persuade the last Heir of a Family, to enter it without the
knowledge of his Parents, who should be sent to make his Nouiciate in a place of
some distance, our General being first advertised of it.

15. If there be a rich Widow our Friend, who has Sons and Daughters, and
there be no hope of getting the Daughters into a Monastery, nor the Sons into
our Society; the Superior should ever lay the blame upon the Confessor, and
therefore he ought to change him and put another in his place, who may manage
the Plot better; and if yet it succeed not, then he ought to persuade their
Mother to leave them some small Pension, and then selling what came by her and
her Jointure, raise a considerable sum of Money; and then try if we can induce
her to give the whole to our Society, that she may obtain pardon and expiation
of her Sins, and her Husbands.

16. If a Widow has married a Widower, and has by him Daughters or Sons, or
only one Son, with Sisters by a former Husband, let first the younger Children
be sent to a Monastery, and then the elder, that we may the easier get their
Pstate.

17. If any Widows, very much affected to our Society, and careful of their
Salvation, having no Heirs, possess two or three Manors or other Inheritances,
we ought to persuade them to leave their Estates to our Colleges, and persuade
them to receive some small annual Pensions from us, that they may serve God
with the greater freedom, being released from the troubles of the World, and so
by degrees bring them from an annual Pension to live as we do, that under
pretense of Mortification and voluntary Poverty, they be as it were our
Domestics, being as it were resigned up to our Wills. And for fear by the
direction their kindred they should be brought to recall their Bounty, it is fit
to send them to spend the rest of their Lives in some distant place, and in the
interim tell them, this sort of Life is an imitation of that of the Hermites,
which is the most devout and humble sort of Life that is.

18. That our devout Persons may think us poor, our Superior ought to borrow
Money upon promises entered before Notaries; it may be that upon their
Deathbeds they may order the Notaries to put the said obligations into our
hands, for the Salvation of their Souls; for it is more easy to give in our
Bonds, then to give us a considerable sum of Money.

19. It is fit to borrow a considerable sum of Money on Mortgage, and then
persuade them to assign the Interest to some other College; that so one Revenue
may increase another: and so in their last sickness in compassion to our
Poverty, if they do not give us the entire sum, yet at least they may be
brought to assign a good part of it, for the building of some new College.

20. We should procure the friendship of some excellent Physician, that we may
be called to visit the Sick, and assist at the Passage of those whom he serves.

21. The Confessors ought not to be negligent in visiting the Sick, especially
those that despair, representing to them the pains of Purgatory and Hell,
telling them they cannot be saved without Charity; for those who before were
Covetous, use then to be most liberal to us, and it may be will presently give
all they have into our hands, which ours should solicit all that ever they are
able, for fear this favorable opportunity slip them. And if a Woman in her
Confessions accuse the vices and ill usages of her Husband toward her, of
being the cause of her not submitting to our Discipline, and that she is much
our Friend, we ought then to tell her she cannot do God a more acceptable
Service than to give us a good Sum of Money without her Husbands knowledge, for
the relief of our necessities; that this is the best way to live for the
future, in repose, and obtain Pardon both of her own and her Husband's Sins;
for we have often known that by this means the ill Nature of Husbands have been
changed into better Conditions.

CHAP. X. Of the Rigor and Discipline of our Society.
Superiors should tessifie that the Severity of this Discipline is such, that
besides the reserved Cases, whosoever of our Society, of what Age or Condition
soever he be, shall divert any of our Devotes, or Friends, from doing us good,
persuading them to embrace any other Religion but ours, and who in any intended
Resignation of their Estates to our use, shall have expressed any Tenderness, or
Coldness, or shall solicit them to assign them to any other Order, or put them
upon the bestowing them upon their poor Kindred, or others; that all these
shall be esteemed the Mortal Enemies of our Society. And shall not be taken
suddenly into favor again, but for sometime at least to be forbidden to hear
Confessions, and be Mortified by low and abject Employments, forcing them to
teach the lowest Forms, denying them degrees in Divinity. And that being
separated from the rest at Dinner, it is necessary to insult over them, chasing
them from all Recreations, Walks, and the more pleasant Entertainments, taking
out of their Chambers all Conveniences, and often imposing upon them public
Penances; and after this, it will not be difficult to cast them out of the
Society. And if it happen that they complain of it to the Provincial, he ought
not lightly to believe them, but should excuse what is done, by saying, They
ought to obey their Superiors, in whatsoever is not sinful. Nor need the
Superiors be in the least scrupulous to cast these sort of Men out of the
Society. For our Order being constituted in a Society, no Man ought to wonder
it has the power of Expulsion: for it is easy to break the band of a Society;
which are not obliging for ever. This right of Expelling, is as old as the
Society it self: Which appears evidently from hence, that the Society has only
Vows for the Masters and Brothers, which have no Reciprocal Obligation, and the
Society is not bound to entertain for ever those that have made them; and
therefore this Obligation binds only them that have made these Vows; and not
the Society, which may at pleasure cast off those that have made these Vows,
and although some of the Society make four solemn Vows, and others but three,
as in other Orders, yet may these too be Expelled.

CHAP. XI. After what manner those of the Society should demean themselves
toward those that are Expelled.
IN as much as those that are Expelled out of our Society, may be prejudicial
to us, see how we ought to behave our selves toward them. And first, before
any Man is Expelled, we should write to both the Temporal and Spiritual Lords,
with whom he may happen to be in Credit, and to whom he may make his Retreat;
telling them his ill Inclinations. his Vices and Defaults, according to that
connizance he shall have give, of them to his Superioars, in discovering the
secrets of his Conscience. Upon which also they shall regulate the Conduct
which shall be observed on his account in the Society, when she renounces her
right in him. If these Lords be well affected to us, then we ought to aggravate
the Reasons we had to Expel him. We should publish in our Exhortations, that he
seeks very ardently to be received again into our Company, remarking as the
causes of his Expulsion, those things for which the People hates us most; and
so we may Expel whom we will, with great show of Reason. If he that is Expelled
meets any belief amongst those he discourses with against us, this must be
remedied by the means of the most considerable of the Fathers of our Society,
who shall oppose, to what he may say, the holiness of our Society, and the
great good it has done in the Church of God, the reputation of our good Lives,
and the sound Doctrine we teach, and that for these Excellencies we have the
advantage to attend Kings and Princes; and the great Men choose out of our Body,
their Confessors and Preachers: they shall enlarge much upon our Zeal for the
salvation of Men in general, and especially of those of our own Society. Let
those be invited to entertainments with us, who may give the Expelled person
any protection, and let them be persuaded that they ought not to give him the
least support, and that they ought to have favorable opinions of the Order;
and then tell them the Reasons why he was Expelled, ordering the matter so, as
they may appear plausible, and telling them exactly his Faults, without
omitting any one, although we have not the least certainty of them. And we
ought also to be very careful not to procure any Benefice for those we have
once Expelled, if they do not first give a good sum of Money to the Society; or
if they have not made it their Heir, or if they do not in some other
extraordinary manner testify their undertaking our Interest. And let the
Confessors persuade Kings and Princes, who are the Patrons to them, the same
things, and let them take their opportunities from their liberality, and from
the affection they bear to our Society to found some College, or do us some
other such like favor. If it happens that they which have been Expelled out of
our Society, have any Credit in the World, let it be acquainted with their
Lives, their Manners, and their Faults, which may be spread abroad by the means
of our Friends and Devotes: And to the end that they too may not favor in the
least those which are Expelled out of our Society, let them be affrighted with
Censures; and if they still persist, let Absolution be denied them. Let the
good qualities of him that is Expelled, be lessened by subtle Discourses, and
full of Ambiguity, so as that all the belief Men have of him may be destroyed.
And lastly, Let the misfortunes of those that have been Expelled, be published
by way of Compassion, that others being warned by it, may be necessitated to
continue in the Society against their wills.

CHAP. XII. Of the Choice of the Young Men which are to be received into the
Society, and of the manner.
THere is need of great Prudence, and of an extreme degree of Discretion, for
the receiving of Young Men into the Society; they ought to be Beautiful, Noble,
and Rich. And that they may be drawn to this, the Masters of the several Forms,
ought to treat them with great Goodness, they ought not to suffer their Regents
to insult over them; they should often commend them, they should give them the
Prize. They should entertain and divert them sometimes in our Country-Houses.
Sometimes they should Chastise them with the rest, objecting Crimes against
them upon Conjectures, and using severity and rigorous Reproof. They should
represent to them, that they shall be Damned eternally by the Bent Youth has
to all sorts of Evils, if they enter not the Society. Yet they should not be
received so soon as they demand to be admitted into the Society; but be delayed
for some time, and in the interim be entertained with the representation of the
sweetness of our Rule; for by this means their desires increasing, they will
make the greater suit to be received: And if any of them who have made this
demand, shall seem to desire to go back, then shall be represented to him the
Zeal, which he at first expressed to get into the Society. But because there is
great difficulty in drawing in the Children of great Birth, and especially the
Children of them that are great in their Country, it is fit to send such to
make their Noviciat, or Trial at Rome, after having advertised the General, or
Provincial of that Province. If it be in Germany, France, or Italy, that they
will enter into our Society, they shall be received without any difficulty; and
in any other place where we have the favor of the Prince: For under such a
Protector, these and such like things may be done; because their Subjects
having need of our favor, they will not easily rise up against us, or if they
do it, they will gain nothing by it. No opportunity should be lost for the
drawing in those Children, which come from other Provinces to study in our
Colleges, especially when their Money comes to fail by Gaming, for then out of
mere shame of this loss, and fear of their Parents ill usage, they will suffer
themselves to be persuaded. This has excellent success in Germany and Poland,
and to the end the Kindred and Friends of them who come amongst us, may be
herewith contented, they should be acquainted with the excellence of our
Institution, the great applause the World give us, and the Honor Princes have
done our Society: It is fit also to insinuate into their Friends, and dispose
them to be contented with it beforehand, if their quality, and the advantage of
our Affairs require it.

CHAP. XIII. Of our Religious Women.
THe Confessors ought to take care they do not offend our Religious Women: for
there have been many amongst them which have done us much good, and contributed
to the Founding of our Colleges, having given one half of their Fortunes to us,
by the consent of their Monastery and Abbess: And for this cause they should
not be disquieted about their enclosure, but leave this care to the Bishops:
They should rather apply themselves to preserve their good will, for fear they
should disturb us in the possession of the one half of their Goods, which they
have given us, by demanding them again.

CHAP. XIV. Of the reserved Cases, and of those Causes for which a Man may be
Expelled out of the Society.
BEsides the Cases contained in this Instruction, from which the Superior only
can Absolve, or the ordinary Confessor by his permission; which are Sodomy,
Fornication, Adultery, Whoredom, unchaste Touches, and the Machinations of any
Person for any Cause whatever against the Society; it is fit to know, that
there are other causes for the expelling a guilty Person out of the Society,
and that they ought not to absolve them till they have promised at the Tribunal
of Confession, that they will declare those Offenses to their Superior, either
by themselves, or by their Confessor. And if it appear that the Sin was acted
with another, and that a great Prejudice may thereby happen to the Society,
then no Absolution ought to be given to the Penitent, if he does not promise to
write of it to the General himself, or consent that the Confessor or Superior
shall write to him about it, and without this the Penitent shall not be
absolved. And when the General shall have known the Crime, he shall confer with
the Secretary, and appoint the Penance, which the Penitent shall undergo, which
if he shall not submit to, he can never be lawfully absolved. The Confessor
should nevertheless forbear saying, that the Penitent ought to be expelled out
of the Society for this cause. If the Penitent declare it freely out of
Confession, then he may be expelled; but if he will not so tell it, then the
same Course ought to be observed with him, which is observed by the Rule
against those that are convicted; and in the interim he shall not be absolved
till he will declare his Crime publicly. If any Confessor shall learn that any
Person, who is not of the Society, shall have committed any dishonest Action
with any of our Religious Persons, then he or the shall be refused Absolution,
of what Sex soever that Person be, till that Person has out of Confession
revealed the Party; and if this be done, the Penitent shall be absolved, and
the guilty Party expelled out of the Society. If two of our Religious Persons
commit the Crime of Sodomy together, he that will not confess it, shall be
expelled, and he that first confesses it, shall be retained, but so ill
treated, that he shall be forced to forsake us. The Society being a Body, it
may for that cause discharge it self of such Persons, as shall in process of
time, appear dull in their Manners or Discourses. The Superiors also may for
any cause whatever expel all sorts of Persons, after they have advertised the
General; and to oblige them to depart the more quickly, they shall be ill
treated, and every thing done contrary to their Inclination; they shall be
refused what ever they desire, tho it be of no consequence; they shall be
hindered from studying Divinity, and be subjected to such Superiors as they love
not; none shall remain in the Society, who disobey their Superiors, who
complain of them in the presence of others, or express their dislike of the
Conduct of the Society in relation to Widows, and the management of their
Estates, and who commend the Venetians who have driven away the Society. A
little before the expelling any Person, let him be rudely abused, and taken
from all regular Emploiments, and put sometimes upon one thing, and sometimes
upon another; and in the interim let him be reproached with the having ill
discharged his Trust, and let the worst Penances be imposed for the smallest
Faults. During the time of Repast, let his Faults be published by the Reader,
till he be overwhelmed with shame; and if then any impatience appear in him,
let him be expelled, as one that scandalizeth the rest who are present, and
rally on him. But then in the first place let a review of what he has, be
taken, and let him be sent into some Country House, or near College, and so let
him be sent thence to the place where he least expects.

CHAP. XV. Which of the Society ought to be kept in, and managed.
FIrst of all, the excellent Workmen, who contribute not only to the Spiritual
but Temporal Good of the Society, as the Confessors of rich Widows, which yet
should be taken from them, when they begin to be oppressed with old Age, that
others more youthful and vigorous may be sent in their stead. And to these
whatever they demand for their Diet and Clothing, and other things, ought to
be granted, neither ought the Ministers of Penance to disquiet them. The
Superiors shall not lightly believe that which is reported of them. It is
necessary also to have some Consideration for them who acquaint the Superiors
with the smallest faults they can observe in others; and also for them who
according to their places know how to mortify others, not out of Passion, but
Zeal for the Religious Discipline. Yet sweetness should be used toward those
younger Persons, whose Kindred are our Benefactors and Founders; and upon this
account they should be sent to study at Rome, or if they perform their Studies
in the Provinces, all things that may gain their Affections, should be granted
to them. It is fit also to treat favorably all those young Religious Persons,
who have not yet given their Estates to the Society; but when they have once
done this, it is fit to feed them with Bread, and not with Milk. It is fit also
to have respect to those who dispose Children of Quality to enter our Society,
as to Persons well affected to it.

CHAP. XVI. Of what is to be avoided or observed besides all this.
FOr fear we should be accused of being too covetous of Riches, it is fit to
refuse small Alms, for the ordinary Services which those of our Society
perform. No lea^e should be given to Persons of mean condition to bury in our
Churches. Those Widows should be treated severely, who have impoverished
themselves by their bounty to us; and the same Course should be taken with
those of our Order, who have given their Estates to the Society. They may
sometimes be expelled too, either without allowing them any thing at all, or
but a very little, under pretense of the Charges the Society have expended
about them.

Let the Superiors keep these secret Advices with great care, and let them not
be communicated but to a very few discreet Persons, and that only by parts: and
let them instruct others with them, when they have profitably served the
Society; and then let them not communicate them as Rules they received, but as
the Effects of their own prudence. But if they should happen to fall into the
hands of Strangers, who should give them an ill sense and construction; let
them be assured the Society owns them not in that sense, which shall be
confirmed by instancing in those of our Order who assuredly know them not.

Let also the general Advices, and printed or written Constitutions of our
Society, be opposed against them.

Lastly, let Information be given, whether any of our own Members have
communicated them (for no Superior ought to be negligent in the keeping such
considerable Secrets of the Society). And if there be the least suspicion of
any Person, let it be charged upon him, and let him be espell'd out of the
Society.

FINIS.

