(...) may make Gentlemen so sensible of the Benefit of Trade, as to Employ
their Heads and Time to consult the best Laws and Methods to encourage it.

This Method not only Secures the Persons Engaging their Estates in this
Design, from being loosers, but makes them great gainers.

It secures the Nation, as well as every particular Person, from any prejudice
by the Tickets, because the Money lent as aforesaid, must be paid off, and
Discharged by the Rent of the Land Mortgaged, which cannot be denied, but to be
equal to the best Mortgages now in England.

This Method will make us Masters of the best of Trades, and much more National
than was ever yet pretended to: For this Company will be obliged to Build all
their Ships and Busses, and to make all their Nets, and other Implements of
Fishery in England, though they will at first, until by Custom and Use we grow
expert in those Arts and Trades, cost us above 30 l. per Cent. more than we now
have them Imported to us from Abroad.

The making all the Necessaries for Fishing in England, will maintain many
thousands of People now Chargeable to the Parishes: And by increasing
Manufactures, that maintain and employ them (if convenient Laws could be
obtained for Encouragement of Forraigners, to come and Inhabit here) we should
have a great Increase of People, which will cause a great increase of Trade,
which is the only way to raise the Value of Land, and to secure the same by Sea
and Land against any Enemy.

This Method, or Bank Credit, is no new thing to other Nations: being
Established in the best Trading places in the World, though under worse
Circumstances, as Holland, Hamburgh, Venice, and other places in Italy. Their
Banks have no certain Fund, and are by most People Believed not worth one third
of what they owe, and yet their Credit is more Valuable than Gold or Silver
Money, for 100 l. Bank Credit is frequently transferred for 2, 3, or 4. per
Cent. advance, and never so low as for a 100 l. in money, Which is well known
to Traders in Holland.

Since then their Banks, with an uncertain Fund, appears by their long
continuance, to be so Beneficial and Valuable to Trading Nations, why should
not this? having a certain Fund, sufficient in the perfixt time to Pay off the
whole Debt, which yearly Lessens, and the Fund accordingly Increases in Value:
And carrying with it all the same benefits and conveniences to our Nation: as
they reap by theirs: besides the mighty National Advantage of this desired
Fishing Trade.

The sum of all is no more but to obtain a Charter to Incorporate such
Gentlemen as are willing to engage their Estates to recover the Fishing-Trade,
Esteemed so great and desirable a Jewel to the Nation, and now possessed by
Forraigners.

And, though the Bills of Exchange of this Company have equal privilege with
other Persons, to run upon their bare Reputation, yet none of their Bills are
proposed to pass, without a greater value of Land be Tackt to them by the
Parliament, according to a Method prepared,

And lastly, That their Bills so settled, being more useful and valuable than
Money of the best Gold or Silver, may, for the same reasons as Gold and Silver
money is imposed, be made Current in all Public and Private Payments: which is
no more than what time and Custom would introduce of Course, as is
Demonstrable by such Bankers having the greatest Credit, as are but reputed to
have the best Fund.

And because nothing under Heaven can be so perfect, as not to admit of
Objections, it is humbly hoped that it will be considered, whether the great
Advantages certainly following this Undertaking, do not far out-ballance all
the supposed Objections, which can possibly be brought against it, and may be
easily cleared, when the Objections shall be Methodically made.

It may not be amiss to add something here in defense of joint Stocks, because
several Papers have of late been dispersed, which condemn them in General: It
is confessed, joint Stocks which ingross any Trade, ought not to be granted
without good Consideration: But such joint Stocks, as neither Interrupts nor
Prohibits any other to Trade the same way, is no more to be discouraged, than a
Rich Merchant, because there are Poorer: besides There are these two Advantages
in a joint Stock, first, many things can be put in Practice, which smaller
Stocks cannot reach to. Secondly, Things of great hazard will be Attempted,
when none can be ruined by their Failures.

(...)
