A FUND For Supplying and Preserving Our COIN. OR, An Essay on the Project of
New-Coining our SILVER.
WHen I had read the REPORT, etc. and considered the Author's Pains, and the
Search he had made, and thereby brought to light, the state of our Coin for
many Ages; I could not but approve his Industry and Care in this so great a
Concern, as our Nation has of late labored under.

And therefore gave my self diligently to consider, what weight might be in
those that oppose his Reasons.

And to examine the force of their Arguments, it may not be improper to reduce
them to a few Heads, wherein I hope to Contract the Substance of their several
strongest Allegations, at least so far as may be worth notice.

And I shall begin with theirs, who say,

1. The Alteration of our Coin to be less in Weight than heretofore, will be of
no Advantage to us. 2. Our Money will then purchase no more of Inland or
Foreign Commodities than before; because Wares will rise proportionable to the
advance in Money, so that Silver by the Ounce will buy no more Goods than it
did before. 3. The Exchange they say, will always follow our state of the Coin,
be it Better or Worse. 4. 'Twill have no influence to make Coined or Vncoin'd
Silver more plenty among us. 5. The Balance of Trade sometimes requires, that
Bullion either Coined or Vncoin'd, must be sent out of the Nation; and when it
comes abroad, they will put no more Value on it than before. 6. All Bargainers
will be Cheated, in receiving less than their Agreements, as Landlords less
Rents, Merchants less Silver in payment, and the King less Taxes. 7. That
Forreigner's that have Lent to the Crown, will have less by receiving Smaller
Money, and thereby be discouraged from Lending again. 8. That all these
together will Ruin us.
And in order to plenary Satisfaction to all Unbyassed Persons, I shall
endeavor to Answer them one by one.

1. It Is Alleged, The Alteration of our Coin to be less in Weight than
heretofore, will be of no Advantage to us.

I humbly propose it will; for as we have cause to believe, former Ages saw
good Reasons from time to time to lighten our Coin, from 20 s. 3 d. for the
Pound Troy-weight, to 3 l. 2 s. so I hope to demonstrate our Governors now
have cause, if they New-Coin the Money to lighten it yet once more, from 3 l. 2
s. the Pound Troy-weight, to about 3 l. 18 s. or 4 l. especially if it shall be
considered, that if it be now Coined at the said Rate of 4 l. to a Pound
Troy-weight, it is but to continue it about its present state; whereas it must
be granted, that to New-Coin it at the old weight, is to make an Alteration,
and that at a time very unfit, when the Nation is in an Expensive War, and when
Foreigners have great Estates here, which they want to carry Home.

2. But say they, If our Money be New-Coin'd lighter, 'twill purchase no more
Inland or Foreign Commodities than before, because Wares do and will rise
proportionable to the Advance in Money, so that Silver by the Ounce will buy no
more than it did before.

I Answer, that Position is not always true, nor is it the only Reason of our
present Advance on Goods, but it is complicated with other Causes, as the Losses
of great quantities of Goods by the War, especially homewards, whereby those
Goods that are left Sell quick, and would have Sold quick, had the state of our
Money remained as formerly; for may it not be well-acknowledged what great
Rates (even as great as now) Goods Sold at in a former War, viz. about Anno
1667?

And yet the Money was then almost twice as heavy as now. And though we should
make it heavy again, yet it may most reasonably be judged Foreign Goods will
Sell quick and high, while Trade is liable to the Obstructions and Hazards of
War: But should the making our Coin heavier, thereby make our own Commodities
Cheaper, I hope there is none but will grant, that were then England's great
Disadvantage.

3. Again, They say the Exchange will always follow our state of the Coin, be
it Better or Worse.

But that I deny, for this Age has furnished us with Experience to the
contrary; and that when our Coin was weighty, the Exchange sometimes varied
heretofore greatly, upon great Emergencies of State and Trade, as well as now,
and yet it was then esteemed, no Cause of altering our Money; nor was the
Exchange so much altered this time Twelvemonth, though our Money was then near
as Bad as now, and worse than it would be, were it New-Coin'd at a quarter or
third part less in weight, than the old Standard.

Besides, they argue to our Loss, who say, The Exchange will rise in proportion
to our New-Coining the Money, if we make it of the old weight. And to show they
propose our Loss, let us draw their Argument into a Demonstration.

Suppose by their Rule our Pound Sterling should again be made near Four
Ounces, then the Exchange will rise to 35s. Flemish per Pound Sterling.

First, I say, How can they tell that? Yet for the present let us grant it, and
then we shall see that One Ounce weight of our Silver purchases 8 s. 9 d.
Flemish, and Four Ounces at 8 s. 9 d. Flemish per Pound Sterling is 35 s.
Flemish.

Which I hope is thus demonstrable to be vastly our Prejudice, for our present
state of the Coin and Exchange is 30 per Cent. better; because now our Pound
Sterling while it weighs but about Two Ounces and a half, is worth about 28 s.
4 d. Flemish, whereby we have 11 s. 4 d. per Ounce weight of Silver; so that
the Change they would have us make (by their own Rule) is visibly 30 per Cent.
Loss to England; as you may see by Substracting the Purchase of One Ounce of
Silver in Flemish Money at their Rate, which is 8 s. 9 d. from the present
Course, which is 11 s. 4 d. the difference whereof is 2 s. 7 d. and that is
about 30 per Cent.

So that if the Subject has occasion then to remit 1000 l. of New-Money of
Four Ounces to the Pound, at 35 s. Flemish, he will lose 300 l. by it, of what
he would do, to remit 1000 l. of our present Money at our present Exchange of
28 s. 4 d. And if the King were to remit Three Millions in Pound Sterling of
Four Ounces at 35 s. Flemish per Pound, he would lose near a Million by it, of
what he would do at the present Exchange, by the aforesaid Demonstration.

Their Fourth Mistake is, 'Twill have no influence to make Coined or Vncoin'd
Silver more plenty amongst us; and they give some Reasons for it, as they
think, but they go but a little way: They say indeed, If the Silver be Coined a
quarter or third part less, Commodities will rise proportionable, so that I
shall then Buy no more Commodities with a Hundred Ounces of Silver than I did
before. But did I yield them that to be true; yet here they go from their own
Arguments, which was, that it would not make either Coined or Uncoin'd Silver
more plentiful, which I call their Mistake; for let them consider, in that
Country where a Commodity will yield most, thither 'twill go, and that made
Foreigners get our Crown-pieces; and if our Coin be New made about a quarter
or third part lighter, and our old Crowns made to go at 6 s. 3 d. or 6 s. 8 d.
'twill make our old Crown-pieces return hither again, if any of them are abroad
unmelted: It being certain, as I said, that in what Country any thing is most
Valued thither 'twill go. And so much Silver come to our Mint.

And as the new Coining our Crown-pieces one quarter or one third part lighter,
may bring back some old Ones; so 'twill certainly bring us in great quantity of
Bullion to be Coined; for if it be worth, as they say, but 5 s. 2 d. per Ounce
abroad, yet if an Ounce Coined here, be worth 6 s. 3 d. or 6 s. 8 d. 'twill
invite all the Bullion in Europe hither to be Coined, or to be sold as Bullion:
For it is granted, Bullion also will hold up the Price, if the new Crown-pieces
be Coined one quarter or one third part lighter.

5. They think, the Balance of Trade sometimes requires that Bullion either
Coined or Vncoin'd must be sent out of the Nation, and when it comes abroad,
say they, Foreigners will put no more value on it than before. I Answer,
That Is a great mistake at this time, and if ever true, it is only when we are
guilty of Egregious False Policy, in valuing our Coin lower than other Nations:
Which the better to prove, let us observe a little of what this Balance of
Trade is; and it is, when there is Imported into England in Goods twelve
hundred thousand pound in a Year, and Exported but eleven hundred thousand
pound, there the Balance of Trade is one hundred thousand pound which England
is Debtor. Which, say they, must be paid in Money. I say no Necessity for that,
for suppose one of those Foreigners, that sent in part of the Goods which
belongs to this Balance of Trade, he never thinks of that, but bethinks him
how most to his Profit to draw home his Estate; whether by Exchange, or by
Manufactures, or Bullion Coined or Uncoin'd: And if he chooses Bullion, it is
because that is more valued in his own Country than here, and perhaps will
yield him more Profit then he can get by Commodities, so that it is our Silver
and Gold being too often under-valued here makes them be taken away, and our
Commodities left, and not any otherwise does our Overbalance of Trade mostly
come, for can any Merchant tell the Time when he might not have laid out his
Money plentifully enough in Cloth, Serges, Lead, Tyn, Leather, West India
Goods, etc. without ever carrying away our Coin, and that upon a supposed
Necessity?

Again, whenever we value our Gold and Silver less than Foreigners, it tends
to lower our Commodities, and our Rents, and our Lands; as when Guineas went
here at 22s. and abroad at 23s. then were they often carried out, and the
Commodities left, and the Commodities thereby falling, must need fall the Land
they rise out of. And the Tenant and Occupier of Land, not being able to sell
his Produce, cannot pay his Rent; therefore Landlords look you to it, if you
make the Money fit for Foreigners to carry away, you lower your Tenants
Manufactures, and your Lands produce first, and then your Lands also.

Another Erroneous part of their pretense is, that let us overvalue our Coin
never so much, Foreigners will not follow us therein.

But the contrary is evident, and I appeal to any Man of Knowledge herein;
Whether Guineas han't of late been sold for more Gilders in Holland since
May Day, than this Time Twelvemonth, so that at last 'twas hardly worth their
while to bring them hither?

And before I go from this Proposition about the Overbalance of Trade, I
would offer one Consideration more, viz. Whenever our Money is more profitable
to Export than Commodities, it makes England Debtor upon the Balance of Trade;
and that too in a very disadvantageous Case, for we thereby exchange an
unperishable Commodity, as our Coin is allowed to be, for perishable
Commodities; I mean for Eating, Drinking and Apparel, and this has been to
often our Case, while we had broad Money, or Guineas left, that they could get
by fetching away.

The next Proposition to be answered is, if the Money be made less than
formerly, all Bargainers will be cheated in receiving less than their
Agreements, as Landlords, less Rents, Merchants less Silver, and the King less
Taxes.

But pray consider, did the Landlord Let his Land to be paid in Money as big
again, as that which is Current? Or did the Merchant sell his Goods to be paid
in a new Coin? Or the Mortgagee to be paid in bigger Money then he Lent? No
such matter, therefore if the Money be new Coined larger, than it has been this
Year or two; 'twill be as great a loss in reality upon he that pays great
Money, as it is in pretense on the other side.

But say they, Foreigners that have Lent to the Crown, will have loss by
receiving it back in smaller Money, and thereby be discouraged from lending
again.

And now methinks, I could be glad the whole Cause were to be tried on this one
Issue: For, did Foreigners lend to the Crown Money of four Ounces to a Pound
Sterling? Or did they lend such as was Current; and such as they Lent, such let
them have again; if they Lent hundred Pound Bags of 16. or 18 l. weight, let
them have such again. But what Policy is it to Coin them new Money of 32 l. in
a hundred Pound, to pay them who Lent but 16 l. or 18 l. in a hundred Pound;
pray consider well of it.

For hereby you will prevent Foreigners from lending any more; because when you
have paid them in such weighty Money, away goes their Estates that are here
with this new heavy Money, and so they leave none here to lend.

Whereas keep but Foreigners Stocks here, which are come over in Guineas, and
you may have Money enough. Lent, and that at Interest low enough: For they
cannot carry back their Estates as yet, and great Estates without doubt they
have here, by the pouring in Guineas, and lowering the Exchange; which brings
me to their eighth Argument

8. Wherein they say, the Consequence is, That all these things will ruin us.

They mean, unless the Money be made heavy by a speedy Alteration of the Coin
to the old weight.

In Answer to which, I offer this Position, and hope the following Lines will
prove it.

That if an Alteration be now made of the Coin, to about an Ounce of Silver in
a Crown-piece, 'twill be ruinous to the Nation, and that in a very vast degree.

First, It Is evident, the War and our Neighbors have carried away, our East
and West India Goods, and our homemade Commodities also: And if the Silver be
made heavy as formerly, there is enough will carry that away too.

Nor will they then leave us the Gold; for if we new-Coin our Silver Money
heavy, that will lower the Guineas; and that will infallibly carry them away
too; nay, perhaps to the profit of those very Men that got 25 per Cent. by
bringing them in; and may get near half as much, by carrying them away.

Nor will it be less fatal to us in the Exchange, for if they of the other side
are in the right, they expect our Pound Sterling (when we shall make it weigh
near four Ounces) to procure us but 35s. Flemish, which is about 8 s. 9 d. an
Ounce.

Whereas at present, we have 11 s. 4 d. Flemish, for an Ounce of Silver, as is
before demonstrated.

So that to alter our Money at this Time, is to make the Exporters thereof a
profit, which they greatly desire; and they will greatly admire our Prudence,
so to fit our Crowns to their Politick-Heads, and our Coin to their Covetous
Purses.

Nor is this all the fatality attends us, from their carrying back their
Estates in Coin, who brought it in Guineas; but it will also stop their laying
out their Stocks, (they have here) in English Produce and Manufactures, which
they have begun to buy, and will go on to do, if we don't inconsiderately
furnish them another way to carry off their Estates.

For it must be granted, that, though some of the Guineas that came, were sent
for by our own People: Yet vast quantities of them, were sent hither by
Foreigners; and of such Foreigners Estates prodigious sums, may well be
supposed to lie here still, and groan to get home; and therefore they use their
skill, to have the same Guineas, or other Coin adapted to their devices.

Nor is it Foreigners only; but also some of our own People, would by it make
themselves an advantage; and they are of two sorts.

First, Such as are for any gain they can come at, and will venture Exporting
Money when so very profitable, though it be so positively against Law; which
fairer Traders scorn to do: And to give those Secret designers, an opportunity
to outdo Honester Men, is no true Policy; if it were not attended with these
general damages to the Nation.

The other sort of our own People, that fall in with this Interest of
Foreigners; may be those, who have undertaken to remit Money for the
Government, and they will needs get by their Trade, and it is very good Reason
they should; yet cannot they propose another way, than that, which will rob us
of our Treasure.

For that is the plain Consequence of making our Money so heavy.

Ever since Anno 1660. the weight has robbed us of it, by Exporting, or
Melting, or both.

And is not 35 Years Experience sufficient to show us, we must take a contrary
Method, if ever we will preserve it here?

For those designing Men, whose Interest it is to Melt or Transport it, will
hardly forbear, though it were ever so Penal; because they can transact it with
Privacy.

Therefore, consider the Proposals in Esquire Lowns's Report: Where he does not
only propose as our Advantage, that our Coin be made lighter. But shows, that
in former Times our Ancestors did often find occasion so to do, and pray what
dishonor did ever attend their making it lesser; when they kept up to the
Fineness?

It may be granted, when the Money has been made Courser, they have soon found
Reason to alter it.

But did they ever see cause to reform, after they had lightened it? And what
ever Reasons they had, we seem to have much more.

For I appeal to all judicious Men, whether ever Foreigners had such vast
Estates here as now, and when they please to have them home, have they any more
then these four Ways, viz. in Silver, in Gold, in Exchange, or in Goods?

1. They cannot carry away our Silver at the present value of it here, not
Uncoin'd Silver, because it is worth here 6 s. 5 d. and abroad about 5 s. 2 d.
nor can they carry it off in our Coin as it now is, (or if new Coined at one
quarter or one third part advance) because it goes for much more here, then it
would there.

But should our Silver be reduced, that one Pound Sterling should have in it
near four Ounces of Silver, away they would carry that.

Or should we thereby lower Uncoin'd Silver to 5 s. 2 d. upon a small turn of
the Exchange, away goes that too.

And the Consequence is the same upon Guineas; and pray consider, that unless
they will take them of us at that Rate, we have took them from them, they ought
not to carry them away; but rather leave them where they are.

3. Nor can they carry it all away by Exchange; for if very many of them should
go about that, it would lower the Exchange to their loss; perhaps more than they
got by bringing in Guineas.

But as the Case now is, it is their Interest, as well as our own, to keep up
the Exchange.

Whereas, if we gratify them in falling our Guineas, and greatening our
Silver, 'twill also raise the Exchange: So that then they have three ways to
choose, and may leave our Manufactures to fall.

But should we so see their devices (and the ruin impends us thereby) as to
avoid fitting their Interest, in either of the said three ways; then they have
but one left, and that is the Fourth.

4. Viz. To carry off our Commodities, and they are Men but of short sight,
that see not how greatly that will still raise our Commodities: Although
perhaps they are as much advanced already, as the Guineas are.

Yet for the Foreigners to carry back their Estates in Commodities; the
English growth and Manufacture, and that of our Plantations, must yet still
advance; to the great enriching of this Industrious Nation.

And were it not false Policy with a witness, to lose this opportunity of
selling our Goods 50 per Cent. above whatever they would give for them, when
they could get by carrying away our Coin: Especially, when we have given them
so dear for their Money.

Rather let it stay and circulate three Times, through the Manufactures of
England, while our Goods are at these advanced Prizes; then in the thrice
circulating, we shall not only get the advance, the Guineas has got, but also
the whole Guinea.

But they say, if our Commodities are so dear, they will not turn to account
abroad: That I deny too, unless there was another Virginia to afford them
Tobacco, or another Barbados to yield them Sugar, or another England to yield
them broad Clothes, Serges, Kersies, Bays, and Stockins, Lead, Tin, and
Leather; for seeing this is the Storehouse, from whence they must have these
useful Commodities for Trade; when they have them abroad, they will go near to
ask as much profit upon them, as they did before, when bought here at 40 per
Cent. less.

And though it be objected, That they who bought early, whether Foreigners or
English, will under-sell the Dear Buyers at Markets abroad; yet that will soon
be over, and then all may run equal.

Besides, if we continue our Coin, about the weight the current Money now is,
Silver will hold about 6 s. 5 d. or 6 d. and that may Encourage Foreigners to
send theirs hither, and that will raise the price with them, as it has done
with us; and so it has done already with Guineas, for they could not lately be
bought, to bring hither with much Advantage; but 'twill be with large Advantage
they will carry them out, and our New Money too, if we make it large.

And though they boast they have gulled our People, to get the Guineas taken at
these high Rates, yet it is much to be hoped, our Government will not be
over-reacht by them, so as to make it their Advantage to carry it away, with as
much Profit as they brought it in.

But if it shall seem meet to the Wisdom of the Parliament, to New-Coin it
again, please to consider, nothing is so like to keep it here, as to make 100
l. of Sterling, to weigh about so many Pound of Silver, as it now does; and
then it will equally answer all Bargains now on foot; and the King will equally
pay those that have Lent Money, according to the goodness or weight of the
Money they Lent; and thereby the Estates of Foreigners will still be continued
here, and be probably Lent to the Crown, if need should require, at Four or
Five per Cent. Interest.

Whereas should the Coin now be made large, and thereby, as is
before-demonstrated, it be all, or most of it carried away, what shall we have
to Lend the Government, or Pay our Merchants and Landlords? Will they be
willing to take Hens, and Pease, and Barley, for Rent, as is common in Scotland?

For the Reducing our Coin to half the quantity which it now is, will render
the Nation so bare of Money: First, By its quantity, being less. Secondly, By
their carrying much of it away; that each Trader will have little enough left
to maintain the Necessary Payments of Trade, and Expenses, and Taxes, and the
fewer to spare to Lend to the King.

But some may Object, This great uneasiness in the People, under the present
Circumstances of the Badness of Money, necessitates somewhat to be done.

It Is true, there is the Disease; but it don't need so desperate a Remedy.

For if the Government should see good to make the Guineas every where passable
at 30s. and they thereby become Current at the Exchequer, the Custom-House,
Excise-Office, and in payment for other Taxes; then will the People also take
them freely, and we should have Money Circulate amain; then would Taxes come in
easily, Rents be well paid, and great quantities of Money ready to purchase
Lands of any Seller, and quantities ready for the Crown; and all the uses of
Money well-supplied, without the Charge of Altering the Money at all, at this
Juncture, when it can so ill be done; or when such Difficulties attend the
finding any other Fund at this time to answer the Loss: And this is the Fund I
propose, both to supply our want of Acceptable Cash to pay every Body, and to
carry on the Affairs of the Nation, by making the Guineas passable at 30 s.

And for the Counterfeit Money, a little time will furnish most People with
Judgment enough to avoid that; and then where is our need of an Alteration, till
the Nation is again in Peace and Prosperity; and by that time you may so find
the sweet of keeping the Money here, as willingly to Coin it in such Bulk as
may continue it with us hereafter.

It will also be made yet more easy, if the next Fifty or a Hundred Thousand
Pounds of Gold that shall be Coined, be done in half Guineas, to go at 15s.
Thirds of Guineas, to go at 10s. Sixths of Guineas, to go at 5s. then surely we
shall not need to go upon this Chargeable and Ruinous Affair now at this time,
when the Nation has so many ways for all the Money they can spare, both at
Home for our Navy, and Abroad for our Army.

Ay, say they, for our Army, how will you pay and supply them?

And truly if this were rightly answered, I hope their Cause were at an end.

Therefore let us divide their Objection into two parts, and answer them
asunder; and First for the Pay.

For that, let us give the King so much the more; we were better do that, than
Ruin us all; as would be the going away of all our Coin. And if we give the
King, in the Quota Allotted to pay the Army one fourth part more, that will be
a much less Inconvenience; and keeping the rest here, our Commodities will Sell
well and quick, and the Nation grow Rich under all; especially, if Providence
Bless the Care of our Superiors, in protecting our Trade with Success.

As for the other part of their Objection, The Supply of the Army with
Necessaries; let them eat our own Bread, and wear our Apparel: I mean, let them
be Clothed from England as before; let their Beef be sent them from England or
Ireland, and their Bread ready Baked, and Cheese, and Pease, and Fish, as are
provided for the Navy, and most part will Circulate among our selves.

And thus having Answered all their Valuable Objections I have met withal; I
shall close this Discourse with a Brief Summary of the whole Matter.

It Is our Interest to be Keepers of our own Coin our selves.

If Foreigners have Estates here, let them take them home in English
Commodities at these Advanced Prizes they now bear, and that is the way to equal
the Balance of Trade; for the more Commodities goes out, the less the Nation
is Debtor on the Balance of Trade.

Or if they will not do so, let them leave them here to Lend the Government.

But don't let us make it their Interest, to Rob us of our Treasure, instead of
Buying our Commodities.

May the Almighty Bless the Debates of our Grandees, and give a Happy Issue to
their Consultations, is the Hearty Desire of England's Well-wisher.

FINIS.
A FUND For Supplying and Increasing Our COIN.


