Compendium Geographicum: OR, A More Exact, Plain, and Easy INTRODUCTION INTO
ALL GEOGRAPHY, Then yet Extant, after the latest Discoveries, or Alterations;
Very Useful, especially for Young Noblemen and Gentlemen, the like not printed
in English.

By Peregrin Clifford Chamberlayne, of the Inner Temple, Gent.

LONDON:Printed for William Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar, 1682.

TO THE Right Honorable CHARLES Lord HERBERT, Son and Heir to the Lord
Marquess of Worcester.
My Lord,
THE Honor that I have had of your Lordships most obliging Kindness and
Favor, in your Travels abroad, has animated me humbly to beg your Lordships
Patronage over these my first Fruits; not that by this Enchiridion, or small
Pocketbook, I pretend to add any thing to the Knowledge of a Person, who
before he had attained to the Age of thirteen Years, et Mores Hominum multorum
vidit, et Urbes; and who now at the Age of twenty, is endowed with so much
Judgment, Wisdom and Discretion, as appears every day, my Lord, by your eminent
Service toward your King, and Country, in a most diligent and dextrous
administration of Justice: Not (I say) that this Epitome of Geography can add
to your Lordships Knowledge; but only, that when your Lordships Illustrious
Name shall appear in the Front hereof, it may the sooner encourage the young
Nobility and Gentry of this Nation, to make use of it; which is the main Aim of,

MY LORD, Your Lordships Most humble, and Most obedient Servant; P. C.
Chamberlayne.

THE PREFACE.
I Will not go about to say very much in commendation of this Science, neither
could I speak its praise enough to satisfy my self, had I that intention;
therefore I will leave it to some more skilful Encomiast: But I cannot
sufficiently admire, to see it thus neglected in a Nation where all other Arts
and Sciences do flourish, and abound in so great a measure: No excuse ought to
suffice any well bred Person for his ignorance in Geography; this being a
Science, and I may truly say, the only Science that comes within the capacity
of all Mankind, whether old or young, Men or Women; for any one may easily
attain to the knowledge of it that has but a Memory, a few Maps and a little
Method; and methinks he that is ignorant of it, (especially if a Man of parts)
must needs blush every time he reads the Gazette, and cannot give an account in
what Country is seated such a Place, or Town of note; and surely he must be
strangely out of countenance to hear himself baffled in Geography by every
ordinary Seaman: Yet I hope there will not be found among our Oxonians, that
shall assert the Moors came out of Greece, (as did a Gentleman of the
University of Paris) because part of this Country is now called Morea; and I
can speak of my own knowledge of a young Minister beyond Sea, who took
Copenhagen to be the name of a Dutch Commander.

I may be bold to say, that this Science is not necessary in our daily
conversation only; for he that understands it has no less advantage toward the
reading of any History, and he cannot but acknowledge that his skill in Maps
gives an extraordinary light to what he reads: Besides, no one will deny but
that it is also very delightful to travel round the Earth, and visit each part
thereof, without danger, and without quitting their Native Country, Friends and
Relations: And seeing that God has allotted the Earth, and all that is in it to
be under the Jurisdiction of Man; it seems as if they, who are wholly ignorant
of the Form, and Dimensions of this Lower World, and of the Situation, Extent,
or Division of it is Parts, did in some sort slight, and despise the Creation.
It Is true, there are other Sciences not a little advantageous to him who will
thoroughly understand a History, as Chronology and Genealogy; yet Geography is
placed before these of course; for the Question is generally asked, first
Where, and afterward When, and by Whom this or that thing was done. Moreover,
God having created the Earth before he made Man, it would seem something absurd
to be well versed in the state of Humane Affairs, and altogether ignorant of
the Countries wherein they were acted.

Knowing that a good Method ought chiefly to be observed in this, as well as in
other Sciences; I have therefore imitated that of Monsieur de Launay, a very
learned Man, in his Introduction to Geography, printed two or three years ago
in France, from whence I translated what made most for my purpose; but from the
beginning to the end of this small Treatise, I have endeavored to observe that
Brevity which I first proposed to myself; therefore if any esteem this Volume
too little for the Subject whereof it treats, I must Apologize for my self, and
it, with Brevitas Memoriae Amica; nevertheless I will at the same time affirm
without any thing of Vanity, that there is no Geography now extant in English,
except one of two of a large Bulk and larger Price, that treats so fully as
this of all the parts of the known Earth, with their Subdivisions. I confess I
have inserted very little of the Historical Part, that it might be the more
compendious, and to make the more room for what belongs purely to Geography,
which induces me to hope that the Reader will here find Magnum in Parvo: To
conclude I have taken all the care imaginable to render this Geography clear
and easy, even to the meanest Capacity, and not to spell the Proper Nomes
wrong, or miscall them, an Error too frequent in most others; by which
confusion the Reader is not seldom discouraged to proceed, in what he began
perhaps with no small delight.

Concerning the Use of the Globe, and Maps.
MY Intention at first, was to have enlarged a little more upon this Subject of
the Use of Maps; but Mr. Guy Miege has lately prevented me with a Treatise
called, A new Survey of the whole World; wherein, as well this point, as all
others relating to Cosmography, are discussed by way of Dialogue: I will
therefore be as brief as possible, at least concerning any matter whereof he
has already treated.

Geography, in Greek (...), i. e. a description of the Earth, is compounded of
(...), which signifies the Earth, and (...) to write or describe: Here the
Earth must not be taken simply but for one Element, as in Natural Philosophy,
but must be understood to be a Terraqeous Globe, that is, a Globe composed of
two Elements, Earth and Water, which together make one Spherical Body, commonly
called the Earth, as being the name of the more worthy part. This Science
differs from Cosmography as one part does from the whole, for the word
Cosmography has a signification far more comprehensive, as is demonstrated by
its Erymology, being derived from (...) the World, and (...) to describe; now
by the World is meant the Heavens with the four Elements, etc. As Cosmography
includes under it Geography, so this latter comprehends Chorography, i. e. a
description of a Country from the Greek (...) or rather (...) a Country, and
(...): But the description of a particular Place, as a small Territory, Town,
Castle, etc. Is called Topography, from (...) locus and (...).

As to the Lines, Circles, or Points, of most use in Geography, either upon the
Globe, or in Maps, we will begin with the Axle-tree of the World; which you
must conceive by an imaginary Line drawn through the Center, or middle of the
Earth to each Pole: Now the two extremities of this Line are called Poles, from
(...) a Greek Verb signifying to turn, for that the whole Frame of the Earth
moves, or turns round upon this Axle-tree. If you will fancy Poles to any of
the Circles, those of the Equator are the same with the Poles of the Earth, and
the four lesser Circles being parallel to the Equator, have also by consequence
the same Poles: The Horizon may have the same, because it is a Circle movable
every way; but the Meridian, and Zodiac must of necessity have different
Poles, as well from the rest of the Circles, as from one another. Here you
ought to take notice, that the Pole of the World which is nearest us, is termed
Artick Pole, or North Pole, the other South, or Antarctick Pole: The word
Arctick is derived from (...), in English a Bear, there being a Constellation
(or Company of Stars) near the North Pole, to which Astronomers give the
likeness of a Bear: Antarctick is compounded of (...) contra, and (...),
because this pole is diametrically opposite to the other.

The next thing worthy of consideration, is the division of the Globe by these
eight Circles; whereof four divide the Globe into equal parts, whence they are
called Great Circles, because they have as large a Circumference as can be made
upon the Globe: The other four divide the Globe into unequal parts, and
consequently making a narrower Compass, are termed Lesser Circles.

The Greater are called, Equator, Zodiac, Meridian, Horizon.
The Lesser are called, Tropic of Cancer, Tropic of Capricorn, Artick Circle,
Antartick Circle.


The Equator being one of the Great Circles, divides the Earth into two equal
parts, the one North, the other South: It is also called Equinoctial Line, ab
aequalitate Noctium, because when the Sun arrives to this Circle the Nights are
every where of equal length with the Days: But Mariners call it the Mid-line,
or simply the Line (...). Upon this Circle are marked the Degrees of Longitude,
which are counted from the Great Meridian quite round the Globe, to the number
of three hundred and sixty. You will find this Great Meridian in most Maps to
pass by the Canary Islands.

The Zodiac cuts the Equator obliquely, and is divided into twelve parts,
Signs, or Houses, through which the Sun passes within the compass of twelve
Months, or three hundred sixty five Days, and something more: And because the
Signs placed upon this Circle represent the figures of Animals, the word
Zodiac takes it is derivation from the Greek (...), which signifies a living
Creature.

Next we come to the Meridian, a word that is applied to eighteen Whole, or
rather thirty six Half Circles; but you may imagine as many as you please, and
then every step a man makes Eastward, or Westward, he alters the Meridian; but
not if he goes exactly North and South. These Meridians cross the Equator in a
Rect-Angle, whose extremities meet all together in the Center of each Frigid
Zone, and are thus termed from the word Meridies, in English Noon or Midday;
because to whatsoever Meridian the Sun arrives, it is Midday with those who
inhabit under it. Upon the Great Meridian you will find marked the Degrees of
Latitude, the first Degree beginning at the Equator, from whence they are to be
counted Northwards to the Arctick Pole, which is ninety Degrees; and in the
same manner ninety Degrees from the Equator to the Antarctick Pole.

The last Great Circle is called the Horizon, from the Greek (...) in Latin
finiens or terminans, for that each Hemisphere (or half Sphere) is limited, and
distinguished from one another by this Circle; vel quod aspectum nostrum
definiat, dividing the half Sphere of the Firmament which we see, from the
other half which we see not. The place where any one stands is the Center of
his Hemisphere and Horizon, and the Poles of his Horizon are the same with two
imaginary points in the Heavens called Zenith, and Nadir, borrowed from two
words of the Arabian Tongue, Semith, and Nathir; the former signifies the point
directly over his Head, the latter is a point in the other Hemisphere
diametrically opposite to it; but as soon as he stirs from that place, he
changes (tho insensibly) his Horizon, Zenith, and Nadir, and makes an
alteration in his Hemisphere.

As to the four Lesser Circles; two of them, the Tropic of Cancer, and the
Tropic of Capricorn, compass the Globe at twenty three Degrees and a half of
Latitude, which (as I said above) is at so many Degrees distance from the
Equator, but the former is in the Northern, and the latter in the Southern
Latitude: They have the name of Tropicks from (...) verto, because when the Sun
has attained the Tropic of Cancer he turns back again by degrees to that of
Capricorn, unto which when he is arrived, he returns again in like manner to
that of Cancer, which is his Annual Course; but this is by an Oblique Motion
from West to East, and must be more clearly demonstrated upon the Globe it
self: The names of Cancer and Capricorn are borrowed from two Signs of the
Zodiac, that are hard by the two Tropicks.

The other two are the Arctick, and the Antarctick Circles, which compass but
very little portions of the Globe, by reason that they are at sixty six Degrees
and a half of Latitude: They are also called Polar Circles, because they lie
nearer than any of the rest to the Poles, the Arctick Circle being distant from
the North Pole but twenty three Degrees and a half, the Antarctick as many
Degrees from the South Pole. The Etymologies of Arctick and Antarctick, has the
like reason with what I said above concerning the Poles.

These lesser Circles make a division of the Globe into five Parts or Zones;
one Torrid or Hot, two Frigid or Cold, and two Temperate; they are called Zones
from (...) a Girdle or Band. The Torrid Zone is all that space of Earth between
the two Tropicks: The two Frigid zones are enclosed, one within the Arctick,
and the other within the Antarctick Circle; and between the Torrid, and each
Frigid, lie the two Temperate Zones, which do thereby partake of a more equal
mixture of Heat and Cold.

As the Globe is made up of two parts, Earth, and Water, so each of these
Elements have their parts and subdivisions: To begin with the Earth, it may
most properly be divided first into Islands and Continents.

An Island is a Country, or portion of Land compassed about with Sea, or other
Water; as Great Britain, Sicily Candy, etc.

Continents are of two sorts: First a Continent properly so called, is a large
quantity of Land having little or no Sea near it; as Muscovy, Poland, etc.

The other sort of Continents, are those which are almost environed with Water,
to which the name of Peninsula, or Chersonesus, is more fitly applied; such is
Morea, the South part of Greece. Peninsula must be understood quasi pene and
Insula almost an Island; and Chersonesus is taken from (...) Terra, and (...)
Insula.

In Isthmus (from (...) to enter) is that space or Neck of Land, which joins a
Peninsula to the Continent, and is called sometimes a Straight, though
improperly.

A Promontory, quasi Mons in Mare prominens, now commonly styled Cape or Head,
is a Hill, or Point of Land, stretching out into the Sea.

All the Water upon the Globe goes under the denomination of Seas, Lakes, and
Rivers; but where the Sea is of a large extent, and not intermingled with Land,
as between America and Astrick, it is generally termed Ocean; and when a small
part of the Sea is almost environed with Land, they commonly give it the name
of Gulf, as the Red Sea, the Gulf of Venice, etc. and that narrow passage by
which a Gulf is joined to the Main Sea, is called a Straight: But a Gulf that
is of no great compass, as six, seven, or eight Mile, is more properly styled a
Bay or Creek; yet it is sometimes otherwise.

A Lake is a large place of a considerable depth, always full of Water, and
compassed about with Land, not having any intercourse with the Sea, unless by a
Subterranean passage, or by some River; as the Lake of Geneva between
Swizzerland and Savoy.

A River is a stream of Water which has it is beginning from a Spring, or Lake,
from whence it flows continually without intermission, and at last empties it
self into the Sea.

Now to make a comparison of some parts of the Earth with others of the Water,
you will find that the Description of a Continent resembles that of the Ocean;
and the Form of an Island, that of a Lake: A Peninsula in point of Figure is
not unlike a Gulf; and an Isthmus has the same relation to the former, as a
Straight has to the latter.

Least any one should make use of Maps that are erroneous or defective; this is
to give notice, that the most exact Maps are those of Sanson, and Du Val, the
two famous French Geographers; unto which (as being the best) I have adapted
this little Geography.

A Short and Easy INTRODUCTION INTO GEOGRAPHY.
CHAP. I.
Of the Earth in general.
GEOGRAPHY is the Description of the Terrestrial Globe, represented by the Maps
of Geography, which are the true plat-forms of it, and by the help thereof it
is made easy to us. The Terrestrial Globe being round, cannot be represented
in the Map of the Earth but by two Hemispheres; the one Eastern, and the other
Western. To the end that you may know the Situation of the places in the Maps,
you must observe that the North is always on the top, (or at least should be
so) the South at the bottom; the East on the right hand, the West on the left.

The Terrestrial Globe is divided into Land and Water: The Land is
distinguished in the Maps by the places filled up, the Sea by the empty, and
the Rivers by the small lines which go winding in and out through the Land
toward the Sea, where at last they all end; the Mountains and Hills are easily
known, being made like little Molehills or like small Waves, the Forests by
small Shrubs, the Rocks and the Banks of Sand by little black specks pricked in
the Water; and certain shadows or small strokes, which one may see in the Maps
all along between the Sea and Land, serve to mark the Sea Coasts, and to divide
the Land from the Water.

The Division of the Earth ought to precede that of the Water, because it is
the dwelling place of Man, and because the knowledge of it is more noble and
necessary.

All the Surface of the habitable Earth is divided into four great parts,
(which the Vulgar call Worlds, and the Geographers Continents) and into several
Islands which lie up and down in the Ocean, or within narrow Seas, which make
as it were a fifth part.

CHAP II.
Of the Continents.
THE first Continent, which we inhabit, is called the Eastern Continent, but
most commonly the Ancient World: It comprehends three parts, to wit, Europe,
situated in the North-west part of this Continent; then Asia, which is the
greatest and most Easterly part; and last of all Asrick which lies South-west
from the other two.

The second Continent, which lies westerly from us, is called America, or the
New World, and by the Merchants and Mariners, the West Indies, or the little
Indies, supposed to be called anciently Atlantis Insula, the Isle of Atlas: It
is divided into two parts, to wit North America or Mexicana, and South America
or Peruviana.

The third Continent, which is the most Southerly part, is known to us by the
name of Magellanica, or Terra Incognita,

The fourth is the most Northern Continent, called Terra Arctica, whereof we
have so little knowledge, that we doubt yet whether or no it is separated from
America.

In the old World; first Europe is subdivided into eight great parts; or to
make a more convenient division, one may add the British Isles, and so divide
it into nine parts; whereof three are toward the North and cold, three in the
middle of Europe which are temperate, and three toward the South more hot; to
which great parts add three small ones, interlaced between the others.

The three Northern parts are,

1. The British Isles, which comprehend the Kingdoms of England, Scotland and
Ireland; the chief Towns are London, Edenburg, and Dublin.

2. Scandinavia, which includes the Kingdoms of Swedeland, Denmark, (at first
inhabited by the Cimbri or Cimbrians) and Norway; chief Towns, Stockholm,
Copenhagen, and Drunthem.

3. Thirdly Muscovy or Russia, which with Poland in the time of the Romans was
called Sarmaria, chapter T. Mosco, Great Novogrod, and Archangel.

The three parts of Europe which partake more equally of North and South are.

4. France, chapter T. Paris, Lions, and Rouen.

5. The Empire of the West, or Germany, chapter T. Vienna, Prague and Colen,

6. Poland, chapter T. Cracow, Warsaw,and Dantzick.

The three Southern parts of Europe are,

7. Spain, chapter T. Madrid, Sevil, and Lisbon in Portugal.

8. Italy, chapter T. Rome, Venice, and Naples.

9. Turkey in Europe, or Greece, chapter T. Constantinople, (before Constantine the
Emperor called Bizantium,) Adrianople; and Buda in Hungary.

The three little parts of Europe interlaced between the great ones, and often
comprehended under them are,

10. The Low Countries, or the Seventeen Provinces, between France, Germany,
and he British Seas, chapter T. Amsterdam, Brussels, and Gaunt.

11. The Swizzerland Cantons and their Allies, between France, Italy* and
Germany, chapter T. Bern, Basil, and Soloturn.

12. The Provinces tributary to the Turk, chapter T. Hermanstat in Transylvania,
Jazy or Jaick^a in Moldavia, Targowisko in Walachia, (all three lying between
Turkey and Poland, and comprised within the bounds of the ancient Country of
Dacia) and Kaffa in Little Tartary once called Scythia Taurica, between Pontus
Euxinus or the Black Sea, and Muscovy.

The most remarkable Mountains of Europe* are, the Riphaean Mountains toward
the North of Muscovy, now called Stolp; the Carpathian Hills now Crapack,
between Hungary and Poland; the Alps, between Italy, France, and Germany; the
Apennine, parting Italy down along through the middle of the whole length of
it; the Pyrenies, which divide Spain from France; and Mount Gibel, anciently
Aetna, in the Isle of Sicily.

Asia is divided into twelve great parts, six of them Southern, and the other
six Northern.

The six Southern parts, beginning with those that are next to Europe are,

1. Turkey in Asia, chapter T. Aleppo, Bagdat, Mosul, Jerusalem, Damascus,
Scanderoonor Alexandretta, Erzerum, Bursa, and Smirna. In this part of Asia
were anciently the Countries of Chaldaea, Mesopotamia, Judaea, Phoenicia,
Syria, Cilicia, Pamphilia, Phrygia, with many others.

2. Arabia, chapter T. Medina, Mecca, Ziden, Zibit, Aden and El-Catif,

3. Persia, chapter T. Ispahan, Ormuz, Schiras, Caswin, Ardevil, and Derbent.

4. The Indian Continent or the Empire of the Mogol, chapter T. Agra, Delli,
Bengala, Cambaia, Surate, and Lahor.

5. The two Peninsula's of the Indies, one on this side the River Ganges, and
the other beyond, chapter T. Goa, Golconda, and Narsinga on this side the Ganges;
and Pegu, Sian, and Malacca beyond.

6. C hina, chapter T. Peking, Nanking, Quancheu, Queyang, Nanciang, and Macao.

The six Northern parts of Asia are,

7. Georgia, situated on the North of Turkey, which includes the ancient Country
of Colchos, chapter T. Kori or Goreden, Teslis, and Savatopoli.

8. Vsbeck, Ziagathai, or Mavaralnahara, on the North side of Persia, chapter T.
Samarcand, famous for the birth of Tamerlane the Great, Bockora, and Cascar.

9. Turquestan, or Thebet, on the East of Ziagathay, chapter T. Thebet, and Chotan.

10. Tartary of the great Cham, by some called Cathay, Northward from China,
chapter T. Muoncheu heretofore Cambalu, Campion otherwise Tanguth, and Camul or
Xamo.

11. Tartary Desert, toward the North Sea, and Muscovy, chapter T. Astracan upon
the Wolga near the Caspian Sea, Cazan, and Bulgar.

12. The true ancient Tartary called the North Tartary, above Cathay, and
Turquestain, chapter T. Chazan or Kaimach, Ciandu, and Tartar in the North.

These five last parts are commonly comprehended under the name of Great
Tartary anciently Scythia.

Taurus is the chief Mountain in Asia, by the Greeks called Ceraunius; it
passes through most of the Countries in Asia, but under diverse names: in the
Western part of Turkey it is most properly called Taurus, more Northerly toward
Georgia, it is named Ararat, again in the middle of Persia, Taurus; it takes the
name of Imaus in Tartary, and between Tartary and the Indies it is called
Caucasus, by which name the Mountains in Georgia are also called.

Africa which is the most Southerly Region of our Continent, is divided into
twelve parts, whereof these six first compose the Upper Africa toward Europe
in time past Libya, and the six others make up the Lower Africa called before
Aethipia, situated toward the South.

Let us begin with the Upper Africa and see its divisions which are.

1. Barbary, which comprehends most of the Ancient Mauritania, chapter T. Fez,
Marocco, Tangier, Algier, Tunis, and Tripoli.

2. Bildulgerid or Numidia, chapter T. Dara, Segelmessa, and Tesset.

3. Egypt, chapter T. Grand Cairo, Alexandria, Rosetta, Damiata, Suez or Calzem,and
Cossir.

4. Zaara or the Desert, chapter T. Zuenziga, Targa or Zaghara, and Zanhaga.

5. The Land of the Blacks, or Nigritia,chapter T. Tombote, Genehoa, Gualata, Cano,
Cassena, Cantozi, Mandinga, Gago, and Guber.

6. Guinny, chapter T. Benin, Arda, and St. George of the Mine, or Mina.

7. Nubia, chapter T. Nubia, Dancala, and Jalac.

8. Congo, chapter T. St. Salvador, St. Paolo or Angola, and Dongo.

9. Abissinia, chapter T. Amara, Depsan, Cangan, Boxa, Fremona, Caxumo, Arquico,
Doncala, and Suaquem.

10. Zanguebar, chapter T. Mozambick, Quiloa, Mombaza, Melinda, Brava, and Magadoxo.

11. Monomotopa, chapter T. Madragan commonly called Monomotopa, Zimbaoe or
Massapa, and Butua.

12. Cafreria, or the Coast of the Caffres, chapter T. Zofala.

Africa has these Mountains following, viz. Mount Atlas, now more commonly
called Claros, between Barbary and Bildulgerid; Lunae Mons, the Lunar Hills or
the Mountains of the Moon, so called by reason of their height, lying between
the Country of the Abissines, and Monomotopa: most Geographers are of the
opinion that the River Nilus springs from these Mountains, yet (new discoveries
being lately made) it is thought otherwise by some. Lastly the Mountains of
Sierra Liona in Guinny.

America is also divided into twelve parts, whereof four lie toward the North,
and eight toward the South, separated from one another by the Istmus of Panama.

The four parts toward the North, which compose North America are,

1. Canada or New France, chapter T. Quebeck, Montreal, and Tadousack.

2. New Mexico, ch T. Sta. Fe or St. Faith, and New Granada.

3. New England, including part of Florida, (the rest being comprehended under
New Spain) all Virginia, New Holland otherwise called New York, and New England
comprised in it self; chapter T. Boston, New-Town or Cambridg, James-Town, New
Plymouth, New York, and Charlestown.

4. Mexico or New Spain, chapter T. Mexico, Compostella, Guadalaiara, Valladolid,
Acapulco, St. Jago de Guatimala, Leon, Truxillo, and Merida.

The eight other parts make South America, viz.

5. Castilla del Oro, chapter T. Panama, Porto-Belo, Carthagena, Sta. Martha, Coro,
and Sta. Fe de Bogota.

6. Guyana, chapter T. Manoa or El Dorado, Ceperou or Fort Lewis, and Corou.

7. Peru, chapter T. Lima or Los Retes, Cusco, St. Francis, Arica, Potosi, and La
Plata.

8. Brasil, chapter T. St. Salvador, Porto-Seguro, Spiritu Santo, St. Sebastian,
St. Vincent, Olinda, Tamaraca, Potengi, and Maranhaon.

9. Paraguay comprehending La Plata,chapter T. The Assumption, Buenos Aires, and
Sta. Fe.

10. Tucuman, chapter T. St. Jago del Estero, St. Miguel, and Cordova.

11. Chili, chapter T. St. Jago, the Conception,and Baldivia.

12, Magellanica, the chief Town (if it may be called a Town) is St. Philip,
otherwise nick named Port-Famine.

As for the Mountains in this part of the Earth, the Andes in Peru, between
Tu^um^n and Chili, and in Magellanica, are the most famous of America, and the
only Mountains worth taking notice of in this small Treatise.

CHAP. III.
Of the Islands.
THE most famous Islands round about the World, are either about our Continent
or America. Those of our Continent are of Europe, Asia, or Africa.

The Islands of Europe are either in the Ocean, as Great Britain, Ireland, and
Island, anciently Thule; or

In the Mediterranean Sea, as Sicily, Candy, (which of old was called Creet)
and Sardinia; or

In the Baltic Sea, as Zeeland, Fuien or Funen, and Rugen.

The Isles of Asia are divided into these eight parts following, viz. 1. The
Japan Islands. 2. The Islands of China. 3. The Philippine Islands. 4. The
Molucco Islands. 5. The Islands of the Sound. 6. The Isle of Zeilan. 7. The
Maldive Islands. 8. The Isle of Cyprus.


The African Islands make six divisions or parts; viz.

1. The Island of Madagascar, or St. Lawrence. 2. The Isles of St. Helena, the
Ascension, the Isle of St. Thomas under the Equinoctial Line, with many of less
note up and down in the Ethiopian Sea. 3. The Isles of Cape Verd, or (as
heretofore) the Hesperian Isles. 4. The Canary (anciently Fortunate) Islands.
5. The Islands of Madera. 6. The Isle of Malta, with some lesser Islands
adjacent to it.
The Islands of America are also divided into six parts; viz. 1. The Isles
Azores, or Terceran Islands, which some make to belong to Africa. 2. The Isles
of Newfound Land. 3. The Isles of the Antilles, or the Antego Islands. 4. The
great Island of Calisurnia. 5. The Isles of New Guinny, or of the Pacifick
Ocean. 6. The Magellanick Islands, by the Straight of Magellan.


The Magellanick Continent, and Terra Arctica shall not be spoken of here,
being not yet fully discovered.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Seas, Gulfs, Straights, Lakes and Rivers.
THE Water which does incompass or separate the parts of the Terrestrial Globe
are divided into Seas, Gulfs, Straights, Lakes, and Rivers.

The great Sea which environs our Continent, is called the Ocean, which is
divided into four parts.

1. The Northern Ocean, called the Frozen, and in time past the Scythian Sea,
which comprehends the Sea of Tartary, of Muscovy, and of Scandinavia.

2. The Western or Atlantic Ocean; this contains the Seas of Great Britain,
France and Spain, with the Sea of the Canaries, and of Guinny.

3. The Southern Ocean or Ethiopian, comprehends the Seas of Congo or Angola,
of Casreria, and that of Zanguebar.

4. The Eastern, Oriental or Indian Ocean includes the Arabian Sea, the
Persian, the Indian, and the Sea of China.

The great Sea about America is divided into the North Sea, the South or
Pacifick Sea, and the Sea of Magellanica.

1. The North Sea is divided into three parts, according to the Countries
adjacent; viz. the Sea of Canada or New France, the Mexican Sea or the Sea of
New Spain, and the Sea of Brasil.

2. The Pacifick Sea comprehends in it is full extent, the Seas of Peru, of New
Mexico, and the Archipelago of St. Lazarus, toward China and the East Indies.

3. The Magellanick Sea waters all the coast of Terra Magellanica, within the
compass of which is included the Seas of Paraguay, Magellanica, and Chili.

But leaving these exact subdivisions of the Seas; this you must observe, that
the Seas always (or most commonly) borrow the names of the adjacent Countries;
so that he who understands the division of the Maritime States, and of the
Islands, knows for the most part the names of the Seas.

The three most famous Gulfs of our Continent, which for their greatness are
called Seas, are the Mediterranean Sea between Europe and Africa; the Baltic
Sea between Sweden, Germany and Poland; and the Red Sea between Asia and Africa.

The three Gulfs of America are, the Gulf of Mexico between Mexico and Florida;
Hudsons Gulf or Bay North-Westward from Canada; and the Gulf of La Plata in
Paraguay.

The three most famous Straights of the World, are the Straights of Gibraltar
(the Ne plus ultra of the Ancients) between Europe and Africa, this joins the
Mediterranean Sea to the Ocean; the Straights of Magellan between America and
Terra Magellanica; and the Straights of Anian between our Continent and the
Land of Jesso.

The three most considerable Lakes round about the Terrestrial Globe are, 1. In
Asia on the North side of Persia, the Caspian Lake or Sea, otherwise called the
Sea of Kilan, or of Sala. 2. The Lake Parima under the Equator, in Guyana. 3.
The Lake called the Fresh Water Sea in Canada.


The most famous Rivers in the World are, in Europe nine; the Thames in
England, Tornia in Scandinavia, Wolga in Muscovy, the Loire in France, the
Rhine in Germany, the Weyssell or Wistule in Poland, the River Tagus now Taio
in Spain, Po in Italy, and the Danow or Danube in Turkey in Europe.

In Asia twelve; Euphrates, and Tigris in Turkey in Asia; Indus or Sind, Ganges,
the River of Pegu, and Menan in India; Kiang, and Hoang or Caramoran in China;
Ghammas, Jihun or Balch, anciently Oxus, Ardock or Alsagsh, in time past
Jaxartes, and Obius in Great Tartary.

Six in Africa, viz. Nile in Abissinia, and in Egypt, Niger in Nigritia, Ghir
in Zaara,the Zair in Congo, Zambera, and Spiritu Santo, in Monomotopa and
Cafreria.

In America there are also six; the River of St. Laurence in Canada, Paria or
Orenoke between Castilla del Oro, and Guyana, the River of the Amazons,
otherwise Orelhana in Peru, that of St. Francis in Brasil, the River Parana in
Paraguay, and that of La Plata in the same Country, the largest River in the
World, the mouth of which is not unfitly styled a Gulf.

CHAP. V.
Of Europe in general.
ALL our design in this little Compendium of Geography is, to take particular
care to describe Europe, the knowledge whereof is most necessary for us.

Although Europe gives place to Asia, Africa, and America, for greatness and
extent, nevertheless it is infinite number of advantages render it, without
contradiction, the most considerable part of the inhabitable World. For if we
consider the situation of it, we shall find that (lying in the middle of the
Temperate Zone) the Countries of this part of the World are exceedingly more
fertile, and fuller of People than those of the other three. Moreover it is to
be observed, that through the natural situation of the Countries of Europe, the
Inhabitants have great trading one among another by the means of the Seas,
Straights, and Gulfs which belong to it, and by the convenience of a great
number of Rivers which run through all parts of it; so that by their Voyages,
Navigation, Trade, and their frequent Wars, they are become the most expert
People in the World, and so warlike, that they have in their hands the
Soverainty of the other parts of the Earth. Witness the Conquests of the
Grecians and Romans in old times, and the victorious Navigations in this Age,
by which the Spaniards, the English, the French, and the Hollanders have added
what was wanting to their own felicity, by the spoils of foreign Nations that
they have overcome. Besides, Europe receives a greater advantage by the
profession of the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST, whose light seems to have been
retracted from the other parts of the world, that it might shine brighter, and
more gloriously in Europe. Again, the Arts* and Sciences, the Policy, Strength,
and Magnificence of the Cities, the excellent structure of all the Buildings,
the courage and wise conduct of the Inhabitants in their Wars and Voyages,
whether by Sea or Land; in a word, the wonderful industry of the Europeans in
all sorts of rare works, makes them to be esteemed infinitely above all the
People in the other parts of the Earth.

We divided Europe in the beginning into nine parts, including the British
Islands: but afterward we added thereto three more, viz. the Low Countries
contiguous to France, on the North-East; the Republic of Swizzerland and their
Allies, on the East side: And the Provinces tributary to the Turk on the South
side of Poland; with Little Tartary nigh the Pontus Euxinus, or the Black Sea:

The Method of Geographers who place the North on the top of their Maps,
obliges us to begin with the three Northern parts, all three different
Countries; the first consisting of the British Isles; the second of the
Peninsula of Scandinavia; and the third of Muscovy, which is the greatest part
of the Continent in Europe. Next we will describe the three middle parts which
are, France, Germany, and Poland, all three alike and take up the rest of the
Continent; yet their situation shows, that France is somewhat more temperate
than Germany and Poland, which lie higher toward the North, where the Winters
are very long and sharp. We shall speak next of the three Southern parts, which
are Peninsula's divided from one another, but have a great traffic by Sea with
the other parts of the World: and lastly we will end this Treatise by the
Explication of the Low Countries, the Swizzerland Cantons, and the Provinces
tributary to the Turk, which being the least Countries in Europe, shall be
explained last of all, although they are situated among the rest.

There are three principal Languages in Europe, viz. Latin corrupt, spoken in
Italy, France, and Spain; Dutch, in Germany Scandinavia, and the British Isles;
and in Poland, Muscovy, and Turk^y in Europe, they make use of the S^lavonian
Tongue; but all under diverse Idioins. Again, the Latin Tongue is spoken
generally where the Roman Catholic Religion is professed; and where they
speak Dutch, they are for the most part Protestants; the Roman Catholic
Religion is professed in Poland, Muscovy allows all sorts of Religions, and the
Mohammedan Religion reigns in Turkey.

CHAP. VI.
Of the British Isles.
THE Kingdom of England, or the British Isles, make the first of the three
Northern parts of Europe, seated in the Western Ocean, nigh France, Germany,
and the Low Countries, and not very far from Scandinavia, and Spain.

The Inhabitants of the Isle of Great Britain (which gives its name to all the
lesser Islands) are, as some think, descended from the Trojans, who entered this
Island under the Conduct of Brute, and laid the first foundations of London,
calling it New Troy; afterward it was named Augusta Trinobantum, and lastly
London: but others say the Britains had their name from the Word Brith, which
signifies stained or painted, (or rather the name of the Paint) by reason of a
custom they took to paint their Skins all over, and of several Colors that
they might thereby the more terrify their Enemies; whence also the Romans
called the People of Scotland Picti, from their painted Skins. Great Britain
was called also once Albion, ab albis rupibus, and is divided into two parts,
both of them Kingdoms, viz. England, and Scotland, which together with the Isle
and Kingdom of Ireland, and an innumerable company of lesser Islands in the
British Seas, are now under the Protection, and Government of our most gracious
and redoubted Soverain, KING CHARLES the second.

There were several Tribes of People who inhabited anciently these Islands; the
most famous of them (for instance, in England) were the Cantii, the
Trinobantes, the Brigantes, and the Silures, etc. who were all governed by
their Princes, but afterward all subdued by the Romans, except the Northern
part of the Island.

The Saxons were the next that possessed themselves of the South part of
Britain, with whom came the Angli, Neighbors to the Saxons, out of the North
of Germany; whence it was called England, and the Inhabitants English.

These Saxons divided it into s^en Kingdoms; not including the Principality of
Wales, whither most part of the Britains, being driven by them out of England,
retired: but now these eight Provinces which compose England, and Wales, are
divided into fifty two Shires. Of these eight Provinces then (according as they
lie from London, the Metropolis of all England) two are in the North of
England, Northumberland, and Mercia; two in the South, Kent, and Sussex; two
lie toward the East, Essex, and the Province of the East Angles; and two
toward the West, Wessex, and Wales.

The two North parts are,

1. Northumberland, in which are the Shires called Yorkshire, Lancashire,
Westmorland, Cumberland, Durham, and Northumberland; the Chief Towns of this
Province are, York, Durham, Newcastle, Carlisle, Barwick, Lancaster, and Hull.

2. Mercia, wherein are these following Shires; Oxfordshire, Glocestershire,
Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, Huntingtonshire, Northamptonshire, Rutlandshire,
Leicestershire, Warwickshire, Worcestershire, Herefordshire, Monmouthshire,
Shropshire, Cheshire, Staffordshire, Darbyshire, Nottinghamshire, and
Lincolnshire;the Chief Towns are, Oxford, Chester, Gloucester, Lincoln,
Worcester, Hereford, Coventry, Peterborow, and Lichfield.

The two South Provinces are,

3. Kent, being but one single Shire or County, chapter T. Canterbury, Rochester,
and Dover.

4. Sussex, containing the Shires or Counties of Sussex, and Surrey, chapter T.
Chichester, Rye, Hastings, and Jews. The two Eastern Provinces are,

5. Essex, which comprehends under it Middlesex, Essex, and Hartfordshire, chapter
T. London the Metropolis of England, which (all things considered) may be said
to be the chief City in the World; then Colchester, Hariford, and St, Albans.

6. East Angles, comprehending Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridgshire, chapter T.
Norwich, Cambridg, Ipswich, Yarmouth, and Ely.

The two Western Provinces are,

7. Wessex, under which is comprehended Somersetshire, Hampshire, Dorcetshire,
Devonshire, Cornwall, Wiltshire, and Barkshire, chapter T. Bristow, Bath, Wells,
Winchester, Southampton, Excester, Plymouth, Salisbury, and Windsor.

8. Wales which includes these twelve Shires following; Pembrok shire,
Caermarthensh. Glamorgansh. Brecknock sh. Radnorsh. Cardigansh. Montgomerysh.
Merionethsh. Denbigsh. Flintsh. Caernarvonsh. and the Isle of Anglesey, ch, T.
Pembroke, St. David's, Cardiff, Landaff, Denbigh, S. Asaph, Montgomery, and
Caernarvon.

Scotland was formerly called Caledonia; afterward comprehended under the name
of Great Britain, as at present; but once it received the name of Little
Britain in comparison of England, which was then properly Great Britain. It is
the most Northern part of this Island, and contains thirty five Shires or
Counties, viz. fourteen beyond the River Tay, which make up the ancient Kingdom
of the Scots. whose King dwelt at Dunstasag; and twenty one on this side the
River Tay, where was the Kingdom of the Picts, the Kings Seat being at
Abernethy; but these two Towns are now ruined.

The chief Towns on this side the River Tay in South Scotland, are Edenburg,
Leith, Glascow. St. Andrews, Sterling, and Dunbriton.

North Scotland, or the habitation of the ancient Scots: the chief Towns are
Aberdeen, Perth, Dundee, and Dornock.

I shall not trouble the Readers Memory with the names of each particular
County of Scotland, nor those of Ireland, (which I am now going to speak of) as
not being of such moment.

The Kingdom and Isle of Ireland was anciently called Ierna, and sometimes
Iverna; from the latter Hibernia seems to be derived, by which name it was
known in the time of the Romans; and from Ierna (as it is generally believed)
comes Eryn, so called by the Natives at this day.

It is now divided into five Provinces, which were formerly Kingdoms viz.

1. Lemster, in which are nine Counties, chapter T. Dublin, Wexford, and Kilkenny.

2. Mead, in which are three County; chapter T. Molingar; this Province by reason
of its small extent is commonly comprehended under Lemster.

3. Vlster, which contains ten Counties* chapter T. Armagh, Drogdagh, and London
derry.

4. Connaught, which has six Counties chapter T. Galxay, Kilaloe, and Athlone.

5. Munster, under which is also comprehended six Counties, chapter T. Waterford*
Limerick, and Cork

The most considerable Islands high the Coasts of Great Britain, and Ireland*
which go under the name of British Isles, are divided into nine parts, whereof
three are in the Channel, viz. the Isles of Wight, Jersey, and Garnsey; which
two last are near the Coast of France.

Three lie Westward in the Irish Sea, viz. the Sorlings, or Silly Islands, the
Isle of Man, and the Western Isles nigh Scotland, called the Hebrides, or
Inchgalles.

The three last are toward the North, viz. the Orcades or Isles of Orkney, the
the Isles of Hetland or Shetland, and the Fair Islands or Isles of Fero, now
belonging, the King of Denmark.

The chief Rivers are, the Thames, Severn, and Trent, in England; Tay, in
Scotland; and Shannon, in Ireland.

CHAP. VII.
Of Scandinavia.
SCandinavia is the second of the three North parts of Europe, joining to
Germany, Poland, and Muscovy; it includes three Kingdoms under two States; viz.
the State of Denmark, and that of Swedeland.

The State of Denmark, contains two Kingdoms, viz. Denmark, and Norway

Denmark consists of three parts; to wit Jutland, which is a great Peninsula or
Chersonesus, annexed to Germany, and formerly called the Cimbrick Chersonesus:
the Isles of the Baltic Sea and the Islands and Countries in the North Sea.

Jutland (so called from the Jutae, heretofore the Inhabitants of this Country
is divided into South-Jutland and North-Jutland.

South Jutland comprehends two Dukedoms.

1. The Dukedom of Holsatia or Holsten; (this is counted part of Germany,
included within the Circuit or Circle of the lower Saxony, and depending on the
Empire; which we should not describe in this place, but that it belongs to the
King of Denmark:) The chief Towns are Rendsburg, Kiel, and Gluckstad.

2. The Dukedom of Sleswick, chapter T. Sleswick, with the Castle of Gottorp,
Tonningen, and Flendsburg.

North-Jutland includes four Lutheran Diocesses, which are. 1. The Diocese of
Rypen, chapter T. Rypen 2. That of Arhusen, chapter T. Arhusen. 3. The Diocese of
Wiburg, chapter T. Wiburg.


Fourthly and lastly that of Alburg, chapter T. Alburg, and Scagen toward the
North-Cape of Denmark, which is famous for it is frequent Shipwracks.

The most remarkable Islands of the Baltic Sea are,

First, the Isle of Zeeland, of old called Codanonia, chapter T. Copenhagen,
Roschild, and Helsenore, with the Castle of Cronemberg.

Secondly the Isle of Fuien or Funen, chapter T. Odensee, Middelfurt, and Niburg.

The three passages or Straights of the Baltic Sea (heretofore Sinus Codanus)
are, the Sound between Zeeland and Schonen, the Belt between Zeeland and Funen,
and Middelfurt Sound between Funen and Jutland.

The Islands and Countries in the Northern Sea, which depend upon the Kingdom
of Denmark are, 1. A great part of the Isle of Island, chapter T. Hola, a
Bishopric. 2. The Fair Islands, chapter T. Strom. 3. Greenland, chapter T. Bearford.


The Kingdom of Norway, which takes up the Western part of Scandinavia, is
divided into five Governments or Provinces, viz. 1. The Government of Bahus,
which belongs to the Swedes since the treaty at Roschild, chapter T. Bahus and
Marstrand. 2. That of Agger, ch T. Agger, Opslo, and Frederickstad. 3. That of
Bergen, chapter T. Berg or Bergen, the residence of the Viceroy. 4. The Government
of Drunthem, chapter T. Drunthem, heretofore Nidrosia, the Seat of the ancient
Kings of Norway. 5. And lastly that of Wardhus, chapter T. Wardhus, nigh the North
Kin or Cape.


The Kingdom of Swedeland or Sweden comprehends seven parts, which are,

1. The coast of Schonen, comprehending Halland, Schonen, and Bleking, all
which go under the name of South Gothland, chapter T. Lunden, Malmugen, Landskroon,
and Christianstad. 2. The North part of Gothland is divided into Ostro
Gothland, and Westro Gothland,chapter T. Calmar. Gottemburg or Gothburg,and
Linkopen. 3. Sweden, containing eight or nine little Provinces, chapter T.
Stockholm, Vpsal, and Nikopen. 4. Laponia otherwise Lapland is divided into
five Regions or Territories, viz. Vma, Pitha, Lula, Tornia, and Kimi or
Lapmark, with the Towns of the same name, whereof Tornia is of most importance.
5. The great Province of Finland, subdivided into several small Provinces, chapter
T. Aho, Wiburg, and Raseburg 6. Ingria, chapter T. Noteburg, and Juannogrod. 7.
Livonia, chapter T. Riga, Derpt, and Revel.
The Crown of Swedeland is also possessed of several Islands in the Baltic
Sea; and in Germany the Dukedoms of Pomeren, Bremen, and Ferden, the town of
Wismar, and the Isle of Rugen.

Tornia, and Kimi, in the North Provinces of Swedeland, are the most
considerable Rivers of Scandinavia.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Muscovy.
MVscovy or Russia, is the most Northern, and most rude and illiterate Country
of all the parts of Europe, but above six times bigger than all the British
Isles.

This Empire contains the three Kingdoms of Cazan, Bulgar, and Astracan, in
Tartary Desert, with the Cities of the same name; and above thirty Provinces,
with several distinct sorts of People who live by Horda's or Companies

The twelve principal Towns, are Mosco, Wolodimer, Great Novogrod, Archangel,
St. Nicholas, Plescow, Rhezan Oustioug, Worotin, Little Novogrod, Wologda, and
Bielizero.

The principal Rivers are, the Wolga, Dwina, and Tanais or Don.

This is enough of a Country where none go to travel, neither do the
Inhabitants (who are all Slaves) go out of it without an express leave from the
Czar, who does not very often grant their request in that.

CHAP. IX.
Of France.
THE Kingdom of France in time past was named Gaul, containing a larger extent
than at present, and was divided into Gallia Belgica, Gallia Celtica,
Aquitania, and Gallia Narbonensis. It is the first and most Westerly of the
three parts of Europe, which are situated between the North and South
Countries: It lies nigh England, being separated from us but by our Channel,
and the Pas de Calais, (as the French call it) a narrow passage not above
eighteen Mile over.

The modern division of France according to the best Authors, and Geographers,
is into twelve general Governments; to which we will add four new Governments,
the late conquests of the French King.

Four of these sixteen Governments are toward the North, and on this side the
Loire; four are in the middle of France, and on each side the Loire; four more
are Southern, and beyond this River; and the four last lie Eastward toward
Germany.

I will not go about to subdivide the Governments which contain but one
Province; only (that I may not overcharge the Readers memory) I will set down
the three principal Towns in them, and in the Governments where there are more
than one Province, we will take notice of the chief Town of each one.

The four Northern Governments are,

1 Picardy, situated upon the Channel of the British Seas, chapter T. Amiens,
Abbeville, and Calais.

2. Normandy, situated on the Channel, and divided into High and Low Normandy,
chapter T. Rouen, Caen, and Alenson.

3. The Isle of France, situated between the River Seyne, the Marne, and the
Oyse, which makes as it were an Isle of it, chapter T. Paris, St. Denis, and Melun.

4. Champaigne, situated on the East of the Isle of France, chapter T. Troys,
Rheims, and Chalons upon Marne.

The four Governments in the middle of France, upon the Loire are,

5. Bretaigne, situated toward the Ocean, and divided into Upper and Lower
Bretaigne; the chief Towns are Rennes, Nantes, and Breast.

6. The Government of Orleanois, subdivided into nine little Provinces, whereof
two lie on the North side of the Loire, viz. Maine, chapter Man's; and Perch, chapter
T. Nogent. Four upon the Loire, to wit; Anjou, chapter T. Angers; Touraine, chapter T.
Tours; Beauce, chapter T. Orleans; and Nivernois, chapter T. Nevers. And three
Provinces on the South side of the Loire: Poictou, chapter T. Poictiers; Angoumois,
chapter T. Angouleme; and Berry, chapter T. Bourges.

7. The Duchy of Burgundy, with Bress, chapter T. Dijon, Autun, Chalons, upon
Saone; and Bourg in Bress.

8. The Government of Lyonnois, subdivided into four little Provinces, viz:
Lyonnois, properly taken, chapter T. Lions; Bourbonnois, chapter T. Moulins; Auvergn,
chapter T. Clermont; La March, chapter T. Gueret. The four Southern Governments of
France are,

9. The Government of Guienn and Gascony situated on the Ocean, and on each
side the River Garonn, cannot be divided more exactly than into eight
Provinces, whereof three lie Northward from the Garonn, viz. Saintonge, chapter T.
Saints; Perigord, chapter T. Perigueux; and Limosin, chapter T. Limoges. Three about
the Garonn, and the River Lot which falls into it; to wit; Guienn properly
taken, chapter T. Bourdeaux; Quercy, chapter T. Cahors; and Rouergue, chapter T. Rhodes.
And two on the South side the River, viz. The great Province of Gascony, ch T.
Auch; and the little Province of Bearn, chapter T. Pau.

10. Languedock situated on the Mediterranean Sea, is divided into High and Low
Languedock, and Cevennes, chapter T. Toulouse, Narbonn, Mompellier; and Viviers in
Cevennes. One may include under the general Government of Languedock, the
County of Roussillon, chapter T. Perpignan.

11. Dauphiny, situated toward Italy chapter T. Grenoble, Vienn, and Valence; to
which one may add Pignerol which serves as a Gate for the French to enter into
Italy.

12. Provence, which lies upon the Mediterranean Sea, whereof the chief Towns
are, Aix, Marseilles, and Toulon.

The four new Eastern Governments of France lie toward Germany, watered with
the Scheld, the Lis, the Meuse, and the Rhine; and are,

13. The Catholic Low Countries belonging to France, or French Netherlands,chapter
T. Lisle, and Dunkirk in the County of Flanders; Arras in Artois; Valenciennes
in Haynault; Cambray in Cambresis;and Montmedy in Luxemburg.

14. Lorain, chapter T. Nancy, Metz. and Verdun.

15. Alsatia or Alsace, divided into Upper and Lower, chapter T. Strasburg,
Brisack, and Friburg; it is almost all in the hands of the French.

16. The County of Burgundy, vulgarly called the Franche or Free County, chapter T.
Bezanson, Dol, and Salins. One might add thereto the County of Monbelliard, chapter
T. Monbelliard belonging to a Prince of the house of Wirtenberg.

The four most famous Rivers in France are, the Loire, the Seyne, the Garonn,
and the Rhone.

CHAP. X.
Of Germany.
GErmany (under which name also, was included anciently the United Provinces,
Denmark, part of Poland, and as some say, Sweden, and Norway) makes one of the
nine parts of Eucope; and directly si^uated in the middle of the other eight.

It is now of less extent by much than it was formerly, but yet comprehends a
great number of different Soverainties which compose the Empire of the Went,
and which depend on the Emperor, who is the chief Head of all the Princes that
have shares in this great Country.

We will then divide Germany into Western Germany, about the Rhine toward
France and the Ocean; into Southern, about the Danube toward Italy and
Hungary; into Eastern Germany comprehending the State of Bohemia toward
Poland; and into Northern, about the River Elbe and Oder toward the Baltic
Sea.

Western Germany is subdivided into six great parts, whereof the most part
contain many little Provinces.

Three of these parts are upon the Rhine, and three on the East of the Rhine.

The three parts situated on the Rhine are,

1. The States of Cleves, Juliers, and the Bishopric of Liege, chapter T. of the
same name.

2. The three Electoral Archbishopricks of the Empire, viz. That of Colen, chapter
T. Colen, and Bonn; of Treves or Triers, chapter T. Treves, and Coblentz; and that
of Mentz, chapter T. Mentz, and Aschaffemburg.

3. The Electoral Palatinate of the Rhine, chapter T. Heidelburg, Worins, and Spire.

The three parts of Germany, situated on the East side of the Rhine are,

4. Westphalia, subdivided into many little States, chapter T. Munster, Osnaburg,
and Paderhorn.

5. Hessen, comprehending Weteravia or Weteraw, and the Abbey of Fuld, chapter T.
Cassel, Darmstad, and Fuld.

6. Franconia, chapter T. Francfort, Norimberg,and Wirtzburg.

Southern Germany about the Danube, is subdivided into nine parts besides
several small divisions.

Three of these parts or Provinces are toward the Head of the River Danube,
viz.

1. Suevia, or Schwahen, chapter T. Augsburg, Vlm, and Constance.

2. The Duchy of Wirtenberg, chapter T. Stutgart, Tubingen, and Wirtenberg.

3. Brisgow, chapter T. Feiburg, now belonging to the French Government of Alsace;
Rotweil, and Estingen.

The three parts following lie higher upon the Danube, and are,

4 The Palatinate of Bauaria, or the upper Palatinate on the North side of the
Danube, chapter T. Amberg, Newburg, and Aichstad.

5. The Electoral Duchy of Bauaria, with the Archbishopric of Saltzburg. chapter
T. Munchen, Ratisbon, and Saltzburg.

6. The County of Tirole, with the Archduchy of Inspruck and the Territories
adjacent, chapter T. Inspruck, Trent, and Brixen.

The three last parts of Southern Germany lie yet further up the Danube, and
are,

7. The Archduchy of Austria, chapter T. Vienna, Lintz, and Cremz.

8. The Hereditary Provinces which are Stiria, chapter T. Graiz; Carinthia, chapter T.
Clagenfurt; Carniola, chapter T. Lauback, with the only Imperial Haven of Triest;
The County of Cilly, chapter T. Cilly; and the Marquisate of Winds or Windisch
Mark, chapter T. Metling.

9. Imperial Hungary. chapter T. Presburg, Komora, and Raab or Javarin.

The Eastern or Bohemian Germany toward Poland comprehends four parts, whereof
the three last depend upon the Kingdom of Bohemia which is the first and
principal part of them all.

1. The Kingdom of Bohemia, chapter T. Prague, Kuttenberg, and Egra. 2. The
Marquisate of Moravia, chapter T. Olmutz, Brinn, and Newstad. 3. The Duchy of
Silesia ch T. Breslaw, Gros Glogaw, and Lignitz. 4. The Marquisate of Lusatia,
now under the jurisdiction of the Duke of Saxony, chapter T. Bautzen, Gorlitz and
Zittaw.
Northern Germany, about the Elbe and Oder toward the Baltic Sea, is divided
into the Upper and Lower Saxony.

Upper Saxony comprehends three parts, viz.

1. The Electorship of Saxony properly taken, with Misnia, and Turingia, chapter T.
Dresden in Misnia, Wittenberg in Saxony, and Ersurt, in Turingia. 2. The
Electoral Marquisate of Brandenburg, divided into the Old, the New, and the
Middle Marquisate, chapter T. Berlin, Francfort upon Oder, and Brandenburg. 3.
Pomerania or Pomeren, chapter T. Stetin, Stralzund, and Colberg.
Lower Saxony comprehends likewise three great parts, subdivided again into
several others, viz. 1. The Dukedoms of Lunenburg, and Brunswick, chapter T.
Wolfenbuttel, Zell, and Hannover. 2. The Stares of Bremen, Ferden, Minden, and
Oldenburg, chapter T. of the same name. 3. Mecklenburg, chapter T. Swerin, Wismar,and
Gustrow.


I shall not make mention here of the Duchy of Holsten, although it be part of
Germany, having spoken of it before in the description of Jutland. It suffices
to observe the two famous Imperial Hans-Towns, Hamburg and Lubeck, which live
under the form of Commonwealths.

The five chief Rivers of Germany are, the Rhine, the Danube, (called long
since Ister) the Elbe, the Oder, and the Weser.

CHAP. XI.
Of Poland.
THE Elective Kingdom of Poland is the most Easterly of the three middle parts
of Europe: It lies Eastward from Germany; on the North of Hungary,
Transylvania, and Moldavia; and South-westward from Muscovy.

It comprehends two States; that of true Poland with the Provinces annexed
thereto, and the great Duchy of Lithuania with its dependances, which is now
united to the Crown of Poland.

We will divide the true Poland into nine great Provinces, and Lithuania into
three, after having first considered that this State is watered by four great
Rivers. The Wistule, the Boristhenes or Nieper, the Niemen, and the Niester
which divides Poland from Moldavia.

The nine great Provinces of Poland are,

1. The Province of Poland, divided into the Lesser or Upper Poland, wherein
are these chief Towns, Cracow, Sandomir, and Lublin; and into the Greater or
Lower Poland, chapter T. Gnesna or Gniesen, Posnan or Posen, and Kalisz.

2. Prussia, part belonging to Poland, chapter T. Dantzick, Marienburg, and Culm;
and part to Brandenburg, chapter T. Koningsbeg, Elbing, and Memel.

3. The Duchy of Curland, the Prince whereof owes fealty to the Crown of
Poland, chapter T. Mittaw, and Goldingen.

4. Mazovia, chapter T. Warsaw, and Czersk.

5. Polachia or Podelassia, chapter T. Bielsko.

6. Little Russia or Black Russia, (to distinguish it from Muscovy, which is
sometimes called Great or White Russia) chapter T. Leopol otherwise Lewenburg,
Halicz, and Zamoski.

7. Podolia, where is Kaminieck, Braclawor Bratzlaw, and Bar.

8. Volhinia, whereof the chapter T. are Kiow, and Lutzko.

9. Vkrania, generally included within the limits of Volhinia, chapter T. Czirkassi.

Moreover Lithuania contains three parts, viz.

1. The great Duchy of Lithuania, chapter T. Wilna, Witepscki, and Novogrodeck.

2. Samogitia, chapter T. Rosinia.

3. The Palatinates or Dukedoms of Smolensko, and Novogiod-Sevierski, with the
Towns so called.

CHAP. XII.
Of Spain.
THis Country at first was called Iberia, from the River Iberus now Ebro; and
also Hesperia, from Hesperus the Evening Star always seen in the West, for it
lies the most Westward of all the Countries of Europe; afterward in the time
of the Romans it was more universally known by the name of Hispania, and by
them divided into three Provinces: Baetica, so named from the River Baetis now
Guadalquivir, running through the middle of it; Tarraconensis, or the Province
of Tarraco; and Lusitania, which is now the Kingdom of Portugal.

It is encompassed with the Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea, which make it a
Peninsula, and is contiguous to France on the North-East side, from which it is
divided by the Pyrenies. But now to the modern division of this Kingdom.

Spain is divided at present into fifteen Provinces, (most of them Kingdoms
heretofore, whereof the greatest part do still reta in the titles) to which one
may add three Isles that are in the Mediterranean Sea.

Of these fifteen Provinces three are Northerly, viz.

1. Navarr, whereof the chapter Towns are Pampelona, Estella, and Olita.

2. Biscay, chapter T. Bilbao, Fontarabia and St. Sebastian.

3. Asturia, chapter T. Oviedo, Santillana,and Aviles.

Three are Westerly, viz.

4. Gallicia, chapter T. St. Jago de compostella, Mondonnedo, and La Corunna.

5. The Kindom of Portugal, now free from the Soverainty of the Spaniards, chapter
T. Lisbon, which they say was built by Ulysses, Braga, and Coimbra.

6. Algarves, belonging to the Kingdom of Portugal, chapter T. Faro, and Tavila.

Three are Southerly, viz.

7. Andaluzia, chapter T. Sevil, Cadiz, and Cordova.

8. Granada, chapter T. Granada, Guadix,and Malaga.

9. Murcia, chapter T. Murcia, and New Carthage or Carthagena.

Three are Easterly, viz.

10. Valentia, chapter T. Valentia, Ali^ant,and Segorbe.

11. Catalonia, chapter T. Barcelona, Tarragon,and Tortosa.

12. Aragon, chapter T. Saragossa, Jacca, and Balbastro.

The three last Provinces are situated in the middle of Spain, viz.

13. Leon, chapter T. Leon, Salamanca, and Toro.

14. Old Castile, ch T. Valladolid, Burgos, Segovia, and the ancient Numantia,
famous for holding out a Siege of fifteen years against the Romans, but now
ruined.

15. New Castile, chapter T. Madrid, Toledo, and Alcala de Henares, not forgetting
the most famous Monastry of the Escurial, not far from Madrid.

The three neighboring Isles depending upon this Country are, Majorca,
Minorca, and Ivica, with the chief Towns of the same name, except Minorca,
which has the Fortress of Citadelli.

The five greatest Rivers of Spain are, Taio or Tagus, Ebro, Duero, Guadiana,
and Guadalquivir.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Italy.
ITaly is situated in the Mediterranean Sea, which makes it a kind of
Peninsula, under the shape of a Leg. It is separated from France and Germany by
the Alps, and divided from one end to the other by the Apennine Hills.

Italy, as well as Spain, has been named Hesperia by the Greeks, from whom it
lies Westward; it has also sometimes gone under the name of Ausonia, but most
generally known, as well anciently as at present, by that of Italia

It was heretofore divided into fourteen Countries, which were inhabited by so
many distinct sorts of People: Toward the North lie four great parts; Gallia
Transpadana, Venetia, Liguria, and Gallia Cispadana; these four Countries are
now called Lombardy, from the Longobardy a People of Germany, who came and
dwelt here, Toward the middle of Italy are five; Hetruria, now called Tuscany,
Vmbria, Picenum, Samnium, and Latium; these four last are now under the
jurisdiction of the Pope. And the South part of Italy includes five Countries
more, viz. Campania, Apulia, Messapia, Lucania, and Brutium; which are all five
now comprehended under the Kingdom of Naples.

Every one of these Countries were subdivided into many small Regions or
Territories, whose Inhabitants lived under several sorts of Governments, till
they were overcome by the Romans; but these I shall omit as not being necessary
to insert here: Now let us see how the modern division of Italy differs from
that of the ancient times.

We will now divide it with the adjacent Isles, first into four great parts.
The Upper Italy or Lombardy, the Middle Italy, the Lower Italy or Kingdom of
Naples, and the Islands.

Lombardy is divided into nine Provinces or States, whereof the five first make
High Lombardy toward France, and the four other Low Lombardy toward the mouth
of the River Po.

The five parts of High Lombardy are,

1. Savoy, chapter T. Chambery, Montmelian, and Monstiers; to which we may add the
Town and Republic of Geneva. Savoy is generally reckoned without the bounds of
Italy, and therefore is mentioned here but because it belongs to Piedmont

2. Piedmont, chapter T. Turin, Vercelli, and Nizza.

3. Milanese or the Duchy of Milan, chapter T. Milan, Pavia, and Cremona.

4. Monferrat, chapter T. Casal, and Trino. The former was long since sold to the
French King by the Duke of Mantua.

5 The Coast of Genoa, chapter T. Genoa, Savona, and Albenga.

The four Provinces which compose the Lower Lombardy are,

6. The Duchy of Parma, chapter T. Parma, and Piacenza.

7. The Duchy of Modena, chapter T. Modena, and Reggio.

8. The Duchy of Mantua, chapter T. Mantua, Mirandola, and Guastella, which are all
Soverainties.

9. The Dominion or Republic of Venice, chapter T. Venice, Padua, and Palma nova.

Middle Italy comprehends the State of the Church or Dominion of the Pope, and
the Grand Duchy of Tuscany, with the Republic of Lucca, and other little
Soverainties enclosed in these two States.

The State of the Church comprehends twelve little Provinces, whereof five are
upon the Gulf of Venice, and the seven others toward the Sea of Tuscany.

Those upon the Gulf of Venice are,

1. The Duchy of Ferrara with the Valleys of Comachio, chapter T. Ferrara, and
Comachio.

2. Bolognese, chapter T. Bologna.

3. Romagna, chapter T. Ravenna.

4. The Duchy of Vrbino, chapter T. Vrbino.

5. The Marquisate of Ancona, chapter T. Ancona, and Loreto.

The seven following Provinces lie on the South of the Apennine Hills toward
the Sea of the Tuscany, and are,

6. The Territories of Perugia, chapter T. Perugia.

7. Of Orvieto, chapter T. Orvieto.

8. Of Vmbria, otherwise the Duchy of Spoleto, chapter T. Spoleto.

9. Terra Sabina, chapter T. Magliano.

10. The Patrimony of St. Peter, chapter T. Viterbo and Civita Vecchia,

11. Campania de Roma, chapter T. Rome, Ostia, and Frescati,

12. The Duchy of Castro, chapter T. Castro.

The Grand Duchy of Tuscany or Florence, is subdivided into three parts; the
Territories of Florence, the Territories of Siena, and those of Pisa, chapter T.
Florence, Siena, Pisa, and Legorn: Piombino, and Orbitello belong to the King
of Spain, with their Jurisdictions which are upon the coast of Tuscany.

The Republic of Lucca with it is dependances, chapter T. Lucca.

The Lower Italy or Kingdom of Naples is divided into twelve Provinces, whereof
six are upon the Adriatic Sea or Gulf of Venice, and the six others are upon
the Sea of Tuscany.

The six parts which are upon the Gulf of Venice, are

1. The Further Abruzzo, chapter T. Lanciano.

2. The Nigher Abruzzo, chapter T. Aquila.

3. The County of Molissa, chapter T. Molissa.

4. Capitanata or Puglia, chapter T. Manfredonia.

5. The Territories of Bari, chapter T. Bari.

6. The Territories of Otranto; chapter T. Otranto.

The six Provinces situated on the Tyrrhenian Sea or of Tuscany, are,

7. Terra di Lavoro, chapter T. Naples at first called Parthenope, and Capua.

8. The Nigher Principality, chapter T. Salerno, and Amalfi.

9. The Further Principality, chapter T. Benevento.

10. Basilicata, chapter T. Cirenza.

11. The Nigher Calabria, chapter T. Cosenza.

12. The Further Calabria, chapter T. Reggio

The Islands of Italy make the fourth part, and are divided into three
greatIslands which are,

1. The Isle of Sicily, separated into three Valleys or Provinces, viz. Val di
Demona, chapter T. Messina and Catania not far from Mount Gibel or Aetna that
vomits out flames. Val di Noto, chapter T. Saragusa the ancient Syracuse, and Noto.
Val di Mazara, chapter T. Palermo, and Montreal.

2. The Isle of Sardinia, chapter T. Cagliari, Sassari, and Algeri.

3. The Isle of Corsica, chapter T. Bastia, Adiazzo, and Bonifacio.

The four most famous River of Italy are, the Pa, the Adige, the Tiber, and the
Arno.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Turkey in Europe.
TVrky in Europe is situated in the Mediterranean Sea near Italy, Poland, and
Asia, and is contiguous to Germany.

We will divide it into High Turkey about the Danube, which includes the ancient
Countries of Pannonia, Illyricum, and Moesia; and into Low Turkey toward the
Archipelago or White Sea, wherein are the Countries called in time past Thrace
and Greece, which last has hitherto retained its old name.

High Turkey contains eight parts, viz.

1. Part of Hungary, anciently called Pannonia, chapter T. Buda or Offen, Gran, and
Kanisia.

2. Part of Slavonia, chapter T. Posega, and Gradiskia.

3. Part of Croatia, with Morlakia, chapter T. Wihitz. The rest of Hungary.
Slavonia, and Croatia, which is not within the Ottoman Jurisdiction, belongs to
the Archduke of Austria, who is now Emperor of Germany.

4. Dalmatia, partly belonging to the Turks, and partly to the Venetians; the
Ottoman Towns are, Scardona, and Dulcigno; the Venetian are, Zara, Sebenico,
and Spalato, with the Town and Republic of Ragusa, tributary both to the Turks
and Venetians.

5. Bosnia or Bossina, chapter T. Jaytza, and Bagnialuck, You must observe that
Slavonia, Croatia, Dalmatia, and Bosnia, made heretofore one great Country
called Illyricum.

6. Servia, comprehending the Western part of the ancient Country of Moesia,
chapter T. Belgrade, and Nisa.

7. Bulgaria, which was the rest of Moesia, chapter T. Sophia, and Nigepoli.

8. Besserabia, with the Territories of Otzacow toward Poland, chapter T,
Bialogrod, and Otzacow.

The Lower Turkey is divided into seven Provinces, viz.

1. Romania, anciently Thrace, chapter T. Constantinople, Adrianople, and Gallipoli.

2. Macedon, chapter T. Salonichi, and Contessa.

3. Albania, which was once part of Macedon, chapter T. Scutari, Durazzo, and
Valona.

4. Janna, anciently Thessaly, chapter T. Armiro, and Larissa.

5. Canina, anciently called Epirus and sometimes Chaonia, chapter T. Prevezza,
Larta, and Bastia.

6. Livadia, in time past Achaia, chapter T. Lepanto, Setines, heretofore called
Athens, Stives heretofore Thebes, and Negropont in an Island of the same name,
which is counted part of Livadia, although it be separated from it by the
Euripus or Straights of Negropont.

7. Morea, called in time past Peloponnesus, chapter T. Patras, Corinth, and
Misithra, formerly Lacedaemon: These fix last Provinces composed the ancient
and famous Country of Greece.

The Islands which are about Turkey in Europe, are a sufficient number to make a
third part; we will then divide them into Turkish, and Venetian Islands.

The chief of the Turkish Islands are, Candy, anciently Creet, chapter T. Candy,
Canea, and Retimo; Negropont, anciently Euboea, chapter T. Negropont; and
Stalimene, heretofore Lemnos, chapter T. of the same name.

The Venetian Islands (which are considerable) are, Corsu, Cefalonia, Zant, and
Cerigo, heretofore Cythera.

The most famous Rivers of Turkey in Europe are, the Danow or Danube, the Draw,
the Saw, and the Tyssa or Teissa.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Low Countries.
AFter having briefly spoken of the nine great parts of Europe, we thought it
convenient to avoid confusion, and to facilitate the Readers memory by the
number of twelve, into the which we have divided Asia, Africa, and America, to
add three lesser divisions of Europe, separated and distant from one another,
viz.

The Low Countries; the Republic of Swizzerland; and the Provinces tributary
to the Great Turk. We shall begin first with the Low Countries or Seventeen
Provinces, vulgarly known by the name of Flanders, and Holland, which are the
two richest and most considerable Provinces of them.

The Low Countries were formerly divided into two parts; one on the South of
the Rhine, comprehended under that part of Gaul called Gallia Belgica: now
most of it is the Spanish Netherlands. The other on the North side of the Rhine
was comprised within the bounds of ancient Germany: at present it is the United
Netherlands.

The modern division is also into two parts, though with some difference from
the ancient, viz.

The Spanish Netherlands, or Flanders;and the United Netherlands, Holland, or
United Provinces.

The Spanish Netherlands contain these following Provinces, viz.

1. Two thirds of Brabant, chapter T. Brussels, and Lovain.

2. Luxemburg, chapter T. Luxemburg, and Thionville. Part of this Duchy of
Luxemburg belongs at present to the French, as also the County of Artois: part
of the County of Flanders, etc. but the French having so latelyw on these
Countries, (which by the hazards of a new War may be as soonbrought under the
Jurisdiction of some other Potentate) I shall forbear to make any more
divisions of the Spanish Low Countries concerning the French King's conquests
there, than what I have mentioned in the Chapter of France; but, as near as I
can, shall stick to the division generally agreed upon by all Geographers,
before the beginning of the last French Wars.

3. Limburg, chapter T. Limburg, and Maestricht.

4. About a third part of Gelderland, ch T. Gelders, and Ruremond.

5. Almost all Flanders, chapter T. Gaunt, Lisle, Dunkirk, and Ostend.

6. Artois, chapter T. Arras, and St. Omars.

7. Hainault, chapter T. Mons, and Valenciennes.

8. Namur, chapter T. Namur, and Charlemont.

9. The Marquisate of the Holy Empire, or the Seigniory of Antwerp, chapter T.
Antwerp.

10. The Seigniory of Malines, chapter T. Malines, or Mechlyn.

You must take notice before we proceed any further; that these two small
Provinces last mentioned, are enclosed within the Duchy of Brabant: and that
besides the Seventeen Provinces, there is the Town of Cambray between Hainault,
Artois, and Picardy, which together with it is adjacent Territory, makes up a
peculiar Province called by the French (who are now Masters of it) Cambresis:
yet this small Province is sometimes comprised under that of Hainault.

The United Provinces or, the States of Holland, contain these following
Provinces, viz.

1. Holland, chapter T. Amsterdam, the Hague, Dort, and Leyden.

2. Zeland chapter T. Middleburg, and Flushing.

3. Zutphen, chapter T. Zutphen.

4. Vtrecht, chapter T. Vtrecht.

5. Overissel, chapter T. Deventer, and Swol.

6. West Friseland, chapter T. Lewarden, and Franeker.

7. The Seigniory of Groningen, with the Town of the same name.

Besides these seven Provinces, there is, and has been a great while in the
Hollanders possession, above two thirds of Gelderland, the chief Towns whereof
are, Nimmegen, and Arnhem. About a third part of Brabant, chapter T. Breda, and
Boldus: and some Towns in the North of the Province of Flanders; the most
considerable of them is Sluys, North. Westward from Gaunt.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Republic of Swizzerland.
THE Republic of Swizzerland is composed of thirteen Canrons, which are each
one by themselves peculiar Democracies, but under one common Alliance with
several little Countries, States, or Towns, which go under the name of their
Allies.

The thirteen Swizzerland Cantons are disposed in this order.

1. The Canton of Zurick, chapter T. Zurick. 2. The Canton of Bern, ch T. Bern, and
Lausann. 3. Of Basil chapter T. Basil. 4. Of Lucern, chapter T. Lucern. 5. Of Soloturn,
chapter T. Soloturn. 6. Of Friburg, chapter T. Friburg: 7. Of Schashausen, chapter T.
Schashauser. 8. The Canton of Switz, which gave its name to the whole Country
chapter T. Switz. 9. That of Zug; chapter T. Zug. 10. That of Appenzel, chapter T.
Appeuzel. 11. Of Glaritz, chapter T. Glaritz. 12. Of Vnderwalden, chapter T. Siantz.
13. Of Vri, chapter T. Altors.
The Allies of Swizzerland worth our observation are, 1. The Grisons, chapter T.
Coir. 2. Valtoline, chapter T. Sundrio. 3. Valais, chapter T. Sion. 4. The Bishopric
of Basil, which has no very considerable Town in it, except Porentru.


Besides these, there are many other small Territories and Towns allied to, and
confederated with the Swizzers; which I shall forbear to name, as being too
tedious to insert them all.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Provinces tributary to the Turk.
BY the name of Provinces tributary to the Turk, we mean those which have each
one in particular a Soverain Prince, but tributary and depending on the Turk,
who protects them, and pretends to a right of deposing them when they do not
embrace his interests, or when they refuse to arm in his defense.

These Provinces are four in number viz. 1. Transylvania, chapter T. Hermanstad,
Clausenburg, and Weyssenburg. 2. Walachia, chapter T. Targowisko, Dombrowitza,and
Braskow. 3. Moldavia, chapter T. Jazy, Soczow, and Targorod. 4. Little Tartary, chapter
T. Kaffa, Crim, and Azof or Azac upon the Don.


A Short ALPHABETICAL TABLE
Of the ancient names of Nations, Countries, Cities, Mountains, Seas, and
Rivers which are mentioned in this Book; compared with the Newer Divisions, and
Names, by which they are generally known at this day.
A
A Chaia, part of Greece, now called Livadia. Adriatic Sea, the Gulf of
Venice. Aethiopia, the South part of Africa, now divided into several
Countries. Ethiopian Sea, now more commonly called the Southern Ocean. Aetna,
a Mountain heretofore so called in Sicily, but at present Gibel. Albion, the
ancient name of England. An^li, a People in the North of Germany. Ap^lia, an
ancient Country in the Kingdom of Naples. Aquitania, the South-west part of
France. Ararat, a Hill in Asia, still known by this name: See the following
Table. Athens, an ancient Town in Greece now called Serines. Atlantic Sea, now
generally known by the name of Western Ocean. Atlantis Insula, the ancient name
of America. Atlas, a Mountain in Africa, at present called Claros. Augusta
Trinobunrum, at first called New Troy, (as is thought) and now London. Ausonia,
Italy heretofore so called.
B
BAetica, an ancient Country in the South part of Spain. Boetis, a River called
at present Guadalquivir. Belgia, the Low Countries in Europe. Boris^henes, a
River now more commonly called Nieper. Brigantes, a People in the North of
England. Britains, the ancient Inhabitants of England. Brutium, an ancient
Country in the Kingdom of Naples. Byzantium, the ancient name of
Constantinople.
C
CAledonia, the North part of Great Britain, now Scotland. Campania, a Country
in the Kingdom of Naples. Cantij, a People in that part of Britain called at
present Kent. Carpathian Hills, now known by the name of Crapack. Caspian Sea,
a great Lake in Asia, which now goes under the names of Kilan or Sala.
Caucasus, the name of some Hills in Asia: See the following Table. Ceraunius or
Taurus, Mountains in Asia: See Taurus in the other Table. Chaldea, the name of
an ancient Country within the bounds of Turkey in Asia. Chaonia, or Epirus, now
called Canina, a Country in Greece. Cilicia, an ancient Country, now part of
Turkey in Asia. Cimbri, a People that inhabited heretofore Denmark. Cimbrick
Chersonesus, Jutland. Codanonia, at present the Isle of Zeland. Colchos, a
little Country anciently so called, in Georgia near the Pontus Euxinus.
Corinth: See the following Table. Creet. now Candy, an Island in the
Mediterranean Sea, Cythera, the ancient name for the Isle of Cerigo.
D
DAcia, subdivided into Transylvania, Walachia, and Moldavia. Dama'cus, a Town
in Turkey in Asia. Danube or Ister, a River in Europe now more generally known
by the name of Danow.
E
EPirus or Chaonia, now called Canina, a Country in Greece. Euboea, the Isle of
Negropont near Greece. Euphrates, a River in Asia: See the other Table.
Euripus, the Straights of Negropont.
F
FOrtunate Islands, the Canary Islands toward Africa.
G
GAllia Belgica, the North part of of France. Gallia Celtica, the Middle, and
North-West part of France. Gallia Cispadana, part of Lombardy. Gallia
Narbonensis, toward the South-East side of France. Gallia Transpadana, part of
Lombardy. Ganges, a River in Asia: See the following Table* Gaul, the Kingdom
of France. Greece: See the following Table.
H
HEsperia, Italy called so heretofore; also Spain. Hesperian Isles, the Islands
of Cape Verd. Hetruria, a Country in Italy, now Tuscany. Hibernia, otherwise
Iverna or Ierna. at this day it is called Ireland. Hispania, the Kingdom of
Spain.
I
IAxartes, the River Ardock or Alsagsh. Iberia, and not seldom Hesperia, both
ancient names of Spain. Iberus, the River Ebro, Ierna or Iverna, Eryn or
Ireland. Jerusalem, a Town in Judaea, so called to this day by us, but
otherwise by the Turks who are Masters of it. Illyricum, a Country toward the
Adriatic Sea; now part of Turkey in Europe. Imaus: See the following Table.
Indus, a River known at present by the name of Sind. Ister or Danube, now
commonly called Danow. Italia, at present Italy. Judoea, part of Turkey in Asia.
Iverna or Ierna, now called Eryn or Ireland. Ju'ae, a People formerly
inhabiting Jutland.
L
LAced ^emon, a Town now called Misithra. Latium, an ancient Country in the
Dominion of the Pope. Lemnos, an Island near Thrace now called Stalimene.
Libya, the North part of Africa. Liguria, the South part of Lombardy.
Longobardi, a People of Germany, in, or near the Marquisate of Brandenburg.
Lucania, an ancient Country now comprised in the Kingdom of Naples. Lusitania,
Portugal with part of Castile.
M
MAcedon: See the following Table. Mauritania, part of Barbary. Mesopotamia, a
Country in Turkey in Asia. Messapia, a Country in the Kingdom of Naples. Moesia,
an old country, at present divided into Servia and Bulgaria.
N
NEw Troy, otherwise Augusta Trinobantum; but now London. Nidrosia, a Town
called Drunthem. Niger: See the following Table. Nilus, a River in Egypt.
Numantia: See the other Table. Numidia, a Country called now Bildulgerid.
O
OXus, a River now called Balch or Jihun.
P
PAmphilia, a Country in Turkey in Asia. Pannonia, the ancient name of Hungary.
Parthenope, the City of Naples. Peloponnesus, at present Morea. Phoenicia, a
little Country in Turkey in Asia. Phrygia, a Country in Turkey in Asia. Picenum,
a Country now comprised in the Dominion of the Pope. Picts, a People inhabiting
the South part of Scotland. Pontus Euxinus, the Black Sea.
R
RIphaeah Mountains, in Muscovy; but now called Stolp.
S
SAmnium, an ancient Country in the Dominion of the Pope. Sarmatia, that part
of Europe which comprehends Muscovy and Poland. Saxons, an ancient People in
the North of Germany. Scandinavia, contains the present Kingdoms of Swedeland,
Denmakr, and Norway. Scythia, Great Tartary. Scythia Taurica, Little Tartary.
Scythian Sea, all the Northern Ocean. Silures; a People toward Wales, about
Monmouth and Herefordshire. Sinus Codanus, the Baltic Sea. Syracuse, a Town
now called Saragusa. Syria, a Country in Turkey in Asia.
T
TAgus, a River now called Taio. Tanais: See the other Table. Tarraco, a Town
at present called Tarragon. Tarraconensis, the Middle, Northern, and Eastern
parts of Spain. Taurus or Ceraunius, Hills in Asia: See the following Table.
Thebes, an ancient Town in Greece, at present called Stives. Thessaly, that
part of Greece which is now called Janna. Thrace, it now goes under the name of
Romania. Thule, the Isle of Island. Tigris: See the following Table.
Trinobantes, a People inhabiting Middle-sex, Essex, and Hartfordshire; whose
chief Town was London, called at that time Augusta Trinobantum.
V
VEnetia, an ancient Country in Lombardy. Vmbria, a little Country in the
Dominion of the Pope, which included the present Umbria or Duchy of Spoleto.
A TABLE Of the Modern Names of all the Countries, Provinces, Islands, Cities,
Towns, Hills, Seas, Lakes, and Rivers contained in this Book, reduced to an
Alphabetical Order, and directing where they may be found in the Maps. Also
showing how the most noted of them were called anciently.
A
ABbeville, a Town in Picardy. Aberdeen, a Town in North Scotland. Abernethy,
an old Town in South Scotland. Abissinia, a Country in Africa, part of the
ancient Aethiopia. Abo, a Town in Finland. Abbruzzo the Further, a Province in
the Kingdom of Naples. Abruzzo the Nigher, a Province in the Kingdom of Naples.
Acapulco, a Town in New Spain. Aden, a Town in Arabia. Adiazzo, a Town in
Corsica. Adige, a River in Italy. Adrianople, a Town in Romania. Adriatic Sea
or Gulf of Venice, between Italy and Dalmatia. Ethiopian Sea or Southern
Ocean, toward the South-West side of Africa. Aetna, a Mountain in Val di
Demona. Africa, one of the four parts of the World. Agger, a Town in the
Government of Agger, Agger Government, in Norway. Agra, a Town in the Indian
Continent. Aichstad, a Town in the Palatinate of Bavaria. Aix, a Town in
Provence. Albania, a Province in Greece, heretofore comprised under that of
Macedon. Albenga, a Town in the Republic of Genoa. Alburg, a Town in the
Diocese of Alburg. Alburg Diocese, in North-Jutland. Alcala de Henares, a Town
in New-Castile. Alenson, a Town in Normandy. Aleppo, a Town in Turkey in Asia.
Alexandretta or Scanderoon, a Town in Turkey in Asia. Alexandria, a Town in
Bgypt. Algarves, a Province in Spain, belonging to Portugal. Algeri, a Town in
Sardinia. Algier, a Town in Earbary. Alicant, a Town in the Province of
Valentia Alps, Mountains dividing Italy from France, and Germany. Alsagsh or
Ardock, anciently Jaxartes, a River in Great Tartary. Alsatia or Alsace, a
Province in France. Altorf, a Town in the Canton of Uri. Amalfi, a Town in the
Nigher Principality. Amara, a Town in Abissinia. Amazon River or Orelhana, in
Peru* Amberg, a Town in the Palatinate of Bavaria. America or West Indies, one
of the four parts of the World, called anciently Atlantis Insula. Amiens, a
Town in Picardy. Amsterdam, a Town in the County of Holland. Ancient Tartary or
North Tartary, part of Great Tartary. Ancona, a Town in the Marquisate of
Ancona. Ancona Marquisate, in the Dominion of the Pope. Andaluzia, a Province
in Spain. Andes, Mountains between Chili, and Magellanica. Angers, a Town in
Anjou. Anglesey, an Island, and County in Wales. Angola or St. Paolo, a Town in
Congo. Angouleme, a Town in Angoumois. Angoumois, a Province in the Government
of Orleanois. Anjou, a Province in the Government of Orleanois. Antego Islands
or Antilles, in the North Sea toward New Spain. Antwerp, a Town in the
Marquisate of the Holy Empire. Antwerp Seigniory, or Marquisate of the Holy
Empire, one of the Seventeen Provinces; in Flanders. Apenine, Mountains going
through the middle of Italy, from North-West to South-East. Appenzel, a Town in
the Canton of Appenzel. Appenzel Canton, a Province in Swizzerland. Aquila, a
Town in the Nigher Abruzzo. Arabia, a Country in Asia. Aragon, a Province in
Spain. Archangel, a Town in Muscovy. Archipelago or White Sea, on the East side
of Greece. Archipelago of St. Lazarus, a Sea between the Japan and Phillippine
Islands. Arda, a Town in Guinny. Ardevil, a Town in Persia. Ardock or Alsagsh,
anciently Jaxartes, a River in Great Tartary. Arhusen, a Town in the Diocese of
Athusen. Athusen Diocese, in North-Jutland. Arica, a Town in Peru. Armagh, a
Town in Ulster. Armiro, a Town in Janna. Arnhem, a Town in Gelderland. Arno, a
River in Italy. Arquico, a Town in Abissinia. Arras, a Town in Artois. Artois,
one of the Seventeen Provinces; in the French Netherlands. Ascension, a little
Island in the Southern Ocean. Aschaffemburg, a Town in the Diocese of Mentz.
Asia, one of the four parts of the World. Assumption, a Town in Paraguay.
Astracan, a Town in Tartary Desert. Asturia, a Province in Spain. Athlone, a
Town in Connaught. Atlantic or Western Ocean, about the west side of Europe
and Africa. Atlas, a Mountain between Barbary and Bildulgerid, now called
Claros. Auch, a Town in Gascony. Augsburg, a Town in Schwaben. Aviles, a Town
in Asturia. Austria, a Province in Germany. Autun, a Town in the Duchy of
Burgundy. Auvergn, a Province in the Government of Lyonnois. Azof or Azac, a
Town in Little Tartary. Azores or Terceran Islands, in the Western Ocean.
B
BAgdat, a Town in Turkey in Asia. Bagnialuck, a Town in Bosnia. Bahus, a Town
in the Government of Bahus. Bahus Government, in Norway. Balbastro, a Town in
Aragon. Balch or Jihun, heretofore Oxus, a River in Great Tartary. Baldivia, a
Town in Chili. Baltic Sea, anciently Sinus Codanus; between Germany, Poland,
and Swedeland. Bar, a Town in Podolia. Barbary, heretofore (for the most part)
Mauritania, a Country in Africa. Barcelona, a Town in Caralonia. Bari, a Town
in the Territories of Bari. Bari Territories, in the Kindom of Naples.
Barkshire, in the Kingdom of Wessex. Barwick, a Town in the County of
Northumberland. Basil, a Town in the Canton of Basil. Basil Canton, in
Swizzerland. Basil Diocese, in Swizzerland. Basilicata, a Province in the
Kingdom of Naples. Bastia, a Town in Canina. Bastia, a Town in Corsica. Bath, a
Town in Somersetshire. Bavaria Duchy, the greatest part of the Province of
Bavaria, in Germany Bavaria Palatinate, part of the great Province of Bavaria,
in Germany. Bautzen, a Town in Lusatia. Bearford, a Town in Greenland. Bearn, a
Province in the Government of Guienn, and Gascony. Beauce, a Province in the
Government of Orleanois. Bedfordshire, in the Kingdom of Mercia. Belgrade, a
Town in Servia. Belt, a straight or narrow passage in the Baltic Sea, between
Zeland and Funen. Benevento, a Town in the Further Principality. Bengala, a
Town in the Indian Continent. Benin, a Town in Guinny. Berg or Bergen, a Town
in the Government of Bergen. Bergen Government, in Norway. Berlin, a Town in
the Marquisate of Brandenburg. Bern, a Town in the Canton of Bern. Bern Canton,
in Swizzerland. Berry, a Province in the Government of Orleanois. Bessarabia, a
Province in Turkey in Europe. Bezanson, a Town in Franche County. Bialogrod, a
Town in Bessarabia. Bielizero, a Town in Muscovy. Bielsko, a Town in Polachia.
Bilbao, a Town in Biscay. Bildulgerid, in time past Numidia, a Country in
Africa. Biscay, a Province in Spain. Black Sea, a kind of a Gulf between Turkey,
Little Tartary, and Georgia, called in time past Pontus Euxinus. Bleking, a
little Province, part of South-Gothland. Bockora, a Town in Ziagathay. Bohemia,
a Province in Germany. Bolduc, a Town in Brabant. Bologna, a Town in Bolognese.
Bolognese, a Province in the Dominion of the Pope. Bonifacio, a Town in
Corsica. Bonn, a Town in the Diocese of Colen. Boristhenes or Nieper, a River
in Poland. Bosnia or Bossina, a Province in Turkey in Europe, part of the
ancient Illyricum. Boston, a Town in New England. Bourbonnois, a Province in
the Government of Lyonnois. Bourdeaux, a Town in Guienn. Bourg, a Town in
Bress. Bourges, a Town in Berry. Boxa, a Town in Abissinia. Brabant, one of the
Seventeen Provinces; in Flanders. Braclaw or Bratzlaw, a Town in Podolia.
Braga, a Town in Portugal. Brandenburg, a Town in the Marquisate of
Brandenburg. Brandenburg Marquisate, in Germany. Brasil, a Country in South
America. Braskow, a Town in Walachia. Bratzlaw or Braclaw a Town in Podolia.
Brava, a Town in Zanguebar. Brecknockshire, in Wales. Breda, a Town in Brabant.
Bremen, a Town in the Territories of Bremen. Bremen Territories, in Lower
Saxony. Breslaw, a Town in Silesia. Bress, a Province in the Government of
Burgundy. Breast, a Town in Bretaigne. Bretaigne, a Province in France. Brinn, a
Town in Moravia. Brisack, a Town ill Brisgow. Brisgow, a Province in the
Southern part of Germany. Bristow, a Town in Somersetshire. Britain or Great
Britain, a Country in Europe; the largest of the British Isles, anciently known
by the name of Albion. British Isles, in the Western Ocean, part of Europe.
Brixen, a Town in Tirole. Brunswick, a Town in the Duchy of Brunswick.
Brunswick and Lunenburg Duchy, in Lower Saxony. Brussels, a Town in Brabant.
Buckinghamshire, in the Kingdom of Mercia. Buda or Offen, a Town in Hungary.
Buenos Aires, a Town in Paraguay. Bulgar, a Town in Tartary Desert. Bulgaria, a
Province in Turkey in Europe, part of the ancient Moesia. Burgos, a Town in Old
Castile. Burgundy County or Franche County, a Province in France. Burgundy
Duchy, a Province, and the greatest part of the Government of Burgundy.
Burgundy Government, in France. Bursa, a Town in Turkey in Asia. Butua, a Town
in Monomotopa.
C
CAdiz, a Town in Andaluzia. Caen, a Town in Normandy. Caermarthenshire, in
Wales. Caernarvon, a Town in Caernarvonshire. Caernarvonshire, in Wales. Caffa
or Kaffa, a Town in Little Tartary. Cafreria or Coast of the Caffres, a Country
in Africa. Cagliari, a Town in Sardinia. Cahors, a Town in Quercy. Cairo, a
Town in Egypt. Calabria the Further, a Province in the Kingdom of Naples.
Calabria the Nigher, a Province in the Kingdom of Naples. Calais, a Town in
Picardy. Calisurnia, an Island in the Pacifick Sea. Calmar, a Town in
Ostro-Gothland. Calzem or Suez, a Town in Egypt. Cambaia, a Town in the Indian
Continent. Cambaln or Muoncheu, a Town in Cathay. Cambray, a Town in Cambresis.
Cambresis, a Province in the French Netherlands. Cambridg, a Town in
Cambridgshire. Cambridg or New-Town, a Town in New England. Cambridgshire, in
the Kingdom of the East Angles. Campania di Roma, a Province in the Dominion of
the Pope. Campion or Tanguth, a Town in Cathay. Camul or Xamo, a Town in
Cathay. Canada or New France, a Country in North America. Canaries, Islands in
the Western Ocean, called in time past Fortunate Islands. Candy, a Town in the
Isle of Candy. Candy, anciently Creet, an Island in the Mediterranean Sea.
Canea, a Town in Candy. Cangan, a Town in Abissinia. Canina, heretofore called
sometimes Epirus, and sometimes Chaonia, a Province in Greece Cano, a Town in
Nigritia. Canterbury, a Town in the County of Kent. Cantozi a Town in Nigritia
Cape of Good Hope, the most Southern land of Africa. Cape Verd Islands, called
heretofore Hesperian Islands, in the Western Ocean. Capitanata or Puglia, a
Province in the Kingdom of Naples Capua, a Town in Terra di Lavoro. Caramoran
or Hoang, a River in China Cardiff, a Town in Glamorganshire. Cardiganshire, in
Wales. Carinthia, a Province in the Southern part of Germany. Carlisle, a Town
in Cumberland. Carniola, a Province in the Southern part of Germany. Carolina a
Province in New England. Carthagena, a Town in Castilla del Oro Carthagena or
New Carthage, a Town in Murcia, Casal, a Town in Monferrat. Cascar, a Town in
Ziagathay. Cassel, a Town in Hessen. Cassena, a Town in Nigritia. Castile the
New, a Province in Spain. Castile the Old, a Province in Spain. Castilla del
Oro, a Country in South America. Castro, a Town in the Duchy of Castro. Castro
Duchy, in the Dominion of the Pope. Caswin, a Town in Persia. Catalonia, a
Province in Spain. Catania, a Town in Val^di Demona. Cathay or Tartary of the
Cham, part of Great Tartary. Caucasus, a great Mountain between the Indian
Continent, and Great Tartary; also a Mountain in Georgia. Caxumo, a Town in
Abissinia. Cazan, a Town in Tartary Desert. Cefalonia, an Island in the
Mediterranean Sea, North-Westward from Morea. Ceperou or Fort Lewis, a Town in
Guyana. Cerigo, an Island in the Mediterranean Sea, near the South Coast of
Morea. Cevennes, a Province in the Government of Languedock. Chalons upon
Marne, a Town in Champaigne. Chalons upon Saone, a Town in the Duchy of
Burgundy. Chambery, a Town in Savoy. Champaigne, a Province in France. Channel,
the name of the Sea between England and France. Charletnont, a Town in the
county of Namur. Charles Town, a Town in Carolina. Chazan or Kaimach, a Town in
North Tartarij. Cheshire, in the Kingdom of Mercia Chester, a Town in Cheshire.
Chichester, a Town in the County of Sussex. Chili, a Country in South America.
China, a Country in Asia. China Islands, about the Coast of China. Chotan, a
Town in Thebet. Christianstad, a Town in Bleking. Ciandu, a Town in North
Tartary. Cilly, a Town in the County of Cilly. Cilly Country, in the Southern
part of Germany. Cirenza, a Town in Basilicata. Citadelli, a Town in the Isle
of Minorca. Civita Vecchia, a Town in the Patrimony of St. Peter. Clagenfurt, a
Town in Carinthia. Claros, a Mountain between Barbary and Bildulgerid,
heretofore Atlas. Clausenburg, a Town in Transylvania. Clermont, a Town in
Auvergne. Cleves, a Town in the Duchy of Cleves. Cleves Duchy, in the Western
part of Germany. Coast of the Caffres or Cafreria, a Country in Africa.
Coblentz, a Town in the Diocese of Treves. Coimbra, a Town in Portugal. Coir, a
Town in the Territories of the Grisons. Colberg, a Town in Pomeren. Colchester,
a Town in the County of Essex Colen, a Town in the Diocese of Colen. Colen
Diocese, in the Western part of Germany. Comachio, a Town in the Territories of
Comachio. Comachio Territories, in the Dominion of the Pope. Compostella, a
Town in New Spain. Conception, a Town in Chili. Congo, a Country in Africa.
Connaught a Province in Ireland. Constance, a Town in Schwaben. Constantinople,
in time past Bysantium, a Town in Romania. Contessa, a Town in Macedon.
Copenhagen, a Town in Zeeland. Cordova, a Town in Tucuman. Cordova, a Town in
Andaluzia. Corsu, an Island in the Mediterranean Sea, near the Western Coast of
Greece. Corinth, a Town in Morea. Cork, a Town in Munster. Cornwall, a County
in the Kingdom of the West Saxons. Coro, a Town in Castilla del Oro. Corou, a
Town in Guyana. Corunna or I a Corunna, a Town in Gallicia. Corsica, an Island
in the Mediterranean Sea. Cosenza, a Town in the Nigher Calabria. Cossir, a
Town in Egypt. Coventry, a Town in Warwickshire. Cracow, a Town in Upper
Poland. Crapack, Mountains between Poland and Hungary, called in times past
Carpathian Hills. Cremona, a Town in Milanese. Cremz, a Town in Austria. Crim,
a Town in Little Tartary. Croatia, a Province in Turkey in Europe, part of the
ancient Country of Illyricum. Cronemberg, a Town in Zeeland. Culm, a Town in
Prussia Roial. Cumberland, a County in the Kingdom of Northumberland. Curland,
a Province in Poland. Cusco, a Town in Peru. Cyprus, an Island in the
Mediterranean Sea. Czersk, a Town in Mazovia. Czirkassi, a Town in Ukrania.
D
DAlmatia, a Province in Turkey in Europe, part of the ancient Country of
Illyricum. Damascus, a Town in Turkey in Asia. Damiata, a Town in Egypt.
Dancala, a Town in Nub a. Danow or Danube, a River running through Germany and
Turkey, anciently called Ister. Dantzick a Town in Prussia Roial. Dara, a Town
in Bildulgerid. Darbyshire, in the Kingdom of Merica. Darmstad, a Town in
Hessen. Dauphiny, a Province in France. Delli, a Town in the Indian Continent.
Denbigh, a Town in Denbighshire. Denbighshire, in Wales, Denmark, a Country in
Europe, inhabited anciently by the Cimbri. Depsan, a Town in Abissinia.
Derbent, a Town in Persia. Derpt, a Town in Livonia. Deventer, a Town in
Overissel. Devonshire, in the Kingdom of the West Saxons. Dijon, a Town in the
Duchy of Burgundy. Dol, a Town in Franche County. Dombrowitza, a Town in
Walachia. Dominion of the Pope or State of the Church, a great Province in
Italy. Don or Tanais, a River in Muscovy. Doncala, a Town in Abissinia. Dongo,
a Town in Congo. Dorcetshire, in the Kingdom of the West Saxons. Dornock, a
Town in North Scotland. Dort, a Town in the County of Holland. Dover, a Town in
the County of Kent. Draw, a River in Turkey in Europe, falling into the Danube.
Dresden, a Town in Misnia. Drogdagh, a Town in Ulster. Drunthem, in time past
Nidrosia, a Town in the Government of Drunthem. Drunthem Government, in Norway.
Dublin, a Town in Lemster. Duero, a River in Spain. Dulcigno, a Town in
Dalmatia. Dunbriton, a Town in South Scotland. Dundee, a Town in North
Scotland. Dunkirk, a Town in the County of Flanders. Dunstafag, an old Town in
North Scotland. Durazzo, a Town in Albania. Durham, a Town in the County of
Durham. Durham, a County in the Kingdom of Northumberland. Dwina, a River in
Muscovy.
E
EAst-England, or Kingdom of the East Angles, one of the seven Saxon Kingdoms
in England. East Indies, (strictly taken) is the Empire of the Mogol with the
two adjacent Peninsula's; but under this name is often included all the Coasts,
from the Cape of Good Hope to the Japan Islands Eastern Ocean or Indian Ocean
on the South side of Asia. Ebro, a River in Spain, anciently called Iberus.
Edenburg, a Town in South Scotland. Egra, a Town in Bohemia. Egypt, a Country
in Africa. Elbe, a River in Germany. Elbing, a Town in Prussia Ducal. El-Catif,
a Town in Arabia. El-Dorado or Manoa, a Town in Guyana. Ely, a Town in
Cambridgshire, Empire of the Mogol or Indian Continent, a Country in Asia.
England, the South part of Great Britain, a Country in Europe; known in time
past by the name of Albion. Erfurt, a Town in Turingia. Eryn or Ireland, a
Country in Europe, one of the British Isles, called by the Romans Hibernia; and
sometimes known by the names of Iverna or Ierna. Erzerum, a Town in Turkey in
Asia. Es^urial, a Palace and Monastery near to Madrid, in New Castile.
Eslingen, a Town in Brisgow. Essex, a Kingdom in the County of Essex. Essex,
one of the seven Saxon Kingdom; in England. Estella, a Town in Navarr.
Euphrates, a River in Turkey in Asia. Euripus or Straights of Negropont, an Arm
of the Sea, which divides the Isle of Negropont from Livadia. Europe, one of
the four parts of the World. Excester, a Town in Devonshire.
F
FAir Islands or Isles of Fero, some of the British Isles, lying Northward from
Scotland. Faro, a Town in Algarves. Ferden, a Town in the Territories of
Ferden. Ferden Territories, in Lower Saxony. Fero or Fair Islands, some of the
British Isles lying Northward from Scotland. Ferrara, a Town in the Duchy of
Ferrara. Ferrara Duchy, a Province in the Dominion of the Pope. Fez, a Town in
Barbary. Finland, a Provine in Swedeland. Flanders County, one of the Seventeen
Provinces; in the Spanish Netherlands. Flanders or Spanish Netherlands, a
Country in Europe adjoining to France; the better part of the Seventeen
Provinces. Flendsburg, a Town in the Duchy of Sleswick. Flintshire, in Wales.
Florence, a Town in Tuscany. Florence Duchy or Tuscany, a large Province in the
middle of Italy, called once Hetruria. Florida, a Country in North America.
Flushing, a Town in Zeland. Fontarabia, a Town in Biscay. Fort Lewis or
Ceperou, a Town in Guyana. France, heretofore Gaul, a Country in Europe.
Francfort, a Town in Franconia. Francfort upon Oder, a Town in the Marquisate
of Brandenburg. Franche County or the County of Burgundy, a Province in France.
Franconia, a Province in Germany. Franeker, a Town in West-Friseland.
Frederickstad, a Town in the Government of Agger. Fremona, a Town in Abissinia.
French Netherlands, a new Government which belongs to France; being three or
four of the Seventeen Provinces, next adjoining to Picardy. Frescati, a Town in
Campania di Roma. Fresh Water Sea, a Lake so called in Canada. Friburg, a Town
in Brisgow. Friburg, a Town in the Canton of Friburg. Friburg Canton, in
Swizzerland. Fuien or Funen, an Island in the Baltic Sea. Fuld, a Town in
Hessen.
G
GAgo, a Town in Nigritia. Gallicia, a Province in Spain. Gallipoli, a Town in
Romania. Galway, a Town in Connaught. Ganges, a River in the Indian Continent.
Garnsey, one of the British Isles near Normandy Westward. Garonn, a River in
France. Gascony, a Province in the Government of Guienn and Gascony. Gaunt, a
Town in the County of Flanders. Gelderland, one of the Seventeen Provinces; in
Flanders. Gelders, a Town in Gelderland. Genehoa, a Town in Nigritia. Genoa, a
Town in the Republic of Genoa. Genoa Republic, a Province in Lombardy.
Geneva, a Town and Republic in Savoy. Georgia, a Country in Asia; the Western
part whereof went heretofore under the name of Colchos. Germany, a Country in
Europe. Ghammas, a River in Great Tartary. Ghir, a River in Zaara. Gibel or
Aetna, a Mountain in Val di Demona. Gibraltar, the name of a Straight which
joins the Mediterranean Sea to the Ocean. Glamorganshire, in Wales. Glaritz, a
Town in the Canton of Glaritz. Glaritz Canton, a Province in Swizzerland.
Glascow, a Town in South Scotland. Gloucester, a Town in Glocestershire.
Glocestershire, in the Kingdom of Mercia. Gluckstad, a Town in Holsten. Gnesna
or Gniesen, a Town in Lower Poland. Goa, a Town in the Indian Peninsula on this
side Ganges. Golconda, a Town in the Indian Peninsula on this side Ganges.
Goldingen, a Town in Curland. Goreden or Kori, a Town in Georgia. Gorlitz, a
Town in Lusatia. Gothburg or Gottemburg, a Town in Westro-Gothland. Gothland, a
great Province in Swedeland. Gottorp, a Town in the Duchy of Sleswick.
Gradiskia, a Town in Slavonia. Gran, a Town in Hungary. Granada, a Town in the
Province of Granada. Granada, a Province in Spain* Grand Caire or Cairo, a Town
in Egypt. Great Britain, heretofore Albion, a Country in Europe; the largest of
the British Isles. Great Novogrod, a Town in Muscovy. Great Tartary, anciently
Scythia, all the North part of Asia, Greece, the most Southern part of Turkey in
Europe. Greenland, a Country in Terra Arctica. Grenoble, a Town in Dauphiny.
Grisons Territorries, in Swizzerland. Groningen, a Town in the Seigniory of
Groningen. Groningen Seigniary, one of the Seventeen Provinces; in Holland.
Gros-Glogaw, a Town in Silesia. Guadalaiara, a Town in New Spain. Guadalquivir,
a River in Spain, known to the Romans by the name of Baetis. Guadiana, a River
in Spain. Guadix. a Town in the Province of Granada. Gualata, a Town in
Nigritia. Guastella, a Town in the Duchy of Mantua. Guber, a Town in Nigritia.
Gueret, a Town in La March. Guienn, a Province in the Government of Guienn and
Gascony. Guienn and Gascony Government, in France. Guinny, a Country in Africa.
Gulf of La Plata, an Arm of the Sea in Paraguay. Gulf of Mexico, between Mexico
and Florida. Gulf of Venice or Adriatic Sea, adjoining to Italy on the
North-West side. Gustrow, a Town in Mecklenburg. Guyana, a Country in South
America.
H
HAgue, a Town in the County of Holland. Halicz, a Town in Russia the Black.
Halland, a little Province, part of South-Gothland. Hamburg, a Town upon the
Frontiers of Holtten and Saxony. Hampshire, in the Kingdom of Wessex. Hannover,
a Town in the Duchy of Brunswick. Hartford, a Town in Hartfordshire.
Hartfordshire, in the Kingdom of Essex. Hastings, a Town in the County of
Sussex. Haynault, one of the Seventeen Provinces; in Flanders. Hebrides or
Inchgalles, some of the British Isles near Scotland Westward. Heidelberg, a
Town in the Palatinate of the Rhine. Helsenore, a Town in Zeeland. Hereford, a
Town in Herefordshire. Herefordshire, in the Kingdom of Mercia. Hermanstad, a
Town in Transylvania. Hessen, a Province in Germany. Hetland or Sherland Isles,
some of the British Islands, not far from Scotland, toward the North East.
Hoang or Caramoran, a River in China. Hola, a Town in Island. Holland, United
Netherlands, or United Provinces; the Northern part of the Low Countries.
Holland County, one of the Seventeen Provinces; in the United Netherlands.
Holsatia or Holsten, a Province in South-Jutland. Hudsons Bay, North-Westward
from Canada. Hull, a Town in Yorkshire. Hungary, anciently called Pannonia, a
great Province in Turkey in Europe. Huntingtonshire, in the Kingdom of Mercia.
I
JAcca, a Town in Aragon. Jaickza or Jazy, a Town in Moldavia. Jalac, a Town in
Nubia. James-Town, a Town in Virginia. Janna, called heretofore Thessaly, a
Province in Greece. Japan Islands, in the the Indian Ocean. Javarin or Raab a
Town in Imperial Hungary. Jaytza, a Town in Bosnia. Jazy or Jaickza, a Town in
Moldavia. Jersey, one of the British Isles near the Coast of Normandy.
Jerusalem, a Town in Turkey in Asia. Jesso, the name of a Country in Terra
Arctica. Jihun or Balch, anciently Oxus, a River in Great Tartary. Imaus, a
Mountain or Mountains in Tartary. Inchgalles or Hebrides, some of the British
Isles, near Scotland Westward. Indian Continent or Empire of the Mogol, a
Country in Asia. Indian Ocean or Eastern Ocean, on the South side of Asia.
Indian Peninsula beyond Ganges, a Country in Asia. Indian Peninsula on this
side Ganges, a Country in Asia. Indies, they are divided into East Indies, and
West Indies. Ingria, a Province in Swedeland. Inspruck, a Town in Tirole.
Ipswich, a Town in Suffolk. Ireland or Eryn, a Country in Europe, one of the
British Isles; anciently called Hibernia, and not seldom Iverna or Ierna. Irish
Sea, between England and Ireland. Island, called heretofore Thule, an Island in
the Northern Ocean. Isle of France, a Province in France. Ispaban, a Town in
Persia Italy, a Country in Europe: It was called heretofore sometimes Italia,
and sometimes Ausonia; but generally known to the Greeks by the name of
Hesperia. Juannogrod, a Town in Ingria. Ivica, a Town in the Isle of Ivica.
Ivica, an Island in the Mediterranean Sea. Juliers, a Town in the Duchy of
Juliers. Juliers Duchy, in the Western part of Germany. Jutland, the greatest
part of Denmark, divided into North and South Jutland: In times past it was
called the Cimbrick Chersonesus.
K
KAffa or Caffa, a Town in Little Tartary. Kaimach or Chazan, a Town in North
Tartary. Kalisz, a Town in Lower Poland. Kaminieck, a Town in Podolia. Kanisia,
a Town in Hungary. Kent, a County and one of the Seven Saxon Kingdoms in
England. Kiang, a River in China. Kiel, a Town in Holsten. Kilaloe, a Town in
Connaught. Kilan or Sala, the name of a great Lake or Sea, between Persia and
Tartary; called heretofore the Caspian Sea. Kilkenny, a Town in Lemster. Kimi,
a Town in Lapmark. Kimi, a River in Swedeland. Kimi, Territories or Lapmark, a
little Province in Lapland. Kiow, a Town in Volhinia. Komora, a Town in
Imperial Hungary. Koningsberg, a Town in Prussia Ducal. Kori or Goreden, a Town
in Georgia. Kuttenberg, a Town in Bohemia.
L
La Corunna or Corunna, a Town in Gallicia. La March, a Province in the
Government of Lyonnois. La Plata, a Town in Peru. La Plata, part of Paraguay.
La Plata, the name of a River in La Plata. Labor, a Town in the Indian
Continent. Lake of Geneva, between Swizzerland and Savoy. Lake Parima, in
Guyana. Lancashire, in the Kingdom of Northumberland. Lancaster, a Town in
Lancashire. Lanciano, a Town in the Further Abruzzo. Land of the Blacks or
Nigritia, a Country in Africa. Land of Jesso, a Country in Terra Arctica.
Landaff, a Town in Glamorganshire. Landskroon, a Town in Schonen. Languedock, a
Province and the greatest part of the Government of Languedock. Languedock
Government, in France. Lapland or Laponia, a Province in Swedeland. Lapmark or
Kimi, a little Province, part of Lapland Larissa, a Town in Janna. Larta, a
Town in Canina. Lauback, a Town in Carniola. Lau'ann, a Town in the Canton of
Bern. Legorn, a Town in Tuscany. Leicestershire, in the Kingdom of Mercia.
Leith, a Town in South Scotland. Lemster, a Province in Ireland. Leon, a Town
in New Spain. Leon, a Town in the Province of Leon. Leon, a Province in Spain.
Leopol or Lewenburg, a Town in Russia the Black. Lepanto, a Town in Livadia.
Lewarden, a Town in West-Frizeland. Lewenburg or Leopol, a Town in Russia the
Black. Jews, a Town in the County of Sussex. Leyden, a Town in the County of
Holland Lichfield, a Town in Staffordshire. Liege, a Town in the Diocese of
Liege. Liege Diocese, in the Western part of Germany, almost environed by the
Low Countries. Liguitz, a Town in Silesia. Lima or Los Reies, a Town in Peru.
Limburg, a Town in the Duchy of Limburg. Limburg Duchy, one of the Seventeen
Provinces; in Flanders. Limerick a Town in Munster. Limoges, a Town in Limosin.
Limosin, a Province in the Government of Gulenn and Gascony. Lincoln, a Town in
Lincolnshire. Lincolnshire, in the Kingdom of Mercia. Linkopen, a Town in
Ostro-Gothland. Lintz, a Town in Austria. Lis, a River in the Low Countries.
Lisbon, a Town in Portugal. Lisle, a Town in the County of Flanders. Lithuania,
a great Province in Poland. Little Novogrod, a Town in Muscovy. Little Tartary,
heretofore Scythia Taurica, a little Country in Europe, tributary to the Turk.
Livadia, a Province in Greece; it was called anciently Achaia. Livonia, a
Province in Swedeland. Loire, a River in France. Lombardy, a great Province in
the North part of Italy. London, a Town in the County of Middlesex.
Londonderry, a Town in Ulster. Lorain, a Province in France. Loreto, a Town in
the Marquisate of Ancona. Los Reies or Lima, a Town in Peru. Lot, a River in
France that falls into the Garonn, between Gascony and Guienn. Lovain, a Town
in Brabant. Low Countries or Seventeen Provinces, in Europe; known in time past
by the name of Belgia. Lubeck, a Town upon the Territories of Holsten and
Mecklenburg. Lublin, a Town in Upper Poland. Lucca, a Town in the Republic of
Lucca. Lucca Republic, a little Province in Italy, near Tuscany Westward.
Lucern, a Town in the Canton of Lucern. Lucern Canton, in Swizzerland. Lula, a
Town in the Territories of Lula. Lula Territories, in Lapland. Lunae Mons or
Mountains of the Moon, between Abissinia and Monomotopa. Lunden, a Town in
Schonen. Lunenburg, a Town in the Duchy of Lunenburg. Lunenburg and Brunswick
Duchy, in Lower Saxony. Lusatia, a Province in the Eastern part of Germany.
Lutzko, a Town in Volhinia Luxemburg, a Town in the Duchy of Luxemburg.
Luxemburg Duchy, one of the Seventeen Provinces in Flanders. Lyonnois, a
Province in the Government of Lyonnois. Lyonnois Government, in France. Lions,
a Town in Lyonnois.
M
MAcao, a Town in a small Island upon the Coast of China. Macedon, a Province
in Greece. Madagascar or St. Laurence, an Island in the Southern Ocean. Madera
Islands, in the Western Ocean. Madragan or Monomotopa, a Town in the Country of
Monomotopa. Madrid, a Town in New Castile. Maestricht, a Town in the Duchy of
Limburg. Magadoxo, a Town in Zanguebar. Magellanica* a Country in South
America. Magellanica or Terra Incognita, a great Tract of Land toward the
South Pole. Magellanick Islands, in the Magellanick Sea. Magellanick Sea,
toward the most Southern side of America. Magliano, a Town in Terra Sabina.
Maine, a Province in the Government of Orleanois. Majorca, a Town in the Isle
of Majorca. Majorca, an Island in the Mediterranean Sea. Malacca, a Town in the
Indian Peninsula beyond Ganges. Malaga, a Town in the Province of Granada.
Maldives, Islands in the Indian Ocean. Malines, a Town in the Seigniory of
Malines. Malines Seigniory, one of the Seventeen Provinces; in Flanders.
Malmuyen, a Town in Schonen. Malta, an Island in the Mediterranean Sea. Man, one
of the British Isles between England, Scotland, and Ireland. Mandinga, a Town
in Nigritia. Manfredonia, a Town in Capitanata. Manoa or El Dorado, a Town in
Guyana. Man's, a Town in Maine. Mantua, a Town in the Duchy of Mantua. Mantua
Duchy, a small Province in Lombardy. Mara^baon, a Town in Brasil. Marienburg, a
Town in Prussia Royal. Marne, a River in France, Marocco, a Town in Barbary.
Marquisate of the Holy Empire, or Antwerp Seigniory, one of the Seventeen
Provinces; in Flanders. Marseilles, a Town in France. Marstrand, a Town in the
Government of Bahus. Massapa or Zimbaoe, a Town in Monomotopa. Mavaralnahara,
otherwise Vsbeck or Ziagathay, part of Great Tartary. Mazovia, a Province in
Poland. Mead, a Province in Ireland. Mecca, a Town in Arabia. Mecklenburg, a
Province in Germany. Medina, a Town in Arabia. Mediterranean Sea, between
Europe and Africa. Melinda, a Town in Zanguebar. Melun, a Town in the Isle of
France. Memel, a Town in Prussia Ducal. Menan, a River in India. Mentz, a Town
in the Diocese of Mentz. Mentz Diocese, in the Western part of Germany. Mercia,
one of the Seven Saxon Kingdoms in England. Merida, a Town in New Spain.
Merionethshire, in Wales. Messina, a Town in Val di Demona. Metling, a Town in
Windisch Marck. Metz, a Town in Lorain. Meuse, a River in the Low Countries.
Mexicana or North America, All the North part of America; so called from
Mexico. Mexico, a Town in New Spain. Mexico or New Spain, a Country in North
America. Middelfurt, a Town in Funen. Middelfurt Sound, a Straight or narrow
passage in the Baltic Sea, between Jutland and Funen. Middleburg, a Town in
Zeland, Middlesex, a County in the Kingdom of Essex. Milan, a Town in Milanese.
Milanese, a Province in Lombardy. Mina or St. George of the Mine, a Town in
Guinny. Minden, a Town in the Territories of Minden. Minden Territoris, in
Lower Saxony. Minorca, an Island in the Mediterranean Sea. Mirandola, a Town in
the Duchy of Mantua. Misithra, anciently Lacedaemon, a Town in Morea. Misnia, a
little Province in Upper Saxony. Mittaw, a Town in Curland. Modena, a Town in
the Duchy of Modena. Modena Duchy, a little Province in Lombardy. Moldavia,
part of the ancient Dacia, a Province in Europe, tributary to the Turk.
Molingar, a Town in Mead. Molissa, a Town in the County of Molissa. Molissa
County, in the Kingdom of Naples. Moluccoes, Islands in the Indian Ocean.
Mombaza, a Town in Zanguebar. Mompellier, a Town in Languedock. Monbelliard, a
Town in the County of Monbelliard. Monbelliard County, in the Government of
Franche County. Mondonnedo, a Town in Gallicia. Monferrat, a little Province in
Lombardy. Monmouthshire, in the Kingdom of Mercia Monomotopa, a Country in
Africa. Monomotopa or Madragan, a Town in the Country of Monomotopa. Mons, a
Town in Haynault. Monstiers, a Town in Savby. Montgomery, a Town in
Montgomeryshire. Montgomeryshire, in Wales. Montmedy, a Town in the Duchy of
Luxemburg. Montmelian, a Town in Savoy. Montreal, a Town in Canada. Montreal, a
Town in Val di Mazata. Moravia, a Province in Germany. Morea, a Province in
Greece, called heretofore Peloponnesus. Morlakia, a small Province in Turkey in
Europe, contiguous to Croatia. Mosco, a Town in Muscovy. Mosul, a Town in Turkey
in Asia. Moulins a Town in Bourbonnois. Mountains of the Moon, between
Abissinia, and Monomotopa, Muzambick, a Town in Zanguebar. Munchen, a Town in
the Duchy of Bavaria. Munster, a Town in Westphalia. Munster, a Province in
Ireland. Muoncheu or Cambalu, a Town in Cathay. Murcia, a Town in the Province
of Murcia. Murcia, a Province in Spain. Muscovy or Russia, part of the ancient
Sarmatia; a Country in Europe.
N
NAmur, a Town in the County of Namur. Namur County, one of the Seventeen
Provinces; in Flanders. Nanciang, a Town in China. Nancy, a Town in Lorain.
Nanking, a Town in China. Nantes, a Town in Bretaigne. Naples, called formerly
Parthenope, a Town in Terra di Lavoro. Naples, a Kingdom and a great part of
Italy. Narbonn, a Town in Languedock. Narsinga, a Town in the Indian Peninsula
on this side Ganges. Navarr, a Province in Spain. Negropont, a Town in the Isle
of Negropont. Negropont, heretofore Euboea an Island in the Mediterranean Sea,
on the Eastside of Greece. Netherlands or Seventeen Provinces, in Europe,
anciently known by the name of Belgia. Nevers, a Town in Nivernois. Newburg, a
Town in the Palatinate of Bavaria. New Carthage or Carthagina, a Town in
Murcia. New Castile, a Province in Spain. Newcastle, a Town in Northumberland.
New England, a little Province in the great Country of New England. New
England, a Country in North America. Newfound Land, a great Island in the
North Sea, near Canada. New France or Canada, a Country in North America. New
Granada, a Town in New Mexico. New Guinny, a great Island in the Pacifick Sea,
toward Asia. New Holland or New York, a little Province in New England. New
Mexico, a Country in North America. New Plymouth, a Town in New England. New
Spain or Mexico, a Country in North America. Newstad, a Town in Moravia.
New-Town or Cambridg, a Town in New England. New York, a Town in the Province
of New York. New York or New Holland, a little Province in New England. Niburg,
a Town in Funen. Niemen, a River in Poland. Nieper or Boristhenes, a River in
Poland. Niester, a River in Poland. Nigepoli, a Town in Bulgaria. Niger, a
River in Nigritia. Nigritia or Land of the Blacks, a Country in Africa.
Nikopen, a Town in Sweden. Nile, a River in Egypt. Nimmegen, a Town in
Gelderland. Nisa, a Town in Servia. Nivernois, a Province in the Government of
Orleanois. Nizza a Town in Piedmont. Nogent, a Town in Perch. Norfolk, a
County in the Kingdom of the East Angles. Norimberg, a Town in Franconia.
Normandy, a Province in France. North America, almost one half of America
Northward, otherwise called Mexicana. Northamptonshire, in the Kingdom of
Mercia. North-Gothland. a Province in Swedeland. North-Jutland, a Province in
Denmark. North Kin, a Cape upon the most Northern Coast of Jutland. North Sea,
on the North-East side of America. North Tartary or Ancient Tartary, part of
Great Tartary. Northern Ocean, formerly Scythian Sea, on the North side of
Europe and Asia. Northumberland, a County in the Kingdom of Northumberland.
Northumberland, one of the Seven Saxon Kingdoms in England. Norway, a Country
in Europe, Norwich, a Town in Norfolk, Noteburg, a Town in Ingria. Noto, a Town
in Val di Noto, Nottinghamshire, in the Kingdom of Mercia. Novogrod the
Greater, a Town in Muscovy. Novogrod the Less, a Town in Muscovy. Novogrodeck,
a Town in Lithuania. Novogrod-Sevierski, a Town in the Duchy of
Novogrod-Sevierski. Novogrod Sevierski and Smolensko Dukedoms, in Poland.
Nubia, a Town in Nubia. Nubia, a Country in Africa. Numantia, a ruined Town in
Old Castile, anciently very famous.
O
OBius, a River in Great Tartary. Odensee, a Town in Funen. Odir, a River in
Germany. Offen or Buda, a Town in Hungary. Oldenburg, a Town in the Territories
of Oldenburg. Oldenburg Territories, in Lower Saxony. Olinda, a Town in Brasil.
Olita, a Town in Navarr. Olmutz, a Town in Moravia. Opslo, a Town in the
Government of Agger. Orbitello, a Town in Tuscany. Orcades or Orkney, some of
the British Isles near Scotland Northward. Orelhana or River of the Amazons, in
Peru, or between Peru and Brasil. Orenoke or Paria, a River between Castilla
del Oro and Guyana. Orkney or Orcades, some of the British Isles near Scotland
Northward. Orleanois Government, in France. Orleans, a Town in Beauce. Ormuz, a
Town in Persia. Orvieto, a Town in the Territories of Orvieto. Orvieto
Territories, in the Dominion of the Pope. Osnaburg, a Town in Westphalia.
Ostend, a Town in the County of Flanders. Ostia, a Town in Campania di Roma.
Ostro-Gothland, a little Province in North-Gothland. Otranto, a Town in the
Territories of Otranto. Otranto Territories, in the Kingdom of Naples. Otzacow,
a Town in Bessarabia, near the Mouth of the Nieper. Overissel, one of the
Seventeen Provinces; in Holland. Oviedo, a Town in Asturia. Oustioug, a Town in
Muscovy. Oxford, a Town in Oxfordshire. Oxfordshire, in the Kingdom of Mercia.
Oyse, a River in France.
P
PAcifick Sea or South Sea, on the South-West side of America. Paderborn, a
Town in Westphalia. Padua, a Town in the Republic of Venice. Palatinate of
Bavaria, part of the Great Province of Bavaria, in Germany. Palatinate of the
Rhine, a Province in Germnay. Palermo, a Town in Val di Mazara. Palma Nova, a
Town in the Republic of Venice. Pampelona, a Town in Navarr. Panama, a Town in
Castilla del Oro. Paraguay, a Country in South America. Parana, the name of a
River in Paraguay. Paria or Orenoke, a River between Castilla del Oro and
Guyana. Parima, the name of a Lake in Guyana. Paris, a Town in the Isle of
France. Parma, a Town in the Duchy of Parma. Parma Duchy, a little Province in
Lombardy. Pas de Calais, a narrow Passage in the Channel, between Kent and
Picardy. Patras, a Town in Morea. Patrimony of St. Peter, a Province in the
Dominion of the Pope. Pau, a Town in Bearn. Pavia, a Town in Milanese. Pegu, a
Town in the Indian Peninsula beyond Ganges. Pegu, a River in India. Peking a
Town in China. Pembroke, a Town in Pembrokeshire. Pembrokshire, in Wales,
Perch, a Province in the Government of Orleanois. Perigord, a Province in the
Government of Guienn and Gascony. Perigueux, a Town in Perigord. Perpignan, a
Town in Roussillon. Persia, a Country in Asia. Perth, a Town in North Scotland.
Peru, a Country in South America. Perugia, a Town in the Territories of
Perugia. Perugia Territories, in the Dominion of the Pope. Peruviana or South
America, all the South part of America, being a large Peninsula. Peterborow, a
Town in Northamptonshire. Philippine Islands, in the Indian Ocean. Piacenza, a
Town in the Duchy of Parma. Picardy, a Province in France. Piedmont, a Province
in Lombardy. Pignerol, a Town in Dauphiny. Piombino, a Town in Tuscany. Pisa, a
Town in Tuscany. Pitha, a Town in the Territories of Pitha. Pitha Territories,
in Lapland. Ple^cow, a Town in Muscovy. Plymouth, a Town in Devonshire. Po, a
River in Italy. Podelassia or Polacha, a Province in Poland. Podolia, a
Province in Poland. Poictiers, a Town in Poictou. Poictou a Province in the
Government of Orleanois. Polachia or Podelassia, a Province in Poland. Poland,
a Province in the Kingdom of Poland. Poland, a Country in Europe; called in
time past, together with Muscovy, Sarmatia. Poland the Lower, the North-West
part of the great Province of Poland. Poland the Upper, the South-East part of
the great Province of Poland. Pomerania or Pomeren, a Province in Germany.
Porentru, a Town in the Diocese of Basil. Port-Famine or St. Philip, a Town in
Magellanica. Porto-Belo, a Town in Castilla del Oro. Porto-Seguro, a Town in
Brasil. Portugal, formerly Lusitania, and a Province in the Western part of
Spain; but now a Kingdom of it self. Posega, a Town in Slavonia. Posen or
Posnan, a Town in Lower Poland. Potengi, a Town in Brasil. Potosi, a Town in
Peru. Prague, a Town in Bohemia. Presburg, a Town in Imperial Hungary.
Prevezza, a Town in Canina. Principality the Further, a Province in the Kingdom
of Naples. Principality the Nigher, a Province in the Kingdom of Naples.
Provence, a Province in France. Provinces Tributary to the Turk, several small
Countries between Turkey, Poland, and Muscovy. Prussia, a Province in Poland.
Prussia Ducal, the North-East part of Prussia. Prussia Roial, the South-West
part of Prussia. Puglia or Capitanata, a Province in the Kingdom of Naples.
Pyrenies, Mountains separating France from Spain.
Q
QVancheu, a Town in China. Quebeck, a Town in Canada. Quercy, a Province in
the Government of Guienn and Gascony. Queyang, a Town in China. Quiloa, a Town
in Zanguebar.
R
RAab or Javarin, a Town in Imperial Hungary. Radnorshire, in Wales, Ragusa, a
Town and Republic in Dalma^a. Raseburg, a Town in Finland. Ratisbon, a Town in
the Duchy of Bavaria. Ravenna, a Town in Romagna. Red Sea, between Arabia and
Egypt. Reggio, a Town in the Further Calabria. Reggio, a Town in the Duchy of
Modena Rendsburg, a Town in Holsten Rennes, a Town in Bretaigne. Retimo, a Town
in Candy. Revel, a Town in Li^^^ia. Rheimes, a Town in Champaigne. Rhezan, a
Town in Muscovy. Rhine, a River in Germany. Rhodes, a Town in Rouergue. Rhone,
a River in France. Riga, a Town in Livonia. River of the Amazons or Orelhana,
between Peru and Brasil. River of La Plata, in La Plata. River of Parana, in
Paraguay. River of St. Francis, in Brasil. River of St. Laurence, in Canada.
Rochester, a Town in the County of Kent. Romagna, a Province the Dominion of
the Pope. Romania, in time past Thrace, a Province in Turkey in Europe. Rome, a
Town in Campania di Roma. Roschild, a Town in Zeeland. Rosetta, a Town in
Egypt. Rosinia, a Town in Samogitia. Rotweil, a Town in Brisgow. Rouen, a Town
in Normandy. Rouergue, a Province in the Government of Guienn and Gascony.
Roussillon, a small Province in the Government of Languedock. Rugen, an Island
in the Baltic Sea, near Pomeren. Ruremond, a Town in Gelderland. Russia or
Muscovy, part of the ancient Country of Sarmatia; in Europe. Russia the Black,
a Province in Poland. Rutlandshire, in the Kingdom of Mercia. Rye, a Town in
the County of Sussex. Rypen, a Town in the Diocese of Rypen. Rypen Diocese, in
North-Jutland.
S
St. Albans, a Town in Hartfordshire. St. Andrews, a Town in South-Scotland.
St. Asaph, a Town in Flintshire, St. David's, a Town in the Isle of France. St.
Denis, a Town in Pembrokshire. St. Faith or St. Fe, a Town in New Mexico. St.
Fe, a Town in Paraguay. St. Francis, a Town in Peru. St. Francis, the name of a
River in Brasil. St. George of the Mine or Mina, a Town in Guinny. St. Helena,
an Island in the Southern Ocean. St. Jago, a Town in Chili. St. Jago de
Compostella, a Town in Gallicia. St. Jago de Guatimala, a Town in New Spain.
St. Jago del Estero, a Town in Tucuman. St. Laurence or Madagascar, an Island
in the Southern Ocean. St. Laurence, the name of a River in Canada. St. Miguel,
a Town in Tucuman. St. Nicholas, a Town in Muscovy. St. Omars, a Town in
Arrois. St. Paolo or Angola, a Town in Congo. St. Philip or Port Famine, a Town
in Magellanica. St. Salvador, a Town in Brasil. St. Salvador, a Town in Congo.
St. Sebastian, a Town in Biscay. St. Sebastian, a Town in Brasil. St. Thomas,
an Island in the Southern Ocean. St. Vincent, a Town in Brasil. Saints, a Town
in Saintonge. Saintonge, a Province in the Government of Guienn and Gascony.
Sala or Kilan, the name of a great Lake or Sea between Persia and Tartary;
anciently called the Caspian Sea. Salamanca, a Town in the Province of Leon.
Salerno, a Town in the Nigher Principality. Salins, a Town in Franche County.
Salisbury, a Town in Wiltshire. Salonichi, a Town in Macedon. Saltzburg, a Town
in the Duchy of Bavaria. Samarcand, a Town in Ziagathay. Samogitia, a Province
in Poland. Sandomir, a Town in Upper Poland. Sta. Fe or St. Faith, a Town in
New Mexico. Sta. Fe de Begota, a Town in Castilla del Oro. Sta. Martha, a Town
in Castilla del Oro. Santillana, a Town in Asturia. Saragossa, a Town in
Aragon. Saragusa, formerly Syracuse, a Town in Val di Noto. Sardinia, an Island
in the Mediterranean Sea. Sassari a Town in Sardinia. Savatopoli, a Town in
Georgia. Savona, a Town in the Republic of Genoa. Savoy, a little Country
between France, Italy, and Swizzerland, but counted part of Lombardy. Saw, a
River in Turkey in Europe which falls into the Danube. Saxony Electorship, a
little Province in Upper Saxony. Saxony the Lower, a Province in Germany.
Saxony the Upper, a Province in Germany. Scagen, a Town in the most Northern
part of the Diocese of Alburg. Scanderoon or Alexandretta, a Town in Turkey in
Asia. Scandinavia, a large Country in the North of Europe, containing the
Kingdoms of Swedeland, Denmark, and Norway. Scardona, a Town in Dalmatia.
Schafhausen, a Town in the Canton of Schafhausen. Schafhausen Canton, a
Province in Swizzerland. Scheld, a River in the Low Countries. Schiras, a Town
in Persia. Schonen, a Province in South Gothland. Schwaben or Suevia, a
Province in Germany. Scotland, heretofore called Caledonia, a Country in
Europe; being the North part of Great Britain. Scotland, beyond Tay, all
Scotland which lies from the Tay Northward. Scotland, on this side Tay, the
South part of Scotland, which is included between the River Tay and England.
Scutari, a Town in Albania. Sea of Kilan or Sala, a vast Lake between Persia
and Tartary; known heretofore by the name of Caspian Sea. Sebenico, a Town in
Dalmatia. Segelmessa, a Town in Bildulgerid. Segorbe, a Town in the Province
Valentia Segovia, a Town in Old Castile. Servia, a Province in Turkey in Europe,
being part of the ancient Country of Moesia. Setines, heretofore called Athens,
a Town in Livadia. Seventeen Provinces, Low Countries, or Netherlands in
Europe, the Romans comprised them all under the name of Belgia. Severn a River
in England. Sevil, a Town in Andaluzia. Seyne, a River in France. Shannon, a
River in Ireland. Shetland or Hetland Isles, in the Northern Ocean, not far
from Scotland. Shropshire, in the Kingdom of Mercia. Sian, a Town in the Indian
Peninsula beyond Ganges. Sicily, an Island in the Mediterranean Sea. Siena, a
Town in Tuscany. Sierra Liona, Mountains so called in Guiny. Silesia, a
Province in Germany. Silly Islands, or the Sorlings, some of the British Isles
between England, France, and Ireland. Sind, heretofore called Indus, a River in
India. Sion, a Town in Valais. Slavonia, a Province in Turkey in Europe, part of
the ancient Illyricum. Sleswick, a Town in the Duchy of Sleswick. Sles-wick
Duchy, a little Province in South-Jutland. Sluys, a Town in the County of
Flanders. Smirna, a Town in Turkey in Asia. Smolensko, a Town in the Dukedom of
Smolensko. Smolensko Dukedom, with that of Novogrod-Sevierski,) in Poland.
Soczow, a Town in Moldavia. Soloturn, a Town in the Canton of Soloturn.
Soloturn Canton, a Province in Swizzerland. Somersetshire, in the Kingdom of
the West Saxons. Sophia, a Town in Bulgaria. Sorling or Silly Islands, some of
the British Isles between England, France, and Ireland. Sound, a straight or
narrow passage in in the Baltic Sea, between Zeeland and Schonen. Sound Isles
or Islands of the Sound, in the Indian Ocean. Southampton, a Town in Hampshire.
South America or Peruviana, the greatest half of America, so called from it is
situation southward, and from the Province of Peru. South Gothland, a Province
in Swedeland. South-Jutland, a Province in Denmark. South sea otherwise
Pacifick sea, on the South-west side of America. Southern Ocean or Ethiopian
Sea, about the south-west side of Africa. Spain, a Country in Europe, sometimes
called by the Romans Iberia, sometimes Hispania, and not seldom Hesperia.
Spalato, a Town in Dalmatia. Spanish Netherlands or Flanders, comprehend nine
or ten of the most Southern Provinces of the Low Countries. Spire, a Town in
the Palatinate of the Rhine. Spiritu Santo, a Town in Brasil. Spiritu Santo,
the name of a River running through Monomotopa and Cafreria. Spoleto, a Town in
the Duchy of Spoleto. Spoleto Duchy or Vmbria, a little Province in the
Dominion of the Pope. Staffordshire, in the Kingdom of Mercia. Stalimene, a
Town in the Isle of Stalimene. Stalimene, once Lemnos, an Island in the
Mediterranean Sea, toward Romania. Stantz, a Town in the Canton of
Underwalden. State of the Church or Dominion of the Pope, a great Province in
Italy. Sterling, a Town in South Scotland. Stetin, a Town in Pomeren. Stiria, a
Province in the Southern part of Germany. Stives, a Town in Livadia, formerly
known by the name of Thebes. Stockholm, a Town in Sweden. Stolp, the name of a
company of Hills in Muscovy; anciently called Riphaeen Mountains. Straights of
Anian, between Asia and the Land of Jesso, an unfrequented Country near America
Northward. traights of Gibraltar, between Spain and Barbary; joining together
the Western Ocean and Mediterranean Sea. Straights of Magellan, between America
and that great Continent called Terra Magellanica. Straights of Negropont or
the Euripus, an Arm of the Sea, separating the Isle of Negropont from Livadia.
Stralzund, a Town in Pomeren. Strazburg, a Town in Alsace. Strom, a Town in the
Isle of Fero. Stutgart, a Town in the Duchy of Wirtenberg. Suaquem, a Town in
Abissinia. Suevia or Schwaben, a Province in Germany. Suez or Calzem, a Town in
Egypt. Suffolk, a County in the Kingdom of the East Angles. Sundrio, a Town in
Valtoline. Surat, a Town in the Indian Continent. Surrey, a County in the
Kingdom of Sussex. Sussex, a County in the Kingdom of Sussex. Sussex, one of
the Seven Saxon Kingdoms in England. Sweden, a Province in the Kingdom of
Sweden or Swedeland. Sweden or Swedeland, a Country in Europe. Swerin, a Town
in Mecklenburg. Switz, a Town in the Canton of Switz. Switz Canton, a Province
in Swizzerland. Swizzerland, a Country in Europe near France. Swol, a Town in
Overissel.
T
TAdousack, a Town in Canada. Taio or Tagus, a River in Spain. Tamaraca, a Town
in Brasil. Tanais or Don, a River in Muscovy, and upon the Frontiers of Little
Tartary. Tangier, a Town in Barbary. Tanguth or Campion, a Town in Cathay.
Targa or Zaghara, a Town in Zaara. Targorod, a Town in Moldavia. Targowisko, a
Town in Walachia. Taragon, formerly Tarraco, a Town in Catalonia. Tartar, a
Town in North-Tartary. Tartary of the Cham, otherwise Cathay, part of Great
Tartary. Tartary Desert, part of Great Tartary. Tartary the Greater, once
called Scythia, all the Northern part of Asia. Tartary the Less, on the South
side of Muscovy, a Country tributary to the Turk; it was called anciently
Scythia Taurica. Tavila, a Town in Algarves. Taurus, the name of several
Mountains in Asia, more especially some Mountains in the Western part of Turkey
in Asia: but Ceraunius was the most ancient name. Tay, a River in Scotland.
Teflis, a Town in Georgia. Teissa or Tyssa, a River in Turkey in Europe,
discharging it self into the Danube. Terceran Islands or Azores, in the Western
Ocean. Terra Arctica, a great unin habited Country toward the North Pole.
Terra di Lavoro, a Province in the Kingdom of Naples. Terra Incognita or
Magellanica, a vast Country toward the South Pole. Terra Sabina, a Province in
the Dominion of the Pope. Tesset, a Town in Bildulgerid. Thames, a River in
England. Thebet, a Town in a Country of the same name. Thebet or Turquestan,
part of Great Tartary. Thionville, a Town in the Duchy of Luxemburg. Tiber, a
River in Italy. Tigris, a River in Turkey in Asia. Tirole, a Province in
Germany. Toledo, a Town in New Castile. Tombote, a Town in Nigritia. Tonningen,
a Town in the Duchy of Sleswick, Tornia, a Town in the Territories of Tornia.
Tornia, a River in Swedeland. Tornia Territories, in Lapland. Toro, a Town in
the Province of Leon. Tortosa, a Town in Catalonia. Toulon, a Town in Provence.
Toulouse, a Town in Languedock. Touraine, a Province in the Government of
Orleanois. Tours, a Town in Touraine. Transylvania, a Province in Europe
tributary to the Turk; being part of the ancient Country of Dacia. Trent, a
Town and Bishopric within the Confines of Italy, but depending on the County
of Tirole. Trent, a River in England. Treves, a Town in the Diocese of Treves.
Treves or Triers Diocese, in the Western part of Germany. Triest, a Town in
Carniola. Trino, a Town in Monferrat. Tripoli, a Town in Barbary. Troyes, a
Town in Champaigne. Truxillo, a Town in New Spain. Tubingen, a Town in the
Duchy of Wirtenberg. Tucuman, a Country in South America. Tunis, a Town in
Barbary. Turin, a Town in Piedmont. Turingia, a small Province in Upper Saxony.
Turkey, a Large Empire in our Continent, divided into Turkey in Europe, and Turkey
in Asia. Turkey the Lower, the South part of Turkey in Europe, comprehending the
two ancient Countries of Greece and Thrace. Turkey the Upper, the North part of
Turkey in Europe, wherein were included formerly Pannonia, Illyricum, Moesia,
etc. Turquestan or Thebet, part of Great Tartary. Tuscany or Duchy of Florence,
heretofore known by the name of Hetruria, a Province in Italy. Tyssa or Tessa,
a River in Turkey in Europe, which runs into the Danube.
U
VAl di Demona, a Province in Sicily. Val di Mazara, a Province in Sicily. Val
di Noto, a Province in Sicily. Valais, a Province in Swizzerland. Valence, a
Town in Dauphiny. Valenciennes, a Town in Haynault. Valentia, a Town in the
Province of Valentia. Valentia, a Province in Spain. Valladolid, a Town in New
Spain. Valladolid a Town in Old Castile. Valona, a Town in Albania. Valtoline,
a Province in Swizzerland. Venice, a Town in the Republic of Venice. Venice
Republic, a Province in Lombardy. Vercelli, a Town in Piedmont. Verdan, a Town
in Lorain. Vienn, a Town in Dauphiny. Vienna, a Town in Austria. Virginia, a
Province in New England. Viterbo, a Town in the Patrimony of St. Peter,
Viviers, a Town in Cevennes. Vkrania, a Province in Poland. Vlm, a Town in
Schwaben. Vlster, a Province in Ireland. Vma, a Town in the Territories of Uma.
Vma Territories, in Lapland. Vmbria or Duchy of Spoleto, in the Dominion of the
Pope. Vnderwalden, a Province or Canton of Swizzerland. United Netherlands or
Provinces, otherwise Holland; seven or eight Provinces in the North of the Low
Countries. Volhinia, a Province in Poland. Vpsal, a Town in the Sweden. Vrbino,
a Town in Duchy of Urbino. Vrbino Duchy, in the Dominion of the Pope. Vri, a
Canton or Province in Swizzerland. Vsbeck, otherwise called Ziagathay or
Mauaralnahara, part of Great Tartary. Vtrecht, a Town in the Seigniory of
Utrecht. Vtrecht Seigniory, one of the Seventeen Provinces; in Holland.
W
WAlachia, part of the ancient Dacia, a Province in Europe tributary to the
Turk. Wales, a Country in the West of England. Wardhus, a Town in the
Government of Wardhus. Wardhus Government, in Norway. Warsaw, a Town in
Mazovia. Warwickshire, in the Kingdom of Mercia. Waterford, a Town in Munster.
Wells, a Town in Somersetshire. Weser, a River in Germany. Wessex or Kingdom of
the West Saxons, one of the Seven Saxon Kingdoms, in England. West-Friseland,
one of the Seventeen Provinces; in Holland. West Indies, by this name is most
properly meant the Antego Islands, and some others upon the Coast of America;
but sometimes all America is so called. Westmorland, a County in the Kingdom of
Northumberland. Westphalia, a Province in Germany. Wester(...)lantick Sea, on
the West side (...)rope and Africa. Westro-Gothland, a small Province in
North-Gothland. Weteravia or Weteraw, a little Province in the Western part of
Germany, comprehended under that of Hessen. Wexford, a Town in Lemster. Weyssel
or Wistule, a River in Poland. Weyssenburg, a Town in Transylvania. White Sea
or Archipelago, on the East side of Greece. Wiburg, a Town in Finland. Wiburg,
a Town in the Diocese of Wiburg. Wiburg Diocese, in North-Jutland. Wight, one
of the British Isles, near the South Coast of England. Wihitz, a Town in
Croatia. Wilna, a Town in Lithuania. Wiltshire, in the Kingdom of the West
Saxons. Winchester, a Town in Hampshire. Windisch Marck or the Marquisate of
Winds, a small Province in the Southern part of Germany, joining to Carniola.
Windsor, a Town in Barkshire. Wirtenberg, a Town in the Duchy of Wirtenberg.
Wirtenberg Duchy, in the Southern part of Germany. Wirtzburg, a Town (...)
Wismar, a Town in M(...)urg. Wistule or Weyssel, a River in Poland. Witepscki,
a Town in Lithuania. Wittenberg, a Town in the Electorship of Saxony.
Wolfenbuttel, a Town in the Duchy of Brunswick. Wolga, a River in Muscovy.
Wolodimer, a Town in Muscovy. Wologda, a Town in Muscovy. Worcester, a Town in
Worcestershire. Worcestershire, in the Kingdom of Mercia, Worms, a Town in the
Palatinate of the Rhine. Worotin, a Town in Muscovy.
X
XAmo or Camul, a Town in Cathay.
Y
YArmouth, a Town in Norfolk. York, a Town in Yorkshire. Yorkshire, in the
Kingdom of Northumberland.
Z
ZAara, a Country in Africa. Zaghara, or Targa, a Town in Zaara. Zair, a River
in Congo. Zambera, a River running through Monomotopa and Cafreria. Zamoski, a
Town in Russia the Black. Zanguebar, a Country in Africa. Zanhaga, a Town in
Zaara. Zant, an Island in the Mediterranean Sea, near Morea Westward. Zara, a
Town in Dalmatia. Zeeland, formerly Codanonia, an Island in the Baltic Sea.
Zeland, one of the Seventeen Provinces; in Holand. Zell, a Town in the Duchy of
Lunenburg. Ziagathay, otherwise Vsbeck or Mavaralnahara, part of Great Tartary.
Zibit, a Town in Arabia. Ziden, a Town in Arabia. Zimbaoe or Massapa, a Town in
Monomotopa. Zittaw, a Town in Lusatia. Zofala, a Town in Cafreria. Zuenziga, a
Town in Zaara. Zug, a Town in the Canton of Zug. Zug Canton, in Swizzerland.
Zurick, a Town in the Canton of Zurick. Zurick Canton, in Swizzerland. Zutphen,
a Town in the County of Zutphen. Zutphen County, one of the of the Seventeen
Provinces; in Holland.
FINIS.

