AN IDEA Of the Perfection OF PAINTING: DEMONSTRATED From the Principles of
Art, and by Examples conformable to the Observations, which Pliny and
Quintilian have made upon the most celebrated Pieces of the Ancient PAINTERS,
Paralleled with some Works of the most famous Modern Painters, LEONARDO da
VINCI, RAPHAEL, JULIO ROMANO, and N. POUSSIN.

Written in French By Roland Freart, Sienr de Cambray, And rendered English By
I. E. Esquire, Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY.

In the SAVOY: Printed for Henry Herringman at the Sign of the Anchor in the
Lower-walk of the New-Exchange. 1668.

THE PREFACE.
THere is hardly that Man living, but has some inclination for PAINTING, and
that does not even pretend sufficient Abilities to control the Works which it
produces: for not only Learned men, and persons of Condition, who are ever
probably the most rational, are emulous of this Knowledge; but the very
Common People will adventure to spend their Judgments too; so as it seems,
this Art is in some sort, the Universal Mystery.

Neither is this presumption a Vice peculiar to the French alone, or of this
Age of ours only; it is as old as Painting it self, and sprung from her very
Cradle in Greece. This is evident by that which Pliny has recorded of Apelles;
who before he gave the last touches to his Pieces, was wont to expose them in
Public to the Censure of all the Passengers, whilst he concealed himself
behind them, that he might hear what every one said, and make use of it
accordingly; whence the Proverb, Apelles post Tabulam. Most of our Painters do
to this day observe something of this very Custom, or at least, something like
it, but which they have turned into a kind of Complement: For they usually
request such as have the Curiosity to visit their Works, freely to tell them
what they think of them; and whether they observe any thing which needs
reforming. But as Complements are but vain and insignificant words, they seldom
produce any real Effects upon these encounters; and to speak sincerely, these
Painters would be but justly punished, should one really take the liberty of
effectually rendering them this friendly Office, which they ask but in Ceremony,
and that instead of those ordinary compliances with which they usually flatter
them, they did ingeniously discover to them their miserable failings. But
instead of receiving this Instruction in good part, and gratifying the Censure
as becomes them, they would certainly be offended at the freedom, and we should
see them rather Confounded than Reformed by it; because they do not so much
seek to be Able men, as they desire to appear so. The days of Apelles are now
past, and our Modern Painters are quite of another strain from these Old
Masters, who never came to be Considerable in their Professions, but by the
study of Geometry and Perspective, the Anatomy of Bodies, the assiduous
Observation of those Characters which expres'd the Passions and Emotions of the
Soul; by the Lecture of the Poets and good Historians; and in fine, by a
continual re-search of whatever might best contribute to their Instruction.

They were in those days so Docile and Humble, that they not only would submit
their Works to the Criticismes and Animadversion of Scholars and Philosophers,
but even to the Common People also, and to Artificers of all Trades, who did
frequently and sometimes judiciously reprehend them. This was (I confess)
something a tedious way, and is indeed inaccessible to a great part of our
Painters in this Age, who have neither the Genius of these illustrious
Ancients, nor the same Object in their working.

In effect, those Painters proposed to themselves, above all other things, the
Glory and Immortality of their Names, for the sole, and principal Recompense of
their Labors; whereas, most of our Moderns, regard only the emergent Profit,
and therefore they hold a quite different Method, and strive as much as they
can to compass only their proposed aim.

To this purpose, they have introduced into their Cabals I know not what kind
of licencious Painting, totally differing from those pretended subjections,
which heretofore rendered this Art so incomparable and so difficult, whilst this
incapacity of theirs makes them imagine, that this rare Painting of the
Ancients, was but an old Dotaress, who had only slaves in her service.

Under this pretext, they have dressed themselves up a new Mistress, trifling,
and full of tattle, who requires nothing of them but Fard and Color to take at
first sight, without being at all concerned whether she pleased long or not.

See then, this Idol of the present Age, to which most of our Painters
sacrifice all their Pains, whilst those of more sublime and noble Spirits, and
that find themselves capable of this excellent Profession, run generously in
the same path, by which those renowned Ancients arrived to the perfection of
their Skill; and leaving those lazy Ignorants behind, pronounce it with as much
compassion as disdain, Aulaedus sit, qui Citharaedus esse non possit,
compassionating those whom Nature having denied those necessary Endowments of
being capable to attain the Principles of the Art, are compelled by that
weakness and want of Talent, to acquiesce in the single Practice of doing
Things as Mechanically as they first learned them from their ignorant Masters.

But how despicable are those poor-spirited men, who are so affrighted at the
study, that to avoid the trouble of it, they chose rather to oppose with the
revolted Cabalists, and to pull on the same hypocritical Vizor, than give
themselves the trouble of acquiring, and effectually possessing the Thing it
self, which they so unjustly affect the reputation of?

What Is now become of the Glory with which those ancient Greeks, those Gallant
souls had Crowned Painting, when they pronounced her Queen of all the Arts, and
permitted only the most noble and renowned of men to be of her Retinues? what
regard, think you, would they have to this Age of ours, which has so unworthily
abandoned her? and to these abject spirits who daily dishonor her by the
contempt and disrespect which they put upon her Laws, and who by a yet more
insufferable attempt, have resigned her sacred Name to this fantastic Idol
which they have established in her place? with what indignation may we suppose
do true and able Painters look on the temerity of these insolent Rivals, whom
they behold so gay and jovial in this present Age, by the Capriciousness of
Fortune, and the favor of an ignorant conjuncture? I must confess, I am
strangely surpised at it; and though I know there is nothing less permanent,
or more Caduque than this false esteem, I cannot but be sensibly touched, and
even altogether impatient of seeing once a period to this odious Abuse, so
reproachful to an Age, that is otherwise extraordinarily flourishing in the
knowledge of Letters, and of all other Sciences, which we find every day
entertained, and more perfection'd than ever, maugre the importunate jarrs and
hostilities which have uncessantly molested them for so many years past; nay,
even Painting it self, whose deminution and decadency we so much deplore, and
which seems not to have been born for times of Peace and Tranquillity, was
happily never in higher esteem amongst us, nor more sought after, than it is at
present; which may partly be the occasion of its Corruption and decay: For as
Arts flourish, and are cherished by the Honors which are conferred upon
excellent Artists; so, on the contrary, a blind Affection, and indiscreet
flattery ruins and destroys them.

To recover then its pristine Luster, and restore her to original Purity, we
must of necessity recall that Primitive severity, by which they were wont to
examine the Productions of those renowned Painters, who were of old so
esteemed; and whose Works have survived their Authors so many Ages, and rendered
their own Names Immortal.

To accomplish this, there is nothing more expedient, than the exact
observation of those Fundamental Principles, which consummate its Perfection,
and without which it is imposible she should subsist.

But forasmuch as the long neglect hereo^ has almost banished the Science, to
the infinite loss and prejudice of those who are curious of Painting; and
since, without this succor, they can never enjoy the satisfaction which a
clear and perfect understanding will present them; I have made it here my
particular enquiry; that laying before them in this Dissertation the same
Compass by which the Ancients steered their Course, they may sail by the same
Route themselves, and discover those things to the very bottom, which they had
never attained to without it, but superficially, and with much imperfection.

And since I consider how extremely difficult it is to disabuse those who are
already infected with so common, and pernicious an abuse, under the pretense of
a specious Liberty: I could not think it sufficient to talk of things only, and
to prove them from pure and undeniable Reasons; had I not also made it appear,
of what importance it is by authentic Demonstrations and examples.

For this effect, I have made choice of some amongst the Works of our most
celebrated Painters; to which, having applied all those Principles which I have
produced, there remains no more cause for us to suspect their Fidelity. And
that I may the better and more generally comprehend the good and bad effects
which result from them, by either observing or neglecting these Rules, I shall
here present them in Order.

Raphael Vrbino, the most excellent of the Modern Painters, and universally so
reputed by those of the Profession, is the Person whose Works I shall propose
as so many Demonstrations of the absolute necessity of exactly observing the
Principles which we have established in this Treatise. And on the contrary,
Michael Angelo, superior in Fame, but far inferior to him in Merits, shall by
his extravagant Compositions, amply furnish us to discover the Ignorance and
Temerity of those Libertines, who trampling all the Rules and Maxims of Art
under their feet, pursue only their own Caprices.

It is in this part chiefly, that the disinteress'd Reader may possibly find my
Animadversions most agreeable: But to enjoy the diversion more entirely, it
were requisite he laid before him those Prints of Raphael which I pretend to
examine and propose, as just, and regular Works, conformable to my Principles:
These are the designs of the Judgment of Paris; That of the slaughter of the
Innocents, and our B. Saviors taking down from the Cross.

These three first Stamps, were Engraven by Marc. Antonio, and are indeed very
rare and curious pieces. The Fourth is a most noble Composition, usually called
The School of Athens. The Graving is one of the best hands, nor in truth so
good as the other; but the Ordonance of the Figures is much more magnificent
and stately.

As for Michael Angelo, we will content our selves with that representation of
the Universal Judgment, which has rendered him so famous amongst the Vulgar,
and this Work is possibly the most Numerous of Figures that was ever painted;
as it is likewise in my opinion, the most copious subject that can be proposed
to disabuse those who have the Name of this Painter in so great veneration,
that they commonly admire whatsoever is his, with so strange a preoccupation of
their Judgments, as to prefer even the very Abuse which is in Vouge, before
Reason her self, and dare not examine, that with Candor and Justice, to which
they manifestly incline without her.

For my own part, I am not altogether so blind, nor scrupulous; as having no
other design then to investigate and find out the Truth; and I hope that the
Research's which I have endeavored to make after her in the following
discourse, may be accordingly received of all who are real Lovers of Painting;
as for the approbation of the Cabalists, despise them perfectly.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
A Friend of mine, who Fortuned to see this Treatise of Painting, whilst I was
writing it, understanding that it was my intention to Publish it, and that my
principal design was to expose it to the view of the Court; advertised me of
certain obscure Italian Terms, which I had made use of in my Discourse; the
understanding of which would doubtless be very difficult to many, who were not
acquainted with that Tongue; and that one should strive to render things as
clear and intelligible to the Reader as was possible. And truly, though I
conceived the Counsel was but reasonable, it gave me a great deal of trouble;
nor was I able to find out words which were purely ours, capable to express
those Barbarismes, which Custom has as it were naturalized amongst our
Painters: And therefore I was resolved to retrench as many of them as I could,
especially, the least necessary. But for the rest which really are proper
Terms of Art, I believed it would be sufficient to make an explanation of them
for the introduction of those who are Lovers of Painting, and that would
discourse of the Art like Knowing Persons with those of the Profession.

STAMPI, or Prints.
THe most remarkable in my Opinion, because most of all mentioned in this
Discourse, and which gives Title to many Sections of this Book, is that of
Stampo or Print: There is not one Designer or Curious man in this Art but knows
that it signifies an Engraven or Printed design, which the Vulgar and such as
Vend them commonly call by the names of Taille-Douces, Cutts and Pictures:
There is yet this difference between them, that Stampi, Prints, consist of more
considerable things, and Designs of more reputation: And of these there are
great variety; for some are graven on Copper with the Burine, some with Aqua
fortis, and others are cut in Wood. Albert Durer, a German Painter, and a most
incomparable Workman, has published some things in all these kinds. The
Original of the word is in Italian, Stampare, and signifies in our Language, to
Print or make Impression.

TRAMONTANO.
I Make use of this Term, when ever I mention Albert Durer, whom I maintain to
have been the greatest Master of the Tramontani: For so do the Italians call
almost all Painters that are Strangers to them; especially, the Germans, and
those of Flanders, who inhabit the Northern parts; because that Quarter, and
the Wind which spires from thence, is named in the Italian tongue La Tramontana.

ELEVATO.
THis Term is particularly attributed to the Learners and Disciples of the
most renowned Painters. Thus Raphael had for his Scholar or Elevato IVLIO
ROMANO: HANNIBAL CARACIO was GVIDO and DOMINIQVINO'S Master, and so of others.
The Italians call them Allievi, and in France they familiarly say, such a young
man has been bien essleve, that is, well Instructed.

SCHIZZO.
THis Term is entirely Italian, though it be now universally understood: It Is
as it were, the first draught, or light touch, and attempt of a Work yet under
meditation. The Italian calls it Schizzo.

ATTITUDO.
I Have made use of this Term in several places of my discourse, though we
retain the Words, Action and Posture, which are in a manner the same thing;
however, methinks, upon some encounters, the term Aptitude is more expressive;
for besides, that it is more general, it is also more significative on many
occasions, than either that of Posture or Action: For Instance, the Word Action
is not applicable to a dead person who is deprived of Action; and it were
better to say the Disposition of a Dead Corpse, than the Posture of it, which
seems a Term too gross, nor were it too speak like a Painter, to say, this
Figure is in an handsome Posture, but in a graceful Disposition and Aptitude.
The Italians says Attudine.

PELLEGRINO.
THis Term the Italians familiarly use when they would express some Rare
thing, excellent and singular in its kind; but they more particularly apply it
to Wit, and say Ingegno Pellerino.

I conceive, there is nothing more which needs any great Explication, and it
would be but a kind of Pedantry to make any farther Glosses. I shall therefore
conclude this with a Remark, which is, in my opinion, a great deal more
important; and that is, an Objection which several Persons have made to me
concerning the Reputation of Michael Angelo, whom they conceive I ought not to
have attaq'd so boldly: But upon my Request, that for their own satisfaction,
they would themselves take the pains to examine not only That Work of his which
I produce in this Dissertation, but likewise several other Pieces of the same
hand, which I have addres'd them to; they in fine assented, that I had reason
for what I said; and are now as much astonished as my self, that the World has
been so long abused, and his Reputation so extravagantly asserted; which could
certainly proceed from no other cause, but that pitiful Juncto, the Wits of
Michaelo's standard, who are ever in greater Numbers than the others: But it is
as the Proverb has it, Afinus Afino Pulcher, Every one loves his Like.

To the Illustrious HENRY HOWARD OF NORFOLK Heir-apparent to that DUKEDOM.
Sir,
THere is no man who has heard of the House of Norfolk, and especially of that
of Arundel and Surrey, but will justify the resolution I have taken to
Inscribe Your Name in the Front of this Piece; since the names of Painting, and
Sculpture (two of the most celebrated and renowned Arts that ever appeared in
the world) had scarce been known amongst us in England, but for your
Illustrious Grandfather, who brought into, and adorned this Nation with more
polite and useful things, than it had received for some Ages before, and who
continued a Mecoenas and Protector of all the sublimer Spirits, as long as this
Island was Worthy of him, which was as long as it remained Loyal.

I have great reason to Consecrate thus his Memory, of whose more particular
Favors I have so frequently tasted both at Home and Abroad; especially in
Italy, where I had the honor to be cherished by him, and from whence I
afterward received one of the last Letters that ever he Writ, which I reserve
by me amongst the choicest of my Treasures.

From Him, through a most Illustrious Father, this Affection to great and noble
things is derived to You: Witness, the Asylum which the ROYAL-SOCIETY found in
your own Palace, when the most fierce and merciless of the Elements subverted
her first Abodes; and now (besides other Accumulations) your free and glorious
Donation of a fonds upon your own Ground, to establish her on for ever, and fix
her at your very Threshold, by which you not only oblige the most grateful and
useful Assembly, that any Age has produced, but do honor likewise to His
Majesty our Founder, by signifying your respect so eminently to his Royal
Institution.

But, Sir, I have something yet to add, and the very Stones would even exclaim
against me, should I omit your never-to-be-forgotten Munificence to the
University of Oxford; because it was upon my First and Sole Suggestion (for
Instigation, the Generosity of your Nature needs not) that You were pleased to
enrich that renowned Seat of the Muses, with a greater Gift, than all the World
can present it; because the World cannot show such a Collection of Antiquities:
And this Great Thing You did, when You placed the MARMORA ARVNDELIANA There.
First, the Greek, and then, the Latin Inscriptions; by which You not only
nobly Consulted the most Lasting way to perpetuate Your Name in the Learned
World, and gave Eternity to those (almost) obliterated Titles, by transferring
them to a less Corrosive Air; but did likewise a piece of Justice, and Piety
too, in Restoring that to the Daughter, which came from the Mother, and
Consigning those Antiquities to Oxford, which were taken away from Athens.

Sir, in my Letter to You into Surrey, (now about a Year since) concerning this
Largess, I cannot forbear to repeat a line or two, which was to move your
Honor in one particular more; and that is, that you would one day, cause the
choicest of your Statues, Basse relievos, and other noble pieces of Sculpture,
standing in you Galleries at Arundel-House, to be exquisitely designed by some
sure hand, and engraven in Copper, as the late Justiniano set forth those of
Rome, and since him (and several others) Monsieur de Lion-Court by the Draughts
of Perier; as formerly that incomparable Historical-Columne of the Emperor
Trajan, was cut by Villamena with the Notes of diverse Learned men upon them:
Because by this means, the World might be informed in whose Possession those
Rarities are; and that it would so much contribute to the Glory of the
Country, their Illustrious Owner, and his Family; as it has formerly, and yet
does, to those noble Italians, and great Persons beyond the Alps, who have not
been able to produce such a Collection as You are furnished with, but who are
honored, and celebrated for it, all the World over, by this virtuous, and yet
no very expenseful Stratagem.

I was the rather incited to mention This here, because I understand there are
some Learned Persons now at Oxford, adorning a new Impression of the Marmora,
in which, such a Work could not pass without due veneration, and would prove a
considerable ornament to the design; and indeed, because the Argument of the
Discourse I am entertaining your Honor with, (dedicated lately to the French
Kings only Brother) does prompt me to it, as my very great Obligations, to
subscribe my self.

Illustrious Sir, Your most obedient and most humble Servant. J. EVELYN
Says-Court, June 24. 1668.
TO THE READER.
I did once think, and absolutely resolve, that I had for ever done with the
drudgery of Translating of Books, (though I am still of the opinion, that it
were a far better, and more profitable Work to be still digging in that Mine,
than to multiply the number of ill Ones, by productions of my Own) But this
small piece coming casually to my hands and from an Author whose knowledge of
the most polite and useful Arts has celebrated him Abroad; and upon a Subject I
had formerly bestowed some Reflections on; partly, in that Parallel of
Architecture (which from the same hand, I not long since published for the
Assistance and Encouragement of Builders) and partly my History of Sculpture; I
did believe I might do some service not only to Architects and Sculptors, but
to our Painters also, by presenting them with this curious Treatise, which
does, I think, perfectly consummate that design of mine, of recommending to
our Country, and especially to the Nobless, those Three Illustrious and
magnificent Arts, which are so dependent upon each other; that they can no more
be separated, than the very Graces themselves, who are always represented to us
holding hand in hand, and mutually regarding one another.

The Reader will find in this discourse (though somewhat verbose, according to
the style of this overflowing Nation) diverse useful Remarks; especially, where
he Treats of Costume which we have interpreted decorum, as the nearest
expression, our Language will bear to it; and I was glad our Author had
reproved it in so many instances; because it not only grows daily more
licentious, but even ridiculous and intolerable: But it is hoped this may
universally be reformed, when (...)dern Workmen shall consider, that neither
the exactness of their design, nor skilfulness in Coloring has been able to
defend their greatest Predecessors from just reproaches, who have been faulty
in this particular: I could exemplify in many others whom our Author has
omitted; and there is none but takes notice what injury it has done the fame of
some of our best reputed Painters; and how indecorous it is to introduce
Circumstances wholly improper to the usages and Genius of the Places, where our
Histories are supposed to have been acted: This was not only the fault of
Bassano, who would be ever bringing in his Wife, Children, and Servants, his
Dog and his Cat and very Kitchin-stuff, after the Paduan mode; but of the Great
Titian himself; Georgion, Tintoret and the rest; as Paulo Veronese is observed
also to have done in his story of Pharaohs Daughter drawing Moses out of the
River, attended with a Guard of Swisses; this puts me in mind of that piece of
Malvogius in His Majesty's Gallery at Whitehall, who not only represents our
first Parents with Navils upon their bellys, but has placed an Artificial
stone-Fountain carved with imagerys in the midst of his Paradise. Nor does that
excellent and learned Painter Rubens escape without being perstring'd, not
only for making most of his Figures of the shapes of brawny Flemings, but for
other sphalmata and circumstances of the like nature; though in some he has
acquitted himself to admiration in the due observation of Costume, particularly
in his Crucifixes, etc. as I might largely exemplify: Raphael Urbino was
doubtless one of the first who reformed these inadvertency's; but it was more
conspicuous in his latter, than in his former piece.

As for Michael Angelo, though I heartily consent with our Critic in reproving
that almost idolatrous veneration of his Works, who had certainly prodigiously
abused the Art, not only in the Table this Discourse Arraigns him for; but
several more which I have seen; Yet I conceive he might have omitted some of
those embittered reproaches he has reviled him with, who doubtless was one of
the greatest Masters of his time: and (however he might succeed as to the
decorum) was hardly exceeded for what he performed in Sculpture and the
Statuary Art by many even of the Ancients themselves, and happ'ly by none of
the Moderns, witness his Moses, Christo in gremio, and several other Figures at
Rome; to say nothing of his Talent in Architecture, and the obligation the
world has to his memory, for recovering many of its most useful Ornaments and
Members, out of the neglected Fragments which lay so long buried; and for
vindicating that Antique and Magnificent manner of Building, from the trifling
of Goths and Barbarians.

The next usual reproach of Painting, has been the want of judgment in
perspective, and bringing more into History, then is justifiable upon one
Aspect, without turning the Eye to each Figure in particular, and multiplying
the points of Sight; which is an error into which our very Author (for all the
pains he has taken to magnify that celebrated decision of Paris) has failed
in: For the knowing in that Art do easily perceive, that even Raphael himself
has not so exactly observed it; since instead of One (as Monsieur de Cambray
takes it to be, and as indeed it ought to have been) there are no less than
four or five, as du Bosse has well considered in his late Treatise of the
Converted Painter; where by the way also, he judiciously numbers amongst the
faults against Costume, those Landskips, Grotesq^s, Figures, etc. which we
frequently find ( Abroad especially, for in our Country we have few or none of
those graceful supplements of Steeples) painted Horizontaly, or Verticaly on
the Vaults and Ceilings of Cupolas; since we have no examples for it from the
Ancients, who allowed no more than a Frett to the most magnificent and costly
ones which they erected.

But would you know from whence this universal Caution in most of their works
proceeded, and that the best of our Modern Painters and Architects have
succeeded better than others of that Profession: It must be considered that
they were Learned men, good Historians, and generally skilled in the best
Antiquities: Such were Raphael, and doubtless his Scholar Iulio; and if
Polydore arrived not to the glory of Letters, he yet attained to a rare habit
of the ancient Gusto, as may be interpreted from most of his Designs and
Paintings: Leon Baptist Alberti was skilled in all the politer parts of
Learning to a prodigy, and has written diverse curious things in the
Latine-tongue: We know that of later times, Rubens was a Person universally
studied, as may be seen in several Latin Epistles of his to the most famous
Scholars of his Age: And Nicholas Poussin the French man, who is so much
celebrated, and so deservedly; did, it seems, arrive to this Culture, by his
indefatigable indust^y: as the present famous Statuary Bernini, now living, has
done to so universal a Mastry; that not many years since, he is reported to
have built a Theater at Rome, for the adornment whereof he not only cut the
Pigures and Painted the Scenes, but writ the Play, and Composed the Music
which was all in Recitativo: And I am persuaded that all this is not yet by
far so much, as that Miracle and Ornament of our Age and Country Dr.
Christopher Wren were able to perform if he were so disposed, and so
encouraged; because he is Master of so many admirable Advantages beyond Them.

I allege these Examples partly to incite, and partly to show the Dignity and
vast Comprehension of this rare Art; and that for a Man to arrive to its utmost
perfection, He should be almost as universal as the Orator in Cicero, and the
Architect in Vitruvius: But certainly some tincture in History, the Optics, and
Anatomy are absolutely requisite, and more (in the Opinion of our Author) than
to be a steady Designer, and skilled in the tempering and applying of Colors,
which amongst most of our Modern Workmen, go now for the only Accomplishments
of a Painter.

I had once thoughts to have added the Stamps and Prints themselves, which our
Author does so critically discourse upon; but then considering, that as this
Piece is of most use to the Virtousi, and that such as are Curious, must needs
already be furnished with them; and that it had been doubtless impossible to
have procured Originals sufficient to adorn this Impression, and would have
immensly exalted its price (I my self having been offered Twenty shillings but
for one of them) I soon laid those intentions aside: Besides that our Author
has also published his Book without them, and to have gotten them well Copied,
had been equally difficult.

J. EVELYN.

ERRATA
To the READER.
PAge 1. line 15 r. parallel. p. 4. 17. r. former pieces.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Sub tit. Attitudo, l. ult. r. the Italian says Atitudine.

PREFACE.
P. 3. l. 9. r ingenuously. 7.3. put on. 14. Retinue. 8. penult. r. diminution.
9. l. 1. add, but for times. 13.6. none of the best. ibid. 16. add, numerous
Assembly. 14. l. ult. r. I despise it.

In the BOOK:
Page. 4. line. 15. r. Worthiest. p. 19 l. 11. dele as. ibid. 20. add, and
regular. 36 14. dele by. 43. 1. r situated. 44.17. situation. 49.14. for Piew
r. Piece. 59.12. r. Which we. ibid. r. their own Nature. 82.12. School. 84.1.
Timantes. 85. ult. r. Memoires. 86.14. Price. 90.8. r. drole and fantastic.
ibid. l. antepenult. r. gentileness, and so in p. 115. l. 1. page 116.18. for
where, r. were. 126.5. dele the. 129.22. r. Noblest. l. 27. Oevure. 130.7. r.
these Works. etc. The rest are litteral, and pardoned with less violation to
the Sense.

AN IDEA of the Perfection OF PAINTING.
It Is a very subtle and curious Enquiry, to know, from whence it should come to
pass, that the Art of Painting is so much degenerated from that perfection,
which it once obtained, and how it happens, that considering the weakness of
its productions, compared with those admirable Masterpieces of the Ancients,
it seems of late to present the World with nothing but the mere shadow and
phantosmes of it?

For my own part, I conceive, the principal cause of its decadence to have
proceeded from that little esteem which it preserved, during the ignorance and
barbarity of the Lower Empire, which did so far ignoble and debase it of its
pristine Honor; that instead of that pre-eminence which it then held amongst
the Sciences, it is now reduced and reckoned amongst the most vulgar Trades;
sufficient to let us see, how much the spirit and Genius of these latter Ages,
have declined, in which the rare Inventions and Lights of this Divine Art are,
for want of encouragement, almost totally extinguished.

However yet, that good Genius, which by a certain providence of Nature does
still preside over Noble things, has always furnished us with some excellent
Men, preserving, as it were, some Seeds of them from time to time: But as we
find it in Trees, and even in the most perfect Bodies, that they attain not to
their consummate form upon the sudden, and till after many years;
notwithstanding which they are yet obnoxious to destruction every instant,
without any means of restoration, but the same from whence first they sprung:
even so it is in the productions of Wit, which coming once, through negligence,
to be lost, or oppressed under the Tyranny of evil Government, never recover
themselves but by a long and laborious re-search; so, as it is realy prodigious;
that in the Age of Leonardo da Vinci, and Raphael (who were the Protogenes and
Apelles's of the Modern Painters) we should see the Art revive again with so
much vigor, and flourish in so short a space. For Painting is none of those
simple Arts, which Chance does now and then present us with, without any
disquisition, and which every one may light on without an extraordinary Talent,
or study to attain them.

There is happ'ly nothing of Ingenious amongst Men of more sublime, and whose
Perfection is more difficult to attain, than that of Painting, the Noblest
Instance which humane wit can boast of: It Is therefore plainly an insupportable
abuse, to obscure and confound her amongst the Mechanical Arts; since she is
established upon a demonstrative Science, infinitely more enlightened and
reasonable, than that Pedantick Philosophy, which produces us nothing but
frivolous Questions and uncertainties, whence some have styled it, The Art of
Doubting, a steril and idle speculation; whereas Paynting, founded upon the
real Principles of Geometry, makes at once a double demonstration of what she
represents: But it will indeed require different Eyes to contemplate and enjoy
her Beauty entirely: For the Eye of the Understanding, is the first and
principal Judge of what she undertakes.

It will, in my opinion, be necessary therefore, in order to the restoration
of her Honor, to evince by undeniable reasons, that she is still as worthy of
the rank and dignity, which she formerly possessed amongst the Greeks, the
worthies of Genius's that ever Nature formed, and that the shameful desertion,
which has since arrived her, could proceed from no other cause but an universal
depravation.

She has moreover had this particular misfortune, that all the Writings and
Works which should contribute to her Instruction, and that diverse excellent
Painters had long since published for the better intelligence of their Art,
have been buried and lost by tract of time. Nor is it strange, that this
accident has more concerned them, than all that has happened to the Books of
Orators, Philosophers, Historians, and diverse others; since 'twas sufficient
for them to find out People that could transcribe them again, and by that means
continually replenish their Libraries; whereas, for the Writings of our great
Master-Painters, the Copists were of necessity to be good Designers, and
knowing in the Matter, which they transcribed, to be able but to accomplish a
very few Volumes in a great deal of time; so as one could hope for no better
event than what is come to pass, by reason of those tedious and very difficult
Figurations, which go to the composure of its principal, and most essential
Parts, as may easily be deduced from that Treatise of Leonardo da Vinci, which
it had been impossible to have explained, without the advantages of the Art of
Graving, and of Printing, which this latter Age of ours has produced.

The same unhappiness arrived to Architecture: All the Ancient Books of it
being utterly lost, that single work of Vitruvius being only excepted, which is
very defective too, for want of its Profiles and lineal Demonstrations, which
this Author set forth in a particular Volume that is perished; but which was to
have been the Crown of all his labors; though we may yet affirm, that the
Moderns; persueing his steps, have made that Glorious and Magnificent Art to
flourish and revive again.

In my opinion, one might render the same service to that of Painting; since we
have a Philostratus to our guide in so worthy a design: But as Architecture is
more gross and material in what it undertakes; the Solidity of it, which
constitutes one of its very Principles, has honored it with some pre-eminence,
even above Painting it self. It stands firm, and has continued many of its
productions, which wonderfully supply the defect of those Books that are lost;
whereas Painting, which is, as it were, altogether spiritual, has not been able
to furnish us with such permanent monuments. And yet for all this, she has
within these two Ages revived with so much vigor, as if she had received the
very same assistances. And truly, she seems to me to have been the
Restauratrix of Architecture; since we find, that almost all the first Masters
of that Profession were also great Painters; such as Bramante, Baldassar
Petrucci, Raphaelo, Iulio Romano, and several more, which is no other then the
result of being able to design well, which is in truth the veritable Principle
and only Basis, not of Painting alone; but, as one may well affirm, the
universal Organ and Instrument of all the politer Arts.

'Twas a singular felicity and advantage to the re-establishment of this rare
Profession, that its Mechanical part did preserve it self so entire; in which
particular I conceive we have nothing more to desire of the Ancients. On the
contrary, the very use of Oil only, which the Moderns have discovered, does
infinitely advance it. Add to this, its refining on Colors; and their
improvements to that multiplicity of different kinds, as even superabound, and
are more than necessary; so as now a man needs only to understand, and be well
versed in what this excellent Talent of the great Masters of Antiquity
consists, and the prodigious Effects, which Historians report of them in their
Works. Nor is this a thing so difficult to resolve; since by that only Treatise
of Leonardo da Vinci, one may easily make it out, that a Painter well
instructed from his Youth in all the necessary Precepts so methodically
prescribed in the first Chapter of his Book, cannot fail of proving to be an
able Man in the Profession: but if to this, Nature likewise favor him with the
Genius of the Art, which consists in a certain vivacity and flowing of
Invention and Grace (which all the study in the World will never attain) he
must then of necessity be excellent. And if his Works perfectly conform to the
Rules of the rest of that exact Dissertation; one may safely pronounce as much
of his Pieces as of those of Apelles himself, Zeuxis, or Parrhasius. But
forasmuch as our Author put not the last hand to his Book, but left it us
imperfect; or the Project rather of a more finished Composure, which he had
under contemplation; I shall here adventure to set down some general Notions
and Observations for the supply of what seems most defective.

Supposing then, that all Arts whatsoever have their Fundamental Principles,
the knowledge whereof is absolutely necessary for those who intend the
Profession, and that This of Painting is superior to the rest, and consequently
more difficult: It is not to be expected, there should any considerable
progress be made without a due and perfect cognizance of those Principles; and
they consist of no mean speculations, Perspective and Geometry; without which,
a Painter can never emerge good Artist.

Seeing now, it is not enough, that to the forming an able Painter, he be
learned in these two Points alone (which study will soon accomplish) without
three or four other more curious Qualities, which he ought to be Master of; but
which are not usually attained to without a singular favor of Nature; it
happens that there appear so very few good Workmen amongst the multitudes of
this Profession, that it may well be verified of Them, which was said of the
Poets; That a Painter is so born, not made; and really their Genius is so
conform, as it became Proverbial; That Picture was mute Poesy, and Poesy
vocal Painting. The reason of which will appear very obvious in the ensueing
periods, where we shall Treat of the different Talents, which necessarily
concur to the production of an acomplisht Painter.

Those renowned Ancients who exalted the Art to its utmost perfection, and
rendered it so famous, observed in their Works five particulars exactly, as so
many Fundamental Principles, without which, Painting is nothing but a mere
Chymaera and confusion of Colors. But before I proceed to the parts, I must
first deferr the honor of this Observation to that Learned Hollander, Francis
Iunius, who about Five and twenty years since, published a Noble Treatise of
the Painting of the Ancients, wherein the entire History of this Art, from the
original to its utmost perfection, is rarely deduced; and were not the Book in
Latin, and by that means much concealed from most of our Painters, I should
satisfy my self to referr them to the Author. See what he writes at the
beginning of his Third Book.

The Ancients, says He, constantly observed these Five Parts in all their Works.

1. Invention, or the History. 2. Proportion, or Symmetrie. 3. Color, (wherein
is also contained the just dispensation of the Lights and Shades.) 4. Motion,
in which are expressed the Actions and Passions. 5. And lastly, the Collocation
or regular Position of the Figures of the whole Work.
But these four being Treated of in so general Terms, that it were almost
impossible, our Workmen should derive the Fruit and Instruction which is so
necessary for them to practice; I will here explain them in Order, and more at
large, and endeavor to render them intelligible, both by Reasons and Examples.

Of INVENTION. 1. PART.
INvention, or the Genius of Historizing and framing a Noble Idea upon the
Subject one would Paint, is a particular Talent, not to be acquired by Study or
Labor; but is properly a certain ardor exciting the Imagination, prompting and
enabling it to Act. And as this part of Invention has Naturally the
pre-eminence in the Nature of things (since it would be ridiculous in a Painter
to prepare his Colors and his Pencils, without resolving before hand, what to
Paint) so does it more than any other, discover the quality and force of the
Spirit; as whether it be pregnant, judicious, and exalted; or, on the contrary,
barren, confused, abject, and plainly repent.

Of PROPORTION. 2. PART.
AS touching Proportion, (i.e.) the Symmetrie and Congruity of the whole to its
parts; it is sufficiently easy to attain, there is no great difficulty in it,
and therefore the ignorant are without all excuse; since it may be gained with
very little pains, and by operations purely Mechanical: but the only way to
arrive at its perfection, and be perfectly acquainted with it, is to pass
through that of Geometry, which is indeed the sourse and original of all the
Arts. Now amongst the Painters and Sculptors of the Ancients who have most
excelled in this, Pliny and Quintilian, and others, principally instance in
Parrhasius, Praxiteles and the famous Asclepiodorus, to the exactness of whose
Proportions, the most celebrated Apelles would always subscribe.

Of COLORING. 3. PART.
BY this third Particular, which is that of Coloring, you are not only to
understand the Painting; since this Talent (though truly very important) must
yield to the Science of Lights and Shades, which is a certain Branch of
Perspective, in which the Center of the Luminous body represented to the Eye,
and the Section, which the beams make upon the Plan, or any other superficies,
precisely expresses the Contours and exact form of the body so illuminated; and
therefore, whoever is Master of this remark, furnishes himself with several
commodious ways, how to put any thing into Perspective, even the most
capricious and conceited, such as we sometimes encounter upon irregular
Surfaces, and that appear so surprising and difficult to those, who comprehend
not the secret of it.

Of MOTION and EXPRESSION. 4. PART.
BUt as the three first Parts are highly necessary for all Painters in general;
this Fourth, which concerns the Expression and Motion of the spirit, excells
them all, and is indeed admirable; for it gives not only life to Figures, by
representing their Gestures and Passions; but seems likewise to make them vocal
and to reason with you. It is from hence, a Man is enabled to judge of the
worth and abilities of a Painter; for such an Artist paints Himself in his
Tables, and represents, as in so many Mirrours and Glasses, the temper of his
own humor and Genius.

There is none but easily perceives, by paralleling the Compositions and
Figures of Raphael, with those of Michael Angelo; that the First was the very
sweetness of Grace it self; whereas, on the contrary, Mic. Angelo was so rude
and unpleasing, that he retained not so much as any regard to Good-manners.
This is evident in that great Work of his in the Chapel of the Vaticane;
where, being to represent the Final Judgment over the very Altar it self, he
introduces certain Figures in Actions extremely undecent; whereas Raphael
observes a Modesty, even in the most licencious of Subjects. From hence it is,
we may conjecture, how highly important this Talent of Expression is in a
Painter; it is really his greatest Excellency, and should accordingly be
accompanied with a peculiar Judgment and Circumspection; since by that alone,
one may conjecture at the force of his understanding, which being far from ever
acquiring any renown by his Works, whilst he violates the forms of Civility,
will doubtless, be the scorn and reproach of every Man; seeing the greatest
Libertines amongst Persons of Condition, generally abstain from lewd and impure
expressions; which, though but in passing, as we say (which makes not so
lasting impressions as what affects the eye) are taken up only by the dregs and
vilest of the People. And therefore, a Painter who makes profession of so noble
and excellent and Art, is extremely obliged to Modesty and good Manners in all
his productions, and should never pollute his Pensil with any Subject, but what
may endure the chastest eyes to behold it; for as he endeavors to render his
Works famous, and worthy to be sought of all the World; it oftentimes fortunes,
that those pieces, which are expressed with too much Liberty, happ'ning to fall
into the hands of scrupulous persons, never appear in the light, by which means
those Workmen are deservedly deprived of what they most of all affected.

I do not infer from hence, that one should be so precise, as not to endure
any kind of Nudities whatsoever, and be so peevish and moross, as altogether to
neglect both the excellency of a Work, and the History which they often
represent so; or in case they do retain some of them, that they should cloth
and cover them, by the hand of some wretched Dauber, which not only more
defiles the Picture, but renders it more ridiculous: But I would show our
Painters, what are the Rocks and Shelves they ought to avoid in that which
concerns Expression: For though this Animadversion may at first seem but
impertinent; since commonly our Wits and Actions are more vigorous and
inventive upon such occasions; yet when men shall seriously reflect upon the
indignity and vileness of the Liberty which some of them assume; and consider,
how much more easy it is to succeed in those wanton representations, than in
more worthy and Heroic Subjects; (as it is easier to make one Laugh, than to
make one Admire) Men will but despise their extravagance and brutality: And in
effect, they are never seen but in obscure Corners, as ashamed to behold the
Light; or in the houses of lewd and abandoned Persons, who feed themselves with
such impurities. If therefore a Painter would consult the honor of his
Profession, let him endeavor to pursue more Noble Ideas, and hold it for an
assured Maxim, that there is nothing praiseworthy which is dishonest. Be this
then spoken for prevention, and, but by the way, till I come to the more
particular applications, and examine exactly what may farther concern this
Advice.

Of the Regular Position of Figures 5. PART.
BUt in the first place, let us dispatch what we have to offer, touching the
due Collocation and Position of Figures in a Piece; since it is the Base and
Foundation of the whole Edifice of Painting; or, as I may term it better, the
Ligature of all those four Parts we have hitherto discoursed upon; which
without this, have neither Form, nor indeed, subsistence. For as it is not
sufficient in an Architect, to have amassed together, and made a vast provision
of Materials, nor even to have assigned each Member of his Building its
particular form, unless he also skill how to dispose of them all in their
proper places; Nor that a Sculptor should carve out each Member of a Statue
with just and due Proportion, without he know how to unite them in their
natural Postures, and not place an Arm where a Leg should stand, nor the Foot
where should be the Hand; but he must not so much as take one hand for another,
nor the left Leg for the right, which would be to form a Monster instead of a
Man. In like sort, a Painter would be found to work in vain, and loose his
time, if when he has laudably passed through the first four Parts, he should
fall short of this last, in which the whole Eurithmie and perfection of the Art
consists. It were the same folly to Invent and Compose a Subject, to have
studied the Beauty, and just proportion of every Figure; to emerge as an able
Colourist, and know how to give the Lights and the Shadows to each Body; their
taints and natural Luster, nay, and withal possess that Divine Talent of
expressing the very Motions and Passions in his History, (which is the soul of
Painting) if after all these noble accomplishments, he be ignorant, how to give
his Figures their due regular Positions.

We do therefore conclude, that if those other, or all of them united, or
asunder, are advantageous to a Painter; this last which we have spoken of, is
absolutely necessary. For though a piece may possibly not answer in every part,
some one of the former requisites be weak, nay, in some measure, defective in
all of them; yet, if this last be well performed, the Work will always deserve
esteem, and credit the Painter. Order is the sourse and Principle of Science,
and as it concerns the Arts, has this of peculiar, and to be admired, that it
is the parent of all Beauty, imparting its graces to the meanest productions
which it renders considerable.

Let us then consider a while, in what this so important, and indeed
accomplished part consists, which not only compleats a Painter, but comprehends
in it whatsoever the whole Art has of Scientific, and emancipates from the
indignity of the Mechanics, to give it place even amongst the Sciences
themselves.

Our Geometricians, who are the genuine Masters of this Question, and can best
explain it, have named it Optica, by which term they would signify, that it is
an Art of seeing by our Reasons and Eyes intellectual; for 'twere impertinent
to imagine, that our corporal Eyes alone should be capable of so sublime an
operation as to pretend themselves judges of the Beauty and perfections of a
good Picture, whence a thousand absurdities would ensue. And should the Workman
think to imitate things according to their external appearance; it is certain,
that if he place them ill, he represents them so, and will form but an ill
resemblance of them; so as before he takes the Crayon and the Pensils in his
hand, he should first adjust his Eye with his Reason by the Principles of Art,
which teaches us to behold things, not as they appear in themselves only, but
as they ought to be; and it were a fault unpardonable to paint them precisely
as they are seen, how Paradoxical soever the assertion seems.

Now this so necessary Art, which the learned call Optical, Painters and
Designers Perspective, prescribes us infallible Rules of exactly representing
upon any surface (be it Cloth or Table, a Wall, sheet of Paper, or the like)
whatsoever is visible at one view or aperture of the Eye, without changing our
place.

I shall not here insist upon the Principles, and various Methods, which the
Masters of the Art have invented for the execution of it, which were to digress
from my present Institution: But presupposing my Reader competently knowing in
it, shall show him here by diverse Instances, and a Critical examen of sundry
Pieces engraven after Raphael (the most renowned certainly of our Modern
Painters, and most accurate in his Works) of what importance this Perspective,
or regular Collocation of Figures is; since by that, a man may precisely
determine, and pronounce definitively what is well or ill done in a Picture.
Nor let any impute it a presumption, if in this survey, which I pretend to make
of Prints, I spare not even Raphael himself, where I find him defective; since,
it is neither my purpose to injure or flatter any man; besides, many of the
errors, which I take notice of, may possibly proceed from the impertinence and
ignorance of the Graver, who perhaps have abused, or altered the Original
Drawing; as I have frequently observed, that the Prints of Andrea Mantegna, and
Albert Durer, which were cut by their own hands, appeared a great deal more
regular and just, than those of Raphael, which had not the same advantage. And
if the manner of those two great Painters designs, had been as pleasant, and
noble, as they were accurate, their stamps had been without comparison; those
only excepted, which Marc. Antonio executed by the direction of Raphael, who
took extraordinary care, not only to furnish him with Drawings, extremely
finished, but instructed him likewise in the very Graving of them; so as one
would esteem those Papers of Marc. Anthony, amongst the greatest curiosities
that Painting has produced of the kind. And it were to be wished, for the
Virtuosi's sakes, that the same hand had Engraved all that are to be found after
this great Master; at least, those larger Compositions of his which are painted
in the Vaticane, the Capitol, and diverse other places at Rome, as the Battails
of Constantine against Maxentius; the School at Athens; the Assembly of the
Fathers and Doctors of the Church about the Sacrament, with several more, which
ill-Gravers have wretchedly abused.

To fix our Critic then on a favorable Augure, I suppose, it will redound both
to the Glory of Raphael, and our own satisfaction; to begin with good Examples,
and to propose Four or Five of the best of Marc. Antonios-pieces, as Antipasts
of the rest; that from what we shall observe from those which follow, we may
the better judge, how great a misfortune it is for a Painter to fall into the
hands of ill Gravers, and how infinitely our loss has been, that so many
excellent Works of the same Genius, have been so vilely lamed under their tools.

The First Stamp. The JUDGMENT of PARIS.
THe very First sheets which carried the name of Raphael out of Italy, and that
showed all the Painters of his Age, who was their Coripheus and Captain, was
that noble and famous Print of the Judgment of Paris; in which, Raphael made
so happy an Essay, both for his own, and his Scholar Marc. Antonios reputation,
that from thence forward he continued him in the same Employment; and for that
end, expressly designed him several other rare things, which probably we had
never seen, but upon this occasion, because he never did paint them.

Let us now examine in the Figures of this Stamp, whether our Painter have
sufficiently acquitted himself in our five Fundamental points; and that we may
proceed orderly in the research, commence at the First, which is the Invention:
But forasmuch, as it is absolutely necessary, e're we can rationally discuss
it, to understand the circumstances of this Poetique-History, we shall briefly
repeat it.

Paris, Son to King Priamus, being soon after his Birth exposed on Mount Ida,
and there abandoned to the wild Beasts (by reason of the funest dream, fatal
indeed to his Country, which his Mother Hecuba had of him, during her great
belly) happened to be taken up by one of the Country Shepherds, who bred him
up as his Son. This young Prince (unknown of his Foster-Father, and indeed to
himself) by a strange and secret virtue of the Royal-bloud in him, became so
accomplished in his Youth, as to surpass all his other Contemporaries in
Strength, Beauty and Address, and in sum, in whatsoever was esteemed most
qualified amongst them. Hitherto, it holds some resemblance of a true History;
but the Poets, who are somewhat near of kin to the Painters, have refined upon
all this, and mingled it with several capricious fancies; and pretend, that
once upon a time, as all the Deities were invited together to the Nuptials of
Peleus and Thetis, the Goddess Discordia only excepted; this malicious Lady, in
revenge of the affront, secretly conveyed amongst the Crowd that were at the
wedding, a Golden-Ball, upon which there was engraven, Be it given to the
Fairest.

Mercury, the busiest of all the rest, perceiving the Ball, catches it up, and
reads the words aloud; which inflamed all the Goddesses (emulous, who should be
counted fairest) with so burning a jealousy, that Jupiter himself refused to
decide the controversy, fearing to displease his Wife Juno, should he
pronounce in favor of any of the rest; or at least, be suspected of Interest.
The only Rivals of Juno, were the fierce Minerva, and the lovely Venus; so as
the difference being by mutual consent of the Competitors, referred to the
decision of the Royal-Shepherd, (who was in those days himself a handsome
Youth) Mercury was immediately dispatched from Jupiter with the Apple or Ball,
with order to deliver it to Her, who of the Three, Paris should judge to be the
Fairest.

You have here, what Raphael intended to represent by this Design, wherein,
for a general consideration, and almost ever a necessary one; he has placed the
principal Figures of his Story in the Center of his Ordonance; and that with
admirable variety both of Aspect and Expression. There, you may behold Minerva,
filled with disdain for missing the Prize she pretended to, turn her back upon
her Judge with a malicious regard: Venus, in whose favor the Sentence was
pronunc'd, stands in the middle of her two Rivals, and receiving the Symbol of
her Victory with a Modesty, accompanied with a marvelous Grace: The Painter has
made her be seen by a side Profile, as the most advantageous to discover the
shape and regularity of each part of a beautiful face. Juno, the haughtiest of
all the rest, enraged with despite, that she had not the preference, seems
altogether transported with rage at poor Paris, who appears not for all this
the least concerned, but continues sitting as becomes a Judge, pronouncing
Sentence with the Fatal-Apple that soon after occasioned those tragical
dissasters amongst the Greeks, and concluded in the total subversion of Troy,
which was the place of his Birth.

This last Goddess presents her self in front, as the most confident of the
Three; and Raphael has expressly designed them all with different aspects, to
make as great an emulation, even between his own very Figures, as possibly he
was able. I observe likewise in that of the Shepherd Paris, a certain variety
in the Profile from that of Venus; for where this fair Deesse discovers a
little of her breast, Paris on the other hand, shows a part of his shoulders
side-long; so extraordinary a care our Painter took, that each part of his
piece, should have something diversified.

Besides these Four, by which indeed the whole History had been sufficiently
illustrated, he has yet introduced Mercury (having finished his Commission) in
a posture of returning to carry back the news of the event to Jupiter, who that
happy person was, that obtained the Victory.

After this, the rest of the Composition is nothing but a Poetique expression
of the Genius of the Painter, to enrich the Ordonance of his Table: For the
Nymphs with their Cruses, and the two naked Men, who sit near them with
Bull-rushes in their hands so unconcerned with what passes, relates only to
Mount Ida, which abounds in Rivers and Springs of Water; and it is evident, that
he whom you see leaning upon the Bank, is the River Xanthus, which washes the
very walls of Troy; next to him, is the River Simois, both whose Sourses rising
in the same Hill, with their frequent Meanders refresh the large and irriguous
Campanias of the Troada, and at last unite themselves at the mouth of the
Hellespontic sea, near the Sigean Promontory.

Now, as there is not the least particular, in this whole Composure, which our
Painter has not managed with admirable, address to show that Mount Ida was of
an exceeding height, and abundantly fertile; he discovers a part of it only,
which successively ascending toward one of the Angles of his piece, and being
not only already parallel with, but even piercing some of the very Clouds,
makes one thence easily to conjecture its prodigious altitude. The plenty of
Trees and Cattle which adorn it, speaks also its great fertility: But of all
this Representation, the most difficult to interpret, is that which passes
amongst the Gods in the Clouds: For at one hand you have Jupiter sitting on his
Eagle, armed with Thunder, born up of one of the Winds, and accompanied by
Diana, and two other Deesses; and on the other part, Apollo, (the brother of
Diana) environed with his Zodiac, and attended by two young Cavaliers (whom I
suppose to be Castor and Pollux, the Brothers of Hellena) hastening to meet
Jupiter, and seeming to be placed there as a kind of Prognostic of the
Catastrophe which this jealous contention produced, and which soon after
kindled so dire a Flame against the unfortunate Umpire, that it reduced both
his House, his whole Race, and his City into ashes; and made so strange a
discord, even amongst the Deities themselves, that every one of them siding
with his own passion, banded such a League in Heaven, as was not ended till ten
years after.

The rest of the Fable, for containing little that concerns our Piece in it, I
need not explain here; and happily, I may already be thought over tedious; but I
have expressly enlarged, that after we have well considered in the Print all
these observations; and that there is nothing in the entire Composition but
what is essential to the Subject; the Idea and freedom of our Painters
invention, may appear with the more luster and advantage; for seeing, that in
so small a space, at one view, and with so few Figures, he has showed us such a
consequence of varieties, we must needs the more admire the force of his
Invention, which is the Talent we so much celebrate, and the first Member of
our present disquisition.

The Second, which concerns the Proportion of the Figures, will not require any
large discussion; it is too apparent to those who look with Painters eyes: we
may only observe in passing, what a judicious difference Raphael has assigned
to every one whom he Personates, as their particular qualities distinguish
them: for the three Goddesses, being the most illustrious and principal ones of
his Piece, he makes of a more august and stately Mine than the rest.

The Shepherd Paris, Mercury and Apollo, discover a more light and Airy
proportion, such as the Italians would call Svelta. The two Rivers are made
more robust and heavy; and the Fountain Nymphs fatter than usual, to denote
their fertility and abundance.

The Third Division, which imports the projection and disposure of the Shades
and Lights upon the Objects, needs as little particular enquiry into, as the
former; since it is generally very regular. We shall only take notice of a
certain license, familiar amongst Painters upon such occasions; which is, that
Apollo (who signifies the Sun, and consequently the Fountain and Center of the
universal Light) appearing here in humane shape but as a particular Figure of
the story, does not only impart no light to the rest of the Figures, but
receives both light and shadow with the other, as the point requires, which our
Painter has given to his Table.

Touching the Fourth Part, which is the Expression, that admirable and peculiar
Talent of Painting, which not only discovers what every Figure does, and
speaks, but even what it thinks also, a thing almost incredible; I shall
likewise pass it over without much enlargeing my discourse, as having
sufficienly examined it in the narrative of this History; and in particular,
where I treat of the Invention, and Intention of the Painter; where I observe
no less than three distinct passions most judiciously expressed in the
Contentions of the Goddesses; as first Disdain in Minerva, who turning her back
toward her Judge, casts a sleer over her shoulder, and lifts up her arm after
a very disrespectful manner. In the second, which is Venus (receiving the Prize
of her glorious Conquest) I remark a certain secret, and bashful complacency,
accompanied with all the grace that Beauty is capable of. As for Juno, she is
sufficiently conspicuous, according to the Poets description of her, full of
Choler, Revenge and Arrogance, threatening her Judge with her very looks, and
extending her arm toward him after an extreme audacious and haughty manner.
The next is Mercury, in a Posture perfectly describing his sedulity and
diligence, since he seems both to speak and to move forwards at the same
instant, and that with an address and Meene, which sufficiently denotes his
agility, and how proper he is for his Employment. The Royal Shepherd in the
interim, who is here one of the Principal Personages, though encompassed with
Divinities, preserves still a settled Countenance, as becomes a Judge; nay the
very Dog by his side, neither sleeps, nor importunately barks as Currs use to
do; but seems as it were to bear some part, and give attention to his Masters
Sentence. All the other Figures of Rivers, and Springs seem very little
concerned at what passes, as I have already noted.

I confess yet, at first, I once imagined, that the Nymph who sits so near the
two Rivers, and seems so extremely melancholy, might have been Oenane the
Mistress of Paris; and he might well be jealous at what he saw; but her tresses
of herbs about her head, and the Water-pot which she holds, do not quadrate
with this conjecture: Above in the Clouds the two young Harbingers full of
heat, and precipitancy, appear as augures of the ensuing War, which soon
overflowed all Greece, by the furious resentment of the angry Godesses, enraged
at their Judge, and by that direful revenge which they espress'd against all
his Posterity, sufficiently cautioning us, how perilous a thing it is, to
intermeddle with the affairs and contentions of Great Persons.

Those who are knowing in the Principles of Judiciary Astrology, will find also
by the position of the Figures about the Zodiac, that our Painter was not only
expert in placing them in their right order; but that he was likewise skillful
in what concerns the Figuration of Horoscops, and erecting of Schemes: For,
pretending to represent those great disasters which were to proceed from this
fatal Contestation, he turned it to the place of Aries, which is the House of
Mars, in which Thunders and Coruscations are engendered: the next is Taurus, the
Domicile of Venus, who is fortunate in that Sign; Then succeed the lucky Twins,
signifying to the History, and representing the two young Cavaliers who ride
before Apollo. From these Particulars so accurately research'd, we may infer
with how great judgment and art he has composed this Piece. There is little
else considerable; save the Figure of Jupiter riding upon Eolus in an
extraordinary garb, accompanied with three or four Divinities, the Lightning in
his hand, and an Eagle near him in a menacing posture, as being interested in
the Difference, which also presages a Tempest to ensue.

Let us now proceed to examine how our first and principal part, which concerns
the position of the Figures in true Perspective, have been observed in this
Ordonance. Our common Painters imagine Perspective to be no more than a certain
particular manner of representing things in Architecture, as they call it;
never conceiving that it signifies any thing in Histories which are composed of
Figures, so as this may be: and I confess it does not appear so perspicuous to
the eyes of our half- Paynters, who do not comprehend it any farther than they
are Mechanically taught by by a certain concourse of Lines, tending to a point
of sight, which is the uttermost limit of their skill: But those grand Masters
who own it for the Universal foundation of their Science, are curious to
observe it in every the minutest touches of a Piece, as I pretend to
demonstrate by this Instance, which is so much the more commodious for my
purpose, as at first sight it seems as if Raphael had thought of nothing less
in the Composition than of Perspective: so free and disengaged it appears from
any kind of constraint imaginable; there being neither any degradation of the
Plan, Buildings, or other form of Horizon, from whence those simple practisers
of Lineal Perspective, can derive the least conjecture how to proceed by in
their Mechanical way: But these men are to know, that it is a most subtle, and
refined address in Painting, to work things exactly regular and precise, and
yet to conceal the Art.

Let us begin then first to determine the point of sight; since it is as it
were, the very Center, to which every part of the Table has reference; and for
that we have in this Piece, no lineal guides to conduct us; our Reason must
supply that defect.

The Subject of this History being chiefly about Sight, and Paris the Person
principally concerned in it; the Paynter could not have placed the Visive point
more judiciously, than in the Eye of Paris, which, for this very cause, he has
represented in Profile, to show that there ought to be but One only, as
Geometricians teach us in their Optics, where they represent Vision, or the
function of Seeing, by a radiated Pyramid with an Eye fixed upon it.

This established, and rightly understood, we proceed to observe in the
Ordonance of this Composition, that the Plan on which the three rival Goddesses
stand, has its degradation toward the Eye of their Judge, toward which
likewise all the rest of the Piece is converted. Now Perspective being an Art
composed of reciprocal proportions, it follows, that from the knowledge of one
part, one may easily pass to that of another; and by this alternative, arrive
in fine, to the knowledge of them altogether: so as from this first point of
Sight, and the consequent diminution of the three prime Figures, we likewise
infer another essential point, exceedingly necessary for such as practice
Designing; and this they usually call the point of Distance; because it
determines the Interval between the Object or Table, and the Eye of the
Spectator. As for the right-line, comprised between the point of Distance, and
that of the Eye, it denotes the Axis of the visual Pyramid, which is always to
remain fixed, and parallel to the surface of the Plan, and the height of the
Horizon. This point of Distance has certain regular and constant limits, beyond
which it works no effect; for approaching too near, it causes the Plan to be so
far elevated, and the Diminutions of the Figures come so suddenly upon us, that
it surprises the eye; and, on the contrary, if it be too remote, it renders
things as much confused; so as there is that mediocrity to be observed, which
the skilful in Optics have agreed upon in the opening of the Angles of
Equilateral Triangles. By this general Maxim, one may immediately discover,
where the precise term of Distance resides, which we are seeking: And therefore
I will dwell no longer upon it; the particulars being also so absolutely
important to those who are already versed in the practice, though something
difficult, I confess, to be conceived by those who never heard any thing of it
before.

Presupposing then these first Operations disposed according to the Rules of
Art; You are only to consider, whither the Figures (as well those which stand
after the usual manner upon the Ground, as those who are elevated in the Air,
and amongst the Clouds) be placed in an aspect agreeable to their Situations,
with regard to the visual point; and whether they diminish, proportionably to
the degradation of the Plan which they should observe; since it is only in
these two particulars, that the whole intention and effect of Perspective in a
Painting does consist. And though they are now adays much neglected by those
of the Profession; Yet is the Consequence of such weight, that whosoever
observes, or knows them not, is unworthy the name of a Paynter; all Pictures
defective in this part, being both contemptible, and ridiculous in the eyes of
intelligent Persons, who instead of Bodies, look on them but as so many
Chymaera's, represented without any possibility of Nature.

The importance of this Remark will be better understood by Instances of
Ill-pieces, than by that of which we are now discoursing, wherein all is so
regular and conformable to the Rules of Art: for if we shall examine the first
effect of perspective in Figures, which consists in making them appear lesser,
or greater, according as they are more or less advanced in the depth of the
Plan; 'twill be manifest, that they successively dimimish; so as from the very
first, which is that of Minerva, compared with that of Mercury (the farthest
off in the piece) there is a considerable difference in the height: And that of
Venus and Juno is yet more remarkable, though the diminution be mediocre, and
but just to the distance which they mutually observe between each other. Easy
it were to pursue the examen through the rest of the Figures; and therefore I
shall now pass to the last, and most important part, which concerns their
Aspect and Position in reference to the Point of Sight; and that I may proceed
methodically, and usefully in this enquiry, we shall first make some
reflections upon these Axioms of Perspective.

I. AXIOM.
THe Point of Sight represents the Eye of him who beholds the Picture; and this
Point is the first, and principal thing to be sought for in a Piece, to enable
one rightly how to discern, whither it be the Work of an able, and knowing
Painter, or of a simple Practitioner only.

II. AXIOM.
THe Point of Sight is constantly, and precisely the height of the
Horizontal-line.

III. AXIOM.
WHatever appears above the Horizontal-line, is seen in the nether part; and
whatever is placed below it, is seen in the upper, seeming to ascend and mount
as it were toward the Horizon.

IV. AXIOM.
FIgures of equal Altitude, being on the same Line parallel to the Base of a
Table or Picture, are always equal.

V. AXIOM
FIgures, more or less advancing in the depth of the Plan in Picture, diminish
proportionably to the degradation or distance of the same Plan: For example;
suppose the Plan be graduated in a scale of Squares; the Figures shall observe
the same Proportion one to another, as the graduated Squares do, upon which
they are placed.

VI. AXIOM.
FIgures, situated Parallel to the Base of the Table or Picture, appear of the
same Aspect in Perspective, with the Squares of the graduated Plan, upon which
they have their position.

Now let us apply these Axioms to every Figure of our Stamp.

The Point of Sight (which is the first thing observable, as being indeed, the
very Compass and Guide to all the rest) being precisely in Paris's Eye; the
Figures which are aloft in the Air, as the Victoria putting the Garland on
Venus; Apollo in his Zodiaque; Eolus, who seems to support and fore-run
Jupiter, and other of the Deities of his retinue; show altogether their
Nether-Parts, according to the Third Axiom. Descending then to the Earth,
toward the right side, and most distant from the Point of Sight; You have the
Figures of the River Xanthus, sitting, and half lying-along the Base of the
Picture; so as by our last Axiom, this Figure must appear in the same Aspect
in Perspective with the graduated Square of that particular place; and
therefore as it regards the Point of Sight (which is here at a considerable
distance from it) that part of the Breast (which according to the Position of
the Body, could not be discovered, if it stood directly opposite to the
Perpendicular of the Point of sight) shows itself almost as fully at this
interval, as if really the Figure had been designed to stand fronting; Whereas
now, in relation to the Plan, it stands altogether in Profile; the traverse
line of the Shoulders ascending also somewhat toward the Horizon, according to
our Third Axiom. The same may be observed of the Nymph sitting near this
River, whose Aspect (though different as to Faces) is yet upon the same
Parallel, and situation on the Plan; both the one and the other being seen in
Profile also. For, presupposing one should advance the Plan of their Position
parallel to the Visual point; you would find, that as the Figures approached
it, the Contours and out-lines of each of their parts, would diversifie
successively, without any alteration or change in their disposition and
aptitude; and so coming at last to be perpendicularly opposite to the point of
sight, would appear exactly in Profile, which is in truth, their proper and
genuine Position in this admirable piece of Painting.

Would you now proceed to place them on the other side, or beyond the point of
Sight; the more they incline toward the left hand of the piece, the more they
alter the apparent Form, and will come in fine, to an Aspect so contrary to
their First; that the Figure which here discovers part of the Breast, will
there turn its back to you, and so would the other also.

The knowledge of this Practical Demonstration will be no difficulty to those
that possess the Genius of this Art, and that are any thing conversant in
Geometry; but it is of such universal importance to all Painters, that whoever
do not rightly comprehend it, will be found to work but like a Blind-man in his
Profession, and especially those, who would accommodate to their designs,
Figures which they borrow, and Copy after Prints of several Masters; or indeed
their own Academic studies, who, above all, should take especial care, so to
place them in their Works, as may the most regularly adjust, and punctually
answer the point of sight, under which they were first of all designed. For
it is a Principle in perspective; that whatever Figure is once fixed upon a Plan,
can never be transported from thence to another, without violating the present
aspect; since (as we have sufficiently showed) the point of sight, is a thing
stated, and immovable, so as it is absolutely impossible to place such a Theft
out of another Painters Works, with any tolerable certitude, or handsomness in
another Composition, without this assistance of perspective.

I could enlarge these Remarks on the rest of the Figures of this particular
Print, but to avoid repetition; and therefore I think it better to make choice
of another Subject, in the examination whereof, and of those which follow it, I
shall only insist upon what is most important, and worthy of observation;
referring the rest to the diligence of particular students, who by the Plan, I
have already traced out to them, may happ'ly be curious to make the same
disquisitions upon every one of our five Fundamentals, as I have established
them in this Treatise.

The second Print. The MASSACRE of the INNOCENTS.
THe Second Stamp which Raphael caused Marc. Antonio to grave, was the
Slaughter of the Innocents. The History is too well known to require
Repetition: nor shall I need to examine the proportion of each particular
Figure; it may suffice to say in general, that the judicious Painter has even
laden the good Women with their swelling Duggs, like so many Nurses; and on the
contrary, made the Executioners extremely meagre, and lean, resembling those
ragged Cutthroats, whom he has also left naked, and without clothes on their
backs, to render them the more terrible. For this Painter did always observe an
extraordinary Modesty in all his pieces; and doubtless, had not this impudent
garb been the most proper to express this Subject, he had certainly clad them
like Soldiers in their Arms. As to the Third part, which imports the Shades and
the Lights; I find nothing that requires any particular observation; every
thing appearing so regular: But in examining the fourth (which we call the
Expression) I must confess, that I expected more from Raphael upon so
advantageous an Argument; for to speak truth, he has handled those violent
Passions with very little force; whence one may easily conclude, how averse his
spirit and Genius was from such tragical and furious representations. I should
have made those cruel assassines of fierce and extravagant Countenances; with
fear, rage, and despair in the faces and actions of the unfortunate Mothers;
their tresses dischevel'd, and their limbs bruised with the strokes and blows
in defending their innocent Sucklings against the savage and merciless
Soldiers: That the ground should have been covered with Arms, Legs, Heads, cut
off from their mangled and lacerated Trunks; that all about should have been
nothing seen, save an horrible butchery, with the dreadful confusion of an
affrighted People; some running up and down, others crying, and the tender
Mothers even expiring for sorrow upon their dead and massacred Babes; others
again, endeavoring by flight to save their Children: In sum, that on all
parts, there should nothing have appeared but desolation, blood and Carnage:
But our Painters Idea was not, it seems, so warm, and would certainly have
succeeded much better, in a less violent Composition, more conformable to his
Genius.

Let us now consider how punctually he has observed all the Rules of
Perspective, which is the last proof of our Examen; and this we shall discuss
with much less difficulty in this design, than in the precedent Piew; the Plan
descending here in such manner, as that the point of sight, and all that
depends upon it, salutes the Eye, without troubling it to search for it by
conjectures, which are never so accurate and precise.

Those who would be curious to observe critically the proportionable
diminutions of each Figure, according to the degradation of the Plan which
comprehends them (as formerly directed in the foregoing examples) will soon
perceive, how just he has every where been. And for the second effect (which is
yet more considerable, and indeed the principal part of Perspective) relating
to the Aspect of the Bodies and to their situation upon the same Plan, and
visual point; there is nothing but what is most exactly regular: For, albeit
the Figure of the Woman, whom we behold in front of the Table, with one of her
knees upon the ground, holding her Child under her right arm, and protecting
it with the other against a Soldier, who seems to deal a back-stroak with his
sword at its head; and that the Figure of the Villain appear also at first, as
if they should rather be seen by the side of the shoulders, than by that of the
Breast; Yet, upon due and mature consideration of the line of their position,
which is directly turned toward the Diagonal of the squares, and divisions of
the Plan; one shall perfectly discover, that their Aspect ought to differ from
those, whose situation is parallel to the Base of the Picture: Besides, that in
the contention of those two Figures, one may perceive a great and violent
contorsion in their Bodies, toward the parts which they discover to us.

There is no more difficulty in what remains of this Composition, and therefore
I shall pass to the Third Stamp; whilst of this, I shall have said in general;
that omitting only the Passions; should we consider it by the exactness of the
Design in the Figures, the Regularity of the Perspective, the graceful
Contoures of each individual member, judgment, and softness in the Graving; we
must be forced to acknowledge it for an incomparable piece of Art.

The Third Print. Our Lords DESCENT from the CROSS.
BEhold here another Piece of the same hand, but infinitely more estimable for
the subject it represents, and the greatness of its Idea, full of rare
Invention, and of an admirable Expression: It is a descent from the Cross, at
the foot whereof stands the B. Virgin, overwhelmed even with sorrow, and
fainting between the arms of the other Mary's, whiles Joseph of Arimathea, and
Nicodemus un-nail our Lord, and are working with St. John, his beloved
Disciple, in taking him down from the Cross, to bear him to the Sepulcher which
they had prepared for him.

It Is almost impossible to imagine, that this History should be represented
with more devotion, more affection, more sorrow, or with expressions more
sensibly touching, and better distributed Devotion, in Joseph of Arimathea;
Love in St. John; Grief in the Virgins and the Mary's; and even the Land-skip
it self does infuse as it were a kind of Melancholy, by its seeming sterility
and the asperity of its situation. These are general considerations only: But
that we may not confound our established Order, which we have already observed
in the Compositions that went before; let us commence with the first part;
namely, the Invention, or Ordonance of the Figure in this design; one of the
most considerable Maxims whereof it is, to place them so discreetly, that the
principal Figure of the subject may be set toward the middle of the Table, or
most conspicuous and eminent place, as we have already touched in the Judgment
of Paris. This I repeat here a second time, because it is seldom well observed
but by the most judicious Painters; and the rather, that the example of Raphael
may incite others to be exact in all our five Fundamental points; since there
is no other expedient, whereby they can arrive to the perfection of the Art.

But 'ere we speak of the Situation of the Figures in this Design, we must
first consider, that the Square of this Table is very different from the two
precedent ones, where the Extent of the Ground-plot exceeded that of the
height; when as in this Piece, the height is superior to the breadth, by a
great space, and as was meet, considering the form of the Cross, which is the
principal Figure, and as it were the Scale of the Table; which I therefore
observe, and mention beforehand, that when I shall hereafter come to discourse
of the Site or Collocation which each Body has in Perspective, we may the
better comprehend the Particular difficulty which is usually met withal in such
Histories as these, where the greatest part of the Figures are up in the Air,
and suspended above the Plan and Terrace.

This being established, let us consider, with what circumspection our
judicious Painter placed his Figure of Christ, not only in the midst of his
Piece, but as he has turned him also toward the right side, whence he receives
the Light; and so makes him to descend between the arms of his beloved
Disciple, who receives him with a Compassion, and a Love, better perceived by
the Figure, then possibly to be described.

Now the Composition of this Piece has this singularity remarkable, that it
comprehends as it were two several Ordonances of Figures; the one of Men, and
the other of Women; the first of which being all in the air, represent those
who are working to un-naile our B. Lord, and take down his Body from the Cross;
and those are Men; as being of the most vigorous and active Sex, and therefore
fittest to set their hands to this painful enterprise: The other Ordonance,
which is disposed after the usual manner upon the Plan, consists of four Women,
amongst whom the B. Virgin is the only considerable, and therefore has
assigned her the most eminent place at the foot of the Cross, where the Mary's,
about her, do as it were, render her the same devoires, which Joseph of
Arimathea and his Companinions do to her Son. These judicious Observations you
shall ever find in the Works of Raphaels Scholars; but since they are in very
small number, and that Raphael sufficiently shows himself to have been their
Master, as may easily be seen in comparing his Compositions with that of
others, by some transcendent marks of his Invention above them, I will only
touch one of them in passing, as being of that Mode which the Italians usually
call ill Costume.

Explication of Costume.
SInce this Word is not a Term particularly affected to Painting only, but
common both to Poets and Historians, who write but the same things, which
Painters are used to represent; I will not reproach the Workmen of our Nation,
for not having yet imposed any name on this rare piece of Art; which may
happ'ly infer, that it is not yet arrived either to their knowledge, or
Practice. It shall therefore suffice us to explain the meaning of it, and to
show wherein the force and intelligence of this Term does consist. Costume, is
properly as much to say, as a knowing style, a judicious expression, a peculiar
and specifique agreement suitable to every Figure of the subject in hand; so as
this word rightly understood, comprehends, and would signify so many things
essential to the purpose, that it can hardly be well explained; and therefore I
shall yet endeavor to unfold it more demonstrably by some general Maxims and
Examples, before I pass to any farther applications upon our Design.

Suppose one were to paint the History of Adam and Eve in the terrestrial
Paradise, when upon the suggestion of the Serpent they tasted of the prohibited
Fruit: A Painter is here to be wary, that he introduce no other Figures of Men,
or any Buildings in the Land-skip, which would be a fault unpardonable, and
repugnant to that Costume and Decorum of which we speak: And yet even this
strange inadvertency has been committed by our famous Artist, in one of his
best Pieces graven by Marc. Antonio; so important a thing it is we see,
carefully to avoid those strange absurdities.

But we have yet found a more unpardonable Error in a Piece of that great
Tramontan Master, Albert Durer; where painting the Nativity of our Lord, with
all the devotion he could imagine, fitted to each Figure, as well in the B.
Virgin, as the Shepherds, who came to adore him; he makes the good old Joseph
on his knees, at prayers with a Chaplett of Beads, or Paternoster in his hands,
by a strange impropriety, and altogether Gotick. One may observe a world of the
like in diverse of his Prints, of a meaner Idea, and if possible, more
impertinent: Of this sort is, his tying an Ape (the most ridiculous, filthy and
vicious Animal in Nature) close by the Virgin Mary, with Christ in her Arms;
which is, in my opinion, the most sottish, and extravagant vision that could
come into a Painters fancy upon this subject, as not only against the Decorum
we mention, but even common sense.

These few Instances may suffice to demonstrate the importance of this piece of
Art, without which a Painter, be he never so great a Designer, knowing in
Perspective, good Colorist, and excellent a Practitioner: I say, if with all
these, he be not well skilled in the Decorum, men will take exceptions at his
work. And though these kind of faults are not so visible to others, as to the
eyes of the judicious; they are nevertheless reproachable: On the contrary as
they are frequently the most obvious to them, and subject to the Censures of
Learned Persons; they prove the more unexcusable, and of worse Consequence; as
it were a greater shame for an Historian to insert some false passage in his
Relation, or talk extravagantly, and to no purpose, then to have used an
obsolete Word, or un-usual Phrase.

A Painter therefore who would aspire to some degree of reputation in his
Profession, should be exceedingly exact in this Decorum, and make it indeed one
of his principal studies, as being universally agreeable to all our Five
Fundamental Maxims, and so far perfecting its harmony, that one may well
esteem it for the crown of all the rest: But when all this is done, we are not
yet to imagine, that to comply with these Essentials, it is enough we avoid the
Impertinences, and grosser Mistakes which we have mentioned; but we must also
endeavor to appear Ingenious, and knowing, how to express the subjects which
we take in hand.

For supposing a Painter, being to represent a Battle of Amazons, or Parthians;
or the Triumph of the great Caesar; should content himself to observe only the
general Considerations which usually accompany the Expression and Ordonance of
Fights and Triumphs, without particularizing any thing more proper and singular
to each of those Historick Actions; such a Painter would by no means reach that
which he would signify by our Costume and Decorum, which requires that the
Parthians should be totally differenced from other Nations, as well by their
Arms and Weapons as by their manner of Combat, which is to fight backward,
and draw their Bows retyring. No less ought he to observe in the Amazons; for
though he may imagine it sufficient to paint them Women, (since among the
people of the Earth, there were never any of this timorous and delicate Sex,
who had so far revolted against its own Nature, and that were so fierce and
courageous as to invade the profession of the bravest Captains) yet will it be
absolutely necessary, to add to them likewise some more peculiar marks, to
show that the Workman knew how to have described them to be Amazons, though
they had not been Fighting and in Conflict; even by their very garb and Cloths;
which are not to cover their left shoulders, but expose it naked, as far as
under the paps; and for the right Breast, which they used to cut off, and
sear, when they were very young, to the end they might with less impediment
draw their Bows; the Painter should leave it without any swelling or
appearance under their Garments on that part of the Body; Besides, we do not
read they used any Swords, but Battle-axes, Darts, and Iavelins, etc. with a
small Buckler in shape of a Crescent, which covered their Arms.

As for Julius Caesar, we are to understand he was very bald, and that his
manner was to raze his Chin close; and therefore it were out of all Decorum to
paint him with an effeminate Perrucque, spruce head of Hair, or a prolix Beard,
as they frequently do Pompy, and some other of the Roman Emperors; since it
would offend the eyes of judicious Persons, and were not to paint the Man we
would represent.

And thus I have laid before you a specimen of all our Three examples, enough
to guide a Workman in the path he ought to tread, and lead him to the
perfection of his Art. For it is really in this, that the very Magistry and
prime of the Science consists; and perhaps it was in This chiefly, that those
famous Artists of old, Apelles, Timanthus, Protogenes,, Zeuxis, and others, so
far surpassed our modern Workmen; since neither the Coloring, nor the
regularity of the Perspective, nor the symmetry and proportion of Bodies, nor
the different manners of Painting, or indeed any Mechanical advantage amongst
them, discovers them to have had the least superiority above ours: It was
doubtless for this alone, and that super-excellent Genius which shined through
all their Productions and Works, that Philostratus, Quintilian, Pliny, and
other grave Authors, have immortalized them in their Writings; as we may judge
by what they have said concerning that noble Masterpiece, the Sacrifice of
Iphigenia; where the ingenious Timantes having painted, and with wonderful
Judgment expressed all the marks of sorrow and pity in the Spectators faces of
that funest story; when he had spent, the utmost Efforts of his Pencill, and
Art, before he came to the Father of this innocent and deplorable Victime, and
there now remaining no more for him sufficiently to express his unexpressable
Grief, as he had done the others, in this sad and lugubrous Consternation; he
drew a vail upon the good man's face, leaving that to Imagination which he was
not able to express with his Colors.

This is the sum of what Pliny has said in the 10th Chap. of his Thirty first
Book; to which he a little after adds, in commendation of this great Master,
that in all his Works he ever left something more for men to conjecture, than
to see; and, that though Painting were both an excellent and sublime Art; yet
this Spirit and Ingenuity of the Painter was infinitely superior to it. 'Twere
greatly to be wished, that one could but show this rare and ancient Piece to
some of our Modern Workmen, and expose it to their Examen I cannot believe but
they would infinitely value it upon the high reputation which it has obtained
amongst those famous men of Antiquity; But happly they would scarcely yet
discern these new beauties, and Mode of the present Age, in which they now
a-dayes place all the excellencies and curiosity of Painting, and have
therefore invented a kind of Iargon and magnifical Gibbrish, to set forth and
exaggerate what they would make men admire: As the Freshness and Grace of the
Coloring; the Freeness of the Pencill; The Bold touches, The Colors well
impasted and nourished; the separation of the Masses; the Draperies well cast;
the rare Folds; the Master-strokes; the Grand Maniere; the Muscles thoroughly
felt; the noble Contours; Sweet Complexion, Tender Carnations; Handsome Groupes
and Morcells, and a thousand other Chymaerical beauties of this Nature, which
were never so much as once heard of amongst the Works of the old Painters, who
doubtless proposed to themselves as great Perfections in what they represented:
For certain it is after all these superficial, or rather imaginary Beauties, if
the Invention of the Subject be not well, and properly applied; unless the
Figures be judiciously disposs'd, and appositely expressed; if the History be
not amply furnished with all the necessary Circumstances; if the regularity of
the Perspective be not exactly and thoroughly observed in the Position, and
Aspects of the Figures, and consequently, even in the very shades and Lights;
In fine, unless that Costume and Decorum (which we lately so fully explained
for the importance of it) be not accurately observed; the Work shall never pay
its Author with Reputation amongst knowing Persons. For even of all the old
vulgar Painters, who had nothing to recommend them to Posterity, save the
ordinary Mechanical talent, and that through the dryness and sterility of their
low and empty Genius, went no farther then this shell and outside of Painting;
there is not one of them to be found whose name has been transmitted to
Posterity; the Critics of that Age being so nice and curious in their Examen
of all those Pieces, that though they were indeed never so exactly wrought,
according to the Rules of Art; if the Subject which they represented observed
not a fit decorum to the places where they were painted, That alone was
sufficient to decry them; so exceedingly did the Painters want of Judgment,
vilify and debase his Workmanship.

Vitruvius in the fifth Chapter of his seventh Book, relates a story very pat
upon this occasion of a certain Workman named Apaturius; and the instance is so
express, that we shall need go no further to recover our eyes, and be freed
from that fond preoccupation of esteem, which the fortune and luck of some
Painters has procured them, and that with so absolute and tyrannical a Title,
that one hardly dares to censure any thing they do, as passing universally for
the very Originals of Perfection in the Cabal of the Curious, who content
themselves in knowing the Names of the old Masters, and so as they can but
distinguish of their Hands and Manners, pass for most profound and able Men.
But since it is just that Reason should prevail over Custom, Let us examine the
real truth of it, according to such Principles as are the most infallible and
assured Guides. And to render a profitable and demonstrative Proof of what I
affirm, we shall begin with that so renowned and incomparable Masterpiece, the
greatest and most stupendous subject that could ever enter into the Idea of a
Painter; namely the History of the most dreadful day, the final Judgment and
Catastrophe o^ the World; as it is extant at Rome in the Vaticane-Chappel
belonging to the Pope, over the Altar of that venerable place, and painted by
the famous Michael Angelo Buonaroti, that Paragon, or rather indeed, that
Antagonist of the Ancient Painters, and Coriphaeus of the Modern.

What would one not have promised ones self of so important a Subject, in a
Concourse so universally advantageous on all sides, from whence he might expect
all imaginable assistance to perfect it with success. But Horace has in his Art
of Poetry, (which is properly but the brother- Twin of Painting) expressed in
two Verses, what these great Attempts do usually produce: Quid dignum tanto
feret hic Promissor hiatu?
Parturient Montes, nascetur ridiculus Mus.


I should do but a very ill Office to the Author of this Prodigious
Composition, should I make the same review here, which I have begun upon some
of Raphaels pieces, and according to the Principles of this Treatise; since
these two Genius's have so universal an Antipathy to one another, that what
makes for Raphael is totally repugnant to Michael; and one may truly affirm,
that one of them is the good- Angel of Painting, and the other the evil: For
as we may observe in most of Raphaels Compositions a generous and free
Invention, noble and Poetic; so in those of his Antagonist, a dull and
rustical heaviness; and if Gracefulness were one of the prime and shining
talents of the First; the other seems to have delighted in appearing rude and
displeasing, by a certain affected hardness as it were in his very designing,
musculous, and notch'd in the Contoures of his Figures, and by the extravagant
and unnatural Contorsions which he generally gives them without any variety of
Proportions; so as he seems never to have made use but of some Porter or sturdy
Booby for his Model: When on the contrary, our Raphael wrought after a sweeter
manner, and more conform to Nature, who always takes pleasure in varying her
Productions.

He had this also singularly recommendable in him, never to paint any thing of
Licentious, or which might give the least offense to modest eyes, or good
manners; whilst the other, on the contrary, made it his glory, publicly, to be
ashamed of nothing; no, not to profane either the most holy Places or
Histories by the infamous freedom which he assumed; as does but too evidently
appear in this Piece of his, which represents one of the most important
Articles of our Faith, which was Figured, or to say better, plainly disfigured,
by this Fanfaron of Painting Michael Angelo; and that with so impious a
temerity, as if he had designed to render it but a pure Fable, and altogether
Chymerical, by the sottish and ridiculous Grimaces which he gives to several of
his Figures, with such odious and mis-becomming actions, as were not
supportable even in places the most profane and abandoned. I shall leave the
particulars to the examination of those who have the curiosity, and the leisure
to divert themselves, when I shall have in general only said something to what
concerns the Decorum, which is our present Theme, and the principal Guide for
us to define whether a Painter be Judicious or knowing in his Art; Qualities
absolutely necessary, and without which he is never to be reputed for an
Able-man.

Let us in the first place then consider what the Evangelist teaches us of this
History, that we may the better see, whether the Idea which this great Wit
Mich. Angelo forsooth had conceived, do afford us any tolerable representation
and Image of it.

We read in many passages of Holy Writ, particularly toward the end of St.
Matthews Gospel, That at the last Judgment day, the Sun shall be darkened, and
the Moon shall not give her light. That the Stars of Heaven shall fall; and
the Sign of the Son of Man shall be displayed before all the Nations of the
Earth, who shall then be surprised with horrid consternation, when they shall
see this terrible Judge appearing in the Clouds, accompanied, and environed with
all the Celestial Court, and sitting upon a dreadful Tribunal, with
unexpressable Majesty; the twelve Apostles being at his right hand as Judges
and Assessors, with a most glorious assembly of Saints following in goodly
Order; whilst there stands beneath at his left hand, an innumerable multitude
of Reprobate and wicked Persons, in fearful and unimaginable Confusion.

What shall we now say of this Piece of Mich. Angelos, if we find nothing of
all this in it! Is it to be conceived he should not think of what he was to do,
before he took Pencil in hand? Or that he should engage himself in a story so
considerable without knowing of it, and a story of Judgment!

This modern Painter had been very unhappy to have lived in the days of those
Ancient Critics, who used to be so rigorous and exact, as never to pardon any
thing; no, not even in the greatest Masters, who by the excellency of their
Pensils, and sublime Genius's, had so much exalted the Art, and born the renown
of their Profession to that pitch, as had been altogether inaccessible to this
Scrabler. I deny not but he might have passed among them, for the Mechanical
part of Painting (as being one who well enough designed the Contours,
out-strokes and Proportions of his Figures) but his strange impertinencies in
what concerned Invention; his fanatical Ideas, full of filthy and ridiculous
Expressions, had for ever rendered him incapable of being admitted into the
Society of good Painters; nor would he ever have been numbered amongst them but
as a Sophist amongst true Philosophers, or as a Stone-cutter, or inferior Mason
in the equipage of a good Architect.

Examen Of the JUDGMENT of MICHAEL ANGELO.
TO make a pleasant and yet a demonstrable Instance of this, Let us suppose he
had been present at the Examen of the Works of Timantes, representing the
sacrifice of Iphigenia, of which we have already spoken; and that in the
presence of the very same Judges who gave their award for him against Colotes
his Competitor on this occasion, our Michael should present himself in this
honorable Contest, and there produce before them that his great Masterpiece
of the Vatican-Chappel, with all those necessary Circumstances for the better
comprehending of this Divine History, namely, the Last Judgment; that so these
Sovereign Arbiters of Painting may judiciously consider it; with this supposal
in the mean time, that they pronounce it for an estastablish'd and fundamental
Principle; Never to introduce any thing Fabulous, suspected, or Dissolute into
any of the Mysteries of the Christian Religion, or mingle things profane, with
Sacred.

This being granted, Let us now enter into the Consistory, and see the
preference divided between our Modern Painters, and the Ancient by the
examination of this piece of Mich. Angelos which is in Controversy before us.

But how will our new Artist be able to answer all those Objections which lie
against almost every part of his Work, and which will be found to contradict
those Maxims of their Examen, of which I shall present you with Four the most
General and Essential?

I. That in Historical Composures, the pure and rigid Truth be always
religiously observed. II. That there be great Consideration had of the place
where it is to be represented. III. That one never discover those Parts and
Members of the Body which cannot honestly be exposed: This Maxim has ever been
so solemnly observed amongst them, that they have frequently left the History
defective, rather than transgress the limits of Modesty. IV. Lastly, for the
fourth degree of perfection. That they strive to represent things after the
most noble, ingenious manner, great and magnificent.
These are the principal of the Consort, or as we may term them, the Harmony of
Painting, as they are the result of a mutual Consent and relation to each
other; and such as our Critics will so rigorously require in the Work which we
are presenting them; but in which, I much fear they will hardly find what they
expect to the advantage of our Modern Pretender. For to take things in Order:
How shall they come to discover the Truth of this dreadful Story, when they
shall see a young Judge standing with so little Majesty on tip-toes as it were,
and in a menacing posture, tumultuarily environed with several unmannerly
Figures, without the least attention to what he is pronouncing, and without any
regard of his presence; some turning their backs toward him, others confusedly
talking to him, and to one another, of which the greater part are shamefully
discovered; some sitting down before him, without any occasion and in most
undecent postures? Then we have the B. Virgin all alone, and without any of the
Sex to accomp^ny her; encompassed with so many v^ll^^nous Nudities, and without
the least deference or honor to her Quality, which in my opinion is very
unbecoming, and almost insupportable. And after all this, what are we to expect
of tolerable in this famous piece? there being so many strange and extravagant
things, totally repugnant to the verity of the Gospels. For first, he paints
the Judge in a naked and uncouth posture, standing upon his feet; whereas the
Sacred Text tells us expressly, That our Lord shall appear sitting upon a
Majestical Tribunal, circled about with all his celestial Attendants: Then he
makes him Young, and like a Beardless Boy, at the age of more than three and
thirty years. Besides, he has omitted the Session of the Twelve Apostles about
him, as Counselors and Assistants as it were, in this Universal and mighty Act
of Justice; but we find them so dispersed and mingled in the Crowd, that they
are hardly to be known. The same Evangelist tells us, That the Faithful shall
stand on the right hand of our Lord, the Reprobate on the left; whilst this
Libertine confounds them here, and there, without the least regard to this so
essential a Circumstance. Moreover he represents the Judge with a furious, and
enraged Countenance, fulminating that dreadful Arrest, and Sentence, which will
cause even the very Angels, and Nature her self to quake and tremble; when in
the interim, and that we may well imagime all to be in the profoundest silence,
and consternation imaginable, You have here the Trumpets sounding, and making
all the noise they can; which must needs be extremely improper upon this
occasion, were not the entire piece a composition of yet greater and less
pardonable Impertinences. For in all this bustle and tintamarre, and the
horrible dread which this irreversable Sentance must needs produce, and which
does so infinitely concern every individual Soul; you scarcely find One who
seems to give any attention to it; but for the most part, they are talking and
entertaining one another, as if they had no interest or concernment in what was
doing; and some there are embracing and Bussing each other, with a world of
very apish and foolish postures.

What would Timanthes now, and his Associates have said d' ye think, to this
rash and ridiculous Composition! who really has not the least true talent of
Painting; and yet has the face to intrude himself amongst Judges so equitable
and clear-sighted, and who must needs confound him with abashment and exile him
from their Assembly; as neither finding in all his senseless Composure, the
verity of the Story, nor the suitableness of the Figures to the Subject, or the
Place; nor that decent modesty, which he ought to have observed, nor that grand
and free manner of expression; nor, in sum, the least degree of that
important decorum, which we have so much insisted upon in the former periods:
so as in all this vast and tumultuary Army as it were of Figures, there is not
to be found a grain of pure Invention, but the effects of a mean and barren
Genius. Could he have told us, why he made his Angels without Wings (which is
their inseparable character in all Paintings, and had been almost indispensably
necessary) amongst such a Chaos of Figures; where those of Souls and Bodies,
Angels and Demons, Elect and Reprobate are so jumbled together, as they cannot
be distinguished? For he makes no difference in his painting of an Angel, and a
Man, whom he forms so gross and material, and in postures so little agreeable to
the function, he employs them in, that one can hardly behold them without
aversion, by reason of the contorsions of their Bodies, and extravagant
Grimaces which he causes them to make, be it in the mouthing of their Trumpets,
supporting of the Cross in the Air, with those other Instruments of our Lords
Passion; as if he had studied in derision to render them the most deformed, and
more ugly than the very Devils themselves.

That which gives me occasion to suspect him of so insolent a Libertinage, is,
that I find him profaning his Works with yet a greater impiety, by his bold
introduction into this sacred and serious History of the sottish Fable of the
Ferry-man of Hell, whom the Ethnical Poets name Charon, and faigne plying with
his Bark upon the Banks of the Rivers Styx, Cocytus and Acheron, to transport
the souls of the Dead into the other World; which I take to be (the Place and
Subject considered) a more criminal, and abominable piece of Sacrilege, than
all his other forgeries, which would never be excused by Timanthes, and the
rest of his Judges, though mere Pagans, who would certainly have detested the
impiety of this hypocritical Christian.

But I insensibly loose my self in the Labyrinth of this exorbitant Piece, in
which, to speak sincerely, there is nothing but what is diametrically opposite
to the Laws of that decorum which we so lately discoursed of, and established
for the very Center and Perfection of this Art, to which, all that is
Reasonable, Judicious, Knowing and Spiritual in Painting, ought to resign and
submit it self. Had I not thought it expedient, or at least, extremely
advantageous, in reference to the demonstration of the Principles of this
Treatise, to instance in diverse examples; and that after those excellent ones
which we have observed in some of Raphaels, I would yet endeavor to render
them more conspicuous, by producing their Contraries, to the end they might
leave a deeper impression of their Effects. I would likewise willingly have
spared this tedious dissertation, which I foresee will be but ill resented of
those Workmen who have learned, and consider this noble Art but as a Trade,
without endeavoring to arrive at any more skill in it, then to Design, and
draw the Contours of what they see like a Workman, and to paint their things
with the greatest Relievo they can devise, as in what they think consists the
whole excellency of their Profession; though in this they sometimes succeed so
well, that their Works are commonly much the worse for it; especially if you
bring them to the Test of the Rules of Optics, and good Perspective; which I
here repeat, for the sake of those that are Judicious, whom this advertisement
may suffice for the full comprehension of this Paradox.

But it is now more then time we should resume our first Discourse, and bring
Raphael into Michael Angelo's place, that so we may come again into that good
way of Painting from whence we have so long been deviating: Let us therefore
return to where we brake off, and finish the Examen of that ingenious and
devout Idea, which that noble Painter Raphael has formed in his Picture of
Christ's descent from the Cross, and in which, we have already observed all
those Points which give Excellency, and consummate Perfection to a Work; the
Decorum of Expression only excepted, in relation to which, we have lengthned
this Digression upon the Judgment of Michael Angelo.

The Examen reassumed Of the Descent of our LORD from the Cross.
SInce I have sufficiently explained, by variety of Examples, what this Costume
or Decorum imports and signifies in Painting; it will be needless to make so
exact a re-search in what remains, and concerns this Print of Raphaels, in
which every individual Figure does amply testify, how circumspect our
excellent Workman has been; This will soon appear, when we shall consider that
of Nine Figures (of which this Ordonance is composs'd,) That single One, which
at first blush seems to be the least active, in a subject so full of Activity;
and by consequent, to be the least studied in it too, is Mary Magdalens. But
upon second thoughts, reflecting how she is described in the twentieth Chapter
of St. Luke; where her sister Martha is complaining to our Lord, that she took
so little care in the Menage, and was so little assistant in the service of the
House, She will doubtless appear more ingeniously deciphered by that mere
Compassion only, and interior grief which we behold in her countenance, then
if Raphael had placed her also busy about the B. Virgin with the other two
Mary's who sustain her in their arms; or that he had represented her in those
transports of inconsolable affliction, which vulgar Painters use to do, who
conceive, that to make her known in their Pieces, she must be made to lie
prostate upon the ground, or embrace the foot of the Cross, in the most
deplorable manner imaginable, with her hair loose about her Shoulders like a
mad Woman, and the Box of Ointment in her hands; without all which, she would,
they think, be in danger never to be known: But our noble Artist had far other
Ideas, and more conformable to the sacred Text.

I remit the rest of this Composure to the examen of the curious and
intelligent, who by the application of our Costume to all the rest of the
Figures, will find them so well poised and judiciously considered, that after a
little thought, they will doubtless have but a very ordinary opinion of M.
Angelo's Rhapsodies, and of the rest of his Disciples; and ingeniously confess,
how far the Schooll of Raphael has surpassed this Mechanic Designer, in the
spirit and excellency of his Invention.

But before I pass to the next Print, I would willingly resolve a Quoere, which
may happly appear difficult to some, Why so near the Cross, upon a barren and
rocky piece of ground, he should plant that single great Tree, furnished with
leaves, and flourishing as in the height of Summer; the H. Gospel mentioning
nothing of any such circumstance? Upon consideration of our learned and
judicious Workmans intention, I perceived that it was a Cedar; tall, strait,
and without any fruit: And in truth this Mystical Introduction is highly
ingenious; the Cedar being the real Symbol of Jesus Christ who is styled the
Spouse in so many places of the Old Testament, particularly the Canticles;
where he is so curiously depainted for his ravishing beauty, by a comparison of
the Cedars of Mount Libanus, Species ejus ut Libani, electus ut Cedri, etc.
from the extraordinary pulchritude, incorruptibility, Odor, strength, use in
Building, and salutary shade of this goodly Tree: so as from this assembly of
so many transcendent Qualities, it does most fitly (of all other Trees)
represent the Church, and those principal Heads that compose her; namely, the
Apostles, Prophets, and holy Fathers: Besides, mystically applied, it may
farther be taken for the Cross of our B. Savior; since the Oil of Cedar is
esteemed so sovereign a Remedy against Leprosy, which, it is reported, it both
cleanses and heals. In sum, it most visibly appears, that it was placed in
this Composition with so much reason and judgment, as from hence alone we may
safely pronounce in favor of this rare, though modern Painter, worthy in truth
of all that glory which has been attributed to the most renowned of the
Ancients, since his Works discover to us the same Genius that they so much
admired in their Trimantes: For even the least things to appearance are
esteemed great and considerable, by the mysterious intention of the Painter,
applied to the Circumstances of his Subject, and minister as much to the
Contemplations of the Learned, as the most principal Figures of an History:
This is the Talent which Pliny so singularly admires in all the Works of
Timantes, and where he takes occasion to say of him, that In omnibus ejus
operibus intelligitur plus semper quam pingitur, and cum ars summa sit,
Ingenium tamen ultra artem est. Lib. 35. cap. 10. Words, worthy to be applied
to this excellent Artist, and which I had already repeated upon occasion of
that his incomparable Masterpiece, the Sacrifice of Iphigenia. I produce them
here again on purpose that I may apply them to Raphael: However, as I foresee,
that those amongst our knowing men, who have not the eyes of their mind so
sharp as those in their head, and who are more taken with Pictures for their
mechanic exactness (that is, the delineation of the Figures) then the
Intention of the Painter, will be apt to judge this consequence of mine to the
advantage of our modern Workman, somewhat bold and over-confident, as it
concerns his foundation (not to judge of the greatness and strength of the Lion
by one of his Claws;) I shall prevent their objections; if taking the sense of
my Proposition rigorously, they conceive my intentions were to render the
Merits of these two Painters so equal, as to assign them the same rank: I must
then explain my meaning, That whatever my esteem for Raphael may be, my
resolution is to render all just deference to those illustrious Ancients, and
such as were like Timantes, and do cheerfully acknowledge, that the Painters of
the latter Age are inferior to them; from whence I infer, in favor of
Raphael, that he having best of all succeeded in discovering the path which
those great Masters trod, and being born with a Genius equal to them, did not
only arrive to the first degree of the Moderns, but seems to have even been
incorporated of their Company, and of the same Sect with those ancient
Originals themselves, who have transmitted to us such glorious Ideas of their
excellency in the Memories of Historians.

Now if we consider in what Language they speak of them, and what it was that
we find so highly celebrated in their Works, we shall perceive, they esteemed
nothing in them so much, as the Novelty, and (as I may call it) the arguteness
and ingenuity of their Invention; by which they discovered, that Painting was
an Art purely spiritual: For that which consists only in the Mechanical
address, is so material and heavy, that they hardly made any account of it.
Neither did they regulate the Prise of their Tables either by the number or
largeness of the Figures; for it frequently happened, that the straitness and
inconveniences of the Place, and barrenness of the subject, gave occasion to
those great Genius's to derive advantage from it; and to produce something
which surmounted the reputation and renown of the more exuberant Compositions.
This Pliny tells us also in the same Chapter, where he has made so handsome a
recital, and elegant description of the Sacrifice of Iphigenia painted by
Timantes, in which were assembled a very great number of Figures. For he
afterward speaks of another Work of the same hand, which represented a
Polyphemus sleeping; but in so narrow a compass, that the streightness of the
Table hindered the Painter to design so Gigantick a body, as that prodigious
Cyclops required. But this distress gave Timantes occasion to show the World,
that his Wit and Invention was superior to all the other rules of Art: He
resolves therefore to supply this defect of Matter, and discover to the eye of
the mind what he could not do to the eyes of the body.

The Ingenious Representation OF A Vast CYCLOP in a narrow Table, Painted by
TIMANTHES.
UPon this Occasion then he introduced a most gentile Parergon into this
Subject, being in it self too simple, as having only one Sleeping heavy Figure
to represent a hideous and enormous bulk. Now this addition was an assembly of
Satyrs, whom he placed round about his snoring Cyclop; some of them seeming to
be affrighted as it were at the unexpected encounter, were taking their flight,
and running away; Others considering him at greater distance, had their
countenances mingled with fear and admiration: some again more hardy then the
rest, approaching nearer to him, endeavored to take the dimensions of one of
his Thumbs, as his Arms lay extended a good way off from the rest of his Body;
and this they did with their Thyrses; but with extraordinary caution, and
without so much as touching him, for fear least they should rouse him up; so as
by the comparison which one might make of these Satyrs to the Cyclop (to whom
they appeared less then one of his Fingers) one would immediately conclude, how
monstrously vast the Giant was; and this Invention of our Painter was thought
so ingenious and new, that it proved a great reputation to his Piece, which was
else but very indifferent of it self, and of an inconsiderable Subject.

Imitation of the same kind By JULIO ROMANO.
I Remember to have seen at Rome in the Palace di Vigna Madama, the same
Subject treated after another manner, yet very noble, though the Invention were
in truth, but in imitation of This; but it had something which I cannot so well
express, of particular in it, which seemed to refine even upon the original.
It Is a Work of the ablest Scholar that ever Raphael bred, and One whom indeed
we may call his Master-Disciple, IULIO ROMANO, of the most singular spirit and
fancy that this later Age has produced for Painting, and in whom Raphael
seemed, as 'twere, to have transfused his own Genius, when he quitted the
World; and indeed he constituted him for his principal Heir by his last Will
and Testament.

This Piece is painted a Fresco upon a Wall, which was larger than might well
serve to design a Cyclop at his full extent, without obliging our Painter to
any shifts, to represent his enormous stature: However, as the Hyperbole has
sometimes as much Grace in Painting, as it has in Poetry; and indeed, that this
Workmans Pensil was extremely poetical, he thought very pleasantly of
introducing other Satyrs into his Composition, more drols and fantasticks than
those of Timantes, playing their Apish tricks about the Cyclop whilst he was
asleep; some of which had seized on his Bag-pipe, and carrying it some distance
from him, were sliding one after another upon the Pipes, as Boys would do upon
long Poles, the thyrses between their legs to make them more slippery, with an
hundred other capricious and munky-tricks, that would make one smile, and yet
served to show how wide and monstrous a throat this stupendous Musician must
needs have, to be able to mouth and inspire this Instrument of his.

This is a kind of Imitation so rare and excellent, that it may well be
compared to the original it self; and I am persuaded, that had Timanthes seen
it, instead of his being jealous of this gallant emulation, he would highly
have esteemed the gentleness of our Modern Painters invention, and made great
account of the Piece.

This single example of Iulio Romano, may serve for a guide to those, who
having already attained to some habitude in Design, and Coloring, have no
more to do but put themselves into the right path of the Art, and to awaken
their Genius for Invention, as having then only to contemplate the Composures
of those Masters whom they most affect, and study in general, what their
Thoughts and Inventions were, without amusing themselves to take every piece of
a work apart, and in severals, as the guise of our Copists is, who discerning
only the rind and outside of Painting, have always this misfortune in their
Works, that they can never come to equal their original; whereas, by these more
spiritual and inventive Operations, Nature is so unconfined, that the Imitator
has almost ever the advantage of the Inventor.

By this means it is, that Raphael, and Iulio Romano have not only exceeded all
other Painters of their Age, but have in some degree rendered themselves
comparable to the most renowned of the Ancients.

That we may now make some useful reflections upon those two several
Compositions of the same subject, viz. the sleeping Polyphemus's: The first,
which is that of Timanthes, will show us, that a small Piece may sometimes
emerge a great and noble Masterpiece, according as the Idea of the Painter is
qualified and heightened, whence one may judge, that there is no Argument so
poor and barren, but what may be enriched by an ingenious and fruitful
Invention; and that it is now and then more advantageous to the glory and
reputation of the Work to be obliged to adorn and Cultivate a mean and sterile
subject, than to be overwhelmed under the abundance of a more ample History,
from which one should rather retrench, and abate something of Essential, than
presume to add any thing of our own.

For the other Composition of our modern Iulio Romano, it does in effect show
us, that an ingenious Imitation, may equal, and even exceed the original; and
that by consequent, it is not less glorious so to imitate by a certain
concurrence of Wit and Invention the Thoughts of another, and refine upon them,
as he has done, than it is reproachful in a Painter mechanicaly to Copy a whole
Piece, Figure for Figure, without any thing of his own, but the pains he has
taken, and the servile subjection of a simple Workman: Seeing this kind of
Labor is not so much esteemed the work of a Painter, as the study of an
Apprentise only. Hence we find, that those Copiers, who are so poorly spirited
as to aspire no higher than to make that their aim, have never been reputed
among the rank of Painters, but as Eunuchs are among Men, incapable of
production, and defective in their particular species.

This digression has a little deverted us again from Raphael, our first and
principal Object, though we still kept sight of him, and pursued his footsteps,
by the guidance and signal of Iulio. But it is now high time to rejoyn again,
and make no more such sallies from him, who has hitherto furnished us with all
our matter, by his excellent productions, the examen whereof has greatly aided
us in forming that visible and demonstrable Truth; namely, the necessity of
those Principles which we have established, to attain the perfection of
Painting. Let us therefore return to this first School of Raphael, and conclude
our discourse in the same style and spirit we began with. Now this incomparable
Painter, whose Works are so many exemplars from whence we may deduce the Rules
of the Art, has produced such variety of them, that amidst such Plenty and
abundance, it is hard to resolve upon the choice of one before another, that
which we saw last, always seeming to be the best. But since it is not our
intention to Criticize his Compositions piece by piece, to judge decisively
which of them to prefer, (which were an odious, and a rash undertaking) it
shall suffice us to elect one of the most remarkable which is in Print, that
the curious setting it before them, and studying it at leisure, may together
with us, pass their opinions upon it.

The First Print. The GYMNASIUM or ACADEMY of the Athenian Philosophers.
IN this liberty of Election, I am resolved to seek for no other than that
which I have at present in my hands; since occasion has offered it to me with
so much advantage and satisfaction: verily it seems to me to be one of the
noblest Ordonances that ever he Painted, and of a great, and magnificent Idea
It is the Representation of one of those famous Gymnasiums of Greece, where we
may behold a general Assembly of all the knowing persons of Antiquity, as well
Philosophers as Geometricians, Astrologers and others.

But before we proceed to the particulars of this Composition, I shall
advertise the curious, that the Graver who designed and published it, was not
so well acquainted with the Subject which it signifies, as may appear by the
Subscription in these words. Paulus Athenis per Epicureos and Stoicos quosdam,
etc. as it seems, taking it from the Preaching of St. Paul in the Areopago,
upon occasion of an Altar which he there espied, dedicated by the Athenians TO
THE UNKNOWN GOD. The History you have in the 17th of the Acts of the Apostles.

That which makes me take notice of the Inscription is, the importance there is
of knowing the truth of the History which lies before us: for if this great
Doctor speak truth, Raphaels Composition will prove very extravagant; whereas,
being rightly understood, and according to the Authors intention, it is both
admirable and excellent, as we shall demonstrate in what we are going to add
farther. As to what imports the Graver (whose Mystery, as well as that of all
other simple Copists, does not consist in over much spirit) his Ignorance had
been the more excusable, had he been more just and accurate in the preciseness
of his Design; but there are so many gross mistakes slipped in, in that which
concerns the Perspective of the Architecture, and delineation of the Figures,
that Raphael had certainly paid him some ill turn for it, had he but seen in
what a manner he has altered and disfigured his Workmanship.

But what shall we say to one of our modern Painters, as famous for his Pen, as
his Pensils; that Historiographer of the Art, and Panegyrist of all his
contemporary Painters and Predecessors for two or three Ages? Author of no less
than three great Volumes upon this Subject, George Vasari by name; who in each
of their Lives, has summed up, as in an Inventory, not only, all their Works,
but the interpretation of them also; in which he has discovered the force of
his quaint Genius. This Gallant Talker undertaking to explain the Piece which
we are describing, after he has in general terms told us upon what occasion he
was called to the Service of Pope Julius the II. begins in this manner. La onde
Raphaelo nella sua arrivata havendo riceuute molte carezze da Papa Giulio,
commincio nella camera della Segnatura vna storia, Quando i Theologi accordano
la Philosofia and l' Astrologia con la Theologia; dove sono ritratti tutti saui
del mondo, ch^ disputano in vari modi. Sonui in disparte, alcuni Astrologi che
hanno fatto figure sopra certe tavolette and carratteri in vari modi di
Geomanzia and d' Astrologia, and a i Vangelisti le mandano per certi angeli
bellissimi, i quali Vangelisti le dichiarano. Fra costoro, e un Diogene con la
sua Tazza a giacere in su le Scale; Figura molto considerata and astratta;
cheper la sua bellezza, and per lo suo abito cosi accaso, e degna essere
lodata. Similmente vi e Aristotile and Platone, l'vno col Timeo in mano, l'
altro con l' Etica; dove intorno, li fanno cerchio vna grande Scola di
Filosofi: ne si puo esprimere la bellezza di quelli Astrologi, and Geometri,
che desegnano con le seste in su le tauole moltissime figure and caratteri. Fra
i medesimi nella figura d'vn giouane di formosa bellezza, il quale apre le
braccia per marauiglia, and china la testa, e il ritratto di Fredrigo II. duca
di Mantoua, che si trouaua allora in Roma. E'uvi similmente vna figura, che
chinata a terra con un paio di seste in mano, le gira sopra le tavole, laquale
dicono essere Bramante Architettore, che egli non e men desso, che se fusse
viuo, tanto e ben' ritratto. E allato a vna figura, che volta il didietro, and
ha vna palla del cielo in mano, e il ritratto di Zoroastro, and allato a esso,
e Raffaello Maestro di questa opera, ritrattosi da se medessimo nello spechio:
Questo e vna testa giouane, and d' aspetto molto modesto, acompagnato da vna
piaceuole and buona grazia con la berretta nera in capo. Ne si pu o esprimere
la bellezza, and la bonta, che si vede nelle test, and figure de' Vangelisti,
a quali ha fatto nel viso vna certa attenzione, and accuratezza molto natural,
and massimamente a quelli che scriuono. Et cosi fece dietro ad un san Matteo,
mentre che egli caua di quelle tauole dove sono le figure, i caratteri tenuteli
da un Angelo, and che le distende in su un libro, un vecchio, che messosi vna
carta in su'l ginocchio, copia tanto quanto San Matteo distende. Et mentre che
sta attento in quel disagio, pare che egli torca la mascella and la testa,
secondo che egli allarga and allonga la penna. Et oltra le minuzie delle
considerazioni, che sono pure assai, vi e il componimento di tutta la storia,
che certo e spartito tanto con ordine and misura, che egli mostro veramente un
si fatto saggio di se, che fece conoscere che egli voleva fra coloro, che
toccano i pennelli, tenere il campo senza contrasto.

Adorno ancora questa opera di vna prospettira, and di molte figure, finite con
tanto delicato and dolce maniera, che fu cagione che Papa Giulio facesse butt
are a terra tutte le story de gli altri maestri and vecchi, and moderni, etc.

But since the Italian tongue is not universal, I shall interpret this tedious
Passage.

Whereupon Raphael having at his arrival received diverse caresses from Pope
Iulio, began to paint in the Chamber della Segnatura, the History of the
Agreement made by the Divines, between Philosophy, Astrology and Theology, in
which Table are represented all the Sages of the World, variously disputing
with one another: At a little distance farther, stand certain Astrologers,
drawing Figures upon little Tables with strange Geomantique Characters, which
they send by the hand of certain beautiful Angels to the Evangelists for their
explication. Amongst these, is Diogenes with his Dish, who lies along upon the
Stairs, a wonderful abstracted and considerable Figure, that for its comeliness
and garb is worthy admiration. There are also Aristotle and Plato, the one with
his Timaeo in his hands, the other, his Ethics, compassed about with a whole
Circle and School of Philosophers: The beauty of these Astrologers and
Geometricians who are there making Diagrams and Figures with their Compasses
upon the Tables, is almost inexplicable. Amidst these persons, in form of a
most lovely young man extending his Arm in the posture of admiration, and a
little inclining of his head, is the Portract of Fredric the second, Duke of
Mantua, who was then, it seems, at Rome. There is moreover, a Figure stooping
down with a pair of Compasses in his hand, which he sweeps about a board, who
they say, is the Architect Bramante, breathingly like him; Near this is a man
with his back toward you, and holding the Celestial Globe in one of his hands,
who represents Zoroaster; and close by his side, stands Raphael, the Author of
this famous Piece, who, it seems, drew himself by the help of a Looking-glass.
It Is the head of a young man, of a very modest aspect and extraordinary m^ld
and graceful Meene, with a black Bonnet upon his head. It is not to be imagined
the beauty, and excellency expressed in the heads and pictures of the
Evangelists, to whose Countenances he has given a certain attention and
liveliness extremely natural; especially, those who are writing. The same he
has done behind St. Matthew, whilst he is copying of those Characters out of
the Tablets full of Figures, which are held up to him by an Angel, and
transcribed into a Book. In the mean time, an aged Person, having a sheet of
Paper on his knee, copies all that St. Mark writ, and as he is intent upon his
work, one would imagine he moved his very jaws, and turned his head as his Pen,
runs farther or near on the Paper. Besides several other minute Particulars and
Considerations, which are in great number, there is a Composition of the entire
History which is in truth, ranged in such accurate Order and Measure, as
discovers his extraordinary ability, and makes it appear, that amongst all that
handled the Pensil, the Works of this Master had no Competitors. Moreover, he
has adorned this Piece with a Perspective, and diverse Figures, finished with so
sweet and delicate a grace, as made Pope Iulio beat down and demolish all the
Histories of other Masters, as well the Ancient as Modern, which were painted
there before, etc.

The Recital is somewhat prolix, but it was very necessary to discover to the
bottom, the quality and spirit of this ample Historian; since by a lesser
Instance, I should never have disabus'd the world, and showed them the weak and
trifling reasonings of their great hablador; his Books and Writings having
been, till now, in such esteem with the Lovers of Painting, and who in effect,
have some reason for it; because generally you find in them the principal
Circumstances of the Lives of the Painters, and a Catalogue of their most
considerable Works: besides, the Author being a pretty tolerable designer, and
(as indeed it appears sufficiently) had more wit in his fingers-ends, than in
his head, he has enriched his discourse with their Pictures, which compose the
best, and most curious part of his Books.

But though from this quality of designs, one might reasonably conclude him a
good Painter; yet the extravagance of his Idea (which has made him to fancy
such strange Chymaeras in this Composure of Raphael, and render him strangely
impertinent) appears to me an indubitable proof, not only of his Ignorance of
any real knowledge in Painting, but of the weakness also and incapacity of his
Genius, as to those two prime Talents of this incomparable and most judicious
Profession, namely, Invention and Decorum, of which by his ridiculous
admirations, he discovers that he had not so much as the least tincture, nor
indeed any natural disposition of acquiring them; so as it has proved a kind of
misfortune to Raphael, that he fell into the hands of so miserable a
Panegyrist, who instead of celebrating him and his works, does miserably
disgrace them by his wretched and ignorant descriptions. But

As of old, it was not lawful for every one that had a mind to it, to go to
Corinth; so, nor is it for every Painter to examine and discourse upon the
works of this admirable Painter. It had far beter become Vasari to have
mentioned him as a simple Historian only, without presuming to the
Interpretation of his Thoughts in his Composures: for if what he here describes
after his guise, and which he endeavors to magnify by so many wild
exaggerations, were no more visible than his Writings have rendered it; what can
we tollerably judge or conclude of them? Verily, these fond Encomiums do more
prejudice than honor to them; and we may well apply it upon this occasion,
Pessimum inimicorum genus Laudantes; since impertinent Flatterers create us
more mischief, than our cruelest Enemies.

I would willingly demand of our new Philostratus, where he learned, that the
Divines had ever any such design, of according Philosophy, Astrology and
Geometry with the Holy Gospel, to accommodate this fantastique Vision of his,
to one of the most ingenious of Raphaels Composures, so natural, and so easily
understood? But presupposing it so; what made Diogenes amongst these learned
persons? Diogenes, I say, who never pretended to any Science, led the life of a
Dog, that eternally barks at all Mankind, without minding any other object in
all his Morality, but to despise and trample upon all those honors, which were
usually and justly attributed to Men of Parts; so as in this brutal affectation
he rather chose to resemble a ragamuffian Vagabond, than a Philosopher, and had
never declared himself of any Party upon such an Encounter, of which he plainly
understood nothing; However, in the judgment of our profound Panegyrist, it is
a Figure which seems highly considerable, amongst the rest of this famous
Assembly. For it is one of the first he takes notice of, with this glorious
Elogy, There is amongst them (says he) a Diogenes with his Dish, lying along
upon the stairs, etc. doubtless, a very honorable place, and posture well
becoming a Philosopher, as well as the pretty moveable, which he would have him
known by, of main concernment, upon this celebrious occasion. Me thinks he
should rather have been with his Lantern than his treen-dish, considering the
employment Vasari has assigned him, and all his Companions appear so dark and
obscure, as might well require a Candle. But to engage the Reader with greater
Admiration yet, at this rare Representation of his Cynic, he adds this sage
reflection; that it is a Figure full of deep and abstracted Considerations, and
worthy to be admired for its beauty and habit, etc. In good earnest, the style
is so abstracted and Chymerical, that one would swear, Vasari rather played the
part of a Mountebank or Harlequin, than of a sober Historian; at least, he
discovers himself a very ill Physiognomist; and that he had yet less skill in
the nature of this humerous and surly Cynic, who was so little abstracted, or
endowed with any tolerable sense; his wretched manner of l^ving making him so
despicable and altogether incapable of those Qualities. Nor does Raphael
vouchsafe him any such expression either in Countenance, Habit, or Looks, from
whence one can deduce the least thing to his advantage; but on the contrary, to
discover the base rusticity of this Savage Philosopher in the midst of a
general Assembly of the most illustrious Persons of Antiquity, he has placed
him in an obscure corner by himself, as unworthy their Conversation, abandoned
of them all, and lying, like a Brute, as he was, upon the stairs of this
Academic-Gymnasium, with his scowling looks, and an equipage suitable to his
snarling and sottish Profession.

But it is not my intention to gloss upon all this tedious Rhapsody of
Vasari's, Enemy, as I profess my self, to the Critical disposition of some.
However, I confess, I am not able to contain, when I see poor Raphael abused
thus by the hands of so dangerous a Friend, who whilst he thinks to flatter,
most insupportably abuses him, by his senseless undertaking to explain his Work,
and be the Interpreter of his Intentions. This little Instance is so
demonstrative a proof of it, that one must be stark Blind not to discern it;
there being nothing so glorious, and without reproach, but what may be rendered
ugly and deformed by such empty Pretenders, whose folly infects all things they
undertake; because they do it always prepostrously, and by the wrong handle.

But what I find unsufferably ridiculous in this here, is, that he is not
contented to decifer in the Historical-Ordonance of our Painter, the Figures
which realy are visible to every body, but forsooth, he would fancy to have
detected and found out Others, that never any body saw besides himself, and
which Raphael, I am confident, never so much as dreamt of. These, you must
know, are the pretty Angels, by whom he tells us, the Astrologers sent their
Geomantique Characters to the Evangelists for Explication. Had this babbler
understood what such Characters meant, he would never have employed Angels to
propose them to the Evangelists, and would have known, that Astrologers never
meddle with this kind of subterraneous and diabolical divination. But, I
perceive that I insensibly engage my self in pursuit of these Dreams, which are
mere Labyrinths, out of which it is difficult to extricate ones self, when one
is once entered: we will therefore quit the Fabulist, and proceed to the
consideration of the Thing it self in the design of Raphael: For albeit the
stamp which they have published be defective enough in some parts of the
Delineation, it will a great deal better serve to give us the Idea of this
excellent Composition, than all that can be said in words; because the
productions of Painting would be seen, and considered with ones eyes. And if
these great Masters of An^iquity, whose works are no where visible, (save in
the writings and records of History) had had the assistances, which we now
enjoy by Graving of Prints, (which is realy an inestimable Treasure of this
present Age, but which of old they never so much as heard of, to our immense
loss) the precise Designs of those Tables which Philostratus describes to us,
had certainly told their stories far better, than he has been able to do, and
his Book had been exceedingly more estimable and useful, could he have thus
transmitted them, as we are now able to do.

Let Us then use the advantage of our own Eyes to contemplate this noble and
magnificent stamp, which we shall certainly find much more intelligible and
reasonable, than the amphibological discourses of Vasari, of which one may
justly affirm Asinus portans mysteria; for he renders this Print so sottishly
Emblematique by his extravagant imaginations, that instead of making wise men
admire, (should one believe all he says) he renders both the Workman and the
Work alike ridiculous; seek we no farther then for any thing in this Painting
but what we shall behold with our own eyes; and rest most assured of it, that
Raphael thought of nothing less, than the proposing of an Emblem in this
Subject, which is in truth, nothing else but a natural and free Representation
of one of those famous Gymnasiums of Greece, where the Philosophers and all
sorts of Academicians used to Assemble themselves for their respective studies,
and to exercise their learned Talents.

Vitruvius describes the form of these public Edifices in the 5th Book, Cap.
11. of his Works, and calls them Xysti, Palestrae, Exedrae, according to their
particular uses, as he there explains them; and Palladio, in his Treatise of
Architecture, lib. 3. cap. 21. discourses of them more clearly, because he
gives us an ocular demonstration, by an ample and very exact design; so as
there is no need for me to speak any farther concerning it.

But as the most celebrated and noble of them, was that of Athens; it is likely
Raphael took his Pattern from it, and those who are curious in Prints, do
frequently style this Piece the School of Athens. We may boldly say that Vasari
did not regard this structure, but as a mere fragment of Perspective drawn at
adventure, and without other intention, then to enrich the Ground of his Table;
though in effect, it be one of the most principal parts of the History. He
adorned (says Vasari) this Work with a Perspective: But it is an usual thing for
those, as well as for him, who see things which are not, that they oftentimes
perceive not the things which realy are; so depraved and reversed are the
Optics of these men's Judgment.

Presupposing then that we have attained to some reasonable knowledge of the
Form, and Use of these Gymnasiums, it may suffice that we here consider a
little the several Appartments and Divisions of these Students and
Philosophers; there being nothing to be seen in this design of any other
corporeal exercises, which we must imagine to be done in certain places abroad,
to prevent the noise and tumult which the Wrestlers and Fencers, and such as
practiced casting the Dart, Running and the like violent applications, made in
that quarter, which would certainly have much disturbed the Conferences of
these Learned persons, which required Silence and Repose. It is toward These
that our Painter has enticed our eyes, to behold those two illustrious Chiefs
of the Sciences that the World ever produced; namely, the Divine Plato, and his
knowing Scholar Aristotle; though he were but little conformable to the
sentiments and Genius of his Master, whose Rival he afterward proved, out of
an ungrateful malignity and jealousy, which procured him the extreme hatred of
all Athens, from whence he was forced to fly till after Platos decease. This I
the more expressly consider, that we may take notice how naturaly Raphael has
in this Piece showed as much in their very Countenances, and by which he has
described as 'twere, the difference of their Genius's: For the first, and
doubtless the most considerable (since he merited the Title of Divine amongst
the greatest Persons,) sufficiently shows by the action of his Arm and Hand,
which he holds up to the Heavens, that he entertained his Auditors with the
most sublime and transcendent speculations; whilst the Other (who was more
versed in the Scholastic) has rather the meene of a severe and dogmatizing
Pedant; as indeed he still dwelt in the Schols amongst them; whiles Plato's
more generous Conversation has ever been with the great and most illustrious
persons.

Truly Raphael seems to Triumph in this Expression, which he has also
accompanied with an air and countenance exceedingly conformable to the spirit
and disposi^ion both of the One and the Other, making Plato to discover a
certain sweetness and noble affability in this aspect, which renders him
extremely venerable; as on the contrary, Aristotle, with a frowning and
contentious look.

Having then, as he ought, placed these two principal Champions of Philosophy,
in the middle, and most conspicuous part of his Table (for there were also other
famous Men, celebrated for their Wisdom, and exemplary Morals, such as Socrates
etc.) our Painter has not much applied himself to the rest of the Figures, of
which the greater number are but Auditors of the two first: For though these
appear to be several Classes of them, viz. Geometricians, Astrologers,
Cosmographers etc. Plato yet so far excelled, even in all those Arts, that the
rest seemed to be but his Disciples: not that we might not well take them for
such as Ptolemy, Archimedes, or Euclid, or imagine them of some other Principal
Sects, since we have found Diogenes amongst them, who was neither profound
Astrologer nor Sophist, but one we may rather conceive, intruded himself to
jeer and scoff at them. For Painters have realy as much privilege in these
things as the Poets themselves, and are not so precisely obliged to the Laws of
Truth, but that they do as frequently introduce Fiction into their
Representations, to adorn and enrich their Histories; And it is chiefly upon
this occasion, that a Painter does best discover the ingenuity and gentleness
of his Conceptions; besides, that such vague and incompos'd Subjects as this
is, leave ample field to Invention; so as it is sufficient, they do not exceed
the limits of verisimilitude, without captiuating their Genius to the rigor of
precise Truth.

Beholding our Table then in this Prospect, one may allow a much more ingenious
application to each Figure, than by contenting our selves in general, to pass
them all for simple Academicians, Sectators of our two great Gymnasiarch's: And
it is probable enough, that Raphael did propose to himself something more
refined in this ample and magnifical Composition. For wherefore should he else
set a Crown upon the head of the Astrologer or Geographer (take Him for either)
who holds a Globe in his hand, had it not been to show us by it, that he meant
Ptolomie whom he would dignifie with that Character; and for that he is called,
by way of eminency, the Prince of Astrologers and Geographers? Notwithstanding
yet, since he was neither Contemporary, nor so much as Compatriot with any of
the former, it might well create some scruple amongst Critics to meet them here
together. But this License is familiar amongst Poets, and consequently Painters
too: Instance, the incomparable Virgil, who has so dexterously adjusted Queen-
Dido with his Aeneas, that at last he puts them in bed together, though there
was a very considerable interval of time between the one and the other, and
that Dido was the younger by at the least three whole Ages. One might farther
believe, and that with greater probability, (with respect to the Synchronisme)
that this Figure situated in the middle of the piece, and just before the Plan,
in so pensive and melancholy a posture, leaning his head upon his arm, and
reposing his elbow on the corner of a Table, where the Philosopher Epicurus,
who wrote his Testament in a Letter which he addressed to Idomenaeus his
intimate friend, as Diogenes Laertius reports; because it was the very last of
his Actions, and, indeed, the most stupendous; since being then attacq'd with
a Paroxysme of that most inconceivable torment of the Stone (of which he soon
after dyed) he remitted nothing of his accustomed Tranquillity of Spirit, but
reasoned, and discoursed to the last minute, in the same manner as he was wont
to do, when he enjoyed the greatest health; which abundantly testifies, that
the Sentiments, and Precepts of this great man, were not such as the vulgar
reported, or that the Pleasure which he styled the Soveraign-Good, consisted in
that shameful and voluptuous satisfaction which some have described.

'Twere easy to form the like Remarks upon the rest of the Figures of this
Table, which would furnish abundant matter to the studious, who had a mind to
divert themselves: For in this universal-School, open to all sorts of Learning,
they did not only treat of the speculative Sciences, but of the Art Military
and Tactics; of Polity, Oeconomie, Medicine and the Mechanics; as appears by
the Writings of Aristotle; so as in this so great variety, there stands not a
single Figure in the whole Gymnasium, how extravagant soever it may seem, but
for what we may find a sufficient and laudable pretense: And yet is not this
altogether so unconfined, but that the bounds may be transgressed, as appears
by our Historiograph Vasari, who without any Wit or Discretion, and against all
shadow of possibilily, has so confounded the order of Times, and Things in that
Chimaerical application he has made upon this Table, that it were enough to
astonish a credulous Reader, who should seek for any Fruit from his fantastic
dreams; For out of I know not what itch to appear Learned, he brings us in
there by head and shoulders, a certain King, called Zoroaster, of whom I dare
say, Raphael never had heard a word in his life; and who came into the World
some two thousand years before Plato was born, in a Country also far distant
from Greece: Besides, this old Scythian Prince was never famous for any thing
but Magic, of which Pliny affirms him to be the Inventor, which is a st^^y they
never made any Profession of in those Schools: but see the admirable address of
our perspicacious Italian, who could espy him out amongst such a crowd of
others. There is a Figure (says he) with his back turned toward you, which is
the Picture of Zoroaster. Another than Vasari would doubtless have been much
put to it, to divine whose that Picture was, that had his back in that posture.

I dare not pursue to examine the rest of what this Rhapsodist says, for fear
of importuning both my Reader and my self, and therefore, I shall here close
this dissertation, which I confess to have protracted a great deal beyond what
I had proposed to my self at first, when I intended nothing more than to give a
general Idea of the perfection of Painting, conformable to the Maxims of the
most ancient Masters, and to derive from thence a kind of ocular demonstration
from some Instances of the most regular works of Raphael, that I might awaken
thereby, and open the eyes of some of the Painters of our times, who realy have
great dispositions of emerging, and becoming excellent in their Profession, and
that have need only to be advertised in some Fundamentals, relating to the
perfection of the Art, which yet are easily attainable; but, without which,
like to Blind men, they will always be groping in the spiny and delicate ways
of Painting.

This is a verity so firmly established upon the Principles which we proposed
at the entrance of this discourse, that it can never be so much as called in
question by any rational person: It may yet possibly happen, that the
preoccupation of those whom Fortune has elevated with a false reputation (as
before their days, St. Martin of Boulognia, Rosso, Tintoret, Paulo-Veroneze,
Parmesano, Freminet, Iosepin, and a number of such designers, Practitioners of
the same form) may render them so remiss and stupid, that they will rather
choose to remain and dwell in the possession of this deceitful good, than take
the pains which the sedulous study and application of these knowing Masters do
necessarily exact of them: For certain it is, that Things which are excellent,
cost in their Production, and are attained with difficulty; the second-Thoughts
of Wisemen are commonly the more judicious and advised than the first; whence
it is just to conclude, that those Painters to whom all subjects seemed alike,
who find no more difficulty in one, than in another, and who after the first
Idea which they form of a Table, set down, and excogitate no farther, by either
changing or adding any thing in their Pieces; I say, such Painters have but
superficial endowments, whose productions will never gratify Intelligent men,
who finding nothing of rare and well studied in their Works extraordinary, will
be soon wearied with a transitory view of their Labors.

Now I call nothing studied, but that which concerns the operations of the
Mind, and those judicious Observations upon that part of decorum, which is the
very ligament and band of Invention and Expression, the noblest of our Five
Principles, and in which all that is ingenious and sublime in Painting does
consist. The other Three, namely, Proportion, Coloring and Perspective, import
rather the Mechanical part of the Art, than the more spiritual and refined, and
are, as one may say, the Instruments of the Science of Painting, so as those
who bend all their studies only upon them, work rather like Men of a Trade or
Mystery; and therefore have never obtained other name amongst the universally
knowing, than Practitioners in designing, who would never have been
considerable amongst the Antient-Painters: Howbeit, seeing they far exceed the
rest in multitude, the current Abuse, and a certain presumptuous Ignorance,
which at present tyrannises over this Art, has so abandoned the Possession of
the Name of Painters to them, and added so many fortunate advantages above
Those who are truly the Sons of Art; that the last we speak of, come seldom to
enjoy the fruit, and glory which is due to them, till it be very late;
continuing for the most part oppressed as long as they live, by the Numbers and
Cabals of the Ignorant, amongst whom, Painting is at this day but a material
and gross Idol, whereas heretofore she was considered as a Deity altogether
spiritual.

The poor Dominiquin, who was questionless the most able of all Caraces
Scholars, and happ'ly, the most worthy the name of Painter, had long succumbed
under this disgrace; though almost all his Competitors were inferior to him,
and not worthy to be named in the day with him; excepting Guido, who was indeed
by Nature more favored than the other for a Gracefulness which rendered him
singular in his time; but who was no ways comparable to him for Expression, and
less yet in the skill of Regular Perspective: What shall we say then of the
blindness and stupidity of the Painters of our days; who prefer a Iosepin, a
Lanfranc, and such Manierists before him, whose Works containing nothing save
the false dazzle of I know not what Novelty, which they style, forsooth, a Fury
of Design, and Freedom of Pensil, that their ignorance of the native Beauty,
and true Principles of Art makes them admire, never preserved their Reputation
any longer, than this transitory favor and partiality of Fortune continued to
indulge them; so as they are now banished out of the Cabinets and Collections
of the Virtuosi, who being at last dis-abus'd, are grown quite weary of them.

The same perversion of Judgment, seconded with the natural jealousy of the
Italians (who will by no means endure, that Painting should smile upon any
other Nation but their own) had begun to exercise the like Injustice toward
that illustrious Frenchman, Nicolas Poussin, the worthiest certainly, that has
appeared since the days of those renowned Ancient Painters, Apelles Timantes,
Protogenes, and the rest of those famous men.

But since it were difficult for me to render this Testimony of him without
suspicion of flattery, speaking of a person ( so lately) living, and born a
French man; yet as his Works have already gained so many Triumphs over all
their Envy, and that his merit has been so powerful (though in a strange
Country) to produce, and elevate it self with so much Luster, above its
Rivals, at no less than four hundred Leagues distance from the Court of France,
and in the Reign of the greatest Favourer, that the Virtuosi must ever hope
for, since the King himself (who has so far honored him as to call him to his
service) is an excellent Designer, and universally knowing in all good Arts: It
has proved a conjuncture infinitely advantageous to our Painter, and a Justice
which Fortune owed him; so as it seems, she is not always blinded, nor envious
at the merits of deserving-men. Since that time, all the reputation of his
Competitors has rather served to establish his Glory, than be an obstacle to
it; and now we see visibly, by comparing their Works together, that this
Poussin is in effect a great Eagle in his Profession, or to say better, and
without a Trope, the most perfect and accomplished Painter of all the Moderns.

There is no difficulty in making this appear to knowing-men, who examine and
judge things like Geometritians, that is to say, rigorously, and as they ought,
by pure demonstration, and the Analyzes of its Principles, without gratifying
Opinion, or Favor; which are the very bane and peste of Truth: But those who
are Masters only of superficial knowledge, and will yet be presuming upon
their Judgments, may happ'ly take this for a Paradox, and thereby render
themselves incapable of being enlightened: I shall therefore quit this
discussion, and content my self to have in this Treatise established the
Fundamental Maxims and Method which we make use of in examining the Works of
Painters, without any farther interesting my self in this Controversy: Only,
I would add by way of Advise, that those who have the Curiosity to come to the
decisive Proof of what I affirm, will find it sufficiently demonstrated in that
Work of his of the Seven Sacraments, which are to be seen at Paris, in the
Possession of Monsieur de Chantelou, Master of the Household in Ordinary to the
King, an intimate and dear Friend of this incomparable Painter. It Is a
Consequence of Seven Uniform Tables, of a midling size, but consisting of an
extraordinary study, where this noble Artist, seems to have given us the utmost
proof, not only of the regularity of the Art, according to all the Parts
explicated in the Discourse, but of its supremest excellency likewise, by the
Novelty of his Invention; the greatness of his Idea upon every Argument, by the
profound and judicious observation of the decorum, (in which he is almost
singular) by the vigor of his the Expressions, and in a word, by all the very
Qualities of those illustrious Genius's of the Ancients, amongst whom (I
persuade my self) he had obtained one of the most eminent ranks; since we
generally find in his Works, the same excellencies which Pliny and others have
observed of their Apelles, Zeuxis, Timantes, Protogenes, and the rest of that
first Class of Painters: For if Apelles appeared so rare a Person amongst them
for his knowing how to represent the noise of Thunder; one may see in the
subject I am speaking of, that our Poussin has even painted the very Voice;
which is so much the more difficult to express, as in effect it is less
sensible: I have remarked this ingenious stroke in his first Piece of the Seven
Sacraments, where St. John, conferring Baptism on our B. Savior, the
Standers-by who were present, and ready to receive him for their Lord and
Master, do visibly discover it by the surprise and astonishment in which they
appear looking up to Heaven, and on every side about them, from whence the
Voice seemed to descend, This is my Beloved Son, etc.

The same Author who proposed (as altogether miraculous in Painting) this
expression of Thunder, adds farther, that this great Master Apelles, took
delight to represent the Histories of Agonizing and dying Persons; And we here
meet with (by I know not what fortuitous encounter) that the Sacrament of
extreme Unction presented the same Subject to our Painter; who being about to
handle this holy Mystery, under a noble and magnificent Idea, suitable to his
Genius, has expressly chosen the Person of a Roman Captain in his last Agony,
environed by all his Relations; Mother, Wife and Children, and a number more of
his Domestics, every one of them severally afflicted with regret or compassion;
amongst whom, and in the most conspicuous place, he has painted the Priest
assisting the poor Dying-man, and administering the Holy Oils with a devotion
full of Piety.

I should be over tedious to undertake here the description of all those other
Considerations, and judicious Circumstances to be seen in this admirable
Composition: I should sooner have said in a word, that it is the real Parallel
of that famous Masterpiece of Timanthes upon the Sacrifice of Iphigenia, which
I have already mentioned, and which Pliny and Quintilian describe to us as the
rarest, most ingenious and accomplished Table of Antiquity. But to determine
whether of the Two; their Old, or our Modern has expressed his Subject with
greater Art, and more Pathetically, is a Question I cannot resolve; contenting
my self in affirming this, that amongst all our Modern Painters, our Poussin
appears another Timantes.

The same reason which restrains me from any farther engaging in the Examen of
this excellent Composition, obliges me to pass over the rest of this great
Work, which makes up but its Seventh part; besides, that the Enterprise would
prove too vast for me, who have already transgressed the limits which I
proposed to myself at my first setting out.

I will only add one thing in general, which seems very considerable to me, and
worthy of remark, with which I shall conclude. That every one of these Pieces
are so admirable in their kind, that it is Impossible to particularise in any
single one of the whole Seven, which appears to have the least advantage of the
other, as to what concerns the Artist: For though the story of the respective
Mysteries which they represent, were not always equally redundant, and fit for
expression; yet this puissant Genius knew so well how to proportion each part
of his Subject to the terms of their mutual equalities, and give so relative a
perfection to the whole, that he has left us no place for our choice, or that
we could wish for any one of them, preferable to another: For though each
Table, considered by it self, and separated from this Union, or, as one may
say, this Encyclopedia of Sacraments, be usually looked on as a complete and
independent History from the rest; yet our Painters original Intention, being
to form of them One particular mystical body, composed of these seven holy
Members (which is the oblest Idea could be conceived in the Mind of a Christian
Painter, and which is so peculiar, that it seems not to have been ever thought
of by any before him) strived to render it a Chef d' Oeure, in which he has
discovered himself such a Master of the Subjects he undertakes, that we may
easily conclude, he knew how to have done as much, even in the most barren and
simple Argument, as in the most rich and magnificent; the fecundity of his
spirit having no need of any aids from Matter, which at first appears as
incredible to be affirmed of him, as it is realy true, and visible in the Works
of his, by the equality which he has introduced with so much Art in each
particular, that there is nothing which domineers above the rest; And this
uniformity of Perfection is an Effect of the most Consummate Excellency which
is to be attained.

I thought to finish this demonstration, which certainly had been very glorious
to him, in setting one of these seven Compositions in Parallel with a subject
resembling it, treated of either by Leonardo da Vinci, or Raphael; for after
these two Sovereign Painters, we need seek no more of the Moderns capable of
this noble Contestation. But when I had well considered, that those kinds of
Comparisons are almost always odious, I resolved to refer the Decision to all
the World, without a syllable more, and content my self to affirm, that I had
for this reason cast mine eyes upon the principal work of Leonardo, that
renowned Supper of our B. Savior, which he painted at Milan, in the time of
our great King Francis the First; which succeeded so well for the fortunate
Artist, that it purchased him the good Grace of their illustrious Monarch, who
did him the honor to invite him to his Court, and retain him ever after in his
particular Service. We have in the Royal Parish of St. Germains at Paris, an
excellent good Copy of this Supper, which many believe to be of the very hand
of Leonardo himself. But the same History has been frequently treated of by
Raphael, and are all to be seen in Stamp, which is a most commodious expedient
by which to paragon them, with that which we have in our Poussins Work of the
Seven Sacraments.

But to arrive to this accurate Criticisme with the requisite circumspection,
and follow the guidance of our Principles; we must above all things remember,
with what importance we have there established the diligent observation of
decorum, in which consists the principal Magistry of Painting, and which is
indeed (as we may say) the very Rational Soul of it, as the rest of the
Mechanical supplements, Color and the delineation of Figures compose the Body
only with its Organical members: so as without the intelligence of this first
part, nothing can be acceptable to the eyes of knowing men, who are always more
offended with errors in Judgment, the most essential and necessary
Circumstances in an History, than in what may possibly be defective in the
Mechanical part. Behold here the very knot of the Question, which yet will not
prove so difficult to unravel, when we shall be fully instructed in the
Ceremonial of this Supper, and above all in the posture which they used at
Table in those days, which is here a very important consideration, and without
which it is impossible to conceive, how St. John could decently repose his head
upon the bosom of our Lord; since in that which we may observe in some
representations of it, there is expres'd a most unpardonable indecorum.

In pursuit of this grand remark (the fame whereof is totally due to our
knowing and most judicious Poussin; since before him we find it scarce
considered by other Painters) it must visibly appear, that as this Action past
at Night, the Figures could not be conspicuous, but from an artificial light;
for what other circumstance could represent it to be a Supper, and not a Dinner
as well? Now these two are points so essential and necessary, that they are not
to be dispensed withal without an inexcusable fault, and against all decorum.
After these two rigorous observations, one may make other less important
recherches; which yet would be attended with certain obvious and remarkable
Circumstances, without which something will still be defective: As suppose upon
that sudden emotion amongst the Apostles, when our B. Lord had advertised
them, that One of them should that very night betray him; one should see St.
John not only leaning, but asleep upon his dear Masters bosom, without so much
as taking any notice with the rest, of what was said: This would certainly be a
most unseasonable and altogether disadvantagious Posture in this Instance. I
purposely take notice of this Absurdity amongst others, because it is realy so
usual amongst our common Painters, and did once escape even Albert Durer
himself, as is to be seen by one of his stamps, though this great Master had
few equals in his Profession; but it seems he was not much acquainted with
decorum.

It would in like manner be a notable mistake to set St. John in any other
place than by the side of our Savior; because then he could not have inclined
on his Masters Breast, as the Gospel does expressly observe it to us.

By the sedulous examination of such like Particulars, we should soon be
qualified to determine concerning the Spirit and Judgment of a Painter, and
after that, give Sentence boldly in favor of the most Ingenious and correct in
this observation of Decorum; thereby imitating the example of those celebrated
Arbiters of Antiquity, whom we have brought upon the Theater, and to whom we
are no less obliged, than are those whom they have immortalized by their
Writings; seeing by the descriptions which they have left us of their Pieces
and Works, with those excellent Reflections of theirs upon the merits and
quality of the different Genius's of those renowned Painters of Greece, they
have preserved that Idea of the Perfection of the Art, which would never have
descended to us without them.

'Twas from these incomparable Books that our illustrious Modern N. Poussin has
been so well instructed, emulating even the most renowned of the Ancients, by
the extraordinary Advantage which he gained by studying Humane-Letters, before
he so much as ever took Pensil in hand; which is a thing at present as rare
amongst Painters, as it is in truth absolutely necessary in those who aspire to
its perfection: For since Poetry and Painting are but one and the same form of
Genius; and that to emerge a good Poet, it is not held sufficient to be able to
compose a well-measur'd Verse, with numbers agreeable to the Ear, unless what
you write be sublime and ingenious also; it follows that in the School of
Painting, he who applies not himself but to the designing of a Model, and
relies upon his Pensil only, shall never prove other than a Mechanical
Workman; unworthy the Character of a Painter, as our Poetaster would pass but
for a simple Versificator.

From all which we deduce, that in the service of this noble and glorious
Princess of Arts, Painting, which is altogether composed of Spirit, One had
need be endowed with Talents and Notices extraordinary, to pretend only to the
honor of her good-Graces: And Those who by the meaness and dullness of their
Nature, arrive no farther than the Mechanical part, resemble those
ill-Courtiers of Penelope, who not having the Wit to insinuate themselves into
her particular Esteem and Conversation, nor address enough, or Merit to render
themselves considerable with the Lady, were forced to stay behind the more
sprightly Gallants, and make Love to her waiting-women.

FINIS.

