THE CHARACTER OF A Modern WHIG, OR An Alamode True LOYAL PROTESTANT.
HE is a Certain Insect bred in the Corruption of the late Rebellion, and is
(for the most part) a Traitor Ex traduce.

At his Majesty's happy Restoration he lay stupefied without Sense or Motion,
but began by little and little to crawl with new life in the warmth of the Act
of Oblivion, and afterward wantonly basked himself in the Rays of Royal
Indulgence and Toleration, till the old Poisonous Ferment began to work and
float afresh, and furnished him with Vigor, and Insolence sufficient to hiss
Venom in the Sacred Face of his Great and Gracious Preserver. And though he be
sufficiently Conscious of the black Ingratitude, and repeated Provocations,
with which he has all-along abused and affronted the King's God-like Patience
and Forbearance, yet the Fool has had the Impudence to flatter himself with
Agag, and say, Surely the bitterness of Death is past; little thinking that he
is still reserved to be hewed in pieces before the Lord.

His Aspect is generally Meagre and Malicious, as representing on the one side
the Puritanical Fool, on the other the Political Knave. His Profession (I
cannot call it Religion) is of the Geneva-Stamp; not that his Conscience, or
Prudence ever engaged him in a judicions Inquest, or sober Trial of this or any
other; or that his Wit and Judgment were ever capable Rationally to discern and
choose, (for in Speculations of this kind, Nature and his Education have
removed him but one degree from an Idiot) but his Father begetting him in the
hot Zeal of this Persuasion, and his Dam all that while fixing her teeming
Fancy with Adulterous lust on their able Holder-forth, he was molded a strong
Presbyterian in the very Womb, and so proves a rank Phanatick by the Pure force
of Imagination and Extract: Nor has he himself been since wanting to improve
these natural Dispositions, and Exalt the Rebellious Genius he derived from his
Sire and Dam; for observing (or rather being told) that the Presbyterian
Principles stood in the greatest Opposition to the Established Government, he
has with irreversible Obstinacy Espoused the good Old Cause, and with the
Sacred Solemnity of a Sacramental Vow has devoted himself, Life, and Fortune,
to the utter Extirpation of Prelacy, and the Royal Race of the Stuarts.

To effect all which, and that he may the more safely, and indiscernibly
accomplish his porfidious Designs, he lies perdue in the unsuspected Covert of
a Protestant; and though that word for ought he knows of the rise and reason of
it, may be Hebrew for a Baboon, yet he assumes and affects it upon all
occasions, because he fancies that it denotes, and signifies distinction and
opposition; and he loves all things, and terms of Separation and Contradiction
at his very heart. But farther observing that many wise and honest men have
plainly discovered that this Religion of his, and as he manages it, proves in
the consequence of Affairs no better than an Antimonarchick-Heresie, therefore
the better to supply all its defects, and answer all objections against it, he
Palliates its apparent Falsehood and Treachery with the specious Epithets of
Truth and Loyalty, and with unparalled Impudence he once for all roundly
styles himself, a true Loyal Protestant. He has been hatching Rebellion, and
working underground the Subversion of Church and State for these many years
past, but has bestir'd himself with all imaginable Application since the
breaking out of the horrid Popish-Plot; as imagining that he might with more
Success and Safety spring his own Mines (which he had carried on to the very
Foundations of the Government) at a time when we were wholly taken up in
detecting the Trains and Treacheries of the Romish Pioneers: And this has
afore-time in all Ages since the Reformation been his Usage, then more
especially to disturb and divert his Governors with Petitions, Grievances,
Toleration, Comprehension, and a thousand Tricks and Artifices, when he has
seen their Endeavors and Intentions bent and busied another way, and engaged
in Rescuing us from the Imminent Dangers of our Popish Adversaries.

The Plot, Entry, and Arbitrary Government is his daily Outcry, the Common
place and burden of his Seditious noise and clamor, and the Pretenses of his
impertinent Fears and Jealousies; whatever his Factious humor dislikes is
Popish, and where the Case will not admit of a positive direct Plea, then
Popishly affected does the business; and any thing that bridles and restrains
his Licentious Insolence, and Seditious Practices is Arbitrary, and Tyrannical.
But for all the loud Hu^ and Cry he makes after the Plot, himself has proved
the chiefest hinderer of its full and home discovery, so that it is now almost
quite spent and lost in running down a Channel of almost three years distance
from its first Spring and Fountain. He plainly foresaw that 'twould thwart and
prevent his Designs, if it had forthwith been Traced to the Fountain head, and
there stopped and ended presently (as it might very easily have been) when we
were at the near distance of 78, and 79; he rather Chose to Wire-draw it at
length with Tricks and Finesses, as having many Stages of devices that were to
run parallel with it, and many Plots and Stratagems of his own that he could
never Accomplish without this Pretense and Exclamation, that, there has been,
and is still a horrid Popish Plot, etc. That, is Still, does his business.

And thus he has kept the Plot at Bay for these three years to amuse and
divert us, whilst all the while he is in the hot and eager Pursuit of other
Game.

He endeavors to Poison the people, and Scare the Nation into Rebellion by
Libelling the best King and Government in the world; insinuating malicious and
groundless Suggestions of imminent Popery and Tyranny, by horrid Stories of
Smithfield Flames, Irish Massacres, etc. by the Villainous Prints of Carr,
Curtiss, and a whole Pack of scurrilous Scoundrels, and by a Thousand Artifices
daily hammered out on the Forge of Faction by Republican Operators (...) their
respective Cabals: In a word he has done all he can to reduce the State of
these Kingdoms to present Bloodshed and Desolation, hoping thereby to make his
own Markets, purchase his Revenges, and glut his Malice, or at least hide his
abominable Head (due long since to Public Justice) in the general Confusion.
Again, our true Loyal Protestant to show how highly he Values his Sovereigns
Content and Quiet, is frequently tormenting him with his impertinent Petitions,
and that about things as much beyond the reach and judgment, as they are beside
the duty and proper business of the Saucy Petitioner; especially since he knows
how that his Majesty has Proclaimed not an Aversion only, but a general
Prohibition to such Dangerous and Seditious Must^r-Rolls, and Factious
Pragmatical intermedlings: But his greatest Artifice and the Court Bugbear as
he thinks, is the perpetually making the King's Ears ring with Clamours about
the Succession; so that instead of a Joyful and Dutiful Exclamation of Vive le
Roy, he is daily Saluting him with a Memento mori: This was so harsh and
grating to Queen Elizabeth, that she returned a sharp Reprimende to such as
motion'd it, telling them besides, That it was to dig her Grave before she was
Dead. Our Modern Whig, I say, would lay these Kingdoms in Blood and present
Pesolation, the better forsooth to prevent the imaginary Evils of a (pretended)
Popish Successor, and such Chimaeras as his factious Fancy only has Conceived
in the Womb of Futurity and bare Poslibility. His tender Conscience can easily
dispense with Disinheriting a Royal Prince of his undoubted Right to Three
Crowns, upon a supposition only of being of an Opinion different from himself;
and yet nothing can serve his own turn, but Repealing Acts of Parliament to
indemnifie his Scismatical Separation, and that he may neglect the Service of
God, and break the Laws of the Land with absolute Impunity: This he prettily
Styles, Uniting his Majesty's Protestant Subjects, though in effect and intent
it is no better than admitting the Trojan Horse (a Magazine of mischiefs) within
the Walls, and we should quickly find that a Ruit alto a Calmine would be the
Fatal Consequence in our Church. He knows well enough that he has Blasphemed
his R. H. beyond all hopes of Pardon, that therefore his All is at Stake, there
is now no Retreat, his Case is desperate, and he must now push it home in his
own Defense.

This is our True Protestants Loyal Behavior toward the Children of that
Royal Father who was so lately Mur^ered by his Faction; whereas if he had but
the least Grain of his so much boasted Loyalty, or indeed of Christianity, he
would strive to Expiate that loud-Crying Guilt, and show his deep abhorrence of
that Fact, by paying strict Allegiance to the present Possessor of the Throne,
though he were the worst of Tyrants, and by not opposing his R. H the rightful
Successor, though he were a professed Mohammedan.

He has all along Danced to the Jesuits Pipe, and Steered by his Compass we
know, but of late he has openly professed, and avowed such Doctrines as these:
That it is lawful to take any Oaths whatsoever with a Mental Salvo for the sake
of the good Old Cause. That no Faith is to be kept with the Tory-Party. That
the selfsame Evidence in one Case is Truth and very Oracle, in another Perjury,
and Subornation; and, that Truth, and Just^ce may Salva Conscientia be nipt in
the bud by Ignoramus, when Billa Vera would be an ill President, prove
prejudicial to the Cause, and of bad Consequence when his nearer and dearer
Friends turn comes to be Concerned, etc.

To Conclude, a Modern Whig is the very. Spawn of Antichrist, the Counterpart
to Popery, the Jesuits Bum-Crack, the Shame of the Reformation, and the Scandal
of Christianity.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for John Smith in Great Queen Street, Bookseller. 1681.


