A FEW PROPOSALS Humbly recommending to the serious Consideration OF His
Majesty's High Commissioner, And the Right Honorable, The Estates of
PARLIAMENT, THE ESTABLISHING A LAND-CREDIT In this Kingdom; With several
Explanations of, and Arguments for, the same; together with full Answers to all
such Objections, as have hitherto appeared against it.

By HVGH CHAMBERLEN, Formerly Physician in ordinary to King CHARLES II.

printer's or publisher's device

Edinburgh, Printed in the Year, M.DCC.

TO HIS GRACE, JAMES DUKE OF QUEENSBERRY, His Majesty's High Commissioner.
MAY IT PLEASE YOUR GRACE,
BEing persuaded to print the following Papers, in hopes to convince or silence
opposers, and to confirm friends, in a matter of the highest importance to the
whole Nation: I have presumed to Dedicate them to Your Grace, not only because
his Majesty has deservedly placed You in this Kingdom at the head of affairs
of State; but also because Your Grace's inclinations for your Countries service
are so visible; and because you so readily vouchsafed me a favorable Audience
in this Business, when humbly desired, all which, as a good Omen, gives me a
modest confidence of a patient Hearing, and a happy Issue in Parliament. And I
am almost certain, no good Reasons can oppose its Success, though some malevolent
Affections, or private Interest not rightly informed may make a noise, till the
wise determination of Parliament shall quiet them. I hope, it will be no
diminution to Your Grace's Grandeur to be principally instrumental in the
Settlement, of what only can with speed make this Nation Flourish, and for that
alone it is, humbly beg Your Grace's favorable Protection, as well as Pardon
for this my Presumption, who am with all duty and deference,

our Grace's most humble and obedient Servant, H. C.

TO THE READER.
A Right Reverend Author says three things, in the Opinion of most, may be very
well neglected: such as are too mean, and unworthy our care; such as are so
uncertain, that they will not recompense it; and such, wherein our interest is
not at all concerned; As to the first I dare affirm, nothing under Heaven can
better deserve this Nations care, than the subject of the following sheets,
which may make all men easy, at least more, than they are now. Nothing human
has a greater certainty of a Natural Possibility, and is better able to
recompense their Care, Nor is there any thing, wherein every man's true Worldly
Interest is more concerned, though not all so immediately, and with equal
advantage, as the Landed men, Yet to the whole Nation it will be infinitely
greater: For, though there are but few venture to Guinea for Gold, Yet it is every
ones interest to have it brought home, and so, though but few Landed men should
pledge their Estates, the whole Nation would certainly partake of the Benefit.
A matter of this General Concern must be suited to the capacities of all, and
enforced with arguments plain and evident; easy and yet powerful, so as to
prevaill on any, but the most obstinate and wilful.

For these and the following reasons, Land-Credit is now made choice of, 1st.
Because Land is the best of pledges, and of Land there is here no want. 2 o.
Because Money can neither be here easily got nor kept, and of that there is
here no store. 3 o. Because in fact, a worse Credit performs in all Trading
Countries the office of Money better than Money, without being changed at the
Bank and without fear of the dangerous Phantoms here sometimes insinuated: and
Lastly because the putting Land-Credit in practice depends purely upon the will
and pleasure of King and Parliament without interfering with, or wanting the
concurrence of, Foraigners, and without charge, hazard of loss, or advance of
Money.

One would be apt to think, that, when I labor thus for the Nations true
interest, it might deserve the favor of every good Scots Man, and that none,
but such as may be engaged in Foraign Intrigues, or influenced by Mischievous
Advice from abroad, should be found obstructing so necessary and useful a Good.

If it may be Lawful to guess the Intent of some opposers, their objections
being for the most part frivolous and impertinent, it would possibly appear
very different from their pretended objections. May it not be suspected, that
some of them are afraid, that, though Land-Credit may be universally beneficial
to the Nation, their private Profits may be a little diminished, which yet in
fact will be quite the contrary? And may not others out of Envy be angry, that
the numbers of the Rich may increase, to equal, or exceed themselves? Some may
mistrust, that a stranger designs to overreach the whole Nation: And others be
displeased, that any profitable invention escaped their discovery. Some may be
also offended, that they are not immediately concerned in the Profits, and that
any besides themselves may thrive. And others may believe it better, for the
Nation to weary and tire the Proposer with tedious Delays and vexatious
Discouragements, that such Reward, as might reasonably be expected for such a
service, might be thriftily, though very Foolishly and disgracefully saved, like
sparing at the Spigget, and letting it run out all at the Bung-hole. These and
such like Passions may possibly govern some few, but, till it more plainly
appears, who are so influenced, I shall forbear mentioning how weak and absurd?
how wicked and improf table to the Nation such like thoughts and arguments
would prove?

There has some time since a scurrilous Pamphlet sneaked about in the dark,
though printed: but hitherto the Author of that spurious brat is so wisely
bashful, as not to own it: and, whenever he, or any other, shall think fit to
appear in the light to defend it, a suitable reply shall be returned; In the
mean time, and at all times, I am ready, and shall be, to the best of my weak
Abilitys to maintain against all, that Wit or Malice can suggest to the
contrary, that Land-Credit is now both a very necessary good to this Nation
and, compared with other matters of equal value and magnitude, very easily put
in practice.

I was in hopes all occasion for such uncivil behavior had been prevented, by
my Printed friendly Invitation to all persons, to acquaint me with their
objections, and my faithful Promise, to endeavor to return answers
satisfactory to all, but such, as like to the report of Roman Catholics, dare
not trust to their reason, nor believe their Senses, but resign themselves
implicitly to the Conduct of those, that may deceive them in the end; nothing
is so easy as with seeming reason to condemn, what cannot be mended.

Elegancy of Style is not my Talent, nor, if it were, should I think it fit for
a subject of this kind; Nor could method be well observed in this collection,
because the Positions, Quere's, and objections, were occasional: and the
borrowed passages are only inserted to obviat unreasonable prejudices. The
Repetition, and variety of Forms, for the same matter, to render it the more
plain to every man's capacity, may be excuseable, in what is published for
general information.

To conclude, since it is manifest to curious observers, that the bulk of Money
centers in a few Years in the hands of the smalest number, being the
Industrious, cunning, Thrifty, and the fortunate, whereby the greatest part of
the People fot want of Tools become idle, or not well employed: though at first
there had been an equal dividend of the money among the whole Nation: It may
therefore seem no contemptible Policy to contrive every such period, some
methods to supply a fresh all such destitute Persons, which frequent necessitys
nothing can so well answer as a Land Credit.

THE INTRODUCTION
THE encouragement the Proposals for Land-Credit met from the Sessions of this
Parliament Anno 93. Together with its, at least seeming, great Intrinsic
worth, obliges me this Session to solicit the establishing an Office in this
Country for the same, either according to the first Proposal, or either of the
following different Modells, which, being as truly Political, as the Coining
of Money, fall more naturally under the examination Statesmen than Merchants,
though the employment for Credit, as that for Money, being partly mercantile, may
deserve the concurrence of Traders also.

Now, to recommend a matter of so general a Concern the more powerfully, it may
not be amiss to inquire a little into the present Wants of this Kingdom: and
then humbly to offer something toward a Remedy.

Is therefore Scotland under such present flourishing circumstances, as that
there is no room left for new advantages? for example, are there Stocks,
workhouses, and Employments for all the Poor? are there Hospitalls for the
Aged, Maimed and Sick Poor? are all the Lands improved as much, as they are
capable, and all profitable Mines wrought and discovered? are Manufactures
multiplied, increased, or improved to perfection, sufficient for home
consumption and foreign exportation? is there half a Million, or a Million
ready for the service of the African Company, to Recover their late
disapointments? are all necessaries supplied, no conveniences wanting, nor no
more superfluitys desirable in this Country? and besides these there may be
many more, too tedious to be here inserted. If these and more remain still to
be wished for? What can be a more speedy and proper remedy, than to discover a
measure of Trade within their own Power, as certain, safe, and effectual, as
Gold or Silver Money, and in such quantity, as their occasions may at any time
require? without which Lands and hands, must remain a long time, if not always
idle, or move but slowly: for, wherever there is plenty of a measure of Trade;
whether money or current Credit, there the foresaid wants are much unknown;
and, wherever there is scarcity of either of them, all Industry sl^eps. Money
of Gold and Silver, and an indifferent Credit, as well as either, ^e^ves these
uses, by making current payments abroad in all Trading places; The first cannot
be procured here in many years sufficient to an^wer the Nations occasions; The
last, of a much better and more useful sort, than in any other Country, ca^ be
here provided, sufficient to supply all de^e^ts and Reasonable d^sires; and is
humbly tendered in the ensueing Papers. As to the danger of having too much
Credit, there can be non more than of having too much Gold; for whatever
becomes useless will never be sought after; therefore none will then venture
abroad for Gold, nor any desire to raise Credit on their Estates. But besides,
let any measure of Trade be increast never so fast, the uses and occasions
will ever Ride the fore Horse, as is evident in all wealthy Countries; and it
would be but common prudence for every particular Family to keep the value of a
Years expense in such a measure of Trade always dead in their Chest, to answer
dangerous contingences, which alone would take up eight Millions at present,
according to aprobable Computation, and much more hereafter.

TO HIS GRACE JAMES Duke of QVEENSBERRY, His Majesty's High Commissioner, And
to the Right Honorable ESTATES of PARLIAMENT, The following Memorial relating
to Land-Credit, is humbly presented by Dr. Hugh Chamberlen.
HAving in the Year 1693 made by my friends a proposal to this Parliament for
the establishing a Land-Credit, supposed then by many, not without seeming
Reason, a great advantage to the Kingdom of Scotland, and accordingly it was
very favorably received by that Session; And finding some Objections since
raised against the Form as well as the matter, I have thought it my duty to
offer to this Session Proposals of the same nature with some alterations; though
the former as well as these may be supported, when the Parliament shall be
pleased to command it, with such arguments, as it is hoped will satisfy evrey
doubting Person: For the many Advantages without Loss by, and the easy
Possibility of putting Land Credit in practice in this Kingdom, without any
manner of danger, seems to plead boldly for its Admission, especially since the
present State of Scotland; being capable of more and greater improvements, may
tempt their prudent states men seriously to inquire, into what promises so
largely: for Land-Credit can do this Nation that good, which is impossible for
Gold or Silver: unless there were fewer foreign industrious Rivals to court
them, or that they had Mines of their own; Nor is the possibility less obvious,
than the utility by the Current and Common passing in all Trading Countries of
a worse Credit, founded either upon public Faith or private Reputation,
wherefore it may not without reason be hoped, such Statesmen will grant this a
kind and generous entertainment.

The former Proposal was to raise Credit upon Land by anticipating one Hundred
Years value of the present Rent of such Estates, as should be thereto assigned
by Parliament, by which both the Public and the Proprietor might reap very
great advantage these since framed, are beneficial to the Public and the
Proprietor, and seem better suited to the present temper and inclination of
this Country.

The Second Proposal is, that to every Heritor, that is able and willing to
engage his Estate, shall be delivered in Credit to the value of as many Years
Rent, as he pleases, [not exceeding twelve, He paying for the same 5 per Cent
Yearly, either in the same Credit, or in money, for thirty Years only, without
Obligation to return the Principal.

The Third Proposal is, that Fourscore Pounds of every Hundred Pounds per Annum
and so proportionably for a greater or smaller Estate, shall be lent gratis for
twenty Years to every Heritor, willing to engage his Estate to pay at twenty
Years end, or within one Year after, a whole Years Rent in Credit or Money; now
this, being not one per Cent. per Annum Interest for that Term, is no
inconsiderable profit, though there were no other: But, to make it yet more
acceptable, the overplus twenty Pounds, in the mean time employed in a forain
and domestic general Trade, are to be returned at the end of the said 21.
Years into the proper Office, to indemnity, as far as that can, the Heritors
Lands from paying more, than the fourscore Pounds, at first Received, for every
Hundred Pounds per Annum.

And, in case any Heritor, by reason of some legal impediment, or for other
considerations, should neglect the Offer, that then it may be lawful, after --
Months, to such others, as shall be willing, to Double, Treble, or Quadruple
the said Credit upon their proper Estates, with a liberty of having as many
Years time after the twenty to return the Credit, as half the Yearly Rent will
complete.

That all the overplus twenty Pounds are to be a Stock in Trade, to be managed
by the direction of the Proposer, and under the inspection and control of the
Commissioners of Parliament and the other Trustees, that so no part of the
Stock be Imbezeled or converted to private use; but kept up by repairing every
loss out of the succeeding profits, before any future dividend be made; And
that, during the whole term, and the continuance of the Office after, the nett
Profits only be divided ^n two equal Parts; the one to discharge the expense of
the Office and management of the Trade, and the other to the sole use and
behoof of the Proposer, his Heirs and Assigns without account; and the same
benefit to be continued to them, as often as Land-Credit shall be renewed or
augmented within the first twenty Years, and to remain only for the
forementioned terms after renovation or augmentation.

These several Proposals are humbly tendered to this August Senate for their
consideration and choice, and many more of the same nature may be offered, when
commanded; if once Land-Credit be approved; But a Proposal lately printed, for
supplying the defects of Money and relief to the Poor, will appear upon
examination to be attended with difficult and dangerous Circumstances except
such as are apparently borrowed from the proposers Papers.

The Credit raised by any of these Proposals, when returned into the Office, to
discharge the engaged Land Funds, either by Annual Rents, or at the end of the
Respective, Terms, must be cancelled, or no more issued without a settlement
of new Land Estates.

I shall Humbly take leave to add, as a necessary circumstance to these
Proposals, that a Council of Trade under a due Constitution, of which some
models may be tendered, when commanded, may be absolutely necessary in this
Kingdom, to consider, how to remove all the impediments of Trade? how to
provide and encourage all that may promote it? and how to keep the balance to
their advantage of all exportations and importations, without which, and a
Court Merchant, Trade is not likely to flourish in this Kingdom so soon.

It is upon the whole humbly prayed by the said Dr. Hugh Chamberlen, that his
Grace the Lord High Commissioner and the Right Honorable the E^tates of
Parliament may Please to commit the consideration of this Proposal to be
examined by a select number of Members, and, report being made, may determine
therein, as in their great wisdom they shall see cause.

Several Passages collected out of Sir Thomas-Pope Blunt, and others, are
thought necessary to be here inserted, to qualify unreasonable prejudices, if
there should be any such.
AN useful Error has often found free admission, when important Truths,
contrary to men's Preconceptions or Interest, have been forbidden entrance.

Men judge all things by Anticipation; and condemn or applaud, as they differ
or agree with their first opinions.

Some are confirmed in their Folly, beyond Possibility of Conviction. Wife-men
suspend their Judgment, and are not forward to censure and condemn. As
Antiquity cannot privilege an Error, so Novelty cannot prejudice Tuth. Some
declaim against new things, and set forth the danger of Alteration and Novelty:
But let us not be frightened with shadows: if to be an Author of new things be a
crime? how will the first Civilizers of men, and masters of Laws and founders
of Government escapes? -- Whatever now delights us in the Works of Nature, that
excells the Rudeness of the first Creation, is new. -- It is no Offense to
introduce new things unless they prove Pernicious in themselves, or must
extirpat better. -- Nothing so ancient, but had a beginning, and was once a
Novelty.

Men of great Power and Reputation have been Enemies to all sorts of Novelties.

The Bishop of Saltzburg was, at the complaint of the Archbishop of Mentz,
condemned for an Heretic, for asserting the Antipodes, supposing some damnable
Doctrine was couched under that name.

The improving Trade, the Life and Soul of the Universe, is no slight matter.
It is not the vastness of Territory: but the convenient situation: Nor the
multitude of men: but their Address and Industry, which improves a Nation.

A Mind transported with Passion rejects the best reasons, and retains the
worst opinions. The dull and unactive spirits trouble themselves not to examine
things: but take them in the gross, and are for keeping the beaten Road.

Some Opinions strangely please, when at the same time others, recommended with
much greater strength of Reason, are not hearkened to.

The following Passages are out of Doctor Stillingfleet's Sermons.
THESE, who will cavil at any thing, are resolved to be convinced by nothing,
and such are not fit to be discoursed with.

The clearest Reason has a difficult access to the Minds of such, who are
governed by Interest and Prejudice. -- When matters of fact cannot be denied,
then ill men seek to blast the Reputation of such as they hate. -- Some have a
strange Spirit of contradiction, even against Designs, that are for their own
good. -- It is fit the grounds of Actions should be examined, and, if they
cannot be justified it is time enough at last to condemn them.

The weakest part of mankind are most suspicious; the less they understand, the
more they imagine Designs are laid for them.

For want of wisdom and Judgment, the generality of Mankind seldom sees to the
End of Things, and hardly distinguish between the name and nature of them, till
their own dear bought Experience has taught them the difference.

The greatest Good, done to an ungrateful People, does but attract their Malice
instead of Gratitude. When men become slaves to their Lusts, they not only
neglect their own true Interest, but the Nations also.

Interest and Education are strong Holds; Scoffs and Raillery the weaker
Weapons of some persons.

Another Author has this Passage.
NOnnulli vel ingeniosissima hominum Inventa contemptui habent, etc contra,
Nugas omnium nugacissimas magna cum Admiratione suspiciunt.

Certain necessary Positions presented to Serious Consideration, follow.
ALL Materials, when made Money by a Government, whether Silver, Gold, Tobacco,
Leather, Fish-Bones, shells, Credit, etc. becomes current living Pledges, and
requires therefore no interest, though some of them are more fit than others, and
none more so, than Land-Credit; but all Materials, not made Money, though Gold,
Silver, or the most Precious commodity, and even a Bag of ^^olib in Money, if
sealed up, and not to be made use of, are but dead Pledges, and therefore not
current, bur requires Interest.

2. It is indifferent of what Material, Weights and Measures are made, provided
they agree with the Public Standard; And it is as indifferent, of what
Material, Form, or Impression, Money is framed, provided it be qualified so, as
to Serve the Uses of Trade, and to secure Dealers from Loss, as well as Gold
and Silver does.

3. Credit upon supposed or unknown funds now serves the uses of Trade, in
making current Payments in all Trading Countries, as well as Money of Silver or
Gold.

4. Credit upon Land must be always safer and better, than upon any other Fund
whatever.

5. Credit upon Land, which Scotland does not want, may be made as useful real
Money, as any of Gold or Silver, which Scotland has not in Plenty.

6. Land-Credit can answer all things, when made current by Parliament, as well
as Solomon says, Money of Gold and Silver does; It is is a spring to give
motion to heads and hands, for improving Lands and Manufactures.

7. Credit upon Land known sufficient may as we^l pass in this Country in small
or great Payments, by Bills accordingly fitted, without ever being changed at
the Bank for Money, as it does, and has done, in other Countries for above 100
Years, upon only a Money Fund supposed sufficient; although such a fund of Money
is subject to many real casualtys, when that of Land can be to no other, than
imaginary dreams.

8. Money is but a Token with the Value in it, and Land-Credit is a better
Token, Because it has a greater value, than it passes for, inseperably annexed
to it by Law.

9. Money being what only makes the European Princes Powrfull, can Scotland
hope to make a figure among them, till they have mended their condition? It is
not Necessity but Choice makes Scotland Poor; not because they must, but
because they will be so.

10. The right and ready methods to obtain wealth honestly, must certainly be
very desirable.

11. Scotland seems to acknowledge, they cannot have too much Money, and have
now too little, because they are so earnest to increase, and regulate their
Trade, which would else be to no purpose.

12. When money or Credit can be easier procured, and heads and hands, that is
Invention and Labor, more encouraged, a much greater Stock can be here
employed in Trade, than is now supposed to be wanting.

13. Current Land-Credit is without exception the best Worldly Advantage, and
in its own nature as practicable, as most, and more practicable, then many
valuable things now in use.

14. The Utility and Natural Possibility of Land Credit is certain, whither it
will be thought so, is yet a Question.

15. Land is esteemed all the World over, as well where is Gold and Silver, as
where there is none and the value still increases with the increase of Gold and
Silver.

16. A good Land mortgage is esteemed equally valuable with a like Sum in
Money, else none would give Money for it: the bills of Land-Credit are little
Land Mortgages as safe, as the greater, and more useful, because small, and
therefore may be made by Parliament Current and living.

17. Land-Credit can soon furnish Scotland with as much Real Money, though not of
Gold and Silver, yet equally useful and profitable, as they now can, or at any
time may, want, or know how to employ, and therefore it is now highly necessary
for Scotland.

18. This Land Money or Land Credit, with prudent Trading, will soon furnish
Scotland, with the Riches of the East and West Indies, as Gold, Silver, Jewels,
Spice etc.

19. This Credit can augment both the growth of Land, and the Quantity of
Improved Manufactures to a much greater Value for Exportation, than is now
possible, or at any time shall be, without Land-Credit, though Gold and Silver
were multiplied as much, as could reasonably be hoped for.

20 Such an Increase for Exportation may, in a well Regulated Trade, not only
furnish this Nation with a greater plenty of Foraigne Wares for home
Consumption, but also with a large overplus in Jewels, Plate etc,

21. More Money cannot be exported in Specie out of any Country, than is
Imported, without great Damage: but, if by misfortune, any such necessity
should happen. Land-Credit, being intended for local Money, can only make
amends, by keeping such hands Employed, which must else be idle.

22. Land may well be Security, for what it is worth, above a present
Encumbrance, and the necessary growing Charges, which therefore ought to be no
Impediment, to a subsequent encumbrance, it within the value of the said Land;
but be rectified by Law, especially for such Heritors, as are willing to engage
their Estates for their own and the Public Good.

23. If the benefit by Land-Credit exceeds the Charge, trouble, and
Inconveneinces of putting it in Practice; all impediments of less Value ought
to be removed; for Public Good must be preferred before private Advantages,
even Laws and Customs, when deficient or inconsistent with a Public Good,
ought to be supplied, or Repealed, and not continued as the Laws of the Medes
and Persians.

24. Supreme Goverments ought to have, if they have not, a full power to make,
what they judge safe and convenient to pass for Money. And Scotland lately
exerted the same Power, in raising the Artificial Value of their Coin above the
natural, though it proved no Advantage to the Country: how much better may they,
when 'twill be no loss, but a great Benefit.

25. In matters of moment, no objection should be received, but such as the
Ob^ector, is persuaded to be real, because neither time nor the Subject
deserves to be trifled with* nor should any O^jection against Land Credit he
admitted, which lies as strong against Gold and Silver, till they by both first
condemned.

26. It may be time enough to doubt the validity of a Law for securing Land
Funds to make Credit current, when the Laws become too weak to protect the
Lives. Liberties, and properties of the Subject in general; And till then this
useful Good may be as well hazarded as the rest; since none can get by
destroying it, and all must by preserving it.

27. The Constitution, prepared for the Management of Land-Credit, makes it,
not only a knaves Interest to be honest, and none will then ^e honester than
he, if he is not a fool also; but puts it likewise out of his Power to play the
Knave.

28. A bare en^ry in the public Registers of Lands, settled for a fund o^
Credit, with an Authentic Duplicat Signed by the Register, and delivered to
the Office of Credit, ought to be a sufficient Legal Tie upon the said Lands,
to answer the Credit Charged on them by Parliament.

29. When proofs are offered as full, as the nature of the subject can permit,
though not Ma^hematicall, it is fit they should be received.

A few Arguments shall be here added to enforce the 4, 13 and 17 Positions,
That Land Credit is the best of Credit. 2o. very Practicable, and 3o. now very
necessary for Scotl^nd
1 BEcause all Credit Subsists either upon a real or Imaginary Fund or Pawn,
and every real Pledge is better, than an Imaginary one, and of all real
Pledges, Land is most secure, therefore the best Fund can b^st support the best
Credit.

2. To prove the 2d no other demonstration is needful, than the common use of
a were Credit in all Trading Countries, and then certainly a better Credit must
needs do as well.

3. To prove the 2d. may be offered, that this Country seems now more disposed
to Tra^e, and better acquainted with the use and value of Credit, than
formerly. That, when this Credit shall be secured by Parliament upon a known
^und, ^t becomes as truly Money as Gold and Silver, for all home uses
certainly, the true design for Money, and must therefore force a larger
Exportation of Manu^actures to answer the Nations foreign Occas ons: and
lastly, that, being an Addition to this Kingdom's Stock of Money, which no
other Credit can safely be it must necessarrly Employ all Heads and Hands:
Improve all Arts; Increase Exportation and Consumption, both foreign and
domestic, which must in avoidably make Scotland flourish and prosper more
abundantly, than it can without it.

These following Queres, way not be Impertinently added to the preceding
Positions.

Q. 1. Would a Million of God or more, lent Gratis to some few Heritors,
willing to engage their Estates, for their own and the Public Service, to
repay it in one Hundred Years, by 10000 lib. a Year, be an Advantage, worth the
Wisdom of this Nations encouragement; notwithstanding that the Sum, might be
thought too great: that not all, but few, of the Heritors could partake of the
immediate Benefit: That no part of the said Gold, should be exported, but only
for repayment of the Annual Debt: that the Widows, Orphans, and others, should
be in Danger of being put to their Shifts, how to dispose of their Money? And
that there may be some difficulty in finding Persons, for Skill and Fidelity,
fit to be trusted, with the Care and Management of the same?

2. Or would the loan of a like Sum, under like difficulties, for thirty
Years, at only 5 per Cent. Interest, without being obliged ever to pay back the
Principal: Or for 20 Years without Interest, among such Heritors, as would and
could secure it by Land, deserve the Governments Encouragement. And should not
all lesser Considerations give place to so great an Advantage?

3. Does not Credit, though but upon Public Faith, or Private Reputation,
supply, at least in all Trading Countries, the want of Money, by making
Satisfactory Payments, even where there is already great Plenty of Money

4. Will not Credit upon Land serve those ends with more safety, than either of
the aforesaid Credits.

5. Has not Scotland Land enough very fit, because of the Register, to be
made a secure Fund for Credit.

6. May not Scotland find employment for a Million at least more, than they now
have?

7. May not the Establishment by Parliament of a Land-Credit in this Kingdom
bring the same or greater Advantage to it, than me loan of so much Gold?

8. Whilst Bullion is appointed the sole Material for Money, can there be as
good Reasons offered, for it is exportation. as against it? Or did ever a Wise
and considerate Statesman plead for it!

9. Does any Person now oppose this establishment, but such as are not fully
informed, for want of leisure or Capacity: Or some few Moneyed Men, who mistake
their true Interest, since nothing can prove more advantageous to them

For a further Demonstration of the Nature, Use, and safety of Land-Credit, a
Comparison betwixt Money and the said Credit, with an Instance of the
Circulation of both follow.
MOney is a common and secure Pledge, instituted to supply the Defects of
Barter, and to be the measure, Medium, and Account of Trade; Whatever can
answer these end sis duly qualified to be made Money by the Laws of any Nation.

Money must have these essential Qualities (viz.) 1. Value to make it a
Security, in Exchange for all sorts of Goods. 2. Denomination, that the Value
may be known. 3. Different Values, for convenience of smaller and greater
payments. 4. Stamp of the Government, not to give, but to Attest, its Value,
and to Authorize the currency of it; for, till Stamped, Silver is not Money. 5.
Durabilitie, to prevent loss by wearing out, or easily perishing 6.
Portabilitie, for easy carriage.

The Bills of Credit or Land-Monie proposed will have all those Qualities of
Money, equally with Money of Gold and Silver in all Respects, and Superior in
some.

As to Value: Money of Gold and Silver exceeds not i'ts Value by Weight at the
most, and is very often short of it, either by too great an Alloy in Coinage,
or by Washing, Filing, Clipping, Wearing, etc: Whereas every Bill of this
Credit will be secured by Land of greater worth, than it is Coined for, and is
not Subject to any Alloy, nor to have its Value diminished by any fraudulent
Arts whatsoever. As to different Values, that s^all be settled, as shall be
Judged most efficacious for the ends of Trade. Denomination, Stamp of the
Government, Durability, And lastly Portability are equally provided for, as in
Gold and Silver: indeed more, as to Portability, for 100. lib. in Credit will
never equal an Ounce of Silver in Weight or Bulk

Money is not so convenient in these Respects, as this Credit (viz.)

For the Danger of Robbery in carrying and keeping: for daily use in large
Payments: For the loss of time in telling and retelling: For the Danger of
Clipped and Counterfeit Money: For the Trouble of carrieing great Sums from
House to House; for its being Subject to be Tranported to other Nations, and to
be hoarded by Misers, who Fondly doat upon the Metalls.

Money is only a secure pledge of a known Value, that a Man shall be repayed
to the full in some other Commodity, for the Commodities he parts withal: and
it serves, but to supply the intervals of time, between the selling of one
Commodity and the buying of another.

Now the proposed Credit can well supply that intervall, and is yet a more
secure Pledge, than Money of Gold or Silvers; for 10000 lib. in Money is of no
greater Value, than what it pretends, and is very often of a less: But 10000
lib. in this Credit will be secured by a much greater Value in Land.

The difference between the true Value of Land and Money is evident, in that
Money is willingly turned into Land: but Land is not turned into Money, but
through necessity and constraint. All Men allow Land a sufficient and the best
security for Money, what secures must then be more eligeable, than what is
secured.

The Use. Validity, and safety, of this Credit is also confirmed in little, by
daily practice at play with Counters, where the Gamesters stake their Money as
security in the Box, and, according to their stakes, receive so many Counters,
which by agreement amongst themselves, are called either Pence, Shillings, or
Pounds, according to the Value of their Stakes: Now so long as such Stakes are
lodged in the Box, so long the Counters pass as currently amongst them, and all
By standers, that knows the Stakes are in the Box, as the best Money of like
Value, though it were for Years or Ages, without the least fear or doubt of loss
or Damage, because the Value is in the Box. Even so it ought and will be with
Land-Credit, when settled by Parliament: For the Land is the Box, the Bents are
the Stakes, and the Bills are the Counters: and so long, though never so long, as
the Land Rents remain engaged, and sufficient to make good the Bills, so long
will the Bills continue as good and useful, as the like Value in Money, though
for many Ages: because the Land-Rents are sufficient, and cannot escape making
good the Bills to the full, at the time appointed, and in the mean time they
serve the Nation by their currency as well, as so much Money.

In short, all Money are counters with an inherent value and Land Bills, of
Credit are Counters with an adherent value: Land Bills of Credit is Land Money,
coined out of Land virtually, as Silver-Money is actually out of Plate, and as
good and secure, and more useful, than Silver or Gold Money.

Bills of Credit made Current by Parliament are Petit Mortgages in respect of
Security as safe, as Mortgages of 10000 lib. and, in respect of use, they are
living pledges, as good as Money, answering the same ends with Money, by making
as satisfactory Payments in all Trading parts; Therefore they Yield no
Annual-Rent, as large Mortgages but may be let out for Annual rent as Money is,
which great Mortgages might also do, by Act of Parliament, if their Greatness
did not make them seldom useful.

An Instance of the Circulation of Gold and of Credit.

A. settles his Land to pay 100 lib. in Gold at a certain Term of Years to B.
he having received from B. before a like Sum in Gold.

C. settles his Land to pay 100 lib. in Bills of Credit at the same Term to the
Office, having received from the Office before, a like Sum in Bills of Credit.

A. pays a Debt of 50 lib. in Gold to his Coach-Maker; the Coach-Maker pays
the same to a Currier for Leather; the Currier pays the same to a Tanner; the
Tanner pays the same to a Butcher for raw Hides; the Butcher to a Grasier for
Cattle; The Grasier pays the same to a Farmer for Pasture; the Farmer pays, it
to A. his Land Lord for Rent; and A. pays the same in Gold to B. from whom at
first he Bo^row'd it.

Not take the Payments as running in Bills of Credit.

C. pays a Debt of 50 lib. in Bills of Credit to his Coach-Maker; the
Coach-Maker pays the same to a Currier for Leather; the Currier pays the same
to a Tanner; the Tanner the same to the Butcher; the Butcher the same to the
Grasier for Cattle; the Grasier pays them to a Farmer; the Farmer pays them
to C. his Landlord and C. returns them in Payment to the Office, where at
first he borrowed them.

Now by this Instance it is plain, that in the Circulation and course of
dealing, all their occasions are answered, and none the worse for the Payments
in Credit than in Gold; And the Office is no poorer in receiving back the
Credit, nor B. any Richer in receiving back his Gold, than both were at the
issueing of their several Sums in Credit and Gold.

Some of the many Advantages, which necessaryly attend the establishment of
Land-Credit, are as follow.
1. EVery Million of Land Credit, made current by Parliament, must yield at
least a Million Benefit yearly to this Kingdom, during the whole Term of its
Currency.

2. Credit, made current by Parliament, does ipso facto become Real Money, and
must Work the same Effect and Advantage, as Gold or Silver Money; And therefore
an Addition or increase of Land-Credit must unavoidably multiply Consumption,
which makes a Trade, and, where that prospers, thither will Numbers of
Laborers and Artificers flock, to increase both wrought and unwrought
Commodities, for home Service, and foraign Exportation: And, when more shall be
exported, more Gold and Silver may be returned, if Trade be wisely managed.

4. Methods may be proposed, if wanted, to buy up all the Wool of the Kingdom
at a middle Price, of what it had yielded any Year, this 20 Years, and to
continue the Contract as long, as the establishment for Land-Credit shall be
settled by Parliament, that so the exportation of unwrought Wool may be
certainly prevented, without loss to the Wool-masters. As also for taking in
Widows and Orphans Money at 5 per Cent. to be returned at 6 Months Warning any
time after two Years. And lastly, to furnish all that want, with Bills of
Exchange, Payable where their Occasions require, upon Payments made here in
Bills of Land-Credit.

5. Plenty of Land-Credit will help Landlords to their Rents, and Money'd-Men
to their Interest, much easier, than is now possible with the present scarcity
of Money.

6. It will enable the Heritors to cultivate their Lands to greater profit, and
the Husbandman to find a better market for all he can raise, though double, to
what he now does.

7. It will be to Money'd-men, what a Rich Cully is to tooking Gamesters. For
most of it in few Years must be Lodged in their Hands.

8. It may increase the Public Revenues, and enable the Subject to pay
cherefully greater Taxes, when necessary.

9. It will mightily quicken Trade, to the great benefit of all Professions, and
Employments.

10. It will discover new, and Work old, Mines; and by Increase of Manufactures
enlarge exportations,

11. It only can effectally set up the Fisherie, the Original of all the Dutch
Wealth and power.

12. It will in time advance the Value of Lands in Rent and Purchase, and sink
the Interest of Money so, as to force it into Trade, which by a new
Constitution may be no less safe to the Owners, than their present Interest
scured by Land, and much more easy, honest, and profitable; and to the Nation
exceedingly more Beneficial.

13. It may make Rivers Navigable, Roades Passable, and such Houses and Towns
Habitable, as are not so now.

14. It may employ the able Poor, and help better to maintain the Impotent, for
both which, Proposals may be offered, when commanded, to put an End to the
dreadful Cries in the Streets, none of the least of God's Judgments on a Land.

16. It will immediately do all things more effectually, than the like Sum in
Silver could. And as an industrious Merchant with a large Stock may sooner
raise a mighty Estate, than another equally qualified, can possibly in the same
time and place with a small Stock, even so will a Nation thrive in proportion to
the largeness of their Stock of current Credit, being the Proper Tools of
Trade, fastler than its possible for them to do with a small Stock of Money,
though their Industry, Frugalitie, Skill, and Fortune were the same.

That Land-Credit may stand the fairer for Judgment, some supposed
Disadvantages are Subjoyned.
THe Advantages in short are all the same, that a supply of so much Money, as
this Kingdom may at any time have Occasion for, or know how to employ, would
produce; and what Money can do, is too obvious to need an Explanation.

The disadvantages, which can but be supposed, there being really none likely;
may be either the mischief of too much Money, which I confess I do not
understand, Mismanagement, Tyranny, or Conquest.

To begin therefore with Mismanagement, that must be either by Counterfeit
Bills; issueing Credit without a Fund; or by not cancelling the Credit at last,
when the Land-Fund is to be discharged; for all which; there is as good a
Provision at least made, as there is for any of the present Public Trusts;
And, if that will not serve to Recommend this it seems Reasonable, all the rest
should be rectified, or Discharged.

As to Tyranny, there seems to be but one expedient, which is, that every one
should now loose their Heads, lest hereafter Tyrant should arise, cruel enough
to Order it.

As to conquest, there can be no great Danger; for Fools seldom become
Conquerors, and the wise will never consent to put out both their own Eyes,
that they may the better put out one of the Nations.

By this it may appear, the hazard is nothing, but of being Rich, and the
Benefits are many.

Some are of Opinion, Scotland wants no such Assistance.

Then certainly it wants no money, which if the Individuals of the Nation were
examined would scarce find a Suffrage among 10000. For the very necessities of
this Country requires a great Sum; the conveniences a much greater; but the
Superfluities an infinite Sum.

If ever there should hereafter happen to be too much Money in any place, as
never yet has happened, None will venture afterward for Guinia or the Indies
for Gold or Silver; And whenever it shall be found by experince, there is too
much Land-Credit, none will raise more upon their Estates. But,

In proportion to the Credit or Money, that is Current, not dormant in the
Chest or Plate, does all the World thrive.

Such Objections, as have occurred, are here endeavored to be fully answered.

1. Obj. That an addition, of so great a Sum in current Credit, to the present
Stock of Money in the Nation, will raise the price of all necessaries.

1. Answ. So world an addition of a like Value in Metal in Money, and Yet such
an Offer would hardly be here rejected, and therefore it deserves no answer: but

2. It is granted, if the whole Sum were to be issue'd in a short time; but
that is impracticable, and yet such care is taken, that the Bills can come
forth but gradually so, as Sellers and Goods may Increase propostionably with
the Buyers, as is evident in London, Paris, etc. where, though there is plenty
both of Money and Credit, Yet most things are cheaper, than in Edinburgh, where
there is greater Scarcity of both: But, if that were not to be avoided, the
Proverb says, a Capon of half a Crown in London is cheaper than one for a Groat
in York; because half a Crown is sooner gained in London, that Groat in York.

2. Obj. That, when this Credit shall be made current by Parliament, Tradesmen
will not sell their Good, without at previous Contract to be paid in Silver,
of else at extravagant Rates.

1. Answ. It Is very unlikely, that such, as now gladly sell for a dead Credit,
will not then more readily sell for a living Credit.

2. This will however be impossible, if Parliaments have Authority to make them
current, and power to Punish the Offenders severely: For none can lose, when
all must take them.

3. It has not this effect in Amsterdam and other places, therefore such
deserve the highest severities; because of the great injury they offer their
Country and Countrymen, without the least benefit to themselves.

3. Obj. This Land-Credit will be no immediate addition of Riches to this
Kingdom.

Answ. 1. Nor would the Loan Gratis of a like Sum in Gold for as many Years;
yet none will deny, but the use of so much so long must be no small advantage.

2. Coining the Plate in this Kingdom would make no addition of wealth to it,
and yet few are so ignorant, as to deny it a means to make it Richer, than it
now can, by lyeing dead to loss.

3. Money and Credit are the Tools and Instruments by which men are Enriched. A
Joiners Tools adds little to his wealth: but yet without them he would sooner
Starve, than thrive.

4. Obj. This will Impoverish the Rich, and enrich the Poor, that is, the Poor
landed Creditor may be hereby enabled to pay off his Encumbrance; And the
gripping Usurer be Impoverished, by the ceasing of his Annual-Rents, and by
Paper Payments, instead of his hard Silver.

1. Answer No Rich Amsterdammer is ruined by the currency o^ that Credit, and
therefore it is as reasonable to say, it will make a man a Woman, and the
contrary, for whatever enriches the Poor must unavoidably enrich the wealthy,
because of their wealth. Friends, and oportunities: And, if the Parliament has
any Power, which ought not to be questioned, the Bills of Credit will do all
the same service, that their hard Silver can be imagined to do.

5 Obj. this will Supersede the use of Money, and drive it out of the Nation.

Answ. Amssterdam Credit has nor yet wrought this effect: but it is much more
probable, it will keep and increase the Money; for nothing can carry it out of
any Nation to its loss; but an over-balance of Importation and Foreign
Expense; And nothing can keep it but the increase of the growth of the Country
and of Manufactures, with a well regulated Trade, to which this Credit will
contribute very much: Nor is there any more danger, that Credit should
Supersede the use, or expel the present stock of Money, than Guineas has
Crowns, or Crowns Coppar Money: for the nature of Trade requires as well Copper
for small Payments, as Guinias for greater.

6. Obj. This Proposal was rejected by the Parliament of England.

1. Answ. If it had? there might have been plausible Reasons for so doing in
England, which may not be so here, as less necessity, the want of a Register,
and the Lawyers fears, that it would in time introduce one to the prejudice of
their Practice.

2. Tho it did not pass into a Law, it was reported to the House by the
Committee to be both practicable and very Profitable to the Nation, as appears
by the Votes Febry. 93 And it occasioned the passing about 15. Millions
Sterling in Credit by Parliament, as Dr. Davenant Computes it.

But, because it had no other Fund, than the Public Faith, it was not thought
sufficient to impose it, and therefore they supplied that defect by an
Interest, and made it transferable by Law, though not Current, which 15. Millions
Credit, notwithstanding the Wealth of England, was so far from being too much,
that it was found much too little; as appears by public Debts yet remaining

2. Some Governments have Rejected that in have, which they have repented at
leisure: Or which has endangered the calling their Judgments in question.
Columbus's offer of America, refused by several Princes, is an Instance of the
first, And Englands not admitting a Register, though often moved in Parliament,
is of the last.

7. Obj. There will, by the addition of this Credit, be a greater Stock current
than can be employed.

1. Answ. When more Credit shall be extant, than can be employed, it will
Naturally stop of it self, though if it should not, it may be then time enough to
put a restraint upon the Increase.

2. No Nation has ever yet been so Rich, as to refuse an addition of either
money or good Credit: for occasions Increase as Riches, and in the most opulent
Cities there are not a few, who can employ more than they have both to their
own and the public emolument.

3. Above 5 Millions may be employed in Scotland more, than they have, only to
augment local Riches and conveniences, besides what may be necessary for
Foreign Exportations and home comsumption.

4. When all the Subject of Trade in Scotland is taken up, and all hands
employed, there may not only be a stock and People in other Countries employed;
But Unwrought Materials may be Imported, and Foreign Artificers invited to
Manufacture them in this Kingdom.

8. Obj. This offers what is altogether new, and unheard of before,

1. Answ. He it granted; Yet, if it appears Practicable and Profitable, this
ought to be no Objection.

2. All things were once New; and, if then Rejected for that reason, we might
at this day have fully possessed the naked enjoyment o Adam; and all known
Inventions, which now serves our necessities, Conveniences, and Pleasures, had
been still reserved for a wiser posterities discovery.

3. There was a time, when Banks were new, and, if they had then waited for a
precedent, they would have been still unknown. This here offered is a Nobler
design, and has less of difficulty to be apprehended, now Banks are known,
than Banks had, when first contrived.

4. Here is nothing new, but the use and application, Mortgaging Land and
passing Credit are of Ancient practice. Nor is the Sanction of Authority new,
no Law having a force without it; All, that is new, is the joining Land and
Credit together by Act of Parliament, to make the Credit current. Or Coining
Land virtually into Money, as Metalls are now actually Coined; it is only the
application of an old known Subject, or material to a new use; And if the
Reasons are as Plain and cogent for Coining Land, as they are for Bullion, will
a wise Nation refuse it only for its novelty?

5. One Argument, often used against Novelties, is that none can forsee the
dangerous Consequences, which may indeed be a good Caution against hasty
Proceedings, and may advise a diligent inquiry into matters: but it can by no
means be a general rule to reject new Proposals at all adventures, without
entering into the merits of them

9. Obj. These Bills of Credit may in a little time be counterfeited.

1. Answ. If that were possible, the Damage would not be so great, as now
happens by Counterfeit Money, and Yet the World continues as fond as formerly,
because the advantages by the use of Money are greater, than the loss by
counterfeits can be.

2. Every ordinary capacity will sooner learn to know a true Bill from a false,
than they can good Money.

3. It will require a large Stock to Counterfeit these Bills, and diverse
persons of different Trades to be in the Confederacy; and the several
necessaries to complete a Bill will be so numerous, so bulky, and so notorious,
that 'twill he impossible to be concealed; especially when 't will be the
Interest of the Confederats, as well as of all others, by reason of the great
rewards and severe Punishments, to make the discovery.

4. There will be public Offices in all places of Trade and dealing, where the
Bills may at any seasonable time be compared with their Counter parts gratis,
to prevent any persons being deceived by them; So that what will be almost, if
not altogether, Impossible to be imitated, and hard to be putt off without
imediat discovery, may well discourage, even undaunted men in their Wits, to
attempt; besides every Bill, having a Particular distinction, may be easily
traced, by entering in the Books of Accounts their particular marks.

10. Obj. This Act may be repeled.

1. Answ. It can never need nor deserve it, and, being every man's concern, 't
will be very unlikely; for htat would destroy the reputation of former Acts,
and the Possibility of passing more to any purpose.

2. If it must be supposed? The Nation will be the better for the time it
continued; Nor will any then loose by it; for the Land must be obliged in a
Year or two to repurchase the Credit, Charged upon them Respectivly, So that,
though the Heritors may be disappointed of an advantage, neither they, the
receivers, nor Possessors, can suffer any loss.

11. Obj. More Bills may be issued, than funds secured in Land.

1. Answ. If any thing is improbable, this must, because there ^re not only
many Checqs in the Office; but it is also in every private man's power, that
pleases with a small charge and pains to discover it; for the whole management
and transactions will be plain, fair, regular, and Public, and accounts of the
Lands engaged, and the Bills issued, will be constantly Printed.

12. Obj. This undertaking may miscarry.

1. Answ. Such an Objection, if not well proved, would hinder the admission of
all good Proposals; for all, that is possible, is not always probable.

2. When once past by Parliament, 't will be almost impossible to miscarry; for
that gives it Authority and currency; the Land gives it Credit and Stock, And,
as for Skill in Trade, and ways for employing the Stock, the Author, if none
else, knows where to Provide.

13. Obj. This Land-Credit may be Suspected to interfere with, or Prejudice the
present Money-Bank established by Parliament.

1. Answ. If it appear to be a greater good, it ought to be encouraged, though it
should; But this Office will be truly a Mint, and no Bank, for it coins Land
into Money, as the Mint does Plate, and neither Lends upon Real nor Personal
Securities, as the Bank does; Nor will it keep any man's Books or Cash as Banks
usually do. But,

2. It must rather Increase, than Diminish the Advantage of the Bank; for,
without an unfortunate neglect, and imprudence in the Regulation of Trade,
there must follow a vast increase of Gold and Silver, which will necessarily
fall into there hands and add to their profit.

14. Obj. This Credit will not pass beyond Sea.

1. Answ. It is far from impossible, nay highly probable, it may; but it is
neither fit, nor necessa^y, Example, Policy, Interest, and Reason makes it
unfit; And a Regulated Trade will prevent a necessity.

15. Obj. Money is Universal Riches, But Land-Credit is not, Therefore unfit
for a measure of Trade.

1. Answ. Money is far from Universal Riches, though Gold and Silver are
generaly esteemed but not by much fo generally as Land, and when made Money
will be every whit as useful and desirable, as Money of those Metals.

2. Though Credit is no measure of Trade by Public sanction, Yet it is every
where practiced as such in defect of the other; for there is scarce a Country
in the World without lending or borrowing, which is Credit, either upon the
opinion of the Person or a Pawn; but Land is universal Riches, valued in all
places, as well where there is Money as where there is none.

16. Obj. That Credit of Banks is only Current; because Men may draw out their
Money at pleasure.

Answ. 1. It is the supposed Security and convenience, which gives Reputation
to the Bank-Credit; and only necessity for smaller payments than are past in
Bank, and for such persons or places, where Credit is unknown, or unusefull,
that compels any to change Credit into Money: for, Many, if not most payments,
are daily made here, without seeing or touching Money at the Bank, and all
payments are made at Amsterdam without it, which plainly demonstrates a
possibility of payments, without ever changing at Banks, and when Credit shall
be made current by Parliament, and fitted for smaller payments, the necessity
of changing will be totally removed.

17. Obj. This Credit ought not to be imposed by Parliament, but left to
choice, as the Credit of other Banks is.

Answ. 1. This Credit ought to be imposed, because it is certain, and safe; and
because, by being imposed, it becomes an Addition of so much Real Money to the
Nations Stock, which is the great Advantage intended, and wanted.

2. Since common Bank-Credit is chosen, though not imposed, before Money, it is
plain, it must answer the end and Use of Money, better than Money, or 't would
never be chosen, therefore a more secure and convenient Land-Credit may with
much more Reason and Prudence be imposed.

3, The very same Reasons and Motives, which have hitherto prevailed upon all
Governments to impose Gold or Silver Money, will justify the imposing this
Credit: besides the present Occasion this Country has for some such supply.

4. But the Credit of Money-Banks ought to be lest to choice and not imposed;
because, as above alleged, it is more Subject to deceit or force, and can
never be so secure as upon Land, and may prove a loss upon the People, when
Land-Credit cannot. And yet, at Amsterdam and other Banks, Credit is partly
imposed, because all foraign Bills of Exchange are obliged to be paid in the
Banks, and custom and convenience makes it always by Transfer in Credit:
moreover it is but Reasonable, Money-Credit should be Exchanged for Money, when
demanded at the Bank, because there is no other proof, that they have a Fund,
for which uncertainty it is unfit to be imposed, and therefore cannot serve all
Occasions, nor small payments: So that persons otherwise unwilling, are
constrained sometimes, to demand their Money from the Banks, except at
Amst^rdam, where the Credit has such a Reputation, that it yields upon the
Exchange in Money 2, or 3 per Cent. sometimes above the Par; so that 't would
be a loss to draw it out of the Bank, and is therefore never practiced, except
upon approaching Dangers.

18. Obj. This Land Credit will not so readily pass in Payments; because the
Office does not undertake to change it at any time into Money.

1. Answ. When Land Credit shall be made current by Law, there can be no more
need of such a provision, than there is for the Mint to keep Silver enough
always to change the Gold Coined there.

2. Credit will be then so safe, useful and convenient, that every person will
be more ready to change it in Money; than they are now at Amsterdam, and other
places where there are Banks; so there can be no need of such a provision.

3. None now changes Bills but such as are jealous of the Security, or have
occasions for small Payments, or for Persons and Places, where Credit is
unknown and useless; when therefore the Credit shall be secured by Land, made
current by Parliament, and fitted for small occasions, both the jealousy and
necessity for changing Bills into Money at the Office, will be quite removed.

4. But the Chief Reason, since there can be no necessity, why the Office
should not be obliged to exchange Money for their Bills, is, because they must
either deprive the Nation of the great benefit, intended to Increase the Stock
of Money, by keeping in the Office as much Money, as they have Credit abroad;
Or else run the Hazard of being undone by Malicious and capricious Peoples
demanding their Money in Specie by surprise, which would Change the Design
from a Land O^^^ce into a Money Bank, and only exchange the use of Money for
the use of Credit without other advantage.

19 Obj. If the Government should raise the present Money to double the Value,
upon Public Faith, it might be as safe and useful to the Nation, as
Land-Credit.

Answ. 1. This may well be denied, for it is as much as to say, that Credit upon
public faith only, can secure the Nation from loss by it, as well as Credit
upon private Estates in Land, which I suppose few will assert, and ^ewer trust.

2. Had Governments always maintained their reputation unspotted, as when the
Proverb was verified, as sure as Checq, this might have been proposed: But that
has been for some time out of Fashion.

3. A private persons Estate in Land was, is, and ever will be, the best of
Funds or pawns for security and duration, though any pawn is safer, than either
Honor, Reputation, or even public Faith.

20. Obj. That no person must be hinderd from calling in his Money at pleasure,

Answ. 1. No Man's private Advantage ought to obstruct a public Good,
especially when he can suffer no other loss by it, than of a cross Humor, or
knavish design.

2. A Proviso in an Act may easily reconcile such an inconsistencie: either by
continueing the Debt sufficiently secured, after the Office shall be
indemnified: Or by disposing of the Estate at a Years Value less, whereby the
Burden charged upon the Estate to the Office might be secured at the end of the
Term.

21. Obj. That the persons, entrusted with the Management, may, through
carelessness or unfaithfulness, discharge the Land at the end of the Term,
without satisfieing the Credit raised upon it.

Answ. 1. The Benefit by this Office will so far transcend the suspected
damage by unfaithful Management, that in prudence it ought to be hazarded: For
this will be the only Life and Spring to set all things else at Work.

2. This may be as faithfully discharged, as other great Trusts now are, as the
Chancerie, Courts of Judicature, the Treasury, the Mint, and the like, lodged
in the Hands of persons, chosen by the King, or, may be, appointed by
Parliament.

3. Great and severe Penalties may be Enacted to deterr them.

4. By the Establishment, such Provision is made, that, though all the persons,
entrusted, were neither wise nor honest; 'twill be impossible to behave
themselves deceitfully.

23. Obj. Such proposals coming from a Stranger may be justly suspected.

Answ. 1. Not in the least, when there is no trust, nor other Reward, but what
must arise out of his own Industry. But let it be suspected, provided it be
fairly and wisely examined, and no doubt but 't will appear plainly, that this
Stranger has offered no contemptible advantage to this Kingdom, as well as to
the Heritors, unless a Strangers service be here accounted a Crime, contrary to
the practice of the King of France, who, knowing very well the advantageous
consequences of his Generositie, usually rewards Strangers, as well as his own
Subjects, for any new or beneficial Invention, far beyond their expectations.

It Is tedious and unpleasant to be bound to answer Objections, that are neither
pertinent nor probable.

A Calculation, by which may be guest, what Sum may conveniently serve the
Occasions of this Kingdom.
SUppose there may be in Scotland two Millions of Souls, and that their Yearly
Expense may amount to 8 Millions, at 4 lib. Sterling per Head, one with another.

Suppose also, that the Yearly Rent of the Land Estates may yield one Million,
and that all the ready Money may be half a Million, then must one of the 8
Millions be defrayed by the Rents, and the remaining seven by Industry, Labor,
and Trade.

Amongst the Laborers, with respect to this computation, may be reckoned all,
that receive no more than their Profit, but live on Rents, Usury, or Salary, as
Ministers of State, Noble Men and Gentlemen, all Divines, Physicians, Lawyers,
Shoolmasters, Journey-men, Soldiers, Seamen, Laborers, and the like.

Amongst Traders, all may be numbered, that receives the return of their Stock,
together with their Profit, which generally is the least part of their
receipts, as Merchants, Shopkeepers, Artificers, Country Farmers, and the
like, that make use of Stocks.

Suppose half the ready Money being 250000 lib. circulate among the first sort,
and that their Expense comes to 4 Millions per Annum. And suppose the remaining
250000 lib. is employed among the last, and that they expend the other 4
Millions per Annum. To discharge the Expenses of one Year of the first sort,
the 250000 lib. must circulate 16 times, which makes 4 Millions: But the same
Sum must circulate very many more times among the Traders; because they must
not only measure their profit of 4 Millions, but their Stock also every return,
which may exceed 2, or 300 times a Year viz.

When Traders make but 5 per Cent. profit of their Money every, return, the
250000 lib. must circulate at least 320 times, to measure their Stock as often,
which amounts to 80 Millions in a Year.

If they make 10 percent. then 250000 lib. must circulate 160 times, and
measure but 40 Millions.

If they gain 20 per Cent. each return, 250000 lib must circulate 80 times, and
measure but 20 Millions in a Year.

For example, if a Trader gains 100 lib. per Annum. profit, with 100 lib.
Stock, and makes 5 per Cent. each return, his Stock must be turned 20 times a
Year, and pay 2000 lib. If he gains 10 per Cent. then he returns his Stock but
10 times, and pays 1000 lib And if he he gains 20 per Cent. then 5 returns,
and 500 lib. paid produces the same 100 lib profit a Year.

Note, That what is not actually measured with Money in Specie, must be
discounted with some sort of Credit or other.

BY this Calculation, half a Million ready Money, discharges at least 16 times
its own Value in a Year, and may circulate above 3^0 times, and measure in
Goods above 80 Millions, for no more than 4 Millions Annual profit. So that a
Million in current Credit added to the Stock of Money must at least produce a
Million profit to the Nation Yearly more than is now gained.

After these Papers had been finished for the Press, and approved by some of
the greatest men in the Kingdom, there appeared a Printed Proposal to supply
the defect of Money, and to relieve the Poor, by an Anonymus Author, I. A. And
because he has borrowed much from my Papers, and yet seems not fully informed
of the method of my Proposals, though he is pleased to make a kind mention of me;
I think it not a miss to bestow a few lines upon his Paper to Rectify his
mistake of mine, and also to show what he has borrowed from mine, and that
what he has not borrowed interferes with the established Bank, or else is so
far from improving the Design of a current Credit, that it much impairs aha
endangers it.

For, I belive I may safely appeal to the World whither all former Banks did
not pass their Credit by an account in Books, and not by Bills? And whither any
other Fund but Money was ever settled for the passing of Credit? And whether
ever the Credit and the Fund was proposed to be discharged or cancelled by an
Annual income, before I published and practiced the same in London? Or lastly,
whither Public Credit of any sort was ever offered to the Parliament in this
Kingdom before mine, in the Year 93.

Now this Author proposes a Fund partly of Money, and so far he incroaches on
the present Bank, and partly upon some other Fund, besides Money to be
exhausted by a Yearly Interest, and so far he borrows from me: but his Funds
are diverse, uncertain, and perplexed; mine certain and easy; his much upon
personal security and Money; mine upon Land a Real security: His to serve the
Merchants and Mechanics, Subservient to the Lords of the Soil; and mine the
Heritors the true Lords of the soil, by whom the rest live and who in all
Countries are naturaly first to be provided for; He proposes the cancelling or
exhausting the Credit by a Yearly Revenue; and so does my first and second
Proposal: He proposes the passing Credit by Bills, and so does mine; But, He
proposes to support and answer all his Bills with ready Money, which mine does
not; because it is impossible, where the Service of the Country is Intended and
where that Fund is so well known to be short of the Credit, for if the tenth
man only would call for his Money, in less than a Year, the whole species would
be drawn out, but if that a Mobb, a Plague, a Fire, a War, a Conquest, or
Revolution should happen, it cannot avoid an Immediate Ruin.

He is pleased to call his Proposal A National Bank which can no more deserve
that Epithet or title, than the present Bank, my proposed Office, or any the
like, unless the credit or the profits were distributed in proportion to every
individual in the Nation, for otherwise all do, or may, equally serve the
whole Nation, though each Family may not have a property in it; He tenders his at
1 per Cent. cheaper than my second, which may spoil his whole design for I have
both thro'ly considered the Charge and Contingences, to which such an
undertaking may be subjected, and also the employing Money in the service, and
have Rejected both as dangerous and inconvenient; but Yet my first and and last
are so Calculated as to make them a far easier Bargain than his.

He reflects on the Joint Stock Proposed by me, as not deserving much Credit,
since the Misfortunes and Mismanagement of the African Company, without first
knowing, what provision was made to render my Stock as certain and safe as
Land-Secu^ity, and forgets that most of the Security proposed by him is upon
jo^nt Stocks. He also Pittys the condition of such Heirs, whose Estates shall
be settled in the Office I propound, being likewise Ignorant what expedients
may be offered to make them not uneasy, but at the same time he does not
consider, that the Heirs of Persons to be concerned in his Proposal are in no
letter State, if not in a worse.

He plainly mistakes, when he affirms my Credit to be built upon public Faith,
whereas private Gentlemen's Land-Estates, more than sufficient to di^^arge the
whose Credit raised, is only propounded by (...) but 3 (...) of ^our of his may
be searched for where it can be found (...) only supported upon private Faith,
as uncertain as public Faith, and the Remainder on Money, a slippery Commodity.

In short, the proceedings in his Proposal are sedious and perplexed; mine easy
and familiar: His cannot exceed ^^^^^tions Stock of Money without hazard of
ruin, min^ (...) be extended as large as the Value of the Lands, the
exigencies or Occasions of the Nation, may require; His diverts a great part of
the ready Money out of the usual Channel of Trade and Husbandry: mine leaves
the whole to operate as formerly, and as the owners please; His interferes
manifestly with the present Bank, being truly a Money Bank with a new Title
Page; mine differs in name, nature and Management.

But if he has invented a better and more useful Form or Method for Bills,
than is already known, he may deserve a generous Reward, but that cannot
entitle him justly to supplant me in my Right, as the first Proposer of passing
a Current Credit in this Kingdom upon any Fund.

There are some other Proposals as I am informed made about Land-Credit, but
however they may vary from mine in Circumstantials, I cannot but look upon them
as so many Advocats for me, because all the Arguments alleged in the behalf of
theirs, must equally Recommend mine; So that I submit mine to the Wisdom and
Justice of the Nation to determine, whether the first or any latter Proposer
deserves best their Favor and Encouragement.

FINIS.

