THE HISTORY OF Jewels, And of the Principal Riches of the EAST and WEST. Taken
from The Relation of Diverse of the Most Famous Travelers of OUR AGE. Attended
with FAIR DISCOVERIES Conducing to the knowledge of the UNIVERSE and TRADE.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for Hobart Kemp (...) Sign of the Ship in the (...)
the New Exchange. (...)

THE PREFACE.
THere is nothing more admirable in this lower World then Precious Stones,
seeing they are the Stars of the Earth, and shine in in competition with
those of the Firmament, disputing with them for splendour, beauty, and glory.
Nature produces nothing more rich, and sufficiently confesses it, in her most
careful laying them up and hiding them in her private Cabinets and Repositories
in the inner parts of the Earth, so that they are not easy to be come by; but
their value and price make them worth the searching for, even through the
bowels of the World. Amongst these the Diamond very well deserves the first
place, and surpasses all in brightness and hardness, and cannot be wrought
upon but by it self; the Blood of a Goat, contrary to the Opinion of the
Ancients, having no power at all over it. The Ruby, whose lively Color, and
whose Fire, pierces the Darkness of the Night, comes next the Diamond, and
there be diverse sorts of them. The Emerald with its lovely green delights our
sight: After these come the Amethyst, the Saphyr, the Turcois, Sardonix,
Chrysolite, Hyacinth, Opale, and others which deserve a particular esteem* The
Sea has likewise her riches as well as the Earth, she gives us Pearl, Coral,
Ambergris, and Yellow, all which serve for Ornament, and are of considerable
use in Physic. The Beast also do enclose riches in their bowels, and the
Bezoar for its great commendation it receives, may very well be ranked with
Precious Stones. Indico, Silks, Sal Ammoniac, Gum Lacca, Salpeter, and other
such like things, are not the least Causes of Admiration, Metals, and chiefly
Gold and Silver, current now-adayes in most parts of the World, the repose and
torment of Mortals, their evil and welfare do hold likewise a considerable
place amongst the Wonders of Nature, and should make us so much the more admire
our Creator.

We have diverse Authors both Ancient and Modern, who have written of the nature
of all these things, of their properties and use. But I have known none who
have taken the care to observe exactly either the places whence they draw them,
or how they are discovered, or their prices, or how they are prepared by any
infallible Rule; of Diamonds, Pearls, and Rubies, in proportion to their
quality and weight, which I find in my Opinion very worthy the inquiry of the
Curious: for if we take delight to observe the situation of the Stars, and seek
out the source of a River, I find no less pleasure to discover a Mine, to trace
its Veins, and to know precisely those places of the Earth where the Diamonds
are found, and where they fish for Pearl; and this is that which this History
does discover: For indeed the Diamond is only produced in Asia, and that but in
a little corner of it; the Ruby in a Kingdom on the other side Ganges, little
frequented by Europoeans; the Emerald in Peru a Region of America; the Turcois
in Persia; the Pearl only in a few Seas of the East and West; the Coral in the
Streights; Yellow Amber upon the Coasts of Prussia; the true Bezoar only in the
Indies, and so of the rest. In all these Inquiries I have labored upon very
good Observations and the nearest Relations of the most Famous Travelers of
our Time; and this Work ought so much the rather to be received, by how much it
seems to be seasonable, and shows the ways to those precious Mines of Asia,
which hitherto have not been well known, and of those fertile Regions into which
our most Powerful King has a desire to establish Commerce, for the benefit and
glory of his Subjects.

A Table of the Chapters contained in this Treatise.
CHAP. I.Of Diamonds, where mention is made 1. Of the Places from which they
are brought. 2. Of the Manner how they seek for them. 3. Of the Knowledge of
them and their price by a certain Rule. 4. Of the ways to come to the Mines.
5. Of the Kinds of Gold and Silver in the Indies.
CHAP. II.Of Colored Stones, where mention is made 1. Of the Places whence
they are fetched. 2. Of the Price of Rubies. 3. Of Emeralds and the ancient
Error touching their Bigness
CHAP. III.Of Pearls, where mention is made 1. Of the Places where they are
fished. 2. Of the manner how they fish for them. 3. Of their different
Qualities.
CHAP. IV.Of Coral, where mention is made 1. Of the Places where it is found.
2. Of the manner and time of fishing for it.
CHAP. V.Of Yellow Amber, where mention is made 1. Of the Place where the Sea
casts it out. 2. Of the manner how it is collected. 3. Of the Places where the
greatest Traffic is for Coral and Amber.
CHAP. VI.Of Metals, Ambergris, Bezoar Indico, and other rich Productions of
the East and West.
THE HISTORY OF Jewels.
CHAP. I. Of DIAMONDS.
AS the Diamond is the most rich production of Nature, and most prcous of all
Jewels, so is it likewise the most Noble of all Commodities. Yet men do not
enough admire it, because they know not the difficulties which must be
incountred with in digging it out of those places where it is formed, and
freeing it from the gross matter that covers it. No man hitherto has exactly
discoursed of this matter, or ventured to treat of it, but only upon
relations, uncertain and of slender credit. But I have drawn this History from
the most curious Observations of the most famous Travelers of our Age, whom I
have discoursed with in diverse places, and who have particularly busied
themselves in the research of the Mines that afford the Diamonds and other
Stones of color; in which to speak true, they have omitted nothing, but have
added remarks worthy to be transmitted to Posterity.

1. Let me therefore tell you, That none has been yet able in all the World to
discover more than five places, from whence the Diamond is brought, viz. two
Rivers and three Mines.

The First of the two Rivers is in the Isle Borneo, under the Equator, on the
East of the Chersonesus of Gold, and is called Succadan. The Stones fetched
from thence are usually clear and of a good Water, and almost all bright and
brisk, whereof no other reason can be given, but that they are found at the
bottom of a River amongst Sand which is pure, and has no mixture or tincture
of other Earth, as in other places.

These Stones are not discovered till after the Waters which fall like huge
Torrents from the Mountains, are all passed, and men have much to do to attain
them, since few persons go to trafick in this Isle; and forasmuch as the
Inhabitants do fall upon Strangers who come ashore, unless it be by a
particular favor. Besides that, the Queen does rarely permit any to transport
them; and so soon as ever any one has found one of them they are obliged to
bring it to her. Yet for all that they pass up and down, and now and then the
Hollanders buy them in Batavia. Some few are found there, but the largest do
not exceed five Carats, although in the year 1648, there was one to be sold in
Batavia of 22 Carats.

I have made mention of the Queen of Borneo, and not of the King, because that
the Isle is always commanded by a Woman, for that People, who will have no
Prince but what is legitimate, would not be otherwise assured of the birth of
Males, but can not doubt of those of the Females, who are necessarily of the
Blood Royal on their Mothers side, she never marrying, yet having always the
Command.

The second River is in the Kingdom of Bengala, and is called Nage, by the Name
of a great Town, the Seat of a Prince, equally distant from Ougoulin, Pepeli,
and Balacor, fifteen days journey from all three. This Province has a Raja,
or a Duke in our Language, who is an Idolater, as are all his Subjects. This
Raja, as also the Kings of Visapour and Golconda, are Tributaries to the Great
Mogol, and have been his Subjects, but took occasion to revolt from him,
whilst they saw him busied against the Tartars. It Is from hence that the three
Mines of Diamonds whereof I shall speak being found in the Countries of these
Princes, are ordinarily said to be found in the Territories of the Great Mogol.

These Diamonds then are discovered in the Sand of a River, at the bottom and
upon the Banks, after that the great Floods are passed, just as in the River of
Borneo. They are fair, for the most part pointed, brisk, high, bright and
large, and what we call now-adays of the Old Rock. But they are hard to come
by, because the River affords but very few, and the Iuhabitants hold them at an
high rate; and that which renders them still more rare, is the perfidiousness
of those who sell them, who lay wait in the Woods for the Merchants who buy
them, and fall upon them. Besides that, the Prince does cruelly tyrannize over
the poor people who come to search for them. In the year 1657 L'Escot of
Orleans ventured to go thither, by reason that he had learned that the Raja had
a Diamond of 42 Carats, he was courteously received by the Prince, who showed
it to him and had a mind to sell it him, upon condition that L'Escot would pay
for it in ready money: but the other having bargained be^^re-hand and desiring
they should deliver him the ^^one, and receive the mo^ey for it in any City of
the ^ealm of Bengala, which ^^e Prince should like best, ^here the Hollanders
had Bank, the Raja would ^ot consent thereto, and ^^e other went his way
without buying of it. An Hol^^nder has since got it from ^n unknown hand.

The first of the three Mines from whence they ^etch the Diamond, is in the
Land of the King of Visapour in the Province of Ca^natica, eight days journe^
from Visapour and five from Golconda. It Is but 20^ years since it was
discove^ed, and the City roun^ about which it lies is called Raolconda. The
Stones are found in the ground and on the Roc^ Those which are taken from the
Rock or the plac^ thereabouts, are commonly of a good water. B^^ for those
which are taken from the Earth, their wat^^ is somewhat of the Colo^^ of that
Earth where they a^^ found, so that if the Earth ^e clear and a little
gravel^y, the Diamonds will be of ^ good water; and if it be ^at and black, or
of an other Color, they will likewise have some of the tincture of the same.

But if there be any Black or Red Sand amongst the Earth, the Diamond also will
have some of it. The Stones which are got from thence are for the most part
Lasques, it is not because they are taken out so from the Earth, but it is
because being stounded by the blow of the Lever that hits against the Rock, to
dig out the Gravel that is in the Vei^^ where the Stone is found they assume an
Ice just as Glass that is cracked; now t^ remove it and make it clea^ they
cleave it, and the^^ are the Stones they ca^^ Lasque Stones, or Fl^^ Stones;
the which the Indians know better how t^ perform than we, especially as to the
business of cutting or cleaving, and finding the thread of the Stone Now if
there remain any small point, they get it made with little fossets, to the end
that the standing out of the fossets may cover the bruise or flaw; the truth
is, if the Stone be clear, they do no more but polish it above and below, and
shape ^t not, for fear of diminishing any thing from its weight. There are
always more than an hundred and fifty Mills that work, and they put not above
one Stone upon each wheel, till such ^ime they have found the way of the Stone,
they water it incessantly, and when it begins to run, they take oil; their
Wheels are of the bigness of our ordinary Plates, and each Wheel has its Woman
to turn it. The Trafick for Stones is free in paying two per Cent. to the King
of whatsoever is sold, and no body dares do the least wrong to Strangers You
may there see Children of ten or twelve years o^d in the Streets with their
Weights at their Girdle, expecting the Miners, in hope to buy of them what
Stone they have by stealth conveyed away. In the Evening (...) these Children
meet to^^ther, and setting the current price upon each Stone they have bought,
do divide the profit of it amongst them, and sell it all again to the great
Merchants, who by little and little make large Collections. They match the
Waters, and mix therewith always some Stone that has a point or flaw, which
they cannot remove. They put their whole confidence in Strangers, especially
the Francks, whereof very few come thither, and place such confidence in their
faith, that they leave them sometimes great quantities of Diamonds of great
value fifteen days together, without comeing to see them, and by that means
affording them all the leisure they can wish to consider well their
merchandise, so that it is their own fault if they be cheated in it.

The second Mine is called Coullour in the Persian Language, and the Idolaters
of the Country call it Gany. This is a large Town, near a great River, and
they dig from the River to a Mountain about two Leagues from thence, and in the
Mountain it self. This Mine has been discovered but within 50 or 60 years, and
is the place where they find the most part of the great Stones, whereas before
that time they rarely met with any above twelve Carrats; but that at this day
some are to be seen of threescore, an hundred, and of two hundred Carrats,
Mirgimola Chief Minister of State, and General of the Armies of the King of
Golconda, a man of great parts, much believed of his Master, who gave him the
Title of Prince of Princes, though at length he proved a Traitor, presented the
Great Mogol, to whose side he turned, with a vast Stone of Nine hundred Carrats
in weight: yet being full of flaws, it was reduced to 300 by Hortensius a
Venetian Lapidary, who cut it, but could not do it so well, but there remained
a flaw in it, which makes it something unhandsom. It Is also to be observed,
that just as at the Mine of Visapour, the Stones in this also do partake of the
quality of the Earth from whence they are brought; so that if the Earth be
marshy and moist, the Stone inclines to black; if it be reddish, the Stone
inclines to be red; for from the Town to the Mountain there is great difference
of Mould: and upon the greatest part of these Stones, after they are cut, there
appears always as it were a piece of grease, which makes you ever and anon put
your hand to your Handkerchief to* wipe it off. We will observe by the way that
whereas we make use of the day to examine rough Stones, and to judge well of
their water, and of the points that may be found therein, the Inhabitants of
the Country make use of the night, and in an hole which they make in the Wall
a foot square, where they put a Lamp with a great Match, holding the Stone in
their Fingers between their Eyes and the Lamp, they make an estimate of the
water and clearness of the Diamond. We must not forget that the Celestial water
(as they call it) is of all waters for a Diamond most unpleasing, and that it
is impossible to know it so long as the Stone is rough; but after that it is a
little discovered upon the Wheel, the infallible secret to judge well of its
water, is to carry it under a Shady Tree, for under its green shade you may
easily discover if it be blew. Formerly there have been reckoned at this Mine
Sixty thousand Miners and upwards, but in the year 1660 there was not a Stone
scarce worth looking upon, and not above Three thousand Laborers in the Mines,
all the rest being dead with hunger and misery; for each Miner has but Five
Crowns a year, and they are certainly the most miserable people upon Earth. The
Land is also very barren, and if it could but produce Pulse, the people would
not trouble themselves to gather Diamonds. Those who pay the Miners, make them
work as much as they please, and take as much as they please of the Earth*
without searching it; but after they have begun to search into it, they owe to
the King a Pagode, which is worth two Crowns of our Money, for the whole time
till they cease to work.

The Third and last Mine was discovered in the year 1448, two days journey from
Raolconda, and the place is called Gazerpoli; the Stones there are very clear
and of a good water, but cannot be ground but with the Stones of the same Mine:
Otherwise, if they should make use of Stones of another Mine, these last would
be bruised: They are likewise apt to break upon the Wheel, and they who are not
versed in the knowledge of Stones, may easily be deceived in them. A Portuguefe
retiring to Venice, was desired, passing by Legorn, to sell one of those Stones
which he had, for which they offered him Twelve thousand Crowns; he would not
part with it at that rate, and bringing it to Venice to get it cut, it broke
upon the Wheel into fifteen or twenty pieces.

Besides these two Rivers and three Mines, there be also some other Mines
toward the Cape of Comorin, of which I will make mention in a few words. In
the year 1652 the Nababe, who is as the Grand Vizier in Turkey, the Etmaldoulet
in Persia, and Constable in France, and the same Mirgimola of whom I spoke even
now, was at the Siege of Indecote, a very strong place in the Province of
Carnatica, by reason of its situation; which he took notwithstanding in two
Months time. There were some French in his service, yet more English and
Hollanders, who had deserted their Colors and come over to him, all able
Gunners; the poor wretches of the Country having never heard the noise of
these Engines, were quite surprised at it, and rendered themselves forthwith to
their discretion. Indecote is 35 days journey from Masselipatan, inclining
toward the Cape of Comorine, and 16 from Golconda. This is one of the fairest
and best Countries of all the Indies, and every where all the Country is
green, full of Rivers and Lakes, to water the Land where need requires. It was
during this Siege that they brought to Nababe a great number of Diamonds of the
six Mines he had caused to be dug toward the Cape of Comorin: yet there was
never a Stone of a good water, they were either yellow or black: and after that
Nababe had viewed them, he forbad them to dig any more, and gave order that
these people should return to their labor, by which they brought more profit
to the King then by working in the Mines; being they found not one good Stone
there.

2. I come now to the manner of finding the Diamond, and especially how it is
performed in the Mine of Coullour. The Miners sink a Pit of about fifteen or
twenty foot square, and throw the Earth about it upon a clean place, almost of
the same largeness, raising a little wall of a foot and half, to keep up the
earth and water which they cast in there; after this they wash and stamp and
tread the earth with their feet in two or three waters, to the end that all the
fat and muddy earth may run through the holes made in the wall, and that there
remain nothing but sand. The sand being dry, they beat it with Pestles of Wood,
that they may better perceive and discover the Diamonds; heretofore they made
use of Instruments of Stone, but they left them so soon as ever they were
perceived to cause flaws in the Diamonds. At length they sit them down all on a
row upon the earth in the posture of Tailors, and seek out with all acurateness
the Stones amongst the sand. Whilst they be at this exercise, several
Commissioners stand up with their eyes fixed upon the Workmen, for fear least
when they find a Stone, they should swallow it cunningly down. When a Miner has
found a big one, he runs to the Master, who set him on work, to receive his
reward for it, which is ordinarily a piece of Linen of a Crown value.

3. We are now to touch upon the price of Diamonds in proportion to their
weight, which is not the least considerable article of this Chapter; and
although some have writ copiously of this Subject, and set down what Rules
ought to be observed, yet here I also present a very easy and most certain one
in favor of the curious.

Some imagine that the Indians and Merchants who employ Workmen in the Diamond
Mines, are ignorant o^ these Rules, as also of all Arithmetic, but without
reason; for on the contrary they are so experienced therein, that having the
Rules always in their head, there is not the least young boy of fifteen years
of age who is not able to give an account on the sudden, without Pen or Paper,
of the most difficult question that can be put to him.

Besides, as it is more difficult to judge of the water of a Stone, and of the
points and flaws that may be found therein, when it is rough than when it is
wrought, these Indians show themselves much more knowing than we, to know the
price of any Stone whatsoever, which they are able to tell presently, by
calculating with themselves without Pen or Chalk, which is enough to make their
sagacity to be admired; this is then the Rule they make use of as well as we,
They take a Stone of 10 Carats, which they multiply by the number of 10, the
Product whereof is 100. Afterward they consider the Stone, whether it be clean
and perfect, or if there be any defect in it; if it be perfect, say they, if we
had one Stone perfect of one Carat only in weight, it would be worth for
example according to its perfection, from 40 to 60 Crowns: If the water of it
be not good, or if there be any flaw or ice, in a Stone of one Carat of the
same nature, it would not be worth for example above from 10 to 30 Crowns; then
they multiply again the aforesaid product of 100, by so much as they judge the
Carat worth, and that which is the product of this, is the price of the Stone
proposed. Let this then be the example of a perfect Stone of 10 Carats* at the
rate of 60 Crowns the Carat.

^

This an example of a Stone of 15, which may have some imperfection, at 20
Crowns the Carat.

^

The Indians have the same Rule, only they transpose the multiplication; for
they multiply first of all the price of a Carat of the Stone propounded by the
number of Carats it weighs, and the product again by the number of the
aforesaid Carats. Let this be the Example following.

^

Another Example.

^

4. For the satisfaction of such as would go to the Mines, we must speak also
something of the ways that lead to them; which modern relations, somewhat
fabulous, make so dangerous and difficult, and represent them to us pestered
with Tigers, Lions, and Cruel Men, but Travelers have found the contrary,
excepting only some Wild Beasts, the Inhabitants being courteous to Strangers.
As for Golconda, he must be very little acquainted with the Map, who knows not
the situation of it; but from Golconda to the Mines, the way is less known,
they measure the ways there by the Gos, one Gos making four French Leagues.

They reckon from Golconda to Canapour, Gos 1. From Canapour to Parquel, Gos 2.
From Parquel to Caquenol, Gos 1. From Caquenol to Canol-Condonor, Gos 3. From
Canol-Condonor to Jettapour, Gos 1 From Jettapour to the River, Gos 2.
This River is upon the Frontiers of the Kingdoms of Golconda and Visapour.

From the River to Alpour, Gos 2. From Alpour to Canol, Gos. From Canol to
Raolconda, where the Mine is, Gos 2.
So that in all from Golconda to the Mine, it is about 15 Gos, which comes to
60 French Leagues.

From Golconda to the Mine of Coullour or Gani, by the same Gos, they count Gos
13, which is 55 French Leagues; this is the way,

From Golconda to Almaspinde, Gos 3. From Almaspinde to Kaper, Gos 2. From
Kaper to Montecour, Gos 2. From Montecour to Naglepar, Gos 2. From Naglepar to
Eligada, Gos 1. From Eligada to Sarvaron, Gos 1. From Sarvaron to Mellazerou,
Gos 1. From Mellazeron to Ponocour, Gos 1. From Ponocour to Coullour or Gany,
there is only the River to pass.
5. It remains to speak of the Pieces which are current in India, with which
the Diamonds are bought, viz. Roupies and Pagodes; a Roupie is worth twenty
eight pence of our Money; as for the Pagodes there be two sorts of them, the
new and the old; the new are worth three Roupies and an half, and the old a
Roupie more. In the Realm of Bengala, in the Country of the Raja, being they
are Tributaties to the Grand Mogol, Payments are made in Roupies. At the two
Mines that are upon the Lands of the King of Visapour, about Raolconda, payment
is made in new Pagodes, which the King gets stamped, because although he be
tributary to the Great Mogol, he causes his own money to be coined, a
Privilege which he has above the King of Golconda, of which I shall speak
hereafter. These Pagodes rise and fall according to the course of Trade, and
according as the Merchants do bargain with the Princes and Governors. At the
Mine of Coullour or Gani, which belongs to the King of Golconda, payment is
made after the same manner in new Pagodes, which are valued as those of the
King of Visapour; but they must sometimes be bought from 1 to 4 per Cent. more,
the reason is because they are of the best Gold, and they will have none but
such. These Pagodes are coined by the English and Hollanders, who have had the
Privilege from the King by grant or by force, I know not; now those of the
Hollanders being fairer than those of the English, the Miners love them better
than the others; which is the reason why they are bought for more by 1 or 2 per
Cent. yet being the Merchants are aware of this false opinion they are imposed
upon by, and because these people at the Mines are rude and savage, and that at
the best the ways are somewhat dangerous from Golconda to the Mine, they stay
commonly at Golconda, where the Merchants who cause them to dig, have their
Correspondence, and whither they usually send the Diamonds, which are to be
paid for at such time in old Pagodes stamped long since with the Coin of diverse
Princes who reigned in the Indies before the Mahumetans took footing there. Now
these old Pagodes are worth as (I said) four Roupies and an half, a Roupie more
than the new; which comes to six pence of our money more than a Ducat, though
there be no more Gold in them than in the new ones, and weigh no more: the
which might administer cause of wonder, if we did not know the reason, which is
this, that the Cherafs or Money Changers, to oblige the King not to get them
coined over again, give him a great sum yearly, because they draw from thence a
considerable benefit; for the Merchants do not receive any of these Pagodes,
without having one of these Money Changers to examine them, some of them being
defaced, others of low rate, others which are not weight; and there ought to be
allowed a quarter per cent. for what they want. When you pay the Miners, they
receive not your Pagodes, but in presence also of the Changer, who certifies
them of what is good or bad, and he again allows his quarter per cent. But to
dispatch the sooner, when they would make any payment that is considerable, as
a thousand o^ two thousand Pagodes, the Changer in allowing him hi^ right, puts
them up in a little Bag, with a Bill of its mark, and when you would pay the
Miner, you carry them to the Cheraf, together with the Bag, and finding its
mark entire, he assures the Miner that he has examined the whole, and that he
will be responsible for what is not good. Now as for Roupies, they take
indifferently those of the Great Mogol, and those of the King of Golconda,
because those which the King causes to be stamped, are to be acccording to the
Great Mogol's Coin, as is agreed upon between them. And to show you that these
Indians have more wit and more subtilty than any one would think, the Pagodes
being little pieces of thick Gold, of the bigness only of the nail of the
little finger, and it being upon that account impossible to clip them, they
have the art to make little holes in them round about, from whence they may get
two or three pence of the powder of Gold, after which they beat them down again
handsomely, that it may not appear that any one has touched them. Moreover,
when you buy any thing in a Village, or when you pass a River, if you give them
a Roupy, they presently kindle a fire, and having cast it into it, if it comes
out white, they take it, if it comes out black, they restore it to you again;
for all the Coin in the Indies is without Allay, and if any of it be brought
thither out of Europe, it must be carried to the Mint to be new coined. We must
add, that those people are deceived, who do imagine that it suffices to carry
Looking-Glasses to the Mines, or Tobacco and such like Toys, to truck them for
Diamonds; our Travelers find the quite contrary, and they desire there the
best and fairest Gold.

Besides, it is a thing undeniable, that as Gold is the most heavy and richest
of all Metals, so is the Diamond the most hard and most precious of all Stones;
and it is a Vulgar Error of Ancient Authors, to believe that the Diamond may be
softened by the Blood of a Bull; which is contrary to the experience of
Lapidaries.

To conclude, and to forget nothing in this Chapter, it is to be observed, That
the Diamond in the Miners Language is called Iri, and in Turkish, Persian, and
Arabian, it is called Almas, but in all the Languages of Europe there is no
other Name besides Diamond. I come to Colored Stones, and particularly to the
Ruby and the Emerauld, which hold amongst Jewels a very considerable place.

CHAP. II. Of Colored Stones.
THere are discovered but two places in the Indies from whence they bring
Colored Stones, viz. in the Realm of Pegu and in the Island of Ceylan. The
first is from a Mountain about 12 days journey from Ava, inclining to the N.
East, which they call Capelan, and it is the Mine from whence they bring the
greatest quantities of Rubies and Espinelles, otherwise Mother of Rubies,
Yellow Topazes, Blew and White Saphires, and other Stones of different Colors,
amongst which they find also some of diverse Colors, yet very tender, which
they call Bacan in that Country Language, Siren is the City where the King of
Pegu has his Residence, and Ava is the Port to his Country; from Ava to Siren
they go up the River in great Flat-bottomed Boats, in which Voyage they spend
at least thirty days. They cannot go thither by Land, because of the thick
Woods full of Lions, Tigers, and Elephants, and in a word it is one of the
poorest Countries in the World. Nothing comes thence but Rubies, and not in so
great quantities as is believed, seeing that every year there comes not out to
the value of an hundred thousand Crowns, and amongst them you will very rarely
find a Stone of four or five Carrats that is fair, considering the Prohibition
against exporting any parcels which the King has not seen, who keeps the
good ones, if he finds any; so that there is a considerable profit in
bringing one of them out of Europe into Asia: from whence we may judge whither
the relation of Vincent le Blane be true, wherein he boasts to have seen some
as he entered into the Country of the bigness of Eggs.

2. The price of Rubies, which comes next the Diamond in dignity, goes thus:

They weigh them by the Rati, and one Rati makes 7 / 8 of our Carrat.

A Ruby at the Mine of the weight of one Rati, has been bought for old Pagodes
20. Of 2 Rati Pagod 100. Of 3 Rati Pagod 250. Of 4 Rati Pagod 500. Of 5 Rati
Pagod 900. Of 6 Rati Pagod 1500. Of 7 Rati Pagod 2300. Of 12 Rati Pagod 1200.


The second place of the Indies from whence they bring Stones of Color, is in
a great River of the Isle Ceylon; they are found in the sand at low water,
three or four months after the rains have past, and the poor people are
employed in seeking for them. The Stones which they ordinarily find there are
clear, more lively than those of Pegu, and of a very high color, especially
the Topaz. As for Granats and Crystal they* find a great quantity of them. At
such time as Don Philippo Mascarini was Governor of those places which the
King of Portugal had in the Isle of Ceylon, the Chief of which was Columbo, he
who since was Viceroy of Goa, he caused all the Movables of a Chamber to be
made of Crystal, viz. Bed, Chairs, Table* Cabinet, etc.

It Is true that in Europe there are also two other places from which they bring
Stones of Color, that is to say, from Bohemia and Hungaria; from this they
bring Opales, and in the other there be Rubies, which they take out of the
middle of certain Flints after they be broken; these Flints are like to the
Stones of Firelocks inclining toward red, some as big as the fist, some less;
but many of them may be broken before you find one Rubie. When the Son of the
Emperor Ferdinand 2. was crowned King of Bohemia, General Wallestein presented
the Governor of Raab at Prague with a great Basket full of these Flints, to
the number of above two hundred: This Lord caused some of these to be broken,
but not finding more than one small Ruby of the weight of half a Carrat, he
made them leave the others unbroken.

The curious Reader will not find it tedious, to know further from whence they
fetch the Lapis and Granate, I cannot tell the reason why they have given the
Name of Syrien to this, seeing it was never found in Syria, but far from thence
thirty days journey from Labor to the North East, in the Country of a Raja,
who depends neither of the Great Mogol nor of the Tartar, in a Mountain, the
Southern part whereof produces Gold; that which respects the North, produces
the Granat, and the East part affords the Lapis Lazuli, for the Turkoise
every one knows that it is found in Persia in the Province of Chamaquay, the
chief place whereof is Maschec, to the North of Hispaham, toward Candahar.
There are there two Mines, one they call the Old Rock, the other the New; those
of the New are but of a bad blew, inclining to white, and little esteemed, and
it is free for any man to take as many of them as he pleases. But the King of
Persia some years since forbad the digging in the Old for any besides himself,
because having no Goldsmiths but such who work in thread, and are wholly
ignorant how to enamel upon Gold, as people who know neither the design nor
manner of it, they make use for the garnishing of their Swords and Ponyards and
other Works of these Turkoises, instead of enamel, and cause them to be cut and
set in the Bearit of Rings, according to the Flowers and other Figures that do
best please him. This shows well enough and is elaborate, but without any
curious Design.

It Is an ancient error of many to believe that the Emerauld is found in the
East, and because before the discovery of the West Indies none could guess
otherwise of it, still to this day the greatest part of Jewellers and
Goldsmiths, so soon as ever they spy an Emerauld of an high color inclining to
black, are wont to say it is an Oriental Emerald; wherein they are altogether
mistaken, since that the East never produced any such. I grant that before the
discovery of America, the Emeralds were brought from the East, but they came
from the source of the West Indies, from the Realm of Peru. For these people
before we knew them, did traffic in all the Molucco Islands, whither they
brought Gold and Silver, yet more Silver than Gold, being that there is more
profit in the one than in the other, by reason of the Gold Mines that are found
in the Eastern Parts. Still to this day the same Trade continues, and those of
Peru pass yearly to the Philippine Isles with two or three Vessels, whither
they bring nothing but Gold and a small quantity of Emeralds; and as for the
Emeralds, within this few years they have left carrying any thither, but send
them all into Europe. In the year 1660 they afforded them in the East for more
than twenty per Cent. cheaper than they were valued at in France. These
Americans being come ashore in the Philippines, those of Bengala, Arachan,
Pegu, Goa, and other places, bring thither all sorts of Linen and a number of
Cut Stones, as Diamonds and Rubies, together with diverse Works of Gold, Stuffs
of Silk and Persian Tapestry.

But it is to be observed, that they can sell nothing directly to those of Peru,
but to such who reside in Manilla they can, and these again retail them to the
Americans; nay if any one obtain permission to return from Goa to Spain, by the
way of the South Sea, he will be forced to put out his money to interest at
fourscore or an hundred per Cent. to the Philippines, without being able to buy
any thing, and to do with it after the same manner from the Philippines to New
Spain. Now this was the way of trafficking for Emeralds before the West Indies
were found out, they came into Europe only by this way and vast compass.
Whatsoever was not good remained in that Country, and what was fair passed
into Asia.

The Holy Scripture makes mention of the Emerald, as of a precious Jewel, and
places it amongst the rich Stones that the High Priest wore in his Ephod, and
those which adorned the Walls of the New Jerusalem. Heretofore the Emerald has
been had in great esteem, and came after the Pearl: Now-a-dayes none makes so
much account of it, in regard of the great quantities are brought every year
from the Indies. The truth is men so much account of rare things, that they
quite undervalue such as they perceive common; and I will relate to you a Story
upon this account.

At the beginning of the discovery of the Indies, a Spaniard was in Italy, and
demanding of a Lapidary the price of an Emerald, which he showed him, he
considering it very well, and finding it a goodly one, told him it was worth a
hundred Ducats: Whereupon the Spaniard being very glad, carried him to his
Lodgings, and showed him a Cabinet full of them. The Italian, who saw so great
a number of these Emeralds, told him that as for those they were well worth
Crowns apiece. Thus it fares with all things which the abundance makes cheap,
and whereto rarity adds a price. Pliny amongst diverse excellencies of the
Emerald, says, that there is nothing more delightful nor recreative to the
sight; and reports that Laelia a Roman Dame had Head-Cloaths and a Gown
embroidered with Pearls and Emeralds, in which she laid out to the value of
Four hundred thousand Ducats. But she might have had as many now-a-dayes for
less than half the Money. Many are found in several places of America, and the
Kings of Mexico, who esteemed them very much, were usually wont to pierce their
Nostrils, and there to hang an excellent Emerald; they put them also upon the
Faces of their Idols. The places where they have found them, and where still to
this day they find the great. abundance, is the New Kingdom of Granada and
Peru, near to Manta and Portviel, there is toward that place a Territory
called, The Land of Emeralds, by reason of the great number known to be found
there; but hitherto this Region has not been fully conquered.

The Emerald is bred in Quarries, just as the Crystal, and runs along, as it
were making a Vein, and grows finer and finer, or thicker and thicker, by
degrees.

We see some half white and half green, some all white, some quite green and
most perfect; some we may see of the bigness of a Nut and bigger, yet none come
near the bigness and figure of the Plate or Jewel which is at Genoua, unless we
believe Theophrastus, who allows four Else in length and three in breadth to
the Emerald, which the King of Babylon presented to the King of Egypt: And who
does further report that there was in the Temple of Jupiter an Aguglia Needle
or Pyramid, made of four Stones of Emerald, forty Cubits long, and in some
places four Cubits broad; and that at his time there was at Tire in the Temple
of Hercules a great Pillar of Emerald, perhaps it was nothing else but a Green
Stone that was a Bastard Emerald, to which they gave this Name falsely: As some
say that certain Pillars of the Cathedral Church of Cordoua are of Emerald
Stones, and were put there since the time it served instead of a Mosk to the
Kings of the Moors, who reigned in those places. In the Fleet which came from
the the Indies in the year 1587, there were two great Chests of Emeralds, from
whence we may judge of the great quantity which is found in America. In a word,
as there is nothing but the rarity that gives value to things, so the price of
the Emerald would be much enhanced, if it were as rare as the Diamond.

CHAP. III. Of PEARLS.
THe Pearl has been at all times so much esteemed, that the Gospel does not
disdain by this to represent to us the Excellency of the Kingdom of Heaven,
and it belonged formerly only to Royal Persons to wear them; without dispute
it is one of the richest productions of Nature, and if we believe the
Naturalists, Pearl is engendered of the dew of heaven in those parts of the
Earth where it is most pure and serene: And the Cockle opening at the first
Rays of the Sun to receive those precious drops, plungeth into the Sea with
its booty, and conceives in its Shell the Pearl which resembles the heavens,
and imitateth its clearness; this admirable Pearl, which men seek with so much
industry: so that heaven does visibly contribute to its generation, and
impresses the most Celestial Virtues and Qualities which Physic was ever able
to boast of, and whereof she makes use for a Sovereign Remedy: yet for all that
all the World does not agree as to this with the Ancient Naturalists, and the
sequel of this Discourse will make appear that they are deceived in some things.

But before we speak of the manner how they fish for Pearl and of their
different Qualities, we must make report of the diverse places of the World
where they are found.

First of all then they have discovered four Fishing Places for Pearl in the
East, the most considerable is performed in the Isle of Bahren in the Persian
Golph; the which appertains to the Sophy of Persia, who receives thence a great
Revenue. While the Portugals were Masters of Ormus and Mascati, every Vessel
which went to fish was obliged to take a Passport from them at a dear rate; and
they maintained always five or six small Galleys in the Gulf, to sink those
Barks which took no Pasports; but at present they have no farther power upon
those Coasts, and each Fisher pays to the King of Persia not above one third
of what they gave to the Portugals.

The second Fishing is over against Bahren upon the Coast of Arabia Foelix,
near to the City of Catif, which belongs to an Arabian Prince who commands
that Province. The most part of the Pearls which are fished in these two
places, are carried into India, because that the Indians are not so hard, but
give a better price for them than we; they are therefore carried thither, the
unequal* as well as the round, the yellow as well as the white; every one
according to its rate* some of them also are sold at Balsora, and those which
are transported into Persia and Moscovy, are sold at Bandarcongue two days
journey from Ormus. They fish twice in a year in the Months of March and
April, and in the Months of August and September; the depth where they fish is
from four to twelve fathoms, and the deeper the Oister is found, the Pearls are
the whiter, because the water is not so hot there, the Sun not being able to
penetrate so deep.

The third fishing is by the Isle of Ceylon, at a place which is called Manar;
the Pearls which are found there, are of a good water but small, and the
greatest do not surpass two Carrats, and it is seldom that they are found of
that weight, but in recompense of this there is great quantity of Seed Pearl
fit to powder.

The fourth and last Fishing in the East is at Japan; the Pearls* there are of
a water white enough and heavy, but unequal: those of Japan sell them all to
the Holland Company, for they make no account, as I shall let you know in
order, of any Jewel.

In the West are discovered five Pearl Fishings, the first is in the Island
Margarita two and twenty leagues from the firm land; this Isle is thirty five
leagues about and has a good Haven toward the North; at the East point it is
all encompassed with rocks: it is fruitful enough, but there is want of water:
and the inhabitants go up into the Country to furnish themselves with it, yet
there are great store of Cattle, and it bears Maize and other things
necessary for those who live there.

The second Fishing was discovered in the year 1496, by the Isle of Cubagua, a
league from the former, in the Gulf of Mexico; it is in ten degrees and an
half of Northern Latitude, an hundred and threescore Leagues from St. Domingo
in Hispaniola, and an hundred from Santa Cruz, one of the Careeby Islands, and
four Leagues from the Province of Aria, which is part of the Continent; it is
much less than Margarita, without Cattle or any other thing which may serve for
the sustenance of man; particularly it wants water, but the inhabitants are
furnished from the Continent, from a River called Comana, seven Leagues from
New Cadis. This Island Cubagua was discovered by that famous Genouese
Christopher Columbus, who having perceived a small Boat with some Fishers in
it, and a Woman who had three rows of fair Pearl about her Neck, said to his
Companions, That he thanked God he had now discovered the most rich Country in
the World. He broke an Earthen Plate of diverse Colors, and for a piece or two
of it this Woman gave him very willingly a row of these Pearls, and for another
Plate he received many others, and I darned of the Indians the place and manner
of their Fishing for Pearls.

The third is at Comana, near the Continent.

The fourth is called Comanagote, twelve Leagues from the former.

The fifth and last is at the Isle of St. Martha, threescore Leagues from the
River La Hache*

All the Pearls of these five Fishings are of a white water, weak, dry, faint,
milky, or leady; not but that they find some fair ones, but they have not so
live a water as those of the East; in recompense they are great ones, in weight
from eighteen to forty two Carrats, and are almost all of the shape of a Pear.

These Five Fishings of which I have spoken, are all in the North Sea, but they
find also great quantities in the South Sea near to Panama, they are long
rather than round, but not so fair as the other, and ordinarily are somewhat
black; for the Indians opened the Oyster by Fire, till Vasques Nugnez taught
the Cacique to open them without it; and since they find the Pearls whiter.
Experience teaches us that Oysters change their places as well as other Fish,
and that they pass sometimes to one side of the Island and sometimes to the
other.

It is is a considerable curiosity to know how they fish for Pearls, seven,
eight, or nine men at most go in one Bark, two of which descend to the bottom
of the Sea, six, nine, or twelve fathoms doep. About the Isles of Margarita and
Cubagua, the water is very cold, but the greatest difficulty in fishing, is
holding the breath under water, sometimes a quarter of an hour or longer; and
that these poor Slaves may the better endure it, they feed them with dry meats
and in a little quantity, avarice putting them upon these abstinences; but
besides this, they use other expedients, they put upon their Nose little
Pincers made of Buffalo's Horn, which stops their Nostrils: they stuff
their Ears with Cotton Wool. Others hold Oil in their Mouths, especially those
who cannot hold their breath long. Others hold their Mouth under their Armpits,
and after that manner breath two or three times under water. There is a Sack of
Stones or Sand tied to each of their Feet, to make them sink strait to the
bottom, and another Bag tied about their Waste, to put their Oysters in; there
is a Cord fastened under their Armpits, held by them who remain in the Boat,
and they under water hold another Cord in their hands, which they draw, to give
notice to those in the Boat, that they can now hold their breath no longer, and
that they must draw them up quickly.

When they have found a thousand or two of these Oysters, they sell them at
adventure, without knowing what is within them, the Meat of the Oyster is
without relish, and of very ill digestion; and is so far from being so good to
eat as the meat of our Oysters of Spain, or those of England, that the very
Fishermen disdain them, and seldom eat any of them. Acosta in the Fourth Book
of his History, glories that he had eat of these Oysters; and found Pearls in
the middle of them. When the night comes, the Fishermen retire to the Island,
and carry the Oysters home to him who employeth them. Upon the opening they
find in some none, in others from one to six Pearls more or less, and in some
great number of grains, which we call Seedpearl. These Oyster-shels are within
of a lively color toward an Azure, they make Spoons of them and other Toys,
such as we call Mother of Pearl.

The Pearls are of very different forms, bigness, figure, color, and polish,
and differ also much in their price.

It was an error of the Ancients, as of Isidorus and Albertus Magnus, to
believe that the Pearl was bred by the dew of heaven, seeing that they are
fished out of the Sea so deep, as twelve fathoms; as also to think that there
is but one found in an Oyster, seeing that in some there are five or six, in
which Pliny also disagreeth with them, while he relates what Aelius Stilo
writes; how that in the war of Jugurtha they gave the Name of Unions to all
great Pearls; and that he had seen four or five in one Oyster. It is true, that
seldom two of the same form, greatness, and color, are found in the same
Oyster; and for this reason, as the same Pliny writes, the Romans called them
Unions. When it happens that two are found which resemble one another
perfectly, it increases their price very much; and it may be those two famous
ones of the Queen Cleopatra were of this sort; each of which were valued at an
hundred thousand Ducats: with one of these that prodigal Princess won the
wager she laid with Mark Anthony, that she would spend above an hundred
thousand Ducats at one Supper; she dissolved it in Vinegar and drank it off at
the latter end of Supper; the other was cut into two pieces and carried to Rome
to the Pantheon, to adorn the Statua of Venus.

The Pearls of those Oysters which stick to the Rocks, are greater than those
which are in the Sand or Mudde; and those which are found in the Mudde incline
somewhat to a dark color; for the rest, as the Pearl seems to depend on the
air as well as the water, if in that time when the Oyster breeds the Pearl,
the air be cloudy, it inclines to be black; if the sky be clear, it is the
whiter. The Pearls grow by little and little in an Oyster, as the Eggs in a
Pullet, so that the greatest come forward toward the orifice or opening, while
the small ones remain at the bottom, until they are brought to perfection. And
lastly, the Pearls grow old and wrinkled, and by consequence become less
beautiful, by losing of their luster.

Scotland also produces some Pearls, but such as are not of the value and
beauty of the Oriental Pearls.

One curious and intelligent in these matters, furnished me with the following
Rule for the price of Pearls according to their weight.

A Pearl weighing
1 Grain, is worth 1 Crown. 2 4 3 9

A Pearl weighing
1 Carrat, is worth 16 Crowns. 1 25 1 36 1 49 2 Carats, 64 2 81 2 100 2 121 3
Carats, 144 3 169 3 196 3 225 4 Carats, 256 4 289 4 324 4 361 5 Carrats, 400 5
441 5 484 5 529 6 Carrats, 576 6 625 6 675 6 729 7 Carrats, 784 7 841 7 900 7
960 8 Carrats, 1024

CHAP. IV. Of CORAL.
ALthough that Coral and Yellow Amber are not ranked amongst Jewels, yet they
very well deserve a place in this History, because both of them have something
admirable in them, and serve for Ornament, nay some Nations have the same
esteem for these as we have for Pearls and Diamonds. There will then be three
things to consider in this Chapter, the Places where they fish for the Coral,
the manner how they fish, and the Countries where it is sold at the best rates.

First, There are three Fishings for Coral upon the Coasts of Corsica and
Sardinia, one called Argueil, which is the best and fairest; the second called
Baza, the third is near to the Island of St. Peter. That which grows upon the
Coast of Corsica is of the fairest color and longest. Upon the Coast of Africa
there are two other Fishings, that near to the Bastion of France and that of
Tabarca. The Coral of this is big enough and long, but of a pale color. There
is another Fishing upon the Coast of Sicily, near to Drepanum, the Coral of
which is small, but of a very good color. Another on the Coast of Catania, by
Cape Quiers, where the Coral is thick and of an excellent color, but the
Branches are very short. There is also another Fishing in the Isle of Majorca,
where the Coral is of the same nature with that of Corsica, so that the Coral,
if not only, is chiefly found in the Mediterranean Sea.

Let us now come to the manner of Fishing for it: The Coral grows under
hollow Rocks, at the foot of which the Sea is deep, so that the Fishers proceed
thus: They fasten cross-wise two great Pieces of Timber, and place a great
Piece of Lead in the middle, to make them sink; afterward they tie Hemp about
the Timber, and wreath it about negligently to the thickness of an Inch; they
tie to the Wood two Ropes, one hangs at the Prow and the other at the Poop of
the Vessel; and so as they run along by the Rocks, they let go the Wood, and
the Hemp windeth it self about the Coral. There is need many times of fifteen
or twenty Boats to draw up the Pieces of Timber, but by plucking up the Coral
thus by force, there falls as much into the Sea as can be drawn out; and the
bottom being ordinarily of Ouse or Mudde, the Coral is corroded continually, as
if it were worm-eaten; so that the sooner it is drawn up, the less waste is
made of it: some think Coral to be soft under water, though it be really hard;
yet true it is that at certain months of the year there is drawn from the end
of the branch by pressing it, a kind of Milk, like that out of a Woman's Breast,
which may very well be the seed of the Coral, the which falling upon something
or other in the Sea, accidentally produces another branch of Coral, as it has
been really found upon a Skull and upon the Blade of a Sword.

The Fishing of Coral is performed from the beginning of April to the end of
July, and commonly two hundred Barks and upwards are employed to that effect,
seven men and a boy in each. They are built all along the Coast of Genoa, are
very light, and bear so great sail, that no Men of War can bear up with them;
and it is by this means they escape the Corsairs. The Fishing is performed
forty miles along the Shore, over against certain Capes that jet out; where
they presume there is Rocks under water. There was lately to be seen at
Marseilles, in a Shop where they deal in Coral, a piece of the bigness of ones
Fist, which they cut in two, because it was somewhat worm-eaten, and there was
found within it a Worm which stirred, and lived some months, being put again
into its hole. It Is observable that round about some branches of Coral there is
bred as it were a Sponge resembling Cells, wherein there lie small Worms like
Bees, so much Nature pleases her self in the diversity of her productions.

We must finish this Chapter by a pretty curious Observation: Those of Japan
contrary to all the rest of the World, make no account of Pearls or Precious
Stones, and all their Jewels consist in a grain of Coral. Now as they carry by
their sides a great Bag, such as our Mechanics wear, so is he the best man,
that has the biggest grain of Coral to slip in his Purse String of Silk; and
to him who can bring them one of the bigness of an Egg, they will not only
give a thousand Crowns, but fifteen or twenty thousand, or whatsoever he shall
demand. Moreover, throughout all Asia, and especially toward the North in the
Great Mogol's Dominions, and beyond the Mountains of Tartaria, part of which
has lately conquered China; the bravery of the Common sort of People is of
Coral, and they wear it as well about their Necks as upon their Arms and and
Legs; and so much for Coral.

CHAP. V. Of Yellow Amber.
YEllow and White Amber are found no where in abundance, but only upon the
Banks of Prussia, the Sea throwing it up time after time at certain Winds. The
Elector of Brandenbourgh lets out all these Coasts, and the Farmers do there
maintain Guards, who lie all along the Coast, to the end none may take it away,
which is very Criminal; the Sea casts up the Amber sometimes on one side
sometimes on the other.

As I have made an Observation of Coral, in respect of Japan, so I must make
another of Amber in respect of China. When any great Lord makes a considerable
Feast, to show his magnificence and splendor, at the close of the Feast they
bring into the Hall three or four Perfuming Pots, upon which they throw a large
quantity of Amber, sometimes to the value of a thousand Crowns and upwards;
seeing the more there is burnt of it, so much the greater splendour it adds to
him who treats. Besides they make use of it after this manner, because Amber
thrown into the Fire, gives a certain Smell which is not unpleasant, and
because the Flame excels all other Flames. Hence it is that Amber is one of the
best Merchandices that one can bring into China, and whereof the Holland
Company does reserve to themselves the particular Commerce, the Chinese coming
to buy of them in Batavia.

I leave to Naturalists to treat of the Proprieties of Yellow Amber, which is
not the Subject of our Discourse.

CHAP. VI. Of Metals, Amber-gris, Bezoar, Indico, and other rich Productions of
the East and West.
ALthough nothing that appears in this Title may come into the List of Jewels,
any more than Yellow Amber or Coral; yet I may touch upon them as things the
most precious which we receive from the East and West.

Metals are like Plants hidden in the Bowels of the Earth, and there is some
resemblance between them in the manner of their production. Minerals. have
branches and a trunck from whence they grow, and great and small Veins, which
are bound together, and do seem to imitate Vegetables. These Minerals are
produced by the virtue and force of the Sun and the other Planets, and in a
long space of time are increased and multiplied in these obscure Caverns; but
there is this difference in the Earth which brings forth Plants, and that which
produces Minerals, that this is fat and fertile, for the nourishment of that
which it sends forth; but on the contrary the other is rude and barren, like
the matter which it generates within. Metals were created for the use of
Physic, for Agriculture, and for the Defense and Ornament of Man, not to speak
of the Species of Gold and Silver, so necessary to the entertaining of Society
and Commerce: Upon which one understanding enough said, That as a Father gives
a great Portion to his Daughter, by that means to provide her a more
advantageous Match, so God has given to the Earth great riches in Mines, to
the end that Men might enquire into her with the greater care. Iron, Lead,
Copper, and Tin* are found in so many places of the Earth, that the
Americans, who have diverse Mines of them, neglect to dig them; I will not give
these therefore any place in this discourse, and will content my self to say
only this, that there is great quantity of Copper in Sweden, that the best
Tin is brought out of Cornwall in the West of England; and that the Peruvians
make use of no other Lead, Iron, or Copper, but what is brought them out of
Europe, although they have Mines of their own. I will speak therefore only of
Gold and Silver which are the most precious of all Metals, and of Quicksilver,
which serves to refine them both. Gold is the richest of all Metals, the
heaviest and most malleable, that is to say, that suffers it self to be
extended the most under the Hammer, and from all time Men have sought and loved
the enjoyment of it. It is found in Asia in the Sand of diverse Rivers, and for
this Ganges and Pactolus have been rendered famous in History; and not to speak
of Tagus and other Rivers of Europe, which carry Gold; the Arva, which falls
from the Mountains of Savoy, and joyneth with the Rhone near Geneva, furnishes
Gold enough to recompense the pains of those who search for it; but the
abundance of Gold is found in Mines, and these Mines are not everywhere, we
have discovered but few in Europe; Scotland has some, and Silesia and
Hungaria, but they do not very much enrich their Masters: let us consider
therefore the Mines of Aethiopia and India, and particularly of the Isle of
Sumatra, which the Ancients called the Chersonesus of Gold. We may mention also
the famous Mines of Potosi, which celebrate Peru above all the Regions of the
Earth, and where so many Slaves are employed; for the Mines of Silver there are
diverse of them in Europe, and particularly in Saxony; there are of them also in
Asia, but the Mines which are the most famous of all are in a Mountain of Peru,
unknown to the Ynca's before the arrival of the Spaniards. This Mine is so
rich, that the Mine which Hannibal found in the Pyrenaean Hills, out of which,
as Pliny reports, every day was drawn three hundred pounds of Silver, cannot be
compared to it; the description of this at large is to be seen in Josephus
Acosta his Natural History of the Indies; and for the manner of refining
Metals, so many have written, that I may be excused from describing it: there
rests therefore no more but Quicksilver, which is found in a certain
Vermillion Stone, great quantity of it comes from the Mountain of Guangavilca,
near to the City of Guamagua in Peru; out of which they draw every year eight
thousand Quintals of Quicksilver; there are also diverse Mines of Gold and
Silver in Spain, but the Inhabitants neglect to work them, contenting
themselves with those which they have in the Indies.

Amber-gris is a Medicinal Liquor, full as odoriferous as the true Balm, but
thicker naturally, and is brought into a Paste of a hot and good Perfume, which
may be applied to wounds; it comes not only out of the East Indies but New
Spain does also produce it, and the Sea casts it up upon the Coast of England
and Ireland.

Bezoar that famous Stone so well known in Physic, is found five days journey
from Golconda, toward the East of Summer in the Province of Renquery, and is
engendered in the Paunch of Goats, some of which have twelve Stones in them. The
Inhabitants of the Country easily know how many Stones the Goat has in his
body by this means, they stroke the belly of the Goat with their hands and rub
it, till the Bezoars come all to the bottom of the Paunch, and then they may be
felt and counted like little Stones in a Bag. They sell them by weight, the
bigger the Stone the dearer. In the year 1660 there were sold of them to the
value of an hundred thousand Francks, and the greatest part fell to the
English; there come also Bezoar Stones from the Kingdom of Macassar in the Isle
of Celebes, at five degrees of Southern Latitude, near the Molucka's, but they
are found in the bodies of Apes, and are not so large as those of Golconda.

Indico, which is made use of for the most rich Colors, comes from a Tree
which is planted every year after the rains are passed, and when it is grown to
the height of between two and three foot, they cut it at half a foot from the
ground, and then take that which is cut and put it into great Pits with Lime,
which becomes so hard, that the Pits seem to be but one piece of Marble. These
Pits are ordinarily about fourscore Paces about, they fill them half or a
little more with water, and then continue to fill them with the green of this
Tree, and every day stir the whole till it settleth and becomes like to mudde
or clay, or clay mixed with water; afterward they let the whole stand for some
days, and then let out the water of the Pits. When all the water is out, they
take the mudde or settlement in their hands, and having steeped it in Oil, they
form great or small pieces, according to their fancy, and dry them in the Sun.
To deceive the Merchant, they set them sometimes to dry upon the sand, that so
the sand sticking to them, they may weigh the heavier; but they pay well for
it, when this deceit comes to the knowledge of the Governor. This Tree is cut
three times, but the oftener it is cut the Indico becomes of less value, and
there is more than twenty in the hundred difference in the price, the latter
giving not so much color as the first. The best Indico comes from Biana, from
Indoua, and from Corsa, three Villages at a day or a day and halfs journey from
Agra, and it is that which is made up into Balls. Eight days journey from
Surat and two leagues from Amadabat, there is a Village called Sarquesse, from
whence the flat dico comes; there grows also Indico of the same nature with
the last, and near the same price, in the Kingdom of Golconda: it is also
brought out of the West, from the Isles of Antilles, where they make it very
much after the same manner as in the East.

Saltpeter comes in great quantity from Agra and Patena, from whence it is
brought twenty days journey down the Ganges, to a place where the English and
Holland Merchants come to lade.

Great quantity of Silk comes from Bengala and thereabouts, which is the best
Country of India, there comes also great abundance from the Province of
Gillon or ancient Hircania in Persia, and from Sicily.

Gum Lacca is brought from the Kingdom of Bengala, but the best comes out of
Pegu. A sort of Ants carry this Gum and fasten it about wild Shrubs, from
whence is made great quantity of Wax.

Sal Ammoniac comes from Amadabat, one of the greatest places of Traffic in
the Indies, for Stuffs of Gold and Silk, as also Tapistry and other Works as
beautiful as in Persia, but their Colors hold not so long. There comes also
from thence great quantity of Linen, of Painted Cottons, which are carried
into Persia, Arabia, to the Abissines, to the Red Sea, to the Isles ^^
Madagascar, Sumatra, Java, ^^^^assar, to the Molucka's, and into Europe, and it
would be the greatest ^^ading Town of all the Indies, if ^^at Surate did not
equal it.

As for Spices, viz. Pepper, Cloves, Nutmeg, and Ginger, the greatest quantity
of them is brought from the Molucka Islands, about the Aeq^at^r.

Cinnamon comes from the Island of Ceylon, not to speak of the Isles of
Antilles, which do also furnish us with Ginger.

This is all I have at present collected of what is remarkable in the modern
and faithful Relations of our Travelers upon the Subject of Jew^^^ and other
rich Productions of which I have given a short Account, ^^ a Platform for a
greater Work.

FINIS.

