THE SEVERAL ARTICLES Or PARTS of the PROPOSAL UPON Land-Credit, RATIONALLY
EXPLAINED.
It Is necessary the Rents securing should be much greater, and for a longer
time, than the Rent secured; that so the Credit raised thereupon, may be
certainly Answered: Therefore One hundred and fifty Pound per Annum, for One
hundred and fifty Years, which amounts in that time to Twenty two thousand five
hun^red Pounds, is required to secure Ten thousand Pound charged thereupon.

The great Advantage hereby accruing to the Subscriber, is not the only Reason
^hy Estates are proposed to be engaged herein for so long a Term, and so great
a Sum, ^ut likewise that there may be a sufficient Joynt-Stock settled, to make
good, (for want of (...) Register) Defective Titles, if any such should be
engaged, which can be no ways ^^se provided against, and also to strengthen the
Fund: And it will certainly be much ^ore beneficial to the Nation in general,
to have Ten thousand (...) upon the same Estate, (though the Ten thousand Pound
were lost at Ten years end) than (...) have but Two thousand Pound current so
long, without being lost: And further, for ^^at so good a Design may not be
hazarded, much less lost, for want of a sufficient ^^pport.

The first payment of the Annual Rent is not to be made, till after the
Freeholders ^^all have received the Third Payment in Bills of Credit, at the
end of the second year; (...) that he will be possessed of above the full value
of his Estate, according to the pre^^nt Rates of Purchase, before he can be one
Farthing out of Pocket.

The Thousand Pound paid down at first into this Office by the Freeholders in
Ster^^ng Money, is neither lent, given, advanced, nor lost, only Exchanged into
Bills of ^redit, which are Money of another Species, or another measure of
Trade, as chang^^g Gold into Silver, and vice versa, and so no loss thereby,
being paid into the Joynt-^^ock, and employed to help the Circulation of the
Bills. Besides which Thousand ^^und, the Subscribing Freeholders will receive
Five thousand Pound, as proposed, in ^^nsideration of settling his Estate to
answer this Credit, and Three thousand Pound ^^ore including the Thousand Pound
paid in Money, fora Joynt-Stock, which toge^^er will trebly exceed the Value of
his Estate, according to common Computation.

These Bills or Tickets of Credit, are proposed to be delivered gradually, at
several (...) successive times, to the Freeholder, for the following Reasons,
(though many more ^^ight, if necessary, be offered) vizt. First, Because if they
were to be paid all at once; ^ere might possibly be such a Glut of Credit, that
other Commodities could not keep ^^ce, and increase proportionably therewith,
which might be a loss to private Persons, ^^o' none to the Public, unless by
excessive raising the Price of Foreign Commodities, ^r Buyers will always
multiply in proportion with Money; and plenty of this current ^redit (superior
in Use and Value to other Money) will give Tradesmen a mighty prospect of good
Markets; and they will then, as they do now, always provi^^ Goods sufficient to
answer the Number of their Chapmen; which Proportion, with out a Law, regulates
Market-Prices. And this further Reason may be added, Tha^ hereby Persons, who
may have prior Engagements, and for want of notice did no^ timely enter their
Claim, may still find their full satisfaction out of what remains.

The Joynt-Stock was not designed only to increase Trade, though that is a very
goo^ Consideration, but also to strengthen the Fund, and to remain a Security
liable to mak^ good all Losses by bad Titles; and therefore it is submitted to
the Control of the Directors, to prevent loss by too apparent hazards, and
from being imbezled.

The Joynt-Stock, like others, will be managed by such Governors as the
Subsc^^bers shall Annually choose, (but still under the Control already
mentioned) and th^^ shall have such Allowances out of a Moiety of the Profits,
as the Subscribers sha^^ judge reasonable, and appoint.

If this Joynt-Stock produces more profit to the Freeholder, than he is hereby
ob^^ged to pay Annually (as in all probability it will) then the Estate settled
as aforesaid f^^ One hundred and fifty years, becomes only a Collateral
Security, and pays nothing.

To avoid the danger of Loss to the Public, as well as to themselves and all
other concerned, which all former Banks, as well as Bankers, are subject to, by
lodging the Trust and Power of deceiving the Nation, and the Management and
Profits, in the same hands, they are by this Constitution divided; For the
Trust is wholly committe^ to known impartial Directors of Public Character,
and the Profits (if any after the defraying all Expenses) remains to the
Undertakers: So that the Directors, if not b^^^led by their Honor and
Consciences, are not under the least Temptation from the Interest, to break
their Trust, by issuing forth more Credit than they have Fund to answer: And
the Undertakers, though their Inclinations were never so strong to pur^^^ their
seeming Interest to the hazard of the Public Loss, have not the least Power
which all other Banks and Bankers have, though their Prudence and Honesty may
forb^^ their using it. Whence this Constitution may by these great and certain
Checks, b^^ pronounced exempt from any Damage to the Public, or any private
Person, by Mista^^ or Loss.

It may be observed, That the whole Sum hereby charged upon Estates, is no mo^^
than a R^turn of the Principal by One hundred equal Annual Payments, and for
fo^bearance in the mean time, with the yearly Interest but of Five Shillings
for every o^ hundred Pound, which is but the 24th part of what the Law allows
to be paid for I^terest of Money.

The hundred Annual Payments is neither very strange, too long a Term, nor
without Precedent; for the Bank of England, though settled by Act of Parliament,
has a pe^petual Income, unless the Principal should be paid at Eleven years
end by the Nation which the Persons interested in the said Bank hopes, and all
others fear, they will no^ And without doubt Freeholders Estates in England are
a more certain Fund than at Tax whatever can be, because of troublesome times,
danger of shutting up the Exch^quer again, of being a Grievance to the People,
as all Taxes are, more or less; and because Taxes are imposed, whenas this is
freely chosen, and for Gain not Loss; and a^ so for that Money-Banks may be a
Temptation to a Conqueror, and Land-Banks cannot; and consequently this
Proposal is much better, and more secure than the sai^ Bank, which is founded
only upon private Reputation, and the Tunnage or Excise Tax; or than the Bank
of Amsterdam, which the City is bound, only by their Interest and Reputation,
to make good. Nor can any other Bank in the World be Superior to this in any
respect.

Here is provided more ready Money to help Circulate this Credit, than any
other Bank has to make their Bills current; for here will be a Fourth part
Money, whena^ the Bank Established by Parliament, had at first but a Sixth
part, and now possibly much less; for who knows how many Bills they have issued
out, or to what value? for they have no Check but their own Honor: And Dr.
Barebone's Land-Bank, though a^ Excellent Contrivance, has not a Tenth part; and
what private Traders and Banke^ have is uncertain, though much to be feared not
near so much.

To sum up all in few words: This proposed Bank offers more Advantages, and a
greater Profit to Subscribers, and is Established upon a securer Fund, which
nevertheless is yearly strengthened; and the same is under a better
Constitution: It has a larger stock of Money to help circulate the Credit; And
will bring much more benefit to the Nation in general, than any other Bank
whatever in being, or proposed; And therefore it is not without much reason
hoped it will prosperously succeed.

Besides, It may not be amiss to take notice, That the Proposer hereof was the
first that ever contrived Banks of this Nature; and those lately Established
are but a small part of his Invention: He was also the first Person that of
late years has moved for Public Banks, and labored to infuse a good Opinion
of them, and to remove all Impediments and Objections that hindered and opposed
them; the Success of which Endeavors is obvious by the present Banks
Established, and of others now setting up.

So that, if there were no more Advantage and Security in this Bank, than in
others, yet it will seem Just to Worthy and Generous Persons to give this the
preference for the Author's sake

Let honest and wise Men therefore consider well this Proposal, together with
their own Interest, and then Act accordingly; and there is no question, but
some, if not many, not altogether so wise, may yet be wise enough to follow
such good Examples.

In short, if any Inlet of a Dishonest Practice can be discovered in this
Undertaking, the Parties concerned are very ready to submit to any Regulation
shall be advised by the Subscribers: And therefore it is hereby concluded, That
any Subscriber may withhold his Rent for the Value of his Bills, which are not
complied with, until he can pass them away.

THIS PROPOSAL is no more than what is daily practiced by Gamesters, who engage
their Guineas to the Box, for thirty Counters a piece, which they then Value as
Shillings; and during the Play, though never so long, pass for so much Currently
among themselves, or any new Gamesters that comes into the Game with them: And
the Reason is, because the Fund or Guineas are secured in the Box, or Bank; for
the Counters are good Shillings as long as the Guineas are kept in the Box,
though it should be for One Thousand Years; and so Land Credit is good as long as
the Land is able to exchange it all at last. When the Game is done, the Box is
obliged to Exchange the Winners Counters for Guineas again at the same Value
they delivered them; so that all their Turns are equally served with the
Counters as with Shillings, and none suffers the least Loss by the Counters.
And if the Game had held Five Hundred Years, and the Guineas been safe kept so
long in the Box, the Counters had been very good Shillings all that time, and
answered all the Ends and Uses as well. Such indeed as were ignorant, that
Guineas were Pledged or Staked, or did not Credit the Box-keeper or Banker,
might probably refuse the Counters for Shillirgs; but no others would, no not a
Bettor or Stander-by.

The Proposal above mentioned, offers principally two Points to Consideration,
the Vtile, and the Possibile: The first is Obvious, in case that the proposed
Credit upon Land Security is equal, if not superior to Gold, as to its use as
Money. And also, if every Subscriber can in a few Months have, what will now
scarcely yield him Two Thousand Pounds, improved to Eight Thousand, of which
the Stock may, in a very few Years, be Reasonably Expected to afford near
Twenty Per Cent. or five Hundred Pounds per annum for ever.

The second is the Possibile, without which the first is but an Airy Notion:
And, as to this, Nothing is more ordinary in Trading Countries, than making
Payments, especially of large Sums, in Bills of Exchange, Bills of Credit, or
Bank-Credit: And so a Bill of one Hundred Pounds may, if it pass no more than
twenty Hands, discharge effectually two Thousand Pounds, without ever counting
above a Hundred Pounds at last; and it might as well have passed two Hundred
Thousand Hands for the same reason

Now all that can be called new in this Proposal, is only the Subjecting, the
Rent of private Gentlemen's Estates, to answer all the Bills or Tickets of
Credit issued forth, to secure thereby all persons, that receive them, from
being loosers by them, which certainly makes the Bills never the Worse: And
though it is confessed, that this is a Novelty, yet it is no such great Mystery of
Trade, but that every Gentleman may easily apprehend it.

A. Comparison of the Circulation of Gold, and of Credit.
A Settles his Land for one Hundred and Fifty years, to pay One hundred lib. of
Annual Rent in Bills of Credit to the Office; he receiving from the Office a
sum or consideration in the same Credit, for the purchase of the said Rent
charge.

B. Makes a like Settlement of Lands to C. to pay a Hundred lib. in Gold, for
the same term of Years; having received his Purchase Money in Gold from C.

A. Pays a Debt of a Hundred lib. in this Credit, to his Coach-maker; the Coach
maker pays it to the Currier for Leather; the Currier pays the same to the
Tanner for Hides: The Tanner pays the same to the Butcher for Skins and raw
Hides: The Butcher pays it to a Grasier for Cattle: The Grasier to a Farmer for
Corn an^ Grass: The Farmer pays it to A. his Landlord, and A. pays it to the
Office for h^^ Annual Rent. Now here is all their occasions answered; and none
the worse, or the poorer by it; but the contrary: the Office receiving back
what is delivered out.

Now take the Payments as running in Gold

B. Pays a Debt in Gold of a Hundred Pound, to his Coach-maker: the Coach maker
pays the same to a Currier for Leather: the Currier pays it to a Tanner for
Hides the Tanner to a Butcher for Skins and raw Hides: the Butcher to a Grasier
for Cattle the Grasier Pays it to a Farmer for Corn and Grass: the Farmer pays
it to B. his Landlord for Rent: And B. the Landlord pays the same Gold to C.
for his Annual Ren^ Now by this Comparison it is plain, that in the Circulation
and course of Dealing from the Office to the Landlord, and from C. to B. and
back to the Office, and t^ C. again, the turn is as well served as in the
instance of Gold. And the Office is n^^ poorer in receiving Back the Credit:
Nor C. no richer in receiving Back his Gold; tha^ both were, at the issuing of
their several Sums in Credit and Gold.

Such as are unwilling to tie their Estates for so long a time as 150 years,
may consider the most men readily part with them now for ever, for less than
half what they are to receive by the Proposal. And in answer to such others as
fancy 150 l. per annum, which they now value 2 or 3000 l. can never secure
10000 l. if they have not read a Pamphlet called, The Rodds f^^ the Fools Back,
they may be satisfied with what follows, vizt. That the 10000 l. issued out in
Credit, is not borrowed at Interest, nor the Interest and Principal to be paid
at once, as common Mortgages, but by one hundred Annual Payments; and certainly
150 l. per annum i^ very good Security for the payment of 100 l. per annum.
These Estates are neither bought n^^ sold, but only made a Security for
satisfying the Bills or Tickets of Credit issued there upon which can be as
well performed in the time hereby limited, as any Payments otherwise secur^^
But if lowering Interest to Three per Cent. will Raise Land to Forty years
Purchase, as all kno^ing Men affirm, then the increase of Credit by this
Proposal may bring down Interest to T^^ or One per Cent. and consequently
advance Land to Eighty years Purchase, or more; and th^^ the engaged Lands will
exceed in value what they are engaged for; especially the Joint Sto^^ being (as
it is) added to the Security.

For the Receiving Subscriptions, and satisfying further all Persons not fully
Infor^ed herein, there is attendance given every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday,
after Six the Evening, at Dr. Chamberlain's House in Essex-street, near the
Temple. And eve^^ Day at Mr. White's Chambers, Numb. 7. at the New Square of
Lincoln's End, a^^ at Mr. Puckle's in the Out-Ropers Office on the Royal
Exchange, from Eight of t^^ Clock in the Morning till Twelve at Noon; and from
Three, till Seven in the Afterno^^

LONDON, Printed by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-street. 1695.


