THE CHARACTER OF A FANATIC:

By a Person of Quality.

ICH DIEN
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1675.

THE CHARACTER OF A FANATIC.
HE is a person of a more exercised faith than understanding; one governed by
Instinct, not Intellect; and who (like those of old) never thinks he has enough
of the Deity; till beside himself: You may call him if you please, a perpetual
motion, or a restless whirligig, ever Turning from bad to worse; or the Ignis
fatuus of Divinity, carried about with every wind; least considering whence it
comes, or whether it goes; as even such likewise, is every one that is born
of him: It may be thought, the Prophet had somewhat like him in his eye, in
that wheel (of his) within a wheel; for of himself he never was, but ill-split
from another; like those imperfect, dough-bak'd Creatures produced by the Sun
on the banks of Nile; so that his generation is founded in Corruption, and his
extraction of the same Parentage with Monsters, not intended, but produced. His
Principles are like the Chaos; a confused lump of every thing and nothing; or a
Gallimofry of negatives; nor this, nor that, nor the other, but what he is no man
knows, no, not the Angels in Heaven, nor himself to boot; this only excepted,
that he is more party colored than Joseph's Coat, and patched together of more
pieces than a Taylor's Cushion; Nor is his practice much unsuitable to his
principles; he puts on Religion as a Cloak, not a G^rment, and varnishes his
Impostures with Holiness to the Lord: Thus Absalom pretends a Sacrifice, when
his business is Rebellion; and Herod a Worship* when his design is Murder; not
with much wonder Machiavel the Florentine has taught him, he that would gain
by deceit, must first acquire a credit, by (at least) a show of integrity; and
he that would practice upon the people, must follow the old rule of Finge Deum
-- such Influence have solemn looks, and verily, verily, upon the multitude,
who have little else to pass them for men, but speech and figure: Hence it is
that he puts off his Tinsel for Standard, and the Maggots of his own brain for
divine Inspiration; That he obtruces his Enthusiasmes for Visions, and
justifi^s Homer, that even such dreams are of God. That he takes a holy pride
to himself, and says to the rest of the world, stand off; that he calls the
common infirmities of Mankind, Crying sins, National sins; Bow-dyed sins, and
his own Mormo's, but slips, and failings; that he can see no sin in Jacob, nor
iniquity ^n his Israel of God. That he ca^ls them the only Holy, only Chosen,
only Godly, only precious, only spiri^ually-discerning people. That he puts a
discriminating Schibolleth on others; as Formalists, Carnalists, dry-Moralists,
withered Fig Trees, outside men, negative-Holiness-men, Opus-operatum-men, will
worshippers, Laodiceans, and what not. That he talks of nothing but new light,
and Prophecy, spiritual Incomes, In-dwellings, Emanations, Manifestations,
Sealings, and the like gibberish and canting. To which also the zealous twang
of the Nose, adds no small efficacy. That he runs Counter to all things in
power, and treads the* Antipodes to every thing commanded, and for no other
reason, but because commanded: for it may be observed, that the Lords Prayer,
was not so absolutely thrown out of the Kirk, till recommended by its own
directory: In short, That he calls subjection in matters of Religion, a tying
up the spirit, and all Injunctions, even in things indifferent, a manifest
invading the Sanctum sanctorum: And now the ^reat cry is persecution for
Conscience; nothing in his mouth, but destitute, afflicted; and (the common
Corollary) but not forsaken. Alas, alas, the habitations of Jacob are
swallowed, and the places of the Assembly taken away: A bow is bent against the
daughter of Judah, and the breach of the Virgin of Sion is like a great Sea,
whereas on the other hand, let him be but as in the years past: and that Sun
once more shine on his Tabernacle. This success new modess his Conscience, and
like ( Aaron's rod) he swallows up every thing that lies in his way: Even
Princes must lay their hands on their mouths, and the Nobles not speak again to
his words: The Poor distressed is become Hogan Mogan, and the Servus servorum,
Dominus dominantium: The little flock claims a Kingdom in condigno, and the
chosen generation sets up for a Royal Priesthood. In short, this little Horn
takes a mouth to himself speaking mighty things, and his language is, Overturn,
Overturn, Overturn. And now he makes his Doctrine suitable to his Text, and
owns above-board, that Dominion is founded in Grace, not Nature: That the goods
of this world, are properly the Elects: That himself and his Hyperdolins, are
the only Israelites, and all the rest Egyptians: That the new Jerusalem must
be propagated, as the second Temple was built, with the Sword in one hand, and
the Trowel in the other; or as the Abbot (in Hen. 3ds time) gave it in absolution
to the Earl of Leicester, Gladium spiritualem sine gladio materiali nihil
posse. What shall I add? He declares that quis suscitabit eum? was personally
meant of his Tribe: And yet this man has his followers, and these of the
honorable Women too, not a few; for (to say truth) his conversation is much
after the rate of that before the Flood, the sons of God among the daughters of
men: Devotion in all places, whether true or false, being most natural to that
Sex: 'Twas the Devil's policy to our first Parents, for well he knew that to
beguil Eve, was the ready way to hook in Adam. And thus he proves a stumbling
block to the Wives; and a rock of offense to the Husbands. In brief, like the
Dragon in the Apocalypse, his tail draws a third part of the stars, and casts
them to the Earth, the reason is obvious, Fortitudo ejus in lumbis ejus, and
virtus umbilico ventris: But to proceed, his profession is like his Allegiance,
a mere ( Fucus) yet, so well laid on, one (at first sight) could not but swear
'twere natural: His Commonplace, Polyanthea, and Concordance, and the height
of his School Divinity, the Assemblies Catechism: His Prayer, a Rapsody of holy
hickops, sanctified barkings, illuminated goggles, sighs, sobs, yexes, gasps,
and groans, not more intelligible than nauseous: However (to give him his due)
he Prays most heartily for the King, but with more distinctions and mental
reservations, than an honest man would have taken the Covenant: From hence (as
out of the third Heaven) he falls by head and shoulders into his preachment;
which what other is it, than a wild career over hill and dale, till the
afternoon Chimes stop him; (...); Thump upon thump, yelp upon yelp, doctrine
upon doctrine, rule upon rule, reason upon reason, text upon text, proof upon
proof, direction upon direction, motive upon motive, sign upon sign, token upon
token, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little: effect upon
effect, and uses more than innumerable; and here likewise he cries up obedience
to Magistrates, but with such a Salva gloria Dei, that he had better let it
alone: as also that they ought to be defended by their Subjects, in defense
nevertheless of the true Religion, of which himself must be Judge. And for his
Grace at meat, what can I better compare it too, than a Canterbury rack, half
pace, half gallop; so his, an odd hobbling shuffle, between a Grace and a
Prayer, and a Prayer and a Grace: Lastly, as to his virtues, (for it cannot be
denied, but he has somewhat of that which Tully calls, adumbrata virtutum
specimina) I wish it might be said of them, that they were other than masked
hypocrisy, the Poet hit it: Da justum sanctumque videri,
Noctem peccatis, and fraudibus objice nubem:
And like an apt Scholar, he has gotten his lesson by heart, and can wrap the
Philistin's sword in a holy Ephod; from whence else is it* that he can crave a
blessing to the design, though never so ungodly; and give thanks for the
success be it never so wicked: That he will not swear, but can dispense with
the profitable sin of lying: That he will not be drunk (to be seen of men) but
yet can take a brotherly rouse in a corner: That he walks as though he had made
a Covenant with his eyes, and yet si uxor non vult aut non si possit, veniat
ancilla, is wholesome Doctrine with him: That he is a zealous observer of the
Sabbath, and yet can make less Conscience of schism than a surplice: That he
cries, Vae mihi si non Evangeliza vero: and yet allows no imposition of hands,
but broken pates: That he abhors Idols, and yet can commit Sacrilege, which,
what is it? than to burn the Idol with a coal from the Altar: That he exhorts
(his beloved) to constancy under persecution, and yet, come wh^^ will he can
lick himself so whole, 'Twill be hard to tell where he had been hurt. In short,
that he is a perfect Samaritan, for let the Gentiles prevail, and he is of the
race of Ishmael; and let the Jews get the upper hand, he had Abraham to his
Father: To conclude, he is a gloworm that shines best in the night of
ignorance, one whose Faith has eaten up his Charity: One that has torn the
seamless Coat into rags, and tacked them together to cover his nakedness: one
that having forsaken, the fountain, has hewed to himself but broken cisterns:
one that swallows all things unchewed, and brings them up again as raw and
undigested: one whose eyes are at the end of the earth, and yet would be thought
not to mistake his way. In short, one that has an excuse for every thing that
he ^^^ld not do, and a ( salvo) for every thing he should do: (...) this by
Scripture: Adeo nihil est quod S. Scriptura Torqueri non possis, modo
Torqueatur* In a word, he is one of whom it may be said, as Heraclius of the
bow, (...); and but that I find him so well cut out by Horace, I had not yet
taken off my hand from so everlasting an Argument, Malaquem scabies, aut morbus
Regius urget
Aut Fanaticus error* aut Iracunda Diana;
Vesanum tetigissetiment, fugiuntque --
Qui sapiunt --
And not without reason; for though his distemper lies not in too much
learning, yet to my unenlightned understanding, he speaks not the words, either
of soberness or truth, but darkeneth Counsel by words without knowledge.


