A DIALOGUE BETWEEN A Paedo-Baptist, AND AN Anti-Paedo-BAPTIST: Containing the
Strength of ARGUMENTS Offered on both sides at the Portsmouth Disputation: WITH
The Addition of a few more Arguments, then ready to be offered, in Vindication
of Infant Baptism.

By Samuel Chandler, and William Leigh.

LONDON Printed for A. Chandler, at a Glover's Shop, over against the
White-Hart-Inn, in Aldersgate Street, and Sold by A. Baldwin. 1699.

TO THE READER.
BEcause Dr. Russel, or some Friend of his, did a while since disgrace the
Press, with some scraps of their Narrative, stuffed with Nonsense and
Partiality; nay, and by its Title did delude the Vulgar with an Imagination,
that it contained the true State of the Portsmouth Disputation; and the same,
how Unjust soever, being Cheap, has been scattered throughout most parts of
the Kingdom: Therefore by Advice of our Brethren, from various Parts, we have
offered (so far as this small Tract would admit) the strength of Arguments then
urged on both Sides, omitting Names and Personal Reflections, apprehending this
way may be most Grateful to Persons seriously Inquisitive. We have also annexed
a few Arguments, which with others, were then ready to be urged, had the
Company's Satisfaction required, and the approaching Evening, admitted.

If this fall into the hands of the Learned, we request them to remember, That
it is designed for Persons of meaner Capacities, that neither understand,
Ornaments of Speech, nor affect Terms of Logic.

If it fall into hands more Illiterate, yet willing to receive Divine Truths,
we request of them, that they would weigh it in the Balance of Scripture and
Sanctified Reason; yea, and we request of God, that they may.

Sam. Chandler, Will. Leigh.


QUESTION I. Whether, according to the Commission of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, Adult Believers only, are the Proper Subjects of Baptism, and not
Infants? Asserted by Antipaedo-Baptists.
THE Controversy is, Whether Christ's Ministers ought (1.) To deny Baptism to
the Infants of professed Christians. (2.) To Baptize those at Mature Age, who
by virtue of descent from professed Christians, were Baptized with a small
quantity of Water, in Infancy?

The first Argument offered at the Disputation by the Anti-paedo-Baptists, I
consider last, because there it will come to be more fairly Answered.

Anti-poedo-Baptist. I prove then, That no Infants can be the Subjects of
Baptism according to Christ's Commission.

Argument 1. No Infants can be made Disciples by the Ministry of Men; therefore
no Infants can be the Subjects of Baptism, according to Christ's Commission,
Mat. 28. 19. Go teach, etc. (or, Disciple) all Nations, etc.


Paedo-Bapt. I deny your whole Argument; and (1.) I assert, If they could not
be made Disciples by the Ministry of Men, yet this Text would not exclude them
from Baptism. And then, (2.) I assert, That they be made Disciples by the
Ministry of Men.


Anti-Paed. Christ puts Teaching before Baptism; therefore it goes before, and
consequently Infants are Excluded.


Paedo-Bapt. This is a weak way of Arguing. The word is placed before in
Scripture, therefore the thing signified must go before. Were this true, then
Baptism must go before Confession of Sin in the Adult, because it is said, They
were Baptized, Confessing their sins* Mat. 3. 6. Nay, Sanctification and
Preservation in Christ, must go before Calling, Jude 1. But the contrary is
evident to all.

But farther, Infants may be Disciples, and therefore, by your own Argument,
may be Baptized; they may be Taught in their Parents, as well as the Kohathites
keep the Charge of the Sanctuary in their Parents, from a Month old, Numb. 3.
28. Or Levi pay Tithes in Abraham, Heb. 7. 9. Or the Israelites in David's time
rejoice in their Ancestors on the Banks of the Red Sea, Ps. 66. 6. There did we
rejoice. etc. i. e. as considered in our Parents.


Anti-Paed. But how can this be by the Ministry of Men?


Paedo-Bapt. (1.) By the Preaching of Men, Parents may be constrained to resign
their All to God, and so their Infants. (2.) They are immediately Discipled by
Men's Ministry, when Parents and Ministers concur in their Solemn Dedication
to God by Baptism.


Anti-Paed. But Teaching and Learning, make the Relation between Master and
Scholar.


Paedo-Bapt. The contrary is most true; the Master does care for and command;
the Scholar is subject, in order to Instruction; and Resignation of the
Scholar, or his Parents for him, and Acceptance of the Master, constitutes the
Relation; and by virtue hereof, the Scholar is as much obliged to submit to his
Master, according to his Capacity, before he touches a Book, as when he has
learned Seven Years. If Teaching were the ground of this Relation, then Persons
long since Dead, might be our Governors. Job 8. 8; 10. The former Age, and
their Fathers shall teach thee. Nay the Beasts of the Field may be our Masters
too, Job 35. 11. Who teaches us more than the Beasts of the Earth, etc. We may
learn of them, and yet be our own Governors* But Christ's Disciples are
resigned to him, in order to their being both Governed, Taught, and Disposed of
by him, according to their Capacity.


Anti-Paed. Argum. 2. Paul did declare the whole Counsel of God, and yet did
never declare the Baptism of Infants; therefore Infant Baptism is no part of
the Counsel of God.


Paedo-Bapt. Neither ever did Paul declare, That the Baptism of Believers
Children ought to be delayed, till they can Personally profess their Faith;
therefore their Practice being such, is no part of the Counsel of God. Take the
Argument to your self, and make the most of it.

2. But I hope to prove Infant Baptism from Paul's Words. 1 Cor. 7. 14. Romans
11. But pray, Is nothing part of the Counsel of God, but what stands on Record
as delivered by Paul?


Anti-Paed. Nothing; and therefore not Infant Baptism?


Paedo-Bapt. If nothing, then how great a part of the History of the Old World,
of the succeeding Patriarchs, of the Ceremonial Law, of Prophecies,
Gospel-History, and other Sacred Matters in Holy Writ, is no part of the
Counsel of God?

The Truth therefore is, Paul might declare Infant Baptism an hundred times, in
his vast number of Sermons and Pious Discourses, and yet the Holy Ghost might
not see fit to insert it, as delivered by him, this Doctrine being sufficiently
Established in other New Testament Texts.

But farther, These words were spoken to the Church of Ephesus: And all that
remains on Record of what he spoke to them in two Years, Acts 19. 9, 10, 11. is
but the Epistle to the Ephesians, and this in Acts 20. And dare any say, That
he never declared * See our Account p. 70, 71. for further Answer.
it to them, because it is not herein contained.

Here, because some Anabaptists, from Dr. Russel's false Narrative do report,
That we pretended at the Disputation, that six Leaves of Paul's Writings
containing Infant Baptism, may be lost, therefore we will (tho otherwise 'twere
impertinent) give a true representation of that Matter. The Doctor's weak
Evasions, did force us to make our Answers evident beyond all Contradiction:
And thus we Argued. If there were a Controversy, whether such an Author did use
such an Expression, and his Writings were produced, if six Leaves of these
Writings were lost, none could determine that he had no such Expression,
because it might be contained in those six Leaves. The Controversy is, Whether
Paul ever did by Preaching, Writing, or Discourse, declare Infant Baptism. We
cannot say we have all his Writings; we dare say, we have not the Hundredth
part of his Sermons and Discourses: Who can then determine, that he never did
any way declare Infant Baptism to these Ephesians.


Anti-Paed. Arg. 3. Christ's Commission does expressly show, who are to be
Baptized: But it does not expressly show that Infants are to be Baptized:
Therefore Infants are not to be Baptized.


Paedo-Bapt. 1. Pray take your Argument back again, and get rid of it as well
as you can. Christ's Commission does expressly show, who are to be Baptized: But
it does not expressly show, That Adult Persons, if Baptized in Infancy, are to
be Baptized again: Therefore Adult Persons, if Baptized in Infancy, are not to
be Baptized again. But,

2. I deny that Infants or Adult Persons, are distinctly expressed in Mat. 28.
19. for both are included in the word Nations.


Anti-Paed. But the Commission does express Disciples; Baptizing them, i. e.
Disciples. The Greek word for Nations, is of the Neuter Gender, and the word
for them, is Masculine; therefore Disciples being Masculine, must be
understood. See our Account page 74.



Paedo-Bapt. 1. If they must be Understood; then they are not Expressed. You
have confuted your self.

2. But I assert, That them, tho Masculine, may refer to Nations, tho Neuter.
For Instance, Let the Learned see Acts. 15. 17. Acts. 21. See our Account.
25. and elsewhere. The Greek informs a Schoolboy the Reason hereof.

3. But suppose Disciples were understood, I have proved, That Infants may be
Disciples, in answer to your first Argument, and shall yet more fully do it,
when I take the Opponency.


Anti-Paed. But, Mark 16. 16. Believers are the only Subjects of Baptism;
therefore Infants are not.


P. Bapt. The Text says no such thing: And if it did, Infants may as well be
Believers, imputatively in their Parents, as the Kohathites Infants keep the
Charge of the Sanctuary, or Levi pay Tithes in Abraham, Number. 3. 28. Heb. 7. 9.


Anti-P. I deny that the Parent's Faith was ever imputed to the Child.


P. Bapt. Parents Faith may be imputed to Infants, for their enjoying external
Privileges, as well as the Parents coming Corporally, may be imputed to them
for Christ's Blessing, Mat. 19. 14. Suffer little Children to come unto me,
etc. when others (probably Parents) brought them. Yea, the Parents Faith also,
we find imputed to Infants, Heb. 11. 29. compared with Exodus 14. 22. By Faith
the Children of Israel, (without Limitation) being 600000 Men, besides
Children, (and many Thousand Children there must be) passed through the Red
Sea. All the Children of Israel, passed by Faith; i. e. The Faith of Miracles;
and therefore Infants, their Parents Faith being imputed to them.


Anti-P. But it might be Moses his Faith, not their own.


P. Bapt. No, see Heb. 11. 27, 28. Moses his Faith is expressed as distinct
from theirs, just before; and here theirs as distinct from his.


Anti-P. But why may not the Parents Baptism be imputed to Infants, as well as
their Faith?


P. Bapt. 1. For the same reason that the Baptism of the Israelitish Parents in
the Cloud and in the Sea, was not imputed to their Infants; All that were under
the Cloud (and therefore Infants) were Baptized, 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2. This was a
Type of the Gospel-Baptism.

2. Because Infants are capable of Baptism, the Subject being therein Passive.
But they are not capable of a Personal act of Faith; if they were, it would be
expected.

But further; You may as well conclude, that no Infant shall be Saved, because
Believing goes before the word [ Saved], as that no Infant must be Baptized,
because Believing goes before the word [ Baptized.] But the weakness of this
Argument, drawn from placing the words, I have shown before.


Anti-P. A Person already Taught, must profess his Faith before he be Baptized;
therefore an Infant that cannot profess his Faith, must not be Baptized. Says
Philip to the Eunuch, Acts 8. 37. If thou believe with all, etc.


P. Bapt. This Instance shows indeed, That an Adult Jewish Proselyte must
confess his Faith before Baptism; but neither this, nor any one word of God,
does show, that Infants must be denied Baptism, because they cannot do what is
required of Adult Persons. See our Account, p. 73, 74.
This Eunuch was probably a Proselyte of the Covenant, and therefore a Member
of the Jewish Church. The Infants of all such Proselytes (if they had any) were
Church Members with themselves. Now, must these poor Infants, immediately upon
their Parents Faith and Baptism, be shut out of God's Church, of which they
were Members before, because they make no profession of their Faith, which is
impossible for Infants to do?


Anti-P. Arg 4. If the Apostles never did Baptize Infants, then the Baptism of
Infants is not according to Christ's Commission.


P* Bapt. 1. I shall quickly show, that the Scripture does authorize the
practice of Infant Baptism, and thence 'twill follow, that they did Baptize
Infants; and they might Baptize Thousands, tho the Scripture (which contains
not the Hundredth part of what they did) does not expressly tell us so.

2. But this Argument also will fall on your selves. Thus, the Scripture does
not tell us, that the Apostles did deny Baptism to any Christian's Infant, or
administer it to any Adult Person descending from a Christian, (tho from the
death of Christ, to the death of St. John, was near 60 Years; in which time,
Thousands of Christian Infants must become Adult,) Therefore your Practice
being such, is not according to Christ's Commission.

3. But we have some probable Instances of Baptizing Infants: Whole Households
were Baptized. I only consider the Jailor, Acts 16. 33. He and all his were
Baptized straitway. All his, upon his Believing.


Anti-P. But all his House Believed.


P. Bapt. The Original is, (...), And he rejoiced in, with, or through all his
House, he having believed in God. I refer it to the Learned, whether this be
not the fairest Translation of the Words.
Not a word of any believing but himself, yet he and all his are Baptized.


Anti-P. But the Word was Preached to all that were in his House, which of
necessity supposes them able to hear.


P. Bapt. 1. No more than those words, Mark 16. 15. Go Preach the Gospel to
every Creature, supposes Stones able to hear, because Stones are Creatures.
All in one place, and Every in the other, is to be understood with limitation,
according to the Capacity of the Subject.

2. But I add, it might be preached to some as included in their Parents. Pray
give me the like probable Instance for your practice.


Anti-P. Christ himself was the Son of a Believer, yet not Baptized till Adult.


P. Bapt. But the Virgin Mary was a Jewish, not Christian Believer, in Christ's
Infancy. The very first Commission for Christian Baptism, was not then given:
Christ himself was born a Jew; and we all assert, that Jews tho never so Pious,
ought not to be Baptized, till they profess the Christian Faith* Christ, as to
the time of Baptism, was not imitable by us: If he were, then none, how Pious
soever, must be Baptized till about Thirty; nor Baptized at all, unless
Circumcised at Eight days Old.


Anti-P. You demand of us, a prohibition of Infant Baptism; I demand of you a
Prohibition of Salt, Cream, Oil and Spittle, such as the Papists use.


P. Bapt. When you can show, that these are as plainly included in the word [
Baptize] as Infants are in the word [ Nations] we shall farther consider what
you say.

Now according to my promise, I consider the Doctor's first Argument, which
will fairly introduce the Opponency.


Anti-P. Arg. 5. Christ has no where required any of his Ministers to Baptize
Infants, therefore the Baptism of Infants, is not according to his Commission.


P. Bapt. I assert, Christ has required his Ministers to Baptize the Infants
of professed Christians. And now taking the Opponency, I Argue, from Mat. 28.
19, 20. Teach all Nations, Baptizing, etc.

Arg. 1. Those of Nations ought to be Baptized, that are not expressly or
consequentially excluded by the word of God; therefore the Infants of
Professing Christians ought to be Baptized. You have not been able hitherto to
prove them Excluded; therefore my Argument stands good against you.


Anti-P. What is not expressly commanded in an Institution, is consequentially
forbidden.


P. Bapt. 1. Then the Baptism of Adult Persons descending from Christians, not
being expressly commanded, is consequentially forbidden.

2. I deny, That all things pertaining to an Ordinance, must be expressed in
the Institution for that Ordinance. The Institution for the Passover does not
express the Cup, which yet was piously used by Christ himself, Luke 22. 17.
because good Consequence did warrant it. Your selves acknowledge previous
Examination and stated Prayer necessary to the right Administration of Baptism,
and have recourse to good Consequence for your Warrant: Nay, Consequence it is
that does oblige you to Baptize an Adult Person; you do not count these
forbidden, because not expressed in the Institution, why then should you count
Infant Baptism forbidden, because not expressed, when we offer good Consequence
for it.


P. Bapt. Arg. 2. Some Infants are Members of the Gospel Church Visible,
therefore they ought to be Baptized.


Anti-P. All Members of the Gospel Church Visible, are made so by Baptism;
therefore, unless you will admit of Re-baptizing, they ought not to be Baptized.


P. Bapt. Baptism is the solemn investing Sign; the Infants of Believers, are
Church Members before Baptism, but by Baptism, they are publicly owned as
such. The Infants of the Jews, were Church Members before Circumcision: The
Israelites while in the Wilderness, tho Uncircumcised, are called the Church,
Acts 7. 38. Yet they must be recognized as such by Circumcision. A King is King
before he is Crowned, but at Coronation, he is (...) as such.


Anti-P. The Pharisees were Church-member^, yet (...) denies them Baptism;
therefore Church Membership gives no right to Baptism.


P. Bapt. These were Members of the Jewish Church* such, without credible
profession of Faith and Repentance* were not to be Baptized. But we speak of
Members of the Christian Church.


Anti-P. Infants are not Christian Church Members


P. Bapt. I prove they are, from Mat. 19. 14. Suffer little Children to come
unto me, for of such is the kingdom of Heaven. If by the Kingdom here, must be
meant the Christian Church Thus the (...) taken, Mat. 13. 47. 48* 49. comp.
with v 41* Mat. 11. 11. Mat. 25* 1. Mat. 5. 19.
Visible, then little Children must be part of it.


Anti-P. I deny that the Christian Church Visible, is there meant.


P. Bapt. If the Kingdom of Heaven here, signify neither the Sea our Impartial
Account, p. 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40.
Laws nor Promises of the Gospel, nor the Graces, nor Heaven's Glory, then it
must signify the Christian Church Visible. But it cannot signify either of the
former; therefore the last, i. e. The Christian Church Visible.


Anti-P. It signifies the Kingdom of Glory.


P. Bapt. Then it must either signify the Happiness, or Subjects of it. If the
Happiness, then the words must run thus; Of such little Children is the
happiness of Heaven, which is Nonsense. If the Subjects, then the words must
run thus; Of such little Children, are the Subjects of the Kingdom of Glory.
Which cannot be, because every Infant that goes to Heaven, immediately upon his
Expiration, his Infancy is dropped, and he enters perfect into Glory. [Here the
Anti-Pedo-Baptists See our Account, page 37, 38.
had not a word to answer for a considerable time, tho the whole Company did
earnestly wait for it: And they were provoked to give it.] At last, this Reply
was given.


Anti-P. This Text has not a word of Baptism in it.


P. Bapt. We before proved, That Members of the Christian Church have a right
to Baptism, and now have proved. That Believers Infants are such Members. The
Conclusion is easy; therefore such Infants ought to be Baptized.


Anti-P. When were any, who were Baptized in Infancy, Excommunicated upon their
Apostasy, tho so many prove Wicked?


P. Bapt. We are not discoursing how Baptized Persons ought to be Managed, but
who ought to be Baptized. Yet, to answer directly, As Infants grow up, their
Infant State cease, and so their Infant Church Membership with it: And if,
when they become Adult, by vicious Practice they renounce Adult
Church Membership, they are no more Church Members than Excommunicated Persons:
And such need no Excommunication.


Anti P. If Infants without Understanding, may be Disciples by the Ministry of
Men, the Beasts of the Field may.


P. Bapt. I have shown before, how Infants may be Disciples, and by the
Ministry of Men, in answering your first Argument. See our Account, p. 75, 76,
77.
Pray show me how Beasts may; Have Beasts the Seeds of Reason? Are they capable
to be Justified, Sanctified, Glorified; nay, to keep the Charge of the
Sanctuary? Were they fit to be brought to Christ for his Blessing? But I
proceed further to prove them Disciples.

Argum. 3. The Infants of Believers, are called Disciples, Acts 15. 10.
Therefore they ought to be Baptized. Why tempt ye God to put a yoke upon the
necks of the Disciples, etc. The Yoke was Circumcision: Upon Infants as well as
others, according The Greek word (...), may well be rendered Custom.
to Moses his Law v. 5. and Custom v. 1. *would they have put this Yoke;
therefore Infants, as well as others, are here called Disciples.


Anti-ped. Infants cannot be meant, because those that* are here called
Disciples, are called Brethren, and such as are Taught.


P. Bapt. And if Infants are Church Members, (as I have proved) they are
Brethren, and may be taught in their Parents. But (2.) I deny, that all who are
here called Disciples, are called Brethren v. 1. or are said to be Taught.
Those on whom the Yoke was like to be put, according to Moses his Law, v. 5.
and Custom, v. 1. are here called Disciples. Now, you know Moses's Law and
Custom, did require the Circumcising of Infants. Nay, this Custom, especially
of Circumcising Infants, is expressly contended for by Judaizing Christians,
Acts 21. 21. The word for Custom, is the same with that Acts 15. 1.


Anti-P. But how do you know any Infants were among these?


P. Bapt. From v. 22, 23. which tell us, That the Christians of Antioch, Syria,
and Cilicia, (and therefore a great number who must have Infants) were
concerned in this matter.


Anti-P. But v. 9. They are said, to have their Hearts purified by Faith.


P. Bapt. And cannot God give Infants the Seed of Faith, and purify their
Hearts by so doing? May he not purge out old Principles by putting in new? (2.)
But those v. 9. are the Gentiles of Caesarea, not those at Antioch, and
therefore not the Disciples here meant, as the Context will show.


Anti-P. But Circumcision cannot be the Yoke here intended, because Infants did
bear Circumcision; but this neither they, nor their Fathers, were able to bear.


P. Bapt. This Expression signifies no more, than that it was a very burdensome
Yoke. Thus Prove. 30. 21. For three things the Earth is disquieted, and for
four, which it cannot bear; and yet you may see in the Context, That they are
such as the Earth has born to this day; but it is burdened with them. So Prove.
18. 14.


Anti-P. But Circumcision binds to keep the whole Law, therefore the whole Law
is here intended.


Pedo-Bapt. Then I am sure Circumcision, one of the prime and most painful
parts of the Law, and the only Part particularly mentioned* must be intended,
and therefore Infants must be some of those Disciples on whom they would impose
this Yoke.


QUESTION II. Whether, according to our Lord's Commission, Baptism ought to be
administered by Dipping, Plunging, Overwhelming only, and not otherwise?
Anti-P. I Affirm and offer this Argument: Christ has appointed it so to be
Administered only: Therefore it must. I prove this, first, from the
signification of the word Baptize. Lexicographers, say, it signifies to Dip.


P. Bapt. They say, it signifies also to Wash; and this is the usual Scripture
Sense of the word: And Scripture is its own best Expositor. Now, to say, it
signifies to Dip in those Texts where the Ordinance is mentioned, and which are
especially the Subject of our present Controversy, is but barely to Assert, and
not to Prove the thing in Question. Therefore let us first go to those Places
where the Word is mentioned, and the Ordinance not intended, and consider other
Texts afterward.


Anti-P. I say, the Scripture Sense of the word is to Dip.


P. Bapt. I have Seven Places at hand wherein the word is used, and the
Ordinance not meant; in none of which is Dipping necessarily included. (1.).
Mark 7. 4. Except they Wash, (Greek, be Baptized) they eat not. Were they dipped
over Head and Ears when they did Eat? No, they were zealous for the Traditions
and Customs of their Elders, and therefore did imitate their two Great
Prophets, Elijah, and Elisha. See 2 Kings 3. 11. It was Elisha's Custom, to
pour water on the Hands of Elijah. Therefore, in all probability, they had
Water poured on their Hands. And why may not a Person be Baptized with pouring
Water on his Face, as well as with pouring Water on his Hands? (2.) In the same
Verse, they hold the Washing ( Greek, Baptisms) -- of Tables, or Beds, (...).
Did they plunge their Tables or Beds into Water? (3.) v. 8. Washing ( Greek,
Baptisms) of Cups, i. e. from Ceremonial Pollution. Burial is not the thing
here intended, but Washing. And Washing the Hands was commonly used to cleanse
from Ceremonial Pollution: Therefore Pilate, in compliance with the Jews
Custom, washes his Hands, when he would declare himself pure from the Blood of
Christ. (4.) Luke 11. 38. The Pharisee wondered that Christ had not first
Washed: Greek, (...), was not first Baptized. Did he wonder, that Christ was
not plunged over Head and Ears before Dinner? The Greek word, to a Letter, is
the same with that Mark 1. 9. And pray, why may it not signify applying a
little Water, in Mark 1. 9. as well as in Luke 11. 38? (5.) Heb. 9. 10. Diverse
Washings: ( Greek, Baptisms.) Such as those, Exodus 30. 19, 20, 21.

Aaron and his Sons are bid to Wash; i. e. Their Hands and Feet. Number. 19. from
the 8th to the 19th. The word in the Original, signifies purely to Wash, yet
the Apostle calls these Baptisms. If washing the Hands or Feet be Baptism, why
may not washing* the Head? (6.) Baptized in the Cloud, and in the Sea, 1 Cor.
10. 2. Not Dipped, be sure, for they went through the Sea as on dry Ground. Is
any dipped in the Sea, when he has dry Land under him, and only the droppings
of the Rain and Sea* upon him. I must take* liberty to dissent from the
Reverend Author of the English Annotations, in this Matter; I never heard, that
(...), much less (...), did signify plunging under Water, unless the Water were
applied, not by drops, but in a great quantity. (7.) Acts 1. 5. I will Baptize
you with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire. Is it proper to say, I will Dip you
with the Holy Ghost and with Fire?


Anti-P. But Acts 2. beginning. The Holy Ghost came upon them, and there came a
sound from Heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and filled the house, etc. So
that they were as in a Fish Pond, (says Causabon) overwhelmed with the Holy
Ghost.


P. Bapt. But it was the Sound that filled the House: The resemblance of the
Holy Ghost, were the cloven Tongues of Fire, and certainly they could not be
overwhelmed with these. And may not a Man be Baptized with Water, when poured
on him, as well as with Fire, when descending only in Cloven-Tongues upon him.
Here are seven Places, (and more might be added*) where the word is used, and
not one of them does necessarily include Dipping.


Anti-P. But it signifies to Dip, in Scripture: He that dippeth with me in the
dish, Mat. 26. 23.


P. Bapt. The word there is (...), not (...): And pray remember, The Holy Ghost
never expresses the Ordinance by the word Bapto, but always by Baptizo.


Anti-P. But in those Places where the Ordinance is mentioned, the word must
signify to Dip; as Mark 1. 9. Christ was Baptized of John in Jordan, (...),
into Jordan. He could not be washed into Jordan; therefore he must be Dipped.
See various places, where (...) signifies into, 1 Timothy 1. 15. John 3. 17. Luke
4. 16.


P. Bapt. I showed before, That the Greek word there for Baptized, to a Letter,
signifies in Luke 11. 38. Washing, and that when applied to the Hands only. And
now, whereas you produce three Places, where (...) signifies into, I can
produce more than three times three, where it signifies in. See Mat. 2. 23.
Mat. 10. 41. Mark 3* 16. Luke 11. 7. Mark 5. 34. etc. Therefore the words may*
be fairly rendered, He was Washed of John in Jordan.


Anti-P. But compare with this, Mat. 3. 16. Christ, when he was Baptized, went
up out of the Water; therefore he must be Dipped.


P. Bapt. The Greek Preposition for Out of, (...), may be rendered From: See
Mat. 24. 31. Luke 1. 78. Mat. 12. 42. And those words, Mat. 3. 16. may be
rendered, Christ went up from the Water.

Now, I offer a fair Paraphrase of these Texts, consistent with our way. John
Preached in the Wilderness near Jordan; Jerusalem and all Judea came to him,
and Christ among others. The Multitude being so great, he goes to Jordan (as he
did another time to Enon) takes a step into the Water; those that are Baptized,
do the like, (it being Refreshing rather than Afflicting in that hot Country.)
and there John does Baptize or Wash them, by pouring Water on them, and then
they go up out of or from the Water, which always runs in a lower Place.

This is much more probable, than that John or the Apostles, Acts 2. should Dip
(according to your way) Hundreds, it may be Thousands in a day: That Person had
need have Sinews of Brass, that could (according to your Custom) bear the
weight of, lay down, and raise up so many in so little time: Besides his Limbs
and Body must be soundly soaked. I am sure the words will well bear our Sense.
And Probability is much stronger on our side, than yours.


Anti-P. But the Eunuch is a clear Instance for us, Acts 8. 38, 39. They came
to a certain Water, went both down into, and came up out of the Water.


P. Bapt. This Instance does you not the least Service. The Greek Prepositions
for to, into, out of, may be rendered fairly* By, To, From. And without the
least Violence, the Text may be thus Translated. [They came by a certain Water,
and went both down to the Water, and came up from the Water.


Anti-P. But could not Water be brought to them in the Chariot, if a little
were sufficient?


P. Bapt. Do you think there was convenient room in the Chariot to place See
our Account, p. 81.
themselves in a praying Posture, or that they were so Irreligious, as not to
Pray at all?


Anti-P. But Baptism does represent a Burial, Romans 6. 4. Col. 2. 12. Buried
with him in Baptism, etc. Therefore it must be administered by Dipping.


P. Bapt. It is one thing to be Buried with Christ in Baptism, and another for
Baptism to represent a Burial. A Person is obliged in Baptism, to die and be
buried with Christ, to Sin and See our Account, p. 78, 79.
the World; but it is not necessary that Baptism should represent these. In the
Lord's- Supper we are obliged to this Burial; Does it therefore follow, that
the Lord's- Supper must represent a Burial? (2.) But supposing, (not granting)
that Baptism must represent a Burial, pouring Water on the Face, the most
remarkable part of the Body, does represent a Person's being under Water, and
raising him up; represents the Resurrection.


Anti-P. This is like burying with a Turf on the Head.


P. Bapt. What then? A Person may be Buried as well with a Turf on the Head, as
1 Cor. 5. 8. Cannot. 5. 1.
Feast abundantly at the Lord's- Supper, with a bit of Bread, and a sup of
Wine; a small quantity of the Element is sufficient for its Sacramental use.


Anti-P. But let us keep strictly to the significancy of a Burial.


P. Bapt. Then I am sure, the Baptized Person must not go into the Water to his
Wast. Do dead Men walk into the Grave, half bury themselves, and wait for the
Sexton to bury their Head and Shoulders?


Anti-P. But the whole Body is under Water, when a Person is Baptized in our
way.


P. Bapt. But the Administrator dips but one half. And, Does he speak Truth,
when he tells the World, that Baptism is dipping the whole Body under Water,
and that he does, according to his sense of the Word, Baptize, i. e. dip the
whole Body under Water, when he dips but one half? And dare he to affix the
Name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to an Untruth? Do you think, John the
Baptist and the Apostles, did so? And if not, then you have not the least
Precept or Example, for your Practice. Is our way attended with this
Inconvenience?

But further, Baptism is designed to signify the pouring out of Christ's Blood,
Spirit, and Blessing; the application of this Blood, which is expressed by
Sprinkling Isa. 44. 3. Heb. 12. 24. 1 Pet. 1. 2.
to signify and excite to a submissive frame of Spirit. Is your way so well
adapted to all these ends? Can any be thrust into the Spirit or Blessing of
Christ, or are Persons like to be so Composed (supposing them Adult) when
striving for Life, especially in Frost and Snow, as when a little water only is
poured on them?


Anti-P. But many Learned Paedo-Baptists acknowledge, that our way is most
agreeable to Scripture.


P. Bapt. 1. Will you stand by the Authority of these Men in other Matters? If
not* why would you have us in this? (2.) Do any of these say, that to Wash, is
not the New Testament sense of the Word? Or, Do they prove us in the Wrong? We
take not Men's Opinions upon Trust, but Trial. (3.) Who of those Authors have
not adhered to that, Mat. 12. 7. I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice, to
justify their Baptizing with a little Water in these cold Countries. (4.) Will
not the Opinion and Practice of your Brethren in Holland, argue as strongly
against you, as the Opinion of these Men, had their Practice been Dipping also,
do against us. (5.) Will not the Opinion and Practice of so many Thousand Men,
great for Learning and Piety, at this day, argue more strongly for us, than
these Men's Opinion only, without their Practice, do against us.


Anti-P. But all you can pretend to for your Way, is Probability; it may be so,
and it may not.


P. Bapt. We acknowledge, The New Testament has not fixed the quantity of
Water, and therefore we must have recourse to a Moral Precept, Mat. 12. 7. I
will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice: And this carries us beyond Probability,
even to a Certainty; which is this; That we must so Administer it as shall
consist with the safety of the Subject. Christ, v. 2, 3. justifies David's
eating the Shewbread, from these words, tho a positive Ritual Law were therein
broken. Then certainly Christ will justify the Practice of applying a little
Water in these cold Countries, where Life might be endangered by Dipping,
especially when neither Gospel Precept, nor Example, does in the least oppose
us.

Nay, and knowing that Christ has appointed for the strongest Christians, a
Sacrament as pleasant as Eating and Drinking, we cannot imagine, that he would
appoint one so very sharp, as Plunging in Frost and Snow, for the Weakest.


I proceed to offer an Argument or two more.
P. Bapt. I Argue from 1 Cor. 7. 14. Else were Children unclean, but now are
they holy.

Arg. The Infants of Believers, are Holy, therefore they have a right to
Baptism.


Anti-P. Legitimacy is there meant by Holiness, and therefore this does not
entitle them to Baptism.


P. Bap. Legitimacy cannot descend from Believers, as Believers, but from
Married Persons, as such, whether they believe or no. But this Holiness
descends from Believers, as Believers, and therefore it cannot be Legitimacy.
(2.) I deny that ever the word Holy is so used in all the New Testament, tho we
have it many hundred times, and therefore you force this Sense upon it to serve
a Turn. (3.) If Legitimacy were meant, then the Apostle would speak false. The
Words would run thus [If the unbelieving Wife be not Sanctified by the
believing Husband, your Children would be Bastards.] No, their being Husband
and Wife, would secure their Children from Bastardy: Nay, and then all the
Idolaters and Murderers in the World, if Legitimate, would be Holy.


Anti-P. But Holiness is not a ground of Baptism, if it were, then Horses Bells
must be Baptized, etc. Zech. 12. 20.


P. Bapt. When you can show, that Bells were once Church Members, that they
have Immortal Souls, capable of Pardon, through the Blood and Merits of Christ,
of going to Heaven, etc. then we will baptize Bells too.


Anti-P. But Children are Pure, or Holy, as all things else, that a Believer
has, are pure, i. e. for Enjoyment. To the Pure all things are Pure.


P. Bapt. Then I am sure Legitimacy is not here meant, because, if a Person
that has a Bastard, be Converted and he truly Penitent, that Bastard is also
Sanctified to his Enjoyment, because all things are. But you ought to show,
that Pure and Holy are the same; Holy does imply a dedication to God. But Meat,
which the Apostle there speaks of, might be clean, as many Creatures under the
Law, which yet were not dedicated to God.

In short, the word Holy is taken, as commonly it is in other Places, and it
includes a visible separation for God, and Relation to him. Thus the Body of
Israel Deuteronomy. 7. 6.
and afterward of a Gospel Church, are called Holy 1 Cor. 3. 17.
in many Places.

Arg. 2. From Acts 2. 39. The Promise is to you, and to your Children, etc.
This Promise the Infants of Penitent Persons have a right to; therefore they
have a right to Baptism; v. 38. Be Baptized, etc.


Anti-P. The Context does exclude Infants from the Promise, and therefore from
Baptism. The Promise is confined to those that the Lord shall Call.


P. Bapt. If 'twere so, then Peter just upon receiving extraordinary Wisdom
from Heaven, would speak Impertinently: Whereas, he says, The Promise is to you
and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even to as many as the Lord
our God shall call: He might have left out their Children, and they would
easily have understood, that their Children if once called, should be
comprehended in those words, As many as the Lord shall call. And farther,
supposing your Sense to be true, this Paraphrase may justly be put on the
Words: [You grown Jews, and ye Gentiles, when Called, have a right to
Church-Privileges; but your poor Infants, who for many hundred Years past have
had the same, are now through the gracious efficacy of Christ's Death, stripped
of it, tho they (poor Hearts!) never did the least to forfeit it.] Do you think
this would have been a good Plaster for their wounded Hearts? And can we
imagine, that neither these, nor any tender Parents of all the Jewish Converts,
would have put in the least Plea to God or Man on the behalf of their poor
abject Infants; or if they had, that the Scripture would have quite buried it
in Silence, when we have their Contests about Circumcising Infants, Recorded?


Anti-P. But Children are not impertinently mentioned, for the Jews had brought
the guilt of Christ's Blood upon their Children as well as themselves; His
Blood be on us and our Children. He drops a word of Comfort to them, with
relation to these Children.


P. Bapt. Yes, all these Children, and therefore their poor Infants, on whom
they had brought the Curse, as well as an those of riper Years. Say they, His
blood be upon our children, whom we have a right in, and are concerned for.
This they spoke to spit their Venom against Christ, And the Apostle charge
these Jews with it, v. 23. 36. Now, the Apostle makes the Plaster as broad as
the Wound, and assures them, That upon their Repentance, the Promise, and
therefore Church-Privileges would belong to their Children, with themselves,
even all on whom they brought the Curse.

Supposing the Church Membership of our Infants, to be the main thing opposed
by you, I offer this Argument to prove it.

Arg. 3. The Infants of converted Jews were not cast out of God's Church;
therefore the Infants of converted Gentiles, are not kept out. I prove that God
did not cast out the former, therefore neither does he keep out the latter.

Arg. 1. God did not cast out those Infants in Judgment to them, nor in Mercy;
therefore not at all. Not in Judgment: For, how is it consistent with Infinite
Grace to inflict so great a Judgment, as deprivation of Churchmembership on
those who never did the least to Forfeit it themselves, and whose Parents are
God's peculiar Favorites? Nor yet in Mercy to those Infants; for how could he
in Mercy deprive them of so great a Blessing The great advantages of Infant
Church Membership, see in our Account, p. 8.
except he gave them a greater in its room? But where is that greater Blessing
vouchsafed to Infants?

2. Not one Privilege of the Covenant of Grace, was ever taken away by the
death of Christ, in whom all the Promises were, Yea and Amen. Therefore the
Church Membership of Jewish Infants, was not taken away by the Death of Christ:
And if not by his Death then not at all.

I prove, That Church Membership is a Privilege of the Covenant of Grace. It
must be of the Covenant of Grace, or of Works; but it cannot be of Works;
therefore it must be of Grace. No other Covenant but that of Grace, has set up
a Church in the World, since the Fall of Man, or admitted any into it.


Anti-P. Have all Church Members then a right to the Covenant of Grace?


P. Bapt. They have a Visible right to it. We ought so in Charity to judge,
while they are rightful Members?

None could justly Exclude those Jewish Infants that were regularly Circumcised
from a visible Right, to the Promises of the Covenant of Grace: Because
Circumcision made them Debtors to the whole Ceremonial Law, Gal. 5. 3. And God
never yet divided the Promises from the Precepts of that Law, and these
together made up the Covenant of Grace. Those who are visibly under the
preceptive part of this Covenant, have visibly a right to the promissive part
of it. But the Jewish Infants were to be managed by it, and (as they grew up)
obedient to it, and so were under the preceptive part of it. Therefore, etc.
Now, if no part of the Covenant of Grace, and so neither this Privilege, which
the Infants of the Jewish Converts had, were ever taken away, then such
Converts were never cast out of Gods's Church, upon Christ his Death, or their
Parents Believing. And from hence We may conclude*

2. That the Infants of Gentile Converts, are not kept out: Because Jews and
Gentiles have the same Privileges in Christ. This, I suppose, no
Anti-Paedo-Baptist will deny* Col. 3. 11.

Other Arguments might be offered, as the Reader may observe in the Abridgment
of Mr. Chandler's Sermons prefixed to our Impartial Account. But a design of
Brevity forbids here to add them.


Anti-P* But after all, the best Arguments you can offer for Infant Baptism,
are but Consequential. Let us have somewhat Express.


P. Bapt. Show me where an Adult Person is expressly Commanded to be Baptized.


Anti-P. Adult Persons making a credible profession of Faith, are Disciples of
Christ; therefore brought to be Ba^^^zed.


P. Bapt. And what is this but Consequence? Such a one is a Disciple,
therefore, by consequence, he ought to be Baptized. This Argument is convincing.

I add, a Believer's Infant is, in a Scripture sense, Holy; a Church Member
has a visible right to that Promise, Acts 2. 39. a Disciple, therefore he
ought to be Baptized. Is not this Arguement as convincing as the other?

Pray, how would you clear up your Right to future Happiness?


Anti-P. I would endeavor to prove myself a Believer an Holy Person. And
finding Eternal Life made over to such, and not finding upon the most strict
enquiry, one word in all the Book of God, to exclude such from it, I should
conclude my right to future Happiness, unquestionable.


P. Bapt. Well then, I have proved the Infants of Believers, Holy Persons,
Church Members, Disciples, and this in a Scripture sense; such I have proved
entitled to Baptism. And not finding upon the most strict enquiry, one word in
all the Book of God, to exclude them from it, I conclude their right to Baptism
unquestionable.

Arguments for the Baptism of an Unbaptized Professing Christian, nay, for the
true Christian's Salvation, are Consequential, and yet most Convincing. Why
then should Arguments for the baptism of Believers Infants be slighted, because
Consequential, when they are so many, and so clear from Scripture?


POSTSCRIPT.
Reader,
TO Prevent unjust Reflections, our design in this Dialogue, was not strictly
to confine our selves to the words of the Disputation, but to present thee with
the Strength thereof; therefore something then omitted on both sides, are here
Inserted, others more intelligibly expressed; and we think nothing of Weight
then delivered, is here Concealed. And whereas other Arguments here totally
passed by, might be urged to good Purpose; particularly from Romans 11. (some
Hints of which, are given in our Impartial Account, Page 4. Second Edit.) We
hope, necessary confinement to Brevity, will be a sufficient Excuse to the
Ingenious.

BOOKS Printed for Abr. Chandler.
AN Impartial Account of the Portsmouth Disputation; with some Just Reflections
on Dr. Russel's pretended Narrative. By Samuel Chandler, William Leigh, and
Benjamin Robinson. With an Abridgment of those Discourses that were the
Innocent occasion of that Disputation; and an Healing Preface to the Sober
Anabaptists: The Second Edition; with a Postscript. Price 1 s.

The Young Scholar's Guide through the English to the Lattin or Writing-School:
Wherein the Nature and Use of Vowels, Consonants, Diphthongs, etc. are
demonstrated by plain Tables; and the Rules for Dividing long Words into
Syllables, made useful to Children, by suitable Examples to each Rule; by which,
a Child, that has learned his Letters, may be speedily taught to Read English
Exactly, etc. With some useful Observations in Orthography. Price Stitched, 3 d.

Sacramental Discourses on several Texts, before and after the Lord's Supper.
By Mr. John Shower.

Of the Duty of Grace: Or a Discourse concerning the Possibility and fear of
its being past before Death: Showing the groundless Doubts and mistaken
Apprehensions of some, as to their being finally Forsaken and Left of God: With
the dangerous Symptoms and Approaches of others to such a sad State: In Four
Sermons; from Psalm 81. 11, 12. By Mr. John Shower.


