THE Country's Concurrence WITH THE London United Ministers In their late HEADS
of AGREEMENT: SHOWING The Nature and Advantages of a General Union among
PROTESTANTS.

In Two Discourses, Delivered before an Assembly of Ministers in the County of
Southampton.

By SAMVEL CHANDLER, Author of The Excellency of the Christian Religion.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultry, and John
Salusbury at the Rising-Sun over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, 1691.

TO THE READER.
THE late happy Union between Two prevailing Parties among us, is a fit Subject
of Joy and Thankfulness: That Differences, which have been managed with too
much heat for so many Years, should now be so happily composed, and the
Contending Parties should mutually condescend and concur together in so fair an
Agreement, is a Blessing we have reason gratefully to acknowledge; that the
Country should so readily and unanimously agree with their Brethren in the City
on the same Terms, and throughout the whole Nation there should be such a
willing consent to lay aside those distinguishing Names and Terms which have
hitherto so miserably divided us: These things afford sufficient matter for
praise, to that God who rules the Hearts of Men, and stills the ragings of the
People. I have long waited that some Abler Pen should publicly express the
Countries Sense of this great Mercy; I said, Days should speak, and Multitude
of Years should teach Wisdom: But there is a Spirit in Man, and the inspiration
of the Almighty gives them understanding, Job 32. 7, 8. Being invited by my
Brethren to Preach before them on this occasion, I composed the following
Meditations, and have now made them public for more general use. I hope the
honesty of the Intention will atone for the weakness and unskilfulness of the
Manager. I am willing to believe that Irenicums will now be more acceptable
than they have hitherto been in this wrangling, divided Age, and the Sons of
Peace will be no longer liable to Reproach and Scorn. O how happy would it be
if this Union were more extensive, and an end were put to that Ceremonious War
that has infested our Borders ever since the Reformation! God seems by his
Providence to make way for such a glorious work; he has not long since (by
putting us in mind of our common danger,) inclined us to be more favorable one
toward another: He has by surprising Providence exalted to the Throne a
Prince of known Piety and Moderation, who has placed such in the Episcopal
Chairs as are Men Famous for their healing truly Christian Spirits; happy
endeavors have been used for stopping that inundation of Wickedness and
Profaneness, which has so woefully overrun our Land. All these are happy
preparations for a general Union, and blessed presages, that God has yet
Designs of Mercy toward us, and will not suffer our Enemies to prevail against
us. Let us all therefore help on so good a work by our Hearty Prayers, Holy
Lives, and endeared Love: Let us maintain an unity in Love and Affection,
though we arrive not at Uniformity in Rituals, and the Ceremonial parts of
Religion. In a word, to conclude all with the Expressions of excellent Bishop
Hall, Let us be at Peace with our selves, and at War with none but Hell and
Rome.

That these Discourses may be some way useful for the advancement of Love and
Peace, is the Hearty Earnest Prayer of a Lover of Peace and Truth,

Samuel Chandler.

1 These. 5. 13. And be at Peace among your selves.
NOtwithstanding the frequent commands of our Lord to Love and Unity, and the
earnest Calls and Persuasions of all his Apostles; yet how apt we are to forget
and overlook them all, our unpeaceable Strifes and censorious uncharitable
Contentions, are too sad a Witness. Though our God be the God of Love, and our
Savior the Prince of Peace, and Love be the last Legacy and earnest Request of
our dying Redeemer; yet he that beholds the bitter malice and envy, wrath and
unchristian Jars of the Professors of the same Faith, and Followers of the same
Blessed Jesus, must needs think it his great Duty to attempt the reviving that
Love which is very much decayed, and that Charity which has almost forsaken
the Earth: When we see the Blood, and feel the Smart, and hear the Noises of
Professed Christians, armed with Malice and Spite against each other, it is the
duty of every Messenger of Peace to sound a Retreat from this unnatural War,
and persuade the furious Combatants to cease those Strifes, and forbear those
hot Contentions which do so much dishonor God, disparage Religion, grieve our
Friends, and make such ridiculous sport for our Enemies. That therefore I may
endeavor to allay these unnatural heats and disorders, I have chosen the Words
read; and if St. Paul had any reason in those early Ages of Christianity, (when
Love most flourished, and Christians were most peacefully united together,) to
call upon them to be at Peace among themselves; surely we have now far greater
occasion to do so, since Christianity is broken into so many odious fractions
and by-names, and every little difference is apt to provoke our Anger, and
cause our Passions to boil up to too excessive heights. God has indeed highly
favored us by his Providence, by now calming our Spirits, removing our
Jealousies and Mis-understandings one of another, and reconciling those
Differences which have unhappily divided us many Years: So that now we can
strengthen one anohers Hands in the work of our Lord, and glory in the title of
United Brethren: We are now come together solemnly to testify our Thankfulness
to God for this happy Union, which many of us have long sighed, and prayed, and
waited, and labored for in vain. Suffer me therefore to show you the nature
and excellencies of Peace, and direct my self and you to those Gospel methods
whereby our Happiness may be continued and promoted; Be at Peace among your
selves.

For the connection of these Words, we need look back no further than ver. 12.
where the Apostle having persuaded the Thessalonians to a due respect to their
Ministers and Spiritual Guides for their Works sake, exhorts them here as a
means to this, to be at Peace among themselves; as if he should have said,
unpeaceable disorders will grieve your Ministers hearts, detract from that just
esteem, which is due to their Office, and render their labors often useless
and unsuccessful; therefore be at Peace among your selves.

The Words are plain and easy in themselves, and need rather an hearty
Meditation, and diligent improvement, than any laborious Explication.

The Observation I shall raise from the Words is this,

That it is the duty and should be the practice of Christian Churches to be at
Peace among themselves.

In handling whereof, I shall use this Method.

1. Explain the nature of Peace. 2. Show the Advantages of Peace in Christian
Churches. 3. Add some Directions for the better maintaining and promoting it.
1. The nature of Peace.

1. Peace implies a command over irregular Passions; ungovernable Lusts are the
great Makebates and Dividers; James 4. 1.
he that has not attained a Government over his Passions, is unprepared for
Peace. Selfishness and Pride, Covetousness and Ambition, Envy and Malice and
Revenge are the bitter Fruits that grow upon the stock of our Ill Natures, and
are the sad occasion of all the disturbances in Church and State, and have
rendered Christendom a Field of Blood. 'Till these Lusts are therefore subdued,
and we have gained a victory within, outward Peace is impossible; he that
cannot rule his own Spirit, will never long live at Peace with others. An Angry
Man will stir up Strife, Prove. 29. 22. Be ye therefore angry and Sin not, Ephesians.
4. 26. Let not your Anger boil up to any sinful Excesses.

2. Peace implies hearty Love; it is very hard and difficult long to maintain
Peace with those we do not heartily love, and utterly impossible to keep it up
with those we hate; Peace without Love is is no better than politic
Dissembling, and Peace with Hatred an insidious cover of Enmity. Love is the
only sure and lasting Bond of Peace, and Hatred the Fountain of Discord and
Violence: If we would therefore forbear and forgive one another, and let the
Peace of God rule in our Hearts, we must above all things put on Charity as a
Rich Robe, Col. 3. 12, 13, 14.
our best Ornament, John 13. 36.
and the proper Livery of Christians. This is indeed the distinguishing badg of
Christ's true Disciples, whereas the Disciples of the Pharisees were known by
the broadness of their Phylacteries, and enlarging the Borders of their
Garments; and of John Baptist's, by their Leanness, contracted by Austerities,
much Fasting and Abstinence: Christ would have ^ known by their undissembled
Love, unfeigned Kindness, and obliging Condescensions for each others good.

3. Peace implies a diligent performance of all Offices of Justice and
Humanity; we must not love in word and Tongue only, but in deed and in truth, 1
John 3. 18. Justice is the Guardian, and Humanity the Nurse of Peace; the only
Sovereign Remedy to prevent Disorders, and put an end to Strife. Punctual
observance of Contracts, truth in our Words, and sincerity in our Promises;
injuring none in their Estates by fraudulent Encroachments, or in their good
Names by slanderous Reports, is a great conserver of Peace, and keeps off those
Contentions which otherwise will unavoidably arise. A tender Compassion to
those in Want, and hearty readiness to advice and assist, relieve and comfort
one another according to our particular Exigencies and Wants, Gal. 6. 10.
is also very necessary in order to the advancing Peace among Brethren. Heb.
13. 15.


4. Peace implies courtesy and respectfulness; this is not only an argument of
a generous Education and good Reading, but also a great ornament of Religion,
and required of every Christian: 1 Pet. 3. 8.
Christ indeed came into the World to sweeten our Passions, calm our Natures,
abate the sourness, and polish the roughness of our Humors. A sour Look,
sullen Spirit, and scornful Carriage, is very unbecoming a Christian, is the
indication of a Mind averse from Peace, and provokes disdain in others: But on
the contrary, respectful Gestures, courteous Language, civil Salutations, and
an affable Behavior, are accompanied with such winning Charms as few can
resist: And when a Man's ways thus please the Lord, they will please men too,
and our very Enemies will be at Peace with us, Prove. 16. 7.

5. Peace implies candid and favorable Opinions; rash Censures, uncharitable
Surmises, severe Reprehensions, and unkind Misconstruction of our Neighbors
Actions, tend mightily to provoke Wrath, and stir up Strife: whereas equity in
our Censures, mildness in our Reproofs, putting the best Construction upon, and
making the most favorable interpretation of our Neighbors Carriage and
Behavior, is the surest way to conciliate Peace and promote it. Christianity
indeed teaches us to be very severe in observing our own Sins, but very
favorable in reflecting on the Miscarriages of our Neighbors. Let others
usurp God's Prerogative that they may do the Devils Work, turn Searchers of
Hearts, that they may become Accusers of the Brethren. The true Christian has
so much to do at Home, that he has very little leisure to look abroad; is so
employed in covering his own Deformities, that he has not time to gaze on the
nakedness of others; hides his Neighbors Faults with the Mantle of Love, and
makes all possible allowances that the nature of the action will bear; will not
conclude a Sin from an inevident sign, as Eli from Hannah's Fervency concluded
her Drunkenness. If our Neighbor be overtaken with a Fault, the Peaceable
Christian will not from one particular act conclude an Habit, nor call that a
Mortal Plague, which may be only one of the Spots of God's Children: Mat. 7. 1.
Nor will he pre-judge a Scandalous Sinners future State, Romans 14. 4.
but pity and pray for him, James 3. 1.
and seek to win him to Repentance.

6. Peace implies restraint of Pragmaticalness; if we would be quiet and at
Peace, we must mind our own Business, 1 These. 4. 11. Those that impertinently
meddle with things beyond their Sphere of Activity, are disorderly Walkers, 2
These. 3. 11. out of their proper rank and station, are like him that takes a
Dog by the Ears, Prove. 26. 17. may only irritate the anger of others, and cause
them to turn upon them and bite them. He is therefore no Peaceable Minded Man,
that plays the Bishop in another Diocese, 1 Pet. 4. 15.

2 General.

The advantages of Peace in Christian Churches.

1. This renders the Church most like to God; he is the God of Peace, the
Father of Mercies, and not only full of Love, but love it self, 1 John 4. 16.
He is all that is good in the most eminent degree, but he is love in a more
especial and peculiar manner; though all his Attributes be infinite, yet his
Love and Goodness is peculiarly Sovereign. The best description we can frame of
him in our Minds, or whereby we can represent him to others, is, that he is
Omnipotent, Alwise, Immutable Goodness; under the old Testament, a dispensation
of Terror, when the Riches of Divine Love were not displayed, yet even then he
accounts his Goodness as his greatest Glory, and the most charming Beauty of
his Nature. Exodus 34. 6, 7.
And now what better way is there for his Church to be like him, Ephesians. 5. 1. 2.
than to be at Peace and abound in all mutual Offices of Kindness and Love?

2. Peace is the Churches greatest Beauty and Ornament; Prove. 20. 3.
'twas this commended Christianity of old; Psalm. 133. 1.
hence Christian were called not Christiani, but Chrestiani, from a Greek Word
signifying their benignity and sweetness of Disposition: and Se^ how the
Christians love one another was a common Proverb in the Mouths of Heathens
themselves What can be more glorious than to behold the most harmoniou^ Union
and Communion of Saint^ in the pleasant ways of true Wisdom and Goodness! Rage
and Fury may be the excellencies o^ Beasts, but Peace and Love is the ornament
of Men. How calm is the Mind, how serene the Countenance, how cheerful the
Discourse, how sweet the Sleep, and how full of Content is the whole Life of
the Peaceable Minded Man! How lovely a melody in the Ears of God and Men, does
an Assembly of such Christians make when united together in acts of Religious
Worship! How much more pleasant are the smooth and even ways of Peace, than the
rugged Paths of Discord and Contention! Is it not much more delightful to
behold the Heavens smiling upon us with a serene and cheerful Countenance, than
frowning with Clouds, or big with Storms and Thunder? Is it not much more sweet
to sail in a quiet and calm Sea, than to be tossed about with a Tempest, and be
continually in fear of every rolling unruly Wave; to hear Harmonious Sounds,
than grating Janglings; and to dwell in a well, Governed City, than in a wild
and savage Wilderness? Peace is the way to the truest Pleasure, and indeed is
itself the greatest Felicity: Hence the Angels in their holy Anthem, when they
wished the greatest Happiness to Men, knew not how better to express their
Sense, than by saying, On Earth Peace, Good Will to Men, Luke 2. 14.

3. Peace is the Churches strength; Peace is the sinew of Society, as Money is
of War; the Cement that holds the parts together, and distinguishes the
Congresses of Men from Herds of Beasts, or which is as bad, the tumultuous
Confusions of the Rabble. Christian Churches might be immortal, did they not
kill themselves by Divisions; the deepest Wounds have been given to
Christianity in the Houses of its pretended Friends, by Heresies and Schisms,
rending and tearing the unity of the Body. He must be a great Stranger in the
History of the Church, who knows not that it flourished while it walked in
love, and enjoyed Peace among its Children; but the adding to the Foundation
the Wood and Hay, and Stubble of their own Inventions, and dividing thereupon,
gave occasion to the rise of Turk and Pope, and all the dismal consequences
thereof. Divisions stopped the progress and cramped the growth of Christianity,
Mat. 12. 26.
and has so of Reformed Christianity to this day: Gal. 5. 15.
The most successful policy of our Enemies whereby they have done us the
greatest mischief of all, has been by fomenting, encouraging and cursedly
improving our intestine Feuds: We have foolishly put Weapons into their Hands,
or rather been destroying our selves, while they have looked on with Scorn and
Laughter. Were we but peacefully united among our selves, we should quickly
dishearten our Enemies, and laugh at all the attempts of Rome and France and
Hell for our ruin and Destruction. Peace would be a mighty Bulwark to defend
us, and would better prevent the Invasions of our Foes, than all our Wooden
Walls on the Sea, or Fortresses and Castles by Land.

4. Peace tends to the comfort of the Church; there can be no comfortable
communion of Saints, no bearing each others burdens, no communicating the
experiences of the workings of Gods Spirit in one another Souls, of the answer
of our several Prayers, and various methods of God's dealings with us in his
different ways of Discipline and Comfort, so long as we are at variance among
our selves. When Souls groan under the burden of Sin and Guilt, never was Drink
so welcome to the Thirsty Traveller, as the converse of truly Spiritual
Christians to restore such in the Spirit of Meekness, and speak Peace unto them
from the Scripture and their own Experience. But where Divisions are, this
cannot be had, or if it be in some measure, is often confined to an
inconsiderable Party, and each particular division wants the assistance of the
rest; so that the breach of their Catholic Love and Communion necessarily
makes a breach in their comfort, Phil. 2. 1, 2.
and hinders the mutual sympathizing assisting and comforting one another.

5. Peace tends to the increase of the Church; when our Lord repeated his
Petitions for Unity, he twice alleges one and the same reason, that the World
might know that God had sent him; John 17. 21, 23: As if the union and love of
his Followers were the strongest proof of the Divinity of their Master, and the
powerfullest persuasive to Jews and Heathens to acknowledge and receive him for
their Lord and Savior; as if his excellent Doctrine* admirable Precepts and
extraordinary Miracles would not do without it; and indeed though Instruction
be necessary, and People perish for want of Knowledge; yet Instruction without
Example will do little good, and no Example is more open to observation than
that of Peace and Love, and the want thereof in the Preachers of Truth makes
the best Doctrine in their Mouths suspected, hardens the Wicked in their sin,
and tempts many to Atheism: If you speak with disagreeing Tongues, Unbelievers
will say you are Mad, and sit down in the Seat of the Scorner, to allude to 1
Cor. 14. 23.

6. Peace is a great means of Edifying by the means of Grace: The Apostle in
Ephesians. 4. 16. speaks of the close and intimate Union of the Body of Christ, as a
necessary means to receiving increase from Christ, and edifying it self in
love; and Col. 2. 2. being knit together in love, is laid down as a means to
the full assurance of understanding, to the full practical persuasion of the
Truth, and excellency of the Gospel; and the want of this rendered the solemn
Assemblies of the Corinthians fruitless and barren, 1 Cor. 11. 17. St. Paul
charge them with a sad miscarriage in their Spiritual Traffic, growing worse
in the use of what should have made them better, the Holy Supper of the Lord;
and the reason is given Ver. 18. I hear there be Divisions among you. Divisions
abate the fervency of our Prayers, blunt the edge of our Devotions, seize on
the vitals of Christianity, evaporate the life and power of Religion in
impertinent squabble; and unless Almighty Grace prevent, will quickly spread
like a Gangrene, so as to eat out the heart thereof.

7. Peace in Christian Churches is an Emblem of Heaven; the more that part of
the Church which is Militant here below does abound in Love and Peace, the more
it resembles that part which is triumphant above: This is indeed the great
difference between Angels and Devils, Heaven and Hell; the Devils have great
degrees of Power and Knowledge, perhaps not much below what Angels have; but
Angels and Glorified Saints abound in Love, Sweetness Benignity, and live in
the joyful uninterrupted exercise of mutual Endearments; whereas a Spirit of
Malice and Envy, Hatred and Revenge, is the very complexion of Satan, and
temper of Hell. But O how happy will it be to dwell in that Society, where
there is no Mistake or Envy, Ignorance or Prejudice, or carnal Interest to
occasion the least Jar or Discord, but all pure Peace, Seraphick Love and
perfect Harmony, as with God, so also between themselves; where the strange
Fire of misguided Zeal is extinguished by the more powerful Flames of Heavenly
Love, and the unhappy names of dividing Sects are no more known; where dark and
deep Mysteries, little doubtful Truths, and ambiguous Words and Phrases no
longer occasion any Brawls or Contentions; where Luther and Calvin and all the
Saints of God perfectly accord together, speak the same Language, join in the
same Praises, and pleasingly entertain and embrace one another, with all the
endearments of intimate Friends and Companions. And as we long for this Blessed
State, so it is our great Duty, and will be our Happiness to let down as much of
Heaven on Earth as we can, to anticipate our future joys by an enlarged love
toward all Saints, and being at Peace among our selves.

III. General.

Directions for the maintaining and promoting of Peace.

1. Remove the Causes of unpeaceableness; the Effects will not be taken away,
except the Causes cease. This Disease will prove Mortal, and still Torment us,
except the Fuel that feeds it be taken away; except that Generation of Vipers
be slain, which has for so many Ages torn out the Bowels of our Common Mother,
the Church, we must never expect our wide breaches will be healed. I shall
therefore take a short view of those Distempers, that have so miserably
infected us, that the discovery may help to their Cure, and restore the
primitive healthful Temper of Christianity; and while I mention the Achans that
have sickned our Camp, and infected our Israel, I beseech you, that you would
cast them out of your Hearts, and have no fellowship with these unfruitful
Works of Darkness. Be ashamed of complaining for want of Peace, if you wilfully
cherish that poisonous Brood, that will otherwise prove your ruin.

1. Unmortifyed Sin. Ungodliness is the great Divider* and till we are
partakers of the same sanctifying Spirit, it is impossible we should love as
Brethren. Jam. 4. ^.
It Is as possible for the Wolf to lie down with the Lamb, as for Wicked Men to
love the truly Godly. While we will not work in the same Vineyard, nor walk in
the same way, nor choose the same Employment, nor delight in the same Spiritual
Duties, how can it be possible to agree together? It Is a vain thing to pretend
agreement in Articles of Faith, while we will not lovingly agree in practical
Holiness. Ephesians. 4. 3.
It Is highly unreasonable for wicked Wretches to rail against Christians (like
Ahab against Elijah) as Troublers of Israel, when they themselves are the Grand
Incendiaries: These Men, like Nero of old, cast Firebrands into the Sanctuary,
and then lay their guilt at true Christians Doors: They hold the most damnable
Errors, and practical Heresies, and thus render Union impossible: They pretend
pity to the Wounded Church, and yet throw away the Salve and Plaster that
should cure it: They complain that the Garment of Christ is rent, and yet throw
away the Needle that should sow it up: They pretend to be grieved to see the
spiritual Building shaking, yet throw away the Lime and Mortar, the Pins and
the Nails that should cement and join the Parts together. Thus do they who cry
up Love and Unity, and yet hate Holiness wherein Christian Union consists: To
hear an Ungodly Man, who is really of no Religion at all, but against the life
and practice of all, cry out of the many ways of Religion among Christians, is
as if a Blackmoor should blame another for a Spot in his Face, or a Murderer
rebuke a Man for an angry Word, Follow Peace therefore with all Men, and
Holiness, without which no Man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14.

2. Pride: This we find already arraigned by the wisest of Men as the great
Makebate and Troubler of the World; Prove. 13. 10. Only by Pride comes
Contention. As this is true of Civil Strifes, so more especially of Religious
or rather Irreligious Jars and Contentions; Men are so Wise in their own
Conceits, that they are angry with every one that is not of the same level, and
impatient of Contradiction; while many are very hot in Exclamations against the
Political Antichrist, they observe not this Antichristian Temper in themselves;
they are justly offended at others for usurping God's Prerogative, sitting in
his Throne, and claiming a Title of Infallibility; but do not these Fools envy
the Pope, and like Adam desire to be God's that their Name may be honored, and
their Will be done through the Earth? Let us therefore entertain an humble
suspicion of our own Understandings, remembering that an over confident
persuasion of our own Knowledge is a certain sign of Ignorance, and he that
thinks he knows most, is commonly most mistaken: 'Twas not for nothing that the
wisest of Men does so frequently give that caution, Be not Wise in thy own
Conceit, Prove. 3. 3. 26. 12.

3. Censoriousness: The censorious Backbiter is the Devils Minister to Preach
down Love, abate Charity, and exhort to the hatred of the Brethren. Have not
our unnatural heats been owing to this original? Are not we too apt to censure
those that agree not with us in every punctilio, and readily take up an evil
Report against them? Is not this contrary to the lovely Grace of Charity, which
thinks no Evil, misconstrues not the Actions and Intentions of others,
rejoices not in Iniquity, but believes all things, and hops all things,
Cor. 13. 4, 5.
is unapt to believe ill without apparent grounds, Psalm. 15. 3.
and hopes as long as there is any reason for hope? Romans 14. 4.


4. Undue admiration of particular Persons or Parties: This was the Corinthian
Error that divided and miserably shattered that flourishing Church; one liked
the powerful plainness of Paul, another the eloquence of Apollos, 1 Cor. 1. 12.
3. 4.
and a third the perspicuity of Peter, and a fourth was above all outward
Ordinances, pretending to the immediate Teachings of Christ. Upon this, they
vilified all others, except those that they had set up for an Oracle: We may
suppose them disputing one with another after this manner.

One, I am of Paul, did you never hear Paul Preach? how clearly does he unfold
the deep Mysteries of Salvation! how sweetly does he display the unsearchable
Riches of Christ! how convincingly does he argue, and how excellently does he
direct in the way to Salvation! As for Apollos, he guilds over his Discourses
with specious Eloquence and gaudy Bravery; but Paul shows the truth in the
plainest Dress, which best becomes her; and as for Cephas, he is indeed fit to
Catechize weak and ignorant Christians, but he tells me nothing but what I knew
before; they therefore show themselves Men of small Judgment, that are for
Apollos or Cephas; I am for Paul. Another I am of Apollos: Let who will be for
Paul and Cephas, could I sit always under Apollos his Ministry, how happy should
I be? How movingly does he Preach, with what a happy fluency does he insinuate
himself into his Hearers, and by his Pathetical Eloquence almost constrain
attention! One while he clothes his Speech in a Silken Dialect, dips each Word
in a Tear, and steeps each Phrase in Honey, that he may win on his Auditors;
another while, he breaths out Flames and Terrors, and causes the stoutest Heart
to quake and tremble. As for Paul he is rude in Speech, homely in his
Expressions, and has no Majesty nor Presence in a Pulpit: I admire therefore
their Ignorance that are for him; I am for Apollos. A Third, I am for Cephas:
How does he stoop to the lowest and meanest capacity! does not Preach about
such deep Mysteries as Paul, nor with such flaunting Eloquence as Apollos, but
feeds us with the sincere Milk of the Word, and teaches so plainly that the
most Ignorant may understand him: I wonder therefore he is no more followed,
and that Paul and Apollos are preferred before him: I am for Cephas. Thus we
may suppose the Corinthians might jangle among themselves, for which St. Paul
so sharply reproves them; and may not we take his Reproofs to our selves? are
not we apt to heap up to our selves Teachers, and have Men's Persons in
admiration, so to value some, as unreasonably to scorn and slight others,
forgetting that they are all the Servants of Christ, deputed and sent by him,
that in much Wisdom and Mercy has given them various Gifts for the Edification
of the Church; that as one is eminent in some respects, so in others (...)
Brethren may exceed them (...) must consider they all Preach (...) same
Doctrine, and direct to the same way to Salvation; and it is more the fault of
our own corrupt Hearts, than of the Minister, if we profit not by their Labors.

2. Be much in Contemplation of the Love of God in Christ: This will blow up a
holy Flame of Love to him and all his Members; when we remember how dearly and
tenderly Christ loves all his Saints, this will constrain us to lay aside all
Wrath and Bitterness, and live in Peace; such a glorious precedent must needs
be a cogent Argument, and can hardly be resisted. Love and Peace is the very
Image of our Heavenly Father, the Copy Christ has set us, and the Lesson he
has written for our Learning in Lines of his own Blood. 1 John 4. 7, 8.
An hearty Love to God will engage us to be at peace with the whole fraternity
of Christians, Ephesians. 5. 1, 2.
and love them without Dissimulation.

3. Make the great design of Religion yours, viz. the advancement of Holiness,
and recovery of the Image of God in the Souls of Men: Remember Religion is not
designed merely to fill your Heads with airy notions, to tip your Tongues for
Discourse, or enable you to talk plausibly for the truth; that it consists not
in little Speculative Opinions, or Ceremonious Trifles; but the great design of
it is to direct us in the government of our Passions, subduing our Lusts, and
conquering the Impediments that hinder our Recovery and Salvation. In a word,
Religion consists in a penitent return to God by Faith in Christ, and Obedience
to his Gospel; let us take this to be our main business, then we shall have so
much work to do at home, that we shall have little inclination to pry into the
Infirmities of others, or quarrel with them. That Man would be esteemed by all
as bereaved of his Wits, that should be picking causless Quarrels with his
Neighbors about a Chip of Wood, or a broken Hedge, when a Fire in his House is
consuming his Goods and Children. We all stand on the Borders of the Grave, and
Confines of Eternity; our great business is to quench the Flames of Lust, which
otherwise will prepare us for Everlasting Burnings, and therefore surely we
should not waste our precious Minutes in strife and contention.

4. Avoid Extremes in disputable Points. Every Truth lies in the middle between
two Falsehoods, and he that goes far from one is apt to slip into the other.
After all the confidence and boast of disputers, there will be uncertainty in
lesser Points, and when we travel in uncertain Roads, it is best to choose the
middle; here we may be sure to meet with Charity and Peace, and very probably
Truth in their Company. The great occasion of our Differences has been that
Men have looked so much at the evil of one Extreme as to forget the Error on
the other side; like an ignorant Physician, who to Cure a Man of a dead Palsy
casts him into a Phrenzy. I dare with some confidence affirm, that most of
those Disputes, that are so hotly agitated among Protestants, are in the
Extremes, and consist more in words than things, because the Curse of Babel has
so confounded our Languages, that though our Sentiments are much the same, we
understand not one another meaning: And if Men would but hearken to calm
dispassionate Reason, they might soon find out such healing Reconciling
Principles, as would quickly make us one among our selves, and a terror to our
Romish Adversaries. Let the Apostles Counsel be in this sense therefore obeyed,
Phil. 4. 5. Let your Moderation be known unto all Men.

5. Avoid unpeaceable Dividers* those who make it their work to soment
Differences, and stir up Strife, and sow Seeds of Discord among Brethren, Prove.
6. 16, 19.
are said to be an abomination to the Lord; take upon them a very ill
employment, and carry on a design quite contrary to the Gospel of Peace and
therefore are to be avoided that they may be ashamed: I speak not this of my
self, but the Apostle Paul is very earnest in the same Advice, Romans 16. 17, 18.
Now I beseech you Brethren, mark them which cause Divisions and Offenses
contrary to the Doctrine which ye^ have learned, and avoid them; for they that
are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Belly, and by good
Words and fair Speeches deceive the Hearts of the Simple.

6. Frequently join together in the same Exercises of Religious Worship: When
Christians come together in the same Assemblies, this naturally tends to abate
their strangeness, calm their Spirits, remove unreasonable Jealousies and
Suspicions, and inclines them to a Cordial Endeared Love. This was one great
means of promoting that hearty affection, which was among the Members of the
primitive Church, They continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and
Fellowship, and breaking of Bread and Prayer: Acts 2. 42. And the same method
would retrieve that love and peace, the want of which has crumbl'd us into
parties, and been the unhappy occasion of so many woeful Effects. Did we but
more frequently resort to the House of Prayer, more diligently hearken to, and
more faithfully improve Ministerial Instructions, more readily submit to
Pastoral Discipline, more carefully watch over one another, and more tenderly
advise, and reprove, and edify one another; more solemnly pray with and for
one another, and more constantly celebrate that uniting Ordinance, the Lords
Supper, together, we should soon see the Blessed peaceful effects of so doing.
Did Neighboring Churches counsel each other, and maintain mutual
correspondences for the advancement of Love and Holiness, occasionally
communicate together, when convenient, and look upon themselves, not as divided
Bodies, or carrying on separate Interests, but all united under the same Head,
acting according to the same Rule, and for the same end, this would engage us
to mutual offices of peace, and we should readily comply with the Apostle's
Counsel, Ephesians. 4. 3. Keep the unity of the Spirit in the Bond of peace.

Many more Directions might be added, but these, if well practiced, would
quickly extinguish those Heats and Animosities, which have made Earth so like
to Hell; and produce those Heavenly Fruits of peace, which might create a
Paradise here below, make the Church, which in a very sad sense is now
Militant, nearly resemble the Church Triumphant.

And now Men and Brethren, what remains, but that we put in practice the Duties
recommended? Then might we hope our Land would become a Goshen, not only in
respect of Spiritual Light, but also of its freedom from those Locusts and
Caterpillars, dividing Lusts, that have so long wasted and consumed us. Blessed
be God that he has in so great a measure healed our Breaches, and thus far
united us together: May not we hope, that this is but the beginning of what God
designs for us, like the dawning of the Morning in order to a perfect day? May
not we hope, that those Glorious Times are hastening, when the Lord shall be
one, and his Name one; Zach. 14. 9. and that that Promise is near its
accomplishment, Ier. 32. 39. I will give them one Heart, and one way, that they
may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and of their Children after them?
May not we hope, that the Philadelphian state, which some expect, now draws
nigh, when Brotherly Love shall flourish, and be more enlarged. How happy would
it be, if this Union were yet more extensive, if the Name of Reformed Christian
were only known, and all those divided Names laid aside, whereby we have been
unhappily distinguished! By Mutual Compliances and Condescentions this is no
impossible Task. And who knows but this beginning may issue in so happy a
Conclusion? This may well be the subject of our Wishes, and earnest constant
Prayers.

John 13. 34. A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another, as I
have loved you; that ye also love one another.
AMong all the advantages of the Christian Religion, wherein it exceeds the
defective Rules of Pagan Philosophy, and obscure Institutions of Moses, there
is nothing wherein it more excels than in the Doctrine of Love and Charity; a
Duty which is urged in the plainest Words, and pressed by the strongest
Arguments, and made not the high qualification of some eminent Saints, but a
necessary essential part of the new Creature: A Duty not only necessary to some
inferior uses, but to all the great ends of Religion, and not to be dispensed
with on any pretense: A Duty that is made the Badg and Character of Christ's
Disciples, and that which our dying Redeemer strictly charged his Followers to
observe; as in the Text, A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one
another.

Our Savior knowing the time of his Departure was near at hand, in this
Chapter gives his Disciples an admirable instance of his condescending Love in
stooping to that servile Office of washing their Feet: And this he did on
purpose that they should imitate him, and not think the lowest Offices of
Charity for their Brethrens good, Ver. 13, 14, 15, 28.
too mean and base for them. Afterward having given the Sop to Judas who went
out with an intention to betray him, he tells his Disciples of his speedy
Separation from them; and lest they should be too much cast down at hearing of
his Departure, he tells them that he should be Glorified, Ver. 31, 32.
and God the Father in him; i. e. that he should give great discoveries of his
Deity, and God the Father would discover the unsearchable depths of his Wisdom,
inconceivable heights of his Love, and infinite strictness of his Holiness and
Justice by his Death, and advance him straightway to the highest degrees of
Glory: And then being filled with an affectionate love to them, he speaks as an
indulgent Father to the Sons of his Love, Little Children, yet a little while I
am with you, ver. 33. and as if he should have said, O my Disciples whom I love
with no less ardent affection than a Father does his darling and tender Infant;
there remains but a small space wherein I shall make my abode with you in the
Flesh, therefore as I said to the Hardened Jews, Whither I go, ye cannot yet
come: One Request and Command I your dying Lord leave with you, Let my Love to
you be the rule and measure of your Love to one another.

A New Commandment I give unto you.

There is some difference among Expositors concerning the Sense of this
Expression.

Some render it this renewed Commandment, this Command that has been almost
obliterated by the corrupting Doctrins of the Pharisees, and false Glosses of
the Jewish Teachers, I now by my Doctrine and Example renew unto you. Some by
New, understand most excellent: Thus we read of a New Song, Psalm. 33. 3.
a most excellent Song, Mat. 26. 29.
of New Wine, of the most delicious sort and kind; q. d. Whatever Commands you
neglect, be sure to comply with this the most excellent of all. Subjects take
care to observe the New Commands of their Princes; let your careful Obedience
to this be as if it were newly promulged: So others understand it.

A New Commandment, say others, because we must be still renewing it; Owe no
Man any thing but to love one another, Romans 13 8. Pay all your Debts, but this
Debt* of Love you must be always paying and yet always owing.

I rather think it is called a New Commandment, because it is expounded after a
New manner, directed according to a new Rule, Bishop Tillotson's Sermon on this
Text.
and required in higher measures and degrees than ever before; for though this
Duty was not wholly unknown to Mankind before, yet never was it so taught or
encouraged; never was such an illustrious example given of it, nor such weight
and stress laid upon it in any former Institution; 1 These. 4. 9.
and special Measures of Assistance proper to Gospel times are vouchsafed to
work it in our Hearts. So that it is as if our Savior should have said,
Whereas it has been said* by them of old time, thou shall love thy Neighbor
as thy self, I give you a new Rule, as I have loved you, so love one another,
after a more indearing manner than the Jews, that the World may see the
excellency of my Doctrine above that of Moses Love; bear an hearty esteem one
for another, and employ your selves in mutual Offices of Kindness, as
acknowledging one another to be Brethren and Fellow Disciples. As I have loved
you; though you cannot love one another to such a degree, yet testify your love
by such instances, and to such degrees as your nature is capable of.

This is the meaning of the Text; Christ came into the World to demonstrate and
exercise his Father's Love and his own: Love he came to kindle in the Souls of
Men, and therefore gives us this excellent Commandment.

The Words being thus explained, the Observation I shall raise from them is
this,

That the last and great Command of our dying Savior, is, that Christians
should love one another, as Christ has loved them.

In Handling of which I shall observe this Method: 1. I shall inquire who are
the Objects of this Love. 2. In what respects must we love one another as
Christ has loved us. 3. Make some Practical improvement of the whole Discourse.


1. The Objects of this Love.

1. There is a common Love due to Men as Men; all Men are God's Workmanship,
bearing his natural Image, and capable of being serviceable to his Glory: Thus,
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self; all Men are our Neighbors, as
partakers of the same Nature and capable of the same Happiness. Special love to
Christians does not diminish, but enlarge our common love to Men: Wherever we
see any part of Gods Image, we must love it. Our Savior when he beheld that
rich young Gentleman, Mark 10. 21. he loved him; he could not but be well
pleased with his Morality, though he was displeased he went no further. Thus
all the footsteps of Divine Goodness must be loved: Virtue even in an Heathen
is to be admired: This will constrain us to Pity, Pray for, and h^lp all in
distress, according to our ability. We must not be like the unconcerned Priest
and merciless Levite in the Parable, Luke 10. 30. who passed by the wounded
Man, and would not relieve him, but like the good Samaritan, who spoke
comfortably to him, supplied his Wants, and bound up his Wounds.

2. There is a Love due to Enemies. Other Men's Faults and Sins against us, give
us no dispensation for the non-payment of this great Debt of Natures Law,
Loving all of the same kind. Christ came to mortify all Inclinations to Rage
and Revenge, and commands Affections and Words, and Actions of Kindness and
Benignity, to those that have expressed the contrary unto us: We must love our
Enemies, Mat. 5. 44. be cordially affected toward them; wish them all the good
in the World; especially when they most need, the good of their Souls; Their
Conviction, Reformation and Amendment. Other Men's Enmity must not pervert or
blind our Judgments, or hinder us from discerning what is amiable in them; nor
must it corrupt our Affections, or hinder us from loving what is truly lovely.
We must bless them that curse us. Not render reviling for reviling, but give
them friendly courteous words, though they rail against us. We must do good to
them, feed and cloth them, if hungry or naked; rescue them if in danger;
comfort them if in distress, and all without the least Tincture of Malice or
Revenge. We must pray for them: Forgive them our selves, and pray to God to
forgive them too. Thus did our Savior; in the midst of his dying Agonies
forgets not this Testimony of his Love to his embittered Adversaries, and with
a generosity beyond Example, pleads excuses for their Sin, saying, Father
forgive them, for they know not what they do, Luke 23. 34.

3. There is a special Love due to all whom we charitably hope to be true
Christians. To this we are directed by the Text. Whoever makes a seemingly
serious profession of Faith and Holiness, and does not disprove it by a
contrary practice, is to be allowed the Name and special Love of a Christian.
It Is Gods Prerogative to see the Heart; It Is our Duty to observe the Life; and
he that makes a credible Profession, and does not live in wilful Sin is
charitably to be esteemed as a Member of Christ. Though he differ from us in
many Points, yet if he holds the Foundations of the Christian Faith, and
manifests the Grace of God in his Life, it is uncharitable for us to judge he is
not the object of Gods special Love, and therefore it is unreasonable he should
not be the object of ours. Though he be weak in Parts and Gifts, subject to
many Passions and Infirmities consistent with real Grace; though his Profession
reach not to that height as to make him Eminent, and his Conversation be not so
exact as to make you confident of his Sincerity, yet if he profess to be a true
Christian, and live not in any Sin, which is the certain mark of an unbeliever,
he is to be loved as Christ has loved us. Gods Love indeed is Guided by
Infallibility, he loves none with a special Affection but sincere penitent
Believers; but our Love must be guided by our own weak and fallible discerning.
Where we see the Fruits of Piety in Men's Lives, we must judge of the truth of
their Graces according to the probability which those signs discover. Though
all be not so Eminent in Grace as Peter, James and John, yet as the weakest
Disciples it sincere are accepted by God, so ought they to be embraced by us.
Christ will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax. Nor ought
we to despise the Babes in Christ, but love them as Members of the same Body,
and Heirs of the same Inheritance.

2. In what respects must we love one another, as Christ has loved us?

Ans. Not in all Respects* Christ so loved us as to purchase Grace and Glory
for us. But we are not capable of thus Loving one another. We cannot pay down a
valuable satisfaction for our own Sins, much less can we super-erogate or
purchase pardon for others. Our own Oil must be perfumed with the Incense of
Christ's Merits, before it can make our Faces shine before God; and we have so
little for our selves that we have none to spare for our Brethren. Christ alone
paid down a complete satisfaction for them and us; nor can we love our Brethren
with an equal degree of Love to what Christ did. He had not the Spirit by
measure, but the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him; and therefore he loved us
without any sinful mixture or imperfection; but our Love as well as other
Graces admit of very great defects. The word (As) therefore does not denote
equality in degree, but likeness in kind. Our Love to one another must bear
some likeness and resemblance of Christ's Love to us.

1. In the Inward Properties of it.

2. In the outward Expressions of it.

1. In the inward Properties of it.

1. Our Love must be sincere and unfeigned as Christ's was. Christ did not
Hypocritically pretend Love, or Dissemblingly feign Affection to us, but
sincerely loved us. His Protestations of Love were all real and hearty; not in
Word and in Tongue only, but in Deed and in Truth. Thus ought our Love to be
without Dissimulation, Romans 2. 9. A pretended Disciple indeed may like Judas
kiss and betray, make large Protestations of kindness to the Saints, and under
this pretext of Affection hide a malicious heart, and contrive their ruin. But
the true Christians Professions of Love as well as Prayers to God proceed not
from feigned Lips. 2 Cor. 8. 8.


2. Our Love to one another must be fervent as Christ's was. 'Twas Love
incomprehensibly great and ardent, that brought our Lord from Heaven to Earth,
carried him through the difficulties of Poverty, Reproach and Scorn, enabled
him to bear the contradiction of Sinners, and the pain and shame of the Cross;
herein Christ as well as God the Father commended his love toward us, Romans 5.
8. rendered it great and admirable beyond all expression or parallel, In that
while we were yet Sinners Christ died for us. We must act according to this
pattern, Love one another with a pure heart fervently, 1 Pet. 1. 22. Our Love
must not be cold and indifferent, frozen or congealed; but we must entertain a
fervent Affection one for another.

3. Our Love must be prevailing as Christ's was. Christ loved us above Gold or
Silver, or Earthly Pomp and Greatness, above his own Temporal Ease and Delight;
and was ready to wade through Storms and Dangers, and Difficulties for our
sakes. So must we love our Brethren, above our Carnal Interest, Honor, Wealth
and Pleasure. Thus Moses evidenced his Love to the people of God by forsaking
the dazzling Honors and bewitching Pleasures of Pharaoh's Court, Heb. 11. 25,
26.
and choosing Affliction with them rather than Sin. Thus must we be willing to
renounce our own Ease and Liberty for their sakes, when God and his Honor
calls. Nay we must Love them better than the nearest ungodly Relations. Christ
loved those that were related to him in the Spirit, far better than the nearest
ungodly Relations according to the Flesh. Mark 3. 35.
There is indeed a natural sensitive Love and Propension toward near
Relations, and we are ordinarily bound in the first place to provide for them,
supply their wants, and give them these outward effects of our Love: But still
we must have a higher rational esteem of the godly and value their Graces above
the most lovely natural perfections of others; and the best must be preferred in
point of Honor, though others may be preferred in point of Maintenance.

4. Our Love must be impartial and universal as Christ's was. He did not
confine it to his own Countrymen the Jews, and die to procure Pardon, Grace and
Glory for them only, but for us Gentiles also, while he was upon Earth: The
Faith of the Centurion, and importunity of the Canaanitish Woman (though Aliens
from the Commonwealth of Israel) attracted his Esteem and Admiration; and
wherever he beheld the Grace of God and Image of Holiness, he loved it.

It Is very observable, he is more sharp and severe in his Invectives against
the Pharisees than any other Persons; because of their stingy narrow Spirit,
confining Religion to their own particular Sect, and scorning and despising all
that were not of their own Party; as if all the rest of Mankind were in a
Reprobate Damnable State.

Our Christian Love must thus resemble our Saviors. It must be enlarged to all
Saints, to the whole Fraternity of Christians. Philem. 9.
To be partial in our Love is a sign it is unsound; Col. 1. 4.
to make our own Opinions the Shiboleth to distinguish between a true and
counterfeit Christian, 1 Pet. 1. 17.
is very unreasonable. Where there is a Profession of the Baptismal Covenant,
the Essentials of the Christian Faith, and a Life in some measure answerable;
we must love such as Christians, not withstanding their mistakes and erroneous
Principles in lesser points. We justly condemn the Church of Rome for confining
Salvation to themselves, and Damning all the World besides: Let us take heed
how we condemn our selves by contracting the Church of God into a narrower
compass, lest we censoriously damn those whom Christ will save, and perhaps
place on higher Seats of Glory than our selves. We know who it was that said,
Lord, Luke 18. 12.
I thank thee, I am not as this Publican, when he was really in a far worse
condition: Our Love to a Party must not blind our Judgments, or pervert our
Affections as to all the rest: Keep up therefore an impartial universal Love to
all professed. Christians as such, and hate a dividing Spirit. 1 Cor. 1. 10.
Take heed how you* stigmatize those with the Name of Heretics, who shall
stand at the Right Hand of Christ; and take not up the Devils accursed
Employment to become Accusers of those that are really your Brethren.

5. Our Love must be proportioned to the degrees of their Grace, as Christ's
was. Christ, that certainly knows who are most furnished with Divine Grace,
must needs love these with an higher degree than others of a lower Form and
Classis in Christianity. St. John who it seems had the most ardent love and
Eminent degrees of Grace among the Apostles, was his peculiar Favorite and
Darling Disciple, had the highect, place next his Lord, lay in his Bosom,
according to the custom of those* Eastern Countries, which was to lie and not
to sit at Meals, and is called the Disciple whom Jesus loved, John 13. 23.
Christ's love was not a fond unaccountable Passion, but the result of his Reason
and Judgment. Because he loved him best we may therefore justly conclude he was
really above the rest in Piety. Thus must our love be proportioned: Some are
but weak Christians, and we can have but small and doubtful persuasions of
their sincerity: Others are stronger, and we may be more confident as to them.
The one must be loved as Christians, but the other with an higher degree, as
bearing more lively representations of the holy God: We must not respect the
Persons of any, but their goodness; and love those best that are really so.
This Property will discover the Hypocrisy of many, who will bear with Holiness
in a lower degree, and speak well of those who (though Godly in the main) are
too remiss and careless in their Conversations, but swell with Rage and Malice
against those that are most Eminent for Piety. What does this Temper show but a
Graceless Heart? if we bear not the highest Love to the best Christians how
dwells the Love of God in us? Alas! can infinite perfect Holiness be loved by
him, that loves not the best Representations of it, that this imperfect* state
affords? If the light of the Moon, which is not without its spots, does offend
us; how can we bear the far more resplendent brightness of the Sun it self?

How unmeet is he for the Communion of Angels and perfected Spirits, that is
not pleased; much more that is offended with the highest degrees of Holiness in
this state of Imperfection? The true Christian having a prevailing Love to God,
will Love his Image wherever he finds it; and where it is more clear and
unsullied, and drawn out in more Beautiful Characters, his Love will be
proportionably greater and more affectionate.

6. Our Love must be compassionate and sympathizing. Christ could not refrain
from weeping when he beheld Jerusalem, Luke. 19. 41, 42.
where was the then visible Church of God, and laments her foreseen
destruction: When Peter. denied him not once, but thrice, with Curses and
Imprecations: He did not disregard him, as he might justly do, such a
perfidious Servant; but though he was unconcerned for himself, and silently
bore the slanders of the Witnesses; yet he manifests his concern for Peter; by
his compassionate looks, testified his sorrow for his Sin, and drew not his
Eyes away till he had looked him into Repentance. Nay, though our Head be now in
Heaven, yet he has a compassionate sense of the Extremities of his Members,
and accounts all the Affronts, Persecutions and Reproaches offered to them, as
done to himself. Thus when Saul (then a Persecutor) breathed out nothing but
Blood and Slaughter against the Churches, He cries from Heaven, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me, Acts 9. 4. He is a merciful faithful High Priest that is
touched with a feeling of our Infirmities, and bears a compassionate Love to
all his Members in Misery: And the same mind ought to be in us that was in him;
we ought to sympathize with our Fellow Members in distress, and remember the
afflicted, as being our selves in the Body, Heb. 13. 2. liable to the same
Trials and Parts of the same Mystical Body of Christ. If any Member be in pain,
all the rest are discomposed, and when some of the Members of Christ are
discomposed, it is natural for the rest to sympathize with them, and be
compassionately sensible of their trouble. Thus we are commanded to weep with
them that weep, Romans 12. 15. To bear one another Burdens, and so fulfill the
Law of Christ, Gal. 6. 2.

7. Our Love must be constant and abiding as Christ's love was; Christ's love
to us was not for a small space of time, but lasting and uninterrupted, He
loved his own, and he loved them to the end, John 13. 1. And the nearer his end
appeared, the higher marks of his Love did he give them; the failings and
miscarriages of his Disciples did not remove his Love, or cause him to withdraw
his affection; their ignorance and unbelief after all his Teachings and
Instructions, their fiery unseasonable Rage against the Samaritans, their Pride
and Ambition, Rashness and Cowardice, and the base Perfidiousness of Peter did
not incline him to lay aside his Thoughts of Love, or leave the work of our
Redemption unfinished; but he still loved them to the Death: Thus must we love
our Brethren, overlook their Failings, pass by their Infirmities, admire what
is lovely, and neglect what may cool our Affections. This new Commandment must
be every day renewed by us; this is a Lesson we must be always Learning, and a
Duty we must be always employing our selves about. We must still be abiding in
our Love, till we enter among that happy Society, where all Sins and unlovely
Imperfections shall be done away, and we shall always solace our selves with
pleasing views of the Divine Purity and Holiness, and the numerous Pictures and
Representations of it among Angels and Glorified Saints.

2. Our Love to one another must resemble Christ's Love to us in the outward
Expressions of it.

1. In the intimacies of our Friendship and Familiarity one with another;
Christ so loves all true Christians, as to enter into the strictest bands of
amity with them; he is nearly united to them as their Head and Husband, and
calls them his Friends and his Spouse; he is the Head and they are the Members;
the Vine, Ephesians. 5. 32.
and they are the Branches; John 15. ^.
the Foundation, and they are the Building; Ioh. 14. 22.
the Root, and they are the Fruit. The Communications of his Grace, the
quickening assistances and influences of his Spirit are imparted to them; he
writes his Law in their Hearts, and causes them to run in the way of his
Commandments; sanctifies their Natures, pardons their Sins, prevailingly
intercedes for them, and prepares them by Grace for Glory: He has communion
with them in his Ordinances, familiarly converseth with them in his Sacraments,
and is continually sitting them for that happy Fellowship with Father Son and
Holy Spirit which glorified Saints enjoy. While he was on Earth, he selected
some few Persons, prepared them by Grace for his Society, and then made them
his familiar Friends. To them he clearly revealed the Mind and Will of God; to
them he unfolded the Mysteries of his Love, and Commands of his Father; to them
he explained what was spoken to others in Parables; these he blessed with his
Heavenly Discourses and Pious Instructions with the special tokens of his Love,
and familiar Expressions of his Friendship. Indeed he did entertertain a Judas
in his Family, but he made a strict Profession as well as the other Disciples,
and was not known to be Hypocritical by any but Christ himself; and had not the
wisdom of God designed by his means to bring about the great work of our
Redemption, no doubt but this Son of Perdition would have been discarded and
disowned. He did indeed eat with Publicans and Sinners, but though for this he
was falsely accused as their Friend and Companion, yet he was not so; he eat
with them as their Physician, and not as their Companion; did not own them for
his Friends, but sought by his holy Discourse and obliging Carriage to make
them so: And the same Mind ought to be in us that was also in him.

Though Christianity allows not moroseness and incivility toward others, yet
all needless familiarity with Wicked Men is forbidden: Our Eyes (with David's)
ought to be upon the Faithful in the Land, Psalm. 101. 6. To delight in wicked
Company may justly fill us with doubts of our own sincerity; we may know we are
passed from Death to Life, if we love the Brethren, 1 John 3. 14. And we have
just reason to fear we are yet in a state of Death if we delight in the
Ungodly. Common civilities may be paid to Wicked Men, but special friendship is
to be reserved only for those who we hope are the Friends of God. If we love
God above all, surely we shall associate most with them that may warm our
Hearts, and raise our Affections, and provoke us by their Example to an holy
imitation. We ought to imitate the Royal Psalmist, who was a Companion of all
them that feared God, Psalm. 119. 63. The Poverty and Meanness of such did not
lessen his delight; he prized a Saint in Rags, beyond a Wicked Man though
clothed in Princely Robes, or Imperial Purple. We ought to have a friendly
regard to all true Christians; and though some because of their eminency in
Grace, suitableness to our Temper, Neighborhood, and the like reasons, may be
our more intimate Friends: Yet must not we despise any because of their
meanness, but as we have opportunity* give them the special tokens of our
Friendship too. Vile Persons must be contemned, and Scandalous Professors must
especially be avoided; Psalm. 15. 4.
but our intimate Acquaintance ought to be the Servants of God; 1 Cor. 5. 11.
and the more Holy any are, the more ambitious should we be of their Friendship
and Converse.

2. In our hearty Prayers one for another. Christ was very earnest in his
Prayers for true Believers; they were the peculiar objects of his Love, and
purchase of his Death, and therefore he prays for them in a peculiar manner:
For Peter, he prays for strengthening confirming Grace, Luke 22. 31. and he put
up a famous Prayer for his. Disciples, and all that should believe on him, John
17. that they might persevere in the Faith, live in Unity, increase in Grace,
and at last be translated to Heaven, and abide with him in Glory. And he has
laid a special Obligation on us to do likewise. Hence in that excellent Form
and Directory of Prayer, Mat. 6. 9. he teaches us to say, Our Father,
intimating that if we would gain acceptance for our selves, we must come to God
as in union with Christ and his universal Church. Our Prayers must not be only
for our selves, but for the whole Church of God throughout the World; we must
hold Communion with all Christians in Faith and Love, and an holy Profession
thereof; and while absent in Body, must be as present with them in Spirit, and
still beg of God for them a freedom from the same Spiritual Evils, and
enjoyment of the same Spiritual Privileges we would desire for our selves.

If the Psalmist under the old Law prayed for the Peace of Jerusalem, Psalm.
122. 6. 137. 5, 6. and makes such solemn Protestations never to forget her;
surely it is our great duty* now the Church is surrounded with Enemies so
potent and numerous, never to forget Spiritual Zion, but always be mindful of
our Jerusalem. If the legal Priests and Watchmen were bound to be God's
Remembrancers, and give him no rest till he establish and make Jerusalem a
Praise in the Earth, Isa. 62. 6, 7. Then surely it is the duty of Spiritual
Watchmen under the Gospel, to put up their Petitions with fervor for the
distressed Christian Churches and Servants of God. We ought with the Apostle to
give Thanks to God always for all Saints, and make mention of them in our
Prayers, Ephesians. 1. 16. Be compassionately sensible of all their Troubles, and
continually bow our Knees before God, that all his dealings may tend to their
good; that their Lives may be a credit to their Profession; and that their
Faith and Love, and Patience and Humility, and Self-denial, may be effectual to
convince Unbelievers, enlarge the Kingdom of Grace, and add new Inhabitants to
the Kingdom of Glory.

3. In forgiving one another. Christ so loved us, as to forgive all the
injuries and affronts we have offered to him; pardon of Sin is the great
purchase of his Death. And though our Sins be more numerous than the Hairs of
our Head, and exceed the Sands of the Sea for Multitude, yet if we sincerely
repent of them, we may be assured they shall be forgiven. And as Christ does
thus testify his love to us, so must we testify our love to one another: Have
they wronged and injured us? we must not bear a Spirit of Revenge, but freely
forgive them: God will not forgive us except we forgive others, Mat. 6. 11, 14,
15. Where God pardons any, he gives them a heart to forgive others. That
Servant in the Parable was very disingenuous, who when his Lord forgave him Ten
Thousand Talents, cast his Fellow Servant into Goal, and would not forgive him
an Hundred Pence. Mat. 18. 23. And are not we guilty of the same disingenuity,
who when we know what numerous Talents God has forgiven us, cannot pass by a
small injury of our Brother against us? This act of Christian Love you see is
strictly required, and a special degree of it* is due to true Christians above
all others. We are bound indeed to forgive Enemies while continuing and
remaining such, so far as not to return Evil for Evil, to entertain no
revengeful Thoughts, and perform all general Offices of Justice and Charity
toward them. But a Friend and true Christian that has offended us, and
returns to his Fidelity, must be forgiven and again treated and entrusted as a
Friend, if he gives sufficient Evidences of his Sorrow and Repentance for
former Faults: For is he the Friend of God, Luke 17. 3.
and shall he be esteemed as our Enemy? Is God reconciled to him, and shall we
still retain our Enmity against him? Surely if God be his reconciled Father, we
ought to be his reconciled Brethren also: Account him no longer an Enemy, but a
Brother beloved, Philem. 16.

4. In our Alms and Bounty to the Necessitous. Christ though he himself lived
on the Charity of others, and had not a sufficient supply for himself and
Disciples, yet we find he did out of that small pittance give something to the
Poor; for in this Chapter Judas who was the Steward of Christ's Family, bore
the Bag, and was to disburse Money for those uses for which his Lord designed
it: When he went out after his receiving the Sop, the Disciples thought he was
gone either to buy Provisions for the approaching Passover, or to give
something to the Poor, John 13. 29; thereby implying it was our Savior's
custom to give to the Poor. And if he thus loved his poor Members, surely we
ought to do so likewise: Those who have a fruitless love to others, have but a
fruitless Faith to themselves: Ium. 1. 27.
They who pretend love to their Brethren, 1 John 3. 17.
and yet relieve them not according to their ability, their Professions of
Religion are vain: We are bound indeed to supply the Wants of all, even of
Strangers and Enemies, according to our ability and opportunities. But to true
Christians, we are bound to open our hands more wide, and be more liberal and
bountiful: Do good to all, especially to the Household of Faith, Gal. 6. 10. God
has made us but Stewards of the Earthly Blessings we enjoy, and given us our
Stock of Worldly Goods, that we might lay them out on those whom Providence
has made the Objects of our Charity; he interprets that as done to himself,
which is done to his Servants and Christ's distressed Members. Christ is
resolved at the day of Judgment to insist on this Duty more than on any other.
Mat. 25* 34.
The true Christian is himself devoted to God, and therefore will devote all he
has to him; will honor him with his Substance, and the first Fruits of his
Increase; expend the Blessings received, to Cloth, Feed and Supply the Naked,
Hungry and Distressed. If God has entrusted him with many Talents, he will not
be so unreasonable as to think he has therefore liberty given to pamper his
Lusts, or gratify his Fleshly Appetite; but like a Wise Steward will seek out
fit Objects for his Charity; and seeing his Lord Redeemer out of that little
which he had, gave to the Poor, will imitate his great Example 3. and because
much is given, will be proportionably liberal and bountiful.

5. In our Counsels and admonitions: Christ was very frequent and earnest in
his pious Counsels and Instructions, he did not only heal the Diseases of Men's
Bodies, but the chief design of his coming was to free the Sons of Men from all
their Spiritual Maladies and Distempers. Throughout his whole Life he was still
explaining to Men the whole Will of God, and to his Disciples more plainly than
to others, Mat. 13 11. This evidence of Brotherly Love we ought to give also.
It Is not only the duty of Ministers, but of every private Christian in his
Station, to counsel and instruct his Brethren, to inform the Ignorant, and seek
their Conversion; tell them their duty and danger, and show them how they may
flee from the wrath to come.

And it will be their wisdom and interest thus to win Souls to Christ, Prove.
11. 30.
and save Sinners from Death and Hell. Iam. 5. 20.
This must we do to the most vicious as we have opportunity: But as we owe a
special degree of Love to Fellow Christians, so we are especially to counsel
and admonish them: To advise them in difficulties, explain what they do not
understand, endeavor to impart our Light to them, to increase their knowledge,
make additions to their Grace, and further their Happiness. He that loves his
Brother will seek to help his Ignorance, rectify his Mistakes, free him from
Error, and communicate his own Experiences to preserve him from Sin, encourage
him in Duty, and make his passage to Heaven more pleasant and delighful.

6. In kind and friendly Reproofs. Christ frequently gave this Testimony of his
Love to his Disciples, reproved the smallness of their Faith, Pride and
Ambition, Mat. 8. 26. 18. 1.
and unbecoming Passions, Luke 9. 55, 56.
and the like Sins. Thus must we also act: Smooth Flattery is an Argument of
Hatred, and neglecting Reproofs when necessary is a piece of negative Flattery;
but a smart rebuke is oftentimes a great Argument of Love, Le^it. 19. 17. When
therefore we see our Brother erring from his way, we must seek by moderate
Reproofs to stir up his dying Graces, and bring him back to his Duty. Here
indeed much Christian Prudence and Discretion is necessary: We are too apt to
aggravate the failings of others, and extenuate our own far greater offenses.
Therefore let us be more ready to behold our own stains, than the lesser spots
of others, and first cover our own nakedness before we cast the Stones of
Reproof at our Brother. Neither must we reprove upon bare Rumors and
Suspicions, without certain knowledge of our Brothers offense: Bishop Hopkins
Sermon. on Lev. 19. 17.
This is to shoot the Arrow before we see the mark. If we are not certainly
assured either from our own personal Knowledge, or the undoubted Testimony of
credible Witnesses, that our Brother is guilty, our reproofs will be but
Slanders, and our Charity in offering the Cure will not be half so great as our
uncharitableness in believing the Disease. Neither must we reprove sharply for
small offenses, for every unvoluntary slip and failing: To dip our Reproofs in
Gall and Satyr upon every little miscarriage, is a piece of impertinent
officiousness, and shows we are very much in Love with the Office. Further, our
Reproofs must be seasonable, Prove. 15. 23. When our Brother is most calm and
sedate, his Passions hushed and still, and his reason Reseated on the Throne,
as Water falling on a Red hot Iron only causes a great deal of noise and
disturbance, so Reproofs just upon the very act of Sin, when our Brothers
Passions are in disorder, will only cause him to fume and fret the more.
Moreover our reproofs must be given in gentle Language, Gal. 6. 1. Rebukes in
reviling words look like the upbraidings of an Enemy, and not like the kindness
of a displeased Friend. Nay, let not your Reproofs be before others, lest it
alienate thy Brothers Heart, and make him suspect it is hatred and not love that
puts thee upon this ungrateful Employment; but let them be between him and thee
alone, with all the secrecy and privacy possible: That he may see it is thy
love that urges thee to this Office of Kindness; and good Men will hearken and
endeavor to amend whatever is amiss, Psalm. 141. 5. Rebuke a Wise Man and he
will love thee, Prove. 9. 8.

8. In dying for one another. The greatest Testimony of Christ's Love was his
dying for us, John 15. 13. Romans 5. 8. Hereby perceive we the Love of God, in
that he laid down his Life for us, and we ought to lay down our Lives for the
Brethren, 1 John 3. 16. If Christ who was so much exalted above us in Glory and
Majesty, did lay down his Life for us, much more ought we to dye for our
Brethren, who are of the same mould by Nature, partakers of the same precious
Faith by Grace, and heirs of the same Inheritance in Glory. If Christ dyed for
Enemies and Strangers, Slaves to Satan, and Rebels against Heaven, surely we
ought not to account it hard to dye for Friends linked to us by the nearest
Bonds of Union, Members of the same Body, and belonging to the same Glorious
Head; seeing Christ did not account his Life too dear for us, we ought not to
account this command an hard saying, or burden too difficult to be born.

But this Duty is only to be performed when we are specially called to it, and
the public good of Christianity requires it; to lay down our Lives without
such a Call is to become Murderers of our selves, and may be to the wrong, and
not the benefit of our Brethren: For thereby we are incapacitated from doing
them any further service in this World. The great instance wherein we are to
lay down our Lives for our Brethren is, when we are called to seal the Truth
with our Blood. The Glory of God and Spiritual Good of our Brethren ought to be
so dear to us, that we ought willingly to Sacrifice our Lives, rather than by
any base and sinful compliances harden Unbelievers, unsettle weak and wavering
Christians, or grieve the Hearts of confirmed Saints.

3. Some Practical Improvement. I shall conclude all with a word of Exhortation.

1. To my Brethren in the Ministry. I have taken upon me the Office of putting
you in remembrance of your Duty.

We all call our selves the Messengers of Peace, and Ambassadors of the God of
Love, and are now come together to testify our Love to one another. Let us now
therefore take up an unanimous Resolution, that we will live together as united
Brethren, and imitate the great Example of our Lord Redeemer, who has given us
our Commission. Let us not be strange or shy, or suspicious one of another;
harbor any envy, ill will or hard thoughts; Take up any evil reports, or
hearken to the Tales of Whisperers and Backbiters, who make it their Business
to sow Seeds of Discord among Brethren: While we all profess the same Holy
Religion, worship God after the same manner, and pursue the same design of
winning Souls to Christ; why should we be angry or displeased, if perhaps we
have not the same Sentiments in some lesser Matters of difficulty; any more
than because we are not of the same Age, Stature or Complexion? Why should we
envy one another Parts, or Gifts, or Success; Or be offended because perhaps
the Assemblies of others may be larger than our own? It ought to be our Joy if
our Lord and Masters Work be carried on by others better than by our selves;
and we ought to embrace our Brethren for their Piety, Warmth and Zeal, and be
highly pleased that God makes them Glorious Instruments for the Conversion of
Souls.

The Apostle Paul could say that though some preached Christ out of envy and
strife, Phil. 1. 15, 18. yet Christ was preached, and therein he did rejoice;
yea, and would rejoice: We all preach Christ, and I am persuaded none of us
with contentious Spirits: Let us therefore rejoice in one another success in
the Work of the Ministy; and make it our business to strengthen one another
Hands in the service of our Lord: Let not our Love be Complemental and
Ceremonious, but let it be real and hearty, as becomes the Ministers of Christ:
Let it be expressed in all the instances forementioned, by the Intimacies of
our Friendship, by our earnest and hearty Prayers; by a readiness to forbear
and forgive one another by our kind Counsels and Admonitions, communicating to
each other that Light and Knowledge we think we may have gained in the
Mysteries of Religion, by our friendly and gentle Reproofs one of another, if
there be occasion; by our hearty faithfulness in informing each other of our
faults, and directing how we may best discharge the Work of the Ministry
committed to us. These, my Brethren, are the great Duties God expects from us;
and the obligations of Christianity forcibly engage us to the performance of
them. As we have therefore begun to do thus, let us hold on, that our Union
together may be for the advancement of the Kingdom of Christ, and enlargement
of the Gospel, and an earnest and happy presage of a yet larger and more
extensive Union among all the Faithful Ministers of Christ throughout the Land,
and (if it be Gods will) throughout the whole Christian World.

2. To the people, and indeed to us all in general. Let us all be persuaded to
the practice of this Duty. The Plague of Uncharitableness has dangerously
Infected the generality of Christians, and therefore it concerns every
Messenger of peace to cry aloud and persuade Men to Love and Union. This was
the dying command of our Lord and Savior, and shall we neglect it? How can we
expect the Legacies and Benefits he has bequeathed, if we omit the commands he
has given? That must be a very unnatural Son that despises the last words and
commands of his Father pronounced with his dying Breath; and are not we very
unnatural if we neglect the dying Admonitions of our Dear Redeemer? When Men
are just departing out of the World, and (especially good Men) they use not to
spend their Breath about Trifles, but speak what they apprehend of greatest
moment, and what they desire may be more especially regarded. Our Lord Jesus
did not trifle with us when he was leaving the World: And therefore seeing this
was one of his last Commands, we may be assured he laid great weight upon it,
and earnestly desired it might be principally observed by his Followers. Nay,
he himself makes it the distinguishing Character of his Disciples whereby they
may be known from all the rest of the World. By this shall all Men know that ye
are my Disciples if ye have love one to another, John 13. 35. Do you therefore
show your respect to your Dying Lord, and make it appear to the World that you
are his true Disciples by a constant unintermitted Exercise of Love to one
another.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for John Dunton.
PRactical Discourses on Sickness and Recovery, in several Sermons, as they
were lately preached in a Congregation in London. By Timothy Rogers, M. A.
after his Recovery from a Sickness of near two Years continuance.

-- His Treatise Entitled, Early Religion.

The Vanity of Childhood and Youth. By Daniel Williams Minister of the Gospel.

The Life and Death of the Renowned John Eliot, the first Preacher of the
Gospel to the Heathens in America. Written by Mr. Cotton Mather.

Mr. Barkers Book, Entitled, Flores Intellectuales, or Select Notions,
Sentences and Observations. Collected out of several Authors.

Mr. Lees Joy of Faith.

Casuistical Morning-Exercises, the 4 th Volume. By several Ministers in and
about London; preached in October 1689.

Books Printed for, and Sold by John Salusbury.
THE Certainty of the Worlds of Spirits; fully evinced by unquestionable
Histories of Apparitions and Witchcrafts, Operations, Voices, etc. Proving the
Immortality of Souls, etc. By Richard Baxter.

An end of Doctrinal Controversies, which have lately troubled the Churches by
Reconciling Explication, without much Disputing. By Richard Baxter. In Octavo.

A Rational Defense of Nonconformity: Wherein the Practice of Nonconformists is
vindicated from promoting Popery, and ruining the Church; imputed to them by
Dr. Stillingfleet, in his Unreasonableness of Separation. By Gilbert Rule,
Minister of the Gospel. In Quarto.

The Harmony of the Divine Attributes, in the Contrivance and Accomplishment of
Man's Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ. By T. Cruso. In Twelves.


