ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Memoires of Monsieur Deageant: Containing the most secret Transactions and
Affairs of France, from the Death of Henry IV. till the beginning of the
Ministry of the Cardinal de Richelieu. To which is added, a Particular Relation
of the Archbishop of Embrun's Voyage into England, and of his Negotiation for
the advancement of the Roman Catholic Religion here; together with the Duke of
Buckingham's Letters to the said Archbishop about the Progress of that Affair:
Which happened the last Years of King James I. his Reign. Faithfully Translated
out of the French Original. Printed for Richard Baldwin in the Old Bailey. 1690.

THE Cabinet Opened, OR THE Secret History OF THE AMORS OF Madam de Maintenon,
With the French KING.

Translated from the French Copy.

London, Printed for Richard Baldwin, in the Old Bailey, 1690.

THE Author's Preface TO THE READER.
LOve and Fortune produce effects so fantastic and surprising, that a man that
accustoms himself to make reflections on all Occurrences, cannot consider 'em
without astonishment. One sees not only the vilest and most abject creatures
raised by this means to the highest elevation of Glory and Grandeur; but one
also sees the most agreeable and haughty of all the Sex, thrown down from their
greatness, by the Caprices of these brutal passions, and the Chimerique effects
of the imagination, to which stupid men offer incense as to a Deity. Nature
never wrought half the diversities in her productions, as Love and Fortune have
done in their Vassals and Adorers. Madam de Maintenon, the person whom we shall
choose to be our Heroine, does abundantly confirm the truth of these evident
assertions; one that the following relation may make to be reputed for a happy
person, if you place the happiness of this World in prosperity, in which it is
confessed she abounds.

As for the rest, I am to advertise the Reader, that although several persons,
having wrote upon the like subjects, have delivered nothing but pure Romance,
nevertheless what I have Wrote is an unquestionable truth; for the better part
of the Memoires, from whence this Little History is drawn, came out of the
Cabinet of Madam de Maintenon, and were partly written with her own Hand. These
we recovered of a certain Gentlewoman, who lived a considerable time with her,
and who had not served her this trick, but only to avoid a greater mischief
which was designed her, and she avoided by her flight. Therefore, what we
received of her, we are now going to expose to the public; and this it is,
which has given occasion to the Title of this Book. I hope the World will
receive some satisfaction by it, since I have given my self the trouble to put
together these Memoires, and digest 'em into a method. If you meet with any
thing that is ridiculous, you are only to accuse the Original, and not the Copy.

Farewell.
THE SECRET AMORS OF Madam de Maintenon, With the French KING.
AMongst all those Effects that Love has produced, one sees nothing that
surprises him more, than when it joins the Scepter to the Crook, and by its
influences makes those Conditions of Life that stand at the greatest distance
from one another, so united and reconciled, that the two Parties forget not
only what they have been, but also what they owe to themselves: Several
Examples have acquainted us with the truth of this Assertion, but we have not
any Instance that has demonstrated it with that clearness, or is more
universally known in our Age, than This which we are going to relate.

Madam de Maintenon owes her Nativity to America: Her Father who had been
formerly one of those righteous Persons, that we use to transport for their
Civil Behavior, after he had made Satisfaction for the Slavery, to which he
was Condemned, took a little piece of Ground, and planted it with Tobacco. With
the Revenue of this small Territory, he made an hard shift to keep Body and
Soul together; when Providence, to let him see, that he had fallen into a
Terrestial Paradise, furnished him with a comfortable Importance, and suffered
a certain Vessel that was plentifully laden with all sorts of Females, to
arrive at the Island de la Martinique. These virtuous Ladies considering the
Corruption of the Age, and the Fruitfulness of the new World, after having
sacrificed their Bodies for some time to the Goddess of Pleasure, and performed
all Acts of Charity to those who begged it at their hands, departed from their
respective Habitations in Low-Poictou, and out of a Spirit of Submission, to
which they were obliged by the Orders of Justice, surrendered themselves at
Rochel. Here the report of their Actions gathered a vast Company of People
together, who ran from all parts to behold them with Admiration. The respect
they met with, was so extremely great, that the Magistrates of the place, not
thinking any ordinary House worthy to entertain Persons of their high
Character, lodged them in the most Magnificent Building of the whole City, as
well in regard of its Height, as of its Situation, and Structure. Their
Quarters were assigned them in the Tower de la Lantern, where they passed some
time without any manner of Diversion for want of Needles. After a short stay,
like true multiplying Daughters of Eve, they embarked for America, where they
arrived, as we told you before: Presently after their Landing, they were joined
to the Tune of for better for worse, according to the laudable Custom of the
Country, which, as we are credibly informed, was taking one another Words
without any tedious Preface or Ceremony; and amongst the rest, Madam de
Maintenon's Father and Mother were coupled together, and so by this means our
Illustrious Heroine came to be begotten. All those Persons who have been at
America, are able to inform you, that whether it happens through the peculiar
Nature of the Climate, or the Temperature of the Country, their Children don't
stay so long a time before they are able to help themselves, as here in Europe;
and Experience has made it evident, that their Infants do commonly make a shift
to walk, when they are but one year Old, which would pass for an extraordinary
Miracle, with us on this side the Globe. To reassume our Discourse, our little
Heroine was employed at the Age of Three years, to look after some Turkies
belonging to the Illustrious Madam de... her Godmother, who out of a Principle
of Charity took her from her Pious Parents, and kept her with her at her own
Mansion. In this honorable important Occupation, she passed Three years more,
after which time was expired, her abovementioned Godmother, having some
occasions to make a Voyage into Europe, carried the pretty Damosel along with
her, with a design to cultivate and refine her Person as she advanced in Age.

Their Voyage, as it happened, was somewhat of the longest, which they, poor
Souls, never expected, by reason of the ill Weather with which they were
frequently distressed. Nevertheless they arrived happily at Rochel, where after
they had refreshed themselves for some time, they took their way toward
Low-Poictou, and there they tarried a considerable space, without any reverse
of Fortune. The first Calamity which befell our Heroine was the unexpected Death
of her Godmother. At that time, she was about Fifteen years Old; the decease of
her careful Fellow-Traveller touched her very sensibly; and, without question,
she wished her self an hundred times in America again. We may imagine, that in
this Melancholy Condition, she had remained without any Comfort; if a Brawny
Rustic of the Village where she sojourned, had not prevailed upon her by
Virtue of his Complements to believe, that whatsoever Loss she had sustained by
the Translation of her Godmother, might be fully made up in him. This amorous
Villager had Riches enough for a Man of his Quality, he had one Leg shorter
than the other, and an Eye less than other Men, but to make him amends, Nature
provided him with a tolerable good Addition upon his Back, for he always
carried a Mountain about him. After all, I say, one could not find in all the
Village, a Man that could surpass him; he had likewise a little share of
Understanding, which was but very necessary, considering the business he went
through, and yet a Man may say without flattery to his Person, that it was not
much for his advantage. A long time before the Death of our Heroin's Godmother,
he had a certain inclination toward her, that cannot be well expressed; for he
perceived in himself a small Je ne scay quoy, a beginning of a Passion, which
he durst not discover. Without doubt, the Veneration he bore to Madam de... the
Godmother of our Madam de Maintenon, hindered him from making a Formal
Declaration of his affection; but as soon as she was dead, he searched all the
means in the World to accost her, he never sung at high Mass when he was there,
nor in any famous Assembly of the Village, when he made his appearance amongst
them; If he went to any Fair of note, he laid out his Money very profusely, on
Ribands of all Sorts and Colors, to present them to his fair Mistress, hoping
by that Liberality to insinuate himself into her good Graces. But all this
while he made but small insensible advances in his Affair by his dumb Language,
and we may honestly conclude, that all these Assiduities had been to no
purpose, if he had not found occasion to accost her one day with his Rural
Rhetoric, as she was drawing water out of a Well. Will you let me help you,
says he, Alas, replys the Damosel, You Will mightily oblige me; so he put himself
in a Posture to execute the Business, and through an excess of Civility,
carried her Buckets for her even to her Cottage, where being arrived, and
finding himself alone with her, Is it not true, says he, That you suffer a
great deal of Sorrow-for the loss of your Godmother; She was a very good Woman,
and had a mighty Concern for you, and if she had lived any time longer, had not
failed to give you some little Fortune, that might have made you an agreeable
Match for some honest Labourer in the Village: But, cries he, pursuing his
Discourse, although She has left you nothing at all, yet I have Love enough for
you, to give you a Moiety of what I possess, if you will be pleased to be my Wife;
you shall always continue to command me upon all occasions, and nothing shall
be wanting for you. Do but allow me, answers she, a small time to consider of
this matter, and Ple return you my Answer to morrow behind our Cottage. Our
amorous Esop was exceeding satisfied with this Answer, and after having
entertained her a while with his Gallantry upon this Subject, retired and
withdrew, impatiently expecting the following day, to know her final
Resolution, so he failed not to appear upon the place, at the hour of
Assignation. When he saw her a pretty way off, Alas! says he, and will you be
my Wife then? I don't know, says she, I find not any great reluctance in my
self, to enter into those Ecclesiastical Indentures with you, but to confess
the Truth, I have no very great Affection for your person at present, however,
I am in good hopes that a little time will bring all these Matters about. Ah!
My dear Guiellemette, says he, how passionately do I love you, I Will make you
such Presents, and give you such undeniable Testimonies of the Sincerity of my
heart, that you shall be in a manner forced to have a Love for me.

In effect, he went to none of the Neighboring Markets, but he courteously
brought her either a Cake-offering, or Buns, or Needles, or Pins, or
Penny-knives, and a great quantity of other things of that Nature. She that saw
with what Zeal and Affection he bestirred himself in her Service, began at last
to have some kindness for him. She considered, she was without Father, and
Mother, Relations, or Friends, to support her, destitute of all manner of
Conveniences, and as it were a Stranger in the Country: On the other hand, she
saw a strong, lusty, two-handed Labourer, that courted and adored her. These
prudent reflections had almost prevailed with her to make this ill Choice, but
it may be alleged for her excuse, that it had not been the first Marriage by
ten thousand, that necessity has occasioned; for when one suffers himself to
tumble down a Precipice, it is twenty to one, unless the Devil's in him, but
that he will lay hold of the next thing he meets to save his Bacon. Therefore she
testified a vast deal of kindness, and more indeed than was usual, for her
trusty Swain, and there is no question to be made, but the Marriage had
succeeded, if a certain Lady that lived in a Neighboring Castle, had not taken
Compassion of her Youth, and the Embarras, she had unavoidably thrown her self
into, by matching with this Villager: and having observed in our Heroine, a
Spirit and Wit that was capable of attaining to any thing, she took her home
along with her, where she lived at first under the Character of a Servant, and
afterward under That of a Chambermaid. There she forgot her poor Rustic to
all Intents and Purposes, and began to show by little and little the greatness
of her Soul, a la mode de la Noblesse. Her disconsolate Lover was in Despair
for loss of her; he was almost come up to the Castle to see her, but he wisely
bethought himself, that he could not make his approaches any further, if he
designed to carry back with him a bundle of Fagots, which he had got upon his
Shoulders. This threw him into one of the severest Fits of Melancholy in the
World, nevertheless to relieve him in this Affliction, he had hopes some time
or other to speak with her, and knowing that she would be obliged shortly to
pay her Devotions all alone at the Parish Church, he was resolved to renew his
correspondence with her there. In order to put this intrigue into execution, he
came thither very early in the morning, being afraid, as you may imagine of
coming too late, and when she was just entered the Church he advanced toward
her, that he might have the opportunity to converse with her; but she that
found her heart raised above the ordinary pitch, by the fine clothes she wore,
a vanity with which she had never been acquainted before, scornfully rejected
him, and would not hear him speak one syllable.

He had like to have lost, for good and all, the respect that was due to so
sacred a place, and was upon the point of reproaching her, for her base
ingratitude; but his Reason proving too powerful for his Passion, he waited
patiently till the Service was over; and then, as he followed her, he pursued
her all along with the bitterest reproaches imaginable, he refreshed her memory
a thousand times over, even with the least inconsiderable triffle he had given
her; not forgetting the expenses he had been at, upon her score, at the
Farthing-Custard-House, and the never to be forgotten present of a Needle-Case.
Sometimes he swore at her like any Dragon, at other times he made his
supplications to her in the most submissive manner, humbly desiring her
Lady-ship not to forget the ardent Love he had for her. In fine, he put himself
into an hundred several postures, but all this signified nothing; for all the
while she marched on carelessly, without regarding his complaints, or showing
the least concern for him. This severe usage made so deep an impression upon
the afflicted Labourer, that the very same day he fell into a violent Feavor,
which in a short time carried him out of the World. She could not forbear the
having un peu de chagrin, a little interval of sorrow, upon so doleful an
occasion, and the Lord knows it was but very little, for two hours put it out
of her head, and made her forget the memory of him for ever. She continued a
good time in this middle station of Life, and without doing her any affront, we
may safely conclude, she had passed her whole Life in this humble Figure, if
the Marquis de Chevreuse had not found some charms in her. The first time he
saw her was in this Ladies family, and having informed himself of her
extraction, he employed all his thoughts to make a conquest of her. To bring
this about, he attacqu'd her with all the ways and arguments, that he believed
would be most agreeable to his design, and could soonest help to vanquish her,
but to no purpose: She lived with a reserved Virtuous Person that had an Eye
continually over her; and besides, had sufficiently instructed her in the
principles of Honor, if she would be content to practice 'em. Monsieur de
Chevreuse who had seen the Court, and consequently knew that some feeble
denials at first were things of course, was not overmuch mortified or
astonished at her refusal; he daily continued in his pursuit, and did not at
all despair to accomplish his ends, and carry off the Game. One day when her
Lady was wholly taken up in receiving a Visit, and she her self, contrary to
her usual custom, was alone in her Chamber, he accosted her with great
civilities. Ah! Dear Madam, says he to her, and have you then sworn to be
always cruel to me, and will you not reciprocally correspond with the most
violent and faithful passion in the World? I love you, Madam, and I have
acquainted you with my flame several limes, and my Eyes have declared it to
you, every moment when I had the happiness of seeing you; yet you, cruel fair
one, will not suffer it to meet with the least encouragement, but seem fully
resolved to make me endure a thousand Martyrdomes, by the contempt with which
you entertain my love, and the indifference with which you receive my
protestations. Monsieur, answers she, very coldly to him, I have neither any
rigor or softness in me, in regard to your self; I know my own inclinations
pretty well, and it suffices me to have a respect for you, which is due to
persons of your Rank and Quality, without troubling my self with any other
matters. Having ended her discourse, she went hastily out of her Chamber, and
disposed of her self amongst her companions, the poor Marquis not being able to
oblige her to tarry one moment longer with him, for all his importunity and
solicitation. Nevertheless he did not suffer any favorable occasion to pass
by, without discoursing to her about his love, and he imagined, that he
observed some prosperous advance in his affairs; when he was obliged to go and
take possession of an Estate a great way off, which a certain pious Aunt of his
had left him at her decease. Being just about to depart out of this Province,
he desired to take his leave of her, but he was not able to find her alone,
because she was always busied before her Lady, who found her self somewhat
indisposed. Therefore he resolved to write to her, which he immediately did, as
soon as he arrived to the place, where he was obliged to be; and that his
Mistress might receive it with security, he dispatched one of his Servants to
visit, as from him, the Lady with whom she lived; with order likewise to slip
the Letter into her hands when he saw an opportunity, which he accordingly did.
When she had received it, she could not tell, whether it was best to deliver it
to her Mistress, or read it by her self. Her mind continued some time in this
suspense, at last her curiosity prevailed, so she opened it, and read as
follows.

Madam,
AFter having oftentimes assured you in conversation, that I love you more than
my self, I take the liberty to write to you; that I may give you fuller
evidences of my sincerity, and at the same time to make this protestation
before you, that notwithstanding all your indifference, I shall ever persevere
to adore you. I am sensibly afflicted that I had not the honor to take my
leave of you before my departure; I have sought every occasion with the utmost
diligence, but you, my cruel fair one, think, that I am not sufficiently
punished for my transgressions either by your rigor, or my owndespair. You
have hitherto industriously avoided my company, because you very well foresaw
that one moment of your charming conversation would sweeten and lenify all that
chagrin which your absence had created. Let me persuade you, Madam, to quit all
those cruelties that are so disagreeable and contrary to the fairest Sex,
consider the violence of my passion, and by an act of generosity, which is so
peculiar to your nature, return one heart for another. Mine is altogether
yours, it will suffer no other image to be impressed upon it, but that of your
charming person, nor will it be ever separated from you. Give me therefore some
small room in yours; it is the only thing in the World which I beg of you, and
for the attaining of it, I would willingly abandon my fortune, and my dignity.
Let me then conjure you, Madam, to comply with my passion, and make your self
absolute Mistress, not only of my Heart, but also of every thing that I
possess. The Bearer hereof will bring me your answer; I beseech you, that you will
no more deny me this favor, than any thing else that I have requested of you;
without which you will reduce to the extremity of despair the person, that
preserves his life upon no other score than to love, nor his Fortunes, than to
serve you.

De Chevreuse.


She continued for some space altogether astonished at reading this Letter, and
could not tell whether she had best return any answer or no; at last she
resolved with her self not to write to him, and to avoid-meeting with the
Messenger she passed the time amongst her Female companions till he was gone.
After this, she took a walk all alone by her self to a pretty Grove of Trees
that was joining to the House; where she had not been long, but she was
possessed with an itching desire to review the Letter; she endeavored with
some little violence to her self to master this inclination, but the curiosity,
which is so natural to her Sex, at last carried it. Immediately she imagined,
that it would prove a very agreeable diversion, and that an hundred Letters of
that nature could not fail to get the ascendent over her heart. Having
therefore pleased her self with the perusal of it, she began to discover some
graces in the Style, which attracted her Eyes as it were by force. In fine, she
read it again with abundance of (...), and after she had mad^ (...) few
reflections, found it (...) ^^^ertaining. How! (says she,) a Marquit fallen in
love with me, and not only so, but passionately in love, that offers me his
Heart, and his fortunes, and shall I refuse him? No, I begin to see my fault, I
will love him, he will make me a great Lady, and instead of being a Servant to
others, as I am at present, I shall then have others to wait upon me; I shall
by this means raise and advance the obscurity of my Birth. But then, says she,
reprehending her self, You know who you are, and if he love thee, it is only to
ravish from thee the dearest thing thou have ^n the World. When that is gone,
^e'l regard thee no more; then ^hou'lt be abandoned, and without support: No,
love him not, but reserve thy reputation and honor.

Thus divided between two different passions, she let her Letter drop without
perceiving it. ^he pursued her walk and medi^^tions, when an old venerable
^ervant-Maid of the house, with whom she was intimately ac^uainted, came
thither: She walked so softly, that Guillemette was not aware of her till she
came up to the place, and had taken up the Letter, which she did very
carefully, not at all questioning, but that it contained some important piece
of secrecy. She accosted her then, and endeavored to drive her out of her
pensiveness. I have never found you, says she to her, in such a sullen reserved
humor before, it must certainly be some extraordinary matter that has
occasioned it; Come, don't conceal any of your affairs from me, and if I am
able to bring you any consolation, you may rest satisfied, that I shall leave
nothing unattempted. She spoke abundance of such things to her, without being
able to extort any positive answer; but seeing that, she did not any more
importune her upon this occasion, not at all questioning but she should
discover something or other in the Letter. In short, they were no sooner
arrived to their respective apartments, but the old Woman shutting the door
upon her self, began to read it; and there was fully satisfied with the true
reason of the change which she observed in Guillemette. She was extremely
concerned to know, what advances the Marquis had made in her affections, and
what effect this Letter had produced. She judged very well, that Guillemette
would not make her any discoveries of this Secret, so she resolved to attend,
and wait till the return of the Marquis, hoping to get an account of the whole
intrigue out of him; and as she knew by experience, that lovers are generally
free and liberal, so she promised her self no inconsiderable advantage, if she
could but be serviceable to him in this Amorous commerce.

All this while, the pensive Guillemette had her mind seized with a thousand
several thoughts, and agitations: She had a desire once more to read the Letter
that gave her all these inquietudes, and for that purpose, she searched her
Pockets. Nothing certainly is able to describe her astonishment and confusion,
when she could not find it there: She immediately ran to the place where she
read it the Second time, but did not meet with it; then she did not at all
question but that she was entirely ruined in the good opinion of her Lady; a
thousand mortifying reflections disturbed her Soul, and she found a visible
alteration in her self within a few days. Her Mistress that loved her very
well, desired to be made acquainted with the reason; but she pretended an
ordinary indisposition of body, and confessed not one Syllable of the true
occasion. There was no body in the whole Family that knew the cause, but only
our old Agnes, who, being willing to apply a remedy to this malady, came
immediately to her Chamber, and thus began. Ah, my dear Guillemette, lays she
to her, you would not tell me the other day in the Grove, what it was that
possessed you with this melancholy, and I believe I had never known the reason,
if my good Stars had not thrown me upon your Letter, which has discovered the
whole business. It Is nothing but the loss of That, continues she, which has
caused all your pain; but it has been lodged in very good hands, behold here I
return it you, no body has read it but my self. I have always had a kindness
for you, and shall ever preserve it; but then to correspond with my friendship,
you must make me your confident, and for the future conceal none of your
Intrigues from me. Guillemette took the Letter with a great deal of joy, which
did not a little contribute toward her recovery, since her indisposition
chiefly proceeded from an apprehension she had, that her Lady had read the
Letter. In fine, she gave Agnes abundance of thanks, and reposed an entire
confidence in her Fidelity. The Old Woman contradicted her in nothing, on the
contrary she agreed with her exactly in all her Sentiments, in order to make
some advantages hereafter by this compliance, which was the only thing that she
proposed to her self by it.

In the mean time, the Marquis de Chevreuse was in despair, for having received
no answer to his better, he resolved to write to her the Second time, and if
that failed to crown his expectation, to make no more efforts of that nature,
but go himself in Person, and endeavor a conquest: Therefore he took Pen in
Hand, and Composed a Sonnet, which he closed up in the following Billet.

It Is I find decreed, Madam, and you have resolved my death; If that is your
design, you will have your satisfaction upon me in a few days, for since I have
been absent from you, I have not been able to procure one moments release from
my torments. However, if you will be pleased to alleviate my pains with one Word
from your adorable hand, I shall have the consolation to be remembered by you.
Do it then, I beseech you, and if you disdain to answer my prose, at least,
answer the Verses, which are sent you by the most Passionate and sincere of
Lovers,

De Chevreuse.
SONNET To my Adorable Guillemette.
I.
FAir Goddess, whose victorious Charms
Have made a Conquest over my heart,
When will you fill my long-expecting arms,
And bid my cruel fears depart.
II.
Since envious fate your absence has procured,
No peaceful rest has crowned the Night.
The day has seen no kind delight,
Ten thousand Martyrdoms I have endured.
III.
Come, make a Victim of your pride,
Gave my despair, and ease my pain,
(...) unbecoming Cruelty aside,
And to mild pity sacrifice disdain.
IV.
Or of my fate you have decread,
And poor unhappy. I must bleed,
In a pathetic tone pronounce my death.
And I with freedom will resign my breath.



This he sent by another Valet, hoping that he would acquit himself better in his
commission than the last, who in a few days arrived at the Castle; and after he
had visited the Lady in his Master's name, as he was ordered, be waited for an
opportunity to find Guillemette alone. At last, ^e had the good fortune to meet
with her in the Parterres, and having saluted her with the appearance of a most
profound respect; he told her, that he had orders to deliver a Packet into her
own hands, and attend her answer. She knew the Livery full well, so it cost her
a moment or two's consideration to conclude whether she should receive the
Letter or no. But the Bearer was so very adroit in his persuasions, and
acquitted himself so handsomely, that he obliged her to receive it. However all
the answer he was able to get out of her, was only this, that he was not to
expect any; he was weary of making a long stay, since it was not likely to turn
to account, therefore he withdrew, and went back to his Master; who was no
sooner informed of the success of his Second Letter, but he sent orders with
all the haste imaginable to dispatch his Affairs, and prepared to be going very
early next Morning, as indeed he did, and soon arrived at the Ladies house.

Immediately he waited upon her, to pay his Devoirs, but staid not any long
time in the Room, out of an impatience he had to talk with his dearly beloved
Guillemette, who took as much Fains to avoid him, as he did to find her out.
She came off well enough for that time, for she took care to be constantly in
her Ladies Company. The Marquis began to despair of the Success of his
undertaking, nevertheless to conceal his impatience as much, as was possible
for him, he visited all the Ladies Maids, amongst the rest as he was passing by
the Chamber of the reverend Old Agnes, he made her some Complements, and as
they had known one another for a long time, she de^^^ed him to come in, and
having made him to sit, thus began her Discourse, I know, Sir, some Melancholy
Consideration or other, has of late oppressed your Spirits; I don't see you in
that pleasant Merry Humor, you were always accustomed to carry about you; on
the contrary you do nothing in the World but think, and sigh, and cast your
eyes everlastingly upon the Ground. For Heavens sake, whence proceeds this
sudden Alteration? Come, Sir, deal fairly, and lay aside your Disguise,
Guillemette has occasioned all this Chagrin, don't conceal any thing from me,
and be persuaded, that I have Compassion enough for your Condition, and
Friendship enough for you, to undertake anything in the World that may prove
Serviceable to your Designs, only tell me what Progress you have made in her
Affections, and how your circumstances stand. Since I must acquaint you with
everything, my dear Agnes, answers he, You are to know, that hitherto she has
scorned and disdained me, and shuns my Company with as much concern, as if I
carried the Pestilence about me. Endeavor to set me right in her good Opinion,
and besides a suitable recompense which I shall give thee hereafter, behold
here are ten Lew is d'ors, which I desire thee to accept. She made some
Ceremony at first of taking the damned Yellow pieces, but in fine she suffered
him to overcome her Modesty, and promised to manage her self upon this
occasion, that he should have no Reason to discommend her Conduct.

Guillemette in the mean time, who knew nothing of this Conspiracy against her,
had no sooner read the Letter, but out she goes to find her virtuous Confident
Agnes, according to her Promise, which, as you were informed before, obliged
her to conceal nothing from the venerable Old Gentlewoman; she found her as she
came from conducting the Marquis to his Lodgings, and immediately showed her
the Letter, and demanded her Opinion of it. Upon my word, dear Child of mine,
replied the charitable Matron, I could almost find in my heart to quarrel with
my Stars, and so forth, for not being young, and in a condition to oblige. A
Lover so sincere as yours is, should never be able to disengage himself from my
Chains, and heaven knows, how advantagiously I Would manage so favorable an
opportunity. I give thee, my dear, the same Advice which I would follow my
self, were I in thy Circumstances, make your Profit of this Affair, and don't
neglect it, 'twill turn to a fine Account, I warrant you. Not to over whelm you
with an hundred and fifty Proverbes, strike the Iron, I say, while it is hot;
for that Person, that has had the Grace to take the first occasion by the
Forelock, will be able to command the other fortunate Moments, as they happen.
In a word, she alleged so many convincing Reasons for what she said, and so
well employed her little Talent of Rhetoric, that Guillemette promised her for
the time to come to comply with the Marquisses Inclinations. Our Old Matron was
never better pleased in all her Life than now, she immediately sentthe Marquis
word in how hopeful a way things were like to go with him, which he was no
sooner informed of; but he prepared himself to give a Visit to the Lady. After
that piece of Formality was over, he walked out to breathe a little fresh Air
in the Garden, where it was his Fortune to meet with the Goodnatur'd Agnes, who
gave him an ample Account of what had passed, and told him withal, that he
might, if he pleased, see his Mistress Guillemette, because she was at that
very time all alone in her Chamber. He ran thither with all the haste
imaginable, and found her very busy about her Linen. At last, Madam, says he,
I may count my self the happiest Man in the Universe, since I have one
favorable moment to acquaint you with the true Sentiments of my Heart; they
are pure, and sincere. Madam, I love you, I adore you, comply with my Passion.
How! continued he, will you then return me no Answer, will you reduce me to the
extremity of Despair? To all this she made no Answer but by her sighs, which
gave the Marquis to understand, that the Pains of the venerable Agnes were not
bestowed in vain, but had operated wonderfully. Nevertheless he could not
content himself with this dumb Language, but conjured her by all manner of
Reasons to quit this Silence, he beseeched her to make some Eclaircissement of
her Love, and in fine prevailed so far, that he drew this Confession from her
Mouth, that she had no Aversion to him. He would needs be assured of the Truth
of it by a Kiss, but she was not willing to grant him such a Favor so soon; in
refusing him, she did not however take away all hopes from him to obtain it for
the time to come, but he that was the most passionate Lover breathing, seeing
he could not have so small a refreshment to his Flame, began to faint away, and
had unquestionably done so, if he had not sustained himself by an Elbow-Chair
that stood near him. As soon as he was recovered out of the Fit, looking upon
her with languishing Eyes, he thus Addressed himself to her in the following
Sonnet.

SONNET.
I.
WEll now, imperious Fair, I find,
You have your Lovers Death designed:
Since you that could have eased my wretched state,
Have added to my Cares, and urged my coming fate.
II.
Go, take a Kiss, Love whispers in my Ear,
But Love, alas! gives place to Fear;
Awful respect disarms my hands.
And to my growing Passion gives Commands.
III.
Ah! must your wounded Lover dye,
And see his Balm, and see his cure so nigh.
Or shall he boldly seize a Kiss,
A prelude to a greater Bliss.
IV.
No, He Will a thousand Deaths endure,
And all reverses of his fate attend,
E're He Will by Sacrilege attempt his cure,
And his dear Guillemette offend.
This Agitation, and respectful Behavior of the Marquis failed not to make a
large breach in the heart of the poor Guillemette, yet she had the care enough
to conceal it from her Conqueror, and after all his reiterated importunities
made no other Declaration of her Affections, than what she had done before;
Namely, that he was not displeasing or disagreeable to her.

Our Marquis immediately gave the discreet Agnes, a full Account of the issue
of his Negotiation, and visited Guillemette with the greatest Assiduity as was
possible, he prevailed so far upon her at last, that she confessed she loved
him; he was not satisfied with this Confession, but conjured her by all the
tenderest things in the World, to answer his Love. Agnes on the other hand
persuaded her not to show her self too Complaisant on the sudden to the
Marquis, but to have a regard to the making of her Fortune: In a word, they
were so well pleased one with the other that she promised him a rendevouz the
next Night at her Chamber, where they might discourse of these Affairs, with
greater Liberty and Freedom. But their cruel Destinies so ordered the Matter,
that a certain Lady of Quality in the Neighborhood, having lost two of her
Maids by an unlucky Distemper, and being informed, that in the House where
Guillemette lived, they had more than they had occasion for, she dispatched a
Messenger to her Lady, to entreat her, that she would be pleased to send her
one or two. This Lady, who had some Suspicion of the Intrigue that was a
driving on betwixt the Marquis and Guillemette, was extremely glad, that she
had an opportunity to break off the Correspondence; and so much the more was
she satisfied, because she knew the Marquis durst not appear there, by reason
of an inveterate hatred between him and that Family. Therefore she ordered our
unfortunate Lover, and another of her Maids to prepare themselves to depart the
next Morning, and commanded Guillemette to come that Night, and lie in her
Chamber, because she had some important Advice to give her for the future
management of her Life. Never did any mortal blow occasion, a greater
Astonishment; these words struck her like a Thunderbolt, or like Medusa's
head, for she imagined her self to be changed into stone. Her Lady, perceiving
the disorder she was in, was very inquisitive to know the Reason, but she, who
had a very good faculty that way, found it it no difficult matter to invent a
sham Excuse; the present Conjuncture afforded her a plausible Pretense, and to
give the better Color to her Hypocrisy, she shed a few Tears, and thus began
her Discourse. Without question, Madam, you are sufficiently acquainted with
the cause of my Grief, but since you are pleased to learn it from my own Mouth;
I dare not assume the Confidence to contradict you. I believe, Madam, it will
not appear strange in the least to you, that after having received such
abundance of Favors and Kindnesses from your liberal hands, I find a sensible
regret to part with you, especially having determined to pass the remaining
part of my Life in your Service, and by my diligence to make you some tolerable
amends for all your Bounty. This only Sorrow, to see my self so miserably
disappointed in my Expectations, bas sofar possessed me, that I can think of
nothing else; and although your Injunctions have ever passed with me for so many
Laws, yet I shall obey this particular Command, with the greatest reluctance in
the World; if my Prayers and Supplications could prevail with you to revoke
this cruel Order. I have parted with you for your own good, replys her Lady
very bluntly, but it will not continue always; as I find you behave your self,
so I shall Act accordingly; go in the mean time, and prepare to obey me.

She departed, and run immediately to inform Agnes of this fatal Command, and
enjoined her to tell the Marquis, she would ever preserve the same Affection
and Tenderness for him; only she desired him to attempt nothing upon the Road,
for that, says she, will raise a great Clamor and Noise, and discover the
whole Affair, which I would have kept as secret, as is possible. Agnes was
mightily concerned at this Contre-coup, this mortifying disappointment, for she
grounded no small Expectations upon the Sacrificing of this Virginity.
Nevertheless she promised to perform whatever she had requested of her, and
presently posted away to acquaint the Marquis with the News, who by this time
had tasted a thousand Fantastic Pleasures in his Imagination: He fell into the
greatest Consternation in the World, but had no other Remedy to apply to his
Sores, except Patience; and endeavored to comfort himself, as well as he
could. As the Night approached, he judged it not a Propos to depart, but stay
till next Morning, that he might give no Umbrage or Suspicion in the Case, and
also, that he might find some opportunity or other, to speak with his Mistress
before his Departure.

Guillemette having put all her things in her Trunk, received Orders to appear
forthwith at her Ladies Chamber. This virtuous Person, who had passed above
Threescore years in the World; had gathered a great deal of Experience, and
considering that a good Tree is easily spoiled, if it is not cultivated when
it is young, was desirous to furnish her with some useful Solid Instructions,
before she went away, and to that end she thus began the Discourse.

Since it has pleased Heaven to take away my dear Husband and Children from me,
I have been effectually dead to all these impertinent gilded Vanities; of Life,
and only paid my regard to those Duties, that cannot but render those Persons
eternally happy that follow them. Now because you are going to be separated
from me for at me, I have some Reason to be fearful of your Conduct, when I
consider what Age you are of. One runs a great deal of Hazard and Danger at
your years, but withal one acquires a vast Reputation and Glory in surmounting
them: Therefore I think it not amiss, to give you part of that Experience which
I have, and to lend you some Instructions for your future Deportment: And I am
able to assure you, that you cannot prove otherwise than Happy, if you will permit
your self to be influenced and directed by them. In the first Place be devout
without Affectation, and have a Care you don't fall into Hypocrisy, for by
that one does immediately Affront and Assault the Divinity.

2. Don't set your Heart upon the Pleasures of the Flesh, for he that prefers
the Pleasures of the Body, before the Health of his Soul is Guilty of the same
sottish Stupidity, with him that let us his Friend drown, and runs to secure his
Clothes.

3. Don't propose to your self any great Pleasure in worldly Vanity, rather
abhor it, and let your Garb be Modest and Civil; ever while you live take more
care to adorn your Soul than your Body, without doing which you offer incense
to an Idol, and abandon the Deity.

4. Don't begin any thing, without having considered seriously of it before,
and let your judgment be mature and well fixed: for he that undertakes any
business of moment, without this necessary provision, ought not to be
surprised, if it never succeeds.

5. Never attempt any thing which is above your strength, for all efforts of
this nature use to produce effects that are infinitely below the expectation
one conceived of 'em.

6. Don't look with Envy at the good of your Neighbor, for by that means you
render your self unworthy to possess your own.

7. Carefully avoid that which they call Love here in the World. Above all,
never give any attention to the discourses of Flatterers. This sort of People
deify you in their warm harangues, though at the same time they endeavor to make
you the most miserable of all Creatures. Therefore in imitation of the Adder,
shut your Ears to the Cllarms of these Enchanters, and be strongly persuaded,
that there is nothing so prejudicial to your reputation, as the vanity of
hearing your self flattered. Of all the passions, that are capable of
misleading, and corrupting the judgment, Love is the strongest and most
imperceptible: for he kindles his Fire only with a design to make us blind and
giddy; to make you entertain a horror of him, he is Painted blind, not only to
represent his Effronterie and immodesty, but also to teach us, that commonly he
reduces those Persons to Nakedness and Poverty, that follow him.

8. If you submit your judgment to your pleasures, you will burn your self at last
with the Torch, that was given you to light and conduct you.

9. Avoid Gaming as much as is possible, for he that loves play to excess,
takes a great deal of pains to die poor.

10. Consider one moment at least, of what you are going to speak, and take two
more to think of what you are going to promise; fearing lest you may come to
feel a great deal of sorrow, for that which you promised with precipitation.

11. Obey with all alacrity and reverence, the person whom you Serve, and
employ your utmost endeavors to set your self in her good opinion. Never stay
for a Command to do that, which you see is necessary to be done, and consider
that the principal cause of the liberality of Masters toward their Servants,
proceeds from their having acquitted themselves well in their respective
duties; for to apply an old but a Proverb upon this occasion. A good Valet
makes a good Master.

12. Be content with your own condition, for he that is not content with an
honest condition, gives himself the trouble oftentimes to render that less,
which he endeavored to increase.

13. Don't be urgent or pressing to know the Secrets of another; be likewise
very reserved, in communicating your own. You are no longer Mistress of 'em
when you have parted with 'em to a Confident, and your own example will justify
the infidelity which one ought to observe in communicating his Secrets to
another.

14. Once more, renounce and defy all cajolers and flatterers, both the one and
the other design by the sound of their empty discourses, to the Money out of your
Pocket, and to ravish you of your Honor. In fine, the infection of the Plague
is not half so contagious and fatal for the body, as the Poison of Vicious
Profligate company; and they that make use of Elaborate harangues for no other
purpose than to enveigle us into a criminal rencoutre with 'em, employ a
perfumed Poniard to pierce us in the heart.

Behold Guillemette, this is it which I had to say to you, and which I always
desire you to retain in your Memory, and fearing lest you might forget it one
time or other, I have succinctly digested it into particulars, and committed it
to Writing. Be sure you keep it carefully, and read it often.

Guillemette made very solemn promises to observe all this, and then they
composed themselves to rest till the Morning. The Lady never pared with her out
of her company, till she saw her in the Coach, so that our Lovers could not
take their farewell of each other, but only in general terms. Our Marquis having
tarried some short time after her, took his leave, and retired to one of his
houses, situated about two Leagues distance from the new Habitation of his
Mistress, who along with her Companion was very kindly received at her first
arrival. But the entertainment that followed did not answer accordingly, for
she lived with a Lady whom we shall call Olimpia, a haughty, imperious,
ill-natured Woman; that treated all her Servants after a rude barbarous manner,
notwithstanding they used the greatest diligence imaginable in the discharge of
their duties. This kind of usage seemed extreme, ly unpalatable to the poor
Guillemette; she was just parted from a person that had always regarded her as
her own Child, whereas she saw her self now in a condition very little
different from that of a Slave, which infinitely disgusted her, and served to
establish the Marquis more then ever in her good inclinations. He was now just
upon the point of despair, never a day passed over his head, but he rode that
way on Horseback; yet was never so fortunate as to see her. At last he
bethought himself of a Stratagem, which accomplished his designs. By the virtue
of Almighty Money, he gained over to his party a certain Peasant of the
Village, that used to furnish that Castle with Fish, and made him promise to
deliver a Letter into the hands of his beloved Guillemette; To prevent all
mistakes, he acquainted him with her Shape and Features, so the other promised
to perform his part, which he effectually did, for he gave her the Letter. She
was somewhat discomposed at the manner of receiving it, till the fellow cured
her of her fears and apprehensions, by assuring her that he was altogether at
the Marquises devotion. She promised to send an answer by him the day
following, so the Peasant made what haste he could to bring this news to the
Marquis, who had all this while impatiently attended his return. In the mean
time, Guillemette opened the Letter, and read as follows.

Madam,
I Am persuaded, that if I did not live entirely for you, I had not been able
by this time so much as to lift up my Eyes to see you without dying. If I could
have had the honor to take my leave of you, and know your sentiments, I had
received sufficient consolation. Do me then the favor that I may enjoy one
minute's conversation with you, in some place or other: Alas! who could have
believed that we should be so cruelly separated, when we were just upon the
point of meeting? However it does not signify much, and I have that favorable
opinion of your Charity, that it will repair the loss we have mutually
sustained. Adieu, my Dear, let me know how matters go with you. You may confide
entirely in the bearer, for he is trusty and faithful.


She took no long time in considering of an answer. The Letter found her when
she was in a suffering condition, and desirous to be set at Liberty, so she
writ the following answer, and dropped it slily into the Peasants Pocket.

Sir,
Although I have not seen you since my departure from... yet I have not suffered
that passion to be extinguished, which you have kindled in my Heart. For a
proof of this let me find you to morrow about four a clock disguised in a
Female Habit, on the side of the Wood that joins the High Way; there I shall
have the Honor to see you.


Never was the Marquis in such a transport of joy, as when he received this
Letter, he kissed it Twenty times over, and made all the haste imaginable, to
get his Love Equipage in readiness. He found her waiting for him on the spot,
at the hour of Assignation, where he spoke a thousand tender passionate things
to her. She that was now made free and sociable by the Marquises good
management, complained of the haughty carriage of Olympia, and of the unworthy
usage wherewith she treated her. He offered her his assistance immediately to
deliver her from this Tyranny; but she would not at first consent to such a
motion; desiring nothing else, as she assured him, but only to relate to her
former Mistress. But her lover managed his cause so effectually, by
representing to her, that if she followed those measures, she would always
continue in the same condition; whereas with him she should be absolute
Mistress of his fortunes, that she consented to resign her self into his hands
the Sunday following. He returned her his thanks with all the Eloquence he was
Master of, he Embraced her, he Kissed her most ardently; all this while she
showed nothing of her primitive rigor; so that we may conclude, without breach
of Charity, that if they had been in a more convenient place, she had scarce
carried that troublesome luggage, called a Maidenhead, home with her. However,
let that pass, he kissed her Eyes, her Mouth, her Neck, her Bosom, and where he
pleased. This complaisant entertainment of his Mistress, threw him into such an
ecstasy, that he was not able to utter one Syllable, till she thus awaked him.
I fancy, says she, that I behold you in the very same condition, as you were in
the other day, when you were transported with a sudden Spirit of Poetry,
because I would not consent to relieve you with a Kiss. If that chagrin, that
sullen fit of melancholy, which at that time possessed you, was able to
inspire your Mase with so much vigor; I am of opinion, that the joy which you
testify upon this occasion, ought to produce as lively effects. You are much in
the right on it, replys he, and after he had a little considered upon the point,
he repeated the following verses, as he walked by her side.

An Ode upon a KISS.
I.
NAy, now Ambitious thoughts farewell,
I pity Kings in all their state,
While thus in Sylvia's arms I dwell,
And mighty love does on my triumphs wait.
II.
Thus let me languishing expire,
Encircled in her Snowy Arms,
Till she revives me by her Charms,
And pours into my breast a new and nobler fire.
III.
Thus let me Kiss my Soul away,
And revel in substantial bliss;
Thus let me spend the fleeting day,
And crown each beauteous moment with a Kiss.
IV.
Adonis never was half so blessed,
Was never so fortunate as I:
Though Loves bright Goddess him carest,
And in her Arms hugged the delicious Boy.
V.
Nor Jove himself such transports knew,
When Danae the amorous God did hold:
Though he, the pleasure to pursue,
Mortgaged his poor Almighty-ship to Gold.
VI.
Ten thousand loves in pompous state
On those two Rosy Lips. reside:
While busy I with erger pride
Sip all the sweets of love, and bless my happy fate.
VII.
Now on her glowing breast I range,
Now kiss her Cheeks, and now her Eyes.
The pleasure's heightened by the change,
And fills my Senfes with immortal joys.
VIII.
But Ah! my beauteous Nymph, beware,
Ho^ you increase my store:
For else your pampered Slave may dare,
Drunk as he is with joy, to sue for something more.
IX.
For say fond Lovers, what you will,
To deify a Kiss:
It Is but a pledge or prologue still,
An earnest to secure the great succeeding blis^.
After he had thus concluded, he let a sigh drop from him, and said, Well,
Madam, what think you of this Poetical transport now, have you enough of it?
Yes indeed, says she, and I here protest to you, that I like these Verses
extremely well. If it were possible for me to have a greater esteem for you
than I have already, it would be, because you have so extraordinary a Genius at
Poetry: Nothing could contribute to advance you higher in my good opinion than
that. To confess the truth, I have a mighty passion and respect for Poets, and
all persons of understanding, as I conceive, ought to preserve the same
veneration for them. I am ravished with joy, Madam, says the Marquis, that I am
Master of any good Qualities, that are capable of giving you a diversion: I
assure you, My dearest, that I shall take care to cultivate this poor ^alent of
mine, since I find you have a kindness for it, and that nothing of Gallantry
shall pass between us, which I shall not endeavor to give you an account of ^n
Verse. Upon my word, answers she, you will infinitely ob^ige me by so doing.
After they had said abundance of amorous things one to another, and had
reasoned sufficiently upon this Subject, they parted with a promise not to fail
meeting at the ^our of Assignation. Immediately when she was returned back to
her Chamber, she began to make some reflections upon this affair; and ^s she
was accidentally looking for some thing or other in her Trunk, she chanced at
the same ^ime to lay her hands on the instructions, that were formerly given
her by the old Lady. She read 'em over not without some uneasiness, and qualms
of conscience, because she saw her actions so apparently blamed in 'em: But to
what purpose? She had had already given her promise, and the intrigue was too
far advanced to think of making a retreat. But on the other side, the
Instructions carried reason and weight in 'em, she was going to embarque her
self in an affair, which perhaps might cost her a great deal of repentance,
when it would be too late, and what should a poor perplexed Damosel do in such
an intricate, mortifying case? She found out, at last, the true expedient,
which was to sacrifice these troublesome instructions to the flames, that she
might have nothing about her to refresh her Memory, or reproach her
proceedings. So now, Gentle Reader, you may imagine the pious Gullemette
committing the helpless criminal Papers to the Fire, and aftewards very
devoutly taking her repose. The fatal Sunday now approached; therefore she made
all the haste she could to pack up the best of her movables in a little
bundle, and at the time appointed she took 'em under her Arm, and marched out
of the Castle, without being perceived by any body. Within two hundred paces of
the place, she found her trusty Lover, who attended her coming in a Coach and
Six Horses; they took her up, and made such speed that in less then two hours,
they arrived at his House; He had prepared a magnificent Apartment for her
reception; In fine, he passed away the Night with her, and ravished that flower
from her, which the men search after with so much curiosity, and the Women
ought so industriously to preserve and guard. In the mean time, they missed her
at the Castle, and believed she was returned back again to her old Quarters.
They presently dispatched a Messenger thither to enquire after her, but she was
not to be found; the old Lady was exceedingly afflicted at the news, and as for
her part Olympia left nothing unattempted to discover whether she was
Assassinated or no. All this while, they could not imagine what was become of
her, and we have reason to suppose, that it had been a long time before they
had received any intelligence, where she resided, if one of the old Ladies
Servants, that was sent to the Marquis upon an Errand, had not by mere accident
spied her looking out of (...) Window. He did not seem to ^iscover any manner
of astonishment at the sight, but she no sooner perceived him, but she
immediately retired to the other end ^f her Chamber; as soon as he ^ame home,
he declared the whole matter to the good Lady, who ^^om the beginning testified
a ^reat deal of sorrow upon this occasion, but now comforted her ^elf to hear
that Guillemette was ^live. Nevertheless, she banished ^^e poor Marquis for
ever from ^er House, and would not per^it him to see her any more. For ^ll
that, he did not in the least for^ear to pass his time as agreeably (...) he
could with his beloved Mi^^ress; and because he remembered ^^mself, that she
loved Poetry, he ^iled not to divert her even that ^ay, as often as their
gallantry furnished him with an occasion.

She found all his compositions very agreeable and natural, and took a great
deal of pleasure in reading 'em over. She paid the Marquis for his Poetry in
the same Coin, as she paid him in for all the other civilities she received at
his hands. Thus according to appearances, they passed their time contentedly
enough, their mutual affection continued very warm and violent for a
considerable space, and all the while this happy couple never troubled their
heads with any other matters. The Marquis made a journey to the Court, after
which he returned home, fuller of Love and Vigor than before; much about this
time the Judge of one of the principal Villages belonging to the Marquis,
became a Widdower, and he immediately thought of supplying that place for him,
with his Guillemette; he was a very honest plain man, very rich, and very
young; but the difficulty was to know whether the Judge would sit down
contented with another man's leavings, and submit the long Robe to the
lubricity and levity of a Woman. However, he was in good hopes to gain him, so
for this purpose he communicated the design to Guillemette, and represented to
her, that it would prove a very advantageous match, that it would repair her
honor, and not in the least destroy or interrupt their correspondence. For in
fine, my dearest, says he to her, it is only for thy Interest that I attempt
this affair; and don't believe that I have a mind to abandon thee. No, I Will
sooner abandon my whole Estate, and I should be happy enough in the sole
possession o^ thee, to make the greatest Monarchs envy my condition, tho^ I was
divested of all my other fortunes. It Is therefore for thy good only that I
undertake this enterprise, and that we may continue our intrigues with the
greater privacy and security. If you are of opinion that it will be for your
advantage, we will jointly employ our efforts to wheedle him into the oval of
Matrimony. She was convinced with the force of his arguments, and returned him
abundance of thanks for all his care, and civilities; promising to make use of
all her Charms to draw this Pigeon to her Pigeon-house, but they were well
matched, he was the Devil of a Rat, and she was the Devil of a Cat.

The Marquis frequently invited the Judge to dine with him, he frequently
complained before him of the loss of his Lady, he often regaled him at his
Table; and gave him all the marks of friendship imaginable, and all this while
the poor Judge knew not one Syllable of the true occasion. Guillemette also
frequently entertained him in particular, when the Marquis was called away by
other company. Never did Vestal Virgin show more Prudence and Piety than she
made appear in all her conversation and behavior; they that were not
acquainted with her Character, would have infallibly taken her for a Second
Lucretia. In the mean time, the Marquis sounded by little and little the Judges
Sentiments, about a Second Marriage, he discoursed en passant of this affair
daily to him; but to all this he returned no clear positive answers, but talked
all the while ambiguously. But one day, our Marquis was resolved to sound his
inclinations for good and all; to this end, after dinner was over, he took him
out to walk with him in one of the Parters of his Garden, and thus opened
himself: You know, Sir, the estimation I have always made of your Person, I
have distinguished you from all the Justiciaries of my Precincts, to place you
in these circumstances; the more I find I have for you a certain honest,
well-meaning, complaisant tenderness, that obliges me to have a great respect
and concern for your welfare. This is the reason why I passionately desire to
see you advantageously placed in a Second Marriage, and upon this score I have
a great desire to marry you from my own hands. The Judge thanked him very
submissively for all the favors he had received of him; and particularly for
the honor he did him daily at his House. But, Sir, says he, you have talked to
me concerning a certain thing, of which I have not entertained the least
thoughts since the death of my Wife; I don't question but that coming from your
hands, she must be a person that has abundance of merit, and honor: but may a
man be so happy as to know who this Lady is? It Is that young Gentlewoman,
replies the Marquis, that you have so often seen at my house; she was given me
for the Governant of my Family, and I must freely own to you, that I have a
great esteem for her virtues. She Is a person of Wit and good understanding; and
besides her other qualifications, she will have four thousand Livres by way of
Portion, which I intend to bestow upon her; besides, the first vacant place
that falls in the Court of Judicature, at Poictiers, which I offer you to
accept of, as you find convenient.

The Judge was not at all ignorant of the train that was laid for him; and as
soon as he heard the name of Guillemette mentioned, he smelt the design, and
immediately formed a resolution in himself not to comply with his Patron's
inclinations. But as it was his interest to manage Monsieur le Marquis as
dexterously as he could, he was not willing on the sudden to give him a total
refusal, not at all questioning, but that the other, who carefully observed all
his actions, would conclude from his rejecting the offer, that he had some
intelligence of their designs upon him. Therefore he took the middle way; and
after he had complemented the Marquis upon the score of all his favors and
civilities, he humbly represented to him, that an affair of that importance, as
Marriage, ought to be nicely considered, before one throws himself into it;
that within five days at farthest he should receive his answer in writing,
where he would take the liberty to express his Sentiments sincerely, in case he
should not be able to accept the party. The Marquis pressed him to explain
himself more clearly upon this point, but without any effect; He only
reiterated his former promise, so that the Marquis was obliged to content
himself with it, and went immediately to carry the (...) Guillemette, who no
sooner (...) it, but she presaged ill success to her self in the matter.
Nevertheless they expected the answer, and accordingly it came to their hands
at the prefixed time, they had the curiosity to know what Mysteries the Paper
contained within; so they broke it open, and read as follows.

Sir,
AFter having made abandance of reflections upon the inconventences and
misfortunes, that Marriage generally carries along with it, I have taken up a
resolution not to venture my self the second time on that outrageous Sea, but
to pass the remainder of my Life in security in the Harbor. The most
convincing arguments that served to determine my opinion in this case, were
sent me in a Letter by a Poet, a Friend of mine: I have transcribed a copy of
'em for you, that you may see the advice which he gives me, and with what an
invincible aversion be declaims against Matrimony. In the mean time, I shall
never cease to make you all the acknowledgments in the World for your infinite
favors, and I am heartily displeased with my self, that I cannot force my
inclination so far, as to offer my Vows to that charming person you designed
for me. You may reasonably believe, that Providence never designed me for so
great a blessing, however I shall always reserve that honor of Writing my self,

Your, etc.


Advice about MARRIAGE.
THe Husband's the Pilot, the Wife is the Ocean,
He Is always in Danger, she always in Motion.
And he that in Wedlock twice hazards his Carcass,
Twice ventures a drowning; and faith that is an hard Case:
Even at our Weapons the Female defeat us,
And death, only death can sign our Quietus.
Not to tell you sad Stories of Liberty lost
How our Joys are all palled, and our Pleasures all crossed,
This Pagan Confinement, this damnable Station,
Suits no Order, nor Age, nor Degree in the Nation.
The Levite it keeps from Parochial Duty,
For who can at once mind Religion and Beauty?
The rich it Alarms with Expenses and trouble,
And a poor Beast you know, will scarce carry double.
It Was invented, they say, to keep us from falling,
Oh the Virtue and Grace of ashril Catterwauling!
But it pales in your Game. Ay, but how do you know, Sir,
How often your Neighbor breaks up the Enclosure.
For this is the principal comfort of Marriage,
You must eat, though a hundred has spit in your Porrige.
True Woman nere minds a Sermon, or Lecture,
Her Glass is her Guide, and her Ghostly director,
Then she Primes her gay Looks, with an early Devotion,
There she Paints, and she Patches, and studies each Motion.
Not to please the dull sight of her Conjugal Satyr,
But charm and confound every gaping Spectator.
If at Night you're unactive, and fail of performing,
Enter Thunder, and Lightning, and Bloodshed next Morning.
Cries the bone of your side, thanks dear Mr. Horner.
This comes of your sinning with Crape in a Corner.
Then to make up the breach, all your might you must Rally,
And Labor, and Sweat like a Slave at the Gally.
Yet still you must Charge, Oh Blessed Condition!
Tho you know to your cost, you have no more Ammunition.
Till at last, my dear mortified Tool of a Man.
You're not able to make a poor flash in the Pan.
Fire, Female, and Flood begin with a Letter,
And the Worlds for them all scarce a Farthing the better.
The Flood soon is gone, and your Fire you may humble,
If into the Flames store of water you tumble,
But the Fire of a Female, on the word of a Friend,
Is never to be quenched, but burns World without end.
You may call half the Engines, and pumps in the Nation,
To extinguish the Flame, and allay Titulation.
But may Piss out as well the last Conflagration.
Thus Sir, I have sent you my thoughts of the Matter,
Judge you as you please, but I scorn to Flatter.
The Marquis was very sorry, that his Project met with no better Success; in
the mean time the two Lovers did what they could, to comfort one another, by a
Continuation of their Amors.

But as resistance feeds the Flame,
And fans the dying Fire.
So dull Enjoyments spoils the Game,
By palling the desire.
In effect, our Marquis also, like he rest of his Sex, began to forget get his
Promises; for he apparently neglected her, and never looked upon her without a
certain spice of Melancholy. Nevertheless she was happy enough, in having
possessed him for about the space of ten years, after which time was exspired,
seeing that he had not that Esteem for her, as he formerly had, but on the
contrary neglected her, she resolved with her self to leave him, so she begged
leave of him to depart, but he pretended at first, by way of Complement, an
extreme unwillingness to part with her, but at last, he gave her his Consent,
and to say the Truth without any great importunity. She had got together, what
by her own savings, and what by the Presents the Marquis made her, a pretty Sum
of Money, with which she took her way toward Paris. When she arrived there,
she lived after a high profuse rate, not being able to dis-accustom her to
those fine Dainties, she used to eat at the Marquis's Table. But as every thing
is dear at Paris, she was obliged to retrench her Expenses, and consider of
some Livelihood or other, whereby to support her self. For this purpose she
entreated a virtuous Old Matron, who made it her business to promote a civil
Correspondence between the two Sexes, and bring good People together, to put
her in a way; but this prudent Gentlewoman seeing her young, and beautiful
enough, proposed a Match to her, as the most probable, and advantageous Course
to make her Fortune. She was not very averse to the Motion, and presently
inquired after the Person, and his Vocation; to this she received Answer, that
his Name was Monsieur Scaron, and that he was of the honorable Society of
Poets. The Name of a Poet ravished her Soul with Joy, she longed to see him
immediately, but the Old Woman judging it convenient to prepare before her
before hand, for seeing so extraordinary a Figure, and to give her some short
Description of his Person, least she should be affrighted at the sight of him,
thus began her Discourse. Like my dear Child with reverence and attention, I am
very willing to oblige you with a short Portraiture of this Gentleman before
you go to see him. In the first place, he is young, of an ordinary Stature, but
very deformed; his Legs, his Head and his Body in the posture as they are
Situate, make the exact Representation of a Z. His Eyes are somewhat of the
largest, but sunk into his Head; his Nose is true Roman, his Teeth of the same
Color with Ebory, and very irregularly placed; his Members to outward
appearance seem small and slender, I mean his visible Members, for I don't
desire to be understood of the rest; however to make amends for this want of
Symmetry and Proportion, he has an infinite deal of Wit above the rest of
Mankind; to recommend him farther to you, he has something to live upon, he has
a Pension from the Court, and is the Son of a Gentleman of the Long robe; at
present if you have a mind to see him, we will go and make him a Visit. She agreed
to the proposal, and so they went; Scaron who had some information of their
coming, had dressed himself up like a Bartholomew-Baby, and attended them in
his Chair; at their entering into the Room. Scaron received them with all the
Civility imaginable, and for her part Guillemette endeavored to answer him in
like manner, but not without laughing to see so Comical, and pleasant a Figure.
Their Conversation having lasted almost the space of an hour, they took their
leaves of him, and the Old Woman engaged her self several times to bring
Guillemette along with her again: They made him a Second Visit, when he
entertained them with a small regale of a Collation, and and the venerable
Matron being gone out to look after something which she had lost, Scaron began
to display the Charms of his Wit, and discovered his Passion to the adorable
Guillemette. He told her, that he very well conjectured, that a Lady so
beautiful and handsome as she, would not willingly Embarras her self with such
a demi Monster as he was. But Madam, notwithstanding all this Discouragement,
says he, if I durst lay any manner of value upon my self, I would tell you,
that this ill favorable Tabernacle of mine, for all it Promises so little,
perhaps lodges a Spirit in it, that deserves a better Case, and that is
extremely concerned to find it self in Company with those Persons, who are so
advantagiously provided with all the Gifts of Nature. As for my self, I can
assure you, Madam, that I shall be always obliged to treat you with the
profoundest respect, in case I shall have the Happiness to be approved by you:
But give me leave to tell you, Madam, that delays are not convenient upon these
occasions. As she was going to answer him, one of Scaron's Sisters entered the
Room, which made her reserve till another time, what she had to say, so that
then she did not explain her self upon this subject, but at the next visit she
made him, well had this old Matron acquitted her self of her commission, that
she plainly promised him to be his Wife. He was immediately inspired with the
greatest joy in the World; and after this happy declaration he never failed to
entertain her daily with his Billets doux, which he composed so agreeably, that
they served not a little to continue her in the same favorable sentiments.

But Oh! the Fates, this complaisant humor did not stay with her long, for
there happened a small rupture between the Lovers. The Old Matron went into the
Country to accommodate a certain affair of mighty consequence to her, but all
this while the obdurate Guillemette continued firm in her resolution, and swore
she would never see, or think of him any more. When the door Scaron understood
this ill news, he endured all those vexations which despair uses to inspire us
with, and his grief was yet the more and more violent, when he heard that she
rejected all his Letters. He and his trusty confident were just upon the point
of accomplishing their designs, and now to be defeated, when they fancied they
had surmounted all difficulties, was a mortification not to be expressed: But
Scaron, that was master of a great deal of Wit, happily remembered himself, that
she loved verses exceedingly, and took an inspeakable pleasure to her him
repeat some of his Poetry. Therefore he resolved to attempt her once more that
way, and wrote abundance of Billets to her in this fashion. After she had read
them over, she decently laid 'em aside, as she had done the rest, but would not
condescend to return him any answer. Nevertheless, our indefatigable lover
charged her daily with his amorous Epistles; his constancy, his respectful
behavior; to which were added the assiduities of his Confidence, failed not at
long run to re-establish him in his Mistresses good graces. But he, that was
very well acquainted with the inconstancy of the Age, did not think it a propos
to spend much time in this affair; therefore he pressed her with all the
arguments he could Summon on this occasion; and, in fine, renewed his
importunities with that success, that in a short time the Marriage was
consummated between 'em. But alas, poor Gentleman! he found himself mightily
mistaken in his judgment; and what he imagined would be the consolation of his
Life, proved just the contrary. He found a large Breach made ready to his
hands, through which the Lord knows how many combatants had mounted to make the
Assault. He complained of this same business to her; but she was so far from
denying the matter, that she told him in an imperious tone, that it was not for
such a feeble, meagre, two-legg'd figure, as he was, to have the entire
possession of such a Woman as her self; and that he ought to reckon himself
happy enough in all conscience, that she was able to suffer his nauseous
embraces. This unwelcome discourse; which he expected no more than a Summons to
the next World, reduced him to the extremity of despair; and forasmuch as it
lay exceeding heavy upon him, he was willing to discharge in into the hands of
one of his Sisters, not at all believing that he could dispose of the Secret to
a better Person; or that she would take pains to publish the infamy of her own
Family: but he found himself exceedingly mistaken, to imagine, that one of the
frailer Sex was capable of concealing so nice and critical a secret; however,
at last, he discovered his grievances to her, after he had mightily aggravated
the consequence of this affair, and told her how tenderly it concerned his Life
and Reputation to have it kept private. She failed not on her side to swear and
promise every thing in the World, which he would have her do, out of an itching
desire she had to be made acquainted with this important matter. But she no
sooner understood what it was, but she found her self possessed with a far
greater inclination to disclose it. Thus she continued for some days in this
Female irresolution, saying and unsaying the very same thing. One day for
instance, she fell into the following transport.

There Is no body knows this secret, but I.
Which I Have heartily sworn to conceal par ma foy:
And I Have promised, without any damned reservation,
Not to utter one Word to a Soul in the Nation.
Then must I conceal it? Alas and alack!
I may promise as well to bear Paul's on my back.
But then if I tell is, I ruin my Brother.
Why Isaith I cannot help it, as well he as another.
This telling of Secrets is part of our Charter,
And for my part, I swear, I Will dye no body's martyr.
Well, let me consider once more of the matter.
Either burn or disclose it, why troth choose the latter.
But then if I speak it, forewell reputation,
And besides I may raise his severe indignation,
But what Woman alive can conceal fornication?
Not a female on Earth can Cuckoldom smother,
Then don't take it ill from your Sister good Brother.
You know what the Matron said unto her Daughter,
Never long keep a Secret, nor long hold your Water.
After so many different agitations, sheoesolved at last to put her self out of
this torment, and communicate the secred to a trusty She-friend of hers; this
trusty Female handed it to another, and she likewise to her next Neighbor, and
so on to the end of the Chapter, till at last, the whole Town was acquainted
with the Secret, and the greatest part of the conversation in the city went to
this Tune. However as every thing in the World has its time, so some new
accident or other, occasioned even this discourse to vanish; but this did not
afford the least comfort to the Unfortunate Scaron, but the often ner he
reflected on the cruelty of his Stars, and the unhappiness of his condition, he
found his Melancholy humor to grow upon him. In fine, he was so sensibly
affected with remorse of conscience for what he had done, that it made him pass
the remainder of his Life in a sad languishing condition, and at last carried
him out of the World. His pious Wife, according to the laudable custom of the
World, for some time appeared very desolate and afflicted, as you know good
manners and civility obliged her to do. She subsisted for a while upon the
small for tune that her Husband had left her, for Poets are seldom guilty of
leaving great Sums behind 'em; but being satisfied that her poor stock would
not last for ever, she resolved to pursue her first design, and look after a
Service. Never was a more favorable opportunity presented to her then now; she
had the luck to meet with one of her old companions of Poitou, who was so happy
as to be placed in a very advantageous station with Madam de Montespan. This
honest acquaintance promised to employ her utmost interest with her Mistress,
to get her fixed in some good condition; and at last succeeded in her
endeavors, for she procured her a Governants place in the house of a Person of
Quality; but this was in Portugal, and thither she was obliged to transport her
self, if she complied with the Motion. She agreed to to it with all her heart;
and during the time that the Persons with whom she was to live, were making
preparations for their Voyage, she went frequently to Madam de Montespan's, to
thank her she companion for the kindness she had done her; and likewise to
endeavor if it were possible to have audience of this celebrated favorite
before she departed. This favor she obtained by the means of her
correspondent, and acquitted her self so agreeably in her conversation before
the abovementioned Madam de Montespan, that she desired to see her often. Not
to be tedious, she pleased her so extremely with the gayety of her diseourse,
that this Lady imagining she might be useful to her upon several occasions, was
willing to entertain her in her Service; and having obliged her to break off
her designed Voyage to Portugal, kept her in her Family: Where she insinuated
her self so dexterously into her good opinion, that in a-short time she became
her only Confident. Nothing was now to be done with the King, but by the favor
of Montespan, and nothing with her, but through the intercession of Madam
Scaron: She managed her good fortune with that address and policy, that she has
never since suffered any alteration in it; on the contrary the favor she found
with her Mistress, brought her daily a vast quantity of presents, and
particularly there happened an opportunity of considerable importance to her,
which served as well to make her carry the cause, as to inform the World what
interest and power she had in the very beginning of her Elevation, which has
increased to her advantage ever since.

The King's Chief Physician being dead, his Majesty resolved to accept of no
body for favor or affection, but to choose one himself; and in order to supply
that considerable place, began to cast an Eye upon Monsieur Vallot. We may
reasonably enough conclude that he had carried it, if death had not ravished
him out of the World. Immediate upon his decease, there appeared a great number
of Competitors upon the Stage; who durst never have made any pretensions to the
place, if Vallot had been living. Every one employed the intercession and
prayers of his Friends to succeed in his design; but all these entreatres were
to no purpose; a request of this nature, without a good handsome gift to
recommend it, carries but little efficacy along with it. The truth of this
assertion was soon understood by those pretenders, who were not over and above
furnished in the Pocket; and they saw clearly that it was but time and labor
lost to make any further bustle. Monsieur Daquin was the man that found the
easiest access, for he thonght it a piece of imprudence to starve a good cause,
and only to depend on a few feeble simple Petitions; so he went a surer way to
work, and promised Madam Scaron to make her a purse of twenty thousand Crowns,
in case she helped him to the place. This was too tempting and advantageous an
offer to be refused; therefore she used all the ways she could think of, to
bring Montespan to her party; she employed her utmost efforts to accomplish the
design, and did not conceal from her, the advantage she was to make, if this
affair succeeded. Montespan who loved her exceedingly, was not sorry to find an
occasion to gain her such a considerable Sum as this; to this effect, she made
use of all her Interest with the King: In short, her Petition met with success,
and she obtained this pretty round Sum of Money for our Heroine, who to testify
her acknowledgments for so transcendant a favor, redoubled her diligence about
her, in such a manner, that it was almost impossible for Montespan to suffer
any one else about her. It was she that kept all her Soctets, and into her
hands she made no scruple or difficulty to commit those Letters which the King
wrote to her; nay sometimes she made use of her assistance to answer 'em. One
day she composed so charming, so accurate, and tender a Billet, that the King,
who has a delicate apprehension and penetration in these matters, soon
perceived that it was infinitely above the Cenius of his Mistress; he presently
presently resolved to enform himself from what hand it came, and began at the
same time, to entertain somesuspicious thoughts, some little motions of
Jealousy, that something had happened which would prove fatal to his Amor.
Being come to Madam de Montespan's apartment, he told her, he was desirous to
know what persons had dictated that Letter; for as for you your self, Madam,
says he, I have known you long enough to be sufficiently acquainted with your
Style, and way of Writing. Therefore tell me without any reserve or disguife,
who it is. Since you must needs oblige me to tell you, answers she, I will do
it, though I am confident you will find it a difficult matter to believe it. But not
to keep your mind any longer in suspense, 'twas Madam Scaron that dictated the
Letter, and I transcribed it from hers; and that your Majesty may not in the
least doubt of the verity of what I have said, I Will go fetch the Original under
her own hand. In short, she brought it, and prosented it to him. The King was
very well satisfied with it, and demanded to see Mademoiselle Searon, who at
that juncture of time was not to be found: But shortly after, as she happened
to be with Madam de Montespan, the King entered the room; she was going to
withdraw out of respect to his Majesty, but he would not permit her to quit the
place; and gave her a thousand commendations for the happy talent she had in
writing of Letters. She answered every thing he said to her with so much flame
and Gallantry, that he admired her more and more, and began to distinguish her
from his other Domestics. At parting he recommended her to Madam de
Montespan's ear, to whom he wrote oftener then his custom usually was, that he
might have the pleasure and diversion to see the answers which Scaron dictated:
He found 'em all so agreeable and charming, the language so beautiful, the
thoughts so natural and tender, that he redoubled his Visits, and never failed
when he was there, to enter into some pleasant facetious conversation with her.
All this, you may imagine, was not very grateful to her Mistress, who began now
to be sensible, that after the example of Madam, she had made a person known to
the King, who was in a capacity to supplant her. Scaron, who likewise perceived
the alteration which these unexpected favors from his Majesty, had created in
Montespan, endeavored all she could to possesher with far different
Sentiments, and attended her with greater diligence every day than other, which
in some sort served to cure her disgust.

The King took such Pleasure in her Conversation, that he seemed to be somewhat
in Love. In effect, he perceived himself to be touched with a cortain Passion
in her favor: He gave himself no great trouble to resist and combat these
growing Inclinations, supposing that they would vanish of themselves as soon as
they were born, but herein he was mightily mistaken: For his Affections
increased so violently, that he resolved to Discourse her about them the very
next opportunity. To be short, one day when Montespan was indisposed with a
Fever, and had composed her self to rest, the King entered Scaron's Apartment;
as soon as ever he was entered, the rest of the Maids withdrew out of a respect
to the King, so that finding himself all alone with her, he thus accostell her.
It it some days ago Madam, says he, since I have felt a certain Je ne say quoi
for you, which obliges me to regard you with a greater Tenderness, than mere
Good Will uses to inspire People with. I have often sought an occasion to make
this Declaration to you, and at the same time to request you to bring me some
Remedy for my Pain: but having never as yet found so favorable an opportunity
as this at present, I conjure you to comply with my Demands, and to recoive the
offer I tender you, of being the absolute Mistress of my Heart and Kingdom.
Alas! Sir, answered she, how ready is your Majesty to sally your popr
undeserving Servants. How! was it enough to divert your self upon the Score of
my Writing, but you must find out at new Subject for your laughter? How ever, I
ought to esteem my self sufficiently happy, in that I am able to contribute any
thing to the Pleasure of the greatest Monarch in the World, though it is all at
my own Expened

No, no, Madam, replys he, somewhat hastily, these are not proper Subjects for
Raillery, what I have said to you, is nothing out the truth, I am sincere,
believe me upon my word, and comply with my Passion. Is it possible then says
she, persuing her Discourse, that a mighty Prince should cast his Eyes so low?
Sir, I am not worthy of such an Honor, and besides, the inumerable Company of
Beauties, the most exquisite in the World, of which your Court is so full, are
sister by far to engage the Heart of so great a Man. The World would be apt to
conclude that your Majesty is blind as to these. Matters, and as for my self,
they would give me a Name, which does not at all belong to me. In fine Sir,
besides that I am some what advanced in Age, and want Charms enough to pretend
to so glorious a Conquest, your Majesty must not be ignorant that I am a Widow,
and that you cannot possibly make choice of a Person that lies under so many
disadvantages as myself, without making her draw down upon her Head the
contempt and indignation of all the beautiful Sex. Ah! Madam, replies the King,
It Is to no purpose to seek for such little Subterfuges-as these to color your
refusal. Are you resolved to make me languish away a miserable Life? Ought you
nor rather to rest satisfied, when Her you see, that although I am above the rest
of mankind, yet never theless I have a Heart which is susceptable of all the
pretty soft engaging things of Love? and such I esteem, that lively penetrating
Wit, which one sees in you, that Grandeur of Soul which you make appear in the
most inconsiderable Actions; in a word, all your charming Perfections.

He said no more to her at that time, and at parting made her a profound
reverence, and bid her consider of what had passed between them. She had no
time to return any Answer, for the King immediate entered Madam de Mantespan's
Apartment, where his Chagrin would not suffer him to carry long.

As soon as he was gone, Mademoisell Scaron revolved all this Conversation in
her mind; she represented to her self the Passion which the King expressed for
her, and did not at all question but that she was beloved by him. Never
thelese, she took up a resolution to dissemble a little upon this Score, to the
end that by a pretended resistance she might inflame the Kings Desires. This
piece of Policy succeeded beyond Expectation, for having suffered two of his
Visits, without making any Declaration in favor of him, she threw him into so
violent a Passion, that being fully resolved to vanquish her, he wrote the
following the Letter.

The Letter of LOVIS XIV. To Madam Scaron,
I Am to tell you, Madam, that your resistance has extremely astonished me; Mr,
I say, that have been hitherto accustomed to Victory, and was never before
refused. I aways believed that being a King, it was sufficient to give any sign
of my desire, in order to accomplish it, but I perceive the contrary by your
Rigeurs, and therefore to oblige you to soften them, was the occasion of this
Letter. Let me conjure you, my dearest, to love me, or at least make as if you
loved me. Toward Evening I shall come to see you, and if then I find you no
more favorable to me, than at your other Visits, you will reduce, to the
extremity of Despair the most passionate of Lovers.

Lovis.


She received this Letter with an unspeakable transport of joy, and finally
determined to surrender her self, that very same Evening to His Royal Pleasure,
for fear she should disgust or exasperate him by a farther Affectation of
resistance. Madam de Montespan, who perceived the Intrigue, was extremely
afflicted, but being very well read in Court-Policies, she dissembled her
Resentment, and showed no appearances of discontent. In the mean time, the King
being come to her Chamber, she endeavored to retain him with her, by her
Caresses, but he had another design in his Head; he was desirou to know, what
mighty Effects his Letter had produced, so he quitted her in haste, and ran to
the Apartment of his new Mistress. As soon as ever she perceived him, she put
her self into a posture of weeping. The King was urgent with her, to know the
occasion. Alas! Sir, says she, I bewail my weakness, which notwithstanding is
powerful enough to triumph over my Duty, and my Honor: For in fine, it is
impossible for me to resist you any longer, you are my King, I owe every thing
to you... But -- No, Madam, replies he to her, I am not willing you should do
any thing by Force and Compulsion. I will lay aside the Quality of a Sovereign
before you; do you lay aside your Cruelty and Rigor, and with a reciprocal
Passion, Love those that love you.

He said to her upon this occasion, abundance of tender, agreeable things, by
the force of which she suffered her self at last to be overcome, and thus the
King in that favorable moment accomplished his Design, and after several
reiterated Caresses, they took their leaves of one another for a few days. The
King gave Orders to have a Magnificent Apartment furnished for her, which he
prayed her to accept; and being willing, that she should not appear under a
meaner Character than any of his former Mistresses, he looked out a Title for
her, and at last conferred upon her, that of the Marchioness de Maintenon. But
that Dignity being only Honorary, he purchased the Estate of Marquis de
Maintenon for her, who parted with it willingly, and received as well as she a
large share of his Majesty's Royal Gratifications; for he had a Frigate in
America defrayed at the Kings Expense for the space of four or five Years, to
make what advantaget he could by her, and withal, a Permission to execute what
Acts of Piracy he pleased upon the Spaniards. If he had been Master of any
Courage, and had known how to manage his Fortune, when the Fributiers desired
him to join with them, he had been without dispute the richest Man that France
had in all her Dominions. But he was far from attempting any thing that was
Heroic, he had always baseness enough to steal out of the Fleet, when he saw
there was any occasion for Fighting, but at the time of sharing the spoil, he
never failed to pay his Attendance, and by his Good Will would have received
the greatest part of the Dividend. This scandalous Conduct sunk him very low in
his Reputation, and at present he is so mortally hated by all these People,
that a Party of them having taken him Prisoner in the Year 85, when he came
from Enrope, to the Isle of St. Martin, designed to put him and his Lady to the
Sword, after they had plundered them: Nevertheless, Compassion prevailed upon
them at last, so they gave him his Life, and having taken his Ship from him,
they left him only a little Shallop to get a shore, of which he was then in
sight. But if they ever meet him the Second time, it is likely to be his last;
and in all Probability they will never give him an opportunity of meeting them the
Third time. To reassume our Discourse; the King having made this purchase,
spared no Charges to make the place agreeable to his Mistress: He laid a
prodigious infinite Expense upon it, he brought store of Water thither, tho
before he could bring his design to Execution, he was forced of necessity to
raise Mountains, and Traverse them. To this end he joined Hills together, at
the incredible Drudgery of his poor People; for it cost the Lives of above
Threescore thousand Souls, and all this, to gratify a brutal insatiable
Passion, with which He was ever possessed.

Madam de Scaron, whom we shall for the future call by the Name of Maintenon,
was not wanting to pay the King the Acknowledements for all his Favors. She
constantly passed two hours in a day in private with him, he sometimes
Communicated to her Affairs of the greatest Importance, and sometimes he also
followed her Advice.

In the mean time, she did not behave her self disrepectfully toward Madam de
Montespan, she treated her always with a great deal of Esteem and Moderation,
and this prudent Conduct served to preserve a good intelligence between them
for a long time.

The Reverend Fathers the Jesuits, no sooner perceived the Elevation of
Maintenon, but they immediately resolved to gain her to their Party; they
rendered her all manner of Homage and Submission, of which fulsome Services the
Society is liberal enough, when they find their Account in doing it. They
ordered the Reverend Father la Chaise and Bourdalou to thank his Majesty, and
to insinuate to him, that he could not have made a fitter Choice of any Person
to entertain his vacant Intervals, than what he had already made; they
established her so far in his good Opinion, that she was extremely glad to see
them at her House. In fine, to testify the Confidence which she had in that
Order, she chose from thence a Spiritual Director of her Conscience; nay, she
entered her self into the Third Order of the Society, and would by all means
carry the Name of a Daughter of that sanctified Company. However, even this
Condescension did not fatisfie the Jesuits, but being informed by her
Confessor. (For these are a sort of Ecclesiastical Pimps you must understand,
that never Scruple to discover any Secret, when it makes for the interest of
their Order) that she was exceedingly given to the Pleasures of the Flesh, and
that she entertained an amorous Correspondence with one of her Domestics, they
unanimously desired him in a full Assembly, which they held in the College de
Montaign, that he would contribute as far as in him lay, to let them make an
absolute Conquest of her, to the end that they might have her entirely at their
Devotion. He promised to use his utmost Efforts for the Advancement of the holy
Society, and to give him his due Character, he left nothing unattempted: To
bring the business about more dexterously, he took care that his Confessor in
ordinary should pretend a certain indisposition for a time, so she was forced
to make use of the Jesuit, and for his part he could not have wished for a
better opportunity; for by this means he discovered the turnings and windings
of her Conscience; and was so far from chastizing her for her Sins, that he
assured her she was not at all accountable for 'em, but that she was obliged by
all the ties of Christianity, to furnish herself with Amorous instructions, in
order to render her self Serviceable to the pleasures of the Eldest Son of the
Church.

Sinners usually love to be flattered in their Crimes, and to find out a way to
damn themselves with pleasure; and this is the method that the Modern Casuists,
the Jesuits prescribe to their Penitents, that make no other use of this
Sacred Tribunal, which if rightly managed ought to be an instrument of saving
People, but only to chalk out to 'em the most compendious Way to Hell. It is no
wonder therefore, that Maintenon abandoned her self to such blessed
Counselors, who had found out so rare an expedient; and she had no sooner
tasted the softness and bounties of Father la Chaise in her Confession, but she
rejected the rest of the Ecclesiastical herd; in effect, after that time she
only made use of him. All this while, he had promised to make a conquest of her
person by way of a Love Intrigue; To succeed in this attempt, by the help of a
little Spiritual Opium, he lulled asleep the Consciences of all her Domestics,
whom he found favorably inclined to the Society, and like a Politic director
he employed some of his own creatures in this pious affair; and amongst others,
two penitential Sisters of the Society, who had an admirable faculty at
wheedling and cajoling, and who had in a short time so strangely established
themselves in Maintenon's good opinion, that she reposed an entire confidence
in 'em, and by way of requital made use of 'em to serve her in her amorous
affairs. By this means Father la Chaise was folly informed of every particular,
and knew how to take his measures accordingly. One day, the Domestic, who was
so very serviceable to her in her nocturnal diversions, had leave of her to go
into the the Country for two days, but whether it was, that he met with any of
his acquaintance there, or was willing to recruit himself with fresh vigor
against his return; he tarried somewhat longer than he had permission. After he
had been absent for the space of six tedious days, Madam de Maintenon, who was
never accustomed to so long a fast, wrote a Billet to him, and gave it one of
her trusty confidents to see it delivered. The Maid immediately carried it to
the Reverend Father le Chaise; they shut themselves up in their Chamber, and
having opened it, read as follows.

UPon my Word, my dear, I must reproach you for the small tenderness you have
for me; if you measured your own impatience by that of mine, you had returned
the very first day. As for my self I can assure you, that I am infinitely
displeased with my easiness in giving you leave to go, and I am yet the more
concerned that you come not at all: You must either not love me, or be dead to,
make so unpardonable a stay. Return then, my dear, and leave me not to suffer
any more from the King's Embraces, whom I don't love the tenth part so well as
thee; and if you would not find me sick, or dead, come at the usual hour
straight into my Chamber; I shall give orders that my door be left open to let
thee in. Adieu my Dear.


Goodly, Goodly! says the Father, and what think you now? What I, says she? I
cannot tell, unless it be that you will give me the Letter to deliver it to him.
No, by no means child, says he, but I want your assistance to do me a certain
kindness: She made no great difficulty to promise it. It Is this, continues he,
I Will go immediately and write a sham-Letter to the Gallant, to spoil his coming
and at the blessed hour of Assignation I Will not fail to expect you in the
Antichamber, from whence you must lead me to her Bed, the place of Execution.
I am much of the same pitch and stature with him, and will throw upon my self
all the consequences of this affair.

The business being thus resolved upon, he made all the haste he could to write
the Bantering Letter, and gave it her to see it delivered instead of the other.
It was conceived in these terms.

Sir,
I Am sensibly afflicted that I must acquaint you with ill News. Your Father is
at the point of death, I have confessed him this Morning, and given him the
Holy Viaticum. He desired me two or three times to write to you, because he has
something of moment to communicate to you before he dies: Fail not therefore to
take Horse immediately upon the receipt of this, for as yet he is in his
senses; and if you lose no time, according to what we are able to judge by all
ontward appearances, you may come soon enough to speak with him.

Cochonet, Curate de Lasine.


He had no sooner received this Letter, but he effectually believed, that the
Matter was so. He had an extraordinary Tenderness for his Father, and therefore
made all the dispatch he could, to see him; but to his great surprise he found
him in very good Health, which did not a little rejoice him. They were not able
to understand the Mystery of this Letter, but our young Gallant had not the
least Jealousy of the real occasion, which made him to continue for some time
with his Parents. In the mean time, the Reverend Father la Chaise came exactly
at the hour appointed to the Antichamber, when he found the Maid expecting
him. He undressed himself, and put on a Nightgown and Cap, which was the
Equipage the other Gentleman used in his amorous Expeditions; after this he was
introduced to her Bed, where he entered softly, and without any farther Ceremony
prepared for the Assault. Although she was fast asleep, she perceived him well
enough, notwithstanding the Pretensions of some certain Females who are of
another Opinion, and supposing it to be her own Game-Bull in ordinary, she
embraced him with such violent and eager Caresses, that the poor Father thought
he should expire in this charming Exercise. The Sport was too entertaining to
leave any Room for dull insipid Conversation; thus they renewed the Combat
several times without uttering one Syllable, and in all Probability they had
passed the Night after this manner, if Father la Chaise had not broke the
silence by reason of a damned unlucky Cold, which set him a Coughing and
Wheezing like a decrepit Alderman, that eevery Morning Vomits ropes of Phlegm
by Wholesale, as juglers do inkle at a Country Fair. Madam de Maintenon gave a
shriek immediately, and would have thrown her self out of Bed; but our
Ecclesiastical Stallion held her fast, and all the while made her the most
plausible Excuses, that either his Fear or his Love could suggest to him: After
he had somewhat appeased the Storm, and calmed her, he represented to her, that
the thing was without Remedy; that she ought to consider it was the violence of
his Passion, which obliged him to do it, but still he was so prudent, as not to
make the least discovery of the true Motive of this Intrigue. How they came to
be reconciled, I am not able to say; but in fine, my Memoirs tell me, that
reconciled they were, and the business fairly accommodated between them. When
the Tempest was happily blown over, they passed the remainder of the Night in
these laudable Recreations, and if we may give any Credit to exterior
appearances, they have pursued the same Sport ever since; and I have the
Charity to believe they will continue the Game as long as either of them are able.
For certain it is; that if She Is the King's Mule; She Is likewise the Mare of
the pious la Chaise, and her Valet's Hackney into the Bargain, who poor Fellow
was no sooner returned to his Mistress, but he excused his long absence, upon
the Account of the Sham-Letter he had received. But she who was advertised of
the whole Affair, by Father la Chaise, was not desirous to search any farther
into these Matters, and received him into her Favor; since which time she
employs him in her Primitive Drudgery to her vast Satisfaction, if we may take
a certain Talkative, busy Gentlewomans word for it, whom the vulgar People
call Fame. All these liberal Contributions by the bye, did not hinder her from
receiving the Kings ordinary Benevolence, when he was in Health, and in a
Capacity of performing; but when his Distemper came upon him, which proceeded
from no other cause than his over-exhausting his Royal Loins, Madam de
Maintenon was infinitely afflicted, and in public gave all the Demonstrations
of Grief imaginable. In fine, the Malady growing daily worse and worse, the
Physicians resolved to apply Plasters to the part affected: This holy Daughter
of the Society, being very well satisfied in her Conscience, that she was
partly the occasion of his Majesty's indisposition, generously offered to lay
the first Plaster on this distressed Son of Priapus. She laid it on
accordingly, and continued to do it several times, even until the entire
recovery of the King: When she saw him restored to his Health, she was willing
to divert him, and having nothing at all of that nice delicate Love in her
which will not admit of a Competitor, she found out for him one of the most
celebrated Beauties in France. 'Twas Madam Fontange, which she presented to
him; the King redoubled his Esteem for her, seeing she made as it were a
Sacrifice of her self, and likewise cherished Fontange with a very particular
Affection; But their Amors having been already written, we think it not worth
the while, to make any impertinent Repetitions of them in this place; only this
I will add, that the King did not enjoy her long, for she was Poisoned. Madam
de Maintenon has entirely possessed the King's inclinations ever since; and
whatever Charms he might find to attract him elsewhere; yet they were never so
powerful as hers since the Death of Fontange. He likewise received another
Present from her hands, and that was la' Martenon; but she died in Childbed,
so that when she came to offer him another Lady for his Royal diversion, he
would not accept the Gift, but applied himself altogether to her; who for her
part is not overmuch afflicted, although the King has not been for a considerable
time, capable to oblige any of the fair Sex; but has so much Discretion, as to
relieve her Necessities elsewhere, His Majesty's favor is more acceptable and
grateful to her then his Love, since she has so many servile Vassals, to
gratify her infamous Passions, and above the rest, the Reverend Father la
Chaise.

FINIS.

