A PROPOSAL By Dr. Hugh Chamberlain in Essex-Street, FOR A BANK of Secure
Current Credit To be Founded upon LAND. In order to the General Good of Landed
Men. To the Great Increase of the Value of Land, and the no less Benefit and
Augmentation of Trade and Commerce.
INTRODUCTION.
THE great Scarcity of Money, and danger of receiving bad, together with the
uncertain Rates of Guineas, makes People willing to receive their Debts in
Bank-Bills, or Goldsmith's Notes, rather than in Money in Specie; by which
means Credit, securely Founded, may be easily brought into use: This has
encouraged several to propose the Establishing of Banks, the Notion of which,
having met with so general Approbation, it is hoped that Dr. Chamberlain's
Proposals shall not fail of good Encouragement; especially since he was the
First Promoter of Banks upon Annual Incomes, to his great Expense of Money,
Time and Pains; besides his Proposals offer Greater Advantages, both to the
Nation in general, and Subscribers in particular, than any others whatsoever;
and the Fund (by him proposed) is in all respects the Best and Safest: And,
though all the Banks that are now Erecting, should flourish together, yet the
Nation may, nay must, thrive the better; and indeed it will be a certain and
effectual means to lower the Interest of Money, and bring the Usurers and
Moneyed Men to more conscionable Terms, and yet without damage to thesmelves,
as it may be ordered. Thus may things be managed to the mutual Benefit, both of
those whose Fortunes lie in Land, and those who have theirs in Money: Whereas
at present, though the Landed-Man be never so willing to sell his Estate to pay
his Debts, yet because he cannot get the Money, the merciless Moneyed Man takes
the Advantage of him, seizes his Estate, imprisoneth his Person, fore-closeth
the Equity of Redemption, and leaves the miserable Landed-Man's Family to
starve, and many Traders to suffer Loss, to whom he was indebted: And what,
except killing the Man, can our Enemies the French do more? This Proposal of
Credit on Land, can only heal the aforesaid Evils, and fully Answer all our
present Necessities; there being now no other known way left that can do. For
the present Royal Bank refuses to supply Mortgagers, though they offered it in
their Advertisements; and yet at the same time endeavor to engross all the
Money in the Nation to themselves; which makes the other Moneyed Men to put the
more extravagant value on what they have; and this looks as if they had all
combined together to undermine the Landed-Men, and seiz their Estates; and that
this is carrying on, may be proved by there being at this instant near Two
hundred Suits at Law for fore-closing the Equity of Redemption. It is the
Interest of Landed-Men therefore, and the only Remedy left, nay it is
absolutely necessary for the better support of their Families, and the
preservation of the Value of their Lands, to agree together, and in their
Defense to run Counter to the Designs of all unfair Dealers in Money, and to
shake off their Slavery by engaging their Lands to make good all Bills and
Tickets of Credit that shall be given out thereupon; and this will make Lands
perform the Use of Money, as well as Gold and Silver when Coined. All
Shopkeepers, and others whatsoever; may more safely take them in payment, than
the present Royal Bank, or Goldsmith's Notes; these having no other Fund to
make them good but their bare Reputation, which is nothing at all; for if they
Break, it is lost; if Dye, it is an hazard; but the Land is the best and
certainest Security the World can give: And by this Means the Interest of Money
will be lowered, the Landed-Man saved from Ruin, and Enabled to pay his Debts,
and spend more f^e^ly, to the great Encouragement of Trade: For as the Case now
stands, all our Land and Staple Commodities dance Attendance on Money, made of
a Foreign Commodity, and of which we can therefore have no certainty; for that
the Industry, Cunning, or Caprice of Foreign Princes and Merehants may not only
debar its Entrance, but draw away what we are already possessed of, which makes
Landed-Men pay 8 l. or 10 l. per Cent. for all Moneys and Foreign Commodities,
as Silk, Linen, and Spices; Whereas the Merchant gives but 3 l. or 4 l. per
Cent. for Land and its Product, as Wool, Corn, etc. So that by degrees the
Landed-Men are eaten out of their Estates, for want of having the Balance kept
even between Interest of Money, and Rents of Land. But when once our Land shall
be thus by Bills or Tickets of Credit, turned into the Nature of Money, it may
wait on Commodities, and serve all our Occasions full as well as Money.
Land-Banks have this Prerogative over all other Banks, viz. We are sure none
but English shall have the immediate benefit of them, without any disobliging
Exclusive Clauses. And whereas we can have no Certainty that the Royal Bank of
England does not belong entirely to Foreigners; it is sure a good part of it
does. Further, The Fund of Land can never be imbezled, nor transported; but
it is possible all the Fund of Moneyed Banks may be drawn out to Holland,
France, or Constantinople, and nothing left to England, but an Hinc illae
Lachrymae.

The Methods and Practices of Banks have fully discovered the Advantages and
Benefits of the use of Credit, so that all which is now necessary to be
insisted upon, is to recommend This to the Favor of the Nation, by showing
wherein it excells all the rest; and that it is safe, and therefore best, for
all Persons to accept the Bills hence issued, tho upon an hundred years Rent,
because there is no difference in the use of those to the Dealers in them, from
such as are issued upon ten years.

For which Reasons therefore, and the following, the Doctor's Land-Bank ought
to have the Preference. Because, 1. There are more Landed-Men in the Nation
than Money'd-Men. 2. There is a greater Value of Land than there is of Money.
3. There is no Money but what is the Product of this Land. 4. The Landed-Men
have chiefly contributed to the Support of this War. 5. The Landed-Men are the
most that want Money, and the least esteemed and considered. 6. The Land does
yearly yield its increase, for our Support, but Commodities perish in their
use. 7. The Land remains a sure Fund, when Money or Commodities are carried
away, or worn out.


We will now show wherein This Excells all the rest. And, 1. Because whatever
Money you deposit, you may have Bills, or Tickets of Credit, with Interest at
(...) per Cent. per diem for the same. 2. It furnishes Landed-Men with double
the Value of their Estates in Credit, which will not only enable them to pay
off all their Debts and Mortgages, and clear their Titles, but likewise to
purchase much more, or to improve the same by building or otherwise: Whereas no
other Bank will supply them with the full value of their Estate. 3. It affords
likewise a Stock to manage in Trade, which at Ten per Cent. does not only pay
the Annuity, but gives twice as much clear gain; by which returns the
Subscribers can the better make good the Bills. 4. It will enable the Society
to erect, and carry on, the so much desired Fishing Trade, or any other
necessary Undertaking that the Subscribers shall think fit. 5. It will lower
the Interest of Money, more than any other Bank, and more Effectually than by
the Restraint of Laws.


The next is, that it is as safe to accept Bills secured by one Hundred Years
Rent, as those by Ten, or on demand, and no difference to the Dealers in them
for first.

1. No Bank can find Money for all their Credit, if called in at once; If there
be but a Fund to make it good sometime or other it is sufficient, and more than
in any of the present Banks besides this; therefore this Bank of Land can no
more be disliked for that reason than any other; and it is very unreasonable to
require, his Bank should discharge all at once, which is not expected from
others. And these Bills may as well pass in the mean time as any other; for
most of the Credit of the Banks abroad has passed above one Hundred Years,
without drawing out any Money, and most of our Lands have yielded Rent very
much longer: These joined make this Bank; for One Hundred Years Rent paid can
fully satisfy One Hundred Years Credit of like value.

2. The sole end of giving out Bills is to supply the Money not now to be had
in England: If then an Estate be Mortgaged for One Hundred Years purchase, and
Bills given out thereupon, and if all be returned at Ten Years end, and then
the same, or another Estate be Mortgaged for Ten Years more, and so on to One
Hundred or One Thousand Years, still the Bills are passing in the Nation as
Money, and are the same in Effect. Now in the Doctor's you have above double
your Estate in Bills presently, as Estates are now valued, which is the
encouragement, and makes you amends for tying your Estate so long as One
Hundred Years: In the other Bank you can have but two Thirds of the present
value of your Estate, which does but just ease you for the present, by paying
off the Mortgages, but still leaves you as much in debt to the Bank, though with
small^^ Interest. And as you pay the Bills away, it answers your ends; for
after your wants are supplied, what matter is it it to you, whether that Bill
you have paid away be cancelled Ten Years or one Hundred Years hence? And it is
all one to the Dealers, when they know it is well secured at last, and can
Trade with them the while, and that the Number of these Bills will be limited
to the Fund, being under a severe check by the Directors, and will all be
certainly bought up, so that the Nation will not loose. Whereas, the Bills of
the other Banks are not limited, but may abundantly exceed their Fund: And
therein lies the secre^ gain to themselves, but apparent danger of loss
hereafter to the Nation.

3. There will be a great Number of Subscribers engaged, whose Lands lie
scattered in all parts of England, and these will agree to receive the said
Bills in all payments of Rents, and Fines from their Tenants, and all other
Persons they Deal with; and likewise will purchase Commodities of all such
Tradesmen and Merchants, that will accept them, before any other.

4. There will be a great Number of Traders and Merchants, who will find it
their Interest by engaging so many Subscribers to be their Customers, to take
these Bills and Tickets for their Goods, so that all may be Supplied by them,
with what Necessarys they shall want, as well as for ready Money; which will
save the trouble of telling, as well as fear of taking bad Money.

5. There will be a great Sum of ready Money deposited in the Bank to exchange
(if there be occasion) Tickets, or Bills; so that no Person need scruple to
take them, when he can turn them into Money as any time: And this will be a
means to prevent long Accounts, and all the inconveniences of Lawsuits that
usually attend them; and a sufficient Encouragement for the Trader to take the
Bills or Tickets, and discharge the Gentleman or Debtor: His business being
afterward only with the Bank, which is well secured by the Fund of Land that
is tied to make all good, which it effectually does by the annual payment into
the Bank where they are canceled: I hope here is enough said of the following
Proposal, to encourage Landed Men to Subscribe, and to promote the general
Currency of the Bills, to the perfecting of this great and good Undertaking.

It is Proposed by Dr. Hugh Chamberlain,
That every Freeholder, who will, for a General, so well as for his own Private
Good, subscribe One hundred and fifty Pound per Annum, for One hundred and
fifty Years, (unless sooner Discharged) to secure the Payment of One hundred,
Pound per Annum, only for One hundred Years (the first Rent not Commencing till
two or three Years after the Subscription) and will further Exchange One
Thousand Pound in Gold or Silver, current Money of this Kingdom, into this
Societies Bills, payable on Demand, at the several Times, and in such
Proportions as is hereafter mentioned: That is to say,

400 l. down, Shall Receive 1000 l. At the same respective Times in the said
Bills, or Current Credit. 300 l. at a years end, Shall Receive 1100 l. At the
same respective Times in the said Bills, or Current Credit. 200 l. at two years
end, Shall Receive 1200 l. At the same respective Times in the said Bills, or
Current Credit. 100 l. at three years end, Shall Receive 1300 l. At the same
respective Times in the said Bills, or Current Credit. And 1400 l. more in the
same Credit, at Four years end, from the time of the First Payment.
And he shall have also 3000 l. viz. The Thousand Pound he paid in Money, and
Two Thousand Pound in like current Credit, paid into a Joint Stock of Trade for
his own particular Advantage, to be managed by Persons chosen by the
Subscribers; which Stock shall not be Alienable, nor Transferable, but together
with his said Estate, and will (if it should yield but Five per Cent. per
Annum, though much more may reasonably be expected) not only pay the Rent
Reserved, but also make good Defective Titles, put Money yearly into his Purse;
and, being added to the Five Thousand Pound advanced to him in manner
aforesaid, will be a very large clear Gain; and all this for nothing in effect,
more than a Collateral Security of One hundred and fifty Pounds per Annum in
Lands. And the like Manner and Proportion will be observed for any greater or
lesser Yearly Payment subscribed.

And, for preventing all manner of Loss and Hazard to the Subscribers, both
Freeholders and Traders, Trustees shall be appointed at first, to whom the
Estates shall be Conveyed; and also Directors (with good Salaries, and without
Interest in the Profit) shall be Elected to take Care, that no Credit be issued
without a sufficient Fund first settled, or Money equivalent thereto paid in.

For a plainer Illustration of this Proposal, observe, That every Freeholder,
subscribing One hundred and fifty Pound per Annum, as above, has Eight
Thousand Pound lent him in the whole, at the yearly Interest of a quarter, or
Five Shillings per Hundred Pounds; which being Twenty Pounds per Annum for
Eight Thousand Pounds, and computed for One hundred years, makes Two thousand
Pounds; and being added to the Eight thousand Pounds, makes together in the
whole Ten thousand Pounds, and no more. Now, because Ten thousand Pound is too
great a Sum to be left to one Payment at the last, or to be made good by the
subscribed Security in less than the whole Term; therefore, as well for mutual
Convenience, as preventing all hazards, the whole Sum is to be repaid by One
hundred equal Annual Payments of One hundred Pound each; which, considering the
Sum advanced, the easy Payments, and the low Interest, is of a far greater
Advantage to the Subscriber than any thing of this kind was ever yet proposed,
or can be by any other Methods effected; and yet here the Credit is secured by
a much better Constitution, as well as a surer Fund, and more ready Money in
proportion is here reserved to circulate the Bills, than in any other Bank or
Fund of Credit whatever in the known World. So that from the Premises, may
follow this strong natural Conclusion, That it is highly the Interest of the
Nation, especially of the subscribing Freeholders and Tradesmen, to endeavor
industriously to promote the Universal Currency and Credit of these Bills; and
the rather, because it is morally, as well as naturally impossible, any Person
can suffer Loss hereby, though very probable all may be great Gainers; for if all
receive them, none can lose by them; and when it is found that none can lose by
them, all will receive them.

If any Landed Man, that does approve of this Proposal, should refuse to
subscribe for want of ready Money, as is herein required; for his Satisfaction,
there may be another Expedient found out to help him, that is not necessary to
be mentioned here.

If it were necessary, it might be here taken Notice, That this Proposal was
Approved by one Committee of Parliament, and Reported to be Practicable, and
Profitable to the Nation, by another. And it is now Resolved to begin to put
the same in Practice, as soon as 50000 l. per Annum shall be subscribed, of
which a good part is already, and the Remainder daily filling up.

For a Demonstration that nothing is hereby intended but what is Just and Fair,
and that no Man can run any hazard by subscribing Lands, or receiving any of
these Bills or Tickets of Credit; It is further proposed. That if, upon a years
Trial, this Bank or Office shall be found Unsuccessful, which seems very
unlikely, if not impossible, Then all the Subscribers, being obliged by
Covenant to return the whole Credit at first received, shall have their Money
again, and their Lands Released.

London, Printed by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street. 1695.


