THE CHARACTER OF A Disbanded Courtier.
Ingenium Galbae male habitat.
HE was born with an aspiring Mind, by much too high flown, for his Quality and
his Estate. His dexterity in doing ill, made him thought capable of performing
admirably well; if ever he came to be employed and entrusted. He was preferred
for Ability to high degrees of Honor and Office; admitted into the Cabinet
Councils, made acquanted with all the secret Wheels, (and could tell how many
Coggs there was in each Wheel) upon which the great Engine of State was turned,
and kept in motion: By the favor of his Prince, he acquired sufficient Riches
to support the Splendour of a new raised Family.

His Glory was eminently conspicuous, that there were but a few persons below
the Crown seemed above him: And nothing was wanting to render his Felicity, as
lasting as Nature intended his Life; but a heart that knew how to be grateful
to a most Munificent Benefactor. He thought all the Favors and Honors he
enjoyed, were less then the reward of his Merit: That Thought puffed him with
Pride; such a sort of Pride, as is commonly attended with an irrecoverable
Fall, (which was his Fortune;) And at his Fall (like that of his Predecessor)
might very well have been proclaimed: Woe to you the Inhabitants of the Earth,
for the Devil is come down among you.

Open Revenge against his Sovereign, being too dangerous to attempt, he
presently resolves upon secret: He exp^ses all the Weaknesses and Infirmities
of the Court, (from which no Court is free) and where he can find no real
Faults, he Feigns imaginary ones; and passes them off for Current: By this new
and false Optic, he represents every Molehill of mistake, in the public
Administration; for a Mountain as tall as Teneriff, and as dangerous as the top
of Aetna. Nay, he multiplies and magnifies the very Miscarriages, which were
the effect of his own Evil Council. He Amuses the freest Nation in the
Universe, with wild Rumors and extravagant Apprehensions of Slavery; under the
Government of a Prince, who in Acts of Favor, and Mercy, and Clemency, has
exceeded all His Predecessors. He fills the Heads of the People full with
Whimsical Fears of Fantastic Devils; (Chymaera's which only his Malice had
raised) on purpose to Frighten them out of their Loyalty and their Wits; and
prepare and ripen them for Bedlam, or for Rebellion. He makes the pretenses of
Liberty, is not a Freedom, for every man to do what he pleases; an exemption
from just Laws: These Laws were made for the punishment of Transgressors; and
are the true Libery of every honest man. The destroying of which Laws, is
throwing down the Fence, whereby Virtuous and good men are secured and protected
Liberty, the Stirrup to get up; and Religion, does not consist in the stubborn
adhering to this or that Party, or in crying up one Faction as Infallible; and
censuring all others as Damnable: But in Doing Justice, and Loving Mercy, and
Walking Humbly with God, (says Micha the Prophet) And it is first pure and then
Peaceable, says St. Paul the Apostle.
Religion the Steed he Rides, in pursuit of his Monstrous Designs: With these
pretenses he Cheats the Innocent, and promising to open their Eyes; serves them
as the Apostate Angel did our Parents in Paradise: Only blows into them the
Magical dust of Disobedience; and robs them of those Jewels he pretends to
bestow, viz. Liberty and Religion; which are both so much talked of, and both
so little understood.

Being a Gentleman of little or no Religion himself, he seems for all that to
espouse every Division and Sub-division of it, every Faction and Person who are
bold enough to stand stiff in opposition against the well settled Government.
What avails it that he is in his own nature a Frugal man? he keeps open House
for entertainment of all State Malcontents; without consideration either of
Qualities or Qualifications. And what is he the better for being Temperate
himself? So long as he Accompanies, and Carrowses, and contracts Intimacy, and
Amity, with the Lewdest Debauchees, that he thinks will help to forward his
private Intriuges. He becomes all things to all men in the very worst of
Senses; perverting the design of St. Paul, that he may at least delude some to
be as bad as himself.

Having lost his Honor with his Prince, and Reputation with the best of men;
he Cringes, and Creeps, and Sneaks, to the lowest and Basest of the People; to
procure himself among them an empty, vain glorious, and undeserved name, the
Patriot of his Country.

And lastly, hoping to be made the Little Head of the Great Rabble; he
persuades them to believe that they are all betrayed: Encourages them to strike
home against the Enemies of King and Kingdom; (pointing at the Faithfullest and
most Affectionate Servants to both) well knowing that the Mighty Fabric can
never be shaken, till its Main Pillars and and Supporters be by Cunning and Sly
Stratagem, either destroyed or undermined.

By this may appear the weakness of that Modern piece of State Policy; Oblige
your Enemies, your Friends you are sure of already: And the transcendant Wisdom
of Solomon's advice: Let thy own Friend and thy Fathers Friend never be forsaken.

LONDON, Printed for N. Thompson, Anno Dom. 1681.


