AN Impartial Account OF THE Portsmouth DISPUTATION. With some Just REFLECTIONS
on Dr. RVSSEL's Pretended Narrative. By Samuel Chandler, William Leigh,
Benjamin Robinson. With an Abridgment of those Discourses that were the
Innocent Occasion of that Disputation.

LONDON: Printed for John Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultry, and Abraham
Chandler over against the White Hart-Inn in Aldersgate Street; and are to be
Sold by A. Baldwin at the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1699.

To the Honorable Major General Earl, Governor; Colonel John Gibson,
Lieutenant Governor, of His Majesty's Garrison of Portsmouth: and the Worshipful
Henry Seager, Esquire Mayor of Portsmouth.
Honorable Sirs,
WITH Hearts full of Loyalty and Thankfulness to our Rightful Sovereign King
William, we humbly lay these Papers at your Feet, who procured for us a Grant
from his Majesty, publicly to vindicate the Common Cause of the Reformed
Churches, and settle the wavering among us in the belief and practice of those
truths, which tend very much ^o the advancement of Early Piety and Reli^ion.

We appeal to you, the Honorable Go^ernour and Worshipful Mayor, as to
Disin^erested Persons, and most proper Judges of ^he Truth and Impartiality of
our Account; which is, what was taken by the Pens of the ^cribes, without any
material alteration. We ^hankfully acknowledge your Condescending Goodness, in
Honoring us with your presence and preventing disorders, during the time of
disputation.

May you still continue maintainers of Justice and discipline in your
respective Posts: May your Names be transmitted to Posterity, as Glorious
Reformers of a corrupt and degenerate Age, in conformity to the Injunctions and
Example of our Gracious King: May others be excited and influenced by your
Example: May these hopeful beginnings be carried on, that there may be no
profane Swearers or Debauchees in your Streets, and Vice and Wickedness may be
put out of Countenance and not able to show its Head: This is, and shall be the
constant Prayer of,

Your Honors Obliged Humble Servant, SAMVEL CHANDLER

To all the Pious and Sober amongst them that deny, or doubt of Infant Baptism.
Brethren-in our Lord,
THE matters in difference betwixt you and us, are not so great, as the angry
and uncharitable on either side would make 'em seem; there may be some (we
doubt not) both with us and you, that do Hereticate and Damn each other on the
Account of their disagreeing Judgments about Baptism: (Nor is it to be wondered
at* if those who are strangers to all serious Religion, should put the
respective differing Opinions in the place and stead of it:) But we were
willing here to let the World see, there are with us, and (we Charitably hope)
with you also, those that are both of a sounder Judgment and of a much better
Spirit.

We are persuaded, there are many amongst you, who (tho you do dissent from us
in some lesser matters, yet) are agreed with us in the most important and
concerning things. Wherever there are real Christians on both sides, in any
Controversy, (as we make no question but there are in this) it is most
certain, the things wherein they are agreed, are greater, far greater, than any
wherein they can differ. When all the great substantials of Christianity are
out of doubt, both with you and us, that which shall afterward remain as a
disagreed, or doub^ed thing on either side, must needs be Comparatively very
small, and not worthy of the Heat and Zeal too commonly laid out upon it.

And we must profess for our own parts, (tho wherein we differ from you, we are
verily persuaded, the truth is on our side, yet reckoning it to be only truth
of an inferior Nature) it has not been without regret, that we have been
engaged in this Contention. The Disputation it self was not what we sought, or
was forward to; it was not we that gave the Challenge: Nor when given, would we
have accepted it, had it not been so circumstanc'd, as that our refusal would
most probably have redounded to the detriment and dishonor of what we believe
to be the Truth: Many, especially the more injudicious part of the Auditory,
before whom the Challenge was given, not being likely to judge otherwise, than
that what we maintain would not bear a public hearing, should we have declined
a Disputation, which we were so publicly provoked to.

And for this Publication of it, it is what we are alike passive in: The World
should have had no after-trouble about that Disputation, might we have been the
choosers: But since your Dr. Russel has abused the World with a most false and
unfair Account of that matter; we are necessitated in our own defense, as well
as that of the Truth, to Publish the ensuing Papers. We would not therefore,
that either what was said by us at the Disputation, or is further added in
these our Reflections should be misunderstood by you: This is not work that we
take pleasure in, but what we have been constrained to: And if any Reflections
should occur that may seem too severe; we would here declare, they proceed not
from displeasure against the whole Body of those whose sentiments agree with
yours, nor against any one barely for that reason: But we could not but
manifest a just indignation against the Egregious falsehood and
uncharitableness of him that published the late (pretended) Narrative: And we
desire, that no one of the Pious and Sober amongst you, would apply to your
selves, what was only intended as a Rebuke to him, or those who are too like
him. Nor will the rest of you (we hope) take it ill from us, that we expose, as
it deserves, that which is so base, though it be found with a Person that
pretends, in the present Controversy, to fall in with you. You will not, you
cannot once imagine, that his Concurrence with you in this Point of Baptism,
will hallow or excuse all that deceit and falsehood that appears in him: Nor
can you your selves like it, that he should endeavor to support your cause
with lies.

This being premised, we are in hopes, the following Papers, if they should do
no good amongst you, may at least be looked into without doing hurt. So far as
they report matters of fact, we can boldly, and without fear of being put to
shame, appeal to the All-knowing-God, and to the Numerous Assembly, who were
Witnesses, that they are undisguised Truths: And so far as they contain Matters
of Opinion on one side or other, we leave you and all others to judge for
themselves.

Yet (as we have already intimated) we would not that the matters contended
about in these Papers, should be over-magnified on either side: Or that it
should be supposed we differ further than we do: And it is a much greater
pleasure to us, to offer any thing that may tend to narrow and lessen, than to
Enhance the differences there are betwixt you and us. After we had been tired
with an unpleasing contention, we therefore (as a refreshment to our selves)
undertook this more delightful service; here to attempt, so far as may be,
(notwithstanding little differences) to reconcile, and bring nearer to each
other the Pious and Sober on both sides. To which end we shall, first, mention
to you how far, and wherein we apprehend we are agreed: And thence manifest in
the second place, how inconsiderable the things are, about which we differ.

I. We are agreed, (without doubt) in every thing that is of absolute necessity
to salvation: This is as certain as that there are Christians (that are truly
such) on both sides; that there are those that shall be saved on both sides:
Nothing that does Essentially constitute Christianity is controverted betwixt
us: And even with reference to this very point of Baptism, we are verily
persuaded, there is a nearer agreement betwixt the truly Pious and Serious on
both sides, than is commonly considered. Particularly,

(1.) It is, it must needs be agreed by all such, that there is no possibility
of salvation, for any Soul in our Apostate World, but only in and through Christ,
Act. 4.12. (2.) It Is also agreed, that the Covenant of Grace does fix the
terms, upon which Christ will be a Savior to any: That thence only it is to be
known, whom he will save, and whom he will not be a Savior to. (3.) It Is also
undeniably plain, and what cannot but be agreed amongst us, that according to
the Constitution of that Covenant Christ will be the Savior of none, but such
as are sincerely devoted to God: He never was, nor will he ever be the Savior
of any others; but such he has alw^ys been a Savior to, Ier. 31.33. Psalm.
119.38. Heb. 7.25. Upon these Principles it is, that every serious Soul does
devote it self to God in hope. And we doubt not, but you are also agreed with
us. (4.) That such who are Sollicitous about their own salvation, cannot be
unconcerned about the State of their Infants. Every Pious Parent will (under
the apprehension of that Guilt and Corruption which they inherit with their
Nature) with enlarged Affections yearn over their tender little ones, and
earnestly cry to God for 'em, and gladly lay hold upon ^^y word of hope
concerning 'em. Those amongst you who are Parents, feel and know what is the
heart of a Parent toward its Child: And however you are (as all that are truly
Christians are) unf^ignedly concerned for, and desirous to promote the common
salvation; yet for your Infants, that are so near you, that are (as it were)
parts of your selves, you feel yet another kind of con^ern: You cannot with any
satisfaction die from 'em; you cannot, when they are dying, part with 'em,
unless ^ou have some ground of hope concerning 'em* Nor can any thing afford
you Encouragement to hope; without some word of Promise. Nor is there any word
of Promise, only to such as are devoted to God and i^ Covenant wi^h him, in and
through Christ: To be without Christ, without hope, and without God in the W^rld,
is represented as the Case of such as are out of Covenant with him, strangers
to his Covenant, Ephesians. 2.12. W^erefore, (5.) ^e d^ubt not but you are also
agreed with us, that we should do all that in us lies, that our Infants may be
in C^venant ^ith G^d: You do desire (as well as we) t^^t they may be so; and we
are persw^ded, you will do whate^^r you are satisfy^d is your D^t^, in order to
it. You w^ll (nay, we doubt not but you do) pray earnestly for 'e^; and (...)
^is Promise with him, that he will b^ your ^od; and the God of your Seed; and
depen^ing upon this promise, you do actually surrender and devote 'em to him;
and look upon your selves as obliged to educa^^ and train 'em up for him, etc.
This is what those that are seriously Religious amongst you, do, and dare not
but do: Nor is any part of this a Controversy betwixt you and us. Now here is
the internal and most excellent part of Baptism, in which we are agreed. --
After which, it is somewhat to be wondered at, that there should be any
remaining difference, as to this matter: However, that which can after such
Agreements remain a Controversy, must needs be concluded to be of an inferior
and less concerning Nature. Which we now therefore come to speak to.
II. The things in which we differ (from what has been already said) appear to
be no fundamental ones: Which will also yet farther be manifested, if the
things themselves be particularly considered. That which is the Subject of the
ensuing Papers, and which is commonly agitated betwixt you and us, may be
reduced to these two heads, viz. (1.) Whether we may, and ought to devote our
Infants to God in the Ordinance of Baptism? And, (2.) Whether in the
Administration of it, we be obliged to dip the Person wholly under Water? As to
both which, it must be owned, we are yet disagreed: You judging the Ordinance
of Baptism, which we apply to Infants, not to belong to 'em: And while we
apprehend sprinkling it self, especially pouring a little water upon the Face
of a Person, or dipping his Face alone in water, to be Lawful in the
Administration of this Ordinance; you suppose we are ob^ig'd to dip, or plunge
the Person wholly into water. And while there is a difference in our
apprehensions, it must also be concluded, that on one side or the other, there
is cert^inly a mistake: But though there be a mistake, suppose it to be on your
side, or on our's, it is far from being a damning one.

1. We will first (as we think we have just reason) suppose the ^istake to be
with you; yet we dare not, nor do A^count it a fatal, or undoing one. Those of
your way, that agree with us as above (and all the Pious and Sober p^rt ^f you,
we take it, for granted, do) do only differ from us in a Circumstance. You
agree with us, that your Infants are to be entered into Covenant with God in
Christ, and seriously devoted to him, etc. You only doubt, whether it may be
done in this Ordinance: Now tho we are persuaded, that they should not only be
entered into Covenant, but also that this solemnity of Baptism should
Accompany, and add force to the surrender we make of 'em to God: Yet we do not
Account it so absolutely necessary, as if the salvation either of the Parent or
Child were suspended on it. We read indeed that Baptism saves us, 1 Pet. 3.21.
But the Apostle to prevent mistake, immediately explains himself, and tells us,
he does not intend it of the External Ceremony, but of the Answer of a good
Conscience: Our unfeigned consent to the Baptismal Covenant for our selves and
for those that we have Power to consent, and accept it for; and our sincere
devoting our selves and them in that Covenant to God in Christ, is indeed
necessary to theirs, and to our own salvation; and this is that Answer of a
good Conscience, which the Apostle calls for: But where this is found, though the
External Ceremony should be omitted (whether through the mistake of the Parent,
or through the absence of a Minister) we don't think God will, nor are we any of
those who dare, pass a sentence of Death in such a Case. And for the point of
dipping, we reckon it to be yet much less material: The necessity of it we do
indeed oppose; and doubt not but the Ordinance of Baptism (so far as concerns
this Controversy) is Lawfully Administered, if water be applied to a Person,
in any other way or manner; so it be done with the awful and solemn mention of
the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: But yet, supposing it be so
ordered, that the Life of the Person be not hazarded by it; nor any breach made
upon the Rules of modesty, we do not Condemn the Practice of Dipping: And in
those two Cases, all that are truly Pious amongst your selves, must (upon
deliberation) needs disallow it, as well as we.

2. And now we will suppose the mistake to be on our part: We make no
difficulty of it, to own that we are fallible: As wise and good Men as we are,
nay, far wiser and better than we, have been mistaken; and it is no wonder if in
many things we be so; Nay, we doubt not, but in some things at least, we are
so, because we are Men: Though we do not know, that in any Principle of Religion
we are so, for that we dare not knowingly Err: Wherein soever we are convinced
of a mistake, we do, and we are willing to retract it: But we may be in an
error, and may not know it: And we will for a while suppose (though we have
never yet seen reason to grant) that, as to the matters in difference betwixt
you and us, we are under a mistake: Yet neither can the mistake on our side
endanger the Foundations, supposing we should be mistaken. For,
As to the Point of Infant Baptism, if it should prove to be a mistake, it is
only a Circumstantial one, a mistake as to the time of Administration: This is
the worst that can be made of it, if we should be mistaken: And where is the
damage, supposing we should be too early laid under the most-solemn Bonds to be
the Lords? Though by the way, we see not how this can be done too soon. We do
not, we dare not rest upon our having been baptized in Infancy, as if that
would of it self save us: We do indeed reckon it to be Valid Baptism, and that
we do not need to be Baptized again, when we become Adult; but we don't think
our Infant Baptism will stand instead of Regeneration, or exempt us from the
necessity of Faith, Repentance, or a life of serious Holiness, when we are
Adult; Nay, we look upon our selves (by Virtue of that Baptism) to lie under
unalterable Bonds and Obligations hereunto. And now, though it should be
supposed, we are under a mistake, as to the time, when this Ordinance should be
Administered; yet can it have no hurtful influence upon us, or upon any of those
great, and important Principles of Christianity in which we are agreed.

Or again, if you suppose us also mistaken as to the manner of application,
while we do not (as you) dip, or plunge the Person baptized wholly under water,
but only apply a small quantity of water to 'em, most commonly by Pouring it
upon their Faces: Yet neither can this surely, (if a mistake) be by you
Accounted a very dangerous one: No part of serious Religion can be thought to
be endangered by it. The Kingdom of Christ does not consist in Dipping; so as
that he that is Dipped shall be saved, and he that is not Dipped shall be
Damned: You your selves dare not lay so great a stress upon it. What! Shall a
Soul that is truly Penitent, and with serious Actings of Faith and Love, gives
up it self to God in Christ, a Soul that resolvedly lies at his Foot, that will
not wickedly depart from him; Can you think such a Soul shall yet be rejected
by him, merely because in their Baptism they were not Dipped under water! This
is what upon serious deliberation, we are persuaded, none of you dare avow.

III. Now then, since it appears, that the matters in contest betwixt you and
us (at least amongst the Pious and Sober on both sides) are so inconsiderable
and comparatively small; we would make it the matter of our earnest request to
you, that they may accordingly be owned and looked upon by you, do not enhance
or over-rate the Value of 'em: By this means, a happy ^utual agreement might
most probably be effected, however all the ill effects of our remaining
disagreements would be prevented or rem^v'd. (1.) No way more likely than this
to promote an Agreement amongst us: Apprehensions that the differences are
greater, and the mistakes more dangerous than they are, do naturally influence
both si^e to ^ook with strangenest upon each other, and prejudice 'em against
what is, or may be offered on either side: But were it rightly consi^er'd, how
little the difference is, it would yet tend to ^ake it less; by softening minds
on each side, and preparing 'em with greater impartiality to entertain whatever
convincing evidence is laid before 'em. Or, (2.) If it would not remove our
differences themselves, it would (at least) prevent all the ill effects of 'em:
For instance, why might we not love, and live like Christians (notwithstanding
the remaining differences in our Opinions)? Wh^ might we not pray with, and for
each other? Wh^ might we not, according to the Rule of the Gospel, look
favorably upon each others mistakes, and receive each other to Love and
Communion, avoiding doubtful disputations, Romans 14. throughout the Chapter. We
solemnly declare, we are ready thus to receive you; we dare not but receive all
whom we are persuaded, our Lord himself will receive: Let there not be a breach
maintained on your Part, while we impose no sinful, or so much as suspected
Term of Communion on you. Or, supposing upon one or other mistake, you should
think fit to separate your selves from us, from our Assemblies, yet, at least,
we beg, you would in your distinct Assemblies see to it, that the great and
uncontroverted Principles of Christianity may be ordinarily, and with greatest
warmth and earnestness insisted on; and let not your Heat and Zeal be laid out
upon the little things in which we differ: Let your endeavors be rather to
make Men Christians, than to make 'em Antipaedobaptists; and show that you
prefer the interests of our common Lord, before those of your particular Party.
For a close, we would leave those Words of the Apostle with you, Phil. 3.15,
16. Nevertheless, wherein we have already attained, let us walk by the ^ame
Rule, let us mind the same things: And if in any thing ye ^e never
(...)-minded, God will reveal even this unto you.

B. Robinson, S. Chandler, W. Leigh.

AN INTRODUCTION.
MUST I again, be called out to engage in this irksome and unpleasing
Controversy? Who had much rather spend my time in healing differences, and
provoking all Christians to love one another. I have often read with some
pleasing satisfaction, those Expressions of Archbishop Tillotson, (that Great
Good Man, and National loss.) I know not (says he) whether St. Paul, Tillotson,
Pres. to six Ser. on family Religion, page 3.
who had been taken up into the third Heavens, did by that Question of his;
Where is the Disputer of this World? Intend to insinuate that this wrangling
work has place only in this World, and upon this Earth, where only there is a
dust to be raised; but will have no place in the other. But whether St. Paul
intended this or not, the thing it self I think is true, that in the other
World all things will be clear and past dispute; to be sure among the Blessed,
and probably also among the miserable, unless fierce and furious Contentions,
with great heat, without light, about things of no moment and concernment to
them, should be designed for a part of their torment. I had much rather be
dressing my own Soul for Eternity, and preparing others for those calm and
peaceable Regions, where perfect Charity and Good will Reign for ever: Than in
fomenting and increasing those Divisions among Christians, which are too
unmeasurably wide already.

My Charity is not confined to any particular Sect, or Party of Christians; but
I bear a hearty good will to all that agree in the Essentials of Religion,
Notwithstanding their distant Opinions, in matters of an inferior Nature. A
reformed Catholic Christian, is a Name that pleases me better, than any of
those distinguishing Titles which the Contentions of Men have occasioned in the
Christian Church. Though I was urged by many serious Christians, before the
disputation, to Print my Sermons on this subject, which were managed rather in
a Practical than Controversal way; Yet so averse was I to foment or Increase
differences, that I willingly forbore. And if Dr. Russel had only Printed the
Imperfect Notes of his own Scribes, perhaps we should still have been silent;
and left the World to judge between us: but seeing he has been guilty of so
many Notorious Falsehoods and Misrepresentations, both on his side and ours, we
are unavoidably constrained to Vindicate the Truths of Christ, the common cause
of the reformed Churches, and our own Reputation, against the bold insolence of
a Scandalous Libeller:

The true occasion of my being engaged in this matter is this: I was invited
some years ago, before any Anabaptist Meeting was set up at Gosport, to Preach
a Lecture once a fortnight at Portsmouth; which I have continued (I bless God
with no small success) ever since. In the course of my Lecture, I thought it
most advisable to give my hearers a true and orderly Scheme of the Christian
Religion. Having therefore explained the Creed and Lords Prayer (Mr. Williams
undertaking the Ten Commandments) I did without any importunity from others,
but purely in the method I had laid down, explain the Doctrine of the
Sacraments: Here I largely explained the Nature of Baptism, and could not do
right to my subject, without defending our own practice as to Infants right,
and the way of Administration. Dr. Russel himself knows how falsely he has
Published to the World, that I inveighed against the Poor Baptists (as he calls
them) with most severe Reflections: Seeing he has read those Notes which Mr.
Ring took of my Sermons. The very hardest expression in those Notes, is the
Title of mistaken Brethren. These Sermons Mr. Samuel Ring, who, though of that
persuasion, usually attends our Lecture, penned down in short hand, and
afterward wrote out at length; with an Innocent design (as he himself
professes) to show them to some of his Brethren. Farmer Bows, a pretended
Messenger of the Churches, hearing of this, appli^s himself to Mr. Ring for a
sight of these Sermons, and having read them, used words to this effect. Shall
we bear this? If we suffer Mr. Chandler thus to go on, it will prejudice our
cause. Mr. Ring replied, Mr. Chandler takes but the same liberty in his own
Congregation, to defend his own practice, that we do in ours.

But this was not satisfactory. Mr. Bows goes over to Gosport, to Mr. John
Webber, Pastor of a Congregation of particular Anabaptists, as they are called,
opposite in their Judgments, in many great points of Religion, to those in
Portsmouth. Mr. Webber (as he told me himself) was willing to live in Peace,
and did not desire to be engaged: But Mr. Leddel, and some others, Men of heat
without light, were very urgent, and willing even to accept of Matthew Caffen
for their Champion, whom Mr. Bows proposed: A Man that denies both the Divinity
and Humanity of Christ, and is justly protested against, by many of his
Brethren, and particularly by Dr. Russel. Mr. Webber justly refused to own
Matthew Caffen, as a Christian, or a Brother. And therefore, since they would
have a dispute, rather proposed Dr. Russel. Accordingly, December 21*98. Mr.
Bows, Mr. Webber, and about twenty of their Party came to my Lecture boldly to
confront me, when I was Answering the Anabaptists Objections. At the
Conclusion, Farmer Bows stands up, and in the Name of the rest Challenges me
with Preaching Doctrines false and wholly untrue, and desired I would admit of
a public dispute with an ordained Minister of the Gospel: This bold Challenge
I accepted, provided they would procure a Man that understood the regular Laws
of disputation, and preliminaries were first settled. Accordingly the next Day,
Preliminaries were settled and Papers interchang'd, between Thomas Bows and
William Leddel, as asserters of the two Questions on the one part: And Francis
Williams, and Samuel Chandler, as deniers of the two Questions on the other
Part. This Dr. Russel perfectly conceals, in his Account of the Preliminaries,
page 4. Because it would have confuted his slander upon the Learned Dr. Smith,
as if he designed, by saying, he that asserts must prove, that the Proof lay
upon us; but this is Accounted for elsewhere. Mr. Webber afterward declares
his utter dislike of the dispute, and wished i^ had never been: And before my
self and Mr. Smith, denied that the Letter in the Name of the Church at
Gosport, Narr. p. 2. was wrote with his Knowledge or consent. Therefore we
Impute not the Falsehood of the matter, as if Mr. Chandler had inveighed against
and ridiculed their Practice; nor the false Grammar in that Letter to him. Mr.
Ring expressed his hearty sorrow by Letter (as well as otherwise) in these
following words -- (after having sent me the notes of my Sermons, and delivered
a Copy of the Disputation to Mr. Smith.) -- I am troubled at the Sad Effects of
the Disputation. I mean the difference it has raised among those, that I hope
are all the People of God: And the Grief it may have occasioned to any of his
faithful Ministers: And most of all that I have contributed any thing toward
it: Though it has been by accident and no otherwise: and as I pray God forgive
me, so I beg your pardon, and crave a share in your Prayers. I always respected
you, as a Minister of Christ Jesus; have prayed for the Success of your
Ministry, and have heard you with a great deal of Satisfaction, and I hope have
profited by it; and shall continue to do so, and so attend your Ministry
without the le^st P^ejudice, and I hope with better Success than formerly. I
am, Sir, yours in all Christian Service. Samuel Ring. Portsmouth, May 29.99.

This is the true Copy of Mr. Ring's Letter to me, who according to his promise
usually attends our Lecture at Portsmouth, Now let the World Judge whether my
Prejudice against the growth of the Church at Gosport, could put me upon this
work; or whether I ever inveighed against them; many of them can testify to the
contrary, to whom I have, and shall bear an hearty love and good will; own them
as excellent Servants of Christ, and be very willing to contribute my
Assistance, to help them forward in their way to Heaven. But alas! It Is Mr.
Bows and his party that are afraid of the growth of Mr. Webbers Congregation:
And therefore did suspend from their Communion, one Isaac Harman by Name, a
Ioyner in Portsmouth, for bearing Mr. Webber: this the Young Man told me
himself, and asked my advice about it; and Mr. Bows told me himself before Mr.
Francis Williams, that if he could Believe that our Doctrine of Original Sin,
he should think Infants had need of Baptism: And wondered the People of Gosport
should Scruple the Practice of Infant Baptism, and yet maintain the Doctrine of
Original Sin. This Man it seems wants not express Command or Example, but only
to be feelingly acquainted with the universal Corruption of Humane Nature; and
then would readily Embrace our Practice. I Pray God open his Eyes, and convince
him of this great truth, which is of far greater weight than this of Baptism.

AN ABRIDGMENT OF THOSE SERMONS THAT WERE The Innocent Occasion of the
Disputation.
HEre I must unavoidably dip my Pen in the Watery Controversy: I love not to
meddle with matters of Dispute, especially where Sober and Good Men are at
Odds: But I cannot do right to my Subject, without mentioning the Grounds of
our Practice, both as to the Subjects of Baptism, and the manner of its
Administration. I shall according to the order o^ the Disputation,

First, mention what I offered, as to the Subjects of Baptism.

1. I shall prove from Scripture, (...) ^arrantableness of Infant Baptism, or
of the Baptizing the Infants of Believing Parents. Here I shall not burden you
with many Scriptures, that might be produced: but only mention some few that I
think most clear.

First From Mat. 28.19. Go, Disciple all Nations Baptizing them. From hence I
thus argue.

1. The Infants of Believing Parents are Disciples, and therefore ought to be
Baptized. Now we have a plain Text that these Infants are Disciples, in Act^
15.19. Why tempt ye God to put a Yoke upon the Necks of the Disciples, which
neither our Fathers nor we were able to bear? This Yoke was that of
Circumcision, a very painful ordinance. Administered to Infants of 8 days old;
this Yoke these false Teachers would impose not only on the Gentile Christians
but their Infants too, and therefore St. Paul was acus'd by them, that he
taught, they should not Circumcise their Children nor Keep the Customs of
Moses, Acts 21.21. Now when our Savior says Go, Disciple all Nations: The
Apostles must need understand, that such as were Disciples in the Jewish State,
should be admitted to this ordinance in the Christian Church.

2. Infants are a considerable part of a Nation, and therefore we cannot
suppose, they should be excluded, except they were excluded by Name or good
Consequence.

3. All Nations, is here put in opposition to the one Nation of the Jews. As if
our Savior had said, whereas the Jews have hitherto been the peculiar People
of God, and admitted to peculiar Privileges, now I admit all Nations to the
same Privileges, the Jews only enjoyed before; Ephesians. 2.12, 13. Now it was a
great Privilege among the Jews, that their Infants were dedicated and devoted
to God, and admitted into his Church, and Covenant, in their early years;
therefore the Apostles must needs understand, when our Savior said, all
Nations should be Discipled, that the Gentiles, and their Children should be
admitted to the same Privileges the Jews enjoyed before.

4. Our Savior must needs intend Infants unless he had excluded them. If he
would not be any longer a God in Covenant with them, he would have razed out
their Names. Suppose the words had run thus: Go, Disciple all Nations,
Circumcising them; the Apostles must have understood that their Infants were
intended, and why not the same, when only the rite is altered? Or suppose it
had run, Go, Disciple the Jews, Baptizing them; They must needs admit Infants
that were admitted before. So that whereas our mistaken Brethren call for an
express Scripture for Infant Baptism, we have reason to answer, there needs
express Scripture to revoke that Privilege and Covenant Interest which Infants
enjoyed before. If it had been Christ's intention to have excluded Infants from
the Church, there must have been a positive Law, where such an intention of
Christ should have been expressed: for nothing can make that unlawful, which
was a Duty before, but a direct and 'express prohibition from the Legislator
himself; Stilling-Fleet Iren. page 7.
who alone has Power to Rescind, as well as make Laws. You know there was a
great Controversy, whether Circumcision should continue or not, Acts 21.21: and
certainly there would have been a far greater, if, upon their coming to Christ,
their Infants had been excluded the Church, and ranked with Heathens; but
seeing we find no Objections made about this matter, nor that our Savior ever
revoked this Privilege, we may be assured they still enjoy it.

5. The Practice of Baptizing Infants was customary among the Jews; those that
have but dipped their fingers in the Jewish Writings know, that not only
Proselytes (as Mr. Tombs acknowledges) but Native Jews themselves, were
admitted into the Church by Circumcision, as an initiating ordinance; by
Baptism, as a purifying Ceremony, to wash them from Legal Uncleanness, which
they might ignorantly contract; and by Sacrifice to expiate their Sin; and that
this was not a Corrupt Tradition, but grounded on those many Texts, that
require washing from uncleanness: And therefore this Practice is grounded on,
Genesis 35.2. Exodus 19.10. by the Gemera Talmud, and Maimonides. Now therefore
seeing Infants were thus admitted by Baptism, and our Savior was pleased to
adopt this custom into a Christian Sacrament, we have reason to believe that
Infants are admitted now as before.

2. Another Scripture is in Acts 2.38, 39. Repent and be Baptized, for the
promise is to you and to your Children; and to those afar off, even as many as
the Lord our God shall call. The Apostle Peter does in this place persuade
those he had convinced, of the greatness of their Sin, in murdering the Lord of
Glory, penitently to return to God, and then Incourages them to hope, they
should again be received into Favor with God: And, says he, the promise will
be made good, not only to you but to your Children too: And to the Gentile
World also, Even to as many as the Lord our God shall call. Thence I argue.

1. This promise, was the great promise to Abraham. Some pretend it is only
that promise in Joel 2.8. Gods giving extraordinary gifts of the Spirit; That
their Sons and Daughters should Prophecy. But this cannot be, because that
promise was not fullfill'd to all afar off. Have all the Gifts of Tongues? Do
all Prophecy? The promise signifys the great promise (...) to Abraham, I will
be a God to thee and to thy seed, Genesis 17.17. Therefore this is called the
promise Gal. 3.14. That the blessing' of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles,
through Jesus Christ, that we might receive the promise of the Spirit, through
Faith. The Blessing of Abraham: That great Blessing that God would be a God to
him and his seed. Now if this great Blessing come to the Gentiles, Then they
and their seed ought to receive the token of the Covenant; the Children of the
promise ought to have the Seal affixed to it.

2. The Apostle uses these words to comfort the Jews, that had Imprecated
Divine Vengeance on themselves and their Children, Infants as well as others; a
curse that lies on the unbelieving Jews to this day: His blood be upon us and
our Children; no doubt, but many of those, that were pricked at the heart at
Peter's Sermon, joined with the rabble in that Loud cry; Crucify him, Crucify
him, and were concerned not only for themselves but their Children too;
therefore the Apostle uses this Argument, if you penitently return to God by
faith in Christ, the curse shall be taken off from you and your Children, you
and yours shall be admitted again, and not only so, but those that are afar
off, the Gentile World, when called.

3. If the words were to be restrained, only to those that believe and repent
themselves, and concern not their Infants; this would be an Argument to
persuade the Jews, to continue in the Synagogue still, rather than to come into
the Christian Church. While Synagogue worship stood before Christ's coming, God
had promised happy Privileges, to themselves and Children; but now if
afterward their Children must be cast off, and looked on as no other than
Heathens, and strangers to the Covenants of promise, this would incline them
rather to continue in the Synagogue, than enter into the Christian Church.

A Third Scripture is in Romans 11.15, 25. In those verses, these following
things are containd.

1. The Apostle speaks of breaking off from and grasfing into the Visible
Church; that the Unbelieving Jews were broken off from that Visible Church, to
which they were related before, by their positive unbelief, and rejecting
Christ; and that the Gentile Believers were graff'd in, and so partook of those
Privileges, from which the Gentiles were broken off.

2. Some only were broken off, the rest that Believed, enjoyed the same
Privileges they did before, v. 17 th. Now this was a great Privilege, that God
would be a God to them and to their seed: Therefore they still enjoyed the same.

3. What Privileges the Jews left, the whole body shall be restored to when
the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in, v. 25. therefore their Infants shall
be restored to the same Privileges the enjoyed before.

4. The Believing Gentiles are admitted to the Privileges the Jews enjoyed
before, gra^fed into the same Olive Tree, v. 24. S^eing Jewish infants were
interested in the Church and Covenant of God, the Inf^^ts of Believing Gentiles
are also in Covenant, and consequently ought to have Baptism, the Seal, applied
to them.

4. A Fourth Scripture is in 1 Cor. 7.14. Else were your Children unclean, but
now are they holy. Hence I argue, If the Children of Believers are holy, then
this ordinance ought to be Administered to them. The only difficulty here, is
to understand what is meant, by holiness in this place.

1. Internal Holiness cannot be ascribed to all the Infants of believers.
Because we find by sad experience, that many of them shamefully Apostatize from
God, and thereby plainly show, the Seed of Grace was never in them, 1 John 3.9.

2. Neither can it be understood of bare Legitimacy, as our mistaken brethren
pretend. For,

1. The Word is never used in this sense, in all the Scripture.

2. The Children of Heathens, if begotten in Lawful Wedlock, are Legitimate, as
well as of Believers; therefore this can be no distinguishing mark, as in this
place.

3. The Apostle's Argument would be weak and unconcluding, if he should only
prove that they were Lawful Man and Wife, because their Children were Lawfully
begotten. The Question proposed to the Apostle was this. Supposing a believing
Wife Married to an unbeliever, or e contra, whether the believer should dwell
with the unbeliever, or part one from another. The Apostle Answers,

If the unbeliever be willing to abide, let them do so, For the unbelieving
Wife is sanctified by the Husband, and else were ^our Children unclean, but now
are they Holy. Because one Parent is a believer, therefore their Children are
peculiarly related to God, and in Covenant with him.

Now if bare Legitimacy were intended, then the Argument would run thus: You
have no Reason to question, whether you are Man and Wife, because your Children
are Lawfully begotten. Can any believe any could question the one, and yet
grant the other?

4. This would not answer the Corinthians Scruple: They did not question,
whether co-habiting with Unbelievers, exposed them to Fornication; but, whether
it would expose them to Irreligion, or at least, great Temptations. Now, says
the Apostle, How Know thou, O Man, but thou may save thy Wife? However,
your Children are holy, because one is a believer.

3. By holiness is meant Relative or Federal Holiness. That the Children of
Believers are Separated to God, entered into a new Relation to him, by virtue
of his Covenant. Thus the Israelites are said to be a holy People, because
Separated to God as his peculiar Treasure, Deuteronomy. 14.2.26.19. the Infants of
Believing Parents are thus holy, as related to God and enjoying distinguishing
marks of Favor, therefore ought to have this distinguishing ordinance applied
to them?

2. What Privileges are the Infants of Believers Invested in by Baptism?

1. They are solemnly admitted into the Visible Church; no longer strangers to
the Covenants of Promise, but more nearly related to God, than the Infants of
Heathens.

2. Peculiarly interested in the Churches Prayers; we are bound indeed to pray
for all Men, but more peculiarly for the Church of God, Gal: 6.16.

3. Have a Title to Gods peculiar care. God gives his Angels a charge over
them, Mat. 18.10.

4. They stand nearer to, and are the more especial Objects of the promises of
Grace, Is. 44.3.59. Infants are called by Gods Name, therefore though Gods Grace
is free, yet we have more Reason to hope, the promises will be made good to
them than others. The vein of Election frequently runs in the Channel of
Believing Parents, and their seed.

5. They are put into a new Covenant Relation. As Abraham received the sign of
Circumcision, as a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, to himself and seed,
Romans 4.11. So this ordinance of Baptism, shall be a Seal of the Righteousness
of Faith, to Believers and their seed.

6. If they dye during their Infant State, they shall be saved. Our Savior
uses this Argument for the proof of the Resurrection. I am the God of Abraham,
Mat. 22.32. Now for God to be the God of any, is to distinguish them from
others by his rewards; he did not do thus for Abraham, and his Family, in this
World, therefore there is another, Heb. 11.16. Now when God is said to be a God
to Believers and their seed, the meaning is, he will be a rewarder of them;
therefore if they die in their Infant State, they have a promise to rely on,
that God will receive them to Salvation. Whereas others must leave their
Children to the unfathomable depths of Divine Mercy, as they do the Heathen
World.

3. The Practical uses of Infant Baptism beyond that of Years. This I do the
rather, to take off the Common Objection, that Infant Baptism is an useless
Ordinance.

1. By Baptizing our Infants we practically own our Original Pollution. Those
Baptized at R^per Years own themselves Sinners by Practice; but do not
necessarily own, that there is a Fountain of Sin within: But when we offer our
Children to be Baptized, we acknowledge that we have been Instruments of
conveying polluted Natures to our Infants; and that they need washing by the
Blood and Spirit of Christ. Thus the Prophet sets forth our sinful State, by
the Pollutions of a new born Infant, Ezekiel. 16.4.

2. Hereby we practically acknowledge the Necessity of Gods free Grace in order
to our recovery. As an Infant cannot contribute to his Baptism, but is purely
passive; So we can contribute nothing, by any Work or Merit of our own, toward
obtaining the Grace of God, and Regenerating Influences of his Spirit. It is
not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows
Mercy, Romans 9.16.

3. Hereby we practically own Christ's universal Headship, that he is Lord of
all, of all Ages, Sexes, and Conditions. Those that deny their Children, to be
in Covenant with God, hereby deny them to be Visible Members of Christ; And
thus rob him of a great part of his Subjects, and indeed rob themselves of that
comfort they might enjoy: they look upon their Infants, as in the same case and
State, with the Heathen World. If Christ save them, it is by a Prerogative of
Mercy, and not as his Members or Covenant Children; but for this cause Christ
both Died, ^^d Rose, and revived, that he might be the Lord, of the Dead and
Living. Romans 14.9. and as Christ whilst an Infant himself, was head of the
Church, so he is pleased to admit of Infant Members, in Covenant with him.

4. Infant Baptism lays stronger Obligations on Parents, to train up their
Children for God. Certainly it is a mighty Obligation on a Parent to consider. 1.
I have Solemnly devoted my Child to God. Solemnly promised, before the
Minister, and in the Face of a great Congregation, that I will Endeavor by
hearty Prayers, Serious Instructions, and a Religious Example, to train up my
Child for God; the vows of the Lord are upon me, and I shall add perjury to the
rest of my Sins, if I Neglect them. The Prophet makes it, a great Agravation of
the Israelites Sin, that they had taken their Sons and Daughters that they had
Born unto God, and Sacrafic'd them to Idols. Ezekiel. 16.21. and it follows, Thou
have slain my Children. God calls them his Children, as born in his Family, and
Solemnly devoted to him. So the sin of Christians will be highly aggravated, if
they bring up their Children for the destroyer, and Neglect those Parental
Instructions, they have obliged themselves to.

5. Infant Baptism Engages Children to acquaint themselves, with the Terms and
Tenor of the Covenant. When Children are told by their Parents, how Solemnly
they were entered into Covenant with God, this engages them to enquire betimes,
what they are by Nature, what they may be by Grace, and to understand all the
Principles of Religion, in order to that end.

6. Infant Baptism Engages us against Sin Betimes. We are prepossessed with a
happy Prejudice against Sin, in our Early Years; and this is a great advantage.
When Hannibal was but 9 years Old, his Father made him la^ his hand upon the
Altar, and Swear, that he would be an Irreconcilable Enemy to the Romans: And
this was the Reason he would never admit of any Peace with them. My Friends, we
were Engaged for God against Sin, and the Devil, as our Irreconcilable Enemies,
not at 9 Years Old, but in our Infant State; and this obliges us to maintain a
constant Enmity against them for ever.

7. Infant Baptism is a great Encouragement for Faith in Prayer, with Respect
to our Children. Those that have dedicated their Children to God in Baptism,
may pray to God, with larger Measures of Faith and Hope, than such as have
Neglected this Duty. They may say, Lord I have resigned them up unto thee;
Brought them to thine Authorized Representative to be listed into thy Family;
consented for them, to the claims of thy Covenant; and the token of thy
Covenant, has been applied to them; let the Promises of thy Covenant be made
good to them. They are called by thy Name, do thou receive them: They are
Visible Members of thy Church. Oh give them the Favors that belong to thy
Children. A Visible Relation to God is a good Encouragement for Faith in
Prayer. We are called by thy Name: Thou bear not Rule over them. Ier. 14.9.
Those that have not thus dedicated their Children to God, can only say, Lord be
Merciful to them, though they are not called by thy Name, and make them thine.
But we have a better Plea; and can say, Lord they are called by thy Name.

8. Infant Baptism adds to the Parents comfort. They may comfortably hope as to
their living seed, that if they are Faithful in training them up for God, he
will according to his promise, Is. 44.3. pour out his Spirit and Blessing upon
them: and as to those that die in an Infant State, they have Reason to Believe
and hope, that they are happy, because God has promised to be a God to them,
and to their seed: Whereas those that Neglect this ordinance have no more
Reason to hope for the Salvation of their Infants, than the Heathens; must only
leave them, to the unfathomable depths of Gods Goodness, having no promise to
rely upon.

4. I shall answer some Principal Objections against this Truth.

1. There is no Precept nor Example for Infant Baptism, in all the New
Testament; This is a Common Objection, and therefore deserves a distinct answer,

1. To this I Answer: What Express Command or Example can they produce for
previous Examination of Persons that offer themselves to be Baptized; for
Stated Prayer, before and after this Ordinance; or for dipping or Plunging the
whole Body under Water? All these things must be deduced by consequence; for no
express Scripture can be produced for them. I may add, what express Command
have they for singing Psalms in Rhyme and Meter, which is the Practice of the
most Orthodox Anabaptists at this day? I mention this the rather, to convince
Mr. Webber and his adherents, what a doughty Champion they have chosen for
themselves. For this Dr. Russel has written some Animadversions on his Brother
Allen's Essay, on singing Psalms; wherein he advances the very same Arguments,
against their Practice of singing Psalms, that he does against ours for Infant
Baptism; and therefore has proved himself a Hackny disputant, that has one
constant Road, and train of Arguments, upon all occasions. Perhaps I may be so
dull of Apprehension, as not to be able to Answer them, therefore must cry, Men
of Israel help. The Arguments of Russel against Allen, page 9.

If it does not appear from Scripture, or any Authentic. History, that the
Psalms of David were Translated into Rhyme or Meter till the 16 th Century,
then it is Impossible any Church could so sing them, as our Brethren now do;
the Major is undeniable, the Minor I thus prove.

If it be so recorded, you or some other are able to show it.

Further, if Singing in Rhyme or Meter was never practiced in any Church, till
the 16 th Century, then it was, because our Lord Jesus had not commanded it so
to be.

If our Lord had Commanded it* his Apostles would have so taught the Churches.

If the Apostles were faithful in the discharge of their Ministry, and kept
back nothing, that was profitable to the Churches, but declared to them the
whole Council ^^ God, then they did teach the Churches all that the Lord Jesus
Commanded.

If the Apostles did teach the Churches to sing in Rhyme and Meter, then it is
somewhere so recorded in the New Testament. Thus argues this mighty Man of
Logic; but as he cannot distinguish between Rhyme and Meter, ^o I can see*
neither Rhyme nor Reason in his discourse: these were the Arguments for want of
better, he ^rif^ed with at Portsmouth; but Mr. Webber (to whose Civility I am
indebted, for a sight of this curious piece,) must either Renounce his beloved
Rhimes, or comply with the Practice of Infant Baptism, notwithstanding the
Wonderful Arguments of his Champion to the contrary. But to return from this
digression.

2. Those Truths that were Established in the Old Testament, are rather
supposed than positively expressed in the New; but the Grounds and Foundations
upon which Infant Baptism stands, were Established in the Old Testament.
Infants were then admitted into the Covenant and Church of God: Except
therefore Christ had blotted their Names out of the Covenant, and Rolls of the
Church; They are to be continued there, under the New Testament. Thus a
Magistracy was settled under the Old Testament, but there is no precept for it
under the New; the Lawfulness of War was then settled, but supposed, not expres^
under the New. The forbidden degrees of Marriage, were settled under the Old
Testament: No need of mentioning them again under the New.

3. Ans. There are many Virtual and General Commands for the Baptizing of
Infants in the New Testament, which were mentioned before.

4. Ans. There was no need of an express Command, because it was the constant
Practice of the Church, when the Scripture was written, in conformity to the
Practice of the Jews, for many Ages before. I cannot here express my self
better, than in the words of the Learned Lightfoot Lightfoots Harmony on Joh. 1
25.
If Baptism and Baptizing of Infants had been as strange and unheard of a
thing, till John Baptist came; as Circumcision was ^till God appointed it to
Abraham; There would then no doubt, have been an express Command for Baptizing
Infants, as there was for Circumcising them. But when the Baptizing of Infants,
was a thing commonly known and used, as appears by Uncontestable Evidence from
all their Writers; there need not be express Assertions, that such and such
Persons were to be the Objects of Baptism, when it was as well known before the
Gospel began, that Men, Women and Children were Baptized, as it is to be known
that the Sun is up when it shines at noon day.

5. There would need a Positive Command, to exclude Infants, who were admitted
into Covenant before. The Jews were extremely tender of their Privileges, and
you know there was a great dispute among them, whether their Children should be
Circumcised, Acts. 21.21. Now if their Children were wholly cast out of
Covenant, this would have enraged them much more; seeing therefore, there is
not one word in Scripture, that once mentions the unchurching of Infants, not
one Apostle, that once questions or discovers it, the believing Jews did not
once Scruple it, nor the unbelieving once charge it on Christ; nor the Council
in Acts 15. Reveal it, tho they that taught Infants should be Circumciz'd, did
suppose they were Church Members. I say seeing all these things are True,
Infants are Church Members still, and consequently ought to be Baptized.

6. There are Examples of whole Households that were Baptized in Scripture, and
we may well conclude, as Abraham's Children, In Luke 19.9. Christ says to
Zaccheus, Salvation is come to this House, for that he also is the Son of
Abraham. Zaceheus was a Publican, and a gatherer of the Roman Tribute, and
perhaps a Gentile, but upon his Faith in Christ, he becomes a Spiritual Son of
Abraham, and Salvation comes not only to himself, but his House; God becomes a
God to him and his. So when we read of so many Households Baptized, upon the
Parents and Masters Believing, we have Reason to conclude their Infants were
Baptized, as Abraham and his were Circumciz'd.

7. There is no Instance of any Christian Child, whose Baptism was deferred
still he came to Years. There was great Reason that they who had been Jews or
Heathens before, should upon their undertaking Christianity, be Baptized at
Years: as Abraham at the first Institution of Circumcision was Circumciz'd,
when he was old; but we may well suppose, their Children (as Abraham's,) were
Baptized with them, and afterward in their Infant State. Now it is utterly
unaccountable, that in that long tract of time, between St. Mathews Gospel and
the Revelations, when many Christian Infants were grown adult, we should read
of none that were Baptized, but only of Jews and Heathens, I say this is
unaccountable, and therefore supposes they were Baptized in Infancy.

Obj. 2. Infants are incapable of performing the Duties prerequir'd to Baptism.
Of confessing their Sins, Mat. 3.6. Of Repenting, Acts 2.38. Of gladly
receiving the word, Acts 2.41. Of Believing, Mar. 16.16.

1. Infants are admitted on the account of their Parents faith. As the Infants
of Believing Jews, so are the Infants of Christians; nor is this at all
unreasonable. For as Infants contract Guilt from their Parents, why may they
not also partake of Mercy, on account of their Parents; except God be more
inclined to Acts of Justice, than Mercy* As many were healed of their Bodily
diseases, by the faith of their Parents, Math. 15.28. So why may they not be
admitted into Gods Church on the same account? As the Jewish Infants,
Covenanted with God, in and by their Parents, Deuteronomy. 29.11.12. So why may not
Christian Infants Covenant in and by them? As Children are said to come to
Christ, being brought in the Arms of their Nurses or Parents, Luke 18.15.16. So
why may they not be said Spiritually to come to Christ, in the Arms of their
Parents Faith? As Parents enter their Childrens Names in Leases and Covenants,
and the Children are obliged to stand to these Covenants, and do Enjoy these
Privileges, when they come to Years: So why may they not enter their Childrens
Names into the Covenant, and Church of God, though at present they are incapable
of Personally Engaging themselves?

2. Infants are obliged to these duties as soon as they are capable; and their
Early Engagements in Baptism, lay the more strong and forcible Obligation upon
them to do so. If afterward they revolt from God, their Sin will be more
highly aggravated, as adding Perjury and Apostasy to the rest of their Sins:
and this may be one Reason why, sometimes, the Children of Believers are worse
than others, because they Sin against greater Light and Love, and stronger
Engagements than other men, and therefore justly provoke the Holy Spirit to
forsake them. The Levites of a Month Old are said to keep the charge of the
Sanctuary, because they were devoted to this Office, and bound to it when
capable, Number. 3.28. So the Infants of Believers are devoted to the Service of
God: And bound to Believe, repent, confess their Sins, and gladly receive the
word, as soon as capable.

3. These Texts therefore only show what was required of grown Persons, when
Baptism was first appointed in the Christian Church. Those Persons were either
Jews or Heathens before, and therefore must Renounce their former Errors, and
profess the Christian Faith; but this is no Prejudice against Infants who are
to be admitted with them. As when Abraham was Circumciz'd, he first Believed in
God, and Submitted to this Ordinance, but afterward the Infants of the Jews
were Circumciz'd in their Infant State^: So if we were to Preach to the
Indians, we must first persuade them to Believe and Repent before Baptism; but
when once they had Believed, their Infants would have the same right with
themselves.

4. As to Mar. 16.16. because many are apt to insist on the order of the words,
and argue that Faith is put before Baptism, and therefore ought to preceed it,

I Answer: The order of the words is not always to be exactly regarded. For
confessing ^f Sin is put after Baptism^ Matthew. 3.6. Besides, this would condemn
all Infants; for, if, because they cannot Believe, they ought not to be
Baptized, then for the same Reason they must all be damned. It Is not positively
said he that is not Baptized shall be damned; Baptism is not of Absolute:
Necessity to Salvation: But it is positively said, he that Believes not shall
be damned. If the latter part of this verse be Interpreted of Grown Persons, so
also must the^ former. As for Grown Persons, Faith must go before Baptism: But
it does not follow, that Infants are hence excluded from Baptism, no more than*
from Salvation. Our Savior does therefore here, only give a general direction
to his Apostles, to Preach the Gospel to every Creature, and admit the Gentiles
to the same Privileges with the Jews, and shows them the Issue of the
Execution of their Commission; that those Jews, or Heathens that would renounce
their former Idolatry, and be^^eving y submit to the Ordinance, as a Solemn
Entrance into the Church, should be saved; bu^ those that wilfully persisted in
unbelief, should be damned. So that this is no Preju^ice to Infants, who are
still in Covenant with God through their Parents Faith, and were never cast out.

I proceed to the 2d General Question. After what manner, the outward Element
in Baptism, ought to be applied, whether by dipping or plunging the whole Body
under Water, or whether pouring Water on the Face be not sufficient? To which I
Answer,

1. It is not Absolutely Necessary that this Ordinance should be administered by
dipping or plunging the whole Body under the Water. There are many mistaken
Brethren lay too great a stress on this; but it proceeds from their ignorance
of the Scriptures.

1. The Holy Ghost, never uses (...), which most frequently fignifys to dip,
but (...): Now why should the Holy Ghost consecrate a new World for this
Ordinance; if dipping had been the only way of administering it? Now (...) is
always used where dipping is signified. Mat. 26.23. Ioh. 13.26. He that dippeth
with me in the dish. Luk 16.24. dip his finger. Rev. 19.13. with Garments dipped
in Blood.

2. The Greek word (...), is used in a differing sense in Scripture. Thus you
read, Mar. 7.4. The Pharisees eat not except they wash often.

Now the way of washing among the Jews, was this; a Servant was ready to p^ur
water, on his Masters hands, hence Elisha is thus described. 2 Kings 3.11. Here
is Elisha that poured Water on the hands of his Master Eli^ah. So we read of
washing of cups and pots, Brazen Vessels, and Tables or Beds. Mar. 7.4. the
Greek word is Baptizo. Surely they did not carry them out to a River and dip
them there, but poured water on them, and so made them clean. Again, Heb. 9.10.
we read of diverse washings; Baptisms in the Greek. Now what were these Baptisms
but v. 13.21. Moses's Sprinkling the Book and all the People, with the Blood of
Calves and Goats and Water. So that (...) and (...) signify the same thing. Let
not Injudicious People therefore pretend, that ours is only Rantism, when we
find in Scripture that Rantism; and Baptism are used promisc^ously for the same.

3. There is no certainty that dipping was ever usd in Scripture times. All
those Scriptures that are commonly urged to this purpose, may be easily applied
another way. If we begin with John the Baptist, he is said to Baptize not in,
but with Water, as Christ with the Holy Ghost and Fire. Luke 3.16. Now how did
Christ Baptize with the Holy Ghost and Fire? but at the day of pentecost when
the Holy Ghost was poured on them. Acts. 10.45. I know the learned Casaubon's
witty Criticism that in Acts 2. when the Holy Ghost came upon them it is said;
There came a ^ound from Heaven as of a rushing might^ wind, and it filled the
House. So that they were as in a Fish Pond Overwhelmed with the Holy Ghost. But
to this I Answer, it was the sound that filled the House, and not the Cloven
Tongues of Fire, which were the Emblems of the Holy Ghost, and sure they were
not Overwhelmed wi^h these; but that promise was made good. I will pour out my
Spirit. Acts 2.17. Now the pouring out of the Spirit, is frequently represented
by pouring out water, Is. 44.3.

But several Scriptures are pretended for dipping; the most material are these.

1. Mat. 3.16. Jesus went up out of the water.

I Answer, he might acording to the Practice of those times, go into the Water
to wash his Feet, foul with Traveling, and John might pour Water on his Face;
but the Greek word may be rendered, he went up from the Water. The like Answer
may be given to Mar. 1.9. Jesus was Baptized of John in Jordan. It does not
prove his whole Body was plunged there. Nay (...) frequently signifys to, and
if we compare this place with Mat. 3.13. Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee to
Jordan to be Baptized of John. So here we may read the words with a
Parenthesis* And Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, (and was Baptized of
John) to Jordan

2. Another Scripture is Ioh. 3.23. John Baptized in Enon, because there was
much Water there.

I Answer, much Water may be meant not of depth but length, many streams and
Rivulets, where John and his Disciples might conveniently together Baptize or
pour Water on the Multitudes.

3. Another Scripture is Acts 8.38. where Philip and the Eunuch are said both
to go down into the Water; whence some would infer that the Eunuch was dipped. I
Answer, they might only go down to, and come from the Water. So the Greek may
be rendered, the Water running in the valleys. B^t if Men will insist on the
letter of the Text, Phillip must dip himself as well as the Eunuch; for they
both went down. Or they might go ankle deep, and Philip might pour Water on his
Head or Face: either of these interp^etations are probable, and therefore it
cannot Necessari^y be proved he was dipped; besides the unlikelihood that he was
dipped on a Journey, when perhaps he might have no clothes to change.

4. The Principal Scripture they boast of, is Romans 6.4. Being Buried with
Christ in Baptism. Whence they argue B^p^ism must represent a Burial, therefore
the whole B^dy must be covered with Water. This Text we have given a distinct
Answer to, in our Reflections on Dr: Russel, Chap. 2. Refl. 12.13. therefore
thither I Refer the Reader, and shall only say here,

1. It is no where said that Baptism represents Christ's Burial, but only that
we are obliged to conform our selves thereby to Christ's Death, Burial, and
Resurrection, to die to Sin, and rise again to newness of Life: This we do
whatever ri^e be used.

2. In our way (if that will satisfy) there is a Representation of Christ's
Death* the pouring out of Water denoting the pouring his Blood or Soul; of his
Burial, as the Face the Principal part of the Body, is put under the Water; of
his Resurrection when the Child is taken up and delivered again to its Parents
or O^^erers.

3. If they will keep strictly to the Significancy of a Burial; the Person to
be Baptized, must not walk into the Water, but be taken up by the Baptizer and
cast down into it: for indeed the difference between our way and theirs is only
this, we Baptize the face and they Baptize the head and shoulders too.

4. Metaphors must not be stretched too far, and let our Brethren take heed,
how they stretch this Expression so, as to Justify the Practice of others, that
differ from them; you read v. 6. our Old Man is Crucified with Christ. H^^ce
the Romanists infer the Necessity of Crossing in Ba^^ism; let not the Metaphor
therefore be stretched too ^ar.

5. There are many more Scriptures, that have an Allusion to Sprinkling or
pouring Water on the Face: thus we r^ad Is. 44.3. I will pour Water on him that
is thirsty, etc. which is Interpreted of Gods pouring out his Spirit, and
Blessing on the seed of Believers. So Heb. 10.22. Having your Hearts Sprinkled
from an Evil Conscience, and your Bodies washed with pure Water: And many other
places. So that our way most fairly Represents the Death, Burial and
Resurrection of Christ, together with the Application of his Blood, and Spirit;
and the Anabaptists of Amsterdam are so sensible of this, that they Generally
Baptize by pouring Water upon the Head.

4. There is great probability, (if not certainty) that many were not dipped in
Scripture times. Particularly Acts 2.41. we read of 3000 Baptized in part of a
day. And this was at Jerusalem where there were no Rivers, but only the Brook
Cedron. Besides these were either dipped naked, or with their Clothes; if Naked,
this would be an unseemly sight, and look as if they were full of New Wine
indeed, though (by the way) I think that part, that is Baptized, ought to be
Naked, to Represent our Nakedness before God: if with their Clothes this would
be as strange, for it cannot be expected, they brought Clothes with them at
that Juncture, and it would have been very unseemly, to see so many Persons
come out of the Water in such a condition* and go down to their Houses, which
might be at a great distance; not to mention that it was hardly possible, for
the 12 Ap^s^les, if we should add the 70 Disciples to them ((...) y^^ ^he Text
mentions not) to dip 3000 in so sho^t a time, they had need have brawny Arms
and an Here^^^an strength to do this.

Again we read A^ts 9.^.18. that Saul after 3 days fasti^g was Baptiz^d by
Ananias, we read not that he wen^ out of the Ho^^e; nor is it probable, that
God ( who will have Mercy and not Sacrifice,) would at that time require, he
should be plunged in Cold Water, which might Prejudice his Health o^ Life.

Again Acts 16.33. The Jailer and all his were Baptized at midnight. It Is
unlikely they went to a River at that time.

5. It is not the quantity of Water, but the quality that is Significant. As in
the other Sacrament we are Commanded to Eat Bread and drink Wine in Remembrance
of Christ; So in this to be washed in the Name of the Father Son and Holy
Ghost: and as in the other, it is not said what quantity of Bread we shall Eat,
or Wine we shall Drink; So neither in this, after what manner the Water shall
be applied, whether by dipping, Sprinkling or pouring Water on the Face. It
might be equally pretended, that we must Eat and Drink plentifully at the Lords
Table, because this best sets forth a Feast, as it is called 1 Cor. 5.8. or Eat
a whole Loaf to represent our partaking of Christ's fullness, and receiving from
him Grace for Grace: there is as much Necessity for this, as for dipping, to
represent our Burial with Christ. But as a small bit of Bread, and Moderate
Draught of Wine, does significantly represent the Death of Christ; so a little
Water does as significantly Represent the cleansing virtue of Christ's Blood.

6. It is very unlikely that dipping, which when mentioned in Scripture, is
generally used as a token of Gods Vengeance, should in this Sacrament be used
as a token of his Mercy. Thus the Old World was dipped and drowned for their
Sins, Gods Vengeance followed them, and they sunk as lead in the Mighty Waters:

But Noah and his Family, whose entrance into the Ark, was a Type of Baptism,
as that is an Entrance into the Christian Church 1 Pet. 3.21. They were only
wet with the Rain they met with in their passage. Thus the Egyptians were dipped
and drowned in the Red Sea, but the Israelites were Baptized unto Moses, in the
Cloud and the Sea, 1 Cor. 10.2. by the dewings of the Cloud, and dashing of the
Waves. Thus the Lord Jesus shall come down from Heaven, to render Vengeance on
his Antichristian Enemies, with Garments dipped in Blood. Rev. 19, 1^. I know the
usual Objection of Naaman the Syrian, of whom it is said 2 Kings 5, 14. he
dipped himself in the River Jordan, Seven times, according to the say^ng of the
Man of God. But this Objection I took off in the Disputation it self Not
according to the fa^se represen^^tion of the Narr^^ive, but thus: The Prophet
bids bim. v. 10 go and wash in Jordan Seven times; and he washed himself, as
the H^^rew ^ay be rendered, according to the saying of the M^n of God As when
our Savior commanded the blind man ^o w^n the Pool of Siloam, John 9.7. he had
(...) need to dip himself, but only to wash his Eyes* So N^aman the Syrian had
no need to wash any part of his bod^, b^t only where he was affected with
Leprosy: And therefore till it can be proved, that N^aman was a Lep^r ^ll
over, this Objection is of no Force. This was my Answer then, which perfectly
silenced Russel. This Argument I ^s'd not to prove the a^solute Unlawfulness of
D^pping; for I lay n^ ^tr^ss at all on the Mode of Administration; and tho
Dipping be u^'d in these places, as a Token of Vengeance, y^^ it may be app^y'd
in a way of Mercy. But I h^nce argue, it i^ very unlikely, that this way, and
no other must be used in Baptism. And this may be a sufficient Answer to all
tha^ little Story about Mr. Fox in the Preface, and the T^ifling Querys upon it.

2. Sprinkling, or pouring Water on the Face, in this Sacrament, is most
significant. We pour wate^ on the Face, the Noblest and Chiefest Part of Man
That part we pour water on is naked to represent our nakedness before God; and
this is sufficient, and significantly represents, 1. The Blood of Christ,
whereby we are cleans'd from the Guilt and Fi^th of Sin. To this, there are
particular Allusions made in many places of Scripture, Heb. 10, 22.12.23. 1
Pet. 1, 2. 2. It fitly Represents the Communications of the Spirit. The Spirit
of God is promised to us under this Metaphor, Is. 44.3.52.15, Ezekiel. 36.25. Thus
in this Ordinance is signifyd the pouring out of the Spirit, to cleanse ^s from
that Pollution we have contracted. 3. Pouring Water on the Face, does most
aptly Represent the Grace of God applied to us, rather than dipping, whereby it
may seem, as if we first applied our selves to him. In dipping, the body is
applied to the Water; in pouring, Water is applied to the body.


This most fitly Represents, that God is the first Mover in our Conversion;
that Regeneration and Sanctification is his Work: Whereas the other way,
inclines us rather to think that we cleans^ and purify our selves. It is no
wonder, that they who mag^ify the Power of Nature, and think by their own free
will they change and convert themselves, are for this way; but as for those
that better understand the Scriptures, and their own weakness, and acknowle^g
that it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that
shows Mercy, Romans 9, 16. and that God Works in us both to will and to do,
according to his own Good Pleasure, Phil. 2, 13. It seems very unreasonable for
them to use such a Practice, that Intimates as if Man had Power to change and
convert himself.

Mr. Chandler's Prologue.
My Friends,
IT is not out of Pride or Vanity, that I now appear in this Place, upon this
occasion. Most of you know; and I suppose many of you have heard, that, in the
course of my Lecture here, I have been discoursing of the Principles of
Religion: And having explained the Creed and the Lord's Prayer, did undertake
to treat of the Doctrine of the Sacraments, particularly that of Baptism. Those
that then heard me know, that I spoke with a great deal of Modesty, calling
those who deny Infant Baptism, by no harder Name than Mistaken Brethren; when I
was unavoidably engaged in this Disputation by a bold and confident Challenge
given me, which I knew not how to refuse, unless I would betray that Truth
which I believe to be the Truth of the Gospel. They themselves not being able
to answer the Arguments I then used, have cried out, Men of Israel, come and
help; and therefore have sent for this Gentleman from London. Now I desire that
all things may be managed with the greatest Fairness and* Calmness, that we may
debate of these matters as Christians, that nothing may be done that is
tumultuous or disorderly: And, as we have the Favor of the Government both
Civil and Military, so, that we may give them no occasion to repent of giving
this Liberty. And I hope we shall all of us be willing to submit to the Truth,
as it is revealed in the Gospel, and lay our selves open to Conviction. I have
no more to add, but desire all of you to join with me in this one Request, That
God would grant that Truth may prevail.

Chand. THE Questions to be disputed of are these in order:


Q. 1. Whether, according to the Commission of our Lord Jesus Christ, Adult
Believers only are the proper Subjects of Baptism, or their Infants also? Q. 2.
Whether this Ordinance of Baptism, as appointed by Christ, be to be administered
by Dipping, Plunging, Overwhelming only, and not otherwise? We deny, and they
affirm.
Russel. I do suppose it (...) be necessary to understand, how much of this,
that we affirm, Mr. Chandler owns, that we may not dispute about those things
wherein we are agre^d; whether you do own, that Adult Believers are the proper
Subjects of Baptism?


Chand. If they were not baptized in Infancy, they ought to be so at Age.


Rus. You do suppose then that they are to be baptized by virtue of some
Com^ission, and that, the Commission of our Lord Jesus Christ.


Chand. Yes.


Rus. Then with respect to the first Question, Whether Adult believers only, or
whether Infants also may be admitted to Baptism? And I suppose you do expect
that I should be Opponent.


Chan. Yes, that was agreed.


Rus. Well then, I shall endeavor (God assisting) to prove, Infants are not,
according to Christ's Commission, the proper Subjects of Baptism.


Arg. If Christ has no where required any of his Minister to baptize Infants,
then the Baptism of Infants is not according to the Commission of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

But Christ has no where required any of his Ministers, etc. Ergo.


Chan. I distinguish here upon your Antecedent. If you mean by Christ's
Requiring, his Requiring Infants expressly, and by Name, there is no need of it:
But i^ by Req^iring, you mean either expressly, or by just consequence; then I
deny your Mi^or.


Rus. Then you suppose that Christ has no where required it.


Chan. No. Distinguish between express words and good consequential Proofs.


Rus. It Is necessary the people should know what Mr Chandler means; and
therefore --


Robinson. It Is fit indeed they should know what he means; but it is also fit he
should explain his own meaning. You must not be permitted to e^plain Mr.
Chandler's meaning in your own words. Your business is to prove what he denies.


Rus. I do hope, Gentlemen, that you will not thus break in upon us.


Rob. I do stand here on purpose to prevent Irregularity in the Disputants.


Leigh. This Gentleman is our Moderator.


Rus. Pray what is your Name?


Rob. My Name is Robinson.


Rus. Now if you will be silent, and Mr. Chandler be pleased to tell me what
part of my Argument he denies, I shall proceed in the defense of i^.


Chan. Repeat your Argument then.


Rus. If Christ has no where required any of his Ministers to baptize Infants,
then the Baptism o^ Infants is not according to the Commission of our Lord J.
C. But Christ has no where required, etc. Ergo.


Chan. Here, I say, as to the Major: If you mean by requiring, Christ's
expressly Requiring in so many words, that Infants shall be baptized, then I
deny the Consequence; but if you mean, that by genuine consequence it cannot be
drawn from Scripture; I deny the Minor.


Rus. The Term is very lax. I do not say, that he has no where commanded it,
but no where required it. If it be any where required, it is enough. Give a
direct Answer.


Leigh. Will you allow good Scripture Consequence to be Proof in this case; or
do you expect Scripture words expressly? Let us not dispute in the dark.

Gentlemen, you that are Notaries, pray observe how ambiguously Mr. Russel
expresses himself. He will not say whether he will allow just Scripture
consequence for sufficient Proof.


Rus. I think I give my Sense in as plain words as I can.


L. Will you have it in express words, or good Consequence?


Williams. No reason for such a Distinction, because our brother has said Any
way; before, the words were any where.
any way.


Rus. It Is all one to me, so you prove He is attempting to shift the Opponency.
the thing: Prove it any way.


Chand. I deny your Minor.


Rus. I prove it thus. Only I would let the people know what you say, viz. That
Christ has Somewhere. The word is again altered from any way to somewhere.
somewhere required his Ministers to baptize Infants.


Leigh. Either expressly, or by Just Consequence.


Rus. If Christ has any where required any of his Ministers to baptize
Infants, then it is somewhere so recorded in the holy Scripture. But it is no
where so recorded in the holy Scripture. Therefore.


Chand. This I answer by distinguishing again; If you mean by being so recorded
in holy Scripture, its being there in so many express words, then I deny your
Consequence; but if you mean that it is not so by good consequence, I deny your
Minor again.


Rus. Let us not confound the people with so many Distinctions, but plainly
deny what part you please The Dr. now seems unwil^ing again to allow Scripture
Consequence.
.


Leigh. I will make it appear, that there is that recorded in Scripture, which
by just consequence will prove what you deny.


Rus. If you can prove it so recorded, it is enough. Here Mr. Leigh was willing
(tho the Respondent ought not to Prove) to offer Pr^of for the peoples
satisfaction.



Rob. Pray Mr. Leigh -- Mr. Russel must prove, that it is not so recorded. This
is what lies upon you, Sir Mr. Robinson will keep him to the Opponency.
.


Rus. I would know what part Mr. Chandler denies.


Chan. I deny the Minor.


Rus. Then you say, it is somewhere so recorded in the holy Scriptures.


Chan. It Is your business to prove the Negative.


Rus If it be somewhere so recorded in Scripture, then Mr. Chandler, Mr. Leigh,
or some other person is able to show it. But neither Mr. Chandler, Mr. Leigh,
or any other person is able to show it. Therefore.


Chan. I deny the Minor.


R^s. It Is a Universal Negative, you must prove it. I appea^ ^o the Moderator.


Rob. This ought not to be put upon the Respondent. You must prove it still.
Supposing that neither Mr. Chandler, nor Mr. Leigh, can give you an instance,
you cannot prove that none else can. If you can, we desire you would.


Will. You are but Moderator, Let the disputants alone.


Rob. But Mr. Russel appealed to me.


Rus. I would have these honorable persons here present, to consider that I am
under great disadvantage -- you are to give an Instance.


Rob. This is your Popular argument to shift the Opponency and turn it upon the
Respondent.


Rus. If Mr. Chandler can give an instance, why do you hinder him? I say it is
an Universal Negative, and I demand only an instance to the contrary.


Leigh. Offer him the Commission -- All Nations.


Robin. No reason for it to be allowed; But if Mr. Chandler, is pleased to take
the part of an Opponent upon him, Now he may.

-- I Suppose, Mr. Russel you must needs know, since you have been so often
engaged in such work as this, that, according to all rules of Logic, you ought
to prove the Negative. You do Universally Affirm this Proposition, though in form
it runs Negatively, That no person can give one instance in any record of holy
Scripture, from whence we are obliged to baptize infants! How do you prove this
^ It lies upon you to prove it. Otherwise we must suppose Mr. Russel is a
confident man, and asserts what he cannot prove.


Will. Mr. Moderator keep your place.


Rob. Sir I am in my place. I must not suffer the Disputants to break order:
Mr. Chandler i^ Respondent and you are Opponents, and therefore pray keep your
p^ace.


Rus. I would take no^ice of one thing. Mr. Chandler has preached to the
People, That there is a plain command for Infant Baptism in Scripture, and I
argue upon him to give but one Instance, and you will not suffer him to do it.


Leigh. It Is not Mr. Chandlers Sermon, but the Question, which we now argue
upon.


Rus. I hope that there are some Honorable P^^sons here that do understand the
nature of this Contro^^^sy; And, I suppose, they will think it reasonable, that
those who have made such a noise about this Practice ought to bring some
colorable Proof for it. No, not one instance has Mr. Chandler given. I am
sure according to the rules of Dispute Mr. Chandler must prove the Negative.


Rob. I desire that the Persons here present would take notice, that however
Mr. Chandler have asserted in this place, and very clearly proved the Baptism
of Infants from the Commission of our Ld. I. C. yet you are not now to call
upon him for proof, you having undertaken to prove the contrary. Mr. Chandler
gives an answer; he deny's your assertion, and therefore you must prove it, and
not sit down and say, Do you prove the contrary, or else I Will take it. -- But
if you can carry this argument no farther, it is time to proceed to another.


Rus. So I design, if there be no answer given.


Chan. Here is an answer. I deny the Minor.


Rus. I have proved it, according to the Judgment of all present.


Leigh, According to the Judgment of those that understand the rules of
Disputation, you ought to prove the Negative. But we will undertake to prove,
that there is that recorded in Scripture which will prove by just Consequence
what you deny.


Rob. If you will change sides you may.


Rus. This is no changing sides: For I do not design to quit the Opponency,
only let him bring an instance. The Drs. design even now was to turn the
Opponency on us, as I can prove from a Letter of Mr. Jo. Williams. But now he
will not quit the Opponency, and yet expects from us a Scripture Proof for
Infant Baptism.



Leigh. I would beg one favor, i. e. the offering a few words. I Will undertake
in any Disputation, Philosophical or Divine, by this method, to turn the
Opponency on the Respondent. I Will but make him bring one Proof of what he says,
and this way, immediately turn the Opponency on him. -- And as for this, Here Is
a Gentleman that understands the Rules of Disputation. -- I desire, Sir, you
would declare whether Mr. Russel, be not obliged to prove the Negative he^ has
asserted.


Dr. Smith. According to the Rules of Disputation. Negantis non est probare.
Or, Asserenti incumbit probatio.



Rus. Well, what must I do?


Rob. Sir, you are to prove your Proposition. Here is this worthy Gentleman of
the same mind.


Rus. How do you mean prove? The whole Current of Scripture sufficiently proves
it. The total silence of Scripture in this matter is Proof; What is not in
Scripture, etc.


Rob. If you can proceed no farther upon this, then it is time you go on.


Arg. 2. Rus. If Infants are not capable to be made Disciples by the Ministry
of Men, then they cannot possibly be the Subjects of Baptism intended in
Christ's Commission. But they are not capable to be made Disciples by the
Ministry of Men. Therefore, etc.


Chan. Here if you mean by Disciples, Actual and Complete Disciples, then I
deny your Major. But if you mean Incomplete Disciples, such as are entered into
a School in order to be instructed, and given up in order to learn there, I
deny the Minor


Rus. The Major is this. If Infants are not capable of being made Disciples by
the Ministry of Men, then they cannot possibly be the Subjects of Baptism.


Chand. Well then. As to your Major. That they that are not capable of being
made Disciples by the Ministry of Men, are not capable Subjects of Baptism.
Distinguish between Complete and Incomplete Disciples. Here we expected that
the Dr. should either have shown that this distinction is groundless, or that
he should have brought it into his ne^t Syllogism. But he does neither.



Rus. What does he mean by denying my Major?


Rob. Mr. Chandler distinguishes between Complete and Incomplete Disciples. If
you mean Complete Disciples, he denis the Major. If you mean Incomplete
Disciples, he denis the Minor.


Rus. Well, come, Tell me what he means by Complete and Incomplete Disciples,
by the Ministry of Men?


Chand. I mean by Complete Disciples, such as are actually capable of Learning;
by Incomplete, such particularly, as are entered into the School of Christ in
order to their future Learning, as we send Children to School before they are
capable of Learning one Letter.


Rus. I do not talk of that, I speak of their being actually capable of being
made Disciples by the Ministry of Men.


Chand. I deny that those, that are capable of being made Disciples by the
Ministry of Men in your sense, are the only Subjects of Baptism. That Is what
you are to prove. We seeing that the Dr. waved distinctions, and grounded his
Discipleship by the Ministry of Men upon the word Teach, Mat. 28.19. And that
because it goes before the Word Baptizing. Therefore we denied the Major.



Rus. Well, if that be the thing you deny, you deny the Consequence. And I
prove it thus. If our Lord in the Commission which he has given for Holy
Baptism has required h^s Disciples and Apostles, who were Men, to make those
Disciples by their Ministry who were to be Baptized, then my Consequence is
true. But our Lord in the Commission has, etc. Therefore.


Chand. I deny the Minor. He has not Commanded all that were to be Baptized by
the Apostles, first to be made Disciples by their Ministry in your sense; I
think here ought to be a distinction. Persons may have a right to public
visible entrance into the Church of God, before they are complete Disciples;
that, we say, Infants have before Baptism, and so in a more imperfect sense are
Disciples, but in a more perfect sense are made so by Baptism.


Rus. We are talking whether Infants are capable of being made Disciples by the
Ministry of Men.


Leigh. We say, that as they are the Infants of believers, so they are in a
more imperfect sense really Disciples before Baptism. And it is nothing, to talk
of their being made such by the Ministry of Men.


Will. If they are such, then it is by the Ministry of Men.


Leigh. That I deny, Knowing that you Ground your Assertion upon the position
of Teach before Baptize, Mat. 28.19.


Rus. Our Savior has joined Discipling and Baptizing together. They are
commanded first to make Disciples, and then to baptize them. Therefore, I say,
if Infants are not capable of being made Disciples by the Ministry of men, they
are not, according to this Commission, to be baptized.


Chan. Prove that Mr. Chandler calls for a Proof of the Consequent, a^^ the Dr.
goes upon the Proof of the Ante^^dent.
.


Rus. If Infants have no Knowledge to discern between Good and Evil, then they
are not capable to be made Disciples by the ministry of men. But they have no
Knowledge, etc. Therefore, etc.


Chan. Here you trick all this while. I told you, by Disciples I meant
incomplete ones, and such as are given up in order to be instructed in the
School of Christ. I require you to prove that these ought not to be baptized,
because not capable of Instruction by the Ministry of Men.


Rus. What do I care what you mean: we are speaking of the Commission of Christ.


Will. The Scripture says they must be Disciples according to the Commission.


Rus. We are talking of the Prerequisites to Baptism: Therefore it is plain,
according to what I have told you, and the Argument is express and full,
according to the words of the Text, that they must be made Disciples by the
ministry of men, if they be to be baptized: For in Mark Christ commissioneth to
go into all the World, and preach the Gospel to every Creature. In Mat. 28.
they were to Disciple all Nations, and then to baptize them. Now if Infants be
not capable of being made Disciples by the Ministry of men, then they are not
capable Subjects of Baptism. Now you denied this Consequence of the Major,
which I proved thus Here the Dr. blunders again, confounding Antecedent and
Consequent.
. If Infants have no Knowledge to discern between good and evil, then they are
not capable of being made Disciples by the Ministry of men. But, etc.


Rob. By his former distinction he denies both Antecedent and Consequent.


Chan. I deny your Consequence with my former Distinction i. e. Because they
are not capable of Instruction, or complete Discipleship by the Ministry of
men; therefore that they are not to be baptized.
.


Rus. Then you say, tho they have no knowledge, yet still they are capable of
being made Disciples by the ministry of men Here is not a word of the
Consequence, which is still denied; but be goes on upon the Antecedent.
.


Chan. I only desire a Syllogism.


Rob. You industriously seek to hide your meaning. If you mean by Disciples
such as are so in the fullest and compleatest Sense, Prove that all must be
made such, in order to their being baptized. But if you mean Disciples in the
lowest Sense, as it intends such as are given up in order to be instructed in
the School of Christ, prove that Infants are not capable of being made such
Disciples. This Mr. Chandler's Distinction puts upon you. We do not know what
you mean.


Rus. The Argument is so plain, that I doubt not but any body of understanding
may know what I mean; therefore it is strange that Mr. Chandler, Leigh,
Robinson, do not understand me.


Leigh. We know there is a double sense of the word, and accordingly we deny
either Antecedent or Consequent.


Chan. You will not allow the distinction of Complete or Incomplete Disciples,
nor yet show it to be groundless.


Rus. Fix upon something.


Chan. I told you before, If in your Argument, by Disciples you mean Incomplete
ones, I deny your Minor. But if Complete ones, I deny the Consequence of your
Major.


Leigh. Give a direct answer according to this distinction; i. e. Either prove
that Infants are not Incomplete Disciples, or that they are not to be baptized,
because but Incomplete; i. e. not capable of Instruction by the Ministry of men.


Rus. Have Infants any knowledge?


Chan. No, not in actual exercise.


Rus. Then I proceed. If the Gospel, in the ministration of it, was appointed
to inform men what is good and what is evil, and Infants have no knowledge to
discern between good and evil, then Infants are not capable of being made
Disciples by the Ministry of men He takes no notice at all of the distinction,
but goes on to prove that Infants cannot be complete Disciples by the Ministry
of Men.
.


Leigh. You ought to add (Incomplete).


Rus. What does he mean by Incomplete Disciples?

Here Mr. Chandler is forced to explain his distinction, as before.


Rus. You forget we are speaking according to the Commission.


Chand. No I don't. I say, etc. As before.


Rus. Then by Complete you mean such as are Actually Disciples.


Leigh. A Complete Disciple is one actually capable of Learning. An Incomplete,
is one given up as aforesaid in order to Learn. And we appeal to the whole
Auditory, whether or no, a child of two years old thus devoted to Learning by
the Resignation of the Parent and Acceptance of the Master, is not justly in
an imperfect sense deemed a Scholar?


Rus. Infants Scholars! Very mean Scholars indeed, not capable of Learning
one word.


Leigh. I believe here is a Gentleman who teaches School. Sir, I would fain
know whether no one may be accounted a Scholar, but he that is actually
capable of Learning?


Mr. Ridge Schoolmaster. I take all to be Disciples in my School, provided
entrance Money be paid, Here followed a General Laughter.
whether they Learn or not.


Rus. I must appeal to these Honorable Persons, whether or no I did not tell
Mr. Chandler, Complete Disciples, such as are made by the Ministry of Men?
What Is the meaning of all this Noise about such little Children, do you think?


Rob. Prove what Mr. Chandler deny's.


Rus. Let me know, what Mr. Chandler deny's. You say that they have no
Knowledge, and that they are not Complete Disciples, the consequence then is,
that they are not intended in the Commission, Mat. 28. Mar. 16. This is the
Consequence that has been still denied, and no Proof offered.



Chand. Put it into a Syllogism.


Rus. There Is no need of putting it into a Syllogism: For you have granted all
the Parts of my Argument. Yes, every Part. You have granted. (1.) That Infants
have no Knowledge to discern between good and evil. You have in the (2.) Place
granted, that according to my Argument they are not capable of being made
Complete Disciples by the Ministry of Men. The Consequence then is, that they
are not at all intended in the Commission. But the Dr. ought to have proved,
either, that there are no Incomplete Disciples, or that they are excluded from
the Commission for Bap^^^ because they have no Knowledge, etc.



Rob. It Is a most false thing you insinuate to the People, and what you your
self cannot but know to be false. For that the Consequence, which, you would
persuade the People, Mr. Chandler allows, is what he has all along denied. And
if you cannot prove it, pray proceed to another Argument.


Arg. 3. Rus. If the Apostle Paul did declare all the Council of God, and kept
back nothing that was profitable for the Church of God, and yet did never
declare the Baptism of infants to be an Institution of Christ, Then Infant
Baptism is not according to the Commission of our Lord Jesus Christ. But the
Apostle Paul did declare all the Council of God, and kept back nothing. etc.
And yet did never declare the Baptism of Infants, etc. Therefore, etc.


Leigh. Your Argument is very long. I deny that the Apostle Paul never spoke of
Infant Baptism, which is part of your Minor. Prove that the Apostle Paul never
did declare the Baptism of Infants.


Rus. If the Apostle Paul has so declared it, then it is some where to be be
found in the Writings of the new Testament. But it is no where to be found in
the Writings of the New Testament. Therefore etc.


Leigh. I deny the consequence of your Major. For Paul might declare it, though
the new Testament should not discover that he did; the Text you quote relates
to the Church of Ephesus. And we have not the whole of the Apostles Sermons to
them, no, not the hundredth part of them, he being among them for the space of
two years. Now you must prove that this refer's to that Epistle he has left
upon record to the Ephesians. This being all that is left to posterity in Holy
Writ of several hundred Sermons that he preached to that Church, wherein he
might speak often of Infant Baptism, though it be not mentioned in this short
Epistle.


Rus. You then acknowledge, that it is no where recorded in the New Testament.


Leigh. I deny that the Apostle did write the whole New Testament. And then,
Would you confine what Paul is there said to have declared to the Church of
Ephesus, To what is left on record, Viz, that particular. Epistle we find
inscribed to them? He had spoken to the Church of Ephesus all the Council of
God, but we cannot suppose all that he delivered to them in 2 years to be
contained within the compass of one short Epistle, containing but six Chapters.


Rus. Is all the Council, that the Apostle Paul wrote, in the New Testament? Is
there any Commission for Infant Baptism in the whole New Testament? Do you
think you speak any thing to me? I hope you will own that the Scriptures of the
Old and New Testament are the only rule to direct us how we may serve and
glorify God.


Leigh. Yes, that I will.


Rus. I refer you to that Scripture and you run to a certain sort of
supposition, etc. Here the Dr. neither deny's that Paul did declare the Baptism
of Infants in his Sermons, nor asserts that all kc Preached is left on record.
-- I am not talking of any Sermons that are not in the Scripture, but of what
is in the Scripture. The words are plain, Acts 20.20. I have kept back nothing
that was profitable for you, and v. 27. I have not shunned to declare unto you
the whole Council of God. And again, 1 Cor. 4.17. He Declares, that his ways in
Christ were such as he taught every where in every Church. I do not suppose
that the Apostle Paul taught one Doctrine at one place, and another at another.
Now if he never taught this Doctrine to the Church of Ephesus, nor to none
else, I hope that then you will acknowledge (since it is not to be found in the
Writings of the New Testament) that he never declared the Baptism of Infants.


Leigh. I utterly deny it, because in the Writings of the New Testament, are
not all the Sermons that Paul Preached.


Rus. I say this, if you will declare before this People, that there is no
Account that Paul did ever declare this in any of the Writings of the New
Testament, It Is sufficient; supposing the thing granted, that Paul's Epistles
are not the whole of what he Preached. That Is nothing to us, I suppose the
People will not look any where else.

If Paul so declared it, then it is This Word It Is may either refer to Paul's
Declaration, or to Baptism. And this ambiguity caused some confusion afterward.
somewhere to be found in the Writings of the New Testament. But It Is no where
to be found, etc.


Leigh. I utterly deny the Consequence.


Rus. Then if it be any where in the New Testament, Mr. Chandler, Mr. Leigh, or
some other Person is able to show it. But neither, etc. Here the Dr. was to
prove the Consequent, and he goes on to prove the Antecedent.



Leigh. I say, it is included in the Words, All Nations, Mat. 28. The
Commission. The Dr. would ramble and we rath^r follow than leave him. And gave
the Words (All Nations) supposing by the Word (It) he meant Baptism.



Rus. Is Mr. Chandler of your mind. I tell you in my Argument, that it is not
any where recorded in the New Testament, that Paul had thus declared the
Baptism of Infants. And I deny that the Commission of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, tells you, that Paul did declare it.


Leigh. I Answer, that Paul might have declared the Baptism of Infants an
hundred times over, and yet it might not be left on record in his Epistle to
the Ephesians, Nor any part of the New Testament that he did so.


Rob. That Is the Consequence you are now to prove. Because it is not left on
record in his Epistle to the Ephesians, that therefore he never declared it to
the Church of Ephesus.


Rus. I have neither Ephesus nor Paul's Epistles in my Arguments, yet you tell
me. -- Here was a general murmuring at the Drs. evasions, the weakness whereof
was obvious to the Auditory


Leigh. I Will beg a little silence. And first read what this Gentleman Quotes, (
Acts 20.) -- The Apostle tells the Church of Ephesus, he had not shunned to
declare to them the whole Council of God. From hence he concludes, ( Without
Proof) that all that Paul had declared to them was written and left on record;
and because the Baptism of Infants does not stand on record, as being part of
what he declared to the Church of Ephesus, therefore that he never did declare
it. Remember. To the Church of Ephesus he speaks. Now of all the whole Council
of God, which he is said to have declared to them, there is but one Epistle
containing six short Chapters left upon record. Can this short record contain
all the Sermons that he Preached to them in two Years? Or dare any say, that he
never declared to them the Baptism of Infants in two years Sermons and
Discourses, because it is not contained in this short record? And so I have done.


Rus. But I have not done with you, the Apostle Paul is the Person under
consideration, and mentioned in my Argument, as one that did declare the whole
Council of God, and kept back nothing that was profitable for them. Who doubts
this, And what is it to the purpose?



Leigh. The Church of the Ephesians. Pray remember that.


Rus. The Question under consideration and my Argument is of one that did
declare the whole Council of God. And that the Apostle Paul did so, I prove,
Acts 20.20. Compared, with v. 27. I have kept back nothing that was profitable
for you, but have showed you and taught, etc. Testifying to Jews and Greeks,
etc. v. 26. He does not only say, That he was pure from the Blood of these
Ephesians, but from the Blood of all Men. For v. 27. I have not shunned to
declare to you. I do say, that in this Text, Paul does solemnly declare that he
had declared all the Council of God, and I do say, that Paul was faithful. I
believe Paul was as faithful, as laborious a Servant and Steward of Jesus
Christ, as ever Christ had in the World. And I argue. If Paul did never declare
the Baptism of Infants to be a Gospel Institution, then, I tell you, there can
be no such thing. The Major is proved from the Words of the Text. The other I
prove by a Syllogism, that if he declare it, it is somewhere so recorded in the
New Testament. But it is, etc. Remember he does not mention any here to whom he
had declared the Council, etc. but the Ephesians. He mentions Jews and Greeks,
because there were Greeks or Hellenists at Ephesus, and many other places up
and down, as well as Jews.

And we don't Question but he did declare the whole Council, etc. and therefore
Infant Baptism; but say it is not necessary to be left on record, as Preached by
Paul, especially to these Ephesians, when there is other good Scripture Proof
for it.

But the Dr. makes a long harangue only to bring over his own Argument again,
which he could not make good.





Chand. I deny both your Antecedent and Consequent.


Leigh. Here, Pray observe it Gentlemen, Greeks and Jews were in Corinth,
Ephesus, and various places where Paul planted Churches. And [ all Men] very
often signifies all sorts of Men. And Paul speaks still to these Ephesians,
among whom were Jews and Greeks, all sorts of Men. And though it be a certain
truth that Paul was pure from the blood of all Men, yet all may here be
understood with Limitation, and so it may not be evident from this Text.


Rus. Did Paul ever speak one word of Infant Baptism.


Chan. If Paul did not, in what is on record to the Ephesians, what then? We
deny the consequence of the Argument. That because Paul says he had declared
the whole Council of God to the Church of Ephesus, among whom he Preached for 2
years, and yet does not mention Infant Baptism in his Epistle left upon record
to them, that therefore he did never speak of it to them, nor none elsewhere.


Rus. I am bound to answer here. If there are any other writings of Paul that
are not contained in the New Testament, and you can produce them, then you say
something to the purpose.


Rob. Because this is what Mr. Respondent puts upon you to prove, unless you
prove that you prove nothing: That, though Paul did not shun to declare the whole
Council of God; and did not declare Infant Baptism in his Epistle to the Church
of Ephesus, therefore he did not declare it in his Sermons to them.


Arg. 4. Rus. Christ's Commission does show who are to be Baptized. But it does
not show that Infants are to be Baptized; Therefore Infants are not to be
Baptized according to the Commission of our Lord.


Chan. I deny your Minor. That it does not show that Infants are to be Baptized.


Rus. If the Commission of our Lord does show that Infants are to be Baptized,
then Mr. Chandler, Mr. Leigh, or some body else is able to show it. But neither
Mr. Chandler. etc. Therefore etc.


Chand. It Is included in the words, ( All Nations.)


Rus. I prove it against you that Infants are not included in the words ( All
Nations) For if Infants then all Infants would be so. But you only allow
Infants of believing parents.


Leigh. The force of this Argument is this. That unless we will Baptize all of
all Nations we must Baptize none of any Nation.


Rus. No it it is not.


Leigh. I say they are included in the words ( All Nations) you must prove that
they are not. And first of all, Gentlemen, I will appeal to you, Is it, in a
Religious sense, improper to say, the whole Nation (suppose) of Palestine are
Mahumetans, and so consequently, that their little Children are Young
Mahumetans.


Chan. You must prove that all Infants are excluded from the words ( All
Nations.)


Rus. Would you have me then show you that there is a Limitation in the words (
All Nations.)


Leigh. The Point ly's here. If he will invalidate my Answer, he must show,
that, because all Nations are to be Baptized and infant are included in the
words All Nations, therefore it follows, that all Infants are to be Baptized.


Rus. Therefore, if I show there is a Limitation I take away the force of the
Argument, and this I do, by Mr. Chandler's confuting himself. Here our Scribes
were imperfect and I cannot Remember what ought to be inserted. But the force
of the Argument is not removed.



Leigh. I deny your Minor, That Christ has not included Infants in this
Commission.


Rus. If those that Christ has commanded to be Baptized must be disciples,
then Infants are not included in this Commission. But those, etc. Therefore.


Leigh. I deny your Consequence.


Rus. I prove it thus. If there are no others Expressed in this Commission,
then they are not included. But no others are Expressed. Therefore.


Leigh. They are employed. The good consequence of the Commission I insist upon.
I say there is no Necessity for all the Subjects, included in this Commission,
to be Disciples in the fullest and compleatest sense.


Rus. All those that are required to be Baptized by Christ's Commission are
Disciples. But Infants are not capable to be made Disciples. Therefore etc.


Leigh. I deny your whole Argument, and first your Major.


Rus. If there are no other expressed in Christ's Commission, Then my Major is
true.


Leigh. They are implied. You know you allowed good consequence but now.


Rus. We are talking of a Commission, good Sir.


Leigh. I hope we are talking of good consequence from a Commission. That which
I assert is this. That all are not to be Complete Disciples, before Baptized,
or, That they are not to be actually taught.


Rus. I know not what you mean by How many times has the Dr. been told what we
mean by Complete Disciples!
Complete Disciples; A Person may be a Disciple twenty years before he be a
Complete one.

If our Lord requires none to be Baptized by the Commission, but such as he
commands to be made Disciples before he commands them to be Ba^^^zed, then what
I say is true. But our Lord requires (...) etc. Therefore,


Leigh. I deny your Minor.


Rus. I Will read the Commission, Mat. 28.18, (...). And Jesus came and spoke to
them saying, All Powe^'s given unto me in Heaven and Earth. ^o ye therefore and
teach all Nations, Baptizing them, etc. Teaching them to observe all things,
etc. This Commission is very solemnly given, etc. In this Commission our Lord
does first of all declare the great Power that was, etc. Here the Dr. was going
on with a large harangue.


Rob. Pray Mr. Russel, do not Preach us a Sermon, but bring us an Argument from
the Words.


Rus. I thought Mr. Leigh had brought the Commission for an instance, we are
now coming to examine, etc.


Leigh. Pray form your Syllogism.


Chand. Pray do.


Rus. I say, in this Commission our Lord does first of all declare, etc. He is
going on again with his harangue.


Rob. It Is not a Sermon, but an Argument from the Commission, etc.


Rus. What, will you not allow me to read my Masters Commission? Here in spite
of us all, he would go on with his tedious dictates.


Rus. I argue thus from this Commission. If there be an express command for the
Baptizing some Persons in Christ's Commission, and there be no express command,
neither there nor elsewhere in the Holy Scriptures, for the Baptizing of
Infants, then the Baptism of Infants is not contained in this Commission. But
there is an express command, etc. Therefore,


Leigh. Pray observe it, whereas good Consequence was but now allowed with
great difficulty, now it is denied. He requires an express command. To this I
answer. If Nations do include Infants, then there is a plain command.


Chand. We deny the Consequence of your Major, and then we deny your Minor.


Rus. My Argument was this. And thus to spend time, he will have his long
Argument over again.
If there be an express command in Christ's Commision, etc. They deny the sequel
of my Major, and by thus denying do say, that, notwithstanding there be no
express command for the Baptizing of Infants, neither in the Commission, nor
any where else in the Holy Scripture, yet they do tell us by this denial, that
they may be included in the Commission.


Rob. Here is a sophism; says he, if it be neither in the Commission, nor any
where else in the Holy Scriptures, then it is not in the Commission.


Rus. If there be an express command for the Baptizing of some Persons in
Christ's Commission, and there be no express command for the Baptizing of
Infants, then Infants are not at all intended in Christ's Commission. But, etc.
Therefore, etc.


Leigh. First, I deny the sequel of the Major, and then I deny the Minor.


Rus. It seems very strange, that you do deny this, and I will endeavor to
prove it. Here is an express command for some Persons to be Baptized, here is
no express command for the Baptizing of Infants; is it not then a necessary
consequence that they are not included in the Commission? An excellent Proof,
i. e. turning the conclusion into a question.



Leigh. I deny both Parts, and first your Major.


Rus. I shall prove it thus. Observe, he falls upon the Minor. Not a Word of
the Major.
That there is an express command for Baptizing some Persons, the Commission it
self proves.


Leigh. It Is the sequel of the Major I deny. Pray prove that.


Rus. Then you do say, That, notwithstanding our Lord has expressly commanded
some Persons to be Baptized in the Commission, and has not expressly commanded
Infants, yet they may be some of the Number. Has Christ two sorts of Subjects,
one that he does expressly command to be Baptized, and another that he does not
command?


Leigh. Put your Proof of the sequel of the Major into a Syllogism.


Rus. We are upon the Commission.


Leigh. I say, Prove the consequence of your Major.


Rus. If no person be to be baptized but what is expressly required to be so by
Christ's Commission, then the consequence of the Major is true; i. e. That the
Baptism of Infants is not contained in the Commission. But no person is to be
baptized, etc. Therefore.


Leigh. I deny your Minor.


Rus. That which I am to prove is this, That there are no persons to be
baptized but what are expressly required in the Commission. I prove it thus. If
the words of the Commission are an express command to the Apostles of our Lord,
to direct them whom they should baptize, then the Minor is true. But the words
of the Commission are, etc. Therefore, etc.


Leigh. I deny your Minor.


Rus. If there be no other Commission of our Lord and Savior J. C. for holy
Baptism, but what is recorded Mat. 28. Mar. 16. then the Minor is true. But
there is no other, etc. Therefore, etc.


Leigh. I deny the sequel of the Major.


Rus. We are now upon the Commission.


Leigh. That we are; and we say, That whatever by good consequence is fairly
deducible from the Commission, is the true sense of it.


Rus. They are not to baptize any but such as they are expressly commanded so to
do.


Leigh. I deny it.


Rus. If there be no manner of allowance given them to baptize any other than
whom they are expressly commanded, then the consequence of the Major is true.
But there is no manner of allowance, etc. Therefore, etc.


Leigh. Now I deny your Minor.


Rus. I f^ll recur to my former Argument. If there be an express command in the
Commission to the Apostles, for the Baptism of all such as they are required to
baptize by virtue of that Commission, then my Minor is true. But, etc. Here
follows a vacancy in the Notes of our Scribes.


R. If for all those they are to baptize by virtue of the Commission, they are
to have an express command from Christ so to do, then there is no allowance in
the Commission to baptize any other person. But for all those they are required
to baptize, etc. Therefore, etc.


Chand. I deny the Minor.


Leigh. I distinguish between the command's being expressed, and the Subjects of
it.


Chand. Prove that all the Subjects are expressed.


Rus. If the words in the Commission, about holy Baptism, be a command of
Christ to the Apostles Here the Dr. waves the distinction, that he may wrap up
himself and the Auditory in confusion.
, then my Minor is true. But they are a command, etc. Therefore.


Leigh. We allow it is a command, but deny that all the Subjects are expressed. I
say, I allow the command to be express, but deny that all the Subjects are
expressed; some are taken in by good consequence.


Rus. If Christ has commanded his Apostles to Baptize such as do believe and
are made Disciples, then such are to be Baptized. But etc: Therefore etc.


L. I find, in the first place, a fault with your Syllogism. The Major ought to
be Universal. Whereas it is, such as do believe are the Subjects of Baptism; It
ought to be, Such are the only, or all the Subjects of Baptism; and thus, in
the Second Place, I deny the Sequel.


W^^l. Then I am to prove that Believers only are intended. If Believers are
the only Persons that are included in the Commission, then no other persons
are. But Believers are the only etc: Therefore.


L. I deny your Minor.


W. I will prove it in Mark 16. last. He that believes is Baptized, etc. Hence
I Argue that Believers are the only Subjects to be Baptized.


L. To this I Answer, First. If Previous Actual Believing be made Universally
Necessary to Baptism, it is much more so to Salvation, and Consequently no
Infant can be saved, For the following words are be that Believes not shall be
damned.


Rus. I do not affirm any such thing, I would rather say that all Infants dying
in their Infancy are Elect, and so saved, the contrary to which I believe Mr.
Chandler 'cannot prove Here the Dr. se^ms willing to turn off the Disputation,
to Original Sin, with those of his Profession d^n^.
.


L. Yes, we know your Opinion about this well enough. I have your Confession in
my Ecclet. But if you will assert that actual believing is necessary to
Baptism, then it is so to Salvation; for it follows, he that believes not shall
be damned.


Will. If believers are the only Subjects of Baptism, according to the
Commission, then Infants are not the Subjects of Baptism: but Believers are the
only Subjects, etc. Therefore, etc.


L. I deny your Minor.


Will. Then pray show me where any others are in the Commission.


L. In the words ( all Nations).


Will. In the words ( all Nations)? No, say I, It Is all Nations so modified.
It Is all Nations discipled.


L. I deny it. This is not evident from this Text.


Will. Go, disciple unto me all Nations, baptizing them. The word them is
relative to all Nations, discipled. If therefore there be none but believers,
and such as are taught in the Commission, then Infants are not in the
Commission. But there are none but believers, etc.


L. I deny your Minor.


Will. If Infants are not capable of being taught, then they are no Disciples.
But they are not, etc. Therefore.


L. I deny it, i. e. the Sequel.


Will. If Infants are incapable of learning Jesus Christ, then they are
incapable of being discipled unto Christ. But, etc.


L. I deny the consequence of your Major; That because they are incapable of
learning Christ, therefore they are incapable of being Discipled to Christ.


Will. I say, If Infants are not the Subjects in the Commission Here Is a
Fallacy; he will now suppose his own conclusion, and the sum of what we denied
before.
, neither are capable of being taught and instructed, then they are not the
Subjects of Baptism. But, etc: Therefore, etc.


L. I deny that they are not the Subjects. And the Greek word signify's to make
Disciples. I deny that they are incapable of being made Disciples, because not
capable of learning.


Will. If to be a Disciple of Christ is to be a Scholar of Christ, then Infants
that are incapable of Learning Christ can be no Disciples. But, etc. Therefore,
etc.


L. I deny still the Sequel of the Major.


Will If he that has learned nothing is no Scholar, then because they are not
capable of learning Jesus Christ, They are no Scholars of Christ. But, etc.
Therefore etc.


L. I appeal to all here present, Whether they do not count that child an
Incomplete Scholar, that is resigned by the Parent and accepted by the Master,
though it has not learned any thing. And now I deny your Minor.


Will. Tell me where Christ's School is for teaching Infants, and who is
Christ's Schoolmaster?


L. Jesus Christ himself is the Schoolmaster.


Will. Jesus Christ is the great Schoolmaster, but his Ministers are appointed
to make Disciples by teaching. Now you say a Child is a Disciple as soon as he
goes to School.


L. I say, the resignation of the Parent, and the acceptance of the Master,
constitutes the Relation.


Will. If he that has been at School, and taught by his own consent, must
appear to be a Scholar of Christ by his having actually learned, before he be
baptized, then Infants that are entered, according to your saying, must not be
baptized. But he that has been at School, etc. Therefore.


L. I deny your consequence.


Will. I prove it thus. The Eunuch was content to be taught He was here to prove
the Consequence, and he brings an Instance to prove the Antecedent and but
barely asserts the Consequent.
; Philip teaches him: Yet afterward he must know whether he believed, before
he baptized him. Therefore Infants, entered according to your saying, must not
be baptized, because they are not content to be taught, etc: And Erasmus, though
he was none of the best of Men yet he was accounted a great Scholar in his
day, he reads it, When they have learned dip thou them.


L. Here are two things that this old Gentleman argues from, the first is, The
Instance of the Eunuch. The Second is, The Authority of Erasmus.


Will. Not from his Authority, but Judgment What is a man's Authority in this
case but his Judgment?
.


Rob. Did Erasmus write in English? You say, you do not understand Latin.


Will. In English. Here the people brake out into a great Laughter.


Rus. Is Erasmus in your esteem so mean a Scholar, that there must be such
Laughing at the old Gentleman's mentioning the Name of Erasmus? The people
laughed not because Erasmus' s name was mentioned, but because he said Erasmus
wrote in English.



L. Well, but as to the first thing; you argue from the Instance of the Eunuch;
The Eunuch was a Proselyte of the Gate, and a grown person, and therefore
Philip deals with him as such. Now, according to the Jewish Law, a Proselyte's
Infant was to be taken into their Church, as the Infant of an home-born
Inhabitant Mr. Leigh since the Disputation, has acknowledged himself guilty of
a mistake, in calling the Eunuch a Proselyte of the Gate; whereas he was
probably of the Church, and such a ones Infants were accounted Church Members.
But the Dr. had not the sense to discover this mistake.
. And because Philip requires of him a Profession of his Faith, suppose he had
had an Infant in the Chariot, must that be denied Baptism, and so looked upon as
the Infant of a Pagan, and be shut out of visible Church Membership, which he
enjoyed before? Did his Parents Faith deprive him of Churchmembership? Then as
to Erasmus, he was an Interpendent between a Papist and Protestant; and many of
these Gentlemen, in their great Zeal against Infant Baptism, will call it a
piece of Popery, and yet can make use of the Name of an Half-Papist when it
serves their Cause.


Will. If the Administrator must have an account of the Subjects Learning,
before he be baptized, then Infants are not the Subjects of Baptism. But he
must, etc. Therefore.


L. I deny your Minor, That he that administers the Ordinance must always have
an account of the Subjects Learning.


VVil. I will prove it first by that of Philip: If thou believe with all
thine heart, thou may. The contrary whereunto is, If thou do not, thou
may not. Again, Mat. 28. Go teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc. The word
is relative to all Nations discipled. They must have an account whether they
are Disciples or not. This is the Antecedent.


L. All Nations?


Will. Nay, all Nations Discipled.


L. So you say. But prove it. What! perhaps you think that All Nations cannot
be the Antecedent to Them; because (...) is the Neuter Gender, and (...) is the
Masculine.


Rus. Yes, (...) is of the Masculine Gender, and (...) is of the Masculine
Gender, and agrees with (...).


Rob. I thought (...) had been a Verb.


Rus. I answer to what he says; he says that (...) is of the Masculine Gender,
and I say so, and that (...) is of the same Gender, and agrees with (...).


L. I suppose Mr. Russel thinks he is got among his Hebrew Verbs. They,
notwithstanding, refer each to other, tho (...) be of the Neuter, and (...) of
the Masculine Gender. For a Boy of 12 years of age, that has looked into the
Greek, can tell you that such a Synthesis is frequently to be met with in the
Greek.


VVil. If Infants are incapable of denying themselves for Christ, then they are
incapable of being Disciples to Christ. But, etc. Therefore, etc.


L. I deny the sequel of the Major.


Will. I prove it out of Luke 14. If he does not deny himself, he cannot be
Christ's Disciple.


L. This purely refer's to the adult. And I will argue ab absurdo. 2 These. 3.10.
If any work not let him not eat, but Infants cannot Mr. Leigh mistook^^ word
is would not. But it comes to the (...), for Infants have Power and will both
alike.
work, therefore they must not eat. But both one Text, and the other refer to
the adult p^^ly.


Rus. What Is all this? We do say, that Infants are not at all concerned in the
Commission, Mat. 28.19. Because they cannot perform the prerequisites, Faith
and Repentance, therefore are not capable of Baptism. Now if you will say, that
incapable Persons are intended in the Commission, then I hope, you may put that
upon your selves; Then you must argue, Infants must be starved to Death because
they will not work. I demand of any of you to give an instance of any one
Scripture, that speaks of Baptism in the New Testament, that does respect any
other but adult Persons. Reader, observe the Argument from Luke 14. Is ^^ opt.
And what Mr. Rus. here says farther, had been Answered before in the Words, All
Nations, Usque ad Nauseam.



Will. If the essence of faith consist in the Acts of the understanding and
will, then Infants are incapable of being Disciples. But, ando. Therefore, etc.


L. I deny the sequel of the Major, viz. That Infants are incapable of being
Disciples.


Will. If a Disciple and a Believer be the same thing, then the sequel of the
Major is true. But a Disciple and Believer are the same thing. Therefore,


L. I distinguish upon the Minor. It Is not Universally and in all respects the
same thing. Those may be Disciples that are not actual Believers.


Will. He that is a Disciple of Christ according to the Commission, is a
Believer. But Infants are not capable of believing. Therefore. He that is a
Believer in Mark, is a Disciple in Matthew.


L. This I deny, and answered it before. It Is not Universally true.


Will. If the essence of faith consist in the Act of the understanding and
will, then Infants are incapable of believing, But, etc.


L. I acknowledge, The Act of faith consists in the Act of the understanding
and the will, and that Infants are incapable of actual believing, but not of
being Disciples in an imperfect sense The contrary whereof, has not yet been
proved.
But I would fain know if Infants are not as capable of believing Imputatively,
as of coming to Christ when brought in the Arms of other Persons. Mat. 19.14.



Will. They can do both alike, as well come to Christ as believe in him; by
believing I mean actual believing. This I acknowledge.


L. Why cannot Children be said in a Spiritual sense to come to Christ
Imputatively, as well as to come to Christ Corporally when only brought in
others Arms. Coming to Christ and believing are the same. Though he that is
brought in the Arms of the Parents faith cannot be (...) actually to believe,
yet Imputatively he may.


VVil. How could they come to Christ when they were brought?


L. And yet they are expressly said to come to Christ. And may they not as well
be said to be capable of Spiritual as of Corporal coming when they were brought
to him? Why can they not come Spiritually by Imputation, as before?


Will. They cannot come Spiritually unless they actually believe (...) child
cannot thus come to Christ without a sight of Christ and also of himself.


L. I do own in a proper and strict sense, none can be said thus to come to
Christ but adult persons; yet in a more large sense, they may as well be said
to believe on Christ Imputatively when their Parents believe and devote them to
Christ, as to come to Christ Corporally when brought in their Arms. You know
Christ says, suffer little Children to come to me. It Is most probable these
were brought in Arms to Christ. Why may they not be said Imputatively to
believe, as well as Imputatively to come?


Will. I deny that the parent's faith was ever imputed to the Child.


L. You know the distinction of Believers, In foro Dei, and In foro Ecclesiae,
which I suppose you will allow. And under the notion of believers In foro
Ecclesiae, The Parents faith may be imputed to their Children.


VVil. We do say that a Person is not a Disciple of Christ before he have
learned Christ Here is no notice taken of the Distinction, only the old thing
asserted.
.


L. Then do we send Children to School because they have learned, or that they
may learn?


Rus. I think we should now see whether we can possibly by force of Argument
bring you to give an Instance Therefore I argue thus.


Arg. 5. If the Apostles of our Lord never did Baptize any Infants, then the
Baptism of Infants is not according to the Commission of our Lord Jesus Christ.
But the Apostles of our Lord never did, etc: Therefore.


Chand. I deny the Minor.


Rus. If the Apostles did Baptize any Infants, it is some where to be found in
the writings of the new Testament. But it is no where to be found, etc.


L. I deny your Major.


Rus. If there be no other rule to direct us concerning Holy Baptism than what
is in the new Testament, then, because it is no where to be found in the
writings of the new Testament, the Apostles did never Baptize any Infants. But
there is no other rule etc: Therefore etc.


L. You are come from an Example to a Rule. I say it may not be recorded in the
writings of the New Testament, and yet the Apostles might Baptize Infants. But
this is not granted, only supposed, that it is not recorded. It is not recorded
in the New Testament (what you practice) that Grown Children of Believers were,
when adult, Baptized. I challenge you to produce one Instance of any, born of
Believing Parents, baptized at Age.


Rus. That Is no business of ours. Don't think to sham off the business so. We
have called for your Instance several times of an Infant Baptized, and you have
not been able to give it.


L. It Is the custom of these Persons to Baptize Grown Persons though Baptized
before, and yet there is no Scripture for it. They talk much of our having no
Scripture for Infant Baptism, and of their having Abundance for their Practice.
Now let them give one Instance of what is their Practice, viz: Of one Person
born of a believer Baptized at years, and I Will give them the cause.


Will. Give your instance for Infant Baptism, or else I hope the People will go
away, and conclude you have none.


L. Give your instance to prove your Practice, or else I hope, the People will
go away satisfied you have none to give. It was by the Computation of the
learned from the Death of Christ to the Death of St. John the Apostle near
Sixty Years, in which time many Thousands of the Children of Believing Parents
became adult, yet we challenge you to produce one Instance in all that time of
any of their Children Baptized, when adult.


Rus. The Emperor Constantine was born of a Christian Parent, and yet not
baptized till adult.


L. But not because they then thought the Children of Believing Parents had no
right to Baptism, but because they thought that sins committed after Baptism
were unpardonable; therefore, they oftentimes deferred it till Death. Besides,
Constantine's father was a Pagan, and Constantine had a desire to be Baptized
in Jordan, because Christ was.
Besides, this is not to the purpose, because a Scripture instance was called
for.


Will. We are able to produce several instances where grown believers were
Baptized, but you not one of Infant Baptism.


L. That was at the first planting of the Gospel: Give an instance of a grown
person, descending from believing Parents, that was baptized when adult.


Rus. If this were any thing to the purpose, I would then say something to it.
But I wonder you should talk thus, when it was practiced a great many years in
the Church to give the Lord's Supper to Infants The Dr. allowed it to be the
first 600 y^^rs, as I remember.



L. Was it? Then ( ad hominem) they were Baptized, because they were not to
receive that Ordinance before they were baptized. We demand an instance of any
child of a believing Parent that was baptized when adult. Give this, and we
will give you the Cause.


Will. Was the Mother of our Lord Jesus Christ a believer?


L. Yes.


Will. Well then, there is the Son of a believer baptized at age Observe, by
Believers was before understood a Christian Believer, by themselves, wherever
they spoke of believing as necessary to Baptism: Neither was the word when in
any other sense. Besides, it was granted before, that Jew; and Pagans ought not
to be baptized till adult; and both Christ and his ^^^^^r were Jews at the time
of his birth.
Here the Anabaptists fell a laughing, and some cried out, it is done, it is
done. And, for a while, Mr. Leigh attempting several times to speak, could not
be heard.


L. I thought our discourse had been grounded on the Commission. Was this
before or after the Commission? Here the people laughed again.


Rus. What do they laughed at? Not at what the Old Gentleman said, but at what
Mr. Leigh says Indeed the people laughed both ways.
The Old Gentleman gave a right instance.


Rob. It Is not at all to the purpose.


Rus. Mr. Williams's instance was sufficiently to the purpose; for that Mr.
Leigh called for an instance of the child of a believing Parent, baptized at
grown years. The Virgin Mary was a Believer.


Rob. Tho Mr. Leigh did express himself in such general Terms, yet the whole
strain of the discourse sufficiently manifests, he meant the child of such a
believer as was properly Christian. The Virgin Mary was undoubtedly a believing
Member of the Jewish Church; but this is not to our purpose; for we want an
instance of the child of a Christian Parent, after Baptism was instituted by
our Lord, that yet was baptized at grown years. The instance of our Savior
does not agree to such a case as this is. For that Christianity, as
distinguished from Judaism, had not then a being, and the Virgin Mary was not
in this sense Christian, nor was baptism it self then instituted by our Lord;
and therefore this instance can signify nothing to the case in hand.


Will. I have given an instance of the Child of a believing Parent, baptized at
Age. Give us an instance of any Infant that was baptized.


L. As for that. Our Lord Jesus Christ is not to be imitated in that particular.


Rus. No?


Will. Do you prove he was not.


L. If he were, then there is no Person to be baptized till 30 years of Age,
nor baptized at all, unless Circumcised at eight days old. And thus their
Scripture instance, with their triumph upon it, vanished.


Will. I demand an instance of an Infant that was baptized.


L. I demand an express prohibition.


Will. I demand an express prohibition of Salt, Cream, Oil and Spittle.


L. I Answer, (1.) The case is not parallel. You speak of the substance, we of
the subjects of baptism. (2.) Infants are included in the words, All Nations.
But Salt, Cream, Oil, etc. are not in the word Disciple, or Baptize.


Rob. What need of an instance when we have a rule. Now, Mr. Chandler, if you
please, you may take the Part of an Opponent. And prove our practice to be
agreeable to Scripture.

Mr. Chandler turns Opponent.


Arg. 1. Chand. Visible Church Members ought to be baptized. But some Infants
are visible Church Members. Therefore some Infants, etc.


Rus. Adult believers may, but not Infants.


Rob. What Is this to the purpose we are upon? Which of Mr. Chandlers
propositions do you deny?


Rus. Let him repeat his Argument.


Chand. Visible Church Members ought to be baptized, according to Christ's
Commission. But some Infants are visible Church Members; Therefore, etc.


Rus. I deny the Major. Mark that. The Dr. denies that visible Church Members
ought to be baptized.



Chand. That all visible Church Members are to be baptized, according to
Christ's Commission, I prove thus. If there be no Precept or Example in all the
Word of God, since Christ ordained baptism, that makes any other ordinance the
visible means of encring a Person into the visible Church, then visible Church
Members ought to be baptized, But there is no, etc. Therefore.


Rus. This is to say. Because they are Members, therefore they are to be made
Members.


Chand. No. Because they are Members, they ought to be solemnly Recognized as
Members: Like the Coronation of a King. He is a King before he is Crown'^ but
he is Crowned that he might be owned as King.


Will. If baptism be the initiating ordinance into the Church, then they were
not Church Members before.


Chand. I say, baptism is the solemn investing sign.


Rus. That baptism is an initiating ordinance, I grant.


Rob. This Argument was brought to prove that visible Church Members ought to
be baptized.


Will. I deny that Infants are visible Church Members in their Infancy. The
Major is dropped, and he denies the Minor; after a while, you will find the Major
silently taken up again.



L. I Will prove that some Infants, are Church Members in their Infancy; Suffer
little Children to come unto me, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat.
19.14. Hence I argue: Those that belong to the Kingdom of Heaven, i. e. the
Church-Militant here upon Earth, are visible Church Members. But some Infants
belong to the Kingdom of Heaven, i, e. The Church-Militant here on Earth.
Therefore,


Will. I deny the Minor. That text proves it not.


L. If the Kingdom of Heaven cannot be taken any otherwise in this Text to make
good sense of the Text, then it must be so taken, i. e. For the Church-Militant
here on Earth. But it cannot be taken any otherwise to make good sense of the
Text. Therefore etc: And this I prove by an Induction of particulars. There are
various acceptations of this Expression, [ The Kingdom of Heaven] in the Word
of God. Sometimes it signifys, The Laws and Promises of the Kingdom; it does
also signify the Graces by which we observe those Laws and believe those
Promises. Thus it is represented by a grain of Mustard Seed. Sometimes the
Kingdom of Glory. And sometimes it signifies the Church-Militant. Hence
therefore I thus argue.

If in this place it can neither signify the Laws and Promises of Gods Kingdom,
nor the Graces by which we observe those Laws and Embrace those Promises, nor
the Kingdom of Glory; then it must signify the Church-Militant here upon Earth.
But it cannot signify either of the former. Therefore it must signify the last,
viz. the Church-Militant.


Will. I deny the Minor. I say it signifys the Kingdom of Glory.


L. If it be nonsense so to understand the words then they are not so to be
understood. But its nonsense, etc: For then the Kingdom of Glory must consist
in part of poor little weak things, such as Infants are: Whereas after Death
all are perfect in the Kingdom of Glory, whatever they are here on Earth.


Will. I thought it had been, to such belongs the Kingdom of Heaven.


Chand. Mat. 19.14. In the Greek it is, (...), of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.


L. That is; of such it consists in part. If we mention the Kingdom of England
or France, and say, of such is the Kingdom, etc. It Is to be understood, In part
it consists of these.


Will. I deny that the Visible Church in part consists of these. If they are
neither Members of the Universal Church, nor of a Particular Church, then the
Church does not in part consist of these; But, etc: Therefore, etc. He Answers
not my Argument by mak^^^ ^ood sense of the (...) any other way. (...) now
brea^'s rule (...) ^^ns Opponent.



L. I Answer. Now you relinguish my Medium. But farther, If they are Members of
the Church at all, then they are Members of the Universal Church visible. But
they are Members of the Church. Therefore, etc.


Will. I deny the Minor, i. e. That they are visible Members of the Church.


L. There are two sorts of Members of the Universal Church. There are Members
in foro Ecclesiae, and Members in foro Caeli. In which of these senses do you
deny they are Members of the Church?


Will. If by the Church, you mean the visible Church, I deny your Minor. Here
for about four or five lines, there is great confusion in what our scribes have
written. But this I take to be the sense of it.


L. If they are Members of the Church in any sense then they are Members of a
Particular or the Universa^ Church, and if of a Particular then of the
Universa^ which includes it; and therefore they are Members of the visible
Church. But they are Members of the Church in some sense, and for Proof hereof
I return to my Argument which you have not been able to Answer; Of such is the
Kingdom of Heaven, i. e. The Church Militant.


Will. I distinguish, as to the Kingdom of Heaven: It Is there meant of the
Kingdom of Glory.


L. If of the Kingdom of Glory, then it is nonsense. But, by the way, the
Kingdom of Glory either is put for the Happiness or Subjects of the Kingdom of
Glory. If the Happiness, then the words must run thus. Of such little Children
is the Happiness of the Kingdom of Glory. If the subjects, then thus. Of such
little Children are the subjects of the Kingdom of Glory. Now neither of these
is sense; Therefore cannot be meant: but my first interpretation stands good
still.


Will. I distinguish between a right Title and Possession. Here is a vacancy
-- Three things. It Is true, faith gives a right to baptism according to the
Commission, a profession of that faith gives a right to the Administration of
that ordinance, and it is the Commission that authoriseth the Administrators.


Rus. This Text you produce has no Relation at all to the Commission, nor is
Baptism in the least intended in the Text.


L. Mr. Russel, I Will propose this question to you. Whether, both what Christ
said and did, together with what the Apostles said and did, be the best
explication of Christ's Commission? And then, whether, I may not argue from
Christ's own Words, For visible Church Membership and so for baptism?


Rus. I do allow that what Christ said and did, and what the Apostles said and
did, is a very good interpretation of the Commission of our Lord. And I do say,
that only adult Persons are intended in the Commission; And that the Apostles
never did baptize any other than adult believers. Here he takes no notice of
the second part which is the main of my Question.



L. Then I hope, we may argue from Christ's own Words. Did he speak pertinently
or impertinently? If pertinently, how comes he to say, of such is the Kingdom
of Heaven, unless he meant the visible Church, which alone makes sense of the
Text. But is this an Answer to my Question, to say that Adult believers are
only intended in the Commission?


Rus. Yes, if your question relate to water baptism.


L. If the Kingdom of Heaven in part consists of Infants, then Infants ought to
be baptized. But, etc. Therefore, etc.


Rob. Pray Mr. Russel, which of Mr. Leighs propositions do you deny?


L. Give me an Answer directly.


Rus. I demand an Exposition. What do you mean by the Kingdom of Heaven? Here
the Dr. could not tell what to say, and therefore will have all over again.



L. I mean the Church and Kingdom of God here on Earth.


Rus. I deny your Minor.


L. I prove it from the forecited Scripture. If by the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat.
19. is signified the Church visible here on Earth; Then Infants do in part make
up the Church. But etc: Therefore etc.


Rus. I deny your Minor.


L. If we must make good sense of Scripture then it must so signify. But etc.


Rus. I deny the Consequence of your Major.


L. If the Kingdom of Heaven cannot be taken in any other signification to make
good sense of it in that place, then it must so be taken. But it cannot etc:
Therefore.


Rus. I deny your Minor.


L. If you can produce no other good Interpretation that can make good sense of
that Scripture, Then etc.


Rus. I deny the Consequence of your Major. It does not follow because I cannot
do it, that therefore it cannot be done.


L. Then I say if neither you, nor any other person can produce any other good
Interpretation that can make good sense of that Scripture, Then etc.


Rus. Is this a good way of arguing? If it be, then it was so in me as well as
you.


Rob. Mr. Leigh. It was not fair, therefore not allowed them. You must not put
the Proof upon the Respondent.


Leigh. I was not driving them to Proof, but going to prove my Assertion by an
Induction of Particulars, as I have already done and that I shall do again.

If the Kingdom of Heaven here signifys neither the Laws nor Promises of the
Kingdom, nor Graces by which these Laws and Promises are observed and embraced,
nor Jesus Christ's Management of his Kingdom, nor the Glory of Heaven, nor the
Subjects of Glory, then it must signify the Church-Militant here upon Earth.
But it signifys neither of the former. Therefore the last. Reader, to repeat
all this is Nauseous, but because the Dr. could do nothing else be would force
us to it.



Rus. I deny the Minor.


L. I prove it by a Recapitulation of those Particulars. Of such little
Children are the Laws and Promises of the Kingdom, of such are the Graces by
which we observe and embrace them, of such is Christ's Management of his
Kingdom, of such is the Kingdom of Glory, of such is the Happiness or Subjects
of Glory. Now is there any good sense in all this.


Rus. Its meant of the Kingdom of Glory.


L. By the Kingdom of Glory you must mean either the Happiness or Subjects of
the Kingdom. If it be taken for the Happiness of the Kingdom of Glory, then I
ask whether little Children are the Happiness of Heaven? If for the Subjects;
then I ask whether of such consists the Subjects of the Kingdom of Glory, when
every one belonging to that Kingdom, i.e. as distinct from the Church-Militant,
immediately upon his expiring is complete, even an Infant 3 days old?


Rus. This is very uncharitable, to exclude Infants from Heaven. I would rather
incline to say, and I am sure the contrary to it Mr. Leigh can never prove,
that all Infants belong to the Kingdom of Glory, than that none do.


L. Yes we know your Judgment of that matter well enough. But you wilfully
misrepresent my sense. I do not say that none who die Infants go to the Kingdom
of Glory, but that none are Infants when they come there. But the Text says, Of
such is the Kingdom of Heaven. This therefore is what I assert, that it is
absurd to say that the Kingdom of Glory is, in any part of it, made up of weak
imperfect things as little Infants are; And therefore that the Kingdom of
Heaven, here spoken of, must mean the Church-Militant here on Earth which is in
part made up of such,

Here Mr. Russel was silent for a considerable time. And thus to no purpose but
to spen^ time Mr. Russel would have the same over again.



Rob. What Mr. Russel have you no reply to make to all this; Pray, if you have
any thing to say, let us hear it; Otherwise, be so kind as to tell the People,
you can give no Answer, that we may go on to some what further.


Rus. My Answer is this. That whereas you have undertaken to prove that Infants
are the Subject^ of Baptism, according to Christ's Commission, you bring a Text
for it that has neither the word Baptism in it nor the Commission of our Lord.
This poor dry evasion, you see, he has before, and i^ beholden to his old
Friend Danvers for.



L. Very well then. If we prove from any Text of Scripture the right of Infants
to Baptism, it must not be allowed, unless we find it in the close of the
Evangelists, where is what you call the Commission; or unless the word Baptism
be in it.


Rob. Mr. Russel. They are not obliged to have the mention either of Baptism or
the Commission of our Lord in the conclusion of every Syllogism. They had it in
the first. They then told you; That such as were Members of the Church-Militant
on Earth were to be Baptized according to the Commission of our Lord. And this
was the case of some Infants. You denied any Infants were Members of Christ's
Kingdom, or Church-Militant here on Earth, and to prove this they brought that
Text. And I suppose the whole company was satisfied that it does sufficiently
prove what it was produced for. And now you dare not deny the Major; if you do
I doubt not but they are ready to prove it.


Will. If Church Members have been denied Baptism, then Church Membership is
not the ground of Baptism, but etc. Here he shifts the Respondency and turns
Opponent, which we give way to, because they could do nothing else.



L. I deny the Minor.


VVil. If Church Members came to John to be Baptized, and were denied, then
Church Membership is is not the Ground of Baptism. But etc.


L. I deny the Minor.


Will. I prove it, Mat. 3. When he saw the Multitude and many of the Pharisees
and Sadduces come to his baptism, he said to them; O Generation of Vipers, etc.


L. I deny that they were de jure, Church Members whatever they were, de facto.
Their being a Generation of Vipers is sufficient to prove, they were not Church
Members, De jure; And we are speaking of rightful Church Members.


Will. I have proved that Church Members were denied baptism.


L. I deny it and distinguish between Church Members, De jure and De facto.


Will. I will not meddle with your distinctions.


Rob. And can you think that the word Church Members cannot possibly admit of
more senses than one?


L. I say, they were not Church Members, De jure.


Will. Were they denied any privileges?


Rob. According to what you said just now, they were denied baptism, was that
no Church privilege? Here he drops his Argument, to prove that Church
Membership is not the ground of baptism.



Will. Such as are visible Members of the Universal Church, are qualified with
a work of Grace, etc.


L. I deny it, viz. That they are always so.


Will. It is in the Judgment of Charity so.


L. Such as were a Generation of Vipers were not qualified with a Work of
Grace, and so were not Church Members, according to your own assertion.


Rob. Especially such as were known to be a Generation of Vipers.


Will. If our Lord Jesus did Disciple such as were Church Members before they
were baptized, then Church Membership is not the ground of baptism. But, etc.


L. We distinguish between the Jewish Church and the Christian Church. And then
I distinguish between Infant Church Membership; and Adult Church Members. Now
Christian Church Membership is a ground of baptism.


Sharp. The Anabaptist Moderator. You say Infants are Church Members; Church
Members upon their apostasy ought to be Excommunicated: when were any admitted
into Church Membership in their Infancy, Excommunicated upon their apostasy?


Rob. There is with us as with the Jews Anciently, a two fold Excommunication,
Excommunicatio Major, and Excommunicatio Minor: as to the first, which is a
solemn cutting off from the Universal Church, I question, whether our Laws
gives us the liberty of practicing it; and as to the second, which is a
suspension from the Lords Supper; I do not see that to be needful in the case
before us.

Leigh to Mr. Sharp; we are not now talking about the management of Church
Members, but who are the Persons which ought to be esteemed so? Farther, it is
needless ^^ exclude those from Adult Church Membership who never offered
themselves to it. It Is as if we should shut our doors against a Person, who
never attempts an entrance.

To this Mr. Sharp made no reply.


VVil. Ministers are to Baptize none, but those that are discipled by the words
of the Commission. Observe how he leaves his Argument, and runs to what had
been worn thredbare before.



Chand. Here Is the Consequence of it.


VVil. No here is no Genuine Consequence. The Commission mentions no more but
Disciples and Believers. And if you can find one Person more besides Disciples
and Believers, do it? The poor Man runs again from consequence ^o express
words, tho consequence was allowed before.



Rus. It does appear by all that has been said, that our practice is allowed.


Rob. Not your practice.


L. We do not allow your practice, unless to such as have not been baptized.
Remember, this refers to the Subjects only, not the m^in^^^.



Will. We agree, that those that are not baptized ought to be baptized. You
are bound to baptize none, but such, as you are bound to Preach to.


L. I deny it.


Rus. Have Infants the use of reason?


Chand. No. Now you see the Dr. very plainly takes the Opponency, because he
could do nothing else; contrary to his most false assertion in his Narrative.



Rus. If Infants, without understanding, are capable of being made Disciples,
by the Ministry of Men; Then may the Beasts of the Field. But the Beasts of the
Field may not, etc. Therefore.


L. I appeal to all present. Is it as proper to take Pigs and Dogs to School,
as little Children of a year and half old? Are those so capable of the Parent's
resignation and master's acceptance as these? If Infants might keep the charge
of the Sanctuary from a month old and upward, they may be esteemed Believers
and Disciples. But etc.


Rus. I wonder you will maintain ^he^hing upon such silly foundations. A wise
Answer from a silly Doctor; is it not?



L. Pray Answer the last Argument.


Rus. There is nothing of Christ's Commission in it.


L. Unless we can prove Infant baptism in the close of one of the Evangelists;
No proof is to be allowed.


Will. I thought it was to be argued according to the Commission. This was
fully Answer before, therefore it was tedious for Scribes to write it.
but I see, etc.


Rob. If you be of Mr. Russel's mind, then you may turn your Children out to
the Dogs and Pigs, and Beasts of the Field. It is most insufferable; I never
heard such an Expression in my Life. But you may see what the Principles of
Anabaptists naturally lead Men to.

Here the Anabaptists being shamefully nonpluss't, Mr. Leigh applied himself to
the Mayor and Governor, in this manner: You see they are not able to answer
our first Argument, but are entirely gravelled. The Rules of Disputation oblige
us to go no farther in the Opponency. Yet we will be at your command. We have
six Arguments more at hand; if you please, we will proceed to offer them: Or,
if you please, we will proceed to the Second Question.


Sharp. Anabaptist Moderator. Let us have a precept or an example.


Rob. A precedent we need not give, here is a precept brought and yet no Answer
given to it.


Rus What Precept?


Rob. That which by Undeniable Consequence obliges us to it though there be not,
in express words, a requirement that we Baptize Infants. -- One would have
thought, Mr. Russel should have allowed, though they are not capable of Dutys,
yet they are capable of the Privileges:

Here an Answer to our last Argument was again and again called for, but none
given.


Rob. Pray Mr. Chandler, let no more time be lost, but proceed to another
Argument.


Arg. 2. Chand. If some Infants be the Disciples of Christ, then, according to
the Commission of our Lord, some Infants are to be Baptized. But some Infants
are Disciples. Therefore etc.


Rus. I deny your Minor.


Chand. Those that the Holy Ghost in Scripture calls Disciples, are Disciples.
But the Holy Ghost in Scripture calls some Infants Disciples; Ergo they are
Disciples.


Rus. I deny your Minor.


Chand. I prove it from that Text: Acts 15.10. Now therefore, why tempt you
God, to put a yoke upon the necks of the Disciples? Upon Infants the Yoke of
Circumcision was laid, They are called Disciples.


Rus. I deny that Text proves it.


Chan. If this Yoke were laid upon the neck of the Disciples, then Infants are
Disciples. But etc.: Therefore etc.


Rus. ^ deny that there is any such thing in the Text either (...) or intended.


Chand. The dispute was occasioned by some false Teachers, that had said,
except Christians were Circumcised, a^^ ^^p^ the Law of Moses, they could not
be saved. Now says the Apostle, Why do you lay a Yoke upon the neck o^ the
Disciples etc: This Yoke was the Yoke of Circumcision, which was laid on the
neck of some Infants.


Rus. No Infants can be here intended, for those, who are called Disciples in
this verse, are called Brethren and Believers in the 9 th verse. And therefore
it could not intend infants.


L. We will read verse the First. Except ye be Circumcised after the manner of
Moses. Now I ask you what was the manner of Moses?


Rus. To cut the foreskin of their Flesh.


L. Suppose we were to teach this People, as the Judaizing Christians did them;
Except you are Circumcised after the manner of Moses you cannot be saved, no
doubt but they would understand the manner of Moses to intend, not only all the
Circumstances of it, but, that their Children must also be Circumcised, this
being after the manner of Moses. Here I will form this Argument. If those are
called Disciples who were to be Circumcised after the manner of Moses, Then
Infants are Disciples. But, etc: And so ought to be Baptized. Now they
themselves allow that Disciples ought to be Baptized.


Rus. It Is the Gentile Believers that are there called Disciples.


Chand. It is all upon whom the Yoke of Circumcision was laid, which neither
they nor their Fathers were able to bear.


Will. They could bear the Yoke of Circumcision.


Chand. They were not able to bear it. The Holy Ghost says so expressly; which
signifys the Painfullness and Troublesomeness of that Ordinance.


L. What you say of moment is this. That Children are able to bear the Yoke of
Circumcision, therefore that Yoke is not there intended, but the whole
Ceremonial Law. We allow the Ceremonial Law was included, but Circumcision was
here chiefly intended.


Will. If Circumcision was binding to keep the whole Law, then this is not the
Yoke that neither we nor our fathers were able to bear. But it was so, Gal. 5.3.


L. Thus far I think the old Gentleman is in the right, that the Apostles are
here and in the Epistle to the Gal. endeavoring the same thing, driving them
off from the observation of the Ceremonial Law. But herein he is mistaken, He
would leave out Circumcision, one of the prime and most painful parts of this
Law, and so would leave out those Infants whom th^se Iudaizing Christians
advised to be Circumcised.


Rus. Prove that Infants are there intended.


L. If the context do oblige us to take in Infants, then they are there
intended. But the context, etc. Ergo. It is a reproof of, or reasoning with,
those that were inclined to impose Circumcision on the Necks of the Disciples,
and with it the whole Law of Moses, v. 5. They were strictly observant of
Moses's Law, Nothing is more plain and obvious to one observant of Moses's Law
than to Circumcise Infants at eight days old. And consequently nothing would
they urge more on these Disciples.


Rus. If they be such as Here is a vacancy in the Notes of our Scribes.
had their hearts purified by faith, brethren, etc.


L. That Is not necessary. Their being barely the Infants of these Disciples was
enough. If I were to act the part of a Judaizing Christian, and were to
persuade all these Gentlemen that they were to observe Circumcision according
to the Law of Moses; And did call those Disciples, who were so Circumcised;
Would they not take it to be sufficiently plain, that their Infants were
intended as well as themselves. And therefore, that I called their Infants
Disciples.


Rus. If you bring a Text, and I show you several weighty considerations, why
it should not be understood in your sense. I expect not such ^tories as these.


Rob. Is it not enough, if Mr. Leigh shows that this Text will admit of no
other sense?


Will. If so be, that children were brought in, it would not follow that they
were Disciples, for those that were Circumcised were not Disciples.


L. You say, the Qualification was, they must be believers and have their
hearts purified by faith. I Answer. These Judaizing Christians would persuade
them to Circumcise after the manner of Moses, And so to take the Yoke not only
themselves, but also on their Infants. Now all these, without distinction, on
whom this Yoke was about to be laid are called Disciples, and therefore their
Infants.


Will. After the manner of Moses^ Th^e relates to the Form, not the Subjects.
Here again is a vacancy in the Notes of our Scribes.


Rob. Here has been a great deal of time spent about this Argument. The
Substance of what was said on both sides is this: Mr. Chandler and Mr. Leigh
have urged, that such as are Disciples of Christ ought to be baptized, and that
some Infants are Disciples of Christ. This Mr. Russel deny's; and they have
proved it from this, That some Infants are called Disciples by the Spirit of
God. This also Mr. Russel has denied; So that the whole Question result's to
this head: Whether any Infants be in Scripture called Disciples? Now this has
been, I think, sufficiently cleared from this Text, Act. 15.10. where the
Persons called Disciples are those, upon whom the Judaizing Christians would
have imposed the Yoke of Circumcision. The Doctrine, they taught the Christian
Gentiles, was, That their Christianity would avail them nothing, It was to no
purpose though they did Believe in Christ; unless they were also Circumcised
according to the Law of Moses, they could not be saved. You all know what the
Law of Moses does prescribe and command in this case, not only, that they
themselves, but that every Male Child among them should be Circumcised.


Rus. It is not according to the Law of Moses, but after the manner of Moses.


Rob. Mr. Russel, it is true; it is after the manner of Moses in the First verse,
but if you look forward into the Chapter, you will find express mention of the
Law of Moses. You must be Circumcised and keep the Law of Moses. v. 5th. I
suppose you that have so often read this Chapter, could not but be sensible that
such an Expression was there, though not in the first verse; And therefore the
distinction you will pretend to make between the Law of Moses and the Manner of
Moses, was but a mere Evasion, and in this case a Distinction without
Difference. The one explains the other. That which is called their being
Circumcised after the manner of Moses, in one place, is called their being
Circumcised and Keeping the Law of Moses in the other place. They must be
Circumcised as Moses did order, so that his Law might be observed and fulfilled
in the doing of it; which it could not be, tho they themselves were Circumcised
never so regularly, unless their Infants were so too. And yet the whole Body of
those on whom the Pharisees would have imposed the Yoke of Circumcision, are
here expressly called Disciples; This whole Body of Adult and Infants are
therefore in common included under this Name, which was all that we had to
prove. And we are now willing to refer it to the People, whether what has been
said be not sufficient Proof. If you please therefore, we will now proceed to
the Second question. Pray Mr. Chandler, let the Company understand what it is.

Reader, Here observe. We were ready (as before mentioned) to offer several
other Arguments, but no tolerable Answer being given to those two, neither the
Rules of Disputation did oblige us, nor the Company's patience, and the
approaching evening allow us to do it, unless the Second Question were wholly
excluded.


Q. 2. Whether, according to the Commission of our Lord, Baptism be to be
Administered by Dipping, Plunging, or Overwhelming only, and not otherways. It
lies upon you to prove, that it is by Dipping, Plunging, Overwhelming only.


Rus. The Holy Scripture shows the way of baptizing. But it does not show that
sprinkling is the way. Therefore, etc. Here observe again. Dr. Russel would
shift the Opponency on us.



L. This Argument does not prove, that it is by Dipping, etc. Only.


Rob. Conclude with the Words of the Question.


Rus. I understand you own, it was in use in our Saviors time. Here the Dr.
spoke several impertinencies, which our Scribes thought not worth the Writing.


L. I deny all this.


Rob. Bring it into an Argument.


Rus. I put it into a Syllogism. I say, If the Holy Scriptures do show us the
right way of Baptizing, according to Christ's appointment, and yet do not show
us that sprinkling is the way of Baptizing, then Sprinkling is not the right
way of Baptizing. But etc: Therefore etc.


Rob. There is not one word of Sprinkling in the Question. It is, whether it be
to be administered by Dipping, Plunging, Overwhelming, only.


Rus. I argue thus then. If the Holy Scriptures -- He goes on as before.


Rob. Pray Mr. Russel.


Rus. What? Cannot I begin to speak, but you must still be Interrupting me. I
don't speak to you. I speak to Mr. Chand. If the Holy Scriptures show us the
right way of Baptizing and yet do not show us that Sprinkling. --


Rob. If you would but observe order, you should have no Interruption from me.
But you both must and shall conclude your Argument with the words of the
Question, before Mr. Respondent shall take any notice of it.


Rus. Must and shall Mr. Moderator?


Rob. Yes Mr. Russel you both must and shall. Otherwise it were fitter you
should call me Mr. Cipher, then Mr. Moderator, if in this case I cannot
Moderari.


Rus. If chat Baptism which is appointed by Christ and does properly set forth
his Burial and Resurrection is the only right way of Baptizing, then it must be
performed by Dipping, Plunging, Overwhelming only and not otherways. But that
baptism, etc. Is the only right way, etc. Therefore, etc.


Chand. I first deny the Consequence of the Major. And then I deny the Minor.


Rus. Then you do suppose, that it does represent the Burial and Resurrection
of Christ, yet it does not thence follow, that this is the only right way of
baptizing.

My Argument has two parts which I shall prove. First, That it does set forth
the Burial and Resurrection of Jesus Christ. Secondly, That therefore it is the
only, right way of baptizing. First, It does set forth the Burial and
Resurrection of Jesus Christ, Romans 6.4. Col. 2.12. Buried with Christ in
baptism, wherein also you are risen with him through the faith of the Operation
of God. And, I do say that, Buried with Christ in his Sepulcher we cannot
possibly be, but the Apostle says, we are Buried with him in baptism, which
does properly represent the Burial and Resurrection of Christ, Now I proceed to
the next, to show that therefore it is the only right way. If there was no
other baptism instituted by Christ, nor practiced by the Apostles and first
Ministers of the Gospel, but what does represent the Burial and Resurrection of
Christ; Then Dipping only is the right way of baptizing. But, etc. Therefore,
etc.


Chand. This is not the Consequence of the Major. You are to prove that,
because baptism is significant of the Burial and Resurrection of Christ;
Therefore it must be by Dipping only.


Rus. Therefore I argue thus. If this was the only way practiced in those
times, then it must be by dipping only. Reader. Observe, That the Dr. grounds
his practice upon two Arguments linked together, viz. The resemblance between
Dipping and a Burial. And Primitive Practice. Mr. Chandler, denies this
resemblance between Dipping and Burial, to conclude for Dipping. And he ought
to have proved that it does; but instead thereof, he insists upon his second
Argument drawn from Primitive practice. Hereupon there was no room (without
contention) to urge any thing more against their first Argument. But you have
it sufficiently Answered in the brief Confutation.



Chand. I deny the Minor.


Rus. If there be any other way, then you or some other Person is able to show
it. But, etc.


Chand. I can show you another way -- I can show that the word signifies
Washing, and there is great Probability that many had water poured on them.


Rus. Give an instance in the New Testament, that any was baptized any other
way.


L. We argue upon a Probability, It might be otherwise than by Dipping; there
is no necessity of Dipping. If you will grant that, we will go upon somewhat
else, viz. That it must be in our climate according to our way. But if not; you
must prove that there is no Probability, that it might be done any other way
than by Dipping.


Rus. Let us hear then what the Scripture says in this matter.


L. Prove that those Texts where you render [baptism] by dipping, do truly and
necessarily signify Dipping. Take what Text you will.


Rus. I choose that of our Savior, Mar. 1.9. He was baptized of John in Jordan.
The Greek preposition is, (...). Into. And to say, he was washed of John into
Jordan is not sense; therefore it ought to be rendered thus, He was dipped of
John into Jordan.


L. The preposition, (...), signifies [ in] in the New Testament, as well as
into; so here, he was baptized of John in Jordan, is the true sense of the
Greek.

Now we will allow thus far. That what was commodious and usually practiced on
other occasions without any burden, in that warm Country, might be observed in
baptism. It is said, that all Judea and the Country round came to John and were
baptized of him in Jordan. In those hot Countries the custom was to go bare
legged, in sandals. Now they might go into Jordan a little way, and then have
water poured upon them; and if so, allowing that the Word (...) signifies to
wash, They might be said in this manner to be washed in Jordan, without the
least necessity of Dipping. I will offer it to the Company whether this be not
a fair interpretation of those words, Mar. 1.9. Christ came to John and was
baptized of him in Jordan, i.e. He went a step into the water, and was washed
of him, in the manner aforesaid.


Rus. I will not allow your signification of the word. I say the word, (...)
signifies more than, In; So Christ is said to come into the world, (...)
Excellent Greek.
(...), 1 Timothy 1.15. He went into the Synagogue, (...): And so into Jordan,
(...) Good Greek still.
(...). This does imply, that he was Baptized or dipped into Jordan, as those
other Texts, that he came into the Synagogue, etc.


L. This Gentleman produces three places where (...) signifys into, and I can
produce three times three, where it cannot signify into, but must signify Here
we were going to read, but they gave no room.
In. The force of your Argument lies upon (...) which you would have rendered
Into, where it signify's In. Then, add this to what I offered before, as a
probable Interpretation contrary to yours, it is evident that there is no
necessity of Dipping, from this Text.


Rob. There can be nothing beyond a probability asserted on our side or yours.


Chand. Well, prove that (...) signifys abluo, To wash frequently in Scripture.
Thither we will go, That Is our tale.


Rus. According to all Lexicographers the primary signification of the word
(...) is, mergo, immergo, to Plunge, Overwhelm.


L. But by the way, you prove your Practice from the Prime and Native
Signification of the word. Suppose it were mergo, to Plunge, and not abluo,
(which yet we deny) You cannot argue from the Native Signification of a word,
with any force, when the Scripture acceptance of it is different.


Rus. I did urge the Commission of our Savior:


Chand. You are to prove that Dipping is the only way. If the word will bear
the sense of washing or pouring water, then dipping is not the only way.


L. You argue from the Prime and Native Significatiof the word. I Will appeal to
the Learned. If this be a good way of arguing; Then the Mathematics must
include all kind of Learning. Because it come's from (...) to learn. Then every
Youth that is skilled but a little in Physics, may be called a Physician,
because it comes from (...). Nay, and every Footboy, sent with a Letter, maybe
called an Angel, because (...) signifies Messenger. To know therefore the sense
of the word (...) in this ordinance, we must consider in what sense the word is
usually taken in Scripture. And to say it signify's to Dip, where the ordinance
is mention^d, is plainly to beg the Question, to assert the thing without
proof; Therefore, rightly to understand the sense of the word, we must have
recourse to those places where the word is used, and the ordinance not
intended. Now I require one such place of Scripture where the word (...)
signify's to dip necessarily.


Rus. No there is no need of producing such a place. I shall prove it from the
story of the Eunuch and Philip. He commanded the Chariot to stand still, and
they both went down into the water, and then, when he had put him under water,
The Text Ac. 8, 38. has not a word of putting him under the water.
they both came out of the water.


L. I deny that the word [Baptize] signifys to dip in any place of Scripture,
or to put under water. i. e. Necessarily.


Rus. Mat. 3.6. They were Baptized, i.e. dip't of John in Jordan.


L. How does it appear that they were dipped?


Rus. The Assembly, The Continuators of Pool, Calvin, Dr. Hammond allow it.


Chand. That Is nothign to us. I defye you to prove that the word (...) in any
Text of Scripture signify's to dip.


Rus. What then? You deny what Dr. Hammond, the Assembly, the Dutch Annotations
have said.


L. We cannot say they have said so. We have not their Books at hand to turn
to. Besides, suppose they should, that is no Proof. We are no Papists, to pin
our faith on other Men's Sleeves.

In the next place. Whereas Mr. Russel has brought the passage of Philip and
the Eunuch, That they went down into the water and came up out of the water. It
might as well be rendered, They went to and came from the water So the Greek
Prepositions often signify.
. Now if they came by a River's side, they might go down out of a Chariot to
the water, and when the Eunuch was Baptized, they came up from the water. Is
not this a fair sense of these words? They went to and came from the water
Where is dipping to be found in this Text?
. Again if you argue from the word (...), I can tell you of Seven Places, where
the word is used and not applied to the ordinance, And you cannot prove that it
signify's to dip in any of them. I argue then. If there are several Texts of
Scripture, where the word cannot possibly bear this sense; Then it does not
necessarily bear it. But etc.


Rus. I deny the Minor.


L. I prove it by some Instances; Mark. 7.4. Except they wash, they eat not:
(...) except they be Baptized. But can it be imagined that they were plunged
over head and ears every time they went to meals?


Rus. The word is sometimes rendered dipping in our English Translation, as, He
that dippeth with me in the ^ish.


L. The word is there (...), not (...); besides, this would avail your cause
but little, for can you suppose that he dip't himself over head and ears in the
dish?


A Gentleman in the Company. I Am sure he would be foul and fawcy then.


Rus. But (...), is a Diminutive from (...),


A Gentleman said to his Neighbor. Because (...), is a smaller word, be thinks
it must be its Diminutive. This whole passage has been attested by the Person
that spoke the words.



L. I find the word to signify no more then (...), Mark. 7.4, 5. And so Naaman
is said to observe the Prophets word, which was (...), yet he went, and; as we
read, dipped. Now since he observed the command of the Prophet, it is plain
that (...) does not necessarily signify any thing but washing.


Rus. What is the word in the Hebrew?


Chan. There are two words, (...) and (...): And the Prophet commanded him,
(...); and it is added, according to the word of the Prophet, (...), where it
is plain the words are used promiscuously; and (...) signifies no more than
(...). So also we may observe, Christ commanded the blind man to wash in the
Pool of Siloam. Must it be said, that he was dipped there? or can it be proved
that Naaman was dipped, because (...). Nay, (...) is so far from always
signifying to dip, th^^ (...) it self, tho (...) in this sense, yet sometimes
signifies only to (...). Thus Dan. 4.33. Nebuchadnezzar (...) with the Dew of
Heaven. The Septuagint renders it (...).


Rus. But the Hebrew is not (...).


Chan. What is it then? Here is an Hebrew Bible, if you will see.

Here the Hebrew Bible was handed to him, of Leusden's 2d Edit. and Mr. Russel
kept it turning from place to place above (...) a quarter of an hour, and could
not find out the Book of Daniel, upon which the People fell a hissing. Than the
Hebrew Bible was handed to Mr. Robinson who (...) the leaf down at the place,
and handed it back again to Mr. Russel, who stood with his Spectacles on his
nose, a while longer, poring on it, but could not read it. But he said, he
understood Hebrew before Mr. Chandler was born, We have good Intelligence that
the Dr. puzzled thus on the same Word, at a Public Disputation sometime before.
and to satisfy the Auditory that he did so, turned to the First Chapter of
Genesis, where he read some part of a verse, or verses. And then again turned
to Daniel, and could not read the words yet. After some time more, Mr. Russel
pretended to read some words, but with a low Voice.


Chand. We come not here, Mr. Russel, to know whether you understand Hebrew,
only tell us what the word is in this place. Which he could not do.


L. We can produce several other texts of Scripture, where (...) cannot signify
Dipping, as where we read of their washing Beds or Tables, the word is Baptize
according to the Greek.


Rus. I deny it.


Chand. There is (...), --


L. What wash Beds, or Tables, by Dipping them under Water? Or must it be by
pouring Water on them etc.? Upon the whole, the Application of a little Water
in Baptism, especially in these Cold Climates, is grounded upon what Christ
quotes. I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice. Now it being not Necessarily
employed in Scripture that Dipping was the ancient Practice, we say, that having
a fair and probable way deducible from Scripture, we must rest therein, having
recourse to that general rule. David's hunger was a fair excuse for eating the
shewbread, which is called Most Holy, and Lawful only for the Priests to Eat.
Therefore, if Dipping in Cold Weather, and Cold Climates, do tend to the
Prejudice of a Person's Health, yea to Endanger Life, and it be not certainly
fixed in Scripture, as the only way of Administering the Ordinance, we may use
our own may, as, in General, most agreeable to the word of God.


Rus. They think, though they Transgress a Rule, God will have Mercy and not
Sacrifice.


L. No. This is not so. We observe the rule, a Moral Precept, which take's
place of a Ritual, when opposite; Much more is it Obligatory when it is not
evident that any Ritual one does oppose it.


Chand. If in those hot Countries they had dip't, or been obliged to dip, this
would not hold in such Climates, and at such Seasons of the Year wherein the
Life of a Person would, this way, be Manifestly exposed to Danger.

Mr. Russel here attempted to read several Quotations, that he had Collected
out of the Assemblies Annot. Pool, Dr. Ham. etc: which had been before
disowned. And therefore the People refused to hear him, as being nothing to the
purpose, however he spoke to this effect.


Rus. I hope the People will observe, that you are forced to differ from the
Revd. Assembly of Divines, etc.


Chand. The Bible, the Bible is our Religion.


Rob. Mr. Russel, we are not ashamed to own our selves Protestants, with whom
it is a Fundamental Principle, that the greatest and best of Men are fallible;
And therefore our Assent is not concluded by the mere words of one or other
name how great soever. We pay a just deference to the very worthy names you
mentioned, but we cannot think our selves obliged to believe every thing they
say. If you have any Solid Reasons to offer, or the clear evidence of any Text
of Scripture, to determine this point, pray let us hear it before we close up
the day. Nothing being said, he, applying himself to the People, added.


Rob. A great deal of loose discourse you have heard, upon this last Question.
Mr. Russel was obliged by all the Laws of Disputation, to prove, that according
to the Commission of our Lord, Baptism was to be administered by Dipping,
Plunging, Overwhelming, and no otherwise. Some attempts he made toward it, of
the weakness of which, I doubt not but, you are all sensible; And therefore
(which yet they were not obliged to) Mr. Chandler and Mr. Leigh undertook to
prove that it was not Necessarily to be so Administered. For the clearing of
which, they have manifested that the word (...) in the Greek as well as (...)
in the Hebrew does not, necessarily, signify any thing more than only to Wash,
or, to apply water to a Person, without determining whether it shall be by
dipping a Person into water, or pouring water upon him, or any other way; so
that water be applied, it is all that can necessarily be concluded from the
words. Of this they have given clear evidence both from the Old Testament and
the New.

And now upon the whole, we are willing to refer it to your own Judgments,
whether you will be persuaded to account your own Baptism a Nullity, because it
has not been administered in the way of these Persons. If you can without any
Solid Reason, or without so much as the evidence of one single Text of
Scripture, be Satisfied, you may then take what our adversaries have said for
Satisfaction. But, since it has been fully proved, that Christ has only
required that Persons be Solemnly entered into his Church by Baptizing or
Washing them in the Name of Father, Son and Spirit, and has not determined, so
far as does appear, whether this washing shall be performed this way or that,
we are willing, I say, to refer it to the Judgment of you all, whether our way
of Admistration be not the most commodious:


FINIS.
I have compared this Copy with the Original, viz. Mr. Maltby's and my own, and
find it exactly agreeable thereto.

Witness, my Hand, this 10th day of July, 1699. W. SMITH.

Some Just Reflections on Dr. Russel's pretended Narrative.
IT IS with great Regret, that we are again diverted from more p^easing and
useful Studies, to dip our Pens in this Watery Controversy, and undertake this
Invidious Service. As we were Necessitated by the Anabaptists Challenge to the
Disputation it self, so had they not (by Publishing a false account,) laid us
under a like Necessity to Vindicate the Truth and our selves, the World had
never more heard of this matter. In these our Reflections, we shall Manifest
the Author's Egregious Falsehood, in some parts of his Narrative, his Trisling
Impertinencys in others, and the Uncharitable Principles that have dropped from
him.

The Narrative is pretended to be Transcribed from Mr. Bissel's and Mr. Ring's
Copy's. Now we can assure the World, that Mr. Bissel's Copy was like a Lawyer's
Breviate, containing only hints for Memory, and may be all contained in 3 or 4
pages, and hardly one word of it in this Narrative. As to Mr. Ring's, we have
taken the pains to compare it with this account, and find several hundred
Falsehoods, Additions, Alterations and Omissions. It is an ill omen thus to
stumble at the Threshold; and what begins with a Falsehood, we have Reason
enough to Mistrust. But to the Narrative it self, we shall (as to some parts)
show it is Egregious Falsehood as to matters of fact, and that by its Omissions
of some, and misciting other particulars, as well as positive false assertions.

1. It is Egregiously false by Reason of its Omissions. Not that every Omission
of a word or Sentence, (perhaps) would have rendered it so; but such Omissions
as alter the very State of the Disputation, and make it look like another
thing, than it truly was, are undoubtedly to be called Falsehoods. Should any
one pretending to report the Psalmists Sense, Ps. 14.1. leave out the first
words, and assure the world he said, there is no God; would not this be called
a Notorious Falsehood? tho the Falseness of it lies, in not relating the whole
Sentence. From whence it may be collected, That it is not only asserting what
was never said, but also the Omission of something that was said, may bring an
Historian under the Guilt of Falsifying. And whether it be not so in the
present case, we shall leave the World to judge, in these few Instances.

Mr. Leigh, upon their frequent pressing for an Instance from Scripture, of our
Practice in Baptizing Infants, happily retorted the Argument upon themselves,
and challenged them to produce one Instance of their Practice, as theirs
differs from ours. For all that know us, know we also baptize such as are
adult, upon the Profession of the Christian Faith, that were not baptized in
Infancy: Nay, that we should refuse to baptize the Child of an Heathen, or
other Notorious Infidel, (unless adopted by some Christian) till he become
adult, and make a credible Profession of Christianity. Mr. Leigh therefore
pressed them for one Scripture Instance of a believing, meaning a Christian
Parents Child, whose Baptism was delayed till adult. And withal, told them,
That from the Death of Christ to the Death of St. John, according to the
computation of the Learned, was about 60 years, in which compass of Time,
multitudes of Christians Children were become adult. Dr. Russel mentioned
Constantine the Great as a Scripture-Instance, which was justly ridiculed: Mr.
Williams, as he acknowledged to us afterward, thought it not of any Force, and
by the intimation of his Son, alleges the Instance of our Lord, as born of a
Believer, of the Virgin Mary. To which Mr. Leigh replied, I thought we had been
speaking of the Commission; now this was before the Commission. Intimating,
that the Instance was not pertinent, relating to a Baptism that preceeded the
Commission of our Lord; and therefore our Disputation was no way concerned in
it. Notwithstanding this, Dr. Russel would have it a pertinent Answer, Christ
being the Child of a Believer. And to this he reports no Answer, but makes Mr.
Leigh seek to be Opponent upon it, as if confounded with this Instance, page
35. Whereas, immediately upon the Reply of Dr. Russel, Mr. Robinson, our
Moderator, adds, Tho Mr. Leigh expressed himself in so general Terms, yet the
whole strain of the Discourse did sufficiently manifest that an Instance of the
Child of a Believer, properly Christian, was called for: Now the Virgin Mary
was a Jew, and not then a Christian: Nor was Christian Baptism then instituted.
With more to the same purpose. Mr. Leigh also further replied, That Christ was
not to be imita^ed in that, because then no Person: ought to be baptized till
30; not except circumcised at 8 days old, as the Reader may set in the
foregoing Narrative. After which Dr. Russel offered nothing. Now we appeal to
all the World, whether when so large and distinct a Reply was made, both by Mr.
Robinson and Mr. Leigh, this man has fairly represented our Cause, when he
takes no notice at all of it. But if this Gentleman, or any of his Friends, can
yet produce one Scripture-Instance of the Child of a Christian Parent, baptized
at grown years, it will be somewhat to the purpose; and they may have the
confidence to call for Instances from us, and to pretend that theirs (as
distinguished from ours) is the Scripture-way, and most agreeable to the
Commission of our Lord: But till then how unreasonable is it for them to expect
Instances of our way, when they have none to produce for their own?

Again he has omitted to tell the World, (what all that were present well
Remember,) that he was put to Silence by what was urged from Mat. 19.14. to
prove Infant Members of the Church-Militant upon Earth. Insomuch that after a
long Silence, Mr. R^binson called to him, and asked if he had no reply to make
and begged of him that if he had any thing to say he would speak; otherwise tell
the People that we might proceed. To which Dr. Russel made a very weak reply*
that in this Text there is not a word of Baptism, or the Commission; and Mr. W.
instead of Answering took the Oppenancy, as in the Narrative. But not one word
more from that Argument could be got from Dr. Russel.

Besides though he has concealed yet he cannot (himself) ha^^ forgotten, that
the 2d. Argument on our part, where he was again Silence^ was sum'd up by Mr.
Robinson in the words o^ our Narative: Then we referred i^ to the Gentlemen
present, whether we should offer any more Argument on the 1st Question, and ^^
was thought wholly needless. Mr. Robinsons closing Speech on the 2d. Question,
is also whol^y omitted.

We forbear to mention here, how he has omitted such passages as did
sufficiently expose his Ignorance to the Learned part of the company: Such a^
were his telling us once and again, that (...) was ^f the Masculine Gender,
agreeing with (...) when Greek Verbs admit not of Genders, though Hebrew do; and
his saying (...) as if it had been with an Omega and I Consonant. So (...).
Faults for which a School Boy would deserve the lash.

And when he was not allowed to conclude his first Argument* on the 2d.
Question, otherwise than with the word of the Question, it will be Remembered
(though his Narrative has not told us,) with how great difficulty he formed his
Syliegism, and how many attempts he made before he could bring the words of the
Question, into the conclusion: Insomuch that our Moderator offered him his
Assistance.

These and several other particulars which quite after the Face of the
Disputation, were by no means to be omitted: Neither can that be called a True
Narrative, that suppresseth ^he Truth in such Instances as these.

2. This Narrative is false, in regard of its strange misplacing some
Particulars: on which account the Reader can form no true Idea of the
Disputation. So, for instance, wh^^ h^ ^ays concerning (...), and (...) page
34. ((...) is true) should have come in in the midst of Mr William's rambling
Discourse, betwixt Dr. Russel's 4th and 5th Arguments; and that about the
Beasts of the Field, should have had its place betwixt the 1st and 2d Argument
on our part for Infant Baptism; when Mr. Williams and Russel were both Rambling
again. And had they been found in their proper places, as in Mr. Ring's Copy,
which Narrative Russel pretends to transcribe, they would only have served to
expose the Weakness of him that brought them. But as he has placed them here,
they serve to hide the shameful Baffle they and their Cause had by the
Arguments on our side. For, as was said before, they never re-assum'd the
Opponency on the fi rst Question, after the closing up the Argument from
Infants Discipleship. Tho Dr. Russel brings in these Two Arguments, as if they
went off with Triumph, to the 2d Question. Which yet every Judicious Auditor
Knows to be False. Lesser slips we pass by.

3. He has forged several downright Falsehoods; one of which is just under our
Eye, with relation to what is immdiately before said, and therefore (tho a
little out of its place (...) mention it here. He (...) tells the World, that
(...) said, they might take up the ^^ponency again, if they pleased: And again,
that be re-assum'd the Opponen^y again, at Mr. Leigh' s Reque^t of which h^ was
sick. With much of the same sort, page 34. Which is the mere Figment of his own
Brain, and not one Sy^^able of it True. The Omission of (...) things that were
said, though it alter the Face of the Disputation, might be Impu^^d to a weak
Imperfect Copy: But this must nee^s be a Contrived and Deliberate Falsehood; nor
has he a right to be Believed in any thing, that dare Forge and Publish such
an untruth.

But because the Preface is almost one continued Falsehood, we shall
particularly take notice of it.

1. He declares Mr. Bows and Mr. Webber were the sole cause of his being
Engaged in the Disputation, whereas Mr. W^bber has declared to Mr. Smith and
Mr. Chandler, that he utterly, disliked the dispute from the Beginning, and was
only thus far concerned; seeing they would Engage he advised rather to Dr.
Russel than Matthew Cassin, whom Mr. Bows had pitched upon. A Man that denis
both the Deity and Humanity of Christ, against whom Dr. Russel has Printed an
Honest Protestation. And this Man though overturning the Fundamentals of
Christianity is hugged by Mr. Bows: Because he agrees with him, in the darling
Notions of Believers Baptism by dipping; Which, he told the Worshipful the
Mayor of Portsmouth, was a Fundamental of Religion. Thus uncharitably does this
Man shut us all out of Heaven, and confine Religion to his own party, while a
denyer of Christ's Deity and Humanity has been since, as well as before the
Disputation, admitted into his Pulpit, while he, as a Messenger of the
Churches, was traveling busily to spread false Reports against us.

2. Another falsehood which is indeed from the wrong Information of Mr. Leddell,
(that Man of heat, which much Water cannot Quench,) is this; that he should
twice go to Mr. Smith to compare Copys and he refused to do so, although his
Copy, was then finished. This is a downright falsehood as appears by the annexed
Testimonial.

To convince the World of the falseness of what is said in the 2 Page of the
first leaf of Dr. Russel's Dedication, with Respect to my self; I do declare,
that Mr. William Leddel never came to me but once, wh^ he asked me whether I
had Transcribed what I wrote at the Disputation I told him I had not, but
intended to do it. He farther said if I had, when I had done it, he desired to
have it to read over; and I sho^ have Mr. Samuel Rings Copy which was
Transcribed; to which Answered, that I had but an Imperfect Account of the
Matter, which I Believe is the most that any Scribe who wrote at the dispute,
could truly say of what they wrote, it being so full of confusion occasion^
through the Anabaptists lo^se and shuffling way of Arguing. Mr. Le^del des never
intimated to me any design they had to Prim the Disputation nor did I think
they really intended any such thing; because not long^ fore, In my own and
several other Persons hearing, Mr. Leddel did (...) tell against Printing it. I
had not when he came to me Transcribe one word from my Copy, neither was it
finished till about 14 Day since; had I known their design of Printing I would
have gotten my (...) ready for them: Which might have prevented Dr. Russel from
(...) so many untruths to the World.

Witness my hand the 10 day July, 1699. William Smith

The Truth of the above Relation, I do attest; being present when Mr Leddell
came to Mr. Smith, and knowing what is said about the time of Transcribing his
Copy to be True.

Witness my hand the Day and year above said. William Wallen.

3. It is false that Mr. Chandlers Sermons were the occasion of the Dispute,
and much more, that this is agreed to by us. As he asserts pr. page 2. We are
all of Opinion, Mr. Bow's Impudent cha^l^ng was the occasion of it, though Mr.
Chandlers Sermons were the innocent occasion of that challenge. So that
according to the Proverb, he might as well have said Tenterden Steeple was the
cause of Goodwin Sands.

4. It is false that it lay upon us to prove our Practice, when in the
Preliminary^ they that made the challenge undertook to be Asserters, and Dr.
Russel took the Opponency upon himself: He has also abused Dr. Smith, who told
him as he was Assertor he must prove, but Negantis non est probare.

5. It is false that as he says pr. page 8. Mr. Robinson should in the midst of
the dispute give him the lie, and yet could not make any thing out about it.
This sentence contains as many Falsehoods as can possibly be crowded into so
narrow a compass. That Mr. Robinson speaks with a loud voice, is what all that
know him, know to be false. Yet this Gentleman ventures to say page 13. he
bawled very loud; again page 35. Mr Robinson stood up, made a noise like one in
a Delirious Paroxysm. What does the Man mean to Write at such a rate as this?
Surely he thinks loud lies will do no hurt.

And that Mr. Robinson ever did in the Disputation give him the lie, (as far as
can by himself or Friends be Recollected, or be made appear by any Copys then
taken) is wholly untrue; and it is strange (if this Dignified Dr. So well
Remember it) that he could find no place for it in his Narrative; that so the
Circumstances that attended it, might have assisted our Memories.

Yet (that we may not wrong him,) Mr. Leigh owns the words as his: That without
a Complement it was a lie in him, to insinuate to the People, as if Mr. Leigh
would have all Infants excluded from Heaven.

Besides he intimates, upon giving him the lie, there was a challenge made to
the party to prove it, and yet he could make nothing out about it. Whereas
there was never any such challenge given, and we are ready to prove to his
Face, that in the Disputation it self he told more lies than one; though he
should not have had that coarse Complement from any of us, Had he but behaved
himself like a Scholar or a Gentleman*

6. It is false that Mr. (...) said that Mr. Robinson exceede^ the bounds of a
(...) or abused Dr. Russel in (...) whole that Mr. Francis Willia^s said was
(...) John ^iliiams complained that (...), he replied; if he did so, (...) But,
as to Mr. Robinson's abusing (...) never said or thought any such thing. (...)
said under this head, but the unexpected (...) of O^d Mr John Williams,
restrained our (...) God he ^^ gone to give his account, and we shall (...) of
(...) is grave.

7. It is a false Misrep^ese^^ation, that M^ Farr^l should acknowledge they
gained any Credit to their c^use by the Disputation, as appears by the
following extract of a Letter from him.

I Solemnly appeal to the great God, who ^est knows what were my words, that to
the best of my Remembrance, I spoke to Mr. Williams after this manner. Mr.
Williams, I must tell you, and that not as mine own Sentiment only, but (I
Believe I may speak it,) as the Sentiments of the rest of my Brethren, that
whatever Credit (not your cause) but ye may have gained, is wholly owing unto
you. To which Mr. Williams rep^y'd, don't Sir put that upon me. I Answered, I
will speak it, for you argued with more Simplicity, and less Subtilty, than
Russel, and so were the fairer Dispu^ant. These words thus in Civility spoken,
had a plain Reference, not to the cause disputed, but Persons disputing; not to
the strength of Argument* but form and manner of arguing, (many things Mr.
Farrel offers that show this was his sense, which we think it needless to
repeat, because the words thus Circumstanc'd carry their own Evidence with
them,) he concludes his Letter thus -- I now leave, it to the Judgment of the
Ingenuous, whether it can be fairly deduced from my words, that we were
conscious of any Credit gained by them to their cause, or whether they are not
conscious their cause was wounded, and interest sinking, when they readily
catch at so vain a shadow to support their Cause and Reputation. I will add no
mo^e, but that having perused the Narrative, find it so full of Fraud,
Partiality, Falsehood, and Misrepresentation; that this Instance may serve as a
Specimen, if not of the whole, yet of the greatest part. Attested by George
Farrel.

8. It is False, that the Advertisement in the Post-Man was ours. And we cannot
but stand amazed at the Confidence of the man who dares say any thing. It was
well Known to Old Mr. John Williams, before he left Gosport, that the
Honorable Colonel Gibson sent up that Advertisement. He generously allowed us
to mention him as the Author of it, and has given the annexed Testimonial in
Confirmation of it.

By Colonel JOHN GIBSON, Lieutenant Governor of Portsmouth, etc.
I do hereby Certify all whom it may any way concern, That the Advertisement
put in the Printed Paper commonly called, The Post-Man, upon the 25th day of
February, in relation to the Debate betwixt the Presbyterians and Anabaptists,
held at the Presbyterian Meeting House at Portsmouth, upon the 22d day of
February; I say, the said Advertisement was inserted, as above, by my
Direction. I do also own, I was then, and am still of the same Opinion as
mentioned in the abovesaid Advertisement.

Witness my Hand at Portsmouth, June 9th. 1699. J. GIBSON.

This we are well assured Dr. Russel knew, as being told so, by some of Mr.
Chandlers Friends at the Coffee-House in Alderjgatestreet: when he gave the
Honorable Lieutenant Governor such Scurrilous Names, as we will not foul our
Paper with. Notwithstanding this, this Man has the Impudence, to dedicate his
false Narrative to him; Indeed with a Diminutive Title as if he were not
Lieutenant Governor, Receiving an Immediate Commission from the King, but only
deputy Govenour, deputed by Major General Earl.

This he should have inquired into, before he had dedicated his Book to him.
This Noble Gentleman is aspersed and ridiculed as one of our unthinking
admirers Nar. page, 7. and a squirter out of Poolish Advertisements, words that
need no other Invective than the Bare Relation, Page 10. what he adds further,
that we would not give him the Civil Title of Dr. that he took his degree at
Cambridg, admitted as a Member of that Honorable Senate, and that not Ex
gratia; is partly false. That he was created a Mandamus Dr. by King James in
1688. we understand, and with how great a Price this Tool bought that
privilege, we leave the World to Jndg. But what he means by a Senate at
Cambridg, is beyond our understanding. That he was not regularly chosen as one
well furnished with the Learned Qualifications required, his Ignorance in Greek
we think to be a sufficient Evidence. We could also inform him to whom he
applied himself for the better understanding of the Latin Tongue. That he also
kept a Coffee-House in Bartholomew-Close, is well known to the Neighborhood
there. But supposing he he had been a Regular Dr. in Physic, as he styles
himself, this may no more qualify him for a Divinity Disputation than being a
Coffeeman. So that why he should insist on his Title, in this case, we know not.

Here we shall also take notice of another Falsehood, that this bold Gentleman
has Published amongst and by his Friends in London. Though he have not
adventured it into his Narrative; one of us has been assured by a Person that
had it, from the Mouth of an Anabaptist of considerable note in London, that
Dr. Russel, to put it out of doubt, that he and his Friends had carried the day
at Portsmouth, added, the Bishop of Salisbury had received a Letter from
Colonel Gibson, wherein he applauded their i. e. the Anabaptist's performance.
That such a report has spread abroad we are well assured. But that it is most
Egregiously false, that Right Reverend Person whose name he has made use of,
has given us leave to assure the World* He does indeed own he had a Letter
from Colonel Gibson, his near Kinsman, Relating to the Disputation. But to a
purpose quite opposite to what this falsiefier reports; and adds, that not only
the Letter he Received, but one directed to the Ld. A. Bi^ of Casterbury, did
Represent the disputation as much to our advantage as could be desired.

To this sense his Lordship was pleased to express himself to Mr. Robinson our
Moderator, (who waited on him on this occasion) and Generously allowed us to
make use of his Name, for the undeceiving the World in this matter.

9. It is false, what he intimates pr. page 11. that when we were pinched upon
an Argument, we made a Noise and Clamor that hindered the People from hearing
what was said. Whereas all that were present, we doubt not, well Remember, the
first disturbance we had of that kind, was that mentioned in the Narrative,
page 35. when the Anabaptists (upon the mention of our Savior, as an Instance
of the Child of a Believer, not Baptized till adult) rudely enough set up a
shout. And Mr. Webber Ignorantly cried, It Is done! It Is done! Though the Triumph
was but short lived, for so soon as Mr. Leigh replied to the Instance, the Body
of the People returned 'em their Civility, and set up another shout at them.
Besides which, there was no further Noise or Interruption of that Nature, till
that rude Comparison of Children and Beasts of the Field, of which more
afterward. The last Interruption was when Russel would have put us off with a
bundle of Humane Testimonys, instead of proof, and we had once and again
protested against them, and given our Reasons viz. that we had not the Authors
at hand, to try the truth of his Quotations; besides that should they have said
what he would have them, their Testimony would not necessarily Engage our
assent, they being but fallible men. When after this he yet would trouble us
with his Impertinent long Quotations, the People refused to hear him, and
continued to hiss till he gave over reading; but what was said at the closing
up of that head by us, does sufficiently Manifest no Human Testimony can pinch
us: It was the Ridiculous weakness and not the force of the Argument couched in
his Testimonies that occasioned that noise. And if there was any thing in it,
that was a grievance to him; Let him thank his Anabaptist Friends that gave the
first Example.

10. It is false, that Mr. Fox was dipped by Mr. Williams's advice, Who was not
then in the Country, nor did Mr. Earl know him. That it was done by Mr.
Chandlers advice, is also false; for he was then at London. But that none of us
would refuse to dip a Person in such a case, is true. We never pleaded against
dipping as one way, but as the only way; not against 'its Lawfulness, but
Necessity. So that this Instance is brought in to no purpose; and Brother Duke
should have informed himself better in the Circumstances of this story, before
he had conveyed it to London. Nay he was dipped not at Gosport but Havant.

We shall purposely wave the Falsehoods in the Narrative it self, because our
own account does sufficiently manifest them. We shall only add that the
Conclusion of the Book is as false as the rest. For he says p. 59, 60. That God
was pleased to make the hearing of the dispute, of such use to several Persons;
That they were fully convinced -- and did in few days after, submit themselves
to 'be dipped in Water; whereas we can hear of no unprejudiced Persons, Who were
any way inclined toward Anabaptism, by any thing that was offered in the
Disputation. And we challenge them to Name us one Person so convinced. Those
that were fixed in their Prejudices, might perhaps take their weak Arguments
and Trifling Answers for a sufficient Confutation, of Infant Baptism: But we
provoke them to Name one unprejudiced Person that did so. And do offer, for one
such Person so na^^'d by them, We will, if they demand it, tell them the Names
of several who did strongly incline to Anabaptism before, who by that
Disputation were set right and fully satisfied, that the Anabaptist cause sloth
rest on weak Unscriptural Principles, how loudly soever they pretend to
Scripture.

CHAP. II.
HAving thus far manifested, how little Regard the Anabaptist Dr. had to Truth
in his Narrative, this were enough to be offered by way of reply; nor need
there any thing more to discredit an History, than to show that it is false.
But we shall so far condescend to the weakness of Injudicious Persons; as to
animadvert also on the Trifling Impertinencies, his Narrative abounds with.

1. All the Arguments they offered were Trifling Cavils. The First was designed
to turn off the Opponency upon us. The 2 d supposes what was never granted
them, that the only Commission and universal directory for Baptism is contained
in Mat. 28.19. Mar. 16.16. For indeed if this were Christ's only Commission.
then his Disciples did Baptize Ioh. 4.2. without his Commission; for this
Command was not then delivered: again, if th^s Command were designed as an
universal directory, Then previous Examination, discourses of the Significancy
and Obligation of this Sacrament, stated Prayer before and after, are besides
the Commission. Nay, the Apostles did deviate, from the Commission, when they
Baptized only in the Name of the Lord Jesus or of the Lord, Acts 10. Vlt. 19.5.
this is therefore no other than extending the Commission to the Gentile World;
supposing that the Practice of it both as to manner and Subjects was well known
before, only then con^^ed to the lost sheep of the (...) of Is^^el. So that
Infants may be Baptized if we can bring good proof for it out of the other
parts of Holy Writ, tho it could not be preyed from Christ's Command: For the
whole Scripture is the will of Christ; and his will discerned in this Matter,
is his Commission. But supposing (not granting) this to be an universal
directory, We distinguished between Disciples, that are complete or Incomplete.
Incomplete may be made by the Ministry of Men.

1. As by the Preaching of Men, Parents may be converted and constrained to
give up all they have and are to God, and so their Infants thus considered in
their Parents, they are remotely made Disciples by the Ministry of Men.

2. They are immediately made Disciples by the Ministry of Men; by the Parents
devoting them to God; and bringing them to his Ministers to be solemnly
dedicated to him. Dr. Russel's vain attempts to take off this distinction, may
be taken notice of in the foregoing Narrative, to which we ^re^er the reader,
as also to observe the little Arguments they further used, and weak Answers
they gave to our Arguments.

2. His Reflections in the time of the Disputation it self and what he has
added, are equally Trifling and Insignificant. For Instance.

1. What he insinuates p. 6. as if in effect we gave away our cause, because we
refused (at that time) to give an Instance, where there was any thing recorded
in Scripture, that did oblige us to Baptize Infants, whereas it then lay on
them to prove the contrary: Our business (who were the Respondents) was to
attend their proof, the time was not yet come for us to produce our own. It was
agreed that they who had reflected on the Doctrine of Infant Baptism as false
and wholly untrue; should prove that it was so. Yet this Trifler when he had
undertaken to prove, that Infants are not the Subjects of Baptism, At the very
first would have put it upon us to prove they were so, and would persuade the
company we gave away our cause, unless we did as he directed. This was Doctor
like Truly! And one would not grudge, (however he came by it) to give him the
Title, who does so powerfully carry all before him. You have his whole sense in
these few words. Gentlemen, if I prove that Infants are not the Sublects of
Baptism, you will allow I perform what I have undertaken, page 5. now this I Will
make so plain, you shall not be able to answer or evade the force of my
Argument. Thus I argue; if they be the Subjects of Baptism, Mr. Leigh, Mr.
Chandler or some Body else is able to prove it. But therefore they are not so:
And now I have effectually done your business; for if you say you can prove it,
let us hear it; if not, you give away your cause. To this sense does this mighty
Man of Logic Flourish at the entrance, and Wonderful Feats no doubt he thinks
he has done in it: But such Egregious Trifling is hardly found among any
pretending to the least degree above common sense. And it was fitter to have
been hissed out, than so soberly replied to as it was.

1. What! Do you prove that Infants are not the Subjects of Baptism, by putting
us to prove that they are. Wonderful! this it is to be a Dr. and to know more
than all the World besides.

For till this Dr. came upon the stage, these 2 things were always very
differing (to make proof of a thing, and put another to prove the contrary.)
This Gentleman undertook to prove p. 5. but (as if he repented of his rash
undertaking) he very courteously invites us to change sides with him, and
thereby free him of a burden that was too heavy for him.

2. Nor is every thing untrue, the contrary to which we cannot prove true. We
cannot prove that this Narrative, Russel ever was at Cambridge, or took his
Degrees there; but would he have us therefore take the contrary for certain
Truth? Yes, we must, according to his method. If one boldly assert against us,
That he never was at Cambridge, we desire they would prove it before we give
Credit to 'em. In his way they will prove it too, and then we must needs grant
it. Well, we wait only for the Proof. Thus it is. You cannot prove that he ever
was at Cambridge, or took any Degree there. Therefore, behold, he was not. The
strange Effects of Logic!

3. Nor if we can prove it, does it follow we needs must? especially when he
had undertaken the Opponency. We that stood upon our Defense (as Respondents)
were only to attend to what they had to offer, and show the invalidity of it;
but were by no Laws of Disputation, that ever yet were published to the World,
obliged to change sides with them and take the proving part on us. Though this we
declare we were ready to do in due time but it was no way fit to be done at the
beginning of the Disputation, unless this Doughty Dr. had said in plain words
(as he did in effect in his first Argument,) Gentlemen, I have undertaken more
than I can do. And therefore though I cannot prove that Infants are not the
Subjects of Baptism, I should take it kindly if you would please to prove the
contrary.

4. And as to his pretense, that his Proposition was an Universal Negative;
Therefore we were obliged by it to give our Instance: It is a great mistake,
and contrary to all the uncontested Rules of Disputation, nor could any order
possibly be observed, if it should be admitted. For how easy were it for an
Opponent in any case, thus to oblige the Respondent to change places with him
-- which what confusion it would create, any one that has an insight into
these things, will easily imagine. That Rule has therefore (as far as we can
find) universally obtained.

Neuter Disputantium alterius parts suscipiat, neque; opponens in partem
Respondentis involet, aut contra; And consequently a very Principal part of the
work of a Moderatot lies, in keeping each within their proper Limits. Regimen
praesidis in eo consistit, ut diligenter attendat, utrum Opponens and
Respondens suo officio fungantur necne: Si utrumque aut alterutrum ab Officio
suo recedentem conspexerit, eum sui muneris admoneat, and intra limits
contineat, ne extra oleas (uti dici Solet) evagentur.

5. Nor will that known Rule Negantu non est probare, and asserenti incumbit
probatio, mentioned by Dr. Smith at all avail our Anabaptist Champion: As
indeed it never was intended by that Worthy Person to any such purpose, as he
has allowed us to assure the World: and as did plainly enough appear to all
the Judicious part of the Company, when he spoke those words: his design was
(as the design of the Rule it self, at least when applied to Logical
Disputations) that the Proof lies not on the Respondent, who only denies, or
distinguishes upon his Adversary, but upon the Opponent, who is the Asserter,
whether his Arguments run in an Affirmative or Negative Form. But thus much is
more than sufficient to expose his ridiculous Trifling under that Head.

2. He next reflects upon Mr. Chandler, as if he was at a Loss, so that Mr.
Leigh and Mr. Robinson were forced to help him out with their Distinctions and
Equivocable Expressions, page 11, Whereas, if, Mr. Leigh did offer any
Distinctions, 'twas what belonged to him, as an appointed Disputant with Mr.
Chandler: And that they spoke promiscuously, is owing to a Proposal made by the
Anabaptists, that the Disputants might be allowed it; which accordingly was
agreed before we went to the place of Disputation. So that it is Ridiculous
Trifling for him, from Mr. Leigh's sometimes speaking, who was allowed equal
Liberty with Mr. Chandler himself, to infer that Mr. Chandler was at a Loss,
and Mr. Leigh forced to help him out. And it is somewhat more than Trifling,
and should be inserted among the Falsehoods, what he asserts, p. 16. That Mr.
Chandler finding himself unable to answer, quitted the place of a Disputant,
and Mr. Leigh desired to take it up, which was admitted upon condition, etc.
Whereas it was moved the Night before the Disputation, when the Anabaptists
came in a Body to us at Mr. Williams's House, That we would admit the Principal
and his Second to speak promiscuously. The Reason given was, Because Dr.
Russel, or Mr. John Williams, had an Infirmity that sometimes disabled him from
speaking for a considerable time vogeb^er. We took till the morning to consider
of the Proposal, and then at the Hour and Place prefixed we gave that Liberty
to them, provided the same might be allowed to us, which was consented to. Upon
which it was resolved on both sides, That the Disputants should be allowed to
assist each other, as they saw occasion. With what Face now can this man
insinuate to the world, That Mr. Leigh, in the midst of the Disputation begged
leave to speak, and could not be admitted but upon Terms: And all this only to
set off that False Lie, viz. That Mr. Chandler quitted the Place of a Disputant.

But to return to what we were upon: Mr. Leigh helped out Mr. Chandler with his
Distinctions. We grant he was helpful to him, and was chosen for that purpose,
and was not Mr. Williams also to the best of his skill helpful to Dr. Russel?
But Mr. Leigh helped out Mr. Chandler, and Mr. Williams did his best to help
out Dr. Russel, tho through the badness of the Cause, he neither did, nor could
help him out. But Mr. Robinson helped too with his Distinctions. It Is false; and
his own Narrative (as it happens) will manifest it to be so; for that
Distinction there mentioned by Mr. Robinson, is there mentioned not as his own,
but Mr. Chandler's; and it was only mentioned to show the no occasion he had to
spend Time in proposing such frivolous Questions; a sufficient Answer to which
he had already had from Mr. Chandler.

There only remains under this head, Mr. Leighs and Mr. Robinsons helping out
Mr. Chandler with their Equivocable Expressions. But this ( Equivocable) like
the ( Senate at Cambridge,) is a word of the Famous D^s. own coining, and
therefore he best knows the meaning of it. Equivocal we have often heard of,
but equivocable we know not what to make of, unless by this, added to the
Hebrew and Greek Instances of his Learning, we be left to collect that (as he
says) he was Created a Dr in the most proper sense Ex Inhabili Materia. Doctor
ex non docto. Yet if he intend Equivocal Expressions, tho he charge them upon
us, they are his own peculiar Talent. Perhaps few Jesuits herein equal or
exceed him at that sort of Weapon. If any thing said by us, was grievous to
him, it was not that we used Equivocal Expressions of our own, but that we
repeated and distinguished upon his.

3. How impertinently does he Trifle, when he over-loaded his 3d Argument with
a multitude of Propositions? Tho Mr. Leigh denied first, That the Apostle Paul
did never declare that Infant Baptism is a Gospel Institution: yet could he
never have it proved. Suppose he did (which yet he neither did nor can) prove
that Paul never declared it in his Writings, yet how will he ever prove that he
never declared it at any time by word of mouth? which yet if he assert, he must
prove. And how frivolously does he afterward talk of our having in our Custody
any such unwritten Tradition? We never did assert, the Apostle Paul did declare
any such thing by word of mouth that is not written, only said, he might do it,
and put this wonderful man to prove he did not. And how insufferably weak and
trifling are all (...) Reflections he has under this Head cast upon us! While
this was the Sum of what was said to his Minor or Antecedent. But afterward we
denied also his Major or consequent; that unless Paul declared the Baptism of
Infants, ^t was no part of the Counsel of God, which (by his own account) he
never proved; nor is it indeed capable of proof, unless what Paul declared must
stand instead of the whole Scripture to us. And tho the Apostle tells us, he
had not shunned to declare, yet he never tells us that he had actually declared
the whole Counsel of God, Acts 20.27. (...). The word intimates he did not
prevaricate with them, or fraudulently keep back any truth, that in the course
of his Ministry among them, he had a call from God to deliver to them: He he
did not do as Peter faultily did Gal. 2.12. (...), who withdrew, sought
Subterfuges through a mean and Timorous Spirit, concealed the truth when it was
most especially to be owned by him; and for which the Apostle rebuked him v.
11. now (says he) I did not from any such mean or base Principle, suppress or
hide from you, or misrepresent to you any part of the Mind of God; but have
freely and boldly declared to you, so far as I had opportunity, and there was
any occasion for it, the whole Counsel of God. Not that we can imagite the
Apostle had any opportunity to declare the whole of what God had at any time,
by any Messenger, revealed of his Counsel. Nor was there occasion he should
spend his Time among them upon such Points with which they were well acquainted
before; especially while he had himself immediate Revelations from Heaven to
communicate to them. If therefore it could (as it never can) be proved that
Paul never said a word of Infant Baptism to them, it would by no means follow
that it is no part of the Counsel of God: but only, that it was no part of what
was immediately revealed from Heaven to himself, nor any thing that he needed
to insist upon among them, who might otherways and sufficiently be instructed
about it. We might therefore (when we had denied the consequence) with just
Reason say as p. 21. Suppose but not grant that Paul had not spoken a word of
Infant Baptism, yet they cannot in the least advantage their cause by it. And
so our Opposition stands good against that Argument; even as he himself does
represent the closing of it.

4. His Reflection upon us especially upon Mr. Robinson, for refusing to admit
him to harrangue the People upon the words of the Commission is (if possible)
yet more trifling. Was he not not allowed to argue from the Commission? And was
not that all that was fit to be allowed him? Was he interrupted in reading the
Text? What would the Man have! Why verily he wanted to illuminate us and our
hearers with his Preach^^nt upon the Text. Poor Ignorant Souls! He perhaps
apprehended we could not understand the Commission without his help. In the
presence of so many Ministers and particularly of him that had the right of the
place; he might have had the Civility to have asked leave, or to have forborne
till invited to it. Besides he knew our company came together, not to hear a
Sermon especially from him, but to attend a Disputation: The man must by all
means Preach and having named a Text, he begins, This Commission is very
solemnly delivered, wherein our Lord tells us, that all power in Heaven and
Earth is given to him, and by virtue of that Power. -- And here he takes it ill
to be interrupted. -- And we must be reflected on as Lucifugae Scripturarum,
Bats and Owls that are afraid of the Commission, and fly the light of the
Scripture, because we would not suffer him to go on with his Impertinent
Harangue: As if it was all one to refuse to hear a Text of Scripture read, to
as hear his Comment upon it: How excessively does this man dote on his own
Labors!

5. How Egregiously does he trifle p. 24. when because our Moderator would not
suffer Mr. Calvin's Authority to stand for an Argument, he Reflects as if he had
no esteem for him. Whereas there are few Names since the Apostles days, for
which he has so great a Veneration. What? is it impossible, in this Dr's
opinion, to have a Veneration for a Person, unless we take his, ipse dixit, and
swallow down all he says without chewing. But does Mr. Calvin any where say,
That the whole of the Commission is expressed in Mat. 28.19. Mar. 16.16. And
tho he say, Infants are not expressly mentioned in this Command, yet we are sure
his Comment on the Place (which will best discover his Judgment) says, That God
includes Infants in speaking to their Parents; and so that Baptism, when
applied to Infants, is not separated^ from Faith and teaching. And this he
speaks in opposition to the Anabaptists, who made a great noise against
Infant-Bapti sm, upon this Pretense. See his own words, Harm. Evang. in Mat.
28.19. Verum quia docere prius jubet Christus, quam Baptizare; and tantum
credentes ad Baptismum vult recipi, videtur non rite administrari Baptismus,
nisi fides praecesserit: arque hoc praetextu multum tumultuati sum Anabaptistae
contra Paedo-Baptismum; Solutio tamen non difficilis est. And so goes on to
answer this Argument. Wherein he has these Words, Quae olim Iudaeis data fuit
promiss^, Inter gentes quoque (...) hodie, necesse est. Ero Deus tuus and
Semi^is tui, Genesis 17.7. B^eos qui side in Ecclesiam Dei ingressi sunt, videmus
cum sua sobole censeri in Christi membris, and in salutis Hereditarem simul
vocari. Nec vero separ^tur hoc modo Baptismus a fide vel Doctrine, qu^a licet
pueri^ Infantes nondum per ae^atem percipiant Dei gratiam, Deus tamen eorum
Parents compellans ipsos etiam complectitur. If this Famous Dr. has not yet
attained so considerable a Proficiency in the Latin Tongue, as to construe
this, there are many Worthy Doctors of the College will assist aim. Let the
Judicious consider whether Calvin's Judgment and this Gentleman's be the same
concerning this Command; and what a vain Flourish it is to bring in Calvin on
this occasion. What he soon after adds, p. 24. to reflect on Mr. Robinson, as
interrupting him, is as little to the purpose. He that pretends to Learning,
and needs (...) hear any more of an Hypothetical Syllogism, than the Major, or
consequent, is none of Solomon's wise men. 'Twas as well known to Mr. Robinson
what would follow as to Dr. R. the Speaker. How is it then that he insinuates
as if he answered a matter before he heard it?

6. As to what he says p. 30. about Erasmus's skill about the Etymology of a
Greek Word, it is most ridiculously impertinent. Mr. Williams had a little
before, very honestly acknowledged, that for his part, he neither knew what
belonged to Greek or Latin and yet presently quotes Erasmus as reading the
Commission. Go Teach all Nations, and when they have learned dip them. Mr.
Robinson remembering what he had said before, admired to hear him quote Erasmus:
and therefore asked him whether Erasmus ever wrote in English? Or how he knew
that he so read the Commission? But there was not a word said by any one about
Erasmus's skill in the Etymology of a Greek word, but he must still be trifling.

7. The story of the Eunuch p. 31. is like all the rest; for Mr. Leigh said not
that the Eunuch had Children, but if he had had one or more, they must not be
looked on as the Children of a Pa^an: He considered him not as an Eunuch but as
a Christian. Besides might he not have adopted ones? Nay, might he not have
Children, and be afterward made an Eunuch? Beside; all this we will tell the
Dr. what he never knew before, and what is better worth his Learning than O^^
Women's Fables. And that is, that the word (...) is Equivalent to (...), and
signifys not only Eunuchus eviratus, but Princeps, Minister regius. Thus
Potiphar is called an Eunuch or Officer of Pharaoh, though he had a Wife if not
Children. Genesis 39.1. So Genesis 40.2. The chief Butler and Baker are called
Eunuchs or Officers. Ier. 29.2. The Nobles and Princes of Judah are called by
this same Name in the Hebrew and Greek, and it is not probable they were all
Evirati. Words have a different Signification in differing Ages; and though this
word bear an Infamous sense in this Age, yet formerly it had a more Honorable
Signification. It would be we think profane and grating to Christian Ears, for
any to call the sweet Ordinance of singing Psalms, by the Name of Ballad
Singing, as this Dr. does in his Animadversions upon his Brother Allen's Essay
on that Subject. Though he Justify's himself from the Old Translation that calls
the Song of Songs, the Ballad of Ballads; he might as well say Paul was a
Knave, because the same. Translation calls him the Knave instead of Servant of
Jesus Christ. To apply this to our purpose, the word Eunuch though now used in an
Infamous, was once used in an Honorable sense, and the most Learned Critics
tell us that this Noble Man had no such Infamous Character, but was high
Treasurer or Chamberlain to Queen Candace. A Lapide, Menochius, Lud. de Dieu in
Loc. So that all the Dr. here has said is nothing but vain babbling: And
methinks what he says of the Turks S^raglio, is too Luscious for a man of his
Gravity. But if ever he had been entered in that Academy, the World had never
rung with such scandalous Reports Turpia-dictu, concerning him.

8. Another Trifle you find, p. 32. That them cannot agree with Nations,
because them is Masculine, and Nations Neuter; but Relativum cum Antecedente
concordat genere, numero and Persona. Alas, poor Dr.! did you read this in your
Latin or Greek Grammar? Not in your Greek certainly; for there you might have
found somewhat better for the purpose. That by the Figure Synthesisquandoque
relativum ad intellectum seu sensum non ad vocem conformatur. And you have a
Scripture-Instance for it, Gal. 4.19. (...). Nay, had you been able to read
your Greek Testament you might have met with Instances as to this very word,
Acts 15.17.21.25.26.17. Rev. 2.26.27.19.15. in all which places (...) agrees
with (...) and (...). So that had we not a rule in the Grammar to this purpose,
it would have been highly fit to have Substituted one for this very occasion,
rather than all these Text s should be accounted false Greek: and this we hope
is a solid Answer worthy noting down, though the Dr. reciting it five leaves
after forgot himself, and said we had no such Answer. But the Dr. has recourse
to Mr. Gosnold for his Assistance, who tells him that the Antecedent must be
not the Verb, as he said in the dispute, but the Noun (...) but where is this
to be found? It is not in the Text, unless the Verb be the Noun. But if the Dr.
had been as well acquainted with his Greek Grammar, as with that Beloved Book
of M^ (...), he might have prevented our Trouble and the discovery of his own
Ignorance.

It Is as Ridiculous to abuse his dear Friend, and prefix false Greek as a Title
to his Book, when at least in that Edition we have seen there is only a plain
English Title, of the Doctrine of Baptisms; calling it (...), but there he may
think himself safe, in keeping to the letter of the Scripture^ for the letters
are the same, Heb. 6.2. from when^ the Titl^ is taken. As the Dr. before could
not distinguish between a Verb and a Noun, so here he is not so great a C^i^ick
a^ to distinguish between the Nominative case and Genitive, but enough of this
stuff.

9. How Impertinently did he alledg. p. 35. Constantine the great, as a
Scripture Instance of a Believers Child Baptized at Grown Years? What Dr. skip
200 Years at once, wh^^ you are pinched! Sure this Nimble Man was a Merry-
Andrea before he commenced, Dr. It was a ^criptu^e instance we cal^'d for, and
an Instance of one Born in the latter end of the 3d or Beginning of the 4 th
Century, is given. Besides^ the Father of Constantine was a Pagan, and it cannot
be proved that his Mother Helena was a Christian in her Sons Infancy As to his
Flourrish of the Fathers of the first Ages; we Remember not that it was
mentioned in the Disputation, nor is it in any of the Copys; though we Remember
the Dr. pretend^d that for the first 600 Years, Infants were admitted to
Communion in the Lords Supper, upon which one of us replied; then by your own
confession, they were Baptized, otherwise the other Sacrament would not be
administered ^o them; which silence^ the Dr. and we heard no more of the Fathers
that day. But if the Dr. dare be so hardy, as ^o abide by the Tes^^^ony of the
Fathers, we will Join Issue with him here, whenever he pleases.

10. How Impertinently does he Harangue, (by way of Apology chiefly) page
35.36.37, for his having se^ our Infants upon a level with brutes. (...) all
that he can say, can never ^xcuse that beastly Comparison. Nay, to make the
matte^ (...), after he had thought of it again at London, where he d^^w up the
greatest part of this Apology, as we suppose, for we h^^ little of it at
Portsmouth; Yet still he has the Face, to challenge us to show the Disparity
if we can: As if it was his fixed Opinion, that there is no difference between
our Children and our Dogs. We must confess we said little to it, as thinking it
rather deserved stripes than an Answer. And the Honorable Colonel Gibson did
profess to us, (the day after the Disputation) that he was so offended at it,
that he would thereupon have quitted the place, had not some Gentlemen near him
Prevailed with him to stay, telling him if he went off, there was Danger, the
provoked Multitude would do him some mischief. And truly an higher (...) cannot
be put upon any Parent, than to make his Infants no better than Brutes. But h^
bears us in hand, he has a might, esteem for our Infants, even a greater than
we have, for he hat^ ^ver and over given it as his Opinion, that they are all
(...) Die in I^fancy. Now the Infants of Believing Parent^ (...) the compass of
a promise. God will be their God (...) their seed. Genesis 17.7. So far therefore
we may safely (...) But seeing God has not told us, how he deals with the
Infants of others, we dare not pretend to enter into his Secrets, or to tell
what we do not know. It Is enough for us, that God ^^ll accept the dying Infants
of such as have sincerely devoted 'em to him. And for others, they are not
concerned how God will deal with them. That Man can never be truly concerned
about the Salvation of his Child, that never was Solicitous about his own. But
after all what strange kind of Salvation, what before e unheard of Heaven has
this Gentleman discovered for Creatures, between whom and beasts there is no
disparity! What! No difference, no unlikeness at all! For we hope he may have
Learning enough to know the English of Di^paritas. Well! (whatever this Dr. can
satisfy himself with,) we do both for our selves and dear Babes, wait and pray
for such a Salvation and such a Heaven, out of which are excluded all Dogs and
Hogs, and all of beastly Capacities and Inclinations, whether you take the Word
Brute in a Natural or Moral Sense. Yet left this Man should think his
Retortion, as he calls it, unanswerable, we add, there is a vast disparity
between Beasts and the Youngest Infants. For (as was hinted^ in the time (...)
the Disputation,) (though this Narrative not only omits but deny's it,) Supposing
them utterly incapable of the Dutys, yet no one can deny but they are capable
of the Blessings and Priviledg^s o^ the Baptismal Covenant.

They are capable of being Pardoned, Justified, Sanctified and Clerified, and
is it so with Brutes? But further, Infants are capable of being obliged to the
Duty of the Covenant, though they be not in a present Capacity to discharge them.
Thus the (...) Infants by Circumcision were obliged to the Dutys of that
Covenant, though during their Infant state they could not actually discharge
them. If they had not been thus obliged how could they upon their
after-forsaking God, be called Covenant^ Breake^, as we fin^ they are Ezekiel.
16.8.59. and often elsewhere. Their Circumcision made them Debtors, brought them
under obligation to the Law, Gal. 5.3. Lastly, Infants have a Fundamental and
remote Capacity, to discharge the Dutys of The Covenant; though they have not an
immediate Capacity for ^it. They have a Principle of Reason, though they have it
not perhaps in present exer^ise: Now is there vet no disparity between them and
Beasts? Though so soon as they have a being, they are capable of the Blessing of
the Gospel Covenant; and as to the Dutys of the Covenant which is all that
remains to be considered in it, they have such a Reasonable understanding
Nature, as does remotely capacitate them for the discharge of these Dutys, and
that does most nearly and immediately Capacitate them to come under Obligations
thereto: So that Infants (as incapable as any of ours,) have been all along
(^ver since there was a Sacrament appointed for that purpose,) Solemnly entered
into Covenant with God, though we never find that any Brutes were.

11. What an Impertinent Trifler does this Man show himself again, page 37.
when instead of proving that Dipping is the only way of Baptizing, He would
have put us to prove that Sprinkling is the way. That it is not the only way we
Grant; that it is not a Lawful way he can never prove. But the Question was not
whether that was (...) way: But whether Dipping, Plunging, Overwhelming was the
only way? And when we held him to the proof of that, He knew not how to alter
the Argument, so as to bring the words of the Question into the Conclusion of
his Syllogism: We then perceived him to be Clericus in Libro; and that, when
put out of his Road, he was lost. However that he might seem to say somewhat he
told the Company, his Argument was an Induction. It should be remembered, that
he had lately been confounded by Mr. Leigh's Induction: and many Reasons
concur, to make it probable, that he scarce ever heard so much as ^he Name
before. But with them that understood t he thing as little as himself, a hard
word would make it look as if he had somewhat to say. This therefore must be an
Induction. But his Argument he brought being only levelled against one
particular thing, (which the Nature of an Induction does not admit,) Mr.
Chandler told a pleasant story from the late Bishop of Worcester, of a Covey of
Patridges which yet was but one. Adding, here we have as Wonderful a thing, an
Induction of one. What he adds afterward is what we suppose he may have
Learned since his return to London, for we Remember nothing of it. Nor is it in
any of the Copys, whether on our side or theirs.

12. His Argument from Romans 6.4. page 38.39. is very Frivolous: Because we are
said to be Buried with Christ in Baptism, therefore it must necessarily be by
Dipping. This was distinctly Answered by Mr. Chandler in his Sermons: But
because the main stress of the Anabaptists cause in this pointlys upon it, We
shall not satisfy our selv^s ^o have gravel'd them in the Disputation, when we
denied bo^^ parts of the Argument as they formed it; neither of which they were
able to prove: But for the help of such as need (...), Shall set this matter in
a clear Light; In order ^o which let it be considered, 1. It is one thing for
us t^ be ^uried with Christ in Baptism, and another ^^ing for Baptism to
rep^esent a Burial. The former the Apostle says: The ^^ter only Dr. Russel and
his Brethren. We are (as the Apostle largel^ That. Romans 6.3.4.5.6.) Baptized
into Christ's Death, Buried, Resu^rection. That is, we are solemnly entered into
the Christian Covenant, which is founded in, and secured by, (...) Death^
Bu^^^, and Resurrection of our Lord; Which thereupon most strongly obliges us
to Die unto Sin, rise to, and walk in, new^ess (...) Life: But where does he
say a Syllable to intimate that our Baptism must represent these things? Our
Baptism is to oblige us hereto^ and is accordingly urged by the Apostle, for
that purpose, throughout this context: But we would beg any one to show us any
Intimasion, that our Baptism is to represent these things. 2. And if Baptism
must represent these things, it must represent all as well as any of them.
There is at least as great if not greater evidence from the Context, That the
Death of Christ, the manner and likeness of it, as that the manner of his
Burial should be Represented in our Baptism. For besides that we are said to be
Baptized into is D^ain, v. 3. we are also said to be planted in the likeness of
is Death. v. 5. whereupon v. (...) it follows, our Old Man is Crucified with
him. But we are no where said to be planted in the likeness of his Burial. Now
what is there in your Administration, that does represent the likeness of
Christ's Death, his Crucifixion? By the same Reason that you would prove dipping
necessary in Baptism, a Papist or any other Person may prove crossing necessary
too, and therefore the same Answer will Inva^dat^ both: i. e. that neit^er of
them are required to be represented. 3. It Is as Trifling, what he adds page 39.
where he says Mr. Chandler grants that Baptism does signify a Burial and
Resurrection. Mr. Chandler only supposed, did not grant it: Besides if he had
granted it, it would not thence follow, that it must necessarily be by dipping.
For, 1. In our way, by pouring water on the Face, we represent Christ's Death;
the pouring out of his Blood and Soul: His Burial; The Face, the Principal part
of Man being put underwater, or having water poured on it, as Earth is poured
on a Dead Body: His Ressurrection; When the Child is taken up and delivered
again to its Parents or Offerers. This is a sufficient Allusion in Christian
Sacraments, which are Commemorative of what is past; and there needs not a more
exact Resemblance. Na^, it is as significant as breaking Bread, and pouring out
Wine, to Represent the Sacrificed Body and Blood of Christ. 2. If they will
keep strictly to the Significancy of a Burial, the person to be Baptiz^ must
not walk into the water, but be taken up by the Baptizer, and cast down into
it. For indeed there is only this difference between our way and theirs: We
Baptize the Face, and they Baptize the head and shoulders too: Unless the
Person going down into the Water, may be said to baptize himself. And then
there are more Se-Baptists among them than we ever understood before. 3. The
Anabaptist^ in Holland ^^e to sensible of the no necessity of Dipping, that the
general way among them at Amsterdam is to baptize by pouring Water upon the
Head. We need not send Dr. Russel cross the Sea^ (as he would us to the Turks
Seragllo), but to a place better known, the Amsterdam Coffee-house, to enquire
into the Truth of this. We would only here ask the Dr. these Two Civil
Questions, 1. Whether he might not have spared all his Dutch? seeihg Doope in
that Language signifies only to wash, and is used when they only pour on Water?
2. Whether his Anabaptist Friends at Amsterdam do practice a Right Baptism? If
not, whether he would Baptize them again, or exclude them from the Church of
Christ, as he does us in his Closing Prayer of which more Anon? If he owns
their Baptism Lawful, Then why such a C^amour and Noise about a Circumstance?
If their way is Justifiable, so is ours.




13. How Egregiously does he Trifle, when he tells us that (...) when it is
joined with an Accusative case signifys into. All that we can know from thence,
is (what we well knew before) that though this Man pretends to be a dignified Dr,
yet he has not the Learning of a Common School Boy. When it is joined with an
Accusative -- Why pray Dr. what other case does it any way admit? We had
thought (...) Soli accusativo jungitur, had been a Rule no one could have
missed, that had but once cast his Eye on the Common Grammar? Well Sir: If you
have any regard to your Reputation, we would advise you never more to pretend
to Greek, and do not make too great a Noise about your degrees, it will but
expose you to the greater contempt: You had better do as Mr. Williams did own
your Ignotance, and not Ambitously gape after the Name and Honor of a (...).

14. As to his Humane Testimonys, They are of little value with us, for the
Reasons given in the Disputation: And it was an Evidence of the wretched
weakness of his cause, that these must stand instead of an Argument with him.
These Testimonys he has chiefly borrowed from Danvers, and how Imperfectly and
lamely they are quoted may be seen in Mr. Wills and Mr. Baxters Answers to him.
So that to wast time and Paper about them is but actum agere: We shall
therefore only put these following querys to him.

1. Will you stand by the Authority of these Men in other Matters? If not, why
would you have us in this? 2. Do any of these say that to wash is not the New
Testament sense of the word Baptize? Or do any Answer those places we brought?
Or prove us in the wrong? Or how many places can any bring where it necessarily
signifys to dip? We take not Men's Opinions upon Trust, but Trial. 3. How few
are there of those Learned Authors, who have not adhered to that in Mat. 12.7.
I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice, To Justify their Baptizing with a little
Water in these Cold Countries? 4. Will not the Opinion and Practice of your
Brethren in Holland, argue as strongly against you, as the Opinions of these
Men, (had their Practice been dipping also) do against us? 5. Will not the
Opinion and Practice of so many Thousand Men, great for Learning and Piety at
this day, argue more strongly for us; than these Men's Opinions only, without
their Practice do against us?
15. We have another Trifle page 45. They had pleaded Philip and the Eunuch
went both down into the Water. It had been replied that the word only signified
they went down to the Water. But Mr. John Williams ventures upon a Greek
Criticism, and tells us, he was informed there were 2 differing words in the
Greek Text, where it is said v. 36. they came unto a certain Water, and v* 38.
they went into. This Dr. Russel confirmed and thereupon, (as they represent the
Matter,) Mr. Leigh concess'd. There is a word for you. It Is well we understand
a Little Latin: Otherwise this Man would quite Silence us. But to the Point:
who ever told them there were 2 differing words in the Greek, told them true.
And we are very ready to concess, or (as we would choose to speak, consent and
yield to Truth. The words are (...) and (...); and the true reading of v. 36th
is, As they went on their way, they came by, near to, or over against, a
certain Water: (...), with an Accusative, well admits such a reading. And v.
38. they went both down out of the Chariot unto this Water. How well do these 2
verses Answer each other? and where is the difficulty this wonderful Critic has
left upon us? But, What need of going down to the Water, unless he were to be
dipped? A little might have been brought up into the Chariot if Sprinkling would
have served the turn. In answer to which we say.

1. His going down to, or into the Water, does no more prove that the Eunuch
was dipped, than that Philip was; for both went down. 2. It Is Improbable he was
dipped, being then on a Journey, and having no cloths to change. And if you
still ask why they went down?

3. It Is not certain, they were provided with a vessel to fetch up Water in. 4.
There was not convenient Room in the Chariot for the performance of the Action,
and what was to attend it. It Is not to be doubted, but it was attended with
Prayer: your selves, we hope, would not administer Baptism without Prayer,
before, or after, or both. But what Room could there be in a Chariot, for these
two Persons to place themselves in a Praying posture? It would neither admit
them, (at least if of the Modern form) to stand nor kneel without uneasiness --
Which alone might be a sufficient Reason, for their coming down out of the
Chariot, if there were no other.
16. How he trifled about the Hebrew Bible, and how fasly he Represents that
matter appears by our Narrative. Mr. Ring had given over writing long before
this, and Mr. Bows and Mr. Webber were ashamed of their Goliath, and therefore
about this time basely deserted and left him alone. The true account in short
is this. Mr. Chandler told Dr. Russel that Baptizo was so far from always
signifying to dip, that Bapto it self sometimes signifys to wet or wash; And
mentioned that Text. Dan. 4.33. Nebuchadnezzar was wet with the dew of Heaven,
in the Greek it is (...). To which Russel replied the Hebrew is not (...) To
which Mr. Chandler returned the Greek word we were then inquiring into.
However, to try his skill in Hebrew, who had so shamefully falter'd in the
Greek, he was asked what the Hebrew word was. He said, if he had an Hebrew
Bible he could tell. Mr. Chandler handed his, being Athias's 2 d Edit. Amstel.
1668. with the Books in Latin Letters, placed after the same order with other
Hebrew Bibles. He could not find the place, but read Genesis 1.1. which he also
falsely Pronounced. Mr. Chandler returned: Sir we come not hither, to inquire
whether you can read Hebrew, but what the Hebrew word is in this place. Then
Mr. Robinson folded down the place for him: On which he muttered something to
himself, which his nearest Neighbors could not hear; and said the word was not
there. But he has not told us to this day what the word is. Hebrew Bibles are
all misplaced with him; for we hear from good hands that at Havering in Essex,
he was confounded with the same place, and could not find the Prophecy of
Daniel. Now we would befriend him against he ^^ngages in the next Heckny Prize,
and inform him of a great Secret; That Daniel is mostly Chaldee and the word
there is not Tabal but Zavang (...), a word of the same Import. And this Mr.
Chandler understood, not before he was Born, but before the Creation of Dr.
Russel.

CHAP. III.
BY this time it appears how unregardable both this pretended Narrative is, and
it is pretended Antho^^^ A Pamphlet stuffed with such Notorious Falsehoods, (...)
happens to speak Truth, trifling so Egregiously, with what contempt does it
deserve to be Treated by the World? But there is yet one thing further, that
may help to discover the man, and that, is the Narrow and uncharitable
Principles, that have dropped from him; and these we shall briefly animadvert
upon.

1. In the very first page of the Narrative, Speaking of Mr. Chandler's
Thursday Lectures at Portsmouth, he tells you they were managed, so as was to
the Grief of such as truly Fear God in those parts. Why! What was the Offense?
He tells you it was given out, that Mr. Chandler would not only prove Infant
Baptism from Scripture; but also furnish his hearers with Arguments to defend
their Practice. Why! We cannot Imagine how this should grieve any that truly
Fear God. To have a truth proved, a truth about which so many good Men differ,
to have it cleared from Scripture Testimony, to have the Oracles of God
unfolded about it: It Is strange this should be grievous to any: Yes (says he)
It was to the Grief of them that truly Fear God in those parts. We are at a
loss to know the Reason why it should be grievous to any such, and here he will
not help us out. However (say we,) was it to the grief of such as were
persuaded of this Truth! Were they grieved to have it cleared up and be
furnished with Arguments for the defense of it? This cannot be his meaning.
Every one is pleased to see what he believes to be the truth, set in a clear
Light -- those that were for the Baptism of Infants could not be grieved at it:
No, that he does not say, but those that Fear God, that truly Fear him, were
grieved at it. So that (with him) none that are for Infant Baptism in those
parts will be allowed truly to Fear God. Not one besides the poor Baptists, as
he calls them, page 2. here is Charity with a Witness! All the Regular Members
of the conforming and nonconforming Congregations, are censured as destitute
of the true Fear of God! Pray Dr. your Reason for this! Will you condemn us and
not tell us why? What is there in the notion of Infant Baptism that is
inconsistent with the Fear of God? Why may not a Person be of Opinion, that he
ought with the greatest seriousness to devote and consecrate his Children to
God; and enter them by Baptism into his Covenant, and bring them under early
bonds to him, and yet for all this truly Fear God! Nay the rather do it,
because he truly Fears God? 2. That he may show it is not an unwary Expression,
but his deliberate Judgment; He does in the very last Paragraph of his Pamphlet
lay the same stress on the Point of Dipping. His concluding Prayer is, that as
God had made the hearing of the dispute of such use to several Persons, that
they were fully convinced, and did a few days after submit to be dipped -- So it
may be of like use to many others in the Reading -- That so there may be added
to the Church such as shall be said. Such a Prayer scarce ever before appeared
in Print, made up of falsehood and uncharitableness. It is amazing to us that a
man dare venture into the presence of God with a (...) in his Mouth, and such
uncharitableness in his Heart. The ^^lshoo^ we have animadverted upon, Cap. 1.
Paragraph 10. The uncharitableness we are now to take notice of. He prays that
as several (...) hearing, so many others by reading, may be (...) and Submit to
be dip^; ha^ so there may be added to the Church such as (...) be saved. What
Apprehensions must thi^ man have of those that never were dipped? Why they are
not yet added to the Church. No not to the Anabaptists Church! but we dou^^
^ot, but (...) are added to the Church of (...). Yet whatever we think, his
charitable man will not allow they can otherwise (...) the Church, and
consequently no othe^wise saved, (...) it consists in de^^ying Infant Baptism,
and (...) the Necessity of Dipping. If you agree with him in these and
according (...) be dipped, you are ((...) as we can find,) added to the Church
(...) of Faith, Re^enta^ce, Obedience, toward (...) being dipped ^on water upon
profession, is with (...) instead of all these; But though you be Regenerate and
Sanctified through (...), Soul and Spirit, Walk humbly with God, and unblamably
before Men; Yet if you were Baptized only in your Infancy, or ^f when adult,
not by dipping: There is no (...) for you if this man were to be your Judg^ But
blessed be God we are to be tried at an another Bar. And therefore with us it
is a very small matter to be judged by him or of Man's day, 1 Cor. 4.4. knowing
that he that will judge (...) the Lord. To whose righteous Judgment we appeal,
and for which we wait in hope.
But let this Man's notions of Religion be never so narrow and uncharitable, we
declare our Religion is of no less compass than Christianity it self. All that
hold the Essentials of Religion, we account to be of the same Religion with us:
Though they differ from us in some inconsiderable matters. We will not be
persuaded to look upon the English Episcopal, or the Foreign Presbyterian. The
Congregational, or Anabaptists themselves, to be of a differing Religion from
us; to be destitute of the True Fear God, or shut out of Christ's Church,
Religion consists in tha^ which is Common to the Pious and Sober of all these
Partys, and not in any thing that distinguishes them from each other. -- We
abominate such a narrow strait-laced Principle, as would place Religion in
being for or against Liturgies, for or against this or that form of
Church Government, for or against Infant Baptism, or this or that mode of
Administration. These things are none of them great enough, to be the Terms of
Eternal Life: The Final Sentence will not proceed upon them: We believe with
St. Peter that God is no Respecter of Persons, but in every Nation, and among
every party of Men, that hold to the head Christ Jesus: He that Fears God and
works Righteousness, shall be accepted of him. Acts 10.34, 35. and with St.
Paul: The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but Righteousness and Peace and
joy in the Holy Ghost, and he that in these things serves Christ is acceptable
to God and approved among Men. Whether he be for or against these things we
have named, or any of the like kind. Romans 14.17, 18.

FINIS.
THE most material Errata, observed in a Review are World for Word, p. 17. l.
20. Word for World, p. 58. l. 15. Sub^ects for Subjects, p. 67. l. 31. which
with any others of the like Nature, can create no difficulty to an intelligent
Reader.

There are indeed several Letters dropped out in working, for which tho room is
left, yet they disappear: but they may be easily supplied. For instance: the
(...) is dropped in (...), p. 17. and the (...) in (...), p. 49. and the Letter ^
twice, a line or two after in the same Page, in (...).

And if any who are fond either of the Greek Accents, or Hebrew Points,
complain of their omission in those Original Words that here occur, they may
charge it par^^ on the different inclination of the Corrector, and partly on
the difficulty of bringing our common Printers to any exactness in what lies
out of their usual Road. To the latter of which ^is also to be ascribed, that
^o many of the Hebrew Letters are needlessly Dagesch'd.


