AN EFFORT AGAINST BIGGOTRY, AND FOR Christian Catholicism.

Being a Discourse on Romans 14. 17. Delivered at Andover in Hampshire.

By HENRY CHANDLER.

Nunquam de Dogmatibus Christus disseruit, sed saepe, and ubique, imo semper de
vivendi Sinceritate.

Mat. 23. 23. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye pay Tyth of
Mint, and Anise, and Cummin, and have omitted the weightier Matters of the Law
--

Jam. 3. 17. But the Wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be entreated.

LONDON: Printed for John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultry, 1699.

To my Generous and much Respected Friend, Mr. Gabriel Goldney of Andover.
THE following Discourse was delivered in your hearing with an honest Design,
and it is now Presented you in compliance with your Request: You some time since
intimated, That the hearing of it was very grateful to you; I pray God it may
in the review be altogether as profitable. It Is not Calculated for the Interest
of any Party of Christians, as a Party needlessly Dividing from, or Hurtfully
Opposing the rest; but (if I mistake not) equally serving the real Interest of
all. Let my Tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, and my right hand forget her
cunning, rather than by Word or Writing I should wilfully promote Faction to
the damage of Substantial Vncontroverted Christianity. No Man on Earth more
sincerely wishes than my self, that all Names of Distinction amongst
Protestants were for ever buried under a just and righteous Accommodation; no
Man more heartily laments the Schisms that are amongst us, or more unfeignedly
longs for a thorough Healing of them. I doubt not but that there are multitudes
of different Denominations that can easily more Skilfully Prescribe for the
Healing of our Distempers than my self, but other Persons receiving more
Talents than my self, is no Discharge to me from a faithful managing and
improving what I have received. Nor must a Sense of the Deficiency of my
Performances so far dishearten me as to prevent my just Endeavors: Wherefore I
am willing that you should have this Discourse to read, after your hearing of
it, and to communicate it as you shall judge expedient: And to this I am the
more inclined, for that the Discourse has been expressly approved by two worthy
Ministers, whose Judgment we both value. One of them is pleased thus to express
himself: -- As to the Discourse it self, I could not but be pleased with it: It
does with great Piety, Solidity and Justice, expose that which I take to be the
most prevailing and dangerous Distemper of the Age, viz. a placing our Religion
in, and laying out our Zeal upon little insignificant things (as Words, or
Phrases, Speculative Opinions, or mere Circumstances and Opinions) in being for
or against these; in which, supposing we be in the right, we are (we can be)
but very little the better; but if it should happen we are under a mistake, we
must needs be greatly the worse. To place the Kingdom of God in such things is
the common mischief of our Day; hence we are broken into Parties, and by the
same Spirit are our shameful Divisions fomented and kept up; and it is the Cure
of this Spirit that alone can effectually heal the Breaches there are amongst
us. Nor is this over magnifying our self-devised Religiousness, and confining
thereupon the Kingdom of God within the Pale of our Respective Parties, the
less pernicious and fatal, for being so exceeding common: Hence it is that
there is so visible a Decay of Christian Charity; that there is so notorious a
disregard of the most important and distinguishing Instances of Christianity,
through the misapplying of Zeal to the little Impertinencies that neither need
nor deserve it -- If this Discourse fall into the hands of such as need it
most, and the Divine Spirit please to accompany it, I cannot doubt but its
success will be such, as will greatly promote and help on a more Peaceful and
Flourishing State of Christ's Kingdom amongst us; for which end it shall be
followed with the fervent Prayers of your affectionate Brother, etc.

Sir, When I read these Lines, and considered the worth of the Person that
wrote them, and when I remembered that another very valuable Minister had said
of the Discourse, That he wished there were Ten Thousand of such Sermons
Printed, and scattered up and down; I found my selfless unwilling to venture
upon appearing thus in public, than I was before. I doubt not but that the
most diseased will find fault; no matter for that, let me be blamed by them, so
I may but heal them; but if that be not the Issue, I shall have the
satisfaction that occompanies an honest Design and Endeavor. May the
infinitely great and good God requite with Spiritual and Eternal Blessings the
Respect and Kindness you have shown me. May you experience more and more the
Solid and Durable Comforts of Practical and Peaceable Christianity; may you be
the Temple of the Holy Ghost, and your Family a little Church; may all good
things be multiplied to you, and you made better by all; may I and mine meet
You and Yours with Joy, at the right hand of Jesus in that Day; may fiery
Faction continually decrease, and Faith, Love and Holiness grow exceedingly
every where: These, Sir, are the Sincere and Fervent Desires of

Your Obliged Friend and Servant, In the Work of the Gospel, Henry Chandler.
Andover, Aug. 16. School.
Romans XIV. xvii. (...)

For the Kingdom of GOD is not Meat and Drink.


THE Decay of Holy Zeal for Practical Godliness, and its woeful Degenerating
into an Uncharitable Factious Contending for little Notions, and the disputable
Appendages of Religion, is too too visible every where. And of such scandalous
Aspect, and destructive Tendency is it, that it deserves to be lamented with
(if it were possible) Tears of Blood. And the Cure of this Distemper (raging
amongst all sorts) to be attended unto with the most Speedy, Skilful, and
Industrious Application. This is my Serious Thought, and the reason of my
pitching upon this Text, as the Foundation of the Present, and some following
Discourses.

Which Text I purpose, with God's help, to manage with the best of my Skill,
and with all possible Faithfulness and Impartiality for the aforesaid End; not
caring whether I do hereby Please or Displease Men, so I may but be Approved of
God, as one that has taken the proper Method to Build his Kingdom in the
World, and particularly in this Town.

I shall endeavor to acquaint you with the Occasion and Sense of the Words,
that I may clear my way for raising the Doctrine that I intend more largely to
prosecute.

The occasion of these Words (as of the whole Chapter, which is one continued
Argument) was this;

Many of the Jews being, by the Doctrine and Miracles of the Apostles,
convinced that Jesus was the Promised Messiah, Believed in Him, and became
Christians; but as yet not understanding the full design of the Christian
Institution; mistaking the Nature and Use of the Mosaic Dispensation, and
possibly misunderstanding the Words in the Old Testament, signifying the long
duration of that Aeconomy, for Perpetuity, as though God meant by them that it
should be continued to the end of the World; they concluded that their
Believing in Christ was no disingagement from Judaism, but thought they were as
much obliged to observe the Law of Moses (even the Ceremonial) as ever. They
looked not on the Christian Institution as what was now to succeed in the room
and place of Judaism, to be laid aside, but as a Supplement to it with which it
was to be continued, supposing they should be never the worse Christians for
their Observation of the Jewish Rituals.

Nay, they not only stuck themselves to the Ceremonial Law, but also took upon
them to oblige the Gentile Converts to the same thing, Acts 15. 5. But there
rose up certain of the Sect of the Pharisees which believed, saying, That it
was needful to circumcise them, and to command them to keep the Law of Moses.

The Gentiles having never been under Moses Law as such, nor apprehending any
Obligation upon them now to come under it, took no notice of what the Jews said
in Vindication of their Superstition, but stuck to their Liberty, and were as
fond of it, as the other were of their burdensome Yoke.

This occasioned uncharitable Contentions amongst the two Parties, raised
Disputes and Quarrellings, put 'em upon Despising and Judging of one another,
as is intimated by the Prohibition, ver. 3. Let not him that eats despise him
that eats not; and let not him which eats not, judge him that eats. The
Gentile Christians ate all Meats, even those forbidden by the Ceremonial Law,
and looked upon the Jew as a scrupulous humorsome Fool, for making a difference.

The Jewish Christian (or Christianized Jew) regarding the Injunctions and
Prohibitions of the Ceremonial Law, ate but such Meats as that allowed;
religiously refusing the rest, judging the Gentile Christian as an ungodly
Sinner, for his violation of Moses Law, and shunned his Communion, as a
Profane and Unholy Person, as is intimated, ver. 1.

To Compose these Differences, and persuade these two differing Parties of
Christians to Friendly Conversation and Christian Communion, the Apostle spends
this whole Chapter, out of which I have taken my Text, and the seven first
Verses of the following Chapter.

He makes use of many Arguments to persuade these Contenders to an
Accommodation; that which my Text affords is the comparative Trivialness of the
things that were the Matter of Debate; they were such as that Men's Opinions and
Practices about them contributed next to nothing to the promoting of God's
Kingdom in the World.

Persons of different, yea, contrary Judgment and Practice, with respect to
them, may be both good and acceptable Subjects of the King of Heaven; both may
be under the power of Grace here, and dwell in Glory together hereafter. And,
on the other hand, Persons of both Persuasions may be destitute of Grace, and
miss of Glory, how strict soever they may be in their Practice, with respect to
the Matters in Dispute betwixt them. For the Kingdom, etc. q. d. These things
commend us not to God, for neither if we Eat are we the better, neither if we
Eat not are we the worse, 1 Cor. 8. 8. It is not a Persuasion one way or other,
about these lesser Matters, that bespeaks Persons Governed by the Spirit of
Christ, or Entitled unto, or fit for Heaven. By Meat and Drink are
Synecdochically comprehended all other Things of like nature that were then
contested. And when it is said, These are not the Kingdom of God, the Expression
is Metonymical, signifying that they contribute next to nothing, if any thing
at all, either to the Building or Destroying of the Kingdom of God amongst Men.
And therefore 'twas sinful Folly in either Party to be so Hot and Eager in
their Disputes about them, and so disaffected to each other, upon account of a
different Opinion and Practice, with respect to them; this is the Sense.

The Text has Two Parts; A Negative; A Positive.


1. A Negative. The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink. The design of which
is to prevent our making a mistake about the things that render us, through
Christ, acceptable to God.

The former stops up a by-path to prevent our straying in the way of Sin and
Ruin, the latter directs us in the true way to Present and Future Happiness.

I begin with the Negative Part, The Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink,
which affords us this useful and seasonable Doctrine, sc. A Zeal for the lesser
Matters of Religion conduces nothing to the promoting of the Kingdom of God in
our selves or others.

In handling of this Point I shall observe this Method, sc.

1. I shall endeavor to prevent your making of Mistakes, as to the meaning of
it. 2. I shall give you the true Sense and Meaning of it, and prove it (both
together.) 3. Make Application.
1. I shall endeavor to prevent, etc. But first I will lay down this
Preliminary Proposition, sc. There are greater, and there are lesser Matters in
Religion. All that is in the Christian Institution taught and enjoined, is not
equally necessary to be known and practiced by us, in order to our acceptable
serving of the Redeemer here, or our comfortable appearing before Him in
another World. There are some things upon account of which Men are more
valuable in God's Estimation, than they are upon the account of others; and
there are things that do more vastly advantage our Souls, improve our Natures,
and promote our Felicity, than others. In a word, there are Doctrines and
Precepts that must be known and observed, or we cannot be Happy, and there are
such, which though we be ignorant of them (and consequently do not designedly
address our selves to the Observation of them) we may yet be Happy. The
Precepts that may justly be reckoned and called the greater and weightier, are
such as enjoin,

Internal, Moral Rectitude, which is our necessary subjective Capacity for
Converse with the Glorious God.

Serious Application to the Lord Jesus as the only Savior.

Such as respect the Essence and Substance of Christian Religion, the Life and
Power of Godliness, as direct more immediately to Holy Practice, as are clearly
and plainly delivered, and as are of constant and perpetual Obligation and Use.

The lesser Precepts are such as direct about the Ornamental Accidents of
External Worship.

Such whereof the Knowledge is not absolutely necessary to Salvation.

Such as direct unto Duties of mere positive Institution, and as are but darkly
and obscurely delivered, and not at all Times, or in all Cases obliging.

That these two sorts of Precepts may be thus distinguished into greater and
lesser, that is more and less necessary, is evident, as by the express
Testimony of Holy Scripture, so from this consideration following, sc. were it
otherwise, one of the two following Absurdities must be granted. 1. Either that
the Observation of nothing in the Christian Religion was necessary to
Salvation: Or, 2. That so much was necessary that no Man could be Saved. For
there is not a Man upon the Earth, that perfectly knows all the several Precepts
that are couched and intimated in the pregnant Style of Holy Scripture,
together with them that lie upon the Surface of the Text, obvious to the most
careless Eye; and no Man can designedly address him to observe those Precepts
that he knows not. But we know but in part, 1 Cor. 13. 9. The wisest Man's
Knowledge is here necessarily imperfect, and therefore his Obedience cannot be
otherwise; wherefore it irrefragably follows, that all things enjoined in Holy
Scripture, are not equally necessary; wherefore the Distinction abovesaid is
just and needful.

Now when I say, that a Zeal for these lesser Matters conduces nothing to the
promoting of the Kingdom of God in our selves, or others, neither of these
things immediately following is intended.

1. That these lesser Things are utterly useless: or, 2. That any Man has a
License to be ignorant of them, that has Capacity and Opportunity to Study
them. 3. That any Man may, without Sin, act contrary to his Persuasion, with
respect to them: or, 4. That a Man may not, in any case, give to another his
Sense and Opinion about them: or, 5. That a Man may Profess, Assent to what he
knows to be falsely affirmed, or approve as good what he knows to be badly
enjoined by Men with respect to them, that he might avoid Persecution.
Neither of these Five Things is intended; for all the Scripture being given by
Divine Inspiration, every part of it is profitable, either for Doctrine, or
Reproof, or Correction, or Instruction in Righteousness, 2 Timothy 3. 16. And
every Man ought to acquaint himself with the whole Book of God, for his own and
others good, as he has Capacity and Opportunity, he being the most perfect
Christian, who is most perfectly acquainted with, and conformed to that blessed
Rule of Holy Perfection.

Nor can any Man act contrary to the Dictates of a well informed Conscience,
even in the lesser Matters of Religion, without sin and danger; for our Lord
says, Mat. 5. 19. Whosoever shall break one of the least Commandments, and
shall teach Men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Moreover, a Christian may safely give his Opinion about these lesser Matters,
when he is asked by a Person that desires to know for his own Direction, and
not for Contentious Cavilling.

And undoubtedly, he that professes Assent to a known Falsehood, and professes
Approbation of that which he knows to be evil, with respect unto these Matters,
to avoid Persecution, is seeking to save his Life by those Methods that tend to
Eternal Death, Matthew. 10. 39.

Having thus endeavored to prevent your mistaking the Sense of the Doctrine, I
come now to tell you positively what I do intend by it.

And there are these things meant by it;

1. That Men's employing their Gifts and Parts, and spending their time chiefly
in the Defense of their Notions and Apprehensions about these Matters, renders
them never the more acceptable unto God. Nor, 2. Do they hereby at all better
their own Spirits: Nor, 3. Are the Souls of others hereby served: Nor, 4. Is
God's Kingdom hereby enlarged, or his Honor and Glory promoted. Of these in
their order.


1. Men's Employing, etc.

God Accepts or Refuses no Man upon account of such little things as are (in
a comparative Sense at least) the Disputable Circumstances of Religion. He
accepts holy Souls of different Apprehensions about them. Romans 14. 18. For he
that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God -- i. e. Which way
soever he inclines with respect to the Matters in debate: God rejects an
Hypocritical, Unholy, Unregenerate Professor, of what Party, Opinion, or
Denomination soever he be. If he be Orthodox as to these little things, it
matters not; For Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision is nothing, but
the keeping of the Commandments of God, 1 Cor. 7. 19. Wherefore Men's
over-fondness of these smaller Matters, their eager Disputes about them, their
consuming their Time in the Study and Defense of them, with the neglect of
Matters of greater Necessity and Usefulness, cannot (by sober Persons) be
thought what will recommend them to the Wise and Holy God, who as He made Men
capable of greater and better Studies, expects that they employ themselves
about them. For the fuller Proof of this Particular, let it be considered, That
God takes no delight in Fools or Hypocrites.

1. Not in Fools. He has no pleasure in fools, Eccl. 5. 4. But Men that are
Zealous for the smaller Matters, whilst they neglect Things of greater
Importance, are Fools. Ye Fools, said our Savior to the Pharisees, whose
Character (by Him given) was, That they tythed Mint, Annise and Cummin, and
neglected the weightier Matters of the Law.

Men of this Kidney, (especially if they be successful in their little Factious
Attempts) are ready to account themselves Wise, and those of their Party are
too prone (too prodigally) to Applaud them as such. But they are Fools. He Is a
Fool that, being in a leaky Ship, minds the Painting of his particular Cabin,
more than the stopping of the Leak that endangers the whole Ship. And what is
he better that spends his Time in the pursuit of those Things, that serves only
for the recommending his particular Notions, and neglects to promote that
practical Godliness in the World, the general decay of which threatens the
whole Christian Interest? He Is a Fool that being Sick of the Plague, slights
the Advice of an able Faithful Physician, because he speaks not the Dialect or
Idiom of his particular County, or had not his License granted him by such a
particular College of Physicians. And he is a far worse Fool, that being a
sinful Creature refuses the help of Charitable Skilful Christians or
Ministers, because they are not in all Things of his Mind in lesser Matters of
Religion, and that confines his Addresses for help to Persons (it may be far
less Skilful) of his own Opinion and Party. How well pleased soever such
Persons may be with their Folly, it is utterly unreasonable and impious to
expect that God will show himself altogether such an one as themselves.

2. God takes no delight in Hypocrites. This is manifest from the terrible
Denunciation of Wrath against the Jewish People, upon the account of Hypocrites
amongst them, Isa. 9. 17. Therefore the Lord shall have no joy in their young
Men, neither shall have mercy on their Fatherless and Widows: FOR every one is
an Hypocrite -- And from our Savior's often repeated Woe thundered out against
such, Matthew. 23. But such as are chiefly concerned for the lesser Matters of
Religion are Hypocrites, as appears by Christ's branding the Pharisees (whose
grand Fault this was) so often with this Name, Woe unto you Scribes and
Pharisees, Hypocrites, Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, no less
than seven times in that Chapter. And is not he an Hypocrite that plays with
Religion? And does not he play with Religion, that spends his Fervor and
Vigor about the Appendages and Circumstantials of it, whilst the great and
weighty Matters are neglected?

(2.) Men do not hereby better their own Spirits. I say not that Men do not
hereby please themselves by gratifying their wanton Fancies, and magnifying
their idolized Friends. I question not but such Foolish Zealots are as well
pleased with these their Childish Impertinencies, as their Children are with
their Jointed Babies and Hobby-Horses. But their Laughter is mad, and their
Mirth what does it? Certain it is, that their Souls are not improved by the
excessive Study and Pursuit of those things, there is no aptitude to promote
such a thing, I mean when sought and pursued with the neglect of the Life of
Religion. What will a Man's Orthodoxness, with respect unto the Doctrine of the
Externals, the Modes and Circumstances of Worship, contribute to the healing of
his Pride, Passion, or Worldliness, or any other Distemper of his Mind, if he
be continually diverted from a close Application of the Specificks that the
wise and good Physician of Souls has prepared for the Cure of such and such
Distempers? If a Man that has a Tertian Ague, should continually spend his
Time in studying in what Vehicle such a Medicine for his Distemper should be
taken in, and when he has fixed his Determination, should spend the rest of
his Time in endeavoring to bring over his Neighbors that are otherwise minded
to his Opinion, would this cure his Distemper (think you) though he never
applied the proper Medicine that he has by him?

To Apply it. May not a Man be right as to the particular (less Principal)
Thing he contends for, and yet as Proud, Contentious, Turbulent, Selfiish,
Uncharitable, and Unrighteous as ever? If a Man be in Heart no true Christian,
will his sticking to, and contending for such Things make him one? If he be a
weak languishing Christian, will this revive the Power of Religion in his Soul?
Yea rather, will it not put out the few Sparks that are left?

(3.) Men do not hereby serve the Souls of others, whom by these Methods they
would Proselyte to their particular Opinions. There are amongst all Parties of
Christians in this Nation, Some that act in this Matter with that unwearied
Industry, and rejoice in their Success with such an air of Complacence, as if
they were in this matter as narrow of their Charity as the Romanists, and
counted none good Christians but those of their own Party; they act as if there
was nothing required of Men in order to Salvation, but subscribing their
Canons, subjecting themselves to their particular Modes of Worship, and walking
with them in their Way. But as such an Imagination is altogether groundless,
and very absurd, so those are most wretchedly imposed upon, that suffer
themselves to be Captivated by it. And I will confidently assert, That there is
nothing in the Purest, most Orthodox, and Apostolical Party of Protestants
which the other Parties have not, to make amends for such a Deception. If any
Man should be told by a Leader of any Party of Protestants, That if he will be
a good Christian, please God, and go to Heaven when he dies, he must be one of
them; he must Subscribe their Canons, follow their Directory, take their
Church Covenant, he must Pray by a Book, he must not Pray by a Book, he must go
to the Parish Church, he must go to Meeting, to this Meeting, to that Meeting;
I say, whosoever talk at this rate, do miserably deceive those that they
persuade: Nor have they any thing in their Communion, which other Societies
have not, to make their deluded Proselites amends. Nay, so far is this
industrious Proselyting of Men to a particular Opinion from being a piece of
Service to Souls, that it is a manifest Injury to them, as it fills the
Christian World with woeful Schisms, diverts from the more important Duties of
Christian Religion, as it stumbles the Ignorant, and hardens the Profane in
their Contempt of all Religion.

(4.) God's Kingdom is not enlarged, nor his Honor and Glory promoted by such
a Course. Men may thus People their respective Assemblies, and increase the
number of Votaries to their particular Faction or Party, but not one good
Subject is or can be hereby added to the King of Saints. Men may hereby
dishonestly drein the Societies of Christians differing from them in their
Opinion about these lesser Matters, and weaken their Hands by enticing their
useful Friends from them, but, not a Soul can they by this Method bring them
from the power of Satan into the Kingdom of God, it has not the least Aptitude
or Fitness to produce so noble an effect. For the Persons such Sticklers would
by this method gain over to their Party, are either good or bad, now which
soever be affirmed the matter comes all to one. If he be a bad Man, destitute
of the saving Grace of God, he is never the less so for espousing the Opinions,
and conforming himself to the Customs and Usages of this or that Party. If he
keep his Vicious Habits, and remain an Impenitent Unbeliever, he is a bad Man
still, with which Party soever of Christians he sides. If he falls in with the
Conformists, he is a wicked Man notwithstanding; if he should thence be gotten
over to the Presbyterians, he is a wicked Man still; if he should remove his
Tabernacle and pitch amongst the Independents, he is a wicked Man nevertheless:
And let him change his Associates as often as he will, though he should happen
at last to light upon the Truth, as to Matters in Controversy, though he should
join with the most Orthodox and strict Party, though he should really and in
Truth be of the same mind with them, as to their distinguishing Opinions and
Modes of Worship, though he should have and manifest a Zeal for them, yet he is
a wicked Man nevertheless, and no more the Hearty and Loyal Subject of the
Redeemer than he was before; For Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision is
nothing, but the keeping the Commandments of God, 1 Cor. 7. 19.

It Is not Conformity or Nonconformity, it is not the Espousing the Interest of
Dioceasan Episcopacy, Presbyterianism, Independency or Anabaptistry, that will
make a good Man of a bad. This will not contribute any thing to the changing a
Slave of Satan into a Freeman of Christ; wherefore it is manifest that Factious
Zealots are not at all serviceable to the Interest of God, by gaining over bad
Men to their Party.

But it may be some will say, If the Person gained be a good Man, the case
(sure) is altered; if he be brought from a less pure to a more pure way of
Worship, this (doubtless) promotes the Kingdom of God.

I answer; First remember that my Discourse is confined to the Matters
controverted by Protestants, who severally and jointly hold to and practice the
more necessary and important Matters of Faith and Worship. Now I say, it must
be granted, that all Deviations from the Rule of the Word in the Worship of
God, are Sins, and every Sin is more or less obstructive of the Kingdom of God:
It must also be acknowledged, that convincing Men of their Mistakes, and
reclaiming them from their Irregularities in the Worship of God, is both
Charitable and Pious. It is a friendly Office performed for the Soul of our
Neighbor, and an act of Service to the King of Heaven. All this is readily
granted. Yet notwithstanding, it may be safely affirmed that the Kingdom of God
is not served by Persons spending their Zeal about lesser Matters. For when
Persons lay a greater stress upon them than their Nature requires, when they
talk of them as if they were the only, or chief and principal Things in
Religion to be minded, despising, or judging and separating from those that
differ from them in their Opinions and Practices, with respect to them: I say,
when it is thus (and this is the Case I have all along intended) though these
Men should be in the right, yet if they endeavor to imprint their Image upon
the Persons they would Instruct, and if they are successful as to the whole of
their Design, it is certain that they do more hurt than good. For, though it be
yielded that they are serviceable to those they Proselyte, as they Correct
their Mistakes, and guide them into the way of Truth, yet in as much as at the
same time they cherish and nourish in them Factious, Dividing, Uncharitable,
Turbulent Inclinations, it is manifest, that instead of making them better
Subjects to the King of Heaven, they make them much worse than they were. Such
Men's new acquired Light having too much Brimstone in it, serves but to fire
them, and all about them. What though they are in some little thing more
Orthodox and Regular than they were before, if withal they grow Conceited and
Proud, Pragmatical and Censorious, Schismatical and Turbulent; if with the
increase of their Light there be a decrease of their Love, Humility and
Peaceableness, they are no more bettered than Men are happily relieved against
the Darkness of the Night, by the Light that comes from their Fired Houses.
Such a zealous promoting of Opinion may spoil Christ's good Subjects, but it
cannot mend them. Moreover, the Honor and Glory of God is not promoted by such
a course. God is then glorified by us, when in our Lives we show by some
significant Actions, that our Souls are impressed with the likeness of the
Divine Perfections; as Wisdom, Holiness, Justice, Goodness, etc. I say, when by
wise, holy, just and good Actions, we show to the World that our Souls are
stamped with the Likeness of the Divine Wisdom, Holiness, Justice and
Goodness, then we may be said to Glorify God in the World -- But is a busy,
uncharitable, contending for, disputable Matters of Opinion, to the prejudice
of Practical Godliness; what will argue our Souls to be thus impressed? Or,
will any sober Person say, That God is hereby Glorified? Is it consistent with
an Understanding Belief of the Wisdom of God, to imagine that He made our noble
Souls to be only, or principally busied about such little things as many will
Christen with the Name of Religion? Or, can a Man that heartily believes God is
good, persuade himself to think, that He should oblige us to spend our Time and
Strength in recommending and supporting those things that have nothing in their
Nature to entertain our Minds to Satisfaction, Minds that are capable of
Conversing with the Glorious God, his high Perfections, and excellent Works?
They know neither God, nor their own Souls, that can think so.

Application, by way of Instruction, Reprehension, Exhortation.


1. Instruction. This Truth leads us into several others, viz.

1. There should be an Harmony in Affection amongst those between whom there is
a Difference in Opinion. 2. Uniformity in Worship is not necessary to the
Flourishing of Christianity. 3. A further Union amongst Protestants is truly
desirable. 4. It Is no Sin for a Christian in some Cases to conceal his Opinion.
Of these in order.
1. There should be an Harmony, etc. Or thus, Christians of different
Sentiments and Practices, with respect unto the lesser Matters of Religion,
should unfeignedly and affectionately love one the other; their little
Differings should not occasion the abating of their mutual Love. God loves them
all, and therefore they should love one another. Thus the Apostle himself
improves this Doctrine, Romans 15. 5. Now the God of patience, and consolation,
grant you to be like minded, (...) This Expression is sometimes used to
signify Agreement in Opinion and Judgment; but here (I take it) it is put to
signify Union and Affection; as the same Expression is used, Phil. 2. 2.
Fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love. -- And the
whole Context seems to favor this Interpretation, for the design of the
Apostle throughout the Fourteenth Chapter, seems plainly to be the begetting a
good Understanding amongst the contending Christians of his Time, to persuade
them to bear with, be friendly, and kind, and loving one to another: And
therefore it is very allowable to suppose, that in the close of his Discourse
upon this Subject, he does by this Expression intend the same thing, especially
seeing it is manifest that the words are to be so understood in that, Phil. 2.
2. and that the very last words the Apostle spends upon this Argument are
these, sc. Wherefore receive ye one another as Christ also received us to the
Glory of God, ver. 7. And Sirs, what hinders that Christians of different
Opinions and Persuasions about lesser matters, love not one another better?
Seeing the things they differ about are not things of great weight, or flat
necessity, seeing the Interest of God suffers not by the variety of Men's
Opinions about them, seeing God does not value or slight Men upon account of
them, seeing both Parties may be acceptable to God, why should they not love
one another? Why should they not in Honor prefer one another? Why should they
not have good thoughts one of another? True it is, Men cannot think or believe
as they list, or as their Neighbors and Friends would have them, but one would
think they should love according to their Savior's Command and Example: He
loves all the pious and good, whether Conformists or Non-Conformists,
Churchmen or Dissenters, Presbyterian or Independent, or whatever Fool's Coat
of distinction their uncharitable envious Neighbors put upon them. He by his
Apostle commends a Catholic Love, or a Love to All the Saints, Ephesians. 1. 15.
wherefore it is a hard case if Christians of different Opinions cannot love one
another.

Objection But perhaps some will say, How can I love those that I see
disorderly and Erroneous?

Answer. A wise Objection indeed! can thou love none but those that are in
all things Orthodox and orderly? Then thou must love thy Father, or Mother, or
Wife, or Children, or Minister, yea, or thine own self no more, for all on this
side Heaven have their Mistakes, and are guilty of their Irregularities. We
know but in part, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. 9. and in many things we offend
all, James 3. 2. But hark Christian what are those Errors and Irregularities
that hinder thy loving of thy Fellow Christian? Does he deny the Catholic
Church, that one Body? Does he deny the Holy Ghost, that one Spirit? Does he
disown the Belief of the Heavenly Glory, that one hope of our Calling? Or does
he deny the One Lord Jesus, the one Faith; Baptism, or God and Father of all,
who is above all, and through all, and in us all? Perhaps thou will say, No,
no, he is not gone so far as that comes to, he owns all these. Does he? then
(to speak a soft word) thou art a foolish Wretch, if thou can not love him
because he thinks and speaks somewhat differingly from thee, about the
Circumstantials of Religion -- But thou say he is disorderly -- what meanest
thou? Is he Profane, Intemperate, Unjust, or Unmerciful? It may be thou will
say, No, I can lay none of this to his Charge; as to the main he seems to live
a Sober, Righteous, and a Godly Life, but he is not of my mind and way in the
Worship of God. he was not admitted to the Lord's Supper as I was, he says not
his Prayers as I do mine, he comes not to the same place of Worship that I do
--

And is this the reason why thou can not love him? Let me tell thee freely,
whoever thou art, thou have great reason to question whether thou thy self
love God or no, and for thy reason why thou can not so heartily love thy
Fellow Christian; thou would have given as good an one if thou had said the
reason was because he has a Mole in his Face, a spot upon his Coat, or another
fashioned Ribbon in his Hat than thou have; for these are as solid Reasons why
thou should not heartily love such as I have described, as the others are.

2. Hence learn, Uniformity in Worship is not necessary to the Flourishing of
Christianity in the World. The Kingdom of God may be in a prosperous and
flourishing Condition, though all do not Worship in the same manner, or with
the same Ceremonies exactly. Because the Kingdom of God consists not in such
little things. That there be Unity among Christians is necessary, they must be
united in the same Object of Worship the ever-Blessed and Glorious Trinity, in
the same Mediator the Lord Jesus Christ; in the same Guide and Director in
Worship the Holy Ghost, in the same Rule of Worship (as to the substance of
Worship at least) the Holy Scriptures; in the same end of Worship, the Glory of
God in their Eternal Salvation. But that there should be amongst the several
Assemblies of Worshippers an exact Uniformity as to all the Modes and
Circumstances of Worship, this is (I think not possible, but I am sure) not
necessary to the flourishing of Christianity, for the Kingdom of God is not
Circumstance or Ceremony.

But alas! how do Persons of all denominations (some at least) talk as if they
thought the quite contrary; the high Flyers of all Denominations talk and act
as if they thought the Kingdom of God was nothing else but Circumstance and
Ceremony. Ask the rigid Church-man's Opinion, and he will tell you 'twill never
be good days till all come to Worship God Almighty with the laudable Ceremonies
of the Church of England; he will tell you, that there are no true Ministers but
those that have Episcopal Ordination, no true Sacraments but what are
Administered by such Ministers, no true Churches where there are not true
Sacraments, no Salvation out of the true Church: That is, in a word, that there
are no true Churches or Christians that are in a State of Salvation, but those
of his Way; and thus we poor Dissenters all are, what in him lies, left
without the Pale of the Church, to be an easy Prey to the next Herd of Devils
that shall chance to light upon us. These Men make the Kingdom of God to be
Ceremony and Circumstance with a witness, in as much as they will not vouchsafe
to reckon those amongst Christians, that want but the supposed Compliment, or
finishing of the Imposition of the Hands of a Diocesan Bishop on their
Ministers at their Ordination, though all other requisites be found amongst
them. Well, are there none of the Dissenters as Foolish in their way? Yes
verily, there are amongst them some as Ignorant and Uncharitable as their
Canonical Neighbors: This wild Fancy walks sometimes in a Cloak as well as in
a Gown and Cassock; some there are that think it can never be as it should be
with the Kingdom of God, till all Ceremonies but their own (for it is impossible
to Worship God with external Worship, without some Ceremony or other) be laid
aside, they have such extravagant Conceits about the Ceremonies used by the
Church of England, that they be ready to conclude that the Salvation of such as
use them, is almost as impossible, as it is for a Camel to go through the Eye of
a Needle. When they think fit to speak of a Churchman, in whom perhaps there is
some good thing that they cannot but see, they speak of it with a But. But he
is a Churchman, But he is for the Liturgy; as if his not being a Dissenter, or
not Worshipping God just in such a way and manner as they, did mar all the
good that was in him, and make it to be nothing -- The truth is, there is such
a dictating, domineering Spirit in Men of all sorts, that every conceited Man
would be a Teacher and Ruler to all the rest. The conceited Episcopal Man would
have all the Nation follow his Fashion, and bow down to his Idol (I mean, his
excessively valued Ceremonies); the proud Presbyterian would have all observe
his Directory; and the proud Independent would have all take his Covenant, and
conform to his Customs and Usages; and if these cannot have their Wills (and
God forbid they should) they utter their Complaints, and vent their
Predictions, as if for want hereof all the Storms were raised that have so long
threatened the sinking of the Church. Whereas the wise, and humble, and
peaceable among all sorts consider, that seeing the Kingdom of God consists
not in Ceremony or Circumstance of External Worship; a variety and diversity
herein may well be allowed unto Persons of different Sentiments and
Apprehensions, without any damage done to the Glory of the Divine Government.
And that this was the Apostle's mind is manifest from this, that when he
considers the difference between the Jew and Gentile, about the Observation of
Holidays, he does not command one to conform his Opinion and Practice to the
others, but advises each to act according to his own Persuasion therein, at
the same time maintaining a Charitable Frame of Spirit toward his differing
Neighbor, Romans 14. 5. If he had thought that an exact Uniformity in the
Externals of Worship had been necessary, he would not have given such Advice as
he there gives, no, he would have Dogmatically determined which was in the
Right, and Authoritatively commanded the other to conform to him.

Third Inference.

A farther Union amongst Protestants is very desirable, seeing these smaller
matters that I have been discoursing of, are of such a nature, that a Man may
be under the saving Influence of the Spirit of Holiness, and a good Subject to
the King of Heaven, which way so ever he acts with respect to them. It Is ten
thousand pities that a Difference in Opinion and Practice herein should cause
such distances and withdrawings one from another, as it does. I acknowledge
there is great cause of Thanksgiving to God, that there is such an Union in
Doctrinals amongst us as there is, and I account the Governments calling
Protestant Dissenting Ministers to Subscribe the Articles of the Church of
England a very good Providence, as their Orthodoxy, in matters of Faith, is
thereby manifested to all the World. But that this is all the Union that is to
be wished, no Person of Understanding and Honesty will dare to affirm. It were
to be wished that what is sinfully imposed on one side was dropped, and what is
needlessly scrupled on the other side was for Peace sake complied with, that the
Names of Churchmen and Dissenters, Presbyterian and Independent might be
happily lost in an honest and beneficial Union, that our Name may be one, our
Hearts as one, and our Way one, to the painful Envy and Grief of Hell and Rome.
I do unfeignedly lament the Spirit of Faction and Partyism that I see amongst
Dissenters, as well as Churchmen. Biggotry is not the Sin of any particular
Party. Ah what a dismal thing is it, that when our Holy Bible tells us plainly,
that the Kingdom of God is not promoted by these little Things, we should stand
aloof from one another upon account of them, as if we were afraid of being
Infected with mortal Disease! Seeing a Man's acceptance with God depends not
upon his using this way of Worship or that, why should we totally separate from
those who Worship with some little Irregularities, as if they were Worshippers
of a false God? Or why should they totally deny their Presence at our
Assemblies, because of the absence of those Ceremonies that they themselves
acknowledge to be indifferent? Let us pray, that where Persons are otherwise
minded about the Worship of God than the Word of God directs, God would reveal
it to them, as it is expressed Phil. 3. 15. that the domineering imposing
Humor on one hand, and the needless hurtful Scrupulosity on the other being
laid aside, we may all walk together in Love, becoming the Gospel of Love and
Peace. You that desire the Peace of Jerusalem pray for this, pray heartily,
pray without ceasing; you shall prosper that thus love the Church of God, Psalm
122. 6.

Fourth Inference.

It Is no sin for a Christian in some cases to conceal his Opinion as to these
lesser Matters. Yea, it is a plain Duty in some cases. Romans 14. 22. Have thou
Faith, have it to thy self before God. i. e. Have thou more knowledge than he,
to believe those things to be lawful, which he judges to be sin, keep thy
Knowledge and Belief to thy self, to justify thy Judgment to God,but use it not
to the hurt of others. [Mr. Baxter.] This Text seems primarily to direct the
strong Christian who has more Knowledge of his Christian Liberty than his
Brother, and can without scruple do those things which the weaker Christian
sticks at; and the Duty enjoined seems to be this, that such an one should not
needlessly divulge his Opinion, nor use his Liberty to the Scandalizing of his
Brother. It is also of use to direct the weak scrupulous Christian, who though
he has a strong Persuasion, that such or such a Thing would be sin to him, yet
should not needlessly divulge his Scruples, when he is not called to do what he
scrupleth; and when the mentioning of his Scruples might disturb his Brothers
quiet; who can do that thing without wronging his Conscience or [it may be]
offending of God, the thing being indiffent, and so lawful to be done or not
done, according as a Man is persuaded in his Conscience. And thus the Apostle
seems to mean by that in the 5th verse, Let every Man be fully persuaded in his
own mind. Q. d. With respect to these disputed Matters, let every Man act
according to the Light he has received, but not be forward to spread his
Opinion for the disturbing and troubling of others, seeing the Glory of God is
not promoted by our contending about these lesser matters; seeing the Kingdom
of Christ is not furthered, nor the Souls of Men advantaged by gaining Men to
our Opinions about them. Let it suffice us that we have the liberty of our own
Thoughts and Actions, and not insist upon them when we have far greater and
more useful things to talk of, and press upon one another wherein we are all
agreed. Wherefore when a Man [that has no manifest Call to declare his
Judgment about these smaller Matters] shall purposely for peace sake refuse the
distinguishing Name of [suppose] Presbyterian or Independent, and shall rather
choose to be called a Christian, a Protestant, or an United Brother, he is not I
think to be looked upon and condemned as an Hypocrite, walking Laodicean, or
Linsy-woolsy Christian. Nor will any Person so judge such, but those whose
Opinion is (as one said) more than their Religion, and who delight in the
supposed Honor [but real Shame] of being the Heads of Schismatical Parties.

Second use of Reprehension,

And here these several sorts following are to be reproved, sc.

1. Tyrannical Church Imposers. 2. Factious Preachers. 3. Schismatical
Dividers. 4. Proud Contemners. 5. Uncharitable Judgers. 6. Hypocritical
Triflers.
1. Tyrannical Church Imposers. I mean here all such pretended or real
Church Officers, as make Conformity to their Opinions and Practices about these
lesser Matters, the indispensible condition of Communion with them. I call such
Tyrannical Imposers, because they act herein Arbitrarily without the Divine
Warrant, and hereby Lord it over God's Heritage. This Spirit is too visible in
the World at this Day; some deny Public Baptism to Children, if their Parents
will not consent to have them signed with the sign of the Cross, or if they
themselves will engage for their Children, and refuse to find Sureties (or
Godfathers and Godmothers) for them; though neither of these be commanded in
the Word, and both be looked on as unlawful and sinful by those who offer their
Children to be Baptized. They refuse to give the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper
to Persons (in the Judgment of strictest Charity, Penitent Believers
competently instructed) except they will receive it Kneeling; though Christ or
his Apostles never so Administered it, and though the Persons that would join
with them think it would be sin in them so to receive it. Others will not admit
Persons to their Communion, unless they will submit to be examined by Officers
that are neither Preachers of the Word, nor Dispensers of the Sacraments;
though. the Divine Right of that Office be controverted by the Learned, and the
Persons refusing to be so examined verily think it is not an Ordinance of
Christ. Others will not admit Persons to their Communion, except they will
(besides their declaring their Knowledge of the Doctrine of Christian Religion,
and professing their Belief of it, and purposes of living in all things
suitable to it) be obliged to give an account of their Experiences to the
Society, or the Heads of them, that they may judge not only of their Knowledge,
but also of the Sincerity and Truth of their Profession, at least of the
Credibility of the Appearances of their Sincerity and Truth. Others will have
no Communion at the Lord's Table with those that have been Baptized in their
Infancy, unless they will renounce their Baptism, by being Baptized again. All
these are to be blamed. Now I do not at this time blame-one Party or other, for
acting themselves according as they are respectively persuaded, nor for
Admitting others to do the like that are of the same mind with them, and are
Volunteers in what they do. But that which is justly reprovable, and which my
Text and Doctrine directs me to reprove, is Persons looking upon those that are
otherwise minded, and dealing with them, as if they were mere impenitent
Pagans, denying to them the means of Salvation; as if these things were of the
Substance of Religion, and a Man could not be a good Christian, unless he was
as to these Things altogether of their Mind. This is but too like the hateful
Cruelty of the Athenian Robber, the condition of Lodging with whom was, to be
made just the length of his Bed, by disjointing, stretching if too short, or by
dismembring, chopping off if two long. Away with this Church Tyranny, with this
intrenching upon Christ's Prerogative, and let us be content with such
Conditions of Church Fellowship, as he in Wisdom and Goodness has appointed.
Certainly, what I am speaking against, is a wicked Lording it over the
Consciences of Christ's Disciples wherever it is, whither in a Parish Church
or separate Meeting, and it is directly contrary to that Precept, Romans 14. 1.
Him that is weak in the Faith receive ye, but not to doubtful Disputations.

2. A second sort to be reproved are, Factious Preachers. Such I mean whose
Business it is to commend themselves and Party, measuring themselves by
themselves, and comparing themselves amongst themselves, as the Apostle speaks,
1 Cor. 10. 12. Such Ministers (by what Names or Titles soever dignified or
distinguished) as under pretense of Orthodoxy, Order, or Decency employ their
Wit, and spend their Time and Vigor in justifying, commending, and magnifying
the Expressions and Phrases, Habits, Gestures, and Modes used by themselves and
Party; villifying and nullifying the Ways and Manners of those that differ from
them. O the Sin and Folly of such a Course! it cannot possibly be the effect of
a better Cause than base Selfishness, Envy, or Ignorance. How absurd and
foolish does this appear, when we consider the relation that Ministers stand in
to the People. They are Ambassadors from God unto Men in Christ's stead, to
persuade them to be reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5. 20. Their business is by all
proper Arguments to persuade Men to take off their Hearts from this World
(whose Friendship is Enmity against God, James 4. 4.) and set them upon God as
their chief Good and only Happiness; in order hereunto they should with the
best of their Skill display before Men the attractive amiable Excellencies of
God, as discovered by the Works of Creation, common Providence and Redemption,
and disgrace the World as a Competitor and Rival with God, by showing its
unsuitableness, uncertaintainty, and insufficiency, etc. Now what madness is
it, instead hereof, to be continually or frequently harping upon the Decency,
Comeliness, or Usefulness of such and such Ceremonies, and the Excellency of
such Churches as make use of them? -- How absurd is it to be continually or
frequently industriously crying of them down, and applauding such Churches as
use them not, to be defending, justifying and pressing such or such particular
Modes of expressing the Doctrines of Christan Religion; and thereby, at least
tacitly, condemning and disgracing others, that, it may be, are altogether as
Orthodox, neither being in terms the Expressions of Holy Scripture? It Is indeed
a deplorable Case, that the Ambassadors of the King of Heaven should so much
mistake the Design of their Negotiation. If the King of England should send an
Ambassador to Treat with his Enemies (his revolted Subjects) and proffer them
their Lives in case they will return to their Allegiance, confess with Shame
and Remorse their Rebellion, would it not be abominable trifling in the
Ambassador, if he should spend his time chiefly in instructing them what
Clothes they should wear, and what Gestures they should keep when they come
into the King's Presence? The Application is easy. --

3. Schismatical Dividers are to be reproved. Such in Christian Societies, I
mean, who, if they cannot have their Wills as to little Trifles, stick not at
renting and tearing all to pieces, by faulting the Ministers Methods, and
prejudicing the Church against him. There are a sort of Men in the World, who,
though they have hardly sense enough to apprehend the plainest Preaching, are yet
so conceited and proud, as to think themselves qualified to be, at least,
Sides-Men with their Minister in all his Acts of Rule and Government, if not
wise enough to go before and lead him. These, if every thing be not done in the
Church according to their Capricio and Humor, if the Minister do not Preach
such a particular Doctrine as they think will be most Edifying, and in such
Words and Phrases as they think most sound; if he proceed not in the Government
of the Church according to their Model, and take them not with him to judge of
his Administrations; they will never leave working like Moles, till they have
undermined him. Though they cannot charge their Minister with Preaching or
Ruling contrary to the Word of God, yet if he do not these things just as they
have seen and heard them done in some other Churches, which they are pleased to
pronounce the most Pure; if all be not done according to the Dictates of such
or such a Minister, whose Person they have in Admiration, they will withdraw
themselves from the Communion, buz about their Discontents, till they have bred
such a Schism, as exceeds the Ministers Skill to unite and heal. I dare not say
that all such are of their Father the Devil, but I will boldly affirm, that his
Works they do, and that they are herein and so far Pests and Plagues to
Christian Societies. And it is my serious Thought, that if God in Mercy does not
by some speedy unexpected Providence prevent it, this sort of Men will ruin
our Liberty, and bring us into miserable Confusion. Friends, if you call this
Railing, I cannot help it, but this shall support me, that God has commanded
me to mark them which cause Divisions, Romans 16. 17. and that if I uprightly do
my Duty, God will at last acquit me, though Men for the present condemn me; God
will for Christ's sake show me his reconciled Face, though Men (my Acquaintance
and Friends) turn their backs upon me, and will not vouchsafe to hear me, I say
to you as the Apostle in another case, 2 Cor. 11. 1. Would to God you could
bear with me a little, and indeed bear with me. I have no delight in offending
any Body, be sure not in troubling those whom I have found Comforters of me,
and from whom I might possibly yet expect further Comfort: I know Discourses of
this nature are not pleasant to either the Guilty or Innocent, and you may
assure your selves I have as little pleasure in speaking them, as you have in
hearing them. But I say as David to Eliah, 1 Samuel 17. 29. Is there not a cause?
Is not this that I am speaking against a Sin? And has it not done Mischief
these many Years in this Nation, and particularly in this place? Does not this
dividing Spirit naturally lead to the levelling the Ministry with the People,
and destroying the necessary distinction of Teachers and Learners, Rulers and
ruled in Churches? And is not this the way, the highway, to
Christianity-Ruining, Quakerism, and Fanaticism? And am not I a Watchman, and
shall not a Watchman speak when he sees Evil approaching? You will cut a Dog's
throat that will not open when he should, and the Spirit of God compares
cowardly silent Ministers (that tell not the People of their Sin and Danger) to
dumb Dogs that cannot bark; and what the Lot of a People is like to be, that
have such Ministers, you may see, Isa. 56 9, 10. All the Beasts of the Field
come to devour, yea all the Beasts in the Forest, etc.

4. Proud Contemners are to be reproved. Such, I mean, who having Knowledge and
a greater Latitude than others, do therefore despise and contemn their
Christian Brethren, that, having less Knowledge, make more Scruples than they.
This was the fault of the converted Gentile in the Apostle's Time, and this is
(without Rancour I speak it) the fault of the more Knowing (if more knowing)
and less Scrupulous Churchman at this Day. There was in the Apostles Day a
dispute between the converted Jews and Gentiles about the Lawfulness of Eating
such and such Meats, and the necessity of keeping such and such Mosaic
Holy Days or Festivals, the converted Jew thought that the coming of the
Messiah was to Establish the Jewish Polity and Mosaic Institution; therefore,
though he believed in Christ, yet he durst not but observe the Ceremonial Law.
Wherefore he conscienciously kept the Jewish Feasts enjoined by that Law, and
forbore those Meats that were by that Law pronounced Unclean.

The Converted Gentile being better informed, took no notice of the Precepts or
Prohibitions of that Law, but eat any Meats, and took no notice of those
Feasts, Romans 14. 2, 5. This diversity of Opinion and Practice in these two
Parties of Christians, occasioned a sinful Distemper of Mind in both, one
against another; the Distemper of Mind that the converted Gentile sinfully
harbored against his Brother was proud Contempt, as we learn by the Apostle's
prohibition, ver. 3. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not. By
this it appears, that he did despise him; he looked upon him as a scrupulous
humoursome Fool. Brethren, we have a like Case in this our day. Some there are
that think we be under the Gospel tied up to all the Circumstances of Worship,
as strictly as the Jews were heretofore under the Dispensation of Moses, and
that nothing is to admitted in or about the Worship of God, but what is
commanded in Scripture. -- There are others who think that we are not so
strictly tied up under the Gospel, but that if the Direction of Scripture be
observed, as to the Object of Worship, the recommending Mediator, and the
assisting Spirit; if God the Father, Son and Spirit be Worshipped, and we
present our Adorations by the Lord Jesus, in the strength and virtue of the
Holy Spirit; if the Doctrine preached be according to the Analogy of Faith, our
Prayers suitable to the Directory for Prayer commonly called the Lord's Prayer;
if we use no Sacraments but such as Christ has appointed, and all be done in
Sincerity and Truth, Decency and Order unto Edification; they think their
Worship nevertheless acceptable to God; if in it they observe some Ceremonies
of Man's appointing: This is the professed Judgment of the Church of England;
for these are her Words, sc. We think it convenient, that every Country should
use such Ceremonies as they shall think best to the setting forth of God's
Honor and Glory, --

I undertake not to determine at this time which is in the Right here, but this
I say, those Churchmen are to blame that do despise and vilify those who
differ from them. It Is their Sin, if they look upon and treat a Person as an
ignorant humoursome Fool, merely because he scruples those things that they can
dispense with in the Worship of God. It Is Uncharitable and Unchristian for such
to overlook the Substantial Piety, and serious Godliness that may be in such,
merely because they have not the Compliment and Finishing of supposed
Orthodoxness, in the business of Circumstance and Ceremony, of which even the
Church of England her self says; That the keeping or omitting of a Ceremony is
in it self but a small thing. When a Churchman therefore shall in scornful
Pride look a-wry upon an humble, peaceable, pious, just, charitable Christian,
merely because he is a Dissenter from his Ceremonies, he sins against the Law
of Christ, and walks unsuitably to the Principles of his own Church.

5. Uncharitable Judgers are to be reproved. Such, I mean, as allow themselves
to Condemn Persons as Graceless and Profane, upon account of their using such
Liberty as they scruple. This was the fault of the Converted Jew, as we learn
by the Words of the Apostle, Let not him that eats not, judge him that
eats. And this (to speak impartially) is the fault of the Censorious
Dissenter. As the Jews heretofore condemned the Gentile, as a profane wicked
Person for his eating of Meats forbidden by the Ceremonial Law; so some
Dissenters (thanks be to God it is but some) are ready to condemn those of the
Church of England as Profane and Graceless, upon account of their use of the
Church Forms and Liturgy. Those of them that are not visibly Profane and
Irreligious, they censure them as mere Formalists; the best they can think of
them is, that they are sober Moral Persons, which by the way a mere Pagan may
be.

If it be said that they are conscientious and serious in their Way, that they
are frequent at their Devotions. O say these Pragmatical Censurers, it is well
if they don't rest in their Duties, thereby intimating that they fear they do.
-- If their Charity be mentioned, O say these, it may be they think to Merit by
their Alms; Are not the Papists Charitable? Thus they audaciously step into
God's Throne, judging Men's Hearts with which they have nothing to do.

Brethren, I tell you faithfully, this is an evil and wicked thing, it is
against the plain Word of God, which says, Judge not, that ye be not judged,
Matthew. 7. 1. Let us not judge one another any more, Romans 14. 13. It Is a sin
against the Doctrine of my Text: For if the Kingdom of God consists not in
these smaller Matters, Persons of different, yea contrary Opinions and
Persuasions about them, may both (as you have already heard) be the good and
acceptable Subjects of the Lord Redeemer. Wherefore it is a very unrighteous
Thing to condemn a Man as a Disloyal Subject of the Lord Jesus for that which
will not, cannot possibly prove him to be so, let all be said against it which
the nature of the thing will admit. Indeed, such a Spirit is contrary to the
drift of the Gospel, that I have as little Charity for such as for any sort of
Men whatsoever, that carry the Face of Religion in their Lives. Let but two
Texts be considered and compared together, and it will be I think an hard
matter to make it out, how such Censorious Persons can be truly good, or (which
is the same) real Christians: The Texts are, 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2. Though I speak
with the Tongues of Men and Angels, and have not Charity, I am become as
sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal: And though I have the Gift of Prophecy,
and understand all Mysteries, and all Knowledge; and though I have all Faith,
so that I could remove Mountains, and have no Charity, I AM NOTHING. Now
compare ver. 5, 7. where it is said of this Charity among other Things, that it
thinks no evil, but hops all things.

By this Text I am strongly inclined to think, that Censorious Persons (those
that are habitually and prevalently so) do really want that Charity which is
essential to Christianity, and so in the midst of their specious Appearances
and high Pretensions are Nothing. Wherefore methinks Persons should be afraid
of being Guilty of a Sin that brings such a Spot as seems not to be the Spot of
God's Children. (To use the words, Deuteronomy. 32. 5.)

6. Hypocritical Triflers are to be reproved. Such, I mean, as satisfy
themselves with adhering to the little things of Opinion, with the Soul-ruining
neglect of the Life of Practical Godliness. And whose fault is this? Perhaps
you will say, Alas Friends! this is the fault of most amongst all Parties, this
impertinent Devil haunts Church and Meeting House too. By him some are
persuaded to think well of themselves, if they keep their Church, say their
Prayers Sundays and Holidays, receive the Sacrament according to the Church of
England, and never go to Meetings. Others think they must needs go to Heaven if
they be zealous Dissenters, and never hear the Common Prayer; if they join with
the strictest sort, and but get to be Church Members, and zealously cry down
all that differ from them; they think they be as safe from the danger of
Damnation, as those in Noah's Ark were from the danger of Perishing by the
Flood, Thus do some of both sides dream, though they be Ignorant, Earthly,
Sensual, Impenitent, Proud, Wrathful, and unto every good work Reprobate.

Foolish Wretches, how do they mock their God, and cheat their own Souls! How
hateful is their Hypocrisy! They strive for a Ceremony, and neglect the
Substance of Religion; they scruple a Ceremony, and yet live in the Commission
of gross Sins. One he is for Decency and Order, but neglects Sincerity and
Truth. Another he is tooth and nail against Supersttion and Will Worship, and
the same time indulgeth himself in the more hateful and mischievous Sin of
Dissimulation and Hypocrisy. Poor Souls! what will their Opinions avail them in
the Day of their Account, when their Hypocrisy shall be detected and laid open,
and they shall by the Sword of Justice be cut in sunder, and have their Portion
with their Fellow-Hypocrites in Hell! As high as their Confidences are built,
it is certain they must (if they Repent not) fall into the bottomless Pit, where
their Worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched; where there is (Eternally)
weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 24. 51. Mark 9. 44.

I conclude my Discourses on this part of my Text with this one

Exhortation.

To poor weak Christians that are ready to stumble, and be turned out of the
way upon account of the many and various Opinions that there are amongst
Christians at this day. Be you assured, that you may please God, gain his
Favor and Blessing on Earth, glorify him before Men, be happy in your Death,
and be eternally Glorified with him in Heaven hereafter, of which Party of
these differing Christians soever you be. Always provided you Act according to
your Light, and sincerely live those grand Duties which none dispute or
question. That is to say, if you give up your selves to God as to your chief
Good and last End, to love and serve him before all, if you accept the Lord
Jesus for your All-sufficient Savior, and obey and trust him, if you walk
after the Spirit speaking in and by the Scriptures, endeavoring to die unto
the World to Crucify the Flesh and resist the Devil: If you live a Sober,
Righteous, and Godly Life, loving God with all your Heart, and your Neighbor
as your selves, and if you persevere herein unto the end, depending upon the
Merits and Mediation of Christ, for your Pardon and Acceptance, You shall be
Saved, which Party of Protestants soever you side with; or, if you never
trouble your selves with the Disputes or Contests amongst them. Your being of
one Opinion or other as to these smaller Matters, cannot possibly hinder your
eternal Salvation at last, or your comfortable Walking with God here, so you
conscientiously mind the Substance of Religion, wherein all are agreed. For
it is a certain Truth, (I pray you to remember it) That no one Party of
Protestants is so in the Right as to Christian Religion, that the other be
damningly Wrong; for the Controversy amongst them is not about those Things
that are Necessary to Salvation, in these they are All Agreed. Wherefore it is
undoubtedly certain, that a Churchman may be an Holy Man, and be Saved. -- A
Dissenter, of one sort or another (whether Presbyterian, Independent, or
Anabaptist) may be an Holy Man, and be Saved. Yea, they will be such
infallibly, if they live the Religion they profess, I doubt not, but that
Heaven is peopled with all these (though there they be of one Mind.) Wherefore
the question is not, Which is the Way to Heaven, by Church or by Meeting? If it
was, I would boldly say, either is the Way. But the question is, Which is the
nearest, neatest, streightest Way? And here I Will leave every one to judge for
himself. Only this for a Conclusion. I exhort you (having given up your selves
to God by Christ as aforesaid) to put your selves under the Pastoral Care of
such a Ministry, as in your most deliberate Judgment you think best qualified
with Ministerial Gifts and Graces, and most Faithful in the use of them for the
good of Souls, and such as you have found by real and undoubted Experience to
be most useful to you. And when you have made your Choice, remember your Duty,
and in Humility, Meekness and Patience, learn of them, as of your Spiritual
Guides, and submit your selves to them as to your Spiritual Rulers under
Christ, according to the Word; and you will find the Blessing from Heaven
descending upon your Souls in such a manner as will abundantly satisfy you,
that you are going to Heaven, whither you hear in a Church or Meeting House.
For the Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness, and Peace, and
Joy in the Holy Ghost.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
FIrst Page Epistle line 5. penult, for Opinions read Ceremonies. Page 2. line
10. for of r. our. Page 9. line 5. for him r. himself. Page 13. l. 5. penult,
dele them.


