A FEW QUERIES Relating to the Practice of Physic, WITH Remarks upon some of
them.

Modestly proposed to the serious Consideration of MANKIND, IN Order to their
Information how their LIVES and HEALTHS (which are so necessary, and therefore
ought to be dear to them) may be better preserved.

By H. Chamberlen, Physician in Ordinary to the late King Charles the II.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, near the Meeting House in
White-hart-court in Gracious-street, 1694.

A FEW QUERIES Relating to the Practice of Physic, WITH Remarks upon some of
them. Modestly proposed to the serious Consideration of Mankind, etc.
Q 1. WHether every Sickness and indisposition in humane Bodies, as well Acute
as Chronical, does not arise from the change of useful, nutrimental, and
natural humors into vicious; and whether such change is not chiefly, if not
only caused by an Error of some of the six Non-naturals in the sick Patient;
or, if Hereditary, in their Parents?

The Author is inclined to believe, that all Diseases proceed only from the
alteration of Good Humors into Bad; for all Persons may enjoy perfect Health,
if some change within them did not hinder. Nor does it appear to this Author,
that any other entrance for Diseases has been anciently or lately discovered,
besides the said six Non-naturals, which are agreed to be as Follows, 1. Air,
2. Meat and Drink, 3. Motion and Rest, 4. Sleep and Watching, 5. Excretion and
Retention, and lastly, the Passions of the Mind. Under some of which, as
Excretion and Retention, may be justly comprehended, Stinging, Bruising,
Wounding, etc.

2. Whether Sickness, or that preternatural Something, thus introduced, can
ever be removed, till such vitiated Humors shall be either changed again into
good, or expelled the Body?

If there is a third way to free Patients from Diseases, besides Evacuation and
Alteratives; such as know it, will do well to oblige the World with it.

3. Whether these bad Humors can be any more altered and reduced to their
primitive Excellence and Order, than Curds and Whey can be reduced again to
good sweet Milk?

If this be impossible, as the Author is apt to believe it is; then 'twill be
in vain to hope for the recovery of Health by Alteratives: For, though the Body
and Blood can be altered by superinducing natural Juices, as the bad wastes, yet
the bad parts of the Blood, or the ill Humors mixed with it, can never be
changed to any good purpose. And that which probably deludes some into a
contrary Opinion, is, that when Health is restored by insensible Perspiration
or Evacuation by Urine, etc. without any more manifest discharge by Siege Sweat
or Vomiting: It Is presumed though it be no natural consequence that the same
individual bad Humors are totally changed into Good, for life being a
continual Flux, daily wasting and requiring daily supply, it is not to be
doubted, but, as the bad are consumed, Nature is daily furnished with a better
Juice from wholesome Food; so that the bad decaying (which is a sort of
Evacuation) faster than they are again recruited, Health returns of course
after all the vicious Humors have been so consumed. But there has been
farther objected against this Opinion, that Pleurisies have been sometimes
cured by Alteratives only, without Bleeding or other manifest Evacuation; and
that pricked and decayed Wines have been also recovered from their Acidity, etc.
by Alteratives: In answer to which may be offered to second Consideration, that
Non causa pro causa has made many, if not most of the mistakes in the World,
and this probably amongst the rest: For it is not unlikely, but that such
Pleurisies were cured, either by Evacuation, though less manifest, as by Urine
or insensible Perspiration; or else by precipitation or depositing the peccant
matter on a less noble part, separating thereby the Humors from their
Impurities: For, if the whole Mass of Blood had been corrupted, it had been
impossible to mend it, and the Patient must have died; because in this acute
Disease Non dantur induciae. And, when there is only a Separation from the
Blood of the corrupted Humors mixed with it, without any expulsion, it can be
but a truce, or shifting off the present inconvenience, and no cure; a kind of
purging the Blood, but not the whole Body, which still remains affected, though
possibly not after the same manner.

As to the Wines it is certain, that the greatest part of them was no otherwise
Acid, than Water made so with a few drops of Spirit of Vitriol, which are
sometimes cured by an Alkali, or by the heavy parts settling by their own weight
to the Bottom, as new River-water is purified when Muddy; and sometimes by the
help of a Ferment as in compound Liquors, where the lighter parts flying
upward, becoome a Cap or Head, as they call it, on the top to preserve the
Liquor, and the heavier parts are precipitated to the Bottom, leaving the Wine
pure and sound in the Middle; but this change is no other, but a Separation of
the Acid or Noxious parts from the rest of the Wine, which (the Cask still
retaining all the hurtful parts within it, as before, though not in the same
manner and mixture) will upon every the least disturbance be again out of Order.

4. Whether it is possible Health can be restored by any other means than
Evacuation only, either by a natural Crisis, or by Art?

Such as grant the Premises can never dispute this Point; but the following
instance, amongst many others, that might have been quoted, may end the
Controversy, viz. Patients recovering out of the Small Pox, where no Art was
made use of, might have been saved only by a critital Expulsion of all the
peccant matter through the strength of Nature. And, whenever that matter
recoils, or is struck back, and not afterward sufficiently expelled by Nature,
the Patient must die, if Art does not assist to drive it out by Sweat or
otherwise.

5. Whether when Poison is received into the Body, there are not very few, if
any, that dreams of curing such a Patient by only Alteratives? And whether they
do not rather unanimously agree to expel it by all the skilful ways, and with
all the speed possible?

If this be daily practice, as the Author doubts not, the same reason may hold
for Diseases, which are as truly Poisons bred in the Body, as the other that is
taken inwardly, and every way as Dangerous: And as there are degrees of Poison,
so there are of Diseases, some more some less injurious or mortal; but, still
all must be expelled sooner or later, the Weaker as well as the Stronger.

6. Whether in a strict sense there is any such thing as Poison?

Some say Van Helmont was of Opinion there was not, and the Author sees no
cause to differ from him; for, God made all things good and useful to Mankind,
but our folly, and ignorance of the right use and just Dose of many things,
makes their excess Dangerous and sometimes Mortal: Even Roast-beef, Brandy and
Opium in too large Doses surfeit and kill, when Arsenick and Precipitate, if
justly dosed or under dosed, do no hurt, but many times much good. Now that
has only been esteemed Poison, which can kill in small quantities, and not
that which can only kill in great, though they were equally injurious to the
Persons killed by them; nor is there any great difference betwixt Poison bred
in or received into the Body, when equally hurtful, both being preternatural,
and to be expelled, before the Patient can be safe.

7. Whether it is not absolutely necessary for a Physician to be able to
determine skillfully, with respect to Patients, Disease, Age, Strength and Sex,
what Evacuation is most suitable as to Manner, Season, Quantity, and Number?

Hipocrates say, Quo natura tendit tinde, dum Natura movet move, and if
Evacuation only cures, it is fit it should be well understood.

8. Whether a Physician who treats his Patient with as much Art and Diligence
as any other could, omitting nothing requisite, nor directing any thing hurtful
or unnecessary, may justly be blamed, should such a Patient miscarry by some
unexpected dangerous accident, lurking in secret beyond any Man's discovery?

Whenever the like happens, the Physician ought not to be blamed, because it
was not his Fault but his Misfortune, and not within the power of any known Art
to be prevented; for, no Man blames a skillful and industrious Husbandman,
because (after he has cultivated his Land with all the Care and Art
imaginable) his Hopes are blasted, and his Crop destroyed by an unexpected ill
Season. Hence may be observed, that good or ill success alone is not sufficient
to guide our Judgments, but that we must suspend our Censures till well
instructed in every minute circumstance; for the interposition of sundry
Accidents, not always to be foreseen, may much alter the Case; nor must a
Physician by such accidents be frightened into too strict caution, which may be
as prejudicial as too forward Rashness. He that regards the Wind, says
Solomon, shall never Sow; and though all that may happen, deserves mature
consideration; yet if that should hinder Action, Physicians must resolve to sit
still, or do no good. General success in like difficult cases, may direct our
judgment, though it is not advisable to be too forward to censure the success of
Physicians or their Methods, without being very well acquainted with both,
least it prove not only injurious to them, but very prejudicial to such as
might have received benefit from them, had it not been for such Scandalous,
Foolish, or false Reports, which may sometimes unintended injure the reporters
Friends as well as others. No Physician is to be blamed when his Patient dies,
unless his own greater care, or another better skill could have prevented it.

9. Whether any Patient who is likely to live without purging can be too weak
to be relieved by Evacuation? Since, as before proved, no relief can be
reasonably expected without it: And whether the sooner it is submitted to, it is
not the better?

If they are able to live without artificial Relief, and removing their
Disease, they will certainly be much more so, if part of, or all their Disease
shall be removed; obsta principijs, sero medicina paratur, is a known rule and
very fit to be followed.

10. Whether Patients, too weak to be relieved by proper Evacuation, can be
strong enough to recover Health without it?

It is not likely, because that Disease which has reduced them from full
strength to so low a degree of weakness, must certainly if it continues,
increase the weakness, if not destroy the Patient; but, if Purging carries off
most part of the Disease, which weakens the Patient, Nature has the less to
contend with, and consequently may master the remainder, and recover strength:
Therefore a Patient's weakness can be no sufficient argument against
Evacuation, unless the Disease be already quite expelled by Nature, and then
there may be no need of it. For a thinking Soldier will hardly ever judge his
condition the worse for having the numbers of his Enemies lessened, let the
success be good or bad.

11. Whether the most powerful and effectual Evacuations, by some called
violent, are not when discreetly used, the most proper for the weakest
Patients, and to be persisted in with the smallest Intervals of rest.

Certainly they are, and to be continued, if weak Patients have little or no
time to triflle away. The Fatal consequences of timorous and needless delays
ought by all means to be prevented, and Diseases not suffered to increase again
by long respits, as they as certainly do, as Hair and Nails grow after cutting.
If indeed strong Patients squander away some time, they have still enough left
with strength to recover such loss; though such hazards are never commendable;
for seeming weak Diseases have by delays at length killed the strongest
Patients, and where Life and Health are concerned, nothing ought to be put to
an Adventure. The Doses are to be proportioned to the weakness of Patients, but
the Indication is still the same: For Example, if nothing besides a Vomit can
cure some Diseases, the Vomit must be taken in a smaller Dose, than robust
Patients do, or the Sick Person must die.

12. Whether the loss of Strength, occasioned by Diseases, can be ever restored
whilst the Disease continues in the same Vigor? And whether weakness
proceeding from the Operations of Evacuating Remedies, does not usually cease
soon after the Operation is over?

Effects always wait upon their Causes, ablata causa tollitur effectus, and
where no impediment hinders, Nature soon recovers Strength.

13. Whether simple weakness being only an impotency or incapacity of Nature to
perform the necessary duties of Body and Mind, and always free from any sort
of Sickness, Fever, or Pains, else it must be more than simple weakness, may
not be removed by good Diet only?

Probably it may.

14. Whether a weak Patient may not as well hope to recover his perfect Health
without Evacuation, as that he shall grow stronger under his Disease without it?

Neither is very probable, and therefore it is imprudent to venture it. That some
recover without Art, it is certain, but very many do die for want of it, who
might very well have been saved by it, if they had timely applied themselves to
Artists.

15. Whether the benefit a Patient afterward receives by expelling with
artificial Evacuation the morbifique matter, does not abundantly compensate his
present loss of Strength and Spirits?

This is daily confirmed in Patients, that, though they are weakened for the
present by every sort of artificial Evacuation, soon after find sensible relief
and great ease. Ex conferentibus and laedentibus sumuntur indicationes.

16. Whether Patients are not more strengthened by a purge which expells the
Disease which weakens, than by Cordials which do not.

That which removes the weakness is more likely to strengthen than that which
cannot. Impura Corpora quo magis nutrieris eo magis laeseris. The most which
can be expected from Cordials, which do not empty by Sweat or Urine, is a
speedier supply of Spirits to encounter the Disease: though too many of them,
as well as of nourishing Diet, may sooner surfeit and destroy than comfort: And
it is certainly much better to save the Spirits that labor and remove the
Distemper by Evacuation; for fewer Spirits can better vanquish a Disease almost
mastered, than greater plenty can a Disease too mighty for them. Nor is there
any Reason, why Purges and other Evacuations should be so terrible, for they
are but a kind of ferment given to awaken Nature to cooperate. Where violent
Exercise Weakens, rest and moderate refreshment Strengthens; but where Diseases
weaken nothing but their total removal can give Nature afterward an
opportunity to be strengthened by a good Diet, which can signify little or
nothing before.

17. Whether the inactivity, want or dissipation of Spirits, which renders Men
dull, weak and faint, does not proceed either from the Spirits being clogged
with preternatural humors for want of due exercise, or from an unusual expense
of Natural Humors and Animal Spirits; either exhaled by unseasonable
Hot-weather, or consumed by tedious labor or violent exercise, or lastly
wasted by large preternatural, or imprudent Artificial Evacuations?

All Weakness or Faintness without question comes by the want or oppression of
Spirits, which cannot always without help extricate or exert themselves when
fettered or suffocated with ill humors; nor can they continue, if not daily
supplied and increased by good Humors, which often corrupt for want of
suitable Exercise, therefore a Patient must necessarily be faint without new
supplies, when his Spirits have been wasted by any of the forementioned ways.

18. Whether any Patient can be either too old or too young, any more than too
weak or too strong to use Evacuations, whenever there is occasion for them?

Surely none can, for if Patients too old or young may be cured without
Evacuating Medicines, Persons in their prime may also be so cured, and then
away with the Profession; but if they cannot, it is not a tenderness but a
cruelty to refuse them; besides they can but die with Evacuation, and may live,
having a chance for it; when without it in all probability they must die.
Praestat anceps remedium quam nullum; extremis morbis extrema remedia
convenient.

19. Whether the speediest way to restore strength and flesh to Patients
exhausted and emaciated by long Sickness, is not to forbid them strong
nourishing Food, and order them a spare plain Diet, to use exercise and to be
cheerful.

If this proves the best Method, then certainly the common practice of the kind
Ladies and Nurse-keepers, to stuff the Sick with strong Broths, and good
Jellies, must needs be destructive. It is for the most part good things only
hurt; because they being agreeable and very nourishing, soon surfeit before one
is aware.

20. Whether, if no Specific, Cordial, or Alterative Medicine can relieve sick
Patients, and expel their Diseases so well as Vomits, Purges, or other
Evacuations, any Person may be too weak to take them; and whether it is fit any
Patient, though never so strong, should be treated with them, if they can only
weaken and disorder and can do no more, or not so much as the other Remedies?

If in this last part it is true that Vomits, etc. can do no good but trouble
and offend a Patient, then all Physicians are highly to blame, that have ever
prescribed Evacuations; but, there are Millions of instances to prove, that
Evacuations discreetly ordered have not only done no wrong, but abundance more
good, than all other Remedies; for there cannot be one Example given, from the
beginning of the World to this day, of any one Patient, that ever recovered
without some sort of Evacuation Natural or Artificial, the contrary being a
contradiction in Nature not to be supposed.

21. Whether Vomits, or any other evacuating Remedies have often, if ever,
caused or hastened the Death of any Patient; or rather whether it is not always,
or at least for the most part Diseases, which, for want of Vomits, etc. soon
enough or often enough repeated, destroy Mankind?

That thousands of Vomits, and other Evacuations have been given in all Cases,
to all Ages and Sexes, not only without hurt, but also with much benefit, is as
clear as the Sun, and also that Diseases daily kill without the help of
Medicine. Such therefore, as maintain the contrary, will do well to show which
way Vomits or other Evacuations kill, but, unless he can prove that he has
killed as many by Vomits and Purges, as others can prove, they have saved by
them, he will do well to spare his labor. Note also that there can be no more
danger, nor greater sickness in vomiting with a Vomit, than without one; which
few Women with Child, and very sick Persons can avoid or are the worse for.

22. Whether it is not very true, that most die without taking Vomits, tho some
may die that have taken them?

This few, if any will deny.

23. Whether any dies with a Vomit, who could probably have lived longer
without it?

This some may believe, but 'twill be a great service to Mankind if they can
well prove it.

24. Whether very many have not died for want of Vomits, who had most certainly
remained alive, if they had taken them?

This can never be proved, but may be strongly presumed.

25. Whether it is not the cause or morbisick matter still remaining behind,
which is dangerous, protracts the Disease, or hastens the death of the Patient,
and neither natural nor artifical Vomiting, Looseness, nor other Flux, nor
Boils, Pimples, nor other Eruptions whatsoever?

Few suffer by what breaks forth or is Evacuated, but by that which remains
behind.

26. Whether, if Vomits must be given, when there are indications for them, and
no considerable contraindications, they ought not also to be repealed, whilst
the indication so circumstantiated continues, supporting Nature in the
intervals by true Cordials and good Nourishment?

The same reason which directs a Vomit at first, directs repetitions whilst it
continues with reasonable intervals, if nothing new appears to prohibit it.

27. Whether (though Vomits are so very uneasy in their Operation as to make
Patients to apprehend them very dangerous) there is really any more danger in
taking them, than in taking a Caudle or a Cordial?

There is oft-times greater danger in forbearing, than in taking Vomits,
because the Disease may kill, which they may possibly overcome; but to answer
directly, the usual Vomits unless over Dosed, (which is no more than where any
other Medicine is so, and therefore not to be supposed to be given by any
Physician, though of small Experience,) are not dangerous, for neither the
material they are made of is inimical to Nature, nor the action of Vomiting
dangerous; for what must then become of most Sick Persons, Women with Child and
even Newborn Babes, who are all generally inclined to and frequently do Vomit?
Indeed Vomits are so safe, and generally so effectual, that many pretenders to
Physic, cherish these terrible apprehensions of them in their Patients to
discourage them from their use, that so they may keep them the longer in hand,
before they will be cured.

28. Whether Purging, Vomiting, or other Evacuations, usually called Violent,
can be ever so dangerous and uneasy, as Diseases are first and last, or as
ineffectual gentle Medicines and Methods are?

That is, no Physic, judiciously given, can be so dangerous as the Disease,
which gentle and ineffectual Remedies can never lessen nor vanquish; and that
which makes them esteemed violent is the Uneasiness, Sickness, and Gripings in
their Operation, which is effected by only moving the vicious humors, cause of
the Sickness, and therefore ought to be courted and not avoided, since Health
cannot be purchased at a cheaper Rate, or without more uncertainty and longer
time.

29. Whether too long intervals of time, betwixt the repeating Evacuations,
loses not many lives?

Most likely; for the Disease recovers in those spaces as much or more strength
and vigor, than it lost by the preceding Evacuations; but, if indeed Diseases
could have their Progress stopped the while, there might be some pretense for a
delay till the Patient recovered strength; but they having once gotten an
existence, do daily draw to themselves Humors for their support. Thus we
plainly see Corns and Warts to continue and increase many years, and so do
several other Diseases for their time, though not so apparently.

30. Whether the Stomach is not originally, or by Sympathy with some other part
of the Body affected in most Distempers? And whether therefore all cures ought
not to be begun there?

Whilst the offending matter is in the Stomach, and primae viae, it is much the
better and shorter way to expel it by Vomits or Purges, than to drive it
through all the Meanders of the Body out by the Pores. Indeed, where it has
left the primae vivae wholly, and is entered or past the Blood, the safest way
may be to protrude it by sweat; though as long as there are any remains in the
Stomach, notwithstanding part is already past beyond, Vomits and Purges are
most proper and beneficial, and ought to precede Bleeding and Sweating,
because, if the first region is not well cleansed the others must continue
foul; as no Cistern can run clear which comes from a muddy Spring, nor can you
clean an inner Room without fouling again the outward Room, having imprudently
cleaned the outward first; for every part of the Body derives its Nourishment
originally from the Stomach, and an Error committed there can never after be
corrected in any other part; but by sending forth those peccant Humors by the
Pores, though their gross parts can never pass them easily, but may lodge by
the way among the small Vessels and cause Obstructions.

31. Whether, if Patients refuse to continue under cure, and to pursue
Directions till the Disease shall be subdued, it is not probable it will return
again?

If so, then Remedies are not to be neglected, till Dise^^^^ (...) shall be
rooted out, and (...) Health restored; for (...) natural for Diseas^^ (...)
their force, if you (...) ^^^ing before the^ (...) for a Boat (...) Stream to
(...) into it, when you cease to row against it without fastening the Boat.

32. Whether a Fever (being only a greater heat than ordinary unnaturally
kindled in the blood by the admission of bad humors) ought not rather to be
assisted in driving forth such humors, than to be checked by the Jesuit's
Powder or the like?

Most certainly, if the Fever or Ague Fit is not the Disease nor ^^use of it,
as there is great rea^^^ (...) believe, but a strife only (...) ^e expulsive
Faculty and (...) ^^^mours, in order to (...) Sweat, which is (...) by Nature
only. (...) ^ot true, it is (...) never re^^^^ (...) by the strength of Nature
without Art. Now, if all or part of those preternatural Juices had been carried
off by Stool or Vomit, whilst they continued in the primae viae, the Fever had
either been quite overcome, or in a great measure so moderated, that there
would have been the less work for Nature. The Jesuit's Powder seems indeed to
cure an Ague, but oft-times it leaves the Patient in as bad, or a worse
condition of Health than before.

33. Whether it is not possible for the present to extinguish, quiet or qualify
the heat of many Fevers long before the Patient recover his perfect Health, or
even without contributing the least toward it; and whether there does not then
remain matter in the Body like embers raked together, ready for a relapse or
the production of seeming new distempers afterward?

Most Fevers are without doubt daily so quieted by the Jesuits Powder, leaving
the Patient many times in a worse condition without the Fever, than before with
it. And the new Diseases which after appear, are believed but by few to be the
effect of the preceding ill cured Fever, tho a little patience and care to
observe may convince them, that there is scarce an Ague cured by the Jesuits
Powder, without previous or subsequent Evacuation, but is soon followed by a
return of the same, or by a seeming new Distemper; especially Chronical, which
had its Original only from the foregoing Ague.

34. Whether it is not possible with God's blessing to prevent the Raging,
Spreading and Progress of the Plague, and to save many thousands, who in all
probability must have else died in a Plague Year?

If it were not possible, such Magistrates as have made reasonable provision
against it, and such Physicians, who have by their advice encouraged the
Magistrates to do so, have been very ill employed; but the possibility may be
demonstrated almost to a certainty.

35. Whether it is not as much the Magistrates Duty as their Prudence to provide
against the Plague as well as against an Enemy upon an approaching War?

Both the Plague and Sword are esteemed God's Judgments, and if it were not
lawful to provide against the Plague, because it is a Judgment; for the same
reason we ought to make no provision against an Enemy; but the last is allowed
by most part of Mankind, and the same reason justifies the former.

36. Whether the many Persons murdered in Plague Years by Nurses, or dying for
want of Care, Skill, Food, or Assistance, could not have been saved alive by a
suitable Provision?

The Truth of this will not be denied; and though all infected with the Plague
were under a necessity of dying as they are not, yet if the abovementioned
might with care be saved, they well deserve it.

37. Whether most infected with the Plague, receive it not from others?

If this is granted, then a seasonable and timely separating the whole from the
sick might save them from such infection; so that though all infected were
incurable, all the whole by a prudent and skillful foresight may probably
escape the infection and live.

38. Whether most of the Cities, infected in these Northern Countries, have not
the Plague brought to them by infected Persons or Goods from Abroad, instead of
receiving it from a pestilential Air, as many Believe?

If it were not communicated by contact, how came it to pass, that in the last
great Plague in England, there were forty Towns infected by Persons or Goods,
known to be brought from London, for any one that had neither; and if it
proceeded from the Air, 'twas wonderful how Mortclack could be so much
Infected, and Richmond and Barnes, but a mile on each side from it, but very
little; besides Rains and variable Winds, do always cleanse and change the Air?

39. Whether any Disease could last long, if not daily supplied from the Body,
as Hair and Nails are?

There is little reason to think it would: But Diseases once existing have a
vegetative life like Plants, and will according to their respective Kinds and
Duration, unless interrupted by Art or Nature, support themselves by attracting
Nourishment out of the Body; and this was apparent in a Patient the Author had
many years ago, and recovered, after she had been wasted by a looseness of
Three Years standing, in which time she must have discharged by Stool, at but
half a pound a day, above 547 pound, which was near five times her own weight;
if therefore it had not been supplied, it must either have ended the Patient or
it self in few Months.

40. Whether all such cures must not fail that are not as justly proportioned
to the Disease, as to the strength of the Patient?

Few will doubt but they must; for, suppose an ounce of peccant matter to be
daily prepared, and no more emptyed either by Nature or the Remedy, the Disease
must necessarily remain in the same state; but if less be emptied, the Disease
must increase; if more, it must mathematically have an End. What is further to
be considered, is, how to avoid making too much have for the Patient's
strength, with violent Remedies so called, or large Doses; or too little to
save his life; for when Diseases ride post, Remedies must not follow a snails
pace, curable Diseases must be headed and outrun according to their pace.
Extremis morbis extrema remedia convenient.

41. Whether (when vicious humors received, bred, or altered within the Body,
happen to be put into motion, either by their quantity, quality, or other
accident) the expulsive faculty is not thereby excited, without ceasing or by
fits, to drive them from one part to another, till they shall be either quite
expelled, or the remainder thrown upon some outward or ignoble part, where it
becomes a settled Pain, Tumor, Ulcer, Fistula or the like, unless Death ends
the strife before.

It is evident how small a matter is uneasy to Nature, a Moat in the Eye and a
small Fiber between the Teeth gives great disturbance, even our natural Humors
out of their proper Vessels, as extravasated Blood, as well as the
preternatural Humors, puts Nature upon an endeavor to free it self, from what
can be no longer useful to it, and thus are both Acute and Chronical Distempers
formed, and that which continues their periods, is either the Weakness or
Situation of the part, or a preternatural Ferment lodged in it, which is a
prepared matter like tinder ready to catch Fire, as soon as any Foreign spark
falls on it.

42. Whether, before a Patient recovers, many ill fits do not return in the
course of a Disease; and whether, before a patient dies, he has not many lucid
Intervals?

This is so known to practitioners that it must not be denied, therefore the
first ought not to minister fear or despair if other circumstances are good;
nor the last to give hopes when they are not.

43. Whether Health is not preserved by the several fluids or humors of the
Body in a natural or healthy State; and Sickness introduced by like fluids in a
preternatural or unhealthy State?

This seems to be self-evident.

44. Whether the Spirits, or finer parts of those Natural Fluids, are not
active for our preservation; and the Spirits or finer parts of the
preternatural Fluids as active for our Destruction?

This appears no less manifest than the last.

45. Whether the natural Fluids are not preserved and supplied by a right use
of the Six Nonnaturals; and the preternatural introduced by a wrong use or
abuse of the same Non-naturals?

This few will deny.

46. Whether the proportion of strength and quantity of good animal Spirits is
not according to the quantity of the natural Humors; and whether the quantity
of evil Spirits and their activity and contrarity to our Natures is not
proportionable to the quantity of preternatural humors?

If this be granted, as it cannot well be denied, then must the Duration,
Power, and Danger of Diseases with their extent to part or all the body bear
exact proportion with the quantity of such preternatural Humors.

47. Whether as long as there is life, there is not hopes, and whether any
Remedy is not better than none?

Dum spiro spero, praestat anceps remedium quam nullum. For Patients have been
reduced to that desperate Condition in the Opinion of Bystanders, as no
appearance of life remained, and yet by God's blessing directing to the right
means, they have beyond hopes recovered, so that none ought to be forsaken
before they are dead; besides, what hurt can there be to try to save a Patient
tho the greatness or progress of the Disease should give little Encouragement;
they can but die? Tentare non nocet. Many who in all appearance were past
Hopes, are now alive and well, and must certainly have died, had not proper
means been used in Season.

48. Whether a frequent unreasonable fancy, if not very accidental and
occasional, is not as much a Disease requiring help, as a Fever or the Scurvy?

The Archbishop of York in his Sermon of the Government of the Thoughts, fully
grants this quere saying, That he doubts not but extravagant Fancies are as
properly a bodily Disease, as a Fever or Fits of the Falling Sickness. Madness
is only extravagant Fancies, and the Spleen but some degrees below it; if
therefore the Spleen and Madness can be cured, why not Fancies, which, though a
Disease, is much less.

49. Whether Persons in perfect Health ought ever to take Physic, or Purge;
and whether the Unhealthy ought to neglect it one Moment?

Health ad pondus is not to be expected on Earth, but Health ad justitiam may,
and such are to take no Purging Physic, except in a visible Plethora; because
it will certainly carry off some Humors which ought not, and protempore weaken
the Patient by wasting without any necessity or benefit so many of his Spirits,
there being no ill Humors to be workt upon which might have recompensed that
loss and trouble; but on the other side, a sick Patient ought to lose no time
in hopes of being well to Morrow, which deceives many out of then lives; for
the sooner they begin, the sooner they will be cured, and the less serves turn,
and they recover with much greater speed and certainty, and less charge than if
they delay till they become weak and the Disease strong.

50. Whether it is not sufficient that Medicaments are beneficial, without
expecting they should be either easy in Operation or pleasant in Taste?

For Medicaments were made for necessity only and not delight, though Food was
made for both; because we cannot live without Food: But, if Mankind was wise
enough to follow in these matters the dictates of Nature, there would be little
need of Physic; so that it is God's Mercy we can have our Healths upon any
Terms, and the worse the better for a punishment to make us wise and wary to
preserve our Healths by Moderation and a Regular Life.

51. Whether it is not as vain to expect to be freed from Diseases without Pain
or Sorrow, as for a Woman to expect to be delivered of her Children without
Pain?

Whatever satisfaction there may be in their Causes, the Proverb tells us,
Sweet Meet must have sour Sauce; so that which is sweet in the Mouth may be
bitter in the Belly, and for want of true Wisdom (which is a faculty of
discerning remote consequences beyond the deceitful appearance of things) most
People are ensnared to their ruin; for Evils have Beautiful outsides but
rotten insides; when Good has comfort in the end, though not outwardly so
charmingly adorned.

52. Whether it is not very prudent, to study to preserve our Healths, to
recover it the shortest and safest way when lost, and to submit (before it is
too late) to stronger means, when gentle are insufficient?

If Health is the most precious Jewel next the Soul, the wise, that know it,
will both study to preserve and recover it, and always use the means though
seemingly violent by which they may attain their end with greatest certainty.

53. Whether violent Medicines ought to be neglected or their use delayed where
gentle will prove ineffectual and endanger a Patient?

If gentle Medicines are equally profitable, it is imprudent to use the violent;
but, where they are not, it is as imprudent to neglect them; extremis morbis
extrema remedia convenient. But much of this doubt would be solved, if the word
(Violent) were well understood; some mean dangerous by it, and then such
Medicines deserve always to be rejected; others powerful and effectual, and
then they ought never to be out of use; for it is always better to make use of
violent Medicines that will certainly cure, than to trust to the weaker and
lose time with hazard to the Patient.

54. Whether all Persons must not either Labor, Fast, use Physic, or be Sick?

For such as will not Exercise, must eat Sparingly, and if they will do neither,
they must take Physic or be Sick, unless they have by the benefit of Nature,
Evacuations proportionable to their Feeding and Sloth. The following rule of
Health is not contemptible Eat when Hungry, Drink being Thirsty, Sleep when
Drowsy, and be never Idle.

55. Whether great Feeders, if not as great Laborers, must not daily grow from
a Horse-load to a Cart-load, or empty a Barrel of Excrements?

For whatever is not discharged in proportion to what is received, must still
remain behind, either for Fat, Diseases, or both.

56. Whether it is not the peccant matter, moved by the Physic, and not the
Physic, which in Purging and Vomiting, gripes and makes the Patient so Sick?

For the same matter gives the like Sickness and Pain, when moved by Nature
without Physic; and Physic gives little or no disturbance, when there is no
diseased matter in the Body or none moved by it; Seneca says, Remedia nulla
sunt tam salutaria, quam quae faciunt dolorem. It must needs therefore be a
sign, when Evacuating Physic neither gripes nor indisposeth, that either the
Patient needed none, or that what was taken, was too weak and improper to do
him any good.

57. Whether it is not much better to give strong and powerful Remedies at first
whilst the Patient is vigorous, and the Disease weak, than to delay so long
with gentle Medicines, as is too frequently practiced, till the Disease is
grown strong and the Patient feeble?

Where the Disease cannot certainly be overcome with gentle means, it is never
prudent to hazard life by delay, whereby many a Patient has been lost who
might have been saved by an earlier application of true and powerful Remedies.
Post est occasio calva, and sero Medicina paratur.

58. Whether Soldiers and Seamen, seasoned by the recovery out of epidemical
Distempers, attending Camps and Fleets, are not afterward less subject to fall
ill again by disorders, and usually continue in Health a long time after?

The reason for this seems to be, that such Diseases for the most part consume
the greatest part of, if not all, the preternatural Humors at that time in the
Body; and it will require again some considerable time before a sufficient
quantity can be collected for another Sickness. Besides, Diseases usually fall
on the Men, before custom and use has hardened them; so that every little
unusual Disorder, which prejudiced them at first, has afterward no power over
them.

59. Whether any Flux whatsoever had better be stopped in the beginning with
Astringent Remedies, or be cured by removing the cause with Evacuation?

If no Flux or preternatural Eruption can happen, but by something received
into the body of a loosening or purging quality; or else by the strength of
Nature, endeavoring to free its self of some offending Humors, the first if
it cease not of its self, must be removed by some other evacuant the same way
or some other; the last if nature proves insufficient to save it self by a
critical Evacuation, must have the cause removed by artificial cleansing, and
not be kept in to a worse purpose by Astringents.

60. Whether there is not the same reason and necessity for the Sick to take
Physic, as for the Healthy food?

Tho some may live many days without Food and not be starved, and some Sick
may live without Physic, and it may be, recover; yet none in their wits will
voluntarily and knowingly make the experiment, unless they either want Money or
Faith in Physic, for Medicine is as much Food for the Sick, as Food is
Medicine for the Hungry.

61. Whether God Almighty has not as well furnished the World with Medicines
for the Sick, as with Food for the Hungry?

God made nothing in vain; every Herb, Animal, and Mineral have their distinct
uses, and properties; and it is the duty of Physicians diligently to examine,
and carefully to observe what they are, and how they may be best applied for
the service of Mankind, which is truly called the Art of Physic, and came down
from Heaven.

62. Whether this Art of Physic, or a right knowledge of Nature, and skill in
Medicines with their various Operations in Humane Bodies, under different
circumstances and affects, is not sometimes better acquired by faithful
Instruction, by diligent Observation, and plain demonstration by Practice, than
always by hard Study and Reading only?

If Reading and Study, without Instruction and Practice, were the best and only
Method of attaining to the highest knowledge in Physic, then ought all
Persons, that intend to follow the Practice, to continue at least Fifty or
Sixty Years studying in the University, and, when they shall have Read and
digested all the Physical Authors and formed to themselves the best Method of
Practice out of the confused heap of Contradictions to be met with amongst
them, which is next to impossible, let them then commence Practice: But this at
best can be but like a Traveller without a Guide, wandering up and down to the
hazard of poor Men's lives. When under the conduct of an able Instructor, the
shortest and best ways are Trodden, and the Dangerous and Tedious avoided, and
the ready way learnt for the future.

63. Whether every Doctor in Physic is an able Physician? And whether he that
has most Practice is always the Ablest?

If Medicus est qui sanat, non qui garrit, and sanitas est finis Medicinae, non
lucrum; Then he must always be the best Physician that cures most in the same
Number and like Cases, and not he that does not, though he has taken all his
Degrees and the other none; and for such as are not well instructed, they ought
to spend some longer time under the care of an Ancient Doctor of Skill and
Experience, that they may not verify the Proverb, That young Physicians must
kill such a Number, before they can be fit for Practice. Again, if bread is not
to the wise, etc. it does not then always follow, that he, who has most
Practice, is the Skilfullest: For, there are many little Artifices to bring Men
into Practice, as Bribes, tatling Gossips, etc. which are much more effectual
than the greatest Skill without their Assistance, and which no skillful
Physician will stoop to use, when on the contrary Ignorant, Mercenary
Pretenders diligently courts them.

64. Whether it is not honester to prognosticate the Truth, at least to Friends
and Bystanders, though not always to the Patient; than constantly to foretell
Danger, even when none appears?

Physicians of mighty Prudence and small Integrity ever gain by Frightful
Prognostics; for, if the Patient dies, their early Prognostic gives them
great Reputation for knowing so long before, what must come to pass at last,
and if the Patient recovers, the cure is the more Miraculous, because the
condition was so Desperate.

65. Whether Women with Child, and in Childbed may not safely, when the
Disease requires, both Vomit, Bleed and Purge, provided it be with good Caution?

It Is very probable, that the Disease which would have killed them for want of
those Operations, when not with Child, or in Childbed, would much sooner do it
in both these cases; because Nature has not only the strength and power of the
Disease, but the hazardous circumstance of a great Belly, or the weakness of
Childbed to struggle with.

66. Whether a Physician should be chosen for Favor and Affection; or for his
Skill and Integrity?

Wise men choose their Physicians only for the help they expect from them in
time of need, which they could have no reason to hope for, if they were not
both able and honest. A skillful Turk is preferable to an ignorant Christian.

67. Whether the practice of Physic is not of late become more a Trade or
Profession to gain a Livelihood, than an Art to restore Health and save Lives?

The present Methods of Practice seem to be accommodated rather to answer the
first part of the Quere, than the last.

68. Whether Anatomy and Astrology, the first absolutely necessary for a
Surgeon, and both very ornamental to a Physician, can better qualify him for
the healing of inward Diseases, than Fidling can qualify a Barber for Shaving.

It would be a good Service to the Public for any to undertake to demonstrate
plainly, wherein either helps the cure of any one inward Distemper; because
many Students lose too much time in these inquiries, which might have been
better spent in observing the Practice of Physic and some great Practitioners;
and also because many are apt to put too great a value, as most necessary, when
in comparison of other more essential requisits to a Physician, they seem but
trifles.

69. Whether any can be so well qualified to Treat of Diseases, their Nature,
Cause and Cure, as a Physician of long Experience, and much Observation?

Young Physicians should not then be forward to attempt this Province.

70. Whether success does not ever attend the Seasonable use of proper means?

Then, when Success is wanted, it is because the wrong means were mis-taken for
the right, or the right too late applied, or misapplyed.

71. Whether, as often as God blesses Persons or things with Success, he does
not direct to the seasonable use of means proper to the end aimed at and
expected?

To expect God's Blessing without the use of proper means, is not to trust, but
to tempt God; His blessing never turns Stone and Sand into good Food and
Nourishment, nor preserves any from drowning, who presumes to walk upon the Sea
from Dover to Callais; things improbable may, by God's Blessing, answer a Man's
Expectation, as a Man in necessity may sometimes cross to Calais in a Wherry,
or rotten Vessel, and Escape: But to undertake impossibilities is affronting,
not trusting the Deity.

72. Whether it is better for a Physician to be a Knave and increase his
Practice by humouring the Fools and letting them die their own way; or to be
honest and lessen his practice in saving them with methods displeasing, because
really there are no other can help them.

An ingenious Gentleman was pleased to say upon this, That it is better for the
Patient, the Physician should be honest; tho it is better for the Physician to
be a Knave.

73. Whether the Practice of Physic does not very much want a just and due
Regulation, and is not capable of great improvements for the benefit of
Mankind? And whether it does not well deserve such Reformation, since it
concerns Life and Health, the dearest earthly enjoyments?

If the Government would undertake this task, besides the charity to Mankind,
it would wonderfully increase their own Glory, Riches, and Power by the
increase of Subjects, in saving so many more lives. And that the Government
might not be persuaded, they are not fit for such an Undertaking, they may
please to consider it was first the Government, that constituted a College of
Physicians, which they would never have done, had they not been able to judge
of the usefulness of the Art, and it is as much in their Capacity, as their
Power to reform the Abuses, even as it is in Judges to determine Differences in
matters of the same Trade, amongst the members of the Trade, when the Arguments
of both sides are brought and argued before them. This would give a more
faithful account of the Abilities of Physicians than common fame now does,
wherein Interest and Affection generally rules.

74. Whether there can be contrived (if the Government please) any just and
proper Test or Standard whereby to try the several Abilities of Physicians much
more truly and certainly than any we have at present?

This were at least to be wished, if there were no hopes to reduce it to
practice, for not to know how to distinguish the skilful Physicians from the
ignorant is next to having none, for want of which most wander without a Guide,
and with the Proverb, sooner light on a Snake than an Eel, there being so many
pretenders for any one truly qualified for the Practice. Wrong ways are not
wanting to misguide Patients, as common fame, which usually proves a Liar; some
few mercenary Apothecaries, Midwives, and Nurses, who discredit the rest, by
preferring their private gain to the Patients welfare: like the Porters at
Billings-gate, who prefer the Oisters of that Boat they ply for though they
really stink, before all others, that are truly good, for no other reason than
their own Gain. Faction, Party, and the fractions of Religion; Relation,
Acquaintance, and good Fellowship; Time and Chance; together with a Plausible,
Fawning and Flattering behavior; a good faculty of Gossiping, and using cramp
Words; the reputation of a Scholar, or Traveller, though it were but very
little to purpose; and in fine any thing, but real skill, which slights all
indirect Artifices, finds not many just and fit Judges, and therefore,
straggling in the Dark, but few have the good fortune to meet it. There are
commonly two other previous Tests, the first at the University, whether fit to
be made a Doctor, the last at the College, whether fit to be made a Member; but
neither of these reach the true and necessary Qualifications of a Physician,
which is the thing wanted and now desired.

75. Whether it is not a necessary Duty of a Physician to consider diligently
the Patients Strength as well as his Disease, and so to adapt the Remedies, as
they be neither too strong for the sick Patient, nor too weak to do them good?

Cito tuto and jucunde, is an old known Rule in Physic, in which this duty is
certainly included and always observed by a good Physician; for as, on the one
hand, a Medicine too strong may destroy a Patient: So, on the other, one too
weak may let them die, which differs little to the Patient. An Eminent Doctor
long since Dead, had, in the absence of the Author, prescribed a Course for a
person of great Quality's young Child: upon the Author's return he gave (being
demanded) the following Opinion of it, That the prescription was proper to the
Disease, but not well accommodated to the particular case of the Child, for the
Method could not take effect in less than a Fortnight, and the Child would die
in two days, as it did. This Query is thought necessary to be here inserted;
because, no caution is so much urged by the Relations and Bystanders, as to
regard the Patients strength, which is altogether needless to good Physicians,
and very prejudicial oft-times in discouraging them to proceed as they ought.
Riverius observing the many mischiefs by Women's Gossiping, cannot forbear
taking notice of it in these Words, Nostratium mulierum nequitia, omnes
infaustos eventus Remediis ascribentium, efficit, ut etiam prudentiores medici
metu calumniae ab utilissimis interdum abstineant.

76. Whether the most effectual Method to sweeten the Blood, so much and often
desired by many, is not to carry off by Evacuation, that which sowres and
spoils it?

The remarks upon the third Query may not impertinently be here considered. All
the sweetners in vogue, either purge by Urine, Sweat or insensible
Perspiration, as Tunbridge, Spaw, Sarsa, crude Antimony, Pearl, Asses Milk,
etc. or else it is the work of Air and Time, though Remedies often have the
credit of the Cure.

77. Whether the mineral Waters sweeten the Blood by some specific quality, or
not rather by a purging or diuretic quality?

We are certain they do this last, the other is not so apparent.

78. Whether the Mineral Waters abstracted from Air, Exercise, Company, and the
like, are in any respect more effectual or convenient, than other Remedies
prepared by Apothecaries, and formerly more in use?

It is certain the great quantity required to make them effectual is none of
their best Qualifications, they may distend the part, and over cool too much,
cause Cholicks, and Convulsions; and as all other Remedies are varied to the
Patients case, so here you must diligently inquire, whether the Patients case
will fit the Waters, which it is most certain all that go thither do not.

79. Whether, to make a right Judgment of the Waters for the public Benefit, a
Register ought not to be kept by a qualified Person, of the Diseases and
Inconveniences of all that drink the several Waters; of the accidents that
happen in the drinking them, and the success and health of the Patient for at
least six Months after?

By this means there would be a true History of the Cures, to inform the
judgment of Physicians much better, which can only by chance now direct the
Patient right, and consequently 'twould prove much for the Patients advantage.

80. Whether a Cure may not be wrought by a course of Physic, some weeks
before the Patient plainly perceives it?

It Is as reasonable to judge it may, as for Diseases not to appear till long
after the occasion given, which causes it, and of this there are many
Examples. A Cancer in the Breast is not found in some Years after a Blow given,
which was the cause. A Woman may not miscarry, in some Weeks after a Fright,
which occasioned it. And it is this which makes so many mistakes, both of the
Causes and Cures of Distempers. That ofttimes cured the Patient, which he
believed would kill him, and a Cordial had the credit, which contributed
nothing to it. The last Physician and Medicine commonly has the Reputation of
curing though it was the first that did it indeed. If this were not so, there
could never have been so many cures for a Toothache, which certainly fail the
next time they are tried; but, happening to be applied, when the pain was going
off for the present (as no Distemper though never so violent, but has
Remissions if not Periods) they being the last applied were recorded for the
cure, when any other at that time, must have had the same good Success.

81. Whether more Patients have not died by not hindering, or not removing the
Disease with proper and seasonable Evacuations, than by attempting to remove
them with Evacuating Remedies?

Most Persons that die before extreme old Age, might by a natural possibility
have had their lives prolonged to Old Age. To Moral possibility many things
must concur, as the Obedience and Wisdom of the Patient, the Skill, Care, and
Honesty of the Physician, besides outward accidents, as Murder, Drowning, the
falling of a House, and infinite others, without the Power of either Physician
or Patient. V. the 21 Query.

82. Whether the Jesuit's Powder makes not double work for the Doctor?

Without doubt, his first Business is to cure the Ague with it; the next to
cure the Patient of it.

83. Whether most Fevers do not take their rise from the primae viae?

Most certainly, for though the Air was Pestilential, or the passions
Extravagant, if there were not suitable matter treasured up in the primae viae,
no sort of Fever would ensue.

84. Whether, if Fevers begin in the primae viae, and are maintained from
thence, Bleeding can be so proper a Remedy as Vomiting or Purging; or whether
it is necessary at all to Bleed, or fit to begin with it?

Whatever is seated in the primae viae is sooner and easier expelled by Vomit
and Stool. It may be often convenient to bleed in Fevers, tho it is but seldom
necessary: But it seems preposterous to begin the cure of any Fever with
Bleeding except a Plethora.

85. Whether Patients are not more weakened by Bleeding than by Vomit or Purge?

If the animal Spirits arise immediately out of the Blood, as it is generally
agreed, and that they give strength, then it is most probable there are more
Spirits contained in an ounce of Blood, than in an ounce of the expelled
Excrements.

86. Whether it is not highly reasonable to believe, that Choler is the cause
of the Disease, and Vomiting the cure; when Patients, that are very Sick, are
wonderfully easied and relieved, after having Vomited of themselves without
Medicines a quantity of Green, Yellow, or Black Choler?

This scarce deserves a Dispute, since there is seldom a sick Person, but has
experimentally found a manifest relief after spontaneous Vomiting, though very
dangerously ill before. And so, as often as they Vomit, they are sensible of a
temporary ease, which deserves their careful observation to convince them of
the Truth hereof.

87. Whether every powerful Antidote against Poison does not plentifully
operate, either by Vomiting, Purging, or Sweating, and by driving out Botches,
Blanes, Soars, or Swellings, all which are manifest Evacuations?

88. Whether a Patients weakness proceeds not from the want of homogeneal
Matter, or natural Humors for the Spirits to dwell and delight in, wasted by
preceding or present Diseases, or by natural or critical Evacuations?

89. Whether Men, after being tired with hard labor, are not for the present
Weakened, by Emptying or Wasting of so much Humor and Spirits by Sweat through
the Pores, which competent rest and food supply again?

90. Whether any of the last Thirty Years discoveries, or pretended
improvements in Physic, Chemistry, or Anatomy have enabled Physicians to cure
one Disease more, or any one sooner, safer, or easier than formerly. Or rather
whether, being trusted to, they have not delayed, if not frustrated the cure of
many, helped before by old Methods.

Fluxing with Mercury was both an invention about an hundred Years since, and a
real improvement: But what have we got by Spirit of Sal Armoniack, Hartshorn
or Goddard's Drops? What benefits appear by the modern use of Steel or Opium
more than formerly? What do the mineral Waters, which Whey and Diet Drinks
could not? and there may be added, What mighty good can the Jesuit's Powder
boast of to compensate the many mischiefs it has caused? Agues were formerly
cured, so as it became a Proverb, to be Physic for a King: But now they are so
cured, as to plague the Patient many Months and Years after, if not shorten his
days.

91. Whether to begin with the Theory, and after proceed to Practice, is not a
preposterous and unnatural way of Teaching, or learning any thing?

Languages are naturally acquired by Practice, and Grammars are formed
afterward. All ordinary people learn foreign Languages by practice abroad, and
not by Rule. Every Mechanic is taught his Handicraft by Practice, and such, as
labor at them by Speculation, bungle always at the Practice: The Lawyers join
the Practice with the Theory, by spending some time in the practice with an
Attorney, or by frequenting the Courts, Assizes, and Sessions. Skill in Physic
is best acquired by Education in the Practice under an Eminent Physician. Some
of our great Men had that Advantage. Besides the use of Rules is more to
preserve the memory of what we have seen and read, and to confirm our Opinions,
they being drawn from the practice of many Physicians. Agendo discis agere.

92. Whether any Physician or others ought, considering the many contingences
in humane affairs, to tie themselves up so strictly to rules or Method, tho
never so well established; as not to depart from the same upon any accident or
success whatsoever?

Pro re nata is a rule in Physic, it is therefore presumed, an honest Physician
will always govern himself with judgment and caution according to Accidents and
Variety of Circumstances.

93. Whether perfect Health does not deserve to be purchased, though upon its
own unacceptable Terms?

No doubt, unless People could be persuaded, they might recover it as well upon
their own pleasing Conditions. But, since these desirable methods cannot
possibly answer any Man's wishes, how much are they to blame, who deceive
Patients to the great hazard of Life and Health, with such false plausible
pretenses?

94. Whether it is not unreasonable to blame a Physician for not curing his
Patient when he would, neither take what was prescribed, nor according to
direction?

This seems to be one of the greatest hardships, that can befall Physicians in
their Practice, to be condemned by incompetent Judges, when innocent; and
sometimes by strangers, who know nothing of the matter, but by imperfect
hearsay, at the same time, when the Friends present are well satisfied, there
is no cause of blame. To this purpose a most ingenious Lady of high Quality was
pleased to ask a Physician upon making this complaint, Whether he had never
been commended, when he did not deserve it, to which, being granted by him, she
was pleased to Reply, You must set one against the other, which, tho it was a
most witty Repartee, is far from being equal; for one adversary shall do you
more hurt, than ten Friends can do you good.

95. Whether wise Men do lazily believe all they hear, or do not rather
critically examine the truth of it, especially if it is of so great moment as
well to deserve the trouble?

Some men despise all that comes from others; some will not spare time from
their pleasures, tho to save themselves, and the Nation; and some out of
modesty distrust their own parts; all these commonly resign up themselves, and
are led implicitly by such as they have once an esteem of: but wise Men will
never take any thing of moment upon trust, but will labor, till masters of it,
and then as it deserves either reject or approve and encourage it.

96. Whether it is possible to discover by the Urine, that the Patient keeps a
Coach?

Tho the inspection of Urines is of great use to a Physician, by which much may
be discerned for the benefit of the Patient, and therefore not fit to be laid
aside; Yet all, that foolish People inquire after and expect, is as far from
being thereby known, as whether the Patient keeps Mares or Horses for their
Coach.

97. Whether is the more desirable qualification in a Physician, skill or the
usual Policy exercised in Practice?

The first makes a Doctor able to serve his Patient; the last hinders him from
being willing, except when he finds it his interest; therefore (when it appears
better for him to let Patients die their own way with comfortable Cordials; or
at least to struggle with the Disease without true help to the manifest hazard
of their Lives, than to save them with Medicines in Taste, Operation or their,
prejudice disagreable to their Humors and Fancy) his Policy makes his skill
and integrity to submit to his interest, and to prescribe something, tho very
insignificant, to amuse the Friends, that they may not think him careless and
idle; and then fight Dog fight Bear: fight Nature fight Disease; and, if it
succeeds well, the Physician has the Credit and the more Money, because cures
by Nature are not so soon wrought as by Art. And, if ill, he yet preserves the
Reputation of a Careful, Tender Hearted, Safe Doctor, and is not in the least
blamed.

This indeed is a common, but not a very honest way of proceeding, occasioned
at first by the Patient's Folly, and continued after by the Doctor's Cunning,
not easily tempted to Sacrifice his Reputation to the censures of an unthinking
People, that do not, and hardly ever will, understand their own good.

98. Whether the same Reason which persuades many there is an Antidote against
every Poison, may not as well convince them, there is a Remedy in Nature for
every Evil: only we want skill to discover the Remedies, at least, to apply
them in due Season.

99. Whether it is not safer for a Doctor to let his Patien^s die their own way
with a gentle wrong Method, than to endeavor to help them with a rough right
one, and to miss?

It Is very probable it is, for the gentle method displeases none, and the
Doctor, though he never endeavored to save the Patient, still continues his
Interest and Credit in the Family, because the Patient and Friends believe he
did, not being able to judge; but on the other hand, the Doctor, that
endeavors to save, and misses, shall be esteemed a murderer, because of the
seeming violent Medicines used and be discarded and hated, though he used the
best skill then known to save the Patient.

A PROPOSAL For the better Securing of HEALTH, Intended in the Year, 1689. and
still ready to be Humbly offered to the Consideration of the Honorable Houses
of Parliament.
THe Bills of Mortality, as well as the many poor Diseased, have given some a
just occasion to Reflect on the great Numbers which Annually Die within the
City of London, and parts adjacent, comprised in the Weekly Bills of Mortality;
whereof very many, by God's Blessing upon the true Methods of the Art of
Physic, and an early application for Help, might in all probability have been
preserved alive.

Therefore, in order to so good and great an End, it is humbly proposed, that a
more complete practical Constitution of Physic according to the following
Schem, may be upon rational Demonstration Established; whereby Care may be
taken, that all Sick, as well Poor as Rich, shall be Advised and Visited, which
needful, by Approved, Skillful Physicians, and Surgeons; and furnished with
necessary Medicines in all Diseases, for a small yearly certain sum Assessed
upon each House, not exceeding for the greatest Family, nor under for the
meanest, that are not Objects of Charity: Which respective Sums will not be the
third part of what is now spent, only in Apothecaries Bills in a Healthy Year.
And for this every Individual Person of the Family, as well the Lodger and
Servant; as Master, Mistress and Children, shall, when there is occasion, be
sufficiently accommodated: Whereas many at present miserably perish without the
least Care, and for want of timely and skilful Assistance. In short, it is
proposed to serve all the Families, Rich and Poor, Little and Great, within the
City and parts adjacent, much better and cheaper than at present, with Visits,
Advice, Medicine, and Surgery.

It is also further humbly offered, That effectual Care be taken that the Laws
already in being may be revised and amended, which provide for the Sale of
wholesome Flesh in the Markets; and that Bread may be well Baked; Wine not
Sophisticated; Beer well Brewed; and the Houses and Streets well cleansed from
Dirt and Filth: All these being very common causes of Diseases and Death.

This Constitution may consist of the following Members, more or fewer, as the
City Occasions and Necessities may require.
First, Ten Noble Curatores, both to Protect and visit the College.

Secondly, Physicians.
One Super-Intendent or President. Two Sub-Intendents. Three Senior Heads of
the College Four Junior Heads. Fourteen Senior Visitors. Seven Principal
Secretaries. Fourteen Junior Visitors. Seven Sub-secretaries. Forty two Chief
Itinerants. Forty nine Junior Itinerants. Seven Senior Amanuenses. Fourteen
Junior Amanuenses. In all One Hundred Sixty Four.
Of this Number, besides the three Intendents in the chief College in
Warwick Lane, there will be Twenty Three Physicians more: As also Twenty Three
in each other the Six Colleges. Seven Colleges being thought at present more
than sufficient to serve the Bills of Mortality, with Convenience and Ease to
the Inhabitants thereof: In each of which Colleges there are as follows.

One Master, Head or Principal. Two Senior Visitors. Two Junior Visitors. One
Principal Secretary. One Sub-secretary. Six Senior Itinerants. Seven Junior
Itinerants. One Senior Amanuensis. Two Junior Amanuenses. In all Twenty Three.
The convenient Places for the Seven Colleges may be 1. The Present College. 2.
Lincolns-Inn-Fields. 3. Near Charing Cross. 4. Near the Poultry. 5. Southwark
near the Hospital. 6. Near Bishops-gate. 7. In or about Goodmans-fields.


Which places are to be published in Print about a Fortnight before the
Settlement, that all may know where to apply for help.

Thirdly, Surgeons.
One Master. One Deputy. Seven Wardens. Twenty Eight Assistants. Fifty Six
Mates. Twenty Eight Junior Mates.
In all One Hundred Twenty One.

Of this Number, besides the Master and Deputy, at the chief College, there are
Seventeen in each of the Colleges, viz.

One Warden. Four Assistants. Eight Mates. Four Junior Mates.
In all Seventeen.

Some of which, besides Surgery, shall be skilful in the practice of
Midwifry, cutting for the Stone, reducing Dislocations, and drawing Teeth in
each College.

Fourthly, Apothecaries.
One Master. One Deputy. Seven Wardens. Fourteen Assistants. Forty two Mates.
Forty two Journey-men. Forty two Sub-Journey-men.
In all One Hundred Forty Nine.

Of this Number, besides the Master and Deputy at the chief College, there are
Twenty one in each College, viz.

One Warden. Two Assistants. Six Mates. Six Journey-Men. Six Sub-Journey-men.
In all Twenty One.

If the Number of any Exceeds the Inhabitants Necessities, it may be (as they
die out) lessened, by not supplying: But if not sufficient, it may be
Augmented, so that few or none of the profession may receive injury by this
improvement; but all if possible some benefit.

Inducement for this New Establishment of Physic.
I. TO preserve Health and save Lives, is always a Public Good, but more
especially in time of War.

II. That Medicine is highly useful to those great Ends, is and has been always
the general Judgment of Mankind.

III. That every Good Quo Communius eo Melius; but that as Physic is now
managed, not only the very Poor, but meaner sort of Tradesmen and their
Families, Servants, and Misers, deterred by Physicians Fees, and Apothecaries
Bills, have little or no Benefit by Physic.

IV. That by these means, together with the want of timely and frequent Visits,
many die yearly that might be preserved; and Epidemical and Contagious
Distempers and Chronical Diseases arise and are propagated.

V. That Physicians and Surgeons may (and possible many do) having no Check,
or Supervisors, for Lucre sake, prolong Cures, to the hazard of Life; and by
new Experiments upon their own single Judgment destroy many.

VI. That Apothecaries may be careless in their Mixtures, or Unskilful; or may
Administer things improper or decayed, or tire their Patients with needless and
nauseous Medicines for their own Advantage.

VII. Mountebanks, and cheats in Physic, are found by Experience, to conduce
extremely to the Ruin of Peoples Healths, and loss, oft-times, of their Lives,
as well as of their Money.

VIII. That by this Constitution all those Ills will be prevented, all will
have equal Help and Benefit: All will apply in time, since they hope for Cure
without fear of Charge: Diseases taken early more easily removed: Frequent
Visits will be mad^, which in acute Diseases are most necessary; changes
therein being often so great and sudden, that life is frequently lost for want
of a timely Visit. Consultations will be candid, and without Passion or Design,
and to be had when necessary, tho of the whole Faculty, in difficult cases:
Medicines publicly and faithfully prepared will only be given: And
Mountebanks, with such others, will hereby sink of themselves, without Law or
Trouble.

IX. Nothing will be here concealed, that in its own Nature requires not
Secrecy. No Man's Ignorance or Negligence can here be prejudicial, for the
Constitution directs all, inquires into and Supervises all.

X. Physic and Surgery will be extremely improved, and in a little time, by
the multitude of Experiments, recording of Observations, and by mutual and
candid Assistance of the Members, come near to a Demonstration.

XI. The Members of both Houses of Parliament as well as all other Strangers,
with their Families, tho not Housekeepers when in Town, will be attended
Gratis: And indeed all the Inhabitants of every House, for the small Rate
charged thereon, Visits, Physic, and Surgery therein included.

XII. The Advantages of this Constitution may be immediately extended to the
great Benefit both of the Navy and Army.

XIII. The Improvement of Health, and Preservation of Life, Increases People,
and that Augments Consumption, Trade, Power and Wealth. And many Foreigners
will repair hither for Remedy, when incurable abroad, which will also improve
Trade.

XIV. The Proposer is sensible that many Objections will be raised by
Prejudice, Interest, and for want of a true Information of the Nature, and
Tendency of this Constitution; all which he is ready to answer, and hope the
Public Benefit will outweigh all bye, and little Ends.

XV. The regulation of the Practice of Physic, to make it more Beneficial and
less Chargeable, does as properly belong to the consideration of Parliament, as
Divinity, Law, State or Trade, all which daily fall under their Cognizance.

AN APPENDIX TO THE QUERIES.
Courteous Reader,
SOme matters relating to the preceding Queries, in order to their better
Illustration, having been omitted are thought fit to be added here by way of
Appendix. As first, to explain further the 20th. Query, Either Vomits can cure
the Diseases that nothing else can, or they cannot? If they can, then Infants,
old and weak must take them in such Diseases as well as the strong, or die: If
they cannot, then are Physicians much to blame that ever gave them to the
Strong, any more than to the Weak: For if the Weak can escape dying without
them, why not the Strong? If the Strong cannot, why should we expect the Weak
should? Secondly, To clear the Twenty Third Query, may be considered all the
ways, by which it is possible Vomits can do any mischief, which are, either the
Action of Vomiting, or the manner of its Operation; the evil property of the
Medicine; the matter Vomitted; or lastly, the wrong Application. As to the
first, there can be no more danger in the Operation of a Vomit, than there is
in vomitting without one, the force, strain and violence being the same, when
the matter Vomitted is so; besides, if the Action were so dangerous, it is not
probable that kind Nature would have ordered that young Infants should be so
subject to it, and breeding Women being the weaker Sex in a tender condition,
and whilst the Faetus is also weak, wherefore the Action singly can never be
Dangerous. As to the evil property of the Medicines, Antimony will be most
suspected, for Carduus, Groundsel, Thea, and the like, will be by all
acquitted. Antimony therefore, the most usual of all Vomits, we find highly
commended by many good Authors. It is so innocent that it is used in Diet Drinks
with great advantage, and is frequently given to fatten Horses, Hogs, and
Pullein, nor is there any thing in the Preparation of Crocus Metallorum, vitrum
Antimonij or Mercurius vitae in its own Nature Poisonous; and Experience daily
shows that they do abundance of Good. As to the matter Vomited, it must be
either injurious, by robbing Nature of so much Good Humor, or by wounding some
parts in its Passage with its ill Quality; if the first, it must have been very
unadvisedly given, therefore scarce to be supposed; if the last, it must
certainly have done more hurt to have continued where it lodged before, than it
could in passing only; but of this if an instance could be found, it might give
some Satisfaction: For a thousand things are imagined which never were nor can
be, and it is such high flights above common Sense which do much injury to the
Art of Physic. As to a wrong application of Vomits, it must be agreed that
Fools are not to jest with Edge Tools; but they are the better for Artists for
being sharp. Who would endure to be shaved by a good Barber with a blunt Razor,
which cannot be too sharp in a skilful Hand? therefore if none but skilful
Physicians fairly approved were permitted to Practice, there would be no danger
of such mistakes. And lastly, the 24th. Query may be further confirmed by
Experience, that Vomits generally cure, not only such Diseases as other
Remedies, but often reach those Humors which no other Medicine can, and
consequently cure many Diseases beyond the power of others; for they perform
what ever others can, and something more.

The Author thinks himself under an Obligation to add something in the nature
of an Apology, to acquaint the Reader, that it is far from his intention to give
just offense to any, much less to the Physicians, by publishing these Queries;
but aiming at the Public Service, he is desirous to provoke some Learned and
Experienced Physicians to inform the World better, to which the Author will
thankfully submit, for amicus Plato, amicus Socrates, sed magis amica veritas;
or else that they would please to reform themselves, that so the Nation may
reap some benefit by these inquiries.

He could very well have been contented at this time not to have appeared in
Print, had not the present Practice of Physic differed so much, from what in
his many years Experience he has observed both here and beyond Sea; and toto
coelo seemed to deviate from the ancient Rules and Practice, without the least
visible amendment by any shorter, safer or more certain methods of Healing.
Nay, had not many lives been apparently lost by the present tender hearted
practice, who, it may be reasonably presumed, had been still alive, had truer
methods been used, as well as the Criminals last Executed might have been so,
had they not then suffered notwithstanding God's time was certainly come, as
the good Women say: But, if right courses had been taken with both the Patient
and the Criminal, they might have been still alive, and God's time would not
have been yet come: For, as God decrees the End, he likewise orders the right
means without a miracle to lead to such an End, and they shall be used, and
wrong means shall not, when he so pleases. The Author therefore thought it his
duty to God and Man to cast into the common Treasury, tho it were but this
mite, and to expose these few Sheets to the censure of the Candid Reader, who
may draw what consequences he please from the manner they are proposed, and
either grant or deny, so it be with plain and solid Reasons, that truth may
appear, and that the public as well as some Physicians, yet unresolved in the
subject of several of those Queries, may reap the advantage.

He is not insensible that it is more advantageous to be Heterodox with a
multitude than Orthodox alone, and that it is much more gainful for a Physician
to win the good Opinion by little complacencies of the tender hearted
Nursekeepers, timorous Patients, and prattling Ladies, than to recover the
Healths and save the lives of Multitudes; for if you have never so good success
it is an easy matter for them to say, if they bear you ill will, it is no more
than what every body could do; or, It was a small matter, the Patient would
have recovered however, or their time was not come.

And when they resolve to excuse a Friend, that has ill success, they will tell
you, he did all, that Man could do, was mighty tender, safe and careful, the
Patients time was come and none could have prevented it, which excuses are
current with the World in matters they are not well acquainted with, so that
whoever thinks to recommend himself by his skill, will find himself as much
deceived as Sir William Petty, who, after he had qualified himself for the
practice as well as most, that ever undertook it, found when he began it, there
was another Lessen to be Learnt, how to humor his Patient's Fancy, and not
answer their understandings, which commonly in most Persons is locked up for
hereafter. It Is hard to strive against the Stream, when it is so easy to swim
with it.

The design of these Queries is not utterly to condemn the use of steel or the
Jesuits Powder, and other specificks or methods, but to recommend and revive
the old practice of Evacuation, as much more certain, effectual and agreeable
to Art, and also to endeavor to remove the too frequent groundless Fears and
Aversion to such excellent Remedies, for every thing God made has its proper
use for the benefit of Man, and nothing was made in vain.

He has the more insisted upon Vomits in this small Treatise, because, they
are so much opposed, and yet so absolutely necessary for recovering that
Health, and saving those lives which nothing else can do so certainly,
especially in peracute Cases, where but little time is to be lost. And he hopes
there are but very few Queries here proposed, but in order to the service of
the Public, he having often met with just cause to wish the inconveniences,
they hint at, reformed. Farewell.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 7. l. 19. r. critical. p. 10. l. 6 r. tend p. 13. l. 4. r. and, before
since. l. 6. after it, r. whether it is not fit to be tried. p. 63. l. 14. dele
both. p. 65. l. 20. for and r. under. p. 70. l. 6. after can r. not.

The CONTENTS.
A
AGes all may purge, Page 20, 22 Alteratives can never cure, Page 3. 6 Anatomy
and Astrology useless to the Practice of Physic, Page 65.
B
Bleeding must be preceded by Purging, Page 32 81, must not begin cures. Page 81
Blood makes Animal Spirits, Page 81, 82 may be altered in the Mass but not
every part changed, Page 3, 6 not all corrupted, Page 5

C
Cause of Diseases, Page 2 Cure of Diseases, Page 5. 31. 33. 41, 42. 55. 78.
not by Alteratives, Page 3, 4 sometimes by Nature, Page 7 not to be delayed,
Page 49 not without pain, Page 51
Cordials the best are Purges, Page 18 speedily supply Spirits, Page 19 force
Sweat or Urine, Page 19
Censures V. judging,
D
Diseases caused by Error in the Six Non-Naturals, Page 2 by change of good
into bad Humors, Page 2 weaken Patients, Page 14 daily supplied, Page 15. 30.
31. 40 vary often in their course, Page 44 are poison bred in the Body, Page 8,
9 increase the weakness first made by them, Page 14 never cured without
Evacuation, Page 7 22. 24. kill for the most part, Medicines seldom or never,
Page 25 must be exposed as Poison, Page 8, 9 greater evil than Evacuation, Page
14. 29 are the ill humors, not the fever, Page 49 recovers by delay. Page 15,
30, 33, 49, 55 cured by Nature, Page 7 not by Alteratives, Page 3. 4 by
proportionable Evacuation, Page 42
appear not as soon as caused, Page 78 too mighty for the Spirits Page 19
Delays dangerous, Page 15, 30, 49, 55

E
Errors in the Six Non-naturals cause of Diseases Page 2. Evacuation V.
purging, must be well understood. Page 10. weakens at present and benefits for
the future. Page 18 does good and cannot hurt, Page 24. 25 no enemy to
weakness, Page 13. 14 early, Page 13. 56 strong best for weak Patients, Page 15
agrees with all circumstances and ages, Page 21 natural, Page 7. 24 saves the
Spirits the labor of curing. Page 19 rarely kills, but that which rests behind
Page 27. never so bad as the disease Page 25 must ripe or it does no good, Page
55
Eruptions rarely kill, etc. Page 27 Excess is poison, Page 9 Evil things have
charming aspects, etc. Page 51
F
Fever fit is not the Disease, but the cure, Page 34 how cured, Page 35. 81
quieted sometimes tho not cured, Page 36 begins oftenest in the primae viae,
Page 80
Fluids good preserve Health, Page 44 bad destroy it, Page 45 good or bad
furnish Spirits accordingly, Page 45 supplied by Six Non-Naturals, Page 45
Fancy is a Disease, Page 47 Feeding must agree with labor, Page 55 Flux is
not the Disease, but the effect, Page 57 cause must be removed, Page 57
Ferments helps purging, Page 6 the effect of purges, Page 19 is a prepared
matter lodged in the body, Page 44

G
Gripes proceed from the Disease not the Medicine, Page 30. 54 Gentle medicines
ineffectual, Page 30. 73 Good things no inviting outside, Page 51 made bad by
our folly, Page 9, 23
Government fit judge of Physicians and Physic, Page 69, 70
H
Humors changed to bad cause Diseases, Page 2 bad must not be kept, Page 58
good must not be wasted, Page 48
Health preserved, Page 44, 51, 53, 52 recovered without art, Page 4, 17, 58
upon any terms, Page 50, 30 needs no Physic, Page 48. 49 is a jewel, Page 52
must run no hazards, Page 16. 55. 88. 91
Hazard nothing in Physic if possible, Page 15 17, Hopes lasts with life, Page
46. 47. 49 Hurtful things have inviting appearances, Page 51
I
Judging Physicians, all are not fit for, Page 11, 12, 88 wrong is dangerous,
Page 11, 12, 88
Jesuits Powder bad, Page 34, 35, 36, 80 Intervals long bad, Page 30
L
Life is a constant Flux, Page 4 V. health must run no hazard without hope
saved, Page 46, 47
Ladys kind make bad Doctors Page 23 Labor must answer Feeding, Page 54
M
Medicines for need, not delight, Page 50 dangerous seldom or never, Page 25,
29 powerful ever better than gentle, Page 52, 53, 55 violent, Page 22, 52. 56
wrong or too late succeed ill, Page 66 never blessed by God, Page 67
gentle ineffectual, Page 22, 30, 73 must continue as long as the disease, Page
33 not for the healthy, Page 48 beneficial better than pleasant, Page 49 gripes
not, but the disease Page 54, 55 food for the sick, Page 58 furnished by God,
Page 58, 59

N
Non-Naturals cause of Diseases Page 2 of health Page 45
Nurse-keepers hurt with their kindness, Page 23 Nature soon recovers, if not
hindered, Page 17 soon disturbed, Page 43 never cures so soon and well, as art,
Page 92 therefore not to be relied on, Page 17
Nourishment strong bad for the weak, Page 23
P
Poison never cured by Alteratives, Page 8 whether any, Page 8 what it is, Page
9 bred in the body, Page 9 the same with diseases, Page 9 must be expelled,
Page 9
Physicians skill, Page 10. 59, 64 Education, Page 60, 59. 65, 77 faults and
artifices, Page 29, 62, 63, 66, 67, 71. 78 blamed without a cause, Page 10, 12,
68, 88 to be judged by the Government, Page 69, 70 best, who cures most, Page
61 not to be lightly censured, Page 11, 12 not to be easily discouraged, Page 11
Physical Art, Page 49, 59, 60, 65, 68 practice to be learnt before the Theory,
Page 60 Practice to be gained by cunning tho without skill, Page 62. 71
Plague, Page 37, 38, 39, 40 Purging. V. Evacuation strengthens more than
Cordials, Page 18, 19 not dangerous, Page 14, 19, 28 with long intervals has
small success, Page 30
Patients have makes wast, Page 33 must take Physic, Page 58 strength must be
duly considered, Page 73 dies more of Diseases than their cure, Page 79 strong
killed by small Diseases, Page 15
Primae viae first to be cleansed, Page 32 Pox small, Page 7
R
Reports false mischievous to the Reporter Page 12 Regions first. V. primae
viae.
S
Strength wasted by Diseases, Page 16, 20 according to the quantity of Animal
Spirits, Page 45 of Food pernicious to the sick, Page 19, 20, 22 which cannot
bear a less evil can never a greater, Page 14
Stomach affected in most cases, Page 31, 32 Spirits, Page 19, 21, 45, 81, 82
Soldiers and Seamen, Page 56 Success not sufficient to judge by, Page 11
constant may guide, Page 12 attends right means, Page 66 nev^r given by God to
wrong means, Page 67
Sweating ought to follow purging, Page 32
V
Vomits, Page 16, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28 29, 31, 32, 35, 82. if not best of
Medicines ought not to be used, Page 23
Violent Medicines, Page 15, 30, 52, 53, 56 Urine, Page 90
W
Weakness, Page 17, 21 no objection to purging, Page 13, 14, 16 comes from want
of Spirits, Page 21 increase by the Disease which made it, Page 14
Weak Patients, Page 15, 17, 18, 21, 22 the same Medicines as strong but not
the dose, Page 16 wants strongest medicines, Page 15
Weak Diseases have killed strong Patients, Page 15 Women with child may take
Vomits, Page 26, 29, 63.

