A SEASONABLE WORD AND CALL To all those called Ranters or Libertines
THROUGH-OUT The three Nations, to come into the true Faith and pure Fear of the
Lord, in this his Day of grace and visitation; by turning into the Light of
Christ, or witness of God in their consciences: from which they have swerved,
and against which they have transgressed. Written in tender Love to their
Souls, By John Chandler, Who has been taken in the same snare; but by great
Judgment redeemed out of it.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1659.

TO all you who are or may be called Ranters, or Libertines, either for your
loose practices or principles (which ye esteem to be good, pure, and without
deceit); This is a word of knowledge or experience, from one who has obtained
mercy from the Lord, in turning to him that smote him: and, whether you hear or
forbear, know and remember, that in a day of Grace, and an acceptable time,
(wherein the Lord is gathering all sorts of wanderers and stragglers into his
fold), Ye have been put in mind, and warned to return; Even you I mean (in the
first place), who formerly have had convictions of; and trouble and sorrow for,
sin against the Lord; and after that, some inlets and openings of peace and
reconciliation, and tastes of the good Word of God within you, and of the pure
powers of the world to come, even of an endless life with, and in, God, the
Father of Spirits, whom ye then believed to be an exceeding great reward to all
that walked before him in uprightness, and with a perfect heart; as he
declared to Abraham the Father of the Faithful, who saw Christ's day and
rejoiced therein: Which melted your hearts, and made them tender; and you
conscious of thinking, speaking, or doing, vainly, idly, or unjustly. Now, know
this (all such) that in the pure and unfeigned love of the Spirit (which dwelt
in the Apostle James) do I write unto you, who truly and sweetly said to the
Brethren, If any among you shall wander from the truth, and any one shall
convert (or turn) him; let him know, that he which has turned a Sinner from
the Error of his life, does save a Soul from death, and cover a multitude of
sins: So it appears, there were those in his days who wandered from the truth,
and so fell into error of their life, as ye have done, which brought their
souls into death, and danger of eternal death, which they could not see at the
present, or (at least) were unsensible thereof, by reason of their wandering
minds and hearts, which brought a Vail over the Understanding, or stupefied the
Conscience; whereby it is no wonder, if such then, and you now, did and do call
Evil Good, and Good Evil; put Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness;
bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter; Bondage for Liberty, and true Liberty
for Bondage; promising others Liberty, when they and you were and are both the
Servants of Corruption; the cause of all which, has been (I testify) the going
from, or forgetting that which first convinced and troubled for the Sin and
Evil, whereby that conviction and trouble was thought to be raised up in the
mind and conscience, by misapprehension or imagination only, and not from a
true thing or principle which was the true Light (that enlightneth every man
that comes into the World) which could not lie, dissemble, or flatter, but
showed Sin and Evil to be so, because they were so really; and therefore
troubled, and vexed, and terrified the sinful Soul: So, by you called Ranters
or Libertines, when ye grew into a carnal freedom, the Master of the House was
called Beelzebub, to wit, the pure, holy, just, and righteous Principle of God,
taken by you but for a Fancy; whereby all that was truly good in you soon went
to wrack, for hereby shipwreck was made of Faith and a good Conscience: of
Faith, because there is nothing that does or can discover to a Man or Woman's
Soul, the true Object of Faith, but the true Light within, (which first
reproves, and then gives the knowledge to the penitent and obedient) which
Object of Faith or Belief is Christ; either, as the living Hope, Gain, and
eternal Reward, to those that love him, keep his Commandments, and wait for
him (as the Saints formerly witnessed him); for, says the Apostle, He that
comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of those that
diligently seek him: or, as an eternal Judge, and Minister of the Father's
justice, wrath, and vengeance to all that follow and obey him not, but their
own Wills and Lusts, according as it is written; Tribulation and anguish upon
every Soul that does evil both to the Jew and Greek. So that ye, miscalling the
Reprover in you for sin, as aforesaid, soon fell from this belief of the
eternal Reward and Punishment, looking upon man (as to his own particular
self) to dye and be but as the Beast that perishes, (although, in the course
of one Generation succeeding another, ye framed up a Unity and Salvation in
your erring minds); whereby, even as a Ship that has lost his Anchor runs at
random in the Sea, so ye having lost the Anchor of your Souls were let loose
to think Sin and Evil to be no such thing, and some of you to commit all
iniquity with greediness; For the strong consolation in the light by the
Spirit, and hope, which the Saints have (which hope enters within the Vail,
even into the Glory that was with the Father, before the World, or succeeding
Generations began) is the Soul's Anchor; as it was of Christ's the Elder
Brother: Who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross and
despised the shame, and is set down at the right hand of God: And the same that
led you, not to believe this particular and eternal Reward, led you also to
deny the eternal Punishment; when as Christ, who was the true Light, and meant
as he spoke without dissimulation or equivocation, says, If thy right hand or
eye offend thee, cut it off or pluck it out, and cast it from thee; for it is
better to enter into life maimed, than having two hands or eyes to be cast into
Hell, where their Worm dies not, nor their fire never goes out. To which
truth the Holy men of God in the Scriptures plentifully witness, as knowing
the terror of the Lord, they persuading men; for the Lord God is known by the
Judgment which he executes on the wicked, as well as by the Reward (which is
himself) that he bestows on the righteous: but ye being erred from the right
Spirit (which David, after a fall, desired might be renewed within him) in your
own phansies and imaginations, (Satan having transformed himself into an Angel
of light within you) have put secret meanings and interpretations upon the
Scriptures, as though Christ and the holy men of God did not really mean, as
they spoke, of these and diverse other things (which I shall not now name
particularly) but according as ye would have them to be understood: whereby
Christ, the true light, and those that were enlightened, and enlivened and
sanctified by him, were by some of you accounted even such as your selves, who
live in diverse lusts; so far has the deceit entered into you: But ye shall
know, in the day of the Lord's righteous Judgment, as I have truly known, by
turning to that which judged aright and made manifest Sin to be exceeding
sinful, that Christ, and the former Saints, and holy men and women, were
sincere in their thoughts, words, and deeds, haring no mental reservation in
what they spoke; and that they lived according as their words hold forth, being
wise as Serpents, (yet not in the Serpent's wisdom,) and harmless as Doves,
yea, fleeing from all sin and wickedness as from a Serpent. And now I will
say, How are the hidden things of Es;au searched out by the light, which is the
Candle of the Lord, even of profane Esau, who for a morsel of meat sold his
birthright? And let me (in God's wisdom and fear) reason with you a little;
Are not some of you profane Esaus? who, for a few momentary pleasures and
unsatisfying Lusts, have quite parted with, and for ever bid Adieu to, the
sense and feeling of that which ye once counted better then life it self; to
wit, a broken heart and contrite spirit, and godly sorrow for sin, which things
wrought you to some Repentance, whereof ye had never just cause to repent: As
also comfort and peace in your Spirits, as your minds were kept in that which
was pure, open to the Lord, and being afraid to offend him: Such a step in the
truth, no doubt, some of you have made; but now your hearts are as hard as an
Adamant, so that ye find no more place for Repentance than Esau did, nay, not
going so far as he; for he sought the Blessing with tears, (though he obtained
it not, being still profane): but ye desire not to return, in any outward
show, yea, perhaps will laugh and scoff at any that shall exhort you thereunto.
Had it not been good for such, if they had never been born? And are you not all
profane ones, from the greatest to the least? that have left your first love
to simplicity, and sincerity, purity, holiness, sobriety, temperance, and
other the good fruits of the Spirit, and think your selves to have attained the
higher perfection, the more freely ye can act contrary to these, without check
or control in your selves, which ye count but the working of the Fancy; over
which to get victory, that it should not at all trouble you, ye count your
perfection, redemption, justification, sanctification, and salvation: So ye
quench the Light, which is God's faithful witness within you, (that in love
often pleads with you for a return, and kill the Just one, and stop the cry of
the innocent, and trample upon the holy Seed that should bruise the Serpent's
head, who is head in you; and call it your perfection and redemption; would (if
it were possible) set God at variance against himself, accounting that to be
God's arm and power in you, which slays his reproving witness, which is his
good Spirit; which Spirit (know ye) shall not always strive with you for good:
Therefore I charge you by the Lord, to bethink your selves (ye that are not
past feeling) of your former estates when ye were conscientious and tender, for
it was much better then with you than now; and commune with your own hearts, by
turning in to the witness of God, that calls for purity and holiness in
thought, word, and deed, for sobriety and temperance and chastity, and all
godliness, and honesty: and that while ye have time, lest your consciences be
quite seared, and the Lord God swear in his wrath, Ye shall never enter into
his pure and everlasting Rest; for this is God's very and true day, (not an
imaginary one, which ye have conceited, for some years past, to your selves) and
so no time to dally with the wicked and back slider; for, Woe (says the Lord
God) to him, that in the land and time of uprightness, will deal unjustly, and
will not behold the majesty of the Lord. And if any of you have, or shall have,
stirrings and thoughts raised up in you of waiting upon God's witness, and any
true desires begotten, to know by the light within you (which makes manifest
all things) wherein ye have erred and done amiss, I charge you flee it not,
though it begin to bring some terror and shame upon the carnal part; for as ye
have made the pure seed to suffer by your sin and deceit, so you must expect to
suffer by the Seed, when he comes to bruise the Serpents head, to whom ye have
been joined; and accept of the punishment of your iniquity, and say, It is all
far less than we have deserved: and let your uncircumcised hearts be humbled,
and wait low and humbly to know the Lord's mind, and be willing to forsake all
evil, and cleave unto, and do, all good that the Lord by his Light shall lay
open before you, (who will bring Judgment to the line, and Equity to the
plummet) and be willing to come into Unity with the Holy men of God, and
Christ's words in the Scriptures, which testify against all the fruits of the
flesh, let them be done under never so fair a pretense of liberty; and above
all things desire sincerity and uprightness of heart, (for so it was with me
at my return, and this was the word in me, His countenance shall behold the
upright) and then will the Lord have compassion, and by degrees heal your land,
I mean, your poor Souls, and ye shall see Faith in the truths of God, and a
good conscience, and the pure fear of the Lord, grow and spring up together in
you; for it is Faith that purifies the heart: But if you flee in Winter, and
will not bear the Judgment till the indignation be over-past, or will be
ashamed to be ashamed of your evil ways, and so let deceit prevail over the
pure, and make up a healing to your selves by quenching the witness, ye shall
receive the fruit of your own doings, even to lie down in perpetual forrow in
the end.

But I hear some of you asking, What is Sin and Evil? Do ever any of you find
any of the Holy men of God, from one end of the Scriptures to the other, to
have asked such a Question? Nay. For they believed the Lord's witness, which
he had placed in them, without their own reasonings, and disputings; as finding
twins in their womb, two Seeds opposite each to other, which brought forth
contrary fruit; and by the Holy Seed, which is the true Light, they saw the
good Tree, and the corrupt Tree; the good fruit, and the corrupt fruit: for the
Light reproved them for evil and corrupt motions, and all words and actions
proceeding therefrom; but it justified them, and gave them peace in pure and
holy motions, and all words and actions issuing from thence, which were seen to
be of its own begetting: David witnessed these two States; Says he, Thou have
set my sins in order before me; Mark, He believed God's witness without
disputings; the Lord had set them before him, he therefore believed they were
sins, or that which was against the Lord, which his pure eye had a controversy
with: Now, the Lord does not set a thing, that is not, before us, but that
which is. Again, he says, Oh Lord I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant, the Son
of thy Hand maid, thou have loosed my bonds; There he felt God's acquittance
and Justification, not in giving him a liberty to do what he list without
control, but in enlarging his heart to run the ways of his commandments, in
which he was accepted, even in that which enlarged his heart so to do: For
(says he) in another place, Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect
unto all thy Commandments. Consider also, that they were the wicked and ungodly
who did say, Tush, our Tongues are our own, we will speak, Who shall control
us? As if they had asked in derision, What is Sin or Evil? Not because there
was not such thing in reality, (but only according to men's apprehension); but
because the Serpent had got such a head in them, that they scarce felt a
Controuler when they so spoke. But if you will be to learn what Sin is, Paul
and John in the course of their ministry (but not in answering such a Question
proposed to them by the Saints) do experimentally declare. The one says, I had
not known sin but by the Law; Mark, the Law written in the heart by the finger
of God (of which the two Tables of stone were a declaration) made Paul to know
sin to be Sin: Now, God's Law in the heart is Light, as David long ago
witnessed; and Christ is the true Light that Lightneth every man: Now, Christ
was he which spoke to Moses in the Mount Sinai, (from whom Moses received the
Law, to declare it to the People,) as Stephen (when he was full of the Holy
Spirit) testified: So then Christ, the Light, is the Lawgiver, whereby Sin
comes to be known; now, if he has enlightened every man, and he be the true
Light, then he shows a truth to every man, which is, that he has
transgressed his Law or Light, by dark motions, words, and actions, arising
from a contrary ground; and so sin is not a fiction or fained thing in any man
whatsoever, because sin is known by a Law, which Law is Light, which Light is
in every man, which Light is true, and discovers nothing but a real thing in
every one: The other says, Sin is the transgression of the Law; He knew the
Law in his heart, or the righteous principle of God, which he had been a
Transgressour against: He does not say, Sin is nothing but an apprehension that
there is such a thing, but that sin is a real transgression of a real Law, or
Principle of God. Again, John says, all Unrighteousness is sin: There is
Unrighteousness, and that of sundry sorts, both toward God and man, and all
this Unrighteousness is sin. Now, (says Peter, by the Spirit of truth), In
every Nation, he that fears God, and works righteousness, is accepted of
him; But (says Paul) all they that had pleasure in Unrighteousness should be
damned: Here are contrary works really so, and they have contrary effects; for
the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all Unrighteousness, with all
which Unrighteousness the Gentiles were and are filled; to wit, with
fornications, wickedness, covetousness, envy, murder; Covenant-breakers,
despisers of those that are good, implacable, unmerciful, etc. Who, (says
Paul) knowing the Judgment of God, that they which commit such things are
worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them.
Here he witnesses, and we see and know it so to be; that they were filled with
all Unrighteousness, and that the things mentioned were real
Unrighteousness; to prove which, none need go any farther than their own
consciences, wherein they knew and felt, by the true Light, the Committers of
such things to be worthy of death, (even eternal death, or separation from the
life and enjoyment of God;) even as a Labourer is worthy of his hire; which
cannot be an imaginary but a real thing.

But ye will say to me, The Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostler; spoke according
to the several dispensations or ministrations they were under: The Jews before
Christ were under a Vail; and the Apostles (after the renting of the Vail of
the Temple) though they saw clearer than they, yet not so clearly as we see now
in this last and highest dispensation.

The Vail that was over the Jews hearts consisted in this, that their
Church-Ministry and Ordinances being according to the flesh, letter, and
written in Tables of stone, they felt not, for the generality of them, the
Spirit and finger of the living God, writing his Law in the fleshy Tables of
their hearts, according to his new Covenant: Their Church were Jews outward;
their Priests, Ministers of the Letter, which left their Souls in death; who
had need both to offer up Sacrifice for their own sins as for the sins of the
People; and so the Law outward made nothing perfect, but it was the
Ministration of condemnation to them, for want of quickening life from Christ to
ease them, who is the Minister of the Spirit, and of Righteousness and Peace;
at which Cornerstone they stumbled, because of the old and long Vail that had
been upon their hearts; which Vail, to this day, when Moses is read in their
Synagogues, abides on them; who, when hey shall turn to the Lord, the Vail
(which is a false apprehension of being accepted in their carnal Services,
Performances, and Ordinances, from a literal rule, without a feeling of the
life of Christ, in whom all Sacrifices should be offered up) shall be taken
away, and then shall they feel a ministration of Righteousness in the Spirit,
in respect whereof, their other ministration had no Glory. But what is all this
(o ye Libertines) to your purpose? for they were not, nor are, veiled in seeing
sin, (which the true Light that lightneth every man, reproves to be sin); for
that is not from darkness of Understanding, but from light set up there,
without which they could not see it at all: Yea, this was that which ministered
condemnation unto them all, both the righteous and unrighteous, so far as sin
was standing; and they could not, nor ought not, otherwise to apprehend,
because else they should, as you do, have believed against God's witness in
them, which is to make him a Liar, an abominable presumption. As for the
Apostles and Saints, both Jews and Gentiles, who had the Vail rent, and lived
in the dispensation or ministration of the Spirit and of righteousness, which
exceeded in glory that of condemnation (which was and is also glorious in its
time and season), Ye Libertines know nor, nor cannot know (while ye are as ye
are) in what a high and sweet state they lived: But ye speak proud and swelling
words of vanity of things ye know not, nor live in; and would be at the top of
the Ladder before ye are come to the foot, even to know Judgment upon the
transgressour in you. Ye are not ignorant that the Apostles and Saints believed
perfection, pressed after it, and might obtain it; But that it was such a
perfection which ye dream of, I utterly deny; for it was a destroying of all
the Devir's works, and a plucking up of all the evil Plants which the heavenly
Father had not planted, by Christ the pure power of God, who was manifested in
the flesh to that end. And know ye (Oh ye haughty and conceited ones) there is
never any other new dispensation, different from this, to be brought forth in
the World; but that the Glory of the Church in these last times is to be
wrought out by the pure and powerful appearance of the Lord God, in this very
way of purifying and refining his People; for through Judgment is Zion to be
redeemed, and her Converts with Righteousness; for Sin and Unrighteousness
stains and marrs the beauty of any People or Person, making them to become
dross, an ill savor, and a smoke in the nostrils of God, and a fire that
burns all the day: Wherefore, that every thing which offends the pure eyes
of his Glory may be gathered out of his Kingdom, will he purge his people by
the Spirit of Judgment and burning; and, by fire, and by Sword, plead with all
flesh; and the slain of the Lord shall be many, and those (be they who they
will, or have what high conceits they can of their own security) that will not
fall upon his Corner stone, Christ, the true Light, that leads to the Life,
that he may be broken, and humbled, and melted, by him, into godly sorrow for
sin, and a sorsaking thereof in thought, word, and work; this stone shall fall
on him with a heavy hand at last, and grind him to powder: So, when such a one
is by the Judge delivered to the Officer, and then by him cast into prison, he
shall never come forth out of those chains of darkness, and that Dungeon of
torment that the Almighty has prepared for all the wicked, till he has paid
the last mite. Now, Let me ask you Libertines (that sore so high in your talk
of this last dispensation of God to his People) one Question, What do you think
of the new Jerusalom which is from above the holy City of our God? Is she not
the Mother of all the Saints? Is she not the Bride, the Lamb's wife? and must
she not then be like the Spotless Lamb her Husband? and does not John in the
Spirit testify that there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that
defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie, but only
they which are written in the Lamb's Book of Life, which must needs be none but
those that are free from all defilements; for, says he, The fearful and
unbelieving, and the abominable, and Murderers, and Whoremongers, and
Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars shall their part in the lake which
burns with fire and Brimstone; which is the second death: Now what think you?
Does the Spirit in John mean as it speaks or not? Or did John mean as he
spoke? Do you think the mind of God in these words were to this purpose, that a
man might do that which is counted Whoredom or Adultery, or Lying, or
Drunkenness, or Swearing and Cursing, or bowing to any Idol, or bewitch
Peoples Souls or Bodies by Sorceries, or murder ones Neighbor, Brother, or
Enemy; or do any other such thing which is declared evil in the Scriptures of
Truth; and yet, if he count it pure to him, and he see no evil therein, he may
do it, and yet enter the holy City. Search with the light (if ye are not quite
past all honesty, tenderness, and feeling) and see whether that does or can
give such an interpretation thereof, or whether any thing but man's fleshly and
corrupted Will, and blinded Judgment can do so. But (Lord) how have some so
darkened the pure eye, that should see things as they are in truth and
simplicity, by often transgressing against the Light that now they even (as
desperate) do not desire to have the blind eye opened! But, Father of glory, I
beseech thee for thy Seed's sake, whom thou have promised to gather from the
remotest parts of the Earth, to show thy Almighty Arm in the ransoming of them
out of the hands of the spiritual Enemy, who has beguiled these People, as he
beguiled Eve, by drawing them to eat the forbidden Fruit, whereby they must
needs know evil as well as good, whatever they may affirm (yet far from being
as gods, but cast out of Paradise) that so thy ransomed ones may come (after
Judgment known) which songs to Sion, praising and magnifying thy holy name (as I
have done and do) for thy infinite goodness and mercy never to be forgotten.

But ye make other Objections, as, Where there is no Law, there is no
Transgression; and, To the pure, all things are pure; and It Is Prophesied in
Isaiah, that the Lord will lead his People by a way that they knew not; and He
will make Darkness Light before them, and crooked things straight, etc. Also,
Solomon has some expressions tending to confirm our Judgment; yea, and Christ
himself says, If the eye be single, the whole body is full of Light; but if
the eye be dark, the whole body is full of darkness: so that all things are
but as they are looked upon, and so is sin and evil.

Where there is no Law, there is no Transgression, that is certain: but where is
the man (as he is in the Fall) throughout the World that has no Law placed
within him, since the Law is light, and Christ the true light has enlightened
every man: So then there is real Transgression in every man, whiles in the
Fall, for there is a Law left in him to show it: now when as a man comes into
the Law of the new Creature, or of the spirit of Life which is in Christ Jesus,
so as naturally to refrain from all sin, and to do the will of God, the Law is
no longer his reprover; and so where there is no Law, there is no
Transgression, and on the contrary: yet such a one is not without Law to God,
but under the Law to Christ; Let him that hears understand. Likewise all
things are pure to the pure: But that which is impurity it self in the Root, as
Pride, Envy, etc. and those words and actions which can flow from nothing else
but that impurity, cannot be pure to the pure in heart, because He cannot but
hate all such things: Now Paul's words are exceedingly abused by unclean
spirits; for he speaks of the things of this life, as Food, Raiment, etc.
(which are pure to one whole conscience is not defiled with sin) and they apply
them to all thoughts, actions, and words which Paul himself often declares
against in all. Tell me also (Oh ye Libertines) is not willful murder
something? and Sodomy something? and Men with Men something, and Women with
Women committing filthynesse something? and Man to engender with a Beast
something? and for a Witch out of malice, without just cause given, to do
mischief upon the Bodies of Men, or the innocent Beast, something? or to curse
ones Maker, something? And dare any of you say these things are pure to the
pure? do any of these, bear any face or resemblance of or with purity? I
believe very few of you would have the face to affirm it: Now if there be
something in you that rises up against these things, why should it not also
against other things which are declared by the Holy Men of God to be the fruits
of the flesh? and how, if but one thing be judged filthy in it self, can all
things in your sense be pure to the pure? That place in Isaiah, is a Prophecy
of Gospel Times: the Jews had been long (before those times came) led by the
Letter of the Law, but then the Lord said, He would lead them by a way they
knew not, even by the teachings of His Spirit: they had before walked in
darkness, but now darkness should be made light before them, not (as a great
Ranter once said) that darkness and its works should be then accounted by them
(that were taught of God) for light, and truly so; for that is impossible they
being of a direct contrary nature: Now darkness is truly said to be turned
into light, when the light and its works do expel the darkness and its works,
because then these are not at all in being: as the darkness of the night, and
works proper to the night, are not in being in the day time; so night is turned
to day. So John came to prepare a People for the Lord, even Christ, when the
crooked perverse pature was destroyed, and made a right and good nature, and
the rough nature destroyed, and made a mild nature, that all flesh might see
the Salvation of God. As for Solomon's expressions in some things; take heed of
stumbling and falling at a wise man's words: He was once Captivated by Lust,
and Idolatry, and Pride; but consider him in all his Raiment or dress of
Wisdom and Knowledge as he was Solomon, a greater than Solomon is here, even
Christ the true light of men, who said, If thy eye be single, thy whole body is
full of light: The single eye is, when a man looks singly to the Lord in all
his thoughts, words, and actions, keeping the watch, that his mind run not out
after other Lovers, so long is the Body full of Light, for the Light shines
out of the Darkness therein; but if the eye be dark, if he looks or runs after
any thing in his thoughts, etc. besides the Lord alone, there is the
double-minded man, whose heart is to be purified; for darkness fills his
Temple, that he knows not what he does in so doing. So that the single eye is
not to look on sin to be no sin (for that is to see a lie) but to look on the
Lord singly, that the soul may be preserved out of all sin and evil, which is
contrary to his pure nature in the ground and root.

But it is said, Amos 3.6. Is there any evil in the City, and the Lord has not
done it? Whence ye conclude, all evil in thought, word, and deed which appears
in Men, or to the view of the World, are of the Lords own doing, and so good.
That Scripture is not rightly translated out of the Hebrew tongue; for there it
is, Is there any evil in the City, and shall not the Lord do somewhat? And, in
the old translation it is, Comes any Plague in a City without it be the Lords
doing? So that this makes quite against you: For shall any evil or sin be
committed, and the Lord (who is pure, and holy, and just) not do something in
punishing or plaguing thereof; for he, in the second verse of the same Chapter,
had said to Israel by the Prophet; Ye only have I known of all the Families of
the Earth: Therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities; and he says in
the seventh verse, Surely the Lord will do nothing, but He reveals His secret
to his Servants the Prophets. So that he speaks here of doing something, or
scourging the Isralites for their sin which he revealed before hand to his
Prophets, that they might declare it to the transgressors; so that the sin and
evil is from the evil nature in man, but the punishment thereof is from the
righteous God: which punishment, be it either Spiritual or Corporal, is an evil
indeed to him that is punished, because it plagues him for his iniquity; but in
God it is good, because it is justly inflicted by him upon the unrighteous
Doer. But had ye Libertines kept your first integrity, and out of your own
humane thoughts, all which are but vain, ye would never thus have run to the
letter for counsel, but would have kept to God's witness in your selves, which
reproves for all sin and evil, which is more to us than a thousand witnesses
from without, and which brings to a right understanding of the Scriptures.

But ye raise another great stumbling block from Isaiah 45. where it is said, I
form the Light and create darkness, I make Peace and create Evil: I the Lord
do all these things. Whence ye gather, that darkness, and Evil which is the
fruit of darkness, is created by the Lord, and done by him: and therefore ye
say, That which we count darkness, and the works of darkness, is as good as
that which we count Light, and the works of Light. Consider, in the wisdom and
fear of God, what the Prophet speaks of, and to what end: He speaks of
Cyrus whom the Lord would raise up to be an Instrument of delivering his people
out of the Captivity of Babylon, whom he had surnamed, and girded by his power
for that purpose: which was a great Work, whereby the Nations from East to West
(who all had the Jewish People in their evil Eye) should know that he was the
Lord, and that there was none besides him, that could put it into the heart of
such a proud Heathen as Cyrus was, to let his People go free: So, the more to
illustrate his own Power, He moved his Prophet to utter those words above
mentioned, concerning the things of the Creation, and the management thereof;
He forms the Light by his natural Sun which He has created, and the Darkness
or Night by the withdrawing of the Sun; He makes peace in the Earth by
restrayning the Oppressors cruelty, and inclining his heart to pitry toward
the Oppressed, (as in this case of Cyrus toward the poor Jews); and creates
evil or trouble, by justly and wisely letting loose the ungodly to scourge
others for their iniquity, and to try his Peoples patience; but that the Lord
who is simply, and perfectly Pure and Holy, who can behold no iniquity, should
be the Author or Creator of Spiritual evil or sin in the Root, both the
Prophet Jeremy, and Christ the true Light does expressly contradict; for one
says, Lamentations 3. verse 38. Out of the mouth of the most High proceeds
not evil and good; Now by the word or mouth of the most High were all things
made that were made, but out of the Lords mouth, or from the Lords word,
proceeds not evil and good; therefore sin and evil in the Root, Ground, and
motion were never created by him; but arose from self, which is a swerving from
the word by whom all things were made: the other says, Every Plant that my
Heavenly Father has not planted, shall be plucked up: So he plainly
affirms, there are some plants and motions in man's heart which the Heavenly
Father never planted, and therefore will He by his powerful and good word pluck
them up; whereas ye plead for their standing, because ye say, God planted them:
so do ye directly oppose the true Prophet, and give him that called himself the
Truth, the lie: Now indeed the Lord does make Darkness his secret place, and
his pavillion round about, because he dwells only in the Light, and so no
darkness can come into his habitation; and therefore also are darkness and
Light both a like to him: for He dwelling wholly in the Light, comprehends
all the darkness and dark ways of men, knowing nothing but Light in himself;
but in man, as he is under a Law, which is his Light, darkness and its ways
are not alike to him; for he reproves the one by the other: And therefore
ought not man to apprehend them to be both alike in himself, but contrary; for
if he does, he believes a Lie, and so deceives his own Soul. Therefore cease
from your own wisdom, reasonings, and disputings, and in silence and humility
come to the Armor of Light, which is the true spiritual weapon; which casts
down all reasonings that exalt themselves against the Knowledge of Christ, as
Paul witnesses, whose words I do also experimentally witness.

Now a word to you, more ignorant Ranters, who never tasted of the good word of
God: some of whom perhaps scarce ever knew what an hours sense of guilt of sin
meant in all your lives; although ye have not, at some time or other, been
without a Checker and Reprover: who have now leightly and inconsiderately leapt
into a carnal and fleshly liberty, (which ye were in before) as it were by
authority; justifying your evil deeds, and idle, and naughty words, and
wicked, vain, and wandering thoughts, by taking up words, and imitating of
others; saying, All is good, and therefore what should we be troubled for? Alas
for you poor Creatures! ye know neither the beginning, nor the end, of the work
of God, even his great and strange work, in turning the Creature from darkness
unto light, and from Satan's power unto God's power; for in Satan's power are
ye at present held, and led Captive at his Will; so that unless ye turn to the
witness of God in your consciences, (and that while it is called to day,) ye
will dance into the eternal pit of everlasting destruction; for to the light
must ye all come, even to Christ the true light, which must show you what
Vessels of wrath ye are, as ye stand in the disobedient nature, through the
Fall, that so, your hearts being searched by that which makes manifest all Sin
and Evil, in thought, word, and deed, Judgment may be set up in the earthly
part; the which, as ye shall come humbly and sincerely to lay down under it,
shall be brought forth to Victory; and then ye shall feel Mercy rejoicing over
Judgment, and so the glad tidings of Salvation will be felt by you, which as ye
hold fast by Faith which purifieth the heart, fruits of righteousness, purity,
chastity, sobriety, temperance, etc. will appear visibly in you, and so the
good Tree will be known by its fruit: Whereas now ye are fruitless Trees that
cumber God's earth, yea, burden and eorrupt it exceedingly; and so, while the
Saints who sollow Christ in the Cross to their own Wills, and, in his
regeneration, feel the sweet effects of righteousness in themselves, which is
peace and assurance for ever; ye are as a barren heath in the wilderness, and
know not when any true good comes: therefore repent and turn to the Lord, with
fasting, weeping, and mourning; fasting from the leaven of deceit and
Hypocrisy, weeping for your sins and loosnesse, whereby God is dishonored, and
his good Spirit grieved within you, and mourning for your killing of the just
and crucifying the Lord of life afresh, that so the pure Oil of joy and
gladness ye may come to feel, the least drop whereof far exceeds all your
carnal pleasnres and delights, which will quickly have an end, and be as if
they had never been, and then will the remembrance thereof be bitter unto you:
for, Are not all such things bitterness in the latter end? Hear what Wisdom
says, Prove. 5. Hear me now therefore, Oh ye Children, and depart not from the
words of my mouth: Remove thy way far from her, (to wit, the deceitful harlot,
within or without, with all her inticements) and come not nigh the door of her
House; lest thou give thine honor unto others, and thy years unto the cruel;
lest strangers be filled with thy wealth, and thy labors be in the house of a
stranger: And thou mourn at the last when thy flesh and body are consumed, and
say, How have I hated Instruction, and my heart despised reproof, and have not
obeyed the voice of my Teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed
me? I was almost in all evil, in the midst of the Congregation and Assembly.

And as for you Ranters in practice and principles, who are turned National
Priests in outward show, for a livelihoods sake, though ye scarce or not at all
regard any truth of God, or the Scriptures, which ye dissemble by, or the
People's good to whom ye speak: Know, that this is the word of the Lord God
unto you; that by such deceit and dissimulation (which ye count your liberty)
ye treasure up wrath to your selves against the day of wrath, and revelation of
the righteous Judgment of God, who (think you what ye will) will reward every
man according to his works; even the Lord God, who is most perfectly pure, who
has his pure witness in every one of you, (though at present ye stifle it for
self ends) which hates and abhors all dissembling falsehood; which is for a
man (under any pretense whatsoever) to appear to be that outwardly to others
(and especially in a Priestly garb, which bears a show of external holiness,
more then ordinary) which he is not in his mind and heart; for it is Hypocrisy,
against which Christ, the true Light, has pronounced the greater damnation:
For the body is to be presented an acceptable Sacrifice to the Lord, which is
but ones reasonable service; for it is but reason that it should be so: but
your bodies and Spirits are (by this means) divided and separated, which should
go both together in all actions: For sometimes, when ye are at your
hypocritical devotions, or in the Pulpit in a Steeple-house, or preaching
elsewhere, your hearts are far off; it may be, to go into some Alehouse, or
ranting and loose Company, or to commit some uncleanness, or the like; and
when ye come into such company, it may be, be ready to laugh at your own
Prayers and Preachings, and how ye gull the People, who know not of what spirit
and conversation ye are: Oh ye deceitful ones! I testify against you in the
name of the Lord, That ye are the worst of all men living in the Nations, worse
than the multitude of Priests, who do much that they do from a deceived
Understanding and Vail that is over them; but ye transgress against the Light,
which (I believe) sometimes pleads with you, though ye put it from you, and
would esteem it but an imagination. Assure your selves that all you get from
the People in this way of deceit, be it less or more, will prove bitter
morsels to you in the end, when God's witness shall arise: Wherefore repent ye
also, and turn to his witness, which will lead you out of all the snares of sin
and deceit (if you will hearken to it and obey it) into the pure liberty of the
Sons of God, whose freedom stands not in doing what Self lists, but in that
which crosses the carnal, and leads into the paths of all Righteousness; out
of which paths (I testify) ye are at present, and are in the way of Balaam, who
loved the wages of Unrighteousness, and his reward shall ye receive, except ye
repent.

And as for all you that have run out into the loosnesse and carnal Liberty,
whom God has been pleased to recollect; so that some are brought, and some
bringing, into the fold of Righteousness, Innocence, and Peace, by believing
and following the true Light: I, in the love and fear of the Lord God, exhort
you to listen continually to the voice of the good Shepherd, whose rod and
staff has reproved and comforted, and is reproving and comforting you; that so
neither ye, nor I my self, may ever any more turn aside to folly, on suffer a
deceived Understanding to turn us aside from his living truth and witness,
whereby we should again let go the Anchor of the Soul, which is Christ, the
hope and eternal reward to all those that obey and love him, and his pure
appearance, more and more, lest the latter end be worse then the beginning.

FINIS.

