PAPERS Relating to a Bank of Credit UPON LAND SECURITY Proposed to the
Parliament of Scotland.
By Dr. HVGH CHAMBERLEN.
Published by Order of the Committee, to which the Consideration of the
Proposal is Referred.

ADVERTISEMENT.
The following Proposal, with the Objections, Answers, and other Papers
relating thereunto, having been Considered by the Committee of Parliament, were
ordered to be Printed: To the end, that all Persons, who have any other
Objections to make, might give in the same to the Clerk of the Committee,
against their next Meeting: Which is to be upon the 18 day of this instant July
1693.



To his Grace William Duke of Hamilton, their Majesty's High Commissioner, and
the Honorable Estates of PARLIAMENT.
The following Considerations and Proposals are humbly Presented by Dr. Hugh
Chamberlen.
WHereas it is most evident, First, A great Increase of Mo^ey, which answers
all things: Secondly, An Increase of People, which is the strength of any
Kingdom or State, and who do always gather to those places where Money is in
abundance. And Thirdly, An Increase of Shipping which is the strongest Rampart
of an Island; And by which Merchandise is conveyed to the most profitable
Market. It is therefore the undoubted Interest of the People of Scot^and,
especially those who have the greatest Estates, whether of ^and or Money, to
employ themselves to the Improvement of Trade, as universally as is possible.
And it is humbly conceived, that this proposition needs no other proof or
illustration, than what ^lainly arises from the Observation of those many and
great Ad^antages derived from Trade, to the Kingdom of England, the ^tates of
the United Provinces, and all other Kingdoms and States, that have applied
themselves to Commerce.

The Kingdom of Scotland is as Capable of making Advantages by Trade, Spain, at
that time the most potent King of Europe, have yet raised themselves within a
short period of Years, to that immense Wealth, Grandeur, and Power, that now
they possess: and have acquir^d it chiefly by their Trafficking in those
Subjects of Trade, which properly belong to this and other Nations.

The People of this Kingdom who have had liberal Education, docil^ and
Tractable, and likewise Robust and Vigorous of Body, and sufficiently inclined
to bestow their Labor, where there is prospect of moderat Gain: And being
hitherto accustomed to small Wages; It may justly be concluded, that no People
in the World are naturally more fitted or better qualified for setting up,
managing, and prosecuting a great and considerable Trade*

It is most certainly true in Fact, Europe.

The Titles and Tenures of Estates, especially Land Estates in this Kingdom, it
unprofitably possesses; and this Credit as far to exceed that of other Nations,
as a real solid and permanent Fund exceeds those of Opinion and Reputation, for
such all those of other Nations will be found to be when duly weighed, with
that hereby proponed for this Kingdom.

Upon these Considerations, which may so justly be presumed to induce the Right
Honorable Estates of Parliament, to receive and Examine a Proposal, that
Tenders to this Kingdom the certain and Effectual Means of so great Wealth and
Honor.

The said Doctor Hugh Chamberlen, Humbly offers to the Wisdom of this August
Assembly the following Proposal.

THE PROPOSAL.
THat a Statute or Law of this Kingdom may be Enacted, for Nominating certain
Trustees or Commissioners to be appointed now, and from time to time, by
Parliament, and accountable thereunto: which Trustees are to have Power to
receive and examine the Titles and Estates of all such as are willing to engage
their Lands for the forming such a secure current Credit. Upon findding any
such Estate clear in Title, the said Trustees to take a Conveya^ce thereof for
150 Years, upon Condition to be void when 100 Years payment shall have been
made to them of the Rent agreed; and such Rent to be paid, not in Money or
Gold, but only in the Bills of Credit issued to the Granter by the said
Trustees; and the Heretor or granter to enjoy the free and undisturbed
Possession of such Estate for the whole Term, he duly paying such Annualrent.
Upon the making over any such Estate, the Trustees thereupon direct their
Warrant to the Master of a proper Office, therefore to be erected, to Issue 100
years value of such Estate in Bills of Credit of several values, the better to
accommodat the uses of Trade: Which Bills of Credit are to be thus divided,
viz. 40 Years Value to the Proprietor; 30 years Value for his use, but to be
employed in such public Trade or Trades, as the several Proprietors shall in a
Body agree upon: 10 years Purchase to the Government in ease of the People in
point of Taxes, and may be appropriated to such uses where the honor of the
Crown, and Interest of the Nation may equally meet: And the residue to the use
of the said Doctor Chamberlen, as Master of such Office; who, and his Heirs to
be perpetually s^, in reward of this ^ervice done the Nation. And the Master of
the Office is out of such his part, to pay all the Charge of the Office, which
will be very great; and to answer all Contingencies of it: and also generous
and becoming Appointments to those Honorable Gentlemen to be made Trustees by
the Parliament, to see Justice ^^^e to the People, and the Honor and Security
of the Bank preserved inviolable. The Heretors, or Proprietors that raise this
Fund, are to be a Corporation, with perpetual Succession, and all necessary
Powers, for managing and carrying on such National Trade or Trades as they
shall agree upon. From 120 to 150 Pounds Sterling per annum, is to be made over
for the payment of every 100 Pound Per annum, to be engag^^ for this Fund, and
so in proportion; and this to the end that all Credit thus to be issued, may be
supported by a greater Value than it self.

That these Bills be made current in all Payments: and as they are paid yearly
for Rent to the Trustees, they are by them to be destroyed: so that at the end
of 100 years they will be all recall^^ (...) Bills of Credit thus founded upon
Land, and Strengthened by the Sanction of Law, and made in a form incapable of
Forgery, will be found an excellent Instrument or Medium of Trade, equal equal
in all respects to Gold and Silver Money, and Superior to them in diverse
regards. They are more sure than any Bills, Bonds, or Morgages, or any manner
of Credit now known in the World: They have a real solid extrinsick and
permanent Value inseparably adhering to them by Law: Nor can their value be
impaired or their Use taken away, by any future Parliaments, or by any
Revolution of State, where all men's properties will not also be swallowed up.
By this means a Considerable part of the Rents of the Nation may be applied to
Trade, which otherwise could not be done, Thus may all the Poor be profitably
employed: All due improvements made in Husbandry, and all needful Arts and
Manufacturies; The Shipping and strength of the Nation will be increased by Sea
and Land. Public Taxes will become easy to the Subjects, and all who
Contribute to this Fund will be made richer by it, at their very entry into it:
Besides what their Share in the future Trade will produce,

No person is forced to be concerned in it, yet all are permitted that shall
desire it; which renders it truly a free and Common-Good. Although at the end of
100 years, all this Credit will be called in; yet the Course of Trade managed
with it, cannot in the mean time but produce Gold, Silver, and other Valuable
Commodities, and that to a far greater Value than the Bills themselves; And the
Trade founded by them, will be perpetual. These Bills not passing out of the
Kingdom, are an Advantage: For all wise Laws restrain Money from going out: and
foreign Trade ought not to be managed with Money, but with the Native Product
and Manufacturies of the Kingdom. The Banks of Holland and Venice are pregnant
Instances of the power of Credit, under wise Regulation* And yet the Credit of
both those Banks, are far inferior to the Credit hereby proponed. They take the
ready Money, and employ i^ for the Government, and give their Bills to
Negotiate, in payment So that in any exigence of State, if all their Creditors
should at once call for their several Debts, it may reasonably be doubted if
either of these Banks should be able to answer their Credit: So that Opinion or
Reputation, is their great Support. But the Bank hereby proponed, touches no
man's ready Money; makes all men concerned in it presently much Richer than
before; lays sure Foundation of lasting National Trades* and becomes every year
a stronger Security than before: For as the Term of years le^sens, the Security
becomes more strong. Upon the whole, It is humbly conceived to have all the
Force of Demonstration, that this Kingdom Receiving and Enacting this proposal,
cannot fail of a Success superio^ to either of those Powerful and Opulent
States; because of the Advantages before enumerated, that this Kingdom
possesses ove^ them.

It is therefore humbly Prayed, by Oliver Salusbury, and Peter Chamberlen,
Gentlemen, Agents on this behalf, o^ the said Doctor Chamberlen, That his Grace
the Lord High Commissioner, and the Right Honorable the Estate of Parliament,
may please to commit the Consideration (...) this Proposal to be examined, and
Report being made, m^^ determine therein as in their great Wisdom they shall
(...) Cause.

THeir Majesty's High Commissioner and the Estates of Parliament, having
considered the above written Proposal; They remit it to the Earls of Linlithgow
and Lothian, the Viscount of Stair, and Lord Polwarth, Sir John Lock heart of
Castle-hill, Sir John Maxwel of Pollock, John Swinton of that Ilk, and Duncan
Forbes of Colloden, Sir John Hall, Sir Archbald Muire, Sir William Hamilton,
and Master James Smollet, together with the Officers of State, or the Major
part of them, being a Quorum, as a select Committee to consider of the said
Proposal, and to prep^^^ a Report thereanent, to the next Session ^f this, as
any other ensuing Parliament, and to meet at Edinburgh the 20. day of June
instant for the first Dyer, and to adjourn their Meetings the reafter, to such
times and places as they shall think convenient.

TWEEDDALE Cancel. I.P.D. Parl.
Edinburgh June 14. 1693.
Arguments to Accept Dr. Chamberlains Proposal.
THe Proposal offers 70 years purchase (that is 40 down, and 30 in a joint
Stock of Trade) for 100 years Annualrent: And this Bargain is to be had in
possession before any Rent paid. In the same specie, that is paid for the
Purchase, in the very same, and in no other, the Annualrent is to be paid; so
that here is nothing given, but what will be received back. And if any man is
compelled by Law, to receive a debt or Payment in this specie, another is by
the same Law, bound to receive it from him again: and so from hand to hand,
till it ends at last in the Annualrent which the Land is obliged to pay; and
there it cease. Would it do Scotland a service to bring some Millions of Gold
and Silver into it? this is Equivalent. For since Credit, upon a less secure
Fund, performs in other Countries, all the uses and Offices of Gold and Silver;
what should hinder the same Effects here, upon a better Fund? But however, if
an Act of Parliament pass de been esse: the Nation runs no Risque, if it do not
take: If it does take there is a Mine of Treasure opened to them, gratis. The
passing the Act, compelis no man to come in and engage his Land. The Proposer,
if desired, will be obliged to cause bring in 100000 lib. sterling or more, and
purchase Lands in Scotland, and give 30 years Purchase for them, the Act being
Passed; and then engage the Lands so purchased, in the Design. The Proposal is
not so very obscure, or Mysterious, to such as will take the pains to read it
two or three times over deliberately and attentively, and will then hearken to
what Answers can be given to any seeming Difficulty. The manner of putting it
into practice, and actual administration of it, will indeed require an uncommon
Skill and Understanding: and this part, Dr. Chamberlen, whose invention and
contrivance this design is, and who has been thirty years maturing it, can best
discharge, so as to reduce all to such an exact method, as shall make the whole
clear and facile, and prevent all confusion and disorder: which should they
happen, might disgrace and ruin the undertaking: but to settle this point, and
concert the matter of Trade, for the greatest benefit of this Kingdom; the Dr.
in case the Act pass, will come to Scotland.

A Comparison of the Circulation of Gold, and of Credit.
A. Settles his Land for a hundred years, to pay a hundred lib. of Annualrent,
in Bills of Credit to the Office; he receiving in the same Credit, a Sum or
Consideration for the Purchase of it.

B. Makes a like Settlement of Lands to C. to pay a hundred lib. in Gold. for
the same term of years; having received his Purchase Money in Gold.

A. Pays a Debt of a hundred lib. in this Credit, to his Coach-maker; the
Coach-maker pays it to the Currier for Leather; the Currier pays the same to
the Tanner for Hides: the Tanner pays the same to the Butcher for Skins and raw
Hides: the Butcher pays it to a Grasier for Cattle: the Grasier to a Farmer for
Corn and Grass: the Farmer pays it to A. his Landlord: and A. pays it to the
Office for his Annualrent. Now here is all their occasions answered: and none
the worse, or the poorer by it; but the contrary: the Office receiving back
what it delivered out.

Now take the Payments as running in Gold.

B. pays a Debt in Gold of a hundred pound, to his Coach-maker: the Coach-maker
pays the same to a Currier for Leather: the Currier pays it to a Tanner for
Hides: the Tanner to a Butcher for Skins and raw Hides: the Butcher to a
Grasier for Cattle: the Grasier pays it to a Farmer for Corn and Grass: the
Farmer pays it to B. his Landlord for Rent: and the Landlord pays the same Gold
to C. for his Annualrent. Now by this Comparison it is plain, that in the
Circulation and course of Dealing, from the Office to the Landlord, and back to
the Office again, the turn is as well served as in the instance of Gold. And
the Office is no poorer in receiving back the Credit: Nor C. no richer in
receiving Back his Gold; than both were, at the issuing of their several Sums
in Credit and Gold.

Three OBJECTIONS against the Proposal, given in to the Committee, the 30 of
June, 1693.
OBJECTION I.
IT appears by Doctor Chamberlen's Proposal, that every one who shall settle
one hundred Pound per annum for a Bank of Trade, shall upon the Settlement
made, receive payment from the said Bank of the Sum of four thousand Pound in
Tallies, current in all Payments, by virtue of an Act of Parliament: and shall
have other three thousand pound of Tallies, employed in Trade and Commerce to
his use and behoof.

Suppose the Person Receiver of the four thousand Pound being in Debt, shall
pay his Debt with the said four thousand Pound, or a great part of it; so that
his Creditor shall be forced to receive his Sum in his said Tallies.

It is questioned, What use the said Creditor who lived upon the Interest of
his Money, can make of his Stock; seeing in all probability there would be no
Borrowers upon Annualrent: For it is to be supposed, that many landed Men will
not need to Borrow, but be in a condition to pay the Debt they owe.

There will be such a considerable Stock made up of the several three Thousand
Pounds employed in Trade, that such Creditors not being able, as it seems, to
be of the Corporation proposed, with the Landed-Men; cannot propose to
themselves to employ their Stock in Trading with any reasonable Prospect of
Advantage.

OBJECTION II.
SUppose, That all the Natural and Artificial Product of Scotland, yearly at
present, is worth a Million Sterling, and that there are two Millions of
Tallies Coined, and Secured on a real Fund, as is proposed.

Then, one Million being bestowed upon the years Product, what shall the Havers
of the other Million do with their Tallies? For on the Supposition, there is
neither Natural nor Artificial Product, but what is already bought by the other
Million, the Tallies are only passable Money in Scotland; and therefore the
other Million must lie idle, and the Person who received them from his Debtor
must let them lie Idle and Starve.

If you will say, that Trade is infinite, and the subject of Trade is
inexhaustible, which is not true: yet as to any Nation, and particularly as to
Scotland, the subject is certainly within the value of one Million: And no
other Nation will give Goods for our Tallies: so that of necessity, all that is
Coined above the yearly product of Natural and Artificial Goods, must be
useless until the Product increases.

OBJECTION III.
IT appears by this Proposal of Doctor Chamberlens, that as much Money will be
raised as may pay all the Debt of the Nation, and so there will be no use nor
place for Money upon Annualrent. In which Case, Quaeritur, what shall become of
the Widows and Orphans, and other Persons in the Kingdom, who are not capable
of Trade? Seeing there is neither access to buy Land, nor lend out the Money
upon Interest.

ABSTRACT of, and ANSWER to, the first and third OBJECTIONS.
FOr these two differ not in substance. The scope of them is, That all the
Debts upon Land being paid by this Proposal; and all the Subject of Trade
wholly taken up by it: What shall become of those who subsist only upon the
Interest of their Money? For there will be no Land to purchase, at least for
some years; nor none to borrow at Interest: And Trade, either is not understood
by such Persons; or there is not room to receive them.

Answer 1. Would this Objection be raised, if these Debts were paid, and such a
Trade Driven by Money of Gold and Silver? If it were then raised, it must needs
be thought groundless: unless it be a Crime to pay Debts; and drive a National
Trade, without the exclusion of any private Person. If it would then be thought
groundless; there is equal reason it should be thought so in this case. For
this Credit is equal in all respects, and Superior in many, to coined Gold and
Silver, which is after made appear.

2. If this Proposal be a public and National Good, the private interest of
some few particular Persons, ought to give way to it: which has ever been the
Rule of all wise Governments.

3. The payment of all Debts upon Land will be greatly to the honor and
advantage of the Nation: and will preserve the Estates and Honors of the
ancient Nobility and Gentry and will also of natural Consequence drive into
Trade, which is the Nations Strength and Riches, the greater part of that Money
that now preys upon the vitals and noblest parts of the Kingdom by devouring
Usury, which is the known destruction of untrading Persons.

4. It is denied, that the whole Subject of Trade in this Kingdom, can be
exhausted by the intended Stock, so as that any can want Employment for their
Money: For no Nation ever was known to be too Rich: And the Uses and Occasions
of Money do always naturally multiply faster than Money it self. Scotland has
many profitable and improveable Subjects of Trade: and had she Money to give
Life to Ingenuity and Industry, the Productions of Nature, and improvement of
Art, might in few years be many hundred times improved.

The Sea alone is an inexhaustible Treasure, and can employ many Millions.
Holland, who has no Subject of Trade; nor can have any; yet by vast Wealth in
Coin and Credit, Drives the greatest Trade of the World, and grows Rich by the
product of other Countries; And by making her self the general Storehouse of
Europe, and almost of the World; and the Carrier also of the Goods of all
Nations to and fro, wherever she is permitted.

In what place soever there is great plenty of a Common Measure or Medium of
Trade, which we usually term Money, it is impossible in should ly Dead,
Useless, or stagnate: For like streams of Water, wherever they break out, they
will by natural and politic Reason force their own way into the wide Sea of
Trade.

5. But to descend nearer to the Moneyed Men, Women, or Children. There will
always more or less, be Money taken up at Interest. The difference this
Proposol will make, will be thus, That now Money is for the most part let to
Interest, to the ruin of those that pay it; being a dead weight upon their
Estates. But in our Case, the industrious Merchant only will take up Money at
Use; who will at the same time enrich himself, and serve the Creditor; by which
also the Nation it self is improved.

6. But further, two thirds of each Landed-Mans Stock in Trade may be made
allienable at pleasure; In order to the taking in of Moneyed-men, and thereby
diffusing the Benefits of this Proposal to the greater number of Persons, to
the end it may become the more National.

7. Also, it may be enacted, that every Creditor upon Land, shall have Right to
the value of half his Debt upon the Land it self, as if he were Proprietor for
so much; but the other half he to accept in Credit; with which he may also
purchase Shares in the Trade of such as are desirous to sell. And thus may such
persons be profitably concerned in Trade, tho unskilled therein; and without
any just fear, as I have showed before, of want of Room to receive them.

8. But if there should be any found so idle or unhappy, after the Springs of
Trade thus strongly fixed, as to know no better way to employ their Money, thus
taken in Credit, than at Interest; Let them put it into the Bank upon these
Terms, viz. To have 4 per cent Interest: And if they call out their Money,
which not to be till after two years certain, and then giving six Months
Notice; they shall accept it in this Credit: But if the Bank put it upon them,
then to be paid in Gold and Silver; and the Bank to give also six Months notice
to the Creditors.

Abstract of, and Answer, to the second Objection.
THe Objection supposes that all the Natural and Artificial Product of
Scotland, exceeds not yearly one Million. And therefore, if two Millions be
Coined; one must be idle and the Possessor of it must Starve. For the Money is
only passable in Scotland: and all Goods there, are bought up with the first
Million. And since no other Nation will give Goods for the Tallies, there will
be no use for them.

Answer. Granting that all the present product of Scotland, Natural and
Artificial does not exceed a Million; yet I deny the Inferrence, that if one
other Million, or ten other Millions be coined, they must be idle, and the
possessor starve. Let Scotland be deprived of all her present Money, and her
present product will instantly abate; and in few years come to nothing.
Increase her Money and her product will be accordingly. Who knows how far the
Natural Product of this Kingdom may extend when there is Money, that causae
sine qua non, to improve things to their highest Perfection. Many Grounds ly
now waste for want of Stock to employ them: And the Nerves of Industry are
every where slackned, by the scarcity of this precious Material, that gives
Life and Motion to every political Body. Money, or what answers it, is the
Nourishment of Kingdoms and States: Withdraw that Food, and they instantly
languish: Supply it plentifully, and they become full of Health and Vigor.
Lands and Hands are the Material and efficient Causes of Wealth: Scotland has
enough of both to raise her to a flourishing condition, if Money were added to
enable her hands, and cultivate her Lands. Add to this the Improvement of so
many Arts and Manufactories, as never fail to offer themselves where there is
plenty of Money; And these in Conjunction with your Natural product, must be
perpetual Springs of Wealth. What does Holland perform, without any Natural
product, only by her Manufactories and Artificial Products. Gold and Silver can
only come to Scotland, by means of an enlarged and extended Trade: Trade can be
only enlarged and extended by a mighty increase and Perfection of Natural and
Artificial product: And those products, as in all other places, so here also,
can only be obtained by great plenty of Money: Which plenty this Proposal
undenyably offers. Your Product in great plenty, in great Perfection, and at
moderate Price will command a Trade: And all those Advantages are the necessary
Effects of a vast Treasure of Money, which will naturally make its own way to
Trade. That Money, because of its plenty, can lie idle, and its Possessors
starve, is a Position till now unheard of. All Experience is against it: For I
deny that any one instance can be given, where part of a Nation starved,
because the whole was rich. It has as little Foundation in Reason as in
Experience. For what Cause can be assigned, why Plenty should occasion Poverty?
Misuse of Plenty may do it: But then the misapplication, not the Plenty is in
fault. But those Misapplications are only personal Follies; they are not
chargeable upon Nations with regard to Trade.

That our proposed Credit, or Land-money, is only passable in Scotland, is an
Excellency it possesses superior to Money of Gold and Silver. The Laws made by
all Nations to restrain the Export of Money, are a plain Demonstration that it
ought to be kept at Home. And this Benefit is Essential to this Credit, it is
in its own Nature Local, and needs not the restraint of Laws.

That any can want Employment for this Money, or starve in the Possession of
it, I think I have sufficiently evinced to be impossible. Which yet may further
appear by Paragraph the fourth of the Answer to the first and third Objections.

Eight other Objections to Doctor Chamberlens Proposal, given in to the
Committee, on Tuesday the 4 of July 1693
THe great Medium of Trade and Commerce, supposed meant by the Proposal, being
to be a kind of Coin, which is to derive its value from an Act of Parliament,
and of which the Pieces being to pass for so great a value (as some of them for
100, some for 50, and the least for 5 lib. Sterling) may be a great temptation
for ill Men to bend their wits, and hazard their Lives, to counterfeit the
same. Quaeritur, How the Nation shall be secured against an Evil of so
daugerous a consequence?

II. The Proposal designing several Millions Sterling, which this Coin is to
pass for, and which cannot be useful to the Nation, and owners thereof, unless
thereby an universal Trade through all the World be carried on by them; which
cannot be without an additional Stock in real Species of Gold and Silver, to
serve in Exchange for the Minute uses of the Nation, whilst this Coin is to
have course: And also requires Trafficking Merchants. who are acquainted and
experienced in a Trade of so vast an extent, for carrying it on. Quaeritur, How
the Nation shall be secured of this additional Stock, (of an hundred thousand
Pounds Sterling, or more) which the maker of the Proposal offers; and that such
Merchants shall take up their Residence here, and carry on the Trade proposed,
and instruct those of this Nation in it.

III. There being little or no use of Annual-rent, if the Proposal take effect,
those who have Money, and are not acquainted with Trade, will be obliged to
carry their Money out of the Kingdom, that they may have Annualrent for it else
where. Quaeritur, How the Nation shall be secured against the draining, this
way, of the Gold and Silver that shall be in the Kingdom, out of it, and
nothing left but this Statutory Coin?

IV. The Debts of all the Landed men will be paid, by the forty years
Purchase, given for their Lands. And if the Act of Parliament, proposed to be
made, should happen to be thereafter Rescinded; the Creditors (who should have
nothing but this Statutory Coin at that time in their hands) should come to be
ruined.

V. The Proposal being designed for the good of the Nation; and carrying a
manifest and extraordinary advantage to the Landed men (above what they could
have projected, or reasonably desired) but seeming rather prejudicial then
profitable to the Merchants and Moneyed men; both in respect that the Trade of
the Nation, which is now only lodged in their hands, comes to be lodged in the
hands of the Landed men; and that the Merchants and M^^^ved men are to be
deprived of the security, which they formerly had, for their Money, upon the
Estates of their Debitors; and of the Annualrents, whereby many of them lived
very plentifully. Quaeritur, What method is proper to bring the loss and gain
of the Landed and Moneyed men to a more equal Balance? And how the Moneyed Men
shall be secured in the payment of their Annualrents, at six per cent, for five
or six years, until they be taught the way of Trading with their Money?

VI. The Proposal being made to the English Parliament, the Members whereof are
understood to be a Wise and Trading People, and the same (as it is reported,)
Rejected by them, though Calculat, (as it would seem) rather for the great
Wealth and Substance of England, than for the present Condition of this Nation.
Queritur, How can it be made appear, that it is reasonable for this Nation, to
embrace a Proposal rejected by that Wise People? As also, it would be cleared,
how a proposal commensured for them, can be agreeable to us.

VII. If Money shall be multiplied at the rate of the Proposal, all Commodities
will rise in their prices, and Workmen will exact greater Wages, And it is not
to be supposed, that people getting their payment in Statutory Coin, will take
the same price as if they were getting payment in Gold or Silver. And the
Advantage that the Masters of Manufactories have, in this Nation, above those
in England is, that the Wages of the Workmen of Scotland is much less than of
those in England. Quaeritur, How this prejudice can be prevented, and the
Nation secured against the same?

VIII. The Coin to be made use of, conform to this proposal, being to be
definit in the Quantity: How shall the Nation be made secure, that no more be
Coined, or made use of in the Kingdom than that precise quantity agreed upon?

A Comparison of Money and Credit, given in to the Committee, on Tuesday July
4th 1693. and relating to the Objections and Answers then given in.
MOney is a Common and Secure Pledge, instituted to supply the Defects of
Barter: and to be the Measure, Medium, and Account of Trade.

What ever can answer those ends, is duly Qualified to be made Money, by the
Laws of any Nation.

Money must have these Essential Qualities, viz. 1. Value: to make it a
Security in Exchange for all sorts of Goods. 2. Different Values, for
convenience of smaller and greater Payments. 3. Stamp of the Government: not to
give, but to attest its Value, and to Authorize the Currency of it. 4.
Durability: to prevent loss by wearing out, or easily perishing. 5.
Portability: for ease of Carriage.


The Tallies, Bills of Credit, or Land-money, proposed by Dr. Chamberlen, will
have all these qualities of Money, equally with Money of Gold and Silver in all
respects, and superior in some.

1. As to Value: Money of Gold and Silver, exceeds not its Value by Weight, at
the most: and is very often short of it; either by too great Allay in Coynage;
or by Washing, Filing, or Clipping. Whereas every Bill of this Credit will be
secured by Land of greater worth than it is Coined for: and is not subject to
any Allay in Coynage; nor to have its value diminished by any sort of
fraudulent Arts whatever.

2ly. As to different Values: that will be settled as shall be judged most
Efficacious for the ends of Trade.

3dly. Stamp of the Government. 4thly. Durability. 5thly. Portability, are
equally provided for as in Gold and Silver: indeed more, as to Portability: for
100 pound in Credit, will scarce exceed an Ounce of Silver, in Weight or Bulk.

Money is not so convenient, as this Credit, in these respects, viz. For daily
use in large Payments; for the trouble and Loss of time in Telling and
Retelling; the Danger of Clipped and Counterfeit Money; the trouble of carrying
great Sums from House to House; its being subject to be Transported to other
Nations; and to be hoarded by Misers, who fondly dote upon the Metalls.

Money is only a secure Pledge, of a known Value, that a man shall be repayd in
some other Commodity, for the Commodity he parts withal: and it serves but to
supply the Interval of time, between the selling of one Commodity, and the
buying of another.

Now the proposed Tallies can well supply that Interval, and are yet a more
secure Pledge than Money of Gold and Silver: For ten thousand Pounds in Money
of Gold and Silver, is of no greater value than what it pretends; and is very
often of a less value. But ten thousand Pounds in this Credit will be secured
by 22500 pounds in Land: For to so much amounts 150 pound per annum, the
payment thereof for 100 years, being secured by 150 years, tho to be void upon
100 Annual Payments.

The Difference between the true value of Land, and Money, is evident, in that
Money is willingly turned into Land; but Land is not turned into Money, but
through Necessity and Constraint. All men allow Land a sufficient, and the best
Security for Money: what Secures must then be more eligible than what is
secured.

ANSWER to the Eight Objections given in to the Committee, upon the 4th. of
July 1693.
To the First.

THe Medium of Trade proposed by Dr. Chamberlen, is a Species of Money, or
Bills of Credit, not deriving any value from an Act of Parliament, but having
the Authority of a Law to Attest, that they have a real Value inseparably
annexed, and adhering to them; and secured by a Fund of Land of greater
intrinsic Value than so much Gold or Silver, as the Credit is to pass for. And
that this will, de facto, be the Case, the Comparison of Money and Credit, this
day also given into the Committee, plainly makes out. As to the preventing
Forgery and Counterfeits; I grant the Proposal to be worth nothing if there be
not an effectual Provision against them. But the Method of that, and Management
of the whole, without Disorder, are Secrets that the Doctor, in Prudence,
reserves to himself, until the Nation have Secured to him the Reward of his
Service, according to his Printed Proposal given in to the Parliament the 14th
of June last.

To the Second.

AN Universal Trade, and through all the World, are very large and Extensive
Terms: and a far less Compass will take up ten times a greater Sum than is
meant by the Proposal. I confess that Gold and Silver will be always useful to
serve the Minute Necessitys of Trade; and those Necessities will occasion a
double Benefit: They will both preserve the present Money within the Kingdom:
and cause Returns of more, as the Balance of Trade. But if in the mean time,
100000 lib. be desired, Security shall be given to have it brought into the
Kingdom upon very reasonable Terms; in case the Proposal be Established by Law,
to the Satisfaction of Dr. Chamberlen. The Doctor will also cause present the
Nation with such a Scheme of Trade; assisted with such eminent understanding
and expe^^^nced Merchants, as shall give a fair and open prospect of all the
Advantages, that result from a proportional Stock, and a well laid Commerce.

To the Third.

THere will be no necessity for any Man to carry his Money to be put to
Interest out of the Kingdom, in case this Proposal take effect: For it is
before plainly showed how Moneyed men may more profitably employ their Money at
home. The Laws of the Kingdom against Exporting Money being reinforced; between
the fear of them and the Advantages of Keeping their Money at home, the Nation
will be in no danger of being drained of their Gold and Silver. Besides, the
great increase of Trade, which must be the necessary Consequent of this
Proposal, will occasion a mighty increase of Gold and Silver in a very few
years.

To the Fourth.

THis Objection seems to fear, that the Nobility and Gentry having paid their
Debts by this means, the Act may afterward come to be rescinded, to the Ruin
of their Creditors. But the Honor, Justice, and Interest of the whole Nation
will sufficiently secure all men; from the fear that a Law made to this end can
ever be rescinded by any Design or Inclination of the Nobility and Gentry. For,
were they capable of so unjust and ungenerous Thoughts, what need they go so
far about; and do at twice what may be done at once? One single Act of
Parliament to discharge all their Debts will do the whole Work at a Blow. But
further, the rescinding such a Law will be utterly impossible; for the Credit
is founded upon Securities made by private persons, for valuable
Considerations, and in virtue of a Law for the Establishing a National Trade.
As well may it be feared, that an Act should pass to Suppress the present
Money, and leave it useless: or to deprive any number of men of their Legal
Inheritance. But further, The rescinding this Law would be for the Nation to
Rob it self: for the Credit being Current in all payments would presently
diffuse it self through the whole Body of the people: and the Nobility and
Gentry would always be well furnished with it, by Rent from their Tennants:
besides the very great loss they would sustain by being deprived of their
shares in the National Trade, which as sounded upon the Credit, must immediately
sink with it. When this is well considered, there can be no imagination so
sickly to entertain so wild and so impossible a Dream. And yet if the
Parliament think fit (though I am sure there can be no need) they may insert a
Clause, that in case such Act should be rescinded, each Creditor and Debtor
shall stand in the same terms and relation to each other, with regard to their
Debts and Credits, and the Legal Obligations to Payment, and Remedies for
Recovery, as at the time of making such Act.

To the Fifth.

The advantage of this Proposal is not so limited to the Landed Man, but that
mediatly, or immediately its influence and benefit must be extended through the
whole Nation in general. and more or less to every individual. It is a mistake
to suppose that either Merchants or Moneyed men will be prejudiced. It is
already showed, how moneyed men may sufficiently find their Account. As to the
Merchants; is it reasonable for them to oppose the Flourishing of their
Country, by a large and National Trade; in favor of their present little
Dealings, that deserve not the name of Commerce? It ought to suffice the
Merchants, that not one of them shall be excluded from driving whatever Trade
he thinks fit. And such of them as have Land or money, may come in and be
actual Sharers: and such others, whose skill and fitness shall recommend them,
will no doubt be employed as the Managers of this National Trade; where they
may gain without hazard: For the Nobility and Gentry, whose Education fits them
more for State and Military Employments, than for Commerce, will unquestionably
call in the Assistance of the Skilful Merchants. If 1000 Foreign Merchants,
with each 10000 lib. Stock, should Petition the Parliament for leave to reside
in this Kingdom, and to follow Merchandise here; is it probable the Government
would deny to receive them, because the Merchants of little stocks should
oppose it? The public Interest is first to be sought; and no little ends are
to be brought in Competition with the prosperity of a Nation.

To the Sixth.

It is not true that this Proposal was ever Rejected by the English Parliament.
But if it had; it is not the first time the English have mistaken their
Interest. They mi^^ to be Masters of the West Indies, by neglecting the
Proposer. A wise Nation Acts by its own Reason; and does not implicitly take
Rules from others. The Wisdom of this Nation is, or ought to be the best Judge
of its own Wants, and whether this proposal be a proper Cure. I think it a
Solecism, to say, the Proposal seems better Calcutate for the great Wealth and
Substance of England, than for the present Condition of this Nation. The
contrary is true: For the whole have less need of the Physician.

To the Seventh.

The Increase of the Medium of Trade, will not so raise the Price of
Commodites, as this Objection fears. For as money multiplies, so do the Uses
and Occasins for it, and Arts and Manufactures in proportion. No wise man
throws away his money, or pays too dear, because he is rich. And the poor, who
subsist by their Labor, must endanger to starve themselves and Families, if
they stand stiff upon extravagant prices. Besides, they cannot all combine to
do so; and want will soon Reduce the Obstinate. But the instance of the Dutch
is as good as a thousand Arguments. They are vastly Rich, both in Coin and
current Credit; yet neither Scotland nor Ireland) though bare enough of Money)
can produce their Manufactures cheaper than the Dutch.

To the Eighth.

The Security to the Nation, that no Tallies can be issued, but what are first
secured by Land, arises from the Care and Inspection of the Trustees appointed
by Parliament; and from the Order and method of management; and the Checks upon
each officer, so contrived; as to make it impossible for a single Tally to be
Coined, that is not first duly Secured by Land. And the like exactness will be
used in the yearly receiving back the Tallies, and cancelling of them as they
come in.

FINIS.

