LITHOBOLIA: OR, THE Stone-Throwing Devil.

BEING An Exact and True Account (by way of Journal) of the various Actions of
Infernal Spirits, or (Devils Incarnate) Witches, or both; and the great
Disturbance and Amazement they gave to George Waltons Family, at a place called
Great Island in the Province of New-Hantshire in New England, chiefly in
Throwing about (by an Invisible hand) Stones, Bricks, and Brick-bats of all
Sizes, with several other things, as Hammers, Mauls, Iron-Crows, Spits, and
other Domestic Utensils, as came into their Hellish Minds, and this for the
space of a Quarter of a Year.

By R. C. Esquire who was a Sojourner in the same Family the whole Time, and an
Ocular Witness of these Diabolick Inventions.

The Contents hereof being manifestly known to the Inhabitants of that
Province, and Persons of other Provinces, and is upon Record in his Majesty's
Council-Court held for that Province.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by E. Whitlook near Stationers' Hall, School.

To The much Honored Mart. Lumley, Esquire(...)
SIR,
AS the subsequent Script deserves not to b(...) called a Book, so these
precedent Lines presume not to a Dedication: But, Sir, it is an occasion that I
am ambitious to lay hold on, to discover to You by this Epitome (as it were)
the propension and inclination I have to give a more full(...) and perfect
demonstration of the Honor, Love and Service, I own (as I think my self
obliged) to have(...) for You. To a Sober, Judicious, and well Principled
Person, such as your Self, plain Truths ar(...) much more agreeable than the
most charming and surprising Romance or Novel, with all the strange(...) turns
and events. That this is of the first sort, (as have formerly upon Record
attested) I do now ave(...) and protest; yet neither is it less strange than
true and so may be capable of giving you some Diversion for an hour: For this
interruption of your more serious ones, I cannot doubt your candor and
clemency, in pardoning it, that so well know (and do most sensibly acknowledge)
your high Worth and Goodness; and that the Relation I am Dignified with, infers
a mutual Patronization.

SIR, I am Your most Humble Servant, R. C.

R. F. Esquire
TO tell strange feats of Demons, here I am;
Strange, but most true they are, even to a Dram
Though Sadduceans cry, it is all a Sham.
Here Is Stony Arg'uments of persuasive Dint,
They Will not believe it, told, nor yet in Print:
What should the Reason be? The Devil 's in it.
And yet they wish to be convinced by Sight,
Assured by Apparition of a Sprite;
But Learned Brown does state the matter right:
Satan will never Instrumental be
Of so much Good, to' Appear to them; for he
Has them sure by their Infidelity.
But you, my Noble Friend, know better things;
Your Faith, mounted on Religions Wings,
Sets you above the Clouds whence Error springs.
Your Soul reflecting on this lower Sphere,
Of froth and vanity, joys often to hear
The Sacred Ora'cles, where all Truths appear,
Which will Conduct out of this Labyrinth of Night,
And lead you to the source of Intellect'ual Light.
Which is the Hearty Prayer of Your most faithful Humble Servant(...) R. (...)

LITHOBOLIA: OR, THE Stone-throwing Devil, etc.
SUCH is the Skeptical Humor of this Age for Incredulity, (not to say
Infidelity,) That I wonder they do not take up and profess, in terms, the
Pyrrhonian Doctrine of disbelieving their very Senses. For that which I am
going to relate happening to cease in the Province of New Hampshire in America,
just upon that Governor's Arrival and Appearance at the Council there, who was
informed by my self, and several other Gentlemen of the Council, and other
considerable Persons, of the true and certain Reality hereof, yet he continued
tenacious in the Opinion that we were all imposed upon by the waggery of some
unlucky Boys; which, considering the Circumstances and Passages hereafter
mentioned, was altogether impossible.

I have a Wonder to relate; for such (I take it) is so to be termed whatsoever
is Praeternatural, and not assignable to, or the effect of, Natural Causes: It
is a Lithobolia, or Stone-throwing, which happened by Witchcraft, (as was
supposed) and maliciously perpetrated by an Elderly Woman, a Neighbor
suspected, and (I think) formerly detected for such kind of Diabolical Tricks
and Practices; and the wicked Instigation did arise upon the account of some
small quantity of Land in her Field, which she pretended was unjustly taken
into the Land of the Person where the Scene of this Matter lay, and was her
Right; she having been often very clamorous about that Affair, and heard to
say, with much Bitterness, that her Neighbor (innuendo the forementioned
Person, his Name George Walton) should never quietly enjoy that piece of
Ground. Which, as it has confirmed my self and others in the Opinion that there
are such things as Witches, and the Effects of Witchcrast, or at least of the
mischievous Actions of Evil Spirits; which some do as little give Credit to, as
in the Case of Witches, utterly rejecting both their Operations and their
Beings, we having been Eyewitnesses of this Matter almost every Day for a
quarter of a Year together; so it may be a means to rectify the depraved
Judgment and Sentiments of other disbelieving Persons, and absolutely convince
them of their Error, if they please to hear, without prejudice, the plain, but
most true Narration of it; which was thus.

Some time ago being in America, (in His then Majesty's Service) I was lodged
in the said George Walton's House, a Planter there, and on a Sunday Night,
about Ten a Clock, many Stones were heard by my self, and the rest of the
Family, to be thrown, and (with Noise) hit against the top and all sides of the
House, after he the said Walton had been at his Fence-Gate, which was between
him and his Neighbor one John Amazeen an Italian, to view it; for it was again
(as formerly it had been (the manner how being unknown) wrung off the Hinges,
and cast upon the Ground; and in his being there, and return home with several
Persons of (and frequenting) his family and House, about a flight shot distant
from the Gate, they were all assaulted with a peal of Stones, (taken, we
conceive, from the Rocks hard by the House) and this by unseen Hands or Agents.
For by this time I was come down to them, having risen out of my Bed at this
strange Alarm of all that were in the House, and do know that they all looked
out as narrowly as I did, or any Person could, (it being a bright Moonlight
Night) but could make no Discovery. Thereupon, and because there came many
Stones, and those pretty great ones, some as big as my Fist, into the Entry or
Porch of the House, we withdrew into the next Room to the Porch, no Person
having received any Hurt, (praised be Almighty Providence, for certainly the
infernal Agent, constant Enemy to Mankind, had he not been overruled, intended
no less than Death or Maim) save only that two Youths were lightly hit, one on
the Leg, the other on the Thigh, notwithstanding the Stones came so thick, and
so forcibly against the sides of so narrow a Room. Whilst we stood amazed at
this Accident, one of the Maidens imagined she saw them come from the Hall,
next to that we were in, where searching, (and in the Cellar, down out of the
Hall,) and finding no Body, another and my self observed two little Stones in a
short space successively to fall on the Floor, coming as from the Ceiling close
by us, and we concluded it must necessarily be done by means extraordinary and
praeternatural. Coming again into the Room where we first were, (next the
Porch) we had many of these lapidary Salutations, but unfriendly ones; for,
shutting the Door, it was no small Surprise to me to have a good big Stone come
with great force and noise (just by my Head) against the Door on the inside;
and then shutting the other Door, next the Hall, to have the like Accident; so
going out again, upon a necessary Occasion, to have another very near my Body,
clattering against the Board-wall of the House; but it was a much greater, to
be so near the danger of having my Head broke with a Mall; or great Hammer
brushing along the top or roof of the Room from the other end, as I was walking
in it, and lighting down by me; but it fell so, that my Landlord had the
greatest damage, his Windows (especially those of the first mentioned Room)
being with many Stones miserably and strangely battered, most of the Stones
giving the Blow on the inside, and forcing the Bars, Lead, and hasps of the
Casements outward, and yet falling back (sometimes a Yard or two) into the
Room; only one little Stone we took out of the glass of the Window, where it
lodged its self in the breaking it, in a Hole exactly fit for the Stone. The
Pewter and Brass were frequently pelted, and sometimes thrown down upon the
Ground; for the Evil Spirit seemed then to affect variety of mischief, and
diverted himself at this end after he had done so much Execution at the other.
So were two Candlesticks, after many hittings, at last struck off the Table
where they stood; and likewise a large Pewter Pot, with the force of these
Stones. Some of them were taken up hot, and (it seems) immediately coming out
of the Fire; and some (which is not unremarkable) having been laid by me upon
the Table along by couples, and numbered, were found missing; that is, two of
them, as we returned immediately to the Table, having turned our backs only to
visit and view some new Stone-charge or Window-breach; and this Experiment was
four or five times repeated, and I still found one or two missing of the
Number, which we all marked, when I did but just remove the Light from off the
Table, and step to the Door, and back again.

After this had continued in all the parts and sides of the first Room (and
down the Chimney) for above four hours, I, weary of the Noise, and sleepy, went
to Bed, and was no sooner fallen asleep, but was awakened with the unwelcome
disturbance of another Battery of a different sort, it issuing with so
prodigious a Noise against the thin Board-wall of my Chamber, (which was within
another) that I could not imagine it less than the fracture and downfall of
great part of the Chamber, or at least of the Shelves, Books, Pictures, and
other things, placed on that side, and on the Partition Wall between the
Antichamber and the Door of mine. But the Noise immediately bringing up the
Company below, they assured me no Mischief of that nature was done, and showed
me the biggest Stone that had as yet been made use of in this unaccountable
Accident, weighing eight pound and an half, that had burst open my Chamber Door
with a rebound from the Floor, as by the Dent and Bruise in it near the Door I
found next Morning, done, probably, to make the greater Noise, and give the
more Astonishment, which would sooner be effected by three Motions, and
consequently three several Sounds, viz. one on the Ground, the next to and on
the Door, and the last from it again to the Floor, then if it had been one
single Blow upon the Door only; which ('it is probable) would have split the
Door, which was not permitted, nor so much as a square of the Glass-Window
broken or cracked (at that time) in all the Chamber. Glad thereof, and desiring
them to leave me, and the Door shut, as it was before, I endeavored once more
to take my Rest, and was once more prevented by the like passage, with another
like offensive Weapon, it being a whole Brick that (...) in the Antichamber
Chimney, and used again to the same malicious purpose as before, and in the
same manner too, as by the mark in the Floor, whereon was some of the dust of
the Brick, broken a little at the end, apparent next Morning, the Brick it self
lying just at the Door. However, after I had lain a while, harkning to their
Adventures below, I dropped asleep again, and received no further Mosestation
that Night.

In the Morning (Monday Morning) I was informed by several of the Domestics of
more of the same kind of Trouble; among which the most signal was, the
Vanishing of the Spit which stood in the Chimney Corner, and the sudden coming
of it again down the same Chimney, sticking of it in a Log that lay in the
Fireplace or Hearth; and then being by one of the Family fet by on the other
side of the Chimney, presently cast out of the Window into the Backside. Also
a pressing-Iron lying on the ledge of the Chimney back, was conveyed invisibly
into the Yard. I should think it (too) not unworthy the Relation, that,
discoursing then with some of the Family, and others, about what had past, I
said, I thought it necessary to take and keep the great Stone, as a Proof and
Evidence, for they had taken it down from my Chambers; and so I carried it up,
laid it on my Table in my Chamber, and locked my Door, and going out upon
occasions, and soon returning, I was told by my Landlady that it was, a little
while after my going forth, removed again, with a Noise, which they all below
heard, and was thrown into the Antichamber, and there I found it lying in the
middle of it; thereupon I the second time carried it up, and laid it on the
Table, and had it in my Custody a long time to show, for the Satisfaction of
the Curious.

There were many more Stones thrown about in the House that Morning, and more
in the Fields that Day, where the Master of the House was, and the Men at Work.
Some more Mr. Woodbridge, a Minister, and my self, in the Afternoon did see,
(but could not any Hand throwing them) lighting near, and jumping and tumbling
on the Grass: So did one Mrs. Clark, and her Son, and several others; and some
of them felt them too. One Person would not be persuaded but that the Boys at
Work might throw them, and strait her little Boy standing by her was struck
with a Stone on the Back, which caused him to fall a crying, and her (being
convinced) to carry him away forthwith.

In the Evening, as soon as I had supped in the outer Room before mine, I took a
little Musical-Instrument, and began to touch it, (the Door indeed was then set
open for Air) and a good big Stone came rumbling in, and as it were to lead the
Dance, but upon a much different account than in the days of Old, and of old
fabulous Enchantments, my Music being none of the best. The Noise of this
brought up the Deputy-President's Wife, and many others of the Neighborhood
that were below, who wondered to see this Stone followed (as it were) by many
others, and a Pewter Spoon among the rest, all which fell strangely into the
Room in their Presence, and were taken up by the Company. And beside all this,
there was seen by two Youths in the Orchard and Fields, as they said, a black
Cat, at the time the Stones were tossed about, and it was shot at, but missed,
by its changing Places, and being immediately at some distance, and then out of
sight, as they related: Agreeable to which, it may not be improper to insert,
what was observed by two Maids, Grandchildren of Mr. Walton on the Sunday
Night, the beginning of this Lithoboly. They did affirm, that as they were
standing in the Porch-Chamber Window, they saw, as it were, a Person putting
out a Hand out of the Hall Window, as throwing Stones toward the Porch or
Entry; and we all know no Person was in the Hall except, at that instant, my
self and another, having searched diligently there, and wondering whence those
should come that were about the same time dropped near us; so far we were from
doing it our selves, or seeing any other there to do it.

On Monday Night, about the Hour it first began there, were more Stones thrown
in the Kitchen, and down the Chimney, one Captain Barefoot, of the Council for
that Province, being present, with others; and also (as I was going up to Bed)
in an upper Chamber, and down those Stairs.

Upon Tuesday Night, about Ten, some five or six Stones were severally thrown
into the Maid's Chamber near the Kitchen, and the Glass-Windows broke in three
new places, and one of the Maids hit as she lay. At the same time was heard by
them, and two young Men in the House, an odd, dismal sort of Whistling, and
thereupon the Youths ran out, with intent to take the supposed Thrower of
Stones, if possible; and on the backside near the Window they heard the Noise
(as they said) of something stepping a little way before them, as it were the
trampling of a young Colt, as they fancied, but saw nothing; and going out
could discover nothing but that the Noise of the stepping or trampling was
ceased, and then gone on a little before.

On Saturday Morning I found two Stones more on the Stairs; and so some were on
Sunday Night conveyed into the Room next the Kitchen.

Upon Monday following Mr. Walton going (with his Men) by Water to some other
Land, in a place called the Great Bay, and to a House where his Son was placed,
they lay there that Night, and the next Morning had ^his Adventure. As the Men
were all at work in the Woods, felling Wood, they were visited with another set
of Stones, and they gathered up near upon a Hat-full, and put them between two
Trees near adjoining, and returning from carrying Wood, to the Boat, the Hat
and its contents (the Stones) were gone, and the Stones were presently after
thrown about again, as before; and after search, found the Hat pressed
together, and lying under a square piece of Timber at some distance from
thence. They had them again at young Walton's House, and half a Brick thrown
into a Cradle, out of which his young Child was newly taken up.

Here it may seem most proper to inform the Reader of a parallel passage,
(viz.) what happened another time to my Landlord in his Boat; wherein going up
to the same place, (the Great Bay) and loading it with Hay for his use at his
own House, about the midway in the River (Pascataqua) he found his Boat began
to be in a sinking Condition, at which being much surpised, upon search, he
discovered the cause to be the pulling out a Plug or Stopple in the bottom of
the Boat, being fixed there for the more convenient letting out of the
Rainwater that might fall into it; a Contrivance and Combination of the old
Serpent and the old Woman, or some other Witch or Wizard (in Revenge or innate
Enmity) to have drowned both my good Landlord and his Company.

On Wednesday, as they were at work again in the Woods, on a sudden they heard
something gingle like Glass, or Metal, among the Trees, as it was falling, and
being fallen to the Ground, they knew it to be a Stirrup which Mr. Walton had
carried to the Boat, and laid under some Wood; and this being again laid by him
in that very Boat, it was again thrown after him. The third time, he having put
it upon his Girdle or Belt he wore about his Waste, buckled together before,
but at that instant taken off (...)ause of the Heat of the Weather, and laid
there again buckled, it was fetched away, and no more seen. Likewise the
Graper, or little Anchor of the Boat, cast overboard, which caused the Boat to
wind up; so staying and obstructing their Passage. Then the setting-Pole was
diverse times cast into the River, as they were coming back from the Great Bay,
which put them to the trouble of Padling, that is, rowing about for it as often
to retrieve it.

Being come to his own House, this Mr. Walton was charged again with a fresh
Assault in the Outhouses; but we heard of none within doors until Friday
after, when, in the Kitchen, were 4 or 5 Stones (one of them hot) taken out of
the Fire, as I conceive, and so thrown about. I was then present, being newly
come in with Mr. Walton from his middle Field, (as he called it) where his
Servants had been Mowing, and had six or seven of his old troublesome
Companions, and I had one fallen down by me there, and another thin flat Stone
hit me on the Thigh with the flat side of it, so as to make me just feel, and
to smart a little. In the same Day's Evening, as I was walking out in the Lane
by the Field beforementioned, a great Stone made a rusling Noise in the
Stone-Fence between the Field and the Lane, which seemed to me (as it caused me
to cast my Eye that way by the Noise) to come out of the Fence, as it were
pulled out from among those Stones loose, but orderly laid close together, as
the manner of such Fences in that Country is, and so fell down upon the Ground.
Some Persons of Note being then in the Field (whose Names are here
underwritten) to visit Mr. Walton there, are substantial Witnesses of this
same Stonery, both in the Field, and afterward in the House that Night, viz.
one Mr. Hussy, Son of a Counselor there. He took up one that having first
alighted on the Ground, with rebound from thence hit him on the Heel; and he
keeps it to show. And Captain Barefoot, mentioned above, has that which (among
other Stones) flew into the Hall a little before Supper; which my self also saw
as it first came in at the upper part of the Door into the middle of the Room;
and then (though a good flat Stone, yet) was seen to roll over and over, as if
trundled, under a Bed in the same Room. In short, these Persons, being
wonderously affected with the Strangeness of these Passages, offered themselves
(desiring me to take them) as Testimonies; I did so, and made a Memorandum, by
way of Record, thereof, to this effect. Viz.

These Persons underwritten do hereby Attest the Truth of their being
Eyewitnesses of at least half a score Stones that Evening thrown invisibly
into the Field, and in the Entry of the House, Hall, and one of the Chambers of
George Walton's. Viz. Samuel Jennings, Esquire Governor of West-Jarsey. Walter
Clark, Esquire Deputy Governor of Road-Island. Mr. Arthur Cook. Mr. Matt. Borden
of Road-Island. Mr. Oliver Hooton of Barbados, Merchant. Mr. T. Maul of Salem
in New England, Merchant. Captain Walter Barefoot. Mr. John Hussy. And the
Wife of the said Mr. Hussy.


On Saturday, July 24. One of the Family, at the usual hour at Night, observed
some few (not above half a dozen) of these natural (or rather unnatural)
Weapons to fly into the Kitchen, as formerly; but some of them in an unusual
manner lighting gently on him, or coming toward him so easily, as that he took
them before they fell to the Ground. I think there was not any thing more that
Night remarkable. But as if the malicious Demon had laid up for Sunday and
Monday, then it was that he began (more furiously than formerly) with a great
Stone in the Kitchen, and so continued with throwing down the Pewter-Dishes,
etc. great part of it all at once coming clattering down, without the stroke of
a Stone, little or great, to move it. Then about Midnight this impious
Operation not ceasing, but trespassing with a continuando, 2 very great Stones,
weighing above 30 pound a piece, (that used to lie in, the Kitchen, in or near
the Chimny) were in the former, wonted, rebounding manner, let fly against my
Door and Wall in the ante-Chamber, but with some little distance of time. This
thundering Noise must needs bring up the Men from below, as before, (I need not
say to wake me) to tell me the Effect, which was the beating down several
Pictures, and displacing abundance of things about my Chamber: but the
Repetition of this Cannon-Play by these great rumbling Engines, now ready at
hand for the purpose, and the like additional disturbance by four Bricks that
lay in the outer-Room Chimney (one of which having been so employed the first
Sunday Night, as has been said) made me despair of taking Rest, and so forced
me to rise from my Bed. Then finding my Door burst open, I also found many
Stones, and great pieces of Bricks, to fly in, breaking the Glass-Windows, and
a Paper-Light, sometimes inwards, sometimes outward: So hitting the Door of my
Chamber as I came through from the ante-Chamber, lighting very near me as I was
fetching the Candlestick, and afterward the Candle being struck out, as I was
going to light it again. So a little after, coming up for another Candle, and
being at the Stare-foot door, a wooden Mortar with great Noise struck against
the Floor, and was just at my Feet, only not touching me, moving from the other
end of the Kitchen where it used to lie. And when I came up my self, and two
more of the same House, we heard a Whistling, as it were near us in the outer
Room, several times. Among the rest of the Tools made use of to disturb us, I
found an old Card for dressing Flax in my Chamber. Now for Monday Night, (June
26) one of the severest. The disturbance began in the Kitchen with Stones; then
as I was at Supper above in the ante-Chamber, the Window near which I sat at
Table was broke in 2 or 3 parts of it inwards, and one of the Stones that broke
it flew in, and I took it up at the further end of the Room. The manner is
observable; for one of the squares was broke into 9 or 10 small square pieces,
as if it had been regularly marked out into such even squares by a Workman, to
the end some of these little pieces might fly in my Face, (as they did) and
give me a surprise, but without any hurt. In the mean time it went on in the
Kitchen, whither I went down, for Company, all or most of the Family, and a
Neighbor, being there; where many Stones (some great ones) came thick and
threefold among us, and an old howing Iron, from a Room hard by, where such
Utensils lay. Then, as if I had been the designed Object for that time, most of
the Stones that came (the smaller I mean) hit me, (sometimes pretty hard) to
the number of above 20, near 30, as I remember, and whether I removed, sit, or
walked, I had them, and great ones sometimes lighting gently on me, and in my
Hand and Lap as I sat, and falling to the Ground, and sometimes thumping
against the Wall, as near as could be to me, without touching me. Then was a
Room over the Kitchen infested, that had not been so before, and many Stones
greater than usual lumbring there over our Heads, not only to ours, but to the
great Disturbance and Affrightment of some Children that lay there. And for
Variety, there were sometimes three great, distinct Knocks, sometimes five such
sounds as with a great Maul, reiterated diverse times.

On Tuesday Night (June 28) we were quiet; but not so on Wednesday, when the
Stones were played about in the House. And on Thursday Morning I found some
things that hung on Nails on the Wall in my Chamber, viz. a Spherical Sun-Dial,
etc. lying on the Ground, as knocked down by some Brick or Stone in the
ante-Chamber. But my Landlord had the worst of that Day, though he kept the
Field, being there invisibly hit above 40 times, as he affirmed to me, and he
received some shroud hurtful Blows on the Back, and other Parts, which he much
complained of, and said he thought he should have reason to do, even to his
dying day; and I observed that he did so, he being departed this Life since.

Besides this, Plants of Indian Corn were struck up by the Roots almost, just
as if they had been cut with some edged Instrument, whereas re vera they were
seen to be eradicated, or rooted up with nothing but the very Stones, although
the injurious Agent was altogether unseen. And a sort of Noise, like that of
Snorting and Whistling, was heard near the Men at Work in the Fields many
times, many whereof I my self, going thither, and being there, was a Witness
of; and parting thence I received a pretty hard Blow with a Stone on the Calf
of my Leg. So it continued that day in two Fields, where they were severally at
Work: and my Landlord told me, he often heard likewise a humming Noise in the
Air by him, as of a Bullet discharged from a Gun; and so said a Servant of his
that worked with him.

Upon Saturday, (July 1) as I was going to visit my Neighbor Capt. Barefoot,
and just at his Door his Man saw, as well as my self, 3 or 4 Stones fall just
by us in the Field, or Close, where the House stands, and not any other Person
near us. At Night a great Stone fell in the Kitchen, as I was going to Bed, and
the Pewter was thrown down; many Stones flew about, and the Candles by them put
out 3 or 4 times, and the Snorting heard; a Negro Maid hit on the Head in the
Entry between the Kitchen and Hall with a Porringer from the Kitchen: also the
pressing-Iron clattered against the Partition Wall between the Hall and a
Chamber beyond it, where I lay, and Mr. Randolph, His Majesty's Officer for the
Customs, etc.

Some few Stones we had on Sunday Morning, (July 2) none at Night. But on
Monday Morning (the 3d) both Mr. Walton, and 5 or 6 with him in the Field, were
assaulted with them, and their Ears with the old Snorting and Whistling. In the
Afternoon Mr. Walton was hit on the Back with Stones very grievously, as he was
in his Boat that lay at a Cove side by his House. It was a very odd prank that
was practiced by the Devil a little while after this. One Night the Cocks of
Hay, made the Day before in the Orchard, was spread all abroad, and some of the
Hay thrown up into the Trees, and some of it brought into the House, and
scattered. Two Logs that lay at the Door, laid, one of them by the Chimny in
the Kitchen; the other set against the Door of the Room where Mr. Walton then
lay, as on purpose to confine him therein: A Form that stood in the Entry (or
Porch) was set along by the Fire side, and a joint Stool upon that, with a
Napking spread thereon, with two Pewter Pots, and two Candle-sticks: A
Cheese-Press likewise having a Spit thrust into one of the holes of it, at one
end; and at the other end of the Spit hung an Iron Kettle; and a Cheese was
taken out, and broke to pieces Another time, I full well remember 'twas on a
Sunday at Night, my Window was all broke with a violent shock of Stones and
Brick-bats, which scarce missed my self: among these one huge one made its way
through the great square or shash of a Casement, and broke a great hole in it,
throwing down Books by the way, from the Window to a Picture over against it,
on the other side of the Chamber, and tore a hole quite through it about half a
foot long, and the piece of the Cloth hung by a little part of it, on the
backside of the Picture.

After this we were pretty quiet, saving now and then a sew Stones marched
about for Exercise, and to keep (as it were) the Diabolical hand in use, till
July 28, being Friday, when about 40 Stones flew about, abroad, and in the
House and Orchard, and among the Trees therein, and a Window broke before, was
broke again, and one Room where they never used before.

August 1. On Wednesday the Window in my ante-Chamber was broke again, and many
Stones were played about, abroad, and in the House, in the Daytime, and at
Night. The same Day in the Morning they tried this Experiment; they did set on
the Fire a Pot with Urin, and crooked Pins in it, with design to have it boil,
and by that means to give Punishment to the Witch, or Wizard, (that might be
the wicked Procurer or Contriver of this Stone Affliction) and take off their
own; as they had been advised. This was the Effect of it: As the Liquor begun
to grow hot, a Stone came and broke the top or mouth of it, and threw it down,
and spilt what was in it; which being made good again, another Stone, as the
Pot grew hot again, broke the handle off, and being recruited and filled the
third time, was then with a third Stone quite broke to pieces and split; and so
the Operation became frustrate and fruitless.

On August 2. two Stones in the Afternoon I heard and saw my self in the House
and Orchard; and another Window in the Hall was broke. And as I was entering my
own Chamber, a great square of a Casement, being a foot square, was broke, with
the Noise as of a big Stone, and pieces of the Glass flew into the. Room, but
no Stone came in then, or could be found within or without. At Night, as I,
with others, were in the Kitchen, many more came in; and one great Stone that
lay on a Spinning-Wheel to keep it steady, was thrown to the other side of the
Room. Several Neighbors then present were ready to testify this Matter.

Upon August 3. On Thursday the Gate between my said Landlord and his
Neighbor John Amazeen was taken off again, and thrown into Amazeen's Field,
who heard it fall, and averred it then made a Noise like a great Gun.

On Friday the 4th, the Fence against Mr. Walton's Neighbor's Door, (the Woman
of whom formerly there was great Suspicion, and thereupon Examination had, as
appears upon Record;) this Fence being maliciously pulled down to let in their
Cattle into his Ground; he and his Servants were pelted with above 40 Stones as
they went to put it up again; for she had often threatened that he should never
enjoy his House and Land. Mr. Walton was hit diverse times, and all that Day in
the Field, as they were Reaping, it ceased not, and their fell (by the Men's
Computation) above an hundred Stones. A Woman helping to Reap (among the rest)
was hit 9 or 10 times, and hurt to that degree, that her left Arm, Hip, Thigh,
and Leg, were made black and blue therewith; which she showd to the Woman, Mrs.
Walton, and others. Mr. Woodbridge, a Divine, coming to give me a Visit, was
hit about the Hip, and one Mr. Jefferys a Merchant, who was with him, on the
Leg. A Window in the Kitchen that had been much battered before, was now quite
broke out, and unwindow'd, no Glass or Lead at all being left: a Glass Bottle
broke to pieces, and the Pewter Dishes (about 9 of them) thrown down, and bent.

On Saturday the 5th, as they were Reaping in the Field, three Sickles were
cracked and broke by the force of these lapidary Instruments of the Devil, as
the Sickles were in the Reapers hands, on purpose (it seems) to obstruct their
Labor, and do them Injury and Damage. And very many Stones were cast about
that Day; insomuch, that some that assisted at that Harvest-Work, being struck
with them, by reason of that Disturbance left the Field, but were followed by
their invisible Adversaries to the next House.

On Sunday, being the 6th, there fell nothing considerable, not on Monday,
(7th) save only one of the Children hit with a Stone on the Back. We were quiet
to Tuesday the 8th. But on Wednesday (9th) above 100 Stones (as they verily
thought) repeated the Reapers Disquiet in the Corn-Field, whereof some were
affirmed by Mr. Walton to be great ones indeed, near as big as a Man's Head;
and Mrs. Walton, his Wife, being by Curiosity led thither, with intent also to
make some Discovery by the most diligent and vigilaut Observation she could
use, to obviate the idle Incredulity some inconsiderate Persons might
irrationally entertain concerning this venefical Operation; or at least to
confirm lier own Sentiments and Belief of it. Which she did, but to her Cost;
for she received an untoward Blow (with a Stone) on her Shoulder. There were
likewise two Sickles bent, cracked, and disabled with them, beating them
violently out of their Hands that held them; and this reiterated three times
successively.

After this we enjoyed our former Peace and Quiet, unmolested by these stony
Disturbances, that whole Month of August, excepting some few times; and the
last of all in the Month-of September, (the beginning thereof) wherein Mr.
Walton himself only (the Original perhaps of this strange Adventure, as has
been declared) was the designed concluding Sufferer; who going in his Canoo (or
Boat) from the Great Island, where he dwelt, to Portsmouth, to attend the
Council, who had taken Cognizance of this Matter, he being Summoned thither, in
order to his and the Suspect's Examination, and the Courts taking Order
thereabout, he was sadly hit with three pebble Stones as big as ones Fist; one
of which broke his Head, which I saw him show to the President of the Council;
the others gave him that Pain on the Back, of which (with other like Strokes)
he complained then, and afterward to his Death.

Who, that peruses these praeternatural Occurrences, can possibly be so much an
Enemy to his own Soul, and irrefutable Reason, as obstinately to oppose himself
to, or confusedly fluctuate in, the Opinion and Doctrine of Demons, or
Spirits, and Witches? Certainly he that does so, must do two things more: He
must temerariously unhinge, or undermine the Fundamentals of the best Religion
in the World; and he must disingenuously quit and abandon that of the Three
Theologick Virtues or Graces, to which the great Doctor of the Gentiles gave the
Precedence, Charity, through his Unchristian and Uncharitable Incredulity.

FINIS.

