THE CHARACTER OF A Church-PAPIST.
A Church-Papist divides his Religion between his Conscience and his Pocket, he
approaches not to the Church that he may serve God, but obey the Law, and it
is only the frightful Face of the Law makes him put on the defensive Masque of
the Gospel, which he makes not use of as a means for the Salvation of his Soul,
but for the preservation of his Purse. To Popery he does indeed stand well
affected, yet too narrow a Soul to be willing to lose by it: and though the
roaring Bulls, Excommunications, etc. of the Pope of Rome may somewhat
affrighten him; yet their remoteness lessens their formidableness, insomuch
that the Apparitour seems more amazing: To keep him off, he presents his
Carcass at Church as seldom as possible, and when he does, it is only his Body,
to save his Bayl: When he is there, though he joins with the Congregation in
their most solemn Services, (yet with no more than his Body,) in the mean
while, by himself, he mumbles over some Paternoster, Ave-Marias, blessing
himself from ever coming among them with a good will, rather begging of God to
forgive him that he e're should come there. If for shames sake he cannot go out
of Church before the Sermon is ended, it is a Yoke too weighty for his Popish
galled Shoulder and Back; he spends the tedious time in cursing the Preacher
for giving him so much; but when he is delivered out of his Prison, he soon
gets into his Element: having arrived home, he will be sure to abuse the
Preacher and his Doctrine, the Preacher for holding him so long in Goal, and
the Doctrine because it too much netled him; it may be it was too Puritanical,
forsooth, for so Vile, and Licentious a Hypocritick Monster as he is: But when
Easter comes, then must his wits to work, in plotting of some shift or other to
omit the Communion; here lies the greatest Block in his way, and therefore for
certain will not be unfurnished with excuses; it is likely he is not in Charity,
very true! neither can he for his Heart be with the Sacrament, for a Martyr
there is not a worser man in the World, for the main stress of his Religion
hangs on interest; as to Religion, were occasion offered, he would move as fast
from one to the other as a Windmill; in a Word, he has none, but to save
Charges. But for a Traveller, there cannot be found a better in the whole
World, for his Conscience is so wide, as that neither it is Longitude or
Latitude could hitherto be found out, so that he may wander in it as far as he
pleases, and nevertheless not reach it is Confines.

He is one that spoils an House; his Wife is a zealous Dame in Pride,
Costliness and Scorn, good for nothing but a show in a Fair, a mere painted
Sepulcher, the very mirror of Impudence and Arrogance; his Children are a
spawn of the Romish Brood, nurtured by him, that they may be useful Tools in
the Service of the Antichristian Beast, but withal to exercise Popish Roguery
with Protestant Masks.

He is a man professing much Loyalty to the King, but a more Treacherous one
there cannot be; he will prate stiffly for Prerogative, but he means the Popes
Supremacy; he will if forced speak a gentle word against his dear Friends the
Papists, but rather chooses to speak a thousand against Protestants, especially
if finding any plausible nick name wherewith to asperse them.

And thus let us leave him a dissembling Hypocrite, as (if he remains
impenitent) in due time his own Master will find him.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for John Kidgell, at the Atlas in Cornhill, 1681.


