Manuale Medicum.

OR A Small Treatise of the Art of PHYSIC in General.

AND OF VOMITS AND THE JESVITS POWDER in Particular.

By Hugh Chamberlain.

Physician in Ordinary to his late Majesty, and Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed by J. Gain, for the Author, 1685.

PREFACE.
IT being my Misfortune to differ in Opinion from Eminent and Famous Physicians
in two things of great moment to the Preservation of LIFE and HEALTH Viz. The
great Contempt or Neglect of Vomits, which in the following Tract is presumed
to conduce more to the Restoring of Health and Saving of Life than any other
Remedy yet publicly discovered; and the Common Use of the Jesuits Powder,
which plainly appears as Destructive. I have been often urged for the Reasons
that prevail with me to be singular, and wanting leisure to satisfy by
Discourse such of those Enquirers to whom I owed that respect I found my self
under a necessity to Print a few of those Arguments which support my said
Opinions, and which I had, Currente Calamo, written for the Use of a Son I sent
to the East Indies, where better Help may be wanting. I purposely avoid
Tediousness, and pretend to no Florid Style, nor Elaborate Treatise, clogged
with many Niceties not easily to be conceived; but waving those difficiles
nugae, I hope I have stumbled upon certain plain and useful Truths, which my
Reader may rely upon in time of Need, and with a small Understanding
comprehend, if he will give himself a little thinking time.

I know Men are under such invincible Prejudices by Education, Custom, and
Interest, that whosoever has the Confidence to oppose common received Opinions
by broaching New, or reviving Old, runs a mighty hazard of his Reputation:
Notwithstanding, I have adventured to cast in my Mite, and if either it proves
serviceable for the Preservation or Recovery of Life or Health, or provokes
some more Able, to perfect or disprove my Notions in this Essay, (the Defects
whereof I am not ignorant of, but want both Time and Ability possibly to
Correct) I have my Satisfaction. I do not here pretend to write any thing of
which our Physicians are Ignorant, but what, for Reasons best known to
themselves, they rarely put in practice: And therefore hope it may be no Crime
unpardonable to refresh their Memories, as well as guide the Patient in some
measure, to judge whether he is Skilfully and Heartily dealt with by his
Physician: Which Use alone may be a small Recommendation of this Manual, for
both Physitian's and Patient's Sake.

It may upon due observation be strongly presumed, that near half that dye
yearly in London, and the Country, come within the Power of Nature and Art to
be kept alive much longer, were but the Practice Reformed, and Patients taught
to be more prudent in making timely Application for H^lp, and being contented
to be Governed until Health be perfectly Restored.

The several particular Points herein asserted, may seem new Notions, yet are
they all Founded upon Old Truths; which unless the Philosopher's Elixir comes
to be discovered, and brought into Common Use, as some have vainly hoped, will
never justly grow out of Date.

This Short Account to my Reader may not be impertinent, since I seem Obliged
to excuse my Appearing in Print: To which I was compelled having no other Means
to Secure my self and others from the Abuse of a False Impression, which might
Surreptitiously creep forth by Imperfect Copies, already given to some few
Friends.

PAge 1. line 3. r. Physical. p. 7. l. 6. r. critical. p. 8. l. 18. r. the
Roots or Fountains of all Diseases. p. 13. l. 10. after or r. some. p. 14. l.
12. r. transmuted. p. 15. l. 1. r. Vomiting. and l. 13. r. as is confessed. p.
16. l. 10. r. Caution. l. 11. place a comma after Distempers. p. 17. l. 2.
after and r. for. l. 10. dele most. p. 18. l. 26. r. who for he. p. 19. l. 22.
r. Boethius with two tittles. l. 23. dele ^ in fasting. p. 21. l. 9. r. deep
rooted l. 11. r. Nerves. l. last add to the bot^om of Berrnier's Relation this
Observation of the late ^uke of Albemarl's ^n the last great Plague, Anno 1665,
Viz.

That all the Soldiers that took Vomits in the beginning of their being
Infected, Recovered. Which by the way, ^s more than can be said of any one
Medicine besides.

P. 33. l. 3. r. Laurinum. p. 36. l. 20. r. though many. l. 24. dele by. p. 41.
beginning of the last lines.

Manuale Medicum, OR, A short Physick-Essay, etc.
THE Art of Healing can never be Succesful, when neither the Theory is
sufficiently understood, nor the Practice well managed, though for the
Instructing therein multitudes of Books are extant, and daily new Hypotheses
started; but as the former cause Confusion, so most of the latter have little
besides their Novelty to recommend them.

This Art is of absolute necessity, and great use to the well-being of Mankind;
and yet it wants, as most other things, not only the Improvements might
reasonably have been made, but even the benefit of many formerly in use, and
still fit to be continued.

Diverse things have contributed to this Misfortune; amongst others, the
causeless Fears and rash Censures of Patients; which have encouraged some
dis-ingenuous Physicians to take advantage of their Ignorance; most of them
choosing rather to be decoyed into their Graves, than forced into their Health.
Something not much unlike this humor was in Jeremiah's Time; Jer. 5.31. The
Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear Rule by their Means, And my
People love to have it so; and what will ye do in the end thereof? And Amelot
de la Houssaie, in his History of Venice, page 260, 261, and 262, observes,
That ill Counsels (provided they are covered with plausible Appearances) are
oftener followed than good. Which most commonly displease, either from the
difficulty of the Execution; or, because the good or ill Consequences are not
generally foreseen; for men do not discern what is true from what is false, nor
what is convenient from what is destructive.

But if Diseased Patients could be healed naturally, as once miraculously, by a
Command to take up their Beds and walk, without a necessity of swallowing many
loathsome Potions, and seemingly churlish Medicines, and always as well
jucunde, as sometimes cito and ^u^o be freed from their Diseases, then might
Physicians boast of a Purge, or Vomit which should neither make sick, nor
gripe; and of Specificks without any sensible Evacuation, wherewith to vanquish
all Diseases: but these are Desiderata: for though a Disease be received with
never so much delight into the Body, it shall cost some pain and trouble before
it can be parted with: it is true, that pain and trouble, where Strength gives
liberty and time, may be divided into smaller Portions, by protracting the
Cure; and a Patient, who cannot suffer a removal of his Disease at once, may be
healed by degrees, there being (besides the true and safe Method of helping
with powerful Remedies) a slower and more uncertain, yet seemingly milder, for
such as have patience, and will run the hazard.

Diseases may of themselves for a time be quieted, and their Fermentation
interrupted, and sometimes also by Art to good purpose; but never was any Cured
without Evacuation, general or particular, natural or artificial, as by
Vomiting, Seige, Urine, Sweat, Sneezing, Imposthumations, or other Eruptions,
B^^oding, Fluxing, Blistering, or Cupping, with, or without Scarifications,
according to the sound Judgment of a well experienced and honest Physician. And
of this his late Majesty has been a late famous Example, when attacqued with
that dreadful Fit, to the terror of the whole Nation, who was only relieved by
speedy Evacuation of all sorts. Which fair way of Practice would not scare
Patients with an Apothecary's Bill, amounting to 15 l. or 20 l. in an ordinary
Case.

It may boldly be affirmed, that Cordials commonly in Use, never Cured any
Distemper which would not as certainly have been Cured without them. It Is
confessed many Cordials, so called, tend toward Evacuation by Urine or Sweat,
and some to Sweetning and Quieting; the former do very little, or nothing
assist Nature, in comparison to larger Evacuation; and the latter only Palliate
or Quiet for the present; and soon after, the Torrent, if not prevented by
Evacuations, breaks forth again with greater Violence: the proper use of
Cordials being with more speed to restore Spirits exhausted by Labor, violent
Workings of Physic, or Diseases already in a great measure overcome; because,
Potu citius quam Cibo reficimur: For otherwise, Impura Corpora, quo magis
nutrieris, eo magis laeseris. And consequently, Cordials then hurt more than
help. As for Example: Compare a Disease in the Body to a Parcel of Wood in a
Chamber, which always incumbers, though sometimes without danger; and admit an
unexpected Fire kindles that Wood; as an accident may rouse a latent Ferment in
the Body; then the Room becomes in danger of burning, and the Patient of being
destroyed by a Fever, or the like.

The Question will be, What may best secure this Chamber and Patient? Whether
with Water, to extinguish the Fire, and leave it smothering, and more apt to
receive a new Inflammation? Or, suffer it to burn out, whereby the Chamber is
also endangered? Or, cause it to be carried away by a brisk stout Fellow? So,
whether to palliate the Patient's Disease with a quieting Medicine, to bridle
the present Ferment, leaving still behind some uneasy Symptoms, the Relics
of an Imperfect Cure, or Chronical Distemper instead of the Fever? Or, suffer
the Fever to make its own way, and Nature to struggle for the Mastery, to the
hazard of the Patients Life? Or, by proper and powerful Catharticks, or other
Evacuants, carry off this Morbifick Matter; this Fomes, and cause of those
Appearances, which by mistake, are called Diseases? For Instance; A Fever
continual or intermitting, a Vomiting, or Looseness, a Cholick or Convulsion,
Jaundice or Dropsies, etc. are no more the Disease than a Cholera Morbus,
Fever and Convulsion caused by the taking Poison, is then the Disease: Whether
therefore at such a time a quieting astringent Opiate may more properly be
administered for the Patient's Recovery, than a Cup of Sack for the Relief of a
wearied Porter would be more acceptable than the taking the Burden off his Back.

Sickness may be said to be the various Passions of the Body, which happen when
Nature is attempting to free it self from whatever is troublesome or useless;
or thus, every Humor received, bred, or so altered within the Body, as by
reason of its quantity or quality, is unapt to be converted into the Use or
Nourishment of the same; but, e contra, irritates, interrupts, or burdens
either the Natural, Vital, or Animal Functions. Nature therefore for the most
part, attempts to expel as a Disease whatever it cannot digest into Use by
Fermentation, arising from a Confusion of the Homogeneous and Heterogeneous
Matter or Humor, retaining the first for the Service of the Body, and
expelling the last as Excrementitious: and possibly, most purging Medicines
work no other way but as a Ferment cast in, to awaken Nature; by the help of
which Fermentation, Diseases are often purged away by the strength of Nature
through the common Vents or Emunctories, as by Siege, Urine, Sweat,
Haemorrhages; or Nature otherwise throws off some, or all of the Morbifick
Matter upon the habit of the Body, or remote Parts, where it after becomes a
Chronicle Disease or Tumor, as Gout, Scurvey, Bubo, etc. These Expulsions are
either Critic or Symptomatical; Critical, when Nature discharges the Whole,
or greater Part; and Symptomatical, when the Peccant Matter so abounds, as to
destroy, or at least endanger or incommode the Patient, by attacquing him in
several Parts and different Manners, notwithstanding the Particular Evacuations.

The true and only Causes of all Obstructions and Diseases are the Abuse of, or
Errors in the six Non-naturals: Solutio continui, Contusions, venomous
Stingings, and Contagion, may also be reduced under the same Heads; which
Errors alter and vitiate the Humors, and they the Solid Parts. Observe
therefore, That

Health is preserved by Good Air. Wholesome Meat and Drink. Moderate Excretion
and Retention Regular Exercise and Rest. Fitting Sleep and Watching. Orderly
Passions of the Mind.
and lost by Bad, Air. Unwholesome Meat and Drink. Immoderate, Excretion and
Retention Irregular, Exercise and Rest. Unfitting, Sleep and Watching.
Disorderly, Passions of the Mind.


Which six Particulars are both the Cause and Cure of Sickness and Health;
Temperance therefore and Content goes a great way in its Preservation.

In short, Repletion and Inanition, or if you please, Addition and
Substraction, with the Passions, cause all Diseases; the first, by receiving
what is unfit in Quantity or Quality for the Support of the Body, or retaining
what ought to be discharged as Useless: the last, by not supplying what is
necessary for the Support of the Body, or expelling too soon by Wound, Purge,
or otherways, what is so supplied, and ought longer to have been retained.

By these means the Blood is either coagulated, whence Stagnation and
Suffocation; or rarefied, so as the Spirits get loose and vanish, by both which
Death only enters.

Diseases produced by the forementioned six Non-naturals are to be
distinguished by their taste, color, and consistence, as, Bitter and Yellow,
Sower and Greenish. Salt and Glassy. Insipid and Viscous.


And were anciently the four Simple Humors, called Excrementitious Choler and
Phlegm, Whey and Melancholy (of which, only the two former are allowed by the
Learned Lister) together with the various Compounds and Mixtures of these,
which when they exceed their Limits, and predominate, bring forth diverse
Symptoms, or, as they are often called, Complicated Distempers, according to
the several parts they possess, sprouting up like many Branches from one and
the same Trunk.

Thus Medicine over-dosed, and Food in an undue quantity, create dangerous
Humors or Diseases; for a Scruple of Mercury precipitate, a Dram of Opium or
Spirit of Vitriol, or a Quart of Brandy, will, by altering and moving the
Humors irregularly, poison such as are not used to them; and yet in small
quantities are both Food and Physic: for 1/1000 part of a Grain of the same
Mercury, a Grain of Opium, ten Drops of Spirit of Vitriol, or one Ounce of
Brandy, are both Food and Physic, and hurt not, according to the Proverb,
Parum Veneni non nocet: For Poison in so small a Dose as Nature can overcome,
may be Food or Physic; and Food and Physic in a larger quantity than can be
subdued by Nature, is Poison; only those things have obtained the Name of
Poison which are powerful in small Quantities, and without great exactness
cannot safely be applied to the benefit of Mankind.

Note, That the Humors may be said to offend in quantity, when any one part is
overcharged with them, though there remain less than necessary in the rest.

For the Signs of Diseases, see Riverius's Institutions, the 1st. Chap. of the
2d. Sect. of his Semeioticks, and so to the 5th. Chap. where he gives a large
Account.

But the most necessary and material Signs I have thence extracted and
subjoyned.

And first, the Signs when Choler predominates, are

A full, frequent, and hard Pulse.

Want of Appetite, and loathing of Meat, great Thirst, a Burning Fever, a
Tertian, Phrensy, Pleurisy, Vomiting of Choler, Looseness, Erisipilas, Tetter,
etc.

Pimples in the Face, bitterness in the Mouth, Stools very yellow, and
sometimes white, when the Skin is yellow, Urine thin and high colored, and
sometimes thick and yellowish, red and intense, a dry burning of the Hands and
Feet, a yellowish color of the Face and Eyes, and sometimes of the whole Body,
falling off the Hair, etc.

Secondly, When Phlegm, expect,

A small, slow, and soft Pulse.

A bad Appetite, little or no Thirst, Catarrhs, Dropsies, Obstructions,
Lethargies, Palsies, etc. a white, thick, insipid Humor from the Nose and
Mouth, slimy Stools, a white and pale Urine, and thin when it proceeds from
Obstructions, else thick, and troubled with a large Sediment; the Whites in
Women, etc.

Thirdly, When Blood, there is

A large, full, and slow Pulse.

An Indifferent Appetite, and moderate Thirst, Burning Fevers, Phlegmons, etc.
frequent bleeding at Nose, Haemorrhoides, and Womb, a good Urine, reddish
Stools, etc.

Fourthly, When Melancholy, you find

A slow and hard Pulse.

Sometimes loss of Appetite, sower Belchings, Quartane Agues, Spleen, Leprosy,
Scabs, Piles, Vomitings, much Spitting, Costive Body, and blackish Stools,
thin Urine and pale, sometimes thick and lived. These are the most material
Signs where the several Humors predominate.

Diseases being reduced, as above, to a few Heads, according to the peccant
Humors, their Method of Cure consequently may be much contracted, with respect
to the Humors, the Part offended, and the manner, whether by Obstructions,
Tumor, or otherwise. I shall here purposely omit treating on the
Inconveniences succeeding Inanition, being more Diaetetical than
Pharmaceutical, a wholesome and moderate Diet proving sufficient, where it is
Simple, without the Complication of Praeternatural Humors, and then it is
included in the following Methods.

For Example, in a Bilious Choli^k, Tertian Ague, Jaundies, Erisipilas, one
sort of Palsy, etc. Choler is the Disease, and these the several Appearances
or Symptoms of the same, according to the Seeds, or pars recipiens, as amongst
other Signs is manifest by their frequent Changings from one to another.

And thus also a Defluxion, or Catarrh, possibly caused by a total or partial
Suppression of insensible Transpiration, when it falls upon the Eyes, Ears,
Nose, sharp Arteries, Lungs, or Joints, is distinguished into several Diseases,
yet materially is the same, only invading different parts, and in the maine
requiring the same Cure, and with equal facility often times to be pursued.

For the first, direct the most effectual Purgers of Choler, and the
Application of suitable Strengtheners to the part affected, Inward or Outward.

For the last, after general Catharticks, nothing seems more proper than
Diaphoreticks, and Sudorificks, to promote sensible or insensible Transpiration
(due regard being had to the Part affected) Evacuation in general being the
chief way to overcome Diseases: therefore a Fever, and all sorts of Fits
caused by Nature for Consumption and Discharge of the Morbifick Matter, are not
to be hindered by the Jesuits Powder, or other Astringents, but treated by
Sweating, or other proper Evacuation, that so the Cause may be removed.

Wherein the pretended Tenderness of some Physicians (allowing long Intervals
betwixt Catharticks, or never using them) is real Cruelty to their Patients,
giving thereby time to the Disease to recover Strength, and often times to the
hazard of the Patient's Life; for either the Patient is Cured by the first, and
needs no Repetition; or not recovered, and then endangered by such Delay.

But a Physician has done his Duty, when he has committed nothing he ought
not, nor seasonably omitted any thing he ought to have used, be the Success
what it will; which notwithstanding always follows a due Course of right means,
as wetting does naturally the use of Water, and burning the application of
Fire; and when success fails, it is either because the wrong means were relied
on, or the right not seasonably exhibited in quantity, both for weight and
time. And he certainly is the most ufeful and skilful Physician who can best
discover a Disease, and the fittest Method to Cure it; and always in like
number, and equally difficult Cases, has the best Success.

His principal Work therefore (taking it for granted, that Diseases must be
expelled before the Part can be strengthend, as being impossible otherwise to
be expiated or transmitted) is to make a wise choice of the forementioned ways
of Evacuation, to answer the several Indications, it being very evident, that
according to the occasion, one sort is not only more effectual, but also the
other may be dangerous; as in the Smallpox Sudorificks are commonly most
successful, Bleeding commonly mortal, except very early performed; therefore
Nature being the best Guide, seldom or never leaves a curious Observer without
some Circumstance to lead him into the ready way.

And of all sorts of Evacuation, Vomits are found by long and daily Experience,
the most successful, and yet by the ignorant, most opposed as dangerous and
violent, when possibly it may not be so very difficult to prove, that Vomits
are the real Cordials, which (by fortifying Nature) enables it to throw off the
Disease by Vomit^^^ or otherwise, and that it is no Malignity in the Vomit which
causes those Gripes and Sickness usually attending it, but the Motion of the
Humors which Nature (being revived by the Medicine, improperly called a Vomit)
is upon expelling.

When Vomits are directed according to Art, with respect to the Patient's
Strength, Indications for them, and no contra-Indications lying against their
Use, it is one of the most effectual means for rooting out of Diseases, and is
confessed by Quercetan, Fernelius, Riverius, Willis, and diverse others.

So ordered, they do not only empty (as the Vulgar imagine) the Stomach, from
which all parts receive their Nourishment, and when foul, can never have good
afforded, but both the neighboring and remoter parts, as the same, and other
Authors readily acknowledge.

And (though of the six only Inlets of Diseases, the Errors of the
Non-naturals, Food is but one) yet shall the Stomach be affected, and
sympathize with most, if not all the other parts, though the Disease be caused
by any of the other five; for instance, tread upon a Man's Corn, and he shall
immediately be sick at Stomach; bring him ill Tidings, and though never so
sharp set before, his Appetite presently flags: and (...) a Headache be caused
by Wind or Sun, (...) Stomach shall not escape.

Vomits reach those Humors, no other sort of Evacuation can touch, at least
(...) so certainly, nor without more frequent Repetitions: And prepared
accordingly, may be given to Old and Young, Men or Women, with Child, or not
(but with great Cautiousness to the Female Sex) in most, if not all Distempers
Beginning, Increase, State or Declination, at all hours Day and Night,
whenever the Stomach is principally, or by consent disordered, always
discerned by loss of Appetite, Pain, Heaviness or Fullness at the Stomach,
Vomiting, or Reaching to Vomit.

Quercitan sp^^^ng of Vomits in the 17th. Chapter of his Pharmacopeia,
declares, That Art must al^^ follow Nature; which of its own (...) endeavors
all sorts of Evacuation, (...) there enumerated, as Stool, Urine, S^^^t, and
Vomit, for the General; and the Exc^^ments of the Nose and Mouth by S^^iva^^^n
and Spitting, for Particulars; all w^^ch Ar^ ^mnst^mitate.

Vo^its ((...) he) anciently were in great Estee^ and much more in Use than
now; for our late Physicians reject them, by reason they do (as they suppose,
very much disturb the Body, introducing dangerous Symptoms, and that (our
Climate being colder than Graece, where Hypocrates and other Graecians used
them, and our Inhabitants more Phlegmatic) Vomits are not so needful: But these
are generally granted to be idle Reasons, and therefore exploded; for on the
contrary, Vomits are found to be very useful and necessary for rooting out the
most desperate and most difficult Diseases no ways else to be effected; the
mention of which alone affrights our Hen-hearted Physicians. But how can they
then boast themselves Friends to Nature who (neglecting the most powerful
Remedies, without daring so much as to make Trial) prove rather her Enemies and
Flatterers, seeking to defend her with Helps too weak and inconsiderable, never
thinking to attacque her Foe with powerful Weapons, who in the mean time
remains unhurt by their gentle Medicines, even despising the milder Vomits;
after which, in vain applied, they dare not return the second time to the same
Remedy. This Author enumerates some Cautions in giving Vomits, and afterward
declares what Spontaneous Vomiting is; and further adds, that the Ancients
ordered Vomits more unsafe than those of late Days invented; making mention of
diverse extraordinary Cures of Rulandus, and afterward cites two; in the first
of which he relates the great Agony a Patient suffered by a Vomit, but yet was
Cured, tho forsaken by all the Doctors before. The last is more considerable,
for the strange matter brought away, and the great success ensuing, so that he
resolves to publish it to the World, to the end those Physicians (who through a
worse Fear than that of a Hare, wickedly condemn this way of Purging) may see
their great Error.

Riverius in his Institutions acknowledges, That Humors contained in the
Stomach and Neighboring Parts, are easier Purged off by Vomit than Stool, it
being the shortest way; and though Vomits are not much in use; yet it is very
certain, that being discreetly appointed, they work admirable Effects; for many
Intermitting Fevers remaining (notwithstanding other Medicines) immovable,
are by Vomits only eradicated, as appears by frequent Experiments; which he
pursues with diverse Instances; and for a further Confirmation, please to take
notice of a late Instance of the King of France, the 1st. of July, 1658, who
being taken with a Malignant Fever, removed to Calais, where his life being
despaired of, the Physicians (finding his Strength daily decay, his Disease
increase, and that the second bleeding in the Foot, on the 8th. of the said
Month, gave no Relief) upon a full Consultation in the Presence of the
Cardinal, resolved to give him an Antimonial Vomit, which the King took with
great hopes of Relief; accordingly the Operation was so happy and speedy, that
after emptying the Stomach and Bowels of a great deal of malignant and adust
Matter, he found himself much eased the same Night, next Morning, being the
10th. he took the second Purge, which although more gentle, work't notwithstanding
so well, that in five or six days he was perfectly recovered. If this Remedy
had been delayed twenty four hours longer, or that it had not work't within
twenty four hours, the King's Recovery had been absolutely desperate. This
Relation was taken out of the History of the Treaty of Peace Concluded on the
Frontiers of Spain and France, Anno 1659.

Diseases, says Boethius, are Cured by the Egyptians, either with Fasting^ or
Vomits every, or every third or fourth day; for say they, All Diseases proceed
from Superfluity of Diet, therefore that is like to be the best restorer of
Health which takes away the Principles of Diseases. Sydenham, quoted by Bonetus
in the English Translation, fol. 159. Sect. 13, 14; intimates, That if he were
permitted, he would give Vomits in the beginning of all Fevers and Dropsies.

Vncerus in Answer to Objections, in Chap. 14. Book I. of the Stone, asserts,
That Vomits do not weaken the Stomach, unless irregularly given; but on the
contrary, strengthen it, by carrying off the Humors that infest it.

That Vomits are given in Vomitings to root out Choler the sooner.

That Vomitings in the Stone are not to be hindered, but furthered.

That Vomits have been extremely helpful in the Stone.

That whatsoever removes the Cause of Diseases, and cleanses the Stomach of
the tartarous Matter, is useful in the Stone; which Vomits do.

That Vomits take off all Humors, prevent the Stone, and Cure it; and may as
well be given for it as Purges; which none scruple.

All which he strengthens by Quotations out of diverse eminent Authors in the
following 15th. Chap. To which again he briefly subjoyns his own Opinion.

Willis, page 26, and 27 of his Rational Pharmacy, says, That as the Operation
by Vomit is more violent than by Stool; so in most Distempers, where it is with
Judgment directed, it does more good than ten Purges. For by this the heavy
Phlegm, untouched by Purges, is removed; besides, the Neighboring Parts are
cleansed: So that Obstructions there made, and Stagnation of Humors in the
Blood, are easily helped, Praeternatural Ferments, and deeply rooted Diseases
can by no other means be removed; epecially of the Brain and Nervs. Then giving
an Account how they work: He concludes, That most desperate Diseases are best
Cured by Vomits, and hardly without them.

Berniers, a French Author of the Memoirs of the Empire of Mogul, page 170, in
his Voyage of Rachimire, speaks thus in commendation of Vomits: By opening of
the Plague Sore, I was my self soon Infected; so that had I not forthwith taken
some Butter of Antimony, I might have been as well as others an Example of the
little certainty there is of the Plague after the Dew: But this Emetick
Medicine in the beginning of the Evil, did Wonders, and I kept but three or
four days within doors.

Hypocrates and Fernelius are both quoted to this purpose in the Pharmacopeia
Augustana. Hypocrates in the 17, and 18 Aphorism of the fourth Book, directed
a Vomit to all such as, having no Fever, complain of loss of Appetite, Gnawing
at the Stomach, dark, melancholy Vertigoes or Fumes, or Bitterness in the
Mouth: and also to Purge by Vomit, when ever Pains and Illness arise above the
Diaphragma; and by Stool when below. And Fernelius in the 3d. Chap. of the 3d.
Book of his Methodus Medendi, speaking of Vomits, says, That they are most
effectual, and best of all Purges, where moderate and easy; for they draw
forth, and empty the true hurtful Humors, and chiefly cleanse all the Filth
which hangs in the Capacity and Tunicles of the Stomach, and expel out of the
Membranes of the Praecordia, the hollow of the Spleen and Liver, and the
Pancreas, the sincere superfluous Humor of all sorts, which for the most part,
neither Hiera, nor any other strong Medicine, tho often repeated, can move in
the Belly; for the Passages are shorter and readier out of those parts into the
Stomach than into the Belly; which makes Vomiting easy. And although at first
it only discharges the Inward Parts, yet consequently it eases the Head and
the rest of the Body.

Wherefore it helps all Diseases arising from the Impurity of the Praecordia,
as, Languishing Appetite, Reaching to Vomit, Loathing of Food, Frequent
Vomitings, Distention of the Stomach and Praecordia, Jaundice, and Green
Sickness, Intermitting-Feavers, Headache, Vertigoes, Night-Mares,
Falling Sickness, Suffusion, and all Diseases of the Head, contracted by the
Sympathy of the Praecordia, and brought forth by the Impurities of the same,
thrown off upon the rest of the Body; in short therefore, in every Disease,
where a languishing Appetite and desire of Vomiting, troubles the Patient, and
Purges do not, Vomits must Cure; for what Purges cannot wash away, Vomits root
out; and what descends not easily from those Parts into the Bowels, readily
returns into the Stomach.

I choose to make the Quotations entire, tho they serve to confirm several of
my Positions; which the Judicious Reader may easily apply.

The Reasons therefore why Vomits are so much laid aside, are first, they Cure
too soon for some Physicians Advantage, and by their seeming Violence in
Operation disgust the Patients; who being for the most part short sighted,
choose to avoid a present Trouble though to their future prejudice, rather than
endure it for Recovery of Health, or saving Life, as the Author of the History
of Venice formerly cited, takes notice, page 262, of the Feebleness and
Ignorance of Mankind, who not regarding the Future, choose rather to loose all
afterward than at present to part with any thing, tho for the safety of the
rest; like those obstinate Persons, who rather run the hazard of a Gangraene
than endure the Pain of an inconsiderable Incision.

2dly. When they are given, and Patients die after, either by the Malignity of
the Disease, or great Progress it had made, or the Patient's unwillingness to
repeat them as often as necessary for mastering any desperate Distemper, they
usually have the ill luck to bear the blame; whereas the Disease is generally
and truly accused, when insignificant and comfortable Cordials are given
without them, though probably the Disease had not got the Victory, if Vomits
had been duly prescribed; nor is it difficult to prove, that fewer die by some
hundreds, if not thousands, after Vomits, than after those Comfortable
Cordials. If that therefore were a good Exception, it lies stronger against
Cordials.

So that the Patient's Humor or Inclination concurs here with the Physitian's
Interest, not to shorten the Cure by Vomits, but to multiply Fees by
protracting it with Cordials: to the great discouragement of Honesty and Skill,
which neither pleases the Patient, nor enriches the Possessor.

Much to this purpose speaks the aforesaid Author of the Venetian History, page
263. That Ill Counsels are most acceptable, and Good not only rejected, but
heard with Indignation.

And Riverius also in the 9th. Obser. of the second Cent. complains, that
Physicians are under a kind of Necessity to forbear doing their Patients good,
to please them: in these words: The Malepertness of our Women imputing every
unhappy Success to the Remedies, makes the more prudent Physicians, for fear of
Calumny, to abstain from the Use of the best Medicine.

Some offer a seeming great Objection, That Vomits are exceeding dangerous,
because of their Violent Operation: Not considering they work the more upon the
peccant Humor, nor remembering the ill Consequence of Delay. Where gentle means
lead as certainly to the same end, violent are not pleaded for; but where
violent will, and gentle will not, they ought to be preferred: for which is
most eligible, to be one of the nineteen that escape of 20 that leap overboard
when a Ship is on fire, or stay behind with five hundred that dread the present
danger of Drowning, and are certainly in a few minutes after destroyed with the
Ship by fire.

But this Object. against Vomits may easily be removed; for the Violence of
their Operation is but remotely the effect of the Medicine, it being the
natural and immediate consequence of the Motion of the Morbifick Matter, and
ought as patiently to be born as Labor when a Women is with Child, the
Periodick Vomiting Motions being no other than the Periodick Throws in Labor,
for the Expulsion of what Nature desires to be freed from, the Reasons being
the same, Viz. Irritation, from the uneasiness by the increase of new useless
Matter: Time for Natures recovery of strength between every Throw or Vomiting:
and the trouble of compressing and squeezing out by the expulsive Faculty; and
this is no new conceit, for Fernelius in the 3d. Chap. of his 3d. Book of his
Rations Medendi uses the same Comparison.

Even as the Womb in Labor, with collected strength from all parts, contracts
it self closely to the upper parts whereby it may bring forth the Birth: So
also the Stomach tired with the Injury of things offensive, by compressing the
bottom is by force wholly moved upwards, throwing out all that is offensive by
Vomit. This is the most manifest of all natural Motions, by which the Stomach
also springing from its proper place, puts a Force upon the neighboring Parts
to which it is fastened, whence arises the difficulty and violence in Vomiting,
tho to some more, some less.

And it may further be observed, that Persons are as sick, when by a Surfeit,
Great Belly, Giddiness, or Sea-Voyage they vomit bitter or sower Choler,
melancholy or tough Phlegm, as when they take a Shop-Vomit, or drink large
quantities of Lukewarm Water, or Posset Drink, or (as they are called) the
milder Vomits such as Groundsel, or Carduus, provided they eradicate the same
Matter; and upon taking a Vomit, if that Matter be not brought up or stirred by
reason of a Congeries of other more easily moved and in the way, or that there
is but a small Quantity to be removed, the Patient shall be no more sick than
when he drinks so much Wine or Water, which for illustration sake, may be
plainly proved by the different Working of three of the very same Vomits for
substance and measure in the same Person within a few days one after the other:
For Instance; the first spending it self upon a large quantity of serous
Matter, and some tough Phlegm, gripes but little, and causes no great Sickness.
The 2d. penetrating deeper, and finding little or none of the first Humor to
take off its edge, by pumping out the green and yellow Matter, causes Gripes,
great Sickness, Faintness, cold Sweats, and almost Convulsions; which is no
otherwise than when the same stuff is cast off by Nature without a Vomit. The
3d. Vomit again shall hardly work at all, most of both sorts of the Morbifick
Matter being removed by the two former, and consequently it causes little or
no Sickness. So that this violence only proceeds from removing the Disease (not
to be avoided, if willing to be rid of the same) it not being the immediate
effect of the Vomit, for then 'twould always accompany it; which by Experience
is found otherwise. But in truth, a Vomit enables Nature to separate and
squeeze out those Humors which are imcompatible with, and Praeternatural to
it, and that Expulsion being the Work of Nature, is the true Cause of that Pain
and Sickness.

And for that Reason there is no more danger in this Artificial than in a
Praeternatural or Spontaneous Vomiting, which, or some other effectual
Evacuation, must either be endured together, or divided, or the Disease must
continue, unless by a present quieting Medicine, a Foundation for future
Chronical Distempers, be laid; for Praeternatural Humors, once in the Body,
if not ejected, will make their way to one part or other, especially to the
weak, if any such, they being altogether incapable of ever after being made
useful to the Body.

A Second Objection often brought against their use is, That Nature never made
the Stomach for Discharge of Excrements upwards.

To which, an Answer may be given, not much unlike one more witty than true, of
Sir Francis Pruiyan in another Case to a Gentleman reproaching him for using
Foreign Drugs, when sufficient were produced at home, according to the common
Saying, That every Country is furnished with necessary Medicines for the
Diseases of the Place which he acknowledged: but withal told him, That if he
went beyond Sea for Food, as Wine and Spice, he must do the like for Physic.

And so in this Case the Fundament and other usual Vents are sufficient for
discharge of Natural Excrements when the Party is in Health; but if by Plenty,
Luxury, and Laziness Praeternatural Excrementitious Humors are collected to
disease Mankind, new ways for their Discharge must likewise be invented, and
this Nature directs.

Furthermore, diverse Excrements are naturally voided upwards by Nose and Mouth,
and these sort of Humors can seldom or never be carried away by Stool, nor are
they the same that naturally pass that way; but I presume no Salivator will
stiffly maintain this Objection.

A Third Objection is, That granting Vomits to be more powerful than other
Remedies, yet it is inexcusable to give them upon every slight occasion.

Which truly seems plausible till it is considered, That Diseases are not
always safely to be trusted, because diverse at first have appeared mild, which
too late have been discovered to be dangerous and malignant, and an opportunity
lost may be a Life lost: but no other use of them is pleaded for, except where
Nature directs; or when in all likelihood most safe, and where no other
Inconvenience can thereby happen, but a speedier Cure.

A short Appendix of PRACTICE.
PReserve your Health by Temperance in Meat and Drink, Convenient Rest and
Labor, Sleeping and Watching, Excretion and Retention, good Air, and moderate
Passions, especially Grief, Anger, etc.

But when, by the Abuse of any of these Non-Naturals, Health is impaired,
Recover it by proper Evacuation, as before mentioned, and the occasional Use of
Hypnoticks.

Begin to apply your Remedies immediately after you find your self disordered,
for Delays breed danger, Quod hodie non fit, cras minus aptus erit;
Principijs obsta, post est occasio calva.


Therefore, as often as ye are Bound, take a Lenient Clyster, or some gentle
Purge, except there were any probable Appearance of Plague, Smallpox, or the
like Pestilential Distempers, and then a Suppository, as a Violet Comfit, or
Candles Ends may be best.

At all times when your Appetite is lost or dulled, a Loathing, Vomiting,
Sickness or Pain at your Stomach attends you, then Vomits are the best
Remedies, though Catharticks may sometimes recover you, when the Inconvenience
is not great.

And then take a Vomit, drinking Possit-Drink, thin Broth, or Lukewarm water
during the Working, and repeat it two or three days together; if your Stomach
continues disordered, the Fever Violent, or intermitting; giving it then just
before the Fits.

After the working of Vomits, or strong Purgers, and where Sleep is wanting,
take a quieting Remedy for Sleep.

In all Fevers, after convenient Purging and Vomiting; and wherever Sweating
is necessary to remove Pains, Soreness, or Weariness, take a Sweating Remedy.

Bleeding is good in all Fevers (Plague, Smallpox, Measels, Spotted, or
Malignant Fevers excepted) in all Pains of the Head or Limbs, Pleurisy,
Running Pains, in Fullness of Blood, in Youth, in all Coughs, and Inflammation
of any Part; but it is not only more advantageous in one Part than another, but
also more prejudicial when taken out of a wrong place.

Whenever you happen to have any Stoppage of Urine by Stone, Gravel, Cholick,
or otherwise, make use of Diuretics, Clysters, and the other Remedies,
provided there be Indications.

For the Itch, Purge, and wash the place with Tobacco Stalks boiled in Beer, or
Urine: or anoint with Olium Laurium with Brimstone, or powdered Ginger.

For Boyls, Swellings, or other Breakings out, apply Pultesses, or Drawing and
Ripening Plasters to break or discuss them, or a Caustic; and, if they are not
malignant, or that they are in a Part to which either you cannot at all, or not
conveniently make an outward Application, then Purge or Flux.

Never leave a Disease till the Disease quits the Patient, for that gives it
but time to recover: The weaker the Patient, the stronger and speedier ought
the Remedy to be, because there is no time to loose; and the stronger the
Remedy, if not beyond Reason, the quicker will the Patient recover strength,
and much sooner than no Remedy, or but a weak one.

Here follows a Short Direction, formerly designed for the English Army in
Flanders.
THe Poverty and Discontents of the ruined Inhabitants in Flanders.

The Intemperance, and thence the frequent Indigences of the Soldiers, whence
their Troubles of Mind.

The Change of Air and Diet, the want of Shifts, and their uncleanliness.

The straightness and illness of their Lodging.

The want of due Exercise, most of them having been Laboring Men,

Are sufficient Causes to produce Camp-Diseases, which the unseasonable heat of
the Air actuates into Malignant, and then is easily communicated by Contagion
to such as converss with them, whose Bodies are thereto predisposed.

For which, the Remedies are,

First, To Preserve the Sound, indicated by the Causes: And,

Secondly, To Cure the Sick.

To which purpose the Peccant Matter and Humors (being thus produced in the
Body, and not possible to be reduced to their Pristine State) must therefore be
carried off.

To effect which, the usual and most approved ways are by Antidotes, and
Alexipharmicks, which sometimes by Urine, and most by Sweat, discharge the Body
of that Enemy; but because they may be slow and uncertain in their Operation,
and that often times there are other Indications;

Therefore as soon as taken ill (after a Clyster is administered, if Costive)
order a Vomit, which may the next day without danger be repeated, if there be
Indications for it.

The Night after the Vomit, an Alexipharmacal Medicine, mixed with Hypnoticks,
will prevent all ill Symptoms.

Afterward Purge but if Matter be cast forth by the common Emunctories or
Habit of the Body; then Drawing-Plasters to the Boyls, and Sudorificks
inwardly, with Blisters and Applications to the Feet, perform the whole Cure.

Of the Jesuits Powder.
ACcording to my promise in the Preface, I think my self obliged to offer some
of my Exceptions against the present unreasonable, and too frequent use of the
Cortex Patrum, or Peruviana, commonly called the Jesuits Powder, and therefore
(without repeating the Description of the Plant, the Place whence 'twas
brought, the time when first Imported into Europe, the manner how the Virtues
thereof were first discovered, with other particulars relating to the same,
which have been already at large treated upon by diverse Authors; to which I
refer my Reader) my Province shall be to take notice of some of the Reasons
which have induced many Physicians to make it so general a Febrifuge, and now
almost a Panpharmacon; and then modestly to propose to the consideration of the
Impartial and Judicious Reader what makes me dissent from the Practice of so
many Learned and Eminent Prof^ssors.

The principal Motives I presume, are the original Recommendations from abroad:
Talbor's Blind and General Applicatlon; together with the sudden and surprising
success they suppose immediately follows the Exhibition of the Cortex, whereby,
the Fit is soon interrupted, and the Patient pleased with a seeming and sudden
Recovery, whereby many to my knowledge are obliged to tedious Courses of the
Cortex, even six times longer than was expected for the Cure, and; which often
f^i^ing has been at last effected by by quite other Methods; of which may be
given diverse Instances, but that every day will furnish faithful Inquirers with
plenty of Examples.

To proceed therefore, please to observe, That it is on all hands agreed, that
the Essential and manifest Quality of the said Bark is Stiptick or Astringent.
Yet at the same time, such as do not rely upon any occult Quality, will have it
endued with a Property to open, empty, and remove the morbifick Cause by some
unintelligible, invisible, and let me add, preposterous manner of working.

That it has the Binding Quality, besides the foresaid acknowledgements, is
manifest by the Retention of the Morbifick Matter in the Body, which appears to
be so from its being let loose and returning to its old Course as soon as, or
in a few days after a Purging Medicine operates upon the Patient, which (had it
been evacuated, as those Gent. would have it) could not possibly be brought
back again into the Body by a Purge or Vomit.

His late Majesty, to justify the supposed Skill of the deceased, and
according to the Proverb, fortunate Knight Sir R. T. was pleased to offer as a
Trial of Skill to the Physicians, that Persons cured by the said Knt. with the
Jesuits Powder, should by taking a Purge, be again reduced to their pristine
state for the Physicians to employ their best Endeavors to help them if they
could.

This was a sufficient concession that the Fomes still remained in the Body,
and only by the quieting or stiptick Quality of the Cortex was hindered from
exerting (for the present) its peccant Motions.

For what can else be the Cause of the almost certain Return of the Ague after
three weeks or a Month, but that the force of the Medicine being spent, the
Cause of the Ague will no longer obey, but attacques the Patient afresh. And if
by chance the Ague appears not so soon nor in its proper Colors, yet what
reason can be given, that at least two in three that have taken any quantity of
it, after the Expiration of three or four Months, are infallibly troubled with
a Shortness of Breath, loss of Appetite, a Hectique Rheumatisme, Colic,
Jaundice, Scurvey, etc. or suffer a severe Augmentation of such Distempers, to
which they were formerly subject, whereby it becomes almost Habitual, and often
times destructive to the Life of at least one in five that had the misfortune
to be therewith treated.

It Is confessed, that it often cheques the Fit of an Intermitting Fever, and
that frequent Repetitions of the same may so disguise the Distemper as the
Patient may believe himself Cured, when alas the best is but a truce, and
though it may never return in the same shape, yet it seldom gives over haunting
the Patient in different Manners, which occasions many to make most grievious
Complaints of their want of Health, Suffocations, or other Maladies, as
abovesaid, that infest them as bad, or worse than their Ague: So that it may be
said, that the Jesuits Powder cures the Ague, but at the same time destroys the
Patient.

Which Dr. Willis seems to allow in an other Case, page 19 of the London
Practice of Physic, where he concludes the Cause of diverse ill Symptoms of
the Brain and Nerves to proceed from the inward restraint of the malignant
Matter driven thither by the means of Opium, or the like Astringent.
Nevertheless as often as the Looseness and Vomiting returned, those affects
were presently appeased.

To prove this further, consider that it is generally owned, that the Cortex
has no Opening, but as already intimated, a Binding and Astringent Quality,
now unless it had withal a Transmuting Quality, to change the Morbifick Matter
into Nutritive, I cannot see how possibly the Patient can be safe, and that
there is no such Transmutation, appears by the frequent return of the Distemper
after a few Weeks, especially upon the giving a Purge: whereby it is evident,
that the Matter was not only damned up in the Mass of Blood, though the motion
of it was suppressed by the Cortex, but that it still remained the same useless
peccant Matter as before, why else should it many times return in the same
shape; indeed if by frequent and continued repetition of the Cortex, the
Disease happens to be a long time imprisoned in the Body, and that Nature wants
power sufficient to expel it, it is possible by the acquisition of fresh Matter,
or the tendency of it to another part, some new Phenomina may arise, very
different from the old, but no less grievous; which therefore deludes the
Patient out of a suspicion of its being a Brat of the former Ague.

But let us now suppose that this Jesuits Powder should infallibly cure the Fit
of an Ague in all Persons, as they say it does in most, yet so long as it
appears by experience that it only prevents the Accidents, leaving the Cause
untouched, the Patient is certainly more endangered, for the Fits not being the
Disease, but caused by the Motion of the Disease in order to a natural
Discharge: wherein then lies the Excellency of this Medicine?

The Author of Sir R. T's. Wonderful Secret, or English Remedy, does Learnedly
Philosophize against all Sense and Reason, as in page 17, etc. where he will
not allow that the Binding, Stiptick Quality does retain the Morbifick Matter
in the Body, but by riveting (as his words are) the Homogeneous parts of the
Blood, seperates them from the Heterogeneous, whereby it facilitates the
Expulsion. Could this Chimara be granted, how comes an expelling Medicine to
destroy the effect of the Cortex, which if so, would really help it? To what
end does his Medicine separate, if Nature cannot, Art must not discharge? Nay,
in page 20. he asserts, that the principal action of the Cortex is directly
opposite to that of Evacuations, and thereby endeavors to confute the Opinion
of the Author of the Additions to Schroderus, who imagines that it operates by
Precipitation: notwithstanding, quickly forgetting himself in finding fault
with La Merry, he changes his Opinion, page 26. and confesses that the
Febrifick Matter remains (after the proper parts of the Blood are reunited)
confounded in the superfluous Serosity wherewith it is evacuated, either by
Transpiration or Urine.

Truly the Discoveries of the Properties of this Remedy would have been no
great loss to the World, if they had still remained concealed under the occult
Quality, for the Explanations seem to me Riddles and Paradoxes, it Opens and
Binds, and Binds and Opens, and both, and neither, ignotum per ignotius. But
it is no wonder it should be so, when Authors write more to support Opinions and
maintain indulged Notions than to discover Truth, and study more what will
please, than what may guide and instruct.

For certainly, if they would have had more Patience, instead of an Ambition to
appear in Print, and had made some more diligent Observations upon the
Exhibition of the Cortex, they could never have been guilty of so great a
mischief, as blindly to recommend a Drugg so highly prejudicial and destructive
to Life and Health as this has since proved, whether by abuse of it or
otherwise, I will not now dispute.

If any curious Observer will but please to reflect a little on the Weekly
Bills of Mortality, since the frequen^ use of the Cortex, he will assuredly find
not a single Corpse less in number than before, it is well if not many increased;
for there are certainly more Cholicks, Apoplexes, Suffocations; Rheumatismes in
abundance, Hecticks, etc. than formerly, which were impossible if it answered
the commendation of some, and the expectation of others, for if we have no
fewer People of the same number of Inhabitants dye, but more painful and
tormenting Diseases increase than before its use, what is the Benefit accrues
thereby? The Observations other Physicians have met with, I hope will in time
weane them from the use of this Drugg, for they may find the same as I do.

If there be any true way to discover the Virtues and Usefulness of Remedies
but by Experience, I must confess my Ignorance, for I know no other.

Scarce a Patient comes to me that has not just cause to complain of the
Cortex by reason of some Chronical Distemper or other, which ever since the use
of the Bark has afflicted them.

If what I have in the former part laid down as a certain Rule (that no Disease
was ever cured without Evacuation) be true, then I think it cannot reasonably
be long controverted whether a stiptick Remedy is fit to be applied for the
complete Cure of an Ague, which none will deny to proceed from Heterogeneous
and praeternatural Humors; and I believe few can prove those Humors ever
after converted into Homogeneous and Natural; and if so, the natural Indication
is Evacuation.

Could this Powder be more effectual than the Method I have in general
proposed, or indeed any other, or did it perform what they say it does, leaving
no deadly poison behind it, then would I as heartily embrace it; but since
other Methods are experimentally seen to be more safe, certain and useful, it
ought to be exploded as a common Enemy to Mankind; witness the untimely Death
of diverse of our Nobility, Gentry and Commonalty, so notorious, that I forbear
to name them. I shall leave these my thoughts to the Scrutiny of any Candid
Person, for my part I do not see how Practice can support it, or Theory
encourage it.

It may not be amiss here to insert an Observation of the Cortex, communicated
by a Person of great Worth and Experience in Chemistry; That a convenient
Quantity of the same being thrown into Wort after Yeast is added to cause it to
work, or any other Liquor upon Fermenting, the Fermentation shall immediately
be interrupted, and the Liquor rendered vapid, useless, and totally destroyed.

POSTSCRIPT.
AFter this Small Treatise was Finished and Composed by the Printer, there
remained four blank Pages to complete the Sheet, which gave me opportunity to
make some Amendments, and to fill up the rest with a few scattered Remarks and
Observations. Wherefore the Reader may please to take notice that in
Translating the Quotations out of the Latin, I followed as near as I could the
Phrase and Style of my Authors, without endeavoring to mend it where it was
significant. And further, that having had the good fortune, since the Printing
the 21st. page, of Mr. Bernier's Acquaintance, whose Curiosity brought him to
visit this Kingdom, and see the Coronation: I look upon my self obliged to
acknowledge my Error in naming a Person of his great Merit and Reputation in
Europe with no more Respect, besides the Honor he had in being Physician to
the Great Mogul in the strange Revolution of that Rich and Mighty Empire.

For Observations take this taste.
A Hackney Coachman in Hedge-Lane having used the Cortex a whole Month in an
Intermitting Fever upon a Promise of being by it recovered without Purge or
Vomit in three or four days. And being in that time reduced to a very weak
Condition, besides an Addition of dangerous Symptoms, was by a contrary Method
in less than a Fortnight much relieved, and in a very short time after restored
to perfect Health.

A Young Gentlewoman having been six Month afflicted with a Quartane,
notwithstanding the frequent Use of the Cortex, was in less than a Week
perfectly Cured by a Purging Course.

Many more to the same Purpose may be added, but that I am not willing to
enlarge at present; but if this small Trifle comes hereafter to be Published,
it is very possible it may receive an Augmentation by some Remarkable
Observations in diverse Diseases.

ERRATA.
PAge 8. l. 18. r. the Roots or Fountains of all Diseases. p. 16. l. 10. r.
Caution. l. 11. place a comma after Distempers. p. 17. l. 2. after and r. for.
l. 10. dele most. p. 18. l. 26. r. who for he. p. 19. l. 22. r. Boethius With
two tittles. l. 23. dele s in fasting. p. 21. l. 9. r. deep rooted. l. 11. r.
Nerves.

FINIS.

