THE CHARACTER OF A Jacobite, By what Name or Title soever Dignifyed or
Distinguished.

Written by a Person of Quality.

-- Licuit, semperque licebit
Parcere, Personis, dicere de vitiis.
Luc. Conscius ipse sibi de se putat omnia dici.

Cato. LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1690.

THE CHARACTER OF A Jacobite, etc.
JAcobites in general are a sort of Animals sprung from the Corruption of King
James's Evil Government; and carry two shapes in one Body, like a Centaur, or
the Irish Virgin with a Fish in her tail, half Protestant, half Papist. If they
are of the Temporal Nobility, they believe the Glitter of their Honor to be
only the Reflection of King James's Favor, and that the Rays of their Grandeur
cannot shine with that luster as they ought, unless like Glowworms Tails they
may be permitted to glister in the dark of Popery and Tyranny. They are the
Mountains of Arbitrary Power and Magnificence, which Tyrants erect to be the
Atlasses and Colossus's to support Exorbitant Dominion. And many times they owe
their Advancement to a Serraband well danced, the activity of their Bodies, or
the allurements of lovely Features: And sometimes they are picked out to combat
(with Colors flying) all Authority of Law and Justice. They love Grandeur, but
little of Nobility, which would teach 'em to ascend to Greatness by other steps
than that of their Countries Ruin. They espouse the late King's Interest, as
many men, when they grow Impotent, marry their Old Mistresses. But the support
and the Interest being feeble alike, it is only to make the World believe the
Conjunction at last to be honest. Or else they think it ill manners to desert
the late King in his Spiritual Amors with the Whore of Babylon, because they
know so well the proneness of their own Inclinations to their carnal Devotions:
Tho on the other side, it is strange they should have so little Esteem for the
Protestant Religion, because the Papists tell 'em, it came out of Henry the
Eight's Cod piece. But certainly these Noble Jacobites are the oddest Courtiers
in the World to worship a setting Sun; and that in his Winter Quarter too, when
he can never expect to rise again, but he must be surrounded with Mists and
Foggs, and Storms and Tempests, which his warmth will never be able to disperse.

These Noble Jacobites are a sort of soaring Politicians, that sin against all
the Prospects of Sense and Reason in the Earth. Were they not banded about the
Eyes like so many Sons of Venus, they who sit upon the Pinnacle of the Kingdom,
and have the opportunity of distant views, could not but with a clearer sight
behold the sinking Estate of the rotten Interest which they labor to support:
But the Noble Jacobites are more sublime in their Politics than others; they
can see into a Millstone not only as far, but farther than other Men; and
their exalted and piercing Imaginations make such holes in Futurity, that they
can see through it as through a Cullender. Then taking their magnifying
Glasses, they fancy they see their Idol King James far more pompous than ever;
and conceit themselves pearching about his Throne, full plumed with all the
Glories and Preferments due to their pretended Merits. And thus, they that
flattered him out of his Throne, no less absurdly flatter themselves with
Felicities of their own erecting, by restoring him again. All this while,
pursuing that abominated Maxim of the Kings Interest, and consequently their
own, being separate from that of the Subject; they tell the World that they
have nothing to do with the People, and thereby teach the People not to have
any thing to do with them. The late King conferred Titles upon 'em, but their
Titles afford 'em no Honor; for they no sooner are invested with their Honor,
but they debase it with pick-thank Sycophantrie, and Slavish Adulation: And
swayed by the powerful Instigations of a pusillanimous Ambition to be great
only in show, betray at once their King, Themselves, and their Country: for
instead of advising the King as they ought, they give him such Counsel as they
believe him inclined to, and determine of his Welfare by his Desire; which is a
kind of setting the Sun by the Dyal; so that the King never knows what time of
day it is among his Subjects. Therefore it is that set before these Lordly
Jacobites, the sight of a guilt Coach and six Horses, or a round Bag of Louy
dors, they are easily persuaded to sacrifice the Welfare of a whole Nation to
their own Ease and Plenty.

In short then, a true Jacobite Lord is a true Jefferies, that is to say, an
Abandoned Slave to Despotick Tyranny; a Sejanus to his own Vices, who will
humor a Tiberius, to the dispeopling whole Provinces, rather than lose the
sordid Advantage of insulting over his Inferiors. A Jacobite of the first
magnitude, is one that will take no warning by the fatal Precipices, from which
he has seen so many of his own degree fall headlong. The Destinies of
Buckingham and Strafford are so far cancelled in his thoughts, that they
prevail with him no more than the Fable of Phaeton. It cannot be thought that
all who were ennobled by the late King, were of Ancient Descent, from Ancestor
to Ancestor, which is the Reason why they cannot be altogether blamed, if like
the Statuaries Cat, that would be starting after Mice after she was exalted to
Humane Shape, they pursue those baser Ends which true Nobility scorns: However
we are glad the Moral only can be fixed upon the Jacobite Race. It Is true, that
some of these Noble Jacobites lay claim to Conscience, and upon that score
pretend whole Ounces of Loyalty and Fidelity to King James: But it is a
Character appropriated to these fort of Jacobites, that they never think; else
they could never be so much mistaken in the distinction of Loyalty: For how can
ever they be said to be Loyal to a Person that never was true to himself? Nor
is it less absurd to believe they may be more Loyal to any one particular Man,
than to the Body of their Country in General: For by this means they fall
under the severe Character of preferring the Advantages of a single Person
before the common Welfare. And then their Loyalty soon discovers it self to be
no more than a factious Adherence to a discarded Prince, in hopes to wrest from
the Kingdom by his Advancement, the disappointed satisfaction of their
Ambitious Ends, which otherwise they give over for lost.

But what Virtues as well as Vices will not Self- Interest infuse into a Noble
Mind? Of a sudden these Noble Jacobites are become the most Charitable and
Believing Persons in the World: They believe that King James has forgot to
forfeit his Promises and Protestations; they believe that he believes it is for
no By-ends of theirs, but purely out of Pity and Compassion that they seek his
Return: They believe they shall never be Closetted more, but that Sympathy and
Antipathy, the Mass and Common Prayer, will kiss each other upon his coming
back, in two Chapels under the same Roof: They believe that his Italian Wife
will Forgive 'em, his Priests will Pardon 'em, and that He himself will acquit,
exonerate, and discharge 'em for assisting to lift him out of his Kingdom: They
believe that young Perkin was truly begot, and truly born at St. James's, and
that he is lawful Heir to the Crown: They believe the French King, like a Most
Christian Prince, will foregoe all his private Contracts, and never sue neither
him nor them with Fire and Sword for all the vast Sums he has lent upon the
Mortgage of of the British Dominions. All this, and more than this, too long
to be enumerated, the Noble Jacobites believe, to that degree, that if their
Faith were otherways employed, there would not be an unruly Mountain in England.

But after all, this is their unhappy Misfortune, that all this extraordinary
Belief of theirs serves only to betray their Weakness, if it may not rather be
called a kind of Frenzy; as if their living formerly so near the Rays of a
Crown had tanned and Blackamoor'd their very Understandings; for it is not
rational to think these Exalted Jacobites believe these Absurdities, as being
in a Station to know better things by woeful Experience; but it shows them
however given over to a fond or wilful Credulity, which is a Vice of Judgment,
a feebleness like that of Maidens, to be twice deluded; so far from the
Prudence of True Nobility, that we seldom find an Irrational Mouse that having
once escaped the Bait, will come near the Trap a second time. But there is this
Distinction between true English Nobility and Jacobite Frenchify'd Nobility,
that the one studies the Welfare, the other the Ruin of the People; one loves
his Country, the other hates it; the one walks by the Rules of Honor and
Justice, the other values himself upon the Quirks of Policy; the one would be
deemed Wise, the other Crafty; the one would be esteemed a good Commonwealths
Man, the other a Cunning Politician; the one asserts the Nations ancient
Freedom, the other would be a eringing French Bashaw rather than a Peer of
England; the one would redeem, the other sell the Kingdom. This sort of
Jacobite Grandees, are the Hedge-Sparrows that hatch King Lewis's Cockatrice
Eggs, in hopes that when England is become tributary to France, they shall be
rewarded with whole Hesperian Gardens, full of Golden Pippins: Not considering
that Princes most affecting Arbitrary Power, detest however a low-spirited
Propensity to Slavery, and that all the Reward which the Senate received for
their servile Submission to Tiberius, was only to be derided by that scornful
Tyrant with the frequently repeated Sarcasm, of O homines ad servitutem Paratos.

In short, such Noblemen as these are like Barren Mountains, that bear neither
Plants nor Grass for Public Use; they touch the Sky, but are unprofitable to
the Earth, and when they come to add the Unjustice of their Actions to the
Worthlesness of their Persons, their Exaltation becomes the Curse of the People.

To come now to the Jacobite Clergy, (for may all those of the true Sacred
Order of the Church of England, long enjoy the Honor and Veneration due to
their Function!) I say then, to come to the Jacobite Clergy, they are such a
Generation of Vipers, so envenomed with the poisonous Pamphlets of the
Observator, that you would swear they made it their business to swallow those
weekly Pasquills; and that the sayings of that same Charming Author being
digested in their Stomachs, has turned to real Nourishment: They are a numerous
Gang, and haunt S -- 's Coffee-House in shoals, where they sit Croaking like
Froggs in March against the Government. If they are of the Tribe of Levi, the
only Reason to be given for it is this, that they are so butcherly inveterate
against the Sichemite Whiggs, upon pretense that they have ravished their
Sister Dina, the Church. They cannot Study for hearkening after News; and in
Parliament time the Court of Requests is so crowded with 'em, as if the Popes
Consistory sat in the Painted Chamber. If they can but get to be a Lords
Chaplain, they presently whip on a long Scarf; and then Lucifer was not prouder
when he exalted himself upon the Mount of the Congregation in Isaiah: And yet
these Scarfs are easily come by; for a Man that showed the Puppet-Play of the
Creation of the World but the other day, may lay Title to one, if he can but
slubber over a few Prayers in a Ladies Family. They are a sort of mere Divinity
Meteors, that run whisking up and down to misguide the wandering People, and
vent their undigested Conceits, as the wind of their airy Fancies agitates
'em. You cannot perceive 'em to be Cripples, and yet there is not one of 'em
but halts most conspicuously between God and Baal. They pretend to be
Protestants, but with an extraordinary Inclination to Popery, that they may
have two Strings to their Bow, and be ready upon the Return of their Idol, to
fall down, and worship his Will and Pleasure. If the Church of Rome would but
release the severity of her Pennances, her work were done; for tho they are
passionately for whipping of others, they do not much care to whip themselves.
They are the Pompeys and Caesar's of Divinity, that can endure neither Equals
nor Superiors, and rather than a Dissenter should get a Living among them, if
it were in their Power, they would sacrifice him to Molock; for they look upon
the Dissenters as Forraigners that would eat the Bread out of their Mouths.
They say that Nebuchadnezzar did very well to throw the three Dissenting
Children into the fiery Furnace, because they would not conform to the Church
of Babylon by Law established. Had they lived in the time of the Ten
Persecutions, what clean work would they have made with those Nonconforming
Christians! Or if any thing had saved a Remnant, it would have been their
Doctrine of Passive Obedience. They idolize King James as the Heathen did their
false Gods, first make the Idol, and then worship it. Tyranny's the Moloch to
which they would offer their own Posterity; and their own Native Country the
Place which they would make their Valley Gehinnon. They pretend to be true Sons
of the Church, but use her no better than a Step Mother, to offer the Price of
her Preservation for the Redemption of her professed Enemy. And so doing, while
they pretend to avoid their being Traitors to a pretended Prince, they betray
not only the People which they mislead, but themselves; as if the Church would
ever be able to give them suck, when they have assisted her Capital Foe to cut
off her Nipples. Whence it is apparent, that they were never well read either
in Scripture or Matchiavel, tho it shows as truly, that their Inclinations are
more for the worst of Politics than the best of Divinity. All this while, how
they should be so charitable to the misfortunes of King James, is a wonder,
having so little Charity one for another, there being nothing more frequent
among them than Envy, Passion, Repining, and supplanting of each other: And yet
they are so insensible as to believe that their King James does not see through
them, (unless because they have made him their Idol, they think he has Eyes and
sees not,) and that he knows he must satisfy the particular ends and aims of
every individual Person, or else there will never be peace in Israel.

They would be the best Marks-men in the World, if they could but bring a great
Gun as well as a little Text to bear upon any Subject whatever they aim at. To
prove Episcopacy, they baulk all other Texts, and take this, Sirs, what shall I
do to be saved? because the Greek word, Sirs, signifies Lords, therefore they
were Bishops that were spoken to. Another to preach up Kingly Government, chose
for his Text, Seek first the Kingdom of God: Not the Commonwealth of God, nor
the Aristocracy of God, but the Kingdom of God, Ergo, Kingly Government is the
best Government. A third to disprove Non-Residence, finds out Mat. 1.2. Abraham
begat Isaac: For that if Abraham had not resided with Sarah, he had never begat
Isaac. Another undertakes to prove the unlawfulness of the Bill of Exclusion,
from Job chapter 36. v. 21. It is not lawful to do evil, that good may come of it.
Another to prove the Excellency of Monarchy, picks out Judge. 17. v. 6. In those
days there was no King in Israel: for had there been a King in Israel, Micah
had never made a Graven Image, nor had the Levites Concubine ever been
ravishe'd. And thus their Sermons are a sort of Lampoons upon Scripture, while
they make use of it only to put their Shamins and Tricks upon the People, and
expose it dressed up in wrested Interpretation, to the Diversion of the worst
of Libertines. They pray to Heaven as if they believed there were no God; or
sought at least to make him the Author of their mischievous Contrivances. They
pray for King James, spend all their most servent Ejaculations in their Cups,
and over their Coffee, for King James, as if they thought that God were a
Favourer of Popery, Tyranny, Oppression and Slavery; and yet would have us
think they believe him to be the God of Mercy, Truth and Justice. But whatever
they would have us believe, it is but an ill sign of the good Opinion they have
of it, to invoke Divine Favor upon the Enemy of their Religion, their Laws,
and Liberties.

While they had the Power, the Hook of recalling the Penal Laws and Test would
not take; but now they would recall the disappointed Angler, and rather throw
themselves into a precarious Toleration of a Popish Tyrant, than abandon
Dominion over their Protestant Brethren. And thus they set up King James like
the Brazen Serpent, thinking to be safe by looking upon him, when stung to
inevltable Death by the fiery Serpents of Rome. Look into their Conversations,
and you shall find 'em Wine bibbers to excess, and frequently removed from the
Coffee-house to the Tavern, to carry on the Elections of Sheriffs and
Parliament Men. And it is a shrewd sign they are no less addicted to the
Smicket, because they love so much as they do to see Religion with her Heels
upward. When they get into their Pulpits, they make 'em roar like so many
Matrasses of Aurum Fulminans, under the Guard of an ignorant Chemist; you would
think they had been learning of the Fire-chawing Mountebanks to carry burning
Coals betwixt their Teeth, their Breath is so hot: They fling about their Bombs
and their Granado's against the Phanaticks, as if they were storming a
Conventicle; every word is a Snap-dragon or a Flash of Lightning, enough to
singe all the Periwiggs in the Congregation. Strange, that such fiery men as
these should be for Passive Obedience! But that is a Virtue which they only
Preach to others, never practice themselves: They make use of Passive Obedience
as House breakers do of the little Engines called Betties, to force open the
Consciences of all that will not bow to their Baal, and rob 'em of their
Understandings. They are so far from Passive Obedience themselves, that never
was any Hornets Nest in such an uproar as were they themselves when their warm
Livings were in danger. The Scripture says, Obedience is better than Sacrifice,
but they cry Sacrifice is better than Obedience; for if all their Opposers were
sacrificed, there would be no need of Obedience: Touch but their Coppy-holds,
and then instead of Passive Obedience they cry It Is better to Obey God than
Man; and let their King de Jure make use of all his Right and Title to Command
'em, he shall as soon Command a Cabin in a rough Sea, as get 'em to read any
of his Acts or Declarations, if they but smell a Rat in 'em to the Prejudice of
their Cheese. Their vain Hopes persuade them to Obey King James, and their
groundless Fears to Disobey King William. Thus they hope in a Popish Prince,
and are afraid of a Protestant King; abandon the Felicity they may justly
expect from King William, and hope in the Courtesy which they can never expect
from King James; like many Men that are afraid of Heaven, and place their hopes
in the Devil's future Civility.

They believe all the rest of the Nation but themselves to be Crows, and come
with their Cherry-Garden Divinity to prove the difference between a King de
Jure and a King de Facto; as a King de Jure that has forfeited his Right by
Breach of Law, Breach of Faith, Breach of Oaths, Breach of all things by which
a Sovereign claims his Sovereignty, were any more than a vain Terror of their
own erecting. Heaven pulled him down, and they would heave him up again. Now
whether the Ancient Romans or these Jacobite Levites were the wisest, must be
left to Judgment; for the one trusted to a Goose to preserve their Copitol, the
other to a Cock-match for the Restoration of their Exile: Indeed the Cock is
the more Martial Bird* but the Goose was the more Fortunate: But they thought
to have been Crowing again upon their own Dung-hills, and therefore they
preferred a Cock-Match Plot before any other Plot. They had cried down the
Popish Plot, and the Presbyterian Plot was of King James's own making, and fell
with himself; but they thought might be Ten to One laid upon the Success of a
Cock-Match Plot. However it were, by this you may discover the right Genius of
a Jesuit and a true Jacobite, the one was for Dispeopling the Nation, the
other for making a Cockpit of the Kingdom.

I would fain exempt 'em from having any hand in the Miscarriage of our Fleet,
a fatal Blow to the Ancient Honor of the English Nation, which all Europe but
their Confederate the French King still laments: Since they that would betray
their Country and their Deliverer, would betray their Savior; for Judas might
perhaps not know how great a Personage our Savior was, but no Man can be
exempted from not believing in his Country.

The other sort of Levitical Jacobites, as they are more highly dignified, and
farther stricken in Years, carry themselves with more Reservedness, and as they
have gained a greater Reputation, so they are more dangerous to the Government;
yet they walk upon the same grounds, and move upon the same the Principles with
the Inferior Crew, who receive their Instructions from them; and when they are
fully Lesson'd, like the little Spaniels that fall a yelping when the great
Mastiff opens, follow the scent with a full Cry.

These Men being generally of low Extraction, cannot forgo those mean and
narrow Notions which their sordid Education infused into their Boyish Years,
which makes them admire Advancement as poor Folks adore gaudy Clothes; and
having once tasted the sweets of Preferment, they so abhor their former
Condition, that they place all their Felicity in this World. They study the
Humor of the Court more than Women do the Fashions, and if they can but gain
the Prince's Favor, they deal by the King as the Filou did by the
Countrey-Fellow in Bartholomew-Fair, that tickled his Ears 'till he picked his
Pocket: Only it shows somewhat ugly, that they should rejoice at the
Missfortune of our Fleet, and that King William's Victories in Ireland should
sadden their Hearts.

Their Sermons are all Calculated for the Court Meridian, the continual
Infusiory of Servitude and Wretchedness into all their Hearers: You might have
known what a Clock 'twas at White Hall by the Chiming of their Pulpits. They
took their Text from the Minutes of the Private Cabal, and then fiting a
Scripture shoe to it, sent it abroad Apparel'd in A Sermon Preached before the
KING, By the Reverend such a One, D.D. If the King wanted one to tell the
People, That though he commanded what was contrary to the Law of God and
Nature, the Subject was nevertheless bound to Obey with an absolute Passive
Obedience; there was a Sibthorp ready to bawl it out in his Pulpit. If the King
wanted another to prove by Scripture, That he was not bound to Observe the Laws
of the Realm concerning the Subjects Liberties and Rights, but that his Royal
Will and Command in imposing Loans and Taxes without Consent in Parliament,
obliged the Subjects Conscience upon Pain of Eternal Damnation; Manwaring, in
his way to the two Fat Livings of St. Giles in the Fields and Stamford Rivers
in Essex, does it to a Hair. These sort of dignified Jacobites derived their
Appellation from Jacobus Primus, who afraid of his English Nobility, caw'd the
most supple of his dignified Clergy, with his new invented Maxim of No Bishop,
No King, for which they gratified him with the Title of a second Solomon; could
they have found a hole in the Scripture to have made that Golden Maxim
Canonical, they had done it; but the Scripture had been so often Translated
before, that they durst not attempt it: However, they went so far, as to make
Episcopacy Jure Divino, which was the same thing as to range it coequal with
Kingship: And they were so much his Slaves, that they did all they could to
make out the Truth of his Apothegm, and their gratitude for his Invention, by
making all along the Scripture the Common Voucher and Asserter of Worldly
Politics.

When these sort of Dignified Jacobites come to be advanced near the Person of
a Prince, they never make use of their Dignity to Correct him when he goes
astray, nor to tell him of his Faults, but to sooth him up in his extravagant
Courses: They tell him, That Kings breath not the same Breath with other Men;
that they are not of the Race of Adam, but the Sons of Jupiter Ammon, etc.
descended from Heaven, Booted and Spurred, to ride their Vassals the People.
Moreover, That they are no more obliged by any Coronation-Oaths, than Lovers by
their Vows to their Mistresses, but may dispense with the Established
Constitutions of the Kingdom at their own Will and Pleasure, and that they are
accountable to none but God. For these good Services, and many more of the same
Nature, they prevail with the Prince to enlarge their Encroachments upon the
Civil Jurisdiction, and having gotten an Unjustifiable Power into their Hands,
they call it the Church, no less Sacred than the Ark, have a care how you touch
it: if the Lord do not smite the bold Adventurer, they will. A Popish Prince
may do any thing but abridge them of this Power of theirs; if he does that, he
is an Vzziah, he has invaded their Properties, and must be turned out of the
Temple with a withered Arm; and then -- it is lawful to send for a Prince of
Orange to help 'em, it is lawful to devolve the Government into his Hands, and
humbly to implore him to take Care of their Ark. But no sooner are their
Properties safe, and King William by the General Consent of the Nation
advanced, in his own Right to a Vacant Throne, but they are offended at his
Protestant Zeal, tell him they never sent for him to make him their Sovereign,
but their Journey-man only; call him King de Facto, slight his Protection, and
rather than acknowledge their Deliverer, would put on their Philistine Yoke
again.

These are a moody sullen sort of Jacobites, that would make all the World
believe there are but so many knowing, Pious Men in the Nation; and by an
affected Ostentation of Conscience, would riggle themselves into the Honor of
having all the Nation dance after their Pipes. They know the ill Consequences
of their Example to the Kingdom, and yet persevere in it; but they imagine the
Humor will take, and therefore they presume upon it. Nor can they be
insensible, that King James takes his Opportunity, and makes his Advantage of
their Bigottry. And yet so highly are these Dignified Jacobites conceited of
themselves, that though the Righteousness of ten Men would have saved Sodom,
they believe the streight-lac'd Tenderness of half the number enough to ruin
England: At least they would have the Public Good and Safety depend upon the
overweening Reason of a few Obstinate Men.

These sort of Jacobites cannot but know the danger of great Examples,

-- Velocius and citius nos
Corrumpunt Vitiorum Exempla Domestica, magnis
Cum subeant Animos Authoribus --
From whence we must conclude they are buoyed up, and encouraged by the more
Politic Jacobites, on purpose to promote their Darling, King James's Interest.
Thus with the Sorceress Circe, these dignified Jacobites see better things, but
follow the worse -- Not out of any Love to King James, for that is impossible,
but out of a Picque to King William: Otherwise it is certain, that never any
Divinity taught them to pretend a Reluctance of Conscience that threatens the
Fate of a whole Kingdom: Nor can Piety grounded upon Error excuse any Man for
designing Mischief to his Country: Or supposing a Man's Piety were seemingly
well intended, neither will the Goodness of a Man's Intentions excuse the
Scandal and Contagion of his Example.

Others there are who are more Pliable and Complaisam, who being unwilling to
come within the Lash of Acts of Parliament, think it their safest way to take
the Oaths both to King William and Queen Mary: But these Men have a Trick to
save themselves, they are Sharpers at Equivocation, never known among
Protestants before, and are able to teach the Jesuits themselves to sing a
Note above Ela: Thus the Chancellor of a certain Diocese in this Kingdom, being
asked how he could take the Oaths to King William and Queen Mary, and act for
King James? Oh! cried* He, though I took the Oaths, I never swallowed 'em. And
thus you see how near to a Reconciliation the Jacobites and Romanists are, they
are linked together against King William, like the wicked against David: But
the Jacobites are so short-sighted, as not to see that were the to others ends
accomplished, it is a Friendship so ill ordered, it would never hold together;
their Darling's good Fortune would soon unloose the Knot, and then they must
come over the Stick for the Pope, or else not a bit of the Crust.

The greatest part of these Jacobite Dons were of King James's Promotion, or by
his Interest when Duke of York, and fearing therefore to be laid aside, they
would make the World believe that the Church of England will fall, should they
be discarded; when others more Dignified, more Conscientious, more Religious,
more Foreseeing, apprehend no such Danger. They would make the World believe,
the Reformation of the Clergy to be the Downfall of the Church.

Hence such a Bustle, such a Clutter, such a Hurry; hence so much Canvassing at
Elections, such bauling out St. George for the Church, as if all lay at stake
when nothing is in danger. Some of these great Jacobites conform on purpose to
do Mischief, and they are the most dangerous; for they are able to give bad
Counsel unsuspected, and their Friendship betrays, like Fire that embraces to
consume. Some of these there are who are easily persuaded to send about their
Diocesan Letters to their Inferior Clergy, upon their Filial Obedience to give
their Voices for such a One, as being pitched upon by the Grand Cabal of the
County for his Affection and Fidelity to the Church. And many times the same
Pretense deludes others that mean better, with the same Hazard of their
Reputation: As if it could be any Honor to the Church of England, to imitate
the paltry Shifts and wicked Politics of Brent and Graham. But a true
Levitica^ Jacobite cares not whom he amuses, nor whose* Example he follows, so
he may but have the Honor to stand fair with Antichrist and King James. A true
Levitical Jacobite cares no more for the Church than for the Alchoran, but he
Worships the Church Lands; and so he may but lie well and at ease, he matters
not whether it be in the Abbey of Glastenbury, or the Parsonage of Simsbury.

However, these Levitical Champions for K. James draw after 'em some Numbers of
the Gentry and Commonalty of the Nation: Among whom of the Male Sex, there are
three Degrees of Comparison. Some Sober, some more Loose, some most
Extravagant. The Sober part are wheedl'd in by the specious pretense of the
Churches Danger: Men otherwise of Honest Morals, but Credulous Bigotts, that
pin their Faith without Examination upon their Instructors Sleeve, and believe
that all they say is Gospel, tho they should tell 'em that High-gate Hill was
made of March-pane. If they are men not so easily gulled, they feel the Ladies
Pulse, and if she be of their Party, Heavens! how the poor Gentleman's Ears are
teased between the Wife and the Doctor; and so they make themselves Masters of
his Reason, as Poachers catch Partridges, astonished with the dinn of the
Lowbell. Others Ambitious of a Seat in Parliament, or a Magistracy in the
County, though they see through 'em, and have perhaps as little Religion as
themselves; however they close with 'em, and applaud their Zeal for the Church,
to save the Expenses of Canvassing, or Feasting the Corporation: But having
studied well neither the Laws of God nor their Country, they render themselves
so obnoxious to a more happy Revolution, that nothing can save 'em but an Act
of Oblivion.

None of these are any more than the Crutches of a Crazy Government, which
being once restored to a healthy Constitution, lays 'em aside as needless
Supporters. Their Devotion is like Meat neither hot nor cold, which frighted
the Devil from being a Serving-man; and their Loyalty is like a Woman's
Affection, generally too much or too little. And for their particular Loyalty
to King James, it is like an Ill Habit, which when a Man has once got, he can
never leave it: However it serves 'em to make a noise with at a Tavern, for
want of other Discourse; or else like a cold Neats-Tongue, or a Dish of
Anchovies to relish a Glass of Wine.

They have a pretended Kindness indeed for the Service Book, and the Liturgy of
the Church of England; but they are more for set forms of Oaths than set forms
of Prayer, and prefer a brisk God damm 'em, before a sneaking Lord have mercy
upon us. They know so little the true value of the Laws and Constitutions of
the Land, that they were ready at any time to part with those Jewels for the
Barley-Corns of Court-Favour. Tyranny therefore huggs 'em, and makes the same
use of 'em as Tamerlane did of his Captive Bajazet, to get up and ride the
People.

The looser sort are Persons wholly addicted to their Pleasure, that measure
their Felicity by their Passions. These are Men that live most at ease under
the Oppressions of Arbitrary Power, like those sort of Animals called Hog-lice,
that breed and multiply under the weight of great Timber-loggs. Under the
strictness of Government they are like Fish out of the Water; in the looseness
of absolute Tyranny, they are as merry as Summer Swallows in a Chimney. Having
therefore experienced the Remissness of King James' Reign, like Ivy to a
Steeple, they cling to his Misgovernment, as being that which allowed 'em the
full swinge of their Licentiousness; and rather choose with Swine to wallow in
the Mire of Voluptuous and Libertine Bondage, than breath the Air of Freedom,
within the limited Impalements of the Law. They live like Brutes, by Sense and
Appetite, not Reason; and having no more Understanding than Dorr-flies, buzz
about the Dazzle of a forfeited Crown, to their own Destruction.

They talk of Religion, as they that never traveled talk of Foreign Countries.
However, if you ask em of what Religion they are, they will tell you they are
Protestants of the Church of England; if you misdoubt the Truth of it, they
presently confirm it with a God Damm 'em but they are. Ask 'em why then they
side with King James who is a Papist: Because, quo' they, the Papists are
better than the Presbyterians: -- Ask em how so, Because, cry they, the
Presbyterians are worse than the Papists. Knock with your middle finger knuckle
against the middle of their Foreheads, and you may hear the Concavity sound
like an empty Cask. If it were searched into, there would be nothing found in
it but the Lees of Forty One Clamor half dried up to nothing.

In short, what they think is Vanity, what they speak is False, whatever they
approve is Bad, and whatever they disapprove is Good.

The most Extravagant sort are like the Wild Beasts of the Forest, and almost
of as many various sorts; Bullies, Beaus, Hectors, Bravoes, St. Nicholas
Clerks, Alsatians, Mint-men, Rake-Hell and Skimm the Devil, and all the rest of
the blessed Canaille of broken Tradesmen, Pimps, and Suburb-Roysters,
Ambubajarum Collegiae, Pharmacopolae
Mendici, Mimae, Balatrones, hoc ^enus Omne.


All these are of the Society of Jacobites, that long for King James, as Women
with Child long for Coals and foul Tobacco-Pipes. These were the Inhabitants
and Freeholders of all the Towns and Counties in England, that had as many
Christian and Sirnames as the King of Spain has Titles, to clap to a Loyal
Address; and then the quaint Piece of Eloquence was carried to White Hall, with
a Label of Subscriptions that looked like a Cluster of Bees before the Mouth of
a Hive. And thus the Cheaters cheated themselves: They were Rampant then, they
are now Couchant, and therefore they Pray for the lost Protector of their
Vices; as Women Mourn at Funerals for the Dead, 'till they make themselves
Drunk for Sorrow: When all the World besides rejects 'em, they think King James
will receive 'em to his Mercy; as if he needed more Curses than he has already
to blast his Prosperity.

Popery indeed is a Common-sewer for any Vicious Excrements; but these
scoundrel Jacobites are so very wicked, that the Priests are afraid to let 'em
die (...) their Communion, lest the flames of ^urgatory should not be hot enough
to purify 'em.

In short, they are the Dreggs and Caput Mortuum of Humane Society, fit for
nothing but to be thrown upon the Dung hill: Or if they may be said to serve
for any thing, it is only to provoke the Anger of Heaven, and to be the
Combustiole Stuff to kindle the general Conflagration.

As for the Females, not to say any thing of the Modest and the Virtuous, who,
considering, the weakness of their Sex, may be easily led away by their
Jacobite Confessors, the Torrents of whose thundering Eloquence they are not
able to withstand; the wonder is, how these Jacobite Infusions come to operate
so generally upon the Common Harlots and Misses of the Town, since it cannot be
presumed that they have any such familiar Converse with the Jacobite Order. But
so it is, that all the Suburb Rahabs, and Daughters of Joy within the Walls,
have universally espoused the Jacobite Interest. It Is true, there was a Lady
said, That she had rather be Mistress to a King, than Wife to the best Noble Man
in England. And perhaps the same Ambition possesses our English Lais's, that
since they cannot all imagine to embrace the Royal Person, they will hugg his
Interest. They know that King James's Cause is the Whore of Babel's Cause; and
then the Whore of Babel's Cause must needs be the Cause of all the Whores in
England.

They know Idolatry to be a kind of Spiritual Fornication; and therefore it is
no wonder that Carnal Harlots should adhere to Spiritual Whore-mongers.
Besides, they are for a General Toleration; and for that Reason favor those by
whose means at length they hope to have the Penal Laws and Statutes taken off.

Others there are who think it a great piece of Ingratitude to forsake a
Religion which has been so kind as to Canonize so many of their Sex, and gives
'em so easy an Absolution from their pleasing Transgressions. For a Female
Jacobite, cares not that her Conscience should be heavier than her Fan; and
therefore chooses that Profession that lays the least weight upon it.

Yet some there are who think these Gypsies to be mistaken in their Politics,
for that tho the Roman Curtisans had some Reason for what they did, in
stickling and caballing as they did to keep the Sodomite Cardinals from sitting
in St. Peter's Chair; yet our Strumpets are the greatest Fools in Nature, for
striving to bring in the Italian Abby-Lubbers into England to spoil their
Vocation: They little dream what terrible Rates will be set upon Night-Walkers
and what an Excessive Excise will be put upon Chamber-practice.

Nevertheless, There are some who pretend to have a deep insight into
succeeding Times, comfort themselves in the Hopes they have in their little
Heliogabalus, who was what do you called it into the World at St. James's; that
when he comes to reign over 'em, he will advance 'em into a Corporation of
themselves, make Harangues and Speeches to 'em, and dignifie 'em with the Title
of his Commilitones, and Fellow Subjects, and be no less kind to them than that
famous Emperor was endearing to the Curtesans of Rome. Expectations of
consequence, and grounds sufficient for the English Trulls and Misses to plead
so hard for an Illegitimate. But such Female Advocates as these for the
Jacobite Cause do it more harm than good; such Sirens as they being looked upon
to be no less clapped in their Understandings than their Bodies. There is no fear
of such Amazon's as these, notwithstanding their Attire for the Head, so like
the Helmets of Tomyris and Penthesilea; and therefore we leave 'em to their
several Cures, and their Diet Drinks of Sarsaperill and Guaiacum.

However, By such a separation as this of the Goats from the Sheep, it may be
easy to give a true Judgment of the Jacobite Cause by the Favorers of it, and
to see what sort of Persons they are that seek for shelter under the Wings of
Tyranny and Popery. And the quite contrary, it may with no less clearness be
discerned who are the Assertors of the Kingdoms Welfare, and the Safety of the
True Protestant Religion, under the happy Auspices of KING WILLIAM and QUEEN
MARY.

THE END.

