THE CHARACTER OF A Modern Sham-Plotter.
HE is the Common Enemy of Honest Mankind: so pregnant with Venom, that his
very sight (like a Basilisk) kills. A Wretch so Pestilent, that if (by
Diabolical Insinuation) he can fasten a moments privacy upon an Innocent man,
he never leaves Swearing, till he has got him Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered. A
right Son of Belial; of the Progeny of Judas; Midwif'd by the Meal-Tub-Hag;
Tutored by Old Nick, or by his Vicegerent, the Triple-Crown'd-Monster; and
taught Practicks by the Malignant Brats of Ignatiue.

A Beggarly Rascal, that lives by the Price of Blood; the very Incendiary of
Nations, and the Compendium or Epitome of all Villainy.

Damming, Sinking, Whoring, Roaring, Drunkenness, etc. are his private
Recreations, and Devotion. His study is the destruction of Innocents, how to
frame his damnable Projects (not in a Mathematical,) but in a Diabolical
Symmetry. He Disgorges Oaths with greater ease then he Spues out the
superfluity of his Intemperate Debauches.

He cannot want Invention, for the Father of Lies sets him his Copy; the
Locusts of the Bottom less Pit guide his hand; and the Jesuits teach him to Con
his Lesson.

His Forehead is so brazen'd with Impudence, that he Blasphemes the Divinity in
the Face of the Sun; makes the Law Pimp to his wide-mouthed Perjuries: and
Sacrifices Lives with less Compassion than Cannibals eat Christians.

He is an active Species of Vermin, that works under Ground, laying his Mines
close, to blow up Lives and Estates; but if once detected, Proteus cannot shift
himself into such a variety of shapes as this Varlet (this Rogue in Grain) has
Methods to Sham his Plots, upon such whose Ruin he has before contrived.

His Dexterity in Malice cannot be paralleled, but by his Master the Devil, to
whom there is nothing on Earth more like. The Sham-Plotters of old were Dunces
to him: Silly Fools, dull at Contrivance, with one String to their Bow, and one
Arrow in their Quiver, which (once missing the Mark) by the discovery of the
Ambuscade, or the unskilfulness of the Archer, the Stratagem expired without a
Resurrection; but this Modern Graduate in Belzebubs School, can either Sham off
the Old, or Conceive, Form, and bring forth, a New Plot, in as little time as
he can Belch out an Oath, [affronting that ineffable Majesty, whose tremendous
Name he never uses but in that Dialect of horrible Volleys of God-dam-me's, yet
expects to be believed as if he made Conscience of Swearing in his more Solemn
and (therefore more) Abominable Perjuries.]

He Haunts the Apartments of Grandees and Magistrates, like an Evil Spirit. The
leading men of the State he labors to seduce and frighten with Apparitions of
horrid, Phanatick, Presbyterian Plots, (the Embrio's indeed, and Production of
Jesuitical Brains.) The Burden of his Song is Forty, One, Forty One; impudently
affronting His Majesty, who past an Act of Indemnity, Enacting that no man
should reproach another with his being concerned in that unhappy War, and
Graciously Pardoned the Delinquents, (except such as were executed) yet Old
Towzer the Observator (as Venomous an Asp as ever spit Poison) Heraclitus,
(that egregious Buffoon) N. T. that impudent Sot, that cannot Write Sense, much
(...) Truth, (but is beholden to the Mercenary Cabal of Sham-Plotters, and the
Debauched Priests (Condemned for Treason in Newgate) with the rest of that
profligate Tribe to furnish him with Matter as well as Form for his Pamphlet)
to Sham off their Traiterous Villainies, and to cover the shame of that
Scarlet-Whore, their Anti-Spiritual Mother, must Weekly fill City and Country
with Lying, Scurrilous, Licentious Pamphlets, Obscene Rime-Doggrel, Drunken
Ballads, etc. void of Sense, Poetry and Truth, etc. -- Which is one goodly
Stratagem of a Sham-Plotter, who,

(Whilst he tickles the Fancy of his Dam-ming Tribe by the Scurrillity of his
Drunken Wit) forgets the Dismal IRISH MASSACRE, GVNPOWDER TREASON, the present
HORRID and Damnable Plot, etc, Which are (besides innumerable more Romish
Treasons) so notorious to KING, PARLIAMENT, and PEOPLE, that the Barking of
these Curs, the Shams of these Villans, the Roaring, Damming Oaths of TORIES,
the Formidable Menaces from beyond the Water, nor the Damnable Intreagues of
Devil, Pope, Shamplotters, Tories, Masqueraders, etc. shall never blind the
Eyes of England, cut Protestants Throats, seize their Estates, Ruin their
Religion, Destroy their King, etc. nor shall they in due time escape the
Vengeance of the all seeing GOD, whose dreadful Scourage never fails to lash so
Reprobate, so Malignant, so Diabolical a Generation as the Shamplotters and
their Abettors.

To Conclude, a Shamplotter is an Indigent Rascal, that would sell his Soul to
the Devil for a Mornings Draught, or to a Whore for a Disease: Extracted out of
a Plebcan Dunghill; Educated in a Popish Seminary, (where he learnt the whole
Mass of his Debauchery) or else one that by Romish Artifice was Decoyd by those
Imps of Hell to do the Devils drudgery. A Creature hated by all good men,
suspected and esteemed as a Devil Incarnate by his Associates and Employers;
Infamous in the Superlative Degree, whose beginning is base, whose Life is
abominable, whose End is the Pox or the Gallows, and whose Eternal State (for
he seldom Repents) is commonly Damnation.

In a word no Dictionary affords a worse Epither for him than SHAMPLOTTER,
TORY, or MAN-CATCHER.

FINIS.
London: Printed for R. Janeway in Queens. H^ad-Ally in Paternoster Row.


