AN AGREEMENT BETWIXT HIS MAjESTY And the Inhabitants of the County of OXFORD,

FOR Provisions for HIS Majesty's Horses Billited in this COUNTY.

Printed by His Majesty's Command at OXFORD, December. 21.

By LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1642.

AN AGREEMENT BETWIXT HIS MAjESTY and the Inhabitants of the County of Oxford,
for Provisions for His Majesty's Horses Billited in this County.
21. December. 1642.
THe Gentlemen and Freeholders of this County, having been formerly moved to
take into their consideration the Billeting and providing for the Kings Troops
of Horse, severally dispersed into several parts of this County, how and in
what places, and by what means they might best be provided for, with the least
trouble or discommodation to the Country.

They met this day at Christ Church before the Lords, and others the Kings
Commissioners; and after some debate with the Lords, and afterward amongst
themselves, the necessity of the service being considered, and the Kings
resolution being declared unto them, that His Majesty would justly satisfy and
pay unto them, what the weekly charge should amount unto, according to those
proportions which had formerly been propounded.

They returned this answer unto the Kings Commissioners; That as many as were
then present did for their own parts, and so much as concerned themselves
agree, and did believe that those who were absent, would agree likewise, that
they would at the general charge of the County provide for such a number of
Horse and Horsemen, as were expressed in the Votes delivered unto them, at
such rates as should with equality be agreed upon.

But by way of caution for the Kings benefit and thrift, as well as for the
saving of their own provisions, they did move, that there might be care taken,
that the numbers might be completed in every Troop, and that neither they might
be forced to provide for, nor the King to pay for, a greater number then in
truth were there from time to time in the Kings service. That being admitted,

It was moved on the behalf of the Country, to the end that this charge upon
the whole County might be equally laid, that the same course might be held in
leavying of these moneys, as has been usually held in the leavying of other
public charges; and that to that purpose the Cleark of the Peace and such
others as were best experienced therein, should attend the Lord Chief Justice,
and some other Gentlemen of the Country, to dispose of the leavy in such equal
portions; which was agreed unto on all parts. 7s by the week for a Horse. 3s 6
for a Man.
And it was also propounded and agreed unto, that the prices of Hay, Straw,
Oats, and other Provender and provisions for the purposes aforesaid, should be
indifferently set and agreed upon, which being done, the Lords and others the
Kings Commissioners did undertake to move the Kings Majesty, that He would be
pleased upon a true account to repay these Moneys, whatsoever they should
amount unto, as soon as moneys should come unto Him, either by the Contribution
of other Counties, or otherwise; and in the mean time to secure the same unto
the Country, in such a way, and by such real and good security, as they should
hold themselves well satisfied with; and when the repaiment shall come, it is
agreed that it should be in the same proportions to every several Parish, and
divisions in the County as it is disbursed; and to that purpose it is agreed,
that such persons shall be trusted on the behalf of the Country to receive the
Kings security, and such to distribute the Money upon the repayment, as any
three of the Gentlemen now present being deputed by the rest shall think fit.

It is further agreed, that the Moneys thus to be collected, shall be first
collected by the Petty-Constables of every Parish for the Inhabitants, and by
them be paid over to the High-Constables, and by them paid to such hands for
the purposes aforesaid, as the King shall under His hand appoint. And it is
farther agreed, that the Inhabitants of this County shall not be pressed to
send in, or provide more or other sorts or quantity of provisions for the Horse
in any part of this County, then they are in truth able to perform, leaving to
themselves that proportion, which of necessity they must have for their own
stock, to maintain their Husbandry. And lastly, it is agreed, that this County
performing this with the King as aforesaid, they shall not be urged, to send in
or contribute toward any Provisions for the maintenance of any other parts of
His Majesty's Army, quartered at Wallingford, Abingdon, Reading, or other
places out of this County.

FINIS.

