The last SPEECH AND CONFESSION, Of Peter Caesar, a Portugal, at the Place of
Execution: Together with his Confession at Justice-Hall in the Old-Bayley, who
in a most barbarous and bloody manner, shot his own dear Lord and Master a
Portugese through the Head, as he sat at Dinner in his Chamber. With the
manner how he put him into a Chest, and afterward cast his Body into the River
of Thames: As also, the miraculous Discovery of this Bloody Murder; and the
Sentence of Death pronounced against him.

Likewise, the Trial of the Frenchmen, for Ravishing a Gentlewoman near
Holborn, and afterward most inhumanely to put a Flaming Torch up into her
Body: Together with the Sentence and Execution.

As also, a true Relation, concerning Mary Smith who cut off her Child's Head;
with her Examination and Confession before Justice Swallow; and the wonderful
Discovery of that cruel Murder, by Streams of Blood running down the River of
Thames, betwixt Dedford and Blackwall.

London, Printed for Charles -- Gustavus, 1664.

The Trial, Examination, and Confession of Peter Caesar, who most barbarously
murtherd his Lord and Master, a Portugese, as he sat at Dinner eating of a
Dish of Fish, etc.
AT Justice-Hall in the Old-Bayley, the last Sessions, Peter Caesar a Portugese
was called to the Bar, to answer an Indictment exhibited against him for
killing of his own dear Lord and Master, a most barbarous and cruel Act; but
the miraculous Effects, in Discovery thereof, is worthy of Remark, by the
Judicious Reader: For no sooner had this bloody Villain contrived the
Dissolution of his Masters life, but Terror possessed his guilty Conscience,
and the Grand Sergeant Death appeared obvious for a high Arrest; but Caesar
thinking to make his Escape, was prevented: Notwithstanding his flying from
Hart-street near Covent Garden, where his Master lodged: Who sending his
Servant from thence, after he had been abroad at his Devotions, to provide him
some Fish for his Dinner, and being dressed, and served up, this Judas-like
Wretch, when his Master was sat down at the Table, and standing with a
Trencher and Napkin to wait upon him, took that bloody Resolution, having a
Pistol ready fixed and charged, to discharge it against his Master, and so
shot him through the head, as he was eating of his Dinner: the Report of which
Pistol was heard by the people of the house; but he using to fire it in Jest,
in his Masters absence, against some Tailors that wrought opposite against
them, they took no further notice thereof. And about an hour after, this bloody
Executioner came down into the Kitchen, and seated himself to Dinner with the
people of the house, where he staid the most part of the Afternoon; and then
went abroad, and came in again; and toward the Evening he went forth again, and
caused a Porter to bring home a large Chest to his Lodging; and causing the
same to be carried up stairs, the Porter was discharged, and the bloody Villain
himself drew it into his Masters Chamber: but about two hours after, he called
the Porter again to help him down with the Chest, which he did accordingly: and
the Mistress of the house meeting him upon the Stairs, said, Where are you
going Peter, what have you got in this Chest? He answered, Goods for my Master,
Landslady, Me Master is to have a boon Collation in the Strand, with many
Gentlemen of quality lately come from beyond the Seas. But bringing the Chest
down, it proved too heavy for him and the Porter, so that another came to their
Assistance, and away they carried it to the Waterside, Designing for the
Faulcon, this bloody Peter pretending, That he was to meet a Gentleman there,
to receive money of him for the Goods in the Chest. But these specious
Pretenses, soon took period in a deceitful Errand, for crossing the Water, he
had no power to land there, but commanded the Watermen to Row him back again
toward the Temple stairs coming near the Shore, he cast the Chest over-boat,
which the Watermen admiring, asked him his Reason, To which he said, there was
a Trick put upon him, and that the Chest was only filled with Trash, Trumpery,
and Garbage, which he would not bestow the pains to carry any further. And
landing, seemed to go away in a Rage to his Lodging; but the next morning some
blood being discovered upon the Stairs, and diligent Inspection made thereinto,
he endeavored to make his escape, but was immediately apprehended, and
committed to Newgate, where he continued till the last Sessions; Right then
taking place, and Real Justice streaming forth, even like unto Streams
descending from the Mountains. For upon bringing of him to the Bar, he
confessed the Fact, acquitting all persons whatsoever from having any hand
therein; but that it was his own Contrivance, and that not suddenly, but
deliberately, having many days before resolved to attempt it, but had no
convenient Opportunity, till that time his Master was eating of a Dish of Fish,
at which time he shot him through the head, being tempted for many days, and
much perplexd in mind till he had effected it; for which he was not only
sorry, but also confident, that nothing could expiate the Guilt thereof, but to
shed the blood of him, who had in such a most barbarous and inhumane manner,
shed the blood of his Dear Lord and Master. And all this, through want of
Grace, merely for the gaining of his Masters Jewels and Rings, together with
the three hundred pounds in Gold, which his Master wore about him in a List to
supply his Occasions. For which horrid Fact, he was Arraigned and Condemned,
and merited that Just Sentence, to be drawn upon a Hurdle from Newgate to the
place of Execution, and there to be hanged till he was dead.

The two Frenchmen also, who committed that inhumane Act against a Citizens
Wife near Holborn; as first to Ravish her, and then to run up a Flaming Torch
into her Body, were also Arraigned and Condemned: But Mary Smith, who cut off
her Child's Head, was Reprieved from public Justice, by the Grand Sergeant
Death, who catchd her from thence to another place, before the time of her
Trial. But it is observable, that never came a more penitent Soul within the
Walls of Newgate, than his poor Creature; for when one of the Officers told
her, she must prepare her Self for her Trial, for the time was near approaching
she must give an Account at the Bar: To which she replied, The Invisible Bar,
to mortal Eyes, was her desire to stand before, where she did not doubt to find
Eternal mercy; and that she hoped the Thread of her Life was spun to the very
end, so that her penitent Soul should not long be Captivated within that Sinful
Body, the Prison of so precious a Jewel; for, says she, I question not, but
these (...) will prove Blessings, and I have Ass^rance therein. This much
sympathiz'd with what she confessed before Justice Swallow, when she was first
Apprehended: for then she ingenuously confessed, That it was her sad Fate and
Fortune to be overcome by One young man, whom she had a great Affection for;
but he having obtained his will, and she conceiving with Child, refused to
marry her: Wdereupon she resolved to forsake Friends and Relations, and to
transport her Self to some Foreign Plantations: In order whereunto, she made
Application to a Master of a Ship, and obtained leave to be Transported: But
before the time came to begin their Voyage, she had a Secret Delivery a
Shipboard, and very obscure under Deck; where, contrary to all Humane Reason,
the Infant became headless, for she quickly severed the Head from the
Shoulders, throwing the Body into the River, out at a Port-hole, and the Head
behind the Casks: Which being quickly discovered, the Bloody Mother was soon
apprehended, and carried before the Justice as aforesaid: from whence she was
committed to Newgate, where she departed this Life, making a very penitent End.

The like did the Frenchman and Portugese, the one Executed in Holborn, and
the other at Tyburn, Wednesday the 27. who confessed his Fact, and very much
bewailed the horroudness thereof, for that his dear Master had bin
instrumental, to save his life in Portugal, where he had killed a man, and
should have bin burnd, had not Mercy transcended Justice.

FINIS.

