New port September 23. 1648.
Soit Baille a^^ Seigneurs, A Ceste Bille les Seigneurs sont Assentuz: An Act
which His Majesty has Promised
His Royal word to pass, for Justifying the Proceedings of Parliament in the
late War, and for Declaring all Oaths, Declarations, Proclamations, and other
proceedings against it to be void.

Agreed on between His Majesty and the Commmissioners, at Newport in the Isle
of VVight.

WHEREAS the Lord^^^^ Commons Assembled in Parliament, have bin necessitated to
make and prosecute a War in their just and lawful Defense; and thereupon
Oaths, Declarations and Proclamations have been made against them, and their
Ordinances and Proceedings, and against others for adhering unto them, and for
executing Offices, Places, and Charges by Authority derived from them; and
Judgments, Inditements, Outlaries, Attainders, and Inquisitions, for the
causes aforesaid, have been had and made against some of the Members of the
Houses of Parliament, and other his Majesty's good Subjects, and Gran^ have
been made of their Lands and Goods:

BE it therefore Declared and hereby Enacted, by the Kings Majesty, and by the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, and by Authority of the same. That
all Oaths Declarations and Proclamations, heretofore had or made against both
or either of the Houses of Parliament, or any the Members of either of them,
for the causes aforesaid, or against their Ordinances or Proceedings, or
against any for adhering unto them, or for doing or executing any Office, Place
or Charge, by any Authority derived from the said Houses; or either of them,
And all Judgments, Iudictments, Outlaries, Attainders; Inquisitions and Grants
thereupon made, and all other Proceedings for any the causes aforesaid, had,
made, done or executed, or to be had, made, done or executed, whether the same
be done by the King or any Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, Ministers, or any
others, are void and of no effect, and are contrary to and against the of Laws
of this Realm. And be it further Enacted and hereby Declared by the Authority
aforesaid, That all Judges, Justices of the Peace, Mayors Sheriffs Constables
and other Officers and Ministers shall take notice hereof, and are hereby
prohibited and discharged in all time to come, from awarding any Writ, Process
or Summons, and from pronouncing or executing any Judgment, Sentence or
Decree, or any way proceeding against, or molesting any of the said Members of
the two Houses of Parliament, or against any of the Subjects of this Kingdom,
for any the causes aforesaid.

London Printed by Robert Ibbitson.


