THE CHARACTER OF A Pilfering Tailor, Or a True ANATOMY OF Monsieur Stich, In
all his TRICKS and QUALITIES.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1675.

(...) be Religion and not Faction, and so far indulge it, as Conscience may be
satisfied and Ambition disappointed: This can be done by none, but by one who
has been bred up in some acquaintance with Moderation, and has not sworn to
advance a Party. Christian Religion has been too far clogged by Ornament,
Superstition, Superstructure, Impositions, unnecessary Questions, and more
unnecessary Determinations, ever to hope that any one Party shall subdue the
other by Argument or dint of Reason so as to bring them over; then there
remains nothing but Force, which is of such ill consequence, that it is the
only way to Banish all sense of Religion out of the World: Therefore a mutual
Forbearance, an Allowance or permissive Indulgence to Mistakes or
Pre-possessions, is all that is left, and more than this Man cannot invent with
any good meaning to his Fellow Creature. A Prince who has been used to this,
who is not startled at Names, who desires to be a Father to his People, and not
a Tool to his Priests, is the Prince that England wants.

Prudence, tho of so large an extent, as to seem to include all Virtues. Nullum
numen abest si sit Prudentia: yet it properly means in a Prince, that admirable
forecast of Events, that dexterous Rencountering of Accidents, that sagacious
discovery of secret Machinations both at home and abroad, so as to prevent them
in their birth, and above all, the understanding of the Interest that his
People is engaged in by their Circumstances. A Nation is composed of private
Men; all brought up very near in the same Customs, and Instructed much by the
same sort of Teachers: the Prince must take them as he finds them. He that
would introduce Monarchy into Holland, which will drown for Liberty at any
time, or settle a Re-publick in France, which will and does as eagerly fight
for Slavery, will have a Task of no small performance. England has always been
the Trimmer between these extremes; and tho that be a troublesome Office, and
sometimes may be unable to keep all steady, yet the inconveniency is soon felt
on either side, and as soon remedied by the weight of Interest: But a wise
Prince will easily keep the Contenders quiet, if he reflects, he can only be
safe by preventing the excess; they who would make him Absolute, would kill him
with kindness, make him debase Human nature, divest his Subjects of their
Reason, by which alone Men can obey sweetly, and at last expose him to all the
Rage and insolent Infidelity of mercenary Guards and senseless Slaves; And
those who would disrobe him of necessary Power, would make him a restless Tool
to ambitious Projects, incapable of protecting his People, a perpetual Martyr
to Fears and Jealousies, while he would be endeavoring to perform his Office;
all his Actions liable to Misconstructions, and in short, put him into so
regular a Diet, that the least good Meal of Fruition in Power would prove a
Surfeit. Therefore the Prince we want, is one accustomed to the ambitious
Projects of others, used to preside in popular Assemblies, that so fathoming
the Depth of human Combinations, he may see the danger of giving colorable
Pretexts by arbitrary Proceedings, and likewise avoid splitting upon the Sand
of too much Confidence in his own Judgment and Management. In short, he that
has managed great Councils, will never be managed by little ones, and so never
drawn aside from his People.

Valor is so essential a Quality in a Prince, that it is part of his being.
Omnia sunt Gladiipedissequa; and the Sword is delivered to him by a more divine
Commission than any other of his Attributes, God allowed the Plea in his own
People, when they rejected the Government of the Priesthood, to demand one to
lead them in and out to Battle. Since the peaceable principles of Christianity,
which endeavored to tame the ferocity of Heathenism, have not been able
entirely to banish Arms and War, and that at least defensively, it must be
allowed; `tis most certain, that a Prince without Valor is not to be relied
upon for Protection: and tho of late perhaps some have troubled the World
without that personal Quality, yet our Nation will always have a profound
Veneration for one who shall head it in glorious Actions. What will they have
then for a Hero, who from his first Manhood has withstood the torrent of
impetuous Invasion, who has in the midst of Fire, and Smoke preserved all the
Security and Calmness that Men have at leisure hours, and yet showed all the
Spirit and Conduct that Danger required. There goes a great deal to the making
of a General, but much more to have a Sovereign be eminent in Generalship; and
when such a Prince falls to a Nations lot, they may boldly hope to find respect
in the remotest parts of this habitable World, particularly having Fleets to
carry the Glory of their Prince to the Antipodes.

Justice is the finishing of that true Picture of God Almighty, a Prince, that
which makes him look lovely in the Eyes of all his Subjects, from the highest
to the lowest; but it must be tempered with Mercy, which is properly the
Justice of his own Nature, the other is the utmost result of human Reason into
Rules called Laws, of which the Prince is the Guardian, and ought particularly
to watch the Administration of them, for they cannot be strained or slakened
without ajarring in the Harmony of Government. At this most admirable
Qualification are levelled all the Batteries of the Rapacious or the Flattring;
Here they place infallibility, and would have the Prince believe that his will
is the Fountainhead, that all the Streams may take what Channel he pleases,
and this that some of them may be diverted to their use. Few Men trust to
Merit, most to Favor, that makes them strive for Power, and make it uphold its
own Extravagancies, even with the hazard of the Princes safety and the Peoples
quiet: And so unhappily fertile are unjust Acts, that they beget one another,
and like the Plagues of Egypt, do but harden Hearts: Nothing can so soon
overturn a Government as the want of Justice. Politic Bodies are never
dissolved till they are in a state of War, and they are never so, till every
Man is his own Carver, for want of an equal distributive Power.

A Prince therefore whose Birth and Education has been in a Country where Laws
flourish, and Property is sacred, whose Nature is just, and Temper merciful,
who has refused Sovereign Power, because he would be true to his Trust, who has
over-worn Fears and Jealousies, where they were supported with specious
Pretenses and foreign Assistances, who has gained his Enemies, reconciled his
Opposers, and powerfully protected his Friends, that Prince, if we are wise,
may make us happy.

Edinburgh, Reprinted in the Year, 1689.


