THE CHARACTER OF AN Ill-Court-Favourite: REPRESENTING THE MISCHIEFS That flow
from Ministers of State When they are More GREAT than GOOD. The Arts they use
to Seduce their Masters, And the Unhappiness of Princes, that are Cursed with
such Destructive Servants.

Translated out of French

printer's or publisher's device

Printed for T. Davis, in the Year 1681.

THE CHARACTER OF AN Ill-Court-Favourite: REPRESENTING THE MISCHIEFS That flow
from Ministers of State, When they are more GREAT than GOOD, etc.
HE that stands by and observes the supple Addresses and sedulous Applications
of Courtiers, how greedily men Reputed wise, sell their Liberties, and
Sacrifice their time, with what Patience they Undergo Attendance more Grievous
than the toil of Algier-Gally-Slaves or Popish Pilgrimages, will be ready to
Imagine, that it must needs be some wondrous Mystery, which deserves such
Superstition; nor can expect less than the Philosophers-Stone, where he sees so
many Furnaces set on work, and so rare Alchymists Engaged.

If he cast but a Superficial Eye on the Lofty Flights of the Favorites of
Princes, how in Effect they manage all the Reins of the Common Wealth, though
their Masters sit in the Saddle; how they give Laws to the people by
Recommending Judges, nay Biass Religion it self by bestowing Ecclesiastical
Dignities and the Fattest Benefices, and make the bravest Swordmen kiss their
Feet* since they can neither get, nor hold any Command of Honor or Profit, but
through their good Graces.

He, I say that Remarques all this, and also how their seeming Virtues, and
perhaps but imaginary Abilities, are Magnified, and Multiplied, and even their
Errors with Veneration Concealed, Extenuated or Justified; with what case they
trample upon their Adversaries, and prefer their Dependants, how can he refrain
from drawing at so tempting a Lottery, or escape those delicious Charms, which
would almost delude a Stoic to mistake such a Fortune for his Summum Bonum.

But alas, these are only Outsides to Amuse the Ignorant, these stately
Scntcheons serve but to hide a dead Corpse, and these excellent Odours to
persume a Sepulcher; The Factions where with every Court and State is
perpetually pregnant, the Envy and Emulation, which, though not so loud, is yet
perhaps siercer than open (...); the Spies which (like Eunuchs in Turkey) are
there set upon all men's Actions, and the S^^ppery paths on which they walk; the
K^e^ and Pestilent slanders against which Innocence it self is soarce Armor of
Proof. These and a thousand other Inconveniences are not presently discovered;
And indeed, 'cis perhaps fit they should be Concealed, lest otherwise men of
Sense and Integrity avoid Courts, as persons in debt do Prisons, and dread
Greatness like Infection.

Which would yet be more Apprehended, if they could have either the Prudence,
or leisure to Reflect, How many persons that in a private Station were Honest,
Just and Resolute Patriots, when once preferred to the Misfortune of being
Great, have Abandoned all thoughts of the publique-weal: their Integrity
Retired to give place to their Fortune, too Rank preferment stiffled their
Honesty, and thence forward they aimed only to Advance their own narrow
Interest, and blow short-lived Sparks to warm their private fingers out of the
Public Ashes of their Ruined Country.

Their Innocence lasts scarce so long at Court, as the first man's did in the
Terrestrtal Paradise. Though they were not wicked before, yet they believe they
ought to become So, and therefore as the Foolish Wiseman of old flung all his
Goods into the Sea, that he might more freely Philosophize: They resolve to rid
themselves of their Consciences, that with less Encumbrance they may Manage the
Affairs of State. They Conceit pride necessary to support their Dignity, and
that should they not swell and look Big, their Condition would be nothing
Changed, that Civility would Reduce them to that Equality, whence they had
fore'd themselves with so much trouble; to avoid Contempt, not being able to
render themselves Respected, they study to make themselves feared. They esteem,
that there is no way left to blot out the memory of their former Quality, but
by the present Objects of their Tyranny, and that they shall not hinder the
people from Laughing at their Infirmities, but by Employing them to weep for
their own Miseries, and complain of their Cruelties.

One would think it Bedlam-Folly, that men not unacquainted with History, and
sufficiently warned by Experiences of their own times, should adventure on the
very same Precipices, on which, All that went before them broke their Necks;
But we must remember, that Ambition is as Blind as Love: They (like the famous
fond Philosopher) are gazing at Stars till they tumble into the Ditch: Their
Eyes are always fixed on the Glittering Vanities above, suggested by a deluded
Imagination, so they never look down on the Wrecks and Shattered Fortunes, and
dismembered Bodies and forfeited Heads, and Infamous Memories of their
Predecessors. For few have the Wisdom to foresee, how hard it is in Greatness
to pursue Honest and Safe Maxims, what Resolution is required for the Potent to
be Innocent, what for did Interests they are fore'd to Espouse, and by what
Insensible Degrees they are brought at last to swallow those Actions and
Compliances without Reluctance, which at first they looked upon with
Detestation; What long since was observed of Sejanus, holds true of many latter
Tympanies of Grandeur, that their favor is not to be purchased without some
notable Crime; You must part with your Honor, nay your Soul, if you expect
promotion from such Spirits: If this were sufficiently weighed, we may justly
presume, such as have a stricct Regard to Honesty, would not so precipitate
themselves into public Affairs, and stand gaping like greedy Camelions to be
puffed up with the tainted Air of Haughty and Luxurious Courts, where Interest
can scarcely be preserved (unless by Miracle) without a shipwreck of Conscience.

But (to make our approaches a little nearer) If it be so ticklish a thing for
even a good man to abide long in Honor, without becoming like the Beast that
perisbeth, and acting Dishonorable things, What then shall we say of those
Portentous Meteors, that some times Blaze in that superior Orb, noxious
Exhalations drawn up by the wanton Beams of Favor, from the slime and filth of
the World, and which presage more Calamities, than a Comet, to those Nations in
which they appear? Insolent Giants I that Combat with displaied Colors, the
Authority of the Fundamental Laws, and all methods of Justice, who in the
Government of a State produce a Design formed for its Ruin, who grow fat and
Burly from the juice and substance of Exhausted Provinces, who build their own
Houses with the Wrack and dissipation of a whole Kingdom. Princes and Great men
would be happy, If without dying by Proxy, they could live in Person; They are
born often timos with excellent Qualities, and are Calm Seas, filled with Riches
and Power, that might do good to all the World, if the Winds would but let them
flow gently according to their own Nature. But as Extraordinary Beauties are
Courted by variety of Lovers, so such Exalted Conditions rarely want a swarm of
Flatterers, mere Insects bred out of putrefaction by the warmth of Royal
Sunshine, that under the umbrage of Adorers, make themselves Masters, and by a
color of Service, exercise an Empire even over those that think they Command
the Universe; whole sacred Names in such a Case become but a Passport to
Mischiefs; Their Authority a Sanctuary to Crimes; their Revenues but Tinder to
Debauchery and supplies for Riot; Their Power an Instrument of Revenge, and a
scourge and plague to those very people whom it ought to cherish and protect.

What shall we say of these Insufferable Grandees, who reck their Private
Spleens, with the Hands and Arms of their Master? Who declare all those guilty
of High Treason, who do not fall prostrate before them? who by Fatal Wars and
dishonorable Treaties of Peace, by abandoning the true Interest of their
Country, and playing the Mountebanks with the Body Politic, till they cast it
at once into a Feavour, and a Consumption endeavor all they can to bring the
people into Despair, and would gladly Reduce the honester sort of men to so
miserable a Condition, as to be unable to save themselves, but in a Revolt;
That so they may palliate their own Villainies by others forced Disobedience,
and trip off with the spoils of a Nation in a General Combustion of their own
Kindling?

Observe them in Ancient History (for meddle not with our Times) They first
Ruin the people, and then, if not themselves, their Masters, and many times
bring Destruction on all three. Their Courses are all Violent and Domineering,
they own no Laws but Will and Pleasure, their pace is always Full-speed, they
whip and slash like Masters of a Bridewell, rather than persons entrusted with
the Governance of Freemen. All to them is plunder, all is Prey: They cannot
feed but on dead Bodies, they first Rifle the Ship they Sail in, and then
wilfully strand Her, to conceal their own Robberies: Though they came only out
of the Dirt, and to speak truly, are of Kin to no Body, yet they believe
themselves the Heirs of all the World; There is no Officer of the Crown, no
Governor of a Place, whose Succession they do not pretend unto; They think
they are not in safety, so long as there is any man in Credit or Authority,
that is not a Creature of their own Raising.

Such people commonly introduce themselves by Low means, and for the most part,
such as are dishonest and Vile; they not seldom owe the Commencement of their
Fortune to a well-Danc'd Saraband, to Agility of Body, to the Beauty of their
face, or the interest of a Strumpet: They make themselves valued by shameful
secret Services, whose payment is not publicly to be demanded. In a word,
though wise Antiquity allowed no Entrance into the Temple of Honor, but
through that of Virtue, yet these crowd themselves into Credit by the
Recommendation of Vice, their crimes which truly deserve the Halter and the Ax,
are the sole Roundels* whereby they mount the Ladder of Towering preferment.

Nor is their progress unsuitable to their Rise, Their design being only to
make complaisant propositions, they enquire not whether they profit or
Incommode; If they do but please it is enough. They insinuate themselves into
their Masters Favor, by the Intelligence they endeavor to keep with his
Passions. And having once possessed themselves of his mind, they seize on all the
Avenues, and leave not so much as an entrance for his Great or Privy Council,
nay, scarce for his Confessor: How weak and tender soever his inclinations may
be to Evil, they water and Cultivate them with so much Art and Diligence, that
presently there springs up a great-Tree from a little Seed, and a violent and
Opinionated Habit, from a light Disposition.

These are the Petroniusses and the Tigillinusses about Nero; These are the
Advocates of Voluptousness, the Pest of a Realm, and the Evil Genii of Kings.

It Is Incredible to think how many Charms they use, without Employing those of
Magic (of which yet the people forbear not to Accuse them.) How Ingenious are
they to invent new pleasures to a Sated and disgusted Soul, and with what
pungent sharpnesses do they awaken the sleeping Lusts, which Languish and can
no more?

Yet do they not at the first onset become absolute Conquerours, but for a time
dispute with Virtue, which shall gain the Ascendent in the Court of a Prince of
Eighteen; Sometimes she gets the better, sometimes is Repulsed, so that for a
short season there is a divided or Alternate Empire over his Affections; A king
of Twylight between Good and Ill, just Government and Tyranny party perpale.
Projects brave and good, are Resolved upon, but before they can come to
Execution, the Humor is altered, good Councels are given, but e're they take
Impression on his mind, a Debauch is contrived, which dashes them out of his
Memory, and they are thought of no more. Honest Burrhus is hearkened to perhaps,
but these Court-Earwigs will take care, he never shall be believed.

However thus far, they are like Seneca's Balance, and things are not yet
grown desperate, but at last, they carry away all before them: The Epicure
destroys as much in three days, as the Stoic built in five Years: Having
undermined or stormed the Fortress, they by peicemeals dismantle it, and undo
the whole Frame: They assault their Masters good parts one after another, from
petty Sallies of Humor and Sociable Revels, and a refreshing Glass and
blushing Gallantries, they lead him on step by step to the utmost degrees of
Debauchery, Adulteries, Perjuries, Cruelty and Tyranny.

At first they content themselves to breath in his Ears, that it is not
necessary for a Prince to be so precisely Religious, so strictly Just, so
nicely Temperate, or so very much an honest Man. That it is sufficient, if he is
not Wicked, that Wine and Women were designed to sweeten the toils of Empire,
and the Fair created on purpose for the diversion of the Great. That he would
put himself to too much trouble to make himself beloved, that he only ought to
prevent his being Hated: Or if that cannot be, to render himself Feared will do
as well. That solid and perpetual Probity is too heavy and too difficult, since
its Umbrage and Counterfeit, has no less splendour than the Original, and
produces the same Effects; that a virtuous action or two, kind and popular,
(which is no great matter of cost,) being fitly performed, may serve to
entertain his Reputation; nor will they leave him in so fair away, After having
made him esteem good, as an Indifferent thing, they make him approve Ill as
reasonable, and afford Vice the color of Virtue, and represent those things
which are the shame of all the rest of mankind, as peculiar Ornaments of
Majesty.

To authorize his worst Actions, great Examples shall not be wanting, they tell
him, it is not in Turkey and amongst Barbarians that he is to look for
Precedents, that all things are lawful to the Powerful, or at least any thing
may be made appear to be so to the Simple. God's own people, the Holy Nation
(say they) Sir, will furnish you with Instances more than enough. That very
King that built the Temple, was also the Founder of a Seraglio, and we at this
day see at Constantiople but a Copy of what was formerly to be seen at
Jerusalem; you content your self even in the heat of full veins and vigor of
youth with half a score or Forty or Fifty Women only, whereas he that was the
wisest Prince the Earth could ever boast of, even the superlative Solomon, in
his old Age had six hundred, which the holy Scripture implies to be Legitimate
Wives, without reckoning those which were his Concubines; And have you not
heard of the last will of his Father David, and of those Gallant things he
commanded by his Testament? We shall not Exaggerate them, only beseech you to
consider, by how many Deaths he counseled his Son to secure his own Life.

Nay Sir, since the Law of Grace, and amongst Christian Princes, you cannot
find more Sweetness; you are nice perhaps to abandon a Child, or stagger to
expose a Son that never disobliged you. But (to omit the practice of
Mahumetans, and the modern Example of the most Catholic King in the
unfortunate Don Carlos) The great Constantine, that most Holy, most Religious,
and most Divine Emperor (as he has been called by the mouth of Councils) did
much more than this, For he caused his own Son to be put to death upon the
first Suspicion, which was falsely suggested to him. It Is true, he regreted his
Execution and acknowledged his Innocence, but this acknowledgment came too
late, and his Regret lasted but four and twenty hours; He thought himself quit
by causing a Statue to be erected in memory of the Deceased; with this
Inscription, To my Son Chrispus, whom I caused to die Hujustly.

Do you reserve your absolute Authority? will you always stand upon Justice and
Title, and vain punctilio's of Equity? Dare you not use Force, when the good of
your Affairs requires it? The Example of the Mighty Charlemaign, who is one of
the Saints of the Church, as well as one of the Nine Worthies, may secure you
against all the Scruples your Consclence can make, he knew neither a better,
nor greater Right, than that of Arms, the l'ommel of his Sword served him for
his Seal and Signet. To this day there are Privileges found granted, and
Donations of Lands made, by that Good and Orthodox Emperor, Rowland and Oliver
being present, sealed with the Pommel, and which he swore he would warrant with
the Edge of the same Sword.

Would you rule Absolutely? At your pleasure leavy Taxes, and dispose of both
the Goods and Lives of your Subjects? you shall therein do nothing New or
Extraordinary. All the Mighty Monarchs of the East, have done it these many
hundred ^ears. And the most Christian King practices it at this day. Discover
not so much weakness, as to regard the Sighs and Groans of your People, who are
but animated Dirt, prattling Beasts, Creatures designed to be Slaves, as well by
Nature as Fortune; What else were they Born for, what else are they good for,
but to be Instruments of your Pleasures, and Sacrifices to your Glory? The only
way to preserve your Authority, is to Curb the Vermin and keep them Miserable,
do they Wince under your Rods, then scourge them with Scorpions. Are they not
your Vastals? Why then do they Complain? shall Slaves be allowed to Murmur and
Capitulate? If their Tears grow troublesome, wash them away with their Blood.

There have been Favorites mentioned in Histories that have Instructed Princes,
in these and the like Pernicious Lessons, and being at last tired out with
defending Crimes, with precedents, To excuse some new Unparalled
Extravagance, they freely have told their Prince, that when there was no
Example to be found, he might make one. That what had formerly been Unheard of,
would, being done, cease to be so: That it would be shameful for the Sovereign
Authority to give an Account of any thing it Commands, and Misbecome him, who
has Armies and Fleets to maintain his Actions, to seek Words or Pretenses
either to disguise or Justify them.

There is not a man (this is the Language of the Sejanusses and the Plautusses)
Innocent in all the parts of his Life, and who in his Soul Envies not his
Superiors, and whom they Envy, they Hate. Therefore the Prince cannot but
Condemn the Guilty, nor strike any but his Enemies; consequently he gratifies
him, whom he bereaves only of his Goods. in that he takes not away his Honor
and leaves him his Life. Honesty and Justice are virtues proper for Merchants
and Lawyers, not for Sovereigns; That to be Slaves to their words, is to
Depose themselves, and abandon their Prerogatives, that even in Heaven (if
there be any such place above a Ladies Lap) the Oaths of Princes are put in the
same Scales with those of Lovers. That Jupiter Commands them to be thrown into
the Wind, as things of no Obligation, and never to be regarded further than
present Interest requires.

Thus in a way of fooling and telling of Fables, they persuade the Prince, that
he is not obliged by his promises, nor ought to hearken to the Fancies of
Preachers, or Dotages of Legislators, but stands Exempted by his Quality from
all Laws Divine and Humane, nor is obliged by ties of Justice or Prudence: And
that it belongs to him Jure Divino, to define unto men, what is Good or Ill, to
declare unto the world, what for the furture he will have to be just or unjust,
as well in Morality, as Policy.

Thus are Tyrants made, from this Stock Monsters are engendered, from such
Commencements, we come to set Rome on fire, to Butcher the Senate, to dishonor
Nature with Debauches, and declare War against it by Parricides. These
wheedling Whisperers are the first Causes of so many Miseries, and did not
these winds Blow, we should be sensible of none of these Tempests and
Hurricanes, able to discompose the Harmony of the best settled Governments in
the World.

Wherefore, since in the whole Bulk of sublunary Beings, there is no Good of so
great use, and which so universally Communicates it self as a Good Prince, nor
any (...) which disperseth it self further, or is more pernicious than a bad
one: Can there be any punishments great enough in all the extent of Humane
Justice, for those who Change this Good into Ill; Who corrupt so Salutiferous
and so excellent a thing? They had far better have poisoned all the Wells and
all the Fountains in their Countries; nay should they infect the Rivers
themselves, Water might be gotten from else where, even Heaven would still
furnish us with some refreshing Drops: But here of necessity we must either
Choke, or drink Poison; against these Domestic Ills, we are not permitted to
use Foreign Remedies; We are obliged to continue Miserable by the Laws of our
Religion, and to obey Furies and Madmen, not only out of Fear, but also for
Conscience sake.

For which cause, since the persons of Princes whatsoever they be, ought to be
Inviolabel and Sacred, and that the Characters of Gods finger makes an
Impression, which we are to Reverence, on what matter soever it be Engraven, no
wonder, if Subjects turn all their hatred against these Flatterers, which cast
them into those miseries without Redemption: If they pursue with all manner of
Execrations these evil Counselors which give them Ill Princes, which provoke
Innocents to Murder, and good natures to Barbarous Cruelties: It Is their
pernicious Advice, which occasions all fatal Resolutions. Their maxims of Fire
and Blood assure and fortify Malice, when it is as yet timorous and doubtful,
they sharpen what cuts, they precipitate what is falling, they encourage the
Violent to run after the prey, they inflame the desires of the Avaricious to
Invade their peoples Goods, and those of the Lascivious to Debauch their
Daughters and ravish their Wives.

But if they meet with Natures, which are not susceptible of those strong
Passions, and which by their Complexions are in an equal degree distant from
Vice and Virtue, if they light on those soft Princes, who are without sting or
Spirit, and have small Inclinations to great and mighty Evils, but rather
propense to Ease and Fffeminate delights, such as divide their time between the
Cup and the Bed, and are more intent at the Theater than the Council Chamber.
It Is still so much the Worse for those people, who live under them, for
abusing the simplicity of their pliant Master, and taking the Advantage, which
their Spirit has over his, they themselves Reign openly, and their unjust
Dominion adds to the weight of Tyranny, the shame that occurs from suffering
it from a particular private Person and fellow Subject.

You cannot Imagine the Wiles and Artifices they use to attain hereunto, and
totally to subject to themselves the Prince. Their method is to spur him with
Glory in the Establishment of their Fortune. They give him to understand
through several Trunks, that his Predecessors, who were nothing more powerful
than He, made some far greater Creatures of their own, that'tis more safe to
raise up New people, who have no dependence, and who shall only hold from his
Majesty, than to use persons of Ancient Birth, and of known Probity, whose
Affections and party may be already made; That it concerns his Honor not to
leave his works Imperfect, but to labor for their Embellishment, after he has
Established their Solidity. That he ought to put them in a Condition, that they
may not be Ruined, but by themselves. That if he yields to the desires of his
Ancient Nobility, who will endure no Companions; or if he consents to the
Complaints and Petitions of his People, who are ever Enemies to all Growing
Greatness, he will not for the future have the power to reward a Servant, or
to gratify those that oblige him. But must live a Praecarious King, a mere Duke
of Venice, a shadow of Royalty, and be fore'd to call an Assembly of the
States, to dispose of the least Office in the Kingdom; Besides, they Represent,
that he cannot Abandon a person who has been so dear unto him, without
condemning the Conduct of many Years, and rendering a public testimony either
of past Blindness, or present fickleness. Nor wants this Argument its force,
for'tis certain, that having begun to love any object for the Love of it self,
time presently adds our own Interest to the merit of the thing, the desire that
we have that all the World should believe, that our Election was good, makes
the action of necessity, which before was Voluntary, so that what has been
done against Reason, being not to be Justified, but by an headstrong
Perseverance, we never think that we have done enough, and upon this fond
conceit, though never so much Reason be offered to discontinue our Affection,
yet it seems, we are obliged in point of Honor, to defend our Judgment.

Now, if these Temptations can shake stable minds, and sometimes make Wise men
fail, we need not be Astonished, if they easily overthrow Weak Princes, who make
use only of borrowed Reason, and who will yield themselves to be persuaded by a
very mean Eloquence, so it but suits with their already biasled Inclination.

And when once a Prince is Engaged in the making of this Subject (whom as much
without Merit, as beyond Measure he dotes upon) Great, He speaks of him no
more, but as his Enterprise, and the utmost Effort of his Prerogative and
creative Power, and so goes on in a blind Zeal, till without minding it, he
even Adores what he has made, like the Statuaries of Athens, who from their
own handiwork chose their Gods; His thoughts which should be employed for
Glory, and the public good of his Realm, and have no other Object, but the
safety and welfare of his people, are all at an end in this pitiful design, in
blowing up a gaudy bubble of Honor, as vain and trivial, and yet no less Gay,
than that which Children raise with a Quil from water and Soap; He opens to him
all his Coffers, and pours out treasures on him as much in despite of others,
as to benefit him; And at last when he has conferred on him all the Offices of
the Kingdom, and all the Ornaments of his Crown, and has nothing left to give
him but his own person, he surrenders that too with so absolute and so total a
Resignation, that in the very Monasteries, there is not an Example of a will
more Subjected and more perfectly Renouncing it self.

Hence forwards he appears at Council, but when his presence is necessary to
Authorize some Extravagant preresolv'd design, in the debate of which he never
bore a part, and is content to show himself for no other purpose, but to
justify what those that advised him to it, are both afraid and ashamed to own;
He is amuzed with petty Divertisements unworthy of his Condition and of his
Age; They take from about him all that dare speak Truth, they Ruin under
several pretenses all that is Eminent and Virtuous in the State, and he Imagins
because they tell him so, that all this is absolutely necessary for his
Service, and the support of his Government; Thus Seneca must be Butchered
before Nero could turn perfect Monster, and Boctius banished by Theodoricus, at
the persuasion of his three fatal Favorites, because that good and wise
Statesmen was an obstacle to their lewd designs.

To ruin honest Patriots that would stop the unhappy Torrent, slanders are
raised, and Calumnies advane'd, and false informations Encouraged, they are
seized, on general Rumors without specifying their Crime, and condemned
unheard as Enemies to Religion and the State: Those that are Rich and peaceable
are Entrapp'd by Informers and penal Edicts let loose upon them: Those whose
past Services and undoubted Loyalty maintain them in repute, and whose fidelity
is without Reproach, are employed in Chargeable, or put upon hazardous Attempts
and ungrateful Offices, either that they may lose their Repntation or
themselves. Some are driven away by an absolute Command to Retire, others
Honorably Banished by an Embassy, and in the room of all these, the ambitious
domineering Cabal place persons at their own Devotion, who never look farther
than their Benefactors, and stop at the next Cause of their Fortune, and
therefore study to serve and advance their Interests, who raised them, not the
Prince's though still they call themselves his Servants, and would be thought
the greatest Zealots for his Honor.

Thus may an unfortunate Prince, come to be at the Mercy and Discretion of his
Favorite, he shall not cast a look, but presently a spy renders the other an
Account, nor utter one word, but what is told him again, so that in the midst
of his own Court, and amongst all his Guards, he shall be Environed with none
but Savages, that prey upon him, not having one faithful Tongue about him, that
dare truly represent his peoples Sufferings, nor one honest Ear to whom he may
tell his own: Besides he quickly becomes so far Engaged, that there is no way
for him to release himself, the other making all the World his Real Enemies, or
suspected for such, that he may have none but him to trust: And by having long
had the possession of Affairs, which he Communicates with none, he alone
understanding all, and knowing the State, he at last becomes a necessary Evil,
which neither can the Prince be cured of, but by a dangerous Remedy.

After this manner, in an absolute Peace, being at amity with his Neighbors,
no Foreign Enemy appearing on the Frontiers, without striking a Stroke, or
having ventured farther than from the Palace to the Theater, may a Prince
insensibly fall into another Man's power, which after the defeat of an Army, is
the worst thing that could happen; And to speak home, the Battle of Pavia, was
not so fatal to Francis the First, nor the taking of Rome to Pope Clement the
Seventh; For if their disgrace was great, it was not Voluntary, if they lost
their Liberty, they in their Afflictions preserved the Glory of their Courage,
and if they were taken Prisoners, 'twas by a great Emperor, who was their
Enemy, and not by one of their Petty Subjects; There is no Captivity so
miserable, so base, nor so Infamous, as that of a Prince who suffers himself to
be shackled in his Cabinet, and by one of his own, he can never Exercise a more
Cowardly patience, nor be more shamefully happy. Suppose a King should Eat his
people to the very Bones, and live in his own State as in an Enemies Country,
he would not so far estrange himself from the duty of his place, as when he
obeys another; There is it is true, a vast difference betwixt Tyranny and
Royalty, yet the former resembles the latter a great deal more than Servitude.
It Is at least some kind of Government, and one way of Commanding men, although
a very ill one. But for a Sovereign to give up himself as a prey to three or
four Petty Fellows, in the knowledge and Conduct of all his Affairs, certainly
there cannot be a more miserable Interregnum, than such a Prince's Life, during
which he does nothing, and yet does all those Evils which may happen to the
People.

In this Condition he is civilly Dead, and has as it were Deposed himself, it
is only his Effigies, which is used in public, which out of custom, and for a
show has some Homages paid, and useless Congees made to it. But in effect
Royalty is forsaken, and Favor only Courted, and a civil Idolatry committed:
For as some superstitious Bigots say ten Ave-Maria's to one Pater Noster, and
call an hundred times oftener upon St. Francis, than on our Savior, so in this
case, where one addresses himself to the King, forty suitors apply themselves
to the Favorite; For indeed to go to the Prince without his mediation, would be
a certain course to spoil your Business, though never so just in it self, or
advantageous to the Public.

What a brave thing it was in former times, to see a King of Castile who durst
not walk abroad, nor put on a new Suite, without the permission of Alvares
DeLuna; all favors which others demanded of his Majesty, he himself was
obliged to obtain from him. The most he could do was to recommend their
Petitions to his Favorite, and to do good Offices with him, for those whom he
loved. How preposterous would it be to see such a Courtier, as he was, who
revoked the Elections of his Prince, turned those out of their places, to whom
his Master had granted them, nay proceeded to that height of Insolence, that he
took it very ill, that his Master should once in his Life offer to read a
paper, which he presented him to Sign, and complained that this was to upbraid
his Fidelity, and forget his past Services.

But there are Shee-favourites as well as Bearded-ones; and though, this be the
weaker-Sex, yet both their passions and Enchantments are the stronger of the
two. Hercules and Achilles were not the only Hero's that truckled to the
Distaff: Love has often governed the Politics, and the fortune of a whole
Kingdom become the pastime of a debauched Woman; For it is too true, that such
persons have strangely derided the authority of the Laws, and the Majesty of
Empire; More than once, they have trampled underfoot Crowns and Scepters, they
have taken pleasure, and sported themselves with the Violation of Justice, and
Gloried in their cruel Pride, in Afflicting and Rendering Humane kind Miserable:
It Is not long since there appeared one of these Heroina's who was risen to so
high a degree of Insolency, that having been solicited about a certain Affair,
which had been represented unto her, as just and facile to be done, that she
might the more willingly Employ her self therein, she answered with a
fierceness worthy of her Sex and profession, That she used not her Credit so
lavisbly, that another might serve in so slight an occasion, to do just and
possible things, for her part. she accustomed her self only to undertake those
which were Unjust and Impossible.

How many Mischiefs do you think follow such an one, how many Violences are
committed under the shadow of these fatal overgrown Medlers? such a puffed up
Succuba has not a Groom or a Lackey, who believes it not to be his Right and
Privilege to abuse at his pleasure any other Subject, and by alleging only
that he belongs to such a agreat Minion, commits all Outrages with Impunity,
affronts Justice, and dares tell you to your teeth, after he has Cheated and
abused you never so grievously, that you are obliged, and ought to thank him
for his Civility, that he did not Murder you.

All this while, you will say, what is this to the Prince? And yet with all
deference be it spoken, he cannot be said to be wholly Innocent of the
miscarriages: His Ignorance is not Unblameable, his Patience herein is not
Virtue, and the Disorders which either he knows not of, or which he Suffers,
are imputed to him before God, even as if himself had done them, and therefore
that Prince who was according to Gods own heart, in express terms desires him,
and that in the fervency of his most ardent Prayers, that he would Cleanse him
from seret faults, and acquit him from the sins of others; which last word
Intimates, that Kings ought not to content themselves with a personal
Innocence, that it is not enough for them to be Just, if they lose themselves,
and destroy their people by the Injustice of their Ministers, which becomes
their own, because they tolerate it, and Countenance it, by Conniving and not
punishing it with soverity. Qui non prohibet, quum potest, Jubet.

Not to multiply Examples: Can King Ahasuerus be justified, who in a moment
abandoned to the Vengeance of a pernicious Haman, so many thousand innocent
Lives, and those too of the Solect people of God, without inquiring into their
Crimes, or making any Reflection on what he granted: He had doubtless no bloody
design, nor any Imagination whither that inhumane Commission he so readily
delivered with his Royal Signet, would tend, and his ordinary idleness, or over
conceit of the Justice and Prudence of his Favorite, suffered him not to take
any further Cognizance of it, which rendered him doubly Culpable, to permit so
many Murders, and yet to be ignorant of it. For so, no less wittily, than
judiciously, Seneca brings in Claudius in the other World, and some men
Reproaching him with abundance of Murders, done under his Name, who pleaded
not Guilty, and protested he did not so much as know what they meant, nor ever
heard of those sufferers Names before, upon which the Ghost of Augustius rose
up, and said, Thou Miscreant, we talk not here of the slaghters thou have
committed, but of those thou have not known: For it is a more shameful thing to
a King to be Ignorant of the Evil that passes in his Kingdom, than to act it.
Turpius ignorasti, quam occidisti.

Great Events are not always produced by great Causes. The Springs are hid
which move these vast Machines of State, that externally appear, and when those
Springs happen to be truly discovered, we are astonished to see them so small
and so weak, and half ashamed of the high opinion we had before conceived of
them. A fit of Jealousy in an amorous Intrigue between two particular persons,
has more than once been the cause of a general War. A little reflective Joak
uttered in a gay Humor, an Affront to a Page, a Whisper and a Nod, a Tale told
at the Kings going to Bed, is in appearance nothing, and yet this nothing, has
been the beginning of Tragedies, wherein a Sea of Blood has been shed, and an
hundred heads made fly. It Is but a Cloud which passes, a small stain in the
corner of the Air, which vanishes rather than abides, and yet'tis this light
Vapor, this almost imperceptible Cloud, which raises the most fatal Tempests,
which shake almost the foundations of the Earth. The people when ever War is
proclaimed, think it their Sovereigns Interest, that it is to Revenge some
insufferable Affronts, or have Reparations of vast damages sustained, that it is
to prevent an Invasion, or secure their Tranquillity, to increase Traffic or
force by Arms the necessary Conveniences of Peace: When in truth, perhaps all
this Bussle and hazard, this Blood and Treasure consumed, proceeds only from
the Capricio's of two or three Pensionary Courtiers, that are content to hazard
the Ruin of their own Master and Country to advance the designs of some
powerful Neighbor, that underhand feeds them with Gold; Or from some other
unthought of whim, if not altogether so base, more Ridiculous.

I doubt not, but the mighty Zerxes made most specious pretenses to justify
his Arms, when he made his Inroad upon Greece, and his Manif^ste's told wonders
of his Intentions; he had received (I Will warrant you) Injuries, which he was
bound to Chastise, and had a Right which he was obliged to assert, so that he
could not without diminution to his Glory refrain the Expedition; he forgot not
to tell them, that he labored for the Repose of the World, and to unite Europe
with Asia, that he, the mighty Monarch of the East, came to Chastise the petty
Tyrants, and that he came purely out of Compassion to the people, and offered
them a rich Glorious Liberty, instead of a poor and shameful Servitude; There
is no doubt, but he Falsified his design several ways, and perhaps swore, that
it was immediately Inspired him from the Immortal Gods, and that the Sun
himself was the Author of his March; Yet not withstanding all this Parade and
colors of Justice and Religion, the bottom of the business was in truth only
this, a Greck Physician, the Queens Domestic, having a mind to review the Port
of Pyraeum, and taste the figs of Athens, put this fancy of War into his
Mistresse's head, and got her to engage her Husband in the Attempt. So that the
King of Kings, the Puissant Redoubtable Zerxes, rai^ed an Army of three hundred
thousand Combatants, levelled the Mountains, drank up Rivers, and overburden'd
the Sea, etc. only to bring back a Mountebank into his own Country. Surely,
surely the Quack might have gone the Journey with less expense and a smaller
Equipage.

The Greek History affords us another notable Example in the Kingdom of
Macedonia. Long before the Birth of King Philip, there happened a famous
Conspiracy, which of one State made two, and divided the Court, the Towns and
the Families, upon the most trivial occasion imaginable; One Maleagar,
Governor of a frontier-Town, and General of the Cavalry, having an handsome
Wife, and withal so good Natured, as seldom suffered any of her Lovers to die
of despair. The King hearing of her Beauty and Gallantry, had a mind to give
her a visit in private, but finding her no such exquisite Beauty, as Fame had
represented her to his fancy, he at first sight betrayed his Disgust, and
presently went away in a Huff, which Affront our stately Dame, (who had no ill
opinion of her own Merit,) resented so briskly, that from that very hour she
vowed Revenge: And not being able to effect it better, than by corrupting her
Husbands fidelity, and debauching him from the service of his Master, she
employed all her Charms to that purpose, till at last by the continual
Croakings of this Night-Raven, the poor man had lost his Reason, and forgot his
Duty, and by this bosom Cockatrice became so Impoison'd, that he quitted the
service of his King, and embarked himself in the party of a Tyrant, without
knowing truly, what motion drove him, nor what passion he Revenged; He acted a
part he understood not, and was but his Wives Soldier, when he thought he was
the head of the Revolt.

It Is undoubtedly a truth, that Kings cannot Reign without Ministers, and
scarce less Certain, that they cannot live without Favorites: The wisest
Princes in the World, the Augustusse's, and the Antonines, the Constantines,
and the Theodosiusse's, if they should Revive, would once again, as well as
formerly, give testimonies of Humane Affection, and might with reason love one
man ( Caeterisparibus) rather than another; For virtue is not so austere and
Savage as to destroy Nature, nor do the Politics oblige a Prince to divest
himself of Humanity, his motions need only be Just and well Regulared; Let him
show his bounty and his Kindness to particular persons, let him enjoy his
diversions, his Complacences, and his Friendships too, but still it were to be
wished he would observe a proportion and measure in the distribution of his
Favors. Let not Nero make his Horse a Consul, nor every Fiddler a Minister of
State; Let not a mighty Monarch Debauch Nobility (the Screen of Majesty,) by
conferring Honors on the Sons of Earth, and little people as void of Quality,
as Merit; Let him not encourage Villainy by preferments, the proper Dowry of
Virtue; nor impoverish the Public, to make one man unmeasurably Rich. Let
there be a man (the dictates both of Religion and Reason allow it) who is the
Princes Confident, and on whom he may like the Sun, more peculiarly dart down
his Beams, but let there not be any, who Day and Night besieges the King, who
by a violent Usurpation (the most abhorrible Monopoly in Nature) appropriates
him to himself: For he who Impales a Good which ought to belong to the public;
attempts the same Injustice, as if he hid the Sun from all the World.

There is nothing that recommends a Prince's Judgment, or that is of more
Importance to his safety, than a discreet Choice of his Ministers; A man cannot
conduct a Boat, nor guide a Chariot, nor manage an Horse, without making use of
Address and Method, and shall those who are to direct Mankind, jump into the
Employ, without any preparatory Discipline? We come to the knowledge of
Affaries, and the dexterity of ordering them, by Experience and Reason; a place
does not presently make a man wiser than he was before; nor are we to expect
Revelations, nor think Heaven obliged to endow a Prince's Ministers with the
Spirit of well Governing, and render his precipitate Election valid and
succesful by a sudden Illumination; Courtiers are the matter, and the Prince is
the Artist, who can easily render this matter Fairer but not better than it is,
he can add to it Colors and shape on the outside, but cannot give it any
interior Goodness. He can bestow the Office and the Title, but he cannot
confer Qualifications, The knowledge of things past, the penetration into things
to come: That Light which disembroils the intrigues of the Court, the Science
of making War, and the dexterity of treating Peace. In a word, he may make an
Idol, but he can neither make a Spirit of it, nor an Able man.

Yet even in Christendom such Idols are to be seen, there have been always
unworthy persons happy; Monkies caressed in Kings Cabinets, and apparelled in
Cloth of Gold; There often happens an Authority, which is Blind and Dumb, which
neither knows nor understands, which appears only and Dazles, pure refined
Authority you may call it, for it has not any mixture of Virtue or Reason.
There are Grandees, who are only remarkable by their Greatness, and their
Greatness is all without them, They resemble certain fruitless Mountains in
some parts of the World, which produce neither Herb, nor Plant, they seem to
touch Heaven with their stately tops, yet serve the Earth for no Use, and
therefore their Sterility makes their height accursed.

Princes therefore should make a strict inquiry into the Abilities and virtues
of those they Employ, they should not suffer themselves to be led by occasion,
but take for their Instruments such as are able, not such as stand next, or
first offer themselves, wherein too, they should regard not only a General
Sufficiency, but a particular fitness for discharging those Charges in which
they place them; They must not think an expert Soldier, that has signalized
himself in diverse Battles, is therefore qualified to be sent on an Embassy, nor
make an old Prodigal Lord, Treasurer, and submit the Exchequer to his dispose,
because having in his youth profus'd away all his own Estate, he now speaks
admirably well of Frugality.

Nor should a Prince presently thrust into his Council all those whose
Conversation is grateful to him; we ought to make a difference betwixt persons
who delight us, and those who are profitable to us; betwixt the Recreations of
the mind, and the necessities of the State; and if a Sovereign take not special
care in this Examen, he will commit irremediable Errors, and such whereby he
may render not only his own Reign miserable, but also his memory accursed and
reproached in Ages to come. He therefore ought not to follow his own private
Affections or Inclinations, but abandon all Capricio's and fantasies in this
matter: Let him in other things Sport and div^rt himself as he pleases, but in
a choice of so high Concernment, he must use the severity of his Judgment, and
at first bring with him an indifferency of will; It ought to be a pure
operation of Reason, freed and dispoil'd of Love or Hate.

For the Mischiefs arising from ill Ministers are no less fatal, than Various,
part of which we have already Recounted, and to sum them up all, is almost as
difficult, as to prevent them. If they are Ignorant, they Ruin the State, their
Master and themselves, by their Weakness; If they are False and Treacherous,
they set the Public to Sale, and betray its Interest for Money. If they are
men of ill Principles, they blow up their Prince to Vanity by Flatteries, and
banish Truth from the Palace. They put him upon extravagant Designs, or
endeavor to drown him in Voluptuousness; They exhaust the Royal Treasury by
their profuseness, and strip poor People to the very Skin to feed their
insatiable Avarice; they rob the Prince of his noblest and most stable Throne,
the hearts of his Subjects, by creating fears and mutual Jealousies between
them; and whilst with vain pretenses and endeavors, no less impracticable,
than Unjust, they would seem to make him more absolute than his Forefathers,
they render him less Considerable at home, and consequently less Revered
abroad, than any of his Ancestors, they manage Affairs according to their
private Fancies, and hate public Councils; having committed Extravagances that
render them liable to Justice, the rest of their life is spent not to serve
their Master, but to save their own Necks, So that in all their following
Councils they consult not his Advantage, but their own Defense, and make his
Interests stoop to their Conveniences; what care they how much the people be
provoked, they had rather their Country should be involved in all the miseries
and desolations of a Civil War, or be made a Prey to a Foreign Invader, than
they themselves brought to an Account before an Impartial Tribunal; since in
the first Case, they hope to shift amongst the Crowd, but in the second, can
expect nothing but certain Ruin, for their Conscious fears presage what will
happen; they know well enough, the ills they have done must be defended with
greater, and if the Law live, they must die; wherefore these being their
Courses, and that the Plague causes not so great a desolation, as one of these
accursed Favorites, it might be wished, that this Prayer might be added to all
the public Litanies of Christians, Lord turn away from all States an Evil,
which is the cause of so many other Evils: Deny not Sovereign Princes the
Spirit of Conduct, which is fit for them to Govern by: Give them understanding
enough to Council themselves well, and to Choose their Counselors as they ought.

To Conclude, As the first advances of Ill Court-Favourites are commonly base
and shameful, their progress Vile, wicked and destructive, their short
Continuances attended with Hazards and Anxieties, so their Eclipses are ever
more fatal, and their falls desperate, they are Generally surprised with Ruin,
and their defeat is like that of Forlorn Troops, cut in pieces before they can
Rally, or be reinforced. Private men oftimes fall upon their Legs and find
Friends to relieve, at least to Commiserate them, and Bankrupt Merchants, are
daily seen to rise again like Phoenixes out of their own dust, but with
Courtiers and Satesmen there are no degrees of Misfortune; Those Ladders they
clamber'd up with so much Sweat, address and difficulty, upon the smallest
miss-step, serve but to render their precipitation more notorious; when they
are hurled down from all those bubled Glories, their best comfort is not to
Survive their destiny, and their greatest misery is, when they outlive
themselves, to see their Families Buried in their Ruins, and all the advantages
of their Honor and Fortune turned against them, like an Army dissipated with
the fury of its own Cannon; Then too late, they find themselves forsaken of all
those Alliances, which they had with so much subtilty contracted, vainly
Imagining to have laid a Foundation of everlasting Greatness: Their Cobweb
policies are unravel'd in a moment, for no sooner do they begin to decline, but
their most obliged Creatures shun them most, and like Haman's Wife are the
first Harbingers of their Ruin. Those that were raised by their Countenance,
not daring to own any Love or Honor to their persons, lest they should be
involved in their Ruin, by being at least suspected, as concerned in their
Crimes; their own Servants conclude it but Justice, as well as Prudence, to
expose their faults; Their Enemies triumph over them, and even their Friends
think it Charity enough to afford them an insulting Pity, and the people, who
with reason universally hated, but feared them before, are now priviledg'd to
Curse them; nay the Prince himself, in whose service perhaps they wounded their
Consciences, and for whose pleasures they Bleed, uses them but as the skreen of
Envy, and hoping with their Ruin to gratify many, and please all, gives them
up, when he cannot in prudence longer support them, as a propitiatory Sacrifice
to the enraged Multitude, and becomes as inexorable to their Petitions, as they
had been formerly to the more just Requests of others in distress.

In fine, having long since forfeited their Innocence (the sweet retreat of
oppressed Virtue) they at last find no Sanctuary sufficient to protect them,
but are precipitated out of the World, loaded with Guilt and shame, and the
Ruins of Nations, and the destruction of their Masters, and the Execrations of
all Mankind.

FINIS.

