THE CHARACTER OF THE PARLIAMENT, Commonly called the Rump, etc. Begun November
23. in the Year 1640. With a short ACCOUNT of some of their PROCEEDINGS.

Ille nefasto te posuit die
-- in nepotum
Perniciem, opprobriumque Pagi.
HORACE. Hinc usura vorax, avidumque in tempore faenus, and concussa fides, and
multis utile Bellum,

LUCAN LONDON: Printed and Sold by the Booksellers of London.

PREFACE.
THERE are few Men of Judgment, Candor, and Impartiality, who will not allow a
Government, consisting of King and Parliament, to be the best Constitution in
the World. France, Spain, Denmark, Sweden, Sicily, and some other Kingdoms, had
once this Advantage, but unfortunately lost it; some by Faction, others by
being Conquered; and others, by a National depravity of Manners, joined to the
Ambition of Princes, and the Intrigues of their Ministers. We of these Islands
are now left the last, who enjoy this Blessing in any Perfection; and we may
still preserve it pure and entire, if we can but retain some Degree of the
Virtue of our Ancestors. But we should be careful what Persons we choose to
Represent us in Parliament; for, if (according to the vulgar Maxim in the
Schools.) Corruption optimi est Pessima, a CORRUPT Parliament would then, of all
Evils in Government, be the Greatest; and exceed the worst Tyranny in a single
Person. An absolute Prince might be Cruel, Rapacious, Covetous, a Dissipater of
the Public Treasure, an Enemy of Religion; and it would be very bad: But all
this would be nothing, when compared to a Mob of such Tyrants, most of them
with the same Dispositions, and every way like that greater one, only the more
provoking, as in their Persons they would be more contemptible, nor is this a
Thing not to be supposed. Our History furnishes us with an Instance of a
Parliament of that kind; which is here undertaken to be described to the
Public, in one unmixed View; both because this has not been yet done by any
one, that I know of; and also, that a Prospect of it in this manner, may
possibly give our Countrymen, a full Notion, of how great Consequence it is to
them, to be extremely cautious whom they trust at any time to be their
Representatives. Here they may have before their Eyes, what Abuses a CORRUPT
Parliament is capable of. The Writer, in putting his Thoughts together on this
Subject, has set himself a Rule to keep Religoiusly to the History of the Men
and the Times, and not to indulge himself or the Reader in charging any
Character too much, or deviating from the Truth, to make the Story more
agreeable. The Facts and Characters are all of them to be found, either in my
Lord Clarendon, Whitlock, Rushworth, Sir Philip Warwick, Ludlow, Hobbs, or some
other Writer of those Times: But many Passages are omitted for the Sake of
Brevity, or through Forgetfulness, or because they did not exactly fall in with
the general Design: And such as are mentioned, are not always considered in the
order of Time in which they happened. True it is, some few of the Things here
imputed to the Parliament, were not their immediate and direct Act; but, which
is much the same thing, though not all done by them, they were all done in
their way, in treading their Paths, and by a Power derived from them. The
greatest Scelerates had either their express Orders, their Approbation or
Example and Authority, to plead for the worst Crimes then committed.

BY what Means and Degrees these Pretended Patriots arrived to the height of
Wickedness, and begat so great Irreverence toward their own Persons and
Characters, is here endeavored to be explained, and may possibly be
instructive to these, who may not elsewhere have observed the Series of their
Transactions; nor the Period, when properly they became dignified with the
Title of the Rump; which was, when they had subverted all the honest Ends and
Purposes of Parliaments, and when they sat by Virtue of their own Choice and
Power, and not by the Free Election of their Country.

THE CHARACTER OF THE PARLIAMENT, Commonly called the Rump.
THIS famous Parliament, which Sat so long, did so much Mischief, and involved
the three Kingdoms in Guilt and Misery, met at Westminster, the 3d of November,
1640. Through the Misrepresentations of those about the King, his Majesty
unluckily thought fit to part with the preceding Parliament upon ill Terms, and
before he had Time to know them, which was thought a very impolitick Step, to
say no worse of it. They were Men of Moderation, and zealous for the Public
Good, and were the Reverse of their Successors; who never ceased 'till they
drew upon these Nations infinite Calamities, and Disrepute, and even Contempt
upon the very Name of a House of COMMONS.

AMONG many illegal and more weak Things, then committed in the Administration
of Affairs, none could be worse judged, than that Precipitate Act of the Court;
which struck, with Concern and Indignation, all who had a due Attention to his
Majesty's Service, and Regard for the Constitution of the Realm. But it was the
Subject of Joy and Triumph to the Men of turbulent Spirits; to the Enemies of
the Church, and of Peace; to those, who longed for nothing more than to throw
the State into Confusion, in hopes to repair their shattered Fortunes, to
acquire Wealth and Power; or to glut their Malice and Revenge. And it must be
owned, the Success answered beyond their most extravagant Imaginations: A great
Part of their Purposes, and even Wishes, having been fatally effected, and many
of the chief Managers having crept into high Stations, purloined Titles, and
amassed immense Sums, who from their Birth, Merits, or Qualifications, could
reasonably have aspired no higher, than to the meanest Offices.

FROM Motives, and by Persons, such as these, the Elections could not but be
carried on very irregularly. The Factious were Men of Craft and Industry, and
stuck at nothing to carry their Point. Returns were made of Persons to serve
for Places, where their Names had never been heard of before; and, where Bribes
and Artifices, to debauch the Minds of the Electors and the Returning Officers,
would not prevail, Violence succeeded. Neither was this the worst of the Case.
When the House of Commons met, and by those and other Means, the Majority was
clearly on the side of the Faction, they turned out, and put in whom they
thought proper, without any sort of Modesty, or the least attention to the
established Rules of the House, or to the manifest Justice of the Cause. Thus
very many, against the Consent, and without the Knowledge of their Country,
assumed to themselves the Title of its Representatives, which yet was not
ordinarily objected to them as any Crime; so much did their Conduct, as Members
of the House, obscure the Reproach of their having dishonourably intruded into
it.

IT is true, a great Part of this foul Management, in point of Elections,
happened in process of Time, when they were grown Old and Hardened in
Corruptions of all Kinds; when they had lost the Remembrance of Right and
Wrong; but it is also true, that even in the Infancy of their Power, the same
Spirit prevailed, and they set out with the Assurance of those, who had
abandoned all Decency and Remorse. The difference was, it was Passion, and
Rage, and Madness in the beginning: Afterward, it was Phlegmatic, impudent
Villainy, and Corruption.

YET, it ought always to be remembered, that there were Men of that House, of as
great Worth, Integrity, and Abilities, as have sat in any Parliament whatever:
Men, who were Proof against all Temptations of Gain, and not to be overawed by
Threats, or the Torrent that then raged. But these were outnumbered by People
of different Views, different Principles: The Majority was a Compound of
Pretenders to Zeal against Popery, of real Atheists, of professed Republicans,
of weak and Ignorant Slaves to the Managers, and above all, of wretched
Mercenaries, who prostituted their Conscience, and sold their Country for their
Daily Pay.

THE Leaders of this Band of Conspirators against their Country deserve to be
delivered down to Posterity, with all possible Marks of Infamy: But because
Descendants may atone for the Wickedness (as they often degenerate from the
Virtue) of their Ancestors, the Names of those Persons shall at present be
passed over in Silence. Yet at the same Time, it may not be altogether
unseasonable to sketch out the Characters of some few of the most Notorious,
that we may look back and see, what sort of Persons those were, who had both
the Will and Power to impoverish the Public, and enslave their Native Country;
that if for the future any others should unhappily arise with the same
Dispositions and Talents, the Resemblance might be observed time enough to
prevent a Parallel in the Story every way.

ONE of these was a Gentleman, well known in those Times, both on the Score of
his Parts, which were competently adapted to the Mechanical Part of Business,
and also of some Disgrace, he had undergone from the late Men in Power; which,
when that Power devolved into other Hands, gave him a Pretense to set up for a
Sufferer. He spoke in the House with great readiness, and at all Times with a
certain appearing Frankness, in his manner of expressing himself, that was not
disagreeable. No Man spoke more than he of Concern for the Public; no Man had
the Public less at Heart; but it served his Purpose, as it furnished him with
Popular Topics for Harrangues, and was likewise a convenient Prey for him and
his hungry Creatures. He was a bold Undertaker in Business; not easily
discouraged by the difficulty of the Work, and never to be put out of
Countenance at the foulness of it. But his chief Excellence consisted in the
dexterous Application of Lies to his several Purposes; and those he could frame
extempore, and with that undaunted Assurance, they were of great Service to him
at particular Seasons; although the too frequent Use of them, and his laughing
at Truth, openly and wantonly, contributed no less to the discovery of his
defect in Judgment, than his snatching at all Opportunities to get Money,
betrayed the Weakness and Impotence of his Mind. However, his Influence in the
House was great: From the Sense of what pleased himself best, he knew how to
gain others; and he was the better qualified for the Times, and for the Part he
had to act, being wholly void of Shame, and as entirely undisturbed with any
Fumes or Principles of Virtue, Honor or Religion; as free in himself from all
Aproaches toward Compassion or Humanity.

A second of these was a Gentleman of good Extraction, liberal Education, and
of some Learning. From the Company he had kept in his younger Years, and from
his manner of Life, he had contracted an inveterate Malice against the Church,
and imbibed early Principles against Monarchy: Though no Man went farther than
he, in the Support and promoting of the most lawless Acts of Tyranny, when he
had his Share of Power. He had been bred up to the Profession of Arms, and had
got some Reputation that way, which he quickly lost, by the unsoldierly Defense
and Surrender of a Town of Importance: For this ill Conduct he was accused, and
might have Suffered, if he had not been befriended by the General, who lived to
repent his good Nature, to a Man, never very sensible of Favors or Benefits.
That Gentleman betook himself afterward to another kind of Life, and got one
of the Seals into his Possession, which he used to ill Purposes enough, but
always with good Manners, which was peculiar to him. Not being well fixed in
any Form of Government, he ran into many wild Schemes, and was rather a Builder
of Commonwealths, than a Member of any one. It was conjectured he had a
Tincture of Enthusiasm in his Composition, which, if true, might account for
part of his Life, and perhaps be thought some extenuation of several things he
had been guilty of, to the Prejudice of his Country, to which, perhaps, few Men
really wished better, than he.

ANOTHER of these, and, it may be; one of the most outrageous of the whole
Set, was an Officer of mean Parts and Parentage; a meddling, blustering Fellow,
determined, and very diligent: Conceited, Undertaking, incapable of offering
any Reasons to convince others, or of comprehending Reason, so as to be
persuaded himself. By the extraordinary Favor of the General, to whom lic had
been Useful in several Capacities, he had made his way, from being a Subaltern,
in a few Years, to one of the highest Posts in the Army; and in every Post, he
still showed great uneasiness, as if the Place were not big enough to hold him,
and that he could not breathe, until he got higher; which made him press and
bustle and affront every thing in his way. He was Servile in his Applications
to those who could advance him, and no Man endeavored to make his Court more
than he, or did it with a worse Grace. So that his Ambition was unmeasurable,
but misbecame him: And it was observed of him by one of the same Side, who was
no bad Observer of Men, That he was a Clown in fine Clothes; intimating, how
uncouthly any thing of Grandeur sat upon him.

WHEN the House of Commons became silled with Soldiers, he got himself returned
to serve for a Borough, and acted the same Part in the House, he had done out
of it; that is, he was restless in his Motions, and brutal in his Opinions; and
though he often appeared more busy, than he really was, he never could appear
more Brutal. If at any Time an unjust Proposition, that might lay whole
Countries waste, was to be made in the House, he was so apprehensive of its
failing, he would run every where to Summon the Posse, and take upon himself
the Office of Muster-Master-General of the Party: And then if by great
accident, the House seemed inclined to come into an Act less ill-natured than
usual, it would put him out of all Patience, and he would show the utmost
disquiet, being unable to keep his Countenance, or to sit still in his Place.
Ingratitude was so much a part of his Character, it was looked upon with the
Indulgence People allow for natural Infirmities, which are not to be cured. His
Understanding was confused and muddy; so he never troubled his Head about
Notions, or Schemes, or Laws of Government; all which he resolved into Force:
Consequently his Politics, as his Morals, were those of a Dragoon, to oppress
and Plunder where he could; which he performed with the most punctual
Discipline, without Bowels, or Mercy.

FROM him a good deal of the Spirit of the Officers of those Times may be
collected: Although they differed in many other Particulars, yet in those of
Rapine, Plunder, and Inhumanity, they seemed to agree very well, and to be
uniform in their Principles, if we may so call them.

A fourth of the Ephori was the then Solicitor General, a Man of all others
the least amiable: He was descended of an ancient Family by an indirect Line;
was extremely formal, proud, and morose; conversed with few, and had a certain
pedantick manner of declaring his own Opinion, and expressing a Contempt of
that of all others; which, perhaps sometimes imposed upon those, who knew no
better than himself, and might have gained him the little Repute he had, of
Skill in his Profession. And that which was very particular, his
Self-Sufficiency was so entire, that whatever he advanced, he would believe to
be right; and he would advance absurd Arguments in Point of Law, upon a
supposition of their receiving a Sanction from him: By which means, he would
wrest the Law in a very shameless manner. The rest of his Brethren of the Law
he surpassed in ill Nature, Sowerness, and Inhumanity: Yet his predominant
Quality was Insolence; which shone in every Act and Motion of his Life, in his
Air, his Gestures, his Words, and particularly in his Looks: All which rendered
him not less insupportable in Business, than he was in his own Family, where he
was an absolute Lord and Tyrant. No wonder if a Person of his Frame, was a very
evil Instrument in tumultuous Times, and especially when Bribery ran highest;
since it was well known, no Man's Ears, and Hands, and Heart, were more open
than his, to Gain.

THERE was indeed, another of the same Fraternity, but of a different Temper,
who had his Hands as deep as any Man, where there was room, either for his
Advice or Assistance, in most Acts of Violence, and barefaced Corruption. He
had the Appearance of gentleness in his Carriage, and had been formerly looked
upon as no ill-natured Man. In the more innocent part of his Life, he had
associated himself with Persons of other Principles, than those of his new
Friends, and had carried those Principles, at least as high as any Man; but no
sooner did he change Sides, than he seemed to change Nature; and as if he had
taken every Man of those, whom he deserted, for a living and lasting Reproach
to him, he prosecuted them with an hostile Fury, and at their Expense, made
himself as acceptable as he could, to his new Companions; to whom he had
devoted himself, Soul and Body. Insomuch, that Justice was never worse
administered, nor partiality more openly exalted on the Bench, than in his
Time. The Fact was; His inordinate desire to gain Credit with the Party and
Money by that Credit; being inflamed by a malign hatred of his old Friends, he
behaved himself like a mad Man, even in private Causes, wherever the Interest
of any one of the Party was concerned: And after he had gone through most of the
Drudgery his Masters expected from him, he was found out by them to be a Man
but of ordinary Abilities, and one proper to be Disavowed as they should see
Occasion.

THERE was another Lawyer of the Party in the House, of a much better Repute
than either of the former. He was a Man of Order in his Profession, had made a
good Figure at the Bar, and had Sat in former Parliaments with Approbation;
but being no good Judge of Men, and not always steady, he was made use of to
serve Purposes he did not intend, and concurred with Persons, and in Things, he
did not like. His Name in the Beginning was of use to the Managers, although he
did not long continue to promote their Schemes. And here once for all it may be
proper to be observed, that many contributed with all their Might and Main to
the first Confusions, who afterward became sensible of their Error, and would
have Retreated; but they found it was very difficult to wear off bad Company,
and that all, who have a Power to do Ill, have not the same to do Good.

BUT far from any Remorse was a Yorkshire Man, of as eminently bad Qualities,
as any one whatever: He was opinionative, and a boaster of his Talents, which
were neither quite so bad as some thought them, nor in any degree so good as he
fancied, but might have passed for tolerable, if he had been content to have
meddled only with Things within his Sphere. But his Ambition was active, and he
procured an Employment, to which he was in no Sense equal, having neither
clearness, nor Courage, nor Fidelity, nor Uncorruptedness, nor Skill enough to
disguise his notorious defect in all the former; so he became a very early rank
Sinner, and stands foremost in the List of the most guilty of those Times. With
a Design to deceive others, he was outwitted himself, and by an odd turn, was
accused by those, with whom he had been an Accomplice in many Crimes: When he
was to plead for himself, he grew Lord Clarendon.
distracted between Pride and Fear, and talked confusedly of the Trust reposed
in him, and of his honest Intentions; which was such Language for him to use,
it provoked the general Indignation of all Men. He was committed to the Tower,
and condemned, and the Circumstances were such, that the immaiate Hand of
Almighty God could not but appear in it to all Men, who knew his Nature,
Humor, and TRANSACTIONS.

ANOTHER was a Gentleman of the West of England of a good Estate, but no
otherwise remarkable, than as a thorough Slave to the Party, of which he
imagined himself a Governor. He was a stupid, though frequent Speaker in the
House; but what made him heard with the better attention, he would clap
together a Parcel of such odd Blunders, as would provoke the gravest Men to
Mirth: Then he was always to be counted upon for a Sure Man; he had moreover a
venomous dislike of the Church, which was a Merit; and though to choose, he would
have been glad to be a Gainer by an unjust or cruel Proposition, yet rather
than not be engaged in any thing of that Nature, he was ready to serve
according to the best of his Talents (which was noise) upon the Foot of a
Volunteer.

I had almost forgot the Speaker of the House, who was a superficial proud Man,
and marvelously delighted with the Ensigns and Parade of his Place; of which he
was said to be tolerably capable, by having applied himself to the study of the
Records, and Journals of Parliament. Besides, his was a gainful Post, and he
loved Money to excess; so the poor Man continued to keep it, amidst many
Changes, and under several Masters, until he and the Mace, were both turned out
together, and became the derision of all People, who had seen to what Uses they
had both been put.

I cannot omit taking notice of two others, who though of no Consequence in
themselves, yet oftentimes, by either having Propositions put into their
Mouths, or by seconding some of the others, made a sort of a Figure in the
House. One of these was a Justice of Peace for London and Middlesex; who from
the Business of that Post, which he exceedingly liked, both for the Business
and the Gain, had passed a great part of his time among Strollers and
Pickpockets, and thence contracted some similitude in their Style, Manners, and
Honesty; which enabled him to be very vexatious, where his Authority was
Supreme, and troublesome elsewhere, by an impertinent Zeal, under the Direction
of a weak Head. Yet such was the Indulgence of the Party toward a fast Friend,
they frequently caressed the Man, and sustained his Follies, (wherein he
abounded) at the same time that he was their Jest and Sport, even to a Proverb.

THE other was one of those we call half-witted: He was absurd and bold in
Discourse, but in every other way a complete Coward. He was at first very much
cherished by them, because he would say things no body else cared to say; and
because when they had a Mind to tire the House out, they could set him to talk
Nonsense, which he would pour forth upon any Subject, with great Ease, and
Earnestness, and Eloquence, for Hours together, and yet without leaving the
Hearers a possibility of guessing at his Meaning, and even without
understanding himself, what he would be at; which though a trifling Circumstance,
was often of singular Service to them.

THERE were likewise several others of Note, who had a considerable Share in
the Transactions and Wickedness of the Times, and One particularly (of a higher
Orb) to whose Power, Craft, profound Dissimularion, implacable Temper, and
Avarice not to be satiated, was owing as much Mischief, as to any one Man in
that, or any other Age. But considering how miserable a Spectacle he afterward
became, being haunted by a Demon in his Bosom, and having out lived a very good
Understanding, it would be pity to say more of him in this place. The other
Persons already taken notice of, were some of the most persevering Sinners, and
are sufficient to give us a view of the Genius and Disposition of the Heads of
an Assembly, which one would think could hardly be parallelled in the Histories
of any Time or Country.

BESIDES these, they had a Number of Hirelings, constant in Attendance, and
prepared to call out, The Question, The Question, when ever it was necessary,
with Clamor, to drown the Arguments of their Opponents, and by Numbers, to
carry what they intended.

THEY had also, besides their Numbers, many Artisices to render the House as
Pliant as they could wish. Several of their own Members at once they got
confined and imprisoned; many they threatened and frighted from attending; and
in the height of their Glory, they bore Contradiction with an Impatience, as if
it were a Crime to control them. This brings to Mind a Story, among several
others, to exemplify both their Cunning, and the Pride of their Hearts. The
House was in a warm Debate of an Affair, which the Managers had much at Heart,
and carried at length, to the irreparable Damage of their Country; but it met
with vigorous opposition; particulary from a Gentleman of great Reputation,
much esteemed every where, and terrible in the House to those People. In the
Argument of that Day, he happened to drop an Expression, that served them for a
Pretense of Clamor against him: this Expression one of their Members, who was
always willing to indulge his spite, and merit a Place or Pension, took notice
of, and complained of its Irregularity: For which the other, he said, ought to
withdraw; which begat another long Debate. The Conclusion was; After much
Passion from the angry Men, which showed how extremely offensive that Person
was to them, he was ordered to withdraw, and to be committed to the Tower;
whereby they inspired new audacity into their Friends, they were revenged on an
old Enemy, they got rid of a troublesome Guest, and endeavored to warn others,
not to provoke their Vengeance and Injustice.

No sooner did the House meet, than it was obvious enough with how little
Temper, Wisdom, or Justice, they were likely to proceed. The Nation required
Peace, that Men's Minds might be calmed; therefore the Party ran into
Violences. A Committee for Secret Affairs.
They began with Impeachments, in order to which, a Committee was appointed to
find out, or rather to make Misdemeanors and High Treason: Nor were the
Committee wanting to their Business: Informers were encouraged, Papers
searched, Words tortured, and Actions misrepresented; and after a most
Laborious Enquiry, they brought forth a real Justisication of the Persons
accused. However, they had Strength enough in the House thereupon to carry the
Impeachments, Impeachments.
and they still gave out they had surther Discoveries to make, until some who
saw their aim, and knew they had Power to compass it, thought it high time to
provide for their own Safety, by not trusting their Lives and Honor in the
Power of Men, who thirsted after the Blood of the greatest Persons in the
Kingdom, and who had no Honor to lose in the pursuit.

IT cannot be contended, but that Impeachments are a very proper resource
against the Power of Ministers and Favorites. It is one of the most glorious
Remains of our Constitution, that Criminals, how subtle soever, and however
protected by an easy or a vicious Prince, may be reached in a Parliamentary
way; which Method, in some Cases, is the best, and perhaps the only one, of
coming at them. For Example, A Privy Councellor advises his Master to enter
into a War, without Provocation, destructive of the Trade and Interest of his
Country, and contrary to National Faith confirmed by solemn Treaties: A
Parasite contrives a Project to enrich the Minions of a Court, at the Expense,
and to the Ruin of many Families; a Trustee for the Public becomes an
Advocate, and Champion for the Pillagers of it; or a Minister of State lays a
Scheme, or signs an Order, that shall famish Thousands of Innocent People. In
one, or all of these and the like Cases, where perhaps the Guilty cannot be
affected in the common course of Law, and yet deserve to be signalized by
Exemplary Punishment, as eternal Monuments of CORRUPTION, and likewise of
National Justice; it is the Duty of the Representatives of the Commons of
England to Impeach the Offenders; and it is the highest Breach of Trust in
them, not thus to exert the Rights of the People, when called upon by such
enormous Crimes, and by the Sufferings of their Countrymen.

BUT on the other Hand, the Privilege of the Commons to Impeach, ought not to
be prostituted on slight Pretenses, or to gratisie the Spleen of this or that
Man, or Party. And in the Case before us, of those unhappy Impeachments, which
created so much ill Blood in the Nation, and promoted so fast the ensuing
Mischiefs, they were not only ill-timed, and fatal in their Fruits, but also
wholly without Grounds, unless to have served ones Prince and ones Country,
ought to have been imputed for Crimes.

THE Persons accused could not be thought Guilty, even by their Adversaries, of
betraying their Trust, of Sacrificing the True English Interest to that of
Foreigners, or of any sort of Bribery, Corruption, or Rapine. But their Crimes
were, They were faithful Servants of the Crown, and loved their Country: They
were known to be averse from all Schemes of private Gain, and abhorred the
Thought of any Innovations ^^^her in Church or State. It therefore became the
Interest, as it was the Inclination, of the governing Party, to remove out of
their way such Obstacles to their Designs; and because there was not the least
ground in point of Law, to proceed upon against them, they fell upon
Impeachments, as the most artful way to conceal the Weakness of their
Accusation, and at the same time to raise that ferment, which was so necessary
to their further Views,

BUT neither could Impeachments, extraordinary as they were, serve their Turn:
They had recourse to Bills of Attainder, Attainders.
which are a summary way of robbing Men of their Honors, Estates, and Lives,
and which are seldom justifyable, excepting against those, who maintain the
Equity of that extraordinary Method of Arraignment.

DURING the dependence of the Impeachments and Bills of Attainder, there were
ushered into the House with great Solemnity, Accounts of Plots against the
Government, and formidable Stories of Invasions, on purpose to alarm the
timorous, to inflame the Angry, to afford a pretext for augmenting the Forces,
the Command whereof, was to be in their Hands, and to multiply Taxes for the
Benesit of the Advocates for the Cause, and the Creatures of the principal Men.

THOSE Distempers and Violences of the Parliament, naturally inspired such, as
were to be the Sacrifice, with a Resolution to defend themselves. So the Civil
War commenced, Civil War.
which was manifestly the effect of the Rage and Wickedness of the Managers in
the Parliament, and of the Craft and Treachery of many about the King. And it
was not denied by some of them, that they intended from the beginning, to drive
Things to these Extremities, which they said were necessary, to make the King a
great King; though it was easily discerned, their Designs were to make him
their Slave, to alter the Frame of the Constitution, to govern by Force and a
Standing Army, and to Oppress and Tyrannize over their Fellow Subjects.

WHEN they had got an Army and a Civil War, or Rebellion to their Mind, it was
far from being their desire to make a speedy End of it; which was visible from
many Things, particularly from this, That they issued out no Proclamation of
Pardon to those, who should lay down their Arms. Nor was it their Interest; the
War, or the Pretense of it, was to bring about many great Things for them. And
because they apprchended that an Army of Englishmen would hardly support them
in what they Projected, Foreign Army.
they invited a Body of Foreign Forces into the Heart of the Kingdom; and these
they kept a long time after the Business was done, for which they were
pretended to be called in; till at length, not out of Compassion to the
Country, although heavily Taxed, for the Maintenance of the two Armies, and
severely oppressed by them, but purely, because they had no further Work for
them, and were now able to walk alone, they difmiss'd, and most liberally
rewarded their Foreign Deliverers, as they termed them.

HAVING all the Money of the Kingdom at their disposal, the Civil Power, and
two Armies well appointed, it was no wonder Victory declared on their Side;
which they used with the Insolence and Barbarity to be expected from them.
Executions.
And if there had been any Disposition to heal the Wounds of a bleeding Nation,
here had been a fair Field for so happy an Event. A frank and generous Pardon
might have established Tranquillity; but this was the Terror of governing Men,
and what they spurned at from their Souls. So they set themselves to execute
Rigor, as it were in despite of the Sense, and Wishes of Mankind, and of the
Addresses of all those, who might be supposed to have most Credit with the
Persecutors. But all Application seemed but to whet the Edge of Cruelty, many
Parts of the Kingdom became the Scenes of their Butcheries, in cold Blood. The
MANNER of one of those was Lord Clarendon. Hist.
New, and without Example. Several Noble Persons and others Surrendered to
Mercy, having been induced to it, through the Persuasions of the Commanding
Officer who attacked the Town, in which they had unfortunately shut themselves
up. One or two of the Prisoners were presently Shot for Example, under Pretense
of Military Justice, the rest Lord Clarendon, Vol. 3. Page, 137. and 204, 205,
206.
they reserved to be more Public Spectacles. They were brought up to London,
treated with all the Ignominy that could be devised, Condemned, and many of
them Executed: And such an Alien to all Gallantry, was the Officer, who
persuaded them to Surrender, that either from the Virulence of his own Nature,
or his Passion to gratify his Masters, or perhaps from both, he mis-interpreted
the Laws of Arms and of Nations, as if a Promise of Mercy did but exempt the
Prisoners from the Fury of the Soldiers, or a Council of War. However it were,
it was an odious Case; and the Sufferers were not more pitied, than he and his
Patrons were loaded with Execrations of all Sorts.

NOT content with the many Executions in several Parts of the Kindgom, the
Parliament seized upon all the Estates of the Delinquents, and appointed a
Commission of Sequestrators, Commission of Sequestrators.
to enquire into the Effects of the Persons they had a mind should forfeit:
This Commission was made up of several of the most Corrupt and Inhuman of the
whole Tribe, and had a Power, almost unlimited, thrown into their Hands, by
which they miserably grieved all sorts of People who had any thing to do with
them.

IT is difficult to conceive the gross Abuses these Men were guilty of: Neither
the Tears and Cries of innocent, starving Widows and Orphans, the Equity of the
Cause, or their own satiety in Injustice and Severities, could make them relax
from their Resolution to do wrong. They undertook the Employment for that
purpose; and their Consciences and Inclinations were of that mold, not to give
them leave to receive their Hire for so agrecable a Work, and to do it by
halves.

WHILST they were so happily possessed of a Rebellion to carry on their
Purposes, many Persons of all Ranks were seized, and without any Forms of Law,
or knowing their Accusers, and even without any Accusation at all, were
detained a long time in Prison; their Friends and Relations prohibited to come
near them, and they not permitted to have common Necessaries: Which Invasion of
Men's Rights was so universally practiced throughout the Kingdom; it would fill
a Volume to enumerate how many Persons and Families were undone by it. I have
seen a Manuscript in the Hands of a Nobleman, containing the Names of the
Oppressors, and an account of Thousands of Innocent People, many of them
Persons of distinction, who suffered in their Health, Estates, and several who
lost their Lives by that illegal Method of Imprisoning, ad arbitrium. Which
surely was a great Argument, among a Multitude of others, of the dangerous
Consequence of breaking in upon the Fences of National Freedom. Not but that it
is a prudent piece of Policy in all Governments, to strengthen themselves by
securing the Persons of such Enemies, as Plot their overthrow: But the Methods,
those Men made use of, were wholly unjustifiable, and would have rendered them
odious, though they had done nothing else, that was bad. For, what else could be
said of them and their Proceedings, but that the Conservators of the Liberty of
their Countrymen, not only gave up the chief Security thereof, which was the
Habeas-Corpus; but showed the Example themselves to others to strike at the
Root of the Constitution?

As the Army was their chief Support, A Standing Army.
they studied all ways of pleasing the Officers, and subjecting the Common
Soldiers to answer their Ends. In order to the first of these, they paid them
well, indulged them in all kinds of License, that a victorious Army are prone
to; and then to quiet their Minds against the Fear of Suits or Prosecutions for
their Outrages, they kindly gave them a Bill of Indemnity for their sole Use
and Protection; and to justify all the Insults and Barbarities they had
committed, which were without Number. And when the Country became exhausted by
Taxes, Modelling the Army which they called Disbanding.
and that all Men cried out to have the Army reduced, they fell upon a Scheme
to favor their good Friends, and yet seem to comply with the Wishes and Wants
of the People: which was to model, the Army so, as to keep up a great Number of
Officers, and fewer Soldiers. By which means, they had a new Opportunity of
Purging that Body of those they disliked, they gratified their Friends, and
still retained the same Power to do Mischief, and continued the same Oppression
upon the Country.

IN Order to subdue the Spirits of the Common Soldiers to all their Uses, they
set up Martial Law, Martial Law in Time of Peace.
independent of the Civil Magistrate, and in Times of Peace. This was to act
fairly, and take off the Masque at once; since it was in effect to set up for a
Military Government without further Ceremony. For how averse soever the
Soldiers might be to trample upon the Laws and Liberties of their Countrymen,
they were by Martial Law to be compelled to it: a Refusal to serve for such
Purposes was thereby interpreted Mutiny; Mutiny.
for which they were instantly to be Shot, being deprived of the Benefit of the
Laws of the Land, and totally excluded from their Right by Magna-Charta to an
equal Trial by a Jury of their Neighbors. And the Hardship was still the
greater upon the Common Soldiers, that though their Country should not require
their Service, and that they should desire to retreat to their Homes, their
Families, or some honest Occupation, it was not in their Power; but they were
to be put to Death for Deserters, Desertion.
to attempt a Delivery from Idleness and Servitude. Thus by Virtue of this Law,
the Soldier became first enslaved, in order afterward to bring the Country
under Bondage: Whilst the Officers gained a Dominion, which they abused
according to the Tyranny of their Natures and the Pride of Upstarts; and this
perhaps might make common Soldiers the more ready to bring their Fellow
Subjects into Slavery, that they might all be upon an equal Foot: For the same
Purpose, they put the Militia under new Regulations, and into the Hands of Men,
notorious for Animosity, against the Constitution in Church and State, or of so
little Interest or Stake in their Country, that they might be depended upon, as
proper Instruments to bring it into Subjection.

UNDER the Notion of suppressing Tumults and Riots, Tumults, and Riots.
they took all Arbitrary Measures to prevent honest Men from meeting and
conversing freely together; at the same time that they encouraged a seditious
Number of Fellows in the City, to insult the well-meaning Freemen and Citizens,
who they imagined disliked their Proceedings. They dreaded lest the True
English Spirit should revolt against such Taskmasters; therefore, by that and
some other terrible Ordinances, they did, what in them lay, to sink the Genius
of the People into that abject Tameness, that might make them more easily
submit their Necks to the Yoke prepared for them. To this, were added many
Examples of their Severity against those, who had fallen under their
Displeasure. For they found out a way of trying them, not in their own Country
where their Characters were known, nor in the Places where the Offenses were
committed; but here in London, where none of the Jury perhaps had eyer heard of
them, Illega^ ^^thod^ ^^ Try^^^
until called upon for this particular Service; which was a Method against all
Rules of common Justice. Neither could it be excused by any pretended Exigences
of the State, nor the Evil balanced by any Advantage those Men could propose
from the breach of the Constitution in so Fundamental a Point: But they knew
they did not deserve to be loved, so they took Care to be feared; as Men, who
had Power, and would use it without regard to God or Man.

BUT one of the most fatal and confounding Parts of their whole Management, The
(...) for ^^uing ^^^^selv^^
was the Act for Continuing themselves; which was since called the Act for the
Perpetual Parliament. The Act for the Perpetual Parliamant as it is called.
Page 204, Clar. Fol. 1st Vol.
This was directly contrary to the Intent and Reasons of the A Bill for the
Triennial Parliament, passed. Page 165, Clar. Fol. 1st Vol.
Triennial Act, which they had before affected to be so fond of, and which the
Nation afterward had ample Reason to wish had been always preserved Sacred and
Inviolable.

IT is not to be represented, what a Flood of Calamities overwhelmed the King
and Kingdom, from this accursed Act. Without this, the sworn Managers, could
not possibly have gone through with their Work. Their Power indeed would have
lasted too long, but it would have had a Period within three Tears; and the
Fear of their being called to Account at the expiration of that Time for past
Crimes, might have put some Bounds to their Wickedness. But the lengthening the
Time of their Domination enlarged their Views, and they looked upon Justice to
be as remote in this, as in another World, Hence, the lowest and meanest
Creatures of that Assembly extended their Ambition, copied after their Elders
and Superiors in Corruption, and dreamed of no less, than of swelling into
Lords and Peers of the Realm; and hence it happened, that all Methods, how
Scandalous soever, of acquiring Riches for the Members, were entertained in the
House with that Joy and Ardor, which left little or no Room for Contradiction.

HENCE befell amongst an infinite Number of other Mischiefs, one of such a
monstrous Nature, it will be an everlasting Blot upon the Sense as well as the
Virtue of the Nation; as it was at that Time a heavy Judgment upon it from
Heaven: A general Infatuation seemed to have seized Men; for although many
there were, who heartily disliked both the Thing, and the manner of it, and
detested the Iniquity of the Contrivers, yet the Parliament passed it in great
Gaiety, and found Instruments as wicked as themselves to execute it. Is habitus
animorum fuit, ut pressimum facinus auderent pauci, pleures vellent, omnes
paterentur.

SOME of the chief Actors in that black-Affair were taken untimely away to
answer for it elsewhere, before they could be brought to Trial here: Others by
other means escaped the Hands of the Ministers of Justice; and indeed all of
them found much milder Treatment than they deserved.

BUT this Evil, great as it was, was but one, out of many, that flowed from the
Continuance of that CORRUPT Parliament. There were some Wise Men saw the ill
Consequences of that perpetuating Act, and the Reasons they gave against it
were sufficiently justified by the Sequel of Things: But no Mortal could have
foreseen all the Ill it really produced. How terrible then must that Act have
been, which was calculated to bring forth many Mischiefs unavoidable from the
Nature of it, and which might, as in Truth it did, beget many more, that no Man
could have conceived, if they had not happened. It is true the Bill had the
Royal Assent, but his Majesty did not weigh the Consequences of it, and the
Craft of the Proposers; nor consider the Blow it gave to his own Prerogative,
by investing Men in Power, who could have no Temptation to desire it, but the
Purpose to abuse it; which they did to the full, and yet had the Art to load
his Majesty as the Author of all those Violences, and to render him the Object
of the Popular Rage and Invectives.

IN all this Tinie that they were heaping Acts one upon another against the
Laws of the Land, of Reason, and Nature, they were also multiplying Taxes as
fast as they could. There was a Committee of Accounts (a sad Pack indeed!
Increase of Taxes.
) whose Trade it was to squander away the Public Money, Committee of Accounts.
and to bring the Public still farther into Debt. Arrears, Services,
Deficiencies, Subsidies to Foreigners, with a thousand other Pretenses, were
every Day made the Ground for new Impositions upon the poor Country; new
Employments were created for their Tools; and Rewards; that is, Pensions and
Bribes, were scattered up and down, though the Treasury was entirely empty;
nay, though the Country was beggared, and Trade which should bring in Money,
was neglected, and wantonly thrown into other Nations. I am told a Gentleman
now living, has been curious enough, to take an Account of the several Sums
those Plunderers lavished away from the Public, and that the Sums voted for
the Service of but one Year exceeded all that had been given for thrice the
same Period by the most prodigal of their Prececessors; yet that Year was a
Year of Peace too, and the People were never so miserably Poor as then.

IT would puzzle a Man to guess, what sort of Notions those People at
Westminster could have. They were eternally told of the Misery of the Country,
they heard scarce any thing out of the House, but the Groans of the Suffering
People; yet as soon as they got within those Walls, they voted away such
prodigious Sums, at such a mercyless rate, one would think they took it to be
the Duty of their Place, to Scourge and Plague the Land.

How little they considered the Interest of England with respect to Foreign
States appeared Clar. Vol. 3. p. 170. In the Year 1658, and 1659. hislock also.
from many Instances. They unseasonably seasonably sent a Fleet at vast
Expenses into the Sound, A Fleet sent unto the Baltic.
under Pretense of mediating a Peace between the Northern Powers; but they
acted the Mediators so ill, it was easily seen they made themselves a Party in
the Quarrel. And which was still worse, they joined with France in a War
against Spain, to the Ruin of the Trade and Commerce of England, and contrary
to all Rules of Policy and good Sense, which at that Time should have engaged
them rather to be Neuters, or if they would needs meddle in the War, A War
against Spain
it should have been, to have raised Spain to be a Balance against the growing
Power of the French Monarchy; which, though under a Minority, was then likely
enough to be one Day a formidable Enemy to England. But those unskilful Rulers,
cast their Politics only for the Day, how for the present they might keep
their Power and Dominion over their Subjects, and so left Posterity under the
many Pressures they had Treasured up for them.

IT cannot be thought but from so long a Train of Abuses and Corruptions, the
Parliament must have drawn upon it self great Odium. The Nation suffered with
Impatience the Tyranny of such a profligate Set, who plainly aimed at nothing
less than to ride and vex, and harrass the three Kingdoms for ever, this seemed
the more insupportable, because by the long execution of Power, their Persons
became perfectly well known, and of Consequence, grew contemptible. Every Day
produced some sharp Pamphlet or other against them: To prevent this, A
Co^mittee Pamph^^^
they appointed a Committee to find out and Examine Printers and Authors, and
as far as they could, to take away the Liberty of the Press; pursuant to which,
several Printers and poor Hawkers were illegally Seized and Confined, and
otherwise Severely handled, at the Pleasure of those despicable Tyrants. But
this had the usual Effect in such Cases; they were more and more pelted, more
and more despised. The Women and Children in the Streets, and their own Footmen
in the Lobby of the House agreed in the same Appellation of them, calling them
a COMPANY OF ROGUES. Whitlock p. 305.


DIVERSE Widows, and other Creditors Ibid. 193.
of the Parliament, flocked to the House, Clamo^^ against Parliam^^^
and in a rude and impetuous Manner, cried out to the Members -- PAY US OUR
MONEY -- JUSTICE -- JUSTICE -- the RUMP -- the RUMP, seeming ready to tear
their Clothes from off their Backs; insomuch, that those who had for so many
Years Lorded over the three Kingdoms, were forced to send for Guards for a
Defense, against a Parcel of Women. Addresses from most of the considerable
Cities and Shires were sent against them, renouncing them for Representatives,
and expressing the greatest Abhorrence of their Persons and Actions; until
being now grown the Aversion and Scorn of the World, Providence was pleased to
dissolve the Charm, that had bound these Nations under the Rule and Disclpline
of such Wretches.

ONE may form an Idea, to what a pitch of Detestation and Contempt that House
of Commons was arrived, from hence, that the most unpopular Man in the Kingdom
became generally acceptable, Parliament in Contempt.
only because he treated them as they merited. He loaded them (as Ludlow.
one of themselves mentions) with the vilest Reproaches, charging them not to
have a Heart to do any thing for the PUBLIC GOOD, to have espoused a CORRUPT
INTEREST, etc. the Supporters of Tyranny and Oppression, accusing them of an
Intention to PERPETUATE THEMSELVES IN POWER. And when a Principal Member did
but mention the Words Morality and comnon Honesty, the other thought them so
improper from his Mouth, he fell into an Exclamation of Contempt, crying out,
The Lord deliver me from --

Whitlock.
ANOTHER of their Writers, who was also of the House, gives much the same
Account of that Passage, he relates, That the Person, above hinted at, told the
House, That they had Sat long enough unless they had done more Good, That they
were CORRUPT, UNJUST, and SCANDALOUS, etc. That it was not fit they should sit,
as a Parliament, any longer, with a good deal more to the same Purpose, so he
bid them be gone, and all of them tamely departed the House.

SUCH was the Fate of the memorable Rump; upon which, this Author makes several
Observations of the Uncertainty of Worldly Things. They afterward revived a
little, and had some glimmering Hopes of their Continuance: but their Hearts
were quite broken by a final Dissclution Lord Clarendon's Hist.
to the unspeakable Joy of all the rest of the Kingdom, Parliamer dissolved.
to whom they had been so long a most uncomely irksome Burden, and who,
notwithstanding their very different Affections, Expectations, and Designs,
were unanimous in their Weariness and Detestation of the LONG PARLIAMENT; which
was obvious from the Multitude of Reproachful Addresses against them, and from
the Behavior of the City of London toward them a little before they were
dissolved. Joythereupon.
For, there could be no Invention of Fancy, Wit, or Ribaldry, that was not
exercised by the Citizens and their Apprentices, to defame them. As soon as the
Evening was come, there was a continual Light of Bonefires throughout the City
and Suburbs, with such an universal Exclamation of Joy, as had never been
known, and cannot be expressed; with such ridiculous Signs of Scorn and
Contempt of the Parliament, as testified the No-regard, or rather, the notable
Detestation they had of it; here being scarce a Bonefire, at which they did not
roast a Rump, and Pieces of Flesh made like one, which they said, was for the
CELEBRATION OF THE FUNERAL OF THE PARLIAMENT.

FINIS.

