CHARACTER.
SIR,
IN Answer to your last, wherein you desire me to give a Character of our
Prince, I shall, as well as I can, satisfy you.

As for his outward Accomplishments, I suppose you expect not that I should say
any thing, you having seen him frequently when he was in England, and been a
Witness of his excellent, noble, and Princely Deportment.

Nor is it necessary to one of your Education and Learning, to have an Account
of his Ancestors, or that you be told, that he is the principal Branch of a
House famous in History for these many hundreds of years, and that his Veins
flow, with the noblest Blood in the World. However accidental these Advantages
are, yet Heaven was not pleased they should be wanting to a Personage it had
consummated to be the Relief and Support of Christendom, and the Delight of
Mankind.

But it is his Mind, I know, of which you require a Character; and of that
though 'twill be impossible for me to do him Justice, yet I will endeavor to
inform you. He is, first, a Prince of exemplary Temperance and Sobriety, and
this not because his Body cannot bear Excesses, his robust and healthy
Constitution manifesting the contrary; but from the strong Impression the
Beauty of these Virtues had early made and still continue upon his excellent
Soul. Nor are they without their Companions, Modesty and Chastity, which few of
bulkier Title do at all regard, and these practiced to that height, that his
Court is esteemed an Academy of good Manners, and his Courtiers, by his
Example, as so many Professors of Ethics. Beside these, his benign Temper, his
readiness to forgive Injuries, his tenacious Memory of Services done, and his
incomparable Prudence, considered in opposition to the haughty Carriage, the
implacable and cruel Resentments, the horrid Ingratitude, and the dull
Unadvisedness of some of his Cotemporaries of the higher Style, render him
still a fit Subject for the Love and Well-wishes of every honest and
understanding man.

And yet, that which adds still to the luster of this fair train of Virtues,
and which seems to have the fullest possession of him, is JUSTICE, not that he
affects to be flattered with the Title of Just, as has been done by those who
least deserved it, and who never practiced it, except it were to serve some
turn, and to preamble a Trepan; or to avoid some impending danger by a specious
show of Restitution and Reparation; but he has made it the peculiar
embellishment of all the Actions of his Life. Hence it was, that upon all the
Successes with which his Arms and Conduct have been blessed, he never was puffed
up into a desire of having any addition so much as to his Title, not one City
or Town in the Netherlands can complain of any Infraction upon their
Immunities, or any Ravishing of their ancient Privileges, So that though it has
frequently been in his power to have aggrandiz'd himself, after the example of
his ill Neighbors, (some of whose cursed Parasites have yet had the impudence
to transcribe their Masters Follies of this fort into his History, as if he had
been guilty of the like) yet he always sacrificed to Justice whatsoever
Advantages his good Fortune put into his hands, and scorned to be great at the
cost his Country; which from the low State wherein he found it when he was
first set at the Head of the Commonwealth, deemed then by one of our best
Politicians to have been upon the point of irrecoverable Declension, he has
reasserted into so considerable a condition, that they seem able to redeem
themselves from a Debt of a hundred years standing to our own Nation. This
Heroical Principle it is, that has set him so high above his neighboring
Contenders for GLORY, as vile Flatterers call it, which is to be acquired by
the depopulating of Countries, stripping Cities and Communities of their Rights
and Privileges, and the enslaving and unmanning a great part of Mankind. This
Contempt of Glory (other than what is raised upon an honorable and just
Foundation) has in him ennobled the present Age with an Example for all
succeeding Potentates in the World, by observing of which, they may avoid those
Exorbitances which have made the foolish Affecters of Glory stink in Chronicle,
and instead of atchieving, forsooth, immortal Honor, have caused their Names
to be ranged only in the higher Class of Robbers and Trouble-worlds: for he,
unlike to them, seems to have made it the truly Glorious Design of his Life to
set Mankind at Liberty; and he began early, when having scarce reached Manhood,
he rescued his Country out of the Jaws of a rabid Tiger, or which is all one, a
Popish Victor, who would have introduced upon her that slavery of Body and Soul
which ever follows the successful Arms of a bigoted Idolatrous Conqueror: And,
if men's Sins hinder not, and their selves be not wanting, why may they not hope
to see this wondrous Blessing by Providence more diffusive, and not concluded
within the narrow Boundaries of Belgium. The Theban Hero, not content to have
asserted his Cradle, vindicated also the Nations round about; for beholding on
one side a Tyrant overrunning and destroying all, to that degree, that he was
fabled to feed his Horses with Man's Flesh; and on the other side the Sea, another
with like Title, Priest-ridden into the most abominable and inhuman Idolatry;
he thought 'twas the Duty of a good man, though he were not a Party concerned,
(which is sillily urged against our living Hero) to take up the Cause of
Humanity, and to pull 'em down. It succeeded well; for he soon brought 'em both
to Reason, and the grateful Pagans voted him a place among their Gods. And
indeed they argued rightly, considering their want of, Divine Light; for what
could they suppose to be liker God than he that for no advantage to himself,
conferred upon them the most valuable Good in the World, even LIBERTY.

A Branch of this Virtue of Justice he deems to be Moderation toward men of
another Religion; and by this also he has always contradistinguish'd himself
from his more dignified Brethren of the Elbow-Seat; for this he not only
professed but practiced always. Never was he known to be the undoing of a
Family, because the Father of it could not be of his Mind. No man with him is
Factious, or a Sectary, but he that troubles the Public Tranquillity. In the
Disposal of his Rewards and Favors, regard is only had to the Honestest Man.
Not but that he is well aware, that there is a Sect of Men in the World, who,
be they never so generously principled by Nature, yet-their Religion (as they
call it) obliging them to an implicit belief of and obedience to Persons of
wicked Designs, he allows them with some discrimination a share in his
Protection, but trusts them with great difficulty.

I should now tell you somewhat of his Valor; but it is of a sort, more
sublime than has yet appeared in the World, and far above my Pen. The Vigor,
the Conduct, the Greatness, and the Evenness of his Mind, the steady Menage,
the Resolution and Contempt of Danger, which are either Ingredients to it, or
complicated with it, are as inimitable as not to be described. In fine, We have
great reason to pray, That the Hand which has so exactly formed and finished
this Prince for the Support and Joy of the Universe, would protect and assist
him in bringing about those noble Designs for the Common Good which nothing
less than a Divine Spirit prompts him to. Our Friend at Soestdyhe is pretty
well again.

Hague, October. 12. St. N. I am, SIR, Yours.
I, had forgot to instance to you the Exact Discipline he observes in his Army;
but if ever you see them here or elsewhere, you will take his Officers and
Soldiers for no other than well-bred Gentlemen and honest Citizens.



Tot de Hague, gedruckt door Hans Verdraght, 1688.


