The Character OF A TRUE-PROTESTANT Ghostly Father.
HE is a Jesuit disguised, and differs in nothing but the Superscription of a
false Name. His hardened Conscience is a Mint where Equivocations and Lies are
coined and they pass among the Brotherhood as current as the most Sterling
Money, and are held by them as precious. He is a motly-complexion'd Saint;
black in his natural hue, but garnisht with some innocent additional colors,
borrowed, or rather stolen from the Church of England's Purity. He follows her,
as Judas did his Master, for the Bag's sake, and for the same Bag he will
betray her too. His speaking well of her is just like the flattery of a
Parasite, to eat her Bread, and all the while laugh at her in his sleeve.
Though none of her Sons, yet he is her most humble Servant, to creep into
Preforment, and partake of her Benefices, which he esteems his right by the
same rule that licenced the Israelates to rob the Egyptians; and when he has
once got into her Bowels he feeds upon her Vitals, and, impatient of the
restraint, gnaws his way through into the free air of the Presbyterian Liberty.
He conforms out of spite, and therefore revenges himself upon those who made
him do it. His plausible sedulity gains him some credit, which he abuses, to
disgrace those who kindly gave him it. None makes a fairer show in writing for
her publicly; and he besprinkles his Books with as little venom as he is
able, that, at a dead pinch, when some considerable job is to be done, he may
repair the seeming fault of giving her false smiles, with a real Stab. He can
patiently temporize a long time, and stand angling for an opportunity some
years, hoping at length to catch her by the gills, and then to prey upon her
without mercy. While his bolder Fellow-Journey-men in their scribbles call her
Popish, he slily jumbles her with Presbytery, resting well assured that is the
most effectual Stratagem, to divide and destroy her: and while he pretends to
establish her REFORMATION, he indeed pulls it down, by settling it on a sandy
basis.

His hatred to the Church descends upon the State, which upholds it; and he
owes a good turn to both alike. He will endeavor, though it cost him the
opinion of Treacherous, to bring the most Loyal Patriot, even his own Master,
to the Block, if he presume to touch that Holy of Holies, the Kirk. He is a
Scotch Sinon; for all his designs, like the Trojan Wooden Horse, are
pretendedly Sacred, and mere Relics of Religion; but when the season is ripe,
they are delivered of whole Armies at a litter. He is still siding with the
factious, not openly, but sheakingly; thrusting his Nose into every nook, and
busily prying into all men's affairs; and he will have to do with a sick or
dying man's Interior, whether he will or no, and thinks it is then set right
when it is tuned to the interest of the Good Old Cause. It Is to be feared his
inside is True-blue Cargil; and that he dislikes nothing in his Spirit but that
which is best in it, the candor and openness; nor that neither but when there
wants force to carry it through. However, though he be not bold enough to act
Treason, yet he is crafty enough dexterously to second and uph^ld it by shams
and palliations. When he once gets an Ascendant over a Soul, he influences it
as best suits with the Holy League, and scruples not if she cancels the
Government of Grace to seal a compact with the Presbyterian Association. He has
his set-forms of words fitted to wrest all Christian Duties to Disallegiance
and Irreligion. He calls the Discovering Fellow-Traytors, the betraying of
Friends; their Just and Legal Punishment, the shedding of Blood; the most
villainous Murders and Massacres for the Cause, well-meant Zeal; the most
abominable Conspirators, the forlorn hope of Israel, and Heroic Adventurers
for the Godly Party.

Thus seasoned and confirmed in the principles they had formerly imbibed, it is
no wonder if they judge it meritorious to dye half Negative: this being the
only expedient (open force failing) to preserve undiscovered Traitors, to
exasperate the Mobile, by making Justice look like Cruelty, to disgrace the
King as a Tyrant, and so carry on the Conspiracy more smartly and effectually.
His little Popeship gives an easy Absolution to all his Penitents, not by
public Bulls, but whispered Inspirations; which instilled with great
assurances of Merit in the canting language, and misused Scripture-phrases
which they have been inured to, makes deep impressions in those otherwise
comfortless Souls, that they dye Martyrs, and that they offer a holy Sacrifice
of their Bodies to God; when alas! (without a special mercy) he is sacrificing
their Souls to the Devil, the Ringleader of all Rebels. To the Oath of
Allegiance he opposes the Covenant and Association; To the High Crime of
arraigning the Justice of the Nation, the keeping up the repute of the Party's.
Innocence, and the revenging their death, which it is hoped may ensue from such
seditious methods. To the giving Glory to God, by a full and sincere
Confession, the false satisfaction that they suffer what the Law enjoins, and
that no more can be required. If the Penitent be of a noble temper, then he
works upon that, and plies him with how mean, and how far from Honor and
Gallantry it is to betray others: As if God loved people better for being civil
Gentlemen than for being sincere Christians: at least, if he finds him inclined
to that false punctilio, he can quickly find a Case to wave all objections,
which might hazard to rectify that bias. By ^his means Repentance comes to
signify little more than a true sorrow to be hanged, and a submission to the
Laws, which they must do whether they will or no. What is more is rendered
insignificant, by being mingled with concealments, and couching particular acts
of Treason under common Words; or, as Adam blamed Eve, she the Serpent, with
laying the fault on others for drawing them in and ensnaring them. By virtue of
which doctrine, and such managery of dying persons, the King, who is a mirror
of Mercy, is made Cruel, the Judges unjust, the Jury foresworn and partial, the
worst of Traitors innocent, their Memory sacred, their Fame untainted, the
unthinking Rabble is exasperated and encouraged, the Nation distracted, Jack
Presbyter is mounted in his Saddle, riding the many-headed Beast, Sedition
becomes culminant, the Good Old Cause triumphant, Treason glorified both here
and in Heaven, the Nations Peace and the established Government of Church and
State, nay, his Majesty's most precious Life still left in danger; and all this
by the most pernicious craft of our Lycaon in Sheeps clothing, that Legion of
mischievous Spirits which herd in the Breast of our True-Protestant Ghostly
Father.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Wait. 1683.


