THE CHARACTER OF AN Irishman: OR, A DEAR-JOY Painted to the Life.
SINCE the Arrival of the Teague-Land Troops, in this Protestant Kingdom, who
can admire at the surprise and consternation of our English Nation, when they
look upon it to be as bad as a New Massacre, and much more Formidable than a
DVTCH-Invasion? But, if this be the Effect of our Fears, Where Is our Fortitude?
Where Is our True English Courage? Where Is our Ancient Grandeur? Can it be
consistent with the Temper of a true Englishman, whose Name has been a Terror
to all Nations, to fear a Neighboring Subject? Is it not a Diminution of that
Ancient Glory that once kept all the Universe in awe? England feared no
Incursions then, but made them. Our Warlike Kings, like Julius Caesar, came
and saw, and whereso-e're they came did Overcome: And shall we stand in dread
of such a Morsel, as would hardly serve the Bull-and-Mouth for a Breakfast,
before a long-winded Meeting? If they be Strangers, we ought to treat them with
Civility: If they be Fellow Subjects, we ought to Embrace them: If they come to
our Assistance, we ought to Encourage them.

But you will Reply, They are a pack of Irish-Wolves, Tories, Cutthroats,
Papists, what not, come over to Devour us.

I Answer, If they be Wolves, you have Dogs enough to Worry them, at a cheaper
Rate than Cromwell did those in Ireland. If they be Tories, we have yet Whiggs
enough remaining of the old Stamp to match their Cocks. For Cutthroats, (thank
the Fates) some can Sleep quietly all Night, and when they Wake, find their
Throats Cut in the Morning, without the help of an Irish-Skein. And for
Papists, you have a Thousand to One.

Where then is the cause of our Fears and Jealousies? It is a groundless
Suspicion; and I will undertake to prove, by Invincible Arguments, that an
Irishman, and Subject of the King of England, is no such Monster as you would
render Him.

First, They are Christians as well as We, the same Hopes, the same Fears, and
same Apprehensions of a Future Being. If we differ in Principles, they have yet
as much Honor and Honesty, Allegiance and Loyalty, Religion and Conscience,
perhaps more than those that suspect their Fidelity.

They are Subjects of the same Prince; subject to the same Laws and
Punishments; Ought we not then to Love our Fellow Subjects? What though we
Arrogate to our selves the upper-hand in Fellowship? Must we therefore utterly
despise these Gentlemen? It Is unnatural to take the Sword in the Right Hand to
cut off the Left: We are all Members of the same Head.

They are Civilized as much as We; a Nation of as much Humanity, Temperance,
and Sobriety: But you will say, They want Sense, They want Courage; It is a
Mercy, if they want them not more themselves, who tax Them with the want of
Either: For their Courage, show me a Hector of Holbourn, that can Bully them;
and for their want of Wit, (for all your Bog-Witticisms, wherewith you upbraid
them) produce the Sharper that can ^ite them. If Diamond only can cut Diamond,
it is odds but the Irishman has the better of the Lay: And for their Behavior,
instance so many? Men of any Nation, under the same Circumstance, that e're
carried themselves with more Decorum, Obligingness, and Respect than they have
done, in their Quarters or elsewhere, since their Arrival: Their Officers being
generally. Gentlemen of Education, Conduct, and Experience.

I will not deny, but amongst so many Thousands, there may be some
Extravagancies committed; but shall we lay it as a Crime to a whole Nation? It
is a small Corporation, that has neither Rogue nor Thief within it; and that
London has both, you need go no further than the Old Bailey, to be convinced: It
is uncharitable to condemn a whole Nation, for the particular Offenses of a few.

Nor will you find the least cause of any such danger from the Irish; there
being amongst them several English Gentlemen Officers, which are Protestants,
yet live amicably with their Superior Commanders, and the Soldiers quietly
under them: Besides, the English which are this day in Ireland, (where the
Natives are more numerous) enjoy their Estates and Possessions, without the
least disturbance or molestation.

How unreasonable is it then, to suspect an Irish-Invasion in England, by a few
Regiments, when our vast Armies in Ireland could hardly reduce them in so many
Centuries?

Let us then no more fear them as Enemies, but embrace them as Friends; and
since they are only come over for the Defense of the King and Country, upbraid
them no more with the Opprobrious Titles of Rogues, Tories, and Rebels; but
call them (what they more properly deserve) The Guardian Angels of the Court,
The Lifeguard of the City, The Safeguard of the Nation.

FINIS.
Printed in the Year 1689.


