THE CHARACTER OF A SOLICITER. Or the Tricks and Quillets of a Pettyfogger.

With his manifold Knaveries, Cheats, Extortions, and other Villainies.

LONDON, Printed for K.C.I.F. 1675.

THE Character OF A SOLICITER.
A Soliciter is a Pet^yfogging Sophister: one, whom by the same Figure that a
North-Country Peddler is a Merchant-man, you may style a Lawyer. List him an
Attorney, and you smother Tom. I humb in a pudding. The very name of a
Strivener outreaches him, and he is swallowed up in the praise, like Sir
Hudibras in a great saddle, nothing to be seen but the giddy Feathers in his
Crown.

Some say he is a Gentleman, but he becomes the Epithet as a Swines snout does a
Carbuncle; he is just such another Dunghil-Rampant. The silly Countryman (who
seeing an Ape in a Scar^^t Coat, blessed his young Worship, and gave his Lordship
joy) did not slander his Complement with worse application, than he th^^ names
him a Lawgiver. The Cook that served up a Rope in a Pie, (to continue the
Frolic) might have wrapped up such a Pettyfogger as this in his bill of Fare.

He is a Will-with-a-Wisp, a Wit whither thou woo't; Proteus has not more
shapes, than he can perform Offices; he can instruct with the Counselor,
Plead as an Attorney, he has all the tricks and quillets of an Informer, nay,
and a Bum too for a need: in a word, he is a Jack of all Trades, and his
shattered brain, like a cracked Looking-glass, represents a thousand fancies. He
calls himself Esquire of the Quill; but to see how he tugs at his pen, and
belaboureth his half amazed Clyents with a Cudgel of cramp words, it would make
a Dog break his Halter.

This juggling Skip Jack, having lately been put to his last shift; has
metamorphosed a Needle into a Goose-Feather, and the sole of an old shoe, into
a sheet of Paper, for the best of his profession have been forlorn Tailors,
outcast Brokers, drunken Cobblers, or the offsprings of such like Rabble-rout.

He huggs the Papers, as the Devil hugged the Witch; for they are an
advancement of his Science, these frisk about him like a swarm of Bees; yet he
is a Man of vast practice if he has but half a score of 'um. If his lousy
Clyent chance to recover an old Rotten Barn, or a Weather-beaten Cottage, he
will be sure to have two third parts for a quantum mervit.

He is Lord Paramount among the shifting Bailiffs, and a sworn brother to the
Marshals-men, and is behind none of them at the extortive faculty, having the
confidence to demand, Item, for his pains and labor, when all the while he
does nothing but hover over a Quart-pot. He is as offensive to the Attorneys,
as Flies are to a gal'd Horse, and whereas their ne plus ultra is ten groats,
Mr. Soliciter forfooth, claims double Fees with Authority; and if the Clyent
prove so saucy to deny it, he will rage like Tom of bedlam, but if that will
not prevail, he will cast a squeezing look, like that of Vespatian, as if he were
breeding over a Closestool.

He is a kind of Cormorant, that fishes for others, but feeds himself; the
misery is, he fishes without the Cormorants property, a Rope to strengthen the
Gullet, and make him disgorge. I care not much if I untwist my pettyfogging
Gentleman, and give him the Receipt of this grand Catholicon.

Take a notorious Vagabond, one that for his good behavior has paid the
excise of his Ears, and so fled his Country like a Runnagado Jew; next the
spurious Relic of a Mountebank, trained up in Bartholomew-Fair; add to these
a mortified Bankrupt, and one that has scarce learnt his Abcedary: These with
one that had a small Knock in the Cradle, and been fed with the Excrements of
the Man in the Moon, together with the by-blow of some santastical Poetaster,
who has had some in-sight in a Scotch sieve full of ballads and merry beuks.
These are the simples of this weedy compound (a kind of vafrous Hotch potch) a
petty-fogging Soliciter.

In the Society of true and genuine Lawyers, he is like an Owl among so many
Lapwings, and is no more fit to converse with them, then a Hog-herd is to
preach a Sermon, or a Cinder vvench to wait upon a Countess.

Never did the Fox play the Craft with the Geese, as this alamode upstart gulls
the Country bumpkins: so that the insinuated boobies have no more Wit than to
prog his guts with Turkies, Geese, pullets, Chines of bacon, et caetera, as if
he were to be fatted for a beelzebian sacrifice, whilst their wives and
children lead the lives of half starved pythagoreans. But this is not all; this
Stygian Crocodile with his Iron Lungs, and brazen Face dares usurp the Office
of Attorney-ship (as I hinted before) and no sooner hears of a puny Lad that is
carved out for a Clerious, but strait he yelps and yawns till he has him in his
Clutches, and for a small sum of Money got at the Plough tail, will undertake
to make him a Barrister, though he can scarce read his Paternoster He is so
expert at co^xing Magic, that he has a sp^ll for every degree and Quality, he
complements Gentility, he flatters. Nobility, and strews a whole sackfull of
spungy Rhetoric among the vulgar; the one hugs him, the other plays at Noddy,
and a third sort admires him, and well they may, since he has not his equal in
the whole Goaldom of Ludgate.

This very name deciphers his practice, solus citat, he alone is able to set a
Town by the Ears, and that is a trick of the Devil, but no body doubts him to
be of the cloven-hearted tribe, whom Old Nick has stigmat^zed with his tripple
claw; nor do ^^e doubt his Commission to play his Pranks at random while he is
hate on Earth, for as soon as my Lady Atropos cries Exit, away he must hie to
his snake-hair'd Grandam Meg^^rn, and needs (...) go, since the Devil drive him.

He writes a Bill of cost in such worm eaten characters, that it is past the
skill of a Rosie-crucian to discover the Apo^aliptical meaning; yet for all
that, he will not abate you an ace of the sun^ma totalis, and that to be sure
shall be plain enough^ wherefore he may very fitly be cailed the Inquisition of
the Purse^ or (in a plainer sense) an Anthentick Gypsi^, thet nips your bung
with a canting Engine: and more then that he scorns to cheat you in
hugger-^ugger, but will not fail to do it before your Face: He is like the Man
that tried any tooth good Barber, rather then stand out for a Wrangler, if he
can pump no chink out of you, he will manage your cause for a breakfast, being
a notable Artist at spunging; Oh! he is a terrible slaughter man at a
Thanksgiving Dinner.

He out-dives a Bailiff in all his cheating faculties, and I know none
out-strips him, except his Infernal Grandfather.

In fine, he is the Yeomans Horsleech, the Gentleman's Rubbingbrush, and the
Courtiers quid pro quo. He is the summum bonu^: of Knavery, in Judgment a mere
Pigmy, in show the Beard of a Demi-blazing-star: to be brief, he is like a Lamp
without Oil, a Trumpet without a sound, a smoke without Fire, a Fiddle out of
tune, or a bell without a clapper; and differs from a Lawyer as a shrimp does
from a Lebster, a Frog from an Eleph^nt, or a (...) from an Eagle.

But once more to single out my Quacking cause-splitter, his Fate (for I know
you would fain see an end of him) is either a whipping Andit, when he is
tongue-tyed by a Learned thong of severe Examinations: or else he meets his
passing-peal in a clamorous mutiny of Tyburnian spectators, or (if he pass
muster with ^hese) his assured Destiny being dead, is to be kicked up and down
^ke a Football to keep the Devils in action.

FINIS.

