THE CHARACTER OF AN Ignoramus DOCTOR.
AN Ignoramus Doctor is a certain Duncical Dolt, who is as much a Doctor, as
Osborn's ragged Colt was a Sturgeon. Hang him out, and he may indeed serve for
the Sign of one, but has really no more Right to the Habit, than an Algerine to
wear Christian Colors: Let Us strip therefore his Gown over his Ears, and
'twill quickly appear, what a Monstrous REPRESENTATIVE Beast he is. To begin
then with his Noddle; as Dull and Blockish it is as the Beetle's. In his Brazen
Forehead is writ ABOMINATION. His Fyes are Murdering as the Basilisk's; though
Blindish too as the Batt's. With his Screech-Owl's Voice, he bodes Death and
Destruction. His Tongue, like the Serpent's, is Forked and Double. His Mouth,
with that of the Revelation-Beast, speaks Lies and Blasphemies, and out of it
issues Wildfire, in which (though others are consumed) the Salamander-Fiend
himself, subsists. His Throat is an open Sepulcher, and no Camel was ever so
big as to choke him. Like the Fabulous Minotaur, he really lives upon Humane
Entrails, and is fed with the Quarters of Sacrificed Men, and glutted with
their Blood, the Unchristen'd Canibal looks Flush and Ruddy. No Morsel is so
Hard and Bloody, but his Ostrich-Stomack can digest it: but to sweeten the
Stench of his Carrion-breath, the Savage for Dessert chews Tobacco, and that,
'till it runs out of his Chaps again like Juice of Toad. With the Egyptian
Frogs and Lice, he infests the Royal Palace, creeps into the King's Chambers,
and like the Locust and Caterpillar devours his Bread; with which being
Farting-full, the Harpy defiles and squirts upon the very Table that feeds him,
and as the starving Snake revived, thrusts out his Sting at all that ever
relieved him. Yet the Slave, when Hungry, is, as the Dog, I awning and
Couchant: When in the least Danger, Timorous, as the Rat; but guarded by his
Whifflers the Rabble, as Bold as the Polecat. Lo! some of the Ingredients that
go to the Compounding of this Non-such-Sham-Doctor, this Hotch-pot of an
Animal, which considered asunder are not only the Worst that can be, but in Him
the Worst put together: for Review him as he is an Individuum, you will find
him the Only One of a strange Species never heard of before, for certainly
nothing that ever yet breathed is like him.

The Monster was begot (as some will have it) by the Giant Typhon, in the shape
of a Broken Tub-preaching Weaver, upon the Body of the foul Viper Echidna;
though, others say, he sprung out of a Dunghill, of which in truth, he is the
very Purging and Offscouring. From the very time he could crawl, he lived
always on Wash, Greazie Trenchers, and Arse-guts; still Needy, Naked, and
Noisome, as when he dropped from his Dam Unlick'd, and with all his Original
Filth about him. His Breeding is as obscure as his Birth, though we find that
when he came to the Age of 30 he went to School; to get (as some thought) a
little smattering in Latin, though really it was a Pretense to beg Bread. Nor
was it long before the Younger Fry smelt him out, so that every little
^op-o'-my-Thumb made him a May Game: Some would kick him, some grub, and tweak
him by the Beard; others would fillip at his Nose; and every one had a fling at
him, 'till finding him still the same Idle Troublesome Drone. they by common
consent quickly chased him away for altogether. But wherever he went, he was
still the Vomit and Nuisance of the Place, nay the Grievance of the very
Scavengers themselves: In his own Defense therefore, was always forced to be a
Runagate and Vagabond. Beggary and Hunger still pursuing him, Satan at last, by
the Temptation of Fatness and Plenty, entered into him; and from that time, the
Starvling made himself over, and contracted to become the First Son of Belial,
the Sans-pareil Swearer, Hell's Narrative-Hawker, and the Devil's
Affidavit-Drudge: In consideration of which, he was promised three or four
Dishes a Meal; that he should (like Dr. Faustus) fly over the World, Unseen;
and converse Invisibly with Grandees at Rome, Paris, Madrid, Salamanca, and
most of the chief Cities upon Earth, nay should be in several places at one
time; That he should have the pleasure of frighting Thousands out of their
Wits, with Armies in the Air, and under Ground, and by Swearing, to make 'em
believe what he pleased; That Tom Thumb slew the two Giants Amarant and
Colbron, and that the seven Champions Armed with Black-Bills and Mustard-Balls,
were Listed to invade Property, and set up Popery; nay, and that in his own
Favor, he should make Black be called White; Nonsense, Sense; Lies, Truth;
Sawciness, Good-Manners; and Buggery, Chastity. That in all these his
Adventures, he should have the Assistance of his Familiars, Lucifer, Beelzebub,
and Ashteroth; and that, whatever mischief he did, he should, like ^ain, have a
Mark on him, (for a time at least) that no body should have power to kill him.

All this the Caitiff has, in some measure, seen fulfilled; and being in a kind
of Ecstasy, by the seeming good luck of his Foolhardy Villainies, he blunders
on, seems to pass away his Time well enough, Eats and Drinks like a Swine; has
two or three Catch-Pole like Porkers to attend him, whose Posteriors he often
taw's, or (as Mother Creswel terms it) Hogg's; and when he has raised his own
Beastly Concupiscence, Tilts at 'em with his Nasty Clyster-Pipe. He puts the
thoughts of his last Execution-day far from him; yet at present, LIES, Swears,
and Blasphemes, as if he were already plunged in his Infernal Flames. SO HELP
ME GOD, is the only Prayer he has power to make; nor that neither, but when he
rams down a Lie with a Deadly Oath, which is his new Whiggish Phrase, and
Equivalent to GOD DAMME, in earnest: And in truth the Wretch is but just
qualified to receive the Damnation, he seems predestined himself to pray for;
having no more Rationality, than serves to put him out of the Rank of down
right Brutes; and that only, that he might not be so Happy as the Beast that
perishes.

Behold! the Engine-Idol which the Mobile once admired, as the Egyptians did
Stinking Garlic, Dogs, and Crocodiles! The Will-o'th'-Wisp, who with False
Fires led them into Quagmites and Ditches! Who with his Hurrican Contradictory
Breath turned all things, as 'twere, Topsy-turvy, to a Miracle! for being in
Himself an Object too vile for the Dogs to piss upon, every Effect, of which he
seems the Instrument, is really a Miracle; and shows how poor a Tool Providence
can work with, nay, is enough to convince an Unbeliever, that a whole World may
be made out of Nothing. But the Changling all this while, (though less than the
pitiful Fly on the Cart-wheel) fancies he makes all the Rumbling, and like the
Cracked brain Groom, conceits himself an Emperor. And so Pampered and Ireakish
is he grown, that now he will neither lead nor drive, but kicks and flings at
the very Jockeys who first rid him, and having broke his Halter, hurries on in
his own Broad-way; But being come almost to his Journeys end, let him take his
Swing, and so we bid him Adieu; for like a true Bromigham Beggar on Horseback,
he is really posting Tantivy to the Devil.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed by M.T. 1681.


