JOHANNES CHARDIN MILES.
portrait of John Chardin Natus 6/16 novembris, 1643.



TRAVELS OF SR JOHN CHARDIN INTO PERSIA AND YE EAST INDIES. Through the
BLACK-SEA And the Country of COLCHIS.

LONDON Printed for Moses Pit in Duke street Westminster. 1686.



THE TRAVELS OF Sir John Chardin INTO Persia and the East Indies.

The First Volume, Containing the Author's Voyage from Paris to Ispahan.

To which is added, The Coronation of this Present KING of Persia, SOLOMON the
Third.



LONDON: Printed for Moses Pit in Duke-Street Westminster. 1686.

At the Court at Whitehal, March 23. 1685/6.
Let this BOOK be Printed.

SVNDERLAND P. * NEMO ^ ME ^ IMPUNE ^ LACESSIT

royal blazon or coat of arms


To the KING.
SIR,
I Presume to Present to Your Royal View the First Volume of my Second Voyage
into Asia; not so much to give it Credit by so Ambitious a Dedication, as to
acquit my Self of an Indispensable Obligation upon me to Offer to Your Majesty
the First Fruits of a Work, whereof the Publication is a Debt solely due to
Your Majesty from me.

I can sincerely affirm to Your Majesty, That it is the Product of Your Royal
Grace and Goodness to me; and that the chief Motive I had to undertake it, was,
Because I perceived it to be a Subject well-pleasing to Your Majesty, being
Composed under the Shadow of that August Throne which Your Majesty does so
Gloriously replenish: Nor had I taken so much time from the Necessary
Occupations of my Life, to propose it for the Press, but out of an earnest
desire to publish to the World the Resentments of my Heart, for the many
Favors I have received from Your Majesty, and my Admiration of Your Majesty's
Heroic and Transcendent Virtue.

From the time that the Bounty of Heaven had blessed me in the happy Choice I
made of establishing my self in this Land of Promise, quietly to enjoy in it
the desirable Fruits of my long Travels, I was always Graciously received by the
late King of ever blessed Memory who as a Mark of His Esteem was pleased to
Honor me with a Character of Dignity. And the Nobility, who of themselves are
so Affable and Generous, were not wanting in their Civilities to me, to imitate
so admirable a Pattern of all Illustrious Virtues.

The most Celebrated Societies in Your Majesty's Kingdom, have done me the
Honor to admit me into their Bodies; and I was by Sovereign Authority employed
in a most Important Negotiation with the Neighbor-State: But though I received
so many great Effects of His Majesty's Bounty to me, I am in Duty bound for
many Reasons to apply the Acknowledgment thereof to Your Sacred Majesty, which
may be comprehended in that perfect Union which Your Majesty had with that
Great and Good King, in participating with him not only in the most Important
Affairs of his happy Reign, but even in the least and meanest of his Cares,
whereby Your Majesty has a just Title to share in all the Gracious Acts of his
Royal Beneficence.

The particular and immediate Testimonies of Favor which Your Majesty (of Your
own Personal Goodness) has extended to me, are too numerous to be related; and
I am defective in words to describe the Gratitude wherewith my Heart is
possessed in the sense of them: Wherefore in this my Incapacity to express my
Resentments of Your Majesty's Benefits to me, I am less able to Delineate those
Heroic Qualities which all Europe admire in Your Majesty's Sacred Person, and
which enable Your Majesty with so much Renown to sustain that Glorious Crown
which is derived to Your Majesty from Your Mighty Ancestors.

I have had the Honor to approach Kings, which pass abroad for the Mightiest
Monarchs in the World; but none of those Magnificent Images of Divinity, are
equal to Your Majesty in the Divine Resemblances of Affability, Courtesy,
Vigilance, Knowledge and Constancy. None of them ever brought such Consummate
Experience to the Government of a great and mighty Empire, or was ever
possessed with so much Justice and Fortitude to uphold or augment it: None of
them have ever joined to the Science of Commanding on Land, such vast and
exquisite Knowledge in Maritime Affairs as well for War, as the Art and
Improvement of Navigation.

I might advance farther in this Parallel, where Your Majesty has so much the
advantage, if I did not find my Eyes dazzled, when I attempt to fix them upon
Your Majesty.

I have indeed taken the Liberty in the Volumes which are to succeed this, (and
perhaps not been altogether unhappy therein) to give the Characters of the most
famous Monarchs of the East: But though my Zeal for Your Majesty's Glory is
very great, I find my Force at present too weak to express that of Your
Majesty's, in so illustrious a manner as the Merit of the Subject requires.
However, I may endeavor hereafter to attempt it; and in the mean time I shall
continue my Prayers to Almighty GOD, That Your Majesty's Reign may be Long and
Prosperous; and that Your Throne may be always an Inviolable Refuge and
Sanctuary to the Oppressed, and Your Scepter as Immovable in the Hearts of
Your Subjects, as in Your Triumphant Hands; and that in the End for an
Accumulation of Glory, Your Majesty may secure and preserve an Accumulation of
Felicity to Your People.

These are the Addresses which shall be Assiduously made at the Throne of Grace
for Your Sacred Majesty, by,

May it please Your Majesty, Your Majesty's most Humble, most Obedient, and
most Faithful Subject and Servant, JOHN CHARDIN.

THE PREFACE.


THis is the First Part of my Relations of Persia, which I have divided into
Four Volumes, whereof the First (which is this I now Publish) contains that
part of the Journal of my Voyage from Paris to Ispahan, which ends in the Month
of June in the Year 1673. I think it Needless in this place to Anticipate the
Readers Expectation with Reciting any of the Particulars of it, because the
whole is Delivered at large in the ensuing Treatise.

The Second Part (which is the rest of my Journal of the Year 1673) contains a
General Description of the Empire of Persia and its Force, together with the
Laws, Governments, Manners and Customs of the Persians, of their Arts and
Sciences, and their Civil and Mechanical Industry, with a particular
Description of Ispahan, (which is at this time the Capital City of that vast
Empire) and Five and Thirty or Forty Cuts Engraven in Copper, of the fairest
and most Remarkable Buildings therein, or other Eminent Particularities thereof.

The Third Part (which is my Journal of the Year 1674) contains (amongst other
things) the Ruins of Persepolis, represented in Twenty Two Copper Plates, as
also an Exact, and Ample Description of them, with Observations Interwoven of
the less Intelligible Parts of those Ruins, (which are the most Glorious
Monuments and Noblest Remains of Antiquity Extant) together with a Relation of
the Religion of the Persians, collected as well from their Public Worship, as
their Writings, whereof there are many Copious Traductions.

The Fourth and last Part (which consists of my Journal of the Year 1675. and
the two succeeding Years) concludes with a Piece wholly new and unknown to Us
in Europe, which is an Abridgement of the History of Persia, Extracted from
their own Writings.

And thus having informed the Reader of the Subject of my Memorials, I shall
mention something of the time, and means which I employed to collect them.

I Traveled by Land to the East Indies, in the Year 1665, and arrived in Persia
at the beginning of the Year 1666. where I stayed all that Year, and a good
part of the next.

I came back to Persia from India in the Year 1669. where I remained Six Months
before my return to Europe. This was my first Voyage. And though I then
provided my self of Observations, and all sorts of Materials for a Relation of
it, in as great a Degree or perhaps greater than those that have visited those
Countries before me (having Learned many things from the Turkish and Persian
Languages, which have not been observed by any that have hitherto Writ of
Persia,) yet I did not then think my self sufficiently instructed for the
Publication of so complete a Work, as I intended. But in the mean time I
entertained the World with a little Treatise of the Coronation of Soliman,
which consisted of some few Curious matters of Fact, whereof I was an
Eyewitness. And the earnest desire I had to improve my knowledge in that vast
Empire of Persia, to be enabled to produce to the World useful and Ample
Relations of it, induced me to undertake a Second Voyage thither, which I did
in the Year 1671. (as the same will appear in this Journal,) I stayed there
until the Year 1677, chiefly following the Court in its Removals, but likewise
I made some particular Journeys, as well of Curiosity as Business, to prosecute
my intentions, studying the Language, and assiduously frequenting the most
eminent and most knowing Men of the Nation, the better to inform my self in all
things that were Curious and New to us in Europe, concerning a Country that may
well be called, Another World, both in respect of the Distance of place it has
from us; and the different Manners and Maxims of it. In a Word I was so
solicitous to know Persia, that I knew Ispahan better than Paris (though I was
Bred and Born there.)

The Persian Language was as easy to me as French, and I could currently Read
and Write it, I had often Traveled, through the whole Country in the Length
and Breadth thereof, and seen its Seas (both the Caspian and the Ocean) from
one end to the other; I have visited its Frontiers in Armenia, Iberia and
Media, and Arabia also, as far as the River Indus, and have been so exactly
informed of those few Places where I have not been, that I am confident I could
know them (if I may so say) upon any sudden Transportation thither; which I say
only to let the Reader see what Ground he may have to rely upon the Truth of
the following Relations.

As for this Translation, I shall not say much of the Expressions and Phrase
used in it, being no competent Judge thereof, but I can aver that it was done
under my Inspection, and I have reviewed it with Attention, and Knowledge
enough to affirm, that it is exactly my Sense, but I must not omit to mention,
that in my Revision of it, there was scarce a Leaf where I did not discover
some considerable Fault, as a Parenthesis, Line or Word omitted, and sometimes
my Thoughts imperfectly rendered, (though the substituted Sense was neither
Incongruous nor Perplexed.) In brief, I have Corrected many Mistakes of this
sort, which could not be Perceptible to any but an Author, who carries the
Sense of his Work, Word by Word in his Head.

As for Example, in describing the Cultivation of the Vineyards of Colchide, I
said, On taille la vigne tous les quatre Anns une fois.
That they cut their Vines there, once in every four Years; and my Translator
had expressed it, As if I had said, On taille la vigne quatre fois en un An.
That they cut their Vines four times every Year. One cannot say that this
proceeded from a defect of Sense, or want of Understanding the French Tongue,
for he knows it well, and is otherways a Man of Letters, and has quickness of
Thought, and is very able for such Works; but Mistakes are inevitable in long
Translations: And as I believe that this of my Book is nearer the Original than
any Version that I have seen of other Voyages, so I am convinced that there are
no Translations wherein many Errors may not be found against the Sense of the
Authors.

The Copper Plates are done by different Gravers, which will not happen in the
others of my Volumes, where all of them will be Engraven by that Hand which has
done the Draught of Tauris, and Nine or Ten other Figures.

I have Written nothing of the Indies, because I lived but five Years there,
and understood only the Vulgar Languages, which are the Indian and Persian,
without the Knowledge of that of the Brachmans, which is the proper and
necessary Organ to arrive at the Knowledge of the Wisdom and Antiquity of the
Indians: but nevertheless I did not altogether waste my Time there in Idleness:
On the contrary, as the Winters in that Country will not permit One to Travel,
I employed that time in a Work which I had long in my Thoughts, and which I may
call, My Favorite Design, by the Pleasure wherewith I labored in it, and the
Profit which I hope the Public will receive thereby; which is certain Notes
upon very many Passages of the Holy Scriptures, whereof the Explication depends
on the Knowledge of the Customs of the Eastern Countries, for the East is the
Scene of all the Historical Facts mentioned in the Bible. The Language of that
Divine Book, (especially of the Old Testament) being Oriental, and very often
Figurative, and Hyperbolical, those Parts of the Scripture which are Written in
Verse, and in the Prophecies, are full of Figures and Hyperboles, which, as it
is manifest, cannot be well understood without a Knowledge of the Things from
whence such Figures are taken, which are Natural Proprieties, and Particular
Manners of the Countries to which they refer; I discerned this in my first
Voyage to the Indies: For I gradually found a greater Sense and Beauty in
diverse Passages of the Scriptures than I had before, by having in my view the
Things either Natural or Moral, which explained them to me, and in perusing the
different Translations, which the greatest part of the Translators of the Bible
had made, I observed that every one of them (to render their Expositions (as
they thought) more intelligible) used such Expressions as would accommodate the
Phrase to the Places where they Writ; which did not only many times pervert the
Text, but often rendered the Sense obscure, and sometimes absurd also. In fine,
consulting the Commentators upon such kind of Passages, I found very strange
Mistakes in them, and that they all along guessed at the Sense, and did but
grope (as in the Dark) in the search of it. And from these Reflections, I took
a Resolution to make my Remarks upon many Passages of the Scripture; persuading
my self that they would be equally Agreeable and Profitable for use. And the
Learned, to whom I Communicated my Design, Encouraged me very much (by their
Commendations) to proceed in it: And more especially when I informed them, That
it is not in Asia as in our Europe, where there are frequent Changes more or
less, in the Forms of Things, as the Habits, Buildings, Gardenings, and the
like. In the East they are constant in all Things; The Habits are at this Day
in the same Manner, as in the Precedent Ages; So that one may reasonably
believe, That in that part of the World, the Exterior Forms of Things (as
their Manners and Customs) are the same now, as they were Two Thousand Years
since, except in such Changes as may have been Introduced by Religion, which
are nevertheless very Inconsiderable.

These Notes upon the Bible will be the last Things which I shall expose to the
Public, unless I shall understand that they are desired sooner: In which case
I may Publish by Advance, those I have made upon the Book of Genesis for a
Taste of the rest. And the same desire which I have to Gratify the World, and
particularly the English Nation, to which I have so many Obligations, will
induce me to Publish the Third or Fourth Part of my Relations before the
Second, if I shall find that they are desired and expected before it.

The Bookseller was desirous to add to this Volume the Piece which is to be
seen at the End of it, which contains, A Relation of the Solemn Coronation of
the Present King of Persia; whereof I was an Eyewitness my self about Twenty
Years ago, and which I caused to be Printed at Paris Five Years after, at my
First Return from my Travels. And though I cannot but say that the Narrative is
Faithful and Exact, yet I must confess that it is too Diffuse, and often
Interwoven with such small Incidents, as I would have omitted, could the
Bookseller have been prevailed with to wait the Publishing of it till after
That of my Second Journey.

PONTI EUXINI CUM REGIONIBUS VERSUS SEPTENTRIONEM ET ORIENTEM ADJACENTIBUS NOVA
TABULA an:1672. A JOAN: CHARDIN MIL:AD LOCA INSTITUTA.
map of Black Sea area

THE TRAVELS OF Sir John Chardin INTO PERSIA, Through the Black-Sea, and the
Country of Colchis.


I Departed from Paris, with an Intention to return to the East Indies, the
Seventeenth of August 1671, just Fifteen Months after I came from thence. I
undertook this tedious Journey a second time, as well to perfect my self in the
Knowledge of the Languages, the Customs, the Religions, the Trades and
Sciences, the Commerce and History of the Oriental People as to endeavor the
Advancement of my Fortunes and Estate.

I found at my Return into France, that the Religion wherein I had been
Educated made me incapable of all sorts of Employment; and that it was
requisite for me either to change it, or altogether to renounce whatever is
called Honor and Preferment. Both the one and the other seemed to me to be
somewhat severe: for we are not at liberty to believe what we please. Thereupon
I presently bethought my self of returning to the Indies, where, without
altering my Religion, or abandoning the Condition of a Merchant, I could not
fail to gratify a moderate Ambition: for Trade is there an Employment so
considerable, that even Sovereign Princes publicly follow it.

The deceased King of Persia made me his own Merchant, by his Letters Patents
in the year 1666. and gave me in charge to order the making of several Jewels
of a great value, of which his Majesty designed the Models with his own Hands.
Madam Lescot, a Lady much more famous for her Wit, and her adventurous Boldness
in Undertaking, then for her Wealthy Gettings, joined with my deceased Father
to encourage me to go on with my Commission, and both promised to go Halves
with me. Monsieur Raisin of Lions, a Person of very good Repute, and my
Companion in my former Travels, embarkt himself once more in this sort of
Trade; and though we differed in our Religion, yet for all that we lived
Peaceably and in Unity together. For Christians learn in the East, to be at
Peace, and keep a good Correspondence one with another, notwithstanding their
disagreement in Opinions. There are a thousand Sects, but there are only these
two Beliefs, the Christian, and the Mahumetan. For Fourteen Months together we
made it our Business to search in the Richest Countries of Europe for the
biggest colored Stones, the largest Pearls, and the fairest wrought Coral that
could be found, We ordered the making of several Rich Pieces of Goldsmiths
Work, Watches and Clocks extraordinary for Curiosity of Workmanship; and
because our Stock was not as yet all spent, we returned into Italy Twelve
Thousand Ducats of Gold. My Companion arrived at Legorn in less then a Month,
by the way of Genoa; and I my self got thither toward the end of October, by
the way of Milan, Venice and Florence.

The 10th of November we Embarked in a Vessel under a Holland Convoy, bound for
Smyrna. This Fleet was composed of six Merchant Men, and two Men of War. The
whole Cargo amounted to three Millions of Livers, besides what the Passengers,
Mariners, and Captains themselves kept close and undiscovered, to prevent the
Payment of Freight, Custom, and the Consuls Dues. We touched at Messina, Zant,
and several other Islands of the Archipelago. Near the Island of Micona we had
a considerable Dispute with a Corsair of Legorn, about one of his Men who had
made his escape aboard us, by swimming a Mile. Upon demand of him, the Corsair
sent us word, He would Fight us, if we did not restore him his Seaman; and for
our parts we did not think it worth our while to protect him.

There are usually about Forty Christian Corsairs Cruising up and down in the
Archipelago, belonging some to Majorca, some to Villa Franca, others to Legorn
and Malta. These Vessels are for the most part but of small Burden, and very
ill Victuall'd; but Manned with People whom Misery and a long habit of doing
Mischief have renderd resolute and cruel. There are not any Villainies or
Violences imaginable which they do not commit upon the Islanders of these Seas,
wherever they can but set foot a-shoar; though the Inhabitants are all
Christians, and most part acknowledge the Popes Jurisdiction.

I cannot forget the Answer which a Corsair, called the Chevalier de
Temericourt, gave upon a time to the Marquess of Pruilly, who commanded one of
the French Kings Ships, called the Diamond. These two meeting together in the
Island of Millo, the Marquess gave the other an Invitation a-board, at what
time among other things falling into discourse about Piracy, Sir, said the
Marquess to the Knight, as I was informed not long after, by some Gentlemen
that were present, The Robberies, the Murders, the Sacriledges, which you daily
commit, your Blasphemies, and in a word, so many impious and barbarous Crimes,
do they not strike a Terror to your Soul? Can you ever hope for Paradise? Or
do you believe there is any Hell? Who I! replied the Knight, Not at all. I am a
Lutheran, I believe not a tittle of any such thing. Thus you may see the
Natural Disposition of Pirates. Concerning whom I will add this one Particular
more.

While we staid for a Wind in the Port of Micona, there arrived in that Haven
two First-Rate Venetian Men of War. They entered in the Nightime. The Admiral
coming to an Anchor, fired several Squibs from his Main-Top-Mast. This is
called Giving the Rocquet, from the Italian word Rocquetta, which signifies a
Squib: And this is done to give Notice to the Christian Corsairs or Rovers, if
any should happ'n to be in Port, to weigh and be gone before Day. Two were
there at that present time. They set Sail early the next Morning, and came to
an Anchor behind a Promontory, not above a League from the Port. The Admiral
was a Nobleman of Venice, to whom I gave a Visit, and desiring to know the
reason of his firing the Rocquets, he told me he had Orders so to do; for that
the Republic being engaged to the Grand Signior by the Treaty at Candy, to
clear the Archipelago of all the Christian Rovers, and to take as many of 'em,
as they could, yet in regard of the several good Services which the Rovers had
done the Republic in the last War, he took that course to satisfy the Port,
without acting to the prejudice of the Rovers. And this was the reason that the
Ships of the Republic were obliged always to make themselves known in the
Archipelago to the end the Christian Pirates might keep at a distance from 'em,
and not approach within ken; that so they might be said not to have had any
sight of 'em. In the Daytime, added he, we are known by our Colors; but in
the Night, when we enter any Port, we let off these Rocquets; and sometimes
also we send certain Officers ashore, to discover whether there be any
Christian Rovers in Port, and so give 'em Notice to be gone.

I arrived at Smyrna the seventh of March 1672, after being four Months at Sea.
In which tedious Voyage we endured much Cold, and many a boystrous Storm. We
were in want of Victuals; nor could we have made this Voyage with more Danger
or more Hardship

I shall not trouble my self to make any Description of Smyrna, where I found
nothing worthy Remark, or in any other part of the Archipelago, more than what
is to be found in the Relations of Spon, and other Travelers, Men of Learning
and Exactness, who have been there since my time. I shall therefore content my
self with recounting some Particulars relating to Commerce and History, of
which they have not spoken.

The English drive a great Trade at Smyrna, and over all the Levant. This Trade
is driven by a Royal Company settled at London; which is Governed after a most
prudent manner, and therefore cannot fail of success. It has stood almost these
hundred Years, being first Confirmed toward the middle of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign. A Reign famous for having, among other Things, given Life to several
Trading Companies, particularly those of Hamborough, Russia, Greenland, the
East Indies and Turkey, all which remain to this Day. Trade was then in its
Infancy; and there is no greater Mark of the Ignorance of those Times, in
reference to Countries, though but a little remote, then the Association which
those Merchants made: for they joined several together in one Body, for mutual
Conduct and Assistance. That Company which relates to the Turkish Trade, is of
a particular sort: For it is not a Society, where every one puts in a Sum for
one General and United Stock: It is a Body which has nothing in Common, but a
peculiar Grant and Privilege to Trade into the Levant. It assumes to it self
the Name of The Regulated Company. None are admitted into it, but Sons of
Merchants, or such as have served an Apprenticeship to the Trade, which in
England is for Seven Years. They give to be admitted into the Society about an
Hundred and Twenty Crowns, if under the Age of Twenty Five Years; and double if
above that Age. The Company never commits to any one single Person their Power,
nor the sole Management of their Affairs, but manage their Business among
themselves by the Plurality of Voices. So that who has sufficient to drive a
Trade that will bear an Imposition of Eight Crowns, has as good a Vote as he
that Trades for an Hundred Thousand. This Assembly, thus Democratical, sends
out Ships, Levies Taxes upon all their Commodities, presents the Ambassador
whom the King sends to the Port, Elects two Consuls, the one for Smyrna, the
other for Aleppo, and prevents the sending of Goods which are not thought
proper for the Levant. It consists at present of about Three Hundred Merchants,
besides that they bring up in Turkey a great number of young Persons well
descended, who learn the Trade upon the Place it self. This Trade amounts to
about Five or Six Hundred Thousand Pounds yearly, and consists in Clothes made
in England, and Silver which they carry as well out of England, as out of
Spain, France and Italy: In exchange of which they bring back Wool,
Cotton-Yarn, Galls, Raw Silk and Wov'n, together with some other Commodities of
less value. Now the Company, finding that Malice which Interest begets among
Persons of the same Profession, would in time be the Ruin of their Society, by
Enhancing or Loring the price of Goods on purpose to under-sell one another;
and that the same Malice causes the Merchants to be at variance with the
Consuls, the Consuls with the Ambassador; (which is the reason that many times
where Expenses are requisite, an unseasonable Stinginess in the Ambassador
causes great Impositions and Fines, and other severe Vexations to the Nation)
The Company, I say, foreseeing these Mischiefs, have prudently provided a
Remedy to prevent 'em. For the English Cloth, of which they send into Turkey
about Twenty Thousand Pieces yearly, and the chiefest part of the rest of their
Merchandise is sent to the Factors with a Bill or Invoice of the Price at what
they are bound to sell; together with another Bill of the Price certain for
those Goods which they give order to be bought; and by that means it never
happens that the Merchants receive any Damage in the Prospect or Design of
their Profit.

For the prevention of these and other disorders, the Company gives a Pension
to the English Ambassador, who resides at the Port; to the Consuls, and all
their Principal Officers, as the Minister, the Chancellor, the Secretary, the
Interpreters, the Janisaries and others. Which Officers have no Power to Levy
any Taxes or Sums of Money upon the Merchandise, whether under the pretense of
Duties, or Presents, or any other extraordinary Expenses. But when any thing of
that Nature is to be done, they give Notice to the Deputies of the Nation, who
are Two Persons appointed to Act in the Name of the rest. These Deputies
examine and debate with the Ambassador, or the Consul, What is fit to be given,
What Journeys are necessary to be made to the Port, and what is there to be
transacted: Not but that the Ambassador or Consul may not Act of themselves,
but they observe that method to acquit and justify themselves; and sometimes
upon Emergent and Extraordinary Affairs they assemble the whole Body of the
Nation. So soon as they are come to a Result, the Deputies give Notice to the
Treasurer to provide what is necessary, whether it be Money, Toys or
Curiosities. This Treasurer also is settled by the Company, and provides Money
for every thing, discharges punctually all manner of Charges and Expenses, and
pays exactly the Wages of every Officer. Thus the Ambassador and Consuls have
no more to do but only to mind the Security of the English Nation, and the good
of Trade without being encumbered and diverted by their own Interests. There
are also many other excellent Regulations and Orders for the support of their
Trade in the Levant; by which means they carry it on with Honor and Profit
beyond any of their Neighbors.

The Hollanders also drive a great Trade at Smyrna, and more then any other
Nation of Europe, but they have little to do elsewhere; all their Dealing in
all the rest of the Cities in the Levant amounting to little or nothing. Their
principal Profit consists in carrying the Armenians and their Goods into
Europe, and carrying 'em back again. They also make great Advantage of their
Money, of which Turkey is very full. This Money of theirs is made of base
Mettle, and notoriously intermixed with Counterfeit pieces. It chiefly consists
of Crowns, Half-Crowns, Testons, or Eighteenpenny pieces, and pieces of Fifteen
Sous. The Crowns and Half-Crowns for the most part carry the Dutch Stamp. Which
the Turks therefore call Aslani, that is to say Lions; in regard of their being
marked on both sides with the Figure of a Lion. The Arabians, either out of
Ignorance or otherwise, mistaking the Lion for a Dog, give em the Name of
Abou-Kelb, or Dogs. The Quarter-Pieces are almost all Counterfeit; or at Best,
but Half Silver. However the Turks are so void of Judgment and Understanding,
that they esteem this Money beyond that of Spain, which they call Marsillies, by
reason that the Merchants of Marseilles first brought it in great Quantities
into Turkey.

The States maintain a Resident at the Port, with an Allowance of Four Thousand
Crowns a Year. Which Resident has besides the one Moiety of the Revenue of the
Dutch Consulships in the Levant, which sometimes amounts to a considerable Sum;
there being one Dutch Consul at Smyrna, who got Fifty Thousand Crowns by
Duties. When I arrived there, it happend that there was a great Quarrel between
the Consul and the Merchants: For he accused them for Cheats; Appealing to
their own Books for the truth of his Affirmation; and desired they might be
viewed; to which the Merchants would by no means give their consent. The
Resident not daring to determine this Difference, both Parties referred
themselves to the States. But at last, for fear the coming of the Convoy,
should occasion farther disturbances, the Merchants and the Consul agreed the
Duties of the Consulship, at Ten Thousand Five Hundred Crowns, for all that the
Convoy brought in, and Shipped off.

The French are very numerous in Smyrna, and over all the Levant, there not
being a Port of Turkey upon the Mediterranean Sea, wherein there are not
several. They are for the most part all Provencalls. But the Trade which they
drive is so inconsiderable, that one Merchant in each Place might dispatch all
the Business. At Smyrna, for example, there are above a Hundred Merchants; and
yet the Truth is, that in some Years the Effects that came out of France
consigned to all those Merchants did not amount to above Four Hundred Thousand
Livres; and there are many that have not above Five Hundred Crowns Stock:
Besides that they agree but very badly together, as being a sort of people that
Love to harbor Division and Contention one among another. So that it is no
wonder if their Trade decrease, and turn to loss rather then profit. For they
who better understand the Nature and Maxims of Trade, affirm, That that same
Disunion is the Thing which ruins'em in the Levant; so that if we should
compare the present with the former Trade which they drove, we should find it
more miserable and pitiful then ever. They add moreover that the Provencalls
have formerly had in Turkey those fortunate Chances and Luckie Opportunities,
that it is highly to be wondered, that they did not fill their Country with
Wealth in that happy Conjuncture. One of those Lucky Seasons began about the
Year 1656, and lasted Thirteen Years, during which time they drove a Trade, by
which they gained Fourscore and Ninety per. Cent.

This Trade which was really and truly a great piece of Knavery consisted in
these Five-Sous-Pieces that have made such a Noise. For the Turks took the
first that were brought at Ten Sous apiece: At which rate they held up for some
time; tho afterward they fell to Seven Sous and a half. There was no other
Money Stirring: All Turkey was full of it; neither was there any other Money to
be had; for that the French carried all the other Money away. This good Fortune
so intoxicated their Senses, that not content with such great Gains, they still
thirsted after more; and to that purpose they set themselves to alter their own
pieces of Five Sons, and made others of the same sort, but of base Mettle,
which they Coined first at Dombes, then at Orange, and afterward at Avignon.
More then this, they Stamped far worse at Monaco and Florence: And lastly they
made more of the same Stamp in the remote Castles belonging to the State of
Genoa, and other private places, which were only Copper plated over. The
Merchants of Marseilles, to utter this Money, brought down the price
themselves, and put off their Pieces in payment, and to the Mony-Changers at a
lower Rate then the Current Value. The Turks were a long time before they
perceived the Cheat that was put upon 'em, though so palpable and of so great a
Consequence; but so soon as they found it out, they were so incensed, that they
laid most heavy Impositions upon the French, using 'em no better then
Counterfeiters of Money, though the Dutch and Genoeses had a hand in it as well
as they. Thereupon they forbid 'em to utter any of those Pieces which they
called Timmins, but such as were stamped with the real Arms of France, which
they also brought down and put at Five Sous apiece. So that all the European
Merchants, except the English, were loaded at that time with great Quantities
of those Timmins. Their Warehouses were full, whole Ships Loadings of 'em
arrived daily, and they began to Coin 'em in all parts. But soon after, this
Money being cried down, several of those Money-Merchants lost all their Gains,
and many much more then ever they got.

The English were the Procurers of this Decry. For had that Money continued
Current, their Trade had been ruined, which consisted chiefly in the purchase
of Silks. And the reason was, because the Timmin-Merchants caused an advance to
be made upon the price of Silks, not caring what they gave, provided the
Sellers would take their Pieces of Five Sous in payment. I have seen above
Fifty several sorts of Coins of this sort of Money. But the most common sort
carried on the one side a Woman's Head with this Motto, Vera Virtutis Imago: On
the other, the Arms of France, with this Imprese, Currens per totam Asiam.

There are no People in the World that have been more frequently cheated, or
that are more easily gulled then the Turks; as being naturally very dull, and
thick-skull'd, and apt to believe any fair Story: Which is the reason that the
Christians have imposed a Thousand Cony-catching-Tricks, and Cheats upon 'em.
But though you may deceive 'em once or twice, yet when their Eyes are open,
they strike home, and pay ye once for all. And those sort of Impositions which
they lay upon Offenders in that Nature, are called Avanies; which are not
always unjust Impositions neither; they being like the Confiscations so
frequent in Custom-Houses: Where for the most part the Chief Ministers and
their Officers devour the People, while the Port winks at all the first time,
and only exhorts to Amendment. If the Complaints cease, the Offense is stifled;
but if the Clamor grow too loud, the Port sends to take off the Head of the
Party accused, and Confiscates his Estate. By which means the People are
satisfied, the Treasury is filled, Justice is done, and the Example remains to
terrify others.

The Merchants of Marseilles affirm, That the Imposition of these Fines was the
main thing that spoiled the Trade of the French in the Levant, as having cost
'em such prodigious Sums. But of all the Impositions that ever I heard of,
there is one which I shall never forget, that was laid upon the French
Merchants, at the time that M. de Sesy was the Ambassador of France at the
Port, which happened thus.

His Excellency had a great desire to turn one of the Grand Signior's Farmers,
and to Farm the Customs of Constantinople and Smyrna. But at the end of Six
Months, M. de Sesy finding himself a Hundred Thousand Franks in Arrear
requested to be discharged: which was a favor granted him on condition he
would pay what he owed. But in regard he wanted Money, the Turks obliged the
French Nation to pay for him. Thereupon he told the Merchants, That he had not
taken upon him to Farm the Customs, but in hopes to advance the Trade of the
French, and to prevent the Squabbles and Differences which daily arose between
the Turks and Them about the payment of their Duties. To which the Merchants
failed not to make a fair Apology, and to justify themselves by solid Reason:
but all to no purpose: there was no more to be done, but they must pay down the
Hunderd Thousand Franks; so that for want of Money of their own, they were
reduced to that Exigency, as to borrow the Sum of the Jews at Five and Twenty
per Cent. for Six Months. And I am certainly assured by persons that were well
acquainted with all the passages, that it was so long before the Hunderd
Thousand Franks were paid, that the Interest amounted to three times as much as
the Principal; so that this Avanie, or Imposition cost the French Nation near
an Hunderd and Fifty Thousand Crowns.

Two other Impositions they paid, during the Embassy of M. de la Hay, the
Son, which amounted to Two Hundred Thousand Franks. I have also heard that one
of his Predecessors for Fifteen Years together took of every French
Merchant-Man that came to Constantinople Five Hunderd Crowns, to re-imburse
himself of a pretended Expense of Six Hundred Crowns for the Advancement of the
Trade of the Nation; and when they made it out, that he had repaid himself that
Sum a hunderd times over, he made answer, I will show ye my Accounts, I take no
more then is my due.

The Venetians maintain a Consul at Smyrna, as also the Genoeses; yet there are
few Merchants, Natives in either of those two Republics, that live there;
especially of the Genoeses, who have little or nothing to do in the Levant.
They were only settled there at first by reason of the great Trade which they
drove in Five-Sous-Pieces, in regard of the great profit which they gained. So
that as soon as that Trade was prohibited, their principal Merchants retired:
Only two or three remained at Smyrna, and one at Constantinople. Thereupon,
their Levant Company began to dissolve it self, and there is no question but
the whole Establishment of the Genoeses had utterly gone to ruin, by the
recalling their Resident from the Port, and their Consul from Smyrna, had they
not been better advised then to make that Revocation, upon two Considerations.
First, Because the Turks never suffer Nations that are settled among 'em to
retire for good and all. Secondly, because such an entire abandoning the
Country, would have too manifestly discovered the beggarly Reason that swayed
the Republic in an Enterprise that had cost 'em so dear, and which had given
France an Occasion to show how highly she was displeased at their Conduct. For
the better understanding of which Transaction, the Reader perhaps may not think
his time ill spent in viewing three or four Pages.

In the first place therefore give me leave to observe, That the Genoeses were
formerly very powerful in the Levant, as being the Lords and Masters of several
Islands in the Archipelago, of several Places upon the Coast of the Grecian,
and several Cities upon the Black-Sea. Pera also, now the Suburbs of
Constantinople, was under their Jurisdiction. Upon which there is no need for
me to dilate, in regard the Stories of past Ages have given a sufficient
Account, how and at what time they lost all this fair Extent of Dominion. But
the War in Candy, which happened in the Year 1645. encouraged 'em to revive
their Commerce in the Territories of the Grand Signior; imagining they should
make themselves Masters of that Trade which the Venetians drove there before
the War. And to the end they might bring about this Design with more speed and
security, they applied themselves to the King of France for his Recommendation,
as being the most Ancient, and most Considerable Allie of the Ottoman Empire.
Which was easily condescended to by the King's Council, who had Affairs in
their Heads of greater Importance then Trade. In so much that they did not
foresee the great Damages which it would bring upon the French Nation; of
which the most considerable was the prejudice done to the Articles of the
Treaty between the Crown of France and the Port, being a kind of Annihilation
of one of the Principal Capitulations, wherein it was concluded, That all
European Nations, that should desire to settle in the Levant, should not be
permitted to Trade, but under the Banners and Protection of France. However the
Genoeses being thus recommended by the King, M. de la Hay, the Father, then
the French Ambassador in Turkey, used the utmost of his endeavors to assist
'em. Nevertheless it came to nothing, because, as they say, it was not
prosecuted with that vigor as it ought to have been.

In the Year 1664. they were very fierce upon it again, encouraged by the great
Profit which was got by Pieces of Five-Sous. But they could not then expect
that the French should solicit in their behalf as they had done before,
because the Face of Affairs was altered, as well in respect of Traffic in
General, as of the Levant Trade in particular; rather they saw that their
Enterprise would be displeasing to France: However they believed, that the King
of France had so embroiled himself with the Turk, by the Assistance which he
had given the Venetians and the Emperor, that they did not think his Opposition
or his Recommendation would stand 'em in any stead. Thereupon they sought the
Assistance of England and the Empire, and as for France, they satisfied
themselves with giving the King a bare Information of their design. Their
Resident informed the King that there was a Levant Company setting up at Genoa,
and that the Republic had a design to send an Ambassador to the Port, in hopes
that his Majesty would favor their Negotiation. But the King said no more,
then only that he wished the Republic all good success.

Which Answer increasing the Suspicions that the Genoeses had already
conceived, and putting 'em into a deep doubt what Reception they should meet
with at Constantinople, they sent Incognito the Marquess of Durazzo, as a
Person that had the chiefest Interest in the Company, to sift out the Truth,
and to treat privately with the Vizier; to which purpose he went with Count
Lesley, the Emperors Extraordinary Ambassador, as one of his Train. In short,
he saw the Vizier, and treated with him, and by the Mediation of the said
Ambassador, and the Ambassador of England, who were very active in forwarding
the Negotiation, obtained that the Genoeses should have the same Articles with
the English and Hollanders. Upon which, the Envoy, having the Grand Vizier's
word in the Name of his Highness, returned to Genoa, and gave an Account of his
Negotiation with the Divan. Presently thereupon the Genoeses fitted out two
Ships, and sent the same Marquess of Durazzo again in Quality of an Ambassador.

However the first Conferences which the Marquess had with the Vizier were not
so secretly carried, but that the French in the Levant had private Intelligence
of the Marquiss's Proceedings. Immediately they were much troubled at this
Design of the Genoeses, fearing it would be a great prejudice to their Trade;
which was the reason that they wrote into France, that their Trade would be
much impaired, if the Genoeses came to be settled in Turkey; and therefore that
all means were to be used to prevent 'em. Which Address procured a Resolution
to hinder 'em, and Instructions to that purpose were sent to the French
Ambassador at the Port, who was then M. de la Hay, the Son.

No sooner therefore was he come back from Adrianople, where he had been about
other Affairs, but he received Orders to oppose the Establishment of the
Genoeses. Which made him send back immediately for leave to return. For in
Turkey no Ambassador must appear at Court without Permission. But it happened
that the Grand Vizier was not then in Town, being gone toward Thessaly, to
hasten the Siege of Candy. And as for the Caimacan, who is as it were his
Deputy, He, having private Intelligence of the new Instructions which the
Ambassador had received from France, made answer, That he could not grant the
Ambassador leave, without the Grand Vizier's consent.

This the Ambassador looked upon as a flat Refusal; and therefore sent a
Gentleman to Adrianople with Instructions, to represent to the Chief Ministers,
That by the Capitulations between the Emperor of France and the Grand Signior,
the Port was obliged not to entertain any European Nation, new Comers, but
under the Colors of France; and so it was contrary to the Capitulations to
Treat with the Genoeses; for which reason if they did proceed to a Conclusion
of the Treaty, He would be gone. Which Message, together with so much of his
Instructions as he thought requisite, were sent to the Grand Vizier, and
debated in the place where he lay. But the Answer which the Vizier returned,
was very harsh and uncivil. Which was not to be wondered at in regard the
Vizier was at that time highly incensed for the Affairsfront which he had
received in Hungary, by means of the French. His Reply therefore was, That the
Port was open for him as well to go, as to come: That the Emperor of France had
nothing to do to hinder the Grand Signior from making a Peace with his Ancient
Enemies, or to grant 'em their Capitulations when they came to demand 'em: and
that it might suffice his Majesty to be acknowledged at the Port under the
Titles of Emperor and Chief Monarch of Christ'ndom, without taking upon him to
prescribe to others what they were to do.

The Ambassador of Genoa arrived at Constantinople at the same time that these
Endeavors were used to prevent his Reception. Which was to him however no
surprise, in regard he had already had Intelligence while he was at Sea, that
some such thing was in Agitation. Besides, he had Advice, that the Resident of
Genoa in France, having made known to the King, that his Masters had sent the
Marquess of Durazzo in the Quality of an Ambassador to Constantinople, the King
should return this Answer; I wish the Ambassador of the Republic a good
Voyage, but I know not what our Own has done at the Port upon this Occasion. I
have seen several People who were of Opinion, that if the Grand Vizier had not
had a particular Peek against the French, and some kind of aversion to the
Ambassador's Person, that the Genoeses had not been received into the Levant.
For that the Port had no such high value for an Interest of Trade, to grant a
favor to the prejudice of France, from which their Hands were so speciously
tied with a fair pretense.

After I had staid twelve days at Smyrna, I embarked for Constantinople, where
I arrived the Ninth of March, and Landed without any trouble, any danger, or
any expense a very great Quantity of Rich Goods, which I brought along with me,
being more then two Horses could carry. For M. de Nointel did me that favor as
to give me leave to put his Name and the Flower de Lices upon my Chests, and
then sent for 'em as belonging to himself. Which was done with the greatest
ease in the World. For he presently sent his Interpreter to the Officer of the
Custom-House, to let him know that he had two Chests aboard a Flemish Vessel
that arrived the day before, which belonged to him; and therefore desired they
might be delivered Custom-free. Accordingly the Officer gave such Order, that
the Interpreter went aboard the Dutch Vessel, unladed the two Chests, and sent
'em to the Ambassador's House, who did me Kindnesses to send 'em to my Lodging
the next day.

For all Ambassadors, Residents, and Envoys that reside at the Port, have the
Privilege to Import and Export whatever they please; provided they undertake
to own the Goods as belonging to themselves; nor does the Officer of the
Customs dare to take any Cognizance of it. Which is a Civility and Generosity
of the Turks not to be paralleled in Europe.

When I arrived at Constantinople, M. de Nointel was preparing to attend the
Grand Signior at Adrianople, in order to the Renovation of the Articles. It was
an Affair of great Importance, and which had made a great Noise in the World,
as having hung in suspense for Seven Years together, and for that the Turks
still stood upon their Terms and haughtily slighted the Ambassador
notwithstanding that they were then entering into a doubtful War against
Poland. And now I shall give ye an account of the Original of the Differences
that were at that time grown to a great Height between France and Turkey.

At the beginning of the Reign of Mahomet the IV. the present Emperor of the
Turks, who ascended the Imperial Throne at Seven Years of Age, in the Year
1648. the Government was solely in the Hands of Women and Eunuchs, who filled
all the Chief Places of Honor and Trust with such Persons as they pleased
themselves. And the Turks acknowledge, that the Ottoman Court was never so
corrupt, nor in such a strange Confusion as at that Time. You should see almost
every Month a new Grand Vizier, who after he had been some few days in his
Office, was not only discharged from his High Employment, but many times
deprived of his Life. Now it is the Custom in Turkey, that upon the Advancement
of any Grand Vizier, all Persons of Quality go to kiss his Hands, and carry him
some considerable Present. More particularly all Ambassadors are obliged to
that Ceremony. But M. de la Hay the Father, then Ambassador of France at the
Port, observing the frequent Changes of Grand Viziers at that time concluded
that there would be no Reformation of this evil Management during the Emperor's
Minority, and that all his Visits and Presents to the New Vizier, were but so
many Visits and Presents lost. So that he resolved to sit still Quietly, and to
spare his Compliments and the charge of his Presents.

It happened in a short while after, that Cuperly Mahomet Pacha, received the
Seals of the Empire, that is to say, was advanced to the High Dignity of Prime
Vizier. But the Ambassador still believed that his Fortune would be no better
then that of his Predecessors, and that he had but a very short Reign; but he
was deciev'd; for it so fell out, that this Grand Vizier upheld himself in his
Office, till his Death, which happened in the Year 1662.

So soon as he was advanced, every one paid him their Visits, and made him
their accustomed Presents, and among the Rest all the Foreign Ministers,
except the French Ambassador. To which as they say, he was adviz'd and several
times most earnestly pressed; but his good Husbandry for the Nation was such,
that he would not be overruled. However at length percieving that Cuperly
fixed himself at Court upon the Ruin of several of the Grandees, and that
according to all outward Appearances he was like to continue Grand Vizier, at
length he made him both his Visit and his Presents.

But then the Vizier, hainously offended at his Remissness, and the little
value he had testified for his Person before, had laid a design to be revenged
not only upon him, but upon all the French Nation. And this in truth was the
Source and Original of that Misunderstanding between France and Turkey, as well
during that whole time the Grand Vizier lived, which was Twelve Years, as also
during the Prime Ministry of his Son that succeeded him. So that the severity
of the Port toward the Three last Ambassadors of France, M. de la Hay, the
Father, M. de la Hay, the Son, and Monsieur Nointel, and the several
Impositions that were laid upon the French, for Twenty Years together, are to
be Originally attributed to a particular and Personal Enmity, notwithstanding
all the Reasons afterward pretended, of which the Principal and justest were
the Enterprise of Gigery, and the Succors given to the Emperor and the
Venetians.

Nor was the Vizier long before he found an Opportunity to Thunder forth his
Resentments. Such a one, as he could not have wished for a better to advance
his mischievous Design. For then was the War very hot in Candy, and France had
secretly assisted the Venetians at the beginning of the War. Nay more, it is
said, that M. de la Hay had Instructions to hold a private Correspondence with
the Venetians, and to give 'em Intelligence of the Turkish Designs. Now it
happened in the Year 1659. that a Frenchman, who went by the Name of
Vertamont, and who had a very considerable Employment in the Venetian Army,
desired leave of the Captain General, to go and see Constantinople. Presently
the General gave him a Pass, and charged him with a great Packet of Letters for
the French Ambassador. But the French Man, who had no other design then to turn
Turk, applied himself to the Caimacan of Constantinople, and told him, That he
had quitted the Camp of the Christians, as being resolved to adjure their
Religion, and embrace Mahumatism; and more, that he had a Packet of great
Importance to deliver into the Hands of the Grand Vizier. Upon which the
Caimacan ordered him forthwith to be conveyed to Adrianople, where the Court
then lay. Nor was this perfidious Renegade, contented only to renounce his
Faith, but discovered to the Grand Vizier the secret Correspondence between the
Ambassador of France and the Venetians; and farther told him, That the Packet
of Letters which he had delivered into his Hands would convince him clearly of
the Truth of what he said.

The Grand Vizier had a jealousy of this secret Correspondence before, but
being now in a manner assured in his suspicions through the Discoveries of the
Renegade, it may be readily conjectured to what a degree his passion
transported him against the Ambassador of France, incensed as he was already,
and boiling with revenge, especially being naturally inhuman and bloody.
However at this time he put a curb upon himself, and showed more reserv'dness
and moderation then could be expected from him.

M. de la Hay, who well understood Vertamont's Design, and what his Errand was
to the Court, and besides was well acquainted with the Grand Vizier's
Disposition, his Implacability, and the Importance of the Affair, made no
question but the Intercepted Packet would put him to a great deal of trouble;
and therefore he consulted with his Interpreters and his Secretaries.
Immediately the Secretary for his Ciphers took such a fright at the Unfortunate
Accident, that he resolved to march off, well knowing that the Grand Vizier,
upon the like occasion of a Letter in Ciphers Intercepted, had caused an
Interpreter to the Venetians to be Drubb'd to Death. Thereupon, addressing
himself to M. de la Hay, Sir, said he, I am naturally so very timorous, that
so soon as I feel the Drubbing-Stick, there is no secret which I shall not
reveal; and therefore secure me, or let me make my escape. Upon which the
Ambassador ordered him to be conveyed into a private Concealment, and
prepared to abide the Shock, whatever happened. He then kept his Bed, very ill
of the Stone, so that he could not go to Adrianople, though he had received
Orders to appear there. However he sent a Message to the Caimacan who sent him
the Order, to tell him, That he was sick a Bed, so that it was impossible for
him to Travel; nevertheless he would send his Son in his stead.

But so it happened, that all the Letters which the Grand Vizier met with in
the Venetian General's Packet, were writ in Ciphers; so that all the Renegado's
and Interpreters in the Ottoman Court were sent for in vain; for there was not
one that had a Key to the Lock: which enraged the Vizier so much the more. And
as for M. de la Hay the Son, he found him in such an ill Humor, at his coming
to Adrianople, that upon his returning him an Answer, somewhat more boldly
perhaps then the Circumstance would bear, Cuperly transsported with passion,
not only caused him to be abused in his Person, but sent him Prisoner to a
Tower adjoining to the Wall of the City; saying withal, That he was not to
endure that from an Ambassador's Deputy, though his Son, which he might bear
with in the Ambassador himself. However, the Vizier did no harm either to the
Merchants or the Interpreters, that went along with M. de la Hay: nor to the
Secretary or Chancellor; being all discharged at the expense of that fear, into
which he had put 'em at first, by Threats and cruel Menaces of Torment and
Death if they did not Decipher the General's Letters. Only one of the
Interpreters fell into such a Distemper upon it, that he has continued sick
every since, and it is thought he will never recover.

The Ottoman Court was then at Adrianople, as I have said, making great
Preparations for the Transylvanian War. So that M. de la Hay the Father,
understanding the Grand Vizier was ready to march, and fearing his departure
before he had enlarged his Son, as it really fell out, strove with his
Distemper, and took a Journey to Adrianople; to which his Daughter-in-Law
persuaded him, urging him continually, That if he did not speedily labor the
Discharge of his Son, he might be in danger of his Life; and that the Vizier
was cruel and incensed; and therefore he ought to use his utmost Endeavors to
pacific his Fury.

A Month after the Vizier's departure, the Ambassador ventured upon a bold
Exploit, that deserves to be remembered.

A little before Vertamont's coming to Constantinople, there arrived in the
same place a certain French Man, whose Name was Quiclet, together with his
Wife, and another French Man whose Name was Poulet, so enamored of Quiclet's
Wife, that he never forsook her in all her Rambles. This Quiclet was a great
Interpreter of Ciphers, a Man of Learning, but of little Judgment. He had also
been employed to Decipher Characters by several Ministers of State, and diverse
Ambassadors. But he was so much a Beggar, that he could not well be poorer then
he was; nor do I know what unlucky Star brought him to Constantinople. It is
reported however, that he having heard of the great Rewards which the Grand
Vizier promised to any one that could Uncipher the Captain General's Letters,
the Wife of this wretched Fellow addressing her self to some Gentlemen that
belonged to Monsieur de la Hay, gave it out, That though his Excellency
refused to lend her Husband Money, yet if he would himself, he could have what
he pleased of the Grand Vizier. I am not certain whether it were really so, as
the Thing was related to me: but however it were, Monsieur de la Hay, who well
knew the great desire which Cuperly had to understand what was contained in the
Intercepted Letters, and fearing lest they should reveal some Things as well to
his own, as to the Ruin of all the French in the Levant, he sent for the
Fellow, carried him up to the Terrace of his Palace that looked into the Garden;
and after he had walked two or three Turns, holding him in a discourse, which
what it was, no body knows, he gave a sign to some persons placed there for the
purpose, who threw him headlong over the Battlements, at what time another
Gang, posted near the place where he fell, perceiving he was not dead with the
Fall, finished the Work, and buried him privately.

After this, the French Ambassador having Audience of the Grand Vizier, he sent
for the Intercepted Letters, and desired the Ambassador to explain 'em. To
which Monsieur le Hay made Answer, That it was well known to all the World,
that the Ambassadors and Ministers of the Christian Princes, never wrote one to
another unless it were in Characters, whatever the Subject were; nevertheless
they did not understand the Characters themselves; as having their Secretaries
who composed and writ the Ciphers, and then explained them when they had done:
That as for the Person by him employed for that purpose, he had sent him back
into France, about six Months ago. Yet if the Grand Vizier would permit him to
carry the Letters home, he would try to Uncipher 'em, and if it could be done,
he would be sure to let him know the Contents. But the Grand Vizier having
heard this Answer, only smiled upon the Ambassador, and so presently rose from
his Seat, without speaking so much as one word. Some few days after the Chief
Minister departed for Transylvania, leaving Monsieur de la Hay, the Son, in
Prison, but not so closely restrained as before, and Monsieur de la Hay, the
Father, without any manner of Answer.

The Grand Signior did not go in Person to the Transylvanian War, but remained
at Adrianople, where the Ambassador also tarried, in hopes to obtain of his
Highness his Son's Enlargement; but no body durst open their Mouths to the
Emperor without the Grand Vizier's order. Who having put a quick end to the
Transylvanian Disorder returned Victorious to Constantinople. Where so soon as
he arrived, he was put in mind of both the Monsieurs de la Hay. At which the
Vizier, faigning a kind of surprise, And what, said he, Are those Gentlemen
still here? Which was as much as to say, They might go where they Pleased; as
it appeared by the discharge of the Son, which was ordered forthwith: And so
both the one and the other returned to Constantinople without so much as seeing
the Vizier's Face.

When it was known in France how unkindly the Grand Vizier has used Monsieur de
la Hay, the Cardinal dispatched a Gentleman to the Prime Minister, to prevent
the ill Consequences of such Proceedings. Cuperly, whose Malice augmented
through desire of revenge, as one that mortally hated the two Monsieurs de la
Hay, would fain have sent them back, and obliged the Gentleman to have taken
upon him the Title of Ambassador in their Room, engaging to interpose so
effectually, that the Alteration should be approved in France. But the
Gentleman would not hear of that Proposition by any means, excusing himself
fairly and genteelly. And it is moreover reported that he highly pleased the
Grand Vizier's Humor in all their Transacting together. I am sorry I know not
his Name, which would have been an Honor to this Relation.

The Account which the Gentleman gave of his Negotiation, caused Monsieur de la
Hay to be recalled. However there was not any one sent to succeed him; only he
had orders to leave in his Place, as Resident, a French Merchant, that had
lived for several Years in Constantinople, whose Name was Monsieur Rokely. Nor
had France any other Minister in those parts till the end of the Year 1665.

The King, who had then taken the Government into his own Hands, and Ruled with
no less Renown then Success, had already sufficiently revenged himself for the
Affronts offered to the Family of his Ambassador, and for the heavy Fines and
Impositions laid upon his Subjects in Turkey, by lending powerful Succors to
the Enemies of the Ottoman Empire. All which did but heighten the bad
Understanding which was between the Two Empires, and Things were arrived to
that Point, that there must either be an absolute Breach, or a New Alliance.
The Importance of the Levant Trade advised the latter; so that the King
resolved to send an Ambassador to Constantinople to renew the Articles of
Peace. Monsieur de la Hay was then at Paris, soliciting for Employment, and
several Arrears due to him as Heir to his Father, who had been dead in that
City some years before. Now in regard he understood better then any other
Person, the Gains and Advantages of a Constantinopolitan Embassy, together
with the Splendour and Authority that belongs to it, he made great Friends for
the Place; and to remove all Opposition and Obstructions in his way, he offered
to quit all his Arrears to the Chief Minister.

Thereupon, his Friends at Court alleged His great Experience in the Affairs
of Turkey; and that his Courage and Resolution was such as was requisite for an
Embassy to the Ottoman Port. On the other side, that it was for the King's
Honor to send him thither, were it only to humble the Grand Vizier, who must
now be constrained to honor that very Person, whom his Father had abused and
hated; Meaning Cuperly Mahamed Pacha, who died in the Year 1662. after he had
settled his Son in his Room. Nor can I tell how this Counsel, as bad as it was,
came to be embraced, unless it were in prosecution of that Design which the
Court always had to bring the Turks to a Compliance by force. The Event of
Affairs will show that there was something of that Nature in the Management of
this Business.

Monsieur de la Hay arrived at Constantinople in the Month of November 1665.
He also made a Magnificent Entry, and behaved himself for five Years together
that he continued Ambassador, with as much State as could be expected from a
Resolute Minister, and one that bore the Character of an Ambassador from a
Potent and Formidable Prince. He discoursed of nothing in the Visits that he
made to the Ministers of the Divan but of the Grandeur of the King his Master,
and the Invincible Strength of his Armies. This offended the Vizier extremely,
who looked upon it as an Affront done to him, and the Grand Signior, even in his
own Court; and this Forestallment of his Honor, caused him to treat the
Ambassador with disdain and contempt. So that when he gave him Audience, he
received him with that pride and scorn which was unsufferable, not vouchsafing
so much as to look upon him, or to rise from his Seat according to the ancient
Custom, and the usual practice at the Reception of Ambassadors either from the
Emperor or any other Crowned Heads. And not content with that, he upbraided him
in bitter Language, with the Succors which France had sent into Hungary and
Candy, and the Enterprise of Gigery. Monsieur de la Hay dissembled his
Resentment, believing that when he took his leave, the Vizier would show him
more Civility: but he was deceived; for the Vizier dismissed him with the same
Indifferency, wherewith he had received him.

The Ambassador reflecting upon the Affront, which the Vizier had done him at
that Audience, sent to him to demand another, upon Condition that he should
receive him standing, and forbear any farther Reproaches. The Raisquitab, who
is the High-Chancellor of the Empire, and the Vizier's Kiaia, or Chief
Controller of his Household, answered the Interpreter, That he might assure his
Master, the Vizier would receive him, as became him. Thereupon, the Ambassador
relying upon a promise, that indeed carried with it a manifest Equivocation,
went to his Audience, but his Reception was nothing different from what it was
before. Which disgusted Monsieur de la Hay to that degree, that he told the
Vizier, That the Emperor of France having sent him to the Port, to Confirm the
League of Amity between the two Princes, he would not take the Audience which
he had given him for an Audience, because he had not paid him those Honors
which were due to the Ambassador of the Greatest and most Potent Monarch in
Christendom. Moreover he declared, That he had Order to give him up the
Articles of Peace, and return into France in the same Vessel that had brought
him, if he did not treat him answerably to the Grandeur of his Master. Which so
incensed the Vizier, that he fell into a passion, and vented his Choler in
reviling and reproachful terms. On the other side, the Ambassador was so highly
provoked, that snatching the Articles of Peace out of the Interpreters Hands,
he threw 'em at the Knees of the Haughty Minister, and rising from his Seat,
flung out of the Room without speaking a word, or vouchsafing to tarry for an
Answer. But he was stopped at the Door of the Antichamber; at what time the
Vizier sent for the Mufti, Vani Effendi the Grand Signior's Tutor, and the
Captain Basha, to deliberate what was to be done in an Accident of such
Importance as this. The Result was, That they should inform the Grand Signior,
who was then gone a Hunting Twenty Leagues from Constantinople; which was the
Reason that the Answer was delayed for three days, during all which time,
Monsieur de la Hay lay under Confinement in an Apartment of the Grand
Signior's Palace.

In the mean while the Captain Basha brought a Message in the Vizier's Name,
That if the Ambassador would Kiss his Garment, he would receive him as he had
received Count Lesley, Ambassador from his Imperial Majesty; that he would also
receive him standing, and pay him all those Honors which he had paid to that
Count. To which the Ambassador answered, That he was not to be governed by
Presidents of any Person, when they were prejudicial to the Honor of the
Emperor of France. The Captain Basha demanded what he could object against the
Example of Count Lesley, whose Master was the Emperor of Seven Kings? a Title
which the Emperor assumes among the Turks, as being Elected by Seven Electors.
At length, after many Disputes on both sides, and that the Grand Signior had
given his Answer, it was concluded between the Vizier and the Ambassador, That
he might return to his Lodging when he pleased, that the two Audiences which he
had received should stand for nothing, and that he would grant him another with
all the Customary Civilities and Ceremonies.

This Audience was given him in the Month of January 1666. At what time, the
Grand Vizier, because he would not be obliged to rise when the Ambassador was
introduced, ordered him to be brought into a particular Room of State, whither
he came to meet him. At his first Entrance he demeaned himself with an
extraordinary Civility, approaching the Ambassador with a smiling Countenance,
and reaching forth his Hand. On the other side, Monsieur de la Hay, who was
glad to see such a Compliance, answered his Civilities and Compliments with all
suitable Decency, as if he had never seen him before; and the Audience ended
with all the Courtesy and Decorum that could be expected on both sides: The
Ambassador and his Retinue being Treated with Perfumes, Coffee, Sorbet, and
Four and Twenty Turkish Vests. The next Month he had Audience of his Highness,
where every thing was managed according to the usual Custom, with all Civility;
it not being proper to discourse of Business to the Grand Signior.

Monsieur de la Hay had Orders to demand the renewing the former Articles of
Peace, and Liberty of Trading to the East Indies through the Red Sea. But the
Grand Vizier would not consent either to the one or the other, upon the
Conditions that were propounded: and in March he left Constantinople, and
attended the Grand Signior to Adrianople, from whence he departed for Candy. At
the same time also Monsieur de la Hay followed the Court to Adrianople, where
he had several Conferences with the Caimacan in reference to his Negotiation;
but in regard that Minister durst not conclude any thing without consulting the
Vizier, Monsieur de la Hay returned to Constantinople, having made no farther
progress in his Business.

Soon after happened the Treaty of Genoa, already spok'n of, which put the
whole Affair into an absolute Confusion, and exasperated both Parties. For on
the one side, the Genoeses were entertained notwithstanding the Protestations
and Threats of the Ambassador, and on the other side, the Ambassador, in his
Complaints and Protests, made use of Expressions that offended the Turkish
Ministers. They had written to him, as I have already related, That it was not
for the King his Master to oppose the Reception of any whoever they were, whom
the Grand Signior was pleased to favor with his Friendship; and that it was
sufficient for his Master to be acknowledged at the Ottoman Court, for the
first Prince in Christendom. To which Monsieur de la Hay made Answer, That as
for what concerned his High Titles, the Emperor of France was only beholding to
God and his Victorious Arms. Which was taken very ill, as being the same Titles
which the Grand Signior assumes to himself, and which the Turks believe to be
only due to his Highness. And therefore the Ministers signified to Monsieur de
la Hay, That never any Ambassador had made use of those Titles before; neither
was it a Thing which had been ever allowed by the Divan, to any other Person
whatsoever. In the mean time the French sent very considerable Succors to
Candy, which much retarded the Conquest of the Island, while the Turks on the
other side oppressed the French Merchants with new Impositions and Extortions.
In so much that their Complaints, which grew louder and louder every day,
obliged the King to send express Order to Monsieur de la Hay, to return to
France, and lay aside all thoughts of renewing the League, at least if it were
not a Thing first sought and desired by the Ministers of the Port. Which Orders
were delivered to him toward the end of the Year 1668. not a little to his
dissatisfaction. However he did not forbear to Visit the Caimacan at
Constantinople, telling him that he had received Orders from the King his
Master to return home; to which purpose he expected the Arrival of the Vessels
which his Majesty had sent, and his leave of the Port, in order to his
Departure; requesting him withal to write to the Court, that he might be sent
for withal Expedition.

The Court was then at Larissa in Thessaly, whither his Highness was gone, to
the end that being somewhat the nearer to Candy, he might be a means to hasten
the Conquest. And therefore, before the Caimacan, who is as it were the Grand
Vizier's Lieutenant, would write, he demanded of Monsieur de la Hay, Whether
any other Ambassador came in his Room? To which he answered, Not any; but that
the Emperor his Master had commanded him to leave a Secretary or a French
Merchant for his Resident, like the Representatives of the Hollanders and
Genoeses. The Caimacan asked him, Wherefore no Ambassador was sent? To which
the other replied, That it was not a Thing which he could declare in public.
By which Answer the Caimacan apprehending that he had something of secrecy to
impart to him, gave him a private Audience. And then it was that the Ambassador
discovered to him, the reasons which obliged the Emperor of France to recall
him, with a Resolution never to send any more Ambassadors to the Ottoman Port.
First, for that the Dignity of the Ambassador of France had not been regarded
nor respected as it ought to be. That no heed had been given neither to the
Complaints nor Requests which his Majesty had made for three Years together.
That they refused to renew the Capitulations of Peace, which was an
unsufferable Damage to the French Merchants, who were constrained to pay Five
in the Hundred Customs, whereas the English, Hollanders and Genoeses paid not
above Three per Cent. That they had entertained the latter in Turkey, contrary
to all his Remonstrances and Protests, and had forced the French to pay within
less then three Years, above Two Hundred Thousand Livres, for unjust and
oppressive Impositions. To which Monsieur de la Hay farther added, That if
these Grievances might be taken into Consideration, so that the Emperor his
Master might be assured of Redress, he did not question but that his Majesty
would rest satisfied and not recall him. Upon this the Caimacan made answer,
That he would write to the Caimacan of the Port, who is also another of the
Vizier's Lieutenants, and one who never stirs from the Person of the Grand
Signior; and also that his Excellency would do well to write himself, which
would add the greater weight, and give the quicker dispatch to the Affair.
Nevertheless all the Answer which the Caimacan of the Port sent to Monsieur de
la Hay, was only this, That he would give an Account to the Grand Vizier of
what he had writ, and that he should know his Answer with the first Opportunity.

While the Ambassador tarried for this Answer, Four of the Kings Men of War
arrived in the Haven of Constantinople, being sent to bring back the
Ambassador. And this Squadron struck no small fear into the Turks at first; but
finding that Monsieur d'Almeras, who was the Commander, had sent to the City,
so soon as he came to an Anchor, for Fifteen Hundred Weight of Biscuit, and that
with no small Importunity too, they began to slight him under the want of
Provision, and reduced to such a Condition that he could not subsist, if they
should refuse to supply him.

In March 1669. Monsieur de la Hay received the Grand Vizier's Answer,
containing a Permission to come to the Court; where he arrived in the Month of
April. And here I shall pass over the Motives and Design of this Journey, not
but that I sufficiently know what was discoursed at Constantinople; but because
those Discourses were different from what Monsieur de la Hay sets down in the
Relation which he gave the King at his Return to Paris; from whence I took the
chiefest part of this Recital: and where he declares that he had no other end
but to take his leave. Nor shall I say any thing for the same Reason, of what
he did at the Ottoman Court, from whence he wrote to Admiral d'Almeras, who
then lay at Constantinople with his Four Men of War to come and take aboard him
at Vola, in the Golph of Salonica, a Turkish Ambassador, which the Grand
Signior was sending into France.

This Turk was named Soliman, being then Muttifar Aga, or the Grand Signior's
Porter. And when he was sent to the French King, he was a Fellow that served
for Fifteen Aspers, or about Sixpence a day. He arrived in France toward the
end of the Year 1669. and departed thence the next Year in the Month of August.
All Paris had a sight of him, and they that were acquainted with him, knew him
to be as haughty, as brutish, and as crafty a Turk as ever was in the World.
The Provencalls that were in the Levant called him Monsieur de la Haye's
Ambassador, and took the Liberty to affirm that Monsieur de la Hay furnished
him with Money for his Equipage. And they grounded their Assertion upon this,
That Soliman's Equipage was far short of the Magnificence of the Turkish
Ambassadors. And Monsieur de la Hay, when he was jeered for Soliman's Rigging,
had no other way to justify himself, but by saying, That Soliman had not time
to make better Provision for himself. Others would put it closer upon him, That
the Title of AMBASSADOR was not to be found in Soliman's Credentials. But for
that he had another shift, That while Soliman lay at Cale Saint Nicolas near
Cerigo, expecting the Admiral's arrival to take him aboard, the Grand Vizier,
secure of taking Candy, and finding no farther necessity to keep fair with
France, or dread their Assistance, altered all Soliman's Titles, Instructions
and Dispatches; recalling the first, and sending him others: But that it was
most certain, that the Name and Title of Soliman Aga were bestowed upon him in
the Quality of an Ambassador; of which there needed no farther proof then this,
That the Great Turk gave him the Scimitar and Vestment which he gives to his
Ambassadors, and that the Fortress of Napoli in Romania saluted him with
several Guns at his entrance into the Haven.

However it were, Monsieur de la Hay returned to Constantinople in July, and
three Months after he received Order to embark, if he could, aboard the Fleet
under the Command of Monsieur d'Almeras; but if the Caimacan prevented him,
that at the same Instant he should lay down the Title of Ambassador, to the end
the Turks might not have the Opportunity to Glory that they had in their Power
an Ambassador of France to abuse at their pleasure. But as I said before, the
Men of War were gone before this Order arrived: so that Monsieur de la Hay
could not obey the first part of the Order; and as to the second, he excused
himself, by writing into France, That the Turks had a great Veneration and
Respect for him.

But this excuse not being so thoroughly acceptable at Court, was the Occasion
that Monsieur de la Hay was peremptorily recalled. Besides the Provencals,
were so incensed against him, that they sent continually into France,
clamouring that so long as he should be continued Ambassador at the Port, the
League would never be renewed, neither would the Passage to the Indies through
the Red Sea be obtained; in regard the Vizier had an old Grudge against his
Person. Which Complaints being believed, it was resolved that Monsieur de la
Hay should be recalled, and that M. de Nointel should be sent in his stead.
Who was a Counselor of the Parliament of Paris, a Person of great Integrity,
and so curious that his Curiosity had carried him to Constantinople before that
Time; but he was of too mild a Disposition to negociate in Turkey. Neither were
they resolved at first to have given him any higher Title then that of
Resident; till the Importunity of his Friends and of the Levant Company,
procured him that of Ambassador. For the Company judging of what begat Esteem
and Reverence among the Turks, by the Humors of the Europeans, represented to
the Chief Ministers of State, that in the transacting matters of such
High-Importance, as the renewing of an Advantageous Peace and the obtaining a
Free Trade to the Indies through the Red Sea, the Grand Signior would sooner
condescend to the Dignity of an Ambassador, then the more obscure Quality of a
Resident.

Monsieur Nointel therefore departed out of France in the Month of August 1670.
together with the Turkish Ambassador, Soliman Aga, and arrived at
Constantinople in October following; the King allowing him four Men of War for
the security of his Passage under the Conduct of M. D'Aplemont. By the way I
have heard several Persons of great Sagacity and Judgment affirm, that M. de la
Hay had wrong done him, and that they were deceived who vainly imagined that
it was either out of disrespect to his Person, or for want of Good Management,
that the Turks refused to renew the League at his Solicitations. Which the
Sequel of Affairs has justified for Truth, plainly demonstrating that the Blame
was to be laid upon the Ill timing the Embassy, and the Potent Succors which
the King of France sent to Candy at the very Instant when he had sent his
Ambassador to desire considerable Favors and particular Advantages of the
Grand Signior.

M. Nointel made a Magnificent Entry into Constantinople; but the Turks were
nothing pleased with so much Pomp, altogether unseasonable, and no way
agreeable to the Circumstances of Time and Business. The Ottoman Court was then
at Adrianople, where Monsieur de la Hay with little difficulty obtained leave
to depart, and to that purpose embarked himself in the Admiral of the Squadron,
Commanded by M d'Aplemont. But soon after both the Admiral and the rest of the
Squadron were Imbargo'd before the Castles, by reason of two Slaves that had
made their escapes, as was supposed, into the French Ships. There were it seems
about an Hunderd in all, who had broke their Chains, of all sorts of Nations;
of which Number was the Chevalier de Beaujeu, who had been a Prisoner in the
Seven Towers. The Caimacan sent to demand the Slaves of M. Nointel, and M.
Nointel went to demand 'em of the Captains of the Men of War, who answered,
That there were none such in any of their Vessels: and M. de la Hay was forced
to write from the Dardanels to the Vizier to attest the same under his own
Hand; who seeming to be satisfied with his answer, sent an Order to let the
Vessels go.

Sometime after the departure of M. de la Hay, M. Nointel went to Adrianople.
Where he had all the usual Honors duly paid him; but demanded Audience before
he had made known the Subject of his Negotiation at the Ottoman Port, which he
should have declared beforehand. For it is the Law in Turkey, That all
Ambassadors before they see the Face of the Prime Minister, or of the Grand
Signior, should signify the Occasion of their Coming, what their Demands are,
and what it is that they have in Commission to Treat about. And the same Law is
observed over all the East. Of which M. Nointel was not ignorant. But he found
it in his Instructions, That he should Negotiate his Affairs in Person with the
Grand Vizier, and that he should not disclose the Kings Orders but in a full
Divan, when he might also speak to the Grand Signior himself. Which was
therefore so resolved upon in the Kings Council, because it was said in France,
That his Highness knew nothing of the Severities of the Grand Vizier toward the
French Nation; no more then did the Divan. That the Haughty Minister refused to
renew the Treaty of Alliance upon the Kings Conditions, out of a particular
hatred which he bore the French, and therefore it behooved him to get himself
out of his Clutches, and free himself from any Dependence upon his Absolute
Authority. But it is a Failing predominant in all the Courts of Europe, that
they take false Measures as to the Affairs of Turkey: a certain sign that the
Genius and Politics of the Turks are not as yet rightly understood. However
most assuredly these Counsels were ill given, and worse followed. For M.
Nointel did all he could to observe his Orders, sometimes he would disclose
nothing at all; then again he was for discovering part of his Commission: but
finding he could not obtain Audience, he was forced to unbosom himself, and to
send a Memorial of all the Demands which he had to make at the Ottoman Port.

This Memorial he gave to the Vizier's Interpreter, whose Name was Panaioti; a
Grecian, and a Man of a piercing Wit, who understood several of the European
Languages; and among the rest Latin and Italian, which he writ as well as spoke
with great Judgment and Dexterity. He was a Person untaintedly faithful to the
Grand Vizier, and it appeared that he was entirely devoted to the Interests of
the Port, to the prejudice of the Christians. Which firmness of his, whether it
proceeded from a dread of the Turkish Severity in the punishment of Treason and
Treachery, or the Obligations of his Birth, or the Influences of Turkish
Slavery, I will not here dispute; however it be, he bears the Title of Chief
Interpreter, and Secretary of the Ottoman Empire. The Commonwealth of Genoa
also made him a Nobleman of that City for the good Offices he did their
Ambassador the Marquess of Durazzo. He was Interpreter to the Emperor of
Germany, before he served the Vizier; who allowed him a Pension of a Thousand
Crowns, which as some say is still privately paid him. And moreover he had the
chief Management of the Treaty of Peace between the two Empires, which was not
so honorable for Germany. He also carried on the Treaty of Candy, wherein he
acted so much to the Satisfaction of the Grand Vizier, that at the time of the
Ratification he gave him the Revenue of the Island of Micone in the
Archipelago, worth Four Thousand Crowns a Year. I have been the longer in
giving an Account of this Panaioti, because he is a Person so well known to all
that have Business at the Port: as being the only Man that Treats in the
Vizier's behalf with all Christians that make their Addresses to him, of what
Quality soever, and whatsoever their Business may be.

The Ambassadors Demands were comprehended under Thirty Articles, of which
these were the chief.

First, That the Grand Signior should not entertain within his Dominions any
European Nation, except what were already settled there, but under the French
Banners; and that particularly the Italians, except the Venetians and Genoeses,
that should come into Turkey, should be obliged to put themselves under the
Banner of France, and the Protection of that King's Ambassador.

This Privilege was granted by the Turks to the French in the Capitulations
made in the Reign of Francis the First, and the French enjoyed 'em till the
beginning of this Age; at what time by reason of certain Pirates that Cruis'd
upon the Coast of Egypt under French Colors, the Port struck out that Article
in a new Agreement then concluded. Afterward the Article was restored, and the
same Privilege granted a second time in these words.

All Nations of Europe, that do not maintain Public Agents at the Port, nor
are in Alliance and Confederacy with the Grand Signior, which shall come into
the Levant under French Colors, shall be there received and entertained, and
enjoy the same Advantages which the French do. But the Turks refuse to
acknowledge these latter Capitulations; and therefore making use of the former,
they allege moreover, That the words [shall come] are not exclusive; and
therefore though the Port be obliged to receive all Strangers that shall come
under French Colors, yet they do not debar the Grand Signior to entertain
Strangers, if it be his Pleasure, that come under other Colors.

Secondly, That the French shall not pay above Three in the Hunderd Customs,
which is no more then the English, Hollanders, and Genoeses do.

Thirdly, That the Grand Signior shall grant Free Liberty to the French to
Traffic to the Indies, through his Dominions and Territories, more especially
through the Channel of the Red Sea, without paying any other Duties then those
of Entrage.

Fourthly, That the Grand Signior shall restore to the Religious Orders of the
Roman Catholics the Holy Land, and the Holy Places from whence they were
expelled by the Greeks in the Year 1638.

Fifthly, That the King of France shall be acknowledged at the Port, the Sole
Protector of the Christians.

Sixthly, That all the Roman Catholic Christians that live within the
Dominions of the Ottoman Empire, shall be looked upon and considered as under
the Protection of his Majesty.

Seventhly, That the French Capuchins, that live at Constantinople, may have
Liberty to Rebuild their Church at Galata, which was burnt down about Fifteen
Years ago.

Eighthly, That all the Churches of the Roman Christians within the Ottoman
Empire, may for the future be Repaired or Rebuilt, as often as need shall
require, without being put to the Trouble of asking Leave.

Ninthly, That all the French Slaves shall be set at Liberty.

The other Proposals were of less Importance in particular, only their Number
rendered 'em considerable. But the Port looked upon these Demands to be so
extravagant, nay so ridiculous, that the Prime Ministers believed, or else
pretended to believe, that the King sought only an Occasion to break with his
Highness. Thereupon the Vizier sent to know of the Ambassador, Whether he had
any Letter from the Emperor of France directed to the Grand Signior or Him,
which contained those Proposals, set down in the Memorial which he had
delivered in his Majesty's Name. For that he could never think the Emperor of
France would ever give Order to make such Proposals to the Port, so exorbitant,
and so remote from Reason and Justice in his own Name, unless he saw 'em
expressly written in any Letter under his Majesty's Hand. M. de Nointel taking
no farther notice of the Vizier's Demand, returned only for answer, That he had
Letters of Credence from his Master for the Grand Signior, and the Grand
Vizier, which was sufficient, for that his Majesty did not use to write about
Business himself. And therefore that the Port was under a mistake to question
the Mind and Intentions of the Emperor of France, because it was not shown in
Writing under his Majesty's Hand. True it is, that the Ambassador spoke Reason,
and the Impediment pretended by the Vizier was only a Litigious Nicety.
However, notwithstanding all that M. de Nointel could say or allege to the
contrary, he would not grant him Audience, till he promised and engaged to send
for a Letter from the King that should contain precisely the same things that
were set down in his Memorial, and that the Letter should come in six Months.

It was toward the end of February 1671. that M. de Nointel made this promise:
and the next day the Grand Vizier sent to him, to let him know that on the
Morrow he should have Audience of himself, and that two days after he should
have Audience of the Grand Signior likewise, upon condition that he would not
discourse of any Business True it is, the Vizier gave him but a cold Reception.
For the Ambassador entering into discourse upon several Subjects, which were all
too long and tedious for the Turkish Humor, they went in at one Ear and out at
the the other: The Vizier for the most part giving him no other Answer but only a
short Yes, or as brief a No. Particularly Monsieur Nointel enlarged upon the
Grandeur of the King, and his vast Forces: which the Vizier taking to be a kind
of secret Threatening, Yes, said he, the Emperor of France is a Great Monarch,
but his Sword is but a new Weapon yet. Intimating that the King had done no
Exploits that deserved such loud Elogies; but therein he was not well informed
of what had passed among the Christian Princes. Neither did Monsieur Nointel
escape some other Quips of the same Nature. For the Ambassador talking of the
Antiquity of the Alliance between France and Turkey, was saying, That the
French were the Turks true Friends. To which the Vizier smiling, Ay, said he,
the French are our Friends indeed, but we always find 'em among our Enemies.
But the next was more home and sharp.

The Ambassador being ready to take his leave, ordered the Interpreter to tell
the Vizier, That he had Orders from the Emperor his Master, earnestly to
recommend to him the Business of the Red Sea. That it was a Thing which his
Majesty had set his Heart upon, and desired the Port would give him
Satisfaction in that Particular with all Expedition. To whom the Vizier drily,
Can it be, said He, That your Emperor, so great a Monarch as you say he is,
should set his Heart so affectionately upon the profit of his Merchants?

Nor was the Ambassador better satisfied with the Audience which he had of the
Grand Signior. For after he had made his Reverence, they led him up to the end
of the Room of State, Face to Face to his Highness, to whom he made his
Harangue, which lasted about a quarter of an Hour. But it signified little. For
the Interpreter explained no more then the Sense of it to the Vizier, which the
Vizier abbreviated in two words to the Grand Signior. Which done, M. de Nointel
began to discourse of Business to his Highness; contrary to Custom, to the
Vizier's Request, and his own Promise. The Grand Signior listened attentively
to what the Interpreter said, and for answer, looking upon the Vizier, who upon
such Occasions is always near the Grand Signior's Person, This Ambassador, said
he, addresses himself to our Lala. Which word Lala signifies both a Tutor, and
a Father. The Turks made use of the word, to denote a Person who has a
particular Care and paternal affection for another.

Then again, it is the Custom, after the Ambassador has had his Audience of the
Grand Signior, for him to Dine in the Divan, where the Ambassador sits with the
Grand Vizier; and the Gentlemen of his Retinue Eat with the Viziers of the
Bench; who are the Greatest Lords of the Empire. There would M. de Nointel be
talking also of business. Which put the Vizier so out of Patience, that being
forced to be somewhat rude with him, after he had desired him to be silent,
Good Mr. Ambassador, said He, Keep to your promise, in Six Months we shall
understand whither you are Friends or Enemies.

This was the first Disappointment of M. de Nointel, and the success of his
Journey to Adrianople. He returned to Constantinople in March 1671. from whence
he wrote to France, what he had done at the Port, and upon what Terms he stood
with the Vizier. By which it was apparent to the Court, that the Vizier did but
make sport with the Ambassador and the French. Upon which it was debated
whether they should break with the Port, or whether they should dissemble such
an Affrontive Entertainment. And therefore that they might not proceed with too
much Precipitancy in an Affair of that Importance, the Chief President of Aix,
M. d'Oppede, was ordered to assemble at Marseilles all the Levant Merchants,
and others that were verst in the Affairs of Turkey, and to take their Opinions
upon what several People had offered to the Council. That France might refrain
from Trading into the Levant, at least for several Years, and that it was easy
to do so much Damage to the Turks by Sea, that the Grand Signior should be
constrained to grant his Majesty his own Demands. Upon which the Result of the
Assembly, by the Plurality of Voices was, That the Proposalls were certainly
true; that Provence was so sufficiently stocked with Turkey Commodities, that
there was enough to furnish France for Ten Years: And that if the King would
send but Ten Vessels into the Grecian Seas, and particularly to the Dardanels,
there would soon be such a Famine in Constantinople, that the People would
certainly make an Insurrection to the Advantage of the French.

Upon this the Provencalls made no question but that there would suddenly be a
War with the Grand Signior. They wrote over all the Levant, what had passed at
Marseilles, and assured their Friends that the King was setting forth a Fleet
of Fifty Ships to send against the Turks. And M. de Nointel reciev'd Letters
from Marseilles, which ascertained him the same thing. In so much that the News
was spread in an Instant through Constantinople, Adrianople, and over all the
Ports of the Levant. Besides, I have been credibly informed, that the Grand
Vizier, and all the Prime Ministers of the Port, were very much startled at it.
Insomuch that he sent to the other Ambassadors and Residents of Christendom, to
know whither the King of France intended a War, and were making preparations
for it. To which they all sent him answer, that it was true that the French
were setting forth a very great Fleet. But whither it were designed against
Turkey or no, they could not tell: but the general Report, and that which they
believed to be the truest was, that they were intended against the Hollanders.
Which Answers abated the Fears of the Turks; and soon after a French Bark
arriving in two Months at Constantinople rid 'em of all their Jealousies. For
tho they thought at first, that it had been a Boat which had brought fresh
Orders to the Ambassador and for all the French Nation; yet were they no less
glad, when the Master being asked, where the French Fleet lay, that was
designed against the Turks, made answer, that he did not understand what they
meant; that he had heard no talk of a Fleet, and that he was sure there was no
such thing, as any Preparations at Toulon.

The first of September, the Grand Vizier wrote to M. de Nointel, That the Six
Months were expired, which was the time he had taken to send for a Letter from
his Master; desiring farther to know whether it were come, what it contained,
and what Instructions he had received from his Majesty. To which the Ambassador
replied by word of Mouth to the Messenger who brought the Letter, That the
Emperor of France's Answer was not yet come, which was all he could say to the
Grand Vizier, being resolved not to give any other Answer to a Letter, that did
not give his Master all the Titles that belonged to his Imperial Majesty. Which
M. de Nointel did on purpose, for that the Vizier had not given the King either
in his Letter, or in the Superscription, any other Title then that of Craul,
which among the Turks is not so high as that of Padcha, though they both
signify a Sovereign Prince. But Padcha is the Title which they always give the
Grand Signior, and which they were always wont to allow the King of France.
Padcha being a Persian word; Craul a Sclavonian, and the very Title which the
Polonians give their King: and in France the word Padcha is taken for Emperor.

All this while the Resolutions and Results of the Council of France in
reference to the Affairs of the Levant, after the Assembly held at Marseilles,
did not answer public Expectation in the Prosecution of that Assemblies
Advice. For the King designing a War with Holland, would not engage in another
with Turkey at the same time, which required the best part of his Navy to
maintain. Therefore he resolved to spin out time, and to endeavor an
Accommodation; that so he might not be obliged to break with the Turks. To
which purpose Monsieur de Lyone wrote to the Vizier, That the Emperor of France
admired he should refuse to give Credit to his Ambassador, since the Port had
never till then questioned the Truth and Reality of the Proposals of the French
Ambassadors. That his Imperial Majesty would not trouble himself to explain his
meaning any otherwise then by his Ambassador M. de Nointel: so that if the
Grand Signior or his Ministers refused to give him Credence, they would do well
to let him return in the Vessel that brought the Letter.

With this Letter M. d'Hervieu, Interpreter to the Dolphin, and at present
Consul at Aleppo, was sent, having Orders to deliver it himself to the Grand
Vizier, and withal to carry the King's last Instructions to the Ambassador. He
fet Sail from Marseilles in September, in one of the King's Men of War called
the Diamond, commanded by the Marquess de Prully, but did not arrive at
Constantinople till February following, bad Weather having detained him Four
Months between Malta and Constantinople.

So soon as the Vessel arrived, and that M. de Nointel had seen the King's
Instructions, he wrote to the Vizier, That his Majesty's Answer was at length
come, after it had been Five Months upon the Seas, and that he only tarried for
Leave to appear at Court, that he might impart it to him. To which the Vizier
returned answer, That he might come when he pleased, and be Welcome. More then
that, he had superscrib'd his Letter according to the Ancient Custom, To the
Ambassador of the Emperor of France; whereas he had only writ upon his former,
To the Ambassador of the King of France. The same day also that the Ambassador
received this Letter, the Caimacan sent a Messenger to him, to let him know,
That he had Order from the Vizier to furnish his Excellency with Thirty Wagons,
Twelve Horses, and a Thousand Crowns toward the Expense of his Journey; which
should be sent him with all speed. In short, the Money was brought the next
day, and the Wagons and Horses were punctually ready according to the time
which the Ambassador had prefixed.

And this was the State of Affairs and Condition of the Alliance between France
and Turkey when I arrived at Constantinople in March 1672.

The Ambassador departed from Constantinople the 29th of March, carrying along
with him the Abbot of Nointel his Brother, a Gentleman, a Confessor, a Steward,
a Secretary, three Interpreters, two Janisaries, and of meaner Officers a
competent Retinue. Besides all these, he had also in his Train, M. d'Hervieu,
who brought the Letter from M. de Lyonne to the Vizier; one of the Directors of
the Levant Company, whose Business it was to Treat about the Conditions of the
Red-Sea-Trade; Two Spanish Friars, Commissaries of the Holy Land, who were to
solicit the Restitution of the Sacred Places, from whence they had been
expelled by the Greeks by Authority from the Port, about Thirty Years before; a
Merchant of Marseilles, who had Business at the Part, together with Four French
and Italian Gentlemen, who, as I my self, made that Journey merely out of
Curiosity. The Caimacan also sent a Chiaus to attend the Ambassador, to provide
him Convenient Lodging, and to preserve that Respect to his Person, and his
Retinue, which the Turks are subject to violate upon the slightest Occasions,
if not overaw'd by the dread of Punishment. We were Six Days upon the Road; it
being reck'nd Fifty Leagues between Constantinople and Adrianople. A Road no
way to be found fault with, as being very broad and level, over Plains, and a
lovely Champain Country: besides that we passed through a great many very neat
Villages, accommodated with fair and handsome Inns.

We lodged half a League from Adrianople, in a most pleasant Situation, upon
the River Hebrus, called Bosna-Koy, that is, the Village of the Bosneans. Ten
days after our Arrival, Panaioti, the Vizier's Interpreter, of whom we have
already spok'n, came to visit the Ambassador in his Masters Name, and to know
the King's Resolutions touching the renewing of the Alliance. After which
Preamble to M. de Nointel, he told him, That it was the Grand Vizier's Opinion,
that it was not convenient for him and the Ambassador to have any Personal
Interviews and Discourse together, till all Affairs were concluded and fully
agreed, for fear lest any Exceptions or Differences should happ'n between 'em,
which though but upon slight and impertinent Punctilio's, might break or put a
stop to the Negotiation, and hinder its good success. To which Panaioti added,
as it were in Confirmation of the Vizier's Judgment, That Affairs in Turkey
were never well managed, unless it were by a Third Person, in regard the Vizier
and the Ambassador being equally concerned to preserve the Honor and Interests
of two great Empires, neither of the two would be the first that should forego
the smallest Tittle of their Pretensions; but that a Treaty carried on by their
Interpreters could not easily produce those unlucky Accidents either in the One
or the Other. In short therefore, the Vizier desired that favor of him, that
he might not give him Audience, but only to deliver into his Hands the new
Articles of Peace and Agreement. M. de Nointel could have wished with all his
Heart, it might have been otherwise: but there was a Necessity of condescending
to the Grand Vizier's Pleasure, which was to Treat by the Intercourse of
Interpreters. Thereupon Panaioti took the Letter which M. de Lyonne had written
to the Vizier, and the Memorial of the Conditions upon which his Majesty was
resolved to renew the Alliance, and no otherwise, as the Ambassador alleged;
and so took his Leave, after he had made a Thousand Vows and Protestations to
the Ambassador of the Services he would do in that Negotiation. Particularly he
told him, That he took it for so great an Honor to have the Management of this
New League between the Grand Signior and the Emperor of France, that there was
no way or means which he would leave unstudy'd that he might bring it to a
Conclusion, to the Satisfaction of his most Christian Majesty. But Time
discovered, that his Protestations were altogether deceitful and fallacious,
and that Panaioti had not the same Inclinations for the Interests of France as
for those of the Grand Vizier.

First then, the Vizier read over the Ambassador's Memorial, and then gave it
to be examined in the Divan. It was not so long by half as that which he had
presented the time before, as not containing above Eleven Heads. Nevertheless
he found it to be very Extravagant. So that when the most Considerable Articles
were read, he would still cry, The Port will never grant 'em. Upon others he
would pass Sentence, saying, This may be granted; and we shall endeavor to
pass over such an Obstacle and to remove such and such Difficulties. So that he
absolutely refused one part of the Demands, and gave his Opinion of the rest
but very doubtfully. Which was a piece of Policy in the Grand Vizier, to
discover by the Ambassador's Answers whether it were true that his Instructions
were not to recede in the least from his Memoires. And it fell out according to
his desire, for by that means he found that the Ambassador had private Orders.

At the end of April, the two Friars, Commissaries for the Holy Land, were very
much troubled at a Report that ran among our selves, That they needed not to
tarry, as they did, in expectation of being restored to the Sacred Places, from
which the Greeks had expelled 'em, for that the Vizier having declared, That he
would agree to the Abatement of the Customs, and the Red-Sea-Trade, on
Condition the Ambassador would not insist upon the Holy Land, he had answered,
That that was a Point to be reserved till the last. Which because it is an
Affair of much Curiosity, I shall here set down the principal Passages relating
to it; withal in some measure to divert the Reader, wearied perhaps with a long
Story of the French Negotiations at the Ottoman Port, for the Renewing of an
Alliance.

The Kingdom of Jerusalem was Conquered by the Christians in the Year 1099. and
lost in the Year 1177. At what time a certain King of Syria whose Name was
Nezer-Salah-el-din-Joseph reconquer'd it, and expelled all the Western
Christians, especially the Knights; leaving only behind the Oriental
Christians, Syrians, Armenians, Georgians and Greeks. In a short time after one
of the Kings of Naples, of the House of Anjou, purchased of the King of Syria
the Sacred Places of Palestine. However the Bargain was kept secret, the King
of Syria being afraid lest the Mahumetan Princes his Neighbors, should
reproach him for what he had done, and quarrel with him about the Sale.
Thereupon the Franciscan Monks were sent to take possession of the Sacred
Places according to the Compact, who continued there, and were confirmed by the
Soldans of Egypt, and the Turkish Emperors who afterward Conquered Palestine.

All this while the Friars had the Keys and Possession of whatever Christian
Devotion had Consecrated at Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Nazareth, and in all other
Sacred Places of the Holy Land. Moreover, the Eastern Christians, who were very
numerous, had also their Chapels in several of those Holy Places, as well in
the Church built upon the Sepulcher of Christ, as in those that were reared in
the Places where he was Born and Crucified. The Popes likewise who make it
their Business to bring over to their Communion all the Greeks, commanded the
Franciscans that they should have all manner of Liberty in the Holy Places, and
withal to permit 'em to build Chapels, to keep Lamps and Tapers burning, and
to erect Images and Altars.

This Allurement of so much Freedom, which the Greeks enjoyed in their
Churches, say the Franciscans, was that which enticed 'em into a design to make
themselves the sole Masters of those Places; though the Greeks most stiffly
deny any such thing. However it were, in the Year 1634. the Greeks repaired to
the Port, and there produced several Ancient Records, setting forth their Title
to the possession of Mount Calvary, the Grotto of Bethlehem, and other Places.
Thereupon the Franciscans were cited to the Divan; who appeared with the
Ambassadors of the Christian Princes that were then resident at the Port: and
the Cause was several times argued before the Prime Vizier. All the Christians
also who were in Alliance with the Port, as well Protestants as Roman
Catholics, interested themselves in the Suit; and both sides were at
extraordinary Expenses. But at length the Greeks gained the Cause, and were put
into possession of the Holy Places, according to their own desires.

The Grand Vizier, who gave Judgment in favor of the Greeks, being dead at the
end of two Years, the Europeans demanded a Rehearing of the Cause. Which was
granted, and it went clearly for the Franciscans, who were thereupon restored
to the possession of what the Greeks got from 'em, but they did not keep it
above two Years more. For after that, another Grand Vizier, more favorable to
the Greeks, resetl'd 'em again in all the Places which had been recovered by
the Franciscans four Years before. After that, the Latins used great Endeavors
to regain the Possession, but all to no purpose, the Divan being still deaf to
all their Solicitations, Promises and Offers; and constantly alleging, That
it was not just, that the Greeks, who were the Grand Signior's Subjects, and
who paid him the yearly Tribute of Eight Hunderd Thousand Crowns, should be
deprived their share of the Custody of the Sacred Places in Palestine, which
was part of the Demeasns of the Ottoman Empire. Yet for all that, the
Franciscans have not forborne to renew their Importunities, their Petitions, and
their Offers of Money, as often as they found any seasonable Opportunities to
do it. In the Year 1665. Count Lesley in the Name of the Emperor took all the
care and pains imaginable for the Restoration of the Franciscans to their
Rights, prayed, paid and promised Mountains, but all was labor lost. Four
Years after, the Procurator Molino in the Name of the Republic of Venice
undertook their Cause with the same Vigor; so that the Franciscans had now no
other hopes but in the King of France. To which purpose they deputed two of
their Order to his Majesty, who presented him with Letters of Recommendation
from Rome, Spain, and the most part of the Roman Catholic Princes, to make use
of his Credit and Reputation in the Ottoman Court, for the Restoration of the
Latins into the Sacred Places, from whence they had been expelled by the
Greeks. But there was no need of a Recommendation to excite the King in the
prosecution of such a Pious Act, to which his own Zeal was a sufficient
Incentive. Immediately therefore he wrote to M. de la Hay to insert the
Demands of those Religious Persons among the Conditions for the renewing the
Alliance. And after that, both M. de la Hay, and M. de Nointel protested to
'em several times, That they had express Orders not to Treat with the Port, nor
to renew the Articles of Alliance, unless they would restore the Franciscans to
the Places they had lost. Nevertheless it appeared at the end of April, that an
Affair of that Nature might be dispensed withal, rather then to put a stop to
such an Important Treaty for the Custody of three or four silly Chapels.

These two Friars told me, how that upon their Arrival at Constantinople, M. de
la Hay bid 'em rest satisfied; for that he understood so well the Resolutions
of the Prime Ministers of the Port, that they would never renew the Treaty,
upon the Conditions which the King demanded, in regard the Restoration of the
Sacred Places, upon which the King so firmly insisted, was an Article the Port
would never grant. To which, as they informed me, they returned this Answer,
which included good Advice indeed for the success of their own Interest. If
your Excellency, said they, have positive Instructions in Reference to the
Restoration, and that you know the Port will never consent to it, make no other
Demand to the Grand Vizier till that be concerted; and declare withal to the
Prime Minister, That you will not Treat, till he has promised to restore us
what the Greeks have taken from us. If your Excellency observe this Method,
either the Vizier will grant or deny. If he grant, the greatest Impediment to
the renewing of the Treaty will be removed: If he refuse, the Rupture will
redound to the King of France 's Honor. He will appear not to have sought his
own Interest: All Europe will admire his Majesty's Piety and Zeal; and there is
no Person but must be forced to acknowledge that his High Respect to Religion
was the only cause that incited him to break with the Turks.

The well-meaning Fathers told me this Story with an extraordinary Vehemence,
which is usual among Spanish Monks. For they believed it to be one of the most
Noble Actions in the World to enter into a War with the Ottoman Empire, to
force the Great Turk to take from the Christians of Jerusalem, his own proper
Subjects, the Custody of five or six petty Churches, and bestow it upon Foreign
Monks, who not content to make use of 'em when they pleased, would have the
Keys hung at their Girdles.

About Mid-May M. de Nointel finding that the Grand Signior and Vizier were
ready to depart for Poland, and that there was but little Progress made in his
Negotiation, went to visit the Reisquitab, or Lord Chancellor: With whom he had
three Conferences, before they could conclude the Treaty. But at the third
Conference, which was upon the 26th of May, all things were agreed and settled,
and the Alliance was renewed upon the following Conditions.

That the French for the future should pay no more then Three per Cent. Customs.

That they should have the Red Sea open for a Trade into the Indies, paying
Five per Cent. Customs, which should be paid at their Entrance into the Grand
Signior 's Dominions, without any farther Payments either for their Passage, or
at their Departure.

That the French Capuchins should rebuild their Church of St. George at Galata,
burnt down by Fire: And that the same Church, together with the Jesuits in the
same Place, and all other Appurtenances belonging to the French within the
Ottoman Empire, should be under the Protection of the King.

That the Ambassador should be acknowledged Protector of the Hospital of the
European Christians in Galata, and that they should have Liberty to say Mass in
the said Hospital.

That all the French Captives that were in Turkey, or should happen to be taken
for the future, should be set at Liberty, provided they were not taken in any
Fleets or Armies, or before any Places in Hostility with the Port.

And this was all that was to be changed or added in the New Capitulations; for
the Article concerning Foreign Nations was to continue as it was before in the
former Treaty.

When all things were accepted and mutually agreed, the Ambassador of France's
eldest Interpreter spoke to Monsieur de Nointel, that he should not stir till
the Chancellor had made out a Draught of the New Capitulations. Which advice
was well given, but the Ambassador gave more Credit to Panaioti the Grand
Vizier's Interpreter, who told him, it would be an Affront to the Chancellor,
to distrust what he delivered by word of Mouth, by asking him for a Draught in
Writing; and that he would engage his Word, and be Security for the performance
of what the Chancellor had declared. Upon which the Ambassador suffered himself
to be overruled; and returned to his Lodging extremely joyful and well
satisfied, and with all the Cheerfulness and Gaiety in his Countenance which
generally displays it self upon the good success of Business. Insomuch that
sitting down at Table, Come, Gentlemen, said he, the Capitulations are renewed;
let us now be merry, and drink to this Renovation of the League.

Now the Chancellor had promised to send a Copy of the Draught in the Evening,
to the end it might be examined, and afterward writt'n out fair: but he failed
in his promise, nor was the Ambassador troubled in the least. The next Morning
however he sent for it: but he was strangely surpised, to find that the
Article about Foreign Nations did not oblige, as it should have done, all those
that were under no settlement already at the Port, to put themselves under the
Banners and Colors of France. Then Monsieur de Nointel began to mistrust that
he had been deluded. At last he fell into a Passion, and presently called for
his second Interpreter, to go and tell the Chancellor, That if that Article
were not put down as he understood it, he would not accept the New
Capitulations. Which his chief Interpreter observing, stepped in, and adviz'd
him to be wary how he enhanc'd the price as he was going to do; that it was not
safe to put the Market into the Turks Hands, as he did; and therefore desired
him to take care how he engaged himself in a heat to break with the Port, for a
single Article of little Importance. But such was M de Nointels Impatience,
that he bid the Messenger go forthwith, and carry his Message to the
Chancellor; who answered, That he would report it to the Vizier.

The 29th the Ambassador went to the Chancellor's House; who told him, That it
became not France to demand of the Port a thing which was not in their Power to
grant: For that the Grand Signior had engaged to the English, the Venetians,
the Hollanders and Genoeses, That all Strangers that should come into Turkey,
under their Colors, should be welcome, whoever they were; should enjoy the same
Privileges, and in a word be entertained as their Friends were. That having
also granted the same Privileges to the Emperor, particularly for the Imperial
Hans-Towns, for the Subjects of the House of Austria and the Italians, his
Highness could not without violating his Faith, grant to the French what they
demanded; that is to say, That he should admit no Foreigners but what came
under the French Colors, unless they were such as had their Establishments
already confirmed at the Port. To which the Chancellor added, That what he had
represented to his Excellency was notoriously public, and a most convincing
Argument, and therefore besought him not to insist any further upon that
Article. To which M. de Nointel replied with a Protest not to renew, unless
that Article were granted in the same form as he demanded. The Chancellor
returned, That he would report his Protest to the Vizier, and then he should
know his Answer. The Ambassador told him, He should think himself highly
obliged, so that his Convenience would permit him, if he would be pleased but
to go immediately and speak to the Vizier, while he staid for his coming back.
The Chancellor consented; went, spoke to the Vizier, and returned with this
Answer.

The Grand Vizier has ordered me to tell your Excellency, That you made him
promise ye about a Month since, That provided the Port should grant the Emperor
of France an Abatement of the Customs, and a Free Trade through the Red Sea, he
would be contented, as to what remained, with what was reasonable and just.
That upon that word he had granted in the Grand Signior's Name those two
Articles, and other Favors which you know; but now seeing you have not kept
your word with him, he declares expressly, That he recalls his own, and will
grant you nothing at all.

This Answer was like a Thunderclap. M. de Nointel and those that were with him
stood like Men in a Trance. They begged to resume, and ratify the Treaty, but
it was impossible, though they proffered upon the place to quit and renounce
the Article contested. To which the Chancellor answered, That he had no other
Orders from the Vizier, then to deliver his Message, and that he had no Power
to Treat any farther. The Ambassador replied; That he had a Letter from the
Prime Minister of France, which he desired only to deliver into his Hands, and
so to take his leave. The Chancellor made Answer, That for his Audience it
might be easily obtained, but as for the Letter from the Prime Minister of
France, the Grand Vizier cared not a Straw to look upon it.

Monsieur de Nointel returning to his Lodging with that vexation and perplexity
of Mind which may be conceived without any great difficulty, propounded to his
Council, which were the Abbot his Brother, the Director of the Levant Company,
and his two chief Interpreters, That since the English and Hollanders had
lately given Ten Thousand Pounds Sterling apiece, for renewing their last
Capitulations, it would be convenient for the French to give the same Money for
the renewing of Theirs. Upon which the two Interpreters had order to propose
the Sum to the Chief Ministers: but it nothing availed. For there are some
Favors obtained at the Port by the Force of Money; others which no Money will
procure. And such for Example was the Business solicited by the two
Commissaries of the Holy Land, who offered an Hunderd Thousand Crowns to the
Grand Vizier to put 'em in possession of the Sacred Places, and to expend as
much in Presents to the Grand Signior, and Ministers of the Port. But their
Money was Dross, the Divan not being to be bribed in that case.

By the way, I shall say this farther, in reference to those Religious Fathers,
that their making such large Offers was not a thing to be wondered at. For they
have assured me, that the Devotion which Spaniards have toward those Sanctified
Places is so great, that they themselves would expend whole Treasures for
Liberty to enjoy 'em again. They affirmed to me moreover, That the Money
expended in the Holy Land amounts to Eight Thousand Pounds Sterling a Year, of
which a third part goes in Presents to the Turks; and that the Guardian who is
Triennial, expends in Presents at his Arrival no less then Two Thousand Five
Hunderd Pounds.

The Third of June, which was the Day appointed for the Grand Signior's
departure for Poland, the Ambassador went betimes in the Morning to the Camp,
to the Quarters of the Grand Vizier, with a design to oblige the Haughty
Minister to grant him that Audience which he had refused him ever since his
Arrival, and to receive the Letter from Monsieur de Lyonne. He carried with him
also M. d'Hervieu, to the end that as he was the Person that brought it, he
should deliver it into his Hands. But the Vizier was not then in the Camp,
being gone to Convoy the Sultaness, Mother to the Grand Signior, to her first
Lodging. Which constrained the Ambassador to go to the Chancellor's Quarters,
where he waited seven complete Hours, sometimes in one Tent, sometimes in
another, because the Camp was then just upon Dislodging. At length a little
after High Noon, the News came that the Grand Vizier was come to the City.
Whither the Chancellor went to him, and told him, That the Ambassador of France
staid in the Camp to Kiss his Hands, and to know his last Commands. The Vizier
ordered him to tell his Excellency, That he needed not to give himself the
trouble of waiting, for that he was then taking leave of his Wife, his Mother,
and his Family, and should not return to the Camp till Night: and therefore
that it would be sufficient for him to leave only one of his Interpreters, to
whom he would give his Answer. Which was, That he would impart the Ambassador's
Demands to the Grand Signior and the Divan; but that he could not do it so soon
as he might expect, by reason that the Army was upon its March. That in the
mean time, his Excellency might return to Constantinople, and there await the
Grand Signior 's Resolution. That he would in the mean time write to the
Caimacan to grant a Pass for the King's Ship in the Harbor; and for what
remained, had it not been but that he confided in the Faith and Honor of the
Ambassador, he would have stopped him at Adrianople, to have prevented his
departure without leave.

At the same time the Interpreter had also Orders to know the Grand Vizier's
Commands touching certain particular Affairs relating to Trade in several
places of the Levant. Which he ordered to be dispatched the next Morning in
manner and form, as the Interpreter desired.

And this was the Success of M de Nointel's second Journey to the Port; upon
which both Parties made different Reflections. For the Turks with great
assurance lay the blame of this Rupture upon the French: Affirming that the
Abatement of the Customs was not a thing to which the French could justly
pretend. For that if other Nations paid not so much, as the English,
Hollanders, and Genoeses, yet there were some Nations that paid more, as the
Germans and Venetians: Or if the first who paid but Three per Cent. had
formerly paid Five, then the French had had some reason to have demanded an
Abatement. Nevertheless, that the Port, who is Free to bestow his Favors where
he pleased, having Treated upon their Arrival with the last Comers upon Terms
more advantageous then those which he granted to his first Allies; he was not
obliged to alter the Conditions of Commerce that had been for so long time
concluded. Then for the rest of the Kings Demands, they said, That they were
Favors which could not be in Conscience demanded; as being such which the
French were so far from having deserved from the Port, that they had always
opposed him in all his Enterprises. To which they added, That the French had
made their Demands, as if they had had the Market in their own Hands,
threatening, and acting like Lords and Masters, while the French that were in
the Levant, did nothing but talk of Burning Constantinople, making War upon the
Grand Signior, and Sacking his Islands, and his Seaports. That the Men of War
that brought M. de Nointel to Constantinople, openly protected the escape of a
great number of Slaves of several sorts of Nations, that put themselves aboard.
And that the French Ambassadors in all the Visits which they made to the Great
Personages, discoursed of nothing but his Majesty's Conquests, and the
Puissance of his Arms. This Defense the Turks made for themselves. With whom
other Nations also sided, alleging, That the Turks were not too blame, as
having showed themselves upon this Occasion less Barbarous then they were said
to be: not having manifested any thing of violent Resentment either against the
French in the Levant, or his Majesty's Ambassador, of the numerous and powerful
Succors which they had many times given their Enemies; of the War which they
carried on, even in Countries under the Turks Protection; or of their Affronts
and Menaces not forborne even in the Court it self. Nor could these things be
otherwise spok'n then out of an Ardent Desire to see some Unlucky Accident
happ'n, which might engage France to employ against the Turks those mighty
Preparations of War which the greatest part of her Neighbors dreaded.

And now having thus given an Account of the whole Progress of M. Nointel's
Negotiation at the Port, I shall add something in short in reference to the
Negotiations of M. Witzosky, the Polish Agent, and Signor Quirini, Procurator
of Venice, of which two the one happened to depart as soon as I arrived there;
but the other remained at the Court all the while I staid.

The Grand Vizier ordered 1700 Crowns to be given to the Polish Agent at his
departure, for the discharge of his Debts, and his Expenses upon the Way;
allowing him besides seven Wagons and a Chiaus. The Basha of Silistria also had
Orders to cause him to be Conducted through the Frontiers of Tartary; and to
Command the Tartars to detain him, till they understood that the Turkish Envoy
who was in Poland, had passed the Frontiers, and was entered into Turkey. The
Divan did all they could to compose all Differences with this Agent, and to
prevent a War with his Master. For the Port had some Designs upon Persia and
the Red Sea, so that it was only by constraint if they turned their Arms
against Poland. On the other side the Polander could not brook the Protection
which the Grand Signior had given to the Cossacks. For which reason the King
demanded that his Highness would publicly renounce the Protection which he had
publicly allowed. To the end that the Cossacks being terrified by such a
Desertion, might be compelled to submit the sooner to the Polish Prince without
Fighting, and he by that means regain the Possession of the Ukraine, which is
his particular Demeasns, and the Patrimony of his Ancestors.

During the Reign of King Casimir, M. Ratzieuskie was sent to demand the
Ratification of the Treaty of Coctchin, which was observed between Poland and
Turkey; and some other Things. To which the Port made answer, That they would
Ratify the Treaty purely and barely without mentioning the Cossacks. But M.
Ratzieuskie died at Adrianople before he could conclude his Negotiation. Whose
Employment of Agent his Secretary, M. Witzosky by the Order of the King that
succeeded Casimir, was appointed to supply, and received Instructions to
represent to the Port, That seeing the Ukraine was the particular Estate of the
Prince who then Reigned, he had a double Reason to claim the Repossession of
it. To which the Port returned for answer, That they would not hinder his
Majesty of Poland from regaining the Possession, and that he might do what he
pleased with the Cossacks; but in regard the Grand Signior's Honor was
concerned, he could not op'nly disavow the Protection which he had openly
granted. But M. Witzoski, being a Person of a violent hasty Humor, would not
accept of that Expedient, nor of any other which the Turks proposed. But loudly
protested in a full Divan, That though the King, the Senate and the Republic
should agree to accept a single Ratification, he would prevent 'em from doing
it, by the Power which he had, as a Gentleman of Poland.

But when the King and the Senate understood that the Grand Signior was turning
his Preparations against them; and that most assuredly the next Spring they
should have him at their Gates, they were both surpised and confounded. Nor
did the Agent himself know what to do, being deceived by the Rumors that were
spread abroad of the Revolt of the Arabians, and Sacking of Mecca; as also for
that through the Assurances which M. de Nointel had given him that his Most
Christian Majesty would send a Fleet of Fifty Ships into the Archipelago, he
had always writt'n to the Republic to hold fast their own, and not to
relinquish the least Tittle of their Demands, in regard that infallibly the
Grand Signior would suddenly have his Hands full on every side.

And indeed Poland was very desirous at that time not to have diverted his
Highness from his Asiatick Designs. For which reason, they sent an Interpreter
to the Port. Who arrived the 23 of May with a Train of eight Men, six weeks
after the departure of the Agent; and had a Lodging assigned him, and Twenty
Shillings a day for his Expenses. The Letters which he brought were from the
Great Chancellor, superscrib'd to the Grand Vizier, purporting, That Poland was
very much surpised to understand, that the Grand Signior was preparing for a
War against them; that they knew not the Reason, nor had they given him any
Occasion. That if the Port would Ratify the Treaty of Coctchin, the King was
ready to do it, and would send an Ambassador Extraordinary for that purpose.
But that if the Grand Signior persisted in his Design of making War, his
Majesty was ready to defend himself; protesting withal that the Polanders were
not the Violators of the Peace. The Interpreter was dispatched and sent back
again in eight days, with Letters to this effect, That Poland might send an
Ambassador Extraordinary, and that he should be welcome. But in the mean time
the Grand Signior's Army and the Grand Vizier at the Head of it, continued
their March toward Silistria.

In the Negotiation of the Signor Quirini there was nothing particularly
observable. Only he had peculiar Instructions to press the release of such
Prisoners as had been taken in the War of Candy: but after great Pains and vast
Expenses he could obtain no more then an Exchange of Eight and Twenty of the
Principal for as many of the Turks. Which Exchange was made at Castello Tornese
in the Morea. As for the rest of the Prisoners to the Number of a Thousand or
thereabouts, the Grand Vizier told the Procurator of Venice, That the Ottoman
Galleys were destitute of Slaves, and therefore to release a Thousand at one
Clap, would weak'n 'em too much; especially at a time when they had so much
need of Rowers to carry Men and Ammunition through the Black-Sea for supply of
their Army in Poland. However he promised that when the Campaigne was at an
end, he would order Two Hunderd and Fifty to be released; and so the like
Number every year till they were all at Liberty.

The Venetians are at that vast Expense at the Port, that it may be truly said
they buy whatever they obtain, and that at a dear rate too There is no Person
of Credit either in the Court or the Divan, to whom they do not make
considerable Presents every year. For the Republic, that has no Neighbor to be
afraid of, but the Turk, spares for no Cost to be at peace with him. They pay
him Tribute, out of several Islands in the Archipelago, as Zant, and Cerigo.
They connive at his Humors, his Affronts, his Tyranny; and all to prevent
Quarrels and Wars that arise every day between Potent Neighbors, as much as may
be done by the Prudence of their Conduct: and the same Republic sends for her
Ambassadors to Constantinople, the Ancientest, and most Experienced of her
Senators. The Procurators also of Venice are usually such as have been
Ambassadors in all the Courts of Christendom, and which have been employed in
Treaties of Peace and War, and all other Negotiations. Persons in a word that
understand all the Politics of all the Princes of the World, and the Slights
of the most Crafty Ministers of State, in the Art of concealing their own, and
discovering the Thoughts of others. These Procurators are fully Commissioned to
expend and give whatever they deem requisite. Generally they reside three years
at Constantinople, during which time they pick up above an Hunderd Thousand
Crowns; or at least it is in their power so to do; for the Republic never
calls 'em to Account. And this they do for two Reasons; the first is, to
balance by their Gains the Trouble and Hardship of an Embassy to
Constantinople, which arise from the Danger and Toil of Travailing; and from
the ill Humor and Contempt of the Turks. And secondly, to recompense those
Procurators, who have wasted their Estates in European Ambassies.

I have heard M. Quirini affirm, at several times that I have had the Honor to
visit him, That the Turkish Policy did very much surpass that of the Europeans:
That it was not confined within Maxims and Rules; but consisted altogether in
Sense and Judgment, as being grounded altogether upon Reason, and never acting
but according to Reason. Which sort of Policy, having neither Art nor
Principles, was as it were unapproachable; insomuch that he seriously
acknowledged, That the Conduct of a Vizier, was to him an Abyss, of which he
could not Fadom the Judgment, the Foresight, the Perspicacy, the Secrecy, the
Cunning, with all its Windings and Labyrinths. He assured me, That if had a
Son, he would send him to no other School then to the Ottoman Court; where he
could not too highly admire the Vizier, who without speaking, writing, or so
much as moving himself, Governed one of the most Potent Empires of the World,
and had extended the Limits of it in several places.

During my stay at Adrianople, I had the Honor several times to converse with
this Venetian Ambassador; and because that then our most general discourse was
concerning the War of Candy, I learnt from him and several other Eminent
Personages of the Court, diverse Particulars worthy Observation; of which I
shall here set down the most Memorable.

One of the Principal Performances which the Law of Mahomet enjoins, is the
Pilgrimage to Mecca and Medina. There is nothing that can legally dispense with
it but an extreme Poverty: and it further lays a strict Injunction upon those
whom either Sickness, or Employment, or other Occasions will not permit to go
in Person, to make their Pilgrimage by Proxy; that is, to send to those Places
of Devotion, a Person on purpose, to perform all those Duties which he himself
ought to have done, could he have gone thither himself.

The Ottoman Emperors are very punctual in the Discharge of this Duty, as well
for themselves, as for their whole Families. They send every year Considerable
Presents to those Cities, of which they esteem it a High Honor to call
themselves the Lords and Protectors: and these Presents are sent sometimes by
Land, and sometimes by Sea. In the year 1644. they were put aboard a great
Gallion, which was to carry 'em to Cairo. Several Eunuchs and Women of the
Serraglio were embarked in the same Vessel, together with the Grand Signior's
Delegates, and a great Number of Passengers and Soldiers. This Vessel putting
to Sea from Constantinople, with several other Vessels under her Convoy, was
set upon not far from Rhodes by the Galleys of Malta, and after a fierce
Engagement taken. Nevertheless the Galleys could not carry her off to Malta, by
reason that she leak'd in several places, as having received several Shot in
the Fight; so that they were forced to carry her into a Port of the Island of
Candy. Where they stopped her Leaks the best they could, and took all the care
imaginable to have carried her Home, but all to no purpose; for she sunk by the
way. However the Cargo which they unladed into their Galleys was valued at a
Million of Money.

The News of the taking this Gallion put the Grand Signior into a Rage:
insomuch that he threatened to exterminate all the Christians that were in
Constantinople, as well Ambassadors and Foreign Ministers, as others. And he
thus menaced all sorts of Nations, because, said he, the Galleys of Malta were
Manned with Christians and Soldiers from all parts of Christendom.

M. Soranzo, the Venetian Ambassador at the Ottoman Court, presently addressed
himself to the Ministers of the Divan. For he was in great hopes to divert the
Storm from falling upon his Head, and to appease the Grand Signior by giving
him to understand, that there was not any one Subject of the Republic who was
a Knight of Malta. The Ambassadors of England and Holland made the same
Remonstrances. So that in all probability the Tempest was like to fall upon M.
de la Hay the Father, then Ambassador of France. And questionless he had
severely felt the Barbarousness of the Turks, and the Fury of the Grand
Signior, if Givan Capigi Bachi the Grand Vizier had not Warded off the Blow.
Who being a Person of great Wit, of singular Worth, and Illustrious for his
Descent in Turkey, as being descended from a Family famous for Six Grand
Viziers, took upon him to secure the Ambassador of France, the French and all
the Christians that were at Constantinople, except the Venetians. He gave his
Highness to understand that the Venetians were the most guilty, for having
permitted the Galleys of Malta to bring in the Gallion into their Harbors, and
not securing it. By which means he turned all the Grand Signior's Wrath upon
Candy, who thereupon determined to make that the Seat of his War. But this
Resolution of his was privately carried, and the better to conceal his Design,
he displayed his intended Revenge only against Malta. To which purpose he
proclaimed open War against that little Island, and ordered all his Forces to
be in a readiness by the end of March 1645.

The Ambassador of Venice spared neither Industry nor Presents to penetrate the
Truth of this Design, whether it were real, or only a Trick to cover some
Enterprise against the Republic. On the other side, the Ambassador of France
assured him, that it was only a dissembled Pretense, and that the true Design
was upon Candy. But he gave no heed to his Intelligence, suffering himself to
be deluded by the Assurances which the Grand Vizier gave him from time to time
to the contrary.

But toward the end of April the Ottoman Fleet consisting of Fourscore Ships
and as many Galleys, under the Command of Issouf Captain Basha, putting to Sea
from Constantinople, Landed in Candy, and in Ten Days took Canea. They who were
acquainted with that same General, affirmed him to be a great Commander, and
that he would have Conquered the Island in a small time, had he not been
deprived of his Life and the Conduct of the War. For the Grand Signior being
put in the Head that Issouf had Vast Treasures; and that he could Conquer the
rest of Candy without his Assistance, caused him to be strangled at
Constantinople some few days after his return. However his Highness had not
only a great loss by his Death, but missed of the Treasures which he expected.
In the following Years he sent other Armies into Candy under different
Generals: and for the Success which they had, it is too well known, to speak
more of it in this place.

For it was neither to the Strength of the Island, nor the Weakness of the
Turks, that we are to ascribe the length of that War, which lasted Four and
Twenty Years; but to the strange Revolutions that happened in the Ottoman Court
almost at the beginning of that Enterprise; and to the Wars of Transylvania and
Hungary that lasted till the Year 1665. But the Prince who undertook the
Conquest of Candy was Ibrahim, then about Two and Thirty Years of Age, who was
advanced to the Empire Four Years before, contrary to his own and the
Expectation of all the World. For he had been kept in a close Imprisonment
during the Reign of Osman, and Murat his Brothers; the latter of which, after
he had caused his two younger Brothers to be strangled, when he saw himself
near his End, commanded also that Ibrahim should be strangled, who was the only
Brother that remained. However this Rigorous Command was not put in Execution,
for that Amureth not having any Children, Ibrahim that was the only Remainder
of the Ottoman Family, was also Heir of the Empire. By the way we are to
observe, that the reason which induced Amurat to let Ibrahim alone, and put his
two other Brothers to death, though much younger, was his want of Wit, which
rendering him unfit for Government, secured him from any fear of a Rebellion for
his sake. So soon as he came to the Throne, he plunged himself into all manner
of Vice and Wickedness. His Debaucheries, his Extortions, and his Cruelties
renderd him Odious and insupportable to all his Subjects. He seized upon the
Revenues of the Mosquees, and private Men's Estates, without any distinction of
Sacred or Profane, and frequently put to death such as he thought to be Rich,
to the end he might with more ease make himself Master of their Estates, and
all this to supply the inordinate Expenses of his Pleasures, and the excessive
Luxury of his Court. The Soldiers were ill paid; which caused 'em to mutiny,
with a Resolution to depose Ibrahim in the Month of August 1648 and to set upon
the Throne Mahamed his Eldest Son, about seven Years of Age; so that twelve
Days after they strangled Ibrahim.

I have already related, how that in the Minority of Mahamed, the Empire was
Governed by Women and Eunuchs, who filled all the chief Places of Trust, as
they thought good themselves, and particularly that of the Prime Minister, till
they gave it to Cuperly Mahomet who undertook the War of Transylvania. His
Successor, who was his Son, began that of Hungary, which being ended by the
Peace in the Year 1665. as already has been said, for the next two Years he
closely pursued the War of Candy, where he found a longer and more vigorous
Resistance then he expected.

Had Candy held out another Winter against the Turks, it is not to be
questioned, but that the Grand Vizier must have been forced to raise his Siege,
and then strange Commotions would have happened in the Empire. The Veterane
Janissaries were all either slain or dead in the Siege: The rest would not budge
a foot. The Turks murmured at the War; and cried out that the Ottoman Forces
were commanded to dash out their Brains against a Rock: The People of
Constantinople were for advancing the Grand Signior's Brother to the Throne.
His Highness was solicited to put the Grand Vizier to death by means of such a
Sacrifice to appease the Fury of the People and Soldiery. Both the one and the
other of these Changes had been sufficient to have raised the Siege.

The Grand Vizier knew all this. So that he despaired of putting an end to the
War: dismally afraid at once to lose both his Honor and his Life. It is
reported that he tore his very Hair from his Chin. However it is most certain
that it brought upon him a most Incurable Distemper, difficult to be named. It
was an odd kind of seizure of the Heart, or fainting of the Spirits, caused by
Fear, Affliction and Pannick Terror. For which the Physicians prescribed him
to drink pure Wine without any Mixture; which he did every day; nor could any
thing but that do him any good.

When the News of the Surrender of Candy was brought to the Grand Signior, his
Highness could not believe it; but when the Tidings were confirmed, it
transported him to such an Excess of Joy, that rather seemed to be a sort of
Frenzy for the time. And both He and the whole Court frequently repeated these
words, The Franks have had pity upon Us.

The Turks boasted upon the taking of Candy, That they had Conquered all
Christendom. Because the Town had been defended by Soldiers and Volunteers from
all parts of Christendom; and they said moreover, That the Siege had lasted
three Years, for that all Christendom had been there, and done the utmost of
their Endeavors.

The most useful and provident Preparation which the Grand Vizier made for the
Siege, was to make his Kiaia, or Steward of his Household, High Treasurer of the
Empire. For he knew the Love and Friendship which that Lord had for him, and
that for a need he would not spare his Life to do him Service. And this same
Foresight of his was the gaining of the Place, and the safeguard of his own
Life. For the High Treasurer would not suffer any want to be in the Camp. Sheep
were there in great plenty at a Crown apiece. The Markets were stored with all
Things necessary for Food and Raiment. And Men cared not what they gave, or
what Risco's they ventured, to carry Ammunition to a Place where Money abounded.

By the Accounts which the Treasurer brought into the Divan of the
Extraordinary Expenses at Candy the three last Years of the Siege, it appeared
that Seven Hunderd Thousand Crowns had been spent in Gifts to Renegado's that
turned Turks, or left the Island, to recompense such Soldiers as had behaved
themselves more bravely then others; and to pay the Prizes set upon the
Christians Heads; which was half a Guinea for every Head. By that Account it
appeared that the Turks had made an Hunderd Thousand Shot with their great Guns
against the Place; and that there had been slain before the Place Seven
Basha's, Fourscore Captains and Colonels, 10400 Janisaries, besides other
Soldiers and Troops of the Provinces, whose Pay is not charged to the State.

The Day that the Grand Vizier entered Candy, Signor Molino, who was sent by
the Republic to make a Peace with the Port, Riding a' one side of him, the
Grand Vizier told him, That the Grand Signior had paid dear for the Island of
Candy. To whom Molino replied, That it had cost the Republic as much; no less
then the Lives of a Hunderd Thousand Men, without reckoning the French. The
Grand Vizier asked him, Why the Place was not surrendered sooner, in regard
they had been but in a bad Condition a long time to hold it out. To whom the
Ambassador made answer, That the King of France had hindered the Surrender, by
his Promises of Powerful Assistance, and to declare a War against the Turks.

The Procurator Molino arrived in Candy in the Spring of the Year 1669. and lay
at a place called Gozi, not far from the Island. From whence he sent to offer
the Grabusi, Spina Longa, Suda, and Tine Islands of the Archipelago; Clissa and
other Places upon the Continent, the whole Expenses of the War, and an Annual
Tribute of Fifty Thousand Crowns a Year for the City of Candy, so that the
Republic might keep the possession of it. To which the Grand Vizier returned
for answer, That the Grand Vizier valued his Honor at a Higher Rate, then all
the World beside; and therefore he would only have that Bit of a Rock, which
his Highness had been laboring for above these Four and Twenty Years.

But it was Captain General Morosini who made the Truce with the Vizier; which
he did without Molino's knowledge, or imparting to him the least Tittle
concerning it. Which Transaction of his had like to have cost Morosini his Life
at Venice, but the large Sums of Money which he paid in one Night, delivered
him from his Fears: For this General minded no other Interest in Treating but
the Public Welfare. He neither troubled himself about Religion or Trade: But
wholly applied himself to what concerned the Island of Candy, and the War, and
agreed with the Vizier, that all other Things should remain in the same
Condition as before the Rupture. Which was the reason that Signor Molino found
it so difficult to rebuild at Galata, part of the Suburbs of Constantinople,
the Venetian Church, that had been burnt down; and labored so sedulously to
remove the Obstacles which he met with on every side, that he died in the midst
of all his Toil: but by Good-Luck the Work was almost finished. He required
several other Things of the Grand Signior; as the Abatement of the Customs,
which the Venetians paid; but could not obtain it. For, said the Grand Vizier,
Signor Molino, The Alliance between the Port and the Republic is an Ancient
Alliance, and the Port values it for its Antiquity. If you change some of the
Articles, the Alliance will be a new one, for which the Turks will never have
that high esteem. Besides, if you require Favors of the Grand Signior, he will
demand something more of you. Signor Molino understood well enough what he
meant, which was the Reason he spoke not a word more of the Abatement of the
Customs, nor of changing the Ancient Capitulations.

And thus I have given a fair Idea of the Grand Vizier's Conduct, not to say
any more in particular concerning his Person. But in regard it was to his
Father, who was also Grand Vizier, that he was beholding to for his Fortune and
his Honor, I shall in the first place, and in few words, give an Account of
the most Remarkable Achievements of that Renowned Vizier.

He was called Cuperly Mahamed Basha, raised to that High Dignity by the
Fantastic Humor of the Women and Eunuchs, who Governed during the Minority of
Mahamed the Fourth. Before his Advancement, it was that which he least dreamt
of; but when he was Invested in his Employment, he began to consider the
frequent Changes of the Grand Viziers his Predecessors almost every three
Months, and therefore for the Preservation of his Life and Dignity, he thought
it his best way to put to Death his Envyers and Competitors, and to set new
Wars afoot, on purpose to remove the Grand Signior from Constantinople, and to
keep himself still at the Head of an Army

He began with the Serraglio, where he caused several Eunuchs to be strangled;
and having in a little time made himself Master of the Credulity and Affections
of the Young Prince, he persuaded him, that to make himself Absolute Sovereign
of the Empire, to free himself from the Fears of Tumult and Sedition, and
prevent the Soldiery from making the same Attempts upon him as they had done
upon his Father, the best way would be for his Highness to remove from the
Capital City, where the People were Mutinous, and the Janissaries were Masters,
and that he should rid himself of all those Persons that had deposed his
Father, and dipped their Parricide Hands in his Blood. In pursuance of this
Project, Cuperly caused Dely Ussein Pasha to be strangled, who had been General
at Candy, and was accounted the most Famous and Valiant Captain of the Empire.
Then he removed the Court to Adrianople, and began the Transylvanian War, in
regard the War in Candy would have called him too far from the Grand Signior's
Person, not being as yet of Age to March at the Head of his own Armies.

This Transylvanian War was short, and honorable for the Grand Vizier by the
defeat of Prince Ragotsky, and by the taking of Waradin, though it cost him the
Blood of the choicest Ottoman Troops, and the bravest of their Officers. He
returned Victorious to Adrianople, and though he had made a Peace with the
Emperor, yet he set himself to make preparation for a new War against him in
Hungary. But being ready to take the Field in the Year 1662. he died; yet so
prevalent at Court as to obtain his only Son Achmet Pasha to be admitted into
his Place, though at that time he had scarcely attained to Thirty Years of Age,
which was a Thing altogether extraordinary, and not to be paralleled in the
History of the Ottoman Monarchy.

It Is a question whether ever there were a Grand Vizier more capable to Govern
the Ottoman Empire, then Achmet Pacha. He was very tall, and somewhat full and
plump of Body. His Eyes large and wide: His Face well shaped; his Complexion
Fair and Smooth: The Air of his Face Modest, Grave, Affable, and Obliging. He
was no Tyrant, mortally hating Oppression, Justice and Equity appeared in all
his Actions, nor did he suffer himself to be swayed by his own Interest. For
whether it were that he did not give his Mind to thirst after Riches, or
whether it were that his own Estate which was very Great, satisfied his
desires, he was never known to be Covetous like the rest of the Turks: And this
is particularly said of him, very much to his Honor, that of all the Persons,
that addressed themselves to him with Presents, to accomplish their Ends, not
any obtained 'em by that means. His Wit was of a large extent, penetrating and
reserved: His Memory happy and prompt: His Judgment sound, and always well
applied: For he still fell directly upon the Point. He spoke little and
Modestly, but with that Solidity and Knowledge which it is not easy to
describe. The First Years of his Ministry were very Honorable and Advantageous
to the Ottoman Empire, and his following Achievements much more.

This Great Personage therefore having observed the Happy success of his Father
in the Government of Turkey, labored to follow his example and tread his Steps
as near as he could. He began the War against the Emperor which his Father had
projected, and was about to have undertak'n. To which purpose he marched to
Buda, with an Army of Threescore Thousand Men, and besieged Neuhausel, which he
took in the Year 1663. He raised the Siege of Canisia, and carried the Fort
Serini toward the beginning of the next Year. And designing a farther Progress
of the Turkish Armies even to the Walls of Vienna, he caused a Bridge to be
laid over the River Raab: Over which Twelve Thousands Turks had already
passed; and all the rest of the Army was about to have followed, had they not
been prevented by the Emperor's Forces, who being reinforced with the Succors
of the Allies of the Empire, and particularly the French, cut to pieces the
greatest part of the Twelve Thousand Turks, put the rest to flight, and gained
that Famous Battle, called the Battle of St. Godard, from the Name of the
Village where it was fought.

The Grand Vizier repaired the loss of that Battle by a Treaty of Peace as
Honorable and as Advantageous as if he had gained the Victory; and perceiving
the Grand Signior's earnest desire to return to Constantinople, carried him
thither so well guarded, that there was no Commotion to be feared; where be
stayed till the beginning of the Year 1666. At what time he undertook the War
of Candy, in which he spent Three Years, as has been already said. Two Years
after he began the War of Poland; observing always his Fathers Great Maxim,
That it behooved a Prime Vizier still to keep himself at the Head of an Army.

We departed from Andrianople the 9th of June, and returned to Constantinople
the 15th. The 17th by Break of Day M. de Nointel went incognito to visit the
Caimacan and to demand a Passport for the Kings Ship. The Caimacan returned for
answer, that he had received no Orders from the Grand Vizier to give him one,
and therefore could not do it. At which the Ambassador was very much surpised,
and as highly concerned; and thereupon complained to the Caimacan of the Grand
Vizier's unkindness toward him. Upon which the Caimacan made a show of taking
his Part, and being concerned for the Unjustice done the Ambassador; and then
concluded with his Excellency, that they would send a particular Messenger and
Letter's to the Prime Vizier. As for the Caimacan, he failed not to send, on
his part, to the Vizier an account of all that the Ambassador had told him, and
represented to him by way of Complaint. On the other side M. de Nointel in his
Letters taxed the Vizier of Breach of his Word. He conjured him not to injure
his Patience, which he had now contained as long as he could; to let him know
the Final Resolution of the Port, and particularly to send him Order for a Pass
for the Kings Ship.

The Expresses that carried these Letters set forth at several times. The
Caimacan's Messenger departed the 18th of June, and the M. de Nointel's the
next Day. The Caimacan's Messenger found the Court not far from Silistria from
whence he returned to Constantinople the Ninth of July. So soon as he arrived,
his Master sent for the Ambassadors Chief Interpreter and told him, that the
Vizier had given no answer to his Express; only had sent him word that he would
let him understand the Grand Signior's Pleasure by another way. The Ambassadors
Courrier was not returned the 20th of July, when I left the City; and therefore
I know not what answer he brought.

At the end of June the Ambassador sent for a Pass for the Director of the
Levant Company, and for my self; a License to bring in a Parcel of Wine, and
another to be admitted into the Santa Sophia. To which the Caimacan returned
for Answer, That he could not grant any one of the Ambassador's Demands, until
he first knew the Grand Vizier's Mind: That it very much troubled him to refuse
him such Trifles; but considering how Things stood between the Grand Vizier and
the Ambassador, he should make himself a Public Offender to grant Passes to
his Excellency: but that so soon as he had leave, his Excellency should find
the great Affection which he had for the French Nation.

This Refusal troubled me extremely; for that it seemed to confirm the Report,
which ran about, That the Grand Vizier intended to Arrest the Ambassador and
all the French Nation. I found I had a large Stock of Goods; as much as two
Horses could carry, as I have said before. My Comrades Baggage and my own was
as much as would load four Horses more. So that it was to no purpose to think
of escaping by Flight, much less of concealing our selves. Besides this, three
other Considerations very much augmented my cares and my perplexity. The first
was, That whatsoever way I took to get into Persia, I could not get out of
Turkey in three Months* during which time the Port would have time enough to
send their Orders to the utmost Limits of the Empire to stop the French, if
they designed any such violent proceedings against 'em. The second was, That
nothing of all that I carried of greatest Value, had paid at the Custom-House,
so that if I happened to be searched either at Constantinople, or any other
Cities of Turkey, I could not expect any Assistance from the Ambassador. The
third was, That because of the Heat of the Weather, there was no Caravan that
traveled into Persia till October.

In the midst of this Intricate Perplexity, GOD, whose Infinite Favor I have
always experienced in my most pressing Necessities, showed me a ready way to
make my escape from Constantinople. The Grand Signior has a Fortress about
Twenty Miles from the River Tanais, over against that part where the great
River discharges it self into the Lake Maeotis; which Fort is called Azac. The
Port sends thither every Year a New Commander with Soldiers and Money: and
they send by Sea, because it is not above 1300 Miles by Water; and to avoid the
Hazards by Land for fear of the Tartars, Cossaques and Muscovites. Moreover,
the Saique which is a sort of Turkish Vessel that takes the Commander aboard,
is not exposed to the search of the Customers, as are the rest of the Ships
that Sail into the Black-Sea. That which is aboard may be said to be free,
there being none but the Turkish Commander that has any Authority to take
Cognizance of it. This Saique touches at Caffa, which is a City and famous Port
in the Crimoean Tartary. Whence all the Vessels that are bound for Mingrelia or
Colchis put to Sea in the Months of September and October, from whence it is
not above seven or eight days Journey before ye enter into the Persian
Dominions. There is no shorter way from Constantinople to Persia, nor less
troublesome. For the whole Voyage may be made in three Weeks, all by Sea till
within about Sixty Leagues, yet is there no passage less used, nor more
unknown, by reason of the Dangers of the Sea; nor could I find any one Person
at Constantinople that ever had undertaken it. I met with a great many that
confirmed my Report, and that had been at the Havens of Mingrelia, where there
are great Numbers of Armenians and Georgians, the Subjects of the Persian King,
who told me that it was not above six or seven Days Journey from thence into
their Territories.

The Dangers of this Passage which discourage People from attempting it, are
twofold: First, For that the Black Sea is very Tempestuous, to the loss of the
most part of the Vessels for want of skill and good Havens. Besides that the
People that inhabit between the Sea and the Persian Territories are naturally
barbarous and wicked, without any Religion, and under no Government: So that I
should never have so much as dreamt of the Way of Colchis, whatever might have
been the Allurements of Curiosity, or Easiness of Passage, had not the Road
through Turkey presented it self much more Formidable, considering the
Mischievous Circumstances already mentioned. But that which most inclined me to
the Voyage by Sea, was the Convenience of the Saic bound for Azac, which to me
seemed a most infallible way to get out of Constantinople, without much
Trouble, and without any Danger, unless it were that of the Black-Sea. But that
Sea so named and so famed from terrible and frequent Shipwracks that happ'n in
it for want of Skilful Pilots among the Turks, made me tremble to think of it.
Nevertheless I saw the Hazards to which I exposed my self, and the Dangers of
the Voyage; however they did not terrify me so much as the Dangers and Perils
which I have mentioned either in staying any longer at Constantinople, or in
traveling quite through Turkey.

The Danger indeed of the Black-Sea was the greatest, because it threatened the
loss of all; but it was more uncertain. The Hazards of Turkey were less; for
there was no fear of Life's being lost; or of losing entirely the whole Cargo.
But it was more difficult to be avoided, so that at length I resolved for the
Black-Sea, and prepared to embark.

One of my Friends to whom I imparted my Design, engaged a Greek Merchant to
assist me, who was bound for Colchis, and went in the Saic prepared for Azac.
He was a very honest Man, besides that my Friend had some hank as well over his
Estate as Person. So that he obliged him to serve me to the uttermost of his
Power, under the forfeiture of his Friendship if he failed. Thereupon the Greek
Merchant undertook to help me, and did it so cordially and sedulously that the
Success answered both his Diligence and Fidelity. He took upon him to hire
Cabbins for me in the Saic, never discovering for whom it was; he put my Goods
aboard, some and some, as he saw his Opportunity. He gave me advice, and
necessary Instructions how to make my self respected in the Vessel, and to get
good Entertainment at Caffa, whither I was first bound. Among the rest of my
Directions, he ordered me to get good Recommendations to the Officer that was
to Command at Azac, and to take along with me the Grand Signior's Pass. As for
the Recommendation, I did not much fear to get it, but the Pass drove me to
despair, because I had already been refused it.

Thereupon I discovered my perplexity to M. de Nointel, beseeching his
Excellency to give me leave to make use of the Letters of Recommendation which
I had from the English Ambassador, who was at Paris, when I departed thence,
for the English Ambassador at Constantinople, that I might by his means obtain
a Pass as an Englishman Which although M. de Nointel scrupled at first, yet he
consented at length, when I told him the Urgency of my Occasions. So that he
caused his Secretary both to write and carry his Letter to the English
Ambassador, who was very glad to serve his Excellency in my behalf. And indeed
the Ambassador pursued his Kindness with the greatest Grace in the World, and
with a real Affection, but without success. For as the Caimacan was ready to
sign the Pass, Somebody gave him private Intimation to take a care what he
did; for that the Pass required of him was for a Frenchman under pretense of
being English. Which spoiled all; and made a Difference between the English
Ambassador and the Caimacan, who complained of the Surprise; and between the
English Ambassador and M. de Nointel, whom he taxed for having given the
Caimacan his private Intelligence.

The 19th of July the Greek Merchant who was to Conduct me to Mingrelia, came
to give me notice that the Saic lay at an Anchor near the Mouth of the
Black-Sea, and only expected a fair Wind. So that I would presently have gone
aboard, but my Friends did not think it convenient, till the Vessel was ready
to Sail, for fear I should be discovered for a Frenchman. Thereupon I staid
three days with Signor Sinibaldi Fieschi, Resident of Genoa, at a Country House
which he had upon the Bosphorus, and four days more at a fair Monastery of the
Greeks, at the end of the Channel upon Europe side, over against the Harbor
where the Saic lay at Anchor.

The Thracian Bosphorus is certainly one of the Loveliest parts of the World.
The Greeks call Bosphori, those Streights or Arms of the Sea which an Ox may be
able to swim over. This Channel is about Fifteen Miles in length, and about Two
in breadth, in most parts, but in others less. The Shores consist of Rising
Grounds covered over with Houses of Pleasure, Wood, Gardens, Parks, Delightful
Prospects, Lovely Wildernesses Watered with Thousands of Springs and Fountains.

The Prospect of Constantinople, when ye behold it from the top of the Channel,
at the distance of two Miles, is beyond compare, as being to my Eyes, as to all
that ever saw it, the most Charming Prospect that can be seen. The Passage
through the Bosphorus is the most lovely and fullest of Divertisement that can
be made by Water: And the number of Barks that Sail to and fro in fair Weather
is very great. The Resident of Genoa told me, He made it his Pastime to tell
the Boats that Sailed to and fro before his House from Noon to Sunset, in what
time he told no less then Thirteen Hunderd.

There are Four Castles that stand upon the Bosphorus well Fortified with great
Guns: Two, Eight Miles from the Black-Sea, and Two more near the Mouth of the
Channel. The Two latter were built not above Forty Years ago, to prevent the
Cossacks, Muscovite and Polanders from entering into the Mouth of the Channel;
who before made frequent Inroads into it with their Barks, almost within sight
of Constantinople.

The 17th by break of day I embarked, our Vessel being then under Sail. Above
Fourscore Vessels of different Burdens put to Sea at the same time. In ours
there were about Two Hunderd Men; the Commander of Azac with his Train, to the
Number of Twenty; a Hunderd Janisaries, Thirty Mariners, and Fifty Passengers.
I had three Cabbins, two for my Comrade and my self, and the third for our
Goods. Our Servants lay upon the Deck. Their Cabbins are very narrow and
incommodious; ours being at the Prow. There were in all Thirty two in the Saic,
with a great Cabin for the Captain very spacious and handsomely furnished;
wherein Ten Persons might lodge very conveniently. But that which is very
inconvenient in the Turkish Vessels is this, That they make no Provision of any
thing for Subsistence, not so much as of Wood and Water; for the rest might
well be endured. Every one has his Liberty to dress his Vittles three of four
times a day. The Fire Place is upon the Deck near the Poop: where they who have
any thing to dress carry their Kettle, their Wood and their Water. So that I
have seen about Eighteen Pots together upon the Fire. Their Places of Easement
are with outside of the Ship near the Poop; like Cages, which they take off and
hang on as they please themselves.

The Saics have no more then one Deck. Nor but two Masts with a Boltsprit; that
is, a Main Mast and Mizen. These Masts carry but two Sails, and for the most
part but one. They have no Shrouds but one that is very small, which is fixed
to the Main Mast, and hangs down upon the Deck. They have no Skuttles at the
top of their Masts. So that the Turkish Seamen never run up to the Yards Arms
to furl or loosen their Sails, which is needless, because the Yards Arm is
always below upon the Deck; so that when they would take the Wind, they only
draw up the Yards Arm, to which the Sail is fixed. The Top-Sail is tied to the
Yards Arm, and when they would make use of it, they pull up the Yards Arm with
a Pully fastened to the Top-Mast-Head. Thus it may be easily seen that they
neither understand the Use of the Yard-Arms nor Masts of a Ship.

Neither have they in these Vessels either Pumps to pump out the Water, nor
Capstalls to weigh their Anchors; but they empty out their Water with Pales:
and then when they weigh Anchor, there are Twenty or Thirty Men that take hold
of the Anchor-Cables that run through two small Pulleys fastened to the Prow of
the Ship, and draw up the Anchor with all their Might, till it be high enough.
When a Vessel enters laden into any Port, they fix four Anchors, two to her
Poop, and two to her Prow, and so let her lie. And this is all I have observed
in reference to the Building and Rigging of these sort of Vessels among the
Turks.

As for their Navigation there is nothing of Art, nor Security in it: The best
of the Turkish or Greek Pilots depend only upon a bare Experience, without any
Foundation of Rules. They never make any use of Sea-Carts, nor ever make those
exact Observations, like our Seamen, of the Ships way every day set down in
Journals, by which Observations they know how far they are from the place
whither they intend. They understand very little of the Compass; only they know
that the Flower de Luce always tends toward the North. When they are to make
any Voyage they stay for a good Wind and fair Weather. Nor do they, when that
is come, presently put to Sea till they have staid eight or ten Hours to see
whether the Weather will hold or no: and generally they Sail along by the
Shore, having the Land always in sight. But when they are forced to take the
Main Sea, then they make use of the Compass: To which purpose they know either
by report or experience upon which hand they ought to have the North, that they
may gain such a Harbor; which is all they have to guide 'em; for more then
this they know not. Were they to make long Voyages in the open Sea, hardly one
Ship would escape a Tempest, which they happily avoid, keeping as much as they
can within sight of Land, or near some Harbor. When the Wind is very high,
they furl their Sails, and let the Vessel drive with the Waves. If the VVind
be contrary, they never strive against it, but vere about, and rather return
from whence they came, then endure the Violence of a contrary Sea. That which
ruins 'em, is when the VVind blows 'em upon the Shore; for then they are so
out of heart, that they split immediately not knowing what it is to lie by.

I have heard several old Turkish Captains affirm, That there are Fifteen
Hundred Vessels upon the Black-Sea, of which they lose a Hunderd every Year.
The most dangerous place where Shipwracks are most to be feared being at the
Entrance of Bosphorus.

The Entrance into it is very Narrow, where generally the Winds encounter one
another; of which there is one that still keeps back the Vessels, which if it
be violent dings 'em upon the Coast which is full of sharp Rocks; to the loss
of so many Galleys and Ships that their Number is hardly to be numberd. It Is
but a little while since that no less then seventeen Galleys were cast away in
one day. And there is no question but that the frequent Storms that arise at
all seasons in the Black-Sea, the Surges short, and cutting one upon another,
its straight and narrow Channel, and the dangerous Coasts that in part surround
it, are the chief cause of the several Shipwracks that happ'n there. On the
other side there is no doubt also but that skilful Pilots and good Seamen would
save above half the Vessels which are there lost.

The Third of August in the Morning we arrived at Caffa, after a Voyage of
eight days, all which time we had very fair Weather and little Wind. Upon the
Fifth we spied the Point of the Tauric Chersonnese. For the Greeks call that a
Chersonnese, which the Latins call a Peninsula, and they gave that Name to this
almost Tauric Island, because it was first inhabited by the Scythians of Mount
Taurus. It lies toward the East and West, being about 250 Leagues in Circuit;
that is, 35 Leagues in length, which I take from the North to the South, and 55
Leagues in the broadest part. But the Isthmus that joins it to the Continent is
not above a League in breadth. The Modern Geographers call it Crim Tartary and
Precopensian Tartary. As much as to say Tartary full of Towns; to distinguish
the Tartars of this Peninsula that live for the most part in Cities, especially
all the Winter long, from those other European Tartars, which inhabit without
the Peninsula, called Nogays, as also Hordes or Hordou, a word which signifies
an Assembly, and of which the Turks and Persians generally make use to signify
the Camp of an Army, or the Numerous Train of a Court. The Country belonging to
these two sorts of Tartars, Precops and Nogays, is that which we call the
Lesser Tartary to distinguish it from the Asiatick Tartars that inhabit beyond
the Lake Maeotis, to the East of the Caspian Sea, and thence as far as China.

The Seacoast of this Precopens Peninsula, to speak of that part which shoots
farthest into the Sea as far as Caffa, consists of very high Shoars, and
Mountains covered with Woods and Villages. And by the Account of the Seamen, it
is from Constantinople to Caffa through the Black-Sea, 750 Miles. Tho I know
not how they reck'n, nor how it can agree, with what frequently happens, for
the Saics to make the Voyage in two Days and two Nights just. And therefore by
my Account it is no more then Two Hunderd Leagues. Upon our coming to an
Anchor; our Vessel fired two Guns, and the Commander designed for Azac made all
his Musketeers give the Castle a Volley. Which done, he went ashore with the
Officers that were come to receive him in the Basha's Name. Both the City and
Port are very free; for you have Liberty to go in and out, never asking any
leave: Nor do they come aboard to search the Vessels. But when a Ship drops her
Anchor, several Boats make from the Haven to carry those ashore that are
desirous to go.

Caffa is a great Town built at the bottom of a little Hill upon the Sea-shoar.
It extends it self more in length then breadth, lying in length very directly
from the South to the North; encompassed with very strong Walls, that advance a
little into the Sea, which is the reason that when we take a Prospect of the
City from the upper part of the Deck, it seems to be built like a Half Moon.
The Castle upon the South side stands upon a Rising Ground that commands all
the parts thereabout, being very large, and the Residence of the Basha. The
other is not so big, but well stored and defended with great Guns; the Sea
washing that side which is next to it. They reck'n about 4000 Houses to be in
Caffa; of which 3200 are inhabited by Mahumetans, Turks and Tartars, and 800 by
Christians, Greeks and Armenians; though the Armenians are more numerous then
the Greeks. The Houses are but small, and all built of Earth, as are also their
Bazars or Marketplaces, their Public Structures, Mosquees, and Baths. There
is not one Building of Stone in all the City, except eight Churches somewhat
gone to decay, formerly built by the Genoeses. This Caffa was once called
Theodosia, which the Greeks built in the fifth Age. Afterward it fell under
the Dominion of the Genoeses, with several other Seaport Towns in several
parts of that Sea, in the Thirteenth Age, in the time of the Holy War and
during the weak and low Condition of the Eastern Emperors. But Mahomet the
Second won all those Places from the Genoeses toward the end of the Sixteenth
Age; Caffa being taken in the Year 1574.

The Soil about Caffa is Dry and Sandy; nor is the Water good; but the Air is
very pure and wholesome. There are very few Gardens about it, nor is there but
little Fruit. However they bring great Quantities from the Neighboring
Villages, though it cannot be said to be very delicious. However I do not know
whether there be any other City in the World where other Provisions are cheaper
and better. Their Mutton is exceeding well-tasted, and not above one Farthing a
Pound. Their other Provisions of Bread, Fruit, Wild Fowl, and Butter, is sold
proportionably at a cheaper Rate. Salt is as good as given ye; and in a word,
whatever is necessary for Human Sustenance costs little or nothing.
Nevertheless by the way take notice, that Fresh Fish is a very great Rarity,
and very small whatever that they catch in the parts round about the Harbor,
and that only at certain times, as in Antumn and the Spring. Almost all the
Turks and Tartars that live in the Town wear little Bonnets of Cloth faced
with Sheepskins. But in regard that over all Asia Bonnets are most usually worn
among the Christians, those of Caffa are obliged to fasten to theirs a little
piece of Cloth, such as the Jews in Germany wear upon their Cloaks, to
distinguish 'em from the Mahometans.

The Road of Caffa is sheltered from the Winds, except it be to the North and
South-East: and the Ships lie at Anchor near the Shore in Ten and Twelve Fathom
Water, Ouzie at the bottom and very safe. There is also a great Trade driven
there, more then in any other Port belonging to the Black-Sea. During the Forty
Days that I staid there, I saw come in and go out above Four Hunderd Sail of
Ships, not counting little Vessels that keep close to the Shore. The most usual
and most considerable Trade which they drive consists in Salt Fish, and
Caveare, which comes from the Lake Maeotis, and is thence transported into
Europe, and as far as the Indies. It Is incredible what a World of Fish is
caught in that Lake, considering its extent. And the reason which the Country
People give for the Infinite Multitude of Fish there bred and taken, is this,
For that the Water of that Lake being muddy, thick, and not very salt, because
of the Tanais that empties it self into it, it invites not only the Fish out of
Tanais and the Black-Sea, but also out of the Hellespont and the Archipelago;
where they breed and grow fat in a small time. Several Persons have assured me,
That they usually catch Fish in that Lake, which weigh every one Eight and Nine
Hunderd Pounds, and of which they make between three and four Hunderd weight of
Caveare. It Is true, I never saw any such large Fish alive at Caffa; however I
am apt to believe it, by the pieces of Fish which I have seen, and the vast
Quantities which they export into a Thousand Places. Their Fishing lasts from
October till April. And perhaps it is the Mudd of that Water of Maeotis which
makes 'em call it a Mersh; for otherwise it would be more properly called a
Lake, in regard it bears Vessels of Burden, nor do the Waters rise or fall, and
besides that it continually partakes of a great River and the Sea.

Next the Exportation of Caveare and Fish, the most considerable Trade is
driven in Corn, Butter and Salt, with which this City furnishes Constantinople,
and several other places. The Caffa Butter is the best in all Turkey. The
Venetians have several times desired leave to Trade to this Town; but it would
never be granted. In the Year 1672. Signor Quirini was at great Expenses to
obtain it, and he had obtained it indeed, but the Customer of Constantinople
caused the License to be revoked upon this Occasion.

All the Europeans have it agreed in their Capitulations, That they shall pay
no Customs, but in such places where they unlade their Goods. By Virtue of
which Article the Venetians would pay no Customs at Constantinople for Goods
that came in a small Vessel bound for Caffa, which the Farmer of the Customs
claimed. And Signor Quirini obtained an Order from the Defterdar to the Farmer,
not to take any Cognizance of what was in the said Venetian Vessel: (Which
Defterdar is the High Treasurer of the Empire; and has all the Customs under
his Inspection.) But the Customer seeing this Order, wrote to the Vizier, That
the Trade of the Venetians into the Black-Sea, would be very prejudicial to the
Grand Signior and the Port, and that the particular Damage to his Highness was
most visible, in regard the Merchandise which is proper for the Black-Sea and
brought from Venice pays Customs twice, at their coming into the Port of
Constantinople, and going out. That it was the same thing as to the Commodities
that were brought out of that Sea, and which the Venetians Export, all which
the Grand Signior would lose if the Venetians had Liberty to Trade thither, in
regard that by Virtue of their Capitulations, they ought to pay no Customs but
where they discharge their Merchandises. Besides, that to permit the Venetians
an Entrance into the Black-Sea, was to open a new way for the Christian Princes
to Correspond and Confederate with the Princes whose Dominions border upon
those Seas who are all Enemies to the Port. And lastly, That it behooved him to
consider that such a Permission would ruin a great Number of Seamen, of the
Grand Signior's Subjects, as well Turks as Christians, for that in regard there
is more Security in the European Navigation then in the Turkish, the Venetians
would have all the Carriage of Goods through the Black Sea, and every one would
Ship his Goods in their Vessels. The Grand Vizier was sensible of this; and
therefore gave Orders to the Governor of Constantinople not to let any Venetian
Ship pass into the Black-Sea.

The 30th my Grecian Guide unladed my Goods, Baggage, and whatever belonged to
me out of the Ship that brought me to Caffa, and Shipped it aboard another
Vessel bound for Colchis. Which done, he went to the Customer of Caffa, and
told him, That there were two French Papa's aboard the Vessel of Azac, who were
desirous to Embark themselves in another Vessel, being bound for Mingrelia.
That those Papa's carried several Trifles along with 'em, as Books, and other
Things of no value, for the Use of a Monastery; and that if the Custom-House
thought fit, that he should send some of their Officers to search the Ship. For
the Oriental Christians as well as the Turks, call Papa's all manner of
Ecclesiastical Persons that Officiate in Holy Orders, whether Single or
Married; and therefore my Guide thought fit that my Companion and my self
should both take upon us the Title of Papa's.

To that purpose our Greek made 'em believe, that we were going to the Italian
Missionaries in Colchis, and that we were of their Fraternity. However the
Customer sent his Officers aboard to search our Packs; and our Greek came along
with him. Presently I opened two Chests before the Searcher; who put his Hand
into one that was full of only Books, Papers, and Mathematical Instruments, and
finding nothing more at the Bottom, then what he saw at the Top, fell a
laughing, and asked the Man that brought him, If such Rubbish as that were
worth carrying out of Europe into Mingrelia? With that I fumbl'd out one of
those Pieces that are worth Three Shillings, like a Man that had not much to
spare, but looked upon five or six of those Pieces to be a great Treasure, and
presented the Searcher with it; who refused it at first, but took it at last,
when I told him 'twas only to pay for his Boat, which he could not deny; and so
went away without more ado. My Guide went along with him, and heard the Report
which he made to the Customer, That we had nothing but a few Books and Papers,
with some few Toys of Brass and Wood that were of little or no Value.

At the end of two Hours my faithful Guide returned, and told me, That to
protect us absolutely from any further danger of the Customers, it behooved us
to give the Clerk of the Vessel as much as we had given the Searcher; in regard
the Clerk took an exact Note of all that was embarked, and gives it every
Evening to the Customer, who keeps it for a Control: to which I answered, That
he might do what he thought fit. Thereupon presently calling to the Clerk, Thou
see, said he, that the Searcher has found nothing in the Frank Papa's Chests.
They have one more full of Papers, and five or six Boxes of Pictures for their
Church. That they did not open 'em because the Air spoils the Color of the
Painting, and because the Pictures were carefully tied up in Bundles; and
therefore I desire thee to accept of this Three Shillings which they give thee,
and to put down in thy Note no more then the two Chests which the Searcher has
seen, without taking Cognizance of the rest. Upon which he let us carry away
all that we had, and bid us, Farewell in the Name of God. So that we carried off
all our Goods in two Boats, and put 'em aboard the Ship that was bound for
Mingrelia. Nor did any Body demand any thing of us. For the Customers, and the
Seamen of the Ship which we left as well as of the other Vessel wherein we
embarked again, really believed us to be Papa's, and that all we carried with
us was of little worth: that the Sacks wherein I told 'em were our Provisions
were full of nothing else beside. For there are certain Slights and Shifts
which we cannot so well set down, that are absolutely necessary for those that
travel Turkey, that they who can make a right use of may pass securely and
without trouble. For thereby we avoid Forfeitures and ill usage, and we free
our selves dexterously from the Custom-Houses, which take 'em all together, are
none of the severest. But after all, it requires Good Luck, that is to say, a
prudent Conduct and a Contrivance proper to the Genius of the Turks; and a Man
must also be sure to watch his Opportunities.

The 25th of August, the Vessel that brought us to Caffa, fet Sail for the
Fortress of Azac, with three Saics of the same Burden in her Company. The New
Commander would not have had her set Sail till the return of the Courrier which
he had sent to the Fortress, to know whether they were at Peace with the
Muscovites, and whether there were any Pirates or not Cruising upon the Lake
Maeotis. The People of Caffa reck'n it 450 Miles from thence to Azac: though it
be not so much by Land, in regard they travel it easily in Twelve or Thirteen
Days. As for the Straight of the Lake Maeotis, or rather the Channel between
the Lake and the Black-Sea, it is about five Leagues in length. Which Channel
was by the Ancients called the Cimmerian Bosphorus; but now the Moderns call it
the Steight of Caffa, and also the Mouth of St. John. The great Vessels that go
to Azac put in at Palestra, which is Forty Miles from the Fortress, and Twenty
from the River Tanais; for that there is not Water deep enough for 'em to Sail
any farther. The Fortress of Azac is Fifteen Miles from the River: And it is
very dangerous and hazardous to send either Men or Money to that Place; for
they are attacked by strong Parties of the Muscovites as well by Sea as by
Land. The Commanders of this Fortress make always Leagues with the
Neighborhood, though they seldom last long: for that either of one side or
the other there arise every day new Occasions to break 'em. The Turks have two
little Fortresses where they keep Garrison at the Mouth of the Tanais upon the
Banks of that great River which the Ancients called Orxentes, and which the
People of the Country call Don, being about Fourscore Leagues in length. They
Fortify the Mouth of this River with a vast Chain, to prevent the Muscovites
and Circassians from Roving with their great Barks upon the Lake and the
Black-Sea. For before those two Fortresses were built, and this Chain fastened
athwart the River, those People came down with their Boats and Gruis'd about
all over those Seas. But there is a stop now put to their great Vessels.
However in the Nightime, and by the power of Number, they sometimes force
their smaller Barks over the Chain; but it is very rarely that they will
venture, for fear of being sunk by the Shot from the two Forts. There was also
formerly another Fort three Leagues off from the Mersh called Tana, belonging
to the River Tanais; but it is now ruined; nor is it Azac, as some would have
it to be, which is fifteen Leagues distant from it.

The 30th our Vessel put to Sea, and Sailed to a place called Donslow, or the
Salt Pits; which are great Mershes of Salt upon the Shore fifty Miles from
Caffa. We arrived there the 31st in the Morning: Immediately all the People
went to Lade Salt; for there was no Guard kept upon it; and they assured us
that Two Hunderd Vessels were Laden there every Year with Salt, and that there
was enough for twice as many if there were occasion. These Salt Pits are
supplied without any Charges: For they only let in the Water into the Mersh;
which is a fat and hard Earth at the bottom. There it congeals and becomes a
white Salt, which has all the good Qualities of Salt, and among the rest that
it preserves the Moisture of Salted Meats. They only pay Three Shillings a Day
to those that they employ to lade the Salt, without any further Examination how
much they carry away.

About a Mile from the Shore there is a Habitation of the Tartars; whither I
went with some of my Servants to buy Provisions, but I did not see in all that
place above Ten or Twelve Houses with a little Mosquee. Only round about it
there was a great Number of Tents, Round and Square very well closed, together
with several Wagons close and covered, which serve 'em in stead of Houses. The
fairest of their Tents were very handsome, being made of Round Poles laid a
cross one upon another, and covered without with large Furs very light and well
stretched. The Door is made after the same Manner, with an opening at the Top,
for the Light to come in, and the Smoke to go out. The Door is shut with a
piece of Felt. The inside is Hung with Tapestry, and the Floor covered also
with the same. Every Family has one Tent of the same Fashion and two others.
The other is covered with a great Sarpler of Wool, for their Cattle and
Horses. The other covered with the same, but not so handsome, and much larger;
in the midst of which is a round Pit five Foot deep and two Foot wide, and
there it is that they dress their Vittles. Here their Slaves lie, and here they
keep their Provisions for the Family. The Tartars store up their Corn and their
Forage, as do all the Country People in the East, in deep Pits under Ground
which they call Amber, or Magazines. Which they cover so exactly, that you
cannot discern where they have removed the Earth, so that only they that made
the Pits can tell where to find 'em. The Tartars dig these Pits either in their
Tents or in the Field; and as I have said they cover these Pits so like the
rest of the surface of the Earth round about it, that you cannot perceive where
they broak the Ground. When they remove their Quarters, they do it presently
and without any Trouble; their Tents being pulled down and lad'n in less then
Half an Hour. Their most usual Carriage is by Oxen and Horses of which they
breed a Great Number. The People profess the Mahumetan Religion but intermixed
with strange Superstitions and Ridiculous Opinions of Fortune Telling and
Divination.

The 2d of September the Wind blew hard and contrary, so that we were
constrained to return for Caffa, in regard the Coast where we lay was very
dangerous.

The Seventh at Midnight we put again to Sea with fair Weather, which did not
long continue. For in the Morning rose a most furious Tempest, insomuch that we
were afraid of being cast away; and that which increased our fears was this,
that our Vessel was very deep Laden, not only the Hold being full, but Twelve
Foot High above Deck. But the Storm, thanks be to God, was soon over, and that
which saved us was this, that the Wind was with us.

Our Ships Lading consisted in Salt, Fish, Caveare, Oil, Biscuite, Wool, Iron,
Tin, Copper, Copper and Farthen Ware, in all sorts of Harness, Arms, Utensils
of Husbandry, Cloth, Linen of all Colors, Habits for Men and Women,
Coverlets, Carpets, Leather, Boots and Shoes, and in a word in all things most
necessary for Man's Use. There were all sorts of Grocery and Pothecary's Ware,
Spices, Perfumes, Drugs and all manner of Ointments. So that the Vessel seemed
to be a little Town, where every thing was to be had; besides the People that
were aboard, to the Number of a Hunderd.

The 8th in the Morning we discovered the Coasts that bound the Lake Maeotis,
which were very High Lands about 30 Miles distant from us. In the Evening we
found our selves near Cape Cuodos which Ptolomy calls Cirocondoma, shouting out
far into the Sea; the shore being all very High Land, and seen a great way off.
From Caffa to this Point, we sailed all along in the Channel, from whence to
Mingrelia we always kept along by the shore.

It is Six and Twenty Mile from Caffa to the Channel of the Lake Maeotis. The
Country on each side is all in Subjection to, and inhabited by the Tartars, but
so very thinly that all the Coast is like a desert. From the Channel of the
Palus Maeotis to Mingrelia they reck'n it Six Hunderd Miles along the Coast,
which consists of pleasant Mountains covered with Woods, inhabited by the
Circassians whom the Turks call Cherks. By the Ancients they were generally
called Zageans, as also Mountaineers. Pomponious Mela calls 'em Sargacians.
They are neither the Subjects of the Port, nor Tributary to it; their Climate
being very bad, cold and moist; it produces no Wheat, nor indeed does it afford
any thing that is rare and valuable; which is the reason that the Turks leave
all this vast Country to the Natives, not worth the Toil of Conquering, nor the
Charge of Keeping. The Vessels that are bound from Constantinople and Caffa for
Mingrelia, cast Anchors in several places along these Coasts, and stay at every
place a Day or two: During which time they Trade with the Cherks with their
Arms in their Hands. For when any of them desire to come aboard, they give
Hostages, and so they likewise do when any of the Seamen or Persons in the Ship
desire to go ashore, which is very seldom; for they are a very perfidious
People: and therefore they give three Hostages for one. The Seamen carry
thither all the very same Commodities which they carry into Mingrelia, for
which they take in Exchange Slaves of all Sexes and Ages; Honey, Wax, Leather,
and Chacal-Skins; which Chacal is a Beast like a Fox, but much bigger.
Zerdava's, which is a Furr that resembles a Martin; with the Furrs of other
Beasts that breed in the Mountains of Circassia. Which is all to be had among
these People. They Exchange their Commodities after this manner: The Ship-Boat
Rows close to the Shore, and they that are in it are well armed. Nor will they
suffer a greater Number of Cherks to come nearer the place where the Boat lies
then they themselves are: For if they see a greater Number approach, they
presently put out to Sea. When they are come so near as to talk one to another,
they show their Commodities, agree upon the Barter to be made, and presently
make the Exchange: however it behooves 'em to stand upon their Guard all the
while: For the Cherks are Infidelity and Perfidy it self; and it is an
Impossibility for 'em to find an Opportunity to steal, but they take their
Advantage.

They are a People altogether Savage: formerly Christians; but now of no
Religion, not having so much as the Light of Nature among 'em. For I look upon
their Superstitious Customs as nothing; which seem to be a Mixture borrowed
from the Christians and Mahumetans their Neighbors. They live in Wooden Huts,
and go almost Naked. Every Person is a sworn Enemy to those that live in the
Provinces round about 'em. The Inhabitants make Slaves one of another, and sell
one another to the Turks and Tartars. And for their Ground the Women Till and
Manure it. The Cherks and their Neighbors live upon a kind of Paste made of a
very small Grain like to Millet: and they who have Traffic along these Coasts
will tell ye a Thousand Stories of the Barbarous Customs of these People.
However there is no safety in believing the Reports which are spread abroad
either of those that live upon the Seacoasts, or of those that inhabit farther
up in the Country; in regard that no body travels thither, and all that we know
is by means of the Slaves that are brought from thence, who are all mere
Savages, from whom there is nothing to be learnt of Certainty. This is the
reason why I have made no more Descriptions of Places in my Map of the
Black-Sea, which is at the beginning of this Book, choosing rather to leave a
space for the Circassians and Abca's void, then to fill it up upon the Credit
of People so illiterate, who for the most part can hardly tell the North from
the South.

The Abca's border upon the Cherks, possessing about a Hunderd Miles of the
Seacoast between Mingrelia and Circassia. However they are not altogether so
much Savages as the Cherks, but they are equally inclined with Them to Thieving
and Robbery. The Seamen also Trade with 'em, with the same Precautions as with
their Neighbors already mentioned. They stand in need of the same Commodities
as their Neighbors, and make their Exchanges in Slaves, Furrs, Does and Tigres
Skins, Linen, Thread, Box, Wax and Honey.

The 10th of September we arrived at Isgaour: Which is a Road belonging to
Mingrelia, pretty safe in the Summer: and there the Vessels that Trade into
Colchis lie; so that we saw seven great Ships there, when we arrived in the
Road. Presently our Captain fastened his own Vessel to four Anchors, two at the
Prow and two at the Poop, and carried his Masts and his Yards ashore. As for
Isgaour it is a desert place without any Habitations: only according to the
Number of Traders that come thither, they build up Huts and Booths of Boughs,
as they find themselves secure from the Abca's, which does not often happen.
But besides those Huts, there is not one House to be seen.

Now before I enter into the Relation of the Hardships which I suffered, and
the Dangers I underwent in Mingrelia, I shall give ye a Description of the
Country and Parts that border about it, without intermixing any thing Dubious,
or what I have not learnt by exact Information.

Colchis is situated at the end of the Black-Sea. To the East it is enclosed
with a little Kingdom, which makes a part of Georgia, which by the People of
the Country is called Imiretta, by the Turks, Pacha tchcouk or Pacha Koutchouk,
as much as to say, the Little Prince: to the South, by the Black-Sea; to the
West, by the Abca's; and to the North, by Mount Caucasus. In length it lies
between the Sea and the Mountains; in breadth, it extends from the Abca's to
the Kingdom of Imiretta. The Corax and Phasis, famous Rivers in Ancient
History, at present called Coclours and Rione, serve for its Bounds; while the
first parts it from the Abca's; the second from Imiretta. The length of Colchis
is a Hunderd and Ten Miles at most, the breadth Sixty. Which I know to be true,
not only by the concurring Report of the People of the Country, but also as
having crossed it my self from one end to the other. It was formerly Fortified
against the Abca's by a Wall Sixty Miles in length, which has been laid in
Ruins these many Years: So that now the Thick Forests are its chiefest
Defense, and its greatest Security. The Inhabitants of Caucasus, that border
upon Colchis, are the Alane's, whose Country was formerly the Northern Frontier
of Armenia; the Suane's, the Gigue's, the Caracioles or Cara-cherks; a sort of
People more Barbarous then their Names. These Cara-cherks, as they are called
by the Turks, that is to say, the Black Circassiens, are the Northern
Circassians. The Turks so call 'em, though they are the fairest People in the
World, by reason of the Foggs and Clouds that continually dark'n their Sky.
Formerly they were Christians; and some Relics of their Customs they retain,
and some certain Ceremonies also they observe, yet at present they profess no
Religion, but live by Robbery and Rapine, utterly ignorant of all Arts and
Sciences, and having nothing that may entitle 'em to Humanity, but their
Speech. They are much taller and more portly then other People; fo furious in
their Looks, and speaking with such a terrible Tone, that you may easily thence
discern their Dispositions and their Courage to be no less savage. Their very
Countenances are frightful to look upon; more especially when you come to
experience their Civility, and understand 'em to be the most resolute
Assassins, and most daring Robbers in the World.

The Ancient Kingdom of Colchis was not so small a Kingdom as now; for it
extended on the one side to the Palus Maeotis, and the other way as far as
Iberia. The Capital City was also called Colchis, seated at the Mouth of Phasis
upon the Western side of the River, and that was the Reason that Mingrelia was
formerly called Colchis; for that Mingrelia is bounded by this River, to the
East. Our Modern Geographers have seated another City which they call Fasso, in
the place where Colchis stood; but this I know my self to be a grand Mistake.

All the Oriental People call Colchis Odische, and the Colchians Mingrelians;
though I could never understand the Etymology of either of those Words. The
Country it self is unequal; full of Hills and Mountains, Valleys and Plains;
which causes great variety of Prospect, and it rises insensibly from the
Sea-shoar. It is almost all over covered with Woods, except the Fields that are
Manured, which are not very many: and besides, the Woods are so thick and tall,
and the Trees grow so fast, that if they did not grub up the Roots that spread
themselves into the Tilled Land, and the Highways, the whole Country in a
short time would be nothing but a Thick Forest altogether Impassable. The Air
is temperate as well in respect of the Heat as Cold, but very moist and very
unwholsom in regard of the extreme wet Weather; for it rains there almost
perpetually. In Summer the Moisture of the Earth, being heated by the Sun,
infects the Air, and causes not only frequent Pestilences, but several other
Distempers and Diseases. Therefore insupportable to Strangers. For it reduces
'em to a Ghastly Leanness, and renders 'em in a Years time yellow, juiceless
and faint. The Natives of the Country, more used to the Climate, are not so
much incommoded by it, for the time that they live, which is seldom above
Threescore Years.

Colchis abounds with Water-Streams, which fall from the Mountains of Caucasus,
and discharge themselves into the Black-Sea. The Principal Rivers are Codours,
which is that Corax I have already mentioned; the Socom, which I take to be the
Terscen of Arrian, and the Thasseris of Ptolomy; the Langur, called by the
Ancients Astolphus; the Cobi, by Arrian called Cobo, which before it enters
into the Sea, meets with another River called Cianiscari, which was the Ancient
Cianeus. The Tacheur which Arrian calls Sigamus; The Scheniscari, that is to
say, The River Horse, so called from the Rapidness of its course, and which the
Greeks for the same Reason call Hippus, and the Abascia to which Strabo gives
the Name of Glaucus, Arrian that of Caries, and Ptolomy that of Caritus. These
two Rivers intermix with Phasis, about Twenty Miles from the place where it
discharges it self into the Sea. I have set down as well the Ancient as Modern
Names of the Mingrelian Rivers, in regard that all the Historical Geographers,
especially Arrian, and several of the Moderns place 'em ill. But besides these
Rivers there are are some others of lesser note; of which I say no more, for
that before they fall into the Sea, they lose themselves in those larger
Torrents already mentioned.

The Soil of Colchis is very bad, and produces little Corn or Pulse. The Fruits
are almost all wild, without any taste, and very unwholsom; and yet there grow
in Colchis almost as many sorts as we have in France. They have also very large
Melons, but they are worth very little or nothing. The only Fruit that thrives
best in this Country are their Grapes; of which there is great Plenty. The
Vines grow about the Trees, and run up to the very Top of the Boughs. I have
seen some Stocks of these Vines that have been so large, that I could hardly
compass 'em with both my Arms. They prune their Vines every four Years, and as
for the Wine of Mingrelia I must needs say it is most excellent. It is strong,
and has a very good Body; pleasing to the Taste, and comfortable to the
Stomach. Nor do I know where there is better in any part of Asia. So that if
the Country People knew how to make Wine so well as we do, theirs would be the
best in the World. But they never take any pains at all with it. They only
hollow the larger Trunks of great Trees, which they make use of in stead of
Tubs. In those they bruise and squeeze the Grapes, and then pour out the Juice
into great Earthen Jarrs, which they bury in their Houses, or else hard by.
These Vessels contain about two or three Hunderd Quarters. And when the Vessel
is full, they close it up with a Wooden Cover, and then lay the Earth upon it.
For indeed they cover these Urns just after the same manner as I have told ye
that the Eastern People cover the Pits where they store up their Corn.

The Earth is so moist in Mingrelia in Seed-time, that for fear of softning too
much the Land where they sow their Wheat and Barley, they never Plough it at
all. They only cast their Grain upon the Top of the Earth, and that is
sufficient: for it comes up without any farther trouble, taking root a foot
deep in the Mould. The Mingrelians moreover affirm, That should they Plough
their Ground where they sow their Barley and Wheat, it would be so soft that
the least Wind would lodge the Stalks, so that they would never be able to rise
again. Their other Lands they plough, and sow their other Grain with Ploughs
and Ploughshares of Wood, which make however as deep Furrows as if they were of
Iron, by reason of the softness and moisture of the Earth, as I have already
said.

Their usual Grain is Gom: which is a sort of Grain as small as Coriander Seed,
and very much resembles Millet. Which they sow in the Springtime after the
same manner as they do Rice: for they make a Hole in the Ground with their
Finger, then put in the Grain and cover it. This Grain produces a Stalk about
the bigness of a Man's Thumb, and grows up as high as most Men are tall; at the
end of which there is an Ear that contains above Three Hunderd Grains: And
indeed the Gom-Stalk is very like to the Sugar-Cane. They gather this Grain in
October, and presently lay it upon high Hurdles exposed to the Sun; which they
do to dry it. After it has been Twenty Days upon the Hurdles, they bind it up
in Sheaves; but they thrash it only as they have occasion to boil it, and they
never boil it, but just before they go to eat it. It is insipid and heavy. Yet
is it presently boiled, and in less then half an hour after it is put into the
Water, they stir it softly with a Stick; and after it has stood never so little
upon the Fire, it turns into Past. When the Grain is all dissolved, and the
Past well wrought together, they lessen the Fire, let the Water boil away, and
the Past harden and dry in the Skellet where it was boiled.

This Past is very white; and some there is, which they make as white as Snow.
They serve it upon little Wooden Peels made on purpose. And this sort of Bread
the Turks call Pasta, the Mingrelians, Gom, being easily brok'n between the
Fingers: but it is of a very cold and laxative Quality; nor is it worth any
thing, after it is once cold, or when it is heated a second time. However the
Circassians, Mingrelians, and Georgians, who are Tributary to the Turks, the
Abca's, the Mountaineers of Caucasus, and all that inhabit the Coasts of the
Black-Sea from the Lake Maeotis to Trebisond, live all upon this Past. It Is all
the Bread they have, nor have they any other; and indeed they are so accustomed
to it, that they prefer it before Bread made of Wheat, as I have observed in
most parts of those Countries which I have seen. Nor do I wonder at it; for
when Necessity constrained me to make it my Food, I found it so acceptable to
my Palate, that I could hardly leave it, when I came where I met with our usual
Bread. Besides, I found my self very well, and my Body in a better Condition of
Health then before. In Armenia and Georgia I saw a great many of the Turkish
and Georgian Lords, and among the rest the Prince of Tiftles and the Basha of
Akalzike, who sent for this Grain and eat it for a Delicacy: but it requires
good store of Wine to wash it down, to correct and temper its cold and laxative
Quality.

Besides this Gom, they have in Mingrelia great plenty of Millet, some Rice,
with Wheat and Barley, but very scarce. The People of Quality many times eat
Wheaten Bread for a Dainty; but the meaner sort never so much as taste of it.

The ordinary Food of the Country is Beef and Pig; of which latter they have an
extraordinary plenty, and that so good, that the World does not afford better.
There is also Goats Flesh, but very lean, neither is it well tasted. Their
Wild-Fowl is very good, but very scarce. While I was there, there was hardly
any to be got, by reason that the Wars had harassed all the Country. For Fish,
there is none but Salt-Fish, which is brought from Turkey; Tunny Fish, and some
few small Quantities of other Fish at certain seasons of the Year. Their
Venizon in Mingrelia is the Wild Boar, the Heart, the Stag, the Fallow Deer and
Hare: which is so excellent that there cannot be better Food. Partridge they
have also, Pheasants and Quails in abundance, some River-Fowl, and Wild
Pigeons, which are very good Meat, and as big as our Crammed Chicken. The
Mingrelians catch these Pigeons with Nets, and take great Numbers of 'em in
Autumn; for in the Winter they return to the Mountains of Caucasus.

The Nobility of Mingrelia spend their whole time in the Field: and their
chiefest delight is in Birds of Prey, which they tame and afterward make use
of for their sport. And indeed it may be truly said that these Birds of Prey
are no where in the World in greater Numbers then in Mingrelia, as
Lanner-Hawks, Gos-Hawks, Hobbies and others, which build and breed in Mount
Caucasus. The young Ones, as soon as they are fledge, resort to the Forests
round about, where they take great Numbers, and reclaim 'em in five or six days.

But of all their Flights, that which yields the most delightful Pastime, is
that of the Faulcon at the Heron. For River-Fowl and Pheasants they only make
use of their Sparrow-Hawks. To which purpose, as they do in Persia and Turkey,
they carry a little Drum at the Pummel of their Saddles to put up the Wild-Fowl
with the Noise, and then let fly their Hawks at the Game. When they take any
Herons, they only cut off the Feathers upon their Heads to make Heron Tufts for
Bonnets, and then let 'em go again: for the People of the Country affirm, that
the Feathers grow again as fair and as beautiful as they were at first. Besides
the Fowl already named, and which are to be found in Mingrelia, there are other
strange Fowl as well for their Shape as Feathers, altogether unknown in our
parts; and not only those, but a great Number of Eagles and Pelicans. All which
Caucasus produces, besides a great Number of Wild Beasts, as Tigres, Leopards,
Lions, Wolves, and Chacalls; which are Creatures much resembling Foxes, only
that they are much bigger, and their Hair is much more thick and shaggy: and
some will have this Chacal to be the Hyaena of the Ancients. For it digs up
dead Bodies, and devours both living Creatures and Carrion. They bury their
Dead in the Eastern Country without Coffins, only in their VVinding-Sheets. And
therefore I have seen 'em in some parts roll great Stones over the Graves of
the Deceased, only for fear of these Beasts to prevent 'em from digging up the
Graves, and devouring the dead Bodies. For Mingrelia is full of these Chacalls
and Wolves; insomuch that they beset the very Houses themselves, where they
make a most dreadful howling Noise. The worst is, they make most terrible
Havoc among their Cattle and Horses. The Superior of the Theatins assured me,
that in one Week the Wolves eat him up three Horses and a Colt, close by the
House.

There are a great Number of Horses, and very good ones too, in Mingrelia, of
which every Man has a great many, in regard they cost 'em little or nothing to
keep. For as soon as they alight, they take off their Bridles and Saddles, and
turn 'em a Field: Nor do they ever Shoe 'em, or give 'em any other Food or
Provender, then what they graze of themselves.

In Mingrelia are neither Cities nor Towns, only two Villages by the Seaside:
But all the Houses are scattered so thick up and down in the Country; that you
shall hardly travel a Mile, but you shall meet with Three or Four together.
There are also Nine or Ten Castles, of which the chiefest is called Rucs, where
the Prince of Mingrelia keeps his Court. This Castle is surrounded with a
Stone-Wall, but so ill built, and so thin, that the least Field-Piece will make
its way through it: however there are some few Cannon within it; but the rest
of the Castles have none at all: being all built after this manner.

In some level and open place in a Wood, they erect a Stone-Tower about Thirty
or Forty Foot High, sufficient to contain Fifty or Sixty Persons. This is the
strongest part of the Tower, where they secure all the Treasure of the Lord,
and of those that desire his Protection. Close by this, stand Five or Six other
Towers built of Wood, much lower then the middlemost, which are the
Storehouses for their Provision; and where they put their Wives and Children,
when they happen at any time to be assaulted. Beside which there are within the
compass of the open place, several Hutts made of Carpenters Work; others, with
Boughs of Trees, others of Canes and Reeds. The space is enclosed with a very
thick Hedge and with the Wood it self, which is so thick that it is impossible
to come near those retirements but by the way which is cut open on purpose.
Which passage, when they are afraid of an Enemy, they dig up and cover with
Trees, that it is impossible to be forced. Nor do the Colchians ever retire to
these Castles, but when they are in fear of an Enemy; for when the danger is
past they return to their Houses.

The Houses in Mingrelia are all of Carpenters Work; and Building is very
cheap, by reason of the great Plenty of Wood. Of these Houses, the Poorer sort
contain but one Story: nor have those of the Gentry and Nobility themselves
above two. The lower Rooms are always furnished with Beds and Couches to lie
down and sit upon, by reason of the great Moisture of the Earth. The Persons of
Quality sit upon Carpets, the meaner sort upon Forms. But their Houses are very
inconvenient and Nasty; as having neither Chimneys nor Windows. The Fire place
is in the middle, and the light comes in at the Door. Their Houses are built
upon no Foundations, which is the reason that they are easily Robbed. For the
Thieves dig a hole under the first Beam that lies upon the Ground, and supports
all the rest of the Fabric, and so creep into the House. And as soon as the
People begin to stir, they get out again with the same ease. Which
Inconvenience constrains the Country People to have no more then one Room for
every Family. Where they keep all that they have about 'em, except their Corn,
and sometimes their Wine. So that they lie all together, and House their Cattle
in the Night.

Mingrelia breeds very good Blood; So that the Men are very well shaped, and
the Women very handsome. Those that are of any Quality carry always in their
Countenances some certain Features and Graces that are very Charming. I have
seen some wonderfully well shaped, that have had a very Majestic Air, with an
Aspect and Proportion much to be admired. Besides, they have those Obliging
Glances, that win the Affections of all that behold 'em, and seem as it were to
command their Love. They that are not so handsome, or in years, paint
abominably, Coloring their Eyebrows, their Cheeks, Foreheads, Noses and Chins;
but the rest only paint their Eyebrows. They dress themselves with all the
curiosity they can. Their Habit is like that of the Persians: but their
Head-Attire is much like that of the European Women, even to the curling of
their Locks. They wear a Vail that covers only the Top and Hinder part of the
Head. They are naturally very subtle and of clear and quick Apprehensions.
Extremely Civil, full of Ceremonies and Complements; but otherwise the
wickedest Women in the World, Haughty, Furious, Perfidious, Deceitful, Cruel,
and Impudent. So that there is no sort of Wickedness which they will not put
in Execution, to procure Lovers, preserve their Affection, or else to destroy
'em.

The Men are endu'd with all these Mischievous Qualities with some Addition.
There is no Wickedness, to which their Inclinations do not naturally carry
'em. But all addicted to Thievery. That, they make their study; that they make
their whole Employment, their Pastime and their Glory. Assassination, Murder
and Lying are among them esteemed to be noble and brave Actions. But for
Concubinage, Adultery, Bigamy, Incest, and all Vices of that Nature, they are
Virtues in Mingrelia. They make nothing to take away one another Wives by
force: and they Marry their Aunts, their Nieces, and their Wives Sisters
without any Scruple. He that has a mind to two Wives at a time, marries 'em
without any more ado: and many there are that will have Three. Every Man keeps
as many Concubines as they please; the Wives never grudging their Husbands
that convenience: for there is seldom any such thing as Jealousy among 'em.
If a Man take his Wife in the act with her Gallant, he has a Privilege to
compel him to pay him a Pig by way of satisfaction; which they eat all Three
together: and generally that is all the revenge the Person injured takes. But
this is the greatest VVonder, that this Wicked Nation should maintain, that to
have several Wives and Concubines is justifiable: for say they, they bring us
many Children, which we sell for ready Money or Exchange for necessary
Conveniences. Which is nothing to another most Inhuman Tenent of theirs, that
it is a piece of Charity to Murder Infants newly Born, when they have not
sufficient wherewith to maintain 'em; or such as are Sick and past hopes of
recovery. And the reason they give is this, that by so doing, they put those
Childern out of a great deal of Misery which they would undergo in a
languishing Distemper, which in the end must of necessity carry 'em off. Such
are the Arguments of these Barbarous People that have neither shame, nor
Humanity. I am afraid to tell the Truth, lest History should want belief in
this particular, or that the Truths which I recount should be looked upon as
the Exorbitances of Relation. But I aver 'em to be really true, as some actions
which I shall recite, will sufficiently justify.

The Gentlemen of the Country have full Power over the Lives and Estates of
their Tenants, with whom they do what they please. They seize upon 'em, whether
Wife or Children; they sell 'em, or dispose of 'em otherwise as they think
fit. Every Countryman furnishes his Lord with so much Corn, Cattle, Wine, and
other Provisions, as he is able. So that their Wealth consists in the Number of
their Vassals. Besides, every one is obliged to entertain his Lord Two or Three
days in a Year at their own Expenses. Which is the reason that the Nobility,
so long as the Year lasts, go from one place to another devouring their
Tenants, and sometimes the Tenants of other Men.

The Prince himself leads the same Life, so that it is a hard matter every day
to know where to find him. When the Vassals of several Lords are at
difference, their Masters decide the dispute: but when the Lords are at
variance among themselves, force and main strength determine the Quarrel, and
the stoutest Arm gets the better. There is not a Gentleman in Mingrelia but has
some quarrel or other. And therefore it is, that they always go armed, and as
numerously attended as they can. When they ride, they are armed at all Points,
and their followers also; nor do they ever sleep without their Swords by their
sides; and when they go to Bed, they sleep upon their Belleys, laying their
Swords under 'em.

Their Arms are a Lance, Bow and Arrows, a straight Sword, a Mace and a
Buckler; but there are very few that carry Fire Arms. They are very good
Soldiers, sit a Horse very well, and handle their Lances with an Extraordinary
Dexterity.

Their Habit is peculiar; and unless they be the Ecclesiastical Persons, they
wear but very little Beard. They Shave all the Top of their Heads in a Circle,
suffering the rest of their Hair to grow down to their Eyes, and then clip it
round of an even length. They cover their Heads with a light Cap of Felt very
thin pared, and cut into several Half-Moons about the Edges. In the VVinter
they wear a furred Bonnet: They are moreover so beggarly and so wretched, that
for fear of spoiling their Caps or their Bonnets in the Rain, they will put 'em
in their Pouches, and go Bare-Headed. Over their Bodies they wear little
Shirts, that fall down to their Knees, and tuck into a straight Pantaloon. Nor
indeed is there any habit in the World more deformed then theirs. They carry a
Rope several Fadoms long at their Girdles, to tie together such People or
Cattle which they Rob from their Neighbors, or take in War. The Nobles wear
Leathern Girdles Four Fingers broad, full of Silver Studs, at which they hang a
Knife, a Whetstone, and a Steel to strike Fire: together with Three Leathern
Purses, the one full of Salt, the other of Pepper, and the other with
Pack-Needles, Lesser-Needles, and Thread. The Poor People go almost naked; such
is their Misery not to be paralleled; as not having any thing to cover their
Nakedness but a pityful sorry Felt like to the Chlamys of the Ancients; into
which they thrust their Heads, and turn which way they please as the Wind sits;
for it covers but one side of their Bodies, and falls down no lower than their
Knees. There are some, that are pared very thin to keep out the Water, which
are not so heavy as the common sort; that are ready to weigh a Man down,
especially when thorough wet. He that has a Shirt and a pair of pitiful
Drawers, thinks himself Rich; for almost all of 'em go Barefoot; and such of
the Colchians as pretend to Shoes, have nothing but a piece of a Bufalo's
Hide, and that untann'd too; which piece of raw Hide is laced about their Feet
with a Thong of the same: so that for all these sort of Sandals, their Feet are
as durty, as if they went Barefoot.

Almost all the Mingrelians, both Men and Women, even the most noble and
wealthy, never have but one Shirt, and one pair of Breeches at a time; which
last 'em at least a Year: In all which time they never wash 'em above Three
times: only Once or Twice a Week they shake 'em over the Fire, for the Vermin
to drop off, with which they are mightily haunted; and indeed, I cannot say I
ever saw any thing so Nasty and Loathsome. Which is the reason that the
Mingrelian Ladies carry a very bad scent about 'em. I always accoasted 'em,
extremely taken with their Beauty; but I had not been a Minute in their
Company, but the Rank VVhiffs from their Skins quite stifled all my Amorous
Thoughts.

The Grandees Eat, sitting upon Carpets, after the manner of the Eastern People
Their Napkin is only a piece of painted Cloth, or Leather, and sometimes they
only wipe upon the Boards. The Ordinary sort sit upon a Form, with another Form
before 'em of the same height, which serves for a Table. All their Dishes are
of Wood to their very Drinking Cups: only among the People of Quality you shall
see a little Silver Plate.

Moreover it is the custom in this Savage Country, that the whole Family
without distinction, Males and Females, Eat all together. The King with all his
Train to his very Grooms. The Queen, her Women, Maids, Servants and all, to the
very Lacqueys that attend her. When it does not rain, they Dine in the open
Courts, where they rank themselves, either in a Circle, or side by side, one
below another, according to their Quality. If it be cold weather they make
great rowsing Fires in the Court where they eat; for Wood-Firing costs nothing
in that Country, as I have said already. When they are sat down, Four Men, if
the Family be great, bring upon their Shoulders a large Kettle full of Gom, or
Grain boiled as I have already related; of which, most usually a Poor beggarly
half-Naked Rascal serves upon a Wooden Plate, to every one his proportion,
which weighs full Three Pound. Afterward two other Servants, somewhat but not
much better equipped, bring in another Kettle full of Grain more white than the
other; which is only for the better sort. Upon Worky-Days they never give but
only Gom to the Servants, the Masters being served with Pulse, or dried Fish
roasted, or else Flesh. On Holy Days or when they make entertainments, they
kill either a Hog, or an Ox, or a Cow, especially if they have no Venson. As
soon as they have cut the Throat of the Beast, they dress it, and set it upon
the Fire, without Salt, or Sauce, in the great Kettle where they boil their
Past. When it has boiled a while, they take it from the Fire, throw away the
Broth, and serve it in half-raw, without any seasoning. The Master of the House
has always standing before him a large Portion of this Vittles: They set before
him likewise all the Pulse, all the Bread, and all the Tame and VVild-Fowl.
Who presently Carves for his Guests and his Friends their share They feed
themselves with their Fingers, and that so nastily, that nothing but extremity
of hunger could provoke the meanest of our Europeans to Eat at the Tables of
those Barbarians. When they have begun to Eat, there are two Persons, that
serve the Drink round the Table: Among the common sort, this Office is
performed by Women or Maids. It Is the same Incivility among them, to call for
Wine, as to refuse it. For they must stay till it is presented, and take it,
when it is given 'em. They never give less then a Pint at a Draught; which at
their Ordinary Meals is thrice done; but at Feasts and Banquets, the Guests,
and the Gentry Drink on till they are Drunk.

The Mingrelians and their Neighbors are very Great Drinkers; far exceeding
the Germans, and all the Northern People They never mix their Wine, but Drink
it pure, both Men and Women. But when they are once Heated, they think their
Pints too little, and therefore Drink out of their Dishes, and out of the
Pitcher it self. While I lay near Cotatis, I lodged at a Gentleman's House, who
was one of the stoutest Drinkers in all the Country: and while I stayed at his
House, he made a Feast for Three of his Friends; at what time they were all
Four so set upon Carowsing, that from Ten in the Morning till Ten in the
Evening, they Drank out a whole Charge of Wine, that weighed Three Hunderd
Pound Weight. It is also a custom among these People, practiced by all the
World, to rise from the Table, and empty as often as they have occasion, and
when they return, they sit down without ever Washing their Hands. They provoke
their Guests and their Friends, as much as they can, to Drink; it being chiefly
at the Table that they observe Civility, and are free of their Complements.
Their discourses between Man and Man, are only Stories of their Robberies,
their Wars, Duels, Murders, and Selling of Slaves. Neither is their discourse
any better among the Women: for they are pleased with all sorts of Love-Tales,
let 'em be never so Obscene, or never so Lascivious: and their Children learn
their filthy Words and Phrases, as soon as they can speak; insomuch that by
that time they come to be Ten Years of Age, all their discourse with the
Women, is the most beastly that a Brothel-House can utter. And certainly the
Education of their Children in Mingrelia, is the most Vicious and Lewd in the
World. Their Father's bring 'em up to Thievery, and their Mothers to Obscenity.

Mingrelia is at present very much dispeopl'd; there not being in it above
Twenty Thousand Inhabitants. Though it is not above Thirty Years ago, that
there was no less then Fourscore Thousand. The cause of which Decrease proceeds
from their Wars with their Neighbors, and the vast number of People of both
Sexes, which the Nobility have sold of late Years. For a long time there has
been drained out of Mingrelia every Year, either by Purchase or Barter, above
Twelve Thousand Persons; all which are sold to the Mahometans, Persians and
Turks, there being none but they, that deal in that sort of Traffic in those
parts. They carry Three Thousand every Year directly to Constantinople, which
they have in Exchange for Cloth, Arms, and other things which they carry, as I
have said, into Mingrelia. To which purpose there came every Year Twelve Sail
of Ships from Constantinople and Caffa, and above Sixty Feluques from Gorica,
Trissa and Trebisond. The Commodities which they export from Mingrelia, besides
Slaves, are Silk, Linen Thread, and Wov'n, Linseed, Hides, Martins, Beavers,
Box, Wax and Honey. The Honey of Mingrelia is very Good; and there are two
sorts of it, the one Red, the other White; the White is not so plentiful as the
other, but it is much better and more Sweet; Sweeter indeed then refined Sugar,
very delicious to the Taste, and Crumples between the Teeth. Besides their
Garden Honey, there is another sort is found in the Trunks and Clefts of
Hollow-Trees in great abundance; which the Vessels from Caffa carry into
Tartary, where they make a very strong Liquor of it, mixed with Barley. The
Turks make great profit of their Mingrelion Trade, selling for Four, what they
buy for one Crown; but their greatest advantage is by their Slaves.

Certainly the Inhumanity of these Mingrelians, their unnatural Cruelty toward
their own Country Men, and particularly of some of 'em toward their own Flesh
and Blood, are things hardly to be Credited. They Study Opportunities to fall
out with their own Vassals, merely to find a Pretense to Sell 'em, with their
Wives and Children. They force away their Neighbors Children from the Embraces
of their Parents, to the same end, and sometimes they will sell their own
Children, Wives and Mothers: And I have been showed several Gentlemen who have
been so Prodigiously Unnatural. One of those Gentlemen sold Twelve Priests in
one Day. In which Piece of Impiety there is one particular passage so strange,
that it deserves to be related as an Example not to be Paralleled.

This Gentleman fell in Love with a Lady, whom he resolved to Marry, tho he had
a Wife already. To which purpose he Courted the Lady, and obtained her Good
Will. Now it is the Custom in Mingrelia, to purchase their Wives, and they Buy
'em, according to their Quality, their Age, and their Beauty. Thereupon the
Gentleman not knowing where to raise the Sum which he had promised for the
Enjoyment of his Mistress, nor to defray the Expenses of his Wedding, but by
selling of Slaves, and for that reason reduced to Despair, bethought himself of
a Piece of Treachery, the most Infamous and Wicked that could be. To that
purpose he invited Twelve Priests to his House, to hear a Solemn Mass and offer
a kind of Sacrifice, upon which the Priests went very Cheerfully, never
Dreaming that he intended to have sold 'em to the Turks, the like Practice
having never been heard of before in Mingrelia. The Gentleman on the other side
received 'em very Courteously, caused 'em to say Mass, and to offer an Ox, and
afterward gave 'em an Entertainment. But after he had made 'em to take a
Hearty Cup, he caused his Servants to seize 'em, Bind 'em, Shave their Heads
and their Beards, and the Night following carried 'em to a Turkish Vessel,
where he sold 'em for Household Goods, and other Necessaries, but finding he had
not yet enough to pay for his Mistress, and his Nuptials, this Tiger went and
fetched his own Wife, and sold her to the same Vessel.

All the Trade in Mingrelia is driven by way of Barter: for there is no set
price of Money among the People: the current Money are the Piasters, Dutch
Crowns, and Abasse's, which are Pieces made in Georgia, and Stamped with the
Persian Stamp, to the value of Eighteen Pence every Piece. It Is true that the
Prince of Mingrelia, who died about Twenty Years ago, began to Coin Money of
his own. But the Mint did not work long, in regard there was but little Silver
brought into the Country, and for that the Country produces none at all, no
more then it does Gold, or any other Metal. I know not what is become of that
Gold-Gravel, and Golden-Sand which the People spong'd out of the Water with
their Sheepskins, according to the Ancient Stories, and which gave occasion to
the Fable of the Golden Fleece. There is no such thing in Colchis, nor in the
Mountains or Rivers adjoining. So that which way soever ye go, there is no
possibility of Reconciling Antiquity with the present Times.

Mingrelia of it self is not able to raise above Four Thousand Men, fit to bear
Arms; which are also all Cavalry for the most part; there not being above Three
Hundred Foot to join with these Horsemen. Nor are the Soldiers Marshalled into
Regiments and Companies. But every Lord, and every Gentleman, leads his own
People to the Fight, without Order, without Ranks, without Officers; and they
follow their Leader, whether it be in Flight, or to the Charge.

The Wars of the Mingrelians, and their Neighbors, are indeed but mere
Incursions, and Boots-Halings; and when they make their Inroads into the
Enemies Country, they fall on with an Extraordinary Fury; for they want neither
Courage nor Resolution. When they have put the Enemy to Flight, they
vigorously follow the pursuit, and overrun all the Country, Burn and Plunder
all before 'em, carry away Prisoners of all Sexes and Degrees, and then retreat
with the same Impetuosity. They take as many Prisoners as they can; so that
when they have Dismounted any one, presently they leap from their Horses, bind
the Person Vanquished, with the Cords which they carry at their Girdles, as I
have said, and deliver 'em to the Custody of their Servants. He that has taken
a Prisoner, has Power over him of Life and Death, he may dispose of him as he
pleases; but generally they make 'em their Slaves, and sell 'em to the Turks.
On the other side, when these People are invaded, they show themselves at the
Ford of some River, where they lay their Musketeers in Ambuscado, endeavoring
to prevent the Enemies Passage. At what time, if the Enemy forces his way, they
fly to the VVoods, leaving the Country to their Mercy: So that the Wars with
these People never last long. In less then Fifteen Days the War is at an end,
and the Enemy retreats, after he has ravaged, and ransackt all the Country.

The Revenues of the Prince of Mingrelia, amount at most, to no more then
Twenty Thousand Crowns a Year. Which arises from the Customs of what is
Imported and Exported out of the Country, the Slaves which he sells, and his
Impositions and Fines. All this he lays up; for he is not at a Farthing
Expense, for his Slaves serve him for nothing, and his Crown Lands furnish him
with more Provision for his Court then he can spend. He often Presents the King
of Persia with Falcons, and all sorts of Birds of Prey. For which the King of
Persia sends him Rich Tissues, Carpets, Tapestries, Arms, all sorts of Cups and
Dishes, and such other Necessaries, of which such a beggarly Prince as the
Prince of Mingrelia, may be thought to stand in need. He also keeps the same
Correspondence with the Came of Georgia. His Court upon Solemn Festivals
consists of Two Hunderd Gentlemen, upon other Days, not above Six Score. His
Train consists of Three Hunderd Persons besides Gentlemen. And as for the
Princess, she is attended by a Hunderd of hoth Sexes: but upon Festival Days,
she shows a Court of about Sixty Ladies, all handsome and well dressed.

The Religion of the Colchians, has formerly as I believe, been the same with
that of the Greeks. The Ecclesiastical Historians say, That a Slave Converted
to the Christian Faith, the King, the Queen, and all the Nobility of Colchis,
in the time of Constantine the Great, who sent both Priests and Doctors to
Baptize the new-Converted, and to instruct 'em in the Mysteries of
Christianity. Others assert, That they owe for their knowledge of Christianity,
to one Cyril, whom the Sclavonians in their Language call Chiusil, who lived
about the Year 860. The Mingrelians also show ye, by the Sea side, at a Place
called Pigivitas near the River Corax, a Church with three Bodies, which is a
very large one; assuring ye withal, that St. Andrew Preached in the Place where
that Church was built. I have seen it at a distance; and it seemed to be a very
great Pile of Building so far as a Man may guess a Mile off. The Catholicos
once in his Life goes thither to make the Holy Oil, which the Greeks call
Mirone. I never discoursed of Religion with any Mingrelian, having never found
any one, that either knew what Religion, Law, Sin, the Sacraments, or Divine
Service were. All I could learn was only this, That the Women sometimes light
up small round Candles, which they fix to the Doors of their Houses, or of some
Church, where they burn at the same time a Grain of Incense and turning toward
the Sun, bow their Bodies very low several times, and cross themselves all over
from Head to Foot.

The Priests and Bishops perform the Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, say Mass, and
Baptize. I have seen 'em at the performance of their Functions, when no Body
has been present for want of Devotion. But in regard I did not understand the
Language which they spoke, I had rather in stead of relating what I only saw
and heard by report, recite what I met with out of an Italian Manuscript
concerning the Religion of the Mingrelians and Georgians, written by Father
Joseph Maria Zampi a Mantuan, Superior of the Theatins in Mingrelia. For that
Friar who made me a Present of the Manuscript, had lived there Twenty Three
Years, and could not be ignorant either of their Ceremonies or their Belief:
which made him write at large his own knowledge of the Mingrelian Piety. And
this is that which he speaks more particularly, and as it lies in the
Manuscript.

The Mingrelians, says he, are fallen into the profoundest Abyss of Ignorance
and Darkness, that the Understanding of Man was ever plunged in: in regard the
people have not the least Idea of Faith or Religion; while the most part look
upon Life Eternal, the Day of Judgment, and the Resurrection of the Dead, to be
mere Fables, and Humane Invention. Nor do the Clergy perform any Ecclesiastical
Duties, there being hardly one of the whole Heard, that can either Write or
Read. They have utterly lost the Knowledge of the true service of God: only the
Priests make a public profession of foretelling things to come, and make the
people believe that their Books do show 'em the success of future Events. With
which Imposture the Mingrelians are so obstinately bewitched that when any one
falls sick, they call the Priests, not to make Confession of their Sins, or to
Recommend their Souls to their Prayers, which is the least thing that troubles
the Patient, but to bid 'em look in their Books, and see whether he shall die
of that Distemper or no; to tell 'em the event and success of it, and what was
the reason that he was visited with that Sickness. Presently the Priest falls
to turning over the Leaves of his Book which he carries along with him, and
after he has turned 'em over and over, and over and over again, he pronounces
with the Voice of an Oracle, That such a Cati (for so the Mingrelians call
their Images) is angry with him, and has therefore struck'n him with that
Disease; nor will he be appeased without a good Present, which if he do not
send forthwith, the Image will certainly ruin him. Which Present is to be
either a Pig, or a Goat, or an Ox, or else Ready Money. The poor sick person
upon this, being dreadfully afraid of death, fails not immediately to give the
Priests what they appoint for an Offering to the Idol, who divide the spoil
among themselves; and in that manner cousen the poor sick person.

The Catholicos of Mingrelia is the Head of all the Clergy of that Country, of
the Abca's, of Guriel, of Mount Caucasus, and Imiretta. Whom the Prince of
Mingrelia appoints and deposes as he pleases himself. His Revenue is very
great, as having Four Hunderd Vassals under him, who furnish his House with all
Things necessary for Human Life, and many other Superfluities. He sells their
Childern to the Turks besides, and as it is his Employment to visit the
Diocesses under his Jurisdiction, he visits em indeed, but it is not for the
good of his Flock, to instruct the people, or to examine the Miscarriages of
the Inferior Clergy: Those Cares never trouble his Brains nor his Thoughts;
but his main business is, to rake Money together, to suck the Blood of the poor
people, and dispoil 'em of what they have. And as to the Train that attends
this Catholicos when he makes his Visitations, it consists of no less then Two
Hunderd persons.

The outward Sanctity of this Pontiff consists in a continual abstinence from
Flesh, and Wine only during Lent; and in long Prayers Day and Night. He is so
ignorant that he can hardly read his Breviary and Missal. And there is so much
to be said concerning his Simony, that it would be a difficult task to make a
true recital of it. I shall therefore say no more then this, That he never
Consecrates a Bishop for less then Six Hunderd Crowns; that he never says Mass
for the Dead, under Eight Hunderd; nor any other Masses under a Hunderd Crowns
a Piece. Not long since the Prince of Mingrelia's Vizier, being sick, made his
Confession to him, and gave him Fifty Crowns. Which the Catholicos took for so
small a Remuneration, that upon the Vizier's falling sick again, and sending
for him to make a new Confession, he sent him word, that he should pay for his
first Confession, and then he would come and hear what he had to say.

There are Six Bishops in Mingrelia, but those Prelates take no care of the
Souls of their Flocks, nor do they ever visit their Churches, or their
Diocesses. They suffer the Priests to live in all manner of Errors, and the
People to prostitute themselves to all manner of Vices; they understand not the
Form of Baptism: they let Polygamy Reign, and permit the Mothers to Bury their
new Born Childern alive. And tho they have been often reproved for so much
Cruelty more then Barbarous; Remonstrances operate nothing upon 'em; this
Inhumanity being become a Custom. The Clergy tolerates it, and the Prince near
Prohibits any one that pleases, from putting it in practice. The chief
Employments of the Bishops, is continual Feasting and Banqueting, where they
are Drunk almost every Day: they are Rich and go Sumptuousl-y Habited; their
Principal Revenue arising from what they Sponge from their Vassals, and the
price of the Women and Children, which they sell to the Turks.

They abstain from Flesh, after the manner of the Greek Bishops, and include
the whole Christian Religion, within the practice of Fasting. They do not
believe themselves obliged to any other Duty; but believe themselves acquitted
of all the Precepts of Christianity, by Fasting. Their Cathedral Church is
indifferent neatly kept, and well adorned with Images, after the Grecian
manner, dressed up and finifi'd with Gold and Jewels. They believe that in
Beautifying their Images they satisfy the Justice of God, and that the
offering of a Jewel, to an Image wipes away all their Sins. And this is the way
which they take, when they have offended themselves.

Their Apparel is very Magnificent, considering the Country, being of Scarlet
and Velvet. It differs little from the secular Habit. That which makes the
peculiar distinction between 'em, is the long Beard which they wear, with a
black Bonnet, Round and High, made after the Fashion of the Greek Monks. They
wear Chains of Gold about their Necks, go a Hunting, and many times to the
Wars, where they Fight no less Courageously at the Head of their Slaves, then
the Gentry and Noblemen. There are some of 'em that are never Consecrated,
which nevertheless does not hinder 'em from bestowing Orders, as if they were
Consecrated.

There are in Mingrelia, certain Monks of the Order of St. Basil, which they
call Berres, who wear the same Habit as the Greek Monks, and observe the same
manner of living. And a Child may be made one of these Monks by his Father and
Mother only. They Consecrate him in his Infancy, by putting a black Bonnet upon
his Head, suffering his Hair to grow, hindering him from eating Flesh, and
telling him upon all occasions that he is a Berre. All this while the Infant
understands nothing more what belongs to his Condition, and all his Life long
never minds any thing else but to observe his Fasts as others that bear the
same Title with himself.

There are also Nuns of the same Order, who observe Fasting Days, and wear a
black Vail; but they have neither Nunneries, neither are they under any Vows or
Subordination. They that have taken upon 'em to wear the Vail of Sanctity, and
to observe Fasting, when they are weary of well-doing, quit their Habit and
their Temperance, when they please themselves: For that same manner of living
is wholly at their own discretions, whether they be Maids, Wives or Widows;
whether Divorced, whether Free or Slaves; no Condition is exempted from that
Liberty.

The Priests of Mingrelia are very numerous; and a sort of miserable Creatures
that live upon whatever they can get, and marry again as often as they please
themselves. There needs no more then to be able to read and say a Mass by
Heart, to be admitted into the Priesthood For the Bishop never examines those
that he admits into Orders, being many times more ignorant then they:
especially if the Priest that desires to be admitted gives him the Value of a
Horse for his Ordination. God alone knows the lamentable Condition of those
Miserable Priests, and the Validity of their Priesthood; for many times it is a
great Question, whether they are Baptized, and whether the Bishops that Ordain
'em, were ever Baptized or Consecrated themselves.

Nor is it to be imagined how these Priests are contemned and scorned. They
Till their own, and the Lands of their Lords, being no less Slaves then the
Seculars; they follow 'em to the Wars, and carry their Baggage. Now that which
causes this Contempt is their Ignorance, their Gluttony and their Poverty.
Their Poverty is so great, that they go Barefoot, and all in Tattars that
hardly cover their Tails. So that there is no respect given 'em but when they
are sat down at Table; for then they are the first to whom they offer Drink;
and they desire 'em to bless the Wine and the Food when they say Mass; and at
another time when they are sent for to visit the Sick, and turn over their
Books to know what Image the sick Party has offended, and what Present will
appease him. They are only distinguished from the Seculars by their Beards,
which they let grow very long: for the Seculars wear hardly any at all.

There are but few of their Churches which have any Bells, but they call the
people together by knocking with a good big Stick upon a Board. The Images in
the Cathedrals are very well dressed; being encircl'd by the Offerings of the
people, such as are Hearts Horns, Boars Jaws and Tusks, Pheasants Wings, and
Weapons, to the end the Image should prosper 'em in their Hunting and Wars

The Parish-Churches are more Nasty then Stables; the Images mangled and
brok'n, and covered over with Dust and Spiders. Their Sanctum Sanctorum is so
Nasty that I am ashamed to speak it. The Ornaments of the Altar are nothing but
a few Nasty Tattered Clouts, torn and stained with Wine. Their Cup or Chalice
is a Goblet of Wood as Nasty as may well be imagined; and the Cover of the
Chalice is a Wooden Plate, as Nasty and as Greasy as the Chalice. When they
have occasion they wipe it with the Curtain of the Sanctum Sanctorum, which is
yet more Nasty then all that has been said; and I say the less, because I would
not offend the Reader. But the Cathedrals are very clean and well adorned. And
I could wish, that every Bishop had as much care of the Education and
Instruction of his Flock, as he has of the Cleansing and Adorning his Church.

The Worship which they pay to their Images, is an Idolatrous Worship. For they
adore 'em not with a Relative Adoration, but pay their Devotion to the Material
Substance and Figure before their Eyes. The Images which are the fairest, are
the best served, and most devoutly adored: especially those that are adorned
with any thing that is costly, as Gold; those that have most Jewels and
Precious Stones; but above all those that are reputed to be Cruel, easily
Provoked, and apt to Kill those against whom they are Incensed. Which latter
are served with an incredible respect: For the People throw themselves to the
Ground, as far off as they can see the Church that contains those Images; thump
their Breasts, and beseech 'em to Kill their Enemies, and such as have Robbed
'em of any thing. They are Horribly afraid to swear by those revered Images,
and when they do, there is no gainsaying such an Oath. For they believe
whatever is sworn by those Images. Some there are that will not call these
Images to Witness the most certain Truths, for fear of being Killed by 'em; and
they that do Swear, Swear only by those that have a pleasing, mild, smiling
Countenance, and are reputed neither Murderers nor Bloody-Minded.

Nor do they Worship these Images in hopes of any Spiritual Advantages, or to
obtain any Assistance in order to a future Life: For the Mingrelians
acknowledge no other Life but their Present Being. And all that they do is
merely out of a Terrible and Servile fear, lest the Images shouid deprive 'em
of their Lives, or Vex 'em with Diseases, deliver 'em over with their Goods,
into the Hands of Thieves and Robbers, or the Fury of their Masters, or suffer
'em to be made Slaves to the Turks. When they have been Robbed at any time,
they go to the Church where stands the Image in which they have most
Confidence, make it a present of two Loaves, and a Bottle of Wine, bow several
times to it; and having driven a Stake into the Earth before it, they Pray to
it in this manner. Thou know, O Image, that I have been Robbed of such and
such Goods, and that I cannot discover the Thief, which has proved so great a
Grief to me, that I come here to make my Prayers to thee, and I offer thee this
Present, to the end thou may take away their Lives, exterminate 'em from the
Earth, and fasten 'em down in the Abyss, as I have driven this Stake into the
Earth before thee. The Priest being present at all this Ceremony, takes the
Offering, and having hung it about the Head of the Suppliant, they go and Eat
it together. But of all the Images of whose Cruel Usage these blind People are
most afraid, there is not any so formidable as that of S. Giobas. They relate
how this Image being one day carried a Journey, and passing by a Lake or Marsh
full of Frogs, the noise of the Frogs so amazed it, and put it into such a
Fury, that it flew away to a Church that stood upon a Mountain. They report
moreover, that it Kills all that approach too near it. So that when any Person
has occasion to Pray to it, he goes no nearer then just within sight. Where he
throws his Present down at a distance, and keeps himself at the same distance
all the while he makes his Prayer. The Mingrelians are also every one very
Zealous for the Honor and Bravery of his Parish-Idol; every one vaunting the
Exploits of the Idol he Worships, and how Courageously it has revenged him upon
his Enemies: or how speedily they die that fall under its disfavour! But to the
Images of the Roman Catholics, the Mingrelians pay not the least Veneration,
nor have they any value for 'em. Only for St. George, they account him their
chiefest Saint, as do all the Georgians, Muscovites and Greeks.

They have several Relics among 'em, of which the chiefest were brought 'em
as they say, by the Prelates that fled for Shelter into those parts, when
Constantinople was taken by the Turks; fearing lest they should fall into the
Hands of the Infidels. Our Theatin Monks have seen a piece of the True Cross,
about a handful long, and one of the Holy Virgins Shifts. The color of it was
something enclining to Yellow, Powdered with Flowers, and Embroidered with
Needle Work. The length of it was Eight Spans, the Breadth Four, the Sleeves
short but a Span in Breadth, and straight at the Neck. This Shift is locked up
in a little Ebony-Box garnished with Silver: They have also a dried Hand of St.
Marina, enchas'd in Gold, adorned with several little precious Stones. Another
Hand of St. Quiric; with several Bones set in Gold and Silver. The Holy
Swaddling Clothes, wherein the Happy Virgin Swathed Jesus Christ. A little
Square Box, where lie the Hairs of his Beard, and the Twisted Cord wherewith he
was Whipped. All which Relics the Prince of Mingrelia has in his keeping; and
when he showed 'em to our Friars, he spread 'em upon a Carpet, where any one
that would, handled 'em without any Veneration or Respect. For the Mingrelians
have a greater Esteem for the Enchasements, then for the Relics themselves.
But as for the Relics they have little or no Value for 'em, but handle 'em
very contemptibly.

Their Mass is after the Greek manner, which the Priests Celebrate, without any
other Sacerdotal Habit, then only in their Surplices. And if they have no
Shoes, they lay a Piece of a Wooden Plank before the Altar to stand upon. If
the Priest comes to the House of any one that desires a Mass, the good natured
Priest never troubles himself to go to the Church to say it; but presently
repairs to the place where the Wine lies, and takes the first Plank that he
meets with, tho never so Durty or Dusty, to serve him in stead of an Altar;
then he Borrows an Old Shirt, or some other piece of Linen, to put about his
Shoulders, and orders a little Dough to be given, of which he makes a little
Cake, and Bakes it in the Cinders. After that he takes a Wooden Cup, and a Dish
for a Chalice and Cover, tho never so Greasy and Nasty; which he wipes with his
Hands in stead of a Towel; and then says Mass without Book. For the Missal of
the Mingrelians is a little Book Written in the Georgian Language: and several
Priests carry about 'em these Missals, all torn or Dog's-Ear'd, and sometimes
here a Leaf and there a Leaf torn out, and altogether imperfect. But this never
troubles 'em. They say Mass all the while they are Looking for it in the
Missal, and many times they have done before they can find it: for as I said
before, they have it by Heart. Nor is the Office performed with any Decency in
the World. For many times, they talk all the while of other matters. During
Lent, they never say Mass, but Saturdays and Sundays, for that all the other
Days it behooves 'em to Fast; and it is an Opinion among 'em that the Communion
spoils their Fasting.

They Consecrate Unleavened as well as Leavened Bread, without any difference;
nor do they ever mix any Water in the Chalice, unless the Wine be very strong.
For they hold that the Communion may be given in Vinegar, as well as in Wine. I
inquired of several Priests (I still recite the words of the Manuscript)
concerning the Form of their Consecration; but I never could meet with above
one that could tell me. Him I asked, Whether after Consecration, the Bread and
Wine were Substantially the Body and Blood of Christ? Upon which the
Mingrelian Priest fell a Laughing, as if I had spoken to him in Raillery.
What, said he, is there any one that can put Christ in a Loaf? Which way
could he get into it? How is it possible he should be contained in such a
little piece of Bread? What reason should move him to leave Heaven and descend
to Earth? I never heard the like of the Question that you ask. Then I asked
him, Whether the Mass were effectual without the words of Consecration? To
which he answered, That the Mass was certainly effectual without 'em, yet that
the Priest who did not pronounce the words of Consecration, did very ill. But
as for the Intention of Consecration requisite in him that Consecrates, that is
a thing of which the Mingrelian Priests know nothing at all.

They make their Viaticum Bread once a Year; that is to say, upon Holy
Thursday. Which they keep in a Purse of Leather or Linen that hangs fastened
to their Girdles. But they have no more Veneration for this Viaticum, then for
a Morsel of any other Vittles. As for example, when they go to Bed, they lay it
under the Bolster with the rest of their Furniture, and when a sick Person
sends for any of this Viaticum, they open the Purse, and take out a piece, and
give it the Messenger for the use of the Person that wants it, whether Man,
Woman or Child. And because this Viaticum is usually very dry, they break it
with their Hands upon a Stone, or in a Platter, never minding to gather up the
Bits or Crumbs that fall to the Ground; which afterward they put into a Draught
of Wine, and give it the sick. At the Years end the Priest empties out of his
Purse upon the Altar the remainder of the Viaticum, if there be any left; where
generally the Mice come and eat it. By which you may conjecture what is the
Opinion and Belief which the Mingrelians have of the Holy Sacraments.

They anoint the Foreheads of their Children so soon as they are born, and the
Oil which they make use of for this purpose is called Myrone. But they are not
Baptized till a long time after: nor does any one Baptize his Child, until he
be in a Capacity to make a Feast after the Ceremony is over; which is the
reason that many Childern die, without being ever Baptized. And when they do
perform the Ceremony, they never carry the Child to the Church, but into a
Cellar or Vault, where the Priest sits down without minding to put on his
Sacerdotal Habit, and reads a good while in a Book; which being ended, the
Godfather strips the Child, washes him all over with Water, and then rubs him
from Head to Foot; which done, he dresses the Child again, and gives it to eat.
And then the Priest, the Father, the Godfather, and the Guests invited, sit
down at the Table. There is not one Priest among 'em all that understands the
Form of Baptism, so that it is a Question whether their Baptism be to any
purpose or no. Which is the reason that our Theatin Monks Baptize as many
Childern as they can: which they generally do under the pretense of some
Physical Application: by that means concealing the Office of the Priesthood
under the disguise of Physical Operation.

There are very few People in Mingrelia, whether Ecclesiastical or Seculars,
that make any Confessions: and I think I might well say there are none at all.
For they believe it to be a sufficient Satisfaction for their Sins to offer a
Present to their Idols, which is the utmost address of their Worship, and limit
of their Religion. They never make use of Extreme Unction, which is a thing of
which they are utterly ignorant. They do not believe that Ordination imprints a
Character not to be defaced. And therefore they Ordain anew those who have been
degraded, as if they had never been in Orders.

They do not allow Marriage to be in the Number of the Sacraments. It Is a
Contract by way of Bargain and Sale; for the Parents of the Maid agree upon the
price which the person that demands her in Marriage is to give for her. The
price of a Woman repudiated is less, then that of a VVidow; and the price of a
VVidow less then that of a Maid. When the Match is concluded, the Party
concerned makes it his Business to raise the Sum agreed upon for the purchase
of his Mistress: which he raises by the Sale of his Subjects if he have any, or
their Childern to the Turks, either for Ready Money or Commodities. However,
while he is raising the Sum, he has Liberty to go privately and see his
Mistress; nor is it any scandal if her Belly swell before she is married. At
length when the Young Man has raised the Sum agreed upon by the Parents, he
carries it to 'em: and that Day they make a great Feast together, and that is
the first Day of the Nuptials. The next Day the Parents Conduct the Bride to
the Bridegroom's House: and usually give him either in Slaves, Cattle or
Houshold-Goods the value they have received from him: and upon the fourth or
fifth of these Feasting Days the Ceremony is concluded, according to the Custom
of the Greek Church, only in this, that the Ceremony is performed not in the
Church, but over the Door. But if any one have married a Barren Woman, or of
an ill Disposition and ugly Humor, they hold it not only lawful, but requisite
to Divorce her; in regard it was no Match of Gods making, for that God does
always that which is good, and never makes Matches between people that are
Barren, or whose Humors are incompatible one with another.

There is not a Man among 'em that understands the Bible, or that reads it;
there being very few among 'em that can read or understand the Georgian; which
is the only Language wherein they have the Holy Scripture written. But as for
the Women, they are not altogether so ignorant as the Men; so that you shall
have some of them who will rehearse several Stories of the Gospel, which they
have read and got by Heart.

Their Fasts are almost the same which the Greeks observe. For they observe the
four great Lents; The first before Easter, being 48 Days; That before
Christmas, which lasts 40 Days; That which is called St. Peter's Fast, which
holds very near a Month; and the last which the Oriental Christians observe in
Honor of the Virgin Mary, which continues for 15 Days.

They make the Sign of the Cross upon certain Occasions, but they do not
believe the Sign of the Cross to be any Mark of Christianity. Only they make
this Sign when they drink Wine and eat Pork. Their Prayers are all addressed
to their Idols, relating only to Temporal Benefits, their own Prosperity, and
the Ruin of their Enemies.

They offer Sacrifices like the Jews and Gentiles. The Priest prays over the
Victim, and then cuts the Throat of it: And when it is Boiled, they set it upon
the Table. At what time all the people of the Family stand about it with
Candles in their Hands, except the person who makes the Offering, who is
Kneeling all the while. He first perfumes the Victim with Incense; which when
the rest have likewise done, they fall too, and eat it altogether. They also
cut the Throats of Beasts and Birds over the Graves of their Relations and
Friends, and pour Wine and Oil upon 'em. And these Libations they observe
every day. No Body drinks, till as he holds the Cup in his Hand, he has first
said a sentence of a Prayer, with his Eyes lifted up to Heaven, and pouring out
at the same time upon the Ground a small quantity of the Wine in the Cup.

They never make Holy Day upon Sundays, or abstain from Work, but upon the
Festivals of Christmas and Easter. However the celebration of their great
Festivals consists only in Eating and Drinking to excess in their Houses. Their
greatest Festivals which they observe is, when any Idol is to be carried
through their Country. Then they put on all the best Clothes they have. They
make a great Feast, and get ready a Present for the Idol which is to pass by.

And this, I believe, may suffice to show that there is not the least shadow of
Religion among the Mingrelians. The Manuscript, from whence I took these
observations, relates their several sorts of Divination practiced among 'em;
their Superstitions and Sundry Customs, which are a Medley of Judaism, and
Paganism. All which I left behind me, not finding therein the least Grain of
Wit or common Sense. But quite the Contrary, nothing but Extravagance. I shall
only add, that all that I observed in the Religious Ceremonies and Belief or
Faith of the Mingrelians, is no other then what I have truly reported.

I shall only speak a word concerning their Mourning, which is the Mourning of
people in despair. When a Woman loses her Husband, or a near Relation, she
rends her Clothes, strips her self naked to the Waste, tears her Hair, and with
her Nails claws off the Flesh and Skin from her Body and Face, she beats her
Breast, she cries, yells, gnashes her Teeth, foams at Mouth, like a Woman mad or
possessed, and acts her passion to that degree, that it seems terrible to the
sight. The Men also express their Grief after a manner altogether as Barbarous:
They tear their Clothes, thump their Breasts, and shave their Heads and their
Beards. This Mourning continues 40 Days, with the same Fury as I have described
for the first Ten Days, but afterward relaxing by degrees. During the first
Ten Days, the Relations of the deceased, and a great Number of Men and Women
come to bewail the Dead, which they do in this manner. The people range
themselves in order about the dead Corpse, and in their torn Habits, thump their
Breasts with both Hands; crying out Vah, Vah; and so keeping time with their
Thumps and their Cries, they make a dismal Noise; which altogether yields a
frightful Spectacle of despair, not to be beheld without a kind of Horror. Of
a sudden you hear nothing, all is quiet, the Mourning stops, and all observe a
profound Silence; By and by they all begin again with a loud Cry, and fall into
their first Transportments. The last Day, which is the Fortieth, they Bury the
Dead. Then they make a Feast for all their Relations, all their Friends, all
their Neighbors, and all those that came to bewail the Party deceased; the
Women eating by themselves, apart from the Men. The Bishop says Mass, and then
seizes as his Right, upon all that the Deceased Person made use of in his Life,
his Horse, his Clothes, his Weapons, his Plate if he have any, and all the rest
of that sort. So that these Mournings ruin whole Families in Mingrelia.
Nevertheless they are obliged to this Solemn Performance. The Bishop says a
Mass for the Dead, for the great profit he receives; and the Mourners come to
wail the Deceased, as sure to live Forty Days upon what he has left behind.
When a Bishop dies the Prince himself causes Mass to be said upon the Forti'th
Day, and seizes upon all his Goods that are Moveable.

This is all that I could learn in Colchis, concerning the Nature of the
Country, and the Customs and Religion of the Inhabitants. Their Neighbors Live
and act after the same Fashion, almost in every respect: only they who Live
nearer to Persia and Turkey, are more Civil in their Manners, and more Honest
and Just in their Inclinations Whereas they who lie nearer the Tartars and
Scythians, are more Barbarous in their Customs, living without any Idea or
outward Form of Religion, or observance of any Laws. I have spoken also of the
Abca's and other People that Live at the Foot of Mount Caucasus; concerning
whom I have related as much as I could learn. But now I shall give an account
of what I have seen and heard, most remarkable, concerning those other
Countries that border upon Mingrelia. Which are the Principality of Guriel,
and the Kingdom of Imiretta.

The Country of Guriel is very small; it Borders to the North upon Imiretta;
Eastward upon a part of Mount Caucasus that belongs to the Turks. To the West
upon Mingrelia, and to the South upon the Black-Sea. It lies all along upon
that Sea in length from the River Phasis, that runs a Mile from the Castle of
Gonie, held by the Turks, distant only Forty Miles from Phasis. The Country of
Guriel resembles Mingrelia in every thing as to its Nature and the Manners of
the Inhabitants. For they have the same Religion, the same Customs; and the
same Inclinations to Leudness, Robbery and Murder.

The Kingdom of Imiretta is somewhat bigger then the Country of Guriel; and is
the Hiberia of the Ancients. It is Enclosed and Surrounded by Mount Caucasus,
Colchis, the Black-Sea, the Principality of Guriel, and Georgia: being about
Six and Twenty Miles in Length, and Sixty Miles broad. The People of Mount
Caucasus that lie next to it, are the Georgians and Turks, and to the North the
Ossi and Caracioles, or Caracherks or Black-Circassians, so called by the
Turks, for the reasons already mentioned. These are those Caracioles or
Black-Circassians, which the Europeans call Huns, who ransackt Italy and Gaul,
and whose devastations in those Countries, are so frequently mentioned by the
Ancient Historians, and particularly by Cedrenus. The Language which they speak
is almost half Turkish.

Imiretta is a Country full of Woods and Mountains like Mingrelia; but the
Valleys are more Lovely, and the Plains more Delicious; where you may meet much
more easily with Bread, Meat, Pulse and Herbs of all sorts. There are also in
it some Iron-Mines. Money goes among the People of this Country, and is Coined
in the Kingdom; and here ye also meet with several Towns. But as for their
Manners and Customs, they are the same as in Mingrelia. The King has Three
good Castles; one called Scander, seated upon the side of a Valley, and two in
Mount Caucasus, called Regia and Scorgia, both almost inaccessible; as being
built in places that Nature her self has ingeniously fortified; the River
Phasis running before 'em. The Prince had also not long since another Fortress
called Cotatis, bearing the same Name as the Country round about it, which
perhaps may be the same place that Ptolomy calls the Region of Cotatene. But
the Turks are at present Masters of it.

The Kingdom of Imiretta, has had under its Jurisdiction the Abca's, the
Mingrelians, and the People of Guriel, after they had all Four shaken off the
Yoke of the Emperors of Constantinople first of all, and then of the Emperors
of Trebisond. But then in the last Age, setting up for themselves, and
revolting one from another, they have been ever since at continual Wars one
with the other. They who lay next the Turks implored their assistance, who
readily took 'em into their Protection, and then made 'em all Tributaries one
after another. The Tribute of the King of Imiretta is Fourscore Boys and Girls,
from Ten to Twenty Years of Age. The Prince of Guriel pays Six and Forty
Children of both Sexes; and the Prince of Mingrelia Sixty Thousand Else of
Linen Cloth, made in the Country. The Abca's also were made Tributary, but
they seldom paid any thing; and now they pay nothing. The King of Imiretta,
and the Prince of Guriel, send their Tribute to the Basha of Akalzike: but a
Chiaux gathers it in Mingrelia.' When I came to Akalzike, the report went, that
the Turks would take possession of these Countries, under the Government of a
Basha, not knowing any other way to prevent the perpetual Wars, that apparently
ruin and depopulate the Countries. However it be now, the Turks formerly
forbore to take possession of it, in regard that the Precepts of Mahumatism,
could not conveniently be there observed, because the best nourishment in those
Countries is their Wine and their Hogs Flesh, which are both prohibited by the
Mohammedan Law: besides that they have no Bread; and the People live scattered
upon and down the Country, so that wherever the Turks should build their
Fortresses, they would not be able to Command, within their reach, above Seven
or Eight Houses. Upon which Considerations they left those Provinces in their
Ancient Condition, and are satisfied only to keep 'em under Subjection for a
Nursery of Slaves; which yields 'em every Year no less then Seven or Eight
Thousand. And the same Reasons and Obstacles most apparently discourage the
Turks from Incorporating into the Body of their Empire, those Vast Plains of
Tartary and Scythia, and the wide Regions of Mount Caucasus. For if the People
that inhabit those parts, were united into Cities and strong Places, there
might be a way found to reduce 'em, and keep 'em in Subjection. But which way
is it possible to subdue a People that change their Habitations every Month,
and all their Lifetime wander up and down the Country?

The present Prince of Mingrelia is the Eighth, since that Country first
revolted from the Dominion of Imiretta. These Princes of Mingrelia, all give
themselves the Title of Dadian: as much as to say, the Head of Justice; from
Dad a Persian Word, that signifies Justice: from whence the first Race of the
Kings of Persia was called Pich-Dadian, that is to say, the first Justice. To
denote, that they were the first Men, whom the People of that vast Country,
established over 'em for the Administration of Justice among 'em; and to
maintain every one in the enjoyment of his own Property. The King of Imiretta
gives himself the Title of Meppe, which signisies a King in the Georgian
Language. Both which Meppe and Dadian boast themselves to be descended from the
King and Prophet David. The Ancient Kings of Georgia also assumed the same
descent; and the Kan of Georgia, among the rest of his Titles, calls himself,
the Issue of that Great King by Solomon his Son. The King of Imiretta, also in
his Letters assumes a more Haughty and Pompous Title then the other, calling
himself King of Kings.

Now so soon as our Vessel was come to an Anchor, in the Road of Isgaour, as I
have already said, I went a Shore with the Greek Merchant, who was my Guide.
For I expected to have met with Houses, where I might have found Provisions and
some other Relief. Nor were these hopes without any Ground, to one that saw no
less then Seven Vessels together at an Anchor in the Road: but I was utterly
deceived; for I found nothing at all. The Coast of Isgaour, is all covered with
Wood. Only they have levelled and laid open, about a Hunderd Paces from the
Sea side, a certain spot of Ground, about Two Hunderd and Fifty Paces long, and
Fifty broad; which is the Grand Market of Mingrelia. In this there is one
Street, containing on both sides of the Way, about a Hunderd small Hutts, made
up of the Boughs of Trees, fastened one to another: of which every Merchant
takes one. There he lies, and keeps Shop, tho with such VVares only as he
thinks he shall sell in Two or Three Days. But as for those which he has
bought, and such for which he does not see any Probability of a quick Vent, he
keeps 'em in the Vessel, there being no kind of Security a Shore, There was
nothing else to be had at this Market, nor a Country-Man's House to be heard of
in all the parts there about. Thereupon my Guide spoke to some of those that
came to the Market, to bring us some Gom, which is that sort of Grain, by them
made use of in stead of Bread, some Wine and other Provisions; which the
Countrymen promised to do, but failed in their Words. So that I was
surpised, and very much troubled to meet with nothing, for our own Provisions
began to grow short, nor to see any thing at such a Market, but a Company of
Slaves Chained together, and about a Dozen of Tattered Fellows, with Bows and
Arrows in their Hands, who it seems were the Officers of the Customs, and
looked more ready to Rob, then relieve us. But I was much more surpised and
perplexed, when I heard, that the Turks, and the Prince of Guriel, were coming
into Mingrelia, that the People took Arms, and had begun the War, Pillaging
and Ransacking their Neighbors, and clearing the Country both of Cattle and
Inhabitants. I must confess I depended very much upon the Theatin Missionaries
in Mingrelia, when I first resolved to make choice of that way. I was assured
they had a House where I might be secure, and that they could much facilitate
my passage into Persia. But their House was Forty Miles from Isagour by Land,
and Fifty Five by Sea. However I sent an Express to the Superior of the
Missionaries, with a Letter wherein I gave him an account, That I was come into
Mingrelia, and that I was going into Persia about business of great Importance.
That I had Letters of Recommendation to him from the Ambassador of France, the
Resident of Genoa, the Warden of the Capuchins of Greece, and the Solicitor
for the Theatins at Constantinople, and therefore I earnestly desired him to
send me some Person that might give me necessary Informations how to proceed in
my Voyage. I would have made my Bargain with the Express for Ready Money, but
he rather chose to have Cloth. Thereupon my Guide agreed with him for two
pieces of blew Linen, upon Condition that he returned in two days and a half.
Which two pieces cost Six Shillings at Caffa. This done, I returned to the
Vessel, very pensive, and sorely troubled to find my self in a Country where
there was no Provision to be bought, where Money would not go, nor any Lodging
was to be had. And besides the sight of so many Slaves of all Ages and both
Sexes, some in Chains, some tied two and two, and of the Officers of the
Customers that looked like mere Robbers and Ruffians, had filled my Head with a
Thousand Fears. However I kept a good Heart still, and did my utmost endeavor
to dissipate those Disturbances of my Mind.

All this while I said nothing to my Comrade or to my Servants, only that I had
been promised Provisions; nevertheless 'twas but prudence to be as good
Husbands as we could of that little we had. Not did the Rumors of the War
hinder the Merchants in our Vessel from going a Shore; where they took every
one a Hutt, and carried their Commodities along with 'em.

The 18th at Noon, my Guide came aboard, and brought me an Answer from the
Superior of the Theatins. It was very short: For he only sent me word, That
within two or three Days he would come to the Vessel with a Bark, and would
serve me to the utmost of his Power.

The 19th toward the Evening, a great Number of Country People that had made
their escapes, passed by Isgaour, and gave us a hot Alarm, That the Abca's
whom the Prince of Mingrelia had called in to assist him against the Turks,
pillaged and burnt all before 'em, carrying away the Inhabitants, and driving
away the Cattle, wherever they came. Thereupon the Merchants endeavored to
carry off what they could in their Long-Boats. But it was late, and the Vessels
rid about a Mile from the Shore; nor could they make above two Returns.
Thereupon every Captain caused two great Guns to be carried ashore, which they
planted at the Avenues of the Market, and stood to their Arms all Night. For my
own part I cannot express the sorrow I was in at such an unfortunate and
unexpected Accident. I had hardly Constancy enough to hold out. And that which
drove me almost to despair was this, That the Captain discoursed of going to
Trade among the Abca's and Cherks, and then to return back to Caffa. Which was
to be three Months at Sea, and not to be laid up till the end of the Year. The
Recoyl of my Fortune, which such a Resolution set before my Eyes, the danger of
perishing at Sea, want of Vittles, the impossibility to get any; all these
things which I foresaw distinctly, were not the greatest Trouble that perplexed
me. My greatest Vexation was to see my Friends Concerns, which I thought had
escaped the Dangers of the Black-Sea and Turkey, exposed to new Hazards, and my
self likely to undergo the Reproaches and Scorn of People, that would be apt to
lay to my Charge unexpected Accidents for Miscarriages, and attribute
unfortunate Conjunctures to my Imprudence. To this I may add the Grumbling and
Imprecations of my Servants, that continually rang in my Ears: Some cursing
Destiny, others the Country, others the People that had adviz'd me to the
Black-Sea. In a word, I was in such a profound Agony, as I thought would have
utterly swallowed me up. But GOD in his Mercy delivered me; He strengthened me
with Courage, and I hearten'd up my People; but their patience was soon tired,
ready to break forth every foot with the same extravagance; for the Hunger
which we endured heightened their Transports even to Brutish Outrage.

The 20th all the People that belonged to our Vessel, and the rest that lay in
the Road, returned aboard. Choosing rather to leave their Wool, their Salt,
their Earthen Ware, and such like Commodities, then to hazard their being taken
by the Abca's, who as they were assured were very near at hand. And indeed
their Intelligence was too true. For about Ten a Clock at Night we saw all the
Marketplace a Fire; and the next Morning such as ventured to see what was the
matter, found nothing but the Ashes, and Remainders of the Conflagration.

So soon as our People were all come aboard, I endeavored to buy of them
Biscuit, Rice, Butter, Onions, and dried Herbs: but no Body would part with
their Goods, fearing lest they should not return to Caffa; till at length by
the power of Money I got of several Merchants Sixty Pounds of Biscuit, a few
Herbs, Eight Pounds of Butter, and Twelve Pounds of Rice. This was but a small
Stock for six People. But good Husbandry made it last longer then I expected.
For there was in our Vessel dried Fish in abundance, and we scarcely fed upon
any thing else. But I was wonderfully pleased when I had prevailed with my Men
to make a Meal without Bread, and looked upon that Abstinence of theirs as the
Lucky Chance of a Fortunate Day.

The 27th, seeing the Superior of the Theatins did not come, and not knowing
what I might hope for from him, I proposed to my People the Necessity there was
that one of them should go and find him out; in regard there was none but he
that could preserve us from the Miseries that threatened us, and which came
thick upon us every day more then other. But 'twas the want of Vittles and
their own despair that prevailed beyond all my Arguments. So that one among the
rest proffered me to go seek out the Theatins. And it so happened that there
was a Bark of Anarguie that lay by our Vessel. Which Anarguie is a Village upon
the Sea-Shoar, not above Twenty Miles from Sippias, where those Friars have
their Residence. This Bark being come to take in a Lading of Salt, my Servant
went aboard, after I had given him four Ducats in Gold, Money, Mercery Ware,
and all the Letters I had for the Superior of the Theatins. Which I did, to
the end that the Recommendation of so many Persons, some of Quality, the rest
his Friends; might hast'n him to assist us in our Extremity: besides that I had
written to him my self at large, desiring him to aid us if it were in his
Power. I wrote to him also, That the Messenger whom I had sent, had Money,
which I desired him to make use of, for that I begged no more of him then his
Trouble; for which I should not also fall to be farther Grateful.

The Fourth of October in the Morning my Servant returned, bringing along with
him the Superior of the Theatins, whose Name, as I have already said, was Don
Maria Joseph Zampi, of Mantua: to whom I presently ran and embraced him. But
observe how he accosted me: Sir, said he, God forgive those People that advised
ye to come this way, the Mischief they have done ye. You are come into the most
Wicked and Barbarous Country in the World; and the best Course you can take is
to return back to Constantinople with the first Opportunity. At which words the
Joy which I felt for the Arrival of the good Friar, was soon at an end.
However, I carried him into my Cabin, and there, together with my Comrade, we
debated what was best to be done. We returned him Thanks in the first place for
the pains he had taken in coming so far. To which he answered, That he had come
according to his promise, but that the War and the Incursion of the Abca's, had
made the Roads so dangerous, that he durst not venture himself. After that, I
told him, That his first Complement to me at our first Greeting, put me at my
Wits end: and therefore I besought him to tell me, Whether he were not come to
take us along with him, and carry us to his own Residence? Who answered, That
he was come to serve me to the utmost of his Power, and that he would carry us
Home to his own House if we desired: however he would gladly let us know the
Nature of the Country through which we were to pass. That it was a Place where
there was no Bread to be had; and hardly any other Food to be got at that
present time: That the Air was very unwholsom, and the People so wicked that it
was scarce to be imagined. I told him, That we had a Letter of Recommendation
to the Prince of Mingrelia. To which he answered, That this Prince was as great
a Cutthroat, and as professed a Robber as any of his Subjects. He told us
moreover, That about three Years before, returning from Italy, he brought along
with him several Presents for the Prince, for the Princess his Wife, for the
Vizier, and the Principal Lords of the Court, which he distributed among 'em
till he had almost left himself nothing; with which the Prince was so far from
being satisfied, that he sent and took away that little that he had reserved;
and although he were at that time Physician to the Prince and all the Grandees,
the Vizier clapped him up soon after in a Dungeon, with a Chain about his Neck,
and Fetters upon his Feet, to get more Money from him, and that he could not be
released out of the Clutches of that Tygre, till he had paid him Forty Crowns.
Not that I tell ye this, Gentlemen, said he, to send ye back again, but only to
inform ye of the danger ye have thrown your selves into, by setting foot in
Mingrelia. Yet after all this, if you will needs go forward, I will do my best
to preserve your Persons and your Goods, and to pass ye securely into Persia.

Upon this, I considered what the Father had represented to us: and I came to
this result with my self, That the Mischiefs that threatened me in Mingrelia
were Mischiefs to come, and which I was in hopes, though I knew not which way,
to escape. Those which I endured were present, and my Head and my Heart were
both full of 'em I represented therefore to Father Zampi, That whatever
Misfortunes should happen to us in Mingrelia, would be less then those would
befall us in returning to Caffa, which would infallibly be our ruin. I desired
him to consider, that we had neither Provision nor Vittles, that the Vessel
where we were was old, and daily took aboard great Numbers of Slaves of all
Ages and Sexes, so that we could hardly stir one by another in the Ship. That a
great Number of Abca's and Mingrelian's went and came from Morning till Night,
that filled it with Vermin that would endanger a general Infection, and end in
a Pestilence. That the Vessel would be two Months before she returned for
Caffa, at what time the Weather would begin to be unseasonable and tempestuous;
as being that part of the Year when the Black-Sea, so dreadful stormy, was most
furiously exasperated by the Violence of continual Tempests; so that suppose
they should get safe to Caffa, and thence to Constantinople, 'twould be four
Months at least before they could perform their Voyage, and then we should be
forced to begin again, and put to find out a new Project which way to pass
through Turkey. Besides running the Risco of extravagant Impositions, or
exorbitant Customs; and yet after all these Adventures we should be still
exposed to ruin, which was the same thing or worse then to run the hazard in
Mingrelia, where the Danger could not be greater, but where the Peril could
never last so long, since it was but four Days Journey before we should be in a
Country where we should be secure.

Father Zampi could not gainsay any of my Reasons: Besides that our passage
could not but be advantageous to himself in particular, or to his Mission. So
that he talked of nothing else but of taking us along with him, and of our
leaving the Ship for good and all. Now the Bark wherein I had sent my Servant
was a long Vessel like a small Lighter, and was hired to go and come with
Goods: and into this Vessel it therefore was that we put our Baggage aboard,
and about a hunderd Crowns worth of Goods which we bought out of the Vessel.
Which Purchase was made at my Entreaty by Father Zampy, because he knew what
would best go off in Mingrelia, for that Money, as I have said already, was no
otherwise Current or Valuable there then as it was a sort of Merchandise. Our
Baggage being Embarked before Noon, we set Sail at the same time. And then it
was that I was overjoyed to find my self quit of the Ship; for I could not
endure the Stench of it. Besides that the Nastiness and Infamous Behavior of
the People aboard made me loath the very sight of 'em. The Vessel was a mere
Sink and Dungeon of Slaves, who as soon as Night came, were Chained two and
two, as well the Boys as the Men. In the Morning they took off their Chains
again, so that I could hardly rest for the rattling of the Irons, and then the
very Object it self grieved me to the very Heart. Every Morning we were sure to
see a Fire ashore, which was a signal that there were people come to sell
either Slaves or other Merchandise. Upon which they sent away their Longboat,
into which they who had a desire to come to the Vessel put themselves and their
Wares, and being brought aboard, drove the Bargains as they could agree. And
indeed the War in Mingrelia was very favorable to our Merchants; for the
Abca's brought 'em all their Plunder and Booty to sell: Among the rest there
came one day to our Vessel an Abca of Quality, having a Train of seven or eight
Men at his Heels, who seemed to be the arrantest Rakehels in the World. He
brought three Slaves, and his Men were laden with Booty; and among other
Things they had got a Frame of an Idol all of Silver; I caused 'em to be asked,
Where the Idol it self was? To which they answered, That they had left it in
the Church, not daring to carry it away, for fear it should have killed 'em.

Our Vessel had Forty Slaves when I left it, which the Turkish and Christian
Merchants had bought for Arms, Housholdstuff, and other Commodities. They gave
'em what they pleased themselves, and reck'nd twice as much as the Goods cost
'em. They gave no more then Fifteen Crowns for Men from Twenty Five to Forty
Years of Age; and Eight or Ten, for those that were older. Handsome Maids from
Thirteen to Eighteen were sold for Twenty Crowns, others for less. Women for
Twelve, and Childern for Three or Four. A Greek Merchant that lay in a Cabin
next to mine, bought a Woman and a Child at her Breast. She had incomparable
Features in her Face, and a truly Lilly-white Complexion; and indeed I never
saw more lovely Nipples, and a rounder Neck, nor a smoother Skin; which created
at the same time both Envy and Compassion. So that I could not choose but cast a
mournful Look upon her, saying this to my self, Unfortunate Beauty! neither
would I envy or compassionate thee, were I in another Condition, and that I did
not find my self just upon the Brink of Danger, threatened with the greatest
Miseries imaginable, if there can be a greater Misery then that of Slavery. But
that which surpised me was this, That these miserable Creatures were no way
cast down, nor did they seem sensible of the misery of their Condition. At
length when they had bought 'em, their Masters took from them the Rags that
covered 'em, clad 'em with Linen and new Habits, and set 'em to work; the Men
and the Boys to moyl in the Ship, and the Women to sow. Nor did they seem to be
much dissatisfied with their Habit, or the Food which was given, only they did
not like Working, so that the Cudgel was forced to walk now and then to quick'n
their Laziness.

We had a good Wind, and we made use of Oars as well as Sails in our Bark. And
for my own part, all my discourse was with Father Zampi, what course I should
take to prevent my falling into the Enemies Hand, and my being plundered and
assassinated by the Mingrelians. Which discourse at length brought us to talk
of those Persons, whose Letters I had sent him. He told me the French
Ambassador's Letter was a Duplicate of one which he had sent the last Year for
Attestations of the Religion of Colchis: but when he gave it into my Hands, and
that I had read it, I was surpised to find, that having been given me for a
Letter of Recommendation, there should not be the least mention of my Name.
Which made me afraid lest Father Zampi should think, that the Ambassador had
not that Value and Kindness for me, which I pretended to make him believe. And
therefore I thought my self obliged to show him the Letter which the Ambassador
had done me the Honor to write to the Prince of Mingrelia, of which this was a
Copy.

Thrice Illustrious Prince,
THE Emperor of France my Master, having Commanded me to make use of his
Protection to support your Interests in the Ottoman Court upon all Occasions
that should offer: I am glad of this Opportunity not only to Confirm it by this
Letter, but for that these two Gentlemen also, the Sieur Chardin, and the Sieur
Raisin will give you farther Assurances of the same Thing in my behalf. You
will oblige me to believe 'em, and in Consideration of that Value which I have
for their Persons, to support and defend 'em with all your Authority so long as
they shall sojourn in your Court; and when they depart from your Court in order
to their going forward into Persia, I hope you will freely grant 'em that
Favor, and add to the rest that one more of believing me to be,

Thrice Illustrious Prince, Your most Humble and Obedient Servant, De NOINTEL,
Ambassador for his Most Christian Majesty, the Emperor of France at the Ottoman
Port.


About Midnight we arrived at the Mouth of the River Astolphus, called by the
Mingrelians, Langur; and which is one of the biggest Rivers in Mingrelia. There
we stopped and sent to Anarghie two of our Seamen, to know what News of the
Enemy, and to see whether the People were not fled, and in what condition they
stood. This Anarghia is a Village two Miles from the Sea, the most considerable
in all Mingrelia, consisting of a Hunderd Houses, but so far distant one from
the other, that it is two Miles from the first to the last.

There are always Turks in this Village that come to buy Slaves, and have Barks
ready to carry 'em away. And it is said, that this Village is built in the same
place where formerly stood a fair and large City, called by the Name of
Heraclea.

The fifth before day, the two Seamen returned, and brought us word that the
Abca's had made no Inroads within Fifteen Miles of Anarghia, but that things
were quiet without any Disturbance or Alteration. Thereupon Father Zampi
desired 'em to Row hard, to the end we might come early to the Village, and
Land our Goods before we should come to be seen by any Person. All things fell
out to our Wish, and we took a Lodging at a Country-Mans House, which was one
of the best Accommodations in the Town. For we had a great many Chests, the
biggest of which was full of Books. Thereupon Father Zampi advised me to open
it, and take out the Goods in the sight of the People of the House, to the end
they might have no suspicion that we carried any Treasure in our Chests; but
might be ready to give it out that we were only Persons in Holy Orders, for
which reason we loaded our selves with a great Number of Books for our
particular use. I followed his Advice, and found it to be very good. For the
People of the House were amazed to see nothing in such a large Chest but only
Books; and I am apt to believe they conceited there was nothing else in all the
rest.

The ninth a Lay-Theatin came to see us: He was the Physician and Surgeon that
served all Mingrelia. And the Access which his Art had procured him to the
Prince and all the Grandees, had puffed him up to that degree of Pride, that he
valued neither Fathers nor Superior, and in all his Actions and Discourse
manifested a most insupportable Superbity. However, I received and entertained
him as his Vainglory seemed to require. Who thereupon gave me a Thousand
Assurances of Protection and Assistance, and promised to bring us Tidings of
the Retreat of the Abca's, so soon as he found his Information to be such as he
could confide in. Nor did he fail in his Undertaking; so that he returned to us
the 13th, and brought us the Good News we expected. He told us that he had been
with the Prince the Day before, at what time the Intelligence came to him. He
recounted also to us, that the Abca's had carried away with 'em Twelve Hunderd
Persons, and a great Number of Cattle, with other Booty; that they had
plundered the House of a Tenant to the Theatins, and taken away three of their
Slaves: That the Prince had sent three Gentlemen to the Prince of the Abca's to
make his Complaints, and to threaten 'em for their Perfidiousness; for that
having enterd Mingrelia, under an Engagement and upon Oath to defend it against
the Turks, they had made use of their Forces to Sack and Pillage the Country,
and was returned, and had retreated without doing him the least Kindness. And
thus after he had given us a full Account of the News that was stirring, he
told Father Zampi farther, That we might all go together to their Residence at
Sippias, and that the Prince and the Catholicos had ordered him to assure me
and my Comrade, That we were Welcome, and that he would provide us Men and
Horses to Convoy us into Georgia. Upon which we resolved to depart the next day.

While we staid at Anarghia we suffered for no want of any thing; we had Fowl,
Wild Pigeons, Porkers, and Goats in abundance. All which my People had in
exchange for Linen, Needles, Incense, Combs and Knives: and they had their
Provisions very Cheap too: Wine was also very plentiful, for it was then the
very time of their Vintage. There was also at Anarghia a Lady of Quality, who
had made choice of that Place to retire to for security but a little before.
She was a Widow, and her Husband had been Chief Minister or Vizier to the
Prince. Father Zampi carried me to her House, where I presented her with some
inconsiderable Trifles, and she in Acknowledgment of what she had received,
and in hopes of more, sent me every Day a Loaf of half a Pound, with some
other of her choicest Viands. One Day she sent me a piece of Wild Boars Flesh,
another Day a Ball of Wax, another Day a small Quantity of Honey, another time
a Pheasant, and by the Messenger still she requested some Trifle or other, as
Knives, Scissars, Ribband, Paper, or the like, and so she paid her self double
for her Presents. One Day she came to give me a Visit, and showed her self very
Complaisant, and signified her Fancy for several other things. But though I did
not like this Trade, I kept fair with her however, because I would not want
Bread, which was not otherwhere to be had.

Father Zampi advised me to pretend my self a Capuchin; and gave out himself
that I was going to the Capuchins in Georgia: That I had disguised my self
because I would not be known in Turkey, and to the end I might travel with
more freedom. And the better to counterfeit my Disguise, he persuaded me to go
very meanly, and to pretend Poverty upon all Occasions. And for my own part, I
acted my part very well, but the ill Management of my Servants prevented my
Plot from taking Effect. They brake my Measures by the Good House which they
kept. For they bought the best Vittles they could find, let it cost what it
would. In a word, they repaid themselves for the scarcity which they had
endured. Which Expenses of theirs caused People to think I was not so poor as
I pretended to be.

The 14th, two Hours before Day, we departed from Anarghia, and Rowed up the
River Astolphus two Leagues, after which we landed our Baggage, and loaded
our Goods into six little Carts: and filled two more with the Provisions
which Father Zampi had bought. These Eight little Wagons made a great Noise;
for it was an unusual sight in Mingrelia to see so many together. So that in
less then two days the News flew about the Country of the Arrival of certain
Europeans, with Eight Wagons laden with Baggage. Which News was spread
with so many Circumstances, as were the occasion of several Misfortunes that
befell us, as I shall relate in the pursuit of my Story. Thus we traveled four
Leagues and a half by Land, and by Sunset arrived at Sapias.

Sapias is the Name of two little Churches, of which the one is a
Parish Church of Mingrelia, the other belongs to the Theatins. It was bestowed
upon 'em, together with the Churchyard wherein the two Churches are enclosed.
Which Enclosure is very large: and where they have also built several
Apartiments and Lodgings after the Fashion of the Country: every one of the
Friars having his Apartiment to himself, according as they are one separated
from another. The lesser Lodgings are for their Slaves, and two Families of
Country People who are their Tenants.

The Theatins came first into Mingrelia in the Year 1627. where they were
admitted as Physicians. The Prince who then Reigned was very Potent, and it
was represented to him as a Thing greatly to the Advantage and Benefit of his
Country, that Persons who understood an Art so profitable for the Advantage of
his Health, should be suffered to settle in his Country. Thereupon he made 'em
Welcome, gave 'em the Residence which they enjoy, with Lands, and a certain
Number of Country People to Manure the Ground, and furnish their Society with
Corn and Wine. One and Twenty Years before, the Jesuits of Constantinople sent
Two of their Fraternity into this Country, but they died there so soon, that
the rest were afraid to venture any more. The Theatins however for some Years
last past, had Houses in Tartary, Georgia, Circassia and Imiretta. Which are
all forsak'n and destroyed, seeing the People no way inclined to embrace the
Roman Religion; and besides they, were over-imploy'd in their Practice of
Physic. Moreover, they assured me that they had long since abandoned Colchis
likewise upon the same Considerations; only that they staid there for the
Honor of the Roman Church, which gloried to have her Missionaries in all
parts of the Earth; but more particularly for the Honor of their own Order,
out of which there being no other Mission into any part of the World, it
would turn to their discredit should they not be able to uphold it.

There were only four Theatins at Sapias when I arrived there, three Priests
and one Laic. The Priests practiced only Physic, the Lay-Brother both Physic
and Surgery. For he had been up and down in the World, a Surgeon by
Profession. The Theatins affirm, That all the Spiritual Benefit which the
Country reaps from their being among 'em, is only Baptizing of Infants, there
being none which are there Baptized, or but after a very odd Fashion. Unless it
be in that, they confess, they make no other progress among the Mingrelians,
who are so far, say they, from embracing the Roman Ceremonies, that they do
not believe the Europeans to be Christians, because they do not see 'em observe
so many Fasts, nor with so strict and severe an Abstinence, besides that they
do not Worship Images. The Theatin's very immediate Slaves, will not
Communicate with their Masters in their Religious Exercises; and they have
assured me, they could never Educate any one to serve at the Mass. I have seen
these Friars sometimes Baptize Childern; for they Baptize all that they meet
with, in Houses where they have not either been of a long time, or where they
do not remember that ever they Administered that Sacrament before. I have
tarried several Days in several Places of Mingrelia with the Superior of the
Theatins, and have frequently seen his way of Baptizing. For when they
brought him any one that was ill, he called for a Basin of Water, pretending
to vvash his Hands, and when he had washed 'em, before he dried 'em again,
with the end of his Finger he touched the Forehead of the Child, making the
Parents believe, it was only to understand the Distemper.

He Baptized Childern that were in Health by flirting a little Water in their
Faces, while he was washing his Hands, as if he had done it in sport. I
asked him, What it was he did? I have Baptized these Childern, said he; happy
is it for them that we came into the House. I asked him a second time, What
Name he had given 'em? I give 'em no Name, answered he; for oft-times I know
not whether I Baptize a Male or a Female; there is no Necessity for the Name,
it being sufficient to cast a drop of Water upon the Infant, and mentally to
recite the Form of Baptism. In a word, the Theatins are very miserable in
Mingrelia, they pillage 'em, they abuse 'em; nor have they any value or respect
for 'em, unless it be when any Sickness or Wound constrains 'em to require
their Assistance.

The 18th the Princess of Mingrelia came to visit the Theatins; and presently
the Superior of the Theatins made haste to attend her. These Princesses of
Mingrelia and those of the Neighboring Countries they call Dedopale, which in
the Georgian Language signifies Queen. She was a Horseback, attended by about
Eight Women and Ten Men, and some Lacqueys that ran by her Horse. But this
Train of hers was very ill clad, and very badly mounted. She told the Prefect
or Superior, That she understood that the Provision which was usually sent 'em
from Constantinople was come, and that there were Europeans in the House, who
had brought a long with 'em a considerable Quantity of Goods: that she was very
glad of it, and desired to see 'em that she might bid 'em Welcome. Presently I
was called for to pay my Respects to her: at what time Father Zampi told me
that I must make her a Present, the way according to the Custom of that
Country, to acknowledge the favorable Visits of the Prince and Princess. Upon
that I besought her to tarry till I could bring her one to her Palace; to which
she readily consented. Now she had been told, that I spoke Turkish and Persian;
upon which she sent for a Slave that understood Turkish, whom she ordered to
ask me a Thousand Questions concerning my Quality, and the design of my
Travels. I made him answer, That I was a Capuchin, and spoke and acted always
as a Religious Person: but it was plain her Majesty did not believe me; for all
her Discourse was about Love: and she caused the Question to be put, Whether I
were sensible of that Passion, and whether I had ever been in Love? How it
could be that a Man could never be in Love, or live without a Woman? And with
this Discourse she went on so pleasingly, that all her Train were strangely
delighted to hear her. Though for my part I could have wished the Princess and
her Train farther off from me: For I was afraid she would have caused the House
to be plundered, having three times demanded to see what I had brought,
together with the Theatins Provision. Which Provision is yearly sent 'em from
Constantinople, as I have already said, and consists of Goods and Commodities
of several sorts; of which they are obliged to send a good share to the Prince,
the Princess, to the Vizier, and the Principal Gentlemen of the Country. Father
Zampi therefore promised to bring her the accustomed Present the next day, and
that I my self should bring her one likewise; and so satisfied, God be thanked,
she went away.

The 19th in the Morning she sent to invite me to Dinner, whither I went with
Father Zampi and another Theatin. She was then at a House about two Miles from
ours. For she did not live with the Prince, who could not endure her, but hated
her to death, in regard he had been forced to marry her. I found her in a Dress
somewhat richer then the day before; she was likewise painted; and had used all
her Skill to set her self out to the best Advantage. Her Habit was of Cloth of
Gold, the Attire of her Head Glister'd with Precious Stones: but for her Vail
it was altogether Curious and Gay, and of a particular Fashion. She sat upon a
Carpet, having on each side Nine or Ten Women that belonged to her Chamber; for
her Maids of Honor were, as they said, retired for safety to a Fortress by
reason of the Wars. The Hall was full of Rakeshames half Naked, which composed
her Court. Before I was admitted, I was asked for the Present I had brought.
Which was carried by a Lacquey, who gave it to some of her Servants; consisting
of Pastes of Genoa, Ribbands, Paper, Needles, Twizers, Knives and Scissars, all
Neat and Curious The whole cost about Forty Shillings; but worth above a Five
Pounds in Mingrelia. The Princess was extremely pleased; and when she had feen
'em, sent for me into her Presence. Where the Slave that spoke Turkish ordered
me to sit down upon a Bench that was close by. Presently the first thing she
said to me was, That she would marry me to one of her Friends, and that she
would not have me to leave the Country, for that she would give me Houses,
Lands, Slaves and Tenants. After that she fell into the same Discourse as the
Day before; but it lasted not long, because the People gave her Notice that
Dinner was ready.

The House where she lived was in the midst of five or six others, every one a
hunderd Paces distant from it, without any Fence either of Hedge or Wall.
Before it stood a large Estrade or Ascent of about eighteen Inches high,
covered with a kind of a Duomo. This they spread with Carpets; where also sat
the Princess, and her Women about four Paces from her upon other Carpets: The
Rakeshames that composed her Court sat in a Circle upon the Grass, to the
Number of Fifty. As for the Theatins and my self there were two Benches placed
near the Ascent, the one to sit upon, the other to serve us in stead of a
Table. So soon as the Princess was sat down, her Butler spread before her a
long painted Linen Cloth, at the end of which he dressed up his Court-Cupboard,
which consisted of two great Flagons and two small ones, four Plates and eight
Cups, some bigger some lesser, a Basin and Eure, and a Skimmer, all of Silver;
and at the same time other Servants set before all those that were seated in
the same place, Wooden Planks to serve in stead of Tables; and one also was
placed before the Women. And thus when every thing was ordered in this manner,
they brought into the Middle of the place two Kettles, one very large, carried
by four Men, which was full of Common Gom; and the the other much less, which was
carried by two Men, full of white Gom. And I have already observed, that this
Gom is a Paste of which the Mingrelians make the same use in their Diet, as we
do of our Bread. Two other Men brought in upon a kind of Bier a whole Porker
boiled, and four other Men, every one a large Pitcher of Wine. Of all which
they cary'd first to the Princess, then to the Women, next to us, and last of
all to the Train. After this they served in to the Princess a Wooden Platter
with Bread and strong Herbs to create an Appetite, together with a large Silver
Plate containing two Fowls, the one Boiled, the other Roasted; both ill dressed,
and with such Sauce that my Stomach would not bear. The Princess sent me a part
of her Bread and Herbs, and bid the Messenger tell me withal that I should stay
and Sup with her, and that she would cause an Ox to be killed; but that was
only a Complement. A short while after, she sent me two Pieces of her Fowl, and
bid the Messenger ask me, Wherefore none of the European Workmen, being such
Excellent Goldsmiths, and Weavers both of Silk and Woollen came into Mingrelia,
but only Monks, of which they had no need, and whose Company they so little
desired? Which was a Question that did not a little startle me; for the
Princess spoke aloud in Mingrelian, and her Slave returned the Interpretation
of his Answer as loud. So that I leave the Reader to judge whether or no the
poor Theatins were not strangely abashed to hear the Princess propound such a
Question. To say truth, I took the scoff to be pretty well aimed at my self,
and therefore I answered as well for my self as for them, since she had
addressed her self alike to all, That the European Artists work for Money, and
that they had Employment enough at Home to keep 'em from any thoughts of
Gadding abroad, but that they who were in Orders sought only the Glory of God,
and the Salvation of Souls, and that only those two predominant Motives could
overruled the Europeans to quit their Country to travel so far.

The Feast lasted two Hours; and when it was half over, the Princess sent me a
Cup of Wine, and bid the Messenger tell me it was Wine which she preserved for
her own Drinking, and the Cup out of which she drank her self: and this Honor
she did me three times. But she wondered very much when she saw me mix Water
with my Wine, saying withal that she had never seen the like done: For she and
her Women drank it Neat, and that to a good pitch. When Dinner was ended, she
sent to know whether or no I had brought along with me any Spices or Porcelane
Dishes; and six or seven of these Messages I had from her all to the same
purpose, by which I guest that the beggarly Princess did not Caress me with so
much Civility but only for her own Interest. But all my Answers were positive
Denials; which put her at length into such an ill humor, that she told me she
would send to search my Chests; to which I only replied, That she might do it
when she pleased: which I did, as well fearing lest a refusal and unwillingness
might incense her Covetous Humor, as to conceal the dread into which her
threatening Language had put me. She answered me, That she had only spoke it in
Drollery; and I made as if I had really believed what she said: but so soon as
we were risen from the Table, I desired one of the Theatins to make haste home,
and give my Comrade Notice of the Princesses words, to the end he might be
prepared, whatever should happen. After Dinner she fell again into her
Discourse of Marriage, and told me that within a few days she would show me the
Lady she had a mind to bestow upon me. To which I answered as before, That
Persons in Orders were never allowed to Marry. And having so said, she was
about to have dismissed me. But as ill Luck would have it, as I was making my
Obeisance, the Princess espied under my poor and mean Habit, that I wore Linen
much whiter and finer then any was made in Mingrelia. Thereupon she came close
up to me, took me by the Hand, thrust up my Sleeve to my Elbow, and holding me
by the Arm, talked to one of her Women with a low Voice. I was then, I must
needs confess, at a cruel Nonplus; for the Ladies Caressing Actions no way
pleased me; and though she smiled very pleasantly in my Face, yet my Fears were
never the less. And that which troubled me most was, that I could not
understand what she said, and yet by her Gesture I could perceive she spoke of
me with a more then ordinary Earnestness and Affection. Nor did I know how to
behave my self before so many People toward a Woman, in whom I considered at
the same time the Quality of a Sovereign Princess, and the Impudence of a
Curtezan. However, till then I felt no more then only a little Disturbance in
my Mind. But that which put me into a very great Consternation was this, that
the Princess, addressing her self to Father Zampi, gave him this Rebuke: You
have both deceived me, said she, but it is my Pleasure that you both come hither
to me again upon Sunday-Morning, and that the New comer say Mass before me. The
Father would have made her an Answer, but the Princess turning her back, bid us
depart.

Upon this I returned to my Lodging very pensive and sad: for her Discourse had
filled me with a Thousand Fears, apprehensive lest her Avarice and some other
Motives might spur her on to do me a Mischief. And Father Zampi admonished me
to take it for good warning, and to expect it as a thing that would infallibly
happen; which made me resolve to prepare for it, insomuch that the Night
following we buried all our Goods that were of greatest Value. To which purpose
I caused a Pit to be made in the Chamber of the Theatin Friars five Foot deep,
where I hid a Chest of Clock-work, and another of Coral: which were so well
covered, that there was not the least Appearance that the Earth had been
stirred. Afterward I went into the Church with the same design. Where Father
Zampi advised me to open the Grave of a Theatin, who had been buried six Years
before, and to commit the Care of a little Caskanet to his Ashes. But GOD, who
knew what would soon after happen to that Grave, prevented me from following
that Advice; so that I rather chose to dig a Hole in a corner of the Church
behind the Door, where I caused as deep a Pit to be made as in the Chamber, and
there buried a little Box that contained Twelve Thousand Ducats in Gold.
Afterward I hid in the Roof of the Chamber where I lodged a Scimiter and a
Dagger set with Precious Stones, and some other Jewels; which Roof was covered
with Straw. And as for such other Things as were of great Value, and light, my
Comrade and I carried those about us; and as for such Things as were of less
Worth, we recommended them to the care of the Theatins.

The 23d I understood the Kindness which the Princess had done me, when she
threatened to Visit my Baggage. It was upon a Sunday, part of which I had spent
in Prayer, and in bewailing my self, out of a deep sense of the Misfortunes
that overwhelmed me, and the Dangers that environed me, not finding any Door
open for me to make my escape. I expected so certainly to be made a Slave, that
I durst not pray to GOD for my Liberty. Only I thought it all I could do to beg
that I might fall into the Hands of a kind Master; for that if I might have my
choice, I should rather choose the Chains of a Turk then the Fetters of a
Colchian Lady.

When we had Dined, word was brought to the Superior, That two Gentlemen
desired to speak with him at the Door; which two Gentlemen were their
Neighbors, both a Horseback, in Coats of Mail, and very well armed: Nor did
the Superior wonder to see 'em in that Equipage with such a Train, in regard
it was in time of War. When he came to 'em, the two Gentlemen told the
Superior, That they came to discourse with him, and the Europeans that were
newly arrived. And so saying, they alighted. Thereupon the Superior called
both me and my Comrade forth, who as readily went to wait upon 'em, never
stopping to consider whether they had any ill design or no. But they quickly
let me understand their Errand; for so soon as we accosted 'em, they caused us
to be laid hold on by their Followers: and at the same time they commanded the
Superior and the other Theatins who were come to salute 'em, that they should
retire; telling 'em withal, that if they stirred, they would cut their Throats.
Upon which the Superior in a Panick fear ran away; but the rest would not
forsake us, and the Lay-Brother stood briskly to us. He sacrificed himself in
our behalf; Nor could the Naked Sword which they set to his Throat affright him
from our sides. Presently our Servants were seized; and one of them who was
resolved to have made some resistance, and to that end drew his Cutlace that
hung at his Girdle, was knocked down with a Lance, and then Bound and Tied to a
Tree.

Afterward these Assassinates declared they would see what we had; to whom I
answered, That they were our Masters, and we only poor Capuchins, all whose
Riches consisted in Books, Papers, and such pitiful Lumber, that they needed
not have used so much Violence to constrain us to show it. For I had no other
Game to play, being seized and bound, and these Cutthroats become Masters both
of the House, and all the People that were in it. And indeed through GOD's
Mercy it took effect; for immediately they unbound me, and bid me open our
Chamber Door; which was in the first Story; and where there was nothing but
what we did not much value whether it were seen or no. For as I have said
already we carried our most Costly Jewels about us; and my Comrade had sowed
his share in the Collar of a large Furred Just-au-Corps which he wore. And for
my own share I had made 'em up in two little Bundles, and hid 'em in the Chest
where my Books were. For I durst not carry 'em about me for fear of being
Murdered or Robbed, or sold for a Slave. I was therefore fain to desire the
Lay-Brother and my Comrade to take the Gentlemen aside, and hold 'em in a
Discourse of Composition, and to offer 'em a little Money, thereby to gain time
to take those two Costly Bundles out of my Chest, to the end I might hide 'em
the best I could. Which they did, and I went into the Chamber, and Locked the
Door upon me. The Soldiers apprehensive of my Design, gave the Gentlemen
Notice, who presently came to the Door, which was strongly Locked within-side.
At what time my Comrade cried out from below, and bid me have a care, for that
the Enemy peeped and watched me through the Chinks. Which made me presently
take away my two little Bundles from the Roof where I had thrust 'em, for fear
they had seen where I laid 'em, and put 'em in my Pocket: but then perceiving
they were about to break open the Door, I flung my self out at the Window into
the Garden, taking such a Leap, that had not Necessity constrained me, I should
not have taken at another time for never so much: for it had been enough to
have broke a Man's Neck; but a Man that is seized with a Panick Dread fears
nothing but the Object of his first Fears. However, being once down, I ran to
the end of the Garden, and threw the two little Bundles among the thickest of
the Bushes: though the Distraction of my Mind would not suffer me to take a
true Notice of the Place where I threw 'em. After this, I returned to my
Chamber, which I found full of Robbers, some of whom were abusing my Comrade,
others knocking with their Maces upon my Chests with a design to break 'em; but
then I took Courage, knowing there was nothing in 'em that was very
considerable, and bid 'em have a care what they did, for that I was the King of
Persia's Envoy; and that the Prince of Georgia would severely chastise the
Violence they had offered me; and so saying I showed 'em the King of Persia's
Passport, which one of the Gentlemen took and would have torn, saying he feared
no Body, nor valued no Man living upon the Face of the Earth; but the other
prevented him, as having a greater Reverence for the Gold Letters and Gilt
Seal. After that he bid me open my Chests, and he would do me no Injury; but if
I made any longer delay, he would take my Neck from my Shoulders. To which I
was about to have replied, in stead of yielding Obedience, which had like to
have cost me my Life, for one of the Soldiers had drawn his Sword, and was
lifting up his Arm to have split my Brains. But the Lay-Brother stopped his Arm.
Upon this I opened my Chests; but then, Heavens bless me, what work they made!
Whatever they had a mind to, 'twas all free Plunder.

While they were thus busy at their Pillage, I was leaning at a Window, and
turning my Eyes another way, as unwilling to increase my Sorrows, I looked into
the Garden, where I perceived two Soldiers among the Bushes, where I thought I
had thrown my little Bundles. Presently I ran like mad to the Place, followed
by a Theatin Friar; but whatever the Matter was, the two Soldiers withdrew
when they saw us enter: Nevertheless I was willing to satisfy my self whether
they were there or no, and sought for 'em, but having mistaken the place,
through the trouble I was in, I could not then find 'em, so that I thought they
had been found and carried away. And you may judge by the Value of these two
little Bundles, that amounted to Six Thousand Pounds, what a desperate
condition I was in: enough to have broke a Man's Heart: but God sustained me
through his Mercy, and so supported me that I had still a presence of mind and
thought that seldom failed me in extremity. But the loud Cries of my Comrade
and the Lay-Brother, called me out of the Garden, into the Chamber: where when
I came, I was seized by two Soldiers, who drew me to a Corner of the Chamber,
and took what I had in my Pockets, which was no great Matter. Which done, they
took me by the Hands, and would ha'bound me. Upon that I made a Noise, and used
all the Strength I had, and made signs that they should carry me to their
Masters; and then I told the Chief of these Cutthroats, that there was no
Necessity to bind or kill me, for that I was ready to suffer whatever they were
disposed to do to me. Who answered, That they would carry us to the Prince
since we were Ambassadors. To which I replied, That we were ready to go without
binding, and that we hoped he would do us Justice: for that we had Letters for
him, for which no doubt but he would have a very great respect. By this time it
grew late, and Night drew on; besides, it was above fifteen Miles to the
Princes Castle: so that they released us, and carried no Body along with 'em
but only the Servant, who offered to make Resistance at first, whom I redeemed
fifteen Days after for Ten Crowns.

When I was rid of these Freebooters, I went to the Garden, for the Friar that
followed me before, when I went to look for the two Bundles I had hid in the
Bushes, had been telling the Misfortune which he believed had befallen me, and
no Body questioned but that the Soldiers had observed and followed me, and
found the Treasure I had so endeavored to conceal. Now I had an Armenian
Servant at that time, whose Name was Allaverdy; (and I therefore name him,
because several of my Friends have seen him at Paris after my return from my
first Travels, and for that his Fidelity to me at that time was so remarkable
that I cannot forbear to mention it.) This poor honest Man followed me into the
Garden; but I could not but wonder to see him throw his Arms about my Neck,
with Tears in his Eyes: Sir, said he, we are ruined: Fear and our common
Misfortune made us forget what we were. I was a little scared at first, for I
took him for some Rakehel Mingrelian that would have cut my Throat: but knowing
him, I was mightily taken with the Man's Affection for me, and bid him forbear
weeping. But, Sir, said he, have you looked well? I have looked so well, said I,
that I am too well assured of my ill Luck. However, the Fellow would not be so
satisfied, but desired me to show him the place as near as I could guess, and
what course I had taken both to hide 'em before, and since to search for 'em
again. Which I did to satisfy a Servant, who showed himself so much concerned
for me, but for my own part, I looked upon it to be so much Labor lost, and
therefore never thought it worth my time to help him. Moreover, it was by this
time almost Night, and I was so possessed with Grief, and my Sorrows did so
perplex me, that I was not sensible either what I did, whither I went, or what
I felt. But I was amazed to find the Fellow come and hang about my Neck a
second time, who at the same time overjoyed thrust the two little Bundles into
my Bosom. Nor is it to be imagined what a Change this Comfortable Return of my
Servant wrought in my Mind. Though my Consolation did not so much proceed from
the Recovery of Six Thousand Pounds, which I thought I had lost, as to see the
Care that Providence took of me, the Goodness of GOD, his Presence, and his
Assistance. This Consideration restored me again to my self in a moment; my
present Condition neither troubled me, nor did the prospect of future Mischief
disturb me, but manifestly acknowledging that only GOD could have thus
preserved me, I conceived such an Assurance of his Preservation, that has still
supported me in all my Distresses.

Thus having saved the two High-Priz'd Packets, I made little account of what
they might have taken out of my Chests; so that returning to my Chamber, I gave
an account of my good success to my Comrade, whom I found restoring to order
the confusion which those Robbers had made; by which it appeared that they had
carried away only some few Clothes, some Arms, Copper Vessels, and other
Trifles. There we agreed together, not to let any Body know that we had found
the two little Bundles, to the end they might think we had nothing more of
Value to lose. Which proved to be very good Counsel. For the Theatin's
Servants, thought we had been utterly Robbed. Tho thanks be to God, the whole
that we lost did not amount to above One Hunderd Pound.

The 24th in the Morning the Superior of the Theatins, and the Lay Brother,
carried me to the Catholicos, and the Prince to demand Justice, and would have
had me carried to each a Present. I alleged in vain, that it would look
strangely for us to complain of being Robbed and Plunderd of all, and yet to
bring Presents. But Custom prevailed, and I presented to the Catholicos, a
Knife, Spoon and Fork of Silver in one Case, with a Hat which he had sent to
request of me. Which done, I showed him the Pass and Command of the Persian
King, as also to the Prince: but I did not deliver to the Prince the Letter
from the French Ambassador, in regard the Theatins did not think it proper. But
neither the one nor the other gave me any satisfaction. The Prince told me,
that in time of War (as now it happened to be) he was not Master of the
Nobility. That at another time he would have done me Justice speedily, and to
the full: However he would endeavor the Restitution of what had been taken
from me. The Catholicos told me the same Story, and in stead of assisting me,
began to preach me a Lecture of Consolation. However, they made choice of two
Gentlemen to go in their Names and demand what had been taken from us.

But the most considerable Thing that I got by this Days Work, was the
Discovery which I made, that the Dadian or Prince had a share in the foregoing
Days Robbery, and that he had a third part of the Goods for himself. Which
Discovery served to make me understand the Nature of the Country where I was,
and that the Dangers were the more inevitable that threatened us. After our
departure, the two Gentlemen appointed to serve us, went along with us, and lay
at our House, where it was necessary to present 'em with something at their
Arrival. And they for their parts made a great show as if they had rid about
all the next Day, and the Day following to serve us; but all their Riding
produced nothing: for the 26th in the Evening they returned to tell us they
could do us no good; nor could they look any farther, for that the Turks were
entered Mingrelia, burnt and sacked all before, and therefore they were obliged
to return speedily to their Masters.

I was so accustomed to suffer, that these same dreadful Tidings hardly moved
me. But the Theatins were at their Wits end; foreseeing that this Incursion of
the Turks would utterly ruin 'em: therefore both they and we prepared for
flight. At the same Instant we heard two great Guns go off, which was a Signal
from the Fortress of Rucks of the Enemies approach. Upon which Signal all the
People betake themselves to flight, carrying away with 'em into the Woods and
Strong-Places whatever they are able.

The 27th by break of Day we began our Flight with the rest: but I resolved not
to meddle with any thing that I had buried, or that I had hid in the Roof of
the House, which I held to be more secure then if I should carry 'em along with
me. The Theatins had only one Wagon drawn by two Oxen, and two Horses to carry
the whole Baggage belonging to the House and two Childern: and as for the
Horses, the Lay-Brother rode upon one, and my Comrade on the other; who was
then sick, which very much retarded our Journey. Two Theatin Friars and my self
followed the Wagon afoot; and the Slaves and the rest of the Servants belonging
to the House followed us. So that there remained but one Friar to look after
it, and a Thousand Things more which we could not carry away, for want of
Convenience. I my self left all my Books, my Papers, and Mathematical
Instruments behind me, believing that neither the Turks nor Mingrelians would
trouble themselves with 'em. The Father, who staid behind, fled into the Woods
in the Daytime, when he heard any Rumor of the Enemies coming, and returned
to the House at Night. Now I have already observed, that the Wars of the
Mingrelians and their Neighbors seldom last long, being no more then Inroads
for Spoil and Plunder, the heat of which being over, the Enemy retreats back
again: and therefore the Inhabitants always leave one or two Persons in their
Houses, to prevent the Neighbors from pillaging the Corn, Wine, and other
Provisions which they cannot carry away. Which Persons are sometimes surpised
by the Enemy, but very rarely; for that they are always upon the Watch; and for
that the Woods are so near and so thick, that they can easily run for it, and
hide themselves when any danger appears.

'Twas one of the most lamentable Things in the World to behold these poor
People in their flight: Women lugging their Children and their Bundles: Men
stooping under the Burden of their Baggage: Here one driving his Cattle;
another halling a Cart after him full of Housholdstuff. The Highways were
strewn with People quite wearied off their Legs, and so faint, that they were
ready to die. Of Aged and Decrepit People and Children not able to go, a great
Number were to be seen crying out, and making lamentable Moans for Assistance.
It was such a spectacle of Lamentation, Misery and Desolation, that would have
melted the Hearts of any but of those Barbarians. Yet I must confess I was not
much concerned at it, not out of hard-heartedness, but because my Compassion
was all spent, my own Miseries had so drained me, that I had none left for any
Body else. Now the Place whither we made our Retreat was a Fortress in the
Woods, like those which I have already described; of which the Lord was called
Sabatar a Georgian, who turned Mahumetan, and afterward became a Christian. He
was also looked upon to be less a Thief and less a Rascal then the rest: and we
arrived at this Fortress after a tedious Journey of five I eagues in deep Mud
and Dirt, out of which I could not think the Cart could ever have been drawn;
which was the reason we were forced to load and unload twenty times by the way:
nor would it be any News to tell ye, That I was twice very near being pillaged
and losing my Life; in regard I ran that hazard every Day. When we came to the
Fortress, he that owned it let us in, and received us kindly enough. For the
Theatins had told him, That I was a Person that never received a Courtesy but
I made a return for it. He lodged us in the place where the Oven stood, in a
little scurvy Hutt, where we were no more sheltered from the Weather then those
that lay in the open Air; for it rained in on every side. However, it was a
great Favor that we had it, and were not crowded as were an infinite Number of
poor Wretches one upon another. For the Fortress was full of People when we
arrived: there being in it no less then Eight Hundred Persons, Women and
Children for the most part.

But here, before I continue the farther Recital of my Misfortunes, give me
leave to say something of the Occasion of this Incursion of the Turks, and what
I have learnt concerning the late Mingrelian Wars, and of the People of
Imiretta and Guriel, in which their Formidable Neighbors the Turk and Persian
were engaged. Therein you will find some Passages perhaps not unworthy the
Remembrance of History; and certainly it is a thing equally to be observed and
wondered at, That such small and inconsiderable Kingdoms should continually
produce such Tragic Revolutions. Nor shall I be accused to have injured the
People of these Countries, while I tell ye how wicked they are, when you have
read this part of my Story; since the bare Relation which I shall make in
reprepresenting 'em such, will justify me perhaps in the Judgment of my
Readers.

The most Famous Prince that ever Mingrelia had, since it revolted from the
King of Imiretta, was Levan Dadian, Uncle to him that Reigns at this present.
He was Valiant, Generous, a Person of great Wit, indifferently just and more
happy in his Undertakings. He made War upon his Neighbors and vanquished 'em
all: and no question but he would have made an excellent Prince, had he been
born in a better Country. But the Custom in his Country of Marrying several
Wives, and those near Relations, was that which transported him to such
Excesses as rendered him unworthy of all Encomiums.

He remained an Orphan almost as soon as he had outlived his Infant Years: at
what time his Father dying, left him to the Tuition of his Brother, who was
Uncle by the Fathers side to the Young Pupil, and called by the Name of George;
the Sovereign Prince of Libardian, a Country that extends it self a great way
into Mount Caucasus. This George faithfully discharged his Trust in the Tuition
of his Nephew. He bred him well, and prudently Governed Mingrelia during his
Minority.

Levan being Twenty Four Years of Age, Espoused the Daughter of the Prince of
the Abca's, by whom he had two Sons; she being a Lovely Princess, and a Woman
of a great Wit. It Is true, she was taxed of being none of the most Faithful
Wives, which perhaps might be in revenge of the Foul-play which her Husband
openly played her every Day. Now among the rest of the Women with whom he fell
in Love, one was the Wife of George his Uncle, who had been his Tutor, and to
whom he had been so highly obliged. This Lady went by the Name of Darejan, of a
Considerable Family, which was called Chilake. And as she was extremely
beautiful, but wicked and ambitious beyond Imagination, she was not only
content to violate her Conjugal Fidelity, and for two Years together to live in
an Incestuous League with the Prince her Nephew, but over-perswaded him at the
end of that season to take her away by Force, repudiate his own Wife, and
Marry her. Levan was overruled by her: He took the Adulteress by Force from
her Husbands House; He Married her, and eight days after sent home his first
Wife ignominiously, without any Train, back to her Father, King of the Abca's,
after he had caused her Nose, her Ears and her Hands to be cut off. And the
pretense which he took to excuse so horrid a piece of Cruelty was, That she had
committed Adultery with the Vizier, whose Name was Papona. And the better to
make People believe the truth of it, he caused this Vizier to be stopped into
the Mouth of a Cannon at the same time that he maimed his own Wife. However,
all Men agreed, that there was nothing of Incontinence that had been committed
between her and the Vizier; only that he sacrificed his Wife and his Prime
Minister to the Hatred and Jealousy of the Chilakite.

The Love of this wicked Woman caused him to Sacrifice these Important
Victims: but her Ambition forced him to offer up two more precious Oblations.
For Levan himself poisoned his two Sons which he had had by the Princess his
Wife. The Chilakite persuading him to this incredible Inhumanity, to the end
the Children which she should have by him might Reign more securely.

Prince George had a great kindness for his Wife, as much an Adulteress, and as
wicked as she was. So that her being taken from him by force threw him into a
most furious despair. He performed the Ceremony of Mourning for her Forty Days,
according to the Custom of the Country, as if she had been Dead; after which he
betook himself to Arms, and fell into the Territories of the Prince his Nephew.
But Levan was Valiant, and had good Soldiers about him, so that George was
constrained to retire into his Mountains, where he died soon after for Grief
and Vexation.

The Prince of the Abca's also went about to revenge the Affront and Injury
done him, in the Person of the Princess his Daughter, but with as ill success.
He raised Forces, began a War against the Prince of Mingrelia, and tho the
consequences of the War did not at all fall out to his Advantage, yet would he
never make Peace or Truce with him, nor would he put an end to the War, till he
understood the Death of his Barbarous Son-in-Law.

There was also a Third Enemy, more formidable but as unsuccessful that would
not suffer Levan to be at rest. This was his own Brother called Joseph, who
engaged himself so far in the just Resentments of his Uncle George and the
Prince of the Abca's, that he resolved to revenge their Quarrel, by causing the
Criminal to be Murdered. To that purpose he corrupted one of his Guards an Abca
by Birth to Assassinate him; the Prince's Cup Bearer being also Privy to the
Conspiracy. The Plot was so laid that Joseph should go and Dine at the Palace:
that the Abca Guard should stand behind him with a Lance in his Hand, and that
when the Prince lifted to his Mouth one of those great Beakers of Wine which
the Mingrelians Drink at the end of the Meal, the Cup Bearer should make a sign
to the Abca, who was then to strike him through the Body with his Lance. This
Plot was within a little of being put in Execution, but failed when the stroke
was ready to have been given, Divine Justice resolving that Levan's Crimes
should be his own Murderers and Executioners, which spared him a long time
before they accomplished it. For the Prince perceived the sign which the
Cup Bearer gave the Guard, and as it were inspired, threw himself down from the
place where he stood, so that the Lance never touched him at all. However the
Abca escaped, but the Cup Bearer was seized, put to the Rack, and dismembered
after he had confessed what he knew of the Plot. Prince Joseph had his Eyes
pulled out, and died soon after, leaving a Son, who is now Prince of Mingrelia.

Levan had by his Incestuous Conjunction two Sons, and one Daughter, who
suffered every one for the Iniquity of their Father, being all Three
Paralytick. No means were unsought for their Cure, but all in vain: their
Distemper Non-pluss'd all the Physicians in the Country, the Theatins and an
Eminent Greek Physician who was sent for from Constantinople. The Youngest Son
and the Daughter died by that time they arrived at the Age of Twenty Years or
there-about: but Alexander the Eldest Son lived longer, was Married and had a
Child; his Wife being the Daughter of the Prince of Guriel. Which one Son he
had a Year after he was Married, and then died, while his Father was yet living.

Levan died in the Year 1657. after whose Death the Shilakite was in such high
Credit, as to set up in his place a Son, which she had by her first Husband,
but which most People were assured was begot by Levan. But this Young Prince
whose Name was Vomeki, did not Reign long. For the Viceroy of that part of
Georgia which is under the Dominion of Persia, dispoil'd him of his
Principality, and reinvested in it Levan's Lawful Heir, after he had invaded
Mingrelia, and the Territories of Imiretta. Which Invasion being an Accident
that happens to be genuinely apposite to this Recital, I shall only give a
short account of the occasion.

The Deceased King of Imiretta, who was called Alexander, and who died in the
Year 1658. had Two Wives, the First was the Daughter of the Prince of Guriel
called Tamar, whom he divorced for her Adulteries, after he had had a Son and a
Daughter by her. The Son, who was called Bacrat Mirza Reigns at this present
King of Imiretta. The Daughter is Princess of Mingrelia, the same that I have
given ye such an account of, that would have both Robbed and Married me to her
Friend. The Second Wife which Alexander Married was called Darejan, a Young
Princess and Daughter of the Great and Famous Taymur Razkan, last Sovereign
King of Georgia. He had no Children by her, and left her a Widow after he had
been Married to her four Years. They talk Wonders of her Beauty and her
alluring Graces. So soon as his Son-in-Law Bacrat came to the Throne, she would
have had him to Marry her. Bacrat was not then above Fifteen Years of Age; so
that the Charms of her Beauty could not make those deep Impressions upon his
Heart, as being so young that the Evil Customs of his Country had not yet
corrupted him. Which was the Reason that he abhorred the Proposal, and
returned disdainful Answers to her Courtship. Darejan therefore finding she
could not support her self upon the Throne, immediately advanced to his Bed a
young Person of Twelve Years of Age, her Kinswoman, called Sistan Darejan, the
Daughter of Daitona, the Brother of Taymur Razkan, whom Bacrat Married at
Fifteen Years of Age, as has been already said. So that Darejan assured her
self of the Sovereign Power, and of keeping the King and Queen continually
under her Guardianship. But Bacrat, as young as he was, perceived his
Mother-in-Laws Design, and one Day gave her apparent Testimonies of his
Disgust. Upon which Darejan, to satisfy Bacrat, assured him that she would
forbear to take any Authority upon her. Who being a good-natured well-meaning
Prince, easily believed Darejan, and restored her to his former Confidence, not
dreaming of the Treason that she was meditating against him. To that purpose
she feigned her self sick, and sent for the King to come to her; who went
accordingly with a great deal of Frankness and VVillingness; at what time
certain People that she had posted in her Chamber, seized and bound him.
Presently she ordered him to be conveyed to the Fortress of Cotatis, the
Principal City of the Country, the Governor of which place was her own
Creature. Soon after she came thither her self; sent for all the Grandees whom
she had gained to her Party, and of whom she was assured, and with them
consulted for five Days together what to do with the King. Some advised her to
put him to Death; others to pull out his Eyes: which latter advice she
followed, and so the Prince was deprived of his sight. Which happened Eight
Months after the Marriage of that poor Prince, which they said moreover he had
not fully then consummated.

Among the rest of the Lords that were of Darejan's Party, there was one with
whom she was passionately in love, whose Name was Vactangle: Him she Married,
and caused him to be Crowned King in the Fortress. Which highly incensed the
rest of the Lords, who thought themselves all affronted by his Advancement.
Thereupon they fell often from siding with Darejan, joined themselves with the
contrary Party, took Arms, and called to their Assistance the Princes of Guriel
and Mingrelia, offering the Kingdom to which of the two should first come to
their Aid. Vomeki Dadian was the first that appeared in the Field with all the
Forces of his Country; and soon reduced under his Subjection all that part
which held for Darejan, except the Fort of Cotatis. However, he laid Siege to
that also, but for want of Artillery, he could do little good against the
Besieged, only that he kept 'em from stirring forth out of their Walls; and it
would have cost him a long time before he could have brought 'em to a
surrender, had it not been for the Politic Contrivance of a Lord of the
Country, whose Name was Ottia Chekaize, who brought that to pass by his Wit,
which they could not do with all their Force. He went to the Fortress full of a
feigned Despair, occasioned by the Prince of Mingrelia; he made Darejan believe
that he was reduced to that extremity, that he knew not where to find a more
secure Sanctuary: that he came to throw himself at her Feet, to beg her Pardon,
and desire her Protection against that Prince. Darejan fell into the Snare. She
believed whatever Ottia said, and that his extraordinary Zeal for her Interests
was true. She admitted him into her Council, soon after increased by the Bishop
of Tifflis and the Catholicos of Georgia, whom the Viceroy of that Country had
sent her, fearing lest they in whom she most confided should betray her. But
this same Runagate deceived 'em both, as quick-sighted as they were. He told
Darejan in their hearing, That considering the Condition of her Affairs, there
was no other way to expel the Prince of Mingrelia, to regain what he had won,
and to Reign securely, but to have recourse to the Turk. That her best way was
to send her Husband to Constantinople for Assistance, and the Confirmation of
his Coronation: That the Kingdom of Imiretta was Tributary to the Port, and
that the Grand Signior had both Right and Power sufficient to restore the
Country to Peace, and fix him in the Throne. Darejan was Charmed by this
Advice, and while he that gave it, offered to assist in the Management of it,
and to Conduct Vactangle to Constantinople, she threw her self at his Feet, not
having Words enough to express that Acknowledgment which she had in her Heart.
Vactangle took only two Men along with him, to the end he might Travel with the
more Security and Privacy. Thus being soon ready, the cunning Ottia Chikaize
his Guide, caused him to set forth out of the Fortress about Twilight, and
carrying him through By-ways to bring him the more insensibly to the Besiegers,
brought him in less then an Hour into their Camp. The Prince of Mingrelia
caused his Eyes forthwith to be pulled out, and sent that Night to Darejan to
let her know that he had her Husband Prisoner, and that he had put out his
Eyes. This News surpised her so, that her Courage and Resolution quite failed
her, and in a short time after she surrendered the Fortress, which was
plundered from Top to Bottom. Insomuch that it was certainly reported that the
Prince of Mingrelia carried thence a very rich Booty, and among the rest Twelve
Wagons of Silver, Plate and Movables. For, as it was said, the Kings of
Imiretta had heaped together such a vast Quantity of Plate, that every thing
within the Palace was of Massy Silver, even to the Steps and Footstools. Which
is no difficult thing to believe in a plentiful Country, and where there is a
good Trade, and adjoining to Countries which were formerly very Wealthy, and
where it appears that Money was not then in use, there being very little that
is stirring at present. The Prince of Mingrelia also carried away along with
him the King and Queen of Imiretta, the wicked Darejan, and the unfortunate
Vactangle her Husband; but to the Viceroy of Georgia he generously returned the
two Prelates which he had sent to the Princess to be her Privy Counselors.

The Viceroy of Georgia is called Shanavas Can; being descended also from the
last Sovereign Princess of that Country: but he turned Mahumetan to make
himself capable of enjoying the Viceroyship under the Persian. He has only two
Lawful Wives, who are both Christians, of which the one is called Mary the
Sister of Levan Prince of Mingrelia, who gave the first occasion to this
Relation: This Lady when she understood how the detestable Shilakite had
excluded the lawful Heir in favor of a Son which she had before she was
Married to Levan, daily importuned the Prince her Husband to undertake her
Nephews Cause, and to settle him in the possession of his Principality, to
which he was the true and lawful Heir. But the Viceroy would not act Hand over
Head by force in this Affair. For Mingrelia being Tributary to the Turk, he
durst not declare open Hostility against that Country, without the knowledge
and consent of the King of Persia. But at length a favorable opportunity
offered it self. For so soon as the Prince of Mingrelia was entered into the
Kingdom of Imiretta, as has been already said, Darejan who was near Kins-woman
to the Georgian Viceroy, and had been bred up in his House, and Vactangle her
Husband, sent and offered the Kingdom to Archylas his Eldest Son, if he would
come and drive out the Mingrelian. The Viceroy made this offer known to the
King of Persia, and assured him withal that he would add that Kingdom and
Mingrelia to his Empire, if he would but give him leave to Conquer 'em. To
which when his Majesty had sent him his consent, he mustered all his Forces and
marched toward Imiretta. But he was no sooner entered the Kingdom, when news
was brought him that a great Georgian Lord, taking the advantage of his
absence, was up in Arms, and preparing to ransack all the Country. Upon which
he marched back again with all his Forces against the Rebel, defeated and put
him to Death, and then returned toward Imiretta.

The Grandees of the Kingdom that invited him in, had raised Four Thousand Men,
which was a great Army for a Country so bounded as that, and this number too
Augmented every Day, some flocking out of fear of His Power, others allured by
the charming Fame of his Valor. So that he found little or no Resistance
either in Imiretta or Mingrelia. Prince Vomeki retired amongst the Souanes into
the Fortresses of Mount Caucasus, inaccessible to the Cavalry. So that the
Georgian Prince had nothing to do but to Ransack; and he carried away a very
Rich Booty out of both Countries. They report that it was there that he
plundered the greatest part of the Gold and Silver Plate, of which his House is
full. He settled in Mingrelia his Nephew, Levan's Grandchild, to whom the
Principality belonged of Right, and affianc'd him to one of his Nieces whom he
promised to send him. Which done, he caused his Son Archylus to be Crowned King
of Imiretta; but he knew not how to be rid of Vomeki. For he was unwilling to
leave him a Fugitive in the Mountains where he was retired, fearing lest when
he was gone, he should come down from the Mountains, and disturb the unsettled
affairs of Princes hardly warm in their Thrones. But a Grandee of Imiretta
whose Name was Kotzia, put him out of that pain. For he wrore to the Souanes,
that the Viceroy of Georgia desired to rid himself absolutely of Vomeki: that
he would give 'em great Rewards and Immunities if they brought him his Head:
but if they denied to gratify him in so small a Matter, he threatened their
Country with Fire and Sword. The Souanes therefore readily condescended, and
having slain Vomeki, sent his Head to the Georgian Prince. Which done he
retreated, and carried along with him the two Blind Princes Bacrat, and
Vactangle; to the end no Friend of theirs in his absence might be emboldened to
undertake any new disturbances in their Favor; and left the Princesses their
Wives at Cotatis. Which Inhuman separations he made for the sake of his Son the
King of Imiretta; who became so desperately in Love with Bacrat's Wife, that he
resolved to take her from her Husband and Marry her.

After the departure of the Viceroy of Georgia, several Grandees of Imiretta
conspired against their new Sovereign. For some had been ill used; others could
not brook the Power and high advancement of Kotzia, whom Archylus's Father had
appointed to be his Sons Prime Minister, nor his Domineering Haughtiness and
severity toward 'em. Thereupon they wrote to the Basha of Akalzike, that they
wonderd to see him sit still with so much indifferency, while the Viceroy of
Georgia ravaged a Kingdom and Principality Tributary to the Turks; nay, reduced
'em under his Subjection, and carried away their Lawful Princes Prisoners, and
set up in their Places his own Friends and Kindred. That therefore they
besought him to let 'em know, whether it were the Port that abandoned 'em to
the Capricious Humors of the Persians; or whether it were the Dread of their
Forces, that tied his Hands at a time when the Honor and Interest of the Grand
Signior lay at Stake. To which the Basha returned for answer, That he had sent
Intelligence to the Port of the Invasion made by the Georgian Viceroy, and
expected Orders every Hour; which when he should receive, he would let 'em know
what was necessary to be done. Soon after he wrote word that his Orders were
come; and that as soon as the Forces which the Basha's of Erzerom and Carrs
(both Provinces of Armenia) had Instructions to send him, should be joined with
his, he would deliver 'em from the Georgian Yoke. That in the mean time they
should get ready to join with him with all the Forces they could raise, and
that they should cause Kotzia to be murdered, for fear his Forces, his Prudence
and his Reputation should put a stop to the Enterprise, and that by his Death
the new King of Imiretta might be without any Counselor to assist him.

The Chief Conspirators were the Grand Steward of the Household, and Bishop
Janatelle; who also admitted into their Plot one of Kotzia's Gentlemen:
promising him withal the Grand Master's Daughter in Marriage, and to prevail
with the Turkish Basha, that he should have all his Master Kotzia's Land, if he
would but undertake to kill him, and perform it effectually: Which Conditions
the perfidious Villain accepted, and one Night Assassinated his Master, at what
time a certain Purge that he had taken wrought upon his Body.

This bold Stroke discovered the Conspiracy, caused all the Grandees of
Imiretta to stand to their Arms, hastened the Basha of Akalzike's March, and
put the King into an extraordinary Trouble and Consternation. Presently he gave
advice of what had happened to his Father the Viceroy of Georgia. Who sent him
Instructions and Counselors, and assured him, he would come in a little time
with an Army to his Assistance. But the Basha of Akalzike would not stay for
his coming; for he fell into Imiretta with that swiftness, that the young
Prince had much ado to escape his Avant-Couriers, and to save himself. He went
to his Father, where in a few days Intelligence was brought him, that the Basha
of Akalzike had put a Garrison into the Fortress of Cotatis, the Capital City of
Imiretta, and that he was Master of the whole Country. Upon which the Viceroy
of Georgia turned back, not daring to act any thing against the Turks without
the King of Persia's Orders.

As for the Orders which the Basha had received from the Grand Signior, the
purport of 'em was, That since the People of Imiretta and Mingrelia made use of
their Liberty only to destroy one another, he should take from 'em all the
Strong Places he could. The Basha had kept his Instructions very secret; and
having by a Stratagem got admittance into the Castle of Cotatis, he made
himself Master of it, and furnished it with a good Garrison. Afterward he sent
for all the Nobility and Gentry of the Country, and made 'em swear Fealty to
the new King which he gave 'em, who was the Son of the Prince of Guriel, at
that time a Berre, or Monk of the Order of St. Basil; but he quitted his
Monastical Habit, and was Crowned King.

While the Basha was thus disposing of the Petty Kingdom of Imiretta, the
Prince of Mingrelia came to wait upon him, with the offer of his Head, and
Tender of his Subjection to the Grand Signior's Commands. That he was and would
still continue a Tributary to the Court; and that the Prince of Georgia in
establishing him, had done no more then restored him the Patrimony of his
Ancestors, which appertained to him of Right. The Basha was appeased by his
Submission, and by the great Presents which he brought along with him. So that
he confirmed him in his Principality, and then returned to Akalzike, carrying
along with him the Wretched Darejan, and the Queen of Imiretta, whom the
Unfortunate Archilus had not time to get into his possession.

This happened in the Year 1659. at what time the Turkish Basha had no sooner
turned his Back, but the Grandees of Imiretta, out of their natural Treachery
and Inconstancy, refused to obey their new King. Thereupon they sent
Commissioners to the Viceroy of Georgia, with their Complaints against him; and
conjured him, to send 'em back Bacrat, as Blind as he was. The Georgian Prince
was afraid that this demand was no more then only an Artifice of their
Treachery, and therefore to ascertain himself of the Truth, he made Answer,
That if the Grandees of Imiretta were really, as they said they were, incensed
against their new Master, and resolved to dethrone him, that they should pull
out his Eyes, and that then when he was assured they had done it, he would send
away Bacrat: Which Conditions were accepted and punctually performed both on
one side and to other. The Grandees of Imiretta pulled out their Kings Eyes,
and sent him back to the Prince of Guriel his Brother; and the Viceroy of
Georgia sent 'em Bacrat, after he had affianc'd him to one of his Nieces,
Sister to her, whom he had given to the Prince of Mingrelia.

This latter was very Young, and Bacrat was Blind: so that their principal
Officers Governed; and thence it came to pass that the Prime Ministers of
Mingrelia and Imiretta had continual Quarrels one with another, wherein they
engaged their Masters, and obliged 'em to make War one upon another. In which
Contest the Mingrelian was Vanquished and taken Prisoner with his Wife, whom
the Viceroy of Georgia had sent him not above two Months before, and a report
was afterward spread abroad, that he had not consummated the Marriage. She is
very fair and very well shaped, and tho I have seen many handsome Women in her
Country, I never beheld a more charming Creature. She is most surely guilty of
all the Passions that a Lovers Breast can feel. For such are the Glances of her
passionately Tender and Languishing Eyes, that she never looks but to command
Love, and inspire hope. In a word, the Air of her Countenance and all her
discourses are irresistible Allurements. So that Bishop Janatelle, who is one
of the greatest Lords in all Imiretta, was taken with her at first sight. Who
being very Rich, plied her with Presents, and gained her so entirely, that now
she sticks close to him, and that so publicly, as if they were Man and Wife.
And indeed the cunning which this Priest made use of to retain this lovely
Prisoner still in Imiretta, was more then usual, and a very pleasant
Contrivance. For he made the King his Master, the poor Blind Bacrat, in Love
with her, by means of the daily Encomiums of her Beauty which he continually
peal'd in his Ears, and when he had kindled his Flame, he laid before him a
kind of necessity of Marrying her. Your Majesty, said he, has lost your Wife,
as being carried away by the Basha of Akalzike, so that GOD knows what is
become of her. The Viceroy of Georgia 's Niece, to whom you are affianc'd, is
an Infant, so that it will be a long time before you can be Married to her. And
therefore your Majesty will do well to espouse the Princess of Mingrelia, nor
can you any where Marry another, that has more Beauty, or more Wit. And thus
the King being overruled, followed his Counsel, never considering that he
acted more for the Interest of his Advizer then his own. And as for the
Princess she was glad of the Bargain.

It Is well known that the Prince of Mingrelia loved her entirely, and that he
would never consent to surrender her to the King of Imiretta. And therefore an
Expedient was found out to take her away under the pretense of Justice, which
was this. The King of Imiretta had her Sister with him; being at that time a
Widow; and it was proposed to her to make her Princess of Mingrelia, in stead
of her that was so already, provided she could but allure the Prince, and so
order it, as that he should be surpised in her Bed. She being the Sister of a
King, Young, Cunning, and Handsome, with little or no trouble easily debauched a
Young, Simple and Captive Prince. So that being both taken in Bed together, the
Prince was forced to Marry her immediately, and at the same time the King of
Imiretta espoused the Princess of Mingrelia. These two Marriages thus
accomplished, the Mingrelian had his Liberty, and was restored to his Country,
after he had sworn upon all the Images, never to repudiate his new Spouse, nor
to Marry any other, so long as she lived.

But so soon as he was returned into his Country, desire of Revenge
transporting him, he Challenged alike both the Turk and the Persian. He sent
his Ambassadors to the Viceroy of Georgia, and the Basha of Akalzike,
Complaining of the Invasion which the King of Imiretta had made into his
Country, and of his taking from him his Wife. The Basha was at that time highly
provoked against the People of Imiretta, for their Treachery, Rebellion and
Cruelty to the King which he had appointed for their Sovereign. The Prince of
Guriel also, Brother to that Unfortunate Prince, loudly demanded Justice. And
the Cruel Darejan inflamed his Revenge with all her might; and urged him to
extend it to the utmost Rigor that such detestable Inhumanities deserved. Now
she was lovely, as I have already said, and her Beauty strangely reinforced her
Arguments. Insomuch that the Basha promised to restore her to the Throne of
Imiretta, together with her Husband, if she could get him out of Georgia where
he was a Prisoner, in the Custody of the Archbishop of Gori; from whence the
wily Darejan found a way to have him stoll'n and brought to Akalzike. So soon
as he was arrived, the Basha took 'em both along with him in his March to
Imiretta; where he sacked and ruined after a most terrible manner all before
him. Whereupon the King and Queen fled to a Fortress called Ratchia, seated in
an inaccessible part of the Mountains. After that, the Basha restored Darejan
and her Husband to the Throne, and caused all the Grandees, and all the People
to swear Fealty to him; and so taking Hostages, he returned with a great Number
of Slaves; but little other Booty, in regard it had been no less then the third
time in five Years that that poor Country had been pillaged, plundered and
ransacked by the Persians, and their other Neighbors.

As for the wicked Darejan, she was destined to be ruined by her excess of
Confidence. One of her great Lords having lulled her into a besotted Credulity,
had plunged her, as I have already related, into one of the most miserable
Conditions that could befall a Woman of her Quality; and now another by the same
means brought her to the most Tragic end in the World. This was the most
perfidious Traitor and Murderer of the Prime Minister Cotzia, who was also
called by the same Name. For the Murder he had committed had raised him to
great Preferment. Now this Person never came near the Basha to pay him his
Homage, because he had been of the Faction contrary to Darejan; and was
therefore afraid of being sacrificed. However, he wrote to the Princess, as
soon as the Turks were retreated, and sent her word, that Bacrat, and they by
whom the Prince still suffered himself to be Governed, had put upon him so many
ungrateful Slights and Affronts, that he would be their vowed Enemy as long as
he lived: That if she would engage to restore him to the Basha's Favor, and to
all his Lands that had been Confiscated, and to invest him in the Estate of the
High Steward of Bacrat's Household, he would deliver into her Hands both Bacrat
and his Wife. All which she promised to perform; and then the Traitor came and
submitted himself to her. At what time the Princess was so overhasty, that
nothing would serve her but she would presently bestow upon him all the Marks
of Favor and Reconciliation, Friendship and Confidence, which are most usual
in that Country between Men and Women. She adopted him therefore, and gave him
the end of her Nipple to suck. Which is a Custom not only in Mingrelia, Georgia
and Imiretta, but also in other the Neighboring Countries, to adopt in that
manner such Persons as they cannot unite to themselves by Alliance. The Traitor
having this Pledge of Darejan's Faith, wrote to Bacrat to come with all his
Party, and he would deliver both her and her Husband into their Hands, either
alive or dead. Now the same Day that Bacrat was to appear, the perfidious
Cotzia kept his Bed, pretended himself sick, and sent to Darejan to vouchsafe
him the Honor of a Visit, for that he had secret Intelligence to impart of
that Importance, that he would not communicate to any but her self. Thus
wheedl'd, away she went, attended only by some of her Women: but as she was
sitting by the Traytor's Bed, certain Fellows hid in the Room, fell upon her,
and seized her Person, her Women in vain endeavoring to protect her. Yet there
was one who took the Princess in her Arms, and run her up into a Corner of the
Room, where she stuck by her, till the Murderers stabbed 'em both. With that
Cotzia rose, and went with his Gang, where Darejan's Husband lodged; a poor
blind Man, incapable of making any Resistance. Him therefore they seized, and
Cotzia ordered him to be bound and kept till Bacrat came. Who was no sooner
arrived, but he demanded the Prisoner, and hearing him approach, Traitor, said
he, thou were the Occasion of putting out my Eyes, and I will tear out thy
Heart. And so saying, he ordered himself to be carried near the Prisoner, and
then groping for his Breast, he gave him several Stabs with his Dagger. His
Followers completed the Murder by ripping open his Breast, and gave the poor
Captive's Heart into the Hands of the bloody sightless Prince, who for above an
Hour held it in his Clutches, grasping and tearing it with an unheard of
Transport of Fury.

These Barbarous Tragedies happened in the Year 1667. from which time till the
Year 1672, there fell out a Hunderd more in the same Countries, altogether as
Infamous and Inhumane: and therefore I pass 'em over in silence, as being
Stories rather frightful then pleasing to the Ear. I shall only add thus much,
that the Traitor Cotzia was himself also Treacherously slain; and in a short
time after the Assassins themselves were also killed at the Battle of Chicaris,
which is a great Village within sight of Scander, a Fortress of Imiretta, where
the Forces of that Country, and the Prince of Mingrelia met. By which we may
find there is a Visible Providence in the Modern Histories of these Impious
People; upon whom Heaven still inflicted such severe and speedy Justice: while
the Murderers are always Assassinated, and with those Circumstances which
plainly demonstrate that God had a Hand in it, and made the one his Instruments
to punish the other.

In the Year 1672, the Basha of Akalzike, perceiving there was no end of
Warring between those two Petty Sovereigns of Mingrelia and Imeretta, neither
by Accommodations nor Remonstrances, nor by Commands or Threats, resolved to
exterminate 'em, and give their Country to others that better deserved it. He
had then in his Possession the true and Lawful Heir of Mingrelia. For when
Vomeki Dadian was advanced to the Throne of that Kingdom, the Wife of Alexander
the Son of Levan, fearing lest the Ambitious Chilakite, the Mother of Vomeki
should Murder Alexander's Son, she fled and carried the Infant with her. This
Princess was Sister to the Prince of Guriel, who apprehensive also lest the
Chilakites fury should bring a War upon him, if he should shelter the little
Infant, adviz'd her to carry him to the Basha of Akalzike. Which she did; so
that the young Prince was brought up in the City of Akalzike, under the Eye of
the Basha himself. Who never desired him to change his Religion; believing it
sufficient to give him such an Education as should infuse into him a deep
Tincture of the Customs and Manners of the Turks. Upon these considerations
therefore the Basha of Akalzike resolved to settle this young Prince in
Mingrelia; as well in regard the Principality belonged to him as his Right, as
for that he had some reason to hope that he would Govern it well, and root out
those abominable Customs that had over run it: and this was the reason of the
coming of the Turks into Mingrelia. The Prince of Guriel also joined with the
Basha, as being overjoyed at the advancement of his Nephew, to the Sovereignty:
for he was in hopes of a Thousand Advantages from the success of this
Enterprise. Presently the Basha Thunder's into Imiretta, and makes himself
Master of the Country; and of the Person of the King But the Queen his Spouse
was not seized. For her Bishop Janatel, gave Fifteen Thousand Crowns to the
Basha that he might have Liberty to carry her where he pleased; and that he
might have the favor to preserve his own Lands and Tenements, from spoil and
Ransack.

When the Basha came to Cotatis, he sent to the Dadian, which is the Title
given to the Prince of Mingrelia, to come and pay him Homage. But the Dadian,
understanding the Alteration of Government which he intended to make in
Mingrelia, refused to obey him, and shut himself up in his Fortress of Rucks.
His Vizier Carzia fled into Lexicom, which is a Principality in the Mountains
inhabited by the Souanes, and from thence sent to the Abca's to succor Dadian.
It Is true, they marched into Mingrelia, but instead of assisting the Prince,
they pillaged all the Country in their March, and then retreated back again. As
for the Basha, after he had stayed a Month in vain, expecting the Dadians
coming to pay him Homage, and receive his Orders, he sent his Army into
Mingrelia. And the noise of the march of this Army it was, that obliged me to
betake my self to flight.

The 27th before Day, the Superior of the Theatins left us, and returned home
to his House to see if he could remove any thing of that Household Stuff and
Provisions which remained behind. I would have been glad to have accompanied
him upon the same design; but he was gone two Hours before Day. But when he
came to his House, he found it full of the Basha's, and the Prince of Guriel's
avant-Couriers, who entertained him but very rudely with their Cudgels and Iron
Maces. These Free-Booters would have had him opened the Church, pretending he
had hid his Goods in it. But the Superior had warily thrown the Key among the
Bushes when he first perciev'd the Soldiers, so that notwithstanding all the
Violence they could offer him, he denied he had it, and would never discover
where it was. At length the Turks having some Consideration for his Character,
took from him a part of his Habits, and carried away only some slight things of
the greatest Value they found in the House, not so much as meddling either with
my Books or my Papers.

But the 29th at Night came a Gentleman of Mingrelia with a Party of Thirty
Followers, and cut all to pieces. He uncovered almost all my Chamber, believing
I had hidd'n many Things in it. He carried away the Remainder of the Copper
Ware, my Chests, and large Movables; and in a word, whatever the Turks and I
had left, as being of no great Value, and heavy for Carriage beside. This
Tygre, as I said, came by Night, and therefore for want of a Candle he set Fire
on my Papers and Books, and tore off the Covers, because they were Gilt, and
marked with Coats of Arms. For I had caused my Books to be very curiously Bound
at my departure from Paris. But they left me not so much as a Sheet of Paper.

The 30th in the Morning I had notice of my being Plundered, to my unspeakable
sorrow. And in the Evening came a Turkish Chiaux to the Fortress where I was,
to let us know that he came from the Basha. Sabatar (for so was the Gentleman
called to whom it belonged, as I have already declared) went forth to receive
the Message. Which imported, that the Basha's Lieutenant who lay before the
Fortress of Rucks admired, that he did not come and submit himself to him, and
pay him his Homage, since that Mingrelia belonged to the Grand Signior; that
the Basha had ordered that they should be civilly used, who joined themselves
with the Turks; but that they should be dealt with as Enemies, who refused to
submit: that if he intended to save his Estate, his Life, his Castle, and all
that was in it, he should make haste to receive the Basha's Orders. To which
Sabatar made Answer, that he acknowledged the Basha for his Lord, and that in
his Heart he was a Turk and not a Mingrelian; that he had resolved to attend
the Basha, so soon as he understood that it was proper for him to attend his
Lordship; and now that he understood that his Lieutenant lay before Rucks, he
would go the next Morning to receive his Orders.

The 31st the Gentleman went with Thirty Men well Armed to wait upon the
Basha's Lieutenant, carrying along with him a Present of Four Slaves, a Silver
Cup, together with a Quantity of Silk, Wax and Vittles for Refreshment. That
Evening he arrived at the Camp, where he found several Lords of Mingrelia, who
were come, as he was, to submit themselves, for fear of being Besieged, and of
having their Castles and Lands plundered and demolished. The Lieutenant told
him that the Orders which his Master had received from the Grand Signior his
Master, were to destroy all the strong places in Mingrelia, however that he
would preserve the Castles of such Lords as preserved themselves in their
Loyalty and Obedience. That the Grand Signior had taken away the Principality
from Levan, who was at Rucks, and had conferred it upon a Young Prince, who was
bred up at Akalzike, and that he must swear Allegiance to him, and give one of
his Childern in Hostage for his Fidelity; and make a Present to the Basha. Now
the Present which Sabatar agreed to make, was Ten Young Slaves of both Sexes,
and Three Hundred Crowns either in Silver or in Silk.

The First of October, Sabatar returned, and brought along with him a
Protection from the Turk, for his Castle and for all his Lands. All that night
he bestirred himself to get ready the Present which he was to carry. To which
purpose he signified to all that were fled for Refuge to his Castle or
Fortress, that the Turks had given him a Protection, for Twenty Five Slaves,
and Eight Hundred Crowns, which he must Levy upon those that were retired under
his security. So that from every Family that had Four Children he took one:
which was the most lamentable spectacle in the World, to see little Childern
torn from the Arms of their Mothers, tied two and two together, and carried
away to the Turks: For my own part I was taxed at Twenty Crowns.

However, Sabatar did not carry any more to the Basha's Lieutenant, then what
they two had agreed between themselves: the rest he appropriated to himself.
Nor could his Wives, his Childern and all the Castle forbear loud Cries of
sorrow when they saw his Young Son carried away among the rest. For those
Childern which are given in Hostage to the Turk, are no less his Slaves: He
never parts with 'em; as being usually sent to Constantinople, to increase the
Multitude of those handsome young Childern that are bred up in the Seraglio.
The Basha's Lieutenant received the Present and the Hostage, and still detained
Sabatar with him nevertheless. He also summoned the Dadian Three times to
surrender, but the Prince refused. For his Fortress was well guarded by the
Souanes, which his Vizier had sent him, and who were more the Masters of it
then himself: besides that the Vizier sent him word every Day that he should
hold out, and that he would be ready in a short time to pour down upon the
Enemy. At last the Turks after they had stayed about Four Days before Rucks,
and got above Two Thousand Slaves and much Booty, raised their Siege: for they
had no great Guns, which was the reason they did not attack the Castle. They
also carried along with 'em all the Mingrelian Lords that came to surrender
themselves, and had sworn Allegiance to the new Prince. The Catholicos was
among the number of those that had taken the Oath. Whom the Basha ordered to be
made Vizier to the new Prince, and that they should send in his Name to the
Prince of the Abca's, to demand the Princess his Daughter in Marriage.

It was thought that the coming of the Turk into Mingrelia, would have
resettl'd all things in order, and restored Peace and Tranquillity, by causing
all Parties to lay down their Arms. But it did not so fall out: they only came
and plundered the Country; but put it into more confusion then it was before.
For they divided it into two Parties; of which the one was engaged by Oath and
Hostages to the new Prince, the other stuck fast to their deposed Sovereign:
Which Division made every one betake themselves to their Arms. Seeing therefore
the Affairs of the Country in this miserable condition so far from any
Accommodation, I took a resolution to get into Georgia by any manner of way, or
whatever the hazard might be. For I ran those Risco's every Day in Mingrelia,
that I expected nothing at length but to be utterly ruined. Levan threatened
Ruin and Destruction to the Castles, Goods and Lands of the Lords who had
surrendered to the Turks: Sabatar was still in Custody: and his Sons that
commanded in the Castle, were the grearest Cutthroats and accomplished Rogues
in the World. I languish'd every Day with sorrow and want. It was a Man's whole
business to buy a handful of Grain, and a Pound of Vittles; and I suffered in
my Oven all the Injuries of Weather, as if I had been in the open Field: the
despair of my Servants went to my Heart; in a word, I was at the brink of
Death. Which was that which induced me to venture all hazards to get my self
rid of Mingrelia, while I had strength and Ability to do it. To that purpose I
sought every where for Guides; promised, entreated, laid down my Money, but
nothing would do; there was no body that would be my Conductor. The Armies they
said, lay so thick upon the Roads of Imiretta, the Country between Mingrelia
and Georgia, through which I was of necessity to pass, that it was a mere folly
to venture, where a man was assured he could not escape being made a Slave. And
these were all the Answers they made me. I proposed the fetching a Compass
either over Mount Caucasus or along the Sea Coast, but no body would undertake
the Journey.

It Is an incredible thing to think how fearful the Mingrelians are of Death, or
of being undone; there is no Reward can prevail with 'em to run the Risco of a
known Danger, how inconsiderable soever it be. At length I was constrained to
take the way by Sea, and through Turkey, that is to say, to fetch a Compass of
Seventy Leagues. To that purpose I went to Anarghia, a Village and small
Seaport, of which I have already spok'n. There I found a Felouque of the
Turks, which I hired for Gonia: so that when I had given Earnest, I returned to
the Theatins House, and to Sabatar's Castle, to prepare for my Voyage.

The Tenth of November early in the Morning I departed from the Castle, having
agreed with my Comrade what ways I would take to recover him out of Mingrelia,
if it pleased GOD to grant me a happy Voyage. I carried along with me Eight
Thousand Pounds in Jewels, and Eight Hunderd Pistols in Gold, with the few
small Packs that were left me. The Jewels were hid in a Saddle contrived for
that purpose, and in a Pillow: and I took a Servant along with me, the same
whom I had redeemed out of Slavery. This was a concealed Rogue; a Traitor whose
Villainy was not well discovered by me. I was advised not to take him along with
me for fear of some Imposition, or some wicked Trick that his very Countenance
told 'em he would play me; nor was I well resolved with my self to be troubled
with him; but my Fortune would have it so, and I could not prevent it. But the
Reasons that prevailed with me more then any other to take him, was, that he
brook'd his bad Condition like one that was mad or in despair; and I was afraid
lest in one of his mad or drunk'n Fits (to which he was subject) he should
discover us in Mingrelia. Friar Zampi, the Superior of the Theatins, bore me
Company as he had done all along. And the Lay-Brother undertook to Conduct me
to Anarghia. The Superior and I went afoot, because we could not meet with
more then one Horse to be hired for Money, upon which I loaded my Goods, and
let my Servant ride to look after 'em. The Lay-Brother was also a Horseback,
and it rained as hard as it could pour after two days; insomuch that the Friar
had like to have been drowned about a League from the Castle in a deep Ditch
that overflowed its Banks, into which his Horse fell, and out of which with
much ado we recovered him half dead. I shall not relate the Hardships I endured
both that and the following days: as being constrained to march afoot in a
rainy season through the Woods, full of Water and Mud, where I went for the
most part up to the Knees: only in a word, that 'twas impossible for any Person
to endure more then we did. For my own part I was quite spent: All that I had
left was a remainder of Courage and Resolution to do and suffer whatever befell
me, to save those Goods that were entrusted to my Care. In the Evening we
arrived at Anarghia wet to the very Skin; Anarghia being six Leagues from the
Castle of Sabatar.

The 12th I was to have Embarked, but was prevented by the News that was spread
about of several Barks of the Mingrelians and Abca's that were Cruising upon
the Coasts of Mingrelia. Which was very true; for they had taken several Barks
of the Country, and one among the rest wherein I was concerned. Yet the
unspeakable trouble which this delay gave me, did not proceed so much from its
keeping me in continual Fears and Dangers, as that it seemed to threaten me
that I should never get rid of 'em.

The 19th Father Zampi had Intelligence that the Day before, they had forced
open the Church-Doors, taken away all that was in the Church, had opened the
Sepulcher, and carried all that one of the Theatins, who was left to look after
the House, had hid in the Tomb, and that there was nothing left standing but
the Wall. This News put me into a terrible fright, considering I had left above
Seven Thousand Pistols buried in the Church. Upon which I dispatched away a
Messenger to my Comrade, thinking to have found him at the Castle; but he was
already gone to the Theatins Residence, to know what course we should take to
repair so great a Misfortune, of which he had Notice as soon as my self. But he
wrote me word, That Thanks be to GOD they had not so much as touched our Money,
having found it in the same place where we had buried it. Which good News
wonderfully revived my Spirits, looking upon so great a Favor of the Almighty
as a sign of his Atonement; so that I went to encourage the Turks, whose
Feluke I had hired to set Sail with all speed.

The 27th I departed from Anarghia, my Feluke being a Vessel of good Burden,
wherein there were near Twenty Persons, the one half Slaves, the rest Turks,
which I the rather permitted the Master to take in, that we might be the better
able to defend our selves against the Rovers that infested the Coasts. After an
Hours Sailing, we got into the Main Sea: For the Langur which we left is very
rapid, and runs with a furious Stream; and besides, he must be a skilful Pilot
that carries a laden Vessel down that River, by reason of the many Flats, where
they stick upon the Sands. I staid all Daylong near the Shore at the request of
the Master of the Shallop, who expected two Slaves to be brought him that
Evening.

While I tarried at Anarghia, I was invited to two Christnings; whither I went
to observe the manner of the Mingrelian Baptism; and found that Father Zampi
had been very exact in his Relation. For the Ceremony was no otherwise then
thus, performed in a Neighbors House adjoining to the Lodging where I lay. He
sent for the Priest about Ten a Clock in the Morning; who was no sooner come,
but he went into the Buttry where they kept the Wine, and sat himself down
upon a Bench without any other then his ordinary Habit, and then fell a reading
in a Book that was half torn, about the bigness of a New Testament in Octavo.
Not that the Child was brought to him when he began to read, for the Father and
Godfather did not bring him till a quarter of an Hour after; and then appeared
a little Boy of about five Years of Age, at what time the Godfather brought
also a little Searring Candle, and three Grains of Incense. The Candle the
Godfather likewise lighted, and fixed it to the Door of the Cellar, where
though it was burnt out before the Child was Baptized, they did not light up
another; and as for the three Grains of Incense, they were strewn upon a few
Embers, and smoked away. All this while the Priest read on, very fast, and
with a low Voice, and in such a careless manner as if he never minded what he
did. The Father and Godfather went to and again all the time, and so did the
Child, that did nothing but eat. At length after an Hours reading, there was a
Bucket of warm Water got ready; into which after the Priest had poured about a
Spoonful of Oil of Walnuts, he bid the Godfather undress the Child: which was
done, and the Child put naked into the Bucket; where, as he stood upon his
Feet, the Godfather washed his Body all over, and when he had well washed him,
the Priest took out of a Leather Pouch that hung at his Girdle as much Myrone,
or Oil of Unction, as came to the weight of a Pea, and gave it to the
Godfather, who Anointed with it almost all the parts of the Child's Body; as the
top of the Head, the Ears, Forehead, Nose, Cheeks, Chin, Shoulders, Elbows,
Back, Belly, Knees and Feet: All which time the Priest read on still; nor did
he give over till the Godfather had again dressed the Child. Which being done,
the Father brought in Wine, Bread, and a piece of boiled Pork, and first gave
the Child to eat, then presented the Priest, the Godfather, the Guests, and all
the House: and then they all sat down to the Table; nor was there hardly one
that was not drunk before he went.

I have also seen Mass performed in the same place: which is done with the same
Carelessness and Irreverence, and altogether as has been related in a Treatise
of the Mingrelian Religion. And once it was my hap to see one very pleasantly
interrupted. For as I was flying with one of the Theatins, we passed along
before a Church where they were saying Mass. At what time the Priest that said
it, understanding that we inquired the way of the People that stood at the
Door, Stay a little, cried he from the Altar, I Will come and tell ye.
Immediately after he came to the Door, muttering his Mass between his Teeth,
and after he had asked us whence we came and whither we went, he showed us the
way, and so returned to the Altar again.

The 29th betimes in the Morning we put to Sea, the weather being clear and
fair: and then we could discover the high Lands of Trebisond, on the one side,
and of the Abca's on the other, and that very easily because the Black Sea
beginning to wind toward the Abca's Coasts, Anarghia stands far out in the
circular circumference of those Coasts answering to Trebisond.

The Black-Sea is 200 Leagues in length wanting Twelve or Fifteen, lying just
East and West. The broadest part, North and South, from the Bosphorus with
Boristhenes, is three degrees; which part is the Western end of the Sea; the
Opposite part not being above half so broad. The Water of this Sea seemed to me
less Clear, less Green, and less Salt, then the Water of the Ocean. Which
proceeds as I am apt to believe from the great Rivers that empty themselves
into it; and for that it is shut up in its self as it were in the bottom of a
Sack, so that it ought to be more properly called a Lake then a Sea, like the
Caspian Sea; With which it agrees in this, that is common to both, that in
neither of the two Seas there are any Islands. And therefore it is in vain to
seek for the reason of its Denomination from the color of the Water. The
Greeks gave it its Name from the Dangerous Navigation daily experienced by
those that ventured into it; by reason of the Tempests there more frequent and
boistrous then in other Seas: Axenos signifying inhospitable, and that will not
suffer any Person to come near it. The Turks therefore for the same reason call
it Cara Denguis, or the Furious Sea. Cara which in the Turkish Language
properly signifies Black, denoting also furious, dangerous, terrible, and
serving usually in that Idiom, for an Epithet given to thick Forests, rapid
Rivers, and steep and rugged Mountains. Now the reason why the Storms are more
Violent and Dangerous in that, then in other Seas, is first because the Waters
are contracted within a narrow Channel and have no Outlet: the Bosphorus not
being to be accounted an Outlet by reason it is so very straight. And therefore
the Waters being Violently agitated by a Storm, and not knowing where to have
Room, and being strongly repelled by the shore, they Mount and roll aloft, and
beat against the Ship on every side with an Invincible swiftness and force.
Secondly, because there are few or no Roads in that Sea which are sheltered
from the Wind, but where there is more danger then in the open Sea.

All the Black-Sea is under the Dominion of the Grand Signior; there is no
Sailing there without his leave; so that there is no great fear of Pirates,
which in my Opinion are a greater danger then the Sea it self.

All that Day we sailed with a Contrary Wind, which was the reason we did not
make above Six Leagues, however in the Evening we bore into a River called
Kelmhel, deeper and almost as broad as the Langur, but not so rapid.

The 30th Two Hours before Day we set sail by the light of the Moon, and by
Noon we made the River Phasis, and bore up into it about a Mile to certain
Houses, where the Master of the Feluke was desirous to unlade some of his Goods.

The River Phasis takes its rise out of Mount Caucasus, called by the Turks
Fachs; though as I observed, the People of the Country call it Rione. I saw it
first at Cotatis, where it runs in a narrow Channel very swiftly, yet sometimes
so low, that it is easily fordable. But where it discharges it self into the
Sea, which is about Fourscore and Ten Miles from Cotatis, there the Channel is
about a Mile and Half Broad and Sixty Fadome deep: being swelled before that,
by several lesser streams that pour themselves into it. The Water is very good
to Drink, though somewhat Muddy, thick, and of a Leaden color; of which Arrian
asserts the cause to be the Earth that is intermixed with it. He farther adds,
and other Authors also affirm the same, that all the Ships took in Water at
Phasis, out of an Opinion that the River was sacred, or believing it to be the
best Water in the World. There are several small Islands at the Mouth of the
River, which appear very delightful, as being shaded with thick Woods. Upon the
biggest of which to the West, are to be seen the Ruins of a Fortress which
Sultan Murat caused to be built in the Year 1578. For he had made an Attempt to
Conquer all the Northern and Eastern Coasts of the Black-Sea. But this
Enterprise did not succeed according to his Design. For to that purpose he sent
his Galleys up the River Phasis; but the King of Imiretta having laid
considerable Embuscado's, where the River was narrowest, Murat's Galleys were
defeated, one sunk, and the rest forced to fly. The Fortress of Phasis was
taken by the Army of the King of Imiretta, reinforced by the Prince's of
Mingrelia and Guriel. The Castle was presently demolished, wherein there were
25 Pieces of Cannon, which the King caused to be carried to his Castle of
Cotatis, where they are now again in the Hands of the Turks by the late
surrender of the Castle belonging to that place.

I fetched a Compass about the Island of Phasis, to try whether I could
discover any Remainders of the Temple of Rhea, which Arrian says was to be seen
in his time: but I could not find the least Footstep of any such thing. Yet
Historians affirm, that it was standing entire in the time of the Grecian
Empire: and that it was Consecrated to the Worship of Christ in the Reign of
the Emperor Zeno. I sought likewise for the great City called Sebasta, which
Geographers have placed at the Mouth of Phasis; but not a Brick to be seen, no
more then of the Ruins of Colchis. All that I observed conformable to what the
Ancients have wrote concerning that part of the Black-Sea, is only this, That
it abounds in Pheasants. Of which there are some Authors, and among the rest
Martial, who say, That the Argonauts first brought those Birds into Greece,
where they had never been seen before, and that they gave 'em the Name of
Pheasants, or Phasiani, as being taken upon the Banks of Phasis. This River
separates Mingrelia from the Principality of Guriel, and the petty Kingdom of
Imiretta. Anarghia is distant from it 36 Miles. All the Coast is a low Sandy
Soil, covered with Woods so thick, that a Man can hardly see six Paces among
the Trees.

In the Evening I caused the Master to put to Sea, with a fair Gale; and at
Midnight we Sailed before a Haven called Copoletta, belonging to the Prince of
Guriel.

The 30th after Noon, we arrived at Gonie, distant from Phasis about 40 Miles;
the Seacoast being all exceeding High-land, and Rocks, some covered with Wood,
and others naked. It belongs to the Prince of Guriel, whose Territories extend
to a River about half a Mile from Gonie.

Gonie is a large Castle, apiece, built of hard and rough Stones of an
extraordinary bulk: seated upon the Seaside upon a Sandy Foundation. It has
neither Trenches nor Fortifications; but only four Walls and two Gates, one
that opens Eastward upon the Sea, and another to the North: Nor did I see any
more then only two great Guns for its defense. Within there are about Thirty
pitiful, low, small, inconvenient Houses, built only of Boards: And without,
close by it, stands a Village consisting of as many more Habitations. Almost
all the Inhabitants Mariners: which is the reason that the Country is called
Lazi; Laz in the Turkish Language properly signifying a Seaman: and
Figuratively, a Clownish, Boarish, Savage Fellow: These Lazi are all Mahumetans.

There is a Custom-House at Gonie, which has the Reputation of being very Rude
and Imperious; yet was not quite so cruel as they made me believe it was: and
yet as it is severe enough to the People of the Country, so is it really a
place that cuts the very Throats of the Europeans. They have no regard to the
Quality of the Persons, nor the Passports of the Grand Signior, nor for any
Recommendations from the Port. It Is in vain therefore to expect any Relief from
thence; They who Command in those extreme parts of the Empire believing
themselves at a distance remote enough from the reach of the Grand Signior.

So soon as the Felouke came to be Moored to the Key, my Servant leaped ashore
with a most extravagant Transport of Joy: he cast up his Eyes to Heaven, kissed
the Earth; he bestowed a Thousand Curses upon Mingrelia; but to the Country of
the Turks he wished all the Happiness imaginable. Presently after, leaving me,
he went into the Castle, at a time that I had more need of him then ever. And
indeed I had a great Jealousy that he was gone to discover as much as he
thought he knew concerning me. For when the Officer of the Custom-House and the
Deputy Governor came to take Notice what was unladed out of the Felouke, and to
demand the Customs, they presently gave me to understand, that they knew I was
an European, told me the Misfortunes which had befallen me in Mingrelia, and
the Design which I had to go to Akalzike. Which surpised me extremely,
perceiving so well that I was betrayed. Nevertheless I was not at all troubled
at it; for GOD through his Mercy still inspired me with Resolution. Besides, I
was sure of one thing, that my Servant did not know particularly who I was. I
had entertained him into my service it is true, at Constantinople, and he had
seen me frequently Visit the European Ambassadors and Ministers, and that I was
honorably received, and that all the rest of my time I spent in Writing and
Reading; so that all he could guess from thence, was only that I might be some
Person that Traveled out of Curiosity. I had given him Instructions also to
tell the Turks if they inquired, that I was a Merchant, and that being come
into Mingrelia to buy Hawks, to carry into Europe, the People of the Country
had Robbed me of all I had, and that I was going to demand Justice from the
Basha of Akalzike. And I kept constant to this Story, not knowing any better
way to conceal my self; besides that I would not by any alteration of my
Instructions, seem to take any notice to my Servant, that I was Jealous of his
Infidelity. The Officer of the Custom-House asked me several Questions; to
which I gave him satisfactory Answers: however he sent to search my Packs, but
met with nothing: my Saddle indeed weighed somewhat heavy, which caused it to
be suspected; in regard that the Turkish Saddles are very light. Whereupon the
Officers Poys'd it and felt every where; but not feeling any thing but Flocks
and Hair, they suffered it to pass.

As for my Eight Hunderd Pistols, I carried the one half about me, the other
was in a Portmantle locked with a Padlock with some other Trifles that were of
no Value; but which I knew well enough, the Turks would be fingring, had they
once but fixed their Eyes upon 'em. True it is, that when I parted from
Mingrelia, I had resolved to have given that Cloak Bag to one of the Seamen, so
soon as we should land at Copoletta, a Neighboring Port of which I have
already spoken. For they never meddle with the Seamen's Packs, and very rarely
search the Feloukes themselves. But the Wind being fair, we never put in to
that Port; which was the reason I did not do as I intended: for it would have
been a piece of Imprudence to have done it publicly in the Felouk where there
were so many Passengers.

The Officers of the Custom-House therefore being informed of what I had, went
into the Felouk and there finding the Cloak Bag, demanded whose it was, to
which I presently answered, that 'twas mine, but that there was nothing in it
that paid Custom. However, the Customer commanded me to open it: to which I
replied, That I would willingly do it at his House, but not a shore before so
many People. Thereupon the Officers carried me home, and the Deputy Governor
went along with him: where the Deputy took one per Cent. and the Officers of
the Customs Five in the Hundred. So that they took from me Twenty Two Pistols
in Gold, and what they thought fit besides of the Trifles that were in the
Cloak Bag, and among the rest a small pair of Pistols, which were all the Arms
I had: for which he paid me, it is true; but not above half the Value.
Afterward he invited me to lie at his House, to which I answered, That sure he
did but laugh at me to offer me his House, after he had unjustly made me pay
Customs for the Gold and Silver which I had, that never paid any Duty's. To
which he replied, That I was mis-inform'd, and that he had done me no
unjustice, for that at Gonie there was nothing exempted from paying the Custom;
and therefore as for offering me his House it was out of kindness and favor
that he did it. I returned him Thanks, and told him, That since he was so
forward as to offer me a kindness, there was one for which I should for ever be
obliged to thank him; that he would so far assist me with a Convenience, that I
might get safe to Akalzike; for it being known over all Gonie that I had a Bag
of Gold, I had reason to fear being Murdered in the Mountains, over which my
Road lay, for the remainder of what I carried about me. That I was a Stranger,
and without Weapons to defend my self, he himself having taken from me all the
Arms I had left me; and therefore that he would be pleased to lend me some
Assistance. To which he answered, That I needed not to be in such a Panick
Fear, for that, Thanks be to GOD, I was now in the Country of the Faithful (the
Epithet which the Turks assume to themselves) where I had no reason to be
afraid either of being Robbed or Murdered. That he would Warrant me my Life and
my Goods; that I might carry my Bag of Gold upon my Head, and Travel without
any danger. But as to what remained, because the way to Akalzike was very bad,
the two first Days Journey being to be Traveled a Foot, through the narrow and
Craggy Passages of the Mountains, where no Horse was able to pass, he would
appoint me the next Morning, such as should carry my Baggage, and conduct me
for the first Days Journey; where likewise the first Guides should be relieved
by others, till I came to Akalzike.

Having so said, He offered me a Third time to come and spend the Night at his
House, and was very importunate with me; and I found afterward that he did it
sincerely and for my Good. I wish to GOD I had perceived his kindness, but I
foresaw not the Danger that my Ill Fortune was preparing for me. I was fearful
that the Customers Design in inviting me to his House, was only that he might
have an Opportunity to search my Packs the more exactly; besides, that I was
desperately afraid, lest it should come into his Head to search my self, having
a large Bag of Gold and Pearls in several parts of my Clothes.

It was almost Night when I took my leave of the Custom-House-Officer at his
own House; and my Servant had carried all my Baggage to the place where the
People were gone to lodge that came along with me in the Vessel; which was a
pitiful Straw-loft, full of Holes in the Walls on every side, and no less nasty
and stinking withal. There I received their Complements of Condolement, if I
may so call 'em; and to say truth, unless it were my Servant, who had his share
of the Twenty Two Pistols, all the rest were sorry for my loss; and every one
blamed me for not giving my Bag to somebody that might have secured it for me.
So that I was forced to act the part of one that was troubled and grieved for
what had happened, though in my Heart I was not a little glad I had escaped so,
and all I desired was only to see the return of Daylight, that I might get rid
of that Cutthroat place.

But while I was eating a Morsel of Biscuit, in came a Janisary to tell my
Servant, that the Deputy Governor would speak with him: for the Commander of
the Castle being absent, the Deputy supplied his place. Away went my Servant,
and about an Hour after, the same Janisary came for me likewise. I found the
Deputy Governor sitting at the Table with my Servant, both very Drunk: and
first of all he forced me to Eat and Drink whether I would or no: then he told
me, That all the Christians that belonged to the Church who passed through
Gonie, were obliged to give his Master Two Hundred Ducats, which makes about a
Hundred Pound; that I was one of those Ecclesiastics, and therefore must pay
so much Money. To which I answered, That I was a Merchant, and that he was
mis-inform'd, and that seeing the Officer of the Custom-House had let me go, he
had nothing to do to take Cognizance who I was. However, if there were any
thing due to the Governor, that I would pay it the next Morning: and that the
Night was no time to discourse the Business: and having so said, I was about to
rise and be gone. But I was stopped by two Janisaries; at what time the
Deputy Governor caused me to sit down again, and forced me to Drink very hard;
teizing me for two Hours together with a Thousand Impertinencies: and among
other things telling me, That all the Goods of the Christians belonged of Right
to the Turks, that the Maltese's had taken two of his Brothers, and that for a
Person of my Circumstances Twenty Pistols was sufficient. I confess I found my
self but in a scurvy Condition, having to do with People that were Fuddl'd, and
my Servant in stead of assisting me, sitting at the Table with my Judge, a
Thousand times more my Master, then I was his, as of right I ought to have
been: yet though I perceived his Treachery, I durst not speak a word, for fear
of worse that might befall me. I took him therefore aside, and advised him not
to lose the Opportunity of making me more sensible then ever of that Fidelity
wherewith he had served me: that only he could reconcile the Business, and that
therefore I gave him Power to offer Twenty Ducats for an Accommodation. My
design by that counterfeit Confidence, which could do me no harm, was to bridle
the Villainy of the Traitor, and to prevent him from using Extremity. After
that, I addressed my self to the Deputy Governor with Entreaties, menacing
Hints, and Remonstrances that no body for the future would come near Gonie,
when they should understand that Passengers were used with so much Violence and
Injustice. To which the Deputy Governor answered laughing, That Gonie was none
of his Livelihood, that he had but a Year to tarry there, that he cared not
whether any body came thither or no after he was gone; then, let the Castle
sink if it would; and that he was all for the present Opportunities, without
any regard of the future; and at length it came to that height, that the
Deputy Governor finding he could not oblige me to satisfy his Demands, sent
for my Baggage; which the Traitor of a Servant, my Man, was very officious to
fetch. Presently the Governor commanded me to take out the Gold; but I refused
to obey him, and told him withal, That I would not give him a Farthing, let him
do his worst; for that I owed him nothing: that I could not withstand his
Violence, so that he might take what he pleased, but that I knew the way to
have Satisfaction. Thereupon the Robber sent for Chains and an Iron Collar,
which did not a little daunt me, considering I had to do with Soldiers, whom
the sight of Gold and the Wine which they had drank to excess, rendered
unlimited in their Actions. At the same time also, one of the Soldiers came to
me, and whispered me in the Ear, The more ye peel Garlic, the stronger it
smells. As much as to say, The longer you delay to accommodate a wrangling
Business, the more you intreague it. My Servant likewise pronounced Sentence
against me for a Hunderd Ducats. To be short, I gave 'em the Sum, and four
more to the Janisaries, who had performed the Office of Bailiffs. The Goods
that I had about me, and at my Lodging, the place where I was, and a Hunderd
other good Considerations made me then give way: whereas in another Condition,
I should never have submitted to their Threats, nor feared their Chains, but
have wrested my self out of their Clutches Scotfree, or else with very little
loss. For to show that it was more then they could answer, the Deputy Governor,
as I was about to tell out the Money, constrained me to swear upon the Gospel,
that I gave it him freely, and that I would not speak a word of it to any
person. Whereupon arose a fresh dispute, and as hot as the former: for I was
unwilling to swear, as being resolved to have made a loud complaint, and
desirous withal to secure my self for the future by the obstinacy of my present
Resistance. But this same Highway-Man of a Governor absolutely refused to take
the Hunderd Ducats, but upon that Condition. And therefore there was no other
way, but I must swear what he would have me in his presence, and desire him to
accept the Money.

The next Day, betimes in the Morning the under Officers of the Custom-House
came to my miserable Lodging, and watched me all along till I was ready to
depart. They had order, it seems, to make a new Inquisition into my Saddle, and
to search my Clothes. To that purpose they called my Man, and told him their
Errand in the most Civil and Courteous Terms they could: and so they fell to
searching the Saddle a second time, I my self trembling for Fear, all the while
it was in their Hands. However they felt nothing that augmented their mistrust,
only the weight amused 'em. Which when I perceived to be the only thing that
gravelled 'em, I told 'em, I had made it so heavy, that it might serve me for a
Pack Saddle upon occasion; which was the reason it was so unweildy: and that
evasion it was that saved me, and satisfied their Curiosity. After that, I
found they had a mind to be searching my Clothes; for they took me aside one
after another, and told me if I had any thing about me, which the Customer had
not seen, that I should make 'em a present, and they for their parts would
never discover me. Friends, answered I, never seek for a far-fetched excuse to
search me, but if you have a mind, do it without any more ado. And with that I
opened my breast, and showed 'em my Pockets: by which Bravado I escaped: for
the Officers thought I would never have been so bold, had I been afraid of
their groaping. Thereupon they forbore to search me; but carried me to the
Customer, to whom with feigned Tears in my Eyes, and Counterfeiting a profound
trouble of mind, I acknowledged how that because I did not lodge at his House,
I had been despoiled of part of my Gold. I gave ye good advice, answered he,
for I was afraid what would happen; and then he importuned me to tell him how
much they had taken, and who had done it, assuring me that I should have
Justice certainly done me: to which I replied, that they had threatened to kill
me if I told. Which was very true, besides that I had such an Impatient desire
to be out of Gonie, that I had no mind to be commencing of Suits. Only I
desired the Customer to be as good as his word. Which he was, and appointed me
two Men to carry my Baggage, and a Turk to accompany me to Akalzike. He also
ordered the two Men to bring a note back under my hand to assure him that I was
safely arrived at my first Journeys end; and gave the Turk a Passport, in the
form of an order, to make use of upon the Road. Which I thus Translated from
the Original.

Guards of the Highway, Provosts, Judges, Bailiffs, conduct from Journeys end
to Journeys end, to the Happy Gate of Aslan-Pasha, John his Banker. Allow hint
for his Money Horses and Men as many as he shall desire. His Person and his
Goods are a Trust, which is given in Charge to the Inhabitants of all the
places through which he shall pass; for which they are to be answerable upon
their Lives. The Customer, when he gave the Note to the Turk that was to be my
Guide, told me, that he had made me to pass for the Basha's Banker, and that I
should get a white Turbant for my self and my Servant, that I might be the more
respected. Which I did, and set forward about eight of the Clock in the
Morning, transported with Joy to see my self at Liberty out of such a wicked
and Dangerous Place in a Country of Freedom, where I had little or nothing to
fear. I began then to breath a little, and to recollect and recompose my
Spirits, having been for five Months in continual Tribulations, Anxieties and
Agitations of Mind. Taxations, Shipwreck, Slavery, Wedlock, loss of Goods, of
Liberty and Life, where the frightful Idea's that daily hovered before my Eyes,
besides a thousand other real Calamities that kept me all that time continually
depressed under the weight of my Misfortunes. But that Day I recovered my self,
and with a pleasure unexpressible, I felt my Heart to expatiate it self, and
reassume its peaceable Motions. I ascended Mount Caucasus with such a
nimbleness of Heels, that my Porters stood in Admiration: so nimble is the Man
that has no burden upon his Heart. And I may truly say without any Hyperbole's
or Metaphors, that I was like one, from whose Shoulders they had removed a
Mountain, so that me thought I could have flown in the Air. We Traveled four
Leagues among Rocks; after which I ferry'd over, in a Boat, the River already
mentioned that parts the Country of Guriel from the Turks.

The 3d I Traveled five Leagues a Foot, three Men carrying my Luggage: and
frequently we passed by the Brinks of such dreadful Precipices, that scared me
to look down. We did nothing but Ascend; so that in Five Leagues we made no
more then two Miles of Level way.

The 4th I tarried in a Village inhabited by Turks and Christians; where I
arrived the Day before, in regard the Rain, Snow and Wind would not permit us
to set forward any further.

I Traveled the Fifth and Sixth, Eleven Leagues. It Is true, I had Horses, but
I dare be bold to say, I did not ride above Three Leagues of all that way; for
I was forced to alight every foot: the way being so rugged and steep, that the
Horses could hardly keep their Feet.

The Seventh and Eighth, I traveled 16 Leagues; up Hill and down Hill for the
Four first I eagues; the next Eight were all a Smooth Road, but full of
Turnings and Windings: and then we got to the Top of Mount Caucasus: after
which we Traveled Four Leagues continually upon the Descent. Half way down the
Hill were to be seen the Spires and Tops of the Ruins of several Castles and
Churches; of which as the People said, there had been a considerable number,
till destroyed by the Turks. The bottom of the Hill leads ye into a fair Valley
Three Miles broad, Rich and Fertile, and full of Villages: being watered by the
River Kur, that runs through the middle of it.

It Is known that Asia is divided by a Chain of Mountains that run along from
one end to the other, of which the highest parts were called Taurus, Imaus and
Caucasus. The first is that part which advances it self to the farthest part of
Asia; and this Chain or Ridg is generally called Taurus. I say generally,
because that every part derives a particular Name from the Nation, to which it
adjoyns. The last part, which is the nearest to Europe, lies between the
Black-Sea, and the Caspian Sea, between Muscovy and Turkey. But these three
Names are confusedly made use of by many Authors, among the rest, Pliny and Q.
Curtius, who place Caucasus in India. However Strabo, who reports this in his
Geography, affirms that Q. Curtius did it to magnify the wonders of
Alexander's History, in regard that Caucasus being the highest part of all
Mount Taurus, and that which the Fables of the Poets have rendered most Famous,
the Renown of his Hero became the greater, whom he makes to force his way over
it with his Victorious Sword. And indeed I should have thought it had been a
fault in Geography, which Q. Curtius committed ignorantly, as when he brings
Ganges from the South, and takes Jaxartes for the River Tanais. I say I should
take it for an Error, if I did not find him in his Sixth Book, putting the
Mountain Caucasus between Hircania and the River Phasis.

But to return to the Description of Mount Caucasus, it is the highest
Mountain, and most difficult to pass over that ever I beheld. For it is full of
Rocks and dismal Precipices, through which there have been great endeavors
used to make a hollow way. At the time when I passed it, it was all covered
with Snow, in many places above Ten Foot deep: so that my Guides oft-times were
forced to make way with their shovels: for they had upon their Feet a sort of
Sandals proper to walk upon the Snow, which I never saw but in that Country,
the bottom of it being made in the shape, and about the length of a Racket
without a handle, but not so broad, the Network is also not so tight, and the
Wood is altogether circular. Which prevents their sinking into the Snow, for
that it bears up the weight of the body, and keeps the Foot from sinking above
a Fingers Depth. They will also run with these sort of Sandals very fast,
hardly leaving any print of their Feet, or any sign which way they have gone,
for that the Sandal has neither Toes nor Heels. The Top of Mount Caucasus is
perpetually covered with Snow, and for eight Leagues in the Road we traveled
in crossing it, altogether uninhabited. So that I was forced to spend the whole
Night in the Snow. Only I caused the Fellows to cut me down some Firr-Trees
upon which I lay, after I had ordered 'em to make a good Fire. When I came to
the Top of the Mountain, the People that were my Guides, made long Prayers to
their Images, for their favor to keep the Wind from Rising. For had the Wind
been high, we had without doubt been all Buried in the Snow; for being loose
and small as dust, the Wind easily carries it away, and fills the Air with it;
but GOD be thanked there was no Wind. However, the Horses would sink so deep in
many places, that I thought they would never get out: for my part I traveled
for the most part afoot, and secure enough: nor do I believe I rode above eight
Leagues in crossing over this hideous Mountain, which is six and thirty
Leagues. I thought for the two last days, that I had been in the Clouds, not
being able to see twenty Paces before me: besides that the Firr-Trees that grow
very thick all over the Mountain prevent any prospect at a distance: only as I
went down Hill, the Clouds rolled under my Feet, as far as I could see, so that
I could not but think my self in the Air, though I felt at the same time that I
trod upon the Ground.

Mount Caucasus till ye come to the very top is extremely fertile in Honey,
Wheat, and Gom, (of which I have spok'n in the Description of Mingrelia) in
Wine, in Fruits, in Pigs, and large Cattle. The Vines grow there about the
Trees, and run up so high, that many times they are not able to climb up to
gather the Grapes. Besides, it was Vintage-time when I crossed the Mountain;
and I found the Grape, the new and the old Wine, to be extremely good, and so
cheap withal in some parts, that you might buy 300 weight for a Crown: for the
Country People not having Vent for it, left the Grapes to hang and rot upon the
Branches, as not worth the gathering.

The Country People dwell in Wooden Huts: of which every Family has four or
five; in the biggest of which they make a Fire, and sit round about it. The
Women grind the Corn, as they have occasion for Bread; which they bake in round
Stones a Foot or thereabouts in Diameter, and some two or three Fingers in
depth. These Stones they make very hot, put in the Dough, and then cover it
with hot Ashes, and live Coals over that: and in some places they bake it in
the Embers only. To which purpose they sweep the Hearth very clean, lay the
Dough upon it, and then cover it with Ashes and live Coals as before.
Nevertheless the Crust is very white, and the Bread very good. They keep their
Wine as they do in Mingrelia. I lodged every Night at some Countryman's House
or other, of whom I hired either Horses or Porters. The Turk also, who was
recommended to me, served me very dexterously, and as well as the place would
afford. They gave us Hens, Eggs, Pulse, Wine, Bread, and overcloy'd us with
Fruit. For every Neighboring House brought us a great Pitcher of Wine, a
Pannier of Fruit, and a Basket of Bread for their share of what we wanted. For
which we never asked them what was to pay, nor would my Guide permit me to give
'em any Gratuity.

I fell on like a Wolf, not being able to satisfy my Hunger in less then two
or three hours. For it is not to be imagined what an empty Stomach I had all
the while that I was in Mingrelia for three months together, during all which
time I could get no Bread, besides that I was all the while under the scourge
of Hunger, and in continual dread of some Mischief or other. But now, thanks be
to GOD, I lived in security and plenty, and from a detestable Country where I
could not get Vittles for Money, I was got into another Region where they gave
me Meat and Drink for nothing: Nor is it possible for any Man, that has not
undergone those Extremities, to conceive the pleasure of so happy a Change.

The Inhabitants of these Mountains are for the most part Christians after the
Georgian Ceremonies. They are very fresh Complexion'd, and I have seen very
handsome Women among 'em. Besides, they are infinitely better disposition'd then
the Mingrelians, and the other People of Mount Caucasus, that are not under the
Dominion of the Turks.

The ninth I traveled five Leagues through a Plain, of which I have already
spok'n; the Soil of which is very proper for Tillage: and upon the Hills that
surround it great Numbers of Cattle graze. In the Evening I arrived at Akalzike.

Akalzike is a Fortress built upon Mount Caucasus, seated in a hollow place,
among twenty Hillocks or thereabouts, from whence the Castle might be easily
battered on every side, though fortified with double Walls, and flanqu'd with
Towers, both built with Battlements after the Ancient Manner. Adjoining to this
Fortress, which is defended with only a few great Guns, stand upon the
Neighboring Hillocks aforementioned a large Town, consisting of about 400
Houses all new, and which seem to have been but lately built: so that there is
nothing of Antiquity to be seen, but two Armenian Churches. The Town is Peopled
with Turks, Armenians, Georgians, Greeks and Jews; the Christians having their
Churches, and the Jews a Synagogue. There is also in it an Inn newly built of
Wood, as are all the rest of the Houses in that place. The River Kur runs along
by it, which derives it Head from the Mountain Caucasus, and was called
anciently Cyrus, and by some Corus. Strabo places the Head of it in Armenia,
Ptolomy in Colchis; Pliny will have it spring from the Mountains of Tartary,
which are beyond Colchis, which he calls Coraxicie, because of the River Corax
that springs from thence, and discharges it self into the Black-Sea. Which
Opinions seeming so various may nevertheless be true, and come all to one and
the same thing. For that Armenia has formerly included Colchis; and because
Colchis formerly was a great Kingdom, as I have already observed. The Basha of
Akalzike lodges in the Fortress, and the Principal Officers and Soldiers
quarter in the adjacent Villages.

This Fortress was built by the Georgians, from whom the Turks took it toward
the end of the last Age.

The 13th about Two a Clock in the Morning I parted from Akalzike, travailing
directly Eastward. At the end of three Leagues the Plain of Akalzike
streightens, to the breadth of half a League, having the Mountains on both
sides. In that part stands a Castle built by the Turks upon a Rock, on the
right side of the River Kur. This Rock below is encompassed with a double Wall;
and round about it lies a little Village like Akalzike, which takes up all the
Ground between the Fortress and the opposite Mountain; and is called Usker;
having a Garrison and a Custom-House under the Command of a Sanziac. I was in
great fear of being there stopped and examined, but Thanks be to GOD, they let
me pass, without saying a word to me. For my Guide was born at Gory a City of
Georgia. So that upon his Answer, to the Captain of the Guard, who asked him,
What Countryman he was? That he was a Georgian of Gory, the Captain let him
pass with all his Train without any farther Examination. The reason is, for
that the Kaan of Georgia and the Basha of Akalzike hold a very good
Correspondence together, which makes the Turks so kind to the Georgians. Two
Leagues beyond Vsker we crossed a Mountain, which parts on this side Persia
from Turkey. We traveled along the Brow of this Mountain after we had crossed
it. There are several Villages seated on the top of it: the River Kur running
below through the Vale, where in several parts are to be seen the Ruins of
Castles, Fortresses and Churches; the Footsteps of the Grandeur of the
Georgians, and of the Turkish and Persian Conquests. After we had traveled ten
Leagues, till it was Night, we stopped at a little Village.

The 14th we traveled not above four Leagues, the way being very rugged in
those Mountains, where you meet with several narrow Paths and close Passages,
where you cannot force your way; together with the Ruins of many Fortresses.
We stopped in the Plain of Surham, at a great Town near the Fortress, which is
called by the same Name. It is a very lovely Plain, full of Copses, Villages,
Hillocks, Houses of Pleasure, and little Castles belonging to the Georgian
Lords. The Country is all over well Tilled; and in a word, it is a very
delightful Spot of Ground.

The 15th I traveled ten Leagues, nine through the Plain, and the other at the
passage of a Mountain somewhat high, which parts it from Gory. I saw nothing on
every side but fair Villages, lovely Fields well Manured, and every where the
Ground very fertile We left upon the right Hand before we ascended the
Mountain, a great City lying almost all in Ruins, as not containing above Five
Hunderd Houses inhabited, whereas formerly, by report it contained above Twelve
Thousand. However, there belongs to it a Bishop and a great Church, built
before the Georgians were reduced under Subjection. Night overtook me upon the
Descent of the Mountain, before I arrived at Gory. I went directly to the
Residence of the Italian Capuchins, Missionaries of the Congregation de
Propaganda Fide; to whom I had Letters of Recommendation. Not above three Years
ago they had a Dwelling at Cotatis, and then they thought also to have spread
themselves into Mingrelia, and to have settled there. But the Continual Wars in
that Country, and the Robberies perpetually there committed, the King either
not being able, or not caring to prevent 'em, constrained 'em to retire back
into Georgia. So that the Opportunity of meeting with 'em was very acceptable
to me; in regard they were able to give me what Advice and Assistance I stood
in need of. For that reason I presently made my self known to 'em; and told
'em, That the King of Persia had sent me into France to do him particular
Services; that I had his Orders, and a Command directed to all the Governors of
the Empire to give me Respect, and to serve me upon all Occasions, and with all
Conveniences I should stand in need of. Afterward I acquainted 'em, That
having chosen to return into Persia by the Black-Sea, and so through Mingrelia,
I had been surpised by the Wars in that Country, and had undergone a Thousand
Hardships so that not finding any way securely to bring along with me those
things which I had brought for the King, I had left 'em in the Custody of my
Comrade, and was come into Georgia to desire Assistance; and therefore I most
affectionately besought 'em to give me the best Advice they could, and to take
that Compassion of my Hardships and Troubles, to which Charity and other
Considerations obliged 'em.

Upon which the Good Fathers were concerned for my Misfortunes, the hazards I
had run, and for the Person I had left in Mingrelia. And they assured me to do
for me what ever lay in their Power so soon as they should have permission from
their General; for that they had no Power to act without first consulting him,
and without his Approbation. That he was at Trifflis, the capital City of
Georgia, two small days journey distant, and that my best way would be to go
and wait upon him. And indeed they gave me so many reasons to constrain me to
go; that I resolved it without any more to do, and to that purpose hired Horses
forthwith. The Superior also ordered a Lay-Brother, whose Name was Angelo of
Viterbo, to get himself ready to bear me Company.

This Lay-Brother was a Person of Honesty and Integrity, and both an able
Physician and Surgeon. His Dexterity and the good luck he had in Georgia and
Imiretta, to cure several Diseases and Wounds which were thought to be
incurable, had raised him to a high Value and Esteem over all the Country. He
understood the Language very well of all those parts, as having traveled 'em
from one end to the other; besides that he was a Person of Courage, Patience,
Humility and sound Judgment. He was the most pleasant and facetious Company in
the World, and after I had testified to him, that his Society would be of great
advantage to me, and a great comfort to me in my return to Mingrelia, he told
me, that I had no more to do then to request the Superiors leave, and he would
willingly go along with me.

The 16th we departed from Gory with this honest Father, and rode Seven Leagues
for the most part upon the Banks of the River Kurr. The road was very
delightful, through fertile Plains, where there was a great number of Villages.
Among the rest there is one City called Cali-Cala about Four Leagues from Gory;
that lies almost in Ruins, through the midst of which we are obliged to pass.

The 17th I traveled somewhat more then Six Leagues in a level Road, but
somewhat Stony in some parts. By that time we got half way, we came right
against the Metropolitan Church of Georgia. seated upon the Banks of Kur. One
half of which lies in Ruins, the other seems to be entire, and a very fair
structure. They tell us, that there is within it one part of the Crown of
Thorns, a piece of the Tunick, and a piece of the Prophet Elia's Garment. I did
not see the Relics my self, but the Capuchins assured me, they had seen 'em
several times. Toward the Evening I arrived at Trifflis, for the Snow that fell
very thick all the Day, hinderd me from getting thither sooner: at what time
the Lay-Brother who accompanied me, conducted me to the House where the
Capuchins lay. I had not time to lose, so that as soon as I came, I acquainted
the Superior with the reason of my coming; which my Letters of Recommendation
gave him likewise to understand. And indeed my main business was to let 'em
know the danger in which my goods were, that I had left in Mingrelia, and of
what importance it was for me to run all hazards to get 'em safe from thence. I
told the Superior that there were in my opinion two several ways to accomplish
my design, both safe in some respects, but hazardous in others. The first was
to make my Addresses to the Prince of Georgia, to show him the Orders of the
King his Master, and to desire his Assistance to fetch from Mingrelia what I
had got for his Majesty's Use. The Second was to go privately into the Country,
without discovering my self, or telling any person what I went about. Nor would
I discover to the Superior my Approbation of the Second way for fear of
preventing his Judgment. He desired some time to consider before he gave me his
advice, and requested me withal to acquaint the rest of the Friars with what I
had imparted to him, for that they most part of them having been in Mingrelia
and Imiretta, might give farther light as to the management of my Affairs, and
promised me he would enjoin 'em Secrecy under forfeiture of the Holy Obedience.
Thereupon I satisfied the Superior, and gave the same Relation to the rest of
the Monks as I had done to him, conjuring 'em to give me their best advice, and
all the Assistance they could in the Misfortune that was befallen me.

The 18th in the afternoon the Superior carried me into his Chamber, together
with the rest of the Monks, where he laid before me all the Reflections that
he had made upon my business, and all the thoughts that had come into his Head
concerning it: and the Monks also did the same thing. They almost all agreed to
try the private way, without making my self known, which was, in a word, to go
secretly into Mingrelia. They told me that if I imparted my Business to the
Prince of Georgia, he would certainly give me all necessary Assistance, that he
would send People along with me that would bring away all my goods, in regard
he was very much feared and respected both in that Country and Imiretta. But
this would be to make a great Noise, which perhaps might prove my Ruin, if they
should wait for me to Murder me in my return and rob me of all I had; for that
the Country through which I was to pass, was all a Country of Murderers and
Robbers the most resolute in the World. Besides that the Georgians were very
perfidious and wicked: and therefore I had great reason to look well to my
self; in regard it was not many years since that a Patriarch of Moscovy,
traveling through Georgia, had been stripped of all; in which Fact it was
thought the Prince of Georgia had a Hand, to make himself Master of the Wealth
which he carried along with him. Besides that, I was also to consider, that
though the Prince of Georgia should absolutely obey the Kings Commands, and
supposing he should be real and sincere, yet he would expect large Presents;
and that it would be impossible to satisfy him and his Retinue, who were
wonderful hungry and sharp for Persons of their Condition.

I was overjoyed to find that the Capuchins concurred so exactly with my
Judgment, and thought the very same Thoughts which I did: so that it was at
last concluded that I should depart privately with my Companion Friar Angelo.
That I should pretend to be a Theatin, who had been sent by those of Colchis,
who were by War reduced to utmost Misery, to beg relief from the Capuchins; who
had ordered along with me one of their Society to find 'em out, and bring 'em
away. Which being thus determined, I provided for my Journey; and to that
purpose I took out all the Jewels, which I had hid in my Saddle, and my Pillow,
and having put 'em into a little Trunk that I carried about me, I delivered 'em
to the Custody of the Superior. And now we were at a great loss for Horses,
for that no body would venture their Goods into Mingrelia; but at length by the
power of Money we obtained two Guides and their Horses; giving security both
for the Horses and the Furniture.

The 20th I set forward with Friar Angelo and a Georgian, who was a Servant of
the Capuchins, a Native of Cotatis, and who had a Thousand times traveled
Colchis and the parts thereabout, and whom the Superior sent along with me, to
serve me upon all Occasions where I should have need of a Trusty Person. And
thus we were five Men, with four Horses. Upon two of which rode Friar Angelo
and my self; the other two carried our Provisions: and all along we gave it out
that we were sent to the Theatins of Mingrelia. As for my Lacquey, I had
dismissed him, before I went to Tefflis. This Rascal had played me a Thousand
Roguish Tricks, and had once endeavored to have ruined me; and I have already
related how he served me at Gonia. The Capuchins advised me to have him sent to
Prison till my return, and then to prosecute him: But the deep sense I had of
GOD's Favor toward me, inclined me to pardon him altogether. I feared to
provoke the Wrath of Heaven, should I at a time that Heaven was so merciful to
me, have presumed to seek the Extremities of Justice and Rigor. And therefore
I paid the wicked Rascal for all the time that he had served me, and let him
go, after I had fully discovered all the Rogueries and Mischievous Qualities
that I knew of him, and had given him good Advice to mend his Manners. But my
Kindness wrought nothing upon him: the Fellow was mad that I had dismissed him,
and gave me those Testimonies of his Discontent, that were enough to forewarn
me of some fatal Consequence of his Revenge. So that I could have found in my
Heart to have laid him in Irons: and had I said the least word, the Capuchins
would have done it in the Twinkling of an Eye, as being in great Credit at
Tefflis. But I forbore, prevented by that Fate which Governs all Things. I was
wholly inclined to pity; for I expected and desired it too much my self, not to
show it to another: and it was no more then what seemed acceptable to GOD. And
we shall see hereafter how he showed himself pleased with what I had done; by
delivering me from a Dangerous Snare which the Traitor had laid for me.

I returned to Gory the 21st.

The 22d we parted thence, and lay six Leagues from Gory, at a Village upon the
Road to Akalzike, which I had Rid in my first Travels in those parts.

The 23d we departed by break of Day, and presently left the Road of Akalzike
upon the Left Hand. At Noon we arrived at a small Village called Aly; lying
nine Leagues from Gory, and seated among the Mountains. Two Leagues beyond
that, we passed a Straight, which is fenced with a great Gate of Carpenters
Work, and separates Georgia from the Kingdom of Imiretta; from whence we rode
one League farther, and stopped at a little Village.

The 24th we traveled seven Leagues in the Mountains; which were full of Snow
that fell in great Flakes: the Mountains themselves, which are a part of Mount
Caucasus, being covered with very high Trees. There we thought we should have
lost our selves: for the Snow being very deep, covered all the Paths and
Tracks, that we could not see our way: but at length we came to a Village
called Colbaure, where we lay. This Village consists of about Two Hunderd
Houses, all in a direct line, and so far distant one from another, that it is
above three Miles from the first to the last.

The 25th we traveled not above nine Miles, the bad Weather, the Snow, Cold,
and Obscurity of the Air in those high Mountains hindering us from going any
farther: however, at last we lodged at a Village containing about thirty Houses.

The 26th, the Air cleared up, it had done Snowing, nor was it so bitter Cold:
so that we traveled Eighteen Miles among the Mountains covered with thick
Woods. Yet the Road was indifferent, in regard the Ascents and Descents were
not very steep. And we lay at a small Village by the side of a great River.

The 27th we Ferry'd over the River, and traveled Three Leagues in a Country
like that which we had passed the Days before. And descending the Mountain we
came into a large and fair plain extending as far as we could see; and lodged
at a Village called Sesano. This Valley is almost a League broad from one end
to the other; and it is very fertile and very pleasant, as being watered with
several Streams; extending it self as far as Mingrelia; and being the most
pleasant part of all Imiretta. The Mountains with which it is surrounded are
covered with Wood and Villages: for the greatest part of the Mountains are
tilled; and full of Vineyards. In this Valley we found the Air to be as warm as
if it had been Spring, and very little Snow.

Sesano lay near to a Castle belonging to an Ancient Lady, who was Aunt to the
King of Imiretta, who lay sick at the time that we arrived there. Who hearing
that there was a Capuchin come to the Village, sent for him, to discourse with
him. For in that Country, they look upon all the Missionaries to be Physicians.
Nor was the Friar unwilling to visit her, hoping to procure some assistance
from her in our design. But two Hours after he had left me, I was surpised to
be overtaken by another Capuchin with a Horse and a Guide. The cause of whose
following me so close was to give me Intelligence, that the Lacquey which I had
dismissed was come from Tefflis to Gory, where he had discovered all that he
knew of my business, swearing to ruin me, and that he was gone, no body knew
which way: Which surpised me very much. For I mistrusted some such thing. I
desired the Capuchin therefore to tarry with me, gave him a Thousand Thanks,
and highly applauded the great Zeal and Affection of the Society toward me,
which they had testified by such an evident and Generous Demonstration: and
indeed they could not have given me more apparent tok'ns of their kindness.

The 20th we traveled Five Leagues in the Plain already mentioned; which is
very full of Villages and Woods, and the soil so extremely fat, that our Horses
had much a do to poach along. After we had traveled Six Miles, we left the
Fortress of Scander upon the right Hand. The People of the Country call it
Scanda, and affirm that Alexander the Great built it. For the Eastern People
call that Victorious Prince by the Name of Scander. They tell ye farther that
he built Seventeen Places more which he called by the same Name. And perhaps
this might be one of the Seventeen, and the same which is mentioned by Q.
Curtius in his Seventh Book. Which I am inclined to believe by its Situation,
for it is seated at the foot of a Mountain. It is now of no force; consisting
only of two square Towers, without any Wall, with some Lodgings round about;
nor does it is Antiquity seem to exceed about 300 Years.

About a League from Scander we passed through Chicaris, a Village consisting
of about Fifty Houses. It goes for a City in Imiretta, though it have neither
Walls, nor any thing more remarkable then any other Villages: we put in, and
lay at a place, a League from thence.

The 29th and 30th we stayed there. For our Guides would go no farther. The
news of the Wars of which all the Travelers upon the Road gave us
Intelligence, melted their Hearts in their Bellies. They cried out we should
carry 'em to certain Death or Slavery, and indeed they gave us a great deal of
trouble. Which I endured with as much Patience, and exhorted my two Capuchins
to the same. I laid before 'em, that I had let 'em understand at my departure
from Tefflis, that it was impossible to accomplish what I had undertaken
without a great deal of Courage and Patience, to vanquish all the obstacles
which we should infallibly meet with. That we were to manage our People gently
and mildly, and to win 'em by fair means and large promises. That when we had
once got 'em into Mingrelia and that they could not go back, the care of their
own safety would make 'em do what we pleased. Thereupon we called the two
Guides, and the Georgian which the Superior had recommended to me, and told
'em that there was no danger, that we had good Intelligence and Instructions,
that we had Lives and Goods to preserve as well as they; and that we had given
'em security as well for their Lives as their Persons. To which one in behalf
of the rest made answer, that we should give 'em a Writing, wherein we should
engage to redeem 'em, if they were taken Slaves in that Journey, or else to give
Sixscore Crowns to their Wives, if they should die. To which I willingly
agreed, and made 'em large promises besides. Which put 'em into a good humor
to go on.

The 31st we set forward; though it were bad Weather, and very bad Way.
Nevertheless we crossed three very broad and rapid Rivers, and at length
arrived at Cotatis. Where we lay at the House of Bishop Janarell; who was not
at home, however we were well entertained. For his Officers were acquainted
with Friar Angelo, and knew that their Master had a great kindness for him.

Cotatis is a Town built at the Foot of a Hill, by the side of the River
Phasis, consisting of about 200 Houses. Those of the Grandees, and the King's
Palace stand at a distance round about. The Town has neither Fortifications nor
Walls, saving where it is enclosed by the River and the Mountain. On the other
side of the River over against the Town, upon the top of a Hill higher then
that under which the Town is built, stands the Fortress of Cotatis, of which I
have spok'n in my Relations of the last Revolutions in Imiretta. I did not go
into it, but I saw it plainly from the opposite Hill. It has several Towers, a
Dungeon, and a double Wall that appears very high and strong.

When I came to Cotatis, I inquired what News. And the truest that I met with,
and which every one assured us, was, That the new Prince of Mingrelia, and the
Prince of Guriel were retired, finding that the Turks would keep the Field no
longer; that the greatest part of the Gentry, who had given their Oaths, had
forsak'n 'em, and that the Vizier of Dadian was preparing to fall down from the
Mountains with an Army. That as soon as the Vizier had intelligence of the
Retreat of the two Princes and the Turks, he had sent 800 Men to Dadian, had
writ to him to quit the Fortress, and to raise what Men he could, that he had
proclaimed a free Pardon to all those that would come and join with him;
lastly, that he was come to Cotatis, where the King of Imiretta had joined him,
with the Nobility of his Country; and that they were marched together in a
Body, with a resolution to fall into the Territories of the Prince of Guriel.
Which was that, they all most earnestly desired, for that he had been the
Occasion of the Incursion of the Turks, and of all the spoil that had been
committed during the War. For this reason the Armies had crossed the Phasis
Three Days before, so that the opportunity favored me, in regard there was no
fear of meeting with any Soldiers.

The 1st of Jan. 1673. I stayed at Cotatis to perform the Duties of Devotion.
But as we were at dinner, my two Capuchins and I, with my two Guides and my
Armenian, at the same table, according to the custom of the Country, where
Masters and Servants eat all together, I saw that Rascal of a Lacquey, of whom
I have already made mention, enter the Room, together with an Armenian of
Akalzike and a Priest of Cotatis, who came along to show 'em the House However
I was not very much surpised to see him. For it was a thing which I daily had
in my thoughts, considering the reason I had to be jealous of the Rogue;
nevertheless I made no show of my fears: yet I could not but believe he was
turned Turk, seeing a white Turbant upon his Head. The Rogue entered the Room
with a wild and furious Aspect, and sat him down among my Servants, without so
much as saying, By your leave. Which affront provoked me to that degree, that I
asked him, Wherefore he came in such a fury? He answered, That he came from
Akalzike, and that he had performed the Journey in two Days. It Is the worst way
in the World, said I; besides that the Mountains are all covered with Snow,
like those that we past, when we came from Gonia. You Will find it true, replied
the Fellow, for you must go along with me to Akalzike: I have Orders to carry
you thither. That may be, replied I, if thou have a greater Power to force me,
then I have to hinder thee. For I have nothing to do at Akalzike, neither will
I go thither. Boy, said I, thou art ill advised; forbear to give thy self the
trouble to do me a Mischief; for GOD will never suffer thy Designs to prosper
to my harm. I paid thee at Tefflis all thou could demand: if thou art not
satisfied, say what it is thou requir'st more.

I thus discoursed him, to try whether I could reduce him to Reason. To which
he answered, That Tefflis was a Place where there is no Justice to be had, but
that at Akalzike he should have Right done him. I replied, That without going
so far, for so slight a Matter, he might find People enough at Cotatis able to
decide the difference. All which I spoke in the mildest Terms imaginable: which
nothing moved this Vagabond, who turning to his Companion, bid him go and fetch
the Turks. The Fellow ran out presently, but this was only a Trick to scare me;
for I found afterward, there were no Turks that tarried till they were sent
for. However, I was extremely terrified, and gave my self over for lost. All
this while the Priest of Cotatis was ignorant of what past, for I spoke
Turkish, which he did not understand; and therefore he asked Friar Angelo what
was the Occasion of the Contest; who as soon as he knew, which was soon after,
informed the Priest. I ordered Friar Angelo to tell him what I had offered the
Scoundrel to release me of his Pretensions, that Persons of Quality might judge
of it, and of the Malice of the Rogue that would force me to Akalzike.

The Priest and several Georgians running in upon the noise that we made, took
my part as to the Offer I had made, and desired the miserable fellow to take
it; but the more they pressed him, the more Insolent he grew, and the more
audacious in his Threats. Which inflamed me to that degree, that I was almost
besides my self. Traitor, said I, Then it is only thy own Wickedness puts thee
upon this: I tell thee again, that by the help of God, no Man shall carry me to
Akalzike, and so saying, I flew upon him with my Sword in my Hand; but my Arms
were held, while the Perfidious Rogue, to whom I intended the mischief, betook
himself to flight, trembling and in great Disorder. After which I did not think
my self safe, but was willing to have made my escape. But Janarell's Steward
stayed me, giving me full assurance, that I should receive no Injury in his
Masters House, and that no Turks would come to meddle with me. Thereupon I
advised with my two Capuchins what course to take, the Result of which was,
that Friar Angelo the next Morning should continue his Journey for Mingrelia,
and that Father Justin of Legorn, for that was the Name of the Capuchin who was
sent after me, as I have said, and I, should tarry together. But the Principal
Reason was, because we could neither buy nor hire Horses: and we knew we should
meet with none in Mingrelia; which obliged us to tarry and send away the Horses
empty, for my Companion to make use of.

The 2d. Friar Angelo set forward with the Horses and the Men which we had
hired at Tefflis. And I returned to Chicaris, Eight Leagues distant from
Cotatis, together with Father Justin. We made choice of this place to stay and
expect the success of Friar Angelo's Journey, because it was just opposite to
Janarell's Country House, where he was with the Queen; from whom we might have
assistance if occasion required.

The 5th the Bishop and the Princess sent for us to come to his House. Thither
we therefore went, and dined with 'em that Day, as we did several other times,
that we made our Visits. The Queen was a very beautiful Person, as I have said,
but her Demeanor spoiled all, free even to Impudence. Her Actions and Discourse
were all obscene, without any restraint upon her self. Leudness appeared in
every thing she said; which is no Vice, nor any Scandal in her Country, where
Dissoluteness is an Evil so common. Her Bishop Janarell devoured her with his
Eyes. Never was unchaste Love, more open and less reserved. There was no need
of more then looking upon the two Lovers, to give an easy guess at their
Familiarity together. The Queen of Imiretta is served like the Princess of
Mingrelia; only her Table is not so well furnished with Plate, but her Train is
not so mean by much.

The 8th a Gentleman whom the King of Imiretta had sent to Tefflis, arrived at
Janarell's House; and gave the Queen an account of his Negotiation. He was sent
to borrow 800 Crowns, upon the Royal Crown which they offered to pawn: the
Crown being set with Precious Stones, and might be worth Four Thousand Pistols.
Yet no body would lend any Money upon it. But the Prince of Georgia
understanding the need which the King and Queen of Imiretta had of the Money,
sent 'em a Present; to the King, three Horses, a quantity of Arms, and a
Thousand Crowns in Silver; to the Queen several Pieces of Tissue, Sattins and
Taffata's, and Five Hunderd Crowns. And the reason why the Georgian Prince was
so kind, was to keep their Majesty's steadfast in their Resolutions to adopt one
of his Sons.

The 12th I went to wait upon the King: who was brought back from the Army by
reason he was fallen Sick. He did us a great deal of Honor, showed us
Extraordinary Kindness, made us sit down by him, and discoursed us with much
Familiarity. He complained to Father Justin, for that he and his Companions had
quitted Cotatis. Which the Father excused by alleging the occasion of their
Removal to have been the continual Wars, by which they had suffered very much.
I am sorry for it, replied the King, but I cannot help it; for I am a poor
Blind Man, and they make me do what they please themselves. I dare not discover
my self to any one whatever, I mistrust all the World; and yet I surrender my
self to all, not daring to offend any Body, for fear of being Assassinated by
every Body. This poor Prince is young, and well shaped; and well shaped; and he
always wears a Handkercher over the upper part of his Face, to wipe up the
Rhume that distills from the holes of his Eyes, and to hide such a hideous sight
from those that come to visit him. He is of a mild Disposition, and a great
Lover of Jests and Drollery. He told Father Justin, He should do well to Marry
in his Country. To which Father Justin made answer, That he could not Marry, as
being under the same Vow with the Bishops and Monks of Imiretta. How! said he,
interrupting Father Justin, and bursting out into a great laughter, our Bishops
and Monks have every one nine apiece, besides those of their Neighbors.

The 16th by break of Day I was to my great satisfaction wak'nd by my Comrade
that came along with me to Mingrelia, Who told me, That Friar Angelo, together
with the Men and Horses which I had sent, were arrived the ninth at Sippias;
where they were extraordinarily troubled and almost at their Wits end, because
they had heard no News of me since my departure and for that they could not
either for Love or Money get any Horses to carry 'em into Georgia. That
understanding my happy arrival at Tefflis, and that I staid near Cotatis in
expectation of him, he was overjoyed, and that he forthwith prepared himself
for his Journey, having taken out of the Earth, the Woods, and from between the
Tiles of the House the one half of what they had had there. That he had staid
till the 'leventh day, to the end he might rest his Horses; leaving one of the
most faithful of our Servants to take care of the rest, which they durst not
remove, for fear of endangering all at one venture. And after he had told me
thus far, Never trouble your self, said he at length, at what I have told ye;
GOD be thanked all is safe and well And then proceeding,

Saturday the 14th, said he, we came safe and well to Cotatis about eight in
the Evening: at what time Friar Angelo carried me to Janatelle's. By the way, I
never heard, said he, till yesterday, how your Servant that you dismissed, came
to threaten ye the first day of the Year as he did, for had I known it, I
should never have stopped at Cotatis. But then, neither Friar Angelo nor any of
our People thinking more of it, desired me upon Sunday Morning, that they might
stay till Noon, and refresh themselves a little. To which I consented, and
bid'em get a good Dinner. But as I sat at Table, I saw the Rogue of a Lacquey
come into the Room with Twenty Armed Janissaries. Where Is my Master? Cried the
Young Ragamuffin, he would have Murdered me, but I Will do his Business for him
now. And so saying, he looked about the Room for ye, and not finding ye there,
he went into your Chamber, thinking you had hid up your self. I followed him,
and throwing my self at his Feet, What have I done to ye, that you should go
about to ruin me? If my Comrade have mis-us'd ye, or not paid ye to your
content, that is no fault of mine; make your demands, and you shall have it
without more ado, only send away these Turks that you have brought along with
ye. It shall be done, replied the Young Traitor, I Will go and dismiss the
Turks, and come again presently.

And so saying, he went back into the Hall, pointing to Friar Angelo, There,
said he to the Janisaries, take that Man, and carry him to the Commander of the
Fortress; and so at the same time the poor Friar was seized and carried away.
The Janisaries looked up and down to see what Booty they could find; and
presently they snatched up our Felts that served us for Cloaks: they did not so
much as meet with any of my Arms, and which was a more signal mark of GOD's
Providence, they mist the Bags which I brought along with me, where were above
Fifty Thousand Crowns in Gold and Jewels. As soon as the Janisaries had left
the House, I sent a Man after Friar Angelo, and conjured the Carriers to let us
make our eseape with all speed. So that we Saddl'd and Loaded our Horses
forthwith, and betook our selves to flight with all the haste we could. Thus
GOD assisted me, and by his Grace and Favor I am at length got hither, with
all that I was entrusted with in Mingrelia. For what the Janisaries took was
hardly worth two Pistols.

I might here endeavor to express the Joy and Satisfaction which I received
upon the rehearsal of these happy Tidings, but they are only to be imagined,
nor is it that which the Reader desires to know. Father Justin went presently
to the Queen and Janatelle, to make his complaints of what the Turks had done
in his House, and to desire him to labor for the Liberty of Friar Angelo: and
about Noon the Father returned and assured us, that they had sent two Gentlemen
to that purpose, to the Commander of the Fortress. For my part I would have
been gone presently, such was my dread of the Turks, though without any ground:
but there was a necessity for us to let our Horses rest. In the mean time, in
the Afternoon my Comrade hired other Horses to return into Mingrelia, and fetch
what was left behind; while I prepared to set forward for Tefflis, with that
which he had already brought.

The 17th my Comrade and I parted, taking each our several Roads: he for
Mingrelia, with Five Men and Four Horses; I for Tefflis, with Father Justin,
Three Men and Three Horses.

The 22th at Night, I arrived at Gori; where I stayed two Days to change Gold,
as well to assist Father Justin to make preparations for his return to Cotatis,
whither he was to carry my Comrade Money, and to accompany him from thence to
Tefflis, as to get Friar Angelo set at Liberty, if he should be detained a
Prisoner.

To which purpose, Father Justin departed the 25th in the Morning for Cotatis,
and I at the same time set forward for Tefflis. Where I arrived thanks be to
GOD the 26th in the Afternoon, with the Capuchin Friar which the Superior of
Gori had lent me, as not being willing to leave me without Company.

The 6th of February in the Evening, my Comrade arrived at Tefflis, with the
Servants which I had left in Colchis, a Theatin Friar and Father Angelo. After
I had embraced 'em all, Friar Angelo took me aside, to give me an account of
the Series of the whole Adventure. You know, said he, after what manner your
perfidious Lacquey caused me to be apprehended by the Janisaries, who were sent
by the Commander of the Fortress to seize me. For the Rascal had told the
Commander how that you owed him Three Hunderd Crowns; that you were an
Ambassador; that you had been in Mingrelia to fetch away a vast Treasure, which
you had left there; and that by the seizure of your Person, he would meet with
a purchase that would enrich him for ever. This Traitor pressed the Janisaries,
who carried me to the Fortress to bind me, and use me severely; but they had a
greater respect and veneration for my habit: and beside there was among 'em an
Italian Renegado who caused 'em to be very civil. I marched along as slowly as
possibly I could, and kept the Rascals in discourse, to the end I might give
your Comrade the more leisure to make his escape; for I made no question but he
would take that course. When they brought me before the Commander, he asked the
Varlet who had caused me to be apprehended, whether I was his Master, who
answered, No; for that he could not find his Master; but that assuredly I knew
where he was. I replied, I knew not where you were, only that when I left ye,
you had a design to go for Tefflis. The Commander asked me afterward, several
Questions concerning your Quality; and told me that I must pay the Three
Hunderd Crowns, which it was said you owed the fellow. To which I answered,
That you were no more then a poor Person in Holy Orders, who had undertaken to
give me Intelligence of the Miserable Condition of those in Mingrelia. Which
when I understood, I went to give 'em a Visit; that I was no farther acquainted
with your concerns; and that as for Money I had none. And that the People in
Cotatis, from the Prince to the meanest of his Subjects, well knew, that I was
a Person that made a profession of Poverty.

Upon this, the Commander ordered me to be searched, and they found the Girdle
which you had sent me to wear, where there was no more then only Six Pound, for
by a wonderful Providence of God, your Comrade had not given me any Jewels to
quilt into it, according to your appointment. Thereupon the Commander finding
no more then that inconsiderable Sum, said he to the Lacquey, Where is all the
Treasure, ye Rogue, with which thou have filled my Head? bring'st thou me
hither this poor Fellow to jeer me? Thou art a cheating Rascal, and I Will have
thee Drubb'd to Death. Sir, answered the Varlet, trembling for fear, The Wealth
is in the Custody of my Master's Comrade, that lies at Janatelle's. Dog, as
thou art, replied the Commander, Why did not bring him hither? And so saying,
He sent him back with the same Janisaries that had guarded me to the Fortress,
and commanded 'em expressly to bring away your Comrade: and indeed I was afraid
they would have met with him; but I was overjoyed, when the Janisaries returned
and told the Commander, that the Person had made his escape. Which made him
vent his Rage upon the La quey, who was in a strange Agony, between Fear and
Madness: at what time he began to open his Eyes, and to perceive that GOD had
confounded his Malice, by his missing your Comrade with all that he carried
under his care. Thereupon I gave an account to the Commander of all the
Villainies, and wicked Tricks which the Rascal had committed in your Service,
and how liberal and kind you had been to him nevertheless, in paying him his
Wages.

That Evening the Commander invited me to sup with him at his own Table: for he
understood I was a Physician, and presently fancied himself to be ill. So that
I made him up some Medecins, as well for himself, as for some of the Soldiers
that were in the Fortress. He ordered an Italian Renegado to be my Guards, at
what time your Lacquey would have had him laid me in Irons for fear I should
make my escape. For the Rascal studied a Thousand Tricks to do me a Mischief.
But the next Day the Queen and Janatelle sent two Gentlemen to the Commander to
demand my Freedom, as being their Physician, and the King's also: and about
Noon there came two Gentlemen more from a great Lord of the Country, whose Wife
lay sick; and he had been informed, that I was a Prisner in the Fortress for
Debt. Thereupon he sent to the Commander of the Fortress, to release me, and he
would pay my Debt: but alas, there was nothing more clear then that I owed
nothing. However, I must give Twenty Five Crowns to the Commander; which being
paid, I was set at Liberty, notwithstanding the Noise and Clamor of the
Lacquey, who pressed that I might not be released, and told the Commander, That
there would be a Thousand Crowns given to purchase my Liberty, rather then let
me lie. So soon as I was free, they carried me to the Lords House, to whom I
was beholding for my Liberty; from whence I sent to Chicaris to know what News:
by the return of which Message, I understood that you were gone to Tefflis, and
your Comrade was returned to Mingrelia. Some few Days after Father Justin
arrived at Chicaris, and understanding there where I was, he came to me; and
then having repaid the Twenty Five Crowns which the Lord had disburs'd for my
Deliverance out of Prison, we returned to Chicaris. Where in two Days your
Comrade arrived with all that was left behind of yours in Mingrelia: who told
us what Road he had taken to miss Cotatis. To which purpose he had Ferry'd over
the Phasis six Leagues from that City; at what time the Ferryman told him, That
the Rogue who had laid so many Snares for us, had given two Crowns to give him
Intelligence of your Comrade's Passage: and that the Villain was under the
Guard of four Janisaries, who had order not to let him escape: for that the
Commander was resolved to make him perform what he had promised him. And thus
you see, said he, that hitherto all things have luckily succeeded, and that GOD
has confounded that Villain in his Wickedness, whose Justice questionless will
not permit him to escape the Clutches of the Turkish Commander, without
receiving some Punishment.

It was now late; nevertheless my Comrade and I could not go to Supper, till we
had discoursed of the happy Issue of our Labor, and of all our Misfortunes, of
which, what I have recounted, is but a part of the Truth; nor till we had
breathed out to GOD our Ardent Thanksgivings for his Infinite Goodness, his
Omnipotent, and his Miraculous Deliverance: For we expected no such thing, when
we were in Tribulation. And indeed, who could have hoped to have saved all,
when we were in such imminent danger of losing all? The next Day following we
cast up the Accounts of our Losses in this Disastrous Journey, and found that
it did not amount to more then above one per Cent. of all that we had saved,
and fortunately brought to Tefflis, without any thing being either broken or
spoiled.

GEORGIA, I mean all the Country so called which is under the Persian
Jurisdiction, borders at this day to the East upon Circassia and Moscovy; to
the West upon Armenia the Less; to the South upon Armenia the Greater; to the
North upon the Black-Sea, and that part of Colchis which is called Imiretta,
which in my Opinion is all that Country which the Ancients named Iberia.
Georgia extended formerly from Tauris and Erzerum to the River Tanais, and was
called Albania, being bounded, as I have described it. It is a Country very
full of Wood, and very Mountainous, that enclose a greater Number of pleasant
Plains that run out in length, but are not proportionable in breadth: only the
middle of Georgia is more even and level then the rest: And the River Kur,
which most Geographers call Cyrus, runs through the midst of it. It takes its
rise in the Mountain Caucasus, a Day and a half's Journey from Akalzike, as has
been said; and empties it self into the Caspian Sea.

I have seen some old Persian Geographies, that place Georgia in the Greater
Armenia. The Moderns make a particular Province of it, which they call
Gorgistan, and divide into four parts; Imiretta, of which we have spoken; the
Country of Guriel, wherein is comprehended all that is under the Government of
Akalzike; the Kingdom of Caket, which extends it self very far into Mount
Caucasus, and is properly the Ancient Iberia; and Carthuel, which is the
Eastern Georgia, and which the Ancient Geographers call the Asiatick Albania.
The Kingdoms of Caket and Carthuel are under the Persian Dominion: and this is
that which the Persians call Gurgistan: but the Georgians give it no other Name
then that of Carthueli. Which is no new Name, as being to be found in the
Writings of several Ancient Authors, although somewhat corrupted; especially St
Epiphanias, who speaking of these People, calls 'em Cardians. It Is reported
that the Grecians were the first who gave 'em the Name of Georgians from the
word Georgoi, which signifies Husbandmen. Though others will have this Name to
derive it self from that of St. George, the Patron Saint of all the Christians
of the Greek Church.

There are very few Cities in all Georgia, as has been observed: though there
has been many more formerly in the Kingdom of Caket. But now they lie all in
Ruins unless one which is also called Kaket. And I heard say, while I stayed
at Tefflis, that these Cities were very large and sumptuously Built, as may be
well enough conjectured, as well by that which is not as yet altogether
destroyed, as by the ruins themselves. Now these Northern Inhabitants of Mount
Caucasus, those Alans, Suans, Huns and other Nations so greatly famed for their
strength and Courage, and by the Report of many People, another Nation of the
Amazons, were they that continually harrass'd and ransackt this little Kingdom
of Kaket. The Amazons lay bordering upon it above, to the North. Wherein as
well the Ancient as Modern Geographers agree. Ptolomy fixes their Country in
the Asiatic Sarmatia, which is now called Tartary, to the West of Volga,
between the River and the Hippic Mountains: and there it is that the Northern
part of the Kingdom of Kaket exactly lies. Quintus Curtius says also to the
same effect, that the Kingdom of Thalestris was near to the River Phasis. And
Strabo is of the same opinion, speaking of the Expeditions of Pompey and
Canidius. I confess, I never saw any Person in Georgia who had been in the
Country of the Amazons; but I have heard many of 'em tell Stories of those
People. And they showed me in the Prince's Palace, a large Female habit of a
course Woollen Stuff, and peculiar for its Fashion and Shape, which they said
was the Garment of an Amazon, that was slain near Caket in the last Wars.
Shortly we may hear farther news of these Famous Warriors; for the Capuchins
of Tefflis told me, they would send two Missionaries into their Country: the
Congregation having ordered that they should be dispatched thither. I had once
a long discourse with the Prince of Georgia's Son upon this Subject; at what
time, among other things he told me, that Five Days Journey beyond Caket toward
the North, there lived a Numerous People, of whom they had no knowledge at all;
who were continually at War with the Tartars, which they call Calmac, and the
same with those which we call Calmouqus: that the several People that inhabit
Mount Caucasus are continually at Wars one with another; and that it signifies
nothing to make any Peace or Truce with 'em, as being a sort of Savages, that
have neither Religion, Government nor Laws. Therefore they that lie next to
Caket make frequent Inroads into the Country: which obliges the Viceroy, who is
the Eldest Son of the Prince of Georgia, to be always ready in Arms to repel
those Barbarians.

Upon the Information which I gave the Young Prince, of what the Greek and
Roman Historians related concerning the Amazons, after I had discoursed for
some time upon that occasion, his opinion was, that they were some particular
People among the wandering Scythians, as the Turcomans, and Arabs, who submitted
themselves to the Sovereignty of Women, like the Achineses: that those Queens
made use of Persons of their own Sex to serve 'em, and to follow 'em wherever
they went. And as for their riding a Horseback like Men, it is easily
apprehended and as easy to be credited, and that they also were Armed. For in
the Eastern Countries, all Women bestride their Horses like Men: and some of
'em mount their Horses and ride 'em as well, besides that the Princesses also
wear Daggers at their sides. But as for the Mutilation of their Breasts, and
other particulars reported of the Amazons, we reject 'em, and rank 'em among
the Fables, with which the leasing Greeks had the Impudence to fill their
Histories, according to the Sarcasm of the Latin Poet.

The Province of Carthuel contains no more then Four Cities, Gory, Suram, Aly
and Tefflis. Gory is a small City, seated in a Plain between two Mountains upon
the Bank of the River Curr, at the Foot of a Hillock, upon which there is a
Fortress Built which is Garrisoned by Native Persians. It was Built in the last
Gurgistan Wars, about Forty Years since by Rustan Can, General of the Persian
Army: and an Austin Monk, who was then at Gory drew the draught of it. However
the Fortress is a place that is not able to make any great defense; its
principal strength consisting in its Situation, having a Hunderd Men within it:
Nor is the City that lies under it but very small, the Houses and Market Places
being all Built of Earth. The Inhabitants however, are all very Rich and
Wealthy. And it is very well stored with all things necessary for Human support
at a cheap rate.

Suram is indeed no more then a Town not above half as big as the City of Gory;
but the Fortress adjoining is large and well Built, having within it a Hunderd
Men in Garrison. Near to Suram is the Country called Semashe. Which in the
Georgian Language signifies Three Castles. The People of this Country boast,
That Noah dwelt in this Country after he came out of the Ark, and that his
three Sons built 'em every one a Castle. I say nothing here of Aly, because I
have spok'n of it in another place.

The Temper of the Air is very kindly in Georgia; being very dry, cold in the
Winter, and hot in the Summer. Their fair Weather does not begin till May, but
it lasts till the end of November. The Soil must be well watered, or else it
proves very barren; but that care taken, it produces all sorts of Grain, Herbs
and Fruits in abundance. Georgia is therefore as fertile a Country as any can
be imagined, where a Man may live both deliciously and very cheap. Their Bread
is as good as any in the World: their Fruit is delicious and of all sorts.
Neither is there any part of Europe that produces fairer Pears and Apples, or
better tasted, nor does any part of Asia bring forth more delicious
Pomegranates. Cattle are very plentiful and very good, as well the larger sort
as the lesser. Their Fowl of all sorts is incomparable, especially their
Wild-Fowl: Their Boars-Flesh is as plentiful and as good as any in Colchis. The
Common People live upon nothing else but young Porkers; of which there are
abundance in all parts of the Country: and indeed there is no better Food in
the World, then this Meat: beside that the People of the Country assure us,
that it never offends the Stomach, let 'em eat never so much. Which I believe
to be true; for though I eat of it almost every Meal, yet it never did me harm.
The Caspian Sea, which is next to Georgia, and the Kurr, that runs quite
through it, supplies it with all sorts of salt and fresh Fish; so that we may
truly say That there is no Country where a Man may have an Opportunity to fare
better then in this.

And with the same boldness we may assert, That there is no Country where they
drink more or better Wine. The Vines grow about the Trees as in Colchis: and
they daily transport great Quantities of Wine into Media, Armenia, and to
Ispahan for the Kings Table. As much as a Horse can carry, which is 300 weight,
costs no more then Twelve Shillings: I speak of their best Wine; for the common
sort is cheaper by half: and all other Provisions are at a proportionable rate.
The Country of Georgia also produces a great Quantity of Silk; tho not so much
by half as most Travelers report: But the People of the Country know not how
to weave it, and therefore they carry it into Turkey, to Erzerum, and the parts
adjoining, where they drive a great Trade.

The Complexion of the Georgians is the most beautiful in all the East; and I
can safely say, That I never saw an ill-favored Countenance in all that
Country, either of the one or other Sex: but I have seen those that have had
Angels Faces; Nature having bestowed upon the Women of that Country Graces and
Features, which are not other where to be seen: So that it is impossible to
behold 'em without falling in Love. More Charming Countenances, nor more Lovely
Statures and Proportions cannot be Pencill'd forth by all the Art of Man, then
those of the Georgian Women. They are Tall, clear Limbed, Plump and Full, but
not over Fat, and extremely Slender in the Waste: Let 'em have never so few
Clothes on, you shall not see their Hips. That which spoils all is this, that
they all Paint, as well the Lovely as less Beautiful. For they make use of
Paint in stead of other Ornaments: Nevertheless when they Dress themselves,
they Deck themselves in Sumptuous Habits and Jewels as our Women do.

The Georgians also are Naturally very Witty. Nor would there be more Learned
Men, or more Ingenious Masters in the World, were they but improved by the
Knowledge of Arts and Sciences: but their Education is so mean and paltry, that
having nothing but bad Examples before their Eyes, those Parts of theirs are
altogether drowned in Vice and Ignorance. Which is the reason that they are
generally Cheats and Knaves, perfidious, treacherous, ungrateful and proud.
Impudent beyond Imagination to deny their own Words, and their very Deeds; to
set afoot and maintain Falsehood; to demand more then is their Due; to
counterfeit Deeds and forge Lies. They are irreconcilable in their Enmities,
and never forgive. True it is, they are not easily provoked; nor do they
readily admit those Hatreds which they preserve inviolably when once conceived.
And besides these Vices of the Mind, no Men are more addicted to their sensual
Pleasures and Bestial Voluptuousness; that is to say, to Drunkenness and
Luxury. In which filthy Divertisements, they plunge themselves with so much the
more freedom, because they are so common, and not looked upon as scandalous in
Georgia. The Churchmen will be as drunk as others, and keep Female Slaves in
their Houses, to make use of in stead of Concubines: at which no body is
offended, as being no more then what is generally practiced, and as it were
authorized by Custom. In so much that the Superior of the Capuchins assured
me, That he had heard the Catholicos, or Patriarch of Georgia say, That he who
was not absolutely drunk at great Festivals, such as Easter and Christmas,
could not be a good Christian, and deserved to be Excommunicated. Besides this,
the Georgians are likewise very great Usurers: They never lend any Money
without a Pawn, and the lowest Interest which they take is Two in the Hunderd
for a Month.

Neither are the Women less Vicious and Wicked then the Men. They have an
Extraordinary Addiction to the Male Sex; and certainly contribute more then
they, to that Torrent of Uncleanness which overflows all the Country. On the
other side, the Georgians are Civil and Courteous, and more then that, they are
Grave and Moderate. Their Manners and Customs are a Mixture of the several
Customs of the Nations that lie round about 'em. Which proceeds, as I believe
from their Commerce and Dealings with Variety of People, and the Liberty
allowed in Georgia, to observe their own Religion and Customs, and to defend
'em in their discourse. You shall meet here in this Country with Armenians,
Greeks, Jews, Turks, Persians, Indians, Tartars, Muscovites and Europeans; and
the Armenians are so numerous, that they exceed the Georgians. They are also
more Wealthy, and for the most part supply all the small Offices and mean
Employments. But the Georgians are stouter, more Haughty, more Vain, and more
Pompous. Which difference between their Inclinations, their Manners and their
Belief, has caused a very great Enmity between 'em. They mutually hate one
another, and never Marry into one another Families. Particularly the Georgians
contemn the Armenians with a more then ordinary Scorn; and look upon 'em much
about the same Rate as we do the Jews in Europe. The Georgian Habit resembles
very much the Polonian Garb, their Bonnets being like to theirs. Their Vests
are open before all down the Breast, and fastened with Buttons and Loops. Their
Hose and Shoes are like those of the Persians. And for the Women's habit it is
altogether Persian.

The Houses of the Grandees, and all their Public Edifices, are Built according
to the Persian Models: nor is Building at all expensive, as having Wood, Stone,
Lime and Plaster in great Abundance; they also imitate the Persians in sitting
at their Tables, in their Beds, and manner of Diet.

The Nobility exercise a more then Tyrannical Power over their Subjects; far
worse then in Colchis. They will make their Peasants labor whole. Months
together, and as much as they please without allowing 'em either Food or Wages.
They challenge a Right over the Estates Liberty and Lives of their Vassals:
they take their Childern and sell 'em, or else make Slaves of 'em themselves.
But they very seldom sell any of the Rabble above Twenty Years of Age,
especially Women.

The Belief of the Georgians is like that of the Mingrelians; as having been
converted to the Faith both at the same time, in the Fourth Age, and by the
same means of an Iberian Woman, who was converted her self to Christianity at
Constantinople. But since that, both the one and the other have lost all sense
of Christianity; so that as I have said of the Mingrelians; they have nothing
remaining of Christianity but the Name. So is it as true that the Georgians
neither observe or know the least precept of the Law of Jesus Christ.
Nevertheless the Georgians more strictly observe their Fasts, and make longer
Prayers. While I was at Tefflis, the Missionaries sent to Rome a Relation of
the State of their Mission, which they showed me; wherein I found one very
pleasant passage, which I shall set down among the rest as not being either
unseasonable or impertinent. There was a Woman at Gory, who having led a very
ill Life, at length fell dangerously ill, insomuch that she thought she should
die. VVhereupon she sent for a Priest, and made her Confession, discovered to
him all her Lewd Pranks, and made him great Protestations, that if she
recovered, she would never admit of any other Man but her Husband. To whom, the
Priest, Madam, said he, I know ye too well, to believe ye: it will be
impossible for ye to leave off the Company of your Gallants. My request
therefore is, that you will entertain no more then Two or Three, which I will
allow ye to do upon that Condition, which I shall impose upon ye. But the
Woman disdaining the Proposal of her Confessor, put him out of her House and
sending for a Capuchin, told him the whole Story, and afterward made her
Confession to him. The same Relation adds, that the Priests enjoin their
Penitents that confefs the taking of another Bodies Goods, to bring the Goods
to Them, and not to restore 'em to the Right Owners; so that Restitution is
never made.

There are several Bishops in Georgia, an Archbishop and a Patriarch, whom they
call Catholicos. Whose preferments when Vacant are supplied by the Prince
though a Mohammedan, who generally prefers his kindred and Relations: so that
the Present Patriarch is his Brother. As for the Churches in Georgia, they are
something more cleanly kept then those in Mingrelia. And in the Cities you
shall see some that are very decent, though they are altogether as nasty in the
Country. The Georgians, as all the other Christians that surround 'em to the
North and West, have a strange humor to build all their Churches upon high
Mountains, in remote and almost inaccessible Places. Where they view 'em, and
bow to 'em at the distance of three or four Leagues: but seldom or never go
into 'em; and we may boldly assert, that the most part of 'em are hardly opened
once in Ten Years. They erect 'em, and then leave 'em to the Injuries of the
Weather and for the Birds and Fowls of the Air to build their Nests in. I could
never find out the Reason of this Extravagance, the Answers of all Persons of
whom I inquired, being altogether as extravagant: It Is the Custom. The
Georgians however are fully persuaded, that whatever Sins they have committed,
they shall obtain Pardon by building a little Church. Though for my part I am
apt to believe they build 'em in such remote and inaccessible Places, to avoid
the Charges of Adorning and Repairing of 'em.

And now I come to the Relations and Histories of the Conquest of Georgia by
the Persians, which are so numerous, that I should have been silent in this
particular, if those Authors had agreed among themselves, or if I had found
they had been rightly informed. Briefly therefore, here is that which I have
met with in the Stories of Persia themselves.

Ishmael the Great, (whom our Historians have Sirnam'd the Sophy) after he had
subdued the Countries that lie to the West of the Caspian Sea, of Media and
part of Armenia, and that he had expelled the Turks out of all these Places,
made War also upon the Georgians, though they had sent him numerous Succors at
the beginning of his Reign. The event of which War was successful to him, as
having reduced 'em to pay him Tribute, and give him Hostages. Now Georgia, as
well as the Kingdoms of Kaket and Carthuel, had several Petty Kings, called
Eristares Feudataries, and always at Wars one with another. Which was the
Reason, or at least the Means that most contributed to the Ruin of the
Georgians. They paid their Tribute during all the Reign of Ishmael, and his
Successor Tahmas, who was a Prince of great Courage, and fortunate in War.
During his Reign Lnarzab ruled in that part of Georgia which is called
Carthuel, and is as I have said the Eastern Georgia, and borders upon Persia
Eastward. This King lest two Sons behind him, between whom he divided his
Kingdom; Simon the Eldest, and David the Younger. But being both ill satisfied
with their Division, they made War one upon another, and in those Wars both
desired Tahmas to assist 'em. The Younger Brother was beforehand with Simon. To
whom Tahmas returned for answer, That he would put him in possession of all his
Fathers Dominions, if he would turn Mohammedan. David accepted the Condition,
embraced the Mohammedan Religion, and went and surrendered himself to the
Persian Army, which was already entered his Dominions, to the Number of Thirty
Thousand Horse; upon which he was presently sent to Tahmas, who lay then at
Casbin. So soon as he had got the Georgian Prince in his Clutches, he wrote to
Simon to the same effect as he had written to his Brother, that is to say, That
he should quit his Religion, and come to him, if he intended to enjoy the
Kingdom of his Ancestors.

Simon, finding the Persian Army pressing too severely upon him, surrendered
his Person, but would not abjure his Religion. But Tahmas, being now Master of
both the Princes, and of the Country of Georgia, sent the Eldest Brother
Prisoner to the Castle of Genghe near the Caspian Sea; and made the other
Governor of Georgia, changing his Name from David to Daoud-Can, which denoted
him to be of the Mohammedan Profession. Which done, he took an Oath of Fidelity
from all the chief Georgian Lords, and carried away their Childern and David's
also as Hostages into Persia.

After the Death of Tahmas, the Georgians shook off the Persian Yoke, as did
also the most part of the Provinces of Persia, and they were at Liberty during
the Reign of Ishmael the Second, which did not last above two Years; and during
the first four Years of Mahomet Kodabende, that is, The Servant of GOD: who
sent an Army into Georgia to reduce 'em to Obedience. Daoud Can fled upon the
Approach of the Army. At what time his Brother Simon, a Prisoner as I have
already declared, near the Caspian Sea, laying hold of the Opportunity to
re-enter into his Dominions, became a Mohammedan, and was made Can of Tefflis,
under the Name of Simon-Can.

During the Reign of Mahomet Kodabende, died Alexander King of Kaket, leaving
Three Sons and Two Daughters. Of which David was the Eldest; a Prince whose
Courage and Misfortunes have rendered him renowned over all the World, under
the Name of Taimuras Can, which the Persians gave him. At the time of his
Fathers Death he remained in Hostage at the Court of Persia, whither he was
carried by King Tahmas as has been said. He was bred up with Abas the Great,
being almost of the same Age, with great Magnificence and exact Care, where he
had inbib'd the Customs and Manners of the Persians, certainly much better then
those of the Georgians. So soon as his Father was Dead, his Mother, a Beautiful
and Prudent Princess, by the Georgians called Ketavana, but Mariana in the
Histories of Persia, wrote a Letter to Kodabende to this effect, Sir, My
Husband is Dead, I beseech ye to send me my Son Taimuras to Reign in his
stead; and withal I send you his Brother for Hostage in his Room. Thereupon
Taimuras was sent back, after he had taken the Oath of a Tributary and a Vassal.

At the beginning of the Reign of Abas the Great, Simon, King of Carthuel
already mentioned ended this Life; leaving the Kingdom to Luarzab his Son, then
a Child, under the Tuition of his Prime Minister, a Person of great parts, but
of a mean Extraction, called by the Georgians Mehrou, and by the Persians,
Morad, who was also Governor of Tefflis, and Governed the Kingdom almost with
an absolute Authority. This Mehrou had a handsome Daughter, with whom Luarzab
was passionately in Love, and by whom he was as passionately beloved. Nor could
the Father, by any means that he could use, prevent the two Lovers from seeing
one another. But one Day having surpised the Prince and her locked up in a
Room together, Sir, said he, I beseech ye, do not Dishonor neither my
Daughter, nor my House. If your Majesty pleases to Marry her, she is at your
service: but if not, forbear Privacy with her. Upon which Luarzab swore he
would have no other Wife; which Oath when the Prince had sworn, he suffered her
to Live with him as with her Husband. However the Marriage was not celebrated,
through the opposition of the Queen and the Ladies of the Country, who
protested they would never submit themselves as Subjects to a Person of her
mean Birth. Luarzab, no less glad of this opposition, told Mehrou, that he
could not Marry his Daughter. Now the Georgians are very Prone to Revenge; as I
have already observed. Thereupon the King was adviz'd to be before hand with
Mehrou, and to put him to Death to prevent his Revenge. To which the King
consented; and to that purpose had contrived it so as to make Mehrou Drunk, and
to kill him at the first Banquet the King should make. Of which contrivance
Mehrou was advertised, at the very Moment it should have been put in Execution.
For he was already half Tipsy, when one of the Kings Pages, who was one of his
Creatures, as he presented him the Cup, and seemed to Bow to him out of
respect, whispered to him: Sir, You will be Murdered. At which he made no
semblance of being daunted; but rising up, as soon as he had given back the
Glass, and pretending to go out to make Water (which is no Indecorum in that
Country, where the Feasts last for half a Day together) he ran directly to his
Stable, takes a Bonnet and a Coat from one of his Grooms that he first met;
Bridles one of the best Horses in the Stable, Mounts him and away he Rides. And
he so ordered his Flight, that not being discovered it proved successful to his
VVish. Presently he got to Ispahan, where he threw himself at the Feet of Abas
the Great, who was newly returned a Victor, from Shirvan and Shamaki, Countries
Bordering upon Georgia and the Caspian Sea. He declared to the King how he had
served Luarzab, and the Deceased King his Father, and what a recompense he had
prepared him for his Service; by seeking to deprive him of his Life, after he
had deflowered his Daughter under the pretense of Marriage. And concluding, he
told the King, that he was the true Monarch of Georgia, and therefore he
demanded of his Majesty Justice, and the Restitution of his Estate.

But Mehrou had contrived a securer way then this, to revenge himself upon
Luarzab, which was to kindle in the Heart of Abas an Affection for Luarzab's
Sister; one of the most lovely Persons in all Georgia; whose Beauty has been
celebrated by all the Persian Poets. Insomuch that in Persia they sing to this
Day the Songs that rendered her Beauty renowned above all the Charming Beauties
of her time, containing a pleasant Romance of the Amors between Her and Abas.
Her Name of Baptism was Darejan. But the Persian Fictions give her the Name of
Pebry. Mehrou therefore took all opportunities to talk of her to Abas with all
the Artificial Language he could invent, to inflame his desires. Thereupon Abas
sent to demand her of Luarzab first by one Ambassador, and then by another. The
first was sent back with fair promises; the second received for Answer, that
the Princess had affianc'd her self to Taimuras King of Kaket, who was then a
VVidower. But Abas the more enflamed by these refusals, sent a third Ambassador
to Luarzab, charging him to demand his Sister with all manner of fair promises
and foul Threats: and he wrote at the same time to Taimuras, not to Marry
Luarzab's Sister, but to come and meet him. Luarzab on the other side incensed
at these repeated and Haughty Importunities, instead of returning an answer to
the Ambassador, affronted and abused him; to the end no more Ambassadors might
be sent to trouble him any more upon that Errand. Abas however was not then in
a condition to execute his intended designs upon Georgia, as being at War with
the Turks. He dissembled therefore his Indignation, and ordered a Carmelite
Missionary, whom he sent into Europe to animate the Christian Princes to a War
against the Turk, to take Georgia in his way, and to admonish Taimuras by no
means to join with the Turks, nor to give 'em any manner of assistance against
the Persians. To which Taimuras either out of too much Fear or too much
Credulity readily condescended: but he soon repented his forbearance: for in
the Year 1613 Abas set forward from Ispahan with a design to make War upon
Georgia. However as he was a Prince, who among his other Extraordinary
Endowments was extremely cunning and reserved, he managed that War like an
Amorous Intreague. He gave out that Luarzab's Sister loved him and desired the
Match: that she had sent him Letters by a confident of her own; moreover that
she had been promised him, and therefore that Luarzab was both Perfidious and
Unjust. In the mean time he made his preparations for something else then to
fight a Rival: for all Men plainly perceived that he was resolved to reduce
Georgia under his Subjection. He had a great number of Georgians in his Army.
He gave Pensions to several great Georgian Lords; and Mehrou corrupted the
Loyalty of several others every day, who engaged to take his part: He had two
of Taimuras's Sons in Hostage, and a Brother and Sister of Luarzabs. In a word
he wrought with some of the Princes of the Blood Royal of Georgia to turn
Mahometans, for the possession of great Employments and Governments. For he
thought he should easily compass his designs against the Georgians, by sowing
Divisions among 'em; an easy thing to do, especially among People that are
given to revenge. He wrote to Taimuras that Luarzab was ungrateful, a Rebel, a
Madman, not fit to Reign, and that he was resolved to deprive him of his
Crown. To Luarzab he wrote the same thing concerning Taimuras; and at the same
time ordered Lolla Beg, General of his Army, who lay toward Media, to enter
Georgia with Thirty Thousand Horse, and to put all to Fire and Sword.

Upon this, Luarzab and Taimuras were counseled to unite. They met, and
communicated to each other Abas's Letters: wherein finding the ruin of both
resolved upon, they swore one to another either to Perish, or rescue each other
from the danger; and the more to confirm and strengthen their Union, Luarzab
gave his Sister, the Incomparable Darejan to Taimuras. Abas was like to run Mad
when they brought him the News; he was ready to have Cut the Throats of
Taimuras's Two Sons with his own Hands, and of the other Georgian Hostages:
nothing would serve him but he swore the Death of all together. But at length
he kept himself within bounds, and minded only to hasten his march rather to
punish the Kings that had offended him.

Taimuras, sensible of the approach of the Persian Army, would have prepared
for his defense. But he discovered that a part of the Grandees of his Kingdom
were inclined to Surrender. Thereupon he sent his Mother to Abas. She was a
Princess that had betak'n her self to a Religious Life, so soon as her
Misfortune had made her a Widow. Not that they make any Vows, or quit their
usual Habitations, but only put on the Religious Habit, who in those Countries
make profession of a Religious Life, as I have already observed in my Relation
of the Mingrelian Religion, which is the same with that of the Georgians.
Mariana or Ketavana therefore (for she was called by both these Names) wore the
Habit of a Religious Person, to the end she might have an excuse to Live more
retired, and uninterrupted in her Devotions. She set forward with a Numerous
Train and Magnificent Presents; and made so much have that she found Abas still
at Ispahan. Where being arrived she threw her self at the Kings Feet, and
besought Pardon for her Son, which she did with all the Submission that she
thought might avail to appease the Kings wrath.

This Princess was at that time well advanced in Years, yet was she still a
Lovely Lady, so that Abas became enamored of her, or at least feigned to be
so, the first day he saw her: thereupon he courted her to turn Mahumetan, that
he might be in a Condition to Marry her. But the Princess more Wedded to her
Chastity and Religion, and perhaps not enduring the strict Confinement of the
Persian Queens, refused the Kings Offers with a Virtue and Constancy
unmovable, which was to be admired in a Georgian. Abas incensed at her Denial,
or at least laying hold of it for a pretense, (for it was thought he never
intended to Marry Ketavana, but out of design to revenge himself upon Taimuras)
sent the Princess Prisoner to a certain House at a remote distance, and caused
her two Childern which Taimuras sent in Hostage, to be made Eunuchs, and to
turn Mahumetans; and then set forward for Georgia. Ketavana remained in Prison
several Years, and was afterward remanded to Shiras, where she suffered a most
cruel Martyrdom, in the Year 1624. a good while after Abas had Conquered
Georgia. For then it was that he wrote to Iman-Kooli-Kan, Governor of that
City, to force Ketavana to turn Mahumetan, whatever it cost him; and to make
use of Torments, if Promises, Threats, and Blows would not prevail.
Iman-Kooli-Kan showed his Orders to the Princess, in hopes that that would take
effect: but it signified nothing. Nor were all their Torments more prevalent
upon a Soul so truly Heroic and Devour. She underwent the Pain of Drubbing,
suffered the Torments of Shackles and Fire, and died at length upon the Burning
Coals; after she had endured for the sake of JESUS CHRIST, a Martyrdom of Eight
Years, so much the more cruel because it was changed and renewed every day. Her
Body was thrown upon the Common Lay-Stall of the City. From whence the Austin
Friars took it away by Night, embalmed it, put it in a Coffin, and sent it
privately to Taimuras by one of their own Society.

But to return to the Georgian War, Abas being entered into the Country of
Georgia with his Army, guided by Mehrou, and reinforced with a great Number of
Georgians every day; Hopes and Promises inveagling some, and fear or desire of
Revenge attracting others, Luarzab resolved however to fight it out, hoping so
to shut up the Persians in the Woods, that he might easily there defeat 'em.
And indeed Abas at one time gave himself over for lost, and thought he had been
betrayed. For being advanced with his Army Five and Twenty Leagues into the
Country, Luarzab divided his Forces into two parts, and shut up the Passages by
felling an infinite Number of Wood, so that the Persian Army could neither
advance nor retreat. Abas was in a strange Consternation, so that Mehrou
fearing the loss of his Head, as a Traitor, Upon my Life, Sir, said he, I will
bring ye out of these Streights in three Days. And he was as good as his word.
For he opened a Cross-way through the Wood by means of his Infantry, and
leaving the Camp which was blocked up by the Georgians, took only the Cavalry
along with him. Nevertheless Abas would lead 'em himself, and having passed the
Wood, fell into the Kingdom of Kaket, committing great Cruelty and Spoil;
insomuch that he commanded all the Trees that breed the Silkworms to be
destroyed; on purpose to ruin past recovery a Country that chiefly subsists by
making of Silk. When these Mournful Tidings were brought to Luarzab, he gave
himself over for lost, and fled into Mingrelia. On the other side, Abas who
knew his Conquests were not secure, so long as the Georgian Kings were at
Liberty, wrote to Luarzab in these Terms: What Reason urges you to fly? It Is
Taimuras that I seek, that Ungrateful and Perfidious Rebel. Come and surrender
your self to me, and I will confirm you in the Possession of the Georgian
Kingdom; but if you fail to yield your self, I will entirely ruin it, and lay
it desert.

Thereupon Luarzab in tender pity of his People, surrendered himself to Abas.
The King received him in most friendly manner, and with a Thousand Caresses,
replac'd him upon the Throne with all the Pomp and Solemnity imaginable; which
was done the better to deceive the Georgians, and to make himself Master of the
Country without striking a Stroke. He also made him several costly Presents,
and among the rest, he gave him a Heron-Tuft of Precious Stones, which he
commanded him always to wear, especially when he came into his Presence. This
is an Ensign of Royalty said he and it is my pleasure you should always wear it
upon your Head, that People may know ye to be King. Now the same Day that Abas
was to set forward for Tefflis, said he to Luarzab, I shall make a halt six
Leagues from this place, and send away the rest of the Army; will not you bear
me Company thither? This was a Snare with fair words to draw the poor Georgian
King from his Capital City: and he was as easily deluded to go along with him,
in regard he mistrusted not the least fowl play. In the mean while Abas
commanded one of his Guards, a noted Pick-Pocket, and one of the most dextrous
in the World at his Profession, to steal Luarzab's Heron-Tuft from him. Which
was done; and then Luarzab coming into the King's Presence, Luarzab, said the
King, what is become of your Heron-Tuft? Did not I recommend it to ye to wear
always as an Ensign of Royalty? Sir, said Luarzab, I am robbed of it, which has
almost put me besides my Wits; I have caused it to be hunted for every where
that I could imagine, but can hear no Tidings of it. How! said the King in a
great Fury, the King of Georgia robbed in my Camp! Bid 'em bid the
Provost-Marshal, the Captain of the Watch, and the President of the Council of
Justice, come to me. And this was the second Artifice made use of to seize the
Unfortunate Luarzab without striking a Stroke. Presently therefore he was laid
hold on; but Abas durst not put him to death for fear of a Revolt in Georgia.
He sent him therefore into Masanderan, or Hyrcania, hoping that the bad Air of
the Country would kill him: but seeing that would not do, he removed him to
Shiras; and at length took the following occasion to put him to death.

The Grand Duke of Moscovy had been a long time solicited by the Georgian
Princes to intercede in his behalf to Abas. Who was therefore at the Charge of
a Costly Embassy merely for that purpose. Thereupon Abas, who was a Person of
a quick Wit, and never idle, gave order to the Governor of Shamaki, a City
upon the Caspian Sea, where the Ambassadors of Moscovy first enter into Persia,
to try what he could do to discover whether the Ambassador came only upon
Luarzab's account or no: and whether the Moscovite did take his part to that
degree that there was any likelihood of a Rupture. To which the Governor sent
word, That the Ambassador came only to serve Luarzab; that he was a very great
Lord, and that his Instructions were very positive for a punctual Answer. Upon
which Abas, who was resolved not to release the Georgian Prince, nor yet could
refuse him his Liberty at the request of the Duke of Muscovy, wrote to the
Governor of Shiras to rid Luarzab out of the World, so that his Death might
seem only to have happened by accident. Which was accomplished to his desire,
and the News was brought to Abas, two Days before the Arrival of the Moscovite
Ambassador. Abas made the Courier tell his Tale in public, at what time he
seemed to be strangely troubled and surpised: Good GOD, said he, this is
Unfortunate News indeed; How came he by his Death? Sir, answered the Courier,
he went a Fishing, and as he was casting his Net, fell into the Pond, and there
stifled himself. I Will make an Example of his Guards, replied the King, for
taking no more care of him.

Soon after the Russian Ambassador had his Audience; at what time, after the
Banquet was over, and that they had drank pretty hard, the King sending for him
near to his own Person Well, said he, Mr. Ambassador, and what is it the King of
the Russes my Brother desires of me? Thereupon the Ambassador began to unfold
his Commission, and declare the Purport of his Embassy; but when he had once
let slip Luarzab's Name, I believe, replied the King, you have heard of the
Misfortune that has befallen that Young Prince: I am extremely grieved for him:
I wish to GOD he had not been dead; for I should have done with all my Heart
whatever your Master could desire in his behalf.

Thereupon the Brother of Luarzab was made Governor of Georgia in his Room,
being turned Mahumetan before that: and called by a Persian Title joined to his
Georgian, Bacrat-Mirzah, or the Royal Prince. Abas also left an Army in Georgia
to oppose Taimuras. Who at first continued the War with such Succors as he
obtained from the Turks and Christian Princes joining upon the Caspian Sea,
into whose Territories he was retired for Sanctuary: But seeing those Petty
Assistances did him no good, he went to the Turk and implored Aid of the Turk.
Which he obtained: and a great Army of Turks was sent into Georgia, who
defeated the Persian Forces, and reestablished Taimuras in the Kingdom of
Caket. But he enjoyed it not long; for so soon as the Turks were retreated,
Abas returned into Georgia, and changed the whole Face of Affairs. He built
Fortresses which he filled with Natural Persians; He carried away above Four
and Twenty Thousand Families, of which he placed the greatest part in Masander,
or Hyrcania, Media, Armenia, and the Province of Persia, removing into their
Rooms both Persians and Armenians. He also intermixed Mildness with his
Severities, to try how far that would avail to keep the People in order. He
likewise made an Agreement with the Georgians, which he confirmed by Oath for
himself and his Successors, That their Country should be free from Taxes, that
there should be no Alteration of their Religion. That he would not pull down
their Churches, neither would he erect any Moschees: That their Viceroy should
be always a Georgian, of the Race of their Kings, but a Mohammedan: Of whose
Sons he that would change his Religion, should be Governor and great Provost
of Ispahan, till he succeeded his Father.

Abas died in the Year 1628. And so soon as Taimuras had Intelligence of his
Death, he re-enter'd Georgia, and caused the Georgians to Rebel, who slew their
Viceroy and all the Persians that opposed 'em; he made himself Master of all
the strong Forts except Tefflis; but could not keep 'em. For Sefy, succeeding
his Grandfather Abas, sent in the Year 1631. a powerful Army against him,
under the Command of Rustan Can, a Georgian, the Son of Simon Can, that same
Viceroy whom the Georgians had slain. He was Grand Provost of Ispahan, at
Abas's decease, and called Cosrou Mirza. King Sefy, therefore, who knew him to
be a Person of great Valor, and deemed him highly provoked, made him General
of his Army and Viceroy of Georgia in his Fathers Room He defeated the
Georgians in several Encounters, won back all Carthuel, and part of the Kingdom
of Caket, and pursued Taimuras who was forced to betake himself into two strong
places in Mount Caucasus. In which inaccessible Fastnesses, this Prince no less
Valiant then Unfortunate, held out for some Years; though rather like a
Fugitive that fought for his Life; than a Prince that defended his Crown. But
receiving no assistance neither from the Turks nor Christians; he went to
solicit the Moscovite, but failing there likewise; he retired into Imiretta,
of which his Sister was Queen, with a Resolution there to end his Life, not
finding any hopes of recovering the Inheritance of his Ancestors. There
Shanavas-Can took him Prisoner, when he Conquered that Petty Kingdom of
Imiretta, and setle'd his Son therein. For Taimuras had always such a passion
to Dye in his own Country, that he would not make his escape into Turkey, which
he might easily have done: and besides he considered that being Old, the Turks
would not have that respect for him, as he might expect from the Persians.
Shanavas-Can carried him to Tefflis, and wrote Word to the King that the Famous
Taimuras-Can was in his Hands. The King sent for him to his Court. Where being
very aged, his Travels and Troubles of mind, threw him into a desperate
sickness. The King lodged him in one of his Palaces with a great deal of
magnificence, and ordered his Physicians to look to him with great care.
Notwithstanding all which he died in the Year 1659. His Body was carried into
Georgia, and Buried with all the Pomp and State which is usual in that Country.

Rustan-Can having reconquer'd Georgia, built the Fortress of Gery as is
reported. He restored Peace and good order to the Country, and Governed with an
exemplary mildness and Justice. He Married the Sister of Levan Dadian Prince of
Mingrelia, though she were a Christian and Married already. Her Husband being
Prince of Guriel; whom Levan had deprived both of his Principality and his
Eyes, for being in a Conspiracy against him, and taking his Wife away from him,
Married her to Rustan-Can neither the Ecclesiastics of Mingrelia nor Georgia
opposing that Monstrous Conjunction, if I may presume to call it so. The Name
of this Princess was Mary, of whom we have already spoken in our Recital of the
last Revolutions of Imiretta. She is now the Wife of Shanavas-Can, Governor of
Georgia.

Rustan-Can Died in the Year 1640. and his Body was carried to Com, where it
was enterr'd. At what time Shanavas-Can, Taimuras's Kinsman, was Governor and
Grand Provost of Ispahan. Him Rustan-Can, having no Children, adopted, and sent
him to the Court, beseeching the King to look upon him as his Son, and to
ratify the Adoption. His Majesty approved his Choice, caused the Young Prince
to be Circumciz'd, and bestowed upon him the Government of the City; and this
is he who is at Present Viceroy of Georgia; being Fourscore Years of Age, yet
very Strong and Lusty.

So soon as Rustan-Can was Dead, the Princess Mary his Wife, had private
Intelligence, that upon the advantageous reports of her Beauty, that had been
made to the King of Persia, he had commanded her to be sent to Court. Thereupon
she was adviz'd to fly into Mingrelia, or to hide her self. But she took a
quite contrary course; for being well assured that there was no place within
the Empire of Persia, where the King would not discover her, she went and locked
her self up for Three Days together in the Fortress of Tefflis, which was
indeed to deliver her self up to the Mercy of him that sought her. All which
time she showed her self every Day to the Commander's Wives; and then sending
for him to her Apartiment, she told him that upon the credit of his Wives, that
had seen her, he might write to the King, that she was no such Amiable Beauty
to be so ardently desired, that she was far gone in Years, and besides that she
was a little misshapen; and therefore that she conjured his Majesty to let her
end her Days in her own Country. At the same time she sent the King a
Magnificent Present of Gold and Silver, and Four Young Damsels of an
Extraordinary Beauty. And so soon as she had sent her present, she retired from
the World, not suffering her self to be seen by any Body, she betook her self
wholly to her Devotions, giving great Alms to the Poor, to the end they might
Pray to GOD for her Souls Health. But at the end of Three Months there came an
order from the King, for Shanavas-Can to Marry her. Who was over joy'd at the
receipt of the Order, for Mary was Rich, so that he Married her, though he had
then another Wife of his own; and he has a very great Value for her by reason
of her great Estate. Her first Husband the Prince of Guriel is still alive,
residing in Georgia, but very Old, and very Decrepit. Nevertheless the Princess
was so kind to send him one of her Damsels, to comfort him for his loss of her;
and she allows him wherewithal to maintain himself, but at a very sorry rate:
However she seems still to have some kind of Affection for him; insomuch that
being upon the Frontiers of Imiretta, some Years since she sent for him, and
kept him with her eight Days. At which when Shanavas-Can seemed to be Jealous,
the Princess fell a laughing at him; and asked Whether he were not ashamed to
be Jealous of a poor, old, blind, miserable Creature, and altogether as
impotent as himself.

The greatest part of the Georgian Lords are outwardly Mahometans; some
professing that Religion to obtain Preferment at Court, and Pensions of State.
Others, that they may have the Honor to Marry their Daughters to the King, and
sometimes merely to get 'em in to wait upon the Kings Wives. For which the
usual Recompense is a Pension, or an Employment. As a forerunner to which the
Mohammedan Religion is always first of all embraced. The Pension is according to
the Quality of the Persons; but most commonly not above Two Thousand Crowns
Upon which account there fell out a very lamentable Accident while I staid at
Tefflis.

A Georgian Lord had given the King to understand, that he had a Niece of an
extraordinary Beauty. His Majesty commanded her to be brought to his Palace:
And who should be so wicked and base as to carry the Order and serve it, but
the Lord himself! Thereupon he came to his Sister, who was a Widow, and told
her, That the King of Persia had a desire to Marry her Daughter, and that
therefore she must persuade her to give her consent. Thereupon the Mother
having made known to the Young Virgin, the force that was upon her, she was
almost at her Wits end. For she had rather have had a Young Lord that was her
Neighbor, by a Person whom she was extremely beloved. Thereupon they took a
Resolution to make him a Sharer in their Misfortune, and to that purpose sent
him the News by one of their Domestic Servants. Away comes the Lord Post, and
arriving at Midnight, found the Mother and the Daughter with mutual Tears and a
condolling Grief bewailing their hard Fortune. Presently the Lord threw himself
at their Feet, and told 'em, That for his part he feared nothing so much as the
loss of his Mistress, and that all the Anger of the King of Persia was nothing
to him in respect of such a fatal Calamity. That there was but one way for him
to disingage himself out of this Noose, which was to be Married immediately,
and the next Day to tell her Perfidious Uncle, That the Lady by him demanded
was no Virgin. This was agreed upon; and the Mother being retired, the Marriage
was Consummated in a Trice. But the Uncle discovering the Plot, gave notice of
it to the King. At which the King was so enraged, that he gave Order to send
for the Mother, the Daughter, and the Husband; who thereupon hid themselves,
and skulk'd up and down for some Months. But at length finding themselves too
hotly pursued, beyond all likelihood of escaping, they fled to Akalzike, the
Basha of which place has taken 'em into his Protection.

The fear which they have in Georgia of Accidents of the like Nature, obliges
those that have handsome Daughters to Marry 'em as soon as they can, and
sometimes in their Infancy. The poor People Marry theirs betimes, and sometimes
in the very Cradle. To the end the Lords whose Vassals they are, should not
take 'em away by force, either to sell 'em, or make 'em their Concubines. For
certain it is, they have a very great respect for Married Persons; and though
they are but Children, they are not easily induced to tear 'em out of their
Houses.

The Kingdom of Caket is at present in Subjection to the King of Persia;
Shanavas-Can having completed the Conquest of it; and now Archilus his Son is
Viceroy, who turned Mohammedan to obtain the Employment. We have already made
mention of him, and of the Love which he had for Sistan-Darejan the King of
Imiretta's Wife, when we gave an Account of the Revolutions of that Petty
Kingdom. Sistan-Darejan remained a Prisoner at Akalzike, where the Basha's
showed her an extraordinary Civility. Archilus had also a longing Affection for
her, from the time that he had lost sight of her. Thereupon his Father so
wrought by his Presents and Contrivances with the Basha, that he released her
in the Year 1660. She was carried in Triumph to Tefflis, where Archilus Married
her immediately, and by that Match entitled himself to the Kingdom of Caket, of
which he was actual Viceroy already. For the Princess his Wife was Daughter to
Taimuras-Can, and Sister of Heraclius, the only Son whom that Unfortunate
Prince left behind him capable of Succession, in regard all the rest had had
their Eyes put out. But he and his Mother were fled into Moscovy; where they
say, the Great Duke allows 'em a Train suitable to their Quality. And here give
me leave to tell ye one Passage concerning this Archilus Viceroy of Caket,
very much worthy to entertain your Curiosity.

He was affianc'd in his Youth, to a Daughter of one of the most Noble Families
in Georgia. And the Lady fully expected to be his Wife, in regard that Breach
of Contract is a thing never heard of in that Country. But when she heard that
he had Married Sistan-Darejan, she sent to him to demand satisfaction, for the
Murder he had committed upon her Honor. For so in Georgia they call the
affront done to a Contract, when a Man leaves the party affianc'd to Marry
another. At first she resolved to Sue him at Law for the Injustice he had done
her; but that way not seeming feasible, by reason of the great Authority and
Sway which Archilus had in the Country, she put her self at the Head of Four
Hunderd Men, and offered fairly to fight her Faithless Lover. But Archilus
refused her, sending her word he did not use to fight with Young Maids: withal
he bid her not make such a noise, lest he disclosed the Favors which Sizi a
Young Lord at Court had boasted to have received from her. The Young Lady
enraged to hear her self reproached as well as scorned, turned all her fury
against Sizi. She challenged him, and because he would not meet her; she laid
her self in Ambush for him, put him to flight, pursued him and killed him above
Twenty Men. She had also a Brother; and he also undertook to quarrel Sizi. The
Prince and the the whole Court did all they could to reconcile 'em: but seeing
they did but labor in Vain, the two Adversaries were permitted to determine
the difference by their Swords. Now it is the custom in Georgia, that when the
Law cannot decide or reconcile a Quarrel among Gentlemen, they are permitted to
try it out in a place Rayl'd in for the purpose. And before the two Combatants
enter the Lists, they Confess themselves, receive the Communion, and prepare
for Death. This is called, Appealing to the Tribunal of GOD, for the Georgians
maintain that this way of referring directly to GOD the Punishment of a Crime,
is both Honest and Lawful; where human Justice is not able to distinguish
whether the party accused be Guilty, or whether the accuser charge him falsely.
At length Sizi and his Adversary being arrived at the place appointed, they
were parted by a Company of Soldiers, just as they had drawn their Swords. And
the Young Lady Dying soon after with shame and Grief; the Prince by his
Authority obliged her Brother to be Friends with Archilus and Sizi.

And now before I relate what befell me at Tefflis, it behooves me to make a
Description of the Place; though the Plate before the Leaf, might suffice to
give a distinct Idea of it.

This City is one of the fairest in all Persia, though it be not so very big.
It is seated at the bottom of a Mountain, at the Foot of which upon the Eastern
side, runs the River Cur: Which River, being the Ancient Cyrus, or an Arm of
that Cyrus, has its source in the Mountains of Georgia, and joins to Araxes.
The most part of the Houses built by the River side stand upon a hard Stony
Rock. The City is encompassed with very Strong and Beautiful Walls, only on
that side next the River. It lies all in length from the North to the South,
defended by a large Fortress on the South side seated upon the brow of a
Mountain, wherein there are none but Native Persians, whether Inhabitants or
Soldiers. The Parading Place that is before it, serves also for a public
meeting Place and Market. This Fortress is likewise a Sanctuary of Refuge: All
manner of Criminals and People in Debt are there safe. The Prince of Georgia is
obliged to pass through the midst of it, when he goes according to custom to
receive without the Gates of the City, the Kings Presents and Letters; for that
when you come from Persia to Tefflis, there is no entering into the City but
through the Fortress. Yet most certain it is, that the Prince never goes
through the Castle, but he is afraid of being arrested, and least the Governor
should have some secret order to seize upon his Person. And indeed the Persian
Kings have very prudently established a custom among the Viceroys of Georgia,
and the rest of the Governors of the Provinces of the Empire, that they are
obliged to go and receive whatever the King sends 'em without the Gates of the
City; by which means he may without any trouble or hazard seize upon their
Persons. Tefflis contains several Churches; to the Number as they say of
Fourteen; which is much in a Country where there is so little Devotion. Six are
maintained and appropriated to the Georgian Service: The other belong to the
Armenians. The Cathedral, which is called Sion, is seated upon the Bank of the
River, built all of fair hewn Stone. It Is an Ancient Building well in repair,
like all the Ancient Churches in the East; which are composed of Four Bodies,
the middle of which is a great Duomo, sustained by Four Great Pilasters, and
covered with a Steeple. The Great Altar is in the Middle of the Body that lies
to the East. The Inside of the Church is full of flat TEFLIS
TEFLIS
A. The Fortress. B. THe Bpps church called Sion. C. The Bastias Monastery. D.
The Holy Cross. E. The Church and Place of ye Catholicos. F. The White Work or
ye Queen's Church. G. The New York. H. Mognay Church. I. Bethen Church. K. The
Church of ye Rupture. L. THe Mosquee. M. The Capuchins. N. The Princes Palace.
O. The Great Bazar. P. The public Magazines. Q. The Viceroy of Caket's Palace.
R. The Prince's Gardens. S. The Prince's Piatza. T. The Place for Military
Exercises.


Paintings after the Greek manner, painted but a while ago, and by such lewd
Artists, that it is the greatest trouble in the World to know what they mean.
The Bishop's See adjoyns to the Church, where the Tibilele resides: For by that
Name they always call the Bishops of Tefflis. Next to the Cathedral the
Principal Churches of Georgia are Tetrachen, or the White-Work, which was built
by the Princess Mary: and Anguescat, or the Image of Abagare. The Georgians
call Abagare Angues, and hold that the Miraculous Portraicture which they
assure us he received from Jesus Christ, has been a long time in that Church.
They also call it the Catholicos's Church, because that Prelate's Palace joins
to it: and that he seldom goes other where to say his Prayers, or Officiate.
This Church is seated upon the Bank of the River, directly parallel with the
Bishop's See. The Georgians also had one more very fair Church at the end of
the City upon the South Side: but the Prince made use of it some years for a
Storehouse for his Powder. And indeed it was fit for nothing else, for long
before that, the Thunder had thrown down a good part of it. Thereupon the
Prince caused it to be repaired; and this Magazin still carries the Name of the
Church of Melete, that is to say, The Rupture. Which Name was given to it, by
reason that it was founded by one of the Kings of Georgia, to show his
Repentance, for that he had without any occasion given him, broken a Peace with
one of his Neighbor Princes.

The Principal Monasteries that belong to the Armenians, are Pacha-Vane, that
is, the Monastery of Pacha: in which Monastery, the Armenian Bishop of Tefflis
resides. They so call it by the Report of the Armenians, for that a Fugitive
Basha of Turkey turning Christian, caused it to be erected in this City.
Sourph-Nishon, that is, to speak properly, the Red Sign; and thence generally
taken for the Holy Cross. Bethem, or Bethlehem, Norachen, or the New Work and
Mognay. Now Mognay is the Name of a Village of the Armenians near Irivan, where
they have for a long time kept a certain Skull, which they assure ye to be St.
George's: hence because that part of the Skull is removed to this Church,
therefore they gave it the Name of the Place from whence they took the Relick.

There is not any Mosque at Tefflis, though the City belongs to a Mohammedan
Empire: and is Governed together with the whole Province by a Mohammedan Prince.
The Persians have endeavored all they could to rebuild one there, but never
could accomplish their design; for the People still Mutiny'd, and by force of
Arms beat down the Work, and abused the Workmen. And indeed the Georgian
Princes were glad of these Seditions of the People, though they would not
countenance 'em openly: For in regard they had not renounced the Christian
Religion but only with their Lips, and to obtain Preferment, they could not
heartily consent to the Establishment of Mahometism. Now the Georgians are
Mutinous, Inconstant and Valiant, as has been said: They also retain a smack
and sense of Liberty. Then they lie near the Turks. And this is that which
hinders the Persian from making use of Extremities, and preserves to the City
of Tefflis and all Georgia a happy Liberty to retain almost all the Exterior
Marks of their Religion. Upon all the Steeples of their Churches at the Top
stands a Cross; and they are furnished with several Bells which they ring.
Every day they sell Pork openly, and in public with the same freedom as other
Vittles, and Wine at the Corners of the Streets. All which though the Persians
are mad to see, yet they know not how to help it.

Some few Years since they built a small Mosque in the Fortress, close to the
Wall that separates it from the Grand Piazza of Tefflis. They built it in the
Castle to accustom the People to the sight of Mosques, and of the Priests, that
call the Mahometans to Prayer from the Top of the Building. Nor could the
Georgians hinder the Building of this Mosque, because they durst not enter
Armed into the Fortress, where there was always a good Guard: But so soon as
the Priest was mounted to the Top to make Confession of his Faith, the People
gathered together into the Piazza, and plied the Top of the Mosque with such
Volleys of Stones, that the Priest was constrained to come down again in more
haste then he went up: after which Mutiny, the Persians would never suffer any
of their Priests to appear at the Top of the Mosque any more.

The public Buildings at Tefflis are very graceful: Their Bazars, or
Marketplaces are very large, built of Stone, and in very good repair. The
Inns, or Caravansera's for the Receipt and Entertainment of Strangers, are no
less beautiful. There are few Baths indeed in the City, by reason that every
Body goes to the Hot-Baths that are in the Castle. The Water of which Baths
springs from a Sulphur-Mine, and is very hot. So that the People which make use
of 'em for Diseases and Distempers are no less numerous then those that go for
Cleanliness and Curiosity. The Magazins also are well built, and kept in Order,
being seated in an open place near the Grand Piazza.

The Prince's Palace is without contradiction one of the most beautiful
Ornaments in Tefflis; being adorned with spacious Halls and Rooms of State that
look out upon the River, and the Gardens which are very large. It also contains
several Aviaries, full of Birds of several sorts, a spacious Dog-kennel, and
the most lovely place to keep Hawks in that Eyes ever beheld. Before the Palace
lies a spacious Court sufficient to hold a Thousand Horse; which is surrounded
with Shops, and joins to a long Bazar right against the Palace-Gate. So that it
is a lovely Prospect which the Piazza and the Front of the Palace makes from
the Top of the Bazar. Moreover, the Viceroy of Caket has a Palace at the end of
the City; which deserves to be well viewed and considered.

The Out-parts of Tefflis are adorned with several Houses of Pleasure, and
several beautiful Gardens. The biggest of which is the Prince's; where indeed
there are but few Fruit Trees; but it is full of those that serve for the
Ornament of Gardens, and for Shade and Coolness.

There is also a Habitation of Missionary Capuchins at Tefflis, where the
Superior of the Missions which that Order has, and hopes to have in Georgia,
resides; it being about Thirteen Years ago since they were sent from Rome. The
Title of Physicians which they give themselves, and which every Body there
gives 'em, is the reason that they are well received wherever they desire to
settle. For Physic, and especially Chemistry, which is very much esteemed, is
little known in the Eastern Counties. They settled first at Tefflis, and
afterward at Gory. Shanavas-Can gave 'em a House in each of those Cities with
free Liberty to exercise their Religion. They brought him Letters from the
Pope, and the Congregation de Propaganda Fide, and in their own Names made
Noble Presents to himself, the Princess, the Catholicos, and the principal
Grandees of the Court, which they continue to do at the end of every two Years.
Whoever among 'em understands Physic best, never stirs from the Person of the
Prince to preserve his Protection, which is their only Safeguard from the
Persecutions of the Georgian and Armenian Clergy. They have endeavored to
expel these Missionaries from time to time, as they saw their Endeavors to
draw People to their Religion; but in regard there are neither Physicians nor
Surgeons in Georgia, they make themselves necessary by the practice of Physic
and Surgery, which some of 'em understand very well, and practice with very
good success. They have permission from the Pope to take Money for their Cures,
and they make good advantage of it, Physic being their chiefest Subsistence:
They are generally paid in Wine, Meal, Cattle, and young Slaves; and some there
are that give 'em Horses: of all which they sell whatever they have no need of,
or whatever they have to spare. Were it not for this support of Physic, they
could never subsist upon the Annual Pension which the Congregation allows 'em
of 18 Roman Crowns for every Missionary, which make but Five Pounds Ten
Shillings. Besides the Dispensation already mentioned, these Missionaries have
several others both in Spirituals and Temporals; as, to say Mass, without any
Body to assist at it, to say it in several sorts of places, and in all sorts of
Habits, to give Absolution of all manner of Sins, to disguise themselves, to
keep Horses and Servants, to have Slaves, to buy and sell, to pay and take
Interest. In a word, they have Dispensations so ample, and of that extent, that
they pretend a power to do, and do in effect, whatever is permitted to the most
priviledg'd Ecclesiastics. Nevertheless these Missionaries, with all their
Artifices, and notwithstanding all this Liberty, make very little progress
among the Georgians. For besides that the people are very ignorant, and take
little care to instruct themselves, it is so rivetted into their Heads, that
Fasting as they observe it, is the Essential part of Christian Religion: That
they do not believe the Capuchins to be Christians, because they are informed
that in Europe they do not fast as they do. This incredible Obstinacy obliges
the Capuchins to fast as they do, and to abstain from Creatures which the
Georgians abhor, as the Hare, the Tortoise, and others. They fast Wednesdays
and Frydays, regulating themselves according to the Ancient Calendar, that they
may be said to be outwardly no more then Georgian Christians. Many People at
first repaired to their Church at Tefflis, drawn thither by the Novelty of
their Service, and a little Music of four or five Voices, accompanied with a
Lute, and a Spinet. But at present there go no more then only five or six poor
People, who get something by the Missionaries. They have also set up a School,
but they have not above seven or eight Scholars, the Children of poor Parents,
who go thither more for Vittles then Learning, as the Fathers confessed
themselves. They told me often that they did not keep up their Missions for any
profit they got by 'em, but only for the Honor of the Roman Church; which,
said they, would not be the Catholic Church; had it not Ministers in all parts
of the inhabited World In a word, these Missionaries have no more in all
Georgia then the two Houses already mentioned. The Wars of Imiretta and Guriel,
and the Calamities of those Countries, have forced 'em to quit several
Settlements which they had made in those parts. And their design was, when I
parted from Tefflis, to visit Kaket in June, and several other places upon
Mount Caucasus. Their Mission consisted of twelve Persons, nine Priests, and
three Lay-Brothers.

The City of Tefflis is very well peopled; and there are as many Strangers
resort thither as to any place in the World. For it drives a great Trade, and
the Court is very Numerous and Magnificent, beseeming the Capital of a
Province, being never without several Grandees of Note.

As to the Name of the City, I could never learn the Etymology of the word.
They say, the Persians gave it that Name. Certain it is however, that the
Georgians do not call it Tefflis, but Cala, that is to say, the City or the
Fortress; which is indeed a Name that they give to all Spacious Habitations
encompassed with Walls. Which makes me think, that because they have no other
Walled City in all the Country, they would give it no other Name but Cala. Some
Geographers call it Tebele-Cala, or the Hot City, by reason of the Baths of Hot
Waters within it, or else because the Air is not so cold nor so boystrous as in
the other parts of Georgia. Neither could I learn the Time when the City was
founded, nor the most remarkable Revolutions that have befallen it. For my part
I do not believe its Antiquity surpasses Eight Hunderd Years. It has been twice
under the Power of the Turks. Once in the Reign of Ishmael the Second King of
Persia; and the second time, in the Reign of his Successor, Solomon becoming
Master of it, at the same time almost that he took Tauris. The Persian Tables
place it in 83 Degrees of Longitude, and 43 Degrees. 5. min. of Latitude. It is
also called Dar el Melec, or the Royal City, as being the Metropolis of the
Kingdom.

The 10th the Superior of the Capuchins gave the Viceroy Notice of my Arrival.
I desired him so to do, considering with my self, that having Servants and
Luggage, and being lodged at the Capuchins House, my Arrival could not be
concealed from a Prince who had Intelligence even of the most trivial Things
that passed in Tefflis, much more of my Adventures in Mingrelia, of which many
People had spread a report. Besides, I was glad to see him, and show him the
King of Persia's Passports, directed to all the Governors of Provinces,
wherein I was effectually recommended. For I made no Question but the Prince
upon the sight of those Orders would make me Welcome, and grant me a Convoy, if
I should have occasion, for the rest of my Journey. Shanavas-Can understanding
who I was, and that the deceased King had employed me into Europe upon his own
Service and Affairs, ordered the Superior to tell me in his Name, That I was
Welcome, that he was glad of my Arrival, and that I would do him a Kindness to
come and see him as soon as I could; which I was neither in a Condition,
neither was I resolved to do so soon: being resolved to stay till I was ready
to depart, because I would not be obliged to go every Day to Court. Therefore I
desired Father Raphael, who was his Physician, to tell him, That I was
overjoyed at the Honor which he had done me, and that I would not fail to pay
my Duty to him, so soon as I had put my self into a handsome Equipage; but that
I was so out of order, that I could not stir abroad these Ten Days. I know not
whether Father Raphael made a true Report to the Prince, or whether the Prince
believed him; for so it happened, that about Twelve a Clock in the Forenoon, he
sent a Gentleman to tell me, That since I was come to Town in a Week of Mirth
and Jollity, while he Feasted every Day at Court, he desired that I would come
and see him. I was surpised and troubled at the Message; and therefore I
desired the Superior and Father Raphael to let the Prince know, That I could
not yet stir abroad, and that he would be pleased to condescend that I might
stay till the Sunday following before I received the Honor which he was
pleased to do me. Which Message the Capuchins promised to deliver, but failed.
They went to the Court it is true, but returned the next moment, to tell me,
That the Prince was impatient to hear what News from Europe. But the truth of
it was, that they had an extraordinary desire to produce me. They were desirous
to show the King of Persia's Agent, whom they asserted to be one of their own
Nation, to the end themselves might be the more respected; and they desired my
Comrade and my self to put on our most Sumptuous Habit, and to enlarge for
their sakes the Present which we intended for the Prince. In which particular I
was willing to gratify 'em, and in whatever else I might conveniently do, as
being glad of an Opportunity to acknowledge the signal Kindnesses they had done
me.

It was almost Noon when we went to the Palace, accompanied by the Superior
and Father Raphael, who attended to be assistant to us. The Prince was in a
Room of State, a Hunderd and Ten Foot long, and above Forty broad, built upon
the side of the River, and all open on that side. The Ceeling, which was all of
Mosaic Work, was placed upon a great Number of Pillars, Painted and Gilt
between 35 and 40 Foot high. The whole Room was spread with very fair Carpets.
The Prince and principal Nobility were sitting near three little Chimneys,
which with several Brasiers warmed the Room to that degree, that the Cold was
not felt. Shanavas-Can, when people approached near him, caused himself to be
Reverenced the first time, like the King of Persia Himself. They fell upon
their Knees Two or Three Paces distant from his Person, and bow their Heads to
the Ground, Three Times one after another. Which manner of Saluting the Eastern
Princes, the Europeans have always scrupled to observe. And indeed it being
impossible that a Man should prostrate himself in a more humble posture, such a
Prostration should only be used before GOD himself. So that sometimes they
excuse themselves from using this manner of Salutation, by saying they are of
another World, and understand not the Complements of the Country. For my part I
made my Obeisance with three Bows, without Kneeling. Afterward two Gentlemen
led me to take my place: but I would not sit above the Capuchins, though the
Gentlemen pressed me so to do, and the Steward of the Household who stood upon
his Feet in the middle of the Room. For I was willing to do 'em that Honor,
that they might have Honor done 'em by others. Which the Superior was so glad
to see, that he would needs have me take place of his Companion.

While I was paying my Obeisance, a Gentleman who had received from me at the
Hall Door the King of Persia's Letters Patents which I held in my Hand, and the
Present which I had brought for the Prince, and laid 'em in order in a large
Silver Voider, set down the Voider at the Prince's Feet. Presently he took the
Patent, opened it, and rising up from his Seat put it to his Lips, and laid it
upon his Forehead, then gave it to his Chief Minister to tell him the Contents.
Afterward he viewed the Present with a great deal of Curiosity and
Satisfaction; which consisted of several pieces; that is to say,

A large Watch, with a Lunary Motion, in a Silver Case, Engraved and Gilt.

A Looking-Glass of Crystal of the Rock, in a Silver Frame.

A Gold Enameled Box to put Opium Pills in. For the most part of the Persians
take those Pills several times a day.

A Surgeons Case, furnished with all sorts of Instruments; being a very
Delicate and Curious Piece of Workmanship.

Knives with Handles, Neat and Delicately wrought.

The first Minister after he had received the Patent, with a low Voice gave the
Prince an Account of the Contents. And I understood afterward that the Prince
should say, they had never read a Patent more Effectual nor more Honorable,
and that they had very seriously considered it. All the Grandees admired the
Golden Character, and the Moresco-Flourishes in the Margent which were very
large. The Prince caused it to be Copied; and I thought it not amiss to give ye
the Translation of it as follows.

1 HE WHO IS, HE IS GOD to whom belongs praise and glory.

God is my sufficiency Who ever he be that loves not Ali tho it were my self I
love not him.

Who ever he be that do not at his door bow his head to ye Earth tho he were
an Angel let earth be upon his head.

The Slave of the King of ye Country Abas ye Second. 1059 Abas ye Second
Victorious:




Ali Hasein Husein Ali Mahamad Iafer Mousa Ali Mahamad Hali Hasein Mahamad
Absolutely Commands

Peace and Happiness remain 17 Eternally with ye followers of ye Holy flight.

At 18 Asheraf ye Noble in ye Province of Theber-Estaan, where God always
maintain Prosperity and Abundance. 19 Mehdy Son of Aabib Alla of ye race of
Hasein.

The Patent is writ upon a Sheet of Paper two Foot and a half long; it is also
beautified with Letters of Gold, Blew, Red and Black. And therefore I have
marked in great Letters, what is written in Letters of Gold, and what is
written in the Original in Colored Letters, I have enclosed between two little
Hooks.

1. It is in the Original, Hou Alla sub han Hou. Which is an Arabian Sentence
taken out of the Alcoran. Hou in this Language is the Essential Name of GOD,
and not Alla, which signifies Most High. This Hou is the Jehova of the Hebrews,
and signifies He, or He there. It signifies also is, or He that is; by which is
to be understood a Being of Himself, and Uncreated. This Name is to be met with
in the Alcoran in a number of places; and it seems that the Impostor who
Composed that Book alludes to that Passage in the Third of Exodus, He who is,
has sent me. The Mahometans place this word Hou over all their Decrees,
Statutes, Petitions, and almost over all their VVritings. And sometimes they
add, Alla ta a Alla, that is to say, He who is, is GOD Most High.

2. These words ought to refer to the bottom of the Patent after these, Being a
Decree from above, Elevated on High above all things, as much as to say, That
GOD is still above. The Persians have this Custom in any Act or Decree, never
to put the Name of GOD at the bottom of the Leaf; but they place it at the top
upon the side, and leave a Blank in that part to which it ought to refer. And
this same Circumspection they observe with great Superstition, believing that
they who fail therein, fail of their Respect to GOD. They have the same Respect
for the King and the rest of his Ministers, in their Juridical Writings, their
Petitions, and their Public Acts: for they never insert 'em into the Body of
the Writing, but always at the top of the Page upon the Right Hand.

3. This word Prophetic set at the top, for the reason already observed, is
relative to that at the bottom of the Patent: The Holy Flight, to signify that
the Computation of Time, which begins from the Flight of Mahomet from Mecca to
Medina, is an Epoche of Sacred Institution, and that it took its Original and
it is Beginning from the time that the Person whom they call by way of
Excellency, The Prophet, began his Mission.

4. They that understand little of the Religion and Customs of the Mahometans,
cannot be ignorant of this Invocation, in regard they pronounce it at the
beginning of all their Actions, and all their Prayers. The most famous
Professors of the Oriental Languages, say, That it ought to be thus Translated,
In the Name of GOD Soveraignly-Merciful. And indeed, the Arabian word Rahmen,
which signifies Merciful, is an Incommunicable Attribute of GOD, and which they
never make use of but in speaking of the Divine Clemency. All the Mahometans
believe that this Invocation conceals great Mysteries, and encloses an infinite
number of Virtues. For they have it always in their Mouths, rising, sitting,
taking a Book or an Instrument in their Hands, or a Pen. In a word, they
believe they shall not prosper in any thing which they undertake, if they do
not begin with this Invocation. They assure themselves that Adam and Eve spoke
it before they went about any Business. It is set at the beginning of every
Chapter in the Alcoran. And it is evident that it is in Imitation of the usual
Sayings of the Jews and Christians, the one always beginning thus, Our Aid be
in the Name of GOD, who Created Heaven and Earth: and the other with these
words, In the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

I shall speak in another place of the Seal which is fixed to this Patent, and
of what is engraved within. The Figure under it is called Nishan, that is, the
Signal, and also the Flourish beneath the Subscription. It is here drawn with a
Ruler, but in the Original it is made of the Tails of Letters. The Secretary
who is used to write this Subscription draws those Tails so straight and so
equal, that you would take 'em for Lines drawn by Rule and Compass. The whole
Subscription is in Colored Letters, except the word which signifies Lord of
the World, and those which I have Translated Absolutely Commands, which are in
Letters of Gold. The words Zels Ziouzoumis, are ancient Turkish still in use in
the Lesser Tartary. They signify properly My Words, or I speak. And Tamberlain
being the first that made use of those words in his Patents, the Kings of
Persia have still retained the Custom. The twelve Names which are in the middle
of the Flourish beneath the Subscription, are the Names of the twelve Pontiffs,
real and lawful Successors of Mahomet, according to the Persian Belief.

5. The Governors in Persia are distinguished into Great and Petty. Media and
Georgia for Example are great Governments; Caramania and Gedrosia petty
Governments: Therefore they call Beglerbeg, which signifies Lord of Lords, the
Governor of a Great Government; and the Viceroy of a Petty Government they
call a Kan.

6. Deston, Tahem-ten-ten, and Feribours, are the Names of the ancient Persian
Heroes, or if you please of the Old Giants, which derived their Being from the
ancient Fables. These are the Alcides's and the Theseus's of the Persians; and
as the Grecian Alcides had several Names, so likewise has the Persian: but the
most common Name which they have always in their Mouths is that of Rustem.

7. Ardevon is the Name of an Ancient Giant or Hero, who as the Persians say,
conquered all Asia, and settled the Seat of his Empire in Persia. Their
Histories have not preserved the Memory of any of his Achievements: but their
Romances feign an infinite Number which are altogether fabulous.

8. In the Original it is, Who unloose all sorts of Knots.

9. There is no People in the World more sottishly devoted to Judicial
Astrology then the Persians. Of which being to speak in another place, I shall
say no more here, but that the Persians rank all Penmen, Books and Writings
under Mercury, whom they call Attared, and hold all People born under that
Planet to be endu'd with a refined, penetrating, clear-sighted, and fubtil Wit.

10. Caagon is the Name of an Ancient King of China: Nor is there any one over
the whole East whose Memory is more Venerable. It seems, by what they report,
that he was more particularly Illustrious in his Country for his Government in
Peace and Administration of Justice, then for his Feats of Arms. Therefore the
Eastern Monarchs assume his Name to themselves, as the Roman Emperors called
themselves Caesar's. Moreover, it has the same signification in Persia, as
August in English; so that when the Persians would express any thing that is
Great and Royal, they say, Caagonie. Thus I have explained the truth of this
little Figure; and I believe we shall be as little troubled to understand the
whole Language of this Patent, though Metaphor and Hyperbole are therein most
furiously injured.

11. The Term which I have Translated Flower of Merchants, signifies Exquisite,
Choice, Elected, or most Excellent. The Persians use it commonly as an Epithet
for all sorts and Conditions of Men; Great Lords, Foreign Ministers, Merchants;
and bring it down even to Tradesmen.

12. It is in the Persian, Nor by Importunate Flatteries, nor by Hanghty
Demands.

13. The word which I have Translated To Encourage, signifies properly To Water.

14. These words In Dignity and Virtue, are not in the Patent, only I have put
'em in the place of those that are, which signifies the Seal of great Quality
resembling the Sun.

15. These words are to be referred to the words Absolutely Commands, which are
under the Flourish beneath the Subscription. They are called here The Decree of
the Lord of the World. Tamberlain was the first that made use of these lofty
Expressions. Now the Grand Signior and the Indian Monarch make use of 'em as
well as the King of Persia; while every one maintains that it belongs to him
only, and assumes it as his most Glorious Title. In the Persian Language it is,
Saheb-Cerani. It may be also interpreted Master of the Age, but the other
Translation is more clear and intelligible, and discovers more plainly the
sottish pride that is contained in it.

16. We shall speak more particularly in another place of the Marks by which
the Persians distinguish Times and Seasons. Here therefore I shall say no more
then for the understanding of the Date, that the Month Shavel is the tenth, and
that the Arabians have given Epithets to all the Months; as for Example, to the
First, the Epithet of Sacred; to the Seventh, that of Praiseworthy; to the
Ninth, that of Blessed; and to this here mentioned the Style of Honorable. The
word Hegyra, which is Translated Flight, proceeds from a Verb, which signifies
to fly, as also to retire. So that the Hegyra of the Mahometans is the same
thing with the Exodus of the Hebrews. And without doubt Omar had that same
Exodus in his Mind, when he settled the Mohammedan Epact, from the time of
Mahomet's departure from Mecca, which was the place in Arabia where Idols and
Idolatry were most in Esteem.

17. In the Original it is Hamhager, that is, Flying together

18. As the Arabians, as we have said, gave Epithets to the Months, the
Persians also have given Epithets to the Principal Cities of their Empire
Ispahan and Casbin are called The Seat of Monarchy. Canhadar, A Secure Retreat.
Asherif was called The Ennobl'd, because Abas the Great built a Spacious and
Sumptuous Palace, and usually kept his Court there when he was in the Province
of Mazenderan. Which Province is called Tabar Estaan in all the Public Acts,
in the Exchequer, and Chancery; but in common Discourse they call it
Mazanderoon. Tabar Estaan signifies a place of Wedges, to denote that the
Country is full of Wood; for that where there is great plenty of VVood, great
store of VVedges are required to cleave it.

19. The Impression of the Seal, which is at the bottom of the Date in the
Translation, is not only upon the back of the Patent, but at the bottom
likewise. This is the Seal of the Prime Minister, who is called Mahomet Mehdy.
The Persians never put their Qualities in their Seals, nor any Title by which
they may be known. There is only their own Name; their Fathers Name, which
serves in stead of a Surname, according to the fashion of the Hebrews; and the
Name of their Family when it has the Honor to be descended from Mahomet by his
Daughter Fatima. For the Mahometans acknowledge no other Nobility then to be
the Original Branches of that Progeny.

I had also joined to the King of Persia's Patent a Note of Recommendation from
the High Steward of his Household; which I was desirous the Viceroy should see,
as being assured that it would work more effectually then the Patent it self.
Which proved to be true; insomuch that I understood afterward, that it was to
that Note, to which I was beholding for all the good Offices and Honors which
I received at Tefflis: which was as follows.

THe Commissioners of Governments, the Farmers Royal, Officers of Cities,
Receivers of Toll, and Provosts of the Highway, will have the (1) Honor to
know, That M. Chardin and M. Raisin, French Merchants, the Flower of Merchants,
having brought to the most High and Sublime Court Rarities and Curiosities set
with Precious Stones, worthy the (2) Wardrobe of the (3) Slaves of the (4)
Distributer of Temporal Goods, they are Commanded to fetch others; and have
express Order to cause to be made in their Country several Pieces of
Workmanship for the Service of his Slaves; to that purpose they are Honored
with a Patent under the (5) Sacred Seal; and that is the Reason they are forced
to Travel. Wherever they come therefore, it is absolutely requisite that they
have Respect shown 'em, and that all Reasonable Assistance that shall be
necessary, be afforded 'em. Care also must be taken that they be not molested
or put to Trouble, nor must any Persons whatever signify in any manner
whatsoever, that they expect or desire any Duties from 'em. For if it comes to
the Ears of the Slaves of the Lord of Human Kind, that they have claimed any
thing of 'em, bad will be the Fruit of such an Information. Written in the
Month of Shaval the Ennobl'd; 1076. of the Holy Flight; To which be Honor and
Glory.

In the Margent there was, The Intention of this is to give all those whom it
may concern to understand, That the Bearers hereof are to be Treated and
Respected according to the Tenor of the Patent, to which all the World pays
Homage. The words of the Seal signify Maxud the Son of Caleb, the Delight of
the Creatures.

1. It is in the Persian, They are Honored by that which they give 'em to
understand. For so the Grandees of Persia write to the Inferior Officers:
especially when those Officers have their dependence upon 'em. This they do to
maintain the difference which their Authority and Employment, puts between 'em:
and that there may not be any confusion by their manner of Communication one
with another.

2 The Word which I have Translated Wardrobe is Sercar, Which signifies
properly Chief of the Workmanship, and also a Magazine. For the King and the
Grandees of Persia keep in their Houses Manufactures of all sorts of Trades and
Arts. They call those places Carcone, or Workhouses. They are like the Gallery
of the Grand Duke of Florence, or the Galleries in the Louvre in France. They
maintain therein a great number of excellent Masters, who have there a Pension
and their Diet as long as they Live: and they find 'em Materials for their
Work. And they make 'em Presents, or advance their pay upon every Curious Piece
which they finish.

3. It Is out of Pride and Vainglory that they express themselves in these
Terms. Worthy the Wardrobe of the Slaves of the King. As much as to say, that
the Kings Wardrobe is so full of rare and precious Jewels, that no body can
bring any thing that is fit to be put therein. And therefore Persian Eloquence
makes very much use of this Circumlocution of Language upon all occasions. So
speaking of an Ambassador that has paid his Obeisance to the King, they say,
That he has kissed the Feet of the Slaves of the King. In like manner, when
they would say, that the King has performed any great Action, they say, The
Slaves of the Prince have performed such a great Action. Forms of Speech that
sufficiently discover the Vanity of the Eastern People. I take 'em to be drawn
from the Alcoran, which the Mahometans affirm to be the source of true
Eloquence. There you shall meet with many such like Expressions. As for
Example, speaking of the Works of GOD, they call 'em, The Works of the Angels.
The Angels Created the Heavens and the Earth. Which, say the Mahometans, more
clearly expresses the Power of GOD. For if the Angels have so much Power as to
Create Worlds, how great must be his Power whose only Servants and Ministers
they are? In short, all the Orientals are perfect Slaves; their Sovereigns
having a right to command their Lives, and Fortunes, their Wives and Childern.
But they are so far from being terrified with their condition, that they Glory
in it. The Grandees themselves count it an Honor to be called Slaves: and
Sha-Couli, or Coolom-Sha, which signifies the Kings Slaves, is as Honorable a
Title in Persia, as that of Marquess in France.

4. Valineamet, which I have Translated Distributer of Temporal Goods, is a
compound Word. Vali signifies a Sovereign, and absolute Lieutenant, who has the
same Power in the place where he is settled as he that Rules the Empire. The
Persians also frequently call their King Vali-Iron, to let ye understand that
he is in Persia, which they call Iron, the true Successor, Vicar, and
Lieutenant of Ali, to whom GOD gave the Dominion of the World, after the Death
of Mahomet. Neamet is derived from Inara, which signifies a Present, Favor,
Temporal Grace, or Bountiful conferring of a Benefit. So that by the Word
Vali-Neamet, which is the most usual Title which the Persians give their King,
speaking to his Majesty, they mean, That he is GODS Lieutenant in the World, to
distribute in his behalf all the Benefits and Blessings of Fortune to Men, and
as it were the Conduit-Pipe, through which Heaven Conveys it is Blessings to the
Earth.

5. It is in the Persian Moubarec-Nishan. It has been said that the
Subscription, wherein are Written the Twelve Names of the Successors of
Mahomet, is called Nishan, though Moubarec signifies Blessed.

I said nothing to the Viceroy when I paid my Obeisance, nor did he speak a
word to me, or make the least sign. Within a Moment after Dinner was served
in, he sent me upon a Plate of Gold the half of a large Loaf that was before
him, and ordered his Carver that brought it me, to tell me, that I was welcome.
A little after that, he sent to ask me how the War went forward between the
Turks and the Polanders. During the Second course he caused us to be served
with his own Wine in the Cup that he Drank out of himself. The Wine stood in a
great Flagon of Gold Enameled; and the Cup was set in the lower part with
Rubies and Turquoises. The Gentleman that filled us out the Wine, bid us in the
Prince's Name, Be Merry, and Eat Heartily. When the Third Course was upon the
Table, the Prince did us yet farther Honor, and sent us part of the Roastmeat
which was set before his own Person; that is to say, a Pheasant, two
Partridges, and a Quarter of a Hind; and ordered our Attendant to tell us, That
the Wine would make the Wild-Powl go down the better; though he had commanded
that we should not be pressed to Drink. All which Honors I received with low
bows, but without making any Answer. And the Capuchins did the same. For it is
the Custom among the Persians never to return any other kind of Answer to those
kind of Favors.

I shall say nothing of the Order and Magnificence of the Feast, but only this,
That there was hard Drinking, that there was a most prodigious Quantity of
Meat, and that they brought it up some Fish, and some Flesh, in respect to the
Patriarch and the Bishop who were there, and profess Abstinence from Flesh all
their Lifetime. We rose from the Table after we had sat three Hours; at what
time others of the Guests were already withdrawn: though as yet they had not
taken away the Roast-Meat. Retiring, we made a low Reverence to the Prince, who
then sent me word once more, That I was Welcome; and caused us to be conducted
Home to our Lodging.

The 14th, the Prince sent me two large Flagons of Wine, two Pheasants, and two
Brace of Partridges. The Gentleman that brought the Present told me, That the
Prince had given him Order to enquire, Whether I wanted any thing and whether
the Capuchins took care to let me not want Company; and to tell me moreover,
That if I likd the Wine, I might send every day to his Buttery. In answer to
which, I desired the Gentleman to assure the Prince, That my Landlords did not
let me want any thing and that we would all together drink his Health in the
Wine which he had sent. Nor indeed could better Wine be tasted: So that we were
very Merry with a Polish Surgeon, and two Syrians, that served the Prince, whom
we sent for to Sup with us.

The 16th, the Prince sent to invite me to his Niece's Wedding, who was Married
in his Palace. I went about Five a Clock with the Superior and Father Raphael;
but the Ceremony of the Marriage was almost over, before we came. It was
performed in the Great Room of State, where we had Dined the Sunday before. I
had a great desire to have seen her, but because the Room was full of Ladies,
there was no Admittance for any but the Prince and his near Relations, the
Catholicos and the Bishops.

This same Custom of forbidding Women the Company of Men, has been only in
Georgia, since the Country became subject to the Persians; nor is this
Prohibition but only in the Cities. For in the Country, and in such places
where there are no Mahometans, they go without Vails, and make no scruple both
to come into Company, and discourse with Men at their pleasure. But in regard
the Customs of the Mahometans prevail more and more in Georgia with their
Religion, we find the Women to be more and more restrained of their Liberty:
and that lovely Sex are forced out of Conformity to good Manners to keep apart
by themselves. The Nuptial Feast was kept upon a Terrass of the Palace,
surrounded with Beds of State, or Estrades raised about two Foot, and six Foot
in depth. The Terrass was covered with a large Pavillion fixed upon five
Pillars, two and twenty Foot high, and about five Inches in Diameter. The
Lining was of Cloth of Gold and Silver, Velvet and painted Cloth so neatly and
artificially intermixed, that by the Light of the Tapers it looked like a
Wainscot of Flowers and Moresco Work. In the midst of this sort of Room of
State, if I may so call it, stood a large Fountain spouting out Water. However,
we did not feel the Coldness of the Weather: For the Crowd of People, and the
large moving Hearths that were in the Room, almost stewed us before we got out.
The Floor was covered with fair Carpets, and about Forty Branches gave Light to
the whole Room. Of which the Four that hung next the Prince were of Gold, the
rest of Silver; which Branches usually weigh Forty Pounds apiece, the Foot
being a matter of Fifteen Inches in Diameter. The Branch about a Foot and a
half high, carries a Bowl full of pure Tallow, which feeds two lighted Matches.
And these sort of Lamps give a very great Light.

The Figure, or rather Picture inserted, gives ye a distinct Idea of the Order
of this Festival. The Guests were ranked upon Beds of State, or Estrades. The
Prince had his Place upon an Estrade somewhat higher raised then the rest,
covered with a Canopy in the likeness of a Duomo. His Sons and his Brothers
were upon his Right Hand; the Bishops upon his Left: The Bridegroom's Place was
betwixt both. As for my self and the Capuchins, the Prince ordered us to sit
immediately next below the Bishops. For you must understand there were at this
Feast above a Hundred Persons. The Music stood at the lower end. And now in a
short time after we were all placed, the Bridegroom entered lead by the
Catholicos.

The Nuptial Feast at Tifflis


Who having taken his place, the Princes Relations, went every one to
Complement and Present him. Which was also done by the greatest part of the
Guests, insomuch that it looked like a kind of Procession, which was the reason
it lasted above half an Hour. The Presents consisted in Money, some Gold, some
Silver, as also in little Silver Cups. I confess I was desirous to know how
much the Presents amounted to; but as far as I could find, 'twas no such great
Sum, as not exceeding above Two Hundred Crowns.

However, let it be what it will, in the height of this Ceremony, Supper was
served up in this manner. In the first place Table Clothes were spread before
all the Guests, and in three parts of the Court before the Tent. Which Table
Clothes were as large as the Estrades. After which done, the Bread was served
in. Of which there were three sorts, the one as thin as Paper, the next about a
Finger thick, and the third sweetened with Sugar. The Meat was brought in
covered in large Silver Dishes, but far larger then are made in Europe. The
Plate and the Cover usually weighing about Four Hundred and Five Hundred
Ounces. They that brought up the Dishes first into the Room, set 'em down in
order upon a Table Cloth at the Entrance; from whence other Officers carried
'em before the Squire-Carvers, who cut off several hollow Plates full, and
ordered 'em to be sent to the Guests: the Princes being first served, and
afterward the rest according to their Degrees: and the custom is to Carve one
Dish to all the Company; then of another, and so of all the rest. The whole
Feast consisted of three Courses every one containing Sixty of those large slat
Dishes a piece. The First was of all sorts of Pilo, or Rice boiled with Meat,
of which they make several sorts of distinct Colors and Tastes. The Yellow is
boiled with Sugar, Cinnamon and Saffron. The Red, with Juice of Pomegranates,
but the White is most natural and the best. This Pilo is a very good sort of
Diet, pleasing to the Taste and very wholesome

The Second Course was of Meats Baked, Stewed, and Fricassy'd; and other
Ragoo's of the same Nature. The Third of Roasted. Not but that in all the three
Courses there was an Intermixture of Fish, Eggs, and Salades for the sake of
the Ecclesiastics. For our parts they served us both the Flesh and Fish. In a
Word, every thing was set upon the Table, and taken away with that order and
silence that was to be admired. Every one did his Duty without speaking a word.
So that you shall hear three Frenchmen at one Table make more noise then a
Hunderd and Fifty Persons, that were in the Room at that Feast.

But that which was most to be wondered at after all this excellent order, was
the Court Cupboard which contained about a Hunderd and Twenty Vessels, that
appertained to Drinking; Bowls, Cups, Horns, Sixty Flagons and Twelve Jugs. The
Jugs were for the most part Silver. The Bowls and Cups were some of Polished
Gold, others Gold Enameled, some set with precious Stones, others only Silver;
the Horns were Embellished after the same manner as the Richer sort of Cups;
and of several proportions. The ordinary ones were about Eight Inches High,
Broad at the Top about Two, very black and Polished. Some were of Rhinoceros's
Snouts, others of Dears Horns, whereas the Common sort were made of the Horns
of Oxen and Sheep. However the Custom of making use of 'em for Drinking Cups,
and Embellishing 'em has been all along observed among the Eastern People. I
cannot tell how long the Feast lasted: for I did not stay it out. Only this I
know, that though it was Midnight before we went away, the Roastmeat was not
then taken off the Table. Nor did they begin to Drink at first, till the Third
Course came, that they began to be Warm, and then they Drank their Healths
after this manner. They sent to Eight Persons, who were the Prince's nearest
Relations, four upon the Right, and four upon the Left, Eight Bowls of the same
Bigness and Equally full of Wine. At what time they rose and stood up till they
had Drank; they that were upon the Right Hand Drinking first: they on the left
hand Pledged 'em; and then the same Eight Bowls were filled again, and carried
to the next in the same order till the Health was gone Round. Which done, they
began again Eight Bigger Bowls. For the Custom of the Country is to Drink the
Grandees Health last in the biggest Cups. Which is done on purpose to Fuddle
their Guests the more Effectually; by that means engaging 'em out of Respect
and Esteem for the Persons to Drink the more Liberally till they are quite
Drunk. In this manner they Drank all the two last Hours that I stayed at the
Feast, and as afterward I understood, from that time till next Morning. The
first Bowls held no more then an Ordinary Glass: and for the last which I saw
Drank off, they held about a Pint and a half. Nevertheless they were only those
that were accounted Moderate Draughts. The Capuchins and my self were exempted
from Drinking, and in truth, had I Drank as much as my Neighbors, I had died
upon the Spot: but the Prince had so much kindness for us as to give order not
to carry us any Healths; nevertheless we had both Wine and Water, and a Gold
Tumbler standing before us all the while. But they never filled us, but when we
called for it. When the Healths were began, the Music began to Play: being a
confused mixture of Vocal and Instrumental, which so pleased the Company, that
they seemed Ravished with it. But for my part I could hear nothing that was
Musical, but rather only what was harsh and full of discord. The Prince also
being in a pleasant Humor, as upon whom the Liquor began to work, sent to the
Superior to bid him send for his Spinette. Who with his Comrade were no less
mad at the Extravagant Fancy of the Prince, though the Chief cause of their
disgust was my being there, fearing I should make some Relation of the Passage
to their Disadvantage, and aggravate their fawning Compliance upon such an
occasion; that a Superior of a Mission, should condescend to prostitute
himself like a Fiddler before a Mohammedan Prince, in and Assembly of Infidels
and Heretics, Clergy and Laity, that in the Condition they were in, might well
be termed an Assembly of Drunkards. However when the Spinette came they set it
upon the Table in the midst of the Room, and the Superior was orderd to Play;
at what time the Prince having ordered him to Sing and Play together, he first
Sung the Magnificat, the Te Denni, and Tantum Ergo, and after that several
Court-Aires in Italian and Spanish, for the Church Music was then too Grave
for the Prince Besides the Spinette was out of Tune, and the Superior played
out a Tune a purpose, and being very Old beside, and brok'n with Age and
Labor, you may well Judge what fort of Divertisement his Consort could be.
However it was Pastime for the Prince for Two Hours together. During which
time, the Steward of the Household came to me, and asked me whither the use of
Instruments were permitted in our Religion? To which when I answered It was; he
replied that the Mohammedan Religion forbid it expressly; and though it were
generally used in Persia, yet yet that custom did not make it Lawful. He told
me moreover that Instruments were particularly forbid in the exercise of
Religion, in regard that GOD required only the Praises of Human Voice. During
which dispute, a Georgian Bishop fell into discourse with Father Raphael upon
the same Subject. I cannot tell all that was then said, in regard I did not
well understand the Language, nor would the Father be my Interpreter. Only he
told me thus much, that he was offended to see the Superior Divertise the
Company at a Festival with the same Hymns, which he pretended were appointed
for the Service of GOD in the Church. Father Raphael also added, That he took
it very ill, that the Viceroy had used his Authority so far, to oblige the
Superior to play upon the Lute, and sing at every turn to please his Humor;
only that their Security depended so much upon his Favor, that they durst not
deny him any thing. About Midnight therefore, as I told ye, we left 'em; after
we had taken leave of the Prince with all due Reverence. Nevertheless before he
would let me go, he asked me how his Kinsman the King of Spain did, and drank
his Health in a Bowl set with Precious Stones: and would needs have both the
Capuchins and my self pledge the Health in the same Cup. Though I know not
whether he did it out of Vainglory, or to honor the Superior, whom he knew
to be a Subject of his most Catholic Majesty.

The 17th, reflecting upon the Title of King of Spain, which the Prince had
assumed to himself, and finding that it was not incoherent with what several
Authors allege, that the Spaniard Originally came out of Iberia, I asked the
Capuchins, How the Prince claimed Affinity with the King of Spain? They
answered, That Clement the VIII. having written to Taymuras, and in his Letters
called him Kinsman to Philip the Second, and the Iberians and Spaniards
Brothers, his Successors ever since retained that Imaginary Kindred. And upon
that occasion they told me several Stories of the Pride and Vainglory of the
Georgians, and of the Viceroy in particular, and showed me the Copy of a Letter
which he wrote about two Years since to the King of Poland. Of which I have
inserted the Translation in this Journal, as being an Authentic Piece, and
proper to show that the pride of the Georgians is not a little Extravagant, and
because the Crowd of Vainglorious Titles with which it is stuffed, discovers
plainly, that the Fastern Nations beyond all compare surpass all others in the
World in Vanity.

PRaise, Glory and Adoration are to be given to GOD most Omnipotent, who has
Created and Preserves all Things; who was neither Produced nor Engendered;
Exempt from all Evils; Ineffable, Merciful to all, as well the Dead as the
Living; who Commands, with absolute Power both Great and Mean, and Governs 'em
with Clemency. The most High, the most Puissant Prince, the King of the
Georgians, Lictimenians, Litians, Mesiulctians, Shevians, Sheviultians, Suans,
Ossi, Bualtians, Circassians Tuscians, Psianetians, Tidisiceans, Jalibusians,
the People both on this side, and beyond the High Mountains, and of all the
places there inhabited; Lord of the three Grand Tribes (the Georgian term is
Eristava, Eris signifiing People, and Tava Chieftain, or Prince) and of the
Holy Seat of Schette, Capital City of all the Provinces which God through his
favor has given us in Heritage: King of Iberia and Mucrania, Sabatian,
Trialet, Taschire, Sometta, Chianchia, and Schianvanda, and of several other
Kingdoms which he possesses with settled and absolute Authority, and over which
he has full Power; who is descended from Jesse, David, Solomon, and who by the
Grace and Power of GOD is laden with Prosperity; the Vanquisher of
Vanquishers, the Invincible King of Kings, the most High Lord, Shanavas-Can. To
you John Casimir, who are laden with Honor, and can replenish Men with it; who
are Famous in Peace, and well edifi'd in Virtue; who by the Mercy and Power of
GOD are August, Happy, Born under a favorable Constellation, most great in
Magnificence, who are always a doer of Good. Who for your rare merit are most
worthy of a Throne and a Crown, most Potent Sovereign, Victor over Victors,
Victorious over Enemies, Celebrated Exterminator of Rebels, Prince born a
Christian and bred up in the Christian Religion; Renowned for feats of Arms;
Hereditary King of Poland, Gothia, Vandalia, Lithuania, Russia, Prussia,
Livonia, Mazovia, Samotia, Chiovia, Ciarnacovia and several other Kingdoms and
Provinces; most Serene Lord whose renown is expanded over all, and Reaches to
the Sun. To you, I say, Great King of Poland, without Compare, profound in
Wisdom and all manner of Knowledge, and Most Illustrious through all those just
Elogies which are given you, for having understood all the most noble
Languages. We salute ye withal our Affection, and with as much ardour as the
Obligation of our Hearty good will desires it, we wish you perfect Content,
long Peace, and multiplied Prosperities. We render infinite Thanks to God for
having learnt the Estate of your Health, by Letters brought us from the most
Illustrious and most Excellent Lord John Lesezunshi, Count of Lersno, Great
Chancellor in your Kingdom, and Lieutenant General in upper Poland. We humbly
beseech his Divine Goodness that we may understand from time to time the
continuance of your Health in its perfection, that you taste without Molestation
the Fruits of a Happy Peace, and that you enjoy a perfect Felicity. Your good
Servant Burgibug-Danbec, Officer of your Kingdom, a Gentleman no less
Illustrious for his Fidelity then Nobility, is come hither in Quality of an
Envoy from your Royal Majesty to renew the Peace, and Ratify the Friendship
and good Correspondence between the happy King Sultan Soliman, whose Grandeur
is advanced to the Heavens, and Established over all the Earth, a Prince most
High, Supreme, Incomparable, Infinite in Power, accustomed to make himself by
force adored by his most formidable Enemies, who enriches the Universe no less
then the Sea, and who is worthy more Praises then it is possible for Men to
give him. Monarch of Persia, Media, Parthia, Hircania, the Persian Golph, and
the Islands therein contained, Caramania, Aracosia, Margiana and other
Innumerable Principalities and Lordships. Your Agent has passed through our
Territories, without having suffered the least Inconvenience, or received the
least Molestation. He has now taken his leave to depart by the Assistance of
God toward your Royal Majesty. I beseech you through the hearty good will and
Friendship which we mutually bear one to the other, that this good Subject and
my Domestic may be as welcome to your self, as he had been to your Predecessor.

At the Royal Palace of Tefflis, March 26. 1671. of the Birth of Jesus Messia.
The Twentieth, I desired the Prefect or Superior of the Theatins, and Father
Raphael to return Thanks to the Prince for the Favors and Honors he had done
me, and to pray him that I might have an Officer to conduct me to Irivan the
chief City of Armenia the Greater. To which the Prince satisfied with the
Complement, and no less ready to grant me my request, Commanded the Capuchins
to tell me, That he had a great Kindness for the Europeans, and would have
wished I could have stayed longer at Tefflis, to the end he might have made it
more clear to me what he professed; but that he would not presume, neither had
he any desire to stop me, because I was going upon the Kings business, and
therefore that I was at Liberty to go when I pleased; that there was all manner
of security within his Territories, and that therefore I needed no Convoy;
nevertheless that he would send one of his Officers along with me if I desired
it.

The Fathers told me afterward that he had held 'em in a long discourse
concerning his earnest desire that the Europeans would come and settle in
Georgia, to which purpose they had orders to tell me, that if they would come
thither for Trade, he would Grant 'em all the Privileges and Advantages they
could desire. That his Territories extended to the Black-Sea, and that bearing
a great sway in Persia, and being highly esteemed in Turkey, such Europeans as
designed to the Indies, could not choose a better Road then through his
Territories; and that he was assured that when they had once traveled it, they
would always make choice of it for the future.

I desired the Fathers to return my most humble Thanks to the Prince, for the
Kindness which he had for our Nation; and to let him know, That I would not
fail to give to the French East India Company Notice of his good Intentions,
which if he would be pleased to signify in a Letter, I would certainly take
care to have it sent. Lastly, That he would do me a great Honor to grant me
one of his Domestic Servants, to Conduct me to the next Government, of which I
should not fail to give an Account to the King and his Ministers, when I should
be arrived at Ispahan.

The 24th, the Tibilelle (for so is the Bishop of Tefflis called, as I have
said already) came to see me. He told me, That the Prince had commanded him to
acquaint me, That having considered upon what I had sent to him about Writing
to the French Company for settling a Trade, and a Passage through Georgia, He
was about to have done it, to inform 'em of the Advantage they might make of a
Trade into that Country: but in regard he was no more then a Vassal to the King
of Persia, he was afraid his Majesty would look upon it as a Crime to have
Written without his Order to Strangers about Business. However, I might assure
'em this, That if they would send Factors into his Country, they should find
many sorts of Merchandises that were proper for Europe very cheap; besides that
they should be received with all the Civility imaginable. In answer to which I
desired the Tibilelle to assure the Prince that I would faithfully discharge my
Trust. The Prelate staid with me about a quarter of an Hour in my Chamber; and
at his departure I presented him a very fair Rosary of Coral: according to the
Custom of Repaying the Visits of a Person of Quality. Nor were the Capuchins
less glad of the Visit I had received, then of the manner of my Acknowledgment,
in regard the Bishop of Tefflis had never been at their House before.

The 25th, the Prince sent me a Present of Wine, and ordered the Messenger to
tell me, That he had appointed a Persian of his own Family for my Guide; that
he had commanded a Letter of Orders to be dispatched that I might set forward
as soon as I pleased.

The 26th, Father Raphael made me spend two Hours with an old Woman that
practiced Physic by the help of an infinite Number of Receipts: Of which he
caused me to write down some that he had heard People make the greatest Brags
of, in my Table Book.

For the Dropsy, half a Dram of the Juice of the Roots of Garden-Chiches, and
repeat the Remedy every other Day.

To stop a Flux of Urine, Eat for three days together the inner Skins of the
Gysern of a Capon roasted, five every day.

Against the Biting of a Scorpion, Take a Live-Hen, pull the Feathers off the
Rump, and lay it upon the Wound. For then the Hen sucks the Poison into her
Body, and dies. When the Convulsion begins to seize the Hen, take another, and
apply her in the same manner, and so another till all the Poison be sucked out.

For the Yellow Jaundise, Make a Bed of Boiled Rice, and lay the Patient well
covered upon it; or else put him into a Bath of Milk, and it works the same
effect.

For External Pains of the Joints, Take either the Decoction or the Perfume of
three Drams of Hellebore.

For Inward Pains of what sort soever, Take Potions of Mummy.

For all sorts of Falls, Bruises and Hurts, Take Mummy in Drink, wrap up the
Patient in a Cows Hide, and let him Blood. The Wound must be healed with the
Powder of the Herb Mullein.

For Defluxions and Rheumes to the Head and Throat, Take Perfume of Yellow
Amber.

For the Dysentery, Give the Infusion of the Leaves and Berries of Myrtle; or
else the Blood of a Roasted Hare infused in Wine.

For the Haemorrhoids, Powder the Leaves of Plantain, and strew upon the part
affected.

For Pains in the Reins, take the Decoction of the Leaves and Seed of
Marshmallows.

For Ulcers in the Reins, use Milk.

Against a Pleuresy, take two little thin Cakes of ordinary Meal, and boil 'em
in Water with Roch-Allum and Madder, and apply 'em as hot as may be endured
upon the side, the one behind and the other before: this Remedy must be daily
repeated till the Cure be perfected.

Against a Cough, make use of the Root of the Herb called Hounds-Tongue or
Dogs-Tongue.

The most usual Cure for Agues in this Country, is to make Plasters of the Fat
of a Sheeps Rump, Cinnamon, Cloves and Cardamomes, and all the time of the cold
fit to lay these Plasters upon the Forehead, Stomach and Feet. When the hot
fit is over, take off those Plasters and lay on others, made of the Leaves of
Cichory, Plantain, and the Herb called Solanum or Nightshade, afterward they
take a Sucking-Pig, cut it in two and clap it to the Feet. All which time the
Patient is fed with Bread and Cream of Almonds, eating nothing that is boiled.

Father Raphael assured me that he had seen 'em in that Country cure Agues, by
carrying the Patient in the height of his Cold fit and plunging him over Head
and Ears in the Water. It is a thing hard to be believed; and in Truth, to me
it appeared a thing altogether Extravagant, in regard it seemed to be so
Dangerous. However it is observed that the difference of Climates and
Temperaments of Countries produces far different effects in Remedies, so that
the Remedy, if I may so say, that Kills in one Country, does but only stir a
Man in another.

In the Evening the Princes Chancellors Secretary, brought me the Officer who
was to conduct me to Erivan; and in my presence gave him the Letter of Orders
for his so doing. Of which the Translation follows.

GOD.
UNder severe Penalties the Noble Lord (1) Emin-Aga, is Commanded exactly to
cause to be Executed the Tenor of the Patent, which the Deceased King, who was
here below the Master of (2) Fortune, and is now in (3) Heaven, gave to Mr.
Chardin, and Mr. Raisin, (4) French Europeans, by Virtue of which the (5)
Judges of Places, Provosts of Highways, Receivers of Tolls, and all sorts of
Officers of the Empire are obliged to Honor 'em, and to take care that no Duty
be exacted from 'em.

The said Emin-Aga shall make it his Business to conduct 'em safe to the
Blessed City of Erivan, without receiving any Damage or Molestation by the way:
that nothing may hinder 'em from arriving well satisfied at the Palace, of the
(6) Support of Human kind. And all Persons to whom this Letter shall be shown,
shall take care not to Contradict or Transgress it in any manner.

Given in the Month of Zialcade the Sacred, in the Year of the Hegyra 4083.
1. Emin has the same Signification as Mir, and is all one. They signify Lord,
Noble, Valiant, Chief of a Family, or Tribe. We find Deuteronomy. 2. v. 10. That the
Word Emim is very Ancient in some of these Significations. Though properly in
Hebrew, Aim signifies Terrible, and thence Haemim, Giants or Men of great
Valor.

2. To render it Word for Word, it signifies Master of the Conjunction. For the
Persians doting as they do upon Judicial Astrology, believe that Victory and
all good Fortune proceed from the Conjunction of two Stars, and therefore it is
that they say, a Man is Master of the Conjunctions, when nothing but Prosperity
and Happiness attends him.

3. It is in the Persian, Whose Nest is in Heaven: For the Followers of Ali
hold the Kings of Persia for Saints, in the Quality of Mahomet's Successors and
Lieutenants of GOD. And it is an Article of their Faith, That their Kings go to
Heaven, by a Destiny as Uncontrollable and as Natural as the Birds fly to their
Nests.

4. The word which I Translated Europeans, is Frangui; for the Orientals call
by that Name all that are born in the Christian Dominions of Europe, except
those of Moscovy. Frangui is most certainly derived from Francois; the Turks
having assuredly given that Name to all the Europeans, because the French were
the first among 'em with whom they had Commerce and Alliance.

5. Homal, which I have Translated Judges, is as much as Petty Regents, or
Inferior Officers. Under which Names are comprehended the Daroga, or Judge of
Criminal Causes, the Mustauf, or Controller of the Exchequer. The
Sheic-el-Islam, or Lieutenant Civil. The Vasier, or Receiver-General, and the
Kelonter, or Provost of the Merchants.

6. One of the most Ordinary Titles which the Persians give their King, is
Alempenha, or the Support and Basis of the World.

7. This is the Eleventh Month of the Year.

I gave the Chancellor's Secretary a Guinea, as his Fee for Dispatches of this
Nature. Though there be no certain Rule for such Fees; but only every one gives
according to the Advantage which he receives by his Dispatch, and according to
his Quality and Condition. Presently my Guide gave me to understand, That he
wanted a Horse, which was as much as to say that he wanted four Guinea's to buy
one. Which I immediately knew to be a Trick to get Advance-Money out of me,
fearing lest when I came to Erivan, that I should be so dishonest as to
recompense him only with a Trifle, or perhaps give him nothing at all. For the
Persians are not very prone to make Acknowledgments, and for the Georgians they
are ungrateful above measure. The greatest Kindnesses make no Impression upon
their Minds: for they forget 'em, and repay with shrewd Turns those to whom
they owe their Advancement with as little Check of Conscience, as if they were
altogether Strangers. For which reason it is, that they desire payment
beforehand, standing very little upon the Nicety of a little Impudence, but
demanding a Reward for the smallest Service which they do.

The 28th I set forth from Tefflis about Eleven a Clock in the Forenoon; the
Polish Surgeon, and some Georgians with whom I had made an Acquaintance,
accompanying me some part of my way. My Guide rode before to prevent the
Toll-gatherers or Receivers of certain small Duties which are taken upon all
Horses that go laden out of the City, from demanding any thing of my Servants.
Which sort of Guides are called Mehemander, (a word which fignifies He who has
care of a Guest:) and are granted to all Envoys, Ambassadors and Strangers of
Quality. Their Duty is to provide Lodging, Vittles, and Carriage-Horses for the
Persons whom they Conduct; and in a word, to discharge 'em from all the care of
a Traveller. They are like Stewards or Purveyors for those Persons to whom they
are appointed for Guides. For they make use of their Service in every thing,
send 'em upon Errands, and to carry Messages to those Persons, to whom a Man
would not be troubled to go himself. These Guides are well paid for their
Service; so that it is a Kindness to be recommended to such an Employment. The
Villages where they pass make 'em Presents, to be the more sparing in what
Money they raise, to defray the Expenses of Travelers which they have in
charge, and to prevent their being too wastful and lavish. They take into their
protection such Merchants as are desirous to Travel along with 'em; and besides
that, they secure 'em from Robbing, and exempt 'em from paying several Tolls
and Duties. Which is worth 'em something more. But their greatest Gain is the
Present which must be made 'em when they are sent back.

I was very glad to see my self got safe out of Tefflis. For I was afraid I
should there be put to some kind of trouble for two Reasons. The first was, For
that the Prince having sent to me two or three times to tell me that he had a
great desire to see what I carried to the King, I constantly refused to show
him, alleging for my excuse, that I had Orders from his Majesty not to expose
'em to any but himself. Moreover, I observed that this Prince is not altogether
so much a Subject to the King of Persia, nor so submissive to his Orders, as
the other Viceroys and Governors of his Empire, besides that the Georgians are
very perfidious and covetous of other Men's Goods. I was therefore fearful lest,
if I should show the high-priz'd Jewels which I had, their Beauty and their
Value might tempt him to take 'em from me, or that other people might Murder me
for the Lucre of such a Booty. And this was one Consideration that prevented me
from showing 'em.

The Second Cause of my Distruct was this, That the Capuchins, to do me the
more Honor, out of a design to bring a greater Reputation to themselves, had
set me out for a Person that was very Rich and Powerful, so that there ran a
Report over all the City, that I had immense Sums. Which made the Customer look
about me; so that he demanded great Duties from me. But those Duties were not
the thing that disturbed me, for by the Kings Patent I was fully discharged.
But I was afraid lest the Prince would make use of that pretense to view my
Goods whether I would or no. And this was that which increased my Fears, and
made me insist upon having an Officer to conduct me. For my reason told me,
that such a Provision would render the Viceroy more responsible for any
Accident that should befall me, and that my Guide would secure both my Person
and my Goods. And indeed the greatest part of my Fears were dissipated when I
saw my self quite free of Tefflis; for then I began to conceive good hopes of
all the rest of my Journey. That Day I traveled two Leagues through a Passage
of the little Mountain that lies to the South of the City; and lay at a Great
Village called Sogan-Lou, or the Place of Onions, built upon the River Cur.

The 1st of March, I traveled Eight Leagues in a fair Plain, where the Road
was indifferently straight, leading to the North-East. Within three Hours I
came to a Village consisting of about a Hunderd and Fifty Houses, called
Cupri-Kent, or the Village of the Bridge. Because there is a very fair Bridge
that stands not far from it, built upon a River called Tabadi. This Bridge is
placed between two Mountains, separated only by the River, and supported by
Four Arches, unequal both in their Height and Breadth. They are built after an
Irregular form, in regard of two great Heaps of a Rock that stand in the River,
upon which they have laid so many Arches. Those at the two ends are hollowed on
both sides, and serve to lodge Passengers; wherein they have made to that
purpose little Chambers and Portico's with every one a Chimney. The Arch in the
middle of the River is hollowed quite through from one part to the other, with
two Chambers at the Ends, and two large Balconies covered, where they take the
cool Air in the Summer with great delight, and to which there is a Descent of
two pair of Stairs hewn out of the Rock. Adjoining to this fair Bridge there
stands an Inn now ready to go to decay. However the Structure is Magnificent,
having several Chambers with every one a Balcony that looks out upon the Water.
Neither is there a fairer Bridge, nor a more beautiful Inn in all Georgia.

The Second, we Traveled Nine Leagues among Mountains very rugged and
difficult to cross. So that we were twelve Hours ere we got to our Journeys
end, though we Traveled at a good rate. About Sunset we arrived at a great
Village called Melik-Kent, or the Royal Village, built upon a point of one of
those High Mountains.

The Third, we Traveled eight Leagues in the Mountains where we were much
perplexed, and where we did nothing but ascend and descend. At length we lay at
a Village as big as Melik-Kent.

The Fourth, we Traveled only three Leagues: and before Noon we came to a Town
that consisted of about Three Hunderd Houses, called Dily-jan. It is seated
upon a River called Acalstapha, at the Foot of a High and Dreadful Mountain,
which together with the rest that we passed the preceding days, was a part of
Mount Taurus. There was every where great plenty of Water, and here and there
some Plains that were but small, but very fertile. The Goodness of the Soil
thereabout is not to be imagined; nor the Number of Villages that are to be
seen on every side. There are several that stand so high-rais'd upon the points
of the Rocks, that you can hardly have a sight of 'em. The most part are
inhabited by Georgian and Armenian Christians, but not intermixed. Those People
having such an inveterate Antipathy one against the other, that they cannot
live together, nor in the same Villages. In all these Mountains are neither
Inns nor public Houses: however, Travelers are lodged in the Countrymens
Houses very conveniently, where there is plenty both of Meat and Drink. For my
part I wanted nothing, for my Guide rode still before when we were got about
half way; so that when I came to the Village, I still found a large Chamber,
empty Stables, a good Fire, and Supper ready. The first days Journey I would
have paid my Landlord, but my Guide would not permit me, telling me, 'Twas not
the Custom, and that I should rather give Him what I intended the Man of the
House. Which was the reason, that the next Days, I only caused something to be
given in private to the People where I Lodged. And indeed it is very good
Traveling with these Guides: for they cause ye to be diligently attended. All
Night long my Chamber was guarded by the People of the Village who kept Watch,
as well in Obedience to the Commands which were laid upon 'em, as for my
Security, though there was no danger to be feared.

The most part of the Houses of these Villages are in truth no more then
Caverns: For they are hollow places made in the Earth. The rest are built of
great Beams of Timber up to the Roof, which is made like a Terrass, and covered
with Turf. Only they leave a hole open in the middle, to let in the Light, and
let out the Smoke: which hole they stop up as they please themselves. Which
sort of Caverns have this Convenience, that they are very warm in the Winter,
and cool in the Summer: nor is it an easy thing for Thieves to break into 'em.

The Borough of Dily-jan, and all the Country round about for six Leagues
distance to the North and South, and very far to the East and West, belongs to
Kamshi-Can; and is called the Country of Casac. It holds of Persia, and depends
upon that Kingdom after the same manner as Georgia, that is to say, it is
always Governed by its own Natural Princes from Father to Son. Abas the Great
subdued it, at the same time that he Conquered Georgia. The Inhabitants of
Casac are Mountaineers, stout and fierce: Originally descended from those
Cosaques that inhabit the Mountains to the North-East of the Caspian Sea.

The Fifth, we Traveled five Leagues over that dreadful Mountain, already
spok'n of. There are two Leagues from the Town of Dily-jan, which stands at the
very Foot of the Hill to the Top, another of even Ground to the Top of all, and
two Leagues of Descent again. A tedious Days Journey, which I thought would
have killed me. For I was troubled with a terrible Dysentery, which forced me
to alight altogether; and then two Men held me up as I went, and a third lead
my Horse. The Mountain is most dreadfully laden with Snow, there being nothing
else to be seen at the Top, neither Tree nor Plant. The Road also lay through a
narrow Path of Snow, hard'nd by the Feet of Horses and Travelers: so that if
they did but slip their Feet out of the Path, they sunk up to the Belly in the
looser Snow. Nor is there any passing over this Mountain when the Snow-falls or
when the Wind blows, for then the print of the Feet is lost and it is
impossible to find the way. Which is the loss of many People and Beasts every
Year. Nor does this Snow ever melt, the Mountain being continually covered with
it.

It separates Georgia from Armenia: and I was no sooner over it, but I found a
Country quite of another Form and Fashion. For whereas on the other side there
was nothing to be seen but very high Mountains, and some few small Plains
between 'em, and a Woody Country very well Peopled, here on this side we saw
spacious Plains, with little Hillocks covered alike with Snow, bare of all sort
of VVood, but what was planted about the Villages. We lodged at Kara Pheshish,
a great Borough seated at the Foot of the Mountain which we crossed over, and
upon the Banks of the River Zengui. Which River waters one part of Armenia the
Greater.

In making the Geographical Description of the Country as I passed along, I
never mind any Author whether Ancient or Modern, finding 'em all so opposite
one to another, and altogether dark and confused. Which was the same thing
that Strabo said of the Authors that preceded him; and whoever will take the
pains to compare those that have followed him, either with the Ancients or
among themselves, will be of the same Opinion. As for example in Caldea or
Assyria, which at present they extend almost to the Mediterranean Sea, though
Herodotus, Pliny, Strabo, Ptolomy, and the other most Celebrated Ancient
Geographers enclose it between the Desert of Arabia and Mesopotamia.

I have also observed one thing in the Government of Persia, which has made me
since believe, that although Authors have set different Bounds and Limits to
the Countries, yet that they might have all written very true and justly, and
as Things stood in their Times, when the Governments were enlarged, or confined
within narrower Bounds, as the Supreme Governor pleases, or as necessity
requires; for then the Province that gives the Name to the Government, has not
the same Limits, nor observes the same Situation as before. And therefore I
will mark out the Extent and Situation of the Country where I passed, as I
found 'em; and if I must follow the Ancient Authors, it shall be only those of
the Persian Geography.

Some there are among 'em who divide Armenia into Three parts. The first which
they call properly by that Name, the second which they call Turcomannia, and
the third to which they give the Name of Georgia. But the greater Number divide
it only into two parts, the Upper and the Lower. The Lower which is sometimes
called the Lesser, sometimes the Western, but generally the Lesser, is under
the Dominion of the Turks. The Upper, which they sometimes call the Eastern,
sometimes the Great, but usually the Greater, is a Province of Persia To the
small or Lesser Armenia they assign for Bounds, the Great Armenia to the East,
Syria to the South, the Black-Sea to the West, Cappadocia to the North, and
they place the Great Armenia between Mesopotamia, Georgia, Media and Armenia
the Less. Which Situation agrees in part with that of the Ancient Geographers,
who enclose Armenia the Less, between Cappadocia and Euphrates, and Armenia the
Greater, between Euphrates and Tygris. But it no way corresponds with that of
some Authors, as is to be seen, who put Syria, the Shoars of the Mediterranean
Sea, and the Banks of the Caspian in Armenia, of which they make Edessa to be
the Capital City. Neither do Authors differ less about the Denomination of this
Country; while some derive the Name of Armenia from Armenius a Rhodian, or
Thessalian. Others with far more Reason from Aram, which might have some
Relation to the Hebrew word Ram which signifies High or Elevated, either
because the Country lies High, and for that several of the Eastern Mountains
make a part of it, or else because it fell as his share to Aram the Grandchild
of Noah; who therefore called it by his own Name. And therefore Hayton who was
King of the Country derives this Name of Armenia from Aram-Noah. But how
uncertain soever this Etymology may be, I had rather give credit to it, then to
another Story which he reports of Armenia, that is to say, that it was the
Province where Salmanassar planted the Greatest part of the Jews which he took
Prisoners in the Conquest of Palestine The Holy Scripture, where ere it has
occasion to mention it calls Armenia, Ararat. Certainly it is one of the most
lovely and most Fertile Countries of Asia. It is watered by Seven large
Rivers, which is the reason in my opinion that obliges the most part of the
Interpreters of the Old Testament to place the Terrestrial Paradise in this
Province. However it were, Armenia is renowned for several other Famous
Accidents and Events. There is not any other Country wherein were fought so
many Bloody Battles nor with greater Numbers on both sides. It has had
particular Kings of its own at several times; though they could not preserve
their Dominion, while as Histories assure us, all the most Eminent Captains
that ever invaded Asia, subdued it under their Subjection in their several
turns. It was the Theater of the last Wars between the Turks and Persians;
while the Turks fought to have had it all entire; though at length they were
content to share it with the Persians, yet not so but that they have had the
greatest part.

The 6th, I continued my Journey, half dead as I was with Cold and a Dysentery.
But the hopes I was in to meet at Erivan with all necessary Accommodations for
my Cure, made me hasten thither, notwithstanding all the Pains that I felt. So
that we Traveled Four Leagues and arrived at Bichni a considerable Village
seated at the Foot of a Mountain upon the River Zengui. We lodged at a fair
Armenian Monastery built between the Village and the Mountain. This Monastery
is an Ancient Foundation between Eight and Nine Hunderd Years standing. The
Cloister is built after the Fashion of the Country, encompassed with High and
Thick Walls of Free Stone. Near to the Monastery are to be seen the Ruins of
Towers, Castles, and Ramparts in so great a Number, that it renders very
probable what the People of the Country report, that Bichni has been one of the
strong Places of Armenia. I lodged in the Convent, where the Monks received me
with great Civility, and put me into the fairest Apartiment they had, only I
could by no means prevail with 'em to let me have a Fowl to make a little
Broth, because it was their time of Lent. So that my Guide was forced to use
his Authority, even to the holding up his Cane to procure me a few Eggs. Toward
the Evening I had a desire to Drink some Coffee, which my Guide brought me
boiled with a little Sugar; and of that I Drank Four small Glasses as hot as I
could; which done, I laid me down well covered before a good Fire. To which
feeble Remedy it pleased GOD to give so great a Blessing, that I slept without
Interruption all that Night, and the next Morning found my self wholly cured of
this Distemper.

The 7th, I set forward by break of Day, after I had made a small Present to
the Monastery. All that day we traveled over Plains all covered with Snow as
the day before. And indeed it is not only troublesome but very dangerous to
travel through those deep Snows. The Mischief is that the Beams of the Sun
which lie all the day long upon it, molest the Eyes and Face with such a
scorching Heat, as very much weak'ns the Sight, whatever Remedy a Man can
apply; by IRIVAN
A. The FOrtres. B. The small Fort called Guetshi-cala. C. Deuf Sultan's Mosquee
D. The Great Piatza. E. An Old Tower. F. The Bpps Church called Two Fronts. G.
The Church called Catovike. H. The New Inn. I. The River Zengui. K. The River
called Forty Fountains. L. The Mountain where Noah's Ark rested.


IRIVAN
wearing as the People of the Country do, a thin Handkerchief of Green or Black
Silk, which no way abates the Annoyance. Then another Danger there is, that
when Travelers meet, there arises a Dispute, who shall be forced into the
Snow. For the Road is so narrow that two Horses cannot go abreast: so that if
equal Parties meet, they fall to blows for the way, and the weakest side is
forced to yield. Then they unlade their Horses, and drive 'em into the Snow,
where they sink up to the Bellies to give passage to the others. But my Guide
constrained all that we met to unlade, which was to me a very great Ease. Thus
we passed through many Villages and Towns, and Night coming on we arrived at
Erivan.

It Is a hard matter to describe the true Road from Tefflis to this City, in
regard of the many Turnings and Windings, and the frequent Occasions to ascend
and descend the greatest part of the way. Only I observed that we still kept on
to the South-West. From Tefflis to Erivan it is reck'ned to be about Eight and
Forty Leagues.

Erivan is a great City, but ill-favored and dirty; and of which the Vineyards
and Gardens make the greatest part, there being no Ornamental Buildings within
it. It is seated in a Plain encompassed with Mountains on every side. Two
Rivers run by it, Zengui to the North-West, and Queurk-boulak to the
South-West. Which Queurk-boulak signifies Forty Fountains; the River being said
to rise from so many Springs; nor does it run a long course. But we shall say
no more of the City, nor of its Figure, the Draught being sufficient to give an
Idea of it.

The Fortress it self may pass for a small City. It is of an Oval Form, being
about Four Thousand Paces in Compass, and containing Eight Hunderd Houses,
inhabited only by Natural Persians. It Is true, the Armenians have Shops
therein, where they Work and Trade all the Day long; but in the Evening they
shut up their Shops, and return Home to their Houses. This Fortress is
surrounded with three Walls of Earth, or Bricks made of Clay with Battlements,
flanked with Towers, and strengthened with very narrow Ramparts, according to
the Ancient Manner, and therefore without any Regularity, after the Eastern
Fashion. And indeed it had been a hard matter to have made a Regular
Fortification in a place that would not admit of it, in regard the Fortress
extends it self to the North-East upon the side of a dreadful Precipice, broad
and steep, above a Hunderd Fathom to the bottom, where the River runs. And
therefore this side being impregnable and inaccessible, has no other
Fortifications then Terrasses furnished with Artillery. However, a Garrison of
no less then Two Thousand Men is always kept in pay for the Guard of this
Fortress; which has as many Gates as Walls, all plated with Iron, and
strengthened with Port-Cullices and Courts of Guard fortified. The Governor of
the Provinces Palace being within the Castle, stands upon the Brink of the
Precipice already mentioned; and is very fair, very spacious, and very
delightful in Summer.

Near to the Fortress, about a Thousand Paces distant upon the North-side,
stands a Hillock which Commands it, the upper part being fortified with a
double Wall, and planted with great Guns, and capable to lodge Two Hunderd Men.
This little Fort is called Queutshy-cala.

The City stands about Cannon-Shot distance from the Fortress; but the space
between is filled up with Houses and Marketplaces; but such pitiful thin
Structures, that they may be all removed away in one day.

There are several Churches in this City; of which the principal are the
Episcopal See, called Ircou-ye-rize, or Two Faces and Catovike. Which two
Churches have stood ever since the Reign of the two last Kings of Armenia. The
others were Erected since; and are small, sunk deep in the Earth, and not
unlike so many Cata-Combs, or Burying-places.

Near the Episcopal See stands an old Tower built of Freestone, of which you
see the Draught in the Sculpture. I never could learn when it was Erected, nor
by whom, nor for what use. Yet there are Inscriptions on the outside, of which
the Character resembles the Armenian, but the Armenians could not read it. The
Workmanship of this Tower is all of Antique-Work, and singular for its
Architecture, as may appear by the Figure. The inside is all empty and naked:
but on the outside and round about it several Ruins so disposed, as if
formerly there had been some Cloister there, and that this Tower had stood in
the midst of it.

Before it appears a great Marketplace, and not far from it an old Mosque
built of Brick, but very much decayed. They call it Deuf-Sultans Mosque, from
the Name of the Founder. Three Hunderd Paces distant is to be seen the Grand
Maydan, which is the Name in Asia for all the Grand Marketplaces. This in
Erivan is apiece, Four Hunderd Paces in Diameter, and planted round with
Trees: being the place appointed An ancient Tower at Irivan.
for all manner of Exercises both for Horse and Foot, as Carousels, Racing,
Wrestling, and Managing of Horses for War.

There are many Baths in the City and in the Fortress, and many Inns: of which
the fairest stands about Five Hunderd Paces from the Castle, built by the
Governor of Armenia some few Years ago. The Portal is Eighty Paces in depth,
and forms a fair Gallery, full of Shops, where are sold all manner of Stuffs.
The Body of the Structure is square, containing three great Lodgings, and Sixty
small ones, with fair Stables, and very large Warehouses. Before it lies a
Marketplace surrounded with Shops, where are to be sold all sorts of Provision
for the Belly; and upon one side a fair Mosque and two Coffee-Houses.

The Elevation of Erivan is in 40 Degrees. 15 Min. The Longitude in 78 Degrees. 20 Min.
The Air is good, but a little thick and cold: and the Winter lasts long; so
that sometimes it will Snow in April. Which constrains the Country People to
bury their Vines in the Winter, and never to dig 'em up again till the Spring.
The Country is delightful and very fertile. The Earth produces her Fruits in
great Plenty, especially Wine, which is very good and cheap. The Armenians also
have a Tradition, That Noah planted a Vineyard near to Erivan, and some there
are who pretend to know the Place, and show it about a small League from the
City. The Soil produces all sorts of Provision, which is therefore sold at a
very low rate. The two Rivers that run by the side of it, and the Lake of which
we shall take an occasion to speak, furnish the City with Excellent Fish, and
among the rest with Trouts and Carps that are wonderfully good, and famous all
over the East; of which I have seen some that have been three Foot long: And
then for Fowl, no place in the World where Partridges are more plentiful.

The Lake of Erivan lies three small days Journeys off to the North-West; by
the Persians called Deria-Shirin, or the Sweet-Lake; by the Armenians,
Kiagar-couni-sou, which signifies the same thing: and the reason why it is so
called is from the extraordinary sweetness of the Water. It is Five and Twenty
Leagues in Circuit, and very deep; affording nine sorts of Fish which are there
taken; the fairest Trouts and Carps which are eaten at Erivan, being caught in
this Lake. There is a small Island in the middle of it; where stands a
Monastery built about 600 Years ago, of which the Prior is an Archbishop, who
takes upon him the Title of Patriarch, refusing to acknowledge the Grand
Patriarch. Our Maps take no Cognizance of this Lake; a wonderful thing to me,
that among all our Travelers into Persia, not one should make any mention of
it. By which defect it may be judged that those Authors were little curious
after the Rarities of the Countries through which they passed. The River Zengui
takes its source from this Lake, and crossing one part of Armenia, meets with
the River Araxes near the Caspian Sea, into which at length they both discharge
themselves.

Erivan, by the report of the Armenians, is the most Ancient inhabited place in
the World. For they affirm that Noah and all his Family dwelt there, both
before the Deluge, and after he descended from the Mountain where the Ark
rested; and that here was also the Terrestrial Paradise. But all this is a
Story without Foundation, and reported by Persons equally ignorant and
vainglorious. Some Authors there are who affirm Erivan to be the City which
Ptolomy calls Terva, and makes to be the Capital City of Armenia. Others hold
it to be the Royal Artaxate. The History of the Turks calls it Eritze: but that
of Armenia, which is to be seen in the famous Monastery of the Three Churches,
asserts, That this City was formerly called Vagar-Shapat, which signifies (word
for word) Vagar's City. But that which renders these Pieces of Antiquity very
much suspected, is, That the same History, speaking of the Etymology of Erivan,
derives it from an Armenian word which signifies To see; and says farther, that
that same Name was given to this City, because the Territory belonging to it
was the first Place that Noah discovered when he descended from the Mountain of
Ararat. And yet it is well known that the Armenian is a Modern Language, that
has not been in use above these Seven Hunderd Years. Nor do we find any thing
in the Persian History concerning the Original of Erivan. Neither do I believe
it to have been built before the Conquests of the Arabs in Armenia; and that
which makes me believe it is this, for that neither in the City, nor in any
parts adjoining round about it, there are any Footsteps of great Antiquity to
be seen. The Turks became Masters of it in the Year 1582. and built the
Fortress still to be seen. The Persians retook it in the Year 1604. and
fortified it against the Violence of Cannon-Shot. In the Year 1615. it held out
a Siege of four Months; at what time the Rampart withstood the Batteries of the
Turk with that Impregnable Resistance, though but of ECS-MIAZIN commonly called
the THREE CHURCH
ECS-MIAZIN commonly called the THREE CHURCH
A Platform of ye Church of Echsmiazin.
A Prospect of ye Church of Echsmiazin.
Earth, that the Besiegers were forced to raise their Siege. After the Death of
Abas the Great, they returned and carried the Place, but were not long Masters
of it. For Sophy retook it in the Year 1635; since which time it has never been
besieged.

Two Leagues from Erivan stands that famous Monastery of the Three Churches;
the Sanctuary of the Armenian Christians, if I may presume so to call it, and
the place to which they pay their greatest Devotion. I have caused a Draught to
be made of it at large, and have added a Geometrical Ground-Plot, and a small
Sketch of the outside of the Principal Church, to give a more distinct
Description of the Monastery, and more easy for Apprehension. The Armenians
call it Ecs-Miazin, or the Descent of the only begotten Son, or the Only
begotten Son is descended. Which Name, say they, was given to this Place,
because Jesus Christ showed himself visibly in this place to St Gregory, who
was the first Patriarch of it. The Mahometans call it Vtsh-Clissie, or the
Three Churches; for that besides the Church belonging to the Convent, there are
two others adjoining to it. The first and the principal, called Ecs-Miazin, is
a very substantial and dark Structure, all built of large Freestone. The
Pilasters, which are Seventy two Foot high, are misshapen Piles of Stone; as are
also the Duomo, and the Roofs. On the inner side are to be seen no Ornaments
either of Sculpture or Painting. The Chapels stand upon the East Side; besides
three at the lower end of the Church. Of which the middlemost is very spacious,
with an Altar of Stone after the manner of the Eastern Christians very well
adorned. But there is not any Altar in those upon the Sides, only one serves
for a Vestry, and the other for a Treasury. In the Vestry the Monks that belong
to the Place show ye several Pieces of Church-Furniture, very beautiful and
rich, as Crosses, Gold Chalices, Lamps and Candlesticks of Silver of an
extraordinary bigness. The chiefest part of which Wealth was the Munificence of
Papal Liberality; and Testimonies of Rome's Credulity, as well as of Armenian
Dissimulation. There are also to be seen in the Treasury, several Shrines of
Silver and Vermillion Gilt. The principal Relics belonging to the Place, by
the report of the Monks that have 'em in keeping, are the upper part of the
Body of St. Repsima, an Arm and a Thigh of St. Caiana; an Arm of St. Gregory,
Sirnam'd the Illuminator, because he Converted Armenia; a Rib of St. James
Bishop of Jerusalem; a Finger of St. Peter, and two Fingers of St. John the
Baptist. Whose Body, as the Monks of this Monastery affirm, lies in a Church
belonging to a Convent of their Order near to Erzerum: That Leontius, Bishop of
Caesarea, gave it to their first Patriarch, and that after it had lain Three
Hunderd and Fifty Years at Echs-Miazin, it was Translated to the place where
they say it now lies. But the Monks of Echs-Miazin, who are the great Doctors
of the Armenians, are so ignorant by their own Confession in my hearing, that
they never heard of those Histories which relate how that the Body of St. John
the Baptist was burnt to Ashes by the Command of Julian the Apostate. I omit to
say any thing of those other Relics which they pretend to have in their
Treasury, as being the Relics of Saints very little known to this part of the
World. I shall only therefore add this farther, That the Monks belonging to the
Convent affirm for a great Truth, That once they had the two Nails that
fastened the Sacred Hands of JESUS CHRIST to the Cross, which are still
preserved, the one at Diar-Bekre, the other in Georgia; and that Abas the Great
took out of their Treasury the true Lance, and the Seamless Garment, to enrich
the Treasury of the Kings of Persia at Ispahan.

In the middle of the Church stands a large square Freestone, being three Foot
in Diameter, and five Foot thick. The Armenians assure us, as an Article of
their Faith, That this was the place where St Gregory their Apostle saw JESUS
CHRIST one Sunday in the Evening, while he was at his Prayers, and where he
spoke to him. They farther ascertain us, That JESUS CHRIST drew round about
this Saint with a Beam of Light the Design of the Church of Echs-Miazin, and
ordered him to build it according to the Model which he had there drawn. They
add, That at the same time the Earth opened in that part where the Stone lies,
and that CHRIST cast down to Hell through that Hole, all the Devils that were
in the Temples of Armenia, and uttered false Oracles, and that Saint Gregory
caused the Hole to be covered with Marble. They add, That Abas the Great
carried away the Marble, and put it into the Royal Treasury of Persia, and
caused this Stone to be set up in the Room of it. Concerning which I made a
diligent Inquiry at Ispahan, nay I asked the Superintendents of the Treasury
themselves; but I could not find that They understood any thing of it. Armenian
Tradition tells ye also of another particular in reference to the Center of
this Church, which I shall set down, though as fabulous as the rest, That this
was the true place, where Noah built that Altar, and offered that Sacrifice,
which is mentioned in the Eighth Chapter of Genesis.

The Great Steeple has been newly rebuilt, containing Six Bells, the biggest of
which weighs 1200 Weight. One of the smaller Bells fell down about Forty Years
since, and was never hung up again, for want of Money, as the Armenians say:
and indeed it is certain that they are very Poor. The first Monastery of this
Church was built by Nierses the Twenty Ninth Patriarch of Armenia. This the
Tartars ruined; and if we may believe the Chronology of the Place, it has been
Five times levelled with the Ground. It is at present built of Brick; the
Patriarchs Apartiment lying to the East. There are besides in the Convent
Lodgings for all strangers that come to Visit it, and for 80 Monks beside; but
usually there are not above Twelve or Fifteen. And here it is that the
Patriarchs of Armenia are obliged to reside. But to say Truth, the Avarice,
Envy and Ambition with which they are possessed in this Age, finds 'em so much
business, that they spend all their time in Rambling over Persia and Turkey.
This Patriarch has Twenty Bishoprics under him.

The two other Churches that stand near Echs-Miazin, are called one St. Caiana,
and the other St. Repsima, from the Names of two Roman Virgins, who, as they
say, fled into Armenia, in the time of the Ninth Persecution, and suffered
Martyrdom in the same place where the Churches stand. St. Caiana stands upon
the Right Hand, 700 Paces distant from the Monastery. St. Repsima upon the
Left, about 2000 Paces off. These two Churches are half-ruin'd, there having
been no Service performed in either for a long time.

Within the Territory of Erivan which extends above Twenty Leagues every way,
there are Three and Twenty Convents for Men, and Five for Women: but all
pitifully Poor and badly kept; the most part not having above Five or Six
Persons a piece, whose Penury continually employs 'em in getting a Livelihood,
so that they never perform Holy Duties but upon Holy Days. One of the most
considerable is Cour-Virah, which in the Armenian Language signifies Literally
the Church upon the Wells: and therefore this Name is given to this Convent, as
being built over a Well, into which, as the Armenian History relates, St.
Gregory was thrown, and yet preserved alive, being fed in the same manner as
Daniel was fed in the Lions Den. This Monastery stands upon the confines of the
Territory of Erivan to the South of Echs-Miazin: where the People of the
Country report, that the Ruins of Artaxarte are also to be seen. Which City
they call Ardashat, from Artaxerxes, whom the Easterns call Ardeshir. Among the
Ruins of which, as they say, are also to be seen the Ruins of the Palace of
Tyridates, built about 1300 Years ago. They say moreover, that there is the
Front of a Palace which is not above half Ruined, where there still remain four
Rows of Columns of Black Marble, every one of Nine Columns, that these Columns
encompass a great Heap of wrought Pieces of Marble, and that the Columns are of
that bigness, that Three Men can hardly enfold 'em in their Arms. They call the
whole place, where this heap of Ruins lies, Tact-Terdat, or the Throne of
Tyridates. I shall forbear to speak of the other Monasteries, or of the
particular Stories which the Armenians recount concerning 'em, or of the
Relics that are there preserved; among which they number up the Veronique, or
the Napkin which a Woman of that Name brought to wipe the Sweat from Christ's
Face: the Bodies of St. Thomas, and St. Simon, which is all mere Idle and
ridiculous Fable: for in truth the Armenian Tradition has nothing of common
Sense. Nor shall I speak any thing of the Armenian Belief or Worship; for it is
well known what they are, as having been for several Ages wrapped up in the
Opinions of the Monophysites, who in the East are called Jacobites, of which at
this day they understand nothing at all, being altogether drowned in Ignorance.

Twelve Leagues from Erivan to the East, is to be seen the Famous Mountain,
where almost all Men agree that the Ark of Noah rested; though no Body can
bring any Solid Proof to make out what they affirm. When the Air is Serene,
this Mountain is not to be seen at more then the distance of two Leagues, as
High and as Great as it is; and therefore I am apt to believe I have seen far
higher; and if I am not deceived, that part of Caucasus which I crossed over,
as I Traveled from the Black-Sea to Akalzike, is higher then this Mountain.
The Turks call it Agridag, the High or Massy Mountain; but the Armenians and
Persians call it both by the same Name Masis. Which word the Armenians derive
from Mas or Mesech the Son of Aram, who, as they say, gave to their Nation both
its Original and Denomination. The Persians derive it from Azis, a Word which
in their Language signifies Dear, or Dearly-Beloved; and they will have this
Mountain to be so called, by reason of the choice that GOD made of it to bear
the happy Ark that enclosed all Mankind. These are forced Etymologies as much
as any can be, and such as we may well compare to the mere Tinkling of Bells.
This Mountain is called by two other Names in the Persian Books: that is to
say, Cou-nough, or the Mountain of Noah, and Sahat-toppous, or the Happy
Hillock. But the Holy Scripture gives it no particular Name, only it says, That
the Ark rested upon the Mountain of Ararat, which is Armenia. These are those
Mountains so famous in the Greek and Latin Authors, which they assert to be
part of Mount Taurus, and call by the Names of Gordian, Cordean, Corduenian,
Cardian, Curdi, and Carduchi, every Author altering the word according to the
Pronunciation of his own Language.

The Armenians have a Tradition, That the Ark is still upon the Point, or
highest Top of this Mount Macis. They add moreover, That never any Body could
ascend to the Place where it rested; and this they firmly believe upon the
Faith of a Miracle, which they say, happened to a certain Monk of Echs-Miazin,
whose Name was James, afterward Bishop of Nisibis. They report, That this
Monk, possessed with the common Opinion that this was the Mountain where the
Ark rested after the Deluge, resolved to ascend to the Top, or die in the
Attempt; that he got up half way, but could never go any farther; for that
after he had clamber'd all the Day long, he was in his Sleep miraculously
carried back to the place from whence he set forward in the Morning. This
continued a long time; but that at length GOD giving Ear to the Monk's Prayers,
was willing to satisfy his Desires in some measure: to which purpose he sent
an Angel to him with a piece of the Ark, with Orders to bid him not toil
himself any more in vain, for that he had debarred from Mortals access to the
Top of that Mountain. And this is the Tale which they tell; upon which I shall
observe two things. First, That it has no Coherence with the Relations of
Ancient Authors, as Josephus, Berosus, or Nicholas of Damascus, who assure us
that the Remainders of the Ark were to be seen, and that the People took the
Pitch with which it was besmeared as an Antidote against several Distempers.
The second, That whereas it is taken for a Miracle, That no Body can get up to
the Top, I should rather take it for a greater Miracle, that any Man should
climb up so high. For the Mountain is altogether uninhabited, and from the
Halfway to the Top of all, perpetually covered with Snow that never melts, so
that all the Seasons of the Year it appears like a Prodigious Heap of nothing
but Snow. What I have reported concerning this Mountain, will doubtless cause
no small wonder in those who have read the Travels of Father Philip, a Barefoot
Carmelite, that he should undertake to say that the Terrestrial Paradise lies
there in some Plain which GOD preserves from Heat and Cold; for those are the
words of his Translator. The thought it self seems to me to be very pleasant;
and I should have thought he had spoke it jocularly, did he not relate with an
extraordinary seriousness several things in the same Book which are altogether
as improbable.

At the Foot of the Mountains, in a Village inhabited by Christians, stands a
Monastery, called Arakil-Vanc, or the Monastery of the Apostles; to which place
the Armenians pay a very solemn Devotion. For they report that the Bodies of
St. Andrew and St. Matthew were found there, and that the Scull of the
Evangelist is still preserved in the Church belonging to the Monastery.

When I came to Erivan, I alighted at the House of an Armenian of my
Acquaintance, whose Name was Azarias. He was a Person extremely persecuted by
those of his own Nation, because he had been at Rome to turn Roman Catholic,
and Disciple to the College for the Propagation of the Faith, and for
endeavoring to settle the Capuchins at Erivan. I found him indisposed and in
Bed. However he rose to give Notice of my Arrival; fearing to come into trouble
if he deferred it till the next Morning. To which purpose he went to Court, but
could not see the Governor who was retired into the Apartment of the Princess
his Wife: Nevertheless an Eunuch did his Message.

The Eighth, the Governor sent a Person to give me a Visit, and to tell me I
was Welcome. Whereupon Mr. Azarias undertook to go in my behalf and return him
my humble Thanks, and withal to let him know who I was. Upon which the Governor
showed an earnest desire to see me as soon as I could, and some part of the
Jewels I had brought along with me. Afterward he asked how many Servants I
had, and ordered Mr. Azarias to inform him whether I had rather Lodge in the
Fortress, or in the Inn which he had built, and to bring him word speedily. For
my part I made choice of the Inn, as well for the Security of the Place, as for
that a Man shall never there want Company, because of the great resort of
Merchants thither, besides that Travelers alighted there every day. Thereupon
the Governor ordered me one of the best Apartments.

The Ninth, I went thither betimes in the Morning, and spent all that day in
settling my self in my Lodging. About Noon one of the Governors Officers brought
me an Order from the Steward to send for from the Office Bread, Wine, Meat,
Trouts, Fruit, Rice, Butter, Wood, and other Necessary Provisions as much as
would suffice six Persons. The Quantity of every thing is regulated, never
augmented nor abated: but the Proportion allowed for one Person is so large,
that two may well be satisfied with it.

The 10th, the Governor sent so earnestly for me to come to him, and bring him
part of my Jewels, that I could no longer defer it. I found him in a very large
Cabinet or Study, very Decent and very Light. There was also with him the Head
Surveyor of all the Mints of Persia, who at that time was come to Erivan, and
four other Lords. He received me with an Extraordinary Civility, three times
told me, I was welcome, and set before me Sweet Meats, and Aqua Vitae of
Moscovy. Presently I presented him with the Kings Patent, and that of the Grand
Master, already mentioned. Of both which he made great account, and spent an
Hour in Enquiries after European News, as well concerning the late Wars, and
the present Estate of Christendom, as about Arts and Sciences, and what new
Discoveries had been made therein. Another Hour he spent in considering and
viewing the Precious Stones and Jewels which I showed him. He gave me to
understand, that among the Persian Poets, Emraulds of the old Rock were called
Emraulds of Egypt, of which they believed there had been a Mine in Egypt which
was now lost: and at length, after he had laid by what he liked himself, and
what he thought would please the Princess his Wife, he stayed me to dine with
him. Dinner being ended, he honored me the other half Hour with his Company
and then dismissed me, commanding an Officer in my hearing to go to the
Caravanserai and charge the Innkeeper to be careful as well for my security,
as to give me all Content. And he was moreover so kind as to tell the Officer
farther, that he made him my Memander, who is as it were a Gentleman-Waiter,
and such as are appointed to attend upon all Persons of Quality to take care of
their Persons: and the same Evening he sent me besides a Present of Moscovy
Aqua Vitae.

This Governor bears the Title of Becler-Beg, or Lord of Lords. For so they
call the Deputy Lieutenants of large Governments; to distinguish 'em from those
meaner Governors whom they call Can's. He has also the Title of Serdar or
General of the Army. So that he is one of the Principal Lords of Persia, and
one of the most Judicious and most refined Politicians in the Kingdom. He is
called by the Name of Sephi-Couli-Can; or the Duke, the Slave of Sephi. He
enjoyed one of the most Noble Governments of the Empire in the Reign of the
Deceased King, but through some Intreague among the Women, he fell into
disgrace, three Years before the Death of that Prince. The Wife which he has
Married is of the Blood Royal by the Mothers side. And this Princess it was,
who at the beginning of the present Kings Reign, restored her Husband to his
Majesty's Favor, from whom in a little time he obtained the Government of
Erivan, the most considerable in the Kingdom, and which yields him the fairest
Revenue, no less then Two and Thirty Thousand Tomans a Year, which are above a
Hundred and Twelve Thousand Pounds Sterling. The Fines, Presents, and indirect
ways to enrich himself, are worth him Fifty Thousand Pounds more. And doubtless
this Lord is the most wealthy and most Fortunate of all the Kingdom. The King
loves him, the Court has a Veneration for him, and his two Sons are the Kings
only Favorites: the People under his Government Love and respect him, because
of his Popularity, his doing Justice, and for that he is not so oppressive and
given to extortion as others. So that he deserves the good Fortune he enjoys;
for besides these good Qualities, he is Learned, and a great Lover of Arts and
Sciences.

The 11th, this Lord sent to invite me to the Nuptials of his Stewards Brother
where he was. I found him pleasant and in a very good Humor. For he had
received at the opening of the Gate, an order from the King by a Coolom-Sha,
who came from Ispahan in Thirteen Days. This Order related to an affair of
great Importance. For several Sultans who are Lords of Countries and Governors
of strong Holds, having refused to obey his Orders, and having made great
complaints against him to the King and his Ministers; He on the other side had
justified his own Rights and Prerogatives; upon which his Majesty had given
Sentence in his behalf, and had sent him an order to Command Obedience. Which
Order the Coolom-Sha was to see Executed, and to cause Satisfaction to be given
to the Governor.

Coolom-Sha signifies the Kings Slave. Not but that they who bear this Title
are as free, as other the Kings Natural Subjects; but they take it as a Mark of
their perfect Devotion to their Sovereign, as being that to which they were
bred up altogether in their Infancy. For the Employment of these Kings Slaves
in the Court of Persia, is almost the same with that of Gentlemen-Ushers; who
are Childern of good Quality, employed very young in Duty, as well for the
Profit which they get by it, as to give 'em a fair Opportunity to make their
way to Preferment at Court. There are some Persons who send their Sons to these
Employments at the Age of Five Years. To whom the King assigns Exhibitions
according to the Quality of their Family, or the Service which it does the
King; for that serves in stead of other Recompense to the Parents. The usual
Exhibition is Twenty Tomans a Year, and their Diet; which Twenty Tomans make
about Seventy Pounds Sterling: And the Diet taken in Money amounts to about
Forty Pounds. But these Exhibitions are frequently enlarged proportionably
either to the Service which they do the King, or to the Kindness which the King
has for their Persons. For which reason they are very diligent at Court, and
are employed in the Execution of all Orders of Importance. They are sent with
the Kings Presents to the Governors; and out of their Number are taken several
to supply the Vacancies of Officers.

Orders that require Expedition are carried Post. Which Couriers are called
Tshapars; a word that comes from a Turkish word that signifies Galloping,
whence that other word Tsapgon, which signifies a Courier. These Tshapars make
great haste, though they do not always meet with Horses when they have occasion
for 'em: For there are no settled Stages in all the East. In Persia the Kings
and Governors Couriers take Horses wherever they find 'em; nay, they have
Authority to dismount Travelers upon the Highway: besides, the Magistrates of
the Places through which they pass, are obliged to furnish 'em. However, this
is a very mischievous Custom; for such as have neither the Strength nor the
Courage to resist, are constrained to give Money to these Couriers, or to
alight and suffer their Horses to be rid away with, and then to run after 'em
if they intend to have 'em again. Nevertheless they dare not meddle with
Persons of Quality, nor the Kings Officers, nor Strangers that are going to the
Court, for fear of being called to Question. Usually therefore they take up
Horses in the Villages through which they pass; which they must not make use of
however above one Days Journey; for which reason they generally send a Runner
along with 'em to bring the Horses back.

These Couriers are easily known by their Habit: For they wear a Cloak tied
behind 'em; and a little Cloak-bag, which runs through the Pommel, and is
fastened to the Saddle-Bow. They carry a Poniard, a Sword, and a Quiver by
their Sides, and a Cudgel in their Hands. Their Bows hang about their
Shoulders; besides all which they have a Scarf that comes twice about their
Necks, which is brought down Cross-wise upon their Backs and Breasts, and tied
to their Girdle. When they are descried at a distance, they who are afraid of
being dismounted, flee out of the way and hide themselves, or compound for
Money, or else offer 'em their Horses. These Couriers ride generally two and
two, and if they be Persons of Quality, it is the more difficult to get rid of
'em: for they will take no Composition; and upon the least Resistance, they
either up with their Battoons, or out with their Swords, well knowing they
shall be upheld in what they do; which is a Violence that other Couriers dare
not offer.

One of the Principal Extraordinary Expenses which the Grandees are constrained
to be at, is when the King sends 'em his Orders or Presents by a Coolom-Sha, or
by any other Person of Quality; for he must Cloth him upon his Arrival, and at
his Departure he must make him a Present answerable to his Employment, and the
Reputation that he bears; besides that he must be well Feasted and Entertained
all the time of his stay. This Coolom-Sha that I speak of, cost the Governor of
Erivan, as I was informed, Four Hunderd Tomans, which amount to Fourteen
Hunderd Pounds besides Lodging and Diet. Many times the King himself Taxes the
Present which is to be given to the Person whom he sends, but then the Person
is obliged to pay it presently down as a Debt, and to bestow in Gifts and
Largesses many times double the Present: in short, they treat their Messengers
according to their Birth, their Merit, and their Credit at Court. This they
diligently observe, so that when they understand that a Messenger or his
Relations have free Access to the King, then they are more free in their
Entertainment, to the end he may make an Advantageous Report of his Usage, and
the Civility shown him. I remember to this purpose, in the Year 1669 when the
King conferred upon the Son of the Prime Minister, the Command of Colonel of
the Musketeers, his Majesty sent the Dispatches and Habit by his Goldsmiths, to
reward 'em for some Jewels which they had made to his liking; and that he Taxed
the Present which the Colonel was to give 'em at Three Hunderd Tomans.
Thereupon four of the chief Goldsmiths carried the Dispatches and the Habit,
who instead of Three Hunderd, received 400 Tomans, which make Fourteen Hundred
Pounds, and a Present besides in Stuffs.

I stayed three Hours at the Wedding, and took my leave after Dinner. The Feast
was kept in a low Dining Room, raised about two Foot, opening into a Court
which was Railed about like a Tilt-Yard, where several Wrestlers and Gladiators
divertis'd the Company, while the Governor spent his time in looking on, and
discoursing sometimes with the Kings Messengers, sometimes with the Company,
and sometimes talking with my self about the news of Europe. There were but
nine Persons at the Feast, among whom the Bridegroom and his Godfather were
sumptuously habited, their Turbants being garnished with Heron-Tuffs, set with
precious Stones. The Master of the Household, his other Brothers and his Sons
standing upon their Feet at the lower end of the Room, with several of the
Governors Officers. Every one of the Guests were served at their first coming,
with a Voider of Sweat-Meats Dry and Wet, upon small Porcelaine Plates; the
Voiders themselves being of Wood Painted and Gilt; so that nothing could be
seen more Neat.

Matrimony in Persia is very expensive, frequently to the Ruin of those that
engage in it: So that only Persons of Estates will venture upon it: as for the
meaner sort, they are contented with a Concubine or a Slave.

The Mahometans that follow the Tenants of Ali, take their Wives after three
manners, either by way of Purchase, by way of Hire, or by Marriage. All which
three ways they hold to be Lawful. Their Religion allows and teaches 'em this
Liberty; and the Civil Law acknowledges the Childern Born in any of these three
sorts of Wedlock, to be equally Legitimate. So that if a Man have a Son by his
Slave, before his Married Wife brings him one, the Son of the Slave is
acknowledged for the Eldest, and enjoys all the Privileges of Eldership to the
Exclusion of the Son of the Lawful Wife, be she a Princess and of the Blood
Royal. And therefore in Persia Quality and Nobility descends only from the
Father.

The Wives, who are Slaves, are called Canize: of whom the Law allows a Man to
have as many as he can maintain. Nor does the Government either Ecclesiastical
or Civil take any Cognizance how they are used. They that have put 'em to all
manner of Drudgery, as they please themselves, being not only Masters of their
Chastity, but of their Lives. Nor is it a dishonor in the East for a Slave to
serve her Master as a Wife; but rather a great Honor and the best Fortune she
can arrive at: for when tkey are advanced to their Masters Bed, they have an
Apartiment separate from the Rest of the Slaves. They are well Clad, allowed
Servants, and a Pension; and if they bring Childern, their Allowances are
enlarged. For then they are no more looked upon as Slaves, but as the Mothers of
the Lawful Heir of the Family.

The hired Wives are called Moutaa, from Amovad, which signifies a Concubine
and also a Servant: of which they may take as many as they please, and as long
as they please for the price they agree upon. At Ispahan, which is the
Metropolis of Persia, those that are handsome and Young may be hired for Five
and Thirty Pound a Year, besides Clothes, Diet and Lodging. Which sort of
Marriage is a contract purely Civil. At the end of the Term, if both parties
are agreed they may renew the Bargain; and they are at Liberty to break off
before the end of the Term, and to put away the hired Wife, but then they must
give the whole Sum contained in the Contract. Yet cannot the Woman so dismissed
let out her self again, nor give her self to another till Forty Days after her
Dismission. Which interval is called the Days of Purification. They who
understand the Ceremonial Law of Moses, may easily perceive that the Mahometans
borrowed this custom from the Jews, though new modeled and altered after their
own humor. And indeed the Law both of the one and the other agrees in the
point of Marriage, and the Behavior of Men toward Women.

The Espoused Wives are called Nekaa: of which the Mohammedan Religion allows a
Man to Marry Four. Nevertheless they never Marry above one, to avoid the
Expense; and because of the disorders that Multiplicity of Lawful Wives creates
in a House. For every one will Command, and their mutual Jealousy keeps the
House in perpetual Confusion. Therefore People of Quality Marry generally into
Families equal in Degree, if they cannot content themselves with one Woman,
which is a Misfortune that never fails to befall 'em, they make use of their
Slaves. By that means the Peace of the Family is never disquieted; for the
Married Wife is always Lady and Mistress. As to other things, whether contented
or no, her Relations never take any notice. As for hired Wives, seldom any Body
takes 'em, but People of mean Condition, or Strangers, which they do that they
may be rid of 'em when they please. The lowest sort of all never make use of
that Custom, as not being able to pay 'em their Wages. Neither do Persons of
Quality; in regard they scorn the Leavings of another, or that another should
make use of a Woman who has belonged to them. But if by chance a Person of
Quality falls in love with a Woman either public, or not fit to be his Wife,
he hires her for Ninety-Nine Years; and by that means he is sure to enjoy her
as long as he lives, without Marriage. And they take this course, especially if
They are Married to Women of Quality or Nobly descended, because their
Relations would take Themselves to be highly affronted should They bring into
their Houses Women of mean Birth to be their Companions.

In Persia they usually-Marry by Proxy: because the Women are never seen by the
Men. Which Ceremony is performed after this manner. The Kindred of both Parties
meet at the House of the Party intended to be the Husband or Bridegroom.
Thither they send for a Churchman to make the Contract. Or if the Parties are
Persons of high Quality, then the Cedre, who is the chief Pontiff, or the
Sheikelislam, who is the chief Civil Judge, and is invited for that purpose. If
they are Persons of mean Degree, they endeavor to get the Kazy, who is the
Lieutenant Civil: and if they be very poor People, they send for a Molla, or
Priest of the Law. Presently the Party Affianc'd in the Company of several
Women repairs to a Chamber not far from the place where the People are met,
where the Door stands half open, but the Tapestry is let down that there is no
Body to be seen. Then the Proxies of both Parties rise, and the Proxy for the
Party Affianc'd setting himself against the Door of the Chamber, and stretching
out his Hand, cries out aloud,

I N. Authorized Proxy for you N. Marry ye to N. here present. You shall be
his perpetual Wife with such a prefixed Dowry according as you have agreed.

Then the other Proxy thus answers:

I N. Authorized Proxy for N. take thee N. in his Name for my perpetual Wife,
who have been given him for such by N. his Proxy here present, upon Condition
of the Dowry prefixed and agreed on by both Parties.

After this the Minister, or whoever he be that is present to make the
Contract, rises, and laying his Head to the Tapestry which divides the Room,
cries out to the Affianc'd,

Do you Ratify the Promise which N. your Proxy has made in your behalf? Who
answers, Yes.

Then he puts the same Question to the other Proxy, makes the Contract, fixes
the Seal, and causes the rest that are met to Seal it likewise; and gives the
Contract to the Proxy of the Affianc'd Virgin. Which Contract is kept by the
Woman for the Security of her Dowry.

There is no difference between this, and the Ceremony of Marriages for time,
when they hire Wives, only that the Proxies make their Promises on other
Terms. As thus:

I N. by Virtue of an Authentic Procuration received from N. give her to N. to
the end he may have the use of her for such a Term, and at such a Price. Or
thus:

I N. by Virtue of an Authentic Procuration from N. take in his Name N. to
Wife. I take her upon the Conditions agreed upon, I take her upon my Soul.

The poor People make less stir, without any Proxy: For the Woman enters
Veiled with her Parents, who are also in the Room where the Men are, and then
says the Party himself,

I N. Proxy for my self, take you N. for my perpetual Wife, at such a certain
Dowry; I take ye for such upon my Soul.

Now the Women are the Match makers; and as soon as the Articles are agreed
upon, the Husband settles the Dowry upon the clearest part of his Estate, and
then sends the VVedding-Ring and the Presents to his Bride: Which consist in
Clothes, Jewels, and Ready Money. For which the Bride returns him several
Knick-Knacks, as Embroidered Handkerchers, Toylets, Needlework Night-Caps, and
such kind of Trifles, usually all made with her own Hands.

The Wedding is kept at the Man's House, and lasts Ten Days: upon the Tenth Day,
by broad Daylight, they send him home that which is called the Bride's Bundle,
which consists in Furniture, Jewels, Movables, Slaves and Eunuchs, according
to the Quality of the Bride, and all this upon Camels or other Beasts of
Carriage, the Music playing before 'em. The Slaves and Eunuchs ride either
upon the Packs or else on Horseback: and sometimes it happens that they borrow
Household Stuff and a Train, and send empty Chests; and all to make a show and
dazzle the World. At Night the Bride is conducted home; and if she be a Person
of Quality she is carried in a Cagiavat, being a kind of Cradle of which a
Camel will carry two. If she be a Person of mean Condition, she is set upon a
Horse, or else goes a Foot: and then the Music marches first; then the
Servants with every one a Wax-Taper in their Hands; followed by the Women with
lighted Candles in their Hands after the same manner. The Bride her self is
veiled from Head to Foot; with another Veil over that, plaited like a Cassock;
made of Silk and Silver, or Cloth of Gold, or plain Silk, which reaches down to
her waste. So that a very Lynx could never be able to discover her shape or
Stature. If she be afoot, two Women lead her by each Arm; if on Horseback, an
Eunuch leads the Horse by the Bridle. About an Hour after she has been at her
Husbands House, the Nuptial Feast being over, the Matrons carry her into the
Bridal Chamber, uncloath her to a little Waste-Coat, and a thin pair of Drawers
next to it, and put her to Bed. Soon after the Bridegroom is conducted to the
same place either by Eunuchs or Old Women, the Lights being all taken away when
he enters the Room.

Thus the Man never sees his Wife till after he has Consummated the Marriage;
and many times he never does that, till several Days after his Wife has been at
home, the nice Lady flying his Embraces and hiding her self among the Women, or
else unwilling to let her Husband meddle with her. Which Coyness frequently
happens among Persons of Quality, who look upon it as a piece of Immodesty to
bestow their last Favors so soon. The Virgins of the Blood Royal more
particularly put their Husbands to this trouble, so that it requires whole
Months to reclaim 'em, and to persuade 'em that their Husbands are worthy their
Embraces.

To this purpose they tell a Story of a Daughter of Abas the Great, who was
Married to one of his Great Generals, that she was a long time before she would
condescend so much as to look upon her Husband. Thereupon the Lord complained
to the King, That his Majesty had given him a Tygress instead of a Wife; that
he durst not come near her; for that she had Twice run at him with a Dagger in
her Hand. At which Abas could not forbear Laughing, and asked him how many
white Slaves he had in his Seraglio? The General answered, about Five and
Forty. Then said the King, Lie with 'em all one after another, I am sure that
will be a means to reclaim your Wife. The General took the Kings advice. The
Princess enraged at this his manner of proceeding, asked him, if that were his
Conjugal Faith that he had plighted to her, and seeing he continued his Course,
notwithstanding all her fury, made her complaints to the King, telling him,
That she came to demand Justice of him against her Husband, who Ravished all
his Maids and Slaves. To whom the King with an incensed Countenance answered,
That he had done it by his Order: and at the same time sent her away, with an
express Command to invite her Husband to come and lie with her. Which the
Princess did accordingly, and was well satisfied.

To the same purpose they relate another very pleasant Story of one of the
Concubines of Sephi, the last King of that Name. She was a lovely Person, and
for that reason infinitely beloved of the Prince, which had made her extremely
Proud, and to take upon her many times to talk over boldly to the King. One Day
therefore Sephi, who was naturally Cruel, was so incensed against her that he
would have put her to Death; but his Anger not believing Death to be a
sufficient Punishment, he took from her all her Women, and her Eunuchs, caused
all her Clothes to be Burnt, and her Jewels to be Pounded in a Mortar, and the
bitts of Stones to be flung into a Pond before her Face; and to add to her
Ignominy, caused her to be Married to a Paltry Negro, that was one of his
Cooks: and so the Unfortunate Lady was sent home to the Cooks House with only
one Chambermaid left her. But when her frightful Husband thought to have
approached her, the Chambermaid as Lovely and Majestic as her Mistress,
drawing a naked Dagger out of her Pocket, and throwing her self before her
Mistress, Dog of a Negro, said she, Do but touch her so much as with thy
Finger, and I will make a Thousand Holes in thy Heart. Upon which the poor Cook
flew for his Life; and the Story being told to the King, he was so pleased with
the action, that he recollected himself, asswag'd his Passion, Married her to a
Colonel, and sent her Clothes and Furniture suitable to her Condition.

There happens in the Marriages of the meaner sort of People, something that
seems to be quite the Contrary. For if the Man have obliged himself to make his
Wife a Dowry, that exceeds his Estate, to obtain the consent of his Wife's
Parents; he shuts his House door when they bring her home, and cries that he
will not give so great a Price for her. Then the Parents of both Parties
dispute the Matter between themselves; and the Friends of the Bride are obliged
to abate something, for fear the Bridegroom should refuse her; for it would be
the greatest Dishonor in the World, as well for them, as for the Maid, to be
carried back again.

Now one would think this way of Marrying, without ever seeing the Parties
face, should produce very unfortunate Matches; but it does not. Nay we may say
in General, that the Matches are more happy in a Country, where the Men and
Women never see one another, then where the Women are so frequently seen and
courted. And the Reason is plain: For they that see not another Man's wife, lose
less suddenly the Affection which they have, or ought to have, for their own.
And yet we cannot say the Persians marry without altogether knowing whom
neither. For the Mother or Kindred or other Persons, upon whom they rely for
the choice of a Wife, make such a frequent and lively Description of the
Virgin, that they may sufficiently judge by their Report, whether the Original
will please, or whether she be a fit Match or no. Besides when they are Girls,
tho the Greatest Lords Daughters, they are not so close locked up, till they
come to be above Seven or Eight Years of Age. Till which time they appear up
and down the House, to the end they may be publicly seen and taken notice of;
so that sometimes it happens, that a Man may have seen the Maid, proposed him
for a Wife, especially when she was little.

The Mohammedan Religion holds Divorce to be Lawful, however it be done, or
whatever the Occasion may be. It Is sufficient that one of the Parties dislikes
the other, and that they resolve to unmarry themselves; for then, tho otherwise
the most prudent and civil People in the World, they presently divorce. Which
Act of Separation is passed, either before a Judge or before a Churchman. This
Act is called Talaac, or a Bill of Divorce; which being granted, the Parties
are at Liberty to marry again where they please themselves. Upon the
dissolution of the Marriage, the Man is obliged to return the Woman her Dowry;
if it be he that sues out the Divorce; but if it be the Woman that seeks the
Separation, then she loses her Portion. The Mahometans also hold for lawful,
the Renewing of Marriages dissolved, and that they may dissolve and renew and
dissolve Three times; but if it happen that after a Divorce the third time, the
Man and the Woman desire to come together a fourth time, they cannot do it; but
upon this strange Condition, that before the Woman marry another Husband, she
shall dwell with him forty days, and then be divorced from him.

The Persians, to speak in general, rarely make use of this excessive License
to unmarry one another. The Citizens and Tradesmen sometimes make their
Advantages of it: But Persons of Quality will rather choose to dye, then
repudiate their Wives, and you may as soon take away their Lives, as force 'em
to consent to a Divorce. The poorer sort never use it, for they are too silly
and clott-pated to unmarry one another; besides that it would cost 'em too
dear, in regard they must return the Portion they had, upon the Repudiation.
Which however occasions a more crying piece of Injustice to be committed among
the viler sort. For they, when they would be rid of their Wives without
returning their Portions, misuse the woman in that terrible and inhumane
manner, that she is forced to sue for a Divorce, and sacrifice all to her
Liberty. Besides, the Courts of Judicature, rarely know the Differences that
happen between Man and Wife, the mischeivous Tricks that they play one another,
and the Reasons that move 'em to separate. The Place where the Women are shut
up is sacred; especially among Persons of Condition: And it is a Crime for any
Person whatever, to be enquiring what passes within those Walls. The Husband
has there an absolute Authority, without being obliged to give any account of
his Actions. And it is said, that there are most bloody doings in those places
sometimes, and that Poison dispatches a World of People, which are thought to
dye a natural Death.

The 12. I dismissed the Officer of the Can of Georgia, who conducted me to
Irrivan. I made him a present of about Six Guines; and gave him a Letter for
Father Raphael of Parma, wherein I let him know how diligently the Officers had
served me, and desired him to give the Prince an Account of it, and to return
him my humble Thanks. For it is the custom to give such Letters of
Commendation to those sort of Officers. Without which should they return to
their Masters, it would be a fault, for which they would not fail to be
punished.

The 13. I stayed at the Palace some part of the day, and dined with the
Governor. The 14 and 15. I dined there likewise. He was extremely civil to me,
to the end I should let him have what he had a mind to at a cheap Rate. For
it is not to be imagined, how these Persian Lords will debase themselves, when
they are dealing for their own Interest with People over whom they have no
Authority. They are not ashamed to beg for what they have a desire to. They
flatter, they praise, they promise, there is nothing so mean, which they will
not make use of to attain their Ends; and when they have once attained 'em,
they have done with those People. Which Inequality of Temper, they that have
business in Persia shall have every day occasion to make Trial of.

The 16. I went to visit the Patriarch of Armenia, whose name was James, an
Ancient Man, all over hairy, and venerable for his Presence and Aspect, but of
a fickle and inconstant Disposition, and whose Behavior justified the
Accusations which his Nation laid upon him, which were, that he wanted
Judgment, but was very Ambitious. He lodged at the Episcopal Mansion; and was
confined within the Walls of the City. A misfortune that for some Pranks which
he had played he had drawn upon himself. And as for that he then lay under, the
occasion was this, of which he made me a long Rehearsal himself.

The Armenian Clergy is very much addicted to Symony, as well as that of the
Eastern Sects. But that which they sell most dear is the holy Oil, which they
call Myrone. The most part of the Eastern Christians believe it to be a Balsom,
and a Remedy that physically Cures all the Distempers of the Soul. Nay there
are whole Societies of Christians who believe, that the Grace of Regeneration,
and Remission of Sins, is imparted by the use of this Oil: Saying, that in
Baptism for Example, it is the Oil and not the Water, which is the Matter
prescribed. And the Clergy keep the People in this pernicious Error, because of
the Advantages which they get by it, selling at a dear rate the Unction of this
Oil. Which the Patriarch has the only right to Consecrate, and he sells it to
the Bishops and Priests. Now about twelve Years since the Persian Patriarch
began to project, how he might prevent the Armenian Ecclesiastics over all the
East from furnishing themselves with this Holy Oil, from any other Person but
himself. Those of Turkey bought it of the Armenian Patriarch residing at
Jerusalem, and who is the Chief over all the Armenian Christians within the
Empire. James pretended, that it was not lawful for the Armenians of Turkey, to
go for Holy Oil to Jerusalem, but at a time when the War between the Turk and
the Persian, hindered 'em from coming to his See; and he was of opinion for a
sum of Money, well expended at the Ottoman Court, he might obtain an Order from
the Port, by virtue of which the Ecclesiastical Armenians of that Empire should
be obliged to fetch their Holy Oil from Persia, as formerly. But first he must
have the consent of the Persian King to undertake an Affair of that Importance,
which James easily obtained, and afterward went to the Port; where after he
had spent a great deal of Money and Time, at length he obtained his Hearts
desire.

All this while the Armenian Patriarch of Jerusalem, a more Politic Prelate,
and one better skilled in the Affairs of Turkey, never stirred from his Seat,
while the other was negotiating at the Grand Signior's Court. He let him expend
and exhaust himself, and only watch't for James's Return into Persia. But then
it was no hard matter for him, to demonstrate to the Divan the Grand Signiors
Interest in that Affair, and the Damage which his Highness did himself, in
obliging the Armenians under his Subjection to fetch their Holy Oil from
Persia, because of the great Revenue which it produced. Whereupon the Divan
cancelled the Order which they had given the Persian Patriarch; and left the
whole Business as it was before.

However James to his own and the misfortune of his Nation, went on obstinately
against his own Interest, he got a Re-hearing, believing that his large
Presents and his Importunity would at length gain him his Cause. I cannot tell
certainly, how much the Money was that he spent in this idle Concern; but they
say it amounted to no less than threescore thousand Guines.

All that I know is this, that he owes forty thousand pound which he took up
at Constantinople, and spent upon this same incomparable Project. He borrowed
first of the Armenians, as long as his Credit would last, and when they would
lend him no more, then he borrowed of the Turks. At length he became an
absolute Bankrupt, and at the same time he was forced to quit his design and
retire out of Turkey, where there is nothing to be done by men that have no
money in their Pockets. The Patriarch however thought he could oblige the
Armeniaus of Persia, that go and come to Constantinople, to pay what he owed
the Turks. Which as he importuned 'em to do, so he obtained in part. For they
paid several considerable Sums, in hopes to free their Patriarch out of his
Troubles; whom they thought not to be so deeply engaged as they found him to
be. But finding still that after they had paid one Debt, larger Sums discovered
themselves, and called for Satisfaction, they refused to disburse any more
Money, notwithstanding all the fair and foul Means he could use. James
therefore soothed up his Turkish Creditors, and told 'em that if they would
send along with him two Trustees to receive their Money in Armenia, he would
pay 'em there: and so they let him go upon his Word. But when he came home, he
found both the Persians and the Armenians equally offended with him for his
extravagant Expenses, and the Folly of his Design; So that not a man would part
with any Money, nor would they suffer him to touch the Patriarchal Treasure:
Insomuch that the two Turkish Trustees for the Customer of Constantinople, that
came to receive the payment of Six Thousand Guineys, which he owed their
Master, were forced to return, finding the Patriarch to be utterly insolvent.

The Customer perceiving his Debt to be so desperate, obtained an Order from
the Grand Signior to the Governor of Erzerum, to give his People, that returned
into Persia, all the Assistance he could, to enable 'em to recover the Debt. To
that end the Governor gave 'em Letters of Recommendation for the Can of Erivan.
But those Letters proved of little or no effect; and because the Length of
Journeys is very tedious in Asia, and for that the distance of one Place to
another happens to be a great delay of Business, the Turkish Trustees stayed a
year at Erivan without doing any good. At length they received new Letters of
Recommendation from the Grand Vizir, the Kaimacan of Constantinople and the
Basha of Erzerum for the Governor of Erivan, which were so full and so
importunate, that the Governor was forced to bestir himself. He sent for the
Patriarch, and told him he must pay the six thousand Guinneys. The Patriarch,
who was really insolvent, demonstrated his Inability to the Governor as clearly
as could be done in the world, and besought him very earnestly to obtain leave
of him from the Court, that he might raise the Sum upon the Churches of Media
and Georgia; and to oblige the Governor to intercede for it, gave him several
considerable Presents. So that the Governor at length consenting, he not only
petitioned for Leave, buthad it granted; and when it came, James sent about his
Deputies to put it in Execution. But both the Clergy and Seculars of those
Provinces, who are really very Poor, and continually vexed with Impositions,
Levies of Money, Taxes and Imposts, refused to pay the Patriarch. Besides, when
the Governors of Media and Georgia were informed of what the Patriarch had
done, they forbid the Christians under their subjection to part with a
Farthing; saying withal, that the if Governor of Armenia were so liberal to the
Patriarch, he might make his Levies upon the Churches that belong to his own
Government. Thereupon there was a necessity for him, to write back to the
Court. But the Governor of Armenia, fearing least the Patriarch should absent
himself, or that he would not go to the Court, ordered him to keep at Erivan,
and not to stir thence without leave. And this was that Prelate's Condition,
when I went to visit him. At what time he seemed to be very impatient in
Expectation of the Resolutions of the Court.

The 21. Forty seven Minutes after Sunrise and the first day of the Month
Zilbage, which is the Twelfth Month of the Year among the Mahumetans, the Great
Guns of the Fortress were thrice Discharged, and the Garrison gave three
Vollies to give Notice that it was New Years Day. And this they always do at
the very Moment that the Sun enters in Aries, whether it be Day or Night. The
Astrologers, who make their Observations very exactly with their Astrolobes,
give the Signal, and then it is that all the Guns go off, as I have already
said. This Festival lasts three days; and is the most Solemn one that is
celebrated in Persia: We shall tell ye in another place, after what manner it
is Solemnized.

The 21. in the Afternoon I went to the Governor to wish him a happy New-Year;
and presented him at the same time with a Hafted Dagger, and a Sheath of Ivory
inlay'd with Gold. Which the Governor very much admired, and was very well
pleased. For it is the Custom in Persia, now become a Law, never to come into
the Presence of a Great Person emptyhanded during this Festival. The Governor
on the other side made me sit down by him, and gave me a Collation of dried and
green Fruits, and Excellent Wines of Georgie and Shiras. The General of the
Mint, and the King's Envoy, of whom we have already spoken, were both with him
at the same time. So that I staid two hours discoursing of Sundry things.

The 25. he sent for me, and after several Discourses at Rovers, he told me, He
was very much troubled for me, that I was come in Persia at such an unlucky
Season, when there was so little Trade for Jewels, for that the King had little
or no esteem for 'em, and therefore bought very few. That I was not now to look
upon my Condition, as if King Abas were alive, for those days were gone; and
that I should find it a hard matter at Court to put off the worth of Three
Thousand Pound. Then going on, he told me farther, That he did not speak this
to discourage me, but that I might betimes consider what I had to do, and lose
no opportunity of selling what I had brought: That he had a design to lay out
to the value of Two Thousand Five Hundred Pounds, if I would let him have good
Bargains. Presently I found what the Governor aimed at by his Discourse, and
that his Advice tho very good and true, proceeded rather from Interest, then
that he was really concerned for my Benefit. However I returned him Thanks, and
told him, I heard of the Great Change of Humor at Court, but yet for all that I
did not question but to sell, expecting from his Majesty's Justice that he
would consider, that I had not made such a tedious Voyage, nor brought so many
Jewels, but by the Orders of the Deceased King his Father. Nevertheless, that I
was resolved to sell as much as I could without Loss, and that I was so much
beholding to him for his Favors and his particular Care of me, that I would
sell Cheaper to him then to another Person.

Thereupon the Governor promised me, that I should have the favor of his Sons,
and be assisted by all the Credit which they had at Court; to which purpose he
would give me most Effectual and Earnest Recommendations, and at length ordered
me to bring all that he had set apart. He told me he would make his first
Purchases of little Jewels and of small value, to the end he might see, whether
I would be as good as my word. Which Method of his did no way please me, and
therefore I propounded to him to take all at a Lump, and never to make two
Bargains, assuring him that he would find it his cheapest way. After that I
desired him to begin with the Great Pieces; but he refused to accept either of
my Proposals; he knew how to manage me so dexterously, that he persuaded me that
his Intentions were real, and that he would try by those things wherein he had
most Judgment, whether I sold him dear or no. So then we agreed upon a Price
for Forty Watches of several Fashions: All which I sold him at a low rate, to
purchase his good Opinion, and to the end I might sell him more of my
Commodities. Presently he sent me to his Cashier to receive my Money; which
while we were telling, in he came with a great Crystal Looking glass set in
Gold, which he had set aside from among those other that I had shown him, and
telling me, the hour was now lucky, asked me the Price of the Glass; and I let
him have it for Five Hundred Crowns, which he paid me with the rest of my
Money. For the Persians are strangly infatuated with Judicial Astrology, and
attribute to the Influences of the Stars all their good and bad Success. And
when two Stars which they call Benign, are in Conjunction, that they call the
lucky hour.

The 27. The Governor did me the Honor to give me a visit. Tho I had rather he
had let his visit alone; for it cost me a Gold-Box of Eight Guineys. Which I
presented to him to gratify the Custom of the Country; which is, to repay the
visits of great Personages with a Present. The Governor staid a quarter of an
hour in my Chamber; after which he went and made a stop where the People that
belonged to the Customer of Constantinople lay, which was very near to my
Apartment. Then he went and visited a Turkish Merchant, and an Armenian
Merchant, that lodged in the same Inn, who made him every one a Present, but of
things of little value. The People that belonged to the Customer of
Constantinople gave him two Ducats, the Turkish Merchant a little bag of
Coffee, worth an Angel, and the Armenian presented him with two Else of Damask.
For the Governor comes forth out of the Castle into the City constantly twice a
Week, that is, Frydays and Saturdays; Friday he goes publicly to the Mosquee
to say his Prayers; Saturday he visits every Quarter of the City, and gives
such Orders as he finds to be requisite. So that there can be nothing better
contrived then his Method of Government. If he stop before any House they never
make him any Present, unless they please themselves. But if he go into the
House, Custom obliges 'em to present him. And there is an Officer, called the
Receiver of Presents, who keeps an account of all that is presented him, let it
be of never so mean a value.

The 29. and 30. I dined with the Governor, and sold him as many ordinary
Jewels as came to about Five Hundred Pounds. We drove our Bargains every price
by it self, and when we were come to a Price he paid me in ready Money. And
most assuredly he got by that way of dealing; for by that means I sold him at a
much cheaper rate. The same day a little after I was returned to my Lodging,
the Princess his Wife sent for me, to make her a price of some certain Jewels
which she had made choice of. But just as I was ready to take Horse, the
General of the Mint, and the Kings Slave came to give me a visit, so that I
could not go to the Castle that day: neither would I go the three next days, as
being the three last of the Passion Week; but the Fourth of April I went. So
soon as I came, the Princesse's Steward, who was an old Eunuch, told me, That
the Princess was extremely angry that I had stayed so long, and that if one of
the Country should have served her so, she would have made him feel two hundred
Drubs upon the Soles of his Feet. At which I laughed, and asked the Eunuch, if
his Lady were wont to pronounce Sentences. Sir, said he, she is one of the
Haughtiest Ladies in the World; and for the least fault exacts a most severe
punishment. If it be a man that has offended her, she sends her Eunuchs to
seize him, who bind him hand and foot, and put him in a Sack, carry him into
the Seraglio into her presence, and punish him according to her Commands,
without letting him out of the Sack, or suffering him to know where he is. But
I never yet knew that the Persian Ladies ever inflicted such sort of
punishments. And therefore I desired the Eunuch, to let the Princess know the
Reason that had kept me at home, and that I was always ready to obey her
Commands. I tarried above four hours at the entrance into the Seraglio, while
the Eunuch went and came back. At length a Bargain was made between us for so
many Jewels as amounted to Four Hundred Pounds, for which I received my Money
the next Morning.

The 3. I went to the Governor, and desired him to give me leave to depart; for
that I was in have to be at Court. He promised to dispatch me after Dinner: and
I waited on him again at his time appointed. At what time, he asked me with a
smiling Countenance what was the value of the Gold Box I had given him, when he
came to visit me. I knew not what his design was, and therefore in my answer I
valued it at Ten Pounds. Pray then Sir, said he, oblige me to take it again and
give me the value of it in Keys, in Springs and Strings for Watches. I was not
a little surpised at his Proposal, which did not seem to be very civil for a
Person of his Quality. However I answered him, that I was ready to do what he
pleased and added that I had several Watchmakers Tools, that I had brought for
the Kings Artificers, which I would send him, if it were his Pleasure. He took
me at my word, assuring me that I should do him a very great kindness. For this
same Grandee is a great Lover of Mechanics, and knows how to mend a Watch that
does not go true. Afterward he caused all that remained in his hands of mine
to be delivered me back: and I thought certainly that he would have made an
entire Bargain; but to my great Astonishment he restored me all. Then I
perceived I had been his Cully, and that he had only drilled me on in hopes of
selling him a great Purchase, to let him have what he chiefly desired at a
cheaper tate. However I concealed my disgust, and my dissatisfaction to be so
served; and returned him a thousand Thanks, with a Countenance as gay, as if I
had had my hearts desire. Afterward I besought him to give me his Letters of
Recommendation to his Son: which he promised me to do, and invited me to go
along with him into the Country, whither he went the next morning. But I
excused my self, returning him Thanks in the best Language I could. I also
requested him to give me the Agreement with Mr. Azarias, who was to accompany
me to Tauris. I will so, answered his Lordship, and I will enjoin him to be
your Mehemandar, or Guide, meaning that honest Armenian already mentioned. This
done, I again returned him my humble Thanks for all his Favors; and after I had
told him that I would not fail to extol his Kindnesses at Court, I took my
leave. I thought it not proper to put him in mind of several other Promises
that he had made me; as being assured they would produce little, for that
according to the Custom of the Country he had made 'em, not with an intention
to be as good as his word, but only to make me the more ready to do what he
desired.

The 5. the Governor went to the Camp, which he had caused to be set up about a
League from the City, in a spacious and lovely Meadow, all covered with flowers
during the fair Season. The two Rivers that encompass Erivan, and run along
with a winding Course and gentle Stream, make several little Islands in that
Place. So that the Governors Quarter, that of the Princess his Wife, and those
of the most considerable Persons that accompanied him, were all separated;
while every one had their particular Island; which were joined together by
certain little Bridges, that were laid on or taken away, as occasion required.
The Governor's Tents were very Magnificent; and indeed there were in a little
Ground all the Conveniences of a Palace even to the very Bathes and Stoves.
His Family consisted of about Five Hundred Men, without reckoning the Women and
Eunuchs. And it is the Custom of the Grandees of this Kingdom to solace
themselves in this manner in the Country in the Spring Time. There they
divertize themselves in Hunting, Fishing, Walking and employ themselves in
several other Exercises, both a Foot and on Horseback: There they suck in the
fresh Air, and enjoy that Coolness which they so much delight in. This is the
Refreshment and Recreation of their Lives; so that if they have no business in
the City which requires their Presence there, they continue thus taking their
pleasure all the Summer long, in the most delicious parts of the Neigbouring
Mountains. This they call Yelac: or a Country Excursion.

The 6. The Prince's Treasurer gave me a Dinner, and the Kings Lieutenant of
the Fortress was at it. He is a Native of Dag-Estaan. Which is a Mountainous
Country to the North-East of the Caspian Sea, and bordering upon Muscovie. So
that I took great delight to hear him repeat several particulars of the
Customs and Manners of his Country. The King of Persia is acknowledged there
as Sovereign Lord; but he is not absolute Master of it: nor are the People that
inhabit it always subject to his Commands. And the Court winks at their
Disobediences; it being a difficult thing to reduce 'em, by reason of the
Roughness and Height of the Mountains. They are a Savage sort of People, and
the most barbarous of all the East: and I take 'em to be some Remainders of the
Parthians. The same Evening that Gentleman sent me a Present of Fruit, Wine,
and Mutton.

The 7. The Treasurer sent me much such another Present, as the Governor had
sent me the day before: and I repaid 'em in small Returns for the Favors I
had received from Both. They had been very civil to me at Erivan, not so much
as offering to take those fees, which men are obliged to pay in Persia to the
Officers of Governors, for all the Money received out of their Treasuries; for
that their Master had forbid 'em to demand any thing of me. And therefore they
did me those Kindnesses to oblige me to be the more free of my own accord; well
knowing I was not so ignorant of the Customs of the Country, but that I knew
that it was not any motion of Generosity, that made 'em so courteous to
Strangers.

In the Afternoon I went to the Camp, to take leave of the Governor; who showed
me a thousand Civilities; and at my departure gave me two Letters of
Recommendation to his two Eldest Sons, who are the Kings only Favorites. They
were both much to the same Effect. And this is the Translation of that which
was written to the Eldest.

GOD,
I beseech the Sovereign Author of all good Things to preserve in Life and
Health the High and Potent Lord Nesr-ali-bec, my most Honored and most Happy
Son, the Favorite and Confident of his Royal Majesty.

We make most perfect vows to Heaven for your Happy Grandeur. The motive that
induced us to write ye this Letter, is upon the Account of our being so much
concerned as we are on the behalf of Mr. Chardin, who arrived some time since
at this City, and is now going in all have to the Palace, which is the (a)
Refuge of the Universe. You must of necessity fully and exactly (b) inform your
self of his designs, and what Petitions he has to make to the most High Court;
and when you rightly understand' em, see that you use your best Endeavor that
they may be favorably answered. We shall be very desirous to know, what Effect
and Success our Recommendation shall have, and after what Manner this
Hlustrious Friend shall be received and entertained. We also desire you to send
us the good Tidings of his Health. We pray to God, that he may have the favor
and the happiness to be well received of our Great King. To whom I wish that
(c) all the World may pay Homage, and that he may prosper in all his
Undertakings. The Eternal God grant ye long life.

(a) The Persian word which I have translated, the Refuge of the World, is
Alempenha. Alem signifies the whole entire World, or Universal Nature. Penha, a
Retreat, a Haven, a Place of Security, and to which a Man may have recourse.

(b) In the Original it is, that they inform themselves. For the Eastern People
addressing themselves to Persons of Quality; to denote the Person, make use of
the Third Person Plural, and when they mean themselves speak in the Third
Person Singular. Which is also the Proper Idiom of the Holy Language.

(c) In the Persian it is, That all Souls may serve his Name, his Name.
Repetition is a Figure very frequent in the Oriental Languages, and
questionless borrowed from the Sacred Language. Of which there are a Thousand
Examples in the Original Bibles, as in the 68. Psalm. v. 13. They are fled,
they are fled. That is, They are absolutely fled. And Psalm. 8. 7. v5. The man,
the man, That is, the Perfect Man.

Afterward I went and took leave of the Principal Lords of the Court, and
among the Rest of the General of the Mint. This Lord, who was called Mahamed
Shefi, persuaded me to go to Ispahan by the way of Ardevil, assuring me that I
should not fail to sell in that City. Thereupon I promised him so to do, and
took along with me a Letter of Recommendation to the Governor of that City; who
was his near Kinsman: Which I thus Translated into French.

GOD,
Thrice High and Potent Lord, Glorious Majesty, worthy to be called Celestial,
Elect of the Governors, Deputy Lieutenants and Happy Men; Fountain of Grace,
Honor and Civility; Exemplar of Purity, Model of Generosity and Manificence;
Heart Sincere, Real and Faithful. Protector of his Intimate Friends and
Kindred, My most Excellent Lord and Master, I beseech the most High God to
preserve your Health and prolong your Life.

Having paid you my due Respects and Homage, These are to let you understand,
Great Sir, whose Wit is Clear and Glistering like the Sun, That Mr. Chardin the
Flower of European Merchants, intending to go through Casbin to the Magnificent
Palace, which is the Refuge of the Universe, I who am your Real Friend,
persuaded him out of a desire to serve you, to go through the Sacred Ardevil.
He carries with him certain Commodities of an Extraordinary value, which he
will show in the presence of your thrice a Noble Person. I am certain you will
buy, if you meet with any thing that is worth your having: and I am assured
your Highness will command your People to take care of this Noble Stranger. I
am preparing to go for Tifflis, with God's Assistance, toward the end of the
next Month Zilhage. If I can serve your Excellency in that Country, you will do
me a great Honor to let me know it. I beseech ye to believe that a richer
Present cannot be made me, then to bring me Tidings of your good Health. God,
through his favor, preserve your Illustrious Person till the Day of Judgment.

I am the true Friend of the Thrice High, and Thrice Illustrious Lords,
Geonbec, Hiaiabec, and Mahamed-bec: I am apt to believe for my own Repose the
Continuation of their Health.

The Seal contained a Verse, or Sentence, of which this was the Meaning. I have
wholly left my Destiny to God, I Mahamed Shefi his Creature.

Upon the outside of the Letter, at one Corner was written in a small
Character. God preserve the happy Condition of my Friend.

While I stayed at the Camp, there arrived a Courier from the King, who brought
his Majesty's Answer touching the Patriarch's Business. And I understood at the
Governors, that the Contents were, That the Chief Ministers were of Opinion,
that the Treasure at Ecsmiazin should be sold with all the Ornaments, and all
the Wealth belonging to the Church and Convent: and that the Money that was
made of it should go to the payment of the Patriarch's Debts. And that this
Resolution had been taken, except Opposition had been made by the Armenians, by
representing that all that Money would nothing near satisfy the Patriarch's
Concerns; and that if they took away from Ecsmiazin its Treasure and its
Ornaments, they would ruin a place that drew a world of Company into Persia,
and which yearly paid a very great Rent, occasioned by the Devotion and
Concourse of the Eastern Christians: That upon that the King had decreed, That
the Money should be levied in Armenia upon all the Christian Villages to
satisfy the Customer of Constantinople, whom there was a necessity to see
paid. The Patriarch was overjoyed at the News, and made a Present to him that
brought it; but it displeased all the honest People in the City, who were vexed
to the Souls, to see the Prelate so insensible of the Violence they were going
to offer to thousands of Poor Christians, to pay for the Expenses of his
irregular Ambition.

The 8. an hour before day, I parted from Erivan, and traveled four Leagues
over the little Hills, and through Valleys, the Country which I crossed being
full of Villages. In one of which that was a very fair and large one I lodged,
called by the name of Daivin.

The 9. we traveled five Leagues through a Country that was very level and
fertile. That which they call the Mountain of Noah, lying upon the Right Hand.
We directed our Course South-West, and lay at a Village called Kainer.

The 10. we continued the same Road, and traveled eight Leagues. Upon the left
hand, after we got half the way, we left a great Town called Sederec. Which is
as it were the Capital of the Province of Armenia, called Charour. The Sultan
of which Province resides in that Town. That Night we had but a very bad
Lodging in an old ruined Inn, near to a Village called Nouratchin.

The 11. We traveled four Leagues upon the same Road, and through a very fair
Country; but not so level, nor smooth, as being stony, and full of little
Hills. We also ferry'd over a River called Harpasony, that waters all the
Neighboring Lands. It separates the Government of that part of Armenia, of
which Erivan is the Capital, from that other part of which Nacchivan is the
Metropolis.

The 12. we arrived at Nacchivan, after we had traveled five Leagues over
Plains very level and Fertile.

Nacchivan is a great City, or rather a vast heap of Ruins, which are repaired
and repeopl'd by degrees. The heart of the City is at present rebuilt and
inhahited; having very large Bazars, which are a sort of long Galleries, or
Streets that are covered, full of Shops on both sides; where they sell all
Sorts of Merchandises and Provisions. There are in it five Inns or
Caravanserays, Baths, Market Places, large Public Houses, where they sell
Tobacco and Coffee; and two Thousand Houses or thereabouts. The Persian
Histories assure us, that formerly it contained above Forty Thousand. They also
tell us, that before the Arabians conquered this Country, there were in it five
Cities which had been built by Behron-Tchoubin King of Persia. Without the City
are to be seen the Ruins of a great Castle, and several Forts which Abas caused
to be destroyed, toward the end of the last Age, not finding himself strong
enough to keep 'em: All which he caused to be ruined, after he had taken
Nacchiavan from the Turks; and after he had ruined and dispeopl'd the City.
Which he did to prevent the Turks from Fortifying themselves in that Place, and
furnishing themselves with Provisions. Most certainly the City is an Object of
Pity, considering in what a Condition it now lies.

The Histories of Persia would have us believe, that it was one of the Greatest
and Fairest Cities of all Armenia, as has been already said. But that History,
now kept in the Monastery of the Three Churches, and which is chiefly spok'n
of, doclares, that this City was the ancient Ardashhad, called Artaxate, or
Artaxasate by the Greek Historians. Other Armenian Authors make Nacchivan to be
much more Ancient, and assert that Noah began to build it, and made it his
Abode after the Deluge. And they make the Etymology of the Name to agree with
the Antiquity of the Original: Affirming, that in the old Armenian Language
Nacchivan signifies the first Habitation. Ptolomy makes mention of a City in
these Parts, which he calls Naxuane, which might have been the same with
Nacchivan. I believe that Artaxate, or Artaxasate, was seated very near it. For
Tacitus observes, that Araxes ran very near that City; and we find it not to be
above seven Leagues from Nacchivan. The height of the Pole over it is Horizon is
marked upon the Persian Astrolobes, to be 38. degrees. 40. min. and the Longitude
81. degrees. 34. min. It is governed by a Kan, and is the Capital of one part of
Armenia.

Five Leagues from Nacchivan, to the North, lies a great village, called
Abrener; which signifies the Fertile Field. The inhabitants of that Village, and
of seven others near it, are all Roman Catholics. Their Bishops and Curates,
are Dominicans; and they perform their Church and Service, in the Armenian
language.

He was an Italian Dominican of Bologna, that brought all this Country under
Subjection to the Pope, about 350. years ago. And about twenty villages more
that lay round acknowledged the same Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. But at length
they returned to their obedience under the Armenian Patriarch, and to their
first Religion: and as for those that persist in the Romish Ceremonies, their
Number daily decreases, by reason of the Persecution of the Patriarch, and the
Governors of Nacchivan. Those poor people, having drawn upon their own heads,
the Indignation and violent Usage of those Governors, for having endeavored to
withdraw themselves from their Jurisdiction and Dependence. To which purpose
there arrived in Persia in the year 1664. an Italian Dominican, in the Quality
of an Ambassador, from the Pope. From whom, and from several other Potentates
of Europe, he brought Letters to the King. He made great Presents to his
Majesty, and obtained effectually, That those Roman Catholic Villages, should
every year send their Tribute to the Royal Treasure, and whatever they were
obliged to pay yearly, according to the Rates set down in Writing in the
Registers of the Superintendant and Receiver-General of Media. Which being
done, that Orders should be sent to the Super-intendant and Governor of
Nacchivan, and all other, the Kings Officers, to acknowledge the Roman
Catholics to be absolutely independent from their Jurisdiction, and that they
should not presume to make any Levies within their Territories. Which
Regulation, that did very little good to those villages, was the occasion of
many Mischiefs that afterward befell em; and will one day be the cause of
their Ruin. For the Governors of Nacchivan provoked at these proceedings, and
the complaints that were made of 'em to Abas, have laid a thousand heavy
Impositions, upon those poor People, since the death of that good King; and
have made 'em pay three or four times the money which they sent to the Treasure
Royal. For which the oppressed people can have no remedy; whether through the
Remissness of the Government, or for that their own Party is low and out of
Credit. The Treasurer of Media has done worse, for he has sent to Court false
extracts of the Registers of that Province, by which it appears that those
villages were to pay fourteen hundred pounds yearly, which is just as much
again as what they pretend to have always paid. Every time they carry their
Imposition of Seven Hundred Pounds into the Treasury, the Officers give 'em a
Receipt, wherein they put that it is upon Account of what they ought to pay, by
which they keep a Door open for Arbitrary Impositions, and Branglings to ruin
'em when they please themselves.

The Governor of Nacchivan was not in Town when I arrived there. But this Son
that was Deputy, had soon notice of my arrival. So that he invited me to
Dinner, and desired me to show him some Watches and some Jewels. But I was no
way satisfied with his manner of dealing with me. For after he had been civil
to me, and had given me a dinner, he left me with his officers who forced me in
a manner, to let him have that for forty pounds, for which I refused fifty at
Erivan. And without question they had used me more uncivilly, but for the
King's Pattent and Pass port which I had about me. And indeed those
Thorow-fairs are a sort of Places for the skinning of strangers, who are
reputed to be rich. They must always there pay Passage-money.

The 13. We departed from Nacchivan, and traveled seven Leagues: At the end of
the first League passing a River over a very broad Bridge, to which the People
of the Country give no other name then that of the River of Nacchivan. The
Country which we passed is dry and Stony, where was nothing to be seen but
little Hills of Stones. We lay upon the Banks of the River Araxes, which the
Orientals call Aras and Ares. We pass it at Esqui-julfa, or Julfa the old, a
ruined City, which some Authors believe to be that City which the Ancients
called Ariammene. They called it Old to distinguish it from Julfa, that is
built over against Ispahan. Nor is it without reason so called, as being
totally ruined and demolished. There is nothing farther to be known of it,
except the Grandeur, which it once enjoyed. It was seated upon the descent of a
Mountain, by the side of a River, that ran close by it. The Avenues to it,
which are naturally very difficult of Access, were defended by several Forts.
It contained four thousand Houses, as the Armenians report; but if we judge by
its Ruins, it never could contain half the number. At present there are
nothing but Holes and Caverns, made in the Mountains, fitter for Beasts then
Men. I do not believe there is in the world a more barren or hideous Place,
then that of Old Julfa, where there is neither Tree nor Grass to be seen. True
it is, that in the Neighborhood there are some Places more happy and fertile;
yet on the other side it is as true, that never was any City seated in a
Situation more dry and stony. But the Figure of it somewhat recompensed the
Situation, resembling a long Amphitheater. At present there are not above
thirty Families in it, which are all Armenians.

Abas the Great was the Prince that ruined Julfa, and all that Art had
contributed to its Fortification. Which he did for the same reason that he
ruined Nacchivan and other Places, of Armenia, to hinder the Turkish Armies
from Provisions. For he being a prudent and Politic Captain, finding his
Forces inferior to those of his Enemies; and studious how to prevent their
return every year into Persia, their winning and preserving their Conquests,
resolved to make a Desert of all the Country between Erzerum andTauris, upon
the line of Erivan and Nacchivan; which was the road which the Turks usually
observed, and where they fortified themselves, because they found provisions
sufficient for the support of their Armies. To that purpose therefore he
transplanted all the Inhabitants and Cattle, ruined all the Houses and
Buildings; fird all the Country, burnt up all the Turf and the Trees, poisoned
the very Springs, as the History relates; and they who have read the Story well
know, that it had an effect answerable to his wishes.

But to return to our lists; Araxes is that famous River that separates Armenia
from Media. It takes its Rise from the Mountain, where they affirm that Noah's
Ark rested, and perhaps it may derive its name from that Mountain. From thence
it empties its self into the Caspian Sea. This River is very Large and very
Rapid. In it is Course it is augmented by several lesser streams that have no
name, as also by several Torrents. Bridges have been built over it several
times above Julfa; but though they made 'em never so strong and massy, as
appears by the Arches which are yet entire, they were not able to withstand the
force of the River; It becomes so furious when swelled by the Thaws of the Snow
that falls down melted from the neighboring Mountains, that no Damms or other
Fortifications can withstand it. And in truth the very Noise of the Waters, and
the Rapidness of it is Course, astonish both the Ears and Eyes of all that come
near it. We ferri'd over it in a large Boat; made to carry twenty Horse and
thirty Persons at a time. But I would not suffer any to go along with me at the
same time, but my own People and my own Baggage. It had four men to manage it.
They rowed up about three hundred paces along the shore a this side, then let
the Barque drive us back with the stream; and so by the help of a long and
strong Rudder guided the Boat to the other side. The current carried it with an
unspeakable Impetuosity, so that we ran five hundred Paces in an instant. And
thus it is that the Ferrymen cross the River Araxes. They allow themselves two
hours to go and come; by reason of the time they must spend in pulling up
against the stream. But in the Winter when the Waters are low, you may pass it
upon the Camels Backs: the Ford being half a mile from Julfa, in a part where
the Channel being very broad, the current is much more gentle.

We have said that Araxes separates Armenia from Media. This Country that
formerly ruled all Asia, with Imperial Dominion, at present makes but one part
of a Province of Persia which the Persians call Azerbeyan, or Asupaican.
However it is one of the largest in the Persian Empire. It borders to the East
upon the Caspian Sea, and Hyrcania; to the South upon the Province of the
Parthians. To the West upon the River Araxes, and the upper Armenia; to the
North upon Dagestan, which is that Mountainous Country, that consines upon the
Cosaque Muscovites, and makes a part of Mount Taurus. It encloses all the
Eastern Media, called by the ancient Authors Azarca, and the Western or lesser
Media, which they likewise call Atropatia, or Atropatene. Assyria is a part of
the upper Armenia. The Persians assirm, that this Place was called Azer-beyan,
that is, the Country of Fire; by reason of the famous Temple of Fire which was
there erected, where was kept their Fire, which the Fire-worshippers, held to
be a God; and because the chief Pontiff of that Religion resided there. The
Guebres, who are all that are left of the Fire-worshippers, show this place
about two days journey distant from Shamaki. They assure us for a certain
truth, that the sacred Fire is still there; that it resembles a Mineral and
subterraneall Fire; and that they who repair thither out of Devotion see it in
the form of a Flame. Nay they add one particular more, which is a sort of
pleasant story, that if you make a hole in the ground, and set a pot over it,
that same fire will cause it to sees, and boyles all that is in the Pot.

To return to the Name of Azer-beyan, the Etymology is true: for Az is the
Article of the Genitive. Er or Ur, in old Persian, as in most part of the
Ancient Oriental Idioms, signifies Fire, and Beyan signifies a Place or
Country. I am not ignorant that some people read and pronounce it Asur-paican,
and affirm that this geat Province wasso called, because it contains Assyria;
which in the opinion of all Authors, derived its Name from Assure; which is the
same thing in my Opinion; for I am apt to think that the Name of Assure, comes
from Az, Ur, that is of Fire. Moses speaking of Nimrod, that Idolatrous Prince,
who introduced the Worship of Fire, and invaded Chaldea, the share and
Patrimony of Sem, tells us, that the Sons of that Patriarch retired thither,
and that Ashur was one. Now it is very probable, that this Ashur was so called
from his retiring thither, or from the worship of Fire; or from Chaldea, which
was then called the Country of Fire; as appears C. 11. of Genesis, and in all
the ancient Authors; who unanimously agree that Chaldea was called the Country
of Ur, or the Country of Fire. And Ptolomy makes mention of a City in that
Country which is called Urcoa, that is to say the place of Fire: ga, with a
long or a double a, being a Persian word, that signifies a Place, or Part of a
Country. But the Ancient Names have been so corrupted by the negligence or
ignorance of Transcribers, or by the differences of Language and Pronuntiation
of Authors and Translators, that when we come to compare the Ancients with the
modern Name, we must not reject every thing that has not an entire Resemblance.
Now what we have already said shows us the Errors of those who have written,
that Azer-beyan is the Northern Part of Syria, and that the word of Azer-beyan
is derived from Ardoebigara, which was the Capital City of the Country. The
Persians divide it into three parts Azer-beyan, Shirvan, and Shamalei. Strabo
divides it only into two parts, the greater and the lesser: but as for Ptolomie
and other modern Geogrophers, they make no division of it at all.

The 14. we traveled five leagues, through a Country full of little Hills,
following the same course as the days before, that it is to the North-West,
leaving that spacious Plain upon the left hand, which has been the Stage of so
many Bloody Battles, fought in the last ages; and in the beginning of this
between the Persians and Turks. The people of the Country show you a great heap
of Stones, and affirm it to be the Place where that Battle began, between Selim
the Son of Solymon the Great, and Ismahel the Great. Our days Journey ended at
Alacou. The Persians assert that this place was so called Alacou, by that
famous Tartar Prince who conquered a great Part of Asia, and there founded a
City, ruined during the Wars between the Turks and Persians.

The 15. our Journey was not so long as the day before, but the way through
which we traveled was more smooth and easy. We lodged at Marant; which is a
good fair Town, consisting of about two thousand five hundred houses, and which
has so many Gardens, that they take up as much ground as the Houses. It is
seated at the bottom of a little Hill, at the end of a Plain, which is a league
broad and five long: and which is one of the most lovely and fairest that may
be seen; a little River called Zelou-lou running through the middle of it: from
which the people of the Country cut several Trenches to water their Grounds and
their Gardens. Marant is better peopled than Nacchivan, and a much fairer Town.
There grows about it great plenty of Fruits, and the best in all Media. But
that which is most peculiar to these Parts is this, that they gather Cocheneel
in the Places adjoining; though not in any great quantity, nor for any longer
time then only eight days in the Summer, when the Sun is in Leo. Before that
time the People of the Country assure us, that it does not come to Maturity;
and after that time the Worm from whence they draw the Cocheneel, makes a hole
in the lease upon which it grows, and is lost. The Persians call Cocheneel
Quermis from Querm, which signifies a Worm, because it is extracted out of
Worms.

Marant is seated 37. degrees. 50. min. of Lat. and 81. degrees. 15. min. of Longit.
according to the observation of the Persians. Some take it for the City which
Ptolemy calls Mandagarana. I made no Platform of it no more then I did of
Nacchivan; because neither their Fame nor their Beauty seemed to me to be worth
any such Pains. The Armenians have a Tradition, that Noah lies buried there;
and that the Name of the City is derived from an Armenian word which signifies
to bury. You may descry from Marant, when the Air is clear, the Place where the
Ark rested, which saved the Patriarch from the Deluge: You may also see the
same Mountain from Tauris, in a serene Sky, as the People of the Country assure
us.

The 16. we traveled four Leagues, turning always among the Mountains, that
come very close one to another in several parts, but never join. By ten of the
Clock in the morning we arrived at Sophian: a little Village seated in a Plain,
full of Rivulets and Gardens; the Soil of which is fertile to a wonder. Some
Authors believe it to be the Ancient Sophia of Media. Others hold, that it was
called Sophian from the Sophi's, who settled there, when Ismael the First left
Ardevil, and removed his Court to Tauris.

That Evening, Mr. Azarias, the honest Armenian, already mentioned, went before
with my Pasports and Letters of Recommendation from the Governors of Georgia
and Armenia. I ordered him to find out the Toll-gatherer of Tauris, and to
desire him in my Name, to give order that I might pass with my Retinue: and the
next day I found he had discharged his Trust, and that care had been taken to
leave such orders at the Gates as I desired.

That day being the Seventeenth, we arrived at Tauris, after we had traveled
six Leagues upon the same Road, as the preceding days, through fair and fertile
Plains, where all the Lands were tilled, and where we had a Prospect of a great
number of Villages. It is fifty three Persian Leagues, every one of which makes
five thousand Paces, between Irivan and Tauris, which may be easily rid on
Horseback in Six days, but the Caravans take double the Time. The Camels seldom
travel above four Leagues aday, and carry six or seven Hundred weight: the
Horses and Mules seldom carry above two Hundred and Twenty weight with a Man,
and travel five or six Leagues a day.

The Figure in the Plate annexed gives ye a very exact Description of Tauris.
It is really and truly a very large and Potent City: as being the second in
Persia, both in Dignity, in Grandeur, in Riches, in Trade, and in number of
Inhabitants. It is seated at the end of a Plain, at the bottom of a Mountain,
which our Modern Authors will have to be the Mountain Orontes or Barontes,
according to Polybius, Diodorus, and Ptolomey. The Figure of it is irregular
and difficult to be named, as is apparent by the Plate; neither is it walled or
fortified; only a little River called Spingtcha run across it. Which sometimes
makes dreadful havoc, and carry's away the Houses that are built by the side
of it. There is another that runs by the Nort-hside of the City; Which from the
Spring till Autumn is not much larger then the Seine is at Paris in the Winter
time. It is called Agi, or the Salt River, by reason of the Torrents that
having run through several Salt Marshes empty themselves into it; which is the
Reason it breeds no Fish. The City is distinguished into Nine Wards or
Quarters, and divided, as are almost all the other Cities of Persia, into
Haydar, and Neamet-Olahi, which are the names of two Factions, which divided
all Persia in the Fifteenth Age, like the Guelphes and the Guibellines in
Italy. It contains fifteen thousand Houses, and fifteen Thousand Shops. For the
Houses in Persia are not in the same place with their Shops; which stand for
the most part in long and large arched Streets forty or fifty Foot high. Which
Streets are called Basar, or the Market, and make the heart of the City; the
Houses being in the out Parts; and have almost all Gardens belonging to 'em. I
did not see many Palaces or Magnificent Houses at Tauris. But there are the
fairest Basars that are in any place of Asia. And it is a lovely sight to see
their vast Extent, their Largeness, their beautiful Duomo's, and the Arches
over 'em; the number of People that are there all the day long, and the vast
quantities of Merchandise with which they are filled. The fairest of all, and
where they sell their Jewels and Wares of greatest value, is octangular, and
very spacious; being called the Kaiserie, or Royal Market Place. It was built
about the Year 850 of the Hegira by King Hassen, who kept his Court at Tauris.
Their other Public Buildings are no less Sumptuous, nor less full of People.
There are reck'n'd to be in the City three hundred Caravanserais; of which some
are spacious enough to lodge three hundred People. Their Cabarets for Coffee,
Tobacco and strong Liquors, the Baths and Mosques are answerable to the beauty
of the other Buildings.

There are in Tauris two hundred and fifty Mosques: of which the Principal are
marked in the Copper Plate. I shall not say any thing of any one in particular;
because they are no otherwise built then the fair Mosquees in the Capital City
of the Kingdom, of which you will find in the following Volume both
Descriptions and Platforms. The Mosquee of Ali-sha, is almost totally ruined.
Only they have repaired the lower part where the People go to Prayers, and the
Tower which is very high, and is the first that discovers its self to the Eye,
coming from Erivan. This Mosque was built about 400 years ago, by Coja Ali-sha,
Grand Visir to Sultan Kazan, King of Persia, who kept his Court at Tauris; and
was there buried. His sepulcher is still to be seen in a great ruined Tower,
which they call by his name Monar can Kazan. The Mosque which they call the
Master Apprentise, which lies half in Ruins at present, was built three hundred
and twenty years ago by Emir-sheic-Hassen. That which is marked with the Letter
(O) in the Plate, is the fairest in all Tauris; all the inside, and some part
of the outside, being guilt with Gold. It was built in the year 878 of the
Hegyra, by a Persian King called Geoncha, or King of the World. That with two
Towers is a very small one, but both the Towers are of a Peculiar sort of
Workmanship; and show the curiosity of the Artist. For they are built one over
the other; and the uppermost is much higher and larger in the Diameter then
that below, which serves for a Basis to the other. There are also three
Hospitals in the City, very neat and well in repair; however there is no body
lodged within 'em, only they give Victuals to those that come twice a day.
These Hospitals at Tauris are called Ach-tucon, that is, Places where they
spend a great deal of Victuals. At the end of the City to the West, upon a
little mountain stands a Hermitage, a very neat piece of Workmanship, which
they call Ayn Hali, or the Eyes of Haly. This Califf, whom their Prophet made
his Son-in-Law, was as the Persians report, the most lovely man that was ever
seen; so that when they would signify any thing that is extremely handsome they
say it is Haly's Eyes. This Hermitage serves the Taurisians for a place of
Devotion, and the way to it for a walk of Pleasure.

Without the City of Tauris to the East, appears a great Castle almost gone to
decay, which they call Cala-Rashide. It was built above 400 years ago by Coje
Reshid, Grand Vizier to King Kazan. The Story reports, that their King had five
Grand Visirs, because he did not believe that one could suffice to dispatch all
the affairs of so great a Kingdom. Abas the Great seeing that Castle ruined,
and judging it advantageously seated as well to defend the City, as to command
it, caused it to be repaired about fifty years since, but his Successors not
being of his opinion, let it go to Ruin.

There are also to be seen the Ruins of the Principal Edifices and
Fortifications, which the Turks built there, during the several times that they
were Masters of it. So that there are very few Rocks or Points, of Mountains
joining to the City where nothing but the Ruins of Forts and Heaps of Rubbish
are to be seen. Of which I carefully surveyed a great Part; but I could not
discover any thing of Antiquity. There is nothing to be dug up but Bricks
and Flint Stones. The only Edifice that remains most entire among the Turkish
Buildings is a large Mosquee, the inside of which is inlay'd or rather
pargetted with transparent Marble; and all the Outside variegated in Mosaic
work. But the Persians account the Place defiled, because it was built by the
Turks, whose Faith they abominate. Among the heaps of Rubbish, of which I have
spoken, without the City to the South, appear the Ruins of the Palace of the
late Kings of Persia. And to the East, those of the Castle where they say
Cosroes lodged; and where he laid up the Holy Cross for Security, and all those
other sacred Spoils which he brought away from Jerusalem.

The Piazza of Tauris, is the most spacious Piazza that ever I saw in any City
of the World, and far surpasses that of Ispahan. The Turks have several times
drawn up within it Thirty Thousand Men in Battle. Toward the Evening this
Piazza is filled with all the meaner sort of People, that repair thither for
Sport and Pastime. Where some are for Gaming, some for Tricks of Activity, some
for seeing Jack-Puddings and Mountebanks act their Drolleries, some for
Wrestling, others for Bull and Ram-fighting, others for repeating Verses, some
reciting Stories in Prose; and some to see Wolves dance. The People of Tauris
take great delight to see that sort of Sport; insomuch that they bring those
Dancing Wolves a hundred Leagues an end, after they are well taught: And such
as are best instructed are sold for five hundred Crowns a piece: and many
times also great Quarrels arise about these Wolves, which are not easily
appeased. Nor is this Piazza empty in the day time; as being a Market for all
sorts of Provisions, and things of small Price. There is also another Piazza at
Tauris, which appears in the Plate before the demolished Castle, called the
Castle of Jafer-Pacha. This was a Place for the Rendezvous, and exercise of the
Soldiers belonging to the Garrison; now it serves for the Shambles; where they
kill and dress all sorts of large Meat, which is sold in all parts of the City.

I have with great diligence endeavored to understand the number of the
Inhabitants in Tauris, but could never have a just account; but I think I may
truly reck'n it to amount to 550 Thousand Persons, yet several Persons in the
City would make me believe there could not be less than Eleven hundred Thousand.

The number of Strangers also which are there at all times is very great: for
that they resort thither from all parts of Asia. Nor do I know of any sort of
Merchandise, of which there is not there a Magazine to be found. The City is
full of Artists in Cotton, in Silk, and in Gold. The fairest Turbans in Persia
are there made. And I have heard several of the Principal Merchants of the City
affirm, that there are above six thousand Bayles of Silk wrought out in
Manufacture every year. The Trade of the City extends all over Persia and
Turkey; into Muscovy, Tartary, to the Indies, and over the Black-Sea.

The Air of Tauris is cold and dry; very good and healthy: nor can any man
complain that it contributes to any bad disposition of Humors. The Cold
continues there a long time, in regard the City is exposed to the North, for
the Snow lies nine months in the year upon the tops of the Mountains that
surround it. The Wind blows almost every day, Morning and Evening. It also
rains very often, unless it be in the Summer: nor is the Sky but seldom without
Clouds any season of the Year. It is seated in 38. degrees. of Latitude, and 82 of
Longit. It abounds with all things necessary for human Support; so that a Man
may fare there deliciously and very cheap. The Caspian Sea, which is not above
forty Leagues distant, affords 'em Fish. And some they also take in the River
of Agi before mentioned; but that is only when the water is low. The usual
price of Bread is three pound for a penny, and of a pound of Flesh Three half
pence. In the Summer there is great plenty of Venison and water Fowl. But they
kill very little Venison or other wild Beasts. There are also Eagles in the
Mountains; one which I have seen sold by the Country people for a groat.

Persons of Quality let fly the Sparrow-Hawk at the Eagle, which is a Flight
full of Curiosity and much to be admired. For the Sparrow-Hawk soaring above
the Eagle, stoops of a sudden with that swiftness, strikes her Pounces into his
sides, and with her wings continually beating upon his head sends him in a
short time to the ground: Yet sometimes it happens that both the Eagle and the
Sparrow-Hawk come both to the Earth together. In the same manner the
Sparrow-Hawks will many times stop the flight of hunted Stags, and render the
Chase much more easy to the Pursuers. But if this were so observable, that
which I am going to say is no less remarkable: which is, That they assured me,
that in the parts adjoining to Tauris, there grow no less then threescore sorts
of Grapes.

Not far from the City in the neighboring Parts, are to be seen great Quarries
of white Marble, of which there is a sort that is transparent. The People of
the Country affirm it to be the water of a Mineral Fountain, congealed and
hardne'd by degrees: and indeed, there are not far from it two considerable
Mines, the one of Gold, and the other of Salt. But there has been no working in
the Gold Mine for this long time, because they always found, that the Profit
never defrayed the Expenses of the Labor. There are also several mineral
Waters: Of which the most frequented are those of Baringe, half a League from
Tauris; and those of Seid-Kent, another Village, which is six Leagues from the
City. These Waters are sulphurous, but there are others that are cold; others
boiling hot.

I do not know whether there be any City in the World, concerning the Original
and first Name of which, there is a greater Dispute among Modern Authors. We
shall produce the Opinion of the most celebrated: only it will not be amiss in
the first place to take notice that the Persians call the City Tebris, and that
when we call it Tauris, as the People of Europe generally do, it is only in
compliance with the common Custom; and to the end, I may be the better
understood. Teixera, Olearius, and some other Authors maintain, that Tauris is
that City which Ptolomy, in the fifth Table of Asia, calls Gabris, the G. being
put in the stead of T. an Alteration frequent in the Greek Language, as they
assert. Leonclavius, Jovius, and Aython, will have it to be that City which the
same Ancient Geographer calls Terva, instead of Tevra, by a transposition of
the Letters of the word. But Terva being placed in Armenia, and it being
certain that Tauris is seated in Media, those two Names can never be
appropriated to the same City. So that without doubt, the Resemblance of the
word deceived those Authors. Tebris is a Persian word; and was given to the
City in the year 165. of the Hegyra, as we shall declare more at large. And
therefore, in regard it was several years ago since Ptolomy wrote, we must
believe that Terva and Gabris are both very different from Tauris. Niger
asserts it to be Tigranoama; other Authors take it to be Tigranocerta. Some
there are of Opinion that it is the Susa of Media, so famous in Scripture: tho
others believe it to be the City, which in the Book of Esdras is called
Acmatha, or Amatha. Some place it in Assyria, as Ptolomy and his Interpreter.
Others in Armenia, as Niger Cedrenus, Aython, and Jovius. Marcus Paulus Venetus
places it in the Country of the Parthians. Calchondylas removes it a little
farther, that is to say, into the Province, of which Persepolis was formerly
the Metropolis. In short, there is a strange Confusion in the Variety of
Opinions upon this Subject. But the most rational in my Opinion, is that of
Molets, who has translated and commented upon Ptolomy; of Ananias, Ortelius,
Golnits, Teixera, de la Vall, Atlas, and almost all the modern Geographers,
that Tauris is the Ancient and Celebrated Ecbatana, so frequently mentioned in
Holy Writ, and in the Ancient Sories of Asia. Minadoi, an Italian Author, if I
am not deceived, has set forth a Treatise to prove it. However, give me leave
to add this, that there are no Remainders to be seen at Tauris, either of the
Magnificent Palace of Ecbatana, where the Monarchs of Asia kept their Courts in
Summer, nor of that of Daniel; which was afterward the Mausoleum for the Kings
of Media, of which Josephus speaks in his tenth Book; and which he assures us
stood entire in his time. If then these stately and magnificent Palaces were
standing not above sixteen Ages ago, in the Place where Tauris now stands, the
very Ruins themselves are now not to found. For among all those that are to be
seen within the Circuit of that City, there are none but what are of Earth,
Brick, or Flint, which were not Materials anciently made use of in Media for
the building of sumptuous Palaces.

The Persian Historians unanimously agree the Time when the Foundations of
Tauris were laid to be in the year 165. of the Hegyra: but they do not concur
in other particulars. Some ascribe the Foundation of it to the Wife of
Haron-Reshid, Califf of Bagdad, called Zebd-el-Caton, which signifies the
Flower of Ladies. They report, that she being desperately sick, a Median
Physician cured her in a short time. For which the Princess not knowing what
Reward to give him, bid him make choice of his Recompense; where upon the
Physician desired that she would build a City in his Country to the Honor of
his Memory. Which after she had performed with great Care and Diligence, he
called the City Tebris; as a Memorial that it owed its Original to Physic. For
that Teb signifies Physic, and Ris is the Participle of Ricten, to power forth,
scatter abroad, or give a Largess. This is what some relate; to which there are
others that tell a Story not much unlike. For they say, that Halacoucan,
General to Haron Reshid, having been two years sick of a Tertian Ague, of which
he never expected to be cured, was strangely delivered from his Distemper by an
Herb, which he found in the same place where Tauris now stands. And that to
perpetuate the Memory of such a fortunate Cure, he built this City, and called
it Tebrift; the Ague is gone. For Teb signifies also an Ague, and rift comes
from the Verb Reften, to go away. But that afterward, either by Corruption, or
because it runs smoother upon the Tongue, it was called Tebris instead of
Tebrift.

Mirzathaer, one of the most Learned Persons of Quality that are in Persia, the
Son of Mirza Ibrahim, Treasurer of the Province, gave me another Reason of the
Etymology: that is to say, that at the Time when this City was built, the Air
was extremely wholesome and preservative against Agues: Which extraordinary
Quality drew a world of People to it; and that therefore it was called Tebris,
as if man should say, the Expeller of Agues. The same Lord also further assured
me, that there are in the Kings Treasury at Ispahan, certain Medals with the
Inscription of that Zebd-el-Caton, which were found at Marant, a city near to
Tauris, with a great number of others both of Gold and Silver, being the Coyns
of the Ancient Kings of Media. And that he had observed others, with Greek
Figures and Inscriptions, wherein he remembered the word Dakianous. And then he
asked me if I knew who that Dakianous was! To which I answered, that I did not
understand the name, but that it might be very probably the Name of Darius.

In the 69. year after the Foundation of Tauris, the City was almost ruined by
an Earthquake. But Montevekel, Califf of Bagdad, of the Race of the Abas's who
then Reigned, not only repaired but enlarged it. A hundred fourscore and ten
years after that, the 14 of the Month Sefer, another Earthquake, more violent
than the former, utterly ruined it in one night. The Persian Geography relates,
how that at the same time there resided in the City, a Learned Astrologer of
Shiras, called Aboutaher, or Just Father, who foretold that the said
Earthquake should happen upon the Sun's entrance into Scorpio, in the year
235. of the Hegyra; which answers to the year 849. of the Christian Epoche; and
should overthrow the whole City: To which, when he found the People would give
no Credit, he went and was importunat with the Governor, to force the People
out of the City. The Governor, who was also the Califfs Lieutenant, over all
the Province, being always a great Admirer of judicial Astrology, gave way to
his Importunity, and did all the could to send away the People into the
Country: But finding that they still looked upon the Prediction of the
Earthquake to be a mere Chimera, and suspected some mischievous Design in the
Governor, he could not persuade above one half of the People to stir; which
fell out to their Destruction. For the Earthquake happened exactly at the Hour
mentioned in the Prediction, to the overwhelming of forty thousand Persons. The
next year Emir Diueveron the Son of Mahamed-Rondain-Aredi, Viceroy of Persia,
received Orders from the Calif, to rebuild it larger and fairer than it was
before, and to know of that famous Astrologer Aboutaker, under what Ascendant
he should begin to work: Who bid 'em begin when the Sun was in Scorpio, and
assured 'em the new City should never be troubled more with any Earthquakes:
but that it was threatened with great Inundations of Water. To which the History
adds, that the Event has in all respects verified the Truth of the Prediction.
After this new Restoration, Tauris came to be wonderfully enlarged, famous and
flourishing. They assure us, that in the Reign of Sultan Cazan, which is about
400 years ago, it extended in breadth, North and South, from the little
Mountain of Ain Ali, to the opposite Mountain, called Tchurandog, and in length
from the River Agi to the Village Baninge, which is two Leagues beyond the
City. The same History also observes, for a Proof of the multitude of the
Inhabitants wherewith that City was peopled, that the Pestilence happening
among 'em, there died 40 thousand in one quarter, before they were missed.

In the year 896. of the Hegira, and 1490. of Christ, the Princes of the Race
of Sheith-Sephi having invaded Persia, removed the Seat of the Empire from
Ardevil, which was their own Country, to this City. In the year 1514. Selim
took it upon Composition, two years after the King of Persia, who thought
himself not safe there, retired from thence, and seated himself at Casbin.
Selim stayed not long at Tauris, but he carried away with him a wealthy Booty,
and three thousand Families of Artificers, the most part Armenians, whom he
settled in Constantinople. Soon after his Departure, the Inhabitants of Tauris
rebelled, and falling unexpectedly upon the Turks, made a most famous havoc of
the Enemy, and became Masters of the City. But Ibraim Basha, General to Soliman
the Magnificent, severely revenged this Rebellion in the Year 955. of the
Hegyra, and Year of our Lord 1548. For he took the City by Assault, and gave
the Plunder of it to his Army; who committed therein all manner of Inhumanity,
even to an Excess unheard of before. In a word, all that could be called
Cruelty, Fire and Sword was there put in Execution. The Palace of King Tahmas,
and all the most considerable Structures were destroyed, and levelled with the
Earth. Yet notwithstanding all these Calamities, the City lifted up her head
again at the beginning of Amuraths Reign, and with the Assistance of some few
Persian Troops, put to the Sword all the Turkish Garrison, consisting of Ten
thousand men. Amurath dismayed at the Courage of the Taurisians, sent a
powerful Army under the leading of Osman, his Grand Visir, utterly to destroy,
and wholly to subdue the Inhabitants. This Army entered the City and pillaged
it, in the Year 994. by the Mohammedan Account, and the Year of our Lord 1585.
at what time the Visir caused all the Fortifications which the Turks had raised
before to be repaired. But eighteen years after this Expedition, in the Year
1603. Abas the Great retook Tauris from the Turks with a small Force, but with
that Policy, Diligence and Bravery, which is hardly to be credited. He divided
the stoutest of his Soldiers into several small Bodies, who surpised the Corpse
du Guard, and cut their Throats in such a moment of time, that they had no
notice of it in the Town. These Troops were followed by a Body of five hundred
Men, disguised like Merchants, who entered the City with a plausible Story,
that they had left the Caravan a days journey behind. Which the Turks readily
believed, because it is the Custom of the Caravans, that upon their Approach
near to Great Cities, the Merchants go before; besides that, the Turks never
dreamt but that they had been examined by the Corpse du Guard. Abas followed
close, and seeing his men were entered, flew into the City at the head of six
thousand Men; while two of his Generals did the same on two other sides of the
Town. So that the Turks, finding themselves surprised, surrendered only upon
condition of sparing their Lives. And the History farther observes, that in
this Expedition it was, that that same Potent Prince first ordered one Brigade
of his Army to carry Muskets, and finding the good Effect of 'em, ordered a
mixture of Firearms among all his Forces. Whereas before the Persians never
made use of Guns in any of their Wars.

Now that we may not omit any thing in the History of Tauris, that is worthy
Observation, it behooves us also to let ye know, what the Armenian Authors have
wrote concerning it. They report that this City is one of the most Ancient in
all Asia, and that it was formerly called Sha-Hasten, or the Royal Place, for
that the Persian Monarchs there kept their Court: and that afterward a King of
Armenia, who was called Cosroes, changed the Name of it from Sha-Hasten into
Tauris, which in the Armenian Language signifies a Place of Revenge, for that
he there defeated the King of Persia; who had murdered his Brother. The
Government of the Province of Tauris, is the Chiefest in all the Empire, and
annexed to the Dignity of the Captain General-ship. It brings him in thirty
thousand Tomans Yearly, which amount to much above a Million sterling, besides
Casualties, which are very considerable in the Asiatic Governments. The
Governor bears the Title of Beclerbec. He maintains three thousand Horse; and
has under him the Governors or Kan's of Cars, Oroumi, Maraga, Ardevil, and
Twenty Sultans, who altogether maintain eleven Thousand Horse more.

I lodged at the Capuchins Inn, who were arrived before me. They were no more
then two, whom I desired to keep my Arrival private, for about fifteen days.
Which I did to put my self into an Equipage, and my Things in the same Order,
as they were before my misfortunes in Mingrelia; as also to methodize those
things which I had brought for the King, to the end I might show 'em to the
best advantage at Court. But my arrival could not be concealed. For Mirzathaer,
Son of the Treasurer, and Receiver-General of the Province, and admitted by way
of Survivor-ship, understood that there were Strangers at the Capuchins Inn.
And therefore he sent the 22d to tell the Superior, that he wondered at his
neglect in not coming to give him notice of the Arrival and Quality of the
Europeans, which he entertained in his House. To whom the Father excused
himself, and farther told the Messenger, that for my part, I had not failed to
wait upon him; had I not been ill disposed; but in a few days I would attend
and pay him my Respects.

The 23. the same Lord, whom I had the honor to know in my first Travels, made
me a Visit, together with the Son of the Can of Guenje, and showed me great
Civilities. He sat two hours in my Chamber, while I gave him an account of the
affairs of Europe, particularly concerning Arts and Sciences. After which he
was so kind as to tell me the good fortune that had befallen his Family, and
his Brothers Employments. He was the eldest of three young Lords, all in good
Credit, and advanced to Places both of Honor and Profit. His Father is
Treasurer, as I said before, and Receiver-General of all the Kings Demeans,
over all the Province of Azerbeyan. This is that Mirza Ibrahim of whom so many
Accidents are related in the Story of Soleiman's Coronation. He was not then at
Tauris, in regard his Employments kept him at Shirvan, a City near the Caspian
Sea: whose place this Mirzathaer supplied in his absence. He is very well read
in the Arabic, Persian and Turkish Languages: and besides a Capuchin taught
him for several years the Philosophy of the Schools, and all our Sciences. He
is a very Learned Personage, a Man of ripe Wit, and extremely civil. After two
hours discourse he pressed me to show him some Jewels and Watches. To which I
had no desire, as not being then in a Condition for the Reasons already
mentioned. But he importuned me so earnestly, and with an assability so
becoming, that I could not refuse him. So that I showed him several Jewels
which I had of a low value, of which he carried away several along with him.

In the Evening Tahmas-Bec, who supplies the place of Governor of Azerbeyan in
the stead of Mansour Can his Father, who is always at Court, sent his Goldsmith
to me, to tell me, I should oblige him, by coming to him the next Morning, and
bringing along with me some Jewels and Rarities of small value: To which I
answered that I would not fail him, and accordingly I went the same day, and to
Mirzathaer also.

The 25. we heard while we stayed with those Lords, the Confirmation, and full
Relation of a Robbery reported a month before, and committed the December
preceding upon the Great Caravan that goes from Ispahan to the Indies by land.
This Caravan sets out once a Year in August, and goes through Candabar which is
in Bactriana. The Robbery was very considerable, as well for the Number of
Persons, for the vast wealth that was in the Caravan, as also for the
Consequences that ensued. It was committed three days journey from the
Frontiers of India, by the Agvan, a sort of People much like the Tartars, but
tributary to the Persian. They had intelligence which way the Caravan marched,
and surpised it in a very advantageous place for such a design. They were in
all five hundred Men, all well Mounted and well Resolved. The Caravan had a
Convoy of about two hunderd, and consisted of about two thousand Persons, for
the most part Indians. The Convoy made no Resistance, but betook themselves to
Flight: and the most part of the Caravan, following the Example of those that
should have defended 'em, shifted every one for themselves. So that there were
but eleven killed, so small was the Resistance made. Nor was it a thing to be
wondered at. For the Caravan's, and particularly those of the Indians, are
composed of Armenians and Indians, people that for the most part will be Scared
with a stick. And they that had any Courage were left alone and abandoned by
those that should have assisted 'em; So that every Man strove to save one, and
happy he that could shift for himself. The Robbery was valued at several
hundred thousands of Pounds: but the true and just account could never be
known, the Merchants upon such occasions usually disguising the Truth, some
because they are afraid of loosing their Credit, others for fear it should be
discovered, that they conceal a part of what they send to save Customs and
Toll. The Inventory which was given into the King, signed by above sixty
Persons concerned, amounted to no less then three hundred thousand Toman's, or
a million four hundred thousand Pound sterling; yet we were assured it was but
the half of the Loss. The Governor of Candabar was accused to have been
accessory to the Robbery. The King therefore sent for to have him apprehended
and brought to Ispahan upon a Camel chained about the Neck, with one Servant
which he had the Liberty to make choice of. It was affirmed that they who
committed the Robbery themselves, were a sort of People so ignorant, that they
understood not what belonged either to Gold or Precious Stones. They divided
the Coined Money one among another, Gold and Silver intermixed together by
weight, without any distinction of Metal, and jumbled the true Pearls with the
false ones, without making any Difference. I must confess I could hardly
believe this, nor had I reported it, if it had not been universally and
constantly avowed by all the People I discoursed with upon this occasion.

The first of May the Deputy Governor sent to the Superior of the Capuchins, to
know if he had no news of the Arrival of the Patriarch of Armenia, and where he
had concealed himself. It Is true we all knew well enough, but we had no mind to
tell, knowing wherefore they sought for him; which was for no other reason then
to apprehend him; and carry him Prisoner to Erivan. He had made his escape six
days before, vexed to the very Soul to find, that while the Governor pretended
to take so much care to pay his debts, he minded nothing more then how to
squeeze a good Sum of Money for himself. For the Governor according to the
forementioned Order from the Court, had sent to several Persons about Irivan,
to Levy the money for payment of the Patriarch's debts upon the Armenian
Villages. But the Officers entrusted to raise the Money had so far
out-stretch'd their Commission, in the outrages and violences which they
committed, as to demand and levy double the sum which was imposed. All which
the Patriarch well knew: but connived at it, for the advantage he was to
receive thereby. And he would fain have been handling the first Money that was
brought to Erivan; but the Governor was so far from suffering him to meddle,
that he would not pay above half to the Customer of Constantinople's Trustees.
So that of three thousand five hundred pounds which were raised for his
Satisfaction, he would not part with above two thousand for the payment of the
debts. The Patriarch complained of this Injustice, but could have no Remedy.
All the Governor said to him was this, that if the Customer of Constantinople
were pai'd in time 'twas as much as he could require, and that it did not
belong to him to take Cognizance what was levied for that purpose. But perhaps
he could not choose but be disturbed with the Cries and Curses of his own
Nation: for they were bitterly enraged against him, and his Proceedings. And
therefore he resolved to appease 'em and withdraw himself from the oppression
of the Governor of Armenia, which made him make his escape, with a design to
make his Complaints to the Court. The Governor on the other side, having notice
of his flight, sent away to the neighboring Governors to stop him; and he
happened to be at Tauris, when the Express arrived there. But the Armenian
Inhabitants of the City preserved him, not so much by concealing him in any
private absconding Place, as by their Presents to the Grandees, and for that
the Injustice that was done him in his private affairs, was so publicly
notorious, that it was no more then what was reasonable for them, to let him
have his Liberty to go to Ispahan for Redress.

The 6. Rustan-Bec Muster-Master General of the Army sent to give me notice of
his being come to Town. For he understood at the Governors house where he
lodged, that I was arrived at Tauris. So that I went to visit him the same day,
and to renew the friendship which I had contracted with him in my first
Travels. He is a Personage the most eminent for his Wit and Valor of any
other in the whole Kingdom. He is Brother to the Governor of Candabar, who was
accused for being Accessory to the Robbing of the Indian Caravan. His Father
was Governor of Armenia; and Abas had a great affection for this Rustan-Bec,
for the sake of his Learning, his Courage, and his Graceful Aspect. Nor was it
above a year before, that the King had given him a Commission to go into the
Province of Azer-beyan, to take a review of the Forces and Ammunitions there;
and now his Commission was out, by which as I understood, he had gotten above
ten thousand pounds. His Company and Discourse extremely pleased me; for he
showed me several Mapps of the Province which he had newly made of which he
promised me copies; and reaching down a Plain-Sphere, which had been lately
printed in Europe, he showed me several Faults in it: I also supped with him,
nor would he let me go til midnight.

The 7. he did me the Honor to give me a Visit, and to spend all the Afternoon
in my Chamber.

The 8, and the three days following, I made it my business to fetch away such
parcels of Goods from Tahmas-Bec, and Mirza-thaer, which they refused to buy,
after I had bargained with 'em for what they made choice of; tho all that I
sold to both came but to a thousand Crowns, and that without Profit. So that I
had much ado to agree with 'em; however I was paid when we all concluded. The
one pretended in abatement of my price, his Fathers being a Favorite at Court;
the other the great Credit which his Brothers and his Uncle Mirza-Sadec, being
Lord High Chancellor, had with the King; and forced me to take Letters of
Recommendation, which they freely offered to compensate the Profit which I
should have got by my goods. For a man would hardly believe the Caresses, the
Flattery, the engaging and familiar Behavior, which the Persians Grandees will
condescend to, for their own Interests, how slight soever. And they behave
themselves with such an Appearance of Sincerity, that a Traveller must very
well understand the Genius of the Country and the Court, to avoid being cully'd
by their kindnesses.

The 13. I went to take my leave of Rustan-bec, whose occasions called him to
Ardevil two days after. He did me the favor to permit me a long discourse upon
the best way to manage my affairs at Ispahan; and how to come off with most
advantage and success. To which purpose he gave me very good advice, and
Letters of Recommendation to his Kindred and for Cosrou-Can, Collonell of the
Musketeers who was one of the most powerful and considerable Lords at Court. Of
which the Translation follows word for word.

GOD.
We send to the most illustrious Lord of the Earth, and we give his most noble
and generous heart to understand, that Mr. Chardin a French Merchant the Flower
of the Christians, who had been sent into Europe by the deceased King, who has
now his (a) Habitation in Heaven, to fetch from thence several costly Pieces of
Jewellers work, is now returned, and lately arrived at this Royal City of
Tauris. The Friendship and Confidence which we had formerly contracted together
induced him to impart his business to me: and he requested of me, since the
great King who sent him into Europe, was flown away to the Kingdom of Spirits,
and become a Citizen of Paradise, that I who am his Intimate Friend, would (b)
recommend him to a Person considerable for the Prudence of his Conduct, and the
Grandeur of his Dignity, and who perfectly knew how to do kind offices; to the
end he might make use of him as a Conveyance to bring him into the presence of
the noble, most high, and most Holy King. He has been also particularly
informed by me, who am your Intimate Friend, of the Great and Royal Qualities
which you possess, and being charmed by the Recitals which I made of 'em, he
discovered to me his extreme desire to have the (c) Honor to be recommended to
the Favor of the (d) Slaves of your Highness. I therefore who am his Real
Friend, recommend him to your Glorious Cares, and whatever shall concern his
Affairs and Interests. He relyes very much upon your Royal Favor, and assures
himself, that your Highness understanding his Business by this Letter from my
self your Servant, will use your endeavor that the Costly Jewels that he has
brought shall come to the Blessed hands of the most noble King. A Favor so
generous will fill this Illustrious Christian with large hopes, and all other
Merchants of his Nation, whom Trade and Commerce draws to this Kingdom.

(a) The word which I have translated Habitation, signifies properly an Eagles
Airy. And the Persians speaking of their deceased Kings usually make use of the
words Krel-coldachion, that is to say, whose nest is in Heaven.

(b) It is in the Persian, that I would send to the Service. Which is a Phrase
in the Persian Language to send a Man to the service of a great Personage,
signifying to recommend him so earnestly, that the other should take that care
of his Business as if he were his Domestic servant.

(c) The Persians instead of saying to have the Honor, use the word to be
ennobl'd.

(d) We have already spok'n of this Rhetorical Figure, whereby the Persians
mean the Lord himself, when they say, the Slaves of the Lord.

The 18. I took my leave of the Deputy Governor and Mirzathaer; being at that
time both together; and both the one and the other offered me the savor of a
Guide; for which I returned 'em my humble thanks, and told 'em withal, that if
they thought it requisite for my security, that I desired they would be so kind
as to let me have a Guide. They answered that the King's Passports which I had
were a sufficient Convoy, in regard that upon showing 'em I might command as
many men as I pleased when or where ever I should have occasion: that I was in
a Country where there was no danger; and that the offer which they made me was
only to show, how ready they were to assist me in my Journey: So that being
also informed by several Persons of Quality at the same time, that I had no
need of any company, I only requested Mirzathaer to grant me a Passport to the
Officers of the Toll from Himself, that I might not be always troubled to pull
out the King's. Which he caused to be forth with dispatched in the most civil
terms that could be, as may appear by the following translation.

GOD.
This Day being the second day of the Month Sefer the victorious, in the year
1084 Monsieur Chardin Merchant, the Flower of Merchants and of Europeans sets
forward for the Court. He carrys along with him a wonderful quantity of Costly
Jewels and other Rareties worthy the Lord of the World, which he had Order to
buy in his own Country and to bring to the feet of the Throne, which is the
true Seat of (a) Gods Vicar. We therefore give notice to all Inferior Officers,
Regents, Kings, Lieutenants, Judges both Civil and Criminal, Provosts of Cities
and High ways, Receivers of Duties and Tools, to the end they may know, that
this Person, is a Person of High Quality, and that in pursuance of an Order
which he has in his Hand, that they are to furnish him where ever he goes with
all things requisite, and give him all reasonable succor and assistance which
he shall demand, and take care that he arrive not only without any misfortune
or disgust, but also with all satisfastion and Honor at the Palace of the most
High. They are likewise to take care they give him no occasion to perceive in
any manner whatever, that they have any pretense to exact any Duties or Tolls
from him; and they shall be certain to give an account, and be answerable as
well for his Person, and for what he carrys, as for the least disgusts, and
provocations they shall offer him.

The Seal was fixed to the Margin, the Inscription of which was a Passage out
of the Alcoran, signifying, My confession of Faith is in the name of God, who
is my Refuge, and of Mahumed the Apostle of God.

(a) The word which I have translated Vicar, is Calife, and properly signifies
a Successor. Nor had the first successors of Mahomet any other Title; and now
because the People that followed his Laws always believed, that God had
established him Universal King and Prophet, had created him his Vicar and
Lieutenant, and had given him a Right to govern all the World both in
Spirituals and Temporals, his Successors have constantly retained these pompous
Titles; and made people believe that they belong to 'em by right of Succession.
Now in regard the Race of the Kings of Persia, that have reigned for these 250.
years, pretend to derive their descent from Ali, Mahomets successor and Son in
Law, they attribute to themselves all his vain both Qualities and Prerogatives:
which is the reason the Persians give to their Kings, that Epithet of God's
Vicar.

The 20 Mirzathaer sent me one of his Domestics to know of me, whether I
intended to set forward the next day with my own Servants; and withal to advise
me to stay for more Company; that there was danger in going alone, especially
being a stranger and having such a great Charge about me; because now the
Season was come, that the Curds, Sara-neshin and Turcomans, and other Shepherds
that live in the Fields in Tents, and who are most part great Thieves, quit the
Plains by reason of the great Heat of the Sun; and with their Herds and their
Houses retire to the Mountains for Shade and Pasture. True it is, that I
resolved to have set forward the next day, but reflecting upon this good
Advice, I thought it not worth my while to run so great a hazard for the
gaining of eight or ten days time. I had also a kind of Surmise the Lord was
unwilling to run himself into any praemunire, and thereby seemed to intimate
that since he had cautioned me, he would not be answerable for any misfortune
that should befall me. And besides some other fears possessed my mind, which ma
deem put off my Journey.

The 26. he sent me word, that the Brother of the Provost of Merchants would
set out in two days; that he was a very honest Gentleman, and that if I pleased
to have his Company, he would cordially recommend me to his Acquaintance. I
returned him a thousand Thanks for his Care and Affection, and told him withal;
that he could not do me a greater Kindness then to put me into such safe hands.
And in the Evening I understood, that he had bin to the full as good as his
word. And I was the more glad of his diligent care, because it rid me of the
trouble of those Reflections I had made upon what he sent me but two days
before.

The 28. I set forward from Tauris with the Provost of Merchants Brother. He
was one of the Kings Slaves, of whom we have spoken already: attended by ten
Servants with fourteen Horses. We traveled through a lovely and even Country
between Mountains, directing our Course Southward. We lodged at Vaspinge, a
great Borough, consisting of Six hundred Houses; watered with a great number of
pleasant Rivulet's, that with their winding Streams enfertiliz'd the
neighboring parts on every side. It is surrounded with Gardens, and groves of
Poplers and Tylets, which they plant to serve 'em for building their Houses.

The 29. we traveled five leagues; crossing over a little Hill at first; but
afterward over Plains that were wonderful pleasant, fertile and covered with
Villages; that where we lodged being called Agi-agach. These Plains are the
best Pasture-Grounds in Media, if I may not presume to say in the world. The
Choicest Horses in the whole Province are there put to Grass, to the number of
about three thousand. For it is the custom in Persia to put their Horses to
grass for thirty five or forty days together, from April to June. Which both
purges, and refreshes, fattens, and strengthens 'em: And they feed 'em thus
with Grass, as well in the Stable as in the Field; but all the rest of the
Summer they mingle Straw cut very small with the Grass. When I beheld those
lovely Pasturages I asked the young Lord, with whom I traveled, whether there
were any better in Media or whither any other Plains so large and so
delightful. Who answered me, that he had seen as rich plains as those toward
Derbent (which is Media Atropatiena) but none so large and spacious. So that we
may with good grounds believe; that those Plains are the Hypopothon of which
the Ancient Authors write, and of which they say that the Kings of Media kept
there in a Breed of fifty thousand Horses; and here it is that we must search
for the Plains of Nysa, so famous for the Nysain Horses. And Stephen the
Geographer asserts that Nysa was in Media. By the way I told the Gentleman my
fellow Traveller, what Histories related concerning these Horses and
particularly what Favorinus reports, that all the Nysain Horses were Isabella
colored; who answered that it was more then he ever read or heard of. I made
the same Enquiry all along as I traveled of several persons, both of Learning
and Quality, but never could learn that there was any part in Media, nor in all
Persia, where all the Horses were foal'd of an Isabella color.

The 30. we traveled a Road that was even enough, but winding among Hills.
After two hours travel we passed by the Ruins of a great City, which they said
had flourished there in former times; but being almost ruined was utterly
destroyed by Abas. Upon the left hand of the Road are to be seen large Circles
of Hew'n Stone; which the Persians affirm to be a great sign, that the Caous
making war in Media, held a Counsel in that place: it being the Custom of those
People, that every Officer that came to the Council brought with him a Stone to
serve him instead of a Chair. And these Caous were a sort of Giants. Herodotus
also reports something like to this, of a Persian Army that went against the
Scythians; for he tells you that the Army being in Thrace, Darius showed 'em a
place, and commanded that every one should lay a Stone therein as he passed
along. But that which is most to be admired, after observation of these Stones,
is this, that they are so big that eight Men can hardly move one, and yet there
is no place from whence they can be imagined to have been fetched, but from the
next Mountains, that are six Leagues off. We met upon the Road, with three
large and fair Inns, and lodged at a Village called Caratchiman, seated at the
Foot of a little Hill: it was not so big as Vaspinge, but altogether as
pleasant.

The 31. we traveled four Leagues over Hills and Dales, all fertile and
delightful to admiration. In the midway we passed through a Village full of
Popler Groves and Gardens, and well watered. It was called Turcman, because
that in the Fields that environ it, there are a great number of Shepherds with
their Flocks that are called by that Name. We stopped at Pervare, another
Village, as handsome and as large as Turcman, seated also in a bottom at the
foot of a Hill, all along by the Banks of a little River.

The 1. of June We traveled two Leagues in a level Country, as even as that we
had crossed the day before; and four Leagues among the Mountains where the way
was rugged and very uneasy. A little River but very rapid passes through the
Midst of it; and by reason of it is winding course obliged us to pass it several
times, to shorten our way. We alighted at Miana. This is a Town seated in the
middle of a fair and large Plain encompassed with Mountains, which upon that
Road separates Media from the Country of the Parthians. Which is the reason
that the Village carrys that Name, for that Miane properly signifies, the
parting of several Countries. To this Town there belongs a kind of
Custom-House, where the Officers are said to be very tyrannical in their
exactions upon the meaner sort of People that travel that way. But they
understood who the Gentleman was who traveled with me, and who I was; So that
they durst not so much as show themselves; for there is that good order taken
in Persia, and almost all over the East; that the Receivers of all Sorts of
Tolls and Duties, have no permission or Authority to demand any thing of any
eminent Person, of any Officer of the Kings, how inconsiderable soever his
office may be, nor of any Stranger of Quality. For should they be so bold, as
to examine what they carried, the offense would be punished with Bastinados.

The 2. we spent so much time in fording the River of Miana, and found the
Mountain beyond it, that we were to cross, to be so rugged, that we could not
travel above three Leagues. We were two hours before we could find the Ford,
and get our Sumpters over, which at length we got over safe without any Damage,
thanks be to God; and five hours crossing the Mountain which was very high, and
very steep, being the Bounds between Media and Parthia. These two spacious
Provinces are parted by a Ridge of Mountains, which are a Branch of Mount
Taurus, that extends it self from Europe to China, crossing, as has been said,
Circassia, Mingrelia, Georgia, the Country of the Parthians, Bactriana, the
Province of Candabar, and the Indies. At the top of the Mountain upon the point
of a Rock, we spied a large ruined Castle, which the Persians call the Virgins
Castle, alleging that Artaxerxes caused it to be built to imprison therein a
Princess of the Blood. But Abas the Great caused it to be utterly demolished,
as serving only for a Retreat to a number of Robbers that made themselves as it
were sovereign Lords of the Mountain. On both sides of the Mountain are large
Causeys, which that great Prince caused to be made, for the ease of Travelers
in the Winter. Toward the end of our journey we passed a large River, called
Kesil-beuse over a fair Bridge, and lay at Semele. Which is an Inn or
Caravanseray built near the Bridge to lodge Travelers that can reach no
farther.

The River Kesil-beuze is much larger and more rapid than that of Miana, and
serves to bound Media from the Country of the Parthians. And now no sooner have
you passed this River, but you may easily perceive the change of the Air. For
whereas the Temperature of Media is somewhat moist and cloudy, which is the
reason of high Winds and much Rain, and that the Soil is fruitful of it self,
whatever ancient Authors have wrote to the contrary, the Parthian Air is dry to
the extremest degree; insomuch that for six Months together you shall neither
see any Rain or any Clouds: but the Soil is sandy, and Nature produces nothing
without good Husbandry and Pains.

The Country of the Parthians, which was so long the Seat of the Empire of
Asia, is the largest and principal Province of the Persian Monarchy. It is all
the proper demeans of the King, nor has it any Governor, as the most part of
the rest of the Provinces. The Persians bound it to the East, by the Province
of Corasson, or Coromitrena; to the South, by that of Fars; which is properly
Persia; to the West, by Azerbeyan or Media; to the North, by Guilan, and
Maganderaan, which compose the Province of Hyrcania. This Province extends it
self at least two hundred Leagues in length, and an hundred and fifty Leagues
in breadth. The Air is very dry, and and the most healthy for the most part of
any in the world. It is more mountainous then level. The Mountains are also
very bare, and to speak in general terms, produce nothing but Thistles and
Briers: but the Plains are very fertile and pleasant, where there is any Water:
otherwise the Soil is very barren. This large Province contains above forty
Cities, which is very much in Persia, as not being an Empire peopled
proportionably to its Extent.

The Orientals call the Country of Parthia Arac-agem; that is to say, Persian
Arack. They call it likewise Balad-el-Gebel, or the Country of the Mountains,
for the reason's already recited. My Opinion is, that the Scythians, from whom,
as ancient Authors hold, the Parthians derived their Original, were the lesser
Tartars, that inhabit to the North of Persia, now called Yuzbecs, and formerly
Bactrians; and that that same Arsaces, who founded the Empire of the Parthians,
was a Native of the same Country with Tamerlan, Halacou and those other Tartar
Princes, that made such great and famous Conquests in the Ages last past.

The 3d. we traveled four Leagues keeping on to the South, as when we first
set out of Tauris: the Road was very good, only we had Mountains very near us
upon the right and left hand. We lay at Sirsham; which is a large Inn,
adjoining to three or four small Villages, but seated in a sandy and dry Soil;
and there the Officers that gather the Duties upon Goods transported out of the
Kingdom keep their Post.

The 4th. we traveled seven Leagues, through bushy Plains and Sands; and we
were forced to make several windings and turnings, by reason of several
Mole-Hills and little Sand-Hills in our way. Nevertheless both on one the side
and the other, at a distance we could see a Champian Country, very delightful and
fertile, and Villages here and there which yielded a very delightful Prospect;
the River Zenjan wat'ring those Villages. We lay at a large Caravanseray called
Niche, built between five spacious Villages.

The 5th. we traveled six Leagues through a Road more pleasant and less
crooked, and observing the same Course as the day before; and lodged at
Zerigan, a little City, that contains not above two thousand Houses. It is
seated in a very narrow Plain between two Mountains that enclose it, not above
half a League one from the other. The Soil of Zerigan is fertile and pleasant,
and the Air wholesome and cool in the Summer. The City without is surrounded
with Gardens, that yield both Pleasure and Profit, but within the Town there is
nothing remarkable but the great Ruins.

The History of Persia records this City to have been founded in the Reign of
Ardechir-babezon, several Ages before Christ; and farther adds, that it
consisted of twenty thousand Houses, which is very probable, for that heaps of
Rubbish, and Ruins are to be seen for a mile together round about SULTANIE
it. Tamerlan the first time he passed through it, utterly demolished it: but
the second time, that is to say, in his Return out of Turkey, he ordered a part
of it to be rebuilt, understanding that it had been for a time a flourishing
Nursery of Arts and Sciences; and had produced several learned and famous Men.
For which reason it is much celebrated among the Eastern Authors. The Turks and
Tartars thatravag'd Persia, since Tama sacked and destroyed it several times,
and it is no longer ago then since the beginning of this last Age, that they
began to rebuild it.

The 6th. Our road lay through a Country, the most lovely delightful that every
Eye beheld, through a fair Plain where the road was level and very straight.
Several pleasant Streams glide through it, that render the Soil very fertile.
The whole Plain is so strow'd with Villages, that they are hardly to be
numbered, with so many Groves and Gardens, that for me the most pleasant
Land-skips, and charming Prospects in the World. We alighted after a journey of
five Leagues at a Caravanserai called Queurk-boulag, over against and within a
good Canons shot of Sultanie.

This City is seated at the foot of a Mountain, as you may see by the Draught
which I have made of it. It seems a far off very neat and well built, and
inflames a Man with a Curosity to see it: but when you approach near it, it
ceases to be the same thing, and appears less beautiful then when ye are within
it. Yet there are some public Buildings very remarkable, as well for the
Structure as the Architecture, together with about three thousand Habitations.
The people of the Country affirm, that this City took up formerly half a League
of Ground more to the West then it does, and that the ruined Churches, Mosques
and Towers, which are to be seen at that distance on that side, stood in the
heart of the City. Which probably may be true, seeing that Histories assure us
that it was once the Metropolis and biggest City of the Kingdom: nor are there
many Cities in the world, where there are vaster Ruins to be seen. Provision
also is there very plentiful and very cheap. The Air is likewise very
wholesome, but subject to change. For in all the Seasons it changes almost
every hour. The Evenings, Nights and Mornings being cold, but all the day long
very hot; from one Extreme to another. Sultany lies in 36. degrees. 18. min. of
Latitude. and 48. degrees. 5. min. of Longitude, and is governed by a Sultan.

Some Histories of Persia relate, that this City is one of the most ancient in
all the Country of the Parthians; but that it is not known who was the Founder.
Others on the other side affirm, that the foundations of it were laid when the
Sun was in Leo, by the order, and in the Reign of Ergon-Can, the Son of
Abkei-Can, and Grandchild of Halacou-Can; and that because it could not be
finished in his days, his Son Jangou-Sultan completed the work and called it
Sultania, or the Royal City. For Sultan properly signifies a King: from whence
comes Seltenet, the usual Persian word for a Kingdom or Monarchy. And the
Monarchs of Asia, who reigned since the seventh Age, assumed to themselves the
Titles of Souldans, from whence came the Title of Sultan given to the last
King's of Egypt; and that of the Emperors of Turkey, who call themselves
Sultans. Nevertheless I have heard some learned Men say, that this City was
never called Sultanie or Royal, till the time that the last Kings of Persia,
who also assumed the title of Sultans, came to keep their Courts in this Place.
On the other side, if this City were built out of the Ruins of Tigranocerta, as
several Modern European Authors maintain, it may be said that the name which
now it bears, was formed out of that Ancient Name. For Certa in old Prsian,
signifies a City, so that Tigranoterta signifies no more then the City of
Tigranes, who was King of Armenia, as is well known to every ordinary Reader.
However I cannot tell, how it is possible for us to take Sultanie for
Tigranocerta; since Tacitus tells us that Tigranocerta was but thirty seven
Miles from Nisibis, a City which every one knows to be seated in Mesopotamia,
upon the River Tigris, 25 Leagues from Nineve. And therefore I must say, as I
said before, the Geography of the Ancients is the most confused thing in the
world; the Writers were misinformed, and it is impossible to bring 'em to agree
together. I should not assert this so confidently, did I not see, that other
Modern Relators commit also very great Errors in what they publish, either upon
the observations or report of others: so that there is not not any one from
whom I might not produce examples sufficient to confirm this Truth.

This City has been several times laid in heaps: First, Cotza Reshid King of
Persia whom other Historians call Giausan; for that it had rebelled, and taken
up Arms against him. After that, by Tamerlan: and after him by several other
both Turkish and Tartarian Princes. The Predecessors of Ishmael Sophi kept
their Court there for some time; and it is said that some Ages before, the last
Kings of Armenia resided there; at which time it contained above four hundred
Churches. And it is very true, that there are a great number in it which are
ruined, but not one that is entire, nor do there inhabit in it any Christians.

The 7th we traveled six Leagues in a Country more lovely then that already
described, where we came to a Village at the end of every thousand paces: and
we could see at a distance an infinite number of others, surrounded with Groves
of Willows and Poplers: and environed which delightful Meadows. We lay at
Hibie, a very fair and fair and large Village; and seated near to a Town that
is walled and well peopled, which is called San-cala: which word being
abbreviated signifies the Castle of Hasan.

The 8th. Our Horses were so tired that we could get no farther then Ebher,
which is no more then two leagues from Hibie; though we traveled all the way
over most of those delightful and pleasant Plains already mentioned, directing
our Course still to the South. Now that which makes those places so delightful
is the great Number of Rivulets, with which they are watered, and the good
Husbandry of the Inhabitants. For as I have already said, the soil of the
Parthians is dry and barren of it self; nevertheless wherever it can be
watered, it produces whatever the Manurer pleases to have it, fair and good in
its Kind.

Ebher is but a small City, counting only the buildings; for it contains not
above two thousand five hundred Houses; but to those Houses belong so many
Gardens, and those so large, that it is good riding for a Horseman to cross it
in half an hour. A small River, that bears the name of the City, runs through
the middle of it, from one end to the other. It is said to be the same City
which the Ancients called Barontha. The situation of it is jolly and
delightful, the Air very wholesome, and the Soil produces plenty of Fruit and
other Provisions. The buildings are tolerably handsome; and the Inns, the
Taverns and other public Structures very well, considering the Place. It
contains three spacious Mosquees; and in the middle of the City are to be seen
the Ruins of a Castle built of Earth. It lies distant from the Equator 36 degrees.
45. min. and from the fortunate Islands, 48. degrees. 30. min. Which Longitude, and
all others that I observe, are taken from the new Persian Tables. It is
governed by a Darogue, or Mayor; and the Mirtshecar-bashi, or Chief Huntsman,
has his Assignations of Money charged upon the Revenue of this City. Which
assignation is called Tahvil. Of the signification of which word we shall speak
more at large in another Place.

The Persian Geographers assert that Ebher was built by Kei-Cosrou the Son of
Sia-bouch, that Darab-Keihoni, or Darius, began to build the Castle, that
Skender-roumy, that is Alexander the Great, finished it, and that the City has
been ruined and sacked as often as the rest which are near it. However she has
so well recovered her self, that, at present, there is but little appearance of
those former havocks. The same Geographers observe, that it is one of the most
Ancient Cities of that Province; and perhaps it may be either Vologoo-certa, or
Messabetha, or Artacana, of which there is so frequent mention made in the
Ancient Stories of Persia.

At Ebher they begin to speak Persian, both in the Cities and Country: whereas
all the way before the Vulgar Language is Turkish, not altogether as they speak
it in Turkey, but with some little difference. From Ebher to the Indies they
speak Persian, more or less neat, as the people are more or less at a distance
from Shiras, where the purity of the Persian Language is spoken: So that at
Ebher, and in the parts thereabouts, it is but a rude and clownish sort of
Dialect which the people make use of.

The 9th we traveled nine Leagues over Plains delightful even unto Admiration:
and indeed more lovely Vales are no where to be seen. After we had rode three
Leagues, we passed through a large Town, almost as big as Ebher, called Parsac;
and a little farther we left Casbin upon the left hand, five Leagues distant
from us: of which I made the following description in the year 1674. during a
residence of four Months that I stayed at Court.

Casbin is a great City seated in a delightful Plain, three Leagues from Mount
Alou-vent: which is one of the highest and most famous Mountains in all Persia,
and a Branch of Mount Taurus, that crosses the Northern Parts of Parthia, as
has bin already said, and separates it from Hyrcania. The length of this City
is from North to South. In former times it was surrounded with Walls, of which
the Ruins are still to be seen, but at present it lies open on every side. It
is 6 miles in circumference, containing twelve thousand Houses, and a hundred
thousand Inhabitants; among which there are forty families of Christians, and a
hundred of Jews, all very poor. One of the fairest places that is to be seen
in this City, is the Hippodrome, which they call Maydan-sha, or the Royal
Piazza, 700 paces in length, and 250 in breadth, and made after the Model of
Ispahan. To the Royal Palace belong seven Gates, of which the chief is called
Ali-capi, or the High-Gate; on which there is an Inscription in Letters of
Gold, to this effect. May this Gate always be open to good Fortune: by that
confession which we make, that there is no God but God. The Gardens belonging
to the Palace are very beautiful, kept in good order, and planted
Checquer-wise. King Tahmas, built this Palace, at first a small thing,
according to a draught given him by a Turkish Architect. Abas the Great quite
altered and enlarged it. There are but few Mosques at Casbin; The chiefest of
which by them called Metshid-guima, or the Mosque of the Congregation, was
founded by Haron-Reshid, Califf of Bagdat, in the year of the Hegyra 170. The
Royal Mosque called Metshid-sha is one of the largest and fairest in all
Persia, being seated at the end of a spacious Street, planted with fair Trees,
which begins from one of the Gates of the Palace Royal. This Mosque was almost
all built at the expenses of Tahmas, and in his Life time: his Father Ishmael
having laid the Foundations, but dying before they came to be even with the
street. There are also several handsome buildings among the Caravanserai's or
Public Inns. That which they call the Royal Inn, contains 250 Channels, has a
large Fountain planted with Trees, in the middle of the Court, and two Gates,
which the lead in the Court from two streets full of shops where the most
costly sort of Merchandises are sold. But chiefest Grace, and Ornament of
Casbin consists neither in Inns, nor Baths, nor in Bazars, nor in Markets,
Tobacco, Coffee, or strong-water Houses, where the Persians debauch themselves;
but in the great number of Palaces of the Persian Grandees, which they keep in
their possession from Father to Son, by reason of the long residence of the
Court at Casbin from time to time. But there are not so many Gardens in Casbin,
as in most part of the other City of that Province, because the soil is Sandy
and dry for want of water, there being only a little River which is no more
then an Arm of the River Charoud, not sufficient to to supply the Grounds about
it. So that they are forced to bring their water from the Mountain in
Subterraneal Channels, which they call Kerises, that empty themselves into
Vaults thirty foot deep; which though it be cool, is nevertheless heavy and
insipid. Which want of water is also the reason that the Air of Casbin is
heavy, thick and not very healthful, especially in Summer; by reason that the
City not having a running stream, has neither any sinks to carry away the filth
of the Town. Yet notwithstanding this same scarcity of water, the City abounds
in Meat and all manner of Provisions, for that the Plains that lie round about
it are so well watered, that they feed a world of Cattle, and produce a
prodigious plenty of Corn and Fruits. Among the rest the fairest Grape in
Persia, which they call Shahoni, or the Royal Grape, being of a Gold Color,
transparent and as big as a small Olive. These Grapes are dried and transported
all over the Kingdom. They also make the strongest Wine in the World, and the
most luscious, but very thick, as all strong and sweet wines usually are. This
incomparable Grape grows only upon the young Branches, which they never water.
So that for five months together they grow in the Heat of Summer, and under a
scorching Sun, without receiving a drop of water either from the sky or
otherwise. When the Vintage is over, they let in their Cattle to browze in the
Vineyards; afterward they cut off all the great Wood, and leave only the young
stocks about three foot high, which need no propping up with Poles, as in other
places, and therefore they never make use of any such supporters. There is also
great Plenty of Pistachio's in those parts, where the Air is very hot in the
Summer all the day long, by reason of the high Mountain that lies to the North.
But on the other side the Nights are so cold, that if a Man expose himself
never so little to the air, after he is undrest, he is sure to fall sick.
Casbin lies in 85. degrees. and 5. min. of Long. and in 36. degrees. and 35. min. of
Latitude.

The most part of our European Chorographers who have discoursed of the Cities
of Persia, affirm Casbin to be the ancient Arsacia, and that before it was
called Europa till the Parthians gave it that name from Arsaces, the first of
their Emperors; that is it the same with that City, which the Greeks called
Ragea, and the holy Scripture Rages of Media. Some are of opinion, that it was
that same Casbira of which Strabo makes mention, but the Persian Histories will
not allow it to be so ancient. The History entitled Elbeijon, or the
Explication, relates, That this was founded by Shapour the Son of
Ardeshir-babecon, and that he gave it the name of Shaepour, as much as to say,
the City of the Kings Son. For Shae, signifies a King; and Pour in the ancient
Persian, a Son. Whence the name of Sha-pour, which the ancient Greeks call
Sapores. The History entitled Teduine, affirms, that the City which was called
Shaepour was not Casbin, and that it was not built on the same place where
Casbin now stands; but at least three Leagues above, toward the West, at the
Concourse of two Rivers, the one named Haroud, already mentioned, which springs
from the Mountain Alou-vent, and the other called Ebher-roud, or the River of
Ebher.

I have heard several Persons of Quality affirm, that there are in that place
vast heaps of Ruins to be seen; and all Authors agree that the two Towns,
called Sartshe, not far from thence, were built in the Reign of
Ardeshir-babecon. Another Persian History, composed by an Author called by the
name of Ambdalla, relates that Casbin had its first Rise from a Castle which
the King last mentioned caused to be built, to stop the Inroads of the
Deilemites, that came down from Mount Alouvent, and ravaged all the Territory.
That this Castle was seated in the middle of the City, where is now the Royal
Piazza of Casbin, and that it was ruined by the Arabians in the time of Osman,
one of Mahomets first successors. And indeed almost all their Histories make
mention of this Castle, and say, that after it was demolished it was rebuilt
again much larger then before, and a great Town raised round about it.
Mousael-hadibilla, the Son of Mahomet-mehdy, Califf of Bagdat, caused it to be
surrounded with walls in the 170. year of the Hegyra, and about a thousand
paces from it built a little City, which he called by his own name
Medina-Moussi, which name one large Ward or Quarter of Casbin carrys to this
day. Moubarec-suzbee one of the Califfs freed Servants, who had the Government
of the Province, and to whom the work was recommended, built another City, at
an equal distance, and called it Moubarekie, for the preservation of his name,
which the Persians some time after called Moubarec-abad. Moubarec signifying
blessed, abada habitation.

Haron-Reshid Brother and Successor to Mousa-elhadi, joined these three little
Cities into one, by filling up the void space with a great number of buildings;
and then ordered the whole to be encompassed with Walls and Fortifications.
Which work was begun in the 190 year of the Hegyra. Haron also had a design to
have made it a Bull-wark against the Incursions of the Hircanians and
Deilamites, and a Magazine for the war which he was intending against Iberia,
and withal a place of Trade: but dying not long after, the work remained
imperfect. In the year 245, in the Reign of Muktadis-billa-Mousi, Nufa's son,
who had shaken off the Yoke of that Pontiff, and usurped the Royal Authority in
Persia, finished the Walls and Fortifications, and gave to the City, the name
of Casbin, or Casvin, for the word is sometimes pronounced with a b, and
sometimes with a v, from a word that signifies Punishment or pain, because he
imprisoned in that Gastle all his Grandees which he designed to punish. There
is also another reason given for the Denomination, that is to say, because this
City was once a place of Exilement. Tho Acemberg, an Armenian Author, is of a
different opinion; for he believes that the City of Casbin was so called by
King Casbin, after his own name.

In the year 364. a part of the Wall being fallen down, Saheb Califf Ishmael,
chief minister of state to Alie-fecre-deulet, King of Persia, caused the Ruins
to be repaired, and being almost utterly destroyed in the Civil Wars, Emir
sherif-abouali Jafer, took care of its Restoration, and in the year, 411.
caused the work to be followed so close, that within two Years, there was no
sign of any Ruins. The History of Casbin makes mention of two other fatal
disasters that befell it, occasioned by Earthquakes. The first in the year
460. that overturned all the walls and a third part of the Buildings: And the
second which did not so much mischief as the first, in the year 562. at what
time Mahomet, the Son of Abdalla-elmegare, who reigned in the Country of the
Parthians, removed his Court near Casbin, to view the Ruins, and take care of
the Reparations. And because that the walls which were then only of Earth did
not seem sufficiently beautiful nor strong enough for so great a City, he
caused that which the Earthquake had left standing, to be pulled down, and
raised up other Walls of red Brick. The Walls were a hundred thousand and three
hundred paces in compass, and at the end of every five hundred paces fortified
with Towers. The Tartars and Turks utterly ruined these Towers and Walls at
several Times, and those that were rebuilt in their Room, after the
destructions of every new invasion. The Ruins of which are still to be seen, as
I have said already.

After all Casbin was restored and rebuilt as you see, it has enjoyed forabove
these three hundred years both peace and plenty, by the Advantage of its
situation, which renders it so convenient for the Trade of Iberia, Hyrcania,
and Media, with the Southern Provinces of the Kingdom. In the 955. year of the
Hegyra, King Tahmas, despairing to defend Tauris against Solomon, retired to
Casbin, and made that City the Metropolis of his Kingdom: finding it convenient
for all Seasons in the Year. There he spent the Winter; in the Summer he
retired three or four Leagues into the Country, and lived in Tents, at the foot
of Mount Alouvent, in a place abounding with cool Springs and pleasant Shades.
His Successors lived after the same Rate, till Abas the Great, who the first
year of his Reign removed his Court to Ispahan. And there are several Reasons
alleged for this Change. Some attributed it to the Air of Casbin, which the
King did not find so healthful: Others affirm that he was frighted by the
Astrologers, who told him, that the Stars threat'ned him with several
Misfortunes if he staid at Casbin. But others assert, it was only the better to
accomplish the design of building a new City, as being over persuaded, that it
was the surer way to Eternize his Memory then all his great Actions. But the
most probable Reason was one which I heard from a great Lord, who was highly
esteemed by that Potent Prince, That when he had laid the design of those
Conquests which he made with so much Renown, as well to the East as to the
South, he forsook Casbin and removed to Ispahan, that he might be nearer the
Country which he intended to Conquer.

However it were, the City is much decayed, since the Removal of the Royal
Residence, and that it has lost all those Perquisites that set forth the Pomp
and Grandeur os a sumptuous Court. The Successors of Abas have resided there
for one or two years together, and the deceased King was upon his way thither
when he died. For the City had earnestly importuned him by Presents and
Requests, and were so overjoyed to understand his Majesty was coming, that they
presented the Messenger that brought the news with a Present of three hundred
Tomans, which amounts to about one thousand Guines.

Now the chief advantage which accrews to the City from the Court's residing
there, is the consumption of a vast quantity of Provision which the Country
produces, and which they cannot export, in regard the Countries round about
have no need of supplies.

Now besides all that has been said, that renders Casbin a famous City, we must
not forget rhat it has been a place celebrated for the Birth of several great
men: among the rest Locman, highly esteemed for the Fables which he so well
composed in imitation of Esop, that some learned Men uphold it to be the same
Book.

The City is governed by a Darogue, or Mayor, who is chosen every Year, and in
that Year makes his office worth him six hundred Tomans; or two thousand
pounds. In their Judicial Acts and Records, they give to this City the
additional name of Daral-Seltenet, or the Seat of Royalty; because the Kings of
Persia who reigned in the 15. and 16. Ages there kept their Court as has been
said.

We ended our days Journey at Kiare, a large Village consisting of five hundred
Houses; in the midst of which upon a rising Ground stands a Castle of Earth
half ruined. The Remainder of several strong Places in this Country demolished
in the 13. Age: Before which time Invasions were so frequent, and so sudden,
and the Civil Wars so tedious and so furiously carried on, that they were
forced to fortify themselves every where, and defend themselves from all sorts
of Persons: for such like Castles are to be seen in all the Villages, and great
Towns, that are under the Jurisdiction of Casbin.

The 10. we traveled four Leagues in a plain and pleasant Country, as in the
preceding days; still directing Course to the South. And our manner of
traveling all the way, particularly from Miane, which is upon the Confines in
the Evening an hour or two before Sun set, rode a Journey, of five or six
Leagues by Midnight, or thereabours. Longer Journeys of eight or nine Leagues
held us almost all night long which is the general way of traveling over all
the East in Summertime, to avoi'd the heat of the Sun, which would melt both
Man and Beast in the day time. In the night we traveled a greater pace and
more at ease: the Servants walk a foot with less trouble; and the Masters
themselves are glad to walk sometimes, when they find themselves sleepy, and to
shake off those little shiverings caused by the Coolness of the Air; besides
that it is a great ease to the Horses. When you get to your Inn, you go to Bed,
and fetch up that sleep in the day, which you lost in the night. Another
advantage of traveling by night is this, that the Beasts of Carriage, rest all
the time that the Heat and the Flies molest 'em, and are better looked after,
while the Servants dress 'em by daylight; besides that in the day time
Provisions both for Horse and Man are more ready to be had. And then again the
Hosts of the Caravanseray, having slept almost all the day for want of
Employment, are then up and ready at all Commands.

The first thing which the Grooms do, at the first coming into the Inn, is to
walk the Horses, then they cloth them and loosen their Girts. About an hour or
two after, they give 'em to eat, and then the Grooms go to sleep: about nine or
ten a Clock every body rises, and eats a light Breakfast; after that the Grooms
dress their Horses, and the Cooks get ready their Victuals. In the mean time
the Master betakes himself again to his Rest, or else otherwise employs
himself. About four a Clock they meat their Horses with Barley (for they never
give 'em Oats in the East) and then put on the Saddle: at which time Supper is
served in. While the Master Sups, the Cook cleanses the Kitchen Furniture, and
the Valet de Chamber puts up the Masra's, which is a kind of Portmantle where
the Bed and Bed-cloaths are put up, with as much Convenience as in a Chest, of
which one Horse will carry two. Then the Servants go to Supper, while the
Master gets himself ready and puts on his Boots. When the Servants have supped,
which is soon done among the Asiatics: the Cook puts up his Utensils, and the
Groom bridles and girts up the Horses, and the rest fold up the Carpets, or do
what else belong to their Duties: lastly, they load and so depart. They that
have not seen the Fashions of the East, will hardly believe with what
Convenience Men travel in those Parts. However it is very great, though a man
may be said to carry a whole House a long with him: and the reason is, because
every Servant knowing what he has to do, every thing is dispatched in an
Instant.

We lodged at Segs-abad, which signifies the Habitation of Dogs; being a Town
as large as Kiare; seated in a fair Plain, where there are a great number of
Villages. There are no Inns at either of those two places, but in each fifteen
or twenty great Houses, which the Owners keep open for the Entertainment of
Travelers, and which are kept much more cleanly than the Caravanserais. There
is also much better Accommodation, but at a dearer rate: For the Host not
daring to demand either for his Lodging or his Trouble, which is not the
Custom, he pays himself by the Provender and Provisions which he sells his
Guests at his own price, whereas in the Caravanserais every thing is taxed.

The 11. we traveled eight Leagues: the first two over Mole-hills and little
hills, where the way was somewhat rugged; the rest over a fair champaign Ground
full of Villages, and for the most part well manured. It is said to be the
place where the Battle was fought between Lucullus and Mithridates, and which
the defeat of Crassus rendered yet more famous in the Roman History.

We alighted at an Inn called Koskeirou, one of the fairest and largest that
ever was built in Persia. There are belonging to it two Gardens, two Cisterns,
a Bath, and a small Canal: being altogether the Gifts of the Chief Wife of Abas
the Great. She founded this place, and settled a Revenue of Fourscore Pounds to
pay four Servants that were to lodge in the Inn, merely to keep it clean, and
to wait upon Travelers. But the fourscore Pounds have bin since converted to
other uses, through the Covetousness of the Trustees. Which is the reason that
the Caravanserai lies very nasty every where, and runs to ruin for want of good
keeping. It cost four Thousand Tomans the Building, which comes to eighteen
thousand Pounds. There are also in Persia other Inns, besides Bridges, Causeys,
and Hospitals, remaining Monuments of the Charity of that Princess; which have
rendered her Name famous, and if we may believe public Report, she expended in
Pious Works, no less than a hundred thousand Tomans, which make about four
hundred thousand Pounds Sterling.

The 12. we traveled eight Leagues, three over the pleasant Plains where
stands Koskeirou; and five in a deep Country, where the Road is somewhat
crooked and rough. Two hours before day we arrived at Sava, and lodged in the
Suburbs that lie upon the high Road.

Sava is a great City seated in a sandy and barren Plain, within sight of Mount
Alouvent. It is two miles in Circuit, and girt with walls, but thinly peopled:
for unless it be the Heart of the City, the rest runs to ruin for want of
Inhabitants. The Walls are also in a bad condition, nor is there any thing
remarkable round about it; tho formerly it has been a fair City, as the ruins
of several great Structures demonstrate. There runs a small River through, and
a good number of Canals. The Soil is dry and sandy; producing nothing without
Art and Industry; yet it is beautified with a great number of Gardens. The Air
is there very hot, and unhealthy. It lies 35. degrees. 50. min. of Lat. 85. degrees. of
Longitude; and is governed by a Derogue or Mayor

The Histories of Persia unanimously consent, that the whole Plain of Sava, was
formerly a Salt Marsh or Lake, like to that Lake which is called the Salt-Sea,
not above twenty Leagues from this City to the East, and which is crossed over
a Crusey thirty Eeagues in length, as ye travel from Ispahan into Hyrcania; but
those Histories do not agree upon the time that this Marsh was dried up. Some
fabulously report that it was the same night that Mahomet was born. Others that
it was Haly, his Son-in-Law, who drained away the waters by a Miracle. And the
same Histories report, that he wrought that Miracle, only by the pronuntiation
of one word; and that he did it in favor to the Inhabitants of Com, who took
his part against the Father-in-Law of Mahomet. They also add, that those
People, to preserve the Memory of so great an Accident, built a City in the
midst of that same drained Fenn, and laid the first Stone upon the Sun's
entering into Gemini. The northern People ruined it in the fourth Age of
Mahumetism. But Coja-Sehid-el-din the Son of Melec-Sheref-el-din-Savegi rebuilt
it forty years after that, much more stately than it was before its
Destruction, walled it, and paved it with red Bricks. Sometime after that
Coja-Sehid-el-din enlarged it to the North, and brought the water to it through
ten Channels, and built a spacious Mosque in the Eastern part of it, upon the
same Foundation where Suyed-Eshac, the Son of Imam-Mousa-Cazem had built one
several Ages before. Close adjoining to that Mosque stands the sumptuous Tomb
of Bercordar-bec Grand Master of the Ordnance of Persia, who died of a Dropsy
in that City about ten years ago.

Just over against Sava, to the East, at the distance of four Leagues, stands a
place of Pilgrimage, the most famous for the Devotion of the Persians. They
call it Ech-mouil, that is to say, Samuel; for they believe that Prophet was
there interred; over his Tomb there is built a most sumptuous Mausoleum in the
midst of a magnificent Mosque. Opposite to this, that is Westward, nine miles
from the City, under the same Parallel, are to be seen some footsteps here and
there of that famous City of Rey, the biggest City in Asia. The Wonders that
are recounted of it are incredible, nevertheless they are generally ascertained
by all Historians; and by some as if they had been Eyewitnesses. The Persian
Histories report, that in the Time of Calife Medybilla-abou-Mahamed-Darvanich,
who lived in the ninth Age of Christianism, the City of Rey was divided into 96
Quarters, of which every one contained 46 Streets, and every Street 400 Houses
and ten Mosques. That there were moreover in the City 6400 Colleges, 16600
Baths, 15000 Towers of Mosques; 12000 Mills, 1700 Channels, and 13000 Inns. I
dare not insert the number of Houses, because I cannot believe there were half
so many people: Nevertheless our Geography is in that particular asserted, and
justified by all the Oriental Authors. The Arabian Writers affirm in like
manner, that in the third Age of Mahumetism, which is exactly at the same time,
that Rey was the best peopled City in Asia; and next to Babylon there never was
any City so considerable, either for the Number, Wealth, or Trade of her
Inhabitants. And hence it was, that those pompous Titles were given her in
Histories, The first of Cities, the Spouse of the World, the Gate of the Gates
of the Earth, and the Market of the Universe. Nor is the Original of Rey less
remarkable. The Chronicle of the Magi makes Chus, the Grandchild of Noah, to
be the Founder of it, and adds that he laid the first Stone when the Sun was in
Scorpio. But the Vulgar Opinion is, that it was founded by Housheing-Pishdadi,
or Chief Justiciary. The Orientals give this Title to all the Kings of Persia
of the first Race, as being the first Governors and Legislators that came to
their Knowledge. Housheing was the second King of that Race. Manou^sher, the
first King after Housheing, greatly enlarged it: and it continued in its
Splendour till the Conquest of the first Mahumetans that destroyed it.
Mehdi-billa, surnamed Mansour, or the Victorious, the third Califfe of Babylon,
raised it to be greater and more populous then before; and under his Successors
it was, that it arrived to that degree of Grandeur which we have related. The
last destruction that befell it happened in the Time of the Civil Wars, at what
time the Tartars extended their Incursions into the Country of the Parthians.
The Religion of the Mahumetans was then divided into Sects, as at this day: so
that the Sect of Shia, which was that which the Persians stuck to, and that of
the Sunnis which the Turks followed, divided the whole Country. These two
Factions were at War for sixty years together, and the Sect of Shia being born
down, by the the Assistance of the petty Tartars, who are Sunnis, the
victorious Sect sub-divided themselves into two other Opinions, which they call
from the Name of their first Broachers, Shafai and Hanifei, which flourish to
this day among the Mahumetan Sunnis. These Wars, together with the Incursions
of the Tartars, destroyed the Potent Rey, and reduced it to nothing before the
end of the sixth Age of the Mahumetan Epoche. Threescore years after that
Facre-Eddin Prince of Parthia, having made a Peace with Gazen-Can King of
Persia, of the Race of the Tartars, endeavored to rebuild this unfortunate
City, but could: not accomplish his Design. Ptolomy calls this City Raquaja,
and the rest of the greek Authors call it by such Names, as seem to be formed
from the word Rey. It lies in 35. degrees. and 35. min. of Latitude, and 76. degrees.
20. min. of Longitude. The Soil is fertile and pleasant; and produces plenty of
good Fruits. The Air is unhealthy, makes the Skin look yellow, and breeds
Agues; nevertheless it is said the People lived there as long as in other
places, which is a wonder, and occasioned that Persian Distick.

Dreaming I saw, and naked in his Shirt The Angel of the Dead;
Who of the City Rey, by break of day The unwholesome Vapors fled.
This City has produced a great many Learned Men, and hoarded within its own
bosom for several Ages, the chiefest part of the Riches of the East. It is
reported that during its Splendour, the smaller Mosques had no less then a
hundred Branches of all sorts of Metal, furnished with burning Tapers, and the
larger Mosques five hundred, that were kept lighted all night long.

The 13. we traveled six Leagues through a plain and level Country: but the
Road was full of turnings and winddings, by reason of the turning and winding
of the River, and the several Canals in several parts of the Plain that water
the Grounds. We passed over one large Bridge, and several small ones, and
lodged at a great Inn built upon a flat piece of Ground, near to four others
which are not so big. It is called Jafer-abad; or the Habitation of Jafer, from
the name of a great Persian Lord, who caused the first Inns to be built that
ever were built in this place.

The 14. we traveled five Leagues over the same Plain. When we came about half
way, we rode along by the side of a little Hill called Couh-Telisme; Couh
signifying a Mountain, and Telisme that which we call Talisman, or
Hyeroglyphic. This Mountain has one thing remarkably peculiar to it, which I
never could believe till now; Which is this, That still as you approach nearer
and nearer to it, it shows a different form, and varies both in its bigness and
figure. The Top or Point of it is always in sight, and you would think, that it
turned that side which way soever you stood to look upon it: which I have
experienced to be true, as having beheld this Mountain from all the points of
the Compass. Which natural Enchantment may proceed in my Opinion, from the
variety of the Optic Mediums through which that little Mountain is beheld,
Nature having there sported something that resembles those Ingenuous Pictures,
that vary the Object by turning the Posture of the Picture this or that way to
the Eye. It consists of a black Earth, that crumbles like the burnt Mould at
the foot of Mountains that vomit fire: and it is full of Caves and blind
Corners, that seem to have been made of purpose. This made me enquire of the
People of the Country, whether that Mountain was wont to cast forth fire; but I
could, meet with no body that ever saw or heard of any such thing. But this is
a public Caution to all men: For they tell ye, that they who desire to ascend
that Mountain never come back; and it is reported that Abas the Great one day
sent a Footboy up with a Cresset Light upon his Shoulders, but that the Light
presently went out and the Fellow never appeared more. This Mountain lies upon
the left hand as you go to Com.

To which City as we drew near, we saw on every side the little Mausoleums and
Mosques, where the Grandchildren and Descendants of Aly lie interred. The
Persians call the first Descendants from this Califfe, Yman Zade, or Sons of
the Apostles; and these are the Persian Saints, of which there are an infinite
number buried in this Kingdom; for they reckon four hundred Sepulchers about
Com. We made this City the end of our Journey at ten a Clock at night: and I
was afraid I should have ended my Life there too by an Accident altogether
unexpected. For I alighted at the Door of the Caravanseray, and held my Horse
by the Bridle, expecting my Groom to come and take him, and what time another
led Horse perceiving me at his Tail, up with his hind Legs, and with all his
force yerk'd with his Heels at my Breast; so that had I been never so little
farther from him, he had broken my Bones. I confess I did not fall; for I was
supported by my Horses head, but for a quarter of an hour I was almost stifled,
not being able to fetch my Breath. God in his Mercy took Comparsion of me, so
that I escaped the fury of the Blow; tho I felt it six weeks afterward; yet
not so, but that I could go about my Business as I was wont.

Com is a large City seated in a Plain by a River side, half a League from a
very high Mountain. The Figure of it resembles a long Square, taking its length
from East to West, as may be seen in the Draught. It contains fifteen thousand
Houses, as the People say: It is surrounded with a Moat and Wall flanqu'd with
Towers half ruined; and encompassed with Gardens; of which there are some very
large on that side of the water. In one of the fairest of which Grounds the
Mausoleum of Rustan-Can, a Prince of the Race of the last Kings of KOM
KOM
The Tombs of ye two last KINGS OF PERSIA.
Georgia, who embraced the Mohammedan Religion, to obtain the Government of that
Kingdom: and in this Garden it is that the common people of Com most usually
take their Recreation. There are also two fair Keys all along the River, the
whole length of the City, and at the East end a fair Bridge. It contains also
very large and beautiful Bazars, where the Markets are kept both for Wholesale
and Retail. Nevertheless Com is no place of great Trade: they export from
thence vast Quantities of Fruit dried and raw, especially Pomegranates, great
store of Soap, Sword Blades, and Earthen Ware both white and varnished. And
this is peculiar to the white Ware, which is thence transported, that in the
Summer it cools the water wonderfully and very suddenly, by reason of continual
Transpiration. So that they who desire to drink cool and deliciously, never
drink in the same Pot above five or six days at most. They wash it with
Rose Water the first time,, to take away the ill smell of the Earth; and they
hang it in the Air full of water, wrapped up in a moist linen Cloth. A fourth
part of the water transpires in six hours the first time, after that still less
from day to day, till at last the Pores are closed up, by the thick matter
contained in the water, which stops in the Pores. But so soon as the Pores are
stopped, the water stinks in the Pots, and you must take new ones. There are in
this City a vast number of deep Cellars, out of which the People draw water to
drink: to the greatest part of which Cellars, you must go down a descent of
forty or fifty Steps, that are very steep to boot. But the water which they
fetch from thence is as cool as any Ice; coming from Fountains that are stopped
with Cocks: So that this Water is a most delicious Refreshment in the Summer,
which is furiously hot at Com, and all the adjacent Parts. This City also
contains a great number of fair Inns and Mosques, of which the fairest is that
wherein the two last deceased Kings of Persia lie enterr'd.

And here I shall give you the Platform of that Celebrated Mosque, so much
talked of over all the East. It has four Courts belonging to it, as you may
perceive by the Draught. The first is planted with Trees and Flowers like a
Garden: being a long Square, having an Alley in the middle which is separated
from the Beds and Plots by a Balustrade. There are also two Terrasses an each
side, running the full length of the Garden, three foot high. Upon each side of
which there are twenty Chambers vaulted, nine foot square, one Chimney and a
Portico. At the Entrance into this Court, upon the left hand, there is one of
these deep Cellars, and upon the right hand an Aviary. It is a place designed
for Recreation. For it is moreover encompassed with a Canall of clear water,
that runs out of one Fountain at the Entrance, and empties it self into another
at the end. Ten Disticks in Letters of Gold, over the Top of the Portal,
compose the Inscription of this Mausoleum; of which the Translation is as
follows.

The Date of the Portal of the Tomb of the most Venerable and Pure Virgin of
Com, upon whom be Salvation.

In the time of the happy Reign of Abas the Second, the Support of the World,
to whom increase of days, This Gate was opened in the face of the People.
Whoever casts up his Eyes, loses the Idea of Paradise.

Who has ever crossed her Courts, whose Aspect rejoices Hearts, has not passed
'em swiftly like the wind.

Masoom Vicar to the Great Pontiff, whose sage Counsels teach the Sun to govern
his Motion, caused this Portal to be made by one of The Word signifies desire.
his Substitutes Aga Mourad, the Height and Excellency of which surpasses the
Celestial Throne.

This is the Entrance into the Palace Royal of the thrice Venerable pure
Virgin, descended from the House of the Prophet.

Haypy and Glorious that faithful Person that shall prostrate his head upon the
Threshold of this Gate, in Imitation of the Sun and Moon. Whatever he shall
demand with Faith from above, this Gate shall be like an Arrow that hits the
Mark, that is to say, shall answer his Desires.

Certainly Fortune shall never molest the Enterprises of him, who for the Love
of God raised this Portal in the Face of the People.

O thou Faithful, if thou demand'st in what Year this Portal was built, I
answer thee, from above the Portal, from Desire demand thy Desires.

To understand this last Distich, you must understand, that whereas in our
Alphabet, there are but seven Numeral Letters, or which serve instead of a
Cipher, as V. for five, X. for ten; L. for fifty, etc. The Alphabet in the
Oriental Languages, stands for Arithmetical Numbers: and so for a knack of Wit,
which indeed requires a quick Fancy, they denote the Year of any thing by words
that have some resemblance to the Thing done, and are composed of Letters,
which according to their arithmetical Value, make up just the Year of their
Epoche: and the Letters of this word make 1061. Year. Of which I shall produce
another Example.

The deceased King of Persia caused a Tent to be made that cost one hundred and
fifty Thousand Pounds. It was called the House of Gold; because there was
nothing but Gold that glister'd in every part of it. I shall give you the
Description of it in another place. It may be easily conjectured that it was a
sumptuous and costly Piece, as well by the Price that it cost, as by the number
of Camels which were required to carry it, that were in all 280. The
Antichamber was made of Velvet with a Ground of Gold. Of which the Cornish was
embellished with Verses that concluded in this manner, If thou demandest at
what time the Throne of this Second Solomon was built, I will tell thee, Behold
the Throne of the Second Solomon; where the Letters of the last words being
taken for Ciphers make 1057. Years. Which is looked upon as mere Gibbrish in
our Language, but among the Orientals passes for Wit and Ornament.

The second Court is not so beautiful as the first; but the third is nothing
inferior to it. It is surrounded with Apartments, every one containing two
Stories, a Terrass, a Portico, and a Canal, in like manner as the former. Four
large Trees stand at each Corner, and cover it with their Boughs. Out of this
third Court you enter into the fourth, by a Marble Ascent consisting of twelve
Steps. The Portal which is at the Top, is a most magnificent Piece. It is
covered below with white Marble, transparent like to Porphiry or Aggat. The top
of it which is a large half Duomo is painted with Moresco Work of Or and Azure
laid on very thick. In this fourth Court are also Chambers both at the lower
end, and on both sides, with Terrasses and Portico's, like the other three.
Those are the Lodgings for the Priests, the Governors and Students, that live
upon the Revenues of that sacred Place.

Fronting these Courts stands the Body of the Structure, consisting of three
great Chapels upon a Line. To the middlemost belongs an Entrance eighteen Foot
deep, every way magnificent, the Portal being of the same white Marble already
mentioned. The Top, which is also a large half Duomo, is over-laid without,
with large square Tiles of Cheney, painted with Moresco Work, and within
embellished with Gold and Azure. The Door which is twelve foot high, and six
broad, is all of transparent Marble. The folding Doors are plated with Silver,
embellished with Vermillion guilt, carved Work and polished, which make a
Mosaic altogether costly and full of Curiosity. The Chapel is Octogonal,
covered with a high Duomo; the lower part of which Chapel is covered with
large Tiles of Porphiry waved, and painted with Flowers in Gold and Colors, so
lively and full of Luster that they dazzle the Eye. The upper part is of Moresco
Work, of lively and glittering Gold and Azure, and the Bottom of the Duomo is
all of the same. This Duomo is very large and wonderfully beautiful, being
overlaid without like the Portal. From the top of all arises a Spire, with a
Crescent fixed at the top, the ends of which are reverse, as you see in the
Figure. This Pinnacle, which is of a remarkable Bigness, is comoss'd of several
Bowls of several Proportions, set one upon another, and appears as you stand
below to be about twenty foot high with the Crescent, the whole of fine Gold.
The Persians affirm it to be all Massy: which if it be true, the Pinnacle is
worth Millions; but let it be what it will, it is a noble Ornament, of which the
Value cannot but amount to a large Sum.

In the midst of that Chapel stands the Tomb of Fatima, the Daughter of Mousa
Casem, one of the twelve Califfs, which the Persians believe to have been the
lawful Successors of Mahomet, after the Death of Ali his Son-in-Law. It
contains eight feet in length, five in breadth, and six in height. Over-laid
with Tiles of China, painted alamoresca, and overspread with Cloth of Gold
that hangs down to the ground on every side. It is enclosed with a Grate of
Massy Silver, ten foot high, distant half a foot from the Tomb; and at each
Corner crowned as it were with large Apples of fine Gold. Which is done to the
end the People should not sully the Tomb with their kissing and handling it:
for the Tomb is looked upon as a sacred Piece. Several breadths of Velvet hung
about the inside of the Grate, hide it from the view of the People: so that
only Favor or Money can procure a sight of it. The Flooer likewise is covered
with a Carpet of very fine Woollen: over which at great Festival Times, are
spread others of Silk and Gold. Over the Tomb, about ten foot in height, hang
several Silver Vessels which they call Candil; being a sort of Lamp, of which
there are some that weigh sixty Marks: and are otherwise fashioned then the
Church Branches, as may be seen in the Figures. But they never light up any
fire therein, which they are not made to hold, nor any sort of Liquor, as not
having any Bottom.

Upon the Grate hang several Inscriptions in Letters of Gold upon thick
Velloms, as large as a large sheet of Paper. Which Inscriptions contain the
Elegies of the Saint and her Family. The Inscription upon the Front of the
Entrance contains the Prayer which they all generally say, that come in the
Pilgrimage to the Sepulcher. The Pilgrim, when he enters, kisses the Threshold
and the Grate three times; and standing upright with his Face toward the Tomb,
one of the Molla's, that attend there day and night, comes to him, who causes
him to say the Prayer word for word. After the Prayer so said, the Pilgrim
again kisses the Grate, and the foot of the Door; then giving the Priest four
or five pence, more or less, according to his ability, he retires. If he
desires a Certificate of his Pilgrimage, they write him one in due form; the
dispatch of which costs him half a Pistole, or eight or nine shillings. All the
money which the Pilgrims and other Votaries give, is put into a little iron
Chest, like the Trunk of a Tree, that stands at the entrance into the Chapel,
which is opened every Friday, and what is found therein is distributed among
the people that belong to the Mosque, and do Duty in that consecrated place. It
would be too long, and perhaps to irksome, to insert all the Inscriptions I
have mentioned: and therefore I shall only give you the Translation of the two
Principal Prayers, which the Pilgrims are bound to say.

In the name of God clement and merciful.
I Visit my Lady and Mistress Fatima, the daughter of Mousa, the son of Dgafar,
upon whom be all Salvation and Peace eternally. And out of my zeal to approach
to God by her Intercession, I invoke her for my self, my Father and Mother, and
all the truly Faithful.

In the name of God soveraignly pitiful, I wish thee Health eternal, O Apostle
of God. I wish thee Health eternal, O Elect of God. I wish thee Health eternal,
O the best and most perfect of all men, Mahamed the son of Abdalla. God grant
thee his Mercy, his Grace and his Benedictions, and to all thy Family. I wish
thee eternal Health, O Prince of the Faithful, O Lord and Chief of the true
Vicars of God. I wish thee eternal Health, O thou that art the Truth it self. I
wish thee Health eternal, and the Mercy and Benedictions of God o Ali who art
the true Balsom, for the wounds of sin. I wish the Health eternal, O virgin
most Pure, most Just, and most Immaculate, glorious Fatima, the daughter of
Mahammed the Elect, the best beloved Wife of Ali, the Mother of twelve true
Vicars of God, of Illustrious Birth; and I also wish the Mercy of God, and his
Benedictions, to thy Mother the most precious, the most pure, and highborn
Khadidge. I wish the mercy of God and his Benedictions to Hasan and Heussein,
true Directors of the way of Truth, Celestial Flambeaux's of the dark Night of
the World, Great Standards of true Piety, unreproachable Testimonies of God
against the World, Lords of all the young Men who are in the Glory of Paradise.
I wish thee Eternal Health O Fatima, the Daughter of Mousa, Virgin Holy,
Virtuous, Just, Directirix of the Truth, Pious, Sanctified, worthy of all our
Praises, who Soveraignly love the Faithful, and who art Soveragnly beloved:
Virgin without blemish, and exempt from all Impurity. May God take his Greatest
Delight in thee, look upon thee as pleasing to Him, and Establish thee in
Paradise, which is thy Eternal Habitation and Refuge. I am come to seek thee, O
Mistress and Lady of my Soul, in hopes that I may approach the most High God by
this Act of Piety, and of his Apostle and his Holy Children. The Mercy of God
be upon him and them Eternally. I Abhor and I Detest my Sins, of which I have
made me an unhappy Burden, that sinks me to the Earth; and I do my Endeavor
to break the Yoke of Hell: Vouchsafe me thy Intercession, O most Holy Virgin,
at the Day when the Good shall be separated from the Wicked. Be then a
propitiation in my behalf, for thou art descended from a Race and Genealogy of
Parents, that will not suffer those that love 'em to fall into Misfortune; that
never refuse any thing to whoever they be that call upon 'em in Prayer; who
divert all evil from those that tenderly cherish 'em; but whose Enemies on the
other side shall never prosper. O God most High, the Holy Doctors of the Race
of the Prophet, upon all whom be eternal Mercy, thy Peace, and thy Salvation,
have truly declared and taught that whoever shall devoutly visit Fatima of Com,
shall have Paradise for his Portion. I am the Man, O my God, who come to visit
her in this manner, persuaded and convinced, as I am, of her Grandeur and her
Excellency, and of that of her glorious Ancestors, pure and clean from all Sin,
upon all whom be Mercy and Peace. O God, be favorable to Mahamed and the
Family of Mahamed. Render profitable to my Salvation the Visit which I make to
this Holy Virgin, and confirm me in the favor of her Love. Suffer me not to be
deprived of the favor of her Intercession, and crown me with the Glory of
Paradise, as thou have promised to do, for that in thee is Sovereign Power.

I visit my Lady and Mistress Fatima, the Daughter of Mousa, the Son of Dgafar.
Peace be upon 'em, and let it be wished 'em eternally by all the Faithful
Believers, whose Devotion enclines 'em to approach to God by her Intercession.

In the Name of God Clement and Merciful, Peace be upon Adam, the Elect of God.
Salvation be upon Noah, the Prophet of God. Salvation be upon Abraham, the
intimate Friend of God. Salvation upon Moses, the mouth of God. Salvation upon
thee Mahomet, the seal and last of the Prophets. Salvation upon thee, the
Prince and Director of the Faithful, Aly the Son of Abitaleb, Vicar of the
Apostles of the Lord of human Creatures. Salvation upon thee Fatima, the Lady
of the Women of the world. Salvation upon both you, the Graud Children of the
Prophet of Mercy, and Lord of the young men that inhabit Paradise. Salvation be
upon thee Ali the Son of Heusein, the Lord of pious Men, and Joy of the Eyes of
the glorified Saints. Salvation upon thee Dgafar the Son of Mahomed the Just.
Salvation upon thee Mousa the Son of Dgafar the Pure. Salvation upon thee Ali
the Son of Mousa, whom we all agree to. Salvation upon thee Mahomet, the Son of
Ali, the tenderly cherished. Salvation upon thee Ali the Son of Mahomet the
Faithful Counselor. Salvation upon thee Hasan the Son of Hali. Salvation upon
thee, the Light and Sun of the World, the last Apostle, and upon the Friend of
thy Friends, and upon the Vicar of thy Vicars. Salvation upon thee, the
Daughter of the Apostle of God. Salvation upon thee the Daughter of Fatima and
of Khadidgeh. Salvation upon thee the Daughter of the Director of the Faithful,
and the Friend of God. Salvation upon thee the Daughter of the Race of Hassan
and Heusein. Salvation upon thee the Daughter of the Friend of God. Salvation
be to thee the Aunt of the Friend of God. Salvation be to thee the Daughter of
Mousa the Son of Dgafar. The Mercy of God, his Benedictions and his Salvation
be upon ye all. God grant that ye may all know one another in Paradise. God
grant that we may be assembled together in your Company, that we may drink out
of our Prophets Fountain, and that you may drink out of the Cup of your
Grandfather, from the hand of Hali the Son of Abitaleb. The Blessings of God be
upon all us. I pray to God that he may fill us with Gladness and Joy, that he
may assemble us into the company of your Grandfather Mahomet, upon whom be the
Mercy and Peace of God, and may be never deprive us of your Knowledge; for he
is a most Powerful Protector. I approach to God under the shadow of your Favor,
detesting your Enemies; I make him the Offering of my self, devoting my self
for a victim without Ignominy or Pride; and I confess with all my heart, that
whatever Mahomet preached is Truth, and I submit thereto. Therefore it is, that
we implore thy Assistance, O Lord our God, thy Compassion, and the glory of the
day of Judgment. O Fatima, intercede for me, for thou art in high Esteem with
God, and thou have power in Heaven. O God I pray thee, that thou will grant me
to make a happy end, nor take away from me any thing that I enjoy. There is
most certainly neither power nor strength, but by the Favor of the most
puissant and great God. Hear me O God, and accept my Pilgrimage, through thy
Liberality, thy Favor, thy Mercy, and thy Clemency. Be favorable to Mahamed
and his Family, and grant 'em Salvation and Peace, O sovereignly-merciful Being.

To conclude, this Fathma's Tomb was rebuilt three times. Her Father carried
her to Com, by reason of the great Persecution, wherewith the Califfs of Bagdat
molested his Family, and all those that took Aly's part, and held him and his
Offspring for the true Successors of Mahomet. She erected several fair
Structures in that City, and there at last ended her days. The People believe
that God carried her to Heaven, and that there is nothing in the Temple, but
only a Representation of her Body.

In the two Chapels on each side, stand the Tombs of the two last Kings of
Persia: the Portals of which are not so large, as the Portal of Fatima's
Monument: but the folding-Doors are over-laid in the same manner with Plates of
Silver. They are of an equal Diameter, both the one and the other, at the end
of a Gallery twelve foot broad and thirty five in length. At the entrance there
is also a kind of Vestry, were the Ornaments and Movables are kept. The
Chapel, where Abas lies enterr'd, is an irregular Twelve-Angle: the other
where Sephi is buried, is an irregular Square. The Vestries, Galleries and
Chapels are hung with rich Tapestries: those wherewith the Chapels are hung,
are of Gold and Silk woven together. And indeed there can be seen nothing more
beautiful, nor more magnificent then these Mausoleums. The lower part is
over-laid with large Tiles of Porphiry, painted with Gold and Azure: the Roofs
are a most ingenious and delicate Piece of Architecture, all painted with rich
Moresco Work in lively Colors, that even dazzle the Eye. For the Gold and Azure
is laid on so thick, that you would swear it was all Massy in its Substance.
The Domo opens toward the lower part, with a double row of four and twenty
Windows; and there is one very large one equal with the Ground, that looks into
the Garden, with another opposite to it, which looks into the great Chapel.
The Glasing Work consists of Panes of Crystal, painted with Gold and Azure,
and fastened in massy Silver. But I remit the Reader to the Draughts, to take a
more perfect view of these sumptuous Monuments, contenting my self to relate
what they cannot express. Abas's is four foot high, four in breadth, and eight
foot long. The three Lamps that hang over it are of pure massy Gold, of which
the biggest is worth four and twenty Marks, the rest twelve apiece; and they
hang by rods (...)EPULCHRE DE ABAS SECOND
(...)EPULCHRE DE SIFY PREMIER
of Silver, that descend from the bottom of the Duomo. The Tomb is paved with
Tiles of Cheney, and covered with Rich Persian Cloth of Gold, that costs
between sixty and seventy Pounds Sterling an Ell, the most gorgeous imaginable,
with a Scarlet Counter-Poynt over that, and over head a Canopy of Gold. The
Counter-poynts are tacked below to the Carpets under foot, with a small Silk
string, that runs through Rings of massy Gold. And the Clasps and Hooks at the
Corners are of the same Metal.

Round the Gallery of Abas's Tomb, runs a Frize, divided equally into
Cartridges of Azure, wherein are written in large Characters of Gold, the
Elegies of the Famous, Haly, the Great Saint and Idol of the Persians, made by
the Learned Hasan-Caza. Of which I shall insert the Translation, as being a
Piece of Eloquence, wherein may be seen not only the Genius of the Persian
Poetry, but the Transports of Mahumetan Devotion. The whole is divided into
seven Songs in Distichs, of which the first runs all upon Mahomet, and the
other six all upon Haly.

The first Song.
I Salute the glorious Creature, of whom the Sun is but the shadow.
Masterpiece of the Lord of Human Creatures, Great Star of Justice and
Religion.

Infallible Expounder of the The Pentateuch, the Psalter, the Gospel, and the
Alcoran. The Mahometans believing that these Books ever were and always shall
be the Rule of their Faith.
four Books, Conductor of the eight The Heavens of the Planets of the Primum
Mobile.
Mobiles; Governor of the The seven Climates which was the Ancient Division of
the Earth.
seven Parts. Chief of the Faithful.

It is in the Original, Doctor in the Knowledge of the Prophets, who knew not
their A, B, C. For the Mahumetans affirm, that Mahomet was so ignorant in human
Learning, that he could not read. To the end they might the better from thence
conclude, that his Knowledge was supernatural.
Doctor of that Knowledge which is infused into the Prophets. Royal Hero, The
twelve Heirs and Successors of Mahomet, the last of which was carried to
Heaven; and shall return to confound the Reign of the unfaithful.
celebrated by twelve Successors, though the Veil should be taken away, yet
would not my Belief be increased. Light of God. Illuminating Soul of Prophecy;
Guide of true Believers.

The first Object of God, when he bethought himself of sending his Orders to
Earth, and Ambassador, Center of divine Secrets, concerning what is past and to
come, who has caused the Acknowledgment of God to shine forth out of the
darkness of Errors; as the Morning goes before the Sun, before he mounts the
Horison, thwart an obscure Night.

Principal Type of things created. Instrument of the Creation of the World, the
highest of the Race of Adam. Soul of the great Apostles and Messengers.

Thou art that Lord, through whom, one Verse in the Alcoran promises the
fulfilling of our desires. Thou art that Sun, through whom another Verse tells
the Sovereign Beauty shall be seen. Light of Eyes! Crown of Prophecy. Idol of
the Angel Gabriel!

Thou art in the world, a world of virtue and dignity. Thou art upon the Earth
a Sun of Majesty and Grandeur.

The Sea is not rich and liberal, but by the gifts of thy munificent Hands. The
Angel Treasurer of Heaven reapes his Harvest in the Fertile Gardens of the
purity of thy Nature.

Moses, who divided the Sea, is the Porter of the Throne of thy Justice. Jesus,
the Monarch of the Fourth Heaven, keeps guard before the veil of the Throne of
thy Glory.

That incomprehensible Painter, who drew the Mole at one stroke of his Pencil
Let it be so, and it was so. Genesis 1.
koun-fikoun never made so fair a Portraiture as the globe of thy Visage.

From thy descent into the Cradle to the last day of thy Life, the Angels who
Register Words, never heard thee speak a word which The Mahometans hold that
every man has two inspecting Angels; the one who writes down the good, the
other the evil which he does.
did not ravish God himself with Joy.

No man in whatsoever condition he is, can resemble God so much as thou do.
But if there could be an Image to represent God as he is, it could be no other
then thy self; that Ambassador whom out of his extraordinary Clemency he sent
to the Earth.

Happy and holy is the man who believes all that God has spok'n in the Alcoran,
according to the sense which his Prophet has observed in the Book of his
sentences. If he should be compared with any other exalted Being, there could
not be found a more perfect exemplar then Mahomet.

The second Song.
O unexpressible man! who have no Equal but Mahomet the Elect Prophet. God has
assigned upon thy The Persians affirm, that Aly was the handsomest Person that
ever was: and that his Beauty was unconceivable. For which reason the Painters
usually cover his Face with a Veil, and will not let it be seen. But what the
Poet here speaks of Haly signifies that the Blessed in Heaven account it their
chiefest felicity to be beloved by him.
Love the Dowry of the Ladies of Paradise.

The Primum Mobile, would never dart the Ball of the Sun through the Trunk of
Heaven, were it not to serve the morning out of the extreme Love she has for
thee.

What is the power of the Stars and Destiny, in comparison of thine? and what
is the Light of the Sun, compared with that of thy Understaning? Destiny does
but execute thy Commands. The Sun is enlightened by the beams of thy Knowledge.

When the numerous Train of thy Majesty goes in its Pomp, we see the Or
Fortune, The sense is, thou know how to turn the world at thy pleasure, as a
Mule turns, the little Bell that hangs at his neck.
Sphere bound to the hand of the Captain that guides it, like a little Bell at
the neck of a Mule.

Let not Hercules vaunt any more the Force of his Courage. For who would endre
a Fly to brave it upon the wings of the great Phoenix of the East.

Had Hercules seen the Valor of thy Arm in one Action, assuredly the Bird of
his Soul would have brok'n the Cage of his Body, and fled for fear.

The immense Sea of thy merit, tosses up surges above the Heavens, and upon
this Sea of Virtue the Tempests of Adversity cause no more disorder then Rushes
in the Water.

If thy Glory be weighed in the Balance of exalted Sense, the highest mountains
weighed against it, would appear no more then the Seed of Lentils.

In the great Career of Happiness, where the (Transparts of those who run the
Race, makes 'em like Horses, that get the Bit in their Teeth and throw their
Riders.

And causes 'em with the force of their Spurs to prick an Artery, at what time
the Angel of Death comes like a fatal Physician to take 'em by the Arm of the
Soul)

Thou shall escape this rude Career, as the Sun passes on from the East. They
shall carry before thee the honorable Standard of the Supreme Majesty; and
behind thee, the Spoils, as marks of the Victory.

And in this Race, were all the Inhabitants of the world as brave as Hercules,
the most undaunted of 'em all would not have the Courage to stand a moment
before thee.

God shall create a Body of Renown or Fame.
Air, that shall cry with a loud voice on his behalf, Victory, Victory. There
is none so stout as Aly. There is no Sword like to Sulphagar is the name of
Haly's sword which the Mahometans say divides it self at the end with two
points:
Sulfagar, that Hero's Sword with two Points.

The third Song.
Thou from whose purity the Heaven of Unsinfulness draws its Luster. The Sun is
made a Crown of Glory of the shadow of thy Umbrello.

Jesus the great Chemist made use of the Earth of the Portal of thy Prudence,
for red Sulphur; of which he composed the Taksir, and the Stones of Divination.
The Mahumetans say: that when Jesus Christ was living Physic flourished in its
highest degree of Excellency; and that God gave him so many secrets of that
Art, that he raised the Dead, and penetrated the very thoughts of Men.
Stone Phale, by means whereof he understood all things, and healed all men.

The eternal Painter painted a great many Images, and brought to light a great
many Ideas, with a design to form thy lovely Countenance; but he found none
that came near thy Beauty.

The Faulcon of thy Umbrello having extended his wings, has found the That is
to say the greatest Prophet.
Birds of the seventh Heaven nestling under the large Feather of thy left wing.

Who ever has A figure taken from the Custom of the Persians, to seal their
Mines with the King's Seal, and of his Officers, because all Mines belong to
the King.
sealed his Heart with thy Love, has found that his Heart is become a Mine of
precious Stones.

The most powerful Creature of all things, admired upon the sixth day of the
Creation, that Superiority of Excellency, which thou have above all his other
Creatures.

Upon the memorable day of thy Victory, the Sweat of thy hands was to thy
Enemies a profound Deluge that swallowed 'em up like the Sea.

Thou Vulture of the heavenly Constellation did fly upon the Blood as a Dog
upon the water.

Insipid Poet, who comparest to the Sea the sweat of the hand of thy Hero. Thou
art astonished at the Thought that comes into thy Head, that the Sea which
resembles that Sweat is the The Heaven.
blew Sea.

Who ever has lifted up the hand of Necessity toward the Portal of thy
Beneficence, he has it always returned back full of what he desired.

O divine and Sacred Host! who give the Saints to drink out of the Basin of
Paradise. To speak something in thy Praise, we must needs say, that Nature is
only adorned and enriched by thee.

A thousand and a thousand Years together the heavens, considering the high
Price of thy pure Essence, beheld the water of the Fountain of Paradise muddy,
in comparison of that.

As well God as Mahomet has always found thy Opinion the most just. The one
gave thee a Sword with two points, the other a most incomparable Virgin.

Had not thy perfect Being been in the Idea of the Creator, Eve had been
eternally a Vrgin, and Adam a Bachelor.

The fourth Song.
Great Saint, who art the true Mansion of God, as the Prophet teaches in the
Book of his Sentences. Thou art also the (16) Kebleh of the World and of
Religion, the Soul of the World of Mahamed. (17) The place toward which they
are obliged to turn when they say their Prayers. Thus Jerusalem was the Kebleh
of the Jews, and Mecca of the Mahometans.


Thy Mouth is the Treasure of sublimest Sense, thou have placed thy Mouth upon
the Fountain of understanding and knowledge, which is the An allusion to the
Kiss which the Mahumetans say that Mahomet gave Haly, when he publicly
appointed him his Heir and Successor, and is a profane imitation of the manner
of Christ's giving his Holy Spirit to his Apostles.
Mouth of Mahamed.

Thou art the Pontiff, who art only found worthy to enter into the Sanctuary of
the Great Prophet, and only Capable to stand upon the Foot-pace of Mahomet.

The hearts which thy victorious Sword continually leads to the true Religion,
are the Flowers with which the vapors of the Ocean of thy Puissance cover the
Garden of Mahomet.

Since the Sphere of the Law has been illuminated by several Stars, the Moon
never appeared so clear and bright, till thou tookest upon thee the Empire of
the Heaven of Mahomet.

The Angel Gabriel, Messenger of Truth, everp day kisses the Groundsil of thy
Gate, as being the only way that leads to the Throne of Mahomet.

Thy Grandeur above all human Possibility is an impossible Comparison, but if
any thing may compare with it, it must be the Power and Authority of Mahomet.

O sovereign King, if in the celebrating thy Praises, I should study upon what
once the Wise Hassan did in the time of Mahomet.

I should not dare to presume to praise thy Majesty, since God himself has
spoken thy Elogy by the Mouth of Mahomet.

The explication of thy Being cannot proceed from the Tongue of mortal men-,
unless we except what has been spok'n of thee by Mahomet.

But it is not the same thing with the unfolding of our own wants; for that is
needless with thee. Thou know what they are, and thou know also that I am
the devoted Slave of thy House, and of the Family of Mahomet.

My soul desires to fly to thee, pressed by the Obligations which I have to
men; do me some Favor that may deliver me from my Obligations to Men, I conjure
thee by the Soul of Mahomet.

Turn not away thy compassionate and favorable Looks from my Countenance. O
love of my Heart, cast a tender glance upon me, O heart of the Heart of Mahomet!

The fifth Song.
Minister especial elected of God for the Master of the Faithful. Thou art the
Soul of the Prophet of God. We ought not to give thee any other name, O Master
of the Faithful!

Thy always victorious Arm has brought under the Yoke the Heads of the most
haughty Hero's of the Age, O Master of the Faithful!

The Treasures which Nature hides, and those with which it covers the Universe,
are without Luster and Price, to what thou liberally bestowest upon us, O
master of the Faithful!

The sparkling Rubies cover themselves with Earth in the hollow of the Mine,
ashamed of their not being bright enough to be put into thy Treasures, O master
of the Faithful!

I will not say what was the difference between the Gentle Zephirus, and the
Breath of thy Mouth, which refreshes the Soul and the Heart, O master of the
Faithful!

All that Jesus did with his Breath was an Emblem, but afterward this is all.
That was an Emblem which signified what miracles were to be wrought by the
words of thy mouth, O master of the Faithful!

How can an understanding, so short and confused as mine, represent the
Excellency and Price of thy Majesty? O master of the Faithful!

The Universal Spirit, with its sublime Knowledge, cannot arrive at the Portal
of thy wondrous Essence, O master of the Faithful!

Were there a place more exalted then the most high Throne of God, I would
affirm it to be thy Place; O master of the Faithful!

That we may give thee Praises worthy of thy self, it behooves us to depaint thy
wonderful Essence; but for that reason alone it is impossible to praise thee
according to thy Merit, O Father of the Faithful!

Thou art all that thou deservedst to be; but who can comprehend thy merit
unless it be thy God. O master of the Faithful!

We beg all as poor Beggars at the Gate of thy Beneficence, and the Kings of
the world are in the number of those Beggars, O master of the Faithful!

The price of thy Favors surpasses the Capacity of human Understanding. The
weight of thy Majesty and thy Glory is too heavy for the shoulders of human
Understanding.

The sixth Song.
Being of an unconceivable Puissance, the Commands of Providence are executed
by thy Orders. Thou can turn with thy hand alone the vast celestial Sphere.

The Sun, under whose shadow and auspicious Omens Nature rowls, is but a
glitterimg Beam of the Clasp of thy Girdle.

The Eternal Fountain of which the visible Ocean is not so much as a single
drop, is it self but a drop to the Sea of thy Bounty.

Human Wit that divided the World into four parts, is no more with thee then an
Atome of Dust. He divides his Knowledge into ten degrees: But how many degrees
are required to be a Canton of thy Knowledge?

In the Elogy of the Mahumetans, it is said, that God created the World by the
Ministry of Angels, which is drawn from the Theology of the Jews.
The Superior of the College of the Creation, Gabriel, with all his Art and
Knowledge, is but a mere Scholar to thee.

The Verses of the Alcoran, which assure men of the Favor and Mercy of God,
were sent from Heaven for thy sake.

It Is too small a Praise of thy ineffable Power, to call it the Zenith of
Power, since the Zenith is no more then the Nadir of the Power of thy Porter.

These two Stars which are the Eyes of the world, are two Globes, which not
having been thought beautiful enough to make a part of the Structure of thy
Mansion, were placed at the Avenues.

The Famous Bird, which is placed over the Roof of thy Palace, raises from the
Earth the nine Vaults of Heaven like a Grain of Wheat.

Whatever the Gulf of Predestination encloses, its Wonders and its Prodigies
came not to light, nor were made manifest but by thy Commandment.

The humble Slave of thy Grandeur, poor Hassen employs himself day and night
every year, every month in the Country of Amul to sing thy Praises.

Devoutly he prostrates his Face to the Earth at the Gate of thy glorious
Palace: He exposes to thy Eyes a sick Heart, of which he implores from thee the
Cure.

Can a man conceal his Distemper from a wholesome Remedy? Certainly it is no
piece of Wisdom, for a man to conceal his Distemper from an infallible and
sovereign Cure.

The seventh Song.
Glorious City of Nedgef, since thou art become the Mansion of the Son of the
Faith, thy Territory is become more honorable then the Country of Abraham's
Wells, of which mention is made in Genesis; and with whose Water the Pilgrims
of Mecca are obliged to purify themselves, a certain number of times.
Zemzen and Mecca the Holy.

Nedgef is the true The house of Abraham, to which the Alcoran commands
Pilgrimage once in a man's life.
Kabeh for people that seek the Truth; because the Adamant of Religion has
there his Habitation.

Which is also the Son of pure Belief, the master of the Faithful; the Governor
of the Kingdom of the Love of God, the Chief of the Citizens of the Heavenly
Babylon.

O destroyer of Heresy! Thou art the Secretary of the Commandments of divine
Inspiration: the Judge of things commanded or forbidden.

If the Idea of thee, the most noble in divine Sense were not in the world, the
world would be but an imperfect and senceless Figure.

Supreme Majesty, who have augmented the Luster of the Supreme Throne, all
Creatures incessantly praise thy Name.

The Sun is less then an Atome in the heaven of Assemblies where thou art
honored. And the Atoms are greater then the Sun, upon those places of the
Earth where thou have wrought thy Miracles.

The Crown of The ancient Kings of Persia of the first Race and Monarchs of the
East.
Gerashid is cloudy and tarnish'd before the Heron Tufft of thy Turban. The
Throne of Fereydon is a wooden Bench in comparison of thy Seat.

The Glory of Solomon, who was the Glory of the Earth, was a small thing in
comparison of thee, because it was only borrowed of the durable Glory of thy
servant Selmon.

The Infallibility of Predestination depends only upon thy Conduct. She is so
modest as never to set her Foot before thine.

It Is a sin to compare thee with man: for how can a lump of Earth pretend to
compare with a Diamond of the clearest water?

Human Wit cannot find a man equal to thee; but by turning toward Mahomet. This
is our firm and clear Faith, and I say no more.

They cry with a loud Voice upon the Gates of Paradise to those that come to
visit thy Highness. You that have repented and are become good People, receive
your Salary entering there for ever.

The Tomb of Sephy the first is no less Sumptuous then that of Abas. The Lamp
that hangs over it is of pure Massy Gold. The Tomb which is of the same Form,
of the same Bigness with that of Abas, is a piece of rare and wonderful
Workmanship. The Materials of which are Ivory, Ebony, Brasile, Camphir, Lignum
Aloes, and other Sweet Woods.

The Workmanship is of several pieces of rapport-work after the Mosaic manner,
upon a bottom of Tissue in a Field Or. The Pieces that compose the Workmanship
are thin, an fastened together with Rivetings and Clenchings of Fine Gold. The
Enchasements, Hooks, Pins, Hinges, Clasps, and in a word, whatever joins the
Pieces one to another, (for the whole Work may be taken to pieces) are all of
pure Massy Gold. The Basis that supports the Tomb, is surrounded with a List
in the Middle of two Frizes, upon which are written in Golden Characters of
Rapport-work the 62. Chapter of the Alcoran; of which this is the Translation.

In the name of God clement and merciful.
Whatever is in the Heavens, and upon the Earth, celebrates the Grandeur of the
most Holy and Wise God who is without compare, (in Puissance.) He has sent to
his People of Mecca, a Prophet chosen from among 'em, to reveal his Testimonies
to 'em. (The Verses of the Alcoran) to purify 'em, and teach 'em the true
Faith and the true Knowledge; for that assuredly before that time they wandered
in manifest Errors. Other men have not been favored with the same Graces. But
God, who is without compare for Power and Wisdom, causes his infinite Abundance
to descend where he pleases himself. The Example of those who carried the Old
Testament in their Hands, but never in their Works, like to an Ass that carrys
a Burden of Books, is a fatal Example to all Impostors, that have falsifi'd the
Ancient Testimonies of God (the Old and New Testament) and they are to
understand, that God never takes upon him the Conduct of Impostors. Tell 'em, O
you that are become Jews! if you believe your selves to be more the Sons of God
then other Men, wish for death, wish for it if you are real (in your words.)
But they have no mind to wish for it, because of what their Hands have
committed. Now God knows the unjust. Tell 'em, that Death which you flee, shall
overtake ye; then shall ye return to him, that knows as well what is concealed,
as what is discovered. He shall set before ye all your Actions. Oh you true
Believers! when they call ye to Friday Prayers, run to Celebrate the Praises of
God, and let alone your private Affairs. In this it is, that real Good
consists, if you have the Wit to know it. When prayers are ended, go where you
please, but never hope for the Relief of your Necessities, but in the Abundance
of God; and always have God in your Minds, perhaps you may (thereby) become
happy. As for those who, drawn away in hopes of Gain or Divertisement, have
left thee to enjoy their Pleasures, tell 'em, That which is with God is far
better than Gain and Pleasure, and that God most assuredly is the best Provider
for our Necessities.

The Tomb of Sephy, like that of Abas is covered with a Pall of the rich Tyssue
of Persia, the richest that is made in any part of the world; and another over
it of fine Scarlet, with a Gold Fringe round about. And the second Covering was
fast'ned to the Carpet below with a string, that runs through Rings of Gold, as
in Abas's Tomb. The Lecterns, or Desks, which are over against it, and are made
to fold one upon another are of all sweet Wood: near to which in several Niches
are a great number of Books of the Law, put up in Bags of Tissue. So that a man
can hardly see any thing more Beautiful and Magnificent. There is such a
Neatness and Gravity mixed together with Pomp and Riches, that I never saw any
thing in Persia that better pleased me.

All the Vessels that belong to the Chapels are of Gold and Silver. It
consists in large Flambeau Branches of four and five hundred Ounces apiece in
flat Dishes, wherein they serve the Poor with Victuals; in Pots to spit in, in
Chafing-Dishes, Fire-shovels and perfuming Pans, and in Boxes for Grease and
sweet Odors. But they never make use of the Gold Plate, unless it be upon
Festivals. In the Evening they light up several Flambeaus in the Tombs and
Galleries, that burn till daylight; which is also done in the middlemost
Chapel, and at the Entrance. They also light up two very large ones, which
they set up upon so many Stands. And eight Priests are paid and entertained, to
read the Alcoran by turns day and night. Twelve more likewise perform the same
Duty in Sephy's Tomb, and twenty five more in the Monument of Abas.

Behind the Chapels, and upon each side, are very neat Gardens, with
Apartments very well furnished and kept in good Repair, with little Gardens
belonging to every one, extremely pleasant and delightful: upon the left hand
is a large Churchyard, fifteen hundred Paces square. In which Churchyard they
bring Bodies to be buried from all parts of Persia; where it is in great
Request, and every where looked upon to be Sacred Ground. On the right side of
the Structure, there is nothing but a high Brick Wall, very broad and very
thick; and serves for a Damm against the Inundations of the River of Com, that
runs at the foot of it.

The Persians call this famous place Massouma, that is, Innocent or Pure, by
reason of the pretended Saint that lies there enterr'd, and to whom they
likewise give the same Epithet. For this word Massouma in the Persian Theology,
signifies a Person that has acquired a Sanctity so habitual as never to sin
more. There belongs to it a Revenue of three Thousand four Hundred Tomans,
which make eleven Thousand Pounds Sterling, that is to say, fifteen Hundred
Tomans for Abas's Tomb, a Thousand for Sephy's, and seven hundred for Fathma's.
This Revenue is employed to keep the Places clean and neat, to repair the
Decays of time, in the Building and Movables, for the buying of Lights, and
maintaining several Churchmen, and a great number of Regents and Governors, of
Students and poor People. They distribute Victuals every day to all that come,
and to people that are hired. And of all these Legacies and Revenues, three
Great Lords of Persia have the Superintendency; every one being appointed his
Chapel. He that at present takes Care of the she-Saints Chapel, is an
illustrious Ancient Person, who has been Courtshi Bashi, or Colonel of the
Courtches, which is a great Body of the Militia, consisting of thirty Thousand
Men. And the same Person is also Governor of Com.

This City contains also several other Edifices, very beautiful and sumptuous.
It is a very pleasant Place, but for the Heat which is very excessive. In the
Summer the River that passes by it is no bigger then a small Rivulet, but the
Winter Thaws swell it to that degree with the Water that falls from the
Mountains, that it not only fills its own Channel, which is as broad as the
Seine at Paris, but overflows a great part of the City. They call it generally
the River of Com; but the true Name of it is Joubad-gan. This City lies in 85.
degrees. 48. min. of Longitude, and 34. degrees. 30. min. of Latitude. The Air is
wholesome, but extremely hot, as I said before: for it scalds in the Summer,
there being no place in all Persia where the Sun scorches more violently. It
abounds in all manner of Victuals and Fruits, particularly in Pistachios. The
people also are very courteous and civil.

The most part of Topographers will have Com to be the same place which Ptolomy
calls Gauna, or Guriana. And his Translator asserts it to be the same with
Choama, tho others will have it to be Arbacte, or Hecatompyle. Several
Histories of Persia likewise relate this City to be very Ancient; and that it
was built by Tahmas, when the Sun entered into Gemini; that it was twelve
thousand Cubits in compass, and as big as Babylon. I must confess there is no
doubt but it was very large; for there are many Ruins and Footsteps of
Habitations to be seen round about it: but it is much to be questioned whether
it were so Ancient as the Reign of Tahmas. Other Persian Histories deduce its
Original from the first Age of Mahumetism; and affirm that in the time of
Mahomet there were in that place seven large Villages, and that in the 83 Year
of the Hegyra, Abdalla Saydon, Califfe, coming into that Country with an Army,
joined those seven Villages together with new Buildings, enclosed 'em with a
Wall, and made 'em one City; and that afterward this City increased to that
degree, that it became twice as large as Constantinople. For Mousa the Son of
that Abdalla came from Basra to Com, and brought with him the Opinions of Haly,
which they call the Religion of Shia or Imamism: which was always professed in
that place even to Martyrdom, nor would the People suffer any other; and
therefore Temur-leng being of a contrary Belief, utterly destroyed the City.
Nevertheless by degrees they repaired one part of it again; but it did not
begin to reflourish until this last Age, and since that Sephy was there
interred. Abas the Second, his Son and Successor, banished thither such Persons
as were fallen from his Favor, to the end they might pray to God for his
person, and give thanks to heaven for their Lives which he had spared 'em.
Soliman at present reigning had made use of it, to the same purpose, sending
thither all those whom he thought convenient to punish with Exile; and the
great number of exiled persons of Quality it was, that has restored the City to
that Splendour wherein now it stands. In the Year 1634. an Inundation of Waters
ruined a thousand Houses: and it is but three Years since, that an Accident of
the same nature had like to have ruined it all together. For two thousand
Houses, and all the Ancient Houses were laid level with the Earth. The Name is
pronounced with a double m, as if we should write the word Komm. It is also
called Darel mouveheldin, that is to say, The Habitation of pious People. The
Governor bears the Title of Darogue or Mayor.

The 15. we staid at Comm to rest our Horses, and departed the 16. at six a
Clock in the Evening. We traveled four Leagues over delightful Plains as level
as could be, fertile, and well stored with Villages: and yet the Soil of Com
appeared Kachan
Kachan
to be somewhat dry. We found the people every where, were treading the Corn,
the Harvest being already reaped. We lodged at Cassem-abad, a Town consisting
of about three hundred Houses, belonging to the Queen Mother, as her Dowry.

The 17. we traveled five Leagues cross the Plain. We found it all the way
covered with a moving Sand, dry, without either Villages or Water. We lodged in
a place called Abshirin, or Sweet Water, because there is in that place a
Fountain of fair Water and Cisterns in the midst of six Carevanserais.

The 18. our Journey reached to Cashan, where we arrived, after we had
traveled seven Leagues, steering toward the South, over the Plain already
mentioned: and at the end of two Leagues, we found the Soil delightful and
fertile, stored with large Villages. We passed through several, and about half
the way left upon the left hand, at a near distance, a little City called
Sarou, seated at the foot of a Mountain.

The City of Cashan is seated in a large Plain, near a high Mountain. It is a
League in length, and a quarter of a League in breadth; extending it self in
length from East to West. When you see it afar off, it resembles a half Moon,
the Corners of which look toward both those Parts of the Heavens. The Draught
is no true Representation, either of the Bigness or the Figure; as having been
taken without a true Prospect. And the reason was the Indisposition of my
Painter, who being extremely tired with the former days Travel, was not able to
stir out of the Inn, where we lay. All that he could do was to get upon the
Terrass, and take the Draught from thence.

There is no River that runs by the City, only several Canals conveyed under
Ground, with many deep Springs and Cisterns as there are at Com. It is
encompassed with a double Wall, flanked with round Towers, after the Ancient
Fashion; to which there belong five Gates. One to the East, called the Royal
Gate; as being near the Royal Palace, that stands without the Walls. Another
called the Gate of Fieu; because it leads directly to a great Village, which
bears that name. Another between the West and North, called the Gate of the
House of Melic; as being near to a Garden of Pleasure, which was planted by a
Lord of that Name. The two other Gates are opposite to the South-East, and
North-East. The one called Com Gate, and the other Ispahan Gate; be cause they
lead to those Cities. The City and the Suburbs, which are more beautiful then
the City, contain six thousand five hundred Houses, as the People assure us;
forty Mosques, three Colleges, and about two hundred Sepulchers of the
Descendants of Aly. The Principal Mosque stands right against the great Market
Place, having one Tower, that serves for a Steeple, built of Free Stone. Both
the Mosque and the Tower are the Remainders of the Splendor of the first
Mahumetans, who invaded Persia.

The Houses of Cashan are built of Earth and Bricks, of which there few that
are remarkable. But the Bazars and Baths are lovely Structures, well built and
well kept. There are also several Inns. That which is called the Royal Inn
without the City, joining to the Gate that looks toward the East, is the
fairest not only in Cashan, but in all Persia. It is four square, every front
within-side being two hundred Geometrical Paces, and two Stories with an
Antichamber, or Hollowness below that runs all-along the length ofthe two
Fronts, raised about the height of a man above the Court, and four Inches below
the level of the Chamber. It is eight foot deep, paved with white Marble,
almost as transparent as Pophiry. The Stories on the sides contain fifteen
Chambers of the same Figure: the two others had but ten, with a large one in
the middle, having five Chambers. The other Apartments consisted of one
Chamber, fifteen foot long and ten broad, high and vaulted, with a Chimney in
the middle, and a square Portico before, ten foot wide, covered with a half
Duomo, with a Contrivance for a Chimney on each side; which was for the
Servants to lodge in. The second Story was contrived like that below, with a
Baluster four foot high, that let in the the Light, and ran round the
Structure. In the Geometrical Part of the Draught, you may perceive a Hexagonal
in the midst of the Entrance, every Front of which is a large Shop, where are
to be sold all manner of Belly-Timber, Wood and Forage. The Entrance is under
a high and magnificent Portal, adorned with Mosaic Work, like all the rest of
the Buildding; and upon the sides runs a Portico, where you may lie in the day
time as conveniently and as pleasantly, as in the Inn it self. The Fountain in
the middle of the Court is raised above five foot: and the Brims of it are four
foot broad, for the Convenience of those that will say their Prayers after they
have performed their Purifications.

THE GREAT INN IN CASHAN.


There is also somewhat that does not appear in the Draught, that is to say,
the hinder part of the Carevanseray, which is worthy to be observed in this
place. For it consists of very large Stables, with places for Servants and
Luggage, built almost according to the same Symmetry, as the Apartments already
mentioned; at least as to the Form and Bigness of Storehouses, and Lodgings
for the Poor, and the Country people that bring their Goods to sell; and the
large Gardens, that lie behind this lovely Palace of a Caravanseray: no less
famous for its Founder Abas the Great, who caused this sumptuous Structure to
be erected. Near adjoining to it stands the Palace Royal; and over against it,
another designed for the Lodging of Ambassadors. Both the one and the other,
with very large Gardens behind 'em, were built at the Charges of that Renowned
Monarch: besides that there is in the middle a void Space for their Carousels,
and other Exercises on Horseback.

The Wealth and Trade of Cashan consists in the Manifactuary of all sorts of
Silk, Stufs, and Tissues of Gold and Silver. There is not made in any place of
Persia more Satin, Velvet, Tabby, Plain Tissue, and with Flowers of Silk, or
Silk mingled with Gold and Silver, then is made in this City, and the Parts
round about it: so that one single Borrough in this Territory, contains a
thousand Houses of Silk-Weavers. That which is called Aron, seeming at a
distance to be a good big City, as containing in it no less than two thousand
Houses, and six hundred Gardens: It is about two Leagues from Cashan.

The City of Cashan stands in a good Air, but violently hot, insomuch that it
is ready to stifle ye in the Summer. Which extreme Heat is occasioned by its
Situation; as lying near a high Mountain opposed to the South. The
Reverberation of which so furiously heats the place in the Dog Days, that it
scalds again. Besides, there is one greater Inconvenience more troublesome and
more dangerous, which is the great number of Scorpions that infest those parts
at all times, especially when the Sun is in Scorpio: Travelers are terribly
threatened by 'em: And yet for my part, (thanks be to God) I never saw any in
all the time that I passed through the Country. Neither could I hear of any
great Mischief that they had done. It is said, that Abas the Great's
Astrologers in the Year 1623. invented a Talisman to deliver the City from
those Vermin; since which time there has not appeared so many as before. But
there is no Credit to be given to these idle stories; no more then to that same
other, that if Travelers stopping at Cashan, are but careful at their entrance
into their Inns, to speak these words, Scorpious, I am a Stranger, meddle not
with me, no Scorpion will come near 'em. For these are meet Tales. However
certain it is, that their sting is very dangerous: And therefore it has given
occasion to an Imprecation frequently in the Mouths of the Persians, May the
Scorpions of Cashan sting thy Golls. However there is no Body, but has by him
several sovereign Remedies against the sting of this Creature. This City lies
in 35. degrees. 35. min. of Lat. and 86. degrees. of Longitude. Cattle and wild Fowl
are not very plentiful in those parts; but it abounds in Corn and Fruits. They
carry from thence to Ispahan, the first Melons and Water-Melons which are eaten
in that City; which they furnish with vast numbers, as long as the season for
Fruit endures.

Several European Authors hold Cashan to be same place, which the Ancient Greek
Authors call Ambrodux, or else that which was called Ctesiphon of the Country
of the Parthians. The Persian Historiansaver, that it owes its Restoration to
Zebd-leca-ton the Wife of Haron-Reshid, Califf of Bagdat. They observe
moreover, that this Princess was a Virgin when she first began to build the
City, and that for that reason she laid the first Stone when the Sun entered
Virgo. She gave it the name of Casan in honor of Casan her Grandfather, the
Grandchild of Haly, who di'd and was enterr'd in that Place; of which there
happened some alteration afterward, through the error of poining: For it is
well known to people versed in the Eastern Languages, that such a mistake so
easily committed, changes the letter S, into that which is called Shin.
Tamerlan, being become Master of this City, spared it in a Humor, as they say,
when he had destroyed almost all the other Cities of Persia. It is called by
another name Darel-mou-menin, or the Habitation of the Faithful; either because
the Descendants from Aly, and his first Followers made it a Sanctuary and
Retreat during the Persecutions of the Califfs, who would not embrace his
Opinions, but held a contrary belief; or else because a great number of the
Descendants of that Califf lie there enterr'd Their Graves are confused among
those that lie buried round bout; the Monuments that were erected over 'em
having bin beaten down by the Turks and Tartars, that invaded those places; and
sacrificed those structures to the honor of their Saints, the grand Enemies
and Persecutors of the Descendants of Aly. They made search for these Graves,
after the Califf became Master of the City again: but how easily they may be
deceived in this search is no difficult thing to conjecture. For in the Year
1667. they found out one that put the whole City into confusion. For they
affirmed the Grave upon which a large Monument had been built a hundred years
before, out of an assurance that one of Aly's descendants was buried there, to
be the Sepulcher of one Yuzbec, a Preacher. The People enraged that they had
worshipped for a whole Age together a Place in their Opinion more worthy of
Execration, ran in a heat to pull down the Monument, dug down the Earth that
was at the top, and round about it, and made a common road over it. But what
happened afterward is much more Remarkable. And that is this, that one of the
great Persian Doctors undertook to write a Treatise, on purpose; that there was
never any such person as Yuzbec buried there. Upon which the People again
offended to see themselves made the sport of their Doctors fancies, have left
the place as indifferent, and will neither pollute, nor give it Reverence. The
Governor of Cashan carries the Title of a Darogue, as do all the other
Governors of the City's of Parthia. A Lord that was one of my good Friends,
called Rustan-bec, Brother to several Governors Provinces had the Government of
that City, the first time that I passed through it. The two years of his
Government being ended, the City was so well satisfied in his conduct, that
they sent some of their Members to petition that he might be continued two
years longer, but their Petition was rejected, as being contrary to custom to
continue such Officers longer then the usual time.

The 19. our Horses were so tired that we were forced to stay at Cashan. We
departed the 29. and traveled seven Leagues; the two first cross the Plain
where the City was built: the rest over a Mountain which was of a good height,
but not difficult to ascend. At the top we met with a very large and fair
Caravanseray, and a little further with a wide Lake, which serves for a
Receptacle to receive the melted Snow and Rain that falls from the Parts
thereabouts; from whence they let go the water into the Plain of Cashan, as
they have need.

Abas the Great, raised up two strong Dams about it, to the end it might hold
more Water; and to prevent the Water from wasting. He also caused several
Causeys to be made in the same place for the Convenience of Travelers. Being
descended from the Mountain, you enter into a deep Valley, very narrow and
about a League in length: all which space of Ground is stored with Houses,
Vineyards, and Gardens so close one to another, that it seems to be but one
Village of a League in length. Several delightful and clean Streams derive
their Springs from that Plain, which preserve the Air wonderfully cool all the
Summer; so that it is a place the most charming and delightful that a man shall
meet with in that scorching Climate. For the Sun has so little Power there,
that the Roses were not then blown; the Corn and Fruit were also then green and
but half ripe; and yet they had reaped their Harvest, and had eaten ripe Fruit
a Cashan at month before. We lodged at the end of that lovely Plain, in a
Caravanseray there built, which they called Carou.

Some of our own modern Authors assert, That this Valley was the Place where
Darius was murdered, which is not improbable, for that the History observes,
that Bessus and Nabarzanes, after they had committed that Treacherous Murder
upon the Prince, took several Roads, the one for Hyrcania, and the other for
Bactriana; and Cashan is exactly the Place that leads directly to those two
Provinces.

The 21, we traveled eight Leagues; two along the foot of the Mountains
between which that Valley lies; and six in a pleasant Vale, stored with a great
number of Villages: where we met with several Caravanseray's upon the Road; we
alighted at one that was larger and fairer then the rest, called Aga-Kemal,
from the name of a rich Merchant that built it, and several other public
Structures about Ispahan.

The 22. our Journeys was not above five Leagues in the same Plain, where
Aga-Kemal stands. We traveled so hard, that by nine a Clock at night we
arrived at Moutshacour, which is a large Village consisting of about five
hundred Houses, where there are several Inns and Gardens, and great plenty of
Water,

The 23. we set forward late, to the end we might not come to Ispahan before
day. We traveled the nine Leagues, which we had to ride, over lovely Plains,
still directing our Course to the South as in our former Journeys: and passed
by so many Caravanserays and Villages, drawing near that great City, that we
thought our selves in the Suburbs, two hours before we got thither. We entered
the City by five a Clock in the Morning, all in good health, Thanks be to God.

The end of the First Book.
THE INDEX.
A. ABas the Great, ruins the Frontiers of Persia. 348 Abca's, a thieving
people. 77 Abrener, peopled with Roman Catholics. 346 Adoption, the manner of
it Mengrelia, etc, by the women. 146 Akalzike, the Description of it. 168
Alexander K. of Imiretta. 136 Alexander Son of Levan Prince of Mingrelia. 136
Amazons, 187 etc. Anarguia, a Town in Mingrelia. 111, 116 Arakilvank, a famous
Armenian Monastery. Araxes, the River. 347, 348 Archylus, Son of Shanavas Can,
139 crowned K. of Imiretta by his Father. 140 Armenia divided and bounded, 242
etc. Armenian Traditions fabulous. 252 Aron. 413 Author, The Author's departure
from Paris. p. 1. His Motives for the second Voyage to Persia. 2. Made the King
of Persia's Merchant. ib. He designs for the Black-Sea and Colchos. 16, etc.
His distress at Isgaour. 108. He sends an Express to the Theatin Superior, 109.
His Answer, ibid. The Author's Surprise, 110. The Marketplace fired, 111. The
Superior comes to him, and carries him off, 112. Amingreham Slave draws
Compassion from the Author, 115. The French Ambassadors Letter in behalf of the
Author, 116. He arrives at the mouth of the River Astolphus, 116. He takes a
Lodging in Anarghia, 117. Visited by a lay Theatin, ibid. A Lady furnishes him
with Provisions, 118. He is advised to pretend himself a Capuchin, ibid. He
departs from Anargy, 119. The Occasions of his Misfortunes, ibid. Visited by
the Princess of Mingrelia, 121. She invites him to Dinner, 122. The
Consequences, ibid. 123, etc. He buys his Goods, 125. He is robbed the by
Mingrelians, 126, etc. He flies upon a Rumor of the Turks being entered into
Mingrelia, 131. The Authors Servant finds a great parcel of Jewels which he
gave for lost, 125, etc. He demands Justice of the Prince, 130. He is robbed a
second time by a Mingrelian, 148. He resolves for Georgia, 151, etc. Taxed 20
Crowns by Sabatar, 152. His usage at Gony, 158. His Goods arrive safe at
Mingrelia, 161, 162, etc. Advises with the Capuchins at Gory, 170. His Journey
from Gory to Cotalis, 173, etc. His dispute with one of his Servants there,
178, He waits upon the King of Imiretta, 180. He returns to Gori, 183. His
Reception by the Governor of Tifflis, 224, etc. By the Governor of Irivan, 254,
etc. Azerbeyan, 350.
B. BAcrat Mirza, King of Imiretta, 136 Baptism of the Mingrelians, p. 101
Basha of Akalzike invades Imiretta, dethrones one, and set up another King, 147
Bichni in Armenia and Monastery belonging to it, 244 Black-Sea, the Description
of it, 155
C. CAffa described, 68 The Kingdom of Kaket subject to the Persians, 206
Carthuel, a Province of Persia, 188 Casbin, the Description of it, 378 Cashan,
the Description of it, 411 Cassem-abad 411 Cherks, a savage people. 76 An
Account of Christian Corsaires in the Archipelago, 3. The grounds of the Candy
War, 53, etc. The Caous, a sort of Giants, 371 Carashiman, a fair Village in
Persia, 371 Casbin described, 378, etc. Colchis, the Description of it, 77,
etc. Com, the Description of it, 390 Cotatis described, 177 Cotzia betrays
Darejan, 146. Slain himself by Treachery, ibid Couh-Telisme, a famous Mountain,
389 Coolom-sha, the King's Slave, 257 Their Employment, ibid. Cuperli Mahamet
Basha, made Grand Visir, 15. He resents the French Ambassadors slights, 16. The
most remarkable Passages of his Life, 57, etc. Cupri kent, 239
D. DAdian, the Title of the Prince of Mingrelia, He is guilty of the Robbery
committed upon the Author, 131 Darejan, Daughter to the last King of Georgia
would have married her Son in Law, 136. Her wicked Pranks to continue her self
in the Dominion, 137, etc. She marries Vactangle one of her Lords, 137 which
causes a Revolt of the rest, ibid. Bitray'd, 138. her tragic End, 145 Darejan,
Levans Aunt and Wife, 134, She sets up her Son Vomeki, 136 Deria-shirin, or the
Lake of Irivan described. 247 Dily-jan, and the Country about it, 240
E. EBber, the Description of it, 377 Echmiazin, or the Monastery of the three
Churches, 249 Echmouil, a place famous for the Pilgrimages of the Persians, 387
F. FEast, the order of a Nuptial Feast in Persia, 226 Two Friars Commissioners
for the Holy Land; their claim at the Port, 39, etc. Their large Offers to the
Turk, and the Reasons, 45
G. GEnoeses maintain a Consul at Smyrna, 11 George, Prince of Libardian, 134
his Wife is taken from him, ibid. He dies for grief, 135 Georgia, the
Description of it, 186, etc. the Religion of the Country, 192, Conquered by
Ishmael the the Great, 193. The History of Georgia ibid, etc, Revolts from the
Persian and conquered by Rustan Kan, 203 Gonie described, 185 Gori described,
188 Guriel, the Description of it p, 105 its tribute to the Turks, 106
H. MOnsieur de la Hay French Ambassador at the Port, 15, 16, 16, 19,
recalled, 20, Monsieur de la Hay the Son, Ambassador 21, 22, 23, 24, etc,
recalled, 28 The best Horses in Persia, where bred, 370 Huns, whence
originally, 106
I. I Miretta, the Description of it, 106 its Tribute to the Turks, ibid, The
Title of the Prince, 107, descended from David, 108 Impositions upon the French
at Constantinople 10 Joseph, the Prince of Mingrelia's Brother, endeavors
Levan's Assassination, 135, his Eyes pulled out, 136 Irivan described, 245
Isgaour, the Description of it, 108 Julfa the Old, otherwise Ariamene, 347
K. KEsil-beuse, a River, 374 Koskeirou, a famous Inn, 385 Kotzia, a Lord of
Imiretta, he procures the murder of Vomeki, 140
L. A Copy of the Viceroy of Georgia's haughty Letter, 230 A Letter of
Recommendation from a Persian Grandee, 222, another, 367 Levan Dadian, Prince
of Imiretta, the Story of him 132, etc.
M. MArant, the Description of it, 351. The place where the Ark rested not far
from it, 352 Marriages among the Mingrelians, p, 102 Matrimony in Persia, 295
Media, the Description of it, 349 Miana, a Persian Town, 372 Mingrelians, their
opinion of Confession, 102, of Ordination, ibid. they understand not the Bible,
p. 103, Their Fasts, ibid. their Opinion of the Sign of the Cross, ibid. their
Prayers, ibid. their Sacrifices, ibid, they work on Sundays, 104, their chief
Festivals, ibid, their Mourning, ibid, their Tribute to the Turks, 107, the
Title of their Princes, 107, descended from David, 108, fearful of danger, 152
Popish Missionaries slighted in Georgia, 211 The Mountain where Noah's Ark
rested, 252 Moutshacour, a large Village. 416 Music not used in the Mohammedan
Religion, 229
N. NAcchivan, the Description of it, 346, The Deputy Governor uncivil to the
Author, 349 Turkish Navigation, 66 M. Noyntel, French Ambassador at the Port,
28, etc, his Negotiation frustrated, 44
O. OTta Chekaize betrays Q. Darejan, 138 Oil Sacred, called Myrone, p. 101
P. PArthia, the Air, and Description of the Country. 373 The Vice roy of
Georgias Pass, 236 The Governor of Irivan's Pass, 342 Mirza-Thair's Pass. 368
The King of Persia's Patent 236 The Patriarch of Armenia; a Story of his
Extravagance. 333. ill used by the Governor of Irivan. 365 Pervare, a Village
of Persia. 372 The River Phasis. 156 Policy of the Turks surpasses the
Europeans. 51 The Plain supposed to be the place where Darius was murdered 416
Pride of the Georgians and Eastern people. 230
Q. SEnior Quirini Agent for the Venetians at the Port. 50
R. REy, formerly a vast City in Persia. 387 A great Robbery committed upon the
Persian Caravan. 363 Roman Catholics in Persia, 346. An Ambassador from the
Pope in their behalf. ibid. how used in Georgia, 350 Rustan-Can, his virtues 366
S. SAbatar, Owner of the Fortress where the Author secured himself. 149, etc.
Sapias, the Description of it. 119 Sava, a City of Persia described. 386
Scorpions, where troublesome in Persia. 413 Sephi-Kouli-Kan, Governor of
Irivan. 256 Mahamed Sephi's Letter of Recommendation. 343 Segs-abad. 385 Mr.
Sese the French Ambassador farms the Customs of Constantinople and Smyrna. p.
10 Shaboni, the fairest Grape in Persia. 380 Shanavas Can, Vice roy of Georgia
139. he is offered the Kingdom of Imiretta for his Son Archylus, if he would
expel the Mingrelians. ib. He invades Imiretta. 140 Shemashe, 188. the place
where Noah dwelt. 189 Sirsham, a Parthian Inn. 374 Slaves, at what rate sold in
Mingrelia. 114 Several Persian Songs. 402 Stones, a wonderful Pile. 371
Sophian, thought the ancient Sophia of Media. 352 King of Spain, his health
drank by the Governor of Tifflis. 230 The Governor of Tifflis how akin to him.
ibid. Sultanie, the Description of it. 375 The Sun troublesome where the Snow
lies all day. 244 Suram in Georgia. 188
T TAuris, the Descriptivn of it. 352, etc. Mount Taurus described. 166
Theatins, their coming into Mingrelia. 119. Their little progress in the
Country. 120. How they baptize in that Country. ibid. They sing and play before
the Governor of Tifflis at a Wedding. 229 Tifflis, described. 208, etc.
Toll-gatherers in Persia how regulated. 372 Trade of the English at Smyrna. 4.
Hollanders Trade at Smyrna. 7. French trade. ibid Tshapars, or Persian
Curriers. 257 Transubstantiation, the Mingrelians Opinion of it. p. 101
Traveling, the manner of it in Persia. 384 Turks easily cheated. 9 Turkman, a
Village of Persia. 372
V. VActangle married by Darejan, and crowned King of Imiretta. 137. He is
betrayed, and looses his Eyes, 137, 138. Carried Prisoner into Georgia. 140
Venetians maintain a Consul at Smyrna. 11 The Virgins Castle. 374 Viaticum
Bread, how used and esteemed among the Mingrelians. p. 101 Vomeki, set up by
Darejan dispoil'd of his Principality. 136 Vomeki King of Imiretta murdered. 140
W. WIne in Persia the best. 380 Witzosky, Polish Agent at the Port. 48, etc.
Women in Georgia not confined. 226
Z. ZErigan, a City in Parthia. 374 Zetou-lou, a River.



FINIS.
THE CORONATION OF SOLOMON III.

THE PRESENT King of Persia.

By Sir JOHN CHARDIN.

The CORONATION of SOLOMON The Third of that Name And the Two hundred thirty
fourth King of Persia.
SUch was the End of Habas the second of Glorious Memory, that his Death may
well be looked upon to have been a Judgment of Heaven upon that Potent Empire
which he all along so prudently governed; and as a Misfortune that at the same
time befell several Millions of People that were under his Dominion. The
Persians never speak of him, but they give him all the Encomiums of a
Magnanimous Prince, whose Courage and good Conduct had already contributed, in
an extraordinary manner, to the Reestablishment of their Country: and who had
questionless restored it to its ancient Splendour, and to a perfect Prosperity,
had his Life been of a longer continuance. In a word, they had great reason to
promise themselves, that he would have rendered both the one and the other
Diuturnal as well as Universal, in regard his Heroic Virtues had Crowned him
with Victory before he had arrived to the Age of nineteen Years, by the
Conquest of the City and whole Province of Kaud-dar, bordering upon the utmost
Confines of the whole Kingdom; and that too, from an Enemy no less Powerful
than the Indian Monarch; and afterward when he defended it against the whole
Force of the same Prince, Mustered together in one Body to regain it. The same
Virtues they were that made him formidable to his Potent Neighbors, the Duke
of Muscovy, the Monarch of the Tartars, and the Puissant King of India himself:
Who being discouraged by the Ill success of his first Enterprise of which we
have already given an account, would never venture any more to molest him.

The same transcendent Virtues in a Breast so truly Royal, even at the very time
that Death surprised him, spurred him on to extend his Dominions toward the
North and East. And the Preparations which he had made for that purpose, gave
the whole World occasion to fear that his Design would infallibly succeed. The
Christians, who had the happiness to live under his Subjection, to this day
lament in private his Decease, not only as a King, but as a Parent. For his
Justice and his Goodness would never suffer any violence to be offered them, or
that they should be disturbed for their Religion, which they had free Liberty
to exercise during his Reign, as being a Person in whom those Royal Virtues
were steadfast and unalterable: which always prevented the Fury of the Cruel and
Impious Mahometans from molesting the Peace and Tranquillity of their Lives or
Estates. And hence it is that Strangers still and ever will bewail his loss and
bear in Remembrance his more than ordinary Endowments; as He that by by his
Affability and Liberality invited them continually to his Court and Cities
under his Obedience, and employed a great part of the Tribute which he drew
from his Subjects in the purchase of their costly Merchandise which they
brought along with them, paying both generously and punctually what they in
reason demanded.

Toward the Conclusion of that account which we have given of the Life of this
Great Prince, we have shown that the cause of his Death was that same nauseous
Distemper which good Manners will not permit to be named, and of which the
Pollution is yet more unseemly; and which notwithstanding all the Endeavors of
Art to conceal it, displays it self in the Faces of the Diseased, and publishes
with Ignominy their frequent Converse with lewd Women: We have also told you
that his Death happened in one of his Houses of Pleasure seated in the Province
of Teber Estoon, two Leagues from Damagaan, according to the Persian
Geographers lying in 78. Degrees, and 15. Minutes of Longitude, and 37.
degrees, 20. Minutes of Latitude, twelve days Journey from the Capital City of
the Empire, and nine days Journey from the Caspian Sea: And this house of
Pleasure inviting several of the Country People to settle round about it, was
the Reason that at length it grew to be a considerable Village, to which the
Persians gave the Name of Cosroe-Abaad, or the Habitation of Cosroes, who was a
Prince, formerly Governor of the Province where this Village is situated; and
the same that built this Palace of Pleasure, in the Reign of Sefi the first,
Grandfather to the present King. But not long after this Cosroes falling into
Disgrace, the King confiscated his House and all his Estate after he had put
the Governor himself to Death, of which I shall say no more at present, as
being a Subject not proper for this Place.

We have also in the same Relation set down the Time of this Prince's
unfortunate Decease, which happened upon the 26. of the Moon which they call
Rabeia el Atier de l'Egere 1077. or according to the Christian Account, upon
the 25. of September, 1666. about four a clock in the Morning, at what time the
first glimpse of Daylight-Dawn began to appear, Eternal darkness closing the
Eyes of that Great Monarch at the very Moment that Day began to give Light to
his Subjects in their several Callings.

We have also farther related, how that an Hour before, the Principal Eunuchs
observing in the Prince's Eyes the Signs of Approaching Death, thought it fit
to put out of the Room all the Women that were with him, for fear lest at the
moment of his last Gasp, the Transports of their Grief, and their loud
Outcries, might discover a Secret, which it was so necessary at that time to
conceal. To that purpose they persuaded them that the King was asleep, and
desired them therefore to retire for fear of disturbing his Repose. This had
been prudently done, if the persons that seemed to be so wise, had had
sufficient Resolution and Courage themselves. But at the Fatal Moment they
could not themselves forbear to cast forth those loud sighs, which betrayed the
Truth to the Ladies, so that they had presently alarmed the whole Camp with
their Piercing Cries and Lamentations, had not the Eunuchs besought them to
forbear but for a while, at a time when the welfare of the Empire lay at Stake.
To which the disconsolate Princesses submitted as much as the Importunity of
their Grief would give them leave.

And here we are to observe by the way, that the Reason why the Women upon such
occasions are so deeply afflicted, is not only for the loss of the King their
Husband, but for the loss of that shadow of Liberty which they enjoyed during
his Life. For no sooner is the Prince laid in his Tomb, but they are all shut
up in particular Houses, pleasant enough it is true for their Situation, and
where they want for nothing, but what is all in all to them, their only
happiness in this World, Conversation with Men. Which is a Satisfaction so
severely debarred them, that they are not allowed so much as the sight of a Man.

The Eunuchs therefore having consulted among themselves, in the midst of their
fears lest the Crowd of overhasty Visitants pressing in at unseasonable hours,
should awaken suspicious Curiosity, resolved to stay till the Sun was up, and
then to give Notice of the Kings Death to the two Chief Ministers of State, who
were two Illustrious Personages, that had had the Management of Affairs under
the deceased King, with an Authority almost equal to his own. To which purpose
they deputed two of their Society, the Mehter, whose Office in the Persian
Court answers to that of our High-Chamberlain, according to the meaning of the
Arabian word, which signifies the Highest. The other deputed Eunuch was called
the Aga-Kafour, a Person already well in years, and the chiefest of those that
had the Custody of the Kings Treasury; as to whom the Prince had more
particularly entrusted all his Jewels.

These two came to the chief Ministers Lodgings, as if they had been sent by
his Majesty, caused them to put forth all the Women out of the Room, and then
informed them of the Death of Habas the Second, giving them an exact and
punctual Account; which was, That the day before, toward the Evening, after
those Ministers were retired from the Kings Presence, the Prince had eaten
heartily certain Sweetmeats which his Wives had provided; after which he
seemed to be much better than he had been for some time before, till about Nine
of the Clock at Night; at what time of a sudden he fell into a Swoon, whereupon
they ran to him and laid him upon his Bed: That about Eleven of the Clock he
came again to himself, not without some disturbance of his Senses. That after
that his Pains augmented, not having received any Benefit from two Medicines
that he had taken by the Direction of his Physicians: That about Two of the
Clock in the Morning the Violence of his Distemper slackned; but returning
about Three, put him into a Delirium that lasted about half an Hour: but the
next half hour he took some Rest. But toward four in the Morning, his Eyes then
faintly rolling in his Head, gave evident signs of Deaths Approach: so that at
the same instant he expired without any other Motion, that they could say, they
perceived him die. Nor indeed had he testified during the whole Course of his
Sickness that he had the least Apprehension or Fear of Death: Insomuch that he
had left no Orders either as to the Disposal of his Body, nor as touching his
Family nor Successor, only in the height of his last Fit, turning his Head
toward the Public Apartment, he uttered with some kind of Fury these words; I
know that you have poisoned me, but you shall drink a good share of the Poison;
for I leave behind me a Son who after my Death shall devour your very Hearts.

This News did not a little surprise the two Ministers, who did not believe the
Kings Sickness had been so mortal, or at least that it would have killed him so
soon: and they had just reason, both, to bewail their loss; but the second
displayed more visible signs of his Grief, as losing infinitely much more than
his Companion.

For Habas, observing a Piece of Policy not usual among the Persians, resolved
to counter-balance the Power of his Prime Minister, believing it would be of
advantage to the Government, that Emulation should render his Ministers more
intent upon their Duty: Which was the reason that he advanced this second
Person to that Degree, that he was nothing inferior in Authority to the first,
and put into his Hands the most important Affairs of the Kingdom.

It was very probable that Habas's Successor, would not be of his Fathers
judgment, but that all things would return to their first Method. Which most
sensibly touched the second Minister, who saw himself tumbling into a more
Private Condition; and that there was no higher Employment to be expected for
him, unless it were the Superintendency of the Kings Household; which was
nothing comparable to the present Offices which he enjoyed.

So that he could not forbear at first from manifesting the Excess of his
Grief, but the Persian Lords being accustomed to dissemble, he soon composed
his Countenance and moderated his Sorrows. Which having done, he told the
Eunuch, that the Grandees of the Empire should be privately called together,
and that he would forthwith appoint both Time and Place for their Meeting,
which was the Answer also of the first Minister to the High Chamberlain.

In the mean time the two chief Physicians Mirza-Sahid and Mirza-Koudchek his
Brother, considerable Lords in the Persian Court (for in the Eastern Countries
Physicians are much more highly esteemed and advanced than in Europe,) these
Lords, I say, coming to the Door of the Royal Apartment for the Women,
presently after the two great Eunuchs were gone, there had notice of the Kings
Death, and consequently of their own Ruin. For that according to the Custom of
that Empire, the Life of the two chief Physicians, or at least their Fortune
and Estates depend upon the Life of the Prince whom they attended in his
Sickness. For the same Week that the King died, they are exiled to some remote
and prefixed Place, whither they are not suffered to carry any more of their
Estates along with them than will suffice for a bare Maintenance; the rest is
Confiscated. Which was also their lot, as shall be said in due place.

But neither the loss of their Master, nor of their Liberty had so disordered
their judgments, as to hinder them from consulting their own preservation at
such a ticklish Conjuncture. Only one thing disturbed them more than all the
rest, and that was the Report of the Kings last words, when he complained of
being Poisoned. For there was enough in those words to condemn them to the
severest of Torments, if the succeeding Prince should give credit to those last
Speeches of a Dying Monarch.

To rid themselves therefore from these Fears, they resolved between
themselves, to throw the Election upon the Youngest of all Habas's Sons, who
being as yet but an Infant, would in all likelihood continue a long time under
the Tuition of his Mother, and his Ministers, from whom they could not expect
to suffer any thing that was Fatal or Dreadful.

And here we must observe that Habas the second left behind him two Sons; or at
least I never heard that he left any more. Nor is it known whether he left any
Daughters or no. For what is done in the Women's Apartment is a Mystery
concealed even from the Grandees and Prime Ministers. Or if they know any
thing, it is merely upon the account of some particular Relation or dependence
which the Secret has to some peculiar Affair which of necessity must be
imparted to their Knowledge. For my part I have spared neither for pains nor
cost to sift out the Truth: But I could never discover any more, only that they
believed he never left any Daughter behind him that lived. A man may walk a
Hundred days one after another by the House where the Women are, and yet know
no more what is done there, than at the farther end of Tartary.

Now of these two Sons of Habas the Eldest who was called Sofie-Mirza, was then
entering into his one and twentieth Year; being Born in the year of the Egire,
1057. for the superstition of the Persians will not let us know the Month or
the Day. Their Addiction to Astrology is such that they carefully conceal the
Moments of their Prince's Birth, to prevent the Casting their Nativities, where
they might meet perhaps with something which they should be unwilling to know.
His Father begot him at Eighteen years of Age enamoured of a Circassian Slave,
or Cherkes, in the Persian Language; whose extraordinary Beauty and rare
Endowments so won the Affection of that Monarch that she was the first of all
his Women that he chose for a Wife; For which reason during her Husbands Life
she was called Nekaat Kanum, or the Lawful Duchess; tho there were also other
Women, which were his Lawful Wives according to the Law and Custom of that
Country.

This Eldest Son, according to Custom was bred up in the Women's Palace, and
committed to the Care of certain Eunuchs under the Eye of his Mother and his
Nurse. who was a Lady of great Quality, and the Wife of Mustaufie-Elmemalek,
which according to the force of the Persian words, signifies a Watcher over
Kingdoms. There he was bred up with all the Tenderness and Pomp, that his High
Birth required, and enjoyed all the Liberty that could be allowed to a Person
of his Quality; which was to go up and down over all that spacious Palace where
he pleased himself: for to go further into the Men's Apartments is by no means
permitted those young Princes.

When he arrived at the Age of seventeen Years, an Accident befell him that
rendered his Confinement much more close. For it happened that an Eunuch
brought him some Pieces of Cloth of Tissue, at what time the Prince being of a
haughty Temper, and not thinking them Rich enough, rejected them with very
scornful and slighting Language: nor was he better pleased when it was told him
that the Pieces were sent him by the Order of the King his Father. Which being
carried back and perhaps aggravated to the jealous Monarch; his Majesty
believing that the overmuch Liberty which was allowed the young Prince did but
serve to heighten his Arrogance and augment his natural Pride, confined him to
the remotest Part of all the Palace.

Some persons were of opinion that he would have caused his Eyes to have been
put out. But when they found that the Walls of the Place to which he was
confined were ordered to be raised, the more Intelligent Sort believed that the
King would not proceed to that Extremity of Rigor; for that he would not have
been so careful to prevent the Escape of one that was Blind, whose Misfortune
would have been sufficient to render him incapable to attempt any Enterprise of
that nature.

However when the King was setting forward for Mazendaran in the year 1665.
according to our Computation, his Actions were such, that even the Grandees and
most Politic Courtiers began to suspect that he had then determined the
Dreadful Execution. For he was not gone above Eight Leagues from Ispahan, when
he turned back again of a sudden toward the City with a very small Retinue,
without imparting his Design to any one of all his Favorites: but when he
arrived, all that he did was to enter unexpected into the Women's Apartment,
where after he had staid about two hours, he came forth again very Pensive and
Melancholy.

Of which the Courtiers not being able to conjecture any other apparent Cause,
attributed it to some Fatal Resolution which the King had taken against the
Prince his Son. Tho as it appeared afterward they were all deceived in their
judgments, and that there was another Motive that put him upon this swift and
sudden return.

For as to what concerned this Young Prince, his Father was satisfied with his
close Confinement in a Quarter of the Apartment remote from the rest, in the
Company of his Mother and such Ladies as the King had appointed to attend her
without stinting her any Number: commiting him also to the farther care of the
Great Eunuch Aga-Nazir, or the Perspicacious Lord, to observe his Action, and
to prevent him from attempting any dangerous Enterprise.

This Word Nazir most usually signifies some Superintendant or General
Overfeer. And therefore the Person last mentioned, besides that he had the
Tuition of the Prince, was Entrusted also with the Government of the Women's
Palace, and to overlook the Management of all Affairs of the Royal Household in
Jepahan, an Employment which gave him great Credit and caused him to be
respected both in the Court and City. In both which Places he was highly
esteemed till the Death of his Master, being as it were the Lieutenant and next
to the Grand Superintendant of the Kingdom, who is likewise styled the Nazir.

As for the Younger Son, he was about Eight Years of Age when his Father Died,
being Born in the year of the Egira 1069. of an Iberian Lady or Gurgi, as the
Persians call them; to whom they gave the Title of Nour-Nissa-Kanum, which
Signifies word for word, Duchess the Light of Women: the Young Prince himself
being called by the Name of Hamzeh Mirza: Tho I never could find or learn the
true Signification of this word Hamzeh. I must confess in the Persian Language
it answers to the word Apostroph in our Tongue; but in that sense I do not
apprehend how it can signify a Proper Name. Nevertheless a Proper Name it is,
whether it signifies something or nothing, and that must suffice.

As for the Title of Mirzah, it is as much as to say the Son of a Prince, as we
have observed in another Place, where we have discovered more at large of the
Persian Names and Titles.

This Illustrious Infant, as I have been informed by several of the Great
Eunuchs, who sometimes Attended upon him while He was with his Father in the
Province of Mazendaran, where I was also a little before his Majesty's Decease,
was a Prince whose Blooming Virtues promised something more than Ordinary. For
notwithstanding the tenderness of his Corporeal Organs, the Strength of his
Soul appeared in all his Actions, discovering such signs of Nobleness and
Generosity, as plainly presaged that one day he would be a Glorious Prince.

Now whether these Signal Endowments had begot in Habas a greater Affection for
him, than for his other Son: Or whether he were swaid by the most usual
Inclinations of Nature, which generally infuse into Parents most Tenderness for
their Younger Children, he would needs have this Younger Son of his to
accompany him in his journey. Tho others believed that it was rather to
gratify his Mother, with whose Beauty the King was extremely enamoured, so
that contrary to custom he made her a Partaker with him in his Royal Bed, tho
two and twenty years of Age, and carried her along with him where ever he took
his Progress. And in this last Progress wherein she accompanied the King, she
had the satisfaction to enjoy the Company of her beloved Son, to whom the King
assigned for Tutor and Guardian a Noble Eunuch, called Aga-Mubarik, or the
Blessed Lord.

Thus this Young Prince happening to be in this House of Pleasure, or of Sorrow
rather, seeing here it was that his Father expired, was at hand to have
Received the Diadem which the Grandees of the Assembly might have presented
him, had the Conspiracy of the Two chief Physicians taken effect.

Nor was it their fault that it did not. For they managed their part with all
the Prudence imaginable. And perhaps they might have laid their Plot before the
Kings Death which by the Rules of their Art, they might easily foresee. Not
that they thought their Lives so much in danger till they had notice of the
Dying Kings last words, but only to serve themselves in their Estates and
Employments.

To this purpose they went to the Prime Minister and under pretense of
Informing him of the Kings Death and the Nature of the two last Medicines which
they had prescribed him, they fell into discourse of more Important Affairs;
and talking of the Election, they put him in mind how much it concerned him and
all the Grandees of the Council to take care of themselves: that the King some
Minutes before he Died, had made loud Complaints of being poisoned by his chief
Ministers, but that he left a Son that would devour their very hearts: that
these his last words and Complaints could not be concealed from his Successor.
So that if they gave the Crown to the Eldest, who besides that he was of the
Age to take the Government into his own hands, and was of a haughty and cruel
Disposition, and therefore would not stick to make use of this pretense to rid
himself of all his chief Ministers and Nobility, to render himself by that
means more absolute, and make room for other New Creatures of his own; more
especially when he came to consider how unkind his Father had been to him, for
the two years last past, which he would certainly attribute to the bad Counsel
of his chief Favorites. Upon this they concluded, that since he could not
choose but see that the Eldest Son would never have any kindness for the present
Grandees, that it would be a great piece of Imprudence, to advance him to that
Dignity which would empower him to do all the Mischief that came into his Mind;
and therefore at such a juncture of time their safest way would be to confer
the Election upon the Youngest, Hamzeh-Mirzah; a Prince of great hopes, and
from whom the Grandeur of the Persian Empire might expect a long Continuance
for the Future, and they at present have no reason to fear the Disturbance of a
sweet and calm Repose, or the loss of their Authority under a Prince that would
not be capable of the Government in fourteen or fifteen Years.

These Arguments thus delivered by the two Lords, first to the Prime Minister,
and then to the Second, wrought upon the Minds of Both as effectually as they
could desire.

Both the One and the Other were convinced, and agreed to advance the Younger
Son, in prejudice of the Eldest. Their infallible Ruin hovered before their
Eyes if the Eldest came to the Crown: as one that seeing himself from a Captive
become an absolute Sovereign, would soon be transported by his Youth and Pride,
and the pleasure of unlimited Control to change the Face of Affairs, and to
take such Resolutions as Humor and Capricio should inspire into him. And who
knows, cried they to themselves, how far he may attempt upon our lives? But
above all the Rumor of the Kings being poisoned, was that which put them all
upon the Rack: For tho they might be all very Innocent, yet the pretense was so
Plausible, that the very Terror of the Accusation represented the continual
fears of Death to their Eyes as dreadful as if they were under present Torment,
should the Successor to the Empire give Credit to the Rumor; whereas if they
Elected the youngest, they should still keep their high Stations of Honor and
Dignity; have leisure and opportunity to advance their Families and raise
Creatures of their own; Ruling all the while almost with an absolute Dominion
one of the greatest Empires of the World.

But now, that I may not seem to contradict my self by speaking frequently of
the Kings being poisoned, when I have already at the beginning of this
Discourse attributed his Death to another Cause, I must beg of the Reader to
make a small Digression, which I suppose will not prove unpleasing, upon the
several suspicions which his Death begot in the various minds of those that
enquired more curiously into the nature of his Disease.

Most true it is then, that the most certain cause was that which I have
already set down, that is to say, the Foul disease attended with a Cancer,
which seizing the Gristle that forms the Conveyances of smelling, preyed not
only outwardly upon the Nose, but inwardly upon the Palate, and then falling
upon the Uvula stopped up the passages of Respiration. But they who imagined
themselves to be more quick-sighted, and to understand the bottom of things
much better, would still be whispering the Curious in the Ear, and I my self
have been one of those to whom it has been told for a great Secret, that
several of the chief Officers of the outward Court, and some of the Eunuchs
also of the inward Court, or Women's Apartment, had for some time before agreed
among themselves to rid themselves of this Great Monarch, and to that purpose
had made choice of Poison, as the most secure way, and less apt to be
discovered. And that which instigated them to this devilish Resolution, was the
frantic and furious humor of the Prince, of which every day still produced
extravagant and bloody Testimonies; which was come to that height, that being
one day overcome with Wine, to which he was extremely addicted, he had cut the
Throat of one of his most beautiful and legitimate Wives without any offense or
other cause given: that he had done the same to several of his Domestic
Servants; so that the rest dreading the like Misfortune, and untimely Ends,
suffered themselves to be tempted into this execrable design of giving him a
Potion, that should waste him by degrees, and give him a slow Death, which
should not be perceived till it came to pass. Others confessed that in his
drunken fits he had committed those cruel Acts of which he was accused, yet
that never any body attempted to poison him for all that; but that it was
rather a secret shame and inward grief for having abandoned himself to such
wild and extravagant Transports that gnawed and devoured his heart. However it
were, the Rumor of his being poisoned was never any other than a Rumor, and
was always looked upon as a Dream for which there was no ground; tho had the
business been more exactly enquired into, the truth perhaps might have come to
light according to the Report.

After the two chief Eunuchs, and chief Physicians had given an account of the
Kings Death to the Prime Ministers, they went also to inform the other Lords of
the Council, still keeping the Secret as private as they could for fear the
People or the Soldiers should come to have the least suspicion of it. At the
same time also they desired them to consider the necessity of assembling
together for the Welfare of the Empire, in regard the King was dead without
declaring a Successor either in writing or by word of Mouth. Whereupon the
Lords approved their prudent Management, and agreed upon a Place where to
assemble, such as should give no occasion to any person living, no not to their
most familiar acquaintance to take the least Alarm.

To that purpose they made choice of the Place before the Gate of the Palace
where the King lay sick, where not only They, but all that belonged to the
Court, were wont to appear about seven of the Clock in the Morning when the
King resides in the Country. Whither repaired the whole Throng of Courtiers,
not knowing any thing of the Accident. There also appeared the Lords who have
their share in the Government, and went into certain little Tents, according to
their usual Custom, as well to expect the Kings coming forth, as to be ready at
hand to receive his Commands; or for the dispatch of Affairs, which either need
no answer at all from the King, or upon which they already know the King's mind.

For the better understanding of which, you are to know, as already has been
declared in our Treatise of the Government of the Persians, that when the King
resides in the Country, they pitch him a large Camp in the Form of a City. In
one of the extreme Quarters of which Camp they erect the Royal Pavilions: and
about fifty Paces from thence the Tents of the Grand Master of the Royal
Household: near to which they also set up several lesser Pavilions richly
furnished on purpose for the Lords to sit down, discourse one with another, or
for the dispatch of Business, such as I have already mentioned.

Nor is this Order of Encamping ever altered, although the King himself be
lodged in a House.

Thus it was an easy thing for the Lords of the Council to assemble together
without giving the least suspicion to others; however to keep their design the
more closely still concealed, they came with their usual Trains and Habits, and
with Countenances so well composed, that notwithstanding the various Emotions
that agitated their different Passions, there outwardly appeared nothing but
such a settled satisfaction and contentment of Mind, as would not permit them
one among another to dive into each others Breasts.

The Lords being assembled in one of these forementioned Pavilions, which by
accident was then erected in a Garden of the Village adjoining to the Palace,
next to the Pavilions of the grand Master of the Household, placed themselves in
the same Order as they used to seat themselves in the Kings Presence. That is
to say, on the Right Hand sat the Athemad-doulet, or chief Minister, so called
from a compound word which signifies the Confidence of the Empire. For the word
Doulet, tho literally taken for Riches and Grandeur, yet Metaphorically and in
a borrowed sense, the Persians make use of it to signify Dominion in general,
or particularly for that which we call Rule or Empire in our Language, as we
have showed in another place. Next to him sat the Koelar-Agasia or Lord of the
Slaves. By which is to be understood the General of the second Body of the
Persian Militia, whom they style the Kings Slaves. Below him sat the Nazir, or
Seeer; Superintendant General of all the Royal Demesnes; and who also takes
particular care of the Treasuries, Furniture, Buildings, Manufactures,
Magazines, Stores, and Servants, and in a word, of all things that relate to
the Kings Household.

Next to him sat the Divaan-Beki; a word so formed from the corruption of two
other, Divaanum-Bek, or Lord of the Council of Justice. And he that bears this
Title is the supreme Judge in all Civil and Criminal Causes, which come before
him by way of Appeal from all parts of the Kingdom. Nor is there any one but
the King himself who can stop the Execution and Sentence by him once
pronounced. Next to whom sat the Mir-Ateuer-Bachi, or Grand Esquire. For those
Persian words signify, The Chief of the Princes of the Stables. The
Hakiem-Bachi, or Chief of the Physicians, that is, the chief Physician and his
Brother, were they that sat lowermost upon the Right Hand.

On the Left Hand, he that held the uppermost Seat was Toefenktchi, or the Lord
of the Musketeers, being the General of the third Body of the Persian Militia.
Next to whom sat the Vateaa-Noviez, or the Notary of Occurrencies, or of such
Transactions as relate to the Empire, and may be therefore said to be the
principal Secretary of State. Next to him sat the Mir-tchekar-Bachi, or Prince
of the Chase, an Office well known in France by the Title of Grand Veneur, or
chief Huntsman of France; and next to him the Munehiziim-Bachi, or the Lord of
the Astrologers, who is one of the most considerable Peers in the Court of
Persia. On the same side, but at some distance below, stood the two Eunuchs
Aga-Kafour and Aga-Mahacite, of whom we have already made mention, as not being
permitted, no more than the rest of the Eunuchs, to sit before his Majesty.

The Meihter, or High Chamberlain stood somewhat higher upon the left hand, and
a little behind, the High Steward of the Household, whom the Persians call
Ichikagasia-Bachi; or Chief of the Masters, or Lords of the Footstool to the
Throne, because his Authority extends over all the Porters, Ushers, Guards,
Masters of the Ceremonies, and other Officers of the like nature belonging to
the Court. But because he performs the Office of Chief Gentleman Usher night
and day in the Kings Presence, he has no Seat in the public Assemblies,
notwithstanding his Authority be very great, and renders him more considerable
than many that have right to sit. Nor do I find that any other Lords than these
were present at this Grand Assembly.

The chief Minister was the first that spoke, and declared at the same time
what the High Chamberlain had informed him concerning the Kings Death, and
which had been confirmed to him by the two chief Physicians: and then
proceeding, he told him, That he made no question but the same Information had
already reached their Ears, and that they were not ignorant how that their
deceased Monarch was departed this Life without declaring either in writing or
by word of Mouth, to which of his two Sons he had bequeatched his Scepter, and
that therefore it was their duty to proceed to an Election with all the speed
imaginable, not only because it was not fit that the Prince to whom Providence
had destined the Crown should remain in a Private Condition any longer, but
also for the security of the Kingdom, which was always in jeopardy so long as
it wanted a Governor, since it was with Monarchies as with living Bodies, that
cease to live when deprived of the Head. For the preventing therefore of so
great a Misfortune, it behoved them before they brake up, to make choice of
some glorious Scien of the Imamic Race to sit upon the Throne which Habas the
II. had quitted for a more blessed Mansion in Heaven. That that great Monarch
of victorious Memory had left two Sons, as he was assured that none of all the
Assembly had any reason to question in the least, Sephie-Mirza, who was about
twenty years of Age, and had been left in the Palace of Grandeur, under the
Tuition of Aga-Nazir; and Hamzeh-Mirza, about seven Years of Age, who was there
among them at Court under the care of Aga-Mubarek present in their Assembly:
That of these two, after they had invoked the most High God, they were to
choose him that the well King had in a manner deputed to be Lieutenant to the
glorious Successor in Expectation.

By Successor in Expectation the Persians mean the last of the Imaans, who
according to their Religion is their hoped for Messia, whose return to Earth
they expect every hour.

Now the Prime Minister having pronounced these words with all the
Demonstrations of a profound sorrow, and an Aspect full of Majesty, which from
his Aged Countenance shot both Awe and Reverence, made a sudden stop, expecting
that some other of the Assembly should speak and give his Advice. But observing
that the whole Assembly out of a particular deference and respect to his
Dignity and high Place, applauded his beginning, and by their frequent
repetitions of Bisin Allah', or so be it, in the name of God, seemed desirous
that he should proceed: the aged Minister modestly resumed his Place, and
beholding the Grandees one after another, told them further, That considering
the Necessity, and the Resolution which they had taken to Elect one of those
two Princes, it was his Opinion, That they were to the Rigorous but positive
necessity to which they were reduced, and which constrained them to prefer
Hamzeh Mirza tho the younger, and to fix him in the Throne, tho to the
Privation of his elder Brother. The reason was, because it was well known to
all the World, how severe Habas had been always toward him: so that it was to
be feared that the young Prince had been deprived of his sight. Of which the
Report had ran very hot, ever since the deceased Monarch at his departure from
Ispahan, displayed such a dismal dissatisfaction in his Countenance, that
portended nothing but fatal; and which they had more reason to believe, because
the King at the beginning of his sickness, had sent in great have, without
imparting his design to any of his Council, an Eunuch with private Orders to
the same City. Which Orders could be no other than either to take off the Head,
or pluck out the Eyes of the young Prince, to the end he might be incapable of
succeeding to the Crown after his death: For in all other things the King never
failed to communicate his Secrets to some one of his Council, and particularly
to the Prime Minister, who was always accustomed to seal with his own Seal, all
such Commands and Orders to which the King affixed his Signet, which if it were
so, they could not Elect him, without running themselves into a great
Confusion, if he should be already either Dead or Blind. For you know said he,
that the sacred Laws of the Elect of God not permiting any person under that
unfortunate Circumstance to be our Sovereign Monarch, we should be constrained
after all to apply our selves to Hamzeh Mirza. And what thanks I would fain
know, will he then give us for our Election? Will he not have reason to tax us
with our want of Affection, for choosing him at a force put, when we knew there
was no possibility for his Brother to govern? Will it please him, do you think,
to accept a Crown at our hands, which we have offered to another? Will he think
himself beholden to us for our suffrages which we did not give him out of
Kindness or Affection to his person, but merely out of invincible Necessity?
And God grant he may stop there, with being only satisfied that he ows us
nothing. Who knows but that he may study Revenge, and whether our Coldness may
not kindle in his Breast a Fire that will not be quenched without our Ruin and
the destruction of our Families? But this is not all that we are to consider;
when the Welfare of the Kingdom lies at stake, particular Interests must give
way. Mind therefore my Lords, what I have observed at the Beginning of my
Discourse. It behooves us to avoid the Dangers of an Interregnum, which will
continue long, while time is wasted in Messages to and fro from hence to the
Capital City. But Providence has put into our Hands Hamzeh-Mirza. What remains
then but to follow the Commands of Providence, and forthwith to advance the
Favored of Heaven to the Sacred Throne of Prince of the World.

The Prime Minister having thus delivered himself, gave no small occasion to
the rest of the Lords to muse from whence this Opinion of his should proceed.
But in regard he was a Person that had always lived in high Reputation for his
Integrity, and for that his being stricken in years, and his long experience in
Affairs rendered him greatly considerable, they never suspected the Advice
which he had given had been the Effect of self-interest; more especially
because there was nothing propounded but what the whole Assembly believed to be
very real. At length the greatest part entertained a Proposal so acceptable to
their wishes with great Joy: and they who only had in their view their own
particular Establishment, were no less willing, in pursuance of the Prime
Ministers Counsel, to be thought as well affected to the public Welfare, when
indeed they minded nothing but their own Grandeur: For the same Considerations
that had swayed the Prime Minister, and the Chief Superintendant, as we have
said already, had got possession of their Minds likewise, and infused into them
an Apprehension of the uncertainty of their Conditions, if Sephie-Mirza were
advanced to the Throne. For that the Young Prince, were it only to show his
Absolute Power; would Rule according to his own Fancy, and change his Officers
as he pleased himself. Nor could they think otherwise but that some secret
Instigations of Revenge would govern his Proceedings against them, as being
persuaded, that their Complacency had contributed to his Misfortunes; and that
they were so far from pacifying the displeasure and complaints which the
deceased King his Father made against him, that they had applauded and
flattered his Indignation. On the other side, if the report were true of
Habas's being poisoned by the Conspiracy of some of his Lords, it was easy to
conjecture how they that were guilty could not choose but feel a Remorse of
Conscience, and with what Terror they looked upon a Successor, who being
naturally inclined to violence, would readily lay hold upon a Pretense so
plausible to revenge his Father's Death. But from the Election of the Younger
Son there was no such Apprehension of danger; in regard all things would move
in their usual Course, and for that his Minority would give them leisure to
provide for themselves, and to make the best advantage of the Employments which
they enjoyed. Thereupon they weighed in the same Balance the Probabilities,
which the Prime Minister had set forth, of the Death of the Eldest of the two
Princes, and the hazards which the Monarchy would run through a tedious
Expectation. And therefore they all with one Voice concluded upon the Election
of Hamzeh-Mirza.

But among all the Grandees there was not any one that testified so violent a
Passion for the Election of the Youngest Son, as the Superintedant General: nor
indeed was there any one whose particular Interest had more reason to urge him
to it, as having more cause to fear the advancement of the Elder, than anyof
the rest. And moreover, he made no question, that he would lay it to his
Charge, that he had not the Furniture, the rich Clothes, and other things that
he desired: all which things by virtue of his Office of Superintendant, were at
his disposal. On the other side he had done several kindnesses for the Mother
of the Younger Son, whose Officer he was in the outward Palace, and then by the
Assistance of the Eunuchs that attended her in the Women's Apartment, he was in
hopes to work himself so effectually into the Favor both of the Princess, and
her Son, that he might be in a Condition to continue himself for a longer time
in that high Credit, wherein he had lived, during the Reign of the Father. To
which purpose when it came to his turn in Rank and Dignity, which was the third
Place of Honor, to give his Opinion, it was with less indifference than those
that preceded him had done. He confirmed all that had been said by the Support
of the Empire, or the Prime Minister. He added moreover that he could not
precisely tell in what Condition Sephie-Mirza was at that time; however that it
could not be but very bad, or rather so deplorable, that it would not suffer
either Himself, or any others in his behalf, to dream of the Empire: That for
the past Years of 1075. and 1076. after his Father had shut him up under a
close Restraint, He had been kept very private: That for him that spoke, he
made no question but that Habas had caused the Eyes of the Prince to be put
out, as not believing him fit to Govern. Of which there was nothing gave him
greater Assurances, than that there had been no mention made of the Prince
since the Kings last Progress to Mazendaran, at what time the deceased King,
being upon the Road not above eight Leagues distant from the Capital City,
brushed of a sudden back again in great have, no man knowing either the Issue
of his Return, nor why he went. And therefore there was no farther reason to
doubt, but that he did it at length with a full determination to rid the world
of that Young Prince. Nor did there need any other convincing Proof of what he
said, than the Eunuch, who not long since had been dispatched with private
Orders, which could only relate to that Prince. And therefore it was an
irrational thing to deliberate to which of the two Sons they should offer the
Crown, since only Hamzeh-Mirza was by Heaven preserved to be their Prince.

Thus was this Royal Infant about to have been advanced to the Throne to the
Exclusion of his Elder Brother. All the Grandees gave their Consents for this
Election, nor had one of these who had right to speak denied him his voice.
There were only two Eunuchs that had not spoke a word. And who would have
thought they durst have presumed to have spoken a word? especially the least in
Credit of the two? seeing that neither the one or the other having neither
Right, Title or Authority to speak, could any one have imagined that they
should have been so bold to entertain Sentiments contrary to all the rest of
that Illustrious Family? Or if they should have been so daring, was there any
likelihood they should have the Confidence to declare them, and to carry it
against so many Voices?

Nevertheless it so came to pass in a Manner that may be thought to be almost
Miraculous, as well by reason of the Circumstances already observed, as for
those which we are going about to observe. Which assures us that there is a
Superior Providence which concerns it self in the Management of all human
Affairs, commands all Events, and frequently brings things to pass contrary to
all our Expectations, as here it happened where Sephie was Elected
notwithstanding the confederacy of persons interessed, and the favorable
opportunities to advance their Designs.

Now this same Eunuch that broke all the Measures which these Lords had taken
was Aga-Mubarek, in great Credit at Court, as we have already observed, as
being the person to whom the King had committed the Tuition of his second Son.
He, I say, was Tutor to Hamzeh-Mirza whom the Grandees all endeavored to
advance to the Throne, and whom it therefore behoved rather than any other to
support and encourage their Suffrages, since that in all likelihood the
Grandeur of his Illustrious Pupil would be a means infinitely to advance his
Reputation, and present him a Fortune the most glorious that a person of his
Condition could hope for.

Nevertheless the love of Justice prevailed over all other Temptations that
could affect his Soul; so that it was not without a noble Indignation that he
heard the Proposal of the first Minister, to prefer the Younger before the
Elder Brother, which augmented so much the more by how much he found the Lords
of the Council so readily inclined to a Condescension. Thereupon he took a
Resolution worthy that Ancient and Constant Fidelity which the Eunuchs have
already gloried in. He thought it his Duty to prevent such a disorder and
confusion as much as in him lay, and that tho he had no right to speak in that
Assembly, yet that it was lawful for him for once to violate a Custom which was
no more than a bare Ceremony, to the end he might reduce into the right way,
those that went about to break that Love which Nature seemed to have
established, and which Religion favored.

Nevertheless he staid till every one had spoken in their turns, as well in
respect to the Lords so much his superiors, as for that he still was in hopes
that some one of better judgment, or at least of better Principles should
deliver his Opinion more justly and according to Law, and deliver him out of
that perplexity wherein such a troublesome Accident would engage him. But when
he saw that they had all with one Consent concluded to Elect the Younger
Brother to the prejudice of the Eldest, under pretenses, which how specious
soever, they seemed to be, were only the persuasions of Interest, and upon
Conjectures too weak at the bottom to gain credit in such an important Affair,
with a fearless, yet respectful behavior he thus began:

The Proposal, Princes, and Lords of Lords, which you have made to exclude from
the Crown Sephie, the Eldest Son of Habas the Second, to whom it appertains by
Law, and to advance in his room Hamzeh-Mirza, is an affront to Justice and the
Laws of the Elect Messiah, too visible to believe you have suffered your selves
to be swayed to such a design any otherwise than by some dazzling Appearances as
have surprised your Judgments. For I dare be confident that not one among you
all does think the Motives that have been alleged sufficient. No -- the
Pretense which you have borrowed for the Election of Hamzeh-Mirza is not
rational. The true Reason that prevails in your Minds, if I may be so bold to
tell you, tho you know it as well as my self, is your desire to govern Persia
for many years to come, and at your own pleasure. It is therefore that you
would elect an Infant, under whose Minority you may be able with permission to
exercise an absolute Authority. For what is alleged of the Eldest Prince, that
without doubt he is either deprived of his Life, or of his Sight, can be looked
upon only as a delusion. For had it been so, should I have heard nothing of it?
I that ever since the Kings departure from the Capital City have always been
exactly acquainted with whatever passed in the Women's Palace; I that have
always been a constant Attendant in it; and more than that have had the
Government of the Young Prince? If the Eunuch, who was sent Post sometime since
to Ispahan, had private Orders to the ruin of Sephie-Mirza out of a design to
render him incapable of the Succession, should I have discovered nothing? Or
would not the deceased King have made some alterations in the condition of his
second Son, for whom he had designed the Imperial Throne after his death? Would
he not have enlarged his Revenue, and augmented the Splendor of his Court?
Would he have concealed it from me, and the Light of Women, the Lady Mother of
the Young Prince? Or if he had concealed it from me, would it not have been
more easy for me than for you to have discovered something? since I have
always lived in the Inner Palace, and that I knew every thing that passed there
under the greatest Secrecy; whereas you are so far from entering into it, that
you can only look upon the outside of it. In a word, there is nothing in all
that which you pretend to fear, Sephie-Mirza lives and sees, my life for yours,
God is my caution; and if it be not so, here is my head. You cannot therefore
without great Injustice, or rather foul Treason, forget the Eldest, and
sacrifice him to your own Passions, and the Interests of his Younger Brother.
Rather let the Younger Brother be sacrificed to Him and the Interests of the
Kingdom. Do you not foresee how you are going about to throw the Kingdom into a
dismal Confusion, and fill it with Division? Think you the rest of the Grandees
will suffer themselves to be accounted Persons without Law, and approve your
Votes? Think you the People will take your Crimes upon their shoulders, and
endure the Younger Brother sitting upon the Throne of the Faithful, whom you
could not place there till you had trampled under foot the most Sacred Duties
with which Religion inspires us? On the other side, all the World will rise
against you, to take part with the Lawful Heir; or if that should not come to
pass, you will be laden with Curses, and looked upon as the Authors of a most
Execrable Assassination: You will blush for shame all your Lives, and live with
perpetual torment in your breasts. Hamzeh-Mirza also himself, for whom you have
prostituted your Consciences, will not he reward you for it one day? He will
look upon you as Dogs that advanced him to his Honor only for the Hounds fees;
and as such who in hopes to fatten your selves during his Minority, forsook
God, the Law, the Prophet, the Book, the Explanation, Right Reason, and
Justice. I am sure his Judgments will pursue you, and that the least punishment
you can expect will be to be sent naked into some Desert, there to thank God
for only saving your Lives.

There he stopped of a sudden with some disturbance in his Countenance: but
immediately proceeds with a sudden Exclamation:

Hamzeh Mirza, cried he, Hamzeh Mirza, to what an extremity do you reduce him?
Would you, my Lords, that I should go and strangle him with my own hands, and
that I should bring him dead into your presence? I have the power, he is under
my charge. By that means I shall be able to prevent you from making an ill
Choice: You shall then be constrained to carry the Crown to the Eldest; and
then I leave you to consider how he will receive it at your hands, when he
shall find that nothing could reduce you to your Allegiance but such a fatal
extremity.

With this threatening Language he concluded his Speech; leaving the Lords of
the Assembly so surprised that if a Mountain had fallen at their feet, as they
say in Persia, they could not have been more astonished. They could not divine
the reason that should induce the Eunuch to such a determined Resolution: He
was neither instigated by Hatred, Fear, nor Hope. Not by Hatred, because they
knew he tenderly fostered his lovely Pupil. Much less by Fear, since he could
expect nothing but a soft Indulgence in respect of himself from the Person that
had been bred up in his Arms. Nor could he hope for any of those advantages
from the Eldest, whose disposition he was not well acquainted with; for tho he
might have a kindness for him, it could never be so great as that of the
younger Brother, who had sucked it in with his Milk. Therefore they all found
that he spoke against his own Interests, and that it could be nothing else but
his zeal for Justice and the Welfare of the Empire, his desire to satisfy the
People, and his Loyalty toward his deceased Master, that caused him to act in
that manner. However it increased their respect for him, and obliged them to
admire his Sentiments so generous, tho contrary to their Intentions, and such
as altogether disapproved their Conduct.

It was about half a quarter of an Hour before any one of the Assembly durst so
much as open their Lips; but still they sat looking one upon another, without
speaking a word, perplexed between the shame of recanting, and the fear of the
danger which they ran, should they adventure obstinately to defend their first
Resolutions. At length the chief Minister, whether it were that he was more a
friend to Justice than the rest, as there was reason to conjecture from his
wonted noble and unbyassed manner of proceeding, or whether he feared lest any
other should speak before him, which had rendered him guilty, in regard it was
his Place to speak first, as he had already done when he argued so stiffly
against Sephie Mirza. However it were, the Prime Minister first breaking
silence thus began: That true it was, that if the Assembly were infallibly
assured that the Eldest Son of Habas II. was no longer in a condition to
receive the Crown, they might justify the Election of the second Son; but
since Aga Mubarek so confidently asserted, that Sephie Mirza had neither lost
his life, nor his sight, they ought to choose him without any further
deliberation: And therefore from the bottom of his heart he gave him both his
Voice and all his choicest Wishes, protesting that it was their duty forthwith
to go and offer him the Diadem and the Empire.

Upon those words all the rest of the Lords grew faint-hearted, and had no
longer power to defend the Injustice which they had began. For the condition of
these Lords renders them naturally fearful, who as illustrious, and as great
Princes as they seem to be, are in effect but so many Slaves; their Lives,
their Liberty, their Honor, their Estates absolutely depending upon the
Pleasure of the Sovereign; So that they were so far from persisting in their
first Opinions, that they strove which should be the first that should renounce
what they had done; and dissembling their Discontents, they all unanimously
decreed, That since the Eldest Son was in a condition to enjoy the Crown, which
legally appertained to him, that it was their duty without delay to fetch him
from the Palace of Grandeur, and accompany him to the Throne.

And thus was Sephie-Mirza elected Monarch of the Persians contrary to the
Intention of those themselves that gave their Voices for him.

The Prime Minister added, that after so unfortunate an Election of the King,
they were immediately to proceed to a second, which was the Nomination of a
Person among the great Lords of the Kingdom, who was to post with all speed to
Ispahan, to fetch the Prince out of the Palace where he was enclosed, and seat
him in his Throne with all the accustomed Ceremonies, and to cause him to be
acknowledged Sovereign Lord of the Persian Empire.

Now though this Election were not of equal Importance with the Election of the
Prince, yet did it not occasion a little trouble among the Lords; who had no
sincere and real Amity one for another, after the manner of Courtiers: for
every one had their particular designs, and had an eye upon his Companion.
However the Person to be nominated was to be taken out of their Number, because
there was not any of higher Quality than they were then at Court; and they that
were of Inferior Rank could not pretend to that Honor. But then again,
believing that the Person, who should happen to be entrusted with such a
weighty Errand, would in all probability gain a great Ascendant over the young
Monarch's favor, who to recompense the welcome Tidings of such a Messenger,
would afford him a large share of his Affections, their business was to cast
their Eyes upon some One whose good nature and generous temper they might best
dispense with; if they could not find out one of absolute Probity, and
Sincerity. For what will not Vice attempt, when furnished with such great
advantages? Or what Impressions will not an evil person stamp upon a Soul, if I
may so say, altogether rare, or on a Prince whose tender Years will not permit
him a due experience in the Affairs of the World?

So that every one of the Lords took care to nominate out of their number such
a one as they thought would do least mischief, who if he had not a Will to do
them good, should have as little desire to do them harm. As for the Prime
Minister, and the Superintendant, who for their high Dignity had most right to
the honor of such an important Deputation could not be spared, because at that
juncture of time their Presence was absolutely necessary at Court. The Prime
Minister was to stay for the dispatch of Business, and to give Audiences upon
Affairs of State, and by his Presence to prevent any Disturbance that might
arise upon the news of Habas's Death, if by any Accident it should happen to be
divulged before the time; which would soon have come to light by the absence of
the Prime Minister, who never stirs from the Prince's Elbow, if the King be
alive. Nor was it more possible for the Superintendant to stir, as well for the
same reason, as for that He, having the sole ordering of all the rich Furniture
and Treasures of the King's House, and of all the Convoys and Wagons every day
going and coming to the Court with Provisions and other Necessaries, cannot
leave his Employment, for fear any Disorder or Confusion should happen.

Then again, because it was still convenient that the People should know no
more but that the King was sick, that was it which prevented the Grand Master
of the Household from being sent; in regard his Office, like those of the two
former, obliges him to be always near the King. The chief Astrologer, and the
chief Physician were not of Quality sufficient to aspire to that Honor, and
much less the Two Eunuchs. Indeed the Dignity of the Grand Esquire, and Grand
Huntsman might in some measure have claimed it. But in regard they are not
properly Officers of the Kingdom, but rather the Kings Officers; they began to
cast their lies upon the Generals of the Army, the General of the Slaves, and
the General of the Musquetteers, chiefly because they are superior in Dignity
to the two latter, and for that their Employments do not tie them to be at
Court; True it is, they were not very grateful to the Lords; but for once as
before there was a necessity that Inclination and Affection must give way to
Duty.

Of these two Competitors, the General of the Slaves expected the Precedence as
his due, in regard his Employment gave him the Preheminency; which he could not
dissemble, but displayed his hopes and expectations in his very Countenance.
However he missed of his reckoning: for he had not one Friend in the whole
Assembly; they knew him too well, to be a crafty Knave of a turbulent spirit,
and of a mischievous humor; and therefore they were all afraid if he spoke
first to the new King, he would not forget his old tricks, but would form such
Contrivances at least against the greatest part of them, that they should not
easily disintangle themselves. Upon which considerations they gave their Voices
unanimously for the General of the Musquetteers. Not but that they had some
apprehensions of him likewise, as not having altogetheer the Reputation of a
sincere man, only he was a Saint in comparison of the other. For his Cunning
did not carry him to the full extent of Malice. Besides that he was looked upon
as a Person of great Parts, and one that understood the Court, and the
Interests of the Neighboring Princes. For which Reason he had been sent for
some Years before in the Quality of an Ambassador to the present King of the
Indies Aurang-Zeb, to congratulate his coming to the Crown; and had behaved
himself with so much Grandeur in the Embassy, that his Master gave him signal
Testimonies of his Satisfaction. And indeed his Rodomantadoes in that Court are
strangely remarkable, such as the Reader will hardly credit, when I shall
publish what I have collected in reference to that Embassy.

This Lord, then, being thus deputed, the Assembly gave order about some other
things that concerned his journey, and how they should manage Affairs at Court
in expectation of the New King.

First, It was ordered that Eleven Persons should accompany the Commissioner to
Ispahan, that is to say, two Astrologers, the Munchiziim-Bachi, or the Chief of
those that profess that Science, who was called Mirza-Baker, and with him
another Astrologer, one of the most noted in the Kingdom, whose Name was
Mahamed-Saleh. They were to be present at the Coronation, with an Astrolabe in
their hands, to take the fortunate hour, as they term it in the Persian
Language, and observe the lucky Moments that a happy Constellation should point
out for Proceedings of that Importance. To these they added four of the
Principal Officers employed in the custody of the Treasure to carry and take
care of what Jewels should be requisite for the Ceremony. The other five were
not then nominated, in regard that every one of the Principal Officers of State
had a right to appoint his own Deputy upon that Occasion.

Those five Commissioners, who are always Persons of Quality, were in their
Masters names to throw themselves at the feet of the new Monarch, so soon as he
should be brought forth of the private Apartment of the Palace, and at the
Ceremony of the Coronation to represent the Person by whom they were deputed.
Of which the one was the Prime Minister; the other the Grand Superintendant;
the third, the General of the Slaves; the fourth, the Lord Chief Justice; and
the fifth, the Principal Secretary of State.

In the second place it was ordered by the Lords, that the General of the
Musquetteers, with his Eleven Attendants, should set forward the next Morning
before day, unless the Grand Astrologer should find the Constitution of the
Heavens and the Aspects of the Planets not to be favorable; whereupon they
should forbear till a more lucky season. That then every one should depart, and
stay at a New Caravan-Seray, which is four Leagues from Demagaan, till the
Twelve Persons being all arrived, they might proceed altogether in their
Journey. And that for fear lest if they should depart in Company from the Camp
Royal, they should create too great a jealousy of the cause of their Journey.

In the third place the Lords ordained that the General of the Musquetteers
should carry a Letter to his Majesty in the name of the whole Assembly, which
should be read in their hearing, before it was put into his hands, that nothing
might be inserted but what was approved by all.

In the fourth place they unanimously agreed, for the better concealing the
Kings Death, that every one should Officiate in their several Stations, as they
did before the doleful Accident happened; and pay their accustomed Attendance
about the Palace. That in the mean time they should amuse the People with a
belief that the King was only sick, and in a fair way of recovery. That the
Eunuchs there present, and others concerned, should endeavor to keep all
things private in the Women's Palace, and use their utmost diligence to cheer
and comfort up the Women, for fear their loud Complaints and Moans should be
heard by those without.

In the fifth place it was ordered that the Eunuchs with the chief Physicians
should take care to embalm the Body of the deceased King, to the end he might
afterward be put into a Leaden Coffin according to Custom.

Lastly, The same Lords ordained that at the end of Eight Days all the Court
should depart from the Village of Kosroes-Abaad where then it was; and in
regard it was impossible in so great a Hurry to travel far in a day, that they
would make short Journeys to Kachaan; that they should order their March
according to the Season, and as they thought most proper, to prevent all
occasions that might give the People any reason too curiously to pry into the
condition of the Kings Person.

Toward Evening the Letter which was to be presented to the New Monarch was
delivered to the General of the Slaves. It was put up in a Purse of Cloth of
Gold, drawn together with strings of twisted Gold and Silk, with Tassels of the
same, and so knit into a Knot. It was sealed with soft Wax; upon which the
Chief Minister put his own Seal. Nor was any omitted of all those Knacks and
Curiosities which the Oriental People make use of in making up their Epistles.

By this Letter, of which I was very careful to get a Copy, drawn from the
Original, the Lords gave His most Excellent Majesty to understand, How the
Great Potentate and Ruler whose place is in Paradise, King Habas II. whose
brightshining Glory God increase, departed this Life the twenty sixth of the
Moon called Rabeya-el-esany, at the beginning of the Return (that is, of the
Return of her Light) without having made any Will, or given any Order touching
his Successor, or nominated any Person to Govern the Kingdom.

That as soon as they had notice of the Dismal Accident, they assembled
together to consider who the Person was whom Heaven had Elected to succeed the
King. Whereupon with an unanimous consent they had as soon named Him, and
caused his most Excellent Person to be acknowledged Lord of Kingdoms of vast
Extent, and only capable to supply the Throne of the Immortal Succession of
Prince of the World. Upon which they had put up their most ardent Prayers, that
God would be pleased to surround him with Glory, and to prepare for him
Triumphs worthy the high Honor to which he had called him, Protesting at his
Feet, that they were his most humble and most obedient Slaves. That to
establish his most Magnificent and most Glorious Person in the Throne which
resembled the Celestial, they had deputed one of their Members, the General of
the Musquetteers to deliver him their most humble and miserable Letter; who was
accompanied with several other Persons elected to express by word of mouth in
the name of the whole Assembly their Submissions and Vassalage, and then to
supply the places of the most humble Slaves of the Throne, which is the true
Seat of the Kalibat, (or Pontificate) in the great Solemnity of his Coronation,
to be performed by the Imposition of the Sacred Imamic Tiara (or Prophetic
Tiara.) That the Body of his thrice Illustrious Father, whose place is in
Paradise, whose bright shining Glory God increase, should be conducted to the
City of Kachaan; and that with the rest of the Court, they who had taken the
boldness to write these Presents would expect the most firm Orders which his
Majesty would be pleased to send them; as well for the Place of his Burial, and
for such other Duties to which their Vassalage of indispensable necessity
engaged them.

This was the substance of the Persian Letter, of which we have expressed the
Style, and imitated the Strain as near as our Language would permit. Moreover
upon the Back and the lowermost Fold was set the Seal of the Prime Minister
according to Custom.

The next day the General of the Musquetteers, and the other Eleven Persons
departed, and made all the have that possibly they could: Yet not so fast as
they could have desired, or as Occasions of that nature required. For
considering the vast number that rode Post altogether, it was not to be
expected they should meet with change of Horses; beside the danger of breaking
or endamaging the Jewels by a violent Motion, was a thing which the Officers of
the Treasury were much afraid of. Thus they travel the hundred and twelve
Persian Leagues (which make a hundred and forty French) between Kosroesabaad
and Ispahan, where they arrived the seventh day after they set out, upon a
Saturday. Which was the third of the Moon, called Gumadi-el-avel, which answers
to our second of October, according to the Computation known among us; about
seven of the Clock in the Evening; at what time the Merchants and Tradesmen in
the Bazars and Piazzas shut up their Shops, and every body goes to his own home.

Some persons of Quality observing this numerous Troop that came Post, and
knowing the general of the Slaves at the head of them, and the rest of the
Commons which they had seen at Court, believed that they rode before, and were
come to prepare all things ready in the Kings Palace by his Order for the
Reception of his Majesty, whose Return that City had long expected with great
impatience. Thereupon they enquired of the General as he passed by, and of
several others that followed him; who made answer, that his Majesty was at hand
and in a little time would appear in the City. Which equivocation was true, and
yet concealed the Secret which he had in Charge.

This numerous Train of Lords being arrived in the great Square before the
Royal Palace, alighted with all their Retinue at the principal Gate of that
Magnificent Pile, which they call Hali-Kapi or Haly's Gate, or by another
interpretation, the High-Gate.

There they all Stopped except the General of the Slaves and the Prime
Ministers Deputy. For they too as soon as they were alighted, went directly to
the second Gate opposite in a direct line at some distance to the other, as we
shall show in our Description of Ispahan, which second Gate is the Principal
Gate of the Women's Apartment, and is called the Sacred Gate.

Through that Gate it was that those two Lords went to the first Apartment
without, appointed for the White Eunuchs. Eunuchs which in truth are posted
there to Guard the Place where the Women are enclosed, but never enter into it,
but upon some extraordinary and urgent Occasion. There the general of the
Musquetteers made known his Quality to the White Eunuch who came to receive
him, and desired to go, and desire the Aga Nazir, that he would be pleased to
come forth with speed, for his business would admit of no delay. We have
already observed that this Aga-Nazir had been entrusted by the Deceased King,
in his Life time, with the Guardianship of Sephie-Mirza, afterward Elected
Monarch, and with the general Oversight of the Women's Palace; which obliged him
to take all the care imaginable of this Apartment, which is as it were a Corpse
du Guard, where the White Eunuchs are lodged that watch the entrance into the
Women's Apartment. However he has a Magnificent Palace in the City; but then he
happened to be attending on his Duty in the Palace.

He therefore understanding that a Lord of that high Quality desired to speak
with him, presently went forth to know what Commands he brought. So soon as he
appeared, the General Musquetteers advanced alone to meet him, while the Prime
Ministers Deputy out of respect kept a distance behind.

The General having drawn the Eunuch aside whispered some words in his Ear,
which were never known what they were, or at least I could never certainly
learn what they were. Some affirm that he discovered to him the Death of Habas,
and the Election of the Eldest Son of that Monarch, whose Governor that Eunuch
was. Which he was forced to do, because he had no Orders in writing from the
King, nor could have, in regard he was Dead. And yet this is always observed,
when any Grandee, dispatched from the Court, demands any person within to be
let out, he shows his Command to the Governor of the Place. Others allege
that he said nothing to him of that weighty Affair, for that it would have cost
him his Head, had he declared it to any other before he had declared it to the
King. However it were, if he did make any discovery, it was in few words. For
immediately those two Lords, the General of the Musquetteers and the Seeing
Eunuch, went forward to the other more remote Apartment, which joins
immediately to the last Entrance into the Apartment.

When they came to that Apartment where lie the Black Eunuchs, who have Liberty
to go up and down the inner House where the Women are lodged, one of the Chief
among them understanding the Aga Nazir was come forth to understand what he
desired: the other desired him to go immediately to Sephie-Mirza and to let him
know that the Messenger of the most Sublime Command and of the most Potent
Order staid at the Door, and had something to communicate to him of the highest
Importance, and which was for his Advantage. And therefore, that he would be
pleased to come forth and speak with him.

Which words the White Eunuch delivered to the Black Eunuch in such a Tone, and
with such a Countenance as discovered nothing either of Sadness or Joy, from
whence he could make any Conjectures either of bad or good Fortune. For
considering the secrecy of the Affair he came about, it behoved him to affect a
kind of Indifferency. So that the Black Eunuch reported back the Message to the
Young Prince as he had received it, who at that time was with the Princess his
Mother.

I shall rather choose to give the Reader leave to imagine what was the
Astonishment that seized those two Royal Persons at the suddenness of the News,
and whence they had reason to gather a thousand suspicions and jealousies, than
go about to express it in words. We learnt afterward, that for some time they
stood like Statues in a profound silence, which was first interrupted by a loud
shriek of the Princess, and afterward by these words, which brake forth
through the midst of her sighs while she embraced the Prince, Ah my dear Son,
there is an end of thy Life.

And indeed she could not look for any other thing for him than Death, or some
other Misfortune little less terrible. She much less dreamt that it was to
advance him to the Throne. For in two Years that she had taken leave of her
Husband, then healthy and vigorous, in the Flower of his Age, not exceeding
thirty six Years, she had never heard of his being sick, much less could she
believe him dead.

Therefore when she heard that a Noble Messenger of the High Order was come to
speak with the Prince, what could she think but that this Order came from Habas
the Second; and that his Command was either to put to death, or pluck out her
Sons Eyes; and that if they pressed him so earnestly to come forth, it was only
to understand and suffer the Execution of that Order. All Appearances confirmed
this sad Suspicion. The severity of the Monarch was known to her, as well as
the disgust which he had taken against his Eldest Son, of which he had given
such public proofs by the strict Captivity to which he had confined him. But
she that most perplexed her, and augmented her mistrusts, was the Lady-Mother
of Hamzeh-Mirza, Questionless, said she, that wicked Woman it is, who by her
Caresses and alluring Charms has overruled the King, to deprive my Son of the
Crown, to set it upon hers. Thereupon she began to redouble her Shrieks and
Lamentations in such a manner, that the whole Palace rang with her Complaints.
All the Ladies surprised to hear the first of the Kings Legitimate Wives in
such an Agony, ran presently to condole her sorrows, and to intermix their
Tears and Complaints with hers. And indeed they had reason, especially the
Confidents of the Young Prince, who had an extraordinary Passion for his
Interests. Friendship in others produced the same Effects, believing bloody
Executioners were come to ravish from their Arms a Friendly Prince in his
tender Years. So that it is said that the Women raised such a general
Compassion, that even the Black Eunuch who was present, tho they are a sort of
People endued with savage and remorseless Souls, could not refrain from
dropping some few tears, and quitting that Indifferency to which his Trust and
Duty obliged him.

The General of the Musquetteers and the Nazir Eunuch at the same time heard
the Women's Lamentations, and believing it proceeded from the mistake of the
Mother of the Ladies that belonged to the Prince, sent a second Black Enunch to
assure the Princess, that the Messenger who waited for the Prince her Son at
the Gate had brought him happy tidings, and desired only to give him notice of
a more Exalted Fortune. Which they both confirmed by an Oath most solemn among
the Persians, by the Head of the Great Agrea, by whom they mean Haty, whom they
believe to be the real Successor to Mahomet. But all those Oaths and
Protestations did nothing avail but only to augment the Mistrusts of the
afflicted Mother. She redoubled her Lamentations more loudly than before; She
hugged her beloved Son in her Arms, and in the Transports of her sorrow called
down a Thousand Imprecations upon the deceased King her Husband, calling him
Barbarian, Infidel, Impious, and the Fatal cause of all her Tears. Wherein she
said Truth, tho he were but a very Innocent Cause. Sometimes she turned toward
the Lordly Messenger, whom she reproached with the scurrilous Terms of Dog, and
Messenger of Death; sometimes toward the Eunuchs that were present, whom she
upbraided for Traitors.

All the while the Young Prince stood immovable; for, as is said, he uttered
not one word; nor did he show in his Countenance any sign of sorrow. It is very
probable, that it was so extreme, as to overwhelm him in such a sort, that he
had neither Life nor Motion. While Nature that could not find sufficient signs
to express her dreadful pains, stood as it were entranced, not knowing what
side to take. Therefore the Young Prince shed not a Tear, because the occasion
which he had to weep was so great: In that manner he stood in the midst of the
Lamentations of the Women, who detained him, and drew him to their knees, as if
they had resolved to defend him, and prevent those that came to carry him away
from approaching his Person.

This Scene had lasted above three quarters of an Hour, for other Black Eunuchs
that were sent one after another with Oaths and new Imprecations to assure them
that the General brought Orders only that were highly to the Princes advantage,
could gain nothing upon the belief of the Mother and the other Women, so that
the Nazir resolved to go himself in person to try what he could do to undeceive
her. But so soon as he appeared before the Mother, and with terrible Oaths
endeavored to assure her that there was no danger, the Princess still holding
her Son closely embraced in her Arms, cried out, And Thou Dog, art thou also a
Messenger of Death like the rest?

The disconsolate Princess was not to be comforted; for the more Messengers
they sent, the more Oaths they swore, the less credit she gave to their
Imprecations. She looked upon them all as Artifices to surprise her, and to
induce her to consent that her Son should go forth where Death waited his
coming. But at length some of the Principal Young Ladies suffered themselves to
be overruled by the persuasions of the Aga, and the horrible Imprecations
which he called down upon his head, that there was no danger in the world, and
assisted him to bring forth the Prince; and yet with some kind of violence in
forcing him from his Mothers Arms. Who being reduced to despair, seeing she
could not resist the respectful violence that was put upon her, and that she
could no longer hold the dear Pledge of her Life, she flung from her Seat of a
sudden, and after she had snatched the Dagger out of the Sheath that hung at
the Young Prince's side, presenting it to the Breast of the Chief Eunuch, who
was next her, and had the Young Prince by the hand, Go, said she, in the Name
of God, but take a care what thou do, and what thou have promised. If he must
perish, know that thou thy self shall first suffer the punishment which thy
Lying and thy Treason deserve. Presently the Eunuch accepted the Condition, and
consented to receive his death at her hands if any thing dismal befell him.
Which somewhat pacified the Lady, so that she delivered the Poniard, and
suffered it to be sheathed again at her Sons side.

And then it was that the Eunuch redoubling the Oaths that he had sworn, and
the Assurances which he had already given her, that there was no danger, but on
the contrary, a prospect of all Prosperity, satisfied those Royal Persons, as
much as it was possible, in such a dubious Dilemma of their Anxious minds.

The Mother accompanied her Son as far as the last Place, where she was
permitted to go without being seen through the Gate that stood open, and then
returned with a sad heart, supported by some of her Women, and the Prince
trembling and quivering was carried, as I may so say, by the Chief Eunuch
without the first Portal, toward the Apartment of the black Eunuchs.

At the very Instant that he appeared without, the General of the Musquetteers,
with the Prime Ministers Deputy, who kept at a distance behind him, threw
himself at the Prince's Feet, and made three Obeysances according to Custom,
knocking the Ground with his Forehead. Then rising upon his Knees, with his
Cheeks all bathed in Tears, which either the Lamentations of the Ladies had
drawn from his Eyes, or the Death of the Monarch, of which he brought the News,
had made him shed, he declared the occasion of his coming in these words, which
he uttered with a loud voice, and very distinctly.

May your Illustrious Head be always safe; The King of the World, your Father
Habas, to whom the God of mercy grant a new accumulation of Glory has found a
Place next to the Divine Goodness; and Your Illustrious Highness is chosen to
succeed Him, and has been styled the Lieutenant of the true Sovereign. For that
is the signification of the word Valie-Neamet, which was made use of in that
Expression, as being the most usual Epithete, as also the most sublime, which
the Persians have been accustomed to give their Kings. For Valie denotes a
Sovereign Lieutenant; that is, an Absolute Prince in his Dominions, and yet one
that depends and holds of another. It also signifies a Mediator almost in the
same sense. Because a Lieutenant of that nature is a Mediator between the Lord
from whom he derives his Authority, and the People to whom he distributes both
Punishments and Rewards in the Name of the Sovereign Supreme. As for Neamet, it
comes from the word Inaam, which signifies the free Gift of a Lord to his
Slave. So that by the Compound Valie-Neamet, the Persians understand a
Lieutenant, whom the true and supreme Sovereign, who is God, has established
with absolute Authority to dispense over all the World in his stead his Favor
and Benefits, as we shall more amply and more to the purpose explain it in
another place.

The General of the Musquetteers thought it not convenient to use more words,
that he might not delay the Prince, whom he found to be impatient to hear what
he had to say. But then from one extremity he fell into another quite contrary.
To those Tears that had forsaken him succeeded Astonishment, Joy and Sadness
that overwhelmed him anew; and rendered him once again as motionless as before.

He became like a person who out of long Darkness comes of a sudden in a
flaring Light. He seemed to be seized with a kind of dazzling Amaze, and like
one that did not see, beheld as in a Trance, the great number of Eunuchs that
kneeled round about him, calling him their Lord and Sovereign. These first
Minutes being over, he appeared more composed in his Countenance, and softly
leaned upon the Chief Eunuch, like one that had been waked out of a profound
sleep. He began to reflect upon what was passed, and he found that they were so
far from having any design upon his Life, that they came to advance him to the
Throne. Nevertheless, in regard he could not hear those joyful tidings, but as
they were accompanied with the News of his Fathers death, both unlookt for, the
surprise was equal on both sides, and put him a third time into such an
astonishment that he stood for some time in a kind of a Trance. This Grief for
some Minutes contested with his Joy, till at length his good nature overcame
the latter. He obeyed the persuasions of his sorrow; not minding what he had
gained, but what he had lost: and in the midst of those thoughts, overpowered
by his Affliction, according to the Custom of the Persians, he tore his Cabaye,
or upper Garment, from the Collar to the Waste. He wept biterly, not having
shed a tear till that time; tho the Lamentations of his Mother, and the
Consternation wherein he had beheld all the Ladies of his Palace had given him
sufficient cause. This showed the good nature of the Young Monarch, as I have
already said, for it cannot be imagined that he dissembled in what he did. He
was too young to understand the sly tricks of craft and subtilty, and being one
who had never seen the world, but had been bred up tenderly among the Women;
accustomed only to talk of fine Clothes, and Baubles, and to command Eunuchs.
Besides that, the disorder of his mind for above an Hour before would not
permit him to observe such a regular Conduct. So that although he had been ill
used by his Father, who had shut him up in a close Prison, and whose Death
seemed to restore him to Life, by giving him his Liberty and a Diadem, he could
not forbear to bewail his loss as an Evil that was never a whit the less for
being the cause of so much good. Rather must it then be an effect of Nature,
which shows that she is always the Mistress of our Affections, and that the
Passions which she inspires will still prevail, notwithstanding all the
Obstacles of Ambition, Interest, or good Fortune.

The General of the Slaves beholding the Prince oppressed with so much grief,
made no Answer, speaking only, as I may so say, with his Eyes, from whence he
let fall a shower of Tears, and without expecting any longer till the Prince
commanded him to rise, he rose of himself, and approaching his Majesty, made
use of all his Eloquence to alleviate his sorrow. The Nazir Eunuch also was no
less sedulous to join with him in comforting the Young Prince, so that by
degrees the violence of his mourning began to abate. The luster of a Diadem
represented it self before his Eyes with all its glory; so that he suffered
himself to be overcome with the Charms of Grandeur, and the splendor of an
exalted Fortune that glittered in his sight, according to the Expression in the
Persian Original.

Thereupon the two Lords looking steadfastly one upon another, as it were making
signs to each other as to what they had already concluded among themselves; and
well knowing that as yet the Young Prince understood not how to act the King,
they asked him, as it were by way of an indirect and glancing Instruction what
he had to do, whether it were his Majesty's pleasure that they should attend
him forthwith to the Palace Royal, to receive his Diadem, in regard it was of
great importance that he should make no longer delay. To which the Prince
condescended, and ordered them to do whatever in their judgment they deemed
most proper and convenient. Upon which the General of the Musquetteers,
attended by the Chief Eunuch, with a great Train of other Persons, conducted
the Prince to the Apartment where the Kings were accustomed to give Public
Audience, which they call Talaar, Tavieleh, where the Deputies of the Principal
Officers of State, the Grand Astrologer, and the rest that came from the Court
were admitted to make their three usual Protestations in his Presence, the
Deputies in the Name of their Masters, the rest for themselves. After that, his
Majesty went into a Bath which was near the Apartment, there to purify
himself, as the Law ordains, and to array himself in new Habits, while all
things were preparing for the Coronation with all diligence.

In the mean time the Chief of the Astrologers, with his Companion that came
along with him from the Court, retiring to their proper Station, set themselves
to observe the Lucky Hour according to the Position of the Stars for the
performance of this weighty Ceremony. Thus all things were got ready in less
than an hour and a half, through the great diligence as well of the General of
the Musquetteers, as of the Nazir Eunuch, who from the very moment that they
arrived at the Ladies Palace, and during the time that the King staid in the
Bath, had privately sent with all speed for the Furniture of Persons necessary
for the Solemnity.

Which before I declare at large, I am induced to think it will not be amiss to
make a description of the place where it was performed. And this I shall borrow
from another Treatise of my own, wherein I have given a full account of the
Capital City of Persia, and what is in it most worthy observation.

Toward the North, very near the Walls of the Palace, over against one of the
Gates that lead to the principal Entry, is an ancient Apartment, built in a
perfect Square, every side containing four and twenty foot. It was erected long
ago by King Talmas: From this Bulding to the Gate appears a very large Alley,
shaded with lofty Maples; all along the sides of which from the Entrance to
that Apartment are placed at the distance of ten or twelve Paces one from
another, certain stone Mangers of a convenient height, and plastered over with
Lime and Chalk, to tie the Horses that are made choice of out of the Royal
Stables to the number usually of twelve or fifteen, or sometimes more upon high
Festival days, or when any Ambassadors or other Foreiners of great quality are
admitted to have their first Andience of the King. At what time they are
conducted through this Alley through the midst of these Horses gorgeously
harnessed. For all their Caparisons are enriched with precious stones as thick
as they can lie; the Chains, the Shoes, the Hammers, the Buckets, the
Curry-combs, in a word, whatever is used in a Stable is all of pure massy
Gold, as we have already declared in its proper place. On the right and left
Hand of the Apartment, were to be seen certain Beds of Flowers and Trees
planted here and there at random according to the Persian manner, where Nature
only seems to be the Garderies. Before and toward the South the Garden extends
it self in Breadth and Length, divided as it were into Beds and spacious Plots,
parted one from another with tall Trees, and planted with so many sorts of
Flowers, that some continue blowing during all the three warmer Seasons of the
Year. This Apartment is built for the most part of Carpenters Work; nor is the
Floor of it level with the Superficies of the Alley, but raised about three
foot above it. The Covering is Flat, sustained with turned Pillars, overlaid
with Gold to a considerable thickness, some six or seven and twenty foot high.
The groundwork of the Ceeling is of carved work in pieces answering one
another, and forming Partitions, where the Gold glisters no less than in other
places. Thus this Apartment is open of all sides, but when the Curtains are let
down, which are fastened at the top of the Pillars, equal with the Ceeling
without side. And they always let them down either on one or the other side
according to the Hour that they know the King will come. But when they let them
down, they do not suffer them to hang to the ground as we do; but draw them
with their strings to the next of the great Trees in the Garden, and then
fasten them to the Bodies of the Trees in such a manner at the height of ten
foot from the ground, that they serve instead of large Umbrellaes, to prevent
the Sunbeams from shining into the Room, and yet without hindering the
Company, whether sitting or standing, from having a full sight of all that is
done within.

The Curtains are of Crimson Linen, lined with Indian Chite most gayly
painted. The bands wherewith they are tied back, as are all the running
strings, are of coarse Silk. The Body of the Apartment is divided into three
parts separated only by small Balisters of Joyners work richly gilded. The two
sides make two Halls of six and thirty paces long, and sixteen broad. Between
the two Halls is to be seen a Talaar, or a Balcony of State raised four foot
higher than the Halls; in the midst of which stand a large and deep Font of
white Marble, which receives the Crystal water that continually falls into it
from a Pipe of the same colored Marble. The whole Room is gilded all over, and
that so thick, that although it be above a hundred Years since it was first laid
on, there is nothing to this day that appears either Tarnished or shel'd off in
any part.

It is called Talaar-Tavieleh, as we have already hinted, the Hall of the
Stables, for that upon certain days, as we have said, the Horses of State are
brought out, and tied close by. For Talaar signifies properly an exalted
Balcony, and Tavieleh denotes a Stable, or any other place where they tie
Horses.

This was the Place, and thus adorned for the Coronation of the King. For the
next day I had the liberty to go in, to look about me at leisure, and observe
the Magnificence of the Furniture, and of all that had been made use of at the
Ceremony. The two Halls were spread with Carpets of Silk, and all along the
sides were placed a great number of low square Beds, covered with flowered
Tissue of Gold and Silver. The Talaar or Balcony of State in the middle, was
hung and spread with Carpets of Gold and Silver: The Cushions round about it
being of a certain Stuff made in Persia, called Machmeli-zer-haf, which is a
sort of Velvet weaved in Flowers and Foliage, consisting of Silk interwoven
with Gold. It was also furnished with Vessels to spit in, like those in the
other Halls, some of which were embellished with small Rubies and Turcoises.

In the place designed for his Majesty, a Quilt was laid, stuffed with fine
Sheeps Wool, four fingers thick, and between three and four foot in length;
over which was spread a very fine Coverlet of Indian Work pinked with Gold,
being a most admirable piece of Workmanship. This Carpet covered all the Quilt,
and hung down four fingers on every side, by that means hindering the Quilt
from being seen; besides that, it was kept tight at the two Corners by two
great Apples of massy Gold set with precious stones; close to which stood two
little Vessels to spit in, sumptuously wrought. At the other end lay a Cushion
of which the lower side was of Cloth of Gold, intermixed with red Flowers and
green Leaves: As for the upper side I could not tell what Stuff it was made of,
because I could not come near enough to observe it; besides that, it was all
over covered with Diamonds, Emeralds, Pearl, and other Precious stones, that
cast a wonderful luster, so that it was impossible to know the ground of that
costly Embroidery.

The Room was enlightened with fourteen Lamps all of massy Gold, not hung up,
but set upon the ground as we set our Candlesticks upon Tables or Stands. These
Branches, all of Duckat Gold, are so substantial, that there are some which
weigh sixty Marks; and the least weigh thirty or forty. Of these Lamps there
were eight in the Talaar, in the Middle, and three in each of the Halls, where
were also eight Candlesticks with two Branches apiece of massy Gold also,
three foot high, and weighing more than the Lamps.

The place for the Coronation, being thus prepared, they brought and laid upon
the middle of the Talaar, the four Principal Pieces which are in a manner
consecrated to this Ceremony.

The first was a Scourzie, or Seat which served instead of a Throne, being a
little square Cushion Stool, three Geometrical feet in height; the feet of the
Pillars that supported the Corners being fashioned like so many great Apples;
and to secure the Seat, there ran as many Cross Bars both above and below. The
upper part was smooth and plain, without any thing that might make the Seat
softer, being all the same materials with the rest, that is, massy Gold very
thick; the four Pillars also and the Feet being plated with Gold, and set with
little Rubies and some Emraulds. This same Stool at other times is kept very
charily in the Treasury Royal, which is a Dungeon in the Fortress of Ispahan,
and so weighty, that two men can hardly carry it. I saw it there by good
fortune; having the opportunity to get in, when the Vazier, or Farmer Royal of
the City came to open all the Magazines and Closets, in regard the King was the
next day to show them to his Mother and his Wives.

The second Piece was a Taag, or Diadem, or Crown, for I cannot find any other
word to express it by in our Language: nor could the Persians, were they to
translate the word Crown into their own Language, find a more proper word than
their own Taag; which is that Persian Crown or famous Bonnet, which some
Travelers call the Sophy's Bonnet, tho I know not for what reason. I have in
another place delivered my opinion sufficiently concerning it. It is a Flat
Bonnet, somewhat like the Mortar-Caps of the Presidents of the French
Parliaments; only it is not altogether so large, nor so deep. It is made
somewhat straiter at the lower end; and carries in the middle a Point that
seems to come out of the middle of the Bonnet, but is only sowed on, tho very
neatly and artificially. This Point rises up about a fingers length, and
lessens toward the end, tho at the top it seems to grow bigger again. The
Materials of the Bonnet prepared for the new King was of Cloth of Gold; bound
about after the manner of a Dhul-bandt (which our Writers, for want of
Language, erroneously call a Turbant) with one of the finest and Thinnest
Calicuts that India could afford, and Tissued with Silver upon the brims the
breadth of two fingers. The outside of the Hollow of the Bonnet at the Top was
covered all over with an Embroidery of Diamonds, from whence hung down several
Chains of precious stones that shaded all the rest of the Circumference, and
dangled down upon the Bonnet, which was no less sumptuously embellished with
all the richest Jewels of the Crown: round about stood little tufts resembling
Herons Feathers, all of Jewellers work, nothing inferior to the rest. In other
parts of the Bonnet were erected little Plumes of Herons Feathers, and Birds of
Paradise. The Dhul-bandt was all hung about with strings of Precious stones,
Diamonds, Rubies, Emraulds and Topazes fastened to the Heron Plumes, which
strings covered all the Dhul-bandt from the top to the bottom, dangling down
upon the Calicut Facing to keep it fast, and prevent it from unloosening. Just
over the forehead shone another Heron-Tuft, much more glorious than all the
rest: from the top of which rose up three Sockets of Precious Stones, wherein
were placed little Tufts of Herons Plumes.

The third Piece was a Chemchir, or Sword, of which the Hilt and Scabbard were
all covered over with Precious Stones proportionably to the Diadem. All the
Persian Swords are about three Fingers broad, and bowed backward almost like a
Semicircle. For they who profess to understand a Weapon in Persia maintain that
a Blade so bowed cuts much keener, and makes a deeper wound than a straight
Sword, which they demonstrate by the Rules of Fencing, which we have not at
this time leisure to examine.

The fourth Piece is a Gangher or Persian Dagger, of which we have given you
the Portraiture, as of all the rest; so that there needs not any farther
description; For the infinite number of Precious Stones would not permit the
sight to judge of the Materials of the Sheath, tho there is no question to be
made but that it was of Gold.

Now to tell you the worth of these three last Pieces (for as to the first it
may be easily computed) is a Task which I dare not undertake, because I could
never understand any thing of certainty in that concern. True it is, that I
have heard a Lord of the Court aver, that as well the Crown as the Sword and
Dagger were valued at above a hundred thousand Tomans, which amount to near
five Millions of our French Money. But I would not advise any person to believe
it. For I know the Persians too well, and particularly the Courtiers of that
Country, for there is no People in the world less friends to Truth, and who
take so much pleasure to multiply Objects, or to enhance the Grandeur and
Magnificence of their Prince. However it is not altogether improbable what they
say: for I have seen one of his Majesty's Heron-Tufts, of which some Europeans
in Ispahan valued one single Diamond in the middle at eighteen, and the rest at
four and twenty thousand pound sterling. If the Royal Diadem had any more than
one Heron-Tuft of that Value, or if that Ruby were upon it, which by the
express Command of the deceased King, the Eunuch that had the charge of the
Treasury showed me at Mazanderan, which be of an Oval form, weighed (as the
said Eunuch told me) a hundred and sixty Caratts, the Chains or Strings, with
the Sword and Dagger, being proportionable in value, the three Pieces might
well amount to a hundred thousand Tomans. But notwithstanding all this to tell
you my opinion sincerely, I could never judge them to be worth above three
parts of the money.

These three Pieces were laid near the Stool, and covered with a rich Toilet.
Presently his Majesty appeared coming out of the Bath, and arrayed himself in
his usual Habit, tho more sumptuous than he was wont to wear; after that being
entered into the Room of State, he sat down in the Place that was prepared for
him, and at the same time they who were appointed to assist at the Coronation,
ascended the Talaar, and ranged themselves in this Order.

Upon the Right side of his Majesty, at a little distance behind him stood the
Aga-Nazir Eunuch, who at that Ceremony performed the Office of High
Chamberlain, carrying to that purpose at his Girdle a little Box of Gold
glittering with Precious Stones, wherein were a good Number of Handkerchiefs,
and Perfumes for his Majesty's service when he had a mind to make use of them.

A little behind him appeared six Georgian Children from fifteen to sixteen
years of Age, who had been made Eunuchs, extremely beautiful, as are most of
the young Children of that Country. They were so placed as to make a half
Circle about the King, standing upright without so much as stirring their hands
which they held across upon their Breasts; being sumptuously habited in Linen,
whose ground was Silver heightened with Gold in the same Order, and as far
behind the Children, as they stood behind the King, appeared a great number of
old black Eunuchs, every one holding a long Musket in his hand, of which the
Stock was garnished with Gold and Precious Stones.

Upon the Left hand of the King, which is esteemed the most Honorable among
the Persians, sat first the Commissioner that represented Dlahammed-Mehdi, the
Prime Minister; Next to him the second Commissioner that represented
Gemchid-Kaan General of a Body of the Army; Next to him the Person that
supplied the Place of Mazsoud-Bek, Superintendant General of the Kings Demeans.
In the fourth Seat, the Person Commissioned by Mirza-sedreel-din, Principal
Secretary of the Empire. Hemireh-Hamzeh-Mirzah-Daroga, Grand Provost of Ispahan
and its Dependencies, took the fifth place. And Mirza-Refie, esteemed one of
the most Learned among the Persians took the next.

Upon his Majesty's Right Hand, in the second Place (for the first was left
void) in honor of Boadaak-Sultan, General of the Musquetteers, who was present
but standing upright; near the Prince sat the Person deputed by
Mahammed-Kouli-Kaan Lord Chief Justice. Below him two Places were left void for
the chief Astrologer and his Colleague, who were retired to observe the Lucky
Hour. The fifth Place was filled by the most learned and wittiest person that
was in all that great Kingdom, by the judgment of all men, being the Brother of
the Prime Minister, and great Uncle to the new Monarch by his Wife. His name
was Mirza-Hali-Riza, and his Title Cheik-el-Islaam, or Ancient of the Law. For
by the word Islaam, which properly signifies the Reverence which we pay to the
divine Commands, by the submission of our Mind and Will, they mean Religion,
which they call the Law, by way of Excellence. For at this day, as formerly
among the Hebrews, all their Politics depend upon Religion; and it is the
Ancient of the Law who holds the Balance of Affairs in his Hand, which cannot
be determined without his Approbation. In the sixth Place sat
Mirza-Moumen-Vazier, or Receiver General for his Majesty in Ispahan and its
Dependencies.

I could never hear of any other Grandees but these that sat. True it is, that
the Halls on both sides were full of Officers that stood; some to authorize the
Solemnity of the Coronation; some to be ready to execute the King's Commands,
as they should receive them from the General of the Musquetteers, who for that
day supplied the Place of Lord High Steward of the Household; carrying in his
hand, as a Badge of his Office, a large Truncheon of Gold, all set with
Precious Stones, and a round Ball at one End; and standing at the left hand of
the King, from whom he received Orders, or to say better, to whom he gave
directions. For the new King who had never seen any such sight before, neither
did nor said any thing but what was dictated to him.

About ten a clock at night the Chief of the Astrologers and his Companion,
having been long observing the Position of the Stars, and Conjunctions of the
Planets, returned at length to give notice that the Fortunate Hour for the
Coronation of the King would be within twenty Minutes. Thereupon his Majesty
ordered the General, as he had been taught before, to lead them both to their
Places.

In the mean time he whispered with the General, who gave him Instructions how
to behave himself upon all the several changes of the Solemnity: which the
young Prince failed not to follow exactly, for fear of committing any
Irregularity, for want of experience in an Action of so public and weighty a
Concernment.

When the twenty Minutes were almost expired, the Grand Astrologer having
winked upon the General to let him know that he might proceed, he told the
King; who thereupon immediately, according to his Instructions, rose up; and
then all the rest rose up likewise. At what time the General threw himself at
his Majesty's Feet, bowing to the very Ground; then rising upon his Knees he
drew out of the Bosom of his Garment, the Bag wherein was the Letter which the
Assembly had sent to the New Monarch. Presently he opened the Bag, took out the
Letter, kissed it, laid it to his Forehead, presented it to his Majesty, and
then rose up. The Prince having received it, returned it to him again, and
commanded him to break it open and read it; which he did aloud very distinctly
and leisurely, to the end that all who were present at the Ceremony might hear
the Contents, and understand that the Grandees of the Kingdom had unanimously
elected the present Prince for King of Persia, that they acknowledged him for
such, and were ready to attest it if there were occasion.

When he had done reading, the King commanded him to send for the Ancient of
the Law, which he did; at what time the Lord Ancient, approaching his Majesty,
threw himself at his Feet, and after the usual Prostrations, he rose up again,
took the Letter out of the Generals hand, to acknowledge and authorize it, to
verify the Seals, and attest that it was real. For that acknowledgment belongs
to him as Chief of the Law, and in all spiritual matters. Having taken the
Letter, and laid it on his head out of respect, he read it, and looked upon the
Seals, and then returning just before the King, he fell upon his Knees, and
made three bows to the ground; by that humble posture declaring his approbation
of the Letter, and that the advancement of the Prince to the Empire was legal.

While the Spiritual Judge was thus employed, the General desired to know the
Kings Resolution, whether he would be Crowned by his own name, or assume any
other before his Coronation. Who made answer, that tho he altered his
Condition, he would not change his Name, but retain that of Sephie which was
given him in his Infancy. The General returned the Kings pleasure to the
Ancient of the Law, who was risen from the Kings Feet, where he had left the
Letter. At the same instant therefore, the two Lords, the Ancient of the Law
upon his Right, and the General upon his Left, conducted the Prince to the
Chair of Gold, so often mentioned before, placed in the middle of the Hall, and
then the Ancient of the Law besought him to take his Place. Which he did,
according to the Rules of the Law, wherein he had been instructed, with his
face toward the Kaabba, or Oratory of Mecca. Then the Ancient of the Law
seating himself upon his Heels, which is the Posture used by the Mahumetans
when they pray to God, or when they are in the presence of any Persons of high
Dignity, some few paces distant from his Majesty discovered the Diadem, the
Sword and Dagger, and then said a Prayer to God, which he began with a short
Confession of their Faith, and concluded with a Benediction upon the Royal
Ornaments appointed for the Ceremony of the Coronation. The Prayer lasted not
above a quarter of an Hour; at what time rising up, he took the Sword and
girded it on upon his Majesty's Left side; and hung the Dagger upon his Right.
Then having made a sign to the General to take off the Bonnet from the Kings
head, he put on the Taagh or Diadem, uttering at the same instant certain
Verses of the Alcoran proper for the purpose, which he did before when he girt
on the Sword and Dagger.

This done he ended, and gave place to Mirza-Refia, the great and learned
Doctor already mentioned, who presented himself to perform the Kotbe, which
word in the Original signifies a Prayer. But by this Prayer is meant a Prayer
in form of a Harangue; and perhaps they might give it the name of an Oration.

By an ancient Custom, time out of mind, these Prayers were always to be
divided into four Heads; to last half an hour, and to contain always the same
Form. Only the Orator had the liberty to alter the Terms, and the Style, and to
give a new flight to his thoughts.

The first Head is called Hamde-Koda, or the Praise of God, because the Orator
here speaks of nothing else, But of the Thanks which we always ought to render
him for his Graces and Favors, since there is not that moment wherein we do
not continually receive some new mark of his Kindness. That his Blessings being
like the Sources of great Rivers, that flow without ceasing, and never stop
their Course, for which reason the blessings of God, are called by the Divines,
Flowing Blessings, our Thanks therefore ought to be continual, and always
running. That whatever his Supreme Majesty exposes to the Eyes of Men, whether
it were in times past, or now at this present, bears the Characters, and
imprints the Seals of his affection toward us, and testifies that whatever he
acts without himself, he does it all for the greatest good of Mankind, in
regard that Infinite Being is the best of all that do best.

These are their Expressions, and very near the sense of the first Head, which
lasts some half a quarter of an hour.

The second Head is called, Nead Berpegamberhou ve douasde Imaam; The Praise,
Remembrance, and Acknowledgment of the Prophet, and of the twelve Descendants
and Lieutenants.

And therefore it contains nothing more than the Acclamations and Benedictions
which they give to persons which their superstition has rendered Venerable among
them; That you are the Fourteenth whom God has chosen pure and unblemished;
That he has made them successively Lords of all Mortals. That the Faith is not
entire, if together with the Confession of the Divinity we do not likewise
acknowledge the sending of these Fourteen to be lawful, upon whom the Heavenly
Lights are shed down, to give light to wandering souls, and to show to all the
way of Truth. Therefore we are obliged to glorify them, to celebrate their
Praises, to wish for their perpetual Welfare and Peace, and to their Family on
Earth all manner of prosperity: that their names may be exalted above all
Created Beings. That Curses may be heaped upon their Enemies. And that all the
Men in the Universe may be lead away, and become dust at their Door. With
several other Wishes of the same nature, which I have rendered as much word for
word as is possible.

The third Head is that Royalty is of divine Institution. Seltemet ez Hokkam
Koda, that is, that Royalty is of Divine Institution. Upon which they observe,
That since God created the World, he has always governed his People by
Prophets, and in their stead by Kings, whom he has established their
Successors. That Kings are the Zel-Alla, or the shadow of God; which is that
which we call the Image of God. But the word Image is such an Expression as
they abhor as Idolatrous, a Term which they dare not make use of; believing at
the same time, that they likened God to any Image, they supposed him at the
same time to be Corporeal. They added withal,

That as at all times we are obliged to serve God, and to obey him, not only by
the light and understanding which Heaven has infused into us at our Birth, but
by the Revelations which we have had from his Prophets, who have declared unto
us his Will, we are in the same manner, and by the same Revelation bound to
obey Kings, as being the Valie or Sovereign Lieutenants of God, Gaanit-chin,
sitting in his place on Earth, and that we ought to submit to their Commands,
without examining whether they be just or no. In regard that in submitting to
their Commands we submit at the same time to the Holy Books in all things, tho
they seem contrary to our Reason and Understanding, by which we showed blind
obedience which God exacts from men; sometimes trying our readiness to submit
to him, by Commands that seem unjust, to render out submission more acceptable
and of greater value.

The fourth and last Point is, Douhaa-Preray, padchae, A Prayer for the King,
Which contains a great number of Supplications for the long life of the present
Monarch of the Persians, for his Health, for the establishment of his Throne
and the increase of his Conquests. That since this illustrious Branch of the
Imaanic Race is according to the true Law become the Lieutenant of the Monarch
of all the Earth, and lawful Lord of the World, that therefore his Dominions
may extend from the one to the other Pole; That his Majesty may always appear
surrounded with glory like the Sun. That his Word may have a constraining
Power. That all his Wishes and Desires may be accomplished; and that all things
may succeed in a more glorious manner than ever in favor of King SEPHIE. Which
last word the Orator pronounced in a louder Tone than he had pronounced all the
rest, to the end that all the Throng might hear him distinctly.

And here it is to be observed, that he rose on purpose at the end of his
Oration, in regard that till then, during all the Ceremony that Name had not
been uttered before.

But at the same Instant that they heard the Name of SEPHIE pronounced, all the
whole Assembly strove which should send forth loudest acclamations of joy by
repeating the usual Intch-Alla, or God grant it, which every one repeated five
or six times. After which the Cheik-el-Islaam, or Ancient of the Law, was the
first that fell upon his Knees before the King, and bowing his Forhead three
times to his Majesty's Feet, pronounced a second Benediction in few words,
which he concluded with zealous wishes of Prosperity; and that he might so
Reign as to extend the Frontiers of his Dominion, and render his Subjects happy.

He made three Bows more at the Conclusion of his Harangue, which he uttered
with a great deal of Eloquence, as they assured me, tho he had had no time to
prepare himself, as having been hurried half asleep out of his Bed to assist at
the Solemnity.

After him all the Grandees, according to their Dignity, and the rest who were
of any Quality came and paid their respects to the Monarch with the three
customary Prostrations.

This done, his Majesty rose from his Seat of Gold and returned to his former
Place, as did all the rest where they sat before. For during the Ceremony they
all stood, there being none that sat but the King.

In this manner was Sephie the Second Crowned, his Grandfather being the first
of that Name among all the Persian Monarchs. True it is, that the first Founder
of this Race was of the same Name, but he is not numbered among the Persian
Kings, because he was never put into the Catalogue. His Modesty would not
suffer him to accept the Title. For as the Historians tell us, he always looked
upon the Throne to be an Illustrious Torment, which under the vain appearances
of happiness concealed continual pain and trouble.

This name of Sephie has several significations which amount to the same sense
and meaning: for sometimes it signifies a Friend, sometimes elected, sometimes
pure or purified. Which I have said turn all to the same sense, for Friends are
but persons selected from others, and purified, which is the most usual
signification, and is not much remote from the other two. As for example, when
the Persians call (as they often do) the first man Adam Safie Alla, we may
translate it the Man, the Friend, or the Elect, or the Purified of God. Which
three Epithites agree very well in their signification. For the friends of God
are his Elect: Nor can they be his Elect before he has purified them. And
therefore it is according as the word is placed, that sometimes it signifies
one thing, sometimes another. As here for example, speaking of the New King of
the Persians, I should rather choose to translate Chae Safie, the King Elect,
than the King purified. True it is, that they who would have Safie to signify
purified, depend upon the Etymology; For that the Root from whence Safie is
derived is Saf, which properly signifies Purity. But let this suffice fot
playing the Grammarian. The subject of my discourse will not permit me to stop
any longer upon these Trifles, but only to observe by the way, that it was from
the word Safie that the Greeks borrowed the word Sophos. It will be more to the
purpose to observe the mistake of our Writers upon the word Safie. For they
would have all the Kings of Persia to be called Sophies. I cannot but laugh
when I find in their Writings the Grand Sophy, the Sophy of Persia, and the
Sovereign Sophy. For the Kings of Persia are neither called Sophies in general,
nor in particular. Could the Kings of Persia read our European Characters, and
should see upon the Letters, that are written to them from some parts of
Europe, the Title which is given them of Sophy, questionless they would spit
upon them, and take it for an affront.

Therefore I would have those that speak, when occasion offers, of Persia, or
whether they be the Ministers of Princes, to be careful how they commit this
mistake in their Dispatches to that Court: or whether they be those Writers who
profess to give a faithful Relation of a Country where they profess themselves
to have been, and pretend to tell us what they have seen with their Eyes, yet
vent a thousand Lies and Stories, and overconfidently impose upon their
Readers; I say I would have such persons content themselves with only giving us
the false names of things, but that the things themselves should be really
true. Nevertheless I find that in those things they make very gross mistakes;
and therefore lest people may think I decry others to gain the more credit to
my own Relations; and to free my self from the lash of the Proverb, That two of
a Trade can never agree, I shall for proof of what I assert, bring an Example
relating to this very Story it self, which I shall not take out of any Book of
Travels, (for it is not my Intention hereto attack any one of them) but from
the Audir of Address, wherein there is a relation of the Death of the late King
of Persia, and of the Coronation of the present King, fol. 523.

I cannot conclude without imparting to you the news which we have received
from the Court of Persia, by Letters from Legorn, the fifth of this Month.

They tell us by an Express dispatched from Ispahan to the English Merchants
residing in Legorn, that the Sophie after a debauch of drinking, fell sick at
Khur, in his return from Casbin, and died four days after. That after his Death
was known, in the City of Ispahan, his Eldest Son, about twenty years of Age,
was Proclaimed by the Principal Minister and other Officers, by the name of
Grandfather Sha-Sophy. That the next day the Governor of Ispahan and the chief
Lords of the Court, who accompanied the Body of the deceased King, being
arrived, and having paid their Homage to the Prince, he showed himself in
public to his Subjects, who testified their joy by their loud Acclamations;
and that afterward he received the accustomed Presents of the Nobility, as
also of the Agents of England, France, and Holland.

They add that several days were spent in feasting and rejoicing by public
Proclamation, with a more than ordinary Magnificence as being a thing which
they saw pleased the humor of the Prince, who they say is more addicted to
Expenses than his Father, and that he having given Audience to the same Agents,
he had promised a Confirmation of the Privileges which his Predecessors had
granted them; and also to enlarge them, as he should see occasion.

Had the Author of this News studied to frame a false story, he could not have
contrived it better; for that he speaks nothing of truth. This Express which
they assure us to have been dispatched from Ispahan to Legorn, is a mere
Fantome. Not one of the English ever dispatched any person in all that time,
nor at any other time; I do not know that indeed they ever dispatched directly
any Person from the Capital City of Persia to that Port of Italy. Nor did ever
that Monarch of the Persians, whom they so confidently call Sophy, ever go by
that name in his own Country, nor any other like it. Whereas he says, that the
King fell sick of a debauch, and died four days after, it is of the same stamp
with the rest.

He did not fall sick of a debauch; neither did his distemper carry him off in
four days; for he lay in a languishing condition four Months and more. The
place which the Relation calls Khur, where he says the King died, is a perfect
Chimera. I have examined all my Persian Geography, and can find no such place,
either great or small, that is called by that name. As little of truth there is
in what he farther adds, that it was in the Kings return from Casbin that he
died. For the King had not been at Casbin in eight years before; but it was
from the Caspian Sea that he was then coming back, as has been already related
in the Life of that great Monarch.

The Author of the Relation passing forward to the Election of his Successor,
goes on with the same sincerity as before. For the news of the deceased Kings
death was not known in Ispahan before the Coronation of his Successor, unless
it were to some few persons of the highest Quality; nor was the Successor
proclaimed in that City by the Prime Minister, nor any other of the Prime
Ministers of State, who were a hundred and forty Leagues off at that time.
There are no public Proclamations in that Country as among us. Nor was he
proclaimed, as his Grandfather is pretended to have been, under the name of
Sha-Sophi, since neither the one nor the other ever bore that Name.

That which follows after, That the Governor of Ispahan, and the principal
Lords of the Court, who accompanied the Corpse of the deceased, being arrived
there, and having paid their accustomed Homage, he showed himself in public to
his Subjects, who testified their joy by their loud and extraordinary
Acclamations.

This whole Period, I say, contains as many impertinencies as there are words.
The Governor of Ispahan never left the City; so that he could not then be said
to return the next Morning: nor was the Body of the deceased King ever brought
thither, as being a thing that was never intended. Then for the Lords that
accompanied the Corpse, the first that came to the Court did not come till
within twenty days after, others not till thirty or forty. And as for the
Acclamations of joy which he mentions, I heard none but those of which I have
already given an account; and yet I was present at the whole Ceremony, so that
no body could be a better Witness than my self. Nor did the Intelligencer know
any better which of the Agents, whether the English, French, or Holland Agent
had his first Audience of the New King, or what Presents they made him, of
which we shall give an account in the series of our Discourse. Let the Reader
now judge, what credit there is to be given to Relations, which are supposed to
have been sent to that Country, which are only grounded upon uncertain Reports,
and Letters of Merchants and Travelers written without judgment, who upon
occasion, speaking of other Affairs touch upon something that was transacted in
that Country.

But now to return to our business. After the Young King, and those that stood
of each side were returned to their Places, the General of the Musquetteers
having whispered some few Minutes in the Kings Ear, among several other things
of lesser Importance, gave out these four principal Commands in his Majesty's
name.

First, That both the soft and loud Music should play in the two Balconies
upon the top of the great Building, which stands at one end of the Palace
Royal, called the Kaisarie, or Imperial Place. No Nation was dispensed with,
whether Persians, Indians, Turks, Muscovites, Europeans, or others, which was
immediately done. And this same Tintamarr or Confusion of Instruments, which
sounded more like the noise of War than Music, lasted twenty days together
without intermission, or the interruption of Night. Which number of twenty days
was observed to answer the number of the Young Monarch's years, who was then
twenty years of Age.

The second was, that the Palace should be furnished with usual Guards, to the
same Number, and in the usual Places as in the time of the deceased Monarch.

The third was, that they should go and deface the Name of Habas out of all the
Seals and Signets of State, which are all of Precious Stones, which were
brought from Court, in a Purse sealed up with the Prime Ministers Seal, and
that the Name of Sephie should be engraved in the room of the other. That if in
any of the Seals the Name of Habas could not be conveniently Erased, that the
engraving should be entirely taken away, to make room for another
Sculpture-upon a new Superficies; or if the Pieces were so delicate that they
could not endure defacing, that they should be broken to pieces, and new stones
be engraved.

The fourth, That all the old Coins and Stamps should be broken, and other new
Money made with the Name of the present Prince upon it. And that care should be
taken to coin with all speed against the next day between sixscore and a
hundred and forty Tomans, which amount to between five or six hundred pounds
sterling of our Money.

This was done with that speed that the Sum was ready the next day in great
Pieces, as is usual, to the value of eighteen pence, for the King to bestow as
he pleased himself. The same day one of these Pieces came to my hands; and the
Person from whom I had it assured me, that there had been some of the same
bigness coined in Gold, which I am apt to believe, tho I never saw any. Round
about the Edge were engraved the twelve names of Mahomet's Successors, with
these words in the middle, Bend, Shae-din-Safie-est; The Sovereign Lieutenant
of the King of the World according to the true Law is Safie.

We have in another Place explained these Inscriptions more exactly and
literally. On the other side was this Persian Distich:

Zibad Destie shae Abas sanie,
Safie zad Zikkeh, saheh Karanie.
That is, After Habas the Second was in Corporeal Being. Or thus:

After Habas the Second quitted his Corporeal Being, Safie Master of the World
coined this Money.

Which is as much as to say, He was declared King, in regard that in those
Countries, as well as here, none but Sovereigns can coin Money.

Underneath were these words: Zarby sefahaan hazar haftad ou Heft, Coined at
Ispahan the year of the Hegirah 1077.

It was almost near Midnight before the Ceremony ended. At what time the King
rose up in his Royal Habiliments, which he did not put off till he was retired
into his particular Apartment in the Women's Palace. All the while there was to
be observed a great alteration in the Countenance of the Young Prince. He
looked with a Countenance all in disorder, like a Person that was not well in
his Senses. And indeed what other could be expected from a Person that had been
all along mued up under a close confinement, and had never seen the World?
Besides that by a secret Fatality of the ill humor of his Father, he had been
shut up in a more rigorous Imprisonment, than ever was practiced before toward
the Kings Children? Could he observe a certain Posture of Majesty, that should
have performed all things after a surprising manner, who had never been
instructed before? Much less, was he able to make any Reflections upon himself.
Add to this, that the Young Prince passed of a sudden from one Extremity to
another. He heard himself called Master of the World, He that but a little
before was in condition little inferior to that of a Slave. True it is, that
he wanted for no Conveniences in his Captivity, which was accompanied with all
the Pleasures grateful to the Senses; but those Pleasures became Torments, when
sowered with the continual fears of Death, or deprivation of his Eyes that
continually threatened him.

And this was that which made him he could not tell what to do. For what may we
say of that last assault that attacked his very Soul? How many dismal
Apparitions did the dreadful Cries and frantic Lamentations of his Mother and
his Wives, and others of the same Sex present to his Mind? His Soul, to speak
after the Persian manner, was like a Sea, which being agitated by a furious
Tempest, expresses its disorder by the roaring of the Waves, and shows the
disturbance it was in after the Storm is over, and tho a pleasing Calm succeed.

The Grand Duchess (for that Title is given to the Mother of the New King from
the very moment of her Sons being Crowned) was not in a worse condition. They
had told her the very first words which the General of the Musquetteers had
uttered, throwing himself at her Sons Feet: they brought her the news every
Minute of what passed. But Fear and Grief had so possessed her Imagination that
there was no entrance for any other Passion. It was above a quarter of an hour
before she would so much as listen to the welcome news which they brought her;
she refused obstinately to believe. And tho she had such forcible reasons to
rejoice, she still continued weeping and lamenting according to the humor of
her Sex, that are willing to dwell upon sorrowful Objects, and wilfully refuse
to put away those Idea's from their Minds. However at length so many Eunuchs
came to tell her the news of the Death of her Husband, and the Election of her
Son, for whose Coronation they were preparing, that she began to lend an Ear,
and to surcease her fears. Nevertheless her Soul continued still in suspense
between Joy and Grief: For as the good Fortune of her Son and his Exaltation
afforded her a happy occasion of Gladness, so the mournful death of her Husband
recalled her Tears: So that those two Passions equally prevailing in her heart
kept the balance so even that her joys and sorrows hung in an equal Poise. But
at length Custom and good Manners turned the Scales. So that for a while she
relapsed into her first Commotions: she rent her Garments, calling upon the
Soul of the Deceased, expostulating with him as if he had been present, what
reason he had to quit the World and leave her in that forlorn condition; with
other moans and lamentations of the same nature. However she gave over when she
understood that the King her Son was returning to her. Thereupon, after she had
performed the usual Ceremonies of Purification which the Law ordains, she
changed her Habit, as did the Princess the New Monarchs Wife, with the rest of
the Ladies of Quality that belonged to the Court, to receive the King, who till
then had lived among them as a Prisoner.

So soon as they had notice that the New King was entered into their Palace,
they went all to meet him. The Great Duchess was the first that paid her duty
to him upon her Knees, bowing her Head three times to the ground: which done,
his Wife and his Concubines did the same; and then the rest of the Persons
belonging to the Place, whose Quality and Employments privileged them for that
Honor. I could not learn what was done more the rest of the Night: for I have
already informed you how difficult it is to be informed of the Transactions in
those secret Habitations, that seem to be Regions of another World. There are
none but Women that can approach within a League of it, or some Black Eunuchs,
with whom a Man may as well converse with so many Dragons that can discover
those secrets, and you may as well tear out their hearts, as a syllable upon
that Text. You must use a great deal of Art to make them speak; just as we tame
Serpents in the Indies, till they make them hiss and dance, when they please.
In the mean time the noise of the Nakara resounded from the Terraces of the
Royal Palace. And in regard it continued longer than ordinary, which is
generally not above three Quarters of an Hour, it gave an occasion to those
that were wakened with the din to wonder what was the matter. But in regard it
was then Midnight, and an unseasonable time to stir out of the House there were
very few, unless they were such as lived near the Royal Palace that would so
far gratify their Curiosity as to enquire the Reason. The rest contented
themselves till next Morning, at what time they understood that Saphie the
Second was seated upon the Throne as Successor to his Father Habas deceased.

I leave the Reader to conjecture how every body was surprised. For my part I
apprehended something so strange upon the novelty of the Accident, that I
thought my self in a dream. That they could conceal the Death of so great and
Potent a Prince so long, and yet that it should not be known till after the Son
was seated upon the Throne and actually Crowned, of which I had never read the
like Example. But this was one Masterpiece of the Persian Wisdom, never too
much to be commended. By means of which Address, the State changed its Master,
without any alteration in Form; and suffered one of the most dangerous
Resolutions without being sensible of it; insomuch that in all Ispahan there
did not appear the least sign of Consternation. They heard without any
disturbance that Habas was dead without making a Will, and with satisfaction
received the Person whom they had Elected in his Place. There was no body that
appeared either very sad or overjoyed: No body that played the Censurer to find
fault with what was done, much less any one that was mutinous. For all things
ran in their usual Course. The Merchants opened their Shops as they did the day
before, and every one followed their Occasions, as little concerned as if no
such thing had happened.

Methought that then Ispahan was one of the Places Republic, above the reach
of Fortune, and exempted from those Accidents that trouble the Tranquillity of
Mortals.

Our Europeans only took the Alarm upon the news of this great and sudden
Revolution, and they that were in their Houses in the City kept their doors
shut all the first part of the Morning. Among the rest the Hollanders, who were
retired to their own Home, to the number of Forty. With them was M. Hubert de
Laresse, who was sent by the Orders of the Holland Company in the Quality of an
Ambassador to the deceased King with Commissions and Presents for his Majesty.
He was then just about to return; but understanding the Change, he who having
been long employed by the Company, had been in several parts of India, and had
there seen upon the death of Princes strange Commotions, and dangerous
Seditions, wherein many Murders and Roberies had been with impunity committed;
He, I say, made cautious by this hazardous Experience, was not a little fearful
of the same Consequences of such a Change, and therefore advised the Dutch to
keep in, to prevent the evil Accidents of mutinies upon such occasion in hopes
of Booty and Pillage. But the Ingenuity of the Persians, and the Excellency of
their Government might have spared him those Fears. However when the Superior
of the Capuchins brought him word about nine of the Clock in the Morning that
all was quiet, that he might no longer discover his mistrust of the Public
Security; he ordered the Doors to be opened. This Superior of the Capuchins
was the Reverend Father Raphael of Man's.

At the same time the New Monarch coming out of the Inner part of his Palace,
went and sat in the great Hall where he was Crowned the Night before, and then
it was that all the Grandees, who were then at Ispahan qualified to receive
that Honor, were admitted to kiss the ground before his Feet. This Ceremony
lasted till ten of the Clock; at what time his Majesty rising from his Seat
took Horse; and that was the first time that ever he rode out of the Place
where he was born. And according to the Custom of the Persians, he made a
Cavalcade round his Palace very leisurely, and with little attendance, riding
in the middle at the distance of twenty Paces from them that marched before,
and those that followed after, only twelve Footmen went of each side, before
and behind his Horse; and all this to the end he might be the better seen by
the People.

His Majesty had on a Cabaye, or Georgian Vest of Satin and Silver, thick
powdered with Violets; the forepart of which upon his Breast was adorned with
long Rows of Pearls and Diamonds, six of each side. Over his Vest he wore a
short Justacore without Sleeves, of Cloth of Gold, faced with Sables. Upon his
right side stuck his Dagger, of which the Sheath and Hilt were set with
Emeralds and other Precious Stones: nor was his Sword less gorgeously
embellished. Upon his Head he wore a Persian Cap or Dhul-bandt, made of very
fine Silk and Gold, with a Royal Heron-Tuft fastened before in a Rose of
Diamonds and Rubies. The People from all Parts flock together in Heaps to see
their New Sovereign; who not being accustomed to see such Sholes of People, as
having always lived remote from Noise and Hurry, seemed, as he had done at the
Coronation Ceremony, to look like one that knew not well how to behave himself,
as being not a little dazzled with so much sudden splendor. However he still
looked up, so that all might see his Eyes, where sweetness sat intermixed with
Majesty, which immediately begat both Love and Respect, as did all the rest of
his Body which was exactly shaped.

His Stature was Tall, and withal proportionable and graceful; his Face was
round, with a pleasing Air in his Lineaments, a little marked with the Small
Pox. His Eyes blue, his Hair white, which he therefore dyed black, as being the
color most esteemed by the Persians. They who know that all the followers of
Mahomet shave their Hair, will understand that I mean the hair of his Beard,
which at those years began to spread its early Down upon his Lips and Cheeks,
wherein he was very like his Father, only that he had not so long a Nose, nor
so full and open an Eye. The whiteness of his Complexion, which the Sun had not
at all altered as yet, had something in it, which I cannot express, that was
extremely charming. In a word, there was nothing in the Prince which did not
then appear very graceful. I say, then; for now he is very much changed, and
still changes every day.

His Majesty having been an Hour abroad returned into the Women's Apartment.
from whence he did not stir out all that day, after he had given Orders, or
rather Leave to the General of the Musquetteers, and the Nazir Eunuch, who were
then his chiefest Favorites, to dispatch such business as required have.

He did nothing more all the rest of that day, nor was there any other Pomp or
Show, contrary to the general expectation. For the King was willing to defer
the time of Public Rejoicing till all the Court should be arrived at Ispahan.
In the mean while, there was no alteration to be seen in the City; The Shops
were open, the Tradesmen followed their business in the public Streets, and
the Markets were kept till a little before Night. And this was observed not
only in the Capital City, but over all that Vast Empire. So that this great
Revolution made no change either in the Estate or Business of any Person. It
was an absolute Calm, for which we may give two Reasons. The one was the
Prudence of the Great Ones, who understood so well to conceal the Death of the
deceased Monarch: The other was, the absolute Authority of the Kings of Persia,
and the terrible Awe that Superstition infuses into the People. At the bare
Command of the Prince the highest in Dignity come and offer their Heads, and
submit themselves to the stroke of Death, without daring to presume to ask the
reason why?

In this manner, no body appeared either pensive or glad; no body discovered
the least sign of discontent. Not but that I believe there were several who
concealed their sorrows, for fear of offending the New King. They considered
that Habas the Second, of whose death they had so lately heard, was fit to
govern; that he was kind and gentle to his Subjects; that he was feared abroad;
but kept all things in peace and tranquillity at home. That he was a lover of
Justice, and took care that his Officers did not abuse their Authority, and
oppress the People; nevertheless, that a secret Providence had cut him off in
the midst of so fair a Race, and in the flower of his Age, when he had strength
of judgment to design, and force of body to execute. That on the contrary, the
Young Prince who was now ascended to the Throne, had never seen any thing, and
was as it were but an Apprentice, not only in the Act of Government, but in all
other things. So that they were likely to suffer long through the tenderness of
his Age, as they had experienced before in the Reigns of his Predecessors upon
the same grounds.

But they who most laid to heart the mournful death of the deceased King, were
the Christians. That Prince had always showed himself kind and favorable to
their Religion, showing them extraordinary Civilities, and rebuking the
Ministers of the Law, and Interpreters of the Alcoran, when they sought to
exasperate him against the Professors of our Religion.

Which he did more than once; as we do relate in his Life; insomuch as the
Armenians would say one among another, that he was more a Christian than a
Mohammedan. Not but that he was very much devoted to his own Religion, even as
much as the most zealous of his Predecessors; only he thought that the violence
of Princes toward the Liberty of men's Consciences was a thing neither
Acceptable to God, nor conformable to Reason. That he was not to cease being a
Man because he was a Mohammedan; That if Providence had exalted him to a Throne,
it was that he should carry himself like a King, and not like a Tyrant: and
that there was nothing more Barbarous nor Tyrannical, than such a Conduct as
not only violated the Law of Nations, but of Nature also; which desire that men
should live in Society one with another, so far from being at Enmity that they
should be mutual Assistances one to another. Lastly, that God alone was the
Lord of the Conscience, and Master of the Will: That for his part he had
nothing to do but with the outward Government of the Kingdom; and for that
reason it became him to do Justice to all his Subjects of whatsoever Religion,
since they were all Members of his Kingdom.

He persisted so constantly in this judgment and opinion, that notwithstanding
all the endeavors of the Doctors of the Mohammedan Superstition to incense him
against the Christians, they could never vanquish his Resolution. He looked
upon them as People whose false zeal rendered them incapable of Right Reason; or
as Persons biased by Interest, who under the specious pretense of Religion
would make themselves great among the Multitude; or else make use of the credit
which they had already, to make Parties, and Factions in the Kingdom, and
disturb the Government. And therefore he always took delight to lessen and
contemn such sort of people.

This clearly appeared, when he prevented the Creation of a new Sadre, or
Mohammedan Pontiff, or Metropolitan of the whole Empire, inspects into all the
Ecclesiastical Revenues which are managed by inferior Officers under his
Authority, and by his Orders: for the word Sadre signifies the Breast of the
Law. Habas the Second also had severely persecuted the Cheik-el-Islaam, or
Ancient of the Law, who is another Petty Sovereign in spiritual Affairs. For it
is his business to take cognizance of, and to resolve all Cases of Conscience
in Matters of Religion as we have already observed. The King had like to have
condemned him to death, upon an Information, that some of the Interpreters
should whisper one among another, that it would be the best way to advance to
the Throne one of the Sons of the Ancient of the Law, who would be more zealous
for their Religion, than the present Monarch: and he had certainly put his
design in execution, had not the Ancient of the Law prevented him by offering
to his displeasure both his own and the Head of all his Children that attended
him. That spectacle appeased his wrath; believing that person innocent whom he
saw so lowly humbled before him.

He had also thrown out of favor his Pichnaamaz, or Chaplain, and Confessor;
for no other reason but because he continually declaimed against the Christians.

The Prime Minister of State that governed during the Minority of Habas, was no
less averse to the Christians than any of the rest, as being a zealous
Mahumetan; and therefore he continually incensed his Master against them, and
would have had the King have given command that they should carry a Mark, like
the Jews, to distinguish them from Mahumetans: but the King continually denied
him; and it is reported that the disgust which he took against him for that
very thing contributed not a little to his Fall.

After these great Examples of his Lenity, the Prince being now become more
absolute, not only suffered the Christians to enjoy the free exercise of their
Religion; but also granted the same freedom to the Jews; notwithstanding all
the secret and public opposition, which the Mulla or Religious People could
make. Nay, it happened that the King took an occasion to depress all that Race of
Hypocrites. For being so transported as they were to talk of deposing him, as
an Infidel, who kept too much Society with the Profane, the secret hatred which
he bare them from that time forward gave him a plausible pretense to show his
resent, and that I may use the Persian Phrase, to break their Teeth, that is to
say, to prevent their Biting.

As to the Armenians who were his Subjects, and professed the Christian
Religion, he was wont to tell the Grandees of the Kingdom, that it would be a
vile Injustice, for People that labored for the good of the Kingdom, by their
Industry and Commerce, to be excluded from the enjoyments of Peace and that
Plenty of which they were the principal Instruments.

Therefore it was not without just cause that the Christians mourned in their
hearts for the loss of so good a Prince: their misfortune seemed to be without
remedy, in regard the New Monarch, whom they saw exalted in his room, was but a
young Man, from whom they could not promise to themselves any thing of
assurance; and tho he should be favorably inclined, and preserve the same
kindness for them as his Predecessor, he could not, in regard of his want of
experience, long continue his good Intentions, by reason of the daily
Importunities of his Counselors, and the perpetual clamours of the
Interpreters of the Alcoran, and the Doctors of the Law.

Besides that, a Prince of his Age could not well tell where to find a more
expert person to be his Confident than the General of the Musquetteers, who was
a terrible Enemy of the Christians, as well out of his one natural humor, as
for that he hated the Superintendant, whom the Christians had for a long time
looked upon as their Protector at Court.

But among all the Christians none were more afflicted for the death of the
late King than the French, or Europeans: They had the same reasons for their
sorrow with the Native Christians, (for the Mahumetans make no distinction
between the several Sects among us) but there was one Reason of greater
Importance. For that they were strangers, remote from their Country, and could
not subsist where they were without the favor of the Sovereign Prince. As for
the deceased King, he had extended his favors toward them in a high measure:
he had used them more like a Father than a Friend: and his public affection
begat them respect and honor in all Societies. But they could not hope for any
such favors from his Successor. Their condition under the deceased King was
too advantageous, that they should presume to aspire to that degree again:
rather they expected that the change of the Prince would be the change of their
good fortune into bad.

At the time of this doleful Revolution, there was at Ispahan the Dutch
Ambassador, as I have already observed, M. Hubert de Lairesse; being sent from
Batavia by the Order, and on the behalf of the Holland Company, with
considerable Presents for the King and his Principal Ministers, with a design
to renew their Alliance, and to request certain Favors of his Majesty, in
reference to their Trading in his Dominions, which was interrupted as well by
the Governor of Fars, which is properly Persia, as the Officers of the famous
Port of Bender-Habassi, or Habas's Port or Market, (for that the the first King
of that name was the first that made it a Place of Trade) to transport their
Merchandise from Ormus to that Place, which is over against it, and in a more
commodious situation: where the Hollanders have their principal Factory. The
Ambassador arrived at Court in July; and at his first coming had his Audience
in the Valley of Saver in the Province of Mazendaraan; four Leagues from the
Caspian Sea; and twelve from Esterabaat. And he followed his business so close,
and managed it so well, that in five Weeks he was dispatched, and obtained of
his Majesty whatever he desired. In September he returned to Ispahan, laden
with joy, for the extraordinary favors which he had received, as well in the
behalf of the Company, as for the honor had been done to his own Person. He
intended to be gone in October, because he was obliged to take possession at
Bender-Abas of the Employment of Director of the Trade, and to look after other
affairs of the Company in Persia, in the room of the Here Henry Wuan-Vick, dead
between three and four Months before. All things were ready for his Journey,
and the fourth of October was the day prefixed. But this great and unexpected
Change which the death of Habas the Second, and the Election of Sephie the
Second brought, put a stop to all business. Nor was it a small trouble to him
when he first heard the news, as well for the great love and esteem which he
had for that Monarch who had obliged him with so many favors, as for that he
knew the Accident fell out unluckily for the Profit of his Masters.

First, He found that the long and tedious Embassy to the deceased King, which
he had accomplished so much to his satisfaction, would be altogether fruitless:
for that the Company would be constrained upon this Change to send another new
Embassy to congratulate the New King upon his coming to the Crown. In the next
place he found, that all that he had obtained at Court with so much trouble and
expense must be all lost; since all the kindnesses granted by Habas, would be
ineffectual, without an express and authentic confirmation of the Reigning
Prince, which would prove as difficult to obtain as the first Decree. Lastly,
he reflected upon the Favors and Privileges which Habas had granted to the
Company which he served, and by which he had been sent: all which he saw lost,
without knowing what to hope from his Successor, whose Youth, and want of
Experience, not understanding the Interests of State, might easily be swayed by
the biased Counsels of some Grandees, who minding nothing but their particular
profit would advise him perhaps to what might prove to the disadvantage of the
Company.

These considerations and reflections very much disquieted the Ambassadors
Mind. But in regard it was high time to apply a Remedy to these
Inconveniences, he advised with those persons that were of his Council, and
having examined the present Conjuncture, he resolved as soon as possibly he
could to go and kiss the New Kings Feet, to the end he might prevent the rest
of the Europeans, by having the honor to see the New King before them; and
then to try whether he could obtain a Confirmation of all the Privileges
granted by his Predecessors to the Company and the Holland Nation.

This Resolution taken, the Ambassador sent after Dinner the Interpreter
belonging to the Dutch House in Ispahan to the General of the Musquetteers, the
only person that could at that time procure his Audience, in regard he was the
only Person upon whom the New King relied, for what he should do or say in
matters of State. The Interpreters Instructions were, That after he had most
humbly saluted the General in the Name of the Ambassador, he should beseech
him earnestly to represent to his Majesty the Splendor, Reputation, and Power
of the noble Company (those were terms he used) which his Majesty had all the
reason to gratify to his utmost, in regard of the great Trade which they drove
in the Persian Dominions. Moreover, to let him understand how highly the said
Company was esteemed by his Predecessors, Habas the Great of glorious Memory,
Sephie the First, Habas the Second, who had granted them particular favors,
and always honored them with their Protection. That not long since, the
Council of Batavia in acknowledgment of the generous Affection which the
Monarchs of Persia had from time to time testified for them, they had deputed
to kiss the fear of the King now gone to Heaven the Here Hubert de Lairess with
considerable Presents. That the said Ambassador had been well received by the
said Monarch, who had not refused him any thing which he requested: and that
the same Ambassador after so favorable a dispatch, being just ready to
return, had received the News of the King his Fathers death, and of his
advancement to the Throne.

That thereupon he had resolved not to leave the Kingdom, before he had had the
honor to kiss his Majesty's Feet, and to appear before him with that humility
which became him. And that he had not any Presents worthy his acceptance,
because he had made an offering of all that he brought along with him to the
deceased King of glorious Memory, to whom his most Illustrious Majesty was now
Successor, and his Prime Ministers of State, and therefore he hoped his
Majesty would be so indulgent as to excuse him, and permit him the honor which
he with all humility requested. Lastly, That he should beseech the General of
the Musquetteers to use his Interest to obtain leave for him with the soonest
that he could, to the end he might present himself at the feet of the new
Monarch, and be favored with a quick dispatch; In regard the death of the
Director his Predecessor, and several other weighty Affairs called him away in
haste to the Port of Habas. That if he would give himself the trouble to
procure that Audience the next day, he would promise him a becoming
Acknowledgment, assuring him that the Company would always be ready to
remunerate his favor, and be for ever obliged to his kindness.

With these Instructions the Interpreter went to the General of the
Musquetteers, and having the opportunity to speak to him in private by himself,
laid before him all his specious Arguments according to his directions. But
while he had no other discourse but plausible pretenses and excuses, they made
no Impression upon the covetous Warrior, who pretending ignorance, or perhaps
because he was really ignorant of those affairs, made answer that he could
determine nothing positive in those matters, and therefore he must be content
to stay till the Court returned to Ispahan.

But when the Interpreter began to add to his Reasons the Promise of a becoming
Acknowledgment, the Luster of Gold cast such a powerful reflection upon his
Lordly senses, that he presently found himself inspired with a new access of
knowledge and understanding; so that there was not any one scruple that
interrupted his performance. He condescended to the Ambassadors Request, and
knew so well how to manage his business, that in the Evening he sent for the
same Interpreter, and gave him Order to promise his Master, in his Majesty's
Name, that he should be admitted to morrow about ten in the Morning to kiss his
Majesty's Feet.

The same day at the time appointed, the Dutch Ambassador, with two more of
the Company, the chief Factor of Ispahan, and the Secretary of the Embassy,
together with the Interpreter attended at the Palace in an Apartment next to
that where the King was Crowned. Where he had staid but a few Minutes before he
had notice to advance forward to the Place where the King tarried: whither so
soon as he was come with all his Train, the General of the Musquetteers, who
supplied the Office of Grand Porter, or Master of the Ceremonies, conducted him
from the Door of the great Hall before his Majesty, at the distance of two
Paces from whom, the Ambassador and the two other Persons with him made their
Obeysances according to the Custom of the Persians, which is to kiss the ground
three times before his Majesty's Feet.

When they had made their Reverence, and were permitted to sit, the Ambassador
by his Interpreter began with the Prayers and Wishes of Governor General of
Batavia for the honor and prosperity of his Majesty upon his happy coming to
the Crown. For which the King returned him Thanks, and added at the Conclusion,
My Lord Ambassador is welcome, and if he have any favor to request, let him
only make it known. Thereupon the Dutch Ambassador took an occasion to
proceed, and gave the King to understand in few words, the Privileges which
his Ancestors had all along granted to the Company; from the first time that
they came to reside in Persia till that day, requesting the same Protection
from his Majesty; an Authentic Confirmation of all the Agreements and Decrees
already made in favor of the Company, and a continuation of the same
Kindnesses.

His Majesty replied, My Lord Ambassador, I take you for my Guest and Friend,
as also all of your Nation; and I will redouble the favors and kindnesses
which my Ancestors of glorious memory have done your Company. Upon which the
Dutch Ambassador made a profound Reverence, as did also the other two that
accompanied him, and replied to the King's obliging words in this manner, We
will no farther doubt it than from the Grace and Generosity of so great a
Prince. On the other side if We or the Company may be any way serviceable to
serve your Majesty, your Majesty shall no sooner Command but be obeyed. In the
mean time we humbly beg of Your Majesty that we may have leave to retire to the
Port of Habas, there to look after our Affairs, to which Importunate Necessity
calls Us.

Thereupon, the General of the Musquetteers, declaring the Kings pleasure (for
he performs the same Office, in Grandeur, near his Majesty, which the
Ambassadors Interpreter supplies out of necessity) His Majesty, said he,
desires to know wherefore my Lord Ambassador discovers so much eagerness to be
gone. He would have him to stay till all the Lords of the Court are come to
Town, for that then he intends to receive him with greater Pomp, and give him
more signal Marks of his Esteem.

To which the Dutch replied, as they had done already, bowing their Heads and
their Bodies with a profound Humility, and returning his Majesty their most
hearty Thanks, beseeching him withal to have the same gracious Opinion as
before; but that for the present, the greatest Favor he could receive at their
hands, was his Royal License to return to their principal Factory, whither
Affairs of Concernment called them. The King thereupon with a Nod of his Head
condescended to their Request; and withal, ordered this farther Complement to
be put upon them, That he would not stay them any longer, but that they might
go in the Name of God; desiring to assure the Company of his Affection, and
that whatever they had for the future to demand, they should but ask and have.

Those last words included his last leave, which they also took, with most
submissive Obeysances after the European manner, the most respectful that could
be imagined. And thus they retired after an Audience of three quarters of an
Hour. About Four in the Afternoon, they sent their Interpreter to the General
of the Musquetteers to return him Thanks for the Trouble he had given himself,
in procuring them so favorable an Audience, and for the continuance of his
kindness they besought him to accept as a pledge of their farther
acknowledgment a Silver Watch, and fifty Ducats of Gold.

The English Agent in Persia, Sir Stephen Flower, understanding that the Dutch
had had Audience of his Majesty, was not a little surprised, but much more
vexed to see himself prevented; and therefore he was no less importunate to
have his; and therefore, to the end he might be admitted to kiss the Kings
Feet, he took the same way and method which the Dutch Ambassador had done: for
indeed there was no other way: and had therefore the same success. For two days
after, being accompanied with his Second in the Factory, about Nine of the
Clock in the Morning he was introduced by the General of the Musquetteers to
make his Obeisance to the King; his Interpreter and his Colleague coming behind
him. After the usual Ceremonies he presented the Prince with two hundred half
Guineys, according to the self-interested Custom of the East, where the Kings
stiling themselves Gods Lieutenants, forbid all People to appear in their
Presence without an Offering. Presently he sat down by the Command of the
Prince, and by his Interpreter, and in the behalf of the English Nation and
Company, wished him a long and flourishing Reign. Afterward he made a short
rehearsal of the great Services which the English Nation had done the Kings of
Persia his Ancestors of Immortal memory. For which reason those Triumphant
Monarchs had always favored the English Nation more than any other Nation of
Europe, of which he was assured his Majesty was well informed; for which reason
he hoped that his Majesty would continue the same favors to the English
Nation, and grant them a Confirmation of all the Treaties and Privileges which
had been granted formerly to the English.

To which the King returned the same answer which he had done to the Dutch
Envoy. Mr. Agent is my Guest, and all the English Nation are most dear to me.
Whatever my Predecessors of Glorious Memory have granted to your Company I
shall also confirm. And if you have any thing farther to request of Me for the
advantage of your Nation, you may confidently propose it, and it shall be
decreed if reasonable. To which the Agent and his Second returned their humble
Thanks, as well for their Master as themselves; beseeching his Majesty to
accept of their Services. To which his Majesty condescended with a Nod of his
Head, which was also a sign of his taking Leave; which they also took, making
their Obeysances after their own manner. Now in regard they were beholden to
the General of the Musquetteers for this favorable Audience; in regard the
King did nothing without his Advice, therefore they sent their Interpreter in
the Evening, to give him thanks for the favor he had procured them; in
acknowledgment whereof they made him a Present of a Rich Jewel, and thirty
Ducats of Gold.

The same day the Meehmandar-Bachi, or Chief of those that attend upon the
Kings Guests, or Strangers of Quality, who is as it were a Grand Master of the
Ceremonies, came to wait upon the King, dispatched from the Grandees of the
Kingdom to give his Majesty notice, that they came forward, making easy
Journeys with the Body of the deceased King, and the whole Body of the Court in
his time. That to prevent the People from suspecting any thing of Fatal, they
had given out that the King was with his Wives, and would not therefore show
himself: that nevertheless the Rumor of his Death began to fly abroad; which
however could not now be much prejudicial, seeing that his Majesty had taken
the Government of the Kingdom into his own hands: that as yet they preserved
all things in the same condition they were in before; and expected with
submission what Orders his Majesty would be pleased to send for their future
proceeding.

Together with this Deputy there came an Eunuch also sent by Hamzeh-Mirza the
Kings Brother, to salute his Majesty in the name of the young Prince, to throw
himself at his Feet, to beg his favor, and to supplicate him by all that was
Sacred in the Mahumetan Law not to put out his Eyes; That he would be pleased
to shut up him as close as he thought fit, that he would take from him whatever
he pleased, but that for the Law of God he would leave him his sight, that he
might not be incapable of applying himself to his Studies, wherein he resolved
to spend his whole Life. The King kept the Eunuch with himself, reserving the
answer to the young Prince's request till he should be brought to Court. But he
returned an Answer the same day to the Letter which the Master of the
Ceremonies brought, which was composed in the form of a Command, and contained
the following Instructions.

1. That the King approved what had been done, from the Fatal Moment of the
King his Fathers death.

2. That they should make all the have they could to him without disturbing the
Order of Affairs; leaving all things in the same condition wherein they were.

3. That they should take care to cause the Body of his deceased Father, of
high and Immortal Memory, whose place is in Paradise, to be carried to the City
of Kom, under the charge of Mirzah-Maassoum; and that at the same time they
should send away three other Coffins like that wherein they had put the King,
under as good a Convoy, one to Metched, another to Ardevil, and the third to
Kachan. For the better understanding the reason of which Command, the Reader is
to know, that the Persians are strangely superstitious about the Burial of
their Kings. For fearing lest by some Magical Art any Enchantments should be
practiced upon their Bodies to the prejudice of their Children, they conceal,
as much as in them lies, the real Place of Interment.

To this end they send to several Places several Coffins of Lead, with others
of Wood, which they call Taboat, and bury all alike with the same Magnificence.
In this manner they delude the Curiosity of the People, who cannot discern by
the outside in which of the Coffins the real body should be. Not but it might
be discovered by such as would put themselves to the expense and trouble of
doing it. And thus it shall be related in the Life of Habas the Great, that
twelve of these Coffins were conveyed to twelve of the principal Mosques, not
for the sake of their Riches, but of the Person which they enclosed; and yet no
body knew in which of the twelve the Kings Body was laid, tho the common Belief
is, that it was deposited at Ardevil.

It is also said in the Life of Sefie I. That there were three Coffins carried
to three several Places, as if there had been a Triple Production from one
Body, tho it were a thing almost certainly known, that the Coffin where the
Body was laid, was carried to this same City of Kom, and to the same Place
where the deceased King commanded the Body of his deceased Father to be carried.

It is a very beautiful City, and for its Antiquity gives way to none of the
rest; as being thought to be the Guriana of the Ancients. It is seated in the
Province of Arak-agem, or Parthia upon the Frontiers of Media. She prides her
self, as one of her most glorious Ornaments, in a sumptuous Mosque, built all
of Marble and Jasper, embellished with Gold. In this Mosque are to be seen the
Tombs of the two forementioned Monarchs. The Porphyry of which they are built
is overlaid with Plates of Gold, as if the Builders had striven to be profuse
in the wast of that rich Metal. We shall give you the description of it in our
Persian Geography.

Now the Persians made choice of Kom, Kachan, Metched, and Ardevil, rather than
of any other Cities for the interment of their Kings, because they believe
those Cities claim to themselves a secret and peculiar Sanctity above any of
the rest, by reason that the Martyrs and Men famous in their Religion have
lived and been buried there. For they hold, that Kom and Kachan were always two
safe Retreats for all the true faithful in their Law, whom in the Primitive
Times of Mahumetism the Arabians persecuted unjustly: and therefore that the
Imaans, by whom they mean their lawful Prophets and High Priests, retired
thither to secure themselves from Persecution, and there died.

This is that which makes them believe that these Cities are holy and happy,
and that in all their Contracts and Public Writings they name the first
Dar-el-mouve-el-Din, or the Habitation of Persons revived in the Law; and the
second, Dar-el-Moumenin, or, the Habitation of the truly faithful. And for the
two other Cities Ardivilis, called Dar-el-Irkaar, or, the Habitation of
direction. For that a great Saint, who lies buried there, was, as they say,
sent by God to direct men in the way of truth, and Metched is called Mouheddes.
The Place where they give Testimony of the Law, and of God. In the first lies
buried among many other Saints of their Law Cheik-Sefie, or the Pure Ancient,
the first of the Race of Kings that now Reign in Persia. In the second lies the
Imaan Reza, whom the Persians reverence with an extraordinary superstition.
Insomuch that they believe the Body of that person who is buried by him, is
more secure of his Salvation, than if he were buried near any other Saint less
considerable. For according to their Doctrine, they that lie interred near the
Tomb of any great and holy Personage lie under his Protection.

The King, who had hourly intelligence of the Advance of the Grandees of the
Kingdom, understanding that they were arrived at Kachan, sent an Express with
Commands to the two Chief Physicians, Mirza-Satrid, that is to say, Signior
Just; and Mirza-Kouchonk, surnamed also the Little, to distinguish him from his
Brother, who was the chief Physician, to retire to the Palace Royal at Kom,
which joins to the Mosque, where are the Tombs of the last deceased Kings; to
betake themselves to the Apartments allotted for them, there to pray to God the
remainder of their days for the Prosperity of his Throne; in acknowledgment of
his Clemency toward them, in that he inflicted no heavier punishment upon
them, than only that slight disgrace; since they had deserved to lose their
lives for understanding no better to preserve the life of his Father and their
Sovereign. The same Messenger carried also Orders to Mirza-Massoon, or the Lord
without Blemish, already mentioned, and the Son also of the Prime Minister; and
Moutuely of Koom, as much as to say, Master of the Works, and Judge of the
Government, to take an Inventory of the whole Estate of those two Physicians,
to give it under their Seals what they found in ready Money, and to send the
Inventory when they had made it up to the King. Out of which he allowed them a
Revenue of twenty thousand Crowns a year to live comfortably in the said City,
without stirring out of the Palace to which they were confined, till the
Supreme Power should dispose of their Lives.

The whole Body of the Court arrived at Ispahan within a Week after that, which
was three Weeks after the Kings Coronation. And then it was that the great
Officers were admitted one after another, troubled in their minds, and with
hearts laden with sorrow. Not one of them that knew what part to act in this
new Court, where every one flattered himself with making an Interest. However
still as they came to Town, they went to kiss the Kings Feet; and to pay him
the Moubarek-Bached, which is a Customary term which they use when they
Congratulate the Prosperity of any great Person: as if we should say, Let such
a thing turn to your blessing.

His Majesty, as every Grandee had paid him his Submissions honored him with a
Calate, or Royal Vest. This Persian word, according to its Etymology, signifies
Entire, Perfect, Accomplished, to signify either the Excellency of the Habit,
or the Dignity of him that wears it. For it is an infallible Mark of the
particular Esteem which the Sovereign has for the person to whom he sends it;
and that he has free liberty to approach his Person; for when the Kingdom has
changed its Lord and Master, the Grandees who have not received this Vest, dare
not presume to appear before the King without hazard of their Lives.

In pursuance of this Custom, the King sent a very rich Vest to that courageous
Eunuch, among others, who was the only person who had set the Crown upon his
Head. With this Present he also sent him a Dagger richly set with Precious
Stones. Immediately upon this it was believed that he would be advanced to some
high Employment; but he refused all Preferment with a generous Constancy: so
that of all the Employments which his Prince offered him he only accepted of
the Superintendency of the Affairs relating to the Princess his Mother.

All the Grandees being thus arrived, the King for several days following, held
a Megeles, that is, an Assembly of his Lords, where the Lords of the Old Court
met to compose a New one. The first day every one came in his Calate, or Royal
Vest which the King had bestowed upon them. But the Nazir or Superintendant
General was not there; because he had not been honored with that Vest. So that
when he found it was not sent him against the next Assembly, he was then
persuaded he had not long to live; or at least that he should lose his
Employment; he feared that his Majesty had been informed, how that at the time
of the Election he had endeavored to prefer his Younger Brother. And this
suspicion of his was not altogether without ground; for that indeed something
had been whispered to the King about it.

Therefore he thought he could not do better than go himself and present his
Head to the King himself before any one was sent to demand it: for that if he
thought to preserve it by concealing himself, he should lose it without all
hope of pardon; but if he had the courage generously to lay it at the Princes
Feet, it might so happen that he might save himself; nor was he deceived: for
this bold Resolution gained the heart of Sephie the Second, and wrought
Compassion even in his very Enemies, and those that envied him. For being come
to the Assembly, he stood upright upon the Terrace among the Crowd of Officers,
with his head hanging upon his Breast, and his Eyes fixed upon the ground, as
if he had been ashamed to show his face. This submissive Posture of his moved
the Assembly to pity, so that one of the Lords, who owed him no unkindness,
told the King of it, and begged pardon in his behalf. The King surprised at the
News, sent the same Lord who had spoken to him, to demand of the Intendent
General, what he did there? I come, said he, to offer his Majesty the head of
an Offender, and to expiate with my blood the misfortune of having drawn upon
me his Indignation. Thereupon the King sent him a Command to go home; where
about four days after he was honored with the Royal Vest, as the rest had
been, and was confirmed for the future in all the Employments which he enjoyed.
I have heard from several persons of Quality, and from some of his own Kindred,
that never any Head was in such a tottering condition, and that the least word
that had been let slip to his prejudice had been enough to have ruined him. But
his good Fortune stopped the mouths of his Enemies; so that there was not one
who either durst, or was willing to oppose him. Besides that, the Young King
who had been always bred among Women, and therefore not accustomed to blood,
was unwilling to put to death a person of whose worth and merit he was well
assured. Tho perhaps another more cruel, and more experienced would not have
needed any Instigation to such a piece of Fatal Inhumanity.

At the sitting of the third Assembly Nicolas Claud de Lalain Esquire,
Gentleman in ordinary to the King of France, and his Majesty's Envoy to the
Princes of Asia, was introduced, together with one of the three Deputies of the
French East India Company, followed by the Interpreter of the Nation. Now this
Deputy had been sick, which was the reason why they demanded Audience no
sooner. For in regard that at the Grand Audience it is necessary to demand the
Confirmation of the Privileges granted to the Company; Monsieur de Lalain had
not power to treat of any such matter, but jointly with the Deputy. Otherwise
the respect which the Persians have for the chief Nation of the World, would
have procured them their Audience before any of the other Europeans. They made
a Present to his Majesty of a Crystal Mirror enchased in Gold, Enamelled on
the backside, and set with Emeralds on the forepart, together with a pair of
Saddle Pistols, and a small Lion of Gold, embellished with Pearls.

After they had made their Obeysances they took their Seats by the Kings Order
among the Grandees; and then being directed to draw near his Majesty, Monsieur
Lalain began with all fortunate Wishes for the Prosperity of the New Monarch in
the name of the King his Master, and in few words gave him to understand, That
Habas II. his Father of glorious Memory, whose place is in Paradise, had
granted to the French Company many Privileges in consideration of the great
advantage and profit they brought to his Dominions. For which reason he most
humbly besought his Majesty to continue to the French Nation the former favors
of his Predecessors, and to grant both the Nation and Company his Royal
Protection. To which the King made answer by his Prime Minister, My Lord
Ambassador, (for the Persians make no distinctions between Ambassadors,
Envoys, Agents, Residents, etc. but still make use of the word Heltchi, which
comprehends all) the King of France is my Brother, and the French Nation are my
Guests and Friends. I do not only confirm what ever my deceased Father, who
rests now in Heaven, granted the French Nation, but it is our Pleasure to add
new Favors, which we shall do upon the first Occasion that presents it self.

By what has been said, it appears that there was no alteration of the Face of
Affairs at the beginning of this New Reign; for that the King did nothing of
himself, but merely like an Engine moved as the Springs and Wires give it
motion. Every one of the Grandees labored to get as near the Kings Person as
he could, to insinuate himself into the Kings Affection, and to remove his
Competitors at a distance. The most Powerful and most his Favorite however, at
that time, was Boudak-Saultan General of the Musquetteers, who continued still
his Majesty's Director, for that he thought nothing well done but what he
either ordered, or at least approved. Next to him Gemtchid-Kaan, as also the
Mehter or High-Chamberlain, had a good share in his favor, not to speak of his
Mother, who in the Inner Palace ruled him as she pleased her self.

As for the General of the Musquetteers, for the first trial of his favor, he
had procured himself a Commission that brought him a great Sum of Money. He had
obtained of the King that he might send out the New Patents, and Royal Vests to
all the great Officers of the Empire. To the Beckler-bekirs, who are the chief
Governors, called by a Name that consists of two words, and signifies Lord of
Lords. To the Kaans, or Governors of lesser Provinces, called by a Title that
signifies strong; and whom the Persians dignifie with the Title of Omrah, or
Prince, (which is the Plural of Mir, an Arabic word, signifying the same
thing.) To the Vaziers or Farmers Royal, whom we call Vizirs; derived also from
an Arabic word, that signifies carriers of Burdens; and in a word, to all
Governors and Officers that had any Command in any City depending upon the
King; and this according to the Custom of Persia, where the Sovereign newly
come to the Crown, sends to all Persons in any Command or Employment of value a
Patent or Commission which they call Ragam, and a Habit called Kalate. Which
two things ascertain him that he is continued in his Employment. So that when
they appear in Public thus habited, the People also know that they are
confirmed in their Authority.

This Commission vastly enriched the Coffers of this great Lord, in regard that
every Officer and Governor to whom he sends such a Patent and Vest, sends a
very considerable Present according to the Custom of Persia. But it was the
ruin of his Fortune and his Family, as we shall by and by declare; in regard
he made an ill use of his Power: For that he sent those Royal Habits more
sumptuous, or less costly, not according to the Rank of the Person, and Dignity
of the Employment which every one held, but according to the friendship and
kindness which he had for them himself. And thus he dealt by the Vazier or
Farmer of the Province of Mazenderan, to whom he sent a Vest of little value,
because he had an Enmity against him; not only to be revenged of him by that
affront, but because he believed the indignity and vexation to be so slighted
would transport his Enemy to some other Act that would promote his ruin, which
was the only thing that he most cordially wished for: and thus it fell out.

This Vazier of Mazenderan, called Mirza-Hachem, during the Reign of Habas II.
was in good credit with his Prince. And yet there was not in all Persia a
person of a more scandalous Tongue. He would talk of the Grandees to the King
with a most dreadful sawciness; call the Prime Minister, Buffle-Head; the
Superintendant, a Liar; the Chief Justice, downright Knave; and then for the
General of the Musquetteers, he said, he was both a Coward and a Robber. And
tho Habas gave little heed to his discourse; nevertheless the persons
concerned, were afraid they should make an impression in the King's mind to
their disadvantage, and therefore they all hated him with a perfect hatred.

But now, the King his supporter being dead, the General of the Musquetteers,
who was become the New Kings chief Favorite, and had obtained a Commission to
send all the Officers their Royal Habits, resolved to be revenged, as believing
withal that it would be no less acceptable to the rest of the Lords.

To this purpose instead of a Royal Calate, he only sent him a plain Habit,
worth not above forty Pounds, not doubting but that the Vazier would commit
some extravagance that would hasten his destruction. Nor did he fail in his
Conjecture. For upon his going forth to meet and receive the Habit, and to put
it on that the People might see, that he was confirmed in his Employment, when
he saw it, and found it to be a thing of no value, he threw it away with scorn
and indignation, believing it to be a trick put upon him, and done on purpose
to disgrace him. However his disdain carried him no farther; for he conjectured
it to be some snare laid to hurl him headlong into Ruin. Not daring therefore
to return to the City in that Habit, and fearing least the People should
despise him, if they saw him so ill dressed at the Kings Expense, as one that
had lost his Reputation at Court, he sent home for a Royal Habit, one of the
Richest and most Magnificent that Habas had formerly bestowed upon him, and so
having put it on, he returned to the City, making the People believe that he
had received it from the New Monarch.

This being known to all the Court, the General of the Musquetteers was the
first that opened his Lips, declaring that the Vazier of Makenderan was a Dog,
that he had thrown away the Kings Habit, with reproachful Language, not
forbearing to say that he had no need of Sha-Sefie's Habits; whereupon he had
made use of another which Habas his Father had sent him. The King who
understood not the Stratagems of Court, looked no farther then the bare
Information, not dreaming of any malice in the Contrivance. And therefore upon
the Prime Minister's first motion, he sent an express Command to the Vazier's
Controller to appear at Court. So soon as the Vazier understood that the
Controller was sent for, he began to consider the bad condition of his affairs.
He knew well, and upon good grounds, that the Controller was a person that
would not spare to inform the worst he could against him, because they had been
at variance a long time. Habas the Second had joined them both together in
Commission of set purpose, to the end that through the mistrust that they had
one of another, they might be the more careful how they demeaned themselves in
the discharge of their duties; and to prevent them from any combination to
defraud him of his Revenues. The Vazier therefore, to prevent his Fall as much
as in him lay, dispatched away, before the Controller set forward, one of his
own Servants with Letters to his Vikil or Agent at Court, wherein he gave him
order to spare for no expense in considerable Presents to such and such Lords.
But, added he at the bottom, beware of offering any thing to that Rascal of a
Prime Minister, or to that Dog of a General of the Musquetteers; withal naming
some others to whom he forbad him to make any addresses. But by misfortune the
Messenger crippl'd himself by the way, so that he could not make that have
which was requisite; by which accident the Controller, who followed him close
at the heels, overtook him in a Caravanseray, or public Inn; where finding him
laid down, and fast asleep, he would not miss so favorable an opportunity, but
stole from under his Head the Purse wherein his Letters were. He read them, and
carried them to Court, to show them to those persons whom they had so highly
abused. Who more enraged then before carried the Controller to his Majesty,
before whom he confirmed the Information which had been already given him, That
the Vazier of Mazenderan had disdainfully flung away the Royal Habit which his
Majesty had sent him, saying withal these words, I have no need of Sha-Sephie's
Habits, and that he sent for one of Habas's Vestments, which he wore upon his
return to the City. Upon which the King highly incensed, several times repeated
the words Gidi, and Segh or Dog, and Scoundrel; with several other more
outrageous and bitter Expressions, usual among the greatest Personages in that
Country, who think it no shame to utter them upon all occasions, and before any
persons whatsoever. Presently the King sent to arrest the Vazier's Agent, and
at the same time dispatched to his Master a Chapar or Courrier extraordinary to
arrest him, and confiscate all his Goods.

The General of the Musquetteers not content with this, the next Morning
informed the King, that this Vazier had been High Steward to Imaan-Kouli-Kaan,
that famous Prince, honored with so many Encomiums, and who is reported in the
Life of Habas the Great to have wrought so many Miracles, besides that he was
Captain General of all Habas's Armies. I say, he informed the King that this
Vazier was entrusted with all Imaan-Kouli-Kaan's Jewels, and yet he would never
discover to Sefie the I. where that Prince had hid them before he was put to
death; protesting he knew nothing of the matter. Which was a visible piece of
knavery, since there could be no other person in the world who could know that
secret but himself: and therefore there was no way to constrain him to tell the
truth but by force. Which Incentives so wrought upon the Young Prince that he
dispatched a second Courrier with Orders to bring the Vazier with his Head and
Feet bare, and a Chain about his Neck; and that every day they should give him
forty drubs upon the soles of his Feet till he confessed where the Jewels were.

The Messengers were punctual in the Execution of the Kings Commands upon the
Vazier, who not able to endure the Torment, nor the hardship of the Journey,
(for it was then in the depth of Winter, when all the ways were covered with
Frost and Snow,) died, by that time he came half way, had nine days together,
as old as he was, suffered horrible totrure, steadfast in his resolutions not to
make any discovery. His Estate being confiscated amounted to twenty five
thousand Tomans which make about four hundred thousand Crowns.

In the mean time, at Ispahan there was nothing but public Rejoicing,
Feasting, Horse-racing, with other Sports and Pastimes of the same nature. And
when day was shut in, an infinite number of Lights, which they call in that
Country Chiragan, were hung out all along the Streets, round about the Houses,
and in the great Squares after a most pompous manner, insomuch that the night
it self might truly be called an Artificial day.

The Young King no less greedily tasted all the pleasures and delight which the
full swinge of Liberty, unknown what it meant till then, gave him opportunity
to enjoy. Every day he walked abroad with his Wives into the parts adjoining to
the City; commanding the Kourouk through all the Villages and Towns adjoining.

Kourouk signifies a Prohibition to all Men and Boys above seven years of Age,
upon forfeiture of Life, to be seen in any place where the Kings Wives were to
pass, if he were in their Company. All the ways are hung on both sides with
such stuff of which they make their Tents, to prevent the Women from being
seen. And notice is given to all the Men to retire home at such an Hour;
besides that, the Guards at two Leagues distance round about, were ready to
prevent any one from coming near the Places so canvast in. Such is their fear,
lest the Wives should be seen by the Men. For they never hinder the Women from
seeing as much as they please.

It is said, that during the five Months from the Coronation of the King till
the year 1078. of the Hegira, which answers the Spring of our 1667. the King
commanded no less then sixty two Kourouks, going abroad with his Wives every
time, and visiting the Places round about Ispahan: especially Gioulfa, a Town
belonging to the Armenians, separated from the City only by a River, over which
he made several large and magnificent Bridges. Which shows what power the Women
had over the Young Prince, that they could cause him to make so many
Prohibitions for their sakes; only that they might have the pleasure of
hunting, and walking, and breathing in a more sweet and spacious Air then that
of their Confinement.

While the Young King denied nothing to his Wives, nor his Pleasures, he
neither refused any thing to his Favorites, nor to those that begged any thing
of him; insomuch that many persons that were laid aside were taken again into
Favor. So that the beginning of the New Prince's Reign was like a year of
Jubilee, that sets open the Prison Doors: They that had never so few friends at
Court might easily be admitted, provided none of the Grandees opposed their
entrance.

Mirza-Rezi or the submissive Prince was one of those persons out of favor,
and Prisoners of whom we have made mention. The deceased King had confined him
to his Palace, and had confiscated all his Estate, to the value of twelve
thousand pounds yearly revenue; and this, because that although he was blind,
he would assume to himself the disposal and management of a Legacy of six
thousand Crowns a year, which one of his Ancestors had left to the Mosquees.
For the Testator having ordered in his Will, that this Revenue should be at the
disposal of him that was in the Family to manage it, the person to whom the
Administration belonged being dead, this blind Lord thought no person more
capable then himself; and because he was very potent, and of the Blood Royal by
the Mothers side, who was the Daughter of Habas the Great (which was also the
reason that they put out his Eyes) he resolved to get this Administration by
force, under pretense that he was going out of the World, and concerned himself
only about Ecclesiastical Affairs; and besides, had more wit then all his
Family. But his Kindred coming to Habas II. and informing him that Mirza-Rezi,
having had his Eyes put out by the Command of the deceased King his Father, on
purpose to render him incapable of the Affairs of this World, nevertheless went
about by force, and contrary to Law, to meddle in Civil matters. The Monarch
hearing this, grew impatient at his arrogance, and after he had given some
signs of admiration, that a blind man should think himself capable to manage
such a a design, sent to confiscate all his Estate, and commanded him to keep
himself confined to one single Quarter of his Palace. But Sefie the Second upon
his coming to the Crown, restored him to his favor, and returned him all his
Estate without the least diminution.

But the most considerable who in these Halcyon days of the King's early
Government were released out of Prison, and admitted to return to Court was
Hali-Kouli-Kaan, who had been a Prisoner at Kasbin, and who with a boldness
altogether surprising, having made his escape from his Guards, came and threw
himself at the King's Feet. The story was this.

So soon as he understood the News of Habas's decease, he conceived great hopes
of recovering his Liberty. To which purpose he considered with himself, by what
means he might make his escape, and get to Ispahan. He was resolved to beg the
King's favor himself, believing that not any of the Grandees at Court owed him
so much kindness as to speak in his behalf: only one friend he had, and that
was the General of the Slaves. He, not forgetful of the ancient and strict
Friendship that had been between them, ventured three or four times in that
privacy which the King allowed him, to represent to his Majesty the misfortune
of Hali-Kouli-Kaan; but when he saw thatt the Prince returned him no Answer, he
sent to the Lord an account of the state of Affairs, and advised him to come in
person, and throw himself at the King's Feet: for that considering the mildness
and sweetness of the new Conjuncture he could run no great Risco.

These Letters confirmed Hali-Kouli-Kaan so much the more in the Resolution he
had taken, because he found himself supported beyond his expectation. Thereupon
he wrote back to the General of the Slaves, returned him thanks for his
kindness toward him, besought him to continue it, and to take care that he
might have Horses laid to be ready at such places and times. And when all
things were ready, he desired leave of the Captain of the Guard to let him go a
hunting.

This being a favor which the Captain had granted him several times before, he
did not then deny him. Thereupon he rode forth, attended only with four of his
most intimate Confidents well mounted, and well armed. Being got into the
field, he still beat toward Ispahan, pretending to hunt, but little minding
whether he put up any Game or no. But at length having drawn off his Guards a
good way from the Town, and finding their Horses tired, toward the close of the
Evening, as if it had been only a frolic, he put Spurs to his Horse and rode
out of sight. As for his Guards they had no mistrust at first, till at length,
that they saw he made so little have to come back. But it was too late to
pursue him, and as vain to stay till he returned; their Horses being quite
tired with Galloping up and down for four hours and more together. Besides, the
resolute Prisoner flew with all the speed that Whip and Spur could make, and
arrived at Ispahan, where he met all his friends at the appointed Rendezvous,
to the number of Fifty persons, and went directly to the King's Gate.

When he drew near the Place where the King was sitting, the General of the
Slaves met him; who was not a little surpised to see him there sooner then he
expected. Nevertheless, without making any show of having kept any
correspondence together, he asked him his business, who answered, That he came
to lay his Head at the King's Feet. It is very well done, replied the General
of the Slaves, I Will go and beg the Kings leave for your admission. But
Hali-Kouli-Kaan, instead of staying for the Kings Answer, followed the General
of the Slaves so close that he could hear the King, as soon as he heard his
Name, and that he was come, make answer aloud, Kouh-Gheldy; Safa-Gheldy, Let
him be welcome, let him come in a good Hour; and then commanding him to enter,
he repeated the same kind words, with a Countenance that testified his
satisfaction; and then caused him to sit down.

Within a Minute after, the King called for him, and ordered him to draw near
him; and when he was close by him, Hali-Kouli-Kaan, said he, what brings thee
hither, and what is thy request? To which the Lord made answer with a wonderful
quickness of Wit, I am come hither, Benefactor of Mankind, to serve your
Majesty; because Slaves and Dogs ought always to be within their Masters call.

This Answer highly pleased the Youthful Sovereign, insomuch that after he had
dismissed him, he gave Order to the Prime Minister to give him a splendid
Entertainment the next day, to provide him a Palace, and to furnish him with
money, and all other necessaries whatever.

In pursuance of which Command the Prime Minister assigned him the Palace where
lodged the Ambassador from Aurang-Zeeb King of the Indians, in the years 1664,
and 1665. But this Lord, so soon as he became Master of it, pulled it down to
the ground, and built it up again far more magnificently then ever; as you may
see in our Description of Ispahan. The next day, as he sat at Dinner with the
Prime Minister, and was telling the Story how he made his escape out of his
Confinement, he added, That a mad Dog, the more you keep him chained up, the
more mad and extravagant he grows; which he therefore said, in regard he had
incurred the Kings displeasure by hairbrain'd, and violent actions, and full of
a Transportment that truly savored of Extravagance.

A while after the King summoned a Megeles, or public Assembly for his sake.
There out of a magnificent humor, not usual but among Sovereign Princes, he
caused to be spread upon the ground in the Garden where this Lord was to pafs
to the very Hall seventy Pieces of Zer-baffe, which is a very rich sort of
Persian Tissue, as much as to say, a Weaving of Silver. For baffen signifies to
Weave or make Tissue. Every Piece of this Tissue might be worth eighteen
Tomans, about threescore or threescore and ten pound, amounting in all to some
twenty thousand Crowns. Such persons as are thus honored by the King, walk
without their Shoes upon the Stuffs, which the King afterward sends them home
to their house, for a Present, as he did to this Person; to whom at the end of
a sumptuous Banquet which he gave him, he spoke these words, Hali-Kouli-Kaan,
hearken what they are going to read.

Upon that the Principal Secretary read a Patent, wherein the King named him
Governor of Corassin, or the ancient Bactriana of which the Capital City is
Metshed, which is one of the chiefest Governments in Persia. But whether this
Lord had heard some report of an Invasion threatened those Parts, he would by
no means accept the honor; or whether it were that he did not care to leave
the Court, or which was more probable, because he thought it beneath him to
accept of a meaner Employment then what he had before his Confinement. For he
had been formerly Generalissimo of all the Armies: and therefore after he had
returned the King his most humble thanks, Benefactor of Mankind, said he, I am
old and broken with Age; Grant me the favor at the end of my life, that I may
spend my days at the Gate of your Majesty.

Some few days after he offered him the Government of Armenia, of which Erivan
is the Capital City; but with his most humble Thanks to his Majesty he refused
that likewise, and questionless for the same Reasons. At length the King caused
Letters Patents to be made him to be General of all his Forces, and Governor
of Media, of which Tebris, that which we call Tauris, is the Capital City; in
regard that Government is always annexed to that Employment.

But at the very time that he had received so great and extraordinary a favor
from his Majesty, he took the boldness to show that he was not yet content, but
that he still desired something more. To that purpose, Benefactor to Mankind,
said he, since your Majesty does me the favor to call me to so high a dignity,
I humbly implore your Majesty to add to my Government such and such Villages,
to the end I may maintain the splendor of that High Rank to which your Majesty
has called me, that when any Stranger comes to visit me, I may be able to
entertain him with a Plate of Pelo (or Rice and Flesh, the usual Food of the
Persians) that receiving this favor at my hands, he may be more ready to join
with me in praying for your Majesty. To which when the King had condescended,
he flung himself prostrate at the Kings Feet, and gave him Thanks. As he was
retiring out of the Kings presence, the King having spied certain white Hairs
in his Beard, which he wore up to his Ears, Hali-Kouli-Kaan, said he, Go to the
Treasury, and bid 'em, in my name, pay thee three hundred Tomans (which is
about Eleven hundred Guineys) and buy thee some Paint to color thy Beard, and
let me see no more gray hairs in thy Face. Which immediately he did according
to the Kings Order, and carried away the Money. And this was another
Accumulation of Favor which his liberal Sovereign added to the rest which he
had bestowed upon him.

Thus was he made General of all the Persian Forces, Governor of Media, and in
a word, the first and most powerful person in Persia, at which all the Grandees
were not a little astonished: and they all began to grow jealous of him: even
they who had been instrumental to his Advancement. For they could not imagine
he should arrive in so short a time to that Pinnacle of Honor where they beheld
him. And indeed they had reason to be jealous of him. For his Authority made
him Master of their Estates; and besides, they knew him to be ill-natured, and
mischievously bent, and as bold and daring as a Lion; more then all this,
Choleric without respect or consideration, and resolute to enterprise whatever
might satisfy his Fury, or advance his Interests. From this time forward till
his death, which happened not long after, as will appear in the Series of this
Story, he was always in great credit with the King; who had a particular esteem
for him, so that there was hardly any thing which he refused him.

At the same time that Haly-Kouli-Kaan was under restraint the Princess
Pehri-Rocksar-Begum, the present King's Aunt was also restored to Favor. For,
as it has been said in the Life of the deceased Prince, whose Sister she was,
the King, to punish her for having been too busy in some Intrigue, which I
know not what it was, only that it was such a one as had highly offended him,
had married her to a Mulla Doctor of the Law, who at that time lived at
Ispahan, the Son of Moute-Veli, or the Steward of the great Mosque at Mitshed.
By him during the Life of Habas she had two Children, to whom the Prince forbad
her to give suck, which is the manner of putting to death the Children of the
Blood Royal when the King resolves they shall not live. But now this Lady
understanding the death of the King, went and threw her self at the feet of the
New Monarch, who received her kindly, and assured her he would advance her
Husband to some considerable Employment: wherein he was as good as his word;
for some Months after, he made her Husband Sedre-Kaassoh, that is, peculiar
Poutiff, being a very considerable Employment, as he that is as it were the
Kings Almoner, or he that has the disposal of all the Gifts bequeathed by the
Kings of Persia to the Mosques; which Employment was worth to him about fifteen
thousand pounds yearly.

There remained another Sister of Habas II. in the Women's Palace, who in the
Kings absence was as it were Sovereigness of the Place; for which reason they
give her a Name that signifies, the white Locks of the Sacred Place; which is a
figurative sort of Speech to denote the dignity of the person, and the
particular respect which is due to her.

This Lady, being desirous to taste the Sweets of Wedlock as well as her
Sister, importunately besought the New Monarch that she might marry the Brother
of her Sisters Husband, a Molla, or Doctor of the Law as he was. For which
reason the King made him Sedre-Mokoufaat, or Pontiff of the Kingdoms, which is
a preferment almost like the other, and very near equal to it in Revenue; as he
that has the disposal of the Legacies which are given to the Mosques by private
Persons. Which two Preferments for above two hundred years were both in one.
But the King, for the satisfaction and advantage of his two Aunts, divided them
for the benefit of their Husbands who are persons of no merit, and of very mean
Capacities. Nor is it likely the King will suffer them to hold their Places of
too great Importance for their management.

And now his Majesty, having supplied these two Pontifical preferments, which
were vacant during the late Kings Reign, took care to fill up other vacancies
also, which he bestowed upon persons of credit that were next about him, or
their Friends. That of Kourtchi Bachi, or General of the Kourtches, one of the
three Bodies of the Persian Militia, and one of the highest Trusts in the
Empire was conferred upon Hustein-Kouli-Kaan. All the Kaanas or Governments of
Persia were likewise bestowed upon persons of worth: In a word, there was not a
vacant place but what was filled up. For the deceased King let them lie vacant
for a secret reason which his Son understood not, which was to reap the profit
of their Revenues. So great, that it is reported the Employments which he
supplied, and of which the King his Father had all the benefit, brought into
the Chequer a Million sterling Yearly. However I do not report this for truth;
but as having heard it affirmed by persons of great knowledge in Affairs, and
who could have given a just account had they so pleased; which they will not
always do.

These were the Favors and Bounties of the Young Monarch during the Festivals
of his Coronation. Of which the mirth and jollity was not a little disturbed by
a sad accident that occasioned the downfall of the Grand Provost.

In the description of Ispahan we have observed that for a long time that City
has been divided into two Factions, which are always quarrelling and fighting
for Precedence, and Antiquity. And upon Festival Times there is always a great
Concourse of the Rabble of both Factions in the old Maydan, or Public Place of
the City, where the two different Factions, ranging themselves, the one upon
the South, the other upon the North side, batter one another with Stones and
Clubs at a strange rate. The Grand Provost all this while makes a show of
parting 'em, but he does it so remissly, that both Parties see well enough that
it is only a Copy of his Countenance: which makes 'em bolder, and more violent
in their mischief. For the Grand Provost is not at all troubled at it by reason
of the great Fines which afterward he milks into his own Pocket.

Upon one of these forementioned Festival days, his Majesty being in the
spacious and magnificent Hall, which is built over the great Portal of his
Palace that looks out into the Royal Square, where he sat to behold a horse
Race, and several of his Lords shooting at a Golden Ball, an Exercise much used
among the Persian Archers, news was brought that about two thousand of the
Rabble were fighting in the Maydan, or Public Market place with that
implacable animosity that there was like to be a great deal of mischief done.
Upon which his Majesty sent for the Daroga, or Grand Provost of Ispahan, and
ordered him to take along with him a Guard of Sixty Musquetteers if he thought
fit, and go and disperse the furious Combatants. Which was a Command too
express to be dally'd withal. But the Grand Provost could never accomplish it.
However away he flew, at the Head of above two hundred Soldiers, and commanded
the Mutineers to part and disperse themselves. But they believing the Provost
did but only make a show, as he was wont to do, fell a shouting at him, and
palting him with stones. He would fain have given 'em to understand he was then
in earnest; but because the Tumult and noise was so great, that he could not
otherwise be heard then by the thunder of his Muskets, he ordered the Soldiers
to fire without Bullets; which they did, but to no purpose. For quite contrary
to his expectation, the insolent Multitude perceiving nothing but fire and
smoke, were the more confirmed in their Opinion, that the Grand Provost was
only come there to show himself in discharge of his Office, and that he did not
desire they should part in good earnest.

In the mean time two Horsemen came from the King to see if the Tumult were
appeased; at what time the Provost, galled to the heart that they should
observe the little Authority he had over the Rabble, who had put him to a
Retreat with their Stones, commanded about twenty of his Soldiers to fire with
Bullets. Of which Volley there was not a shot that missed. So that Nine of the
Multitude were killed upon the place, and others were dangerously wounded. The
rest, finding now that the Provost was not in jest, fled with all the have they
could, leaving their dead and wounded behind.

When word was carried to the King what had happened, some of the Grand
Provosts private Enemies, which the great Lords are never without, and who,
unfortunately for him, were then at his Majesty's elbow, laying hold of the
opportunity, How comes it to pass, Sir, said they, that a private Person, and a
Slave, dares thus abuse the Inhabitants of your Capital City? Has he nothing to
do but thus to destroy your truly Loyal Subjects? Cannot a Grand Provost
prevent these disorders? It Is not well done to make such a slaughter of
innocent and disarmed people. This will cause a contempt of the Authority which
your Majesty has over your Subjects, and to lose the Respect and Reverence
which they ought to bear your Majesty over all your Empire, when they find such
terrible extremities used under pretense of keeping 'em to obedience. Upon this
the King, who of himself was already troubled at the Accident, was far more
incensed by these exasperations. Wherefore he immediately dismissed the Lord
from his employment, and sent him Prisoner to a House, from whence he was
released some few days after at the earnest suit of the Queen Mother, and some
other persons that were concerned at his Misfortune. For indeed he was a man of
courage, eminent for his virtue, and one that showed in all his Actions the
Nobility of his Extraction: for he was descended from the Blood Royal of
Georgia, the last Sovereign Prince of that Country being his Grandfather, whose
name was Hemire-Hamzeh-Mirza. We shall speak more of him in the Progress of his
Story; fortune calling him again upon the Stage to act a part of more
importance, and of greater Authority. The charge of Grand Provost was again
supplied the next day, and conferred upon a very worthy person, the Son of
Mir-Kassem-bek, or Lord Prince Robust. This same Mir-Kassem-bek had been Grand
Provost before the last that was so lately put out, and in the time of Habas
II. by the craft of the Prime Minister had his Head cut off in the Royal Piazza
of Ispahan. His Son, who was called Kelk-Hali-Bek, or the Lord, the Dog of
Haly, during the little time that he enjoyed this Employment, most worthily
behaved himself in it: and we must needs say, that raised his Father made
himself eminent again, by driving out all the Thieves, Pick-pockets, and Rabble
which infected that great City.

This happened at the latter end of the Year 1077. according to the Mahumetan
account, which answers to the beginning of our Year 1667. For their Year 1078.
began with the Vernal Equinox, which his Majesty made a great day of public
rejoicing according to the Custom of the Persians.

But this Year that began with so much rejoicing, and with such lucky Omens,
was not so fortunate however in the Conclusion.

Scarcity, War, and Epidemick distempers afflicted the most part of the
Provinces during the whole course of it. The Court was turmoyl'd with several
disorders, which cost some persons many a troublesome Hour. And through the
negligence and remissness of the Sovereign, the Grandees erected so many petty
Tyrannies, which trampled under foot and pillaged the poor people as they
pleased themselves. So that there was not any person but was sensible of the
miseries which ill Government occasions when the Prince only minds his
pleasures, and to content his Passions; and the great ones following his
example give themselves the liberty to follow the swinge of their own Arbitrary
Wills.

The first thing remarkable at the beginning of the Year was the death of
Mahammed-Kouli-Kaan-Divan-Beki, or Lord Chief Justice. He neither lay long
sick, nor was it long before his Place was supplied; being conferred upon him
that was Mirraab, or Prince of the Waters, or Steward of the Waters: For in
regard that water is very scarce in that Country, this same Overseer of the
Waters is a very considerable Employment. However it was not thought that he
would be the Person made choice of to succeed the Chief Justice, but rather
that he who had formerly executed the Place, and had been banished by the
deceased King to Metshed for his ill Government would be restored to the Kings
favor, and to his former Post. Nor was the Conjuncture without great
Probability, in regard that Hali-Kouli-Kaan, General of all the Kings Forces,
was then very powerful, and that the other was his Nephew, the Son of
Rustan-Kaan his Brother. However he was deceived, and the General, quite
contrary to his Expectation, hindered all people to solicit in his behalf,
out of the care he took of his own Reputation, which he had sulli'd in a high
degree, had he been instrumental to restore a Person that was hated by all the
world; besides that, his private enmity against him prevailed beyond all the
Considerations of Blood and Consanguinity. For which the Christians had reason
to bless God, because there was no man more their enraged and bitter Enemy then
he. And it was well for 'em, during the time he held his Employment, that Habas
was not a young man, and that he undertook their Protection. For it is reported
of him, that when any Christian was Cited before his Tribunal by any Mahumetan,
he presently condemned him before he heard him; and that he was wont to say, It
was Crime enough for an Armenian to have a suit with a Mahumetan, for him to
cause his head to be broken. Why should he not suffer the Injuries that are
done him, Dog as he is, that does not know that the Christian Religion is
inferior to the Mahumetan?

In the mean time the King held on his debaucheries every day at the same rate.
But his health did not keep at the same stay, while he grew every day worse
then other. For the young Prince having plundg'd himself into the excesses of
Wine and Women, it was impossible he should hold out without some alteration.
So that during the whole course of this Year he was always ill, what Physic
soever his Physicians could prescribe him; for he took little care of himself.
If he sometimes refrained Wine by their advice, it was not so long, but that he
fell to drinking again before he had time to recover his strength. For which
reason he was always pale, and his Body imparted its own weakness to his Mind,
and rendered him unfit for business to which the Grandeur of his Quality called
him.

All this while the Dearth increased at Ispahan, and the poor people cried
aloud against the excessive price of it. And indeed there were many causes of
this Scarcity. First, the last years Harvest did not amount scarce to the half
of what they expected; for the Locust had devoured the Ears. Then the whole
Train of the Court was come all together of a sudden to Ispahan before they
were expected, so that they had taken no care to lay in their Stores against
Winter. Moreover, at the King's first coming to the Crown, the greatest part of
the Officers of the Empire coming to present themselves before Him, and a vast
number of private persons crouding together about business, or for curiosity,
the Multitude of Inhabitants was increased to above half as many again, so that
of necessity the Price of Provisions must be double in Proportion. But the
chief Reason that all things were so dear was the bad appearance of the Harvest
at hand, which promised no better then the last year. For in regard the
Harvests in these Climates are generally reaped in the Months of June and July,
it is easy to conjecture in March and April what the year will produce. And
therefore the Corn Merchants perceiving that there would be an infallible
scarcity of all sorts of Grain, enhans'd their Prizes, and would not part with
what they had, but staid till the Prizes were at the highest, so that the
probability of a dearth to come caused a present Famine. Lastly, the ill
Government was in part a great cause of the scarcity, for that the Laws were
not observed, and the Magistrates neglected their duty, without fear of being
punished. And this was the Reason that the Mochtesek, or Chief of the
Government, received Bribes of those that sold necessary Provisions, and
therefore to gratify 'em he published every Week the Prizes of things as those
people desired; that is to say, at an excessive rate, and three quarters higher
then in the time of the deceased King. For we are to observe, that it is a
Custom in Persia, that every Saturday the Chief Justice sets the Price of all
Provisions for the Week following, which the Sellers dare not exceed under
great forfeitures. This Knavery then of the Judge of the City Government, who
stood in no aw of the superior Government, was the cause that all things were
sold at double and treble the Rate they ought to have been.

The People therefore almost starved by this Scarcity, redoubled their Cries,
so that they reached the very Gate of the Palace Royal, which moved his
Majesty's Compassion to that degree, that he committed the Affair to
Ali-Kouli-Kaan, General of all his Forces. Who began his first endeavors of
redress with an Act of Generosity and Justice, which made him dreaded by all
the Merchants and Corn-sellers. He had commanded one of the most eminent
Merchants in Ispahan to send him in upon the place, the first day of the
Market, two hundred Sacks of Wheat, and not to sell 'em at a dearer rate then
they were sold the year before. Now the Merchant thought that he expected a
Bribe; and therefore upon the Market day, thinking to exempt himself from
obedience to his Command he sent him two hundred Tomans, which amount to the
value of about a thousand Pistols. Thereupon the Generalissimo, being highly
offended, sent for him, and when he came, Dog as thou art, said he, is it thus
thou go about to famish a whole City? For the Affront thou have done me
receive a hundred Drubs upon the soles of thy feet. Which were paid him at the
same instant; and besides, the General condemned him in a Fine of two thousand
Crowns; which he took to himself, sending the thousand Pistols to the King.

Presently he ordered a great Oven to be built in the Royal Piazza, and another
in the public Piazza, ordering the Criers to proclaim that those Ovens were
fixed to bake those alive, that should sell their bread at a rate above the set
price, or that should hide up their Corn. There was moreover a fire continually
kept in these Ovens, but no body was thrown in; because no body would venture
the pain of such a rigorous punishment of his Disobedience.

At the same time he also went himself to visit all the Granaries and
Storehouses of Corn and Meal that were in Ispahan, and having taken an account
in Writing of their Number, every Week he commanded the Merchants to send a
certain quantity according to the Proportion of what their Storehouses
contained, and not to sell but at a certain Price, and not to deliver their
goods to any but such as brought a Note under his hand. He gave the same
Command for Barley: so that almost for a whole years time there was neither
Wheat or Barley to be had without a Ticket sealed with his Signet. All the
Bakers went for such a Ticket. And in regard the General knew full well what
every one of 'em vented, he would not permit the Baker by virtue of his Ticket
to buy any more then what he had occasion for. To that purpose he prohibited
the Bakers to sell to any other then those of their own Precinct, nor to sell
'em any more then what was needful for their subsistence according to the usual
rate of their spending, to the end that the Bakers should not pretend that
persons came from abroad to buy their bread; or that those in their Precincts
bought more one Week then they did another, and so that the vent could not be
always equally proportioned. And for the Price, he ordered that the Batman-cha
of Bread (the Royal weight of Persia, consisting of eleven pounds three
quarters) should be worth an Abassi, which makes four Groats.

By this good management he wonderfully eased the People, who before paid for
eleven pound and three fourths of Bread an Abassi and a quarter, or twenty
pence; whence it also came to pass, that there was Plenty sufficient. Thus the
Complaints and Cries of the People ceased. For the Bakers being obliged to
furnish those in their Precincts with as much bread as they stood in need of,
no body was apprehensive of the scarcity, but only that he paid five farthings
for that which cost not above four in time of plenty. And to the end that the
same rate might continue, he sent to all the Buroughs, Towns, and Villages,
from eight to nine days journey round about, to send in such a number, of
Waggon-Loads of Corn and Meal to Ispahan, and there to sell it at the set
price. By which means there came enough to supply the City for six Months.
Moreover, when any considerable Quantity arrived, he ordered it to be brought
in, as it were, in triumph; the People dancing before with their Instruments of
Music, and the horses being covered with Housses, and gingling an infinite
number of little Bells, which together with the Acclamations of the Rabble made
a strange, confused, and yet pleasing noise.

Some Villages there were that mutiny'd and refused to send in their Corn; but
the punishment of the Inhabitants of Ispahanimcha struck a terror into the
rest. For the General had sent to this Place, being a great Town consisting of
four thousand Houses, two Leagues distant from Ispahan, one of his Officers
with a Command from the King to send at the set Price two hundred Sacks of Meal
to the Capital City for their present necessity. The Townsmen made answer,
'twas nothing to them if there were such a Famine in the City, for that they
had paid all their duties and Impositions for the last Harvest: that they had
something else to do then to send their Corn and their Meal to Ispahan Market,
and that those that wanted might come to them, for that they were not bound to
sell but in their own Town. Thereupon the Officer remonstrated to the Principal
of the Village that it was the Kings pleasure, and showed 'em the Kings Warrant
which he had in his hands; to which their answer not being with that becoming
reverence which became 'em, the Officer laid his hand upon his Sword, thinking
to have frighted 'em into obedience. But the Country fellows not understanding
his hard words, fell upon the Officer, beat him almost blind, and tore the
Kings Command, crying out, 'twas a Cheat and Counterfeit.

The General highly offended at this Insolence of the Countrymen, gave the King
an account of it, who ordered him to inflict such punishment as the Offense
deserved. Upon which he sent two hundred of his Guards, who Drubb'd to excess
the Principal of the Ringleaders. He also set a Fine upon their heads of a
hundred thousand Crowns; which was mitigated to a third part, tho after many
Petitions and Submissions, with a Present to the General of a thousand Pistols,
which was all paid down upon the nail.

At the same time the General also found a way to revenge himself upon the
Armenians for refusing him a kindness which he asked 'em; making use, for his
pretense, of this Commission which the King had given him to furnish Ispahan
with Corn. These Armenians are Christians born in Ispahan; so called because
they are originally Natives of Armenia, from whence Habas the Great
transplanted 'em into the heart of the Kingdom. At present their principal
Colony is without the Walls of the Capital City, in a place adjoining separated
from the City only by the River: the Persians also call 'em, as we do, Armeni
for the same reason. They also call the two Armenia's, the one Armen the Great,
and the other Armen the Less. Now Hali-Kouli-Kaan at his first coming to Court,
being in want of money to put himself into an Equipage, and to go forward with
his Buildings, and not knowing where to have it, one day that some of the
Armenians came to him about business, demanded of 'em, which were accounted the
most wealthy of all their Country-Folks? Upon which they named him five or six,
and among the rest Koga Zachara. The General remembered his name, and two days
after, when another Armenian came to present him some Petition or other, he
asked him whether he knew the Merchant Zachara; who making answer that he did,
the General bid him go and seek for him. Now the Armenian little thought that
the General had meant the rich Merchant, which the former had mentioned, but
another of the same name, who with his two Brothers managed the Kings Money,
and had always considerable Sums in their hands, to purchase in Foreign
Countries such Curiosities of value which might please the King. This latter
therefore the Armenian fetched. And the General believing him to be the
Merchant Zachara, caused him to sit down by him for two hours together, and
received him so civilly as to make him stay and dine with him.

After Dinner, Koga-Zachara, said the General, can not thou do me the
kindness to lend me two hundred Tomans (which are about a thousand Pistols) I
expect in a short time considerable Sums of Money, and then I will repay thee
with Interest, and upon any occasion thou shall see I know how to be grateful
to those that oblige me. To which the Armenian replied, Not only two hundred,
but two thousand Tomans, if your Lordship pleases. This answer pleased the
General, insomuch that he showed himself highly satisfied, and asked him if he
could not send him in the money the same day. To which the Armenian,
understanding what he had to do, replied, Sir, said he, the money shall be sent
in, when you please to command it; but I must beg the favor first to give me
the liberty to speak one word. We are two Brothers and my self his Majesty's
Factors, the one is in the Indies, the other in Europe; as for my self, I
reside here, as you see; all the Money that we turn and wind is the Kings, and
then it will be requisite that the Receipt which you give me should be sealed
with the Kings Signet, and then you may have the Sum you desire.

The General then saw he was mistaken, for he could not meddle with the King's
Money, and chafing in his mind, dismissed the Merchant, believing the Armenians
had named this person to him, on purpose to baffle his request, by putting him
to desire a kindness of the King's Factor, of whom it was not proper for him to
borrow Money. However it was only an Error caused by the mistake of the Person,
where there were two of a name. For in regard that the Armenians are only
called by the Proper names which they receive in Baptism, never using any
Sirnames, it happens that there are several persons that go by one and the same
Name.

However the General resolved to try once more; and two days after he found an
opportunity to make a second Request. For the Keloanter, or chief and sole
Governor of the Armenians, and who has therefore that Title given him, which
signifies Greatest, having made some Presents to the King, for which his
Majesty sent him a Royal Habit, put it on, and being attended by the most
considerable persons of his Nation, went to return his humble Thanks to the
King, and to kiss his feet. After that, according to custom, he goes with all
his Company to pay his Visits to the Grandees of the Court, and to return 'em
his Thanks for having contributed to the Honor done him to have the Royal Vest
bestowed upon him. When he came to the Generals House, the Grandee caused him
and all his Company to sit down, and after the usual Complements, he desired
'em to lend him two hundred Tomans, assuring 'em that he would repay 'em again
with Interest, and be their Protector upon all occasions at Court. But they,
who knew how usual a thing it was for the Persian Grandees to be borrowing, and
how frequently they were denied; and besides, as well understanding the humor
of the Person, to whom a Loan would have proved a Gift, made him answer, that
it would be their happiness to serve him, but as at present their affairs
stood, it was impossible: for that all their Money was either in the Indies, or
in Europe, in the hands of their Factors, and before their return they knew not
how to raise such a Sum. Very well, replied the General, then lend me but half
so much: nay, he came down at length to a third part. But these imprudent
persons swey'd by their own Avarice, refused him also that small Sum, not
considering the Credit he was in at Court, and that he was able to do 'em a
great deal of harm. Which so incensed the General, that he put 'em out of the
Room before him, calling 'em Dogs, and turning his back upon 'em would not
receive their Complement. Three Weeks after he sent a Command in the Kings name
to their Chief, to furnish the City with forty thousand Batman-Sha of Meal,
which make five hundred thousand pound weight. To which the Chief of the
Armenians answered, that there was not so much in all the Town: and to fetch it
from other places was a thing not to be done, in regard the expense of Carriage
would raise the Price of every Batman, or twelve pound, to an Abassi and a
fourth part; which was contrary to the King's Command; who intended that the
abovementioned weight should be sold for an Abassi, which in that manner would
be a fifth part loss to them. The Account was just, and the General knew well
enough they would be losers at least a thousand Pistols in the quantity of Meal
which he demanded: but that was the thing he aimed at, that they should be
losers the full Sum of what they refused to lend him. And therefore, not
satisfied with their reasons, he sent to 'em again to let 'em know that they
must furnish the Quantity of Meal which the King had ordered; That the Place of
of their Residence was a dependence upon Ispahan, and that they were obliged to
relieve the Capital City as well as others: and that it was his Majesty's
express Command. But notwithstanding all that the General could say, the
Armenians would do nothing. They pleaded that they were not obliged to that
over-chargement; and that by their Agreement with the King they were exempt
from all new Impositions and Tributes, paying yearly four hundred Tomans, which
come to about two thousand Pistols, so that although there were a real Famine in
the City, as thanks be to God there was not, there could no more then that Sum
be demanded of them.

They were in the right, but they wanted strength. The General was resolved to
carry it on with a high hand, and no less was agreed upon then to arrest the
Principal Heads of the Town. Of which when they had notice, they sent all their
Wives, to the number of above three hundred, to the Gate of the Haram, or
Palace of Women, there to wait for the King, and demand Justice. To which
purpose they took their opportunity when his Majesty was there, and placed
themselves before the Gate against the Walls. For indeed, this is the Place
allowed to be free for all that come to cry for Justice, or to Petition for any
Favor: nor dare the Guards upon pain of death hinder any Persons that offer to
go thither, where they have liberty to implore with a loud voice the Justice of
the Prince. There these Women made such a noise, that they were easily heard to
the innermost part of the whole Palace, so that the King having understood the
Cause, commanded 'em to go home, and he would take order in their business.

However the Generalissimo ceased not to press the Armenians, and to threaten
'em with Imprisonment, so that finding no other remedy, they sent their Wives a
second time to the Palace, and to the same Place. Where the Women set up their
throats as they did before; and understanding that his Majesty was just coming
forth at the Gate that leads into the Royal Alley, thither they ran in heaps
with so much fury, that one Crowd of 'em got so near as to touch the Kings
Horse; nor could the Sophies and Lacqueys that went before, and round about the
Kings Person hardly keep 'em off. For the Women in the heat of their fury began
to throw stones, and one among the rest was so impudent as to lay hands upon
the Bridle of the Kings Horse. So that his Majesty, being before not a little
startled at the Tumult, began to be more astonished at the boldness of such an
action; and besides, his Youth and want of Experience was such that he knew not
how to deal with that Sex: only he commanded the Guard, to drive 'em away, bid
'em be gone, and that he would do 'em Justice: but for all that, he had much
ado to quit himself from those she Devils let loose.

At the same time the Armenians had presented a Petition, by means of an
Eunuch, to the Queen Mother, as being under her Protection, for that their Town
is one of the Places assigned for her Dowry. The Princess received their
Petition, and promised to act in their behalf. In a word, so soon as the
Monarch her Son was returned to her Apartment, she besought him to remit the
Surcharge which he had laid upon the poor Armenians in regard that by the
Concessions which the Kings his Predecessors had granted to 'em upon payment of
the Sum agreed, they were exempt from all other Impositions. To which the King
answered, A God's name let it be so, I acquit 'em. Immediately the Princess
dispatched away an Eunuch to give 'em notice of their discharge; but the
Eunuch, either through negligence, or otherwise, not meeting with those he was
sent to, the Armenians knew nothing of the Kings Discharge.

For indeed the Chief Heads of the Armenians, to the number of Forty or Fifty,
ignorant of the Kings mercy, and fearing lest the General should send to
apprehend 'em, were fled to the Grand Portal of the Kings House, called
Haly-Capy, that is to say, the High-Gate, which is a Sanctuary for all those
that are pursued by Justice, and from whence no person can be taken without an
express Warrant from the King. Toward Evening, as his Majesty returned from the
Women's Palace to the Place where he gives his Audiences, it was told him that
all the Armenians were got together in a riotous manner under the High Gate,
and that they cried out against the General for threatening to imprison 'em. To
which the King made answer, What do those Armenians do there? I have pardoned
'em, and acquitted the Imposition of Meal which was laid upon 'em by
Hali-Kouli-Kaan by my Order. All which the General, being present, heard, but
said not a word, tho mad in his mind that he had missed his aim. Presently
several of the Officers ran with the news to the Armenians in the Gate; but
blinded by their Destiny, instead of going home, they thought it had been a
snare only to draw 'em thence, and arrest 'em when they had got 'em out of the
Sanctuary; so that they would not stir, till they saw the King's Grace
confirmed under his Seal.

With this Resolve of theirs, the same Officers returned to the King: but then
the General finding his opportunity, Sir, said he, had I not reason to
represent to your Majesty as I did, that the Armenians were a company of Dogs,
a rebellious sort of people that submit to your Majesty more for fear then
force? Does not your Majesty see that they despise your Royal Word? Refusing to
rely upon it, or to obey your Orders? But they would force your Majesty to
give 'em in writing what your sacred Lips have pronounced? Was ever such a
matchless piece of Impudence ever heard of?

Thou speak^st reason, replied the Prince; they deserve my displeasure, and to
be punished. Send, and let their Guts be ripp'd up; They are Dogs.

Upon these words the Officers were ready to execute the Monarchs Sentence; but
the General made 'em a sign to stay a little. For besides that he had no design
upon their Lives, but only upon their Purses; he considered that such a bloody
Execution, and the loss of so many industrious and understanding Merchants
would be very prejudicial to the Kingdom; and therefore falling upon his Knees,
and imploring his Majesty's Pardon in behalf of those miserable Creatures. Sir,
said he, they are unworthy your Majesty's displeasure; Let 'em live; it will be
a sufficient punishment to bleed their Purses of a round Sum of Money. Well
then, said the King, let their Fine be four times the value of the Meal which
was demanded of 'em. Which came to fifteen thousand pound sterling.
Immediately, contrary to any president that had ever been seen in Persia, the
Armenians were hurried from their Sanctuary, which till then had been always
held inviolable, and committed into the hands of their Enemy, who sent 'em
prisoners to a fair Palace formerly belonging to the Mir-aab, or the Prince of
the Waters, where they had order to remain till they had paid their full Fine.

This Imprisonment made 'em look about 'em, so that they petitioned the General
the same day for their Release, and that in acknowledgment of his favor they
would give him the two hundred Tomans which he had formerly desired to borrow,
and that for their Fine, they would summon the whole Town of Julfa, and cause a
Contribution to be made for raising the Sum imposed; for that as for themselves
they were not able to pay it. How! cried the General, Dogs as they are, do they
think the Sum imposed is to be paid by any other then themselves? Do they
imagine, that they who are rich shall be exempt from the Burden for the Poor
to pay it? They talk of making the Borough contribute, but it is his Majesty's
pleasure that the Rich shall pay, and not the poor Mechanics and such as have
no Trade. The Merchants alone are able to pay a Fine of fifteen thousand
pounds; and therefore no more words, nor no more contending, unless they intend
to have this Fine doubled.

Nevertheless the Armenians persisted to plead their want of Money, and that it
was impossible for 'em to raise such a Sum. But at length there were two
Indians, who whether out of their own good Nature, or whether it were at the
request of the Armenians, who went to the General, and offered to advance the
said Sum of fifteen thousand pounds for the Armenians, provided they would
engage to repay it with Interest, to which they agreed; and so the business was
concluded in four days; and all the rest were released but only the Governor,
who remained a Prisoner still for some Weeks till the whole Sum was fully paid;
that is to say, four thousand Tomans for the King, and five hundred to the
General of the Army, which make some eighteen thousand pounds. And thus you see
what these People got by being wedded so stiffly to their own Interests, for
refusing the crafty old General the thousand Crowns, which was all at first by
him desired.

This Fine so considerable was not paid neither by all the Armenians, but by
those only who are called Giculfali. And here for his better Information, the
Reader is to understand, that Giulfa, which is a part of the Suburbs of
Ispahan, is inhabited altogether by Christians that came out of Armenia, tho
not at all from one part, and therefore they are divided into two sorts of
Colonies. Of which the Principal is the Colony of the Giulfali, so called as
being once the Inhabitants of Jiulfa a small Town in Armenia, built upon the
Banks of Araxis, who built this Borough when they were transplanted to
Ispahan, and gave it the name of their former Habitation. Since, and in these
latter times the other Armenians, being constrained to remove from the Village
where they had before seated themselves at one end of Ispahan, came and settled
at the end of this new Town, adding new buildings to it, which make four
distinct Quarters, the one called the Quarter of the Hirvanli, the other of the
Nakshivanli, as being Peopled by the Native Inhabitants of two Cities in
Armenia, Nackchivan and Hirvan. The other two are called Shams-abadi,
Sheik-Sabani, in regard that they who inhabit 'em formerly lived in the two
Suburbs of Ispahan, Shams-abad, or the Habitation of the Sun, and Sheik-Sabana,
the Habitation of the Ancient Mason. Now this Fine of eighteen thousand pounds
was only paid by the first; the rest, against whom the General had no such
Antipathy, were discharged all together from the Imposition of Meal only for
fifteen thousands pounds weight.

The Guebres, who are the ancient Persians or Fire Worshippers, and who live at
the farthest end of the Town, were wholly discharged upon their pleading
Poverty; it being well known that they were a miserable sort of People, and
under great distress.

The General of the Army, within a small while after caused a Fine of thirty
thousand pounds to be paid to his Majesty, and indeed upon a much more rational
and juster score, by the Multani, who are a sort of Indian Banians, so called
from Multan, one of the chief Cities of India, and the first that lies next to
Persia toward Kaud-Dar, because the first that frequented Persia came from that
City. Now two of these Indians had Intelligence several years since with the
Ministers of the Indian King, and served him as Spies at Ispahan, to give him
private intelligence of all the Affairs and Intrigues of the Persian Court and
Kingdom: nor did they fail to write upon all opportunities, and at that time
taking hold of the opportunity of the Caravan which in the Spring time goes to
the Indies, they sent Letters by that Caravan, among other things, that
Aureng-Zeb (for that was the Indian Monarchs name) should not let slip this
advantage of invading Persia; That he could never desire a more favorable
Conjuncture, then that which now invited him; That there was nothing to hinder
his Victorious March even to Ispahan it self; for that the Prince himself was
very Young, wanting both Experience and Courage: that he who bore all the sway
under him, was an old Tyrant, the General of the Army; but in regard of his Age
unfit for War; and for his other Ministers, besides that they were persons that
had neither Courage nor Conduct, they were disgusted with the Government. More
then this, that there was a very great scarcity in the Country of all things
necessary for humane support, especially in the Metropolis, where there was a
general murmuring against the disorders and bad management of the Government;
and that the general Rumors were, that Persia was attacqu'd in several places.
In a word, that the Indians could never have such an opportunity to conquer the
Kingdom, and retake Kand-Dar. In these Letters also were enclosed the
Portraitures of the King, and all the Principal Ministers and Officers of
State, which those Indians had prevailed with a Painter to draw for a good Sum
of Money, on purpose to send to the Indian that they might be known to the
Monarch of that Country.

This Plot was discovered by a little Slave belonging to the Painter. For about
six Weeks after the setting forth of the Caravan, his Master having beaten him
to excess, he attempted a Revenge above his Age and Condition. He ran to the
General of the Armie's house, and desired he might be admitted to speak with
the General in private. But the Servants at first would not permit him with a
trifle of no importance to interrupt the General, who had always an incredible
Crowd of People waiting upon him, and a multitude of business upon his hands.
Till at length being importunate to speak with him, and urging the weight of
the secret which he had to discover, the Guards informed the General, who sent
for him into his presence, and demanded what he would have. To whom the Slave
made answer, with an undaunted courage, that it was not a secret to be
discovered, but if he pleased to order the People to withdraw, or to retire
himself, he should know his business in private. Notwithstanding all this the
General at that time made little reckoning of what he said, and they assured me
that it was three days before the General would trouble himself to examine him.
Till at length the Slave persevering in his resolution never to discover any
thing but to himself in private, the General moved by his perseverance, sent
for him into a little Cabinet, where he discovered that his Master had drawn
the Portraitures of the King and all the Grandees of the Court, and had sold
'em privately to the Indians to send into India; that three Dervicks (such are
those that out of a Religious Motive make a profession of Poverty) carried
those Portraitures into India, and that they came to his Master with the
Indians, and hid 'em under the tattered Garments that they wore: that they hid
certain Letters also in the same manner at the same time, but of which he knew
not the Contents, and that they went away with the Caravan for Caudar.

The General of the Army was at a stand whether he should give credit to the
Deposition of this Slave or no. He tried him sometimes with threats, sometimes
with promises to see if he could find him any way tripping or various in his
story; not knowing but that it might be a falsehood of the Slaves Invention. But
when he found him resolute in the same tale, and still affirming Positively the
same thing: and that he affirmed it with all the Oaths which among the Persians
are esteemed to be most dreadful, and that he offered his Life as a Gage of
what he had said; the General resolved to dive into the bottom of the Affair.
Thereupon he dispatched away two Horsemen after the Caravan, with a Warrant
under the Kings hand to seize the persons that were accused of carrying those
Letters and Portraitures. Which two Horsemen in a months time overtook the
Caravan, and knowing the Derwicks by the descriptions which the Slave had
given, brought 'em Prisoners to Ispahan.

When they were brought to the General of the Army, he sent for the Slave, and
asked him if he knew those poor people, and if they were the persons that
carried the Letters and Portraitures. The Slave assured him that they were the
men, and pressed 'em so home that they began to stagger in their Answers.
Thereupon the General caused their Clothes to be searched, and their Tatters to
be unripp'd, and there, as the Slave had declared, he found the Portraitures
and the Letters sowd up in several places. All which were carried to the King,
who having seen the Contents of the Letters fell into such a passionate Rage,
that he resolved to put to death one part of the Multani Indians, and to
exterminate the rest out of his Dominions, tho they were above twenty thousand.
But the Generalissimo, and the Chief Minister endeavored to appease him, and
humbly represented to him, that it was not reason to punish the Innocent with
the Guilty. In the mean time they could not make any discoveries of the Authors
of the Letters; for the Derwicks, notwithstanding all the Torments and Tortures
they were put to, would discover nothing: constantly affirming, that they knew
not who they were, nor their names, nor had ever been at their Houses. That as
for what had been found about 'em, they met with those things in their Bundles
at the Painters, and that the Indians that brought 'em, never told them either
their Names, or their Habitations.

Now in regard their Names were not subscribed in the Letters, the General knew
not what course to take to sift out the truth. He had caused the Principal of
the Multani to be apprehended, to the number of two hundred, but they were all
released again except three, who paid for those that were guilty, if they
themselves were not the very persons, (for it never could be made out, and the
suspicions were very slight) and therefore being thus in the dark, it was
thought sufficient to confiscate a part of so much of their Estates as they
could discover, which they found to amount to vast Sums; of which nevertheless,
out of mere pity they took no more then eight Thousand Tomans, or thirty
thousand pounds: The rest was left 'em upon their pleading that what seemed to
be theirs, belonged to Merchants that lived in the Indies. As for the three
persons that carried the Letters and Portraitures, and the Painter, they were
drubb'd with a witness; nor were they released till their Feet were swelled as
big as their Heads with the violence of the blows.

At the same time Sha-Naavaz-Kaan, Prince Governor of Georgia, sent his Son to
the Court of Persia to desire the King to bestow upon him the Employment of
Daroga, or grand Provost of Ispahan, which appertained to him of right,
according to former agreements between the Kings of Persia, and the Princes of
Georgia. To which demand his Majesty was very unwilling to condescend, because
he had already given away the Place: but his Ministers of State acknowledging
the justness of his claim, spoke so effectually to the King, that the Georgian
was invested in the Employment, and Kelb-Haly-Bek was ordered to resign, who
was recompensed with an Employment altogether as considerable.

For the better understanding of which passage we must observe, that when Habas
the Great became the Master of Georgia (which he obtained rather by slight then
by force.) by those snares into which he drew poor Temuraz-Kaan, who was the
last King of Georgia; he proposed to him great advantages, provided he would
submit himself to his Empire, and acknowledge his Sovereignty; and among the
rest that the Employment of Grand Provost of Ispahan should for the future
belong to one of the Children of the Prince of Georgia, and that it should
descend by inheritance to his Successors to perpetuity. Which has been
faithfully all along observed to this time, and the Son of the Prince of
Georgia always hol'ds that Employment.

A third Vacancy was also supplied, that is to say, the Government of Shamaky,
which encompasses one part of the Southern Media, and another of Hyrcania. And
this was given to Sepher-Kouli-Kaan, or the Princely Slave of the Armies. It
became vacant by the Death of Negef-Kouli-Kaan, one of the bravest Lords of
Persia, generous and stout, who by his Resolution and Courage had raised
himself to that high Dignity. The European Merchants trading in Jewels have
often tasted of his generous Liberality; for he did not only satisfy 'em for
their Jewels, but carress'd 'em with Habits, Presents, and good Cheer.

During these Transactions in the Capital City of Persia, the Frontiers were
greatly apprehensive of a War, that threatened 'em from all parts. Courriers
came thick and threefold to Ispahan, some from the Confines of Bactria,
Hyrcania, and Media, who brought intelligence of several designs which the
Kossacks, the Yusbeks, and other Tartars were suspected to be forming against
the Empire. Others from the Confines toward Turkey and India, who brought no
less unpleasing Tidings. However at Court they feared no War but only from
those two sides, especially the latter: for the Turks had their hands full at
Candy.

As for the Indian King, all concurring Probabilities made 'em conjecture that
he would engage in a War against Persia. For besides that he was naturally of a
haughty and Ambitious Disposition; that he was quiet at home, and had nothing
to fear from abroad, he had a fair pretense to revenge the Affronts which his
Ambassador Terviet-Kaan had received in Persia. For in the Life of Habas II.
we shall give a full account of that Ambassador, who came to Ispahan in the
year 1664. according to our account, with a Train of eight thousand men: as
also of the Presents which he brought, so rich as is hardly to be believed, as
well in respect of those which the King accepted, as those which he refused. We
shall also there declare the Occasion of his Embassy, and of his stay in the
Court of Persia, the public Affronts which Habas put upon him, on purpose in
his Own to affront the Person of his Master Aureng-Zeeb, and to revenge himself
for his delay in not sending his Ambassador before; and lastly, we shall
describe the Presents which the King of Persia gave the Ambassador to carry to
his Master.

Habas II. di'd about fifteen days before the Indian Ambassador arrived at his
own Master's Court; who therefore not knowing as yet of his Death, and having
had an account from his own Ambassador of the bad usage he had received in the
Court of Persia, testified his resentment with a more then ordinary fury. He
presently degraded Terviet-Kaan, upbraiding him for a Coward, and telling him
he should rather have di'd then have suffered such affronts. He caused all the
goodly Horses which the Persian had sent him, to the number of Sixcore, to be
brought out into the great Piazza of Dehly, his Royal Residence, and there cut
off their Legs. Afterward, he caused all the costly Stuffs of Gold and Silk,
the Turquoises, and all other Presents sent him by the Persian Monarch to be
publicly burnt, and, as if he resolved to declare open War, he forbad his
Subjects all manner of Commerce with the Persians either by Land or Sea, and
sent express Orders to all the Ports of India that no Indian Vessels should
stir out of the Kingdom. The news of these proceedings coming to Ispahan made
most people believe that nothing but a War was intended, and every one prepared
for it. But they that had a deeper reach, were not so positive in their
judgments, tho they durst not discover their thoughts. But he who most upheld
this news of an Indian War, and gave most credit to it, was
Gemshid-Kaan-Koular, Agacie, General of the Slaves, a great Favorite at Court,
and as a Friend esteemed by the General of the Army. This same Grandee, being
one of the falsest persons that ever were, during the first nine Months of the
New King's Reign, had contrived so many dangerous designs, as well against the
Meaner sort as against the Grandees, that at length some of his practices being
discovered, he became odious to all, and had drawn upon himself the Universal
hatred of the Courtiers; so that he was sufficiently apprehensive that he could
not resist so many Enemies. True it is, that he had the favor of the King and
the General of the Army; yet was it not so assured that he could promise
himself the continuance of it for any long time. Therefore he thought the
safest Course he could take at such a ticklish conjuncture was to retire as far
from the Court as he could under a specious and very honorable pretense. And
in regard the Government of Candabar presented him an opportunity so favorable
to his design he endeavored to have the Grant of it.

To that purpose he labored the confirmation of the false reports that were
spread of the War which the King of the Indies threatened against Persia. He
gave his Majesty Intelligence, which he said was most certain, that the Indian
Prince was coming to besiege Candabar with a mighty Army; that the better to
accomplish his designs, and draw the Yusbecs to his Party, he had sent 'em
fifty Lacres of Roupies, amounting to about six hundred thousand pounds
sterling, upon condition that they would declare open Hostilty against Persia:
that Aurengh Zeeb himself had already taken the Field. In a word, he knew so
well how to lay his Stories so cunningly together, and to render the Terrors
and Affrights which he forged so probable, that all the business was now to
apply remedies to those Mischiefs that were thought to be so near approaching,
and so dangerous. Thereupon he counterfeits himself to be the most faithful
Subject, and most passionate for his Countries welfare in the World. He vowed
that he himself should be the Korban, as they call it, or the Sacrifice that
would be offered for the safety of the People, and that he would go himself to
Kandaar, and there expose his own Person to the first Assaults of his Enemies.
He also engages the General of the Army in this Intrigue; who besides was
willing enough of himself to return him like for like, and to repay him for the
kindness he had done him, as we have already related. The King therefore
persuaded by these two Lords that were his Confidents, the one the General of
his Armies, and the other General of his Slaves, granted to the latter what he
contended for with so much heat, and gave him a Commission to raise men for
Kandaar, with hopes of the Government it self in a short time. Which was no
small joy to this same contriver of Wiles and Intrigues, who thereby thought
himself safe sheltered from all those mischiefs which his turbulent spirit had
brought upon him.

We have already told ye that this Lord was always looked upon as a notorious
Cheat, and that in the Reign of Habas II. being supported by the favor of his
Prince he had put a hundred tricks upon the Court: that he took money at that
time of all that offered it him: promising to help 'em to the Offices and
Employments for which they su'd: but that when he had their money, he presently
forgot all his Promises: that it was his pastime to sow discord, and kindle the
Coals of Dissension: that he forged dangerous Calumnies and Accusations against
his Competitors, and with a brazen forehead uttered 'em to the King for real
Truths. As to other things he was a comely well proportioned Person, a man of
great Courage and Wit, dexterously handled his Arms, and liberal to
Magnificence: so that he might have passed for one of the bravest men in the
World, had it not been for that same black Malignity that infected all the rest
of his Actions. In a word, there never was in one man a greater Medley of good
and bad Qualities.

His good Qualities gained him the affection of his Masters; his bad ones
rendered him odious and formidable to his Equals: and having gained the
Affection of his Young Sovereign, as he had won the favor of his Father, he
practiced the same fooleries under the new Prince as before.

One of the first mischievous Pranks fell upon Mirza Ibrahim, or Abraham,
Vazier, or Royal Farmer of Azour-beyan or Media; which is one of the richest in
all Persia. From this person he squeezed four thousand pounds, and withal
brought him into so much trouble that he caused him to lose the greatest part
of his Estate, and to fall under that displeasure of his Prince, that he could
never since recover himself, nor is it thought he ever will. And thus it
happened: The General of the Slaves having a design to get that Sum of four
thousand pounds, addresses himself to the Nephew of that rich Farmer; for the
Uncle was then at Tauris where his Employment lay. This was a young Gentleman,
the Son of Mirza Sadek or just Lord, Farmer also of the Province of Fars, not
inferior to the other for profit. And this Young Lord had also at Court the
Employment of Erbaeb Tahuel, or Chief Surveyour of the Kings Buildings and
Houses in Ispahan. To whom the General of the Slaves one day, taking him aside
thus delivers himself. What makes thy Uncle Mirza-Ibrahim now at Tauris? Why
does he not come to Court? Is there any more fit than he to supply the place of
Prime Minister? Mahomet Mekdy who enjoys it at present is a Bufflehead, and a
Changeling, unfit to manage public business. I partly know the King intends to
confer his Employment upon some body more worthy; Nor can I tell where there is
a person more fit for such an important Trust then Mirza Ibrahim. And I believe
I could with little trouble procure it for him by the help of some Presents,
which should not be very expensive neither. If thou will give me a thousand
Tomans (or four thousand pounds) I dare undertake, instead of a Vazier of a
Province to make him Grand Vizier of all Persia.

To this the young Lord replied, that he would consider of it: and no sooner
had he left the General, but he dispatches in all have a Courrier to his Uncle,
to let him know what the General of the Slaves had proposed to him. Upon which
the Vazier by the same Courrier sends an Order to his Nephew to pay the Money
demanded; which was done accordingly. Soon after another Courrier arrives at
Ispahan from Myrza Ibrahim. For he assured himself of his advancement to the
Chief Ministry, and so much the rather, because he conceived himself fit for
such a Dignity, as indeed he was; and therefore to facilitate his Preferment,
by the same Courrier he besought leave of his Majesty that he might come and
kiss his Feet; since it could be no prejudice to his Majesty, in regard his Son
was able to supply his Place. The other Ministers, who knew nothing of the
Intrigue, never imagined that such a permission could be any way prejudicial to
their Interests, or that it was only a pretense for the foundation of a more
Important Design. So that his Request was granted, and an Order signed for him
to come and kiss the Kings Feet, leaving his Son to supply his Place.

While these two Courriers were coming and going, a report, that was only
whispered about, came to the Ears of Mirza Ibrahams Nephew, that the General of
the Slaves was ready to depart for Candaar. Thereupon he labors more exactly
to inform himself, and understanding it was too true, he bethought himself of
the Thousand Tomans which he had paid him in his Uncles behalf, which were like
to be lost if he did not speedily look about him. Thereupon he went and gave
the General of the Slaves a Visit, and civilly hinted to him to be mindful of
the promise which he made to bring his Uncle into his Majesty's favor, and of
the Money which he had paid him upon that consideration: that he understood the
General of the Slaves was going to leave the Court, to the ruin of his Uncle's
Interest: or at least if the business should succeed it would not by his
procurement; and therefore besought him to return the four thousand pounds
which he had paid him. At which request the General of the Slaves did not seem
to be in the least offended; but made answer, that 'twas all the reason in the
world, and so appointed a certain time to repay the Sum. Which time being come,
he sent him away again with the same answer from one day to another. Still
Mirza Ibrahim's Nephew followed him close without letting any opportunity slip:
but still the young Lord was as careful to speak softly, or when he was alone,
for fear of divulging a secret that would have been the ruin of his own and
his Uncle's Family. At length the General of the Slaves, ashamed of having put
off the young Lord so many times, and now being run to the end of his Rope, as
one that had no more Excuses to make, he resolved to break off at once with the
Vazier, that he might deliver himself from his importunate Solicitor. To this
purpose, one Evening, at the time that he was ready to go to his Prayers, and
from thence to Court (for it is the Custom of the Mahumetans to say their
Prayers in Public) perceiving the young Lord at a distance advancing toward
him, he took that opportunity when there was a great number of People and
several persons of Quality to hear him; at what time, as soon as the young Lord
came near him, fetching a deep sigh, and lifting up his Eyes and Arms to
Heaven, Good God, said he, what shall I do with this man, he pursues me every
where like a Criminal, he will not give me time to say my Prayers; he haunts
me, going into my Haram among my Women; I find him at my heels wherever I go;
prithee Friend what would have me do to satisfy thee? Am I King of Persia,
to create thy Uncle Prime Minister of State? Prithee go to his Majesty; the
business does not lie in my Power.

You may easily judge what a Thunder Clap this was to the young Lord: he would
not for ten times the Sum that he had provoked those Expressions from a man so
ill principl'd; he repented with all his heart that he had pressed him so
close, but 'twas too late: for Mirza Ibrahim's Plot was thereby discovered; and
all the Court that knew him rightly, believed 'twould cost his Ambition sauce;
as indeed it fell out.

By a Quirk of the same nature, the General of the Slaves had already formerly
hooked out of the Nazir or Lord Treasurer's Pocket three hundred Tomans, which
make a thousand pound, at the time that the Court returned to Ispahan. To which
purpose the cunning Fox went to him at his house, all in a heat, and after he
had drawn him aside, Sir, said he, I come to assure you, that your Head, which
the practice of your Enemies had endangered, is now secure. The King at first
began to listen to their Calumnies, so that had not I interposed for your
safety, the King was resolved neither to have sent you the Habit, nor the
Patent Royal. The General of the Musquetteers was he that did you the most
prejudice, which caused a Quarrel between us; I suppose you will acknowledge
the kindness we have done you.

The same Prank he played Mirza Moumen, that is, Lord without Blot, the Nazir,
or Superintendant of the Stables, who was drawn in by him for about nine
thousand pounds by making him believe that he had protected him against Potent
Accusers, who sought to bring him under his Majesty's displeasure. But that was
not all, for that he was resolved to employ his Credit with his Master, as to
raise him from being Treasurer of the Stables to be Treasurer of the Kings
Demeans, in the room of Mac-Soud-Bec, who undeservedly enjoyed the Employment,
and whose head already tottered upon his shoulders; for that the King was
resolved that none of those should live who had opposed his Advancement to the
Throne.

Upon his Departure also, that he might leave some marks behind him of his
malicious Cunning, he resolved to set the King's two Chief Eunuchs (who are
petty Kings in the Palace) together by the ears to the mutual perdition of each
other; that is the Mehther or Lord Chamberlain; and the Aga Moubarek, or
Overseer of the Queen Mothers Household.

To that purpose he went to the High Chamberlain, to tell him as a secret of
great Importance, and which the Friendship he had for him, obliged him to
reveal, that Aga Moubarek took all opportunities to slander and accuse him to
the King, but that his wickedness fell upon his own head: for that he had often
heard his Majesty say, that he could no longer endure the Backbiting Tongue and
Malignity of that person; that he was resolved to have put him to death, and
had done it already, had it not been for some remainder of kindness he has for
him; for the service he did him at his Fathers death stopped his displeasure. At
the same time he went to Aga Moubarek, and told him also the very same Story of
the Chamberlains Inveteracy against him. So that the two Eunuchs fostered for
some time a secret and implacable hatred one against the other: both expecting
when the effects of the Princes Anger would break out to the ruin of his
Enemy, according as the General of the Slaves had fed their hopes. But the time
being elapsed, and nothing happening of what they were made believe; they began
to doubt the truth of what he had informed 'em. And therefore knowing the
Author of the Story to be a great forger of Lies, they resolved to find out the
truth.

The Mehther or High Chamberlain was the first that discovered it. For being
saluted one day with the usual Complements, the Great Chamberlain coldly
replied, There Is a Tongue that coldly salutes my Ears, but stabs me to the
heart, and then drawing him aside, What unkindness, said he, have I done you,
that you should go about to procure my death, by rendering me odious to the
Prince as you do every day: all my comfort is, you will not be so successful in
your enterprise as you think for.

Aga Moubarek finding thereby a Gate opened for discovery, It Is not for you,
said he, but for me to complain. For is it not you that have been continually
pealing in the Kings Ears such and such stories concerning me; which had been
enough to have taken away my life, had his Majesty given credit to your Tales,
but thanks be to God they were not believed.

The two Eunuchs were so strangely surpised to find themselves upbraided with
the same unkindnesses, that they began to compare their accusations of each
other, with which they were charged, and that Examination at last discovered
that it was but a Romance, tho a pernicious Romance, which the General of the
Slaves had composed to set those two Lords together by the Ears, and to make
his advantage of their quarrelling. Nevertheless seeing the dark contrivance
had not succeeded altogether, they dissembled their resentment at present, and
said nothing: resolving to wait for an opportunity of Revenge, which they vowed
should never escape 'em, whenever it offered it self.

These Eunuchs are very ready at these kind of dark Contrivances: there being
no people in the World that know how to carry on a private Revenge by close and
covert means, and then give fire to the Mine of a sudden, so well as they do:
nor did they fail to pay this crafty Deceiver in his own Coin; For it is
thought that they were the persons who mainly contributed to his disgrace and
death.

But now so soon as the General of the Slaves had received his Commission for
the Government of Cand-daar, and to withstand the Invasion of the Indians, he
began to raise Soldiers at Ispahan, which he caused to be exercised every day,
with so much exactness, as if the Enemy had been at the Gates: and after he had
mustered together four thousand, all stout proper fellows, he declared he would
raise no more, that Recruit being sufficient: and he ordered his business so
well by the assistance of the General of the Army, that the King, whom they
assured that the Enemy was at hand, caused his dispatches to be made for
Serdaar or Chief General of Kandar, and the Territories belonging to it, and
made him Governor of the Province and City it self, being a famous Garrison,
and the Key of the Kingdom toward India. It is seated upon three rising
Grounds, which defend each other; the Persians esteeming it impregnable, and it
is a Proverb amongst 'em, Who shall take the Habitation of security? Alluding
to the word Candaar, which signifies the same thing.

Before this Lord departed he obtained of the King, that his Brother
Phereidon-Bek, should supply his Place of General of the Slaves, as his
Lieutenant, till his Son, to whom the Prince had granted the Reversion, should
be of years to manage it himself: and not content with that, he also procured
an Order from the King, by which his Majesty gave him leave to come to Court
when he pleased, without asking leave. And thus Gemshid-Kaan departed well
satisfied, conceiving with himself, that he had craftily disintangl'd himself
from all those troubles which his ill management had brought upon him at Court.

Some few days after this Lord was thus departed there was no more talk of the
War; on the other side it was evident there would be none. For the report ran
about, that Aureng-Zeeb understanding that Habas II. was dead, and that his
Successor was but young and unexperienced, scorned the Encounter of so trivial
an Enemy. Which Rodomontado of the Indian Prince to save his Honor might have
held good in the time of the Rustans, who were the Amadis's of Persia, at what
time they never entered into Combat but for Honor. But now Monarchs never
fight hand to hand, nor in single Duels to try each others strength. But they
fight Army against Army, and their only aim is the Conquest of Cities and
Provinces, assailing whatever they think they can master.

All the World knew that for three months after the death of Habas II. was
known in the Indies, the Prince of that Country still continued his
preparations of War, in order to the besieging of Candaar; of which this was an
evident proof, for that all that while, all Commerce was forbidden with Persia
as before. Which would not have been, had the Indian Prince abandoned his
designs of the War, in derision of his feeble Enemy, whom he thought too young
to be the subject of his Triumphs.

The truth was, as I have heard from very Intelligent persons. that Aureng-Zeeb
was diverted from his Enterprise by the Princess his Sister, who used these
Arguments to him, That it was not proper for him to hazard the Honor he had
won; that till that time he had Reigned in high Reputation, which he could
never lose so long as he kept himself quiet. That Fortune could not make him
greater then he was, but that she might prove froward to his prejudice. That
the taking of Candaar was no such easy thing, which his Father had twice with
two potent Armies attempted in vain. That the chiefest part of his Courtiers
being Persians, they would serve him very unwillingly, and assist him but
coldly; and in a word; That if he did not succeed in the War, it would be a
stain to his Reputation, which he would never be able to wipe out. Especially
since his Reputation had no need of this Conquest to aggrandize it self, as
being sufficient to support it self without it. To which reasons of his Sister
the Prince submitted: and without doubt he did wisely: there being nothing so
true as what the Princess told him, that there was little to be got by the
Enterprise, but much to be lost.

The General of the Slaves before, now General of the Armies, had not been gone
above a Month from Court, when Mirza-Ibrahim arrived at Ispahan in a trembling
and quivering condition, after he had been put in such great hopes. For he had
been informed at Tauris, what a Trick the General of the Slaves had put upon
him, and how he had discovered the whole secret of his Project. However having
received a permission to come to Court, there was a necessity for him to go: so
that being reduced to this extremity he was not so eager upon his journey: he
made but slow preparations, and delayed his departure as long as possibly he
could: excusing himself sometimes by reason of the bad weather, the bad
Position of the Planets, or his own Indisposition of body. But at length go he
must, but he traveled such easy days journeys, that he spent double the time
that he needed to have done; and perhaps he did it to shun his meeting with the
General of the Slaves upon the Road, being upon his march to his New Government.

How he was received at Court you may easily judge: for there was not one
living soul that vouchsafed him a kind look. So that to mollify the hearts of
the Grand Ministers and Potent Lords, he was forced to expend a good part of
the Treasure that he had hoarded up, and to suffer himself to be despoyl'd of
that which he had pillaged from the People.

And as for the Grand Ministers the better to accomplish their design of
squeezing Rich Presents out of his Coffers, they backed all Complaints that
were made against him at Court. For you must understand that in Persia, every
private Person, let his Condition be never so mean, is allowed to bring his
Complaints against the Governors, Royal Farmers, and other Persons, who have
any Authority over 'em. So that when the Grandees at Court have a mind to ruin
any great Personage in the Provinces abroad, there usual Policy is to support
the Complaints of the Oppressed; and to make 'em the more Ponderous, they
invite all that will come, and then cause 'em to appear at the Palace in shoals
to demand Justice. Which course was taken with this same Lord. But in regard
the Principal Courtiers had no mind utterly to ruin him, which had been only a
particular benefit to the King; but rather to show him, that it lay in their
power, to the end they might make their best advantage of him themselves, they
would not suffer the Clamours of his Impeachers to run too high; but satisfied
the greatest part, by causing him to restore to his most dangerous Accusers a
part of what he had extorted from them.

But among all the rest his greatest Enemy at Court was that Brutish Old
Signior, the Generalissimo, Hali-Kouli-Kaan, who mortally and so openly hated
him, that he would neither accept of his Visits, nor his Presents. The reason
of which animosity was, because that in the Reign of Habas II. about twelve
years before his death, when the General of the Army, being then in his
Government of Tauris, fell a second time under the displeasure of his Prince,
for the reasons already related, and after a Confiscation of all his Goods, was
sent a Prisoner to Casbin, Mirza-Sadek, Brother of this Mirza-Ibrahim, being at
that time Farmer Royal of the same City and Province, was appointed
Commissioner by his Majesty for the sale of those Confiscated Goods: At what
time he carried himself so rigorously that he took away the very Tombans or
Linen Drawers belonging to his Wives, and sold 'em in open Market: for in
regard the disgraced Lord had several Wives, and for that the Persian Ladies
are all sumptuously habited; there are some of these under-Drawers that are
worth thirty or forty Crowns; so that a good number might come to a great deal
of Money.

This Affront touched the General to the Quick, and enraged him to that excess
against the whole Family, that he gave it its full swinge, first against the
Vazier himself, who had given him the Affront. For after he was restored, and
found he had power to do what he pleased, he sent for him, and not so much as
vouchsafing to see him when he arrived, he caused him to be shut up in his
Stables; where to do him the greatest Injury that could be done him in Persia,
he exposed him to the beastly Passion of six lusty Grooms.

Mirza Ibrahim was not ignorant of all this, and knew how far the Transports of
his Pride and Cruelty was able to carry him: he saw him newly restored, and
advanced to the third dignity in the Kingdom; and that which was of more
importance, that he was the Chief in favor, and that the King listened to him
as his Governor. For those reasons he conjectured rightly that among those
that sought his ruin, there was not any one who had more Power, or a greater
good Will. Therefore he resolved to purchase his favor, whatever it cost him;
or if he could not oblige him to do him a kindness, at least that he would be
pleased to hold his tongue. To which purpose he went to give him a Visit,
desiring he might be admitted to pay him Reverence. At first when the Vazier
entered the General of the Army pretended not to see him, but feigning as if
his head ak'd, called for a Couch to lie down, where after he had lain about
two hours, he retired into his Palace, leaving a great throng of People that
waited without to come another time, and among the rest Mirza Ibrahim.

However Mirza Ibrahim would not take this for a denial, but returned the next
day; To whom the General, taking no notice that he had demanded leave to be
admitted to make his salutation in the great Hall where he dispatched all
Comers and Goers, gave him no Answer, so that the poor Lord was forced to stand
three hours together among the Officers and Common Persons; and after that he
passed by him without so much as looking upon him, and so took horse before his
Palace Gate. Mirza Ibrahim followed him; and keeping close to him, ever now and
then gave him the usual Salute of My Lord, peace be with ye, and that so loud
that he might easily be heard. At first the General of the Army said nothing to
him; but finding the other still pursue him, tired with his importunate
Complements, turning about, Gidi segh, Cursed Dog, said he, what have I to do
with thee, or thou with me? Go to the Devil, and let me never see thee more.
And having so said, he caused his Servants to thrust him away.

Poor Mirza Ibrahim seeing himself so coursely used, made trial of Presents,
the great Spring that moves the whole Court of Persia. To that purpose he sent
the General two thousand Tomans, which the General refused: the other believing
'twas too little sent again two thousand five hundred; which were sent back as
before; then he sent three thousand, which had no better acceptance; after that
four thousand, which still could make no impression in the haughty Spirit of
the Exasperated Lord: So that at length he sent five thousand Tomans, which
comes to twenty thousand pounds. And then, somewhat suppl'd, he invited Mirza
Ibrahim two days after to his Megeles, or Public Feast: nevertheless he showed
him no particular Civility, nor said any thing to him, more then what is
usually spoken to all the Guests, Kochs-Geldi, You Are welcome. I questioned the
truth of this Present of twenty thousand pounds when I heard it related the
first time, not believing that any person would purchase any man's favor at so
dear a Rate, but afterward upon farther examination I found it to be really
true. And I the rather give this Advertisement to the Reader, that he may not
mistrust the fidelity of my Relations, or think that I speak by Hearsay, and
not upon any exact information.

All this while the Kings distemper increased upon him, that he could ride no
longer, so that he never went abroad with his Wives but in a Kagia veh, which
are little wooden sheds carried by gread Camels, wherein they usually put their
Women, when they go to take the Air.

In this Condition he continued a month: tho all the while he would not forbear
his usual recreations with his Wives. The Kourrourks continued in all the parts
round about Ispahan, where the Prince caused all the handsome women to be taken
up, and brought to his Haram.

One day the Queen Mother had a desire to see the Fortress of the City, where
are kept all the Curiosities and rarities belonging to the present Monarch, and
his Ancestors, whether Presents, or Purchased, or Trophies of their Conquests.
To which purpose she persuaded her Son to carry her thither; so that there was
a Kourrouk proclaimed all over one part of the City, which was never known, or
at least never remembered by any body then alive.

Now it haepn'd that one time, as the King was thus sporting himself abroad
with his Wives, an Accident fell out, that rendered 'em still more
unsupportable to the People. His Majesty at that time lay in the Fields without
Ispahan, under Tents, in Harvest time, when the sheaves lay heaped up one upon
another in the Grounds, and as he was one that greatly delighted in Fireworks,
some flying Rockets were presented him one Evening of an extraordinary weight
(for there are some that weigh forty pounds) of which he ordered a trial to be
made. But their extraordinary weight hindering the Massy Squib from mounting
directly upwards, as it should have done, and so not flying very high, they
made a kind of a Semicircle at a distance, which carried 'em a great way into
the Fields, where they set the Sheaves on fire, and burnt the Corn together
with some houses that stood not far off. So that the loss was valued at sixteen
thousand pounds; and the misery was, that this accident happened when there was
great scarcity of Corn.

Here I cannot omit a small Circumstance, which has some affinity with what I
have already spoken concerning that spacious place full of Trees, and Alleys
that compose the Avenues to the Palace; through one of which, called the Royal
Alley, the King and his Train went always in and out, to avoid passing through
the City. The other great Alleys were adorned with Beds and Borders planted
with Flowers and sweet smelling herbs, which together with the Fountains and
Rows of Trees caused a very pleasant prospect.

In the mean time came certain intelligence that the Yusbecks were entered into
the Province of Corason, or Bactriana. The Governor of the Province sent
Courrier after Courrier to the King for Orders; for that the Enemy was already
entered the Kingdom, burning and spoiling all before 'em; and that unless
speedily opposed, the Province would be in danger to be lost.

The Yusbecks are a People that inhabit to the North of Persia, Possessing all
that Country between the Caspian Sea and the Indies; under several petty
Sultans or Princes, absolute within themselves. They are called Yusbecks, at
least if the Persian Etymology be true, by reason of the great number of
Sovereign Princes by which the Tartars are Governed; for Yus, as well in the
Language of the Tartars as Turks, which is but a Dialect of it, signifies a
hundred, and Bek, Lords; to show the great number of Masters by which they are
Ruled. But those People reject that Etymology, which they say is both false and
injurious to 'em; That the true Etymolgy is Yusi, which signifies He in both
Languages (tho pronounced Yus by cutting off the last Vowel) and Bek, Lord. So
that when they say Yusbek, it is as much as to say, He the Lord, or He is the
Lord; as if these People were the only People upon the Earth that are truly
Lords. Such is the pride of this Nation, and the high conceit they have of
their own merits. One of the principal Lords of the Persian Court, when he told
me this he gave me an account of a certain petty King that Reigned in the
Molucca's in the time of Habas the Great, who nevertheless assumed to himself a
Grandeur almost equal to his: For he looked upon himself to be the only lawful
Lord of the East, and assumed to himself the Title of sole Monarch of it:
Saying withal, that he knew not whether there were any other in the West; but
that he was well assured, that He himself was Master of that part of the World
where he inhabited. For which reason he caused his Dominions to be called by
way of Excellency Moulouk; that is to say, the true Kingdoms; for tho we
pronounce the word Molucca's after our Manner, over all Asia they write and
pronounce it Moulouk.

But among all those petty Princes that Govern Tartary the less, there are
three who are accounted the Principal. That is to say, the Prince of Bokora,
the Prince of Balke, and the Prince of Carechme, or Orquenge, upon which the
rest in some manner or other have have their dependence. In the Reign of Sephi
the Second, which the Persians for distinction sake call Mazi, the passed
Reign, he being Grandfather to the present King; these Yuzbecks overrunning the
Territories of Corasson, or Bactriana and Margiana, were pursued by the
Persians, who made a dismal slaughter among 'em; after they had gained a most
signal Victory over the Enemy, killing twelve of eighteen Thousand, of which
their Body consisted, and taking the rest Prisoners. Among these Captives there
was a young Prince, one of the Cheiftaines of the Tartars, descended from the
Royal Line of Karechme or Orquenge, who was called Abouel-Kazi, or the
Father-Arbiter. This Prisoner, being known to be what he was, among the rest of
the Prisoners was carried to Ispahan, but his usage was quite different. For
Sephi did not look upon him as a Robber, but as a Prince who was only a
Prisoner of War, and paid him all those Honors and Civilities due to a
Personage of Royal Birth; assigned him a Revenue of fifteen hundred Tomans,
which amounts to six thousand pounds; gave him a stately Palace furnished
accordingly, a number of Officers, and a suitable Train to attend him. And it
was his Pleasure, that the Vazier, or Treasurer to the Governor of Ispahan
should take care of his Person, and perform the Office of a Mehmandaar, who is
the Person, as we may say, that takes care of the Guests, and is the Master of
the Entertainment. This Mehmandaar, for ten years together paid this
Tartar-Prince by his Majesty's Order all the Respect and Service which the
rights of a most tender Hospitality could reasonably claim; and such as there
could not be any thing showed him more obliging in our best civilized
Provinces. On the other side, the Prince understood so well how to disguise the
natural Savageness and Barbarity of the Tartars, that you would have taken him
for a Persian, he behaved himself with such a Grace, and so much affability in
all things: So that his Majesty observing him endowed with so many rare
Qualities, strained his affection for him so high, that he admitted him into
his Megeles or Royal Assemblies, where he ranked him equal with the Grandees of
his Kingdom, and for his maintenance assigned him Pensions that were no way
inconsiderable.

During his abode at Ispahan, where he had liberty to go and come as he
pleased, only attended by his Mehmendaar and the Guards that were assigned him,
more in honor to his Person, then for a Watch on his Freedom; he had still in
his mind a natural hankering after his own Country, his Kindred, and that
Sovereignty to which he was lawful Heir. The Magnificence, the Mildness, the
Beauty and delights of Persia could not eradicate out of his Breast this
violent affection for the place of his Nativity. For tho it were true, that
nothing but Barrenness and a hideous prospect overspread the Country for which
he had such a lingering desire, however, it was the place where he was born, and
where he was to change the condition of a Slave for that of a Master.
Importuned therefore by his own ardent desires he wrote privately to the King
of Orquenge his Father, and besought him to endeavor his Liberty. Who having
consulted what course to take, pretends an occasion to send an Ambassador into
Persia, who brought to the Prince the King his Fathers answer. And at length
the Prince and the Ambassador agreed upon the manner of his escape; And then
the Ambassador after a stay of six Months took his leave of the Court. But then
it was that the Prince, when he thought the Ambassador was got beyond the
Bounds of Persia, and that it was seasonable for him to make his escape, laid
his Plot in this manner.

He feigned himself one day to be very ill, and gave notice of his
Indisposition to the King: He added, that he had tried several medicines to no
purpose, and therefore by the advice of his Physicians, he believed there was
no other cure for him but by the hot Baths about a days journey from Ispahan,
whither he easily obtained leave to retire: at what time the Treasurer to the
Governor of Ispahan, whose Employment would not permit him to stir out of the
City, gave him for an attendant in his Room one of his Masters Domestic
Servants, with a Convoy of fifteen or sixteen Persons.

At the time prefixed there appeared under the Trees without the Village, near
the Baths, whither the Prince pretended to go for his Health, about twenty
Yuzbecs all young chosen fellows, nimble, well Mounted, and well Armed with
certain Led-Horses. Presently the Prince knew 'em, and without any further
Consultation, leaving the small number of Persians, which were then with him,
up he gets a Horseback and putting Spurs to his Horse, away he gallops directly
forward before his own Troop. There was not any one unless his Persian Guide
that followed him, as dreaming of nothing less then the accident that had
fallen out, neither had they men enough, nor time to call for more aid. And
therefore the Deputy Mehmandaar, seeing he had lost the great Trust that was
committed to his charge, all that he could do, in such a surprise, was still to
follow him, and try if his prayers and entreaties could move him to return.
Sir, said He, what is my Crime, what is my Ill-fortune, or what Offense have I
committed against you, that you thus go about to endanger my Head if I return
to Ispahan without your Person? What can I expect less then to loose my Head?
Nay, I fear the King will not be satisfied with that slight punishment, but
without doubt in the excess of his Anger, will order my Bowels to be ripp'd out
of my Belly. To whom the Yusbeck Prince thus briskly answered; I am highly
obliged to the King of Persia, but I owe more my own Country and Relations that
call me back. It Is my Father that sends me these Men, to facilitate my return
to my Native soil, in expectation of that Crown which he designs me after his
death: if thou will go along with me, I will repay thee for all those
kindnesses I have received in Persia, and I will make thee one of the Lords of
my Kingdom; If not, return in time, and tell thy King that I return him thanks
for all his Favors, and that I shall always be his Goulom or Slave, and shall
believe my self obliged to him as long as I live: and that in time I will make
him sensible of the truth of my Promises. Having so said, he put spurs to his
Horse, and flew away with that swiftness, that the Persian Mehmandaar soon lost
sight of him. For there is not any Nation under Heaven that ride more swiftly
then these Yusbecks.

When this escape was known at Ispahan, a great number of Horsemen were sent
after the Prince, but all to no purpose, he having got the start so far before
'em: the Court was in an amaze, especially the King, who never dreamt that
Abouel-Kazi ever dreamed of Tartary; being verily persuaded that after ten
years, that he had lived in his Court, he could never have any more remembrance
of his own Country.

But as the Tartar Prince could not forget his own Country, so neither did he
forget his obligations to Persia and the Persian Monarch. For all his lifetime
he had a particular affection for that Kingdom, more especially when he came to
succeed his Father; which was presently after his Return. And so long as he
Reigned, he was not only careful to keep a good correspondence with Sephi the
first, and Habas the second, but he also kept in such awe Sub-haan-Kooli-Kaan,
The Prince, the Slave of the Praiseworthy, by which they mean God; and
Abdul-hazize-Kaan or the Servant of the Majesty, understood Divine, King of
Bokora; the only two Princes which sometimes infested the Confines of Persia,
that they were not able to undertake any considerable Enterprise. For when
either the one or the other entered Persia, presently he was in the Bowels of
their Territories, thereby constraining 'em to return with more have then they
went. And thus all the Frontier Provinces, as Bactriana, Margiana, Drangiana,
and the Caspian Coasts enjoyed a profound Peace. So that Habas won by his
grateful and constant affection, with the same gratitude repaid the Prince's
perseverance, allowing him all along, as a mark of his esteem, the large
Pension which he enjoyed in Persia.

But after that, upon the death of Abouel-kazi the Crown descended to his Son
Enouch Kaan, or the Lord of Profit, Habas the Second, who had not that esteem
for him which he had for his Father, thought himself no longer obliged to
continue the Pension, which he had given his Father merely in kindness.
Whereupon Enouch-Kaan, who looked upon that Pension as a sort of Tribute which
the Persian Monarch paid the King of Careckme or Orquenge to keep him from
Plundring his Territories, finding himself frustrated of his expectation,
thought the surest way to recover it, or at least to recompense himself for his
losses, would be to carry the War into the Empire, and to Ravage the Frontier
Provinces. To which purpose he enters into a League with the two other Kaans
against Persia, and the better to cement it, he espouses the Sister of the
Sovereign Prince of Balke, and gives his own Sister in Marriage to the King of
Bokora; which done, the three brothers-in-law resolve to fall altogether into
the Persian Dominions.

There was only one scruple that troubled the Prince of Balk and Bokora, which
was, that the deceased King of Orquenge, the Father of the present King, was a
Shia Mahumetan, according to the Persian Worship, and not a Sunni Mahumetan
according to the Worship both of the Turks and Tartars. Enouch Caan therefore
makes open Profession of the Religion of his Country, and of having quitted his
Fathers belief. But the two Princes mistrusting his sincerity, and fearing he
would play 'em some scurvy trick or other, the better to assure themselves that
he was a true Sunnie, that he was real in his proceedings, and that he was from
the bottom of his heart a declared Enemy of Persia, they were desirous that he
should first begin the War, and fall in with all his Forces into the Kingdom,
and the next year they agreed they would all three join together to advance
their Conquests. According to this Resolution the Prince of Orquenge enters the
Kingdom, but met with too powerful a resistance. For Habas II. being informed
of the Conspiracies of these petty Kings, had Vowed their Ruin, and not only
to repel their Incursions, but to make an absolute Conquest of their
Territories, to deprive them of Life and Scepters both together, and unite the
Province of Balk to the Empire. For this reason it was that in the year 1665.
according to our account he undertook his Progress into Mazenderan, and marched
against 'em. The Yusbecks perceiving the King of Persia at hand, and
apprehensive of his Power, failed in the great Courage which they pretended at
the beginning, and thought it their better course to submit. So that the next
year, 1666. they sent every one their Ambassadors to beg a Peace, and by that
means in some measure asswag'd the Indignation of that Prince, and suspended
those designs which he had contrived in his thoughts, and which by his death
not long after happening, proved altogether abortive.

After his unfortunate death, the Tartars took heart again. Besides, the weak
Government of a young Prince whose age and want of experience rendered him
incapable to oppose their designs, was such a favorable Opportunity that they
could not forbear to take the advantage of it. And therefore the Prince of
Orquenge, like a hungry Lion, in the year 1667. entered Merve Sava, and the
Country round about; where finding no resistance; he made strange Havoc, and
carried away whatever he found to be of value, not one Persian Governor daring
to oppose him. Nor indeed could the Governors prevent it, for these Tartars
are like Birds of Prey, flying from the Place they have plundered with that
swiftness, before a man can suspect 'em to have been there; besides that they
had not a sufficient force to oppose a furious Multitude, whom Revenge and hope
of Booty had fleshed and animated beyond the sense of fear or danger.

The Court having intelligence of these disorders took a resolution to apply
Remedies; but it was so remissly and slowly executed, that they who had an
insight into things foresaw it would come to nothing, as indeed it came to pass.

The Council of Persia, under the Kings name, made choice of two Lords,
esteemed to be Personages of the greatest Experience in the Kingdom, the one
called Clichs-Kaan, and the other Sheik-Hali-Kaan, both the one and the other
already provided of two of the best Governments in the Empire; the first of the
Province of Kirmaan, or Caramania, the other of Kirmoon Sha, which is Caldea.
These Lords were sent for from their Government, which were disposed of, the
one to the Brother, the other to the Son of those Lords; and they themselves
were sent against the Yusbeck, with the Title of Generals of the Army. They
marched with four thousand men from Ispahan, to join the Army that lay ready in
the Province of Corasson; and in regard there was no more talk of the Indian
War, the Governor of Candaar, had order to supply the Generals with what
Recruits they should think necessary. Six weeks after the departure of these
Lords, with their small Body of four thousand men; several Sums of Money were
sent to Corasson to pay both the Armies, as well that belonging to the Province
as the Indian Recruits. This Treasure was convoyed only by two hundred Men, in
regard there was no appearance of any danger upon the Road; and yet, however it
came to pass, the Yusbecks had intelligence of it. Thereupon they sent out a
Party to observe the motion of the Convoy, and took their opportunity so well,
that with three thousand of their own People they carried off the Booty,
notwithstanding all the speed that was made to overtake 'em.

During these Troubles Hali-Kouli-Kaan departed this Life of a stoppage in his
Breast, for which no remedy could be found, after he had kept his Bed four
days. In the Story of Persia, which we intend one day for the Press, we have
given an account of his Birth, and his Misfortunes; for it was a wonderful
thing, that whatever faults he were guilty of, and he committed a great many,
Habas II. still pardoned him: he never would reduce him to utmost misery, much
less put him to death; because of the good tidings of which he had been the
Messenger to him. For this same Lord it was, whom Sephi I. the Father of Habas,
perceiving his Distemper grow upon him, sent to fetch the young Prince out of
the Women's Palace, to the end he might have him ready near his person, out of a
design which he had to present him to the Lords for his Successor. Never had
any man run through so many strange adventures in fifty years that he belonged
to the Court, and seventy of his Life; nor did ever any man experience the
fickleness of Fantastic Fortune in her sports of Prosperity and Adversity so
much as he did.

At the time of his Decease he was advanced to the highest Pinnacle that ever
his good fortune could raise him. He was in the entire possession of the
affection and favors of his Master, who refused him nothing. His Majesty was
never weary of his Bounty toward him; and six weeks before his death had
presented him with a Sword, a Dagger, and three Heron Tufts, valued in all at
fifty thousand Crowns. But these outward Marks of Favor were of little value
to the high-priz'd Power which he had over the thoughts and actions of the
Prince, who dispatched no business of Importance before he had taken his
Advice. So that it might be said, that the General was the true Monarch of the
Persians, while he that carried the Title was but the shadow of the Sovereign.
And therefore it was that he lived like a Monarch; there being nothing that
appeared about him, that betrayed the least discovery of a private Fortune; for
he entertained fifteen hundred men about his Person, besides Officers and
Eunuchs, of which three hundred at a time mounted his Guards. He got by his
Government of Tauris, and his Fees, as Generalissimo, thirty thousand Tomans,
or one hundred and twenty thousand pounds; of which he laid aside the one half
for the payment of his fifteen hundred men, whom he always took care to have in
good Equipage; the rest went to defray the charges of his Housekeeping. He had
also set up for his own use in his Palace several Kaar-Kaane or Workhouses for
all sorts of Manufactures, where he had mustered together Workmen and
Artificers in all manner of Trades; Goldsmiths, Tailors, Sadlers, Armourers,
Burnishers, etc. besides Riders for his Horses, and Masters to teach his men
how to handle their Arms. In a word, his Palace was altogether Royal. And in
this manner was he at continual Expenses; insomuch, that notwithstanding his
large Revenue he always was poor and in debt. For besides that he was of a
prodigal humor, having neither Wives nor Children to provide for, he never
spared for Luster and Pomp upon all occasions that required it. Nor will it be
amiss, considering the high degree that he held in Persia, and the Fantastic
Traverses as well in his Fortune, as in the Consequences of his Conduct, to
give the Reader a Portraiture of his Person.

He was of a middle stature, rather enclining to be tall then low: his Aspect
grim and terrible, yet without any deformity. He wore his Monstachios very
thick, and about three quarters of a foot long: and tho threescore and ten
years of Age he never used Spectacles, and all his other Senses equally as
vigorous as his sight. He performed his Exercises as duly as the young men: nor
was he inferior to any other person whatsoever in handling his Bow, his Sword,
and other Weapons; which made him always to be looked upon as a brave Soldier:
but the more Intelligent sort never believed him a good Captain; looking upon
him to be fitter for Counsel then Execution. He was endu'd with a mixture of
Qualities that rarely meet together: on the one side haughty and Choleric; on
the other, subtle and a deep dissembler; he knew the proper season to show the
violence of his Revenge, and how to take his Measures to the ruin of his
Competitors. He could not endure to be contradicted: and it was the misfortune
and the greatest trouble in the World to his Servants, that when he asked for
any thing, it was a crime to tell him it was not to be had: for without reply
they must either put a force upon the very Seasons of the Year and Fortune her
self to satisfy him, or else expect to have their bones broken with
Bastinadoes. Setting that humor aside, he was affable enough, especially to
strangers: to them he was easy of access, and readily granted 'em the favors
which they requested. He could neither write nor read in any other Language
then his own Natural Georgian. He was a lover of Sciences, tho he understood
'em not. He was very much addicted to Predictions and Fortune-telling. And out
of an extraordinary want of judgment gave more credit to a Prognostication then
to sound Reason.

The same day he di'd he was laid in a Mosque close by his Palace; from whence
some few days after, he was carried to Metshed, there to be interred under the
protection of that great Mohammedan Saint, who formerly had lived there, and
made choice of that place for his Sepulcher. It is a thing which we may well
wonder at, were it not a thing frequent among us, in regard these sudden
alterations are to be seen as well in our own as in the Eastern Courts. For as
soon as his dead body was carried out of his Palace, about six hours after he
had given up the Ghost; that very House which the day before could hardly
contain the Crowd that resorted to it, was so wholly deserted that there was
hardly one of all that numerous Family that environed him while alive, left to
tell a man what was become of their Master.

His death caused a great alteration at Court, tho no body was troubled at it
but the King, who had a particular kindness for him. But there were an infinite
number that rejoiced at it; especially they who having some share in the favor
of which he deprived 'em the full Possession, now hoped to make more room for
themselves. So that the Grandees at Court began to take new Measures, and in
the midst of those delusions with which their Ambition flattered 'em, every one
fancied to himself more daring hopes.

The Death of this Person, which did not a little afflict the King, was
accompanied with other Tidings no less unwelcome; That the Kalmachs, a fierce
and untameable People, had declared open War against Persia. Whereupon the
Governors of Ester-abaat, which is the Eastern Hircania, besought his Majesty
to send 'em requisite Assistance. And here it is necessary that we should say
something concerning the People, and the occasion of the War.

The Kalmac's derive their Name from Kalmack, the principal City of the Country
which they inhabit, upon the Confines of the greater Tartary toward the Caspian
Sea upon the East side. Sometimes they are called Yusbeck-Kalmaki, but for the
most part no otherwise then barely Kalmac.

Now some years ago it hapn'd that a great number of Turkmans, or Shepherds
that wander together by thousands up and down the fields, and live in Tents,
like Swallows, changing their Habitations according to the Seasons, got
together upon their Frontiers, between Orquenge and Esther-abaat: and these
People our Modern Autohrs call Tureomans, which are properly Turks. For these
People, and those that hold the Empire of Constantinople came at first from
Turq-Estaan, that is to say, from those Provinces of Tartary, which are very
vast, although we have but little knowledge of 'em. And this is also that Country
which ought properly to be called Turkey, and not the Provinces of Asia and
Europe, possessed by the Ottomans. For the Eastern People never call by that
name the Inhabitants of those Provinces, nor the Monarch that Commands 'em,
Great Turk. And therefore it is an error of our Europeans; in regard the People
of Turkey acknowledge no such appellation, deeming it Barbarous. For that among
them Turk signifies one that comes from those High-lands of Tartary, let it be
from what part it will. The Persians therefore to define those Turkmans more
distinctly, call 'em Sara-Netshin. Sara signifying a Plain or Down, and Netshin
those that abide there, from the Verb Netshinen, to rest or Repose. So that
Sara-Netshin signifies those that abide and repose in the Country. Now ancient
Historians, and writers of Travels, who understood not the Eastern Languages or
at least had but a smattering understanding of 'em, call these People Sarazens,
which word was never pronounced at first by a Frenchman, who would surely have
pronounced it Sarashins. In regard Frenchmen pronounce with less trouble the
Shin of the Asiatics then some of their Neighbors, especially the English; who
every where write it Zin.

But to make a true relation of a Country, it is necessary that they who
describe it should know the Language; else they must commit a thousand errors
not passable among persons of Judgment, of which there needs no other proof,
then such Relations of Travels which we have seen printed in this Age: Not to
mention any other then those of Persia, of which there are two which are
indifferently tolerable; Valle's and the Travels of Olearius: though the first
be full of faults, which may be said to be Monstrous; and the latter be not
altogether exempt. And yet they are better then the rest, in regard those
Authors understood the Persian Language; and therefore it is my Opinion, that
whoever publishes his Travels, and Observations of a Country, of which he has
not learnt the Speech, shall never make any perfect and accomplished. And this
digression I did not think would be displeasing to the Curious.

But to return to our story, this Colony of Turcmans was formerly Tributary to
the Calmachs; but about thirty years ago they took Sanctuary in Persia,
submitting under the Government of those Princes who commanded the Persian
Empire, to avoid the oppression of the Calmachs and to find out a less Barren
Region, and more proper to feed their Flocks. During all which Interval of time
the Calmachs had taken no notice of the Turcmans, but in the year 1667. judging
Persia to be in a weak condition, under a young Prince, to the end they might
have a pretense for a War, they sent to demand Restitution of the Tribute which
the Persian Monarch had received for thirty years together of the Turkman, whom
they alleged to be their Subjects. So soon as their Commissioners were arrived
at Esther-abaat, which is the first considerable City of Persia on that side,
the Governor detained 'em, and assured 'em he would both send to inform the
Court of Persia concerning the occasion of their coming, and give 'em an
account of the answer back. Immediately the Kings Council were all of opinion
to reject with scorn a demand so affrontive to the Grandeur of the Empire.
Which Resolution was without doubt the most honorable and made most noise, but
not the wisest. For the Calmachs no less highly offended when they understood
the answer returned, came toward the end of the Campaign to the Frontiers that
separate the two Dominions, and there in a most solemn manner shot an Arrow
into the Territories of the Persians, which is the Signal they use in declaring
open War against any of their Neighbors. To which War, what issue Heaven
ordained we shall below make known.

All those Wars that threatened Persia, in this same languishing and feeble
condition wherein it was, were the reason that the Court would not listen to
the Propositions of the Basha of Basra, vulgarly tho erroneously called
Balzura, a City seated at the mouth of the Persian Gulf; wherein for several
years together the said Basha had assumed to himself a kind of Sovereign
Dignity: while he, acknowledging no Supreme, so well managed his affairs in the
midst of those two Monarchs, between whom he lay, the Turk and Persian; that
the desire which both had to ruin him, made for his preservation. For when the
Turk had a design to fall upon him he offered himself to the Persian; at what
time the Turk being unwilling that the Persian his Enemy should become Master
of such a Territory, and rather choosing that they should remain under
Subjection to a Neuter Prince, forbore to molest him; and when the Persian
summoned him to give an account for breach of his promises; with the same
policy he threatened to surrender to the Turk. And then the Persian fearing
lest the Turk, already two potent, should enlarge his Empire by the addition of
these Territories, were unwilling to give him a disturbance so highly
provoking: and several of these tricks did the Basha play during the Reign of
Habas II.

After his decease, the Turks desirous to take the opportunity of Sephie II.
being come young and newly to the Crown, to make an attempt upon Bas-ra in the
same manner as thirty years before. Sultan Mourad whom we call Murat, took hold
of the occasion, Sephy I. being newly advanced to the Throne, to Besiege
Babylon; so that although he were then busied in the War of Candia, he undertook
that Conquest also, and to that effect gave orders to the Bashas of Diarbekre,
Moussol, Alep, Merdin, and other Governors on that side, to march against
Bas-ra, every one with an embodied Army, of which he appointed the Basha of
Bagdat or Babylon to be General.

Hossein-Basha (for so was the petty Sovereign of Bas-ra called) sends away
into Persia to make the same Offer which he had already made so many times
before to Habas II. But he was not in being; and his Successor minded only his
pleasures, and had no inclination for War. However, the chief Ministers,
unwilling to discover the weakness of their present condition, answered the
Ambassadors that they had no encouragement to hearken to their Propositions,
after the Basha their Master had so frequently and so insolently baffled the
Persian Monarchy. That he had drawn his own misfortunes himself upon his own
head, and that his sufferings were no more then what he well deserved. However,
the Basha nothing discouraged for having missed the Succors which he expected
on that side, betook himself to another Stratagem, and being a person that had
heaped a vast Treasure together by his Merchandise, he now employs it to
corrupt the Basha of Bagdat General of the Turkish Army and the rest of the
Grand Officers. Thereupon he treats with 'em, upon condition of being
Tributary, for the future, to the Grand Seignior, to pay him every year a
hundred thousand Crowns, and to give him in ready Money two hundred thousand
upon the nail: some other conditions were likewise added of small importance,
and so the Siege being raised, and the Basha sent his Sonin-law to
Constantinople to have the Treaty ratified, which was all that happened in
reference to this War in the year 1667.

Toward the end of the same year arrived sad tidings at Ispahan from the
Provinces adjoining to the Caspian Sea, that at Shirvan, the Capital City of a
Province of the same Name, and which makes a part of Armenia the greater, were
Tefflis, the Capital City of Georgia, an Earthquake had overturned the greatest
part of that City, and ruined four Villages near adjoining: and and that above
thirty thousand Persians had perished in the Ruins. That in another City
called Shama-Ki, in the Province of the same name, which is the Southern Media,
another Earthquake altogether as dreadful as the former, had occasioned the
loss of twenty thousand Persons, and swallowed up three fourth parts of the
City; which two accidents had reduced those two Provinees to utter Desolation.

I do not believe there was any more then one person in the World that could
rejoice at these dismal tidings, and that was Mirza-Ibraim, already mentioned;
although as being Royal Farmer of the latter Province he ought to have been
afflicted rather at his loss. However, he looked upon the sad event with a
joyful heart, as being that which offered him more an opportunity to get rid of
his troubles and persecutions which he sustained in the Court of Persia, and to
get out of Ispahan, which he looked upon as a kind of confinement, or to speak
more truly as his place of Torment; nor did he neglect the opportunity, but
presented forthwith a Petition to the King and the Chief Ministers, wherein he
declared that Shamaky was dependent upon his employment, and therefore besought
his Majesty that he might return thither to see what might be done to recover
it out of its Ruins.

He backed his Petition with several considerable Presents which he made to the
chief Ministers, and by that means obtained a Grant of his desires. And thus
did that unfortunate Lord delay for a time the bad effects of his unfortunate
Ambition. Certain it is that for six months that he staid at Court, the King
and Prime Ministers under various pretenses got from him above sixty thousand
Tomans, which amount to two hundred and fifty thousand pounds, and all the
while they contemned him as a Cully and a Person of no value. Infamy attended
him every where; and not only the Grandees but persons of ordinary condition
took delight to make sport with him, as if he had been one of the dregs of the
People. For being a man that was very Covetous, and yet one that his
misfortunes had rendered extremely fearful, they who had any thing to receive of
him, and to whom he had made over Assignations upon his Farm, could find no
better way to make him bleed then to abuse and affront him. And I was informed
by some persons who were able to tell me, that upon some disorder at Court how
to raise money, the Divan Beki, or Chief Justice gave the King to understand in
a Memorial which he presented him, that if his Majesty would but deliver up
into his power Mirza Ibrahim, and Mirza Sadek his Brother, he would lose his
head if he did not raise him a Sum of six hundred thousand Tomans, which are
two Millions and a half Sterlin. It happened that at the same time when this
Memorial was delivered this unfortunate Lord was in the Hall, where his Majesty
sat, who thereupon caused the Memorial to be read aloud. It may be easily
judged in what a taking he was; but without answering a word, he patiently
endured the punishment of his rash Ambition, and want of Conduct. In a word, he
was a lost man, and his misery had increased to its full height, had not the
conjuncture of the Earthquake furnished him with an opportunity to beg leave to
retire. So that in some measure his good fortune proceeded from an event which
at another time might have proved most prejudicial to him. Yet as I have
already said most prudent persons believe, that he has only delayed his evil
Destiny for some years, that his ruin is infallible, and that upon the least
want of money, he will still be the Prey in the eyes of the Hungry Courtiers.

The year 1668. according to our account, and 1079. according to the Mahumetan
Computation, began with great Rejoicing, the Prince imagining that the rest of
the year would be no less happy then the beginning. But it fell not out
answerable to his expectations: nor that of the Grandees of the Kingdom, as
well as those of meaner Condition, who had any insight into Affairs: tho to
outward appearance they attended at the Festivals with a cheerful countenance,
yet their hearts were not so light: for they found the condition of the Empire
grew every day worse and worse; that the Enemy was in the Bowels of several
Provinces, while others were laid desolate by Earthquakes: little Money in the
Kingdom, a scarcity still continued at Ispahan, where tho there was no want; of
any thing, yet every thing was sold at an excessive rate. The Exchequer
moreover was exhausted, while the new Prince in eighteen Months had drained all
the Treasures of the Empire. Which happened through his Profusion on the one
side, either by reason of the prodigious Expenses that he delighted in, or
through the excessive Presents which frequently, and many times without any
Reason at all, he heaped upon his Favorites. And on the other side, through
the little care that was taken of the management of his Revenues: For indeed he
had not made the third part of what his Father was wont to make of 'em; as
having without considering the consequences, filled up all the vacant
Employments both in the Court and in the Countries. Whereas his Father never
supplied those Vacancies unless he was thereto compelled by necessity, to the
end he might have the Money himself which was due to his Officers. But the young
Monarch little experienced in Government, imagined that the Coffers which he
found full would never be empty. Nor durst any body be so bold as to tell him
'twas much more easy to empty then to fill 'em. But at length when they found
him wondering that Money was not plentiful with him as it had been, they were
constrained to let him understand the reason.

The Duchess his Mother, for whom he had an extraordinary respect, and who
might be said to be more then his Governess, spoke with more freedom to him
then any other person, and made him condescend to let her act in the public
management of Affairs. Thereupon she took upon her the Government of the
Empire, and to show her first Masterpiece of Policy, she reduced the Monarch
her Son from one extremity to another. Insomuch that whereas he was so
extremely liberal before, that he was always and upon all occasions giving,
afterward he became covetous even to pitiful sordidness: and was so far from
being bountiful that he hardly rewarded those that did him extraordinary
services. So that it might be said of him, that he was like some Torrents that
overflow the Meadows to day, and the next leave 'em quite dry.

All these disorders obliged the Persians to look backward, and to wish for the
days of the deceased Kings Reign. And they were taken with the Answer which the
late General of the Armies, when he lived in such splendor and high favor at
Court, made the King; For one day the Prince and he being private together,
Hali-Kouli-Kaan said the King to him, Do thou not know who they were that
rejoiced at the death of the King my Father? If I knew who the Dogs were, I
would cause their guts to be ripp'd up. To whom the Lord with his usual
boldness said: Your Majesty will do well to take care what you do, lest you
begin with your self and me: For I know none but our selves to whom his Death
could be acceptable; by which, of Prisoners that we were, we became Kings of
Persia.

Nor had the King his Health this year any better then the year before. His
Distemper still perplexed him, tho his fits were always alike, some quickly
off, others more tedious. Sometimes he lay whole Weeks together languishing in
his Haram, whence he never stirred out at his usual times, but a little now and
then in the Evening to show himself: Sometimes he took the Air a Horseback with
a Handkerchief tied three or four times about his neck, which in Persia is the
certain sign of a sick Person. However all this while he forbore nothing of his
debaucheries, and always carried his Women along with him; his most usual Walks
being upon Giulfa side, a Town belonging to the Armenians, out of which he
picked all the handsome Virgins to fill his Palace. It is said, the first time
that he caused the young Virgins under twelve and above ten years of Age to be
thus cull d out, of twenty that were carried to the Palace there was but one
that showed the least joy in her Countenance for her good fortune, and she was
detained; the rest who fell a weeping, either because they were thought too
Innocent, or else believed to be too cunning, were restored to their Parents.
But to the Father of her that was detained the Sum of Eight Tomans, or thirty
Guinees Pension was presently ordered. For it is the Custom of that Court, when
the King makes choice of any Virgin out of a Family that is not very well in
the World, he assigns the Father a Pension to that value, or near it, during
his Life. I say, when a Family is low in the World: For as for the Grandees,
they count it a great happiness to have a Kinswoman in the Kings house, where
she may be useful to him in his advancement, and do him a thousand good Offices
near his Majesty's Person.

Nevertheless the Young Prince had forborne Wine all the last year, by reason of
an Inflammation in his Throat occasioned by his hard drinking; with which his
Father also had formerly been troubled for the same cause. Which was the Reason
that the Kourouk or Prohibition of Wine was renewed, to the end there might be
no more sold. For it is the Custom of the Grandees in Asia, when they have an
Intention to abandon Wine, they send Orders to throw away all that they have,
and to knock out the heads of the Vessels, to the end that if they should have
a desire to drink it again, they might not have an opportunity to satisfy
themselves; not looking upon themselves to be Masters of their Passions.

But notwithstanding all this Abstinence of the Young Prince, his Distempers
nothing abated. His pale and wan Color, and his Stomach loathing all manner of
Food, were certain Symptoms of his disordered Body.

His Chief Physician knew not what to think: he had essayed in vain all the
secrets of his Art: which was no small affliction to him, in regard his life
depended upon the Kings: Or if his life were spared, yet he was sure to lose
his Estate and his Liberty: as happened to the two Chief Physicians of Habas
II. and as it happens to all those that attend the Asiatick Sovereigns, when
they die under their care.

The Astrologers also began to whisper one another in the Ear, and tell their
Confidents, as a great secret, that the King would never recover; that they
could not find in his Horoscope that he had above six years to live after his
Coronation, of which he had already survived a third part; and that he should
languish out the two others in perpetual misery.

The Queen Mother, pressed by her natural affection, and blinded by the
transports of her Passion, forbore to lay the fault upon her Sons distemper;
but quarreled with the Physician, asking him how it came to pass her Son was
sick, accused him of Treason or Ignorance, believing that since he was her
Son's Physician, he was obliged to cure him. This made the Physician at his
Wits end, so that all his Receipts failing him, he bethought himself of one
that was peculiarly his own Invention, and which few Physicians would ever have
found out, as not being to be met with neither in Galen nor Hippocrates. What
does he then do, but out of an extraordinary fetch of his Wit, he begins to lay
the fault upon the Stars, and the Munshi-Zumes, or Kings Astrologers, crying
out that they were altogether in the wrong. That if the King lay in a
languishing condition, and could not recover his health, it was because they
had failed to observe the happy hour, or the Aspect of a Fortunate
Constellation at the Time of his Coronation. Which Fable was backed by all the
friends which the Physician had at Court; and besides that, by one of the Kings
Astrologers himself, called Mirza Mougiim. For this person either out of
Emulation, or for what other reason I know not, bearing a private grudge to the
Prince of the Astrologers, whose business it was to observe the favorable
Conjunction for the Coronation of the young Prince, and perceiving so fit an
opportunity to discredit the Chief of the Astrologers, and advance his own
Reputation, failed not to lay hold of it.

He therefore made it out, or at least seemed to make it plain by long disputes
full of Astrological Reasons, in all the chief Assemblies of the chief
Courtiers, that the Moment designed for the Coronation of the King signified
nothing; and afterward by Arguments as strong as the first, he labored to
prove that the defect of the Kings health proceeded from his Coronation which
had been solemnized under an Inauspicious Aspect.

The first that gave credit to his idle stories were the Mother and the Son;
and the Women that were suffered to be near his Majesty were of the same
opinion likewise, that it was the fault of the Star-Gazer, who had not taken
notice that the Aspect was not favorable at that time. The Eunuchs also were
drawn into the same belief, and the Courtiers who are still ready to comply
with the most extravagant Proposals, to please their Master, declared no less.
In short the Physician got the day, and by this Chimera saved his Credit and
his Estate.

'Twas in vain for the Astrologer, by the most convincing Arguments he could
allege, to maintain the contrary. No body gave ear to him; so that he was
constrained, for fear of running himself into farther danger, not only to hold
his peace, but at length to applaud the Sentence pronouncd against him.

Therefore there was nothing now to be done but to repair a pretended defect,
and to seek out proper remedies for the mistake: nor could they find any other
Expedient but to proceed to a second Coronation of the King, as if he had never
been Crowned before. It was resolved also at the same time, that his Majesty
should quit the name of Sephie, as carrying in it somewhat I know not what of
unfortunate; and that he should make choice of another. They gave his Majesty
therefore to understand, that the beginning of his Grandfathers Reign had been
accompanied with the same accidents as his own. That there was a great scarcity
of Provision in Ispahan; that the Turks had declared War against him, and that
he had never enjoyed a perfect health.

These two things being thus resolved, the next thing was to pitch upon the
day. Upon this Point there was a long deliberation, and many Contests about it.
The Astrologers were consulted: and at length after many Consultations and
serious Enquiries, they agreed that the happy Hour which was to be attended by
so many fortunate Events, would be toward the time of the year that the Sun
entered the Ram: which accordding to our account was Tuesday the twentieth of
March, about nine in the Morning.

At for this second Coronation, in regard it vari'd little or nothing from the
former, it will be needless to make a second description of it: All the
difference was, that this second Coronation was solemnized in the great Hall,
called Tshehel Setoon, or the Hall with forty Pillars. Which is that
Magnificent Apartment, the most stately in all the Royal Palace, by us
described with all possible exactness in our description of Ispahan. There the
whole Court met at the time prefixed by the Astrologers with all the Pomp that
such a glorious Ceremony required. All the Grandees of the Court who had the
privilege of sitting before the King, placed themselves upon the Right hand.
The two Pontiffs, the most eminent Interpreters of the Alcoran, and all the
Tribe of Molla's stood upon the Left. When all the Court was sat, and that
there was no body else to come, every one observing a profound silence, the
King entered from the farther part of the Hall, and sat down: In a short time
after, upon a a signal given, they all rose; and then the Ceremony it self was
performed as before related. Mahamed-Baquer-Corasini made the Sermon of four
parts, and the Kothe the Prayer, at the end of which, exalting his Voice, he
gave the Prince a new Name, which was that of Soleimaan. Which name being once
pronounced, every one, as at the first Ceremony, gave their Intsh-Alla, so God
grant it; and may this Prince surpass in glory and happiness the wise Prince
who was the first that bore the Name. For Soleimaan signifies the same thing as
Solomon; in the Hebrew; from whence it was questionless derived. Solemn in that
Language signifies peace, from whence the Arabs derive their Selim, which
signifies Affable, Courteous, Peaceable; and perhaps the name of that famous
Legislator among the Athenians, Solon, might have the same Etymology. And then
the Hebrew Solomon, the Persian Soleimaan, the Turkish and Arabian Setim, and
the Grecian Solon will come to be one and the same Name.

The Doctor composed that Prayer with all the Eloquence he was Master of: which
done, every one went to kiss his Majesty's feet, and then returned to their
places. Where all the Court staid till it was Noon, and where they were served
with a Collation of Sweetmeats, but no meat, by reason of the Kings sickness.
And by and by the Loud Music from the Royal Palace proclaimed to the whole
City the News of the Ceremony. All the rest of the day was spent in Pastimes
and public Shows: and at night Lights were kept burning till Morning, and the
Shops ordered to be kept open, for the People to walk the Streets as at Noon
day.

At the same time all the Seals and all the Money Stamps were broken, and
others made with the new name of Soleimaan: and in the space of twenty four
Hours some thousands of new Crowns were dispersed abroad. Moreover, to inform
all the Provinces of this new Coronation, a Commission was given to
Mahamed-Salek the Kings Astrologer, Brother to the Chief Astrologer, and Head
of the Society, to write to all the Officers of Persia, and all that had any
Employment or Command in the Empire, and give 'em an account of the reason why
his Majesty had changed his Name: That for the future they were to acknowledge
King Soleimaan for Sovereign Monarch of Persia; and that they were not any more
to write to his Majesty but only by that Name; that in all their Provinces they
were to erase the Name of Sephie wherever they met with it, as an Ominous
Name, that portended nothing but misfortune to the King and Kingdom. Nor was
Mahamed-Saleh dissatisfied in the least with this Commission: For the Grandees
and Officers, and in a word, all those to whom he directed his Letters, were
obliged to send him some considerable Present, every one according to his
Quality, for the Moushtelog, or good News which they had received.

Royal Habits also were sent presently after the Coronation to the Governors,
Lieutenants, and Collectors of the Public Receipts, and all other Persons of
Quality in all the several Provinces. With Patents and Commands in the Name of
Soleimaan, as if a New King had ascended the Throne: so strangely had a foolish
and superstitious Fancy possessed the mind of this Monarch and his
Counselors. Not but that it is very probable they acted merely out of
Complaisance. For they were too wise in my opinion, seriously to appear in an
Action so fantastic and extravagant, and which a man shall hardly meet with
the like in any other History.

However his Majesty, so soon as the Ceremony was over, fancied the recovery of
his Health; and whether it were that Opinion contributed to his Imagination,
certain it was that the Physic which his Majesty took had some good Effect,
and the King grew better; but the Kingdom had no advantage by it. On the
contrary, the news of Wars arrived at Ispahan from all Parts, augmenting the
Terror, with which that dreadful Comet, that year appearing, had possessed
their Minds.

That great and remarkable Comet, which was seen almost over all the earth,
appeared also at that time in Persia. The Astrologers called it Niazouk, or the
Little Lance, as resembling that Figure. For the Persians do not give to
Comets, as we do, the name which is common to those Meteors, but according to
the Figure which they represent, as we have observed in its proper place. They
affirmed they never saw, not ever had heard speak of any one that ever was like
it. The Head of it was hid in the West, in such a manner, that nothing of it
could be perceived in that Horizon. In our Treatise of the Persian Astrology,
we have given the description of a Figure according to the observation made in
the Capital City of the Province of Persia the seventh of March, which was the
second day of its appearance. But we have not any where mentioned the
Observation that was made of it at Ispahan, for which reason I thought it would
be something to the purpose to speak of it in this place.

The Observation then that was made of it in the Capital City of the Kingdom by
the Munshiziims or Kings Astrologers, the tenth of May, at seven of the Clock
in the Evening was this. It appeared in the Southern part, and followed the
motion of the Primum Mobile, it extended in length 30 degrees. 32. min. and almost
of an equal breadth of 6 degrees. The color of it was inclining somewhat to
yellow. The upper part of it advanced toward the Girdle of Orion, and the River
Eridanus; in length from the Ram 72 degrees. And its lower Extremity under the
Whale, or the winding of Eridanus, where it extended in length 41 degrees. 30 min.
and in breadth 6 degrees.

All the Persian Astrologers declared in their Takuims or Almanacks, which are
properly the Ephemerides of the present Year, speaking of this Meteor, that it
signified nothing but Wars, Murders, Seditions, Conflagrations, dangerous
Diseases, overturning of Kingdoms and States, and, in a word, all manner of
Calamities. But they fixed all these dreadful Effects far off from Persia, upon
the Sunnis or Turks; and Kafers, which is a name that they give to Idolaters,
among whom, according to their belief, they esteem us Christians to be the
chief. But Time, who is the Master Astrologer, has made it appear to the
Persians that these scourges were as well prepared for themselves: For what has
happened this year in that Kingdom has given 'em to understand that they are
the Persons that must be smitten with this Cudgel: and that the Little Lance
(for both these names they gave that Comet) will as severely gore their sides,
and that a good share of so many sad Influences will fall upon the Dominions of
the Persian Empire, as well as in other places. The Governor of Kandaar was
one of the first who felt the fatal Influences of this Comet by his fall and
death, which happened at the same time upon this occasion. For the better
understanding of which we must go back to the Story of his Life, where we left
off, to bring him in a few words to his End.

We left him going to Kandaar with his Recruits; where so soon as he arrived,
he found no likelihood of any War. Nor indeed did he expect any such thing:
only he himself had caused the Rumor to be spread abroad to obtain the
Government; and to disincumber himself from those Troubles which his turbulent
and wicked Conduct had drawn upon himself. But no sooner was he arrived in that
City but he began to appear in his own Colors, not so much by secret
contrivance, but openly and with a lofty pride acting a Petty Sovereign, and
assuming absolute Dominion, taking away by force Virgins from their Parents,
Married women from their Husbands to replenish his Palace; observing no
measure, but using as his Slaves and Footmen the Sultoons, or inferior
Governors, the Royal Farmers, and meaner Officers, pillaging and plundering
where ever there was any thing to be got. In a word, his Tyranny grew to that
extremity, that in all that spacious Province there was not any body that was
not in an extraordinary Consternation: for without any form of Proceeding, he
put to death whomever he thought good, according as his fury or his interest
inspired him. Of these things Complaints were sent to the Court, and the Cries
of that infinite number which he had rendered miserable were so loud, that they
reached the Kings Ears. Which the Governors Enemies had so much the fairer
opportunity to improve, considering how the Clamours against his exorbitances
daily increased. Thereupon his Kindred and those few friends he had left at
Court sent him word, that his Affairs were but in a bad condition, his
proceedings being highly resented by his Majesty, and that unless he looked
carefully to himself, some mischievous Backstroke of Fortune threatened him.
But he took little notice of this good advice; believing himself so well
assured of his Princes favor; and therefore thinking himself proof against all
the most Potent Accusations, he never altered his Conduct, but rather grew more
haughty and disorderly.

The Kaan Governor who had been displaced to make way for him, was then at
Court; however by the means of his friends he failed not to have a strict eye
upon all his Actions; nor were they less diligent to conveigh the complaints of
the afflicted to the Kings Ear. So that at length all his Crimes were heaped
together; but while the King was wavering, whether to disgrace him and cast him
from his favor or not, he committed a new Act of Violence, which added a most
terrible weight to the foregoing Accusations.

Between the Kingdom of Kackmir, and the Province of Kandaar, lie a certain
People called Bolluki, who extend themselves into India on that side; which
Country is Governed by their own Native Princes; only those that are next
neighbors to Persia, acknowledge the King and are his Tributaries. One of
those Princes had a very lovely Daughter of whom the Governor of Kandaar had
heard a great Report, and therefore passionately desired her for one of his
Wives. To which purpose he sends to demand her of the Prince her Father; who
refused his Motion: The enamored Governor, not so discouraged, sent again, and
receives a second denial, he sends nevertheless a third time, but to as little
purpose, for that the Bolluki never intermix alliances but one with another.
Upon this the Governor dissembling his Indignation, always professed a great
friendship for him, and invited him one day to a sumptuous Feast at Kandaar.
The Prince mistrusting nothing came to the Entertainment; but when the Governor
had him in his Clutches, he caused his head to be cut off. Upon which, the
Prince's Attendants when they understood of his Death, disdaining so foul a
piece of Villainy, all enraged fell upon the Governors Guard, between whom and
the Strangers there happend a bloody Combat, wherein three hundred Persians
were slain upon the place, and between seven and eight hundred of the others.

This made such a noise that the King began to show himself highly offended.
Nor would the Governors Enemies omit so fair an opportunity; believing now his
Majesty would suffer 'em to say any thing against a man that gave him so much
occasion of inward disturbance, so that they easily persuaded him to revoke the
permission he had given him to come to Court when he pleased himself. The
pretense of which Revocation was grounded upon this, that it was a thing which
had never been accustomed to be done, and which might in the end produce
dangerous Consequences: and they thought they had gone a great way in gaining
that point. For they were afraid, lest if the Governor had free access to Court
he should regain by his Presence, the Kings Favor; which seemed no difficult
thing for him to do, who had the art so well to counterfeit his passionate
affection for the Kings Interest: and for that the King when the Governor was
ready to depart for Kandaar, had testified his Sorrow to part with him, at what
time he thus expressed himself: Tho thou go to Kandaar, thou shall be never
a jot the less my Favorite, and thou shall return to my Court whenever thou
think it convenient. Which was the reason of his giving him Letters of
License to come when he pleased to Court without expecting any new Orders.

The Governor received the revocation of that Favor, and at the same time
other Letters from his Brother, and the rest of his Friends, advising him to be
careful in his Conduct; that his Fortune tottered, and was within a little of
falling altogether; and that his Enemies had made great advantage of the
opportunities he had given 'em.

Upon this News he took a course which he thought so much the more worthy of
himself, by how much it appeared to him to be equally prudent and daring; tho
by the event it proved no less fatal than rash. He assured himself that so soon
as he should but see the King, he should set all things right again: that he
should regain his first Favor, and scatter the Faction of his Enemies. And
therefore without ever Petitioning for any new Order or expecting any Command,
nay, against the very Command which he had received expressly forbidding his
coming to Court, he takes Horse, and in nine days arrives at Ispahan.

The speed that was made in this Journey was discoursed of at Ispahan, as of a
thing altogether extraordinary and which was never done before. For of these
nine days one must be deducted that he staid to rest himself in a Garden about
a hundred and fifty Leagues from Ispahan. So that in some eight days he rode as
much ground as usually takes up three Months ordinary Traveling from Kandaar
to Ispahan, that is to say, three hundred and fifty Persian Leagues, which are
more then four hundred and fifty French Leagues.

However he did not enter the City, but went to a Garden near the Tokshi which
is one of the Gates of the City, from whence according to Custom he sent to
give notice to the King, that the Governor of Kandaar his Slave, attended till
his Majesty should grant him the favor to come and kiss his feet. By which
action he thought to have carried the day from his Enemies, and to have
regained the Kings Affection.

The King was then in the Women's Palace, where the Eunuchs were charged to
carry him the news. Which Charge the High Chamberlain and the Princesses High
Steward (those potent Eunuchs whom he had endeavored to set together by the
ears by his cunning contrivances of false reports) undertook upon themselves,
and taking their time to enjoy that revenge which they had prepared in their
hearts, with an astonishment in their faces, so much the greater because
affected, they tell the King of the Governors arrival, adding withal, That they
could not tell how that Action of the Governor might be interpreted, but to
come not only without permission, but contrary to a positive inhibition to quit
his new Government, could not but be a heinous contempt of his Majesty, and a
manifest Rebellion; that since the first foundation of the Persian Empire,
never any Governor durst be so bold as to quit his Government and come of his
own head, and out of his own humor to the King. In a word they represented
this Order so foul to the King, that he sent to the Governor of Kandaar, to go
and surrender himself into the Custody of Ogourlon Kan Grand Porter; and to him
he sent orders to put him into the Krondoushake, which is a little Wooden
Engine that Pillories the neck, and fastens the right Arm of the Prisoner to
his Girdle, so that he has no way to help himself with that hand, which is the
way to secure the persons of Grandees that are looked upon as Criminals.

Thus he remained three days in the Captain of the Royal Gate's House. All
which time the poor Governor conjured Heaven and Earth; besought of God and Man
that he might only be permitted to see the King; assuring himself that with one
single word he should be able to ruin those that had determined his
destruction. But they who feared no less, and dreaded that permission, labored
their utmost to prevent it, and sought by all ways to exasperate the Kings
anger already kindled against him. For as the Governor thought it a knack of
State to be permitted to see the King; so on the other side, his Enemies deemed
it no less a piece of State Policy to prevent that honor from being granted
him.

In the mean time the Chief Porter being gained by the Governors moans and
entreaties, the third day of his imprisonment carried him with the wooden
Pillory to the great Portal of the Palace that looks toward the Royal Piazza,
and there leaving him in the hands of his Servants, went to his Majesty and
told him, That the Governor of Kandaar, had as it were forced him by his moans
and entreaties to bring him to the Kings Gate: and that the poor Lord was
there, waiting for the favor to be admitted to kiss his Majesty's feet. But
then the Enemies of that unfortunate Lord, who were in no small number about
the King, renewed their Accusations, and took the more boldness, in regard the
King was no way unwilling to hear their complaints. Every one aggravated what
he knew the Offender to have most criminally committed: But above all his
Predecessor in the Government of Kandaar, who the day before and that very day
had caused above three hundred Petitions to be Presented against him by several
Persons of the same Province, that demanded Justice.

Thus his Enemies became too powerful for him, so that after an hours
deliberation, the King commanded the Chief Porter to go and rip up his Guts.
Presently the Lord hastened to obey the King's Orders, and as far off as he
could see the Gate he cries Vour, that is to say, strike; which is the Signal
of death. Immediately the next Officer that heard the word, gives him a kick
with his Foot upon the Stomach, and threw him out of the Portal into the Royal
Piazza. There with his Sword he gives him two great Gashes upon one side of his
Neck: but in regard his head did not tumble as yet, another drew his Dagger,
and stabbed him under the Ribs into the small Guts, and thus he expired
weltring in his Blood, which streamed from him in a prodigious quantity, as
being a very Sanguine Person.

Now in the midst of the Royal Piazza, over against the great Portal of the
Palace is set up a large May Pole of an extraordinary height, on the top of
which upon solemn Festivals and days of public rejoicing is fixed a Cup of
Gold, which is a Prize to be won by the first among the Horsemen that can shoot
it down with his Bow and Arrows upon a full Gallop: and upon the top of this
Maypole it was, that the head of this great Personage was set up by the Kings
order, the reason of which was, as the Persians said that passed along, to the
end his malicious Tongue might not be able at so great a distance to sow
Discord and Dissension.

This was the end of Gemshid-Kaan, who indeed did no way merit a better Fate:
for there was not any body that piti'd his fall; or rather, there was not any
body that did not load him with Curses: so that his Body lay two days in the
public Piazza, before his Majesty gave permission for its Interment.

He was of a goodly stature and proportion; had a noble aspect, and the Port of
a Person of Quality; his Countenance very pleasing and winning at first sight;
besides that a vast Courage, and profuse munificence accompanied these outward
Graces of the Body. But setting aside these two Qualities of his Soul that were
laudable, the rest were all as venomous and tainted as these were Eminent.

Four days after this Execution, the Commission for Governor of Kandaar was
sent to Mahammed-Kouli-Kaan, that is to say, the Lord Slave of Mahamed. This
Lord had been thirteen years a Prisoner, Banished to Casbin by Habas II. Of
which this was the true Cause.

Habas II. being one day abroad with his Women, this Lord, before he was aware
was got within the limits that are prohibited to men; where the Guard of the
Courouk perceiving him fell upon him, and Bastinado'd him most severely. Some
days after, so soon as he was able to go, he went to the Palace where the King
was sitting in the public Assembly, where taking the King aside, with a
resolved Countenance, Did I not see thee, said he, with this Heron Tuft upon
thy Head, and observe the great Honor which the Grandees pay thee, there is
nothing that I should take thee for less than the King of Persia. By the name
of God does it become thee to run a rambling over these Mountains with a Covey
of Women, and at the same time cause the Lords of thy Kingdom to have their
bones broken with ignominious Bastinadoes?

The King heard this Reprimand without seeming to be any way disturbed; only in
a careless manner ordered an addition of Bastinadoes to be given him besides
those of which he already complained. Upon which, Generous and Courageous as he
was, losing all manner of Patience, he draws his Sword, and throwing himself at
the Kings feet, Let 'em, said he, Bastinado me again, here is my Sword to
punish my self; your Majesty may do with me what you please, and put me to what
Torments you think fit, but if a Person of my Quality must be subject to
Bastinadoes, what must a poor Kest-Bash expect (for so they call the Soldiers
that compose the Persian Militia.) The Monarch pleased with this generous
Repartee, would neither Sentence him to Death as he deserved by the Laws of the
Kingdom, nor to the Cudgel; but only Banished him to Casbin.

But he was joyfully surprised when he received the Patent for a Government,
which not only restored him to his Liberty, but at the same time conferred upon
him one of the most important employments in the Kingdom. I confess I know not
what may be thought of such Politics as these, as hunt in Jails for men of
Merit, to advance the disobliged by long Imprisonment to the most considerable
places of Trust in the Kingdom, and to commit to his care a Province and strong
Hold which on that side the Country may be said to be the Key of the Kingdom.
Of necessity the King must be strangely assured of the fidelity of his
Subjects. For there is no question to be made, but that if a Governor of
Kandaar will call in the Indian, and sell him that Place, but that he may have
several Millions of Money for his Service, and have what advancement he pleases
himself in that Empire, as is apparent by one Example in the time of Sephi I.

During these Revolutions in the Court of Persia, four Commissioners arrived
from the Muscovite Cosaques, who but two Months before had made a most furious
Inrode into Persia on that side where Hyrcania lies, upon the Shore of the
Caspian Sea. But before we speak of the Invasion it will be necessary to tell
the Reason.

In the year 1664. according to our account there arrived at Ispahan a famous
Embassy from Muscovie, wherein two Ambassadors were concerned, with a Train of
about eight hundred Men: and the Presents which they made the King were valued
by appraisment at five thousand Tomans or seventeen thousand five hundred
pounds Sterling.

They consisted of two Coaches enriched with most sumptuous Embroideries,
Flanders Horses, and Beasts of their own Country, as black Foxes, white Bears
and Doynes. But the chiefest wealth of the Present lay in the prodigious
quantity of Sables which the Persians call Samur. These Ambassadors as it was
believed came only to Traffic, and to have permission by virtue of their Title
of Ambassadors to import and export what Goods they pleased without paying
Custom. And indeed 'twas thought that they sold in Sables only at Ispahan as
many as came to 280000 l. Ster. by which you may judge of the rest.
Nevertheless the King of Persia entertained 'em very civilly at first, and
allowed 'em their expenses which was taxed at ten Tomans or 35 l. Sterling per
day, which they rather chose to take in Money than in Victuals, to the end they
might lay up the best part. To which purpose they lived most wretchedly, and in
the Magnificent Palace which the King had assigned 'em they laid their tails
among the Costly Movables wherewith it was furnished, like so many Dogs. For
which reason the Persians looked upon the Moscovites as the most paltry
narrow-soul'd, and infamous among all the Christians; and in derision call 'em
the Yusbeks of Europe, thereby expressing the small esteem they have of 'em;
for the Yusbeks are the most abject People of all the East.

The King therefore disdaining the Infamy of these Ambassadors, and seeing that
indeed they were sent by their Master for no other reason then to Traffic, to
sell their Furs and other Commodities, and to carry away Stuffs, Leather, and
other such like Merchandises out of Persia, but especially Money, abused 'em at
length and made little account of 'em. One of 'em died, and the other returned
home with his tattered Train without any honor shown him, or hardly any answer
given him.

The Grand Duke highly resented this Affront, but dissembled his Choler for the
present, in regard he durst not meddle with Habas: but understanding at the
beginning of the Year 1665. that he was dead, and that the Scepter of Persia
was fallen into the Hands of a Young Prince, he resolved to take his revenge,
tho he were unwilling to enter into open and declared Hostility; and therefore
that he might strike and not be seen, he incites and encourages the Cossacks
next adjoining to the black Sea; orders 'em to march along the Lake Moeotis,
and so to fall into Persia upon Hircania side, with this Caution that they
should take care how they mentioned him, or acknowledged that they had any
Correspondence with him, but only that they had undertaken the Enterprise upon
their own Heads: which is no more than what was reported and believed at the
Court of Persia.

The Cossacks were easily persuaded, and therefore embarking to the number of
six thousand in forty large Barques, such as use the Caspian Sea (which are
long and broad Vessels, but shallow built to avoid the Rocks that lie two or
three foot under water) and in each Barque carrying two Pieces of Cannon, they
cast Anchor first near Ereck, a small City upon the Borders of Guilan or
Hircania, where they landed to the number of four thousand, and finding the
Place without Soldiers, and the Inhabitants no way prepared for defense, they
pillage and plunder it, and after a great slaughter of both Sexes retreat in
great have with all their Booty to their Vessels, that lay out at Sea as far as
they could for fear of being discovered.

Moreover, for the more crafty management of their Game they sent four of their
chief Heads, in the Nature of Ambassadors with Letters of Credence to the
Court, and the Governor of Shamaky ordered his People to convey 'em to
Ispahan, where they arrived soon after the news of their Irruption. They were
civilly entertained, a Lodging was assigned 'em, and their Expenses defrayed as
is usual for other Ambassadors. Soon after they demanded Audience of the King,
but that was denied 'em, because they were not of sufficient Quality to claim
that Honor. However it was concluded that the Prime Minister should grant 'em
Audience, which they accepted. There they set forth, That they were
Commissioners sent by six thousand of the Cossacks, that lay at Anchor in the
Caspian Sea; that in truth they were formerly subject to the Empire of the
Muscovites, but that being wearied by the oppression which they endured there,
they had resolved to fly their Country with their Wives and Children: and
whatever else of their Goods they could carry along with 'em. That after they
had debated whither to fly for safety and protection, Persia was the Place that
they had pitched upon, as being a Monarchy that loved Justice, and was kind to
her Slaves. For which reason they had concluded to offer their service to his
Majesty, and therefore they were departed from Sha-Seven, for love of the King,
and now they hoped from the Generosity of so great a Monarch, that he would
listen to their Petitions, afford 'em a Sanctuary, and assign 'em Lands for
their Habitation.

This said, they presented their Letters of Credence; which the Persians could
never uncypher, tho they made use of all the most cunning and learned
Interpreters as well of their own Nation, as of Europeans, that were found at
Ispahan.

The Chief Minister thus disappointed, made his last trial upon a Capuchin, who
for twenty years together had been still employed by the Ministers of State of
that Kingdom. It happened also when the Paper was brought him, that the Sieur
Herbert d'Jager was with him; a Chief of the Dutch Factory at Ispahan. He was a
person that for the understanding of Languages had few that might compare with
him: for besides that he perfectly understood all that are at present spoken in
the East; he is also well skilled in the Ancient and Vulgar Greek, the Syriac,
and the Hebrew.

They could hardly have met with persons more able to have dissipated these
Clouds; nevertheless they could do nothing; They were Greek Letters, they said,
for the most part intermixed with other unknown Characters, of which some were
somewhat like the Syriac: They read some words here and there, but in regard
they could find no Connection of sense, they durst not be certain whether they
read right or no. So that they were constrained to send the Writing back to the
first Minister; the Superior of the Capuchins giving him this farther account
by the Messenger, that it was a half Russian, half Casaque writing, that he
could not uncypher.

They were therefore forced to give credit to what the Commissioners had told
'em by word of mouth; which was always the same thing that they had said at
first. To which the Prime Minister answered: If what you assure us be true,
that you are come to be our Guests, and to surrender your selves Slaves to his
Majesty, wherefore do you enter Persia with your Swords in your hands? Why have
you massacr'd our Subjects, laid wast our Cities, and pillaged our Territories?

The Cosaques replied in justification of themselves that they had been forced
to do it; for that when they came civilly to desire provision for their money,
the People of the City forgetful of the Laws of Hospitality, and that
Commiseration which is due to strangers, fell upon 'em, and misused 'em; and
therefore the necessity of self-defence ought to justify the Cosacques for
endeavoring to obtain that by force, which they could not get by fair means.

At the same time that they were thus treating with these Commissioners,
arrived an Envoy from Orous, that is to say, the great Duke of Muscovy (which
name I think the Persians give him, because that Russia makes a part of his
Dominions) which Envoy presented Letters from the grand Duke to the King of
Persia to this Effect, That whereas he understood that a certain number of
Cosaques being his Subjects, had quitted their Habitations, on purpose to
withdraw themselves from his Obedience, and sought for Protection in Persia, he
desired his Majesty not to receive 'em, nor to give any credit to their
Propositions; That they were Rebels and Fugitives who would never be true to
any other, since they had been false to their Prince; and that he was ordering
Forces to reduce 'em to their former Obedience.

But if the Muscovite Prince advised the Persians not to believe the Cosaques,
they were sufficiently assured, that they were not to give credit to him; for
that the Court were all along of Opinion that he held a correspondence with
those Boot-halers the Cosaques. And the reason upon which they grounded their
belief was probable enough. For how is it possible else said the Politicians,
that five or six thousand Fugitives should come into a Country, with forty
Barks, and four and twenty Pieces of Artillery, provided with all sorts of
Ammunition and Provision? Is it not easy to see that it is the Grand Duke that
sends 'em, to revenge the Affronts, which he is made believe his Ambassadors
received?

And as the Grand Duke of Muscovie's Agent could not infuse a good opinion of
his Master into the Court of Persia, so neither could the Basha of Bazra's
Envoy prevail in behalf of his. It has been said, how that Basha had made an
Accommodation with the General of the Ottoman Army the last year, and that he
had sent his Son-in-law to Constantinople for a Ratification of the Agreement.
But when he came there, the Ministers of the Port made him Answer, that the
General of the Army had treated with the Basha without their Order, and that
they would by no means hear of that Agreement, for that the Place must
absolutely be surrendered into the Grand Signior's hands. Whereupon they
offered the Basha's Son-in-law, that if he would contribute to the reducing
that place, he should be made Goverour or Basha of the Territory; and managed
him so well, that at last he consented, and promised to make 'em Masters of it.
After this, the Ministers dispatch to the same Generals new Orders to return
with their Forces to the Siege of Basra; sharply rebuke the Basha of Babylon
for having been so remiss in that Affair; That the pretended agreement was to
the prejudice and dishonor of the Empire; that he should repair the fault he
had committed; and that they would make him General a second time, provided he
would take the City by force, or constrain it to a surrender, and that when he
had reduced it, he should constitute for Governor Hiatria Basha, the
Son-in-law of the Basha of Basra himself.

The Basha of Basra, when he heard these Tidings was strangely surpised at the
Treachery of his Son-in-law, and set himself to consider which way to divert
his terrible storm that threatened him. And therefore perceiving in the Spring,
that the Turkish Armies were preparing to thunder in upon him the next
September or October (for the heat of those Climates will not permit 'em to
take the Field sooner) he sent beforehand to offer his Territory to the King of
Persia, upon such condition as he pleased himself, provided he might have the
Command of it during his own Life. The Council of Persia knew the Importance of
that place; they saw how prejudicial it would be to Persia, if it should fall
into the hands of the Turks, and how advantageous it would be to themselves to
be Masters of it. So that at another time, and under another Prince, they would
willingly have embraced such a Proposal; but they were afraid to provoke that
Bugbear of the Universe, that Pannic Terror of the Earth, considering the weak
Estate of the Empire under a Prince effeminated by Pleasures, and whose Age as
well as his Humor rendered him incapable to undertake great Actions. Therefore
they gave no Positive Answer to the Envoy from Basra, but put him off from day
to day, and assured him they would take him into their Consideration, and all
to gain time, for they were unwilling to say we dare not, nor we cannot do it.

While these things were transacted in Council, they were consulting at Court
the recalling of Boudak Sultaan General of the Musquetteers. For this same Lord
as well as the rest whom we have discoursed of, in the time of his being a
Favorite had abused his Power, by which means he had raised himself many
enemies, whose number daily increased. At first they began to frame Complaints
against him, so that his Authority began to lessen by degrees, and his Prince's
affection began to wax cold. Which made him fear the same ill fortune as had
befaln Gemshid Kaan, Governor of Kandaar, and therefore he would not carry
things with a high hand, as that Grandee had done, but before the Mischief was
past cure, he began to think which way he might retire silently and without any
notice taken, to discharge himself of that Envy, which the luster of his good
Fortune had brought upon him.

The principal occasion of his losing his Masters Favor was this. To the East
of Ispahan, and near adjoining to his Territory lies the Province of
Lour-Estom, which is held to be a part of ancient Parthia, extending on
Arabia's side toward Basra. The People that Inhabit it, never mind the building
of Cities, nor have any settled Abodes, but live in Tents, for the most part
feeding their Flocks and their Herds, of which they have an infinite number.
They are Governed by a Kaan who is set over 'em by the King of Persia but
chosen from among themselves: and for the most part all of the same Race, the
Father Succeeding the Son. So that there still remains among them some shadow
of Liberty; however they pay both Tribute and Tenths. This Province furnishes
Ispahan and the Neighboring parts with Cartel; which is the reason that the
Governor of these People is greatly respected in those parts. Soleiman the
third therefore at his coming to the Crown, commanded the General of the
Musquetteers to send Royal Habits and Gommissions unto all the Grandees. But
the General of the Musquetteers having had some quarrel with this Governor who
is called Lour-Manoushar Kaan, neglected to do him that Honor, putting off his
sending the Kings Present to him till six Months after. The Grandee impatiently
brook'd the contempt; and being sufficiently convinced who was the occasion of
it, for madness he tore in pieces the Habit which was presented him, saying
withal, I value not the Habits, nor the Commissions which the King of Persia's
General of the Musquetteers sends me.

His Majesty knew nothing of this for a good while; the thing was concealed
from him, for fear at the same time he should have informed himself of the
Cause. But the Prince himself informed the King; for some time after he desired
leave to come to Court and kiss the Kings feet; which was granted him: He paid
his Homage to his Majesty, delivered him his Present which was very
Magnificent, and afterward made his Complement that the General of the
Musquetteers having by his order sent Royal Habits to all the Grandees of
Persia, even to the meanest Officer, had omitted the sending to him for seven
or eight Months, and after all had sent only by one of his Servants.

The King took it very ill, and declared to the General of the Musquetteers,
that his manner of proceeding did not please him. However his Majesty would not
ruin him altogether, having an esteem for him as being the Person that had
placed him upon the Throne. And therefore he spared him, as his Predecessors
had always done, in being gentle to those who brought 'em the first tidings of
their advancement; for they never put 'em to death, as being satisfied with
their disgrace and misfortune.

The General of the musquetteers was then at Court in this Condition of his
Affairs; but he could not continue long in that posture; when the death of one
of his Relations, or at least of one whom he so called gave him a fair
opportunity to retire with Credit. This pretended kindsman of his was called
Abdal Bek Chief Porter of the Haram or Palace of Women. The General therefore
as soon as he heard of his death, presented a Petition to the King, wherein he
set forth, that Abdal-Beck was his kinsman, that the Employment which he had
executed had continued in their Family from time to time, as it were
hereditary. Wherefore in consideration that the deceased Officer had left no
Sons to serve his Majesty in such a particular and ordinary Employment, he was
willing to lay down his Commission of General of the Musquetteers, and his
Right of sitting before his Majesty in public Assemblies, and that he should
think himself more happy to be employed in keeping the Gate of his Majesty's
Palace for the Women. The King, who for the reasons already alleged still
preserved some kind of Affection for him, granted his Request. And it was then
that he had conferred upon him the favor of keeping the Women's Palace-Gate, to
shelter him from the Tempest that threatened him; and thus he delivered himself
from the Intrigues of the Court.

This was he whom Habas II. had sent Ambassador to Aureng Zeb, King of the
Indies, after he came to be in quiet Possession of the Empire. We shall in its
proper place relate how he then carried himself, tho the famous M. Bernier, who
was then at the Court, when this Ambassador, appeared there speaks sufficiently
of it in his Works made public to the World, to satisfy the Readers Curiosity.

Upon this Sheik-Hali-Kaan was recalled from the War against the Yusbeks, where
he Commanded as General, to be advanced to the Charge of General of the
Musquetteers, which was a Noble Employment, as well as to all the rest to which
he was afterward raised. He is a Person of Courage, and an excellent Captain,
one of those old Heroes that rendered the Reign of Habas the Great so Glorious
and Triumphant. His Government of Chaldea was at the same time conferred upon
one of his Sons Soleimaan Kan, who is a Nobleman of Merit and Courage, and
worthy such an Illustrious Father.

The Lightning of Royal disfavour fell afterward upon Mirza-Sadec, which name
of Sadek in the Oriental Languages signifies Just, and is the same with Sadoc
among the Hebrews. He was Brother to Mirza-Ibraim already mentioned, and worse
then he; Vazier or Farmer-Royal of Fars or the ancient Persia. The Complaints
of Shiras at length threw him out of this Employment. The People had for
several years with hearty prayers to Heaven implored his Ruin, but could never
obtain it: they clamoured against his Robberies and Violences; whole crowds of
Petitioners thronged to Court with complaints against him; but his Presents and
his specious Letters frustrated all their Attempts. Nay, one of the principal
Occasions of the Dutch Embassy in the year 1666. was to complain of his
Vexations, and the stop which he gave to their Trade. All the World thought
that such a blow as that would have fetched his Head from his Shoulders; but he
fended it off by the help of a Sister which he had in the Women's Palace. So
that he was discharged with only a severe Reprimand which was sent him in a
Patent of which the Dutch themselves were the Messengers. At length this very
year so many fresh complaints came against him, that he could find no more
Evasions, neither would his pretenses avail any longer, though he plied the
Court still to the value of about thirty thousand pound; which they took, but
spared him never a whit the more. He was expelled from his Employment and all
his Goods Confiscated. It was believed at Court that his Estate would have
amounted to several hundred thousand pounds, but they were amazed when they
found that the Account rose to no more then 80200 l. Sterling in Gold and
Silver, which he had at home in his Coffers, six thousand four hundred pound in
Goods, Movables, Horses, Stuffs, Merchandise, and such other like Furniture
which was not for ordinary use. In his Treasurers Coffers was found seven
thousand pound in Silver Money, and eight hundred seventy five pound in Ducats
of Gold.

This crafty Lord long foresaw what then befell him; and therefore he had
conveyed away his Jewels, and what he had of most costly value, and the
greatest part of his ready Money; and had only left those Sums at home to dazzle
the Eye, and make the Court believe it was his whole Estate. But no body could
imagine it, and his Majesty sent into all Places belonging to his Jurisdiction
an express Order to make diligent search for all Goods and Money, or whatever
else might be thought to belong to the Offender, and put forth a Proclamation
for all to discover what they knew. The same was done at Ispahan: but
notwithstanding all that extraordinary diligence there was no more discovered
then about sixty thousand Crowns; besides Goods that were not moveable. The
King left him all the Furniture of his Palace: nor did he meddle with his
Wardrobe, nor with any thing that belonged to his Women, nor with any thing
that was for common use in his Offices and Stables. Beside, he gave him liberty
to enjoy a yearly Revenue of four thousand pound Sterling to maintain him shut
up in a Palace a little way distant from Shiras; whence he was not to stir
himself; but might receive the Visits of his Friends. His Children also were at
the same time put out of Favor, and lost their Employments.

After his Fall the King would not confer his Place upon any Lord, as being one
of the most gainful Employments in Persia, but sent to a certain Persian Lord
of an ancient Family, who resided at Shiras, whose name was Sefie-Kouli-Sultaan
a short Commission, under the Title of Governor pro tempore of the Province,
till he should think fit to supply the Place other ways.

We have told ye how the greatest part of those that fell into disgrace in the
Reign of Habas II. returned from their Exile, and were restored to favor, at
the beginning of the new Reign. In the number of these was Mirza Hadi one of
the most Learned Lords of Persia, able to instruct whoever would be desirous to
know whatever is of choicest Secrecy in that Empire, whether as to the
Situation of Places, as to History or Politics: and therefore it was that I
endeavored to benefit by his friendship and discourse. The Chief Minister to
the deceased King made out the Process against him, and had confined him to his
Palace in Ispahan; whence he never stirred, till after the death of that
Monarch. And in regard he often frequented the Court, and was in great
Reputation there, he was advanced to the Employment of Farmer-Royal of Kirmaan
or Caramania.

There was also living in Ispahan, some three years since, an ancient Indian
Princess, who was there detained a Prisoner. She was Sister to the last King of
Decan, and was called by the name of Saheb-Koud-shek, that is to say in the
Persian of the Indies, the Little Lady; to denote a second Princess, that has
another above her. This Lady was retired to Vijapour, and toward the end of her
days was desirous to make a Pilgrimage to Mecca, carrying along with her an
immense Treasure. In pursuance of this Pilgrimage she passed through Persia.
But Habas II. for reasons that never were yet well understood, having her in
his Power, would not permit her to go any farther, nor to return out of his
Dominions, tho she offered several times considerable Presents to obtain that
favor. The new Prince, and that year the New Soleimaan, did not show himself
so insensible of the Ladies Presents, as his Father had done, but condescended
to what she desired, and received from her a Treasure of Jewels of an
inestimable value.

For she took her time one day that the King passed by the House where she had
been lodged, and went forth her self with her Presents and her Petition. She
had also prepared a sumptuous Banquet to be made ready in the Court that
belonged to the House, and caused the Street to be spread with Cloth of Gold
for the King to ride over; and as he rode along, her Officers came and threw
under his Horses feet whole handfuls of money both Gold and Silver, to the
value of two thousand Crowns. Which is a piece of Pomp and Grandeur practiced
in Persia, when any one would honor the Prince after a more splendid and
obliging manner.

Toward the end of the year 1668. arrived in Persia a new Mission of Italian
Capuchins, sent by the Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith, for
Georgia. They were six, attended by two Lay Brothers; their Superior being
called Father Steven d' Ameria. They also brought a Letter from the Pope to the
King of Persia, of which I took a Copy in these words.

To the most Illustrious and most Potent King of the Persians CLEMENT IX. Pope.

ILlustrious and most Potent King; we wish you Health and the Light of Divine
Grace. Such is the Charity of the Roman Pontiff whom God, the Sovereign Creator
of all men, has bestowed upon 'em, that he does not believe there is any
Society upon Earth estranged from himself or his most tender cares. On the
other side he admires and embraces with a particular affection Probity,
Justice, and whatever other eminent Virtues, where ever they shine forth.
Therefore our Predecessors have always had a most particular esteem and
affectionate good will for the glorious Kings of Persia, but more especially
for your Highness so famous over all the Earth for being adorned with all the
splendor of virtuous Encomiums. And as we have no less high thought, and no
less an esteem of your Merit, we promise to our selves the same good will and
kindness for Us, as you had for Them. In confidence whereof we desire your
Majesty to grant your Protection to Father Stephen of Ameria, and the rest of
his Companions who are going into the Province of Georgia, not in pursuit of
their own Honor, but only for the Glory of God, and the Salvation of Souls.
And we beseech you to defend and shelter 'em by your Authority from the
Injuries of the Schismatics who follow the Ceremonies and Opinions of the
Greeks, to the end they may with freedom and unmolested employ themselves in
the duty of their Function. We desire and expect also from your signal Clemency
the same favor and protection for all those other Catholics that are
dispersed through the vast extent of the Kingdoms and Provinces under your
Dominion. Whom we recommend as far as in us lies, to your Royal Generosity and
Goodness. In recompense whereof we pray continually to God with all our hearts,
that his Omnipotent Right Hand may send your Highness a particular knowledge of
his Divine Truth; that he will pour upon you all manner both of Spiritual and
Temporal Blessings, and to grant you perpetual prosperity.

Given at Rome in the greater St. Mary's, under the Seal of the Fisher, March
8. 1668. and the first of our Pontificate.
We have already given an account in part of what the Cosaques did this year
upon the Caspian Sea, of the Commissioners which they sent to Court, with whom
the Council was not satisfied; what means were used to discover their
Intentions; and whether there were not some deceit concealed under that
Deputation. We shall here add the second Inroad which they made, and what spoil
they committed more in Persia, the same year 1668.

While they were therefore disputing at Ispahan whether they should take 'em
for Friends or Enemies; The Cosaques, whose Commissioners were now returning
back, as all that they had done was only to amuse the Persians (though they had
been treated with good words, and had received promises very advantageous for
their Colony) continued their design of plundering and pillaging all the
Maritime Regions of Persia to the East. To which purpose they quit Save, and
directing their March toward the more Eastern Provinces of the Caspian Sea,
they sailed seventy Leagues without being descried from the Land, and land at
Ferhabaad the Capital City of Mazenderaan. They landed in the disguise of
Merchants, went up and down the Market places, and into the Shops like People
that had no great skill in Traffic, and yet had something both to buy and to
sell. They let go their Ducats of Gold for five Shayet, which make not so much
as two Shillings, sold English Cloth for four Abasses, or five shillings six
pence the Ell. On the other side the Persians while this Trade lasted caressed
the Cosaques at a high rate, finding 'em such admirable Customers, and Chapmen
both together, and looked upon 'em as Cullies and Novices which their kind
Stars had brought among 'em: But the sixth day, continuing their Game, at the
hour prefixed among themselves, at what time they had scattered themselves in
several parts of the City to avoid suspicion, they drew their Swords, slew all
they met, plundered the Houses, and laden with Booty, after they had killed
above five hundred persons, they returned to their Vessels, lying still out of
ken at Sea.

The most considerable, and a loss not to be repaired, was the ruin of the
King's Palace, a most stately Pile, seated in the midst of the City, wherein
was kept a vast Treasure of Dishes and Basins of Porcellane, or China,
Cornaline, Agate, Coral, Amber, Cups of Crystal of the Rock, and other Rarities
without number, which those Barbarians either broke or carried away. They also
brake the great Haouse, or Tangi, being a Jasper Fountain covered with Plates
of Gold and erected within the Palace. Every time I think of the Magnificence
and Delightfulness of that place, where I was in the year 1666. I cannot but
lament its hard Fate; and had the Reader seen the Description which I have made
of it, he would acknowledge that such a wonder of Art deserved a kind of
perpetuity.

In Ferhabaad and the parts adjoining there are some few Christians still
remaining of that vast number which Habas the Great formerly brought in to
people that Country some sixty years ago, which has so much lessened their
Number, that there is not the sixtieth part of what there was before: and the
most part of these for worldly Interests have embraced the Mahumetan
Superstition. Those few Christians that remained knowing that the Cosaques were
likewise Christians, to save themselves from their fury, and their Houses from
being plundered, when they saw 'em coming, cried out Christous, Christous, and
the better to let 'em understand they were Christians signed themselves with
the sign of the Cross from head to foot, so that the Cosaques hearing 'em
invoke that adorable Name, and seeing how they crossed themselves, not only
spared their lives, but protected their Houses.

The Inhabitants of Ferhabaad, who had saved their lives by flight, returned
the next day betimes in the Morning, to pick up what was left of their Goods:
but while they were thus busily employed, the Cosaques landed a second time,
and now more greedy of humane Blood, than of Plunder, killed about seven
hundred, and took as many Prisoners, and then retired for good and all.

By this time Winter was come, which they resolved to spend in Persia, and to
that purpose they sought out for a Place where they might quarter together in
security. Now just against the City of Ferhabaad there lies a Peninsula, or
Tongue of Land that runs forward into the Caspian Sea about ten or eleven
Leagues. This place did abound in Hearts, wild Boars, wild Goats, and other
sorts of wild Venison: It is also full of Forests and fresh Water, nor does it
want any thing that is convenient for the support of Humane Life, and is
therefore a most convenient place for Habitation: The Persians call it
Mionne-Kelle or the Middle-siz'd Horn, thereby denoting a Tongue of Land that
runs out into the Sea; there it was that the Cosaques entrenched themselves. To
which purpose they made their Prisoners work day and night to dig a large
Trench about their Camp; and then with several great Trees pestered one within
another, and filled up with Turf, they raised a kind of a Bulwark, upon which
they planted their Badeliege or great Guns, for their better defense.

This was that which the Persians desired; for as soon as they understood they
were fortified in that place, the same year, notwithstanding the Winter season,
they attacked 'em, and being stronger by Land than the Cosaques, they beat 'em,
retook all their Prisoners, and constrained the Enemy to betake themselves to
their Vessels, with which, after they had roam'd about the whole Peninsula on
every side, they found at the farthest end a more advantageous Post, as being
defended by a Marsh, where they stopped with their Booty, and their little
Barks, at which time I came away for Europe.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A A Bouel-Kazi, a Tartarian Prince taken by the Persians, Page 115. their
civil usage of him, 116. makes his escape into his own Country, 117. his
gratitude, 118. Aga-Mubarek, Tutor to Hamzeh-Mirza second Son to Habas II. 8.
but much against his advancement to the Throne, 19. his Speech upon the debate,
20, 21. a great Favorite of Sefie II. 57. an animosity between him and the
High Chamberlain, 108. Ali, see Hali. Ambassador see Envoy and Ambassador.
Ardevil a Persian City of more than ordinary Sanctity, 69. Armenians hated by
the Persian Lord Chief Justice, 87. suffer great injustice fron
Hali-Kouli-Kaan, 92, 93, 94. Astrologers of great esteem in Persia, 13. 25. 43.
131, 132. Athemad-doulet, chief Minister of Persia, 13. his Speech upon the
choice of a new Emperor, 14, 15. Audience of the Dutch Envoy, 65. of the
English, 66. of the French, 72. Audit of Address, the Author of it grossly
mistaken, 49. Aureng-Zebe King of India keeps Spies in the Persian Court, 98.
his Ambassador affronted at the Court of Persia, 102. upon what motives
diverted from a War, 110.
B Balke, a petty Principality of Tartary, 115. Basra, corruptly Balzura, the
policy of the Basha there to preserve himself, 125. offers to become tributary
to the Grand Seignior, 126. which will not be accepted, 145. Bastinadoes
bestowed upon a Persian Nobleman, 140. what followed thereupon, 141.
Bisin-Allah, a Persian Acclamation, 15. Bokora, a petty Principality of
Tartary, 115. Bolluki, a people bordering on Persia, 136. abused by the
Governor of Kandaar, 137. their King slain, ibid.
C Calates or Vests presented by the King to his Noblemen, 70. Camp of the
Persian King, the manner of it, 12. Capuchin Friars, a Mission of them to
Georgia, 151. Carechme, a petty Principality of Tartary, 115. Character of
Habas the Second, 1. of Sefie Mirza, 6, 7. of Hamzeh Mirza, 8. of Koelar
Agasia, 25, of Hali-Kouli-Kaan, 121, 122. Cheik-Sefie the first of the Royal
blood of Persia, 69. Chemchir or a Persian Sword, the description, 41.
Christians kindly used by Habas II. 1. 58. Cities of the Persians of a peculiar
Sanctity, 69. Pope Clement his Letter to the Emperor of Persia, 15.
Clichs-Kaan one of the Persian Generals against the Yusbecks, 120. Coffins,
several made alike at the death of the Persian Emp. 68. Coin of the Persian
Emperor its Inscription, 52. Comet, its appearance, 134. the Astrologers
opinion of it, 135. Conspiracy of the two chief Physicians of Persia to prefer
the younger Son of the Persian Emperor, 9. in which the Prime Ministers join,
10. Speeches thereupon, 15. Coronation of the Persian Emperor, the Ceremonies
thereof, 42, to 48. resolved to be performed again, 132. Cosroes, a Prince of
Persia, his fall, 2. Cossaks invade Persia, 141. the occasion, 143. their
Ambassadors how received, 144. plunder Ferhabaad, 153. are defeated by the
Persians, 154. Council holden for election of a Successor to Habas II. 12, etc.
another of the Noblemen with the Emperor, 71, another where the French Envoy
has his Audience, 72. Convoy of the Persians surprised by the Yusbecks, 121.
D Dearth in Persia, and especially at Ispahan, 88. Death of Habas II. related
by the Eunuchs to the chief Ministers, 4. Dervicks, a sort of Mohammedan
Mendicant, 99. concerned with the Indian Spies, 100. punished, 101. Description
of the Emperors Apartment for Audience, 37. of the Imperial Throne, 39. of his
Crown, 40. of his Sword, 41. of his Dagger, ibid. of his Personage, 57.
Dhulbandt, erroniously Turbant, a description of that of the Persian Emperor,
40. Divaan Beki, Lord of the Council of Justice, 13. Dutch Envoy obtains
audience at the Persian Court, 65.
E Earthquake in Georgia, overturns great part of the City Tefflis, 126.
another destroys Shama-Ki, 127. Election of Sephie-Mirza, Emperor of Persia,
from 12, to 23. of a Messenger to carry him the tidings, 23, 24, 25. Ambassador
from India affronted at the Persian Court, 102. those from Muscovy, their
sneaking carriage, 142. slighted thereupon, ib. which gives occasion to an
Invasion from the Cossaks, 143. English Envoy his Audience at the Persian
Court, 66. Enouch-Kaan, King of Orquenge wars upon Persia, 119. submits, ibid.
invades the Persian borders, 120. Envoy from the Hollanders has Audience of
the Emperor, 64. the English has the same, 66. the French likewise, 72.
F Ferhabaad, the Capital City of Mezenderaan, plundered by the Cosaques, 153.
Sir Stephen Flower, the English Envoy at the Persian Court, 66. has Audience,
ibid. and 67. French Envoy has Audience at the Persian Court, 72.
G Gangher, or a Persian Dagger, its description, 41. Gemshed-Kaan Koular, a
perfidious Nobleman, 103. his Character, 104. Instances of his roguery, 106. he
is made Governor of Candaar, 109. his Insolences there, 136. shamefully put to
death, 140. his Personage, ibid. Georgia, the last King thereof how made a
Feudatary of Persia, 101. the Eldest Son of the Prince of it always grand
Provost of Ispahan, 101. Giulfa, the place of habitation for the Armenians in
Persia, 97. Guebres, or Persian Fire Worshippers, 98.
H Habas II. his Virtues and Character, 1. his death, 3. his last words, 4. his
cruelty, 11. kind to the Christians, 58, 59, 60. Habit of the Persian Emperor
when he first appeared in public, 57. Hakiem Bachi, the chief of the
Physicians, 13. Hali-Kouli-Kaan escapes out of custostody, 77. his reception at
Court, 77. highly advanced, 82. his method of easing the People in the time of
dearth, 89. his injustice to the Armenians, 93, 94, etc. his ill usage of Mirza
Ibrahim, 112. his death, 121. his Character and Personage, 122. Hamzeh-Mirza
Son to Habas II. 8. his Character, ibid. proposed for Emperor upon his Fathers
death, 15. begs heartily that his eyes may not be put out, 67. Hossein Basha,
petty Sovereign of Basra, 126. offers to become tributary to the Grand
Seignior, ibid. which is not accepted, 145.
I Ichigakasia-Bachi, chief of the Masters of the Footstool to the Throne, 14.
Imaan, a Persian Priest, 69. Imaan-Reza a Persian Saint, 69. Inscription on the
Coins of the new Emperor, 52. Instructions of the Dutch Envoy for his
Negotiation at the Persian Court, 63.
K. Kachan, a City of reputation for Sanctity, 69. Kalmachs, a Tartarian people
invade Persia, 123. Kand-dar, the Province subdued by Habas II. 1.
Koelar-Agasia, Lord of the Slaves, 13. his Character, 25. Kom, the Burial-place
of Habas II. 68. reputed among the holy Cities, 69. Kotbe, or Persian Prayer,
45. Kafer, the name given by the Persians to Idolaters and Christians, 135.
L M. de Lalain French Envoy his Audience, 72. Hubert de Laresse, Envoy from
the Hollanders to the Emperor, 56. his negotiation at the Persian Court under
Habas II. 61, 62. and under Sefie II. 64. his Audience, 65. Letter of the
Persian Lords to Sefie-Mirza, upon having Elected him Emperor, 27, 28. of the
Spies in the Persian Court to the King of India, 98. Letters of Credence of the
Cosaque Ambassadors not to be uncypher'd, 144. of the Great Duke of Muscovy to
the King of Persia, 145. of the Pope to the same, 151.
M Mahamed-Kouli-Kaan, a great Enemy to the Christians, 87. Bastinado'd, 140.
made Governor of Candaar, 141. Mahamed Saleh, a famous Astrologer, 25. Meihter
or High Chamberlain of Persia, 3-14. Message of the Persian Noblemen to the
Emperor, 67. his Answer, 68. Mer-Atever-Bachi, Grand Esquire to the Emperor,
13. Metched an extraordinary holy City among the Persians, 69.
Mir-tchekar-Bachi, Prince of the Chase, 13. Mirza the signification of it, 8.
Mirza-Baker Chief of the Astrologers, 25. Mirza-Hali-Riza, a learned Persian
Nobleman, 43. imprisoned by Habas II. and released by Sefie II. 78. Mirza
Hachem a foul-tongu'd person, 74. out of the Kings favor, 76. his death, 77.
Mirza-Koudchek, Physician to Habas II. 5. confined, and his Estate confiscated,
70. Mirza-Ibrahim, Vazier of Media, 104. how cheated by the General of the
Slaves, 106. his usage at his arrival at Ispahan, 112, 113. when almost ruined
he gets leave to retire, 127. Mirza-Refie, a learned Persian, 42. his Oration
at the Coronation, 45. Mirza-Sadek his fall, 149. Mirza-Sahid, Physician to
Habas II. 5. confined, and his Estate confiscated, 70. Mission of Capuchins to
Georgia, 151. Moubarek-Bached, a Persian Complement. 70. Moulouk, the meaning
of the word, 115. Multani a sort of Banians, 98. the principal of them
apprehended, 100. Munckiziim-Bachi, the Lord of the Astrologers, 13. ordered to
accompany the tidings of his Election to Sefie-Mirza, 25. Muscovite
Ambassadors slighted at the Persian Court, 142. the Great Dukes Letter to the
King, 145.
N Nazir Eunuch, see Aga Mubarek. Nazir, the signification of the word, 8.
Nazir, or Seer, the Superintendant General of the Royal Revevenues, 13.
Passionate for the preferment of Hamzeh-Mirza to the Throne, 17. not honored
as other Noblemen, 17. his abject Submission, ibid. gains his pardon, 72.
cheated by the General of the Slaves, 107. Nekaat-Kanum the first Wife of Habas
II. 6. her extreme passion upon the Message from the Lords to her Son, 31, 32.
Niazouk, the Comet so called. Noblemen of Persia assemble to choose a new
Emperor, 12, etc. their Message to him, 67. their Arrival and Reception at
Court, 70, 71. Nour-Nissa-Kanum, the second Wife of Habas II. 8.
O Orders for the Commissioners who carried to Sephie Mirza the News of his
being elected Emperor, 26, etc. Orquenge, a petty Principality of Tartary,
115. a Prince of that Country taken Prisoner by the Persians, ibid. and his
usage among them, 116.
P Pehri Rocksar Begum restored to favor, and her Husband preferred, 83.
Physicians to the Emperor of Persia. their case upon the death of their
Master, 5. they complot to raise the younger Son to the Throne, 9. they are
confined, and their Estates confiscated, 70. Popes Letter to the Persian
Emperor, 151. Portraitures of the Emperor and great Officers taken by the
Indian Spies, 98. Prayer or Speech at the Coronation of the Emperor, 45.
Present of the Dutch Envoy to the General of the Musquetteers, 66. of the
English to the Emperor, ibid. and to the General of the Musquetteers, 67. of
the French to the Emperor, 72. of Mirza Ibrahim to Hali-Kouli-Kaan, 113. of
the Indian Lady Sakeb-Koudshek to Solomon III. 151.
R Religion of Mahomet divided into the Shia and the Sunni Factions, 119.
Revenues of Persia decrease under the management of the young K. 128.
Sepher-Kouli-Kaan the Princely Slave of the Armies, 101. Sephie, the
signification of the word, 48. Shama Ki, a City almost Ruined by an Earthquake,
127. Sha-Naavaz Kaan, Prince Governor of Gorgia, 101. Sheik-Hali-Kaan, one of
the Persian Generals against the Tusbeks, 120. advanced to be General of the
Musquetteers, 148. Shia, the name of that Sect of Mahometans of which are the
Persians, 119. Soliman, the new name of the Persian Emperor, 134. the original
and meaning of it, 133. Sophy, a word used by Historians, etc by mistake, 49.
Speech of the prime Minister for the promotion of Hamzeh-Mirza to the Throne,
14, 15. of Aga-Mubarek against it, 20, 21. of the Messenger who brought the
news to Sephie-Mirza of his being Elected Emperor, 34. of Mirza-Refia at the
Coronation, 45. of the Emperor of Persia and the Dutch Envoy at his Audience,
65. of the Emp. and the English, 66, 67. of the same and the French, 72, 73. of
the Emperor and Hali-Kouli-Kaan upon his Arrival, 80. of the same Lord upon
another occasion, 129. of the prime Minister to the Cossque Ambassadors. Spies
in the Persian Court from the King of India, 98. Stephen d' Ameria Superior of
a Mission of Capuchins to Georgia, 151. Sunni the name of that Mohammedan Sect
of which the Yusbecks and Turks are, 119, 135.
T. Taag, the Diadem or Crown of the Persian Emperor, 40. Talaar Tavieleh, the
Emperors Apartment for Audience, 36. the description of it, 37. Tefflis, the
Capital City of Georgia, a good part of it overturned by an Earthquake, 126.
Temuraz-Kaan, the last King of Georgia, 101. Terviet-Kaan, Ambassador from the
King of India, 102, Toefenktchi, the Lord of the Musquetteers, 13. chosen to
carry the tidings to Sefi-Mirza of his being Elected Emperor 25. and his
Character, ibid. a great Favorite of the Emperor, 57. 73. loses his Love and
retires, 148. Tshehel Setoon, or the Hall with forty Pillars, 132. Tumult in
Ispahan, 84, 85. Turbant, see Dhulbandt. Turks or Turkmans, whence they came,
124.
V. Valie-Neamet, its signification, 34. Vateaa-Noviez, the Notary of
occurrences, 13. Vazier, the meaning of the Word, 73. Vazier of Mazenderan see
Mirza-Hachem. Vests given by the Persian Emperor to his Noblemen, 70, 71.
W Wine prohibited to be sold, 130. Wives, the choice of them by the Kings of
Persia, 130. Women why extremely afflicted upon the death of the Emperor, 3.
the constant Companions of Sephie, 130.
Y Yus and Yusi, the meaning of the words, 115. Yusbecks a People of Tartary
invade the Persian Territories, 114. an account of them, 115. a great defeat of
them, ibid. they submit to Habas II. 119. make an irruption into Bactria, 120.
surprise a Persian Convoy, 121.
Z Zachara, an Armenian Merchant, 91.

FINIS.

