THE CHARGE OF A TORY PLOT MAINTAINED, IN A DIALOGUE BETWEEN THE OBSERVATOR,
Heraclitus AND AN Inferior Clergyman At the TOWZER-TAVERN.

WHEREIN The First Discourse published under that Title is Vindicated from the
Trifling Animadversions of the Observator, and the Accusation justified.

By the same Author.

LONDON, Printed for N. L. to be sold by Richard Janeway, 1682.

TO THE READER.
I Hope it will not be construed any reflection upon the Church of England,
that I introduce a Clergyman into familiarity with Heraclitus and Observator.
For though it is true, A man is known by his company; and therefore such as are
chary of their credit, would be very shy of conversing with two such infamous
Libellers: Yet the Clergy of the complexion of our Dialogizer, do rather glory
in such conversation; And the more sober and truly Reverend may do well to
correct the scandalous Clubbs of our Coffee-house- and Tavernhaunting Parsons,
before they censure my exposing them. If he speak not overmuch Reason, that is
not my fault, but the Observator's, whose Echo my Clergyman is. As for the
Observator himself, he discourses after his manner, with little sense but great
confidence. But Heraclitus I have engaged partly to Act another's Part; which
may not be very absurd: for he that can laugh and weep together, may well
enough represent both Whig and Tory in one Person, doing all by Fits as the
fancy takes him.

The Discourse is not only levelled against the Observator's Animadversions on
The Tory Plot, but against all the Pamphlets of that Nature, that he has ever
writ, or shall write. For he has a certain Set of Arguments that are
calculated Indifferently for all occasions, that is, truly for none at all;
just as becomes Poor Robin's Man: the Master uttering his Observations by
Wholesale once a Year at the proper Season, and his Man His by Retail three or
four times a Week, or oftener as Customers come in. The truth is, He Is every way
so contemptible, that no man of sense, that values his Credit or his Hours,
would take any notice of him, if the Faction for want of a better did not make
him their Champion: and so it may be but honest Policy to take the advantage of
Encountering so Doughty a Combatant. But the Reader, when he finds Heraclitus
upbraiding him with betraying their Cause, may deem me too ungrateful, thus to
vilify one that has contributed so much to my undertaking. For I must confess,
he has intimated plainly enough, that he is at my Service to appear as an
Evidence to prove A Tory Plot: But for all that, I shall not court him, but
rather advise him to keep on that side he is; for the matter of Fact is so
notorious, that there will be but very small Encouragement for Witnesses; and
every one must live.

If any one shall yet clamor I have not sufficiently justified the Charge, I
am confident he speaks not his conscience, but designs only to egg me on to
press so close on the Heels of Truth, as to have my Brains beat out. But let
him set his heart at rest: for it is not so hard to distinguish their feigned
Loyalty and treacherous devotion to the Church, from that which is genuine; but
that a man may perfectly delineate the one, without giving one rude touch upon
the other. And when it shall be as easy to bring the Plotters to condign
punishment as to prove the Conspiracy, they shall have no reason to complain of
the shortness of the Evidence.

A DIALOGUE BETWEEN OBSERVATOR, Heraclitus, AND AN INFERIOR CLERGYMAN (At the
Towzer Tavern) concerning The Tory Plot, etc.
Herac. GEntlemen, I hope I do not hinder any business?


Observe. No, no, Sir; we are very glad of so good company. For having received
some Contribution-money from this Gentleman to day, I only invited him to a
glass of Wine, to pay him my thanks, and to drink my Benefactors good health.


Inf. Cl. Worthy Sir, your acceptance is sufficient. But I hope when our design
is accomplished, your services will be better rewarded, and your merits procure
you the Guidance of men above my degree.


Herac. Yes of my conscience, if ever we are so happy as to have a Catholic
King, I shall not doubt, but to see Mr. L. Archbishop of Canterbury, for he
takes more pains than all the Jesuits put together.


Inf. Cl. That preferment were indeed but suitable to his deserts; but you know
he is incapacitated for that by being married.


Herac. Puh! is the Bond of Marriage stricter than the Vow of perpetual
Virginity? and yet how ordinary is it for his Holiness to dispense with that?
Though in this case there will be no need of the Pope's kindness; for the Civil
Law will serve Mr. L's turn, according to which, Impotency makes a Nullity. And
I Will warrant you his young Wife will be glad enough of a brisker Husband.


Obs. Come Sir, you have got such a habit of Raillery, that you exercise even
upon your Friends; but I know your humor, and cannot be angry.


Herac. Troth Sir, I must be merry. But no more of that. Pray Gentlemen, what
News?


Obs. Faith I have hardly any time to listen after them, these Libelling
Rascals find me so much work. And there is the Plaguey Tory Plot has kept me
doing so long, that I am I know not how much behind-hand with 'em.


Inf. Cl. Indeed Sir, we are much indebted to you for the pains you have taken
with that damned Libel; and for the hints you have given us to take off the
imputations it casts on Loyal Protestants.


Herac. 'Pox on it, it was too close and serious for me to meddle with; and, but
that something was to be said, Observator had even as good have let it alone
too, as, if you will give me leave to personate a Whig a little, I Will show you.


Obs. As for the Whigs, they are such dull souls, any thing will confute them:
and our Friends that are privy to the Plot, know, that nothing can be said to
the purpose, to take off the suspicion; nor is there much need to palliate the
business any longer, now it is just come to perfection. But however Mr. Whig,
let us see what you can say against my Observations?


Herac. We understand one another, and therefore freedom can be no offense.
Have at your Observations then between Jest and Earnest. In the first place (
N. 130.) you find fault that he calls Addresses needless, (seeing they are but
repetitions of the Oath of Allegiance) and say it is as needful to repeat that
Oath as Sacraments and Prayers. Now you know that Baptism is but once
administered, and therefore can be no Instance for your turn; and as for the
repetition of the Lord's Supper, you of all men should not make use of such an
Argument, that could neglect it for seventeen or twenty years together, and the
public Prayers in like manner; (but for Closet-Prayer indeed, I can say
nothing.) So that by your own practice you confess Addresses needless.


Obs. This is damned close! but however I could easily answer it, if I durst
own going to Prayers to the Queens Chapel, and receiving the Body of Christ
from my Confessor.


Herac. In the second place you are too Barefaced in affirming, That if the
matter of a Law be Controvertible, the Subject is not to dispute either the
Authority of it or his Obedience.]


Inf. Cl. Why Sir, this is no more than we have been preaching these twenty
years.


Herac. Pardon me Sir, if I say you mistake. For I never knew you affirm more,
than that a Law can make a thing that is indifferent in its own nature, to
become necessary as to practice. But the Observator extends this to all things
Controvertible, which comprehends all the Articles of Faith owned by the
Catholics and rejected by the Church of England, Worship of Images, praying
for the Dead, etc. In a word, whatsoever is Controverted betwixt the Catholics
and Heretics.


Obs. Well, but you know when I writ that, I personated a Protestant; and those
have condemned such Tenets.


Herac. Ha, ha, he! What, are they therefore no longer Controvertible? Why, the
Church has as well condemned the Protestant Tenets; will the Protestants
therefore under a Popish Government never controvert such Tenets more? I wish
you could persuade 'em to it, and then a Catholic Successor would make short
work, for, as you say, The King only is the Government. (Numb. 131.) You are
likewise too open, when you say, That you can name at least a dozen Sets of
Dissenters that are more Diabolical Heretics than the Papists.] You know the
most learned Doctors of the Reformed Religion have always held the Pope to be
Anti christ, and the Church of Rome to be Idolatrous; and the King-killing
doctrine is avowed by none but our selves.


Obs. Puh! you would have me write to no purpose at all; must not I train up my
Charge to prefer Popery before Presbytery; and how shall I do that, if I do
not give the Schismatics a wipe now and then?


Herac. Well, let that pass. But when you come to speak against the Bill of
Exclusion, why took you no more pains to prove it unlawful?


Obs. Why, have I not done it sufficiently? As to his Precedents, I have told
him, ( N 131*) That nothing is therefore well done, because it has been done;
and it is to be supposed that none of his Precedents were justifiable.


Inf. Cl. Yes, yes, it is best arguing ex concessis.


Obs. And as to the point of Religion, I do not read of any Bills of Exclusion
among the Primitive Christians. (ibid.)


Herac. Admirable! for it is to be supposed, that the Emperors and Senate of
Rome were Primitive Christians.


Obs. And then I have proved it plainly unlawful by this, That if any
Parliament in Christendom shall preach any other Doctrine of Obedience to
Magistrates, than what our Savior and his Apostles have taught us, I am afraid
that Parliament, without repentance, will go to the Devil, ( ibid.)


Herac. I wish they send no body thither before them. But where lies the Logic
of this Argument?


Obs. Why Sir, you very well supposed for me before, that the Emperor and
Senate were primitive Christians; and now give me leave to suppose for my self,
that first our Savior, and after him S. Peter were Emperors, and the rest of
the Apostles the Senate; and we do not find that ever they attempted to exclude
Tiberius or Nero or any other from the Throne because they were Heathens, and
those sure were as bad as Papists.


Herac. 'Pshaw! but part of this Supposition is too gross. For our Savior
says, that his Kingdom was not of this world: and that he came not to divide
or dispose of Inheritances; which implies, rather than denies, that such whose
kingdom is of this world, may dispose of Inheritances. But as for S. Peter
indeed, if we may guess at his power and quality by the Pope's his
Successour's, he was Universal Monarch; and if he had thought it lawful, might
not only have excluded an Heathen Successor; but from his plenitude of power,
have deposed the present Heathen Possessor, and given the Crown to a Christian.
Which because he did not do, your Argument indeed is very cogent, That no power
on Earth can hinder any man from coming to the Crown in his course, be he as
bad as the Devil.


Obs. Look you there! now I see you conceive me.


Inf. Cl. Yes, and as to the Apostles that made up the Senate, you have their
opinions plain in their writings: Submit your selves to every ordinance of man
-- -- whether it be to the King as supreme: Obey them that have the rule over
you: Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and Powers, to obey
Magistrates. And abundance of such like commands we have. All which make it
clear, (seeing the words are general) that Emperor and Senate, King and
Parliament and all must obey, submit and give way to the presumptive heir. For
seeing dispersed Jews and the meanest of the people are forewarned from
rebelling against their lawful Sovereigns; it follows, a fortiori, that the
King and Parliament cannot exclude any man from the Succession.


Herac. Indeed Sir, I think it is rather a debiliori: and, upon my soul, if the
Whigs argued at this rate, we should call it perfect Cant, and make sport
enough with it. But however such Arguing may do pretty well out of the pulpit,
for it looks like Atheism, Schism and Irreligion to question or dispute any
thing delivered there. Well Mr. L. I see a word is enough to the wise, you need
but give the hint, and your Charge have it presently.


Obs. Yes, yes, my Observations are their Common places, and I must leave them
to improve them into Argument, for I have no time for that, nor does my talent
much lie that way. But to go on: In the last place I prove the Bill of
Exclusion unlawful, because the King, Lords and Commons can no more justify an
Unrighteous action than a private man. (ibid.). Now Sir, supposing the Bill
unrighteous, it is plain they cannot pass it.


Herac. Well then your Argument lies thus:

If the passing the Bill of Exclusion be an unrighteous action, the King, Lords
and Commons cannot pass it.

But such passing is an Unrighteous Action.

Therefore, etc.


Obs. Just so: for look you, get but the main point in question once granted,
and my life for it, you win the cause.


Herac. Well, these hypothetical syllogisms are almost as serviceable as the
Doctrine of probable opinions; the first to inform the reason, the latter to
guide the practice. But what now if one should not grant you, that the passing
of such a Bill were an Unrighteous action?


Obs. If men will not believe the Apostles and primitive Christians, I cannot
help it. But pray let us hear what you can say in the case.


Herac. Faith I shall say little in the case, seeing there is more said already
than I see well answered. But this I will add: You Will grant me the King can do
no wrong.


Obs. Yes, that I will.


Herac. Then I say, I cannot see how his having the advice and consent of Lords
and Commons should make him do wrong. For to me it seems indifferent as to
that, whether the King do a thing from his own mere motion and science, or by
the advice of his Privy Council, or of his Parliament. Now Sir, to do wrong, or
to do an unrighteous action, as you term it, are all one.


Obs. Hanged, my mistake was, to bring the King into the Argument; for if I had
only said Lords and Commons, I had hit it. But now I think on it, it is not the
Pope and Council, but the Pope alone, that is infallible; and if I durst own my
self a Papist, this would help me to make it out.


Herac. It would so, but the necessity of your dissembling that, hinders you
from making the best of your Argument. However I am sure you are right in that
which you instance in, That it would be an unrighteous action for the King,
Lords and Commons to put a Man to death for refusing to swallow forty Thousand
Black Bills: For no Power in Heaven or Earth can oblige a man to that which is
impossible. But then what is this to the Bill of Exclusion; or where lies the
parallel?


Obs. Now I see you are dull: Id possums quod jure possumus. The first is
naturally impossible, and the latter morally. The first cannot be done, because
it cannot; and the latter, because it ought not.


Herac. Here are two faults in Logic, first, transitus a genere ad genus, and
then petitio principii. For you first pass from a moral to a natural action,
and then you are at your old way of supposing the thing in question. But
besides, this is nothing to the purpose; for the dispute was, about what the
King, Lords and Commons could do; and now you come to what a man can or can not
do. For I see nothing to the contrary, but the King and Parliament may pass the
Bill of Exclusion, though a man cannot swallow 40000 black Bills.


Obs. Come I warrant you would tie me up to the Pedantry of the Schools: I hate
insisting too long upon one thing, for that does but confound a man: I love a
touch and away.


Herac. Yes Sir, you are excellent at that: And thus you prove notably, That
Parliaments are no essential part of the Government, for if that were so, in
the Intervalls of Parliament there were no longer a Government. ( N. 131) And
I Will give you such another, The Common Council are no essential part of the
Government of the City, for if that were so, in the Intervalls of Common
Councils there would be no longer a Government. Now Sir, this Argument will not
down with Citizens, nor yours with any man else. For hey'l be apt to
distinguish between the Government, and the administration of it. Now the
Government (or more properly the Governors) are the King and Parliament,
without whose joint Authority no Law can be established. But the putting these
Laws in execution, or administration of the Government, that indeed is in the
Kings hand, or such as he will commit it to. And till an Order of the King in
Council shall be as valid as an Act of Parliament, I doubt we shall not get it
believed that the King alone is the Government. But enough of this. In the next
place I do not well like your fastening the faults of the King's Ministers upon
the King. ( N. 130.)


Obs. Why, do you not know the mystery of that? I have a double end in it:
First, to get the Libellers punished; and then to cast the odium of all
Maladministration upon the King. For you know well enough we care not what
scandals and suspicious we draw upon the King, so we can but preserve the
Duke's esteem. And hence I say, that the pretended devolution of an ill thing
done, from the King to his Ministers, is as ridiculous, as to excuse a man that
commits a Murder, by crying he was set on. (ibid.)


Herac. So then, you will have the King responsible both for his own faults,
and for theirs also that advised him to them. This will do the King's business,
I Will warrant him. And yet it may be very serviceable Doctrine for a Successor:
as thus: All the faults of his Ministers will lie upon him; and seeing he
cannot be called to account, the greatest faults shall pass unpunisht, and so
no man will be afraid of serving his pleasure, and then hey for arbitrary
Government! However since you are the Champion for the present Government, it
seeems but a quaint way of maintaining the King's reputation, by devolving
those faults upon Him, that the Whigs are content to fasten upon his Ministers
only: but you have told me of the policy of it, and I am satisfied.


Obs. Well, is there any thing else you can object against?


Herac. How do you make it out that Protestants may not as well exclude a
Papist from the Crown, as Papists a Protestant?


Obs. Thus: Either the Papists do Well in it, or Ill: If the former, they are
not to be blamed; if the latter, they are not to be imitated. (ibid) And this
Dilemma I defy any Whig of 'em all to Answer.


Herac. Soft ^ little. For I think it not hard to make out, though the Papists
are to be blamed, yet the Protestants may law fully do the same thing.


Obs. Pray let us hear you, for methinks that sounds somewhat odd.


Herac. My enemy assaults me and endeavors to Murder me; that is ill done in
him: I kill him in my own defense; that is well or lawfully done by me.


Obs. That Is true: but how can you apply this to the Case in question?


Herac. Thus: The Papists are the Assailants, who if they can help it, will
neither let a Protestant King enjoy his Crown, nor Protestant Subjects their
Estates or Lives. Such King and Subjects may therefore lawfully unite and
combine for their mutual defense and preservation; and make sure of him (or
them) whose prevailing is sure to be their overthrow. For if it be lawful for
the Subjects to defend the King and Government established; and for the King to
secure the Estates and Lives of his Subjects; I do not see how it should be
unlawful to disable or prevent any man from destroying them.


Inf. Cl. But we must not do ill that good may come of it.


Herac. Nor we must not do well that ill may come of it; if indeed it be doing
well, to let one cut my King's, mine own and my Neighbors throat, when I can
hinder it.


Inf. Cl. Well, but we should trust Providence.


Herac. We should trust providence indeed with a witness, if we should believe,
it would protect us whether we would or no. It Is as bad to tempt providence as
to distrust it. For my part, I think Miracles are too rare now adays to be
depended on; and therefore making use of lawful means, I do not take to be any
distrusting of providence: nor does it appear that the means in question are
unlawful, any further, than supposing them so, makes them so.


Obs. Now you act the Whig to the life; for, demonstrate a thing never so
plainly, they are so obstinate, you shall never convince them.


Herac. They Are very refractory fellows I must confess. But have you not
something somewhere concerning the Bill of Exclusion's reaching the King?


Obs. Oh yes: it is N. 131. If the Exclusion should pass, it would manifestly
show, that the Government were outwitted; for it would reach the King as well
as the Duke.


Herac. Well, I see the King and the Government are still convertible terms
with you, signifiying one and the same thing. But methinks the King is in a
fine case betwixt you and the Whigs (for that may stand well enough for the
House of Commons) For they cry, the King's person, etc. cannot be safe without
the Exclusion; and you, that he cannot be safe with it. But why do not you
prove your assertion, as they have pretended to do theirs?


Obs. Why, though I do it not in this very place, yet look but in the page
before, and I have done it: It Is but drawing of one Stone out of the building
many times, that brings the whole fabric upon your head] Just so, remove but
the Duke, and the King cannot stand.


Herac. But there is an old rule, That similitudes illustrate, but do not prove.
And why should not the King stand, though the House fall? But now for my part,
I think the Whigs speak reason; for seeing the King is reputed an Heretic by
the Catholics, and when he is removed, they have hopes of a Popish Successor,
He is apparently in double danger, both as he is taken for an Heretic, and so
it may be no sin to murder him; and also because in their opinion he keeps a
better man from the Crown, and one that has more right to it. And besides, the
Whigs still affirm, (and you dare not deny it) that for these reasons there
were several that actually undertook the Job, and I know not that their designs
or principles are yet changed. But I care not for meddling with these
Edge-tools: let us pass to the power and privileges of Parliament; it is safe
enough to speak freely there, for mortui non mordent.


Obs. As for the power of Parliaments, The House of Commons are as much
subjects to the King jointly at severally (N. 131.) They are made choice of by
subjects, to represent as subjects. Their Commission is Temporary, and limited
to the Ends for which they were called and chosen: And those Ends and Powers
must be circumscribed by the Qualifications and Capacities of those that chose
them: for the case is the same as betwixt a Trustee and his Principal. N. 135.


Herac. The sum of what you say is this, That the House of Commons have no
more power, than those that chose them. Now I am not of your mind: Nor is there
any correspondence between Freeholders and a House of Commons, and a Principal
and his Trustee. For a Principal can both pitch upon the person and limit the
Power of his Trustee: but so cannot the Freeholders, of their Representatives
in Parliament. For though they elect the Persons, yet the Power is from the
Law; and can neither be enlarged nor abridged by the Electors. You know, no
subject has power over the Life or Estate of his fellow-subject: And yet when
twelve are elected or nominated by the Sheriff, they have a greater power than
the King himself in depriving a man of either; which they have not from their
Elector, but from the Law.


Obs. No, but they have their power from the King, whose Minister the Sheriff
is.


Herac. If we should grant that, it would come still to the same thing; for the
King must owe it to the Law, that he can give such a power. For if he had it
absolutely of himself, he might himself adjudge any man to death that he thinks
deserves it, which you know he cannot do.


Obs. Well, but what is this to the business?


Herac. It Is only the very same case. For as the King gives the Sheriff power
to nominate the Jurors, who after their Impannelling have a power, which
neither he that nominated them gave them, nor themselves have singly and apart:
so by the several Writs directed to be proclaimed by the Sheriffs, Bailiffs,
etc. the King gives the people a power to Elect Members for Parliament, who
being returned, and assembled in the House, are by the Law and Constitution of
the Government invested in a power which neither their Electors have, nor
themselves had before they were so assembled. They have not such a power indeed
as Jurors have, but they have a power that is proper and peculiar to them, AS
they are one of the three Estates in Parliament.


Obs. Well, but with all this, what kind of power is this these Commons have,
seeing the King is the SOLE Sovereign, and they are only to do their part
toward the furnishing of Materials for New Laws where they are Defective? (N.
135.)


Herac. The King indeed is a Monarch, and that is as much as sole Governor;
not absolutely, but in a limited sense and suo modo. He Is sole Governor as to
the Administration, not sole in Legislation. For I do not think the Lords and
Commons to be only Laborers to serve up Materials to the King to build new
Laws withal, but (to pursue your Metaphor) they are Builders as well as He.


Obs. How can that be? for let them Vote and Pass their Hearts out, all
signifies nothing without Le Roy le veult, or Soit fait come il est desire.


Herac. It Is true, the King has a Negative Voice; but consider it well, and
it is no more than what either House have. For let the Commons pass a Bill, and
the Lords can reject it; and on the contrary; though the rejecting House know
that the King so much favor the Bill, that he would most certainly pass it
into an Act, if they would but give their consent to it. So that it is evident
the consent of either House is as necessary in order to the making of an Act,
as the King's is. And indeed the usual preface to all Acts evidences this
plainly, viz. Be it Enacted by the King's most Excellent Majesty, by and with
the advice and CONSENT of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons
in Parliament Assembled, and by the AVTHORITY of the same. Here you have the
Consent and Authority of the two Houses linked with the King's. Seeing
therefore part of the power of Making Laws is in the Commons Assembled in
Parliament, and they have no such power out of Parliament, but can then only
Obey them; it is plain they are not in all respects as much subjects jointly as
severally, unless to make Laws and obey them be the same thing. Nor do I know
to what purpose you should so much insist upon this point, unless you intend it
as a bait to catch some fool with, that would be nibbling at the disparaging of
the King's Prerogative: (as you speak in another case of the Plot, N. 130.)


Obs. Why, that is the bottom on it, and I hope I shall catch some or other.


Herac. Well, enough for the Power, let us pass to the privileges of
Parliament. What do you think of them?


Obs. As to the Power, Privileges, and freedom of English Parliaments; tell me
what it is first, and what they are; and I Will give you my Answer. The four Inns
of Court them selves are not able to determine what they are ( N. 132.) I had
rather forty times the King should lay me by the heels without showing cause
for it, than a House of Commons; and be a Slave to an Imperial Prerogative,
than to a popular privilege. N. 135.


Herac. You were once indeed pretty near being laid by the heels; but all the
cunning's in catching. But what signifies it what you had rather? I think there
is no necessity to be made slaves either to prerogative or privilege, which
are both useful and wholesome enough when they do not exceed their bounds. Now
seeing neither you nor your four Inns of Court can tell what these privileges
are, or upon what they are bottomed, I Will tell you my opinion. I think they
stand much upon the same terms with Prerogative, part of which is confirmed by
express Law, and part has no other foundation, but Prescription; (the Kings and
Queens of this Realm having exercised such a power in such and such cases, time
out of mind:) and this part of the Prerogative I look to be as firm as the
other. For prescription or Common usage, (time out of mind) is Common Law in
all cases. Nor is there any reason why the Sovereign should not enjoy the
benefit of that Maxim as well as the meanest subject, nor why the House of
Commons should not enjoy it as well as either. It Is true, both Prerogative and
Privilege may be strained too far, or something may be called so, that is not
so: but shall we therefore deny there are any such things, or turn them into
ridicule? It signifies little what you shall deny to be privilege, or I to be
prerogative: for I doubt the King will think himself a more competent Judge of
the one, and the Parliament of the other.


Obs. Let them think what they please, but it does not stand with the
Constitution of this Government to suppose them to be competent Judges of their
own privileges: For it is an abandoning of the very essentials of Church and
State to their Mercy. What if they should seize upon the Militia; the King' s
Magazins and Shipping; Levy Arms, coin Money, etc. and tell ye all this is done
by privileges of Parliament? It would be no more than what we have seen and
suffered already under the same pretense. Though I do not say that since the
damned Apostasy of Forty One, and the period of that accursed Train of
Rebellions, we have labored under Many Abuses of that kind, N. 135.


Herac. Well, this Forty one is (...), excellent at a dead lift. It Is a Fac
totum, the Philosophers stone, a Panaceia, it is good for every thing. Now do
not poor I Mr. Whig know in the world what to say. But however I am resolved to
stand to my tackle, and see what can be said; and will maintain, that though
the Parliament be held to be the sole competent Judges of their own
privileges, this is neither against the constitution of the Government, nor do
Church and State lie at their mercy for all the Apostasy of Forty One. You
will grant me that it is necessary to all Secular Government, that there should
be a supreme Power, from whence there should be no Appeal; and that in Absolute
Monarchies, this is the Sovereign only; but in Limited, the highest or supreme
Court.


Obs. What, I warrant you will be for Mr. Prynn's Sovereign Power of Parliaments?


Herac. No, hold there; I am not for a Parliament's usurping a Power over the
King and invading his Prerogative: I only affirm this, that beyond the High
Court of Parliament there lies no Appeal.


Obs. Well, but Appeals are only made to the House of Lords, which is a Court
of Record, and of Judicature; but what is this to the House of Commons?


Herac. It Is as much, for my purpose, to the one as to the other. For though
they be two Houses, they are but one Parliament, and have community of
privileges. And originally they were but one House. This, Sir Edw. Cook, while
he was Speaker of the House of Commons in 35 Eliz. has made out for me, At
first we were all one House and sat together, but the Commons sitting in
presence of the King and amongst the Nobles disliked it, and found fault that
they had not free liberty to speak. And upon this reason, that they might speak
more freely, being out of the Royal sight of the King, and not amongst the
great Lords so far their Betters, the House was divided and came to sit
asunder. A bold and worthy Knight at the time when this was sought, (the King
desiring a reason of this their request, and why they would remove themselves
from their Betters) answered shortly, That his Majesty and the Nobles being
every one a great person represented but themselves; but the Commons though
they were but inferior men, yet every one of them represented a thousand of
men. And this Answer was well allowed of. But now though we be divided in Seat,
be we therefore divided Houses? No; for if any writ of Error be brought, as you
shall see a notable Case in 22 E. 3. this Writ must be returned in Parliament,
that is, to the whole House, and chiefly to the Upper House, for We are but a
Limb of the House. Never any Man saw a writ returnable in the Lower House; --
Yet I speak not this, to take any privilege from this House; for -- it is
certain, whatsoever we do sitting the Parliament, it is an Act of the whole
Court; for the Lords without the Commons, and the Commons without the Lords,
can do nothing.] Vid. Journ. of Parl. of Q. Eliz. page 515, 516. You see here
what unity and consent there is between the two Houses, so that one can have no
privilege, in which the other is not interested. Judgments indeed upon Writs
of Error are given by the Lords, but being the Writs are returned in
Parliament, the sentence is constructively the Commons also, unless one would
be so absurd as to call the House of Lords the Parliament, as some do the House
of Commons. But to make this plainer yet: You know the Upper House has no
Jurisdiction over the Lower, so as to take cognizance of any thing transacted
therein, otherwise than by desiring Conference; and that the Lower House has as
well over the Upper: but in both cases it is improperly called Jurisdiction:
for at the Conference, he that can show the plainest Precedents or the most
convincing Arguments, carries the thing in dispute: or if either side be
obstinate, it is just so good and so good, the other may take its course,
protest against the proceeding, and then sit down and be quiet.


Obs. Well, but though the Upper House are no Judges of the privileges of the
Lower, (nor on the contrary) why may not the Judges of the Land determine of
these Privileges?


Herac. As for that, the aforesaid Learned Lawyer brings you a precedent, In
Parl. 31 H. 6. Thorpe was Speaker, and the Parl. being summoned to be in June,
it was prorogued until September; in the mean time Thorpe was taken in
Execution by the Duke of York, he notwithstanding this thought to have had the
privilege of the Parliament. At the next sessions, the matter being greatly
considered, whether he could have a privilege or no, a Conference was had in
the Cause with the Judges. The Judges being required, in humble sort refused,
except it were so that the House did command them (for in the House of
Parliament, says he, the Chief Judges and their Judgments are Controulable by
the Court) but if the House did Command them, they would be Willing to inform
them what in their opinions they knew and thought.] Ibid. Here the Judges were
so far from determining what were the privileges of Parliament, that without a
Command they would not so much as their opinion.


Obs. Yes, yes, and you have Sergeant Topham's Case for another Precedent.


Herac. This is but another bait to catch some fool with. I only show you the
opinion of former times.


Obs. Come, come, I have been but dodging with you all this time, the King is
the Judge of their privileges.


Herac. The King's Prerogative indeed is hard enough for all their privileges
put together: And if that be well husbanded and maintained, I defy all the
privileges of Lords or Commons to do Church or State any harm, though
themselves be still left to be the sole Judges what they* are. And this will
bring us to your Non-^lich Argument of Forty One. That the Long Parliament
should do all those feats you mention, as Levying Arms, coining of money, etc.
under the notion of privilege, I cannot imagine: I much rather believe they
did them for maintenance of their privileges, which they pretended the King
went about to invade.


Obs. Why, it is all one.


Herac. No but it is not* unless ones Life, and the Means to guard it be the
same thing. I say again, they pretended the King went about to invade their
privileges, and therefore they raised an Army in the defense of them, and
coined money to pay the Army.


Obs. Well, and may not any Parliament pretend the same Invasion, and make the
like defense as well?


Herac* No, that they cannot; and therefore for ever hereafter leave your
bawling out of forty ^^^, ^^^ before God it is nothing to the purpose. ((...)
you know whose cause I am pleading, and therefore I hope you will pardon this
heat.)


Obs. Faith, and you act their part to the life.


Herac. You know in forty one, etc. the power of the Militia might seem
somewhat a disputable point* not that I question but that it truly belonged to
the King* but he was not ins^^^ed in it by any express Law that I know of,
though prescription in my opinion ought to have gone as far on the King's side
as express Law. But to take away any pretensions of the Parliament for the
future, you know that the Parliament Ann. 13. and 14. of this King chap. 3. has
recognized as it were, or expressly acknowledged, that the power of the Militia
appertains to the Crown of this Kingdom, so that for the future there cannot be
the least pretense for any such claim in the Parliament, unless the King will
consent to the repealing of that Act, which you may suppose if you will.


Obs. Well, but this is nothing to the purpose; for if, for all this, the
Parliament shall affirm that the Militia belongs to them, and they be the sole
Judges of their own privileges, the same things may be acted over again.


Herac. No, they cannot, for all that. For not to mention the improbability,
nay moral impossibility of the Parliaments pretending to a power which so
recent and express an Act has declared to be in the King; yet though they
should be so grossly unreasonable and bare-fac'dly factious, the Kings
prerogative is able to cope with them. And this Prerogative Charles the First
gave away when he assented to the Act of Perpetuity; in passing of which if he
showed little Policy, they showed less gratitude in making so bad an use of so
redundant a Grace. But if the King will give away his Prerogative, who can help
it? And if He will give the Parliament leave to sit as long as they please, he
gives away the only Antidote against their pretense of privilege. For though
the King cannot determine of their privileges, so as to sentence this to be
one, and that not: Yet he can do as much as this comes to, he can prorogue or
dissolve the Parliament whenever he sees reason for it, and that puts an end
both to them and their Privileges. And this is the incomparable Constitution
of our Government! If it were otherwise, there lay a gap open either for
arbitrary power on the King's side, or for usurpation on the Parliament's. For
if the King might determine what were the Power and Privileges of Parliament,
we might soon have a Parliament of Paris; and if They might sit as long as they
please, they would even be the high and mighty States of Holland, and the King
but a Stadtholder, or if you will a Staff-holder. But it is best as it is; and so
long as the King shall be so wise as to keep what is his own, and so gracious
as to desire no more, it is impossible it should be otherwise on one side or
the other. And therefore to make a Cuckow's song of Forty one, may indeed betray
something of your own nature, but it signifies no more to the purpose you Chant
it, than baculus in angulo.


Obs. Come, Sir, you are too sharp upon me. But the King's well holp up in the
mean time: If the Parliament will entrench on the Prerogative, or will not do
what He would have them, He can only dissolve them, and there is all his mends.
What Is the King the better for being able to prevent their doing any mischief,
if he cannot get them to do what he sees necessary for the maintenance of the
Government? [I am for Parliaments that are subjects, as well together as
asunder: for a House of Commons that will do the business they were Called for,
and the business they were Sent for.] N. 135.


Herac. Truly, as to their doing what they are Sent for, I believe the Whigs
will not be much against it. But then I doubt, if they do no more, the King
would many times come short of Money. For the greater number of the Electors
who are they that send them, do commonly (as most other men do) love their
money so well, that they care not how little of that they part with, nor how
saving a bargain they make for removal of their grievances. And as for other
things besides raising of Money, I do not believe that any of us Tories do much
care for their receiving or following the Instructions of those that choose
them, ever since the Members that were sent to Oxford were documented by their
Electors. For if they could have been able to have accomplished what they were
sent for, our hopes had been totally ruined by the Bill of Exclusion. 'Pray
therefore let us hear no more of doing what they are sent for. And as for their
doing what they are Called for, I Mr. Whig do wish with all my heart, that they
might always see it reasonable to comply with the King's demands, and follow
his directions; but yet I would leave Them a judgment of discretion, to
consult whether such demands are reasonable, and such directions advisable to
be followed.


Obs. Well, if they be the Judges of that, the King is like to be finely served.


Herac. And if they be not, Liberty and Propertv are finely secured! For if the
King's dictates must be followed, and he may dictate what he please; all Acts
of Parliament will be but Orders of the King in the Great Council of the
Kingdom; and the like Orders in the Privy Council, might even as well pass for
Acts of Parliament.

How now Monsieur! why so blank? Well, there is something more than ordinary in
these Whigs; for while I have been but personating one, methinks I have spoken
more reason than ever I did in my life. But let Whig and his Reasons both be
damned; for they have made me as dull as a dog. Come let us have a Brimmer to
the confusion of all Whigs and their Reasons, for that is the readiest way to
confute them. And now am I, Heraclitus again, the Merry-weeping Tory. What
therefore I shall say from henceforward, take as from a Friend, not an
Opponent. And in the first place I wonder at your imprudence, that while you
undertook to wipe off the suspicion of a Tory-plot, you have rather confirmed
the belief of it. For he that could not be convinced of it by that Pamphlet,
nor the notoriousness of the thing it self, must needs make no doubt of it when
he has read your Observations, if he will but do you the honor, to believe you
the mouth of our Party. Come Sir, the Whigs and Jesuits are wiser in their
generation than we Loyal Protestants. Charge them with a Plot, and though the
thing be as plain as the Nose on one's face, they will deny and forswear it even
at the Gallows. But you now go about to traverse the business, and to justify
the crime; nay give matter of new Evidence against your self.


Obs. Why, you know the matter of fact could not be denied.


Herac. Then you should have taken no notice of the charge at all; and so our
party could have vapour'd it out, as if you slighted it for it is impertinency:
but now you have given it a cast of your Office to so little purpose, you
cannot imagine how they are dampt. 'Pray what does it signify to quibble upon
the Title page, to make Misopappas signify a hater of the King, when you know
it means a hater of the Pope, or at worst of the Bishops, (for a Pope and a
Bishop are all one in the Greek.) Then, how weak a justification of our
arraigning the two last Parliaments, is it to say that the Whigs vilify the
late Long Parliament? If they do well in that, why do you find fault; if ill,
why do we imitate them; nay so far exceed them? for you say, they scandalize
but about two hundred of that Parliament, and that for being Pensioners: but we
Have at all, while we condemn them so much for what they Voted Nemine
contradicente. And again, how weak is your allegation of forty one, to prove
that these Parliaments are guilty of what we accuse them? If those were Rebels,
does it follow that others would raise such a Rebellion if they could, nay or
could if they would? 'Pray remember what I said before, when I was Mr. Whig. In
the next place you are but too injurious to his Majesty, to fasten on Him all
the Miscarriages and male-administrations of his Ministers, as if it were
impossible for the King that has so many servants, to have a good opinion of,
and commit a trust to, a bad man. Nay and you stretch this so high, or rather
so low, that a fellow cannot reflect on halfa dozen Printers Hawkers, but
presently you cry, the King is wounded through their sides. If you hold on, I
believe a man shall not call a Scullion wench of the King's Kitchen, dirty
Slut, or his Corn-cutter, pitiful fellow, but you will call it arraigning the
Government. You know it is impossible the King should attend all the affairs of
State himself, He must necessarily see many things with other folks eyes, and
hear them with others ears; and therefore if things be misrepresented to him,
he may indeed act otherwise than he would if he were better informed: but He is
so far from being worthy to be blamed for such acting, that those that were the
evil advisers, ought rather to be doubly punished, partly for the thing it self
of which they are truly the Authors, and much more for abusing his Majesty by
their evil suggestions. But enough of that. Then as to the Bill of Excluston,
you know the Author of the Tory-plot had taken some pains to prove it lawful,
just and necessary; now one would have thought, if you would have meddl'd with
it at all, you should have endeavored to prove it unlawful, unjust and
inconvenient.


Inf. Cl. Why, he has suggested Arguments enough, That supposing it unlawful,
the Parliament cannot pass it; that there is no other rule of Obedience to
Magistrates but that given by Christ and his Apostles; and that the primitive
Christians never voted for a Bill of Exclusion.


Herac. Good Mr. Parson, these are only Arguments to persuade your
Devotionists: As for your beaux Esprits, they are not at all moved at them; and
the perverse Infidel Whigs as little as they. But to go on. When we were
charged with a design of getting Parliaments laid aside, how do you excuse us;
marry by making the business much worse: justifying our suggesting to the King
that a Factious Multitude will make a Factious Choice; and therefore he ought
to have a care of such a House of Commons; there may be danger in it. ( N. 131.)
Just as if you had drawn up the Address from Devonshire, or had taken the hint
from thence, who crave leave to observe, that our Corporations and Boroughs,
who have so great a share in the Government, are now the Nurseries and
Seminaries of Faction, Sedition and Disloyalty.


Obs. Well, and are they not so?


Herac. Yes; but truth must not be spoken at all times. For can you think that
such Accusations are a likely way to persuade the world, that we have an esteem
for Parliaments? or rather do they not confirm any man in the belief of our
desire to cast them quite off, whiles we insinuate that both the Electors and
Elected are so factious, seditious and disloyal? Then, what need was there for
you to go about to excuse all the Extravagancies of the Addressers, as
particularly that snivelling canting complement from Richmond, who tell his
Majesty, that he dislolv'd the two last Parliaments by the inspiration of the
special Spirit of God. You may guess what Spirit they are inspired with, by
Thompson's Intelligence of May 13. where you see how they refuse to present any
Abhorrence of the Association; no, damn 'em, not they. How bravely these
Fellows deserve your Advocateship! And to what purpose was it to touch upon
that importune Eulogie of his Royal Highness from Northumberland, who call him
the Greatest Example of Duty and Obedience to His Majesty? Do you think the
King has not both entreated him and Commanded him to continue his presence at
the Chapel, if that would have done?


Obs. Nay then, if I must not keep up the Duke's reputation, I had has good
give over writing.


Herac. You do well to keep up the Dukes reputation, but then it must be by
such Instances as are capable of being improved to that end; as by commending
his constancy to his Friends, his valor, and the like: but surely you cannot
commend every man from every Topic. In the last place, you too manifestly
grossly pervert the meaning and scope of the Pamphleteer in several places.


Obs. Nay, if Vice correct sin, we shall have blessed doings!


Herac. It Is true, my talent lies pretty much that way; but then it is when I
have to do with a Brooks, or the like, that is marched off the stage, and has no
body to take up the cudgels for him; in such a case indeed I commend it as the
only way, and that is the reason your Dissenter's sayings have taken so well:
But now when you have to do with an Adversary that is alive, and looks out
pretty sharp, that way will never do.


Obs. Well, but where have I so grossly perverted his meaning?


Herac. I Will give you an Instance or two. When he had said, that even Papists
might join in a Protestation to defend the Religion established by Law,
believing Magna Charta to be the firmest Law, and Popery to be established
thereby; what do you, but insinuate presently, that he calls the Protestant
Religion, professed at present in the Church of England, flat Popery? than which
nothing is more contrary to the drift of his discourse. Thus when he goes about
to prove that Kings cannot claim their Crowns by right of Primogeniture from
Adam, from the frequent changes of Government in the same Nation, whereby such
lineal succession is every where interrupted* and in order to prove this asks,
In how many Kingdoms has force and violence and the longest sword settled an
absolute Monarchy? how often has that yoke been shook off, and the Government
turned into a Free State? How many different Models of both Monarchies and
States Are there at This day in the world? and yet, says he, none of them
(that I know of) but are, and ought to be owned by the Subjects for Lawful
Governments:] By this you say he justifies Forty One, etc. and all Usurpations
whatsoever. Now who can with any color draw such a consequence from such
premises? He only shows that from the several revolutions of Government that
have been in most Nations, the claim by primogeniture lineally from Adam is so
confounded, that it is impossible to make out any Right that way: But does he
therefore say that Charles the First had by force and violence and the longest
sword settled an absolute Monarchy, so that there should be any color from
thence taken to justify the Usurpation of forty one? The truth is, we that
are for King's reigning altogether jure divino, are forced to fly to this right
of Primogeni^ure, seeing only paternal Government is Purely of divine original;
all other Governments having a Mixture of humane policy: But seeing it is
impossible to determine who is the eldest of the Family in a right line of
succession from Adam; if that notion should be relied on, Princes Titles would
be so much in the dark and admit of so much dispute, that it is safer nay
necessary to rely on the establishment by humame Law and the sworn Allegiance
of the Subjects, though the general precepts of the Scripture, of obedience to
humane ordinances, do confirm the duty and obedience of Subjects to their
respective Rulers, be they Emperors, Kings, States, or of any inferior kind
or denomination. But this only betwixt you and me. -- But there is one thing I
had like to have forgot, the greatest subtilty in all your Observations, and
that is N. 132. Where by severing the Successor from the Papist you will have
the Addresser* transport of joy, that the Bill of Exclusion did not pass, to
proceed only out of respect to the former. Now Sir if you could distinguish the
Popish Successor, or Successor and Papist into two Persons, as you have done
into two notions, you would do something; but otherwise your Quatenus is
somewhat like that of the Bishop's, who being found fault with by a Countreyman
for living too pompous and luxurious a life, so unsuitable to his office,
answered, That he lived not so AS he was a Bishop, but AS he was a secular
Prince: to whom the Fellow replied* But I doubt if the Prince go to the Devil,
the Bishop will not stay far behind.] And it is believed the Papist will be
as soon in the throne as the Successor. And therefore that nicety had as good
also been omitted.


Obs. Well, but there is one point I have handled to purpose, (both N. 132. and
135.) that to imagine the death of the Presumptive heir, is Treason.


Herac. Truly Sir, you seem not over-confident of what you have done as to
that, for you say you will not deliever it for Law as a Lawyer, but should be
glad to be better informed. (ibid.) Now Sir, you have been told already, that
my Lord Cook delivers it for Law as a Lawyer (though you will not the contrary)
that a Collateral Heir is not within the Stat of 25 E* 3. that makes the
imagining the death of the King's eldest Son and Heir to be Treason. But
methinks you are like some Philosophers, that undertake to solve Phenomenon,
that never were in Nature. Before you had taken such pains to prove the
presumptive Heir to stand upon equal ground with the King's Son and Heir, so as
to make that which is Treason to the one, to be so to the other; I say you
would have done well to have first made it out, that his death was imagined.
For I do not find, by any Overt Act, that your Adversary has imagined any such
thing.


Obs. Why, has he not called him Traitor, and protested He shall not Reign over
him?


Herac. Not that I know not of. He calls such an one indeed a Traitor, as shall
murder the King or force him to resign, and I think he does not call him out of
his name: but it is you that interpret this of the presumptive Heir; which if
one should suppose to be his true meaning, yet would not his protestation, that
such an one shall not reign over Him, be an imagining his death; for 'twere but
for him and his thousands he talks of, to slip over into Holland, etc. and the
Protest were made good.


Obs. Well, I think I have not said one word but what you have found fault
with? what would you have me do? write nothing, and starve?


Herac. No, but keep to your province of translating Erasmus's Colloquies,
Quevedo's Visions or French Romances: these will hold you doing, and keep life
and soul together. And then if you do us no good, you will do us no harm. And for
my own part I Am half in mind to give over also; for Ben. Took's fifteen
shillings a Week is but poor wages, and the Rogue thinks he gives too much too.


Inf. Cl. Good Gentlemen, be not discouraged, for I can assure you, your Works
are in great esteem amongst us: We should not know what course to Steer, if we
were not guided by you. But come, 'pray let us adjourn to Sam's, I believe the
House begins to fill by this time.


Obs. Herac. I, come let us go.


FINIS.

