A CHARACTER OF His most SACRED MAJESTY KING CHARLES the IId.

WITH A short Apology before it, An Introduction to it, And a Conclusion after
it.

Written By a Minister of the Word, Who has for a long time desired, and daily
Prayed for the happy Settlement of Church and State within the three Nations of
England, Scotland and Ireland In Truth, and Peace, and Order.

Some mocked: and others said, We will hear thee again of this matter, Act.
17.32. LONDON, Printed by D. Maxwell. 1660.

The Apology.
IF any shall wonder (as doubtless many will,) why a private person should
presume thus to meddle, in such a high business, and of so great concernment as
this: it is answered, First, That in a sinking Bark the poorest Ship-boy is as
much concerned to mind his own preservation, as the Pilot himself. And then,
for the Substance of what is here written, He is not alone, or does not stand
as one single person to affirm it, because there are more then many thousands
(as he dares presume to say within these Nations, whose Hearts, and Tongues,
and Hands, and Feet, with every thing beside are ready to bear witness to it.

For the Writer hereof, if He had manifested himself to be one of those strange
Spirits which very much appear in this scribbling Age, the rankness and
luxuriency of whose fancies, (to the exceeding high dishonor of God, and the
very great reproach of Religion) make bold profaneness, filthy obscoenity, or
downright and disgraceful railings, as foyls to set off (what they abuse)
their wit, whereby they fight, as much as they can, against God, with his own
weapon, he could not suffer too much for so doing: But he cannot lie under that
guilt, who hates and abhors such blots, and blurs, and defilements, and waste
of Paper; and here most seriously professes, (so far as he can know his own
Heart,) that he believes there is not one which breaths out of flesh and blood,
who more desires the happy settlement of this Church and State, then himself:
and could be well content to do or suffer any thing within his compass in order
to it. And therefore being much persuaded of the Truths laid down in these
following Papers; and hoping they might (accidentally at least) tend toward
that happy End to which they are intended; he was like one of those bottles in
Job, ready to burst until he had found a vent for them.

Yet, if his strong affections and hearty desires herein expressed, have
carried him beyond the Rules of Prudence or Discretion, he humbly craves pardon
for his sake, whose Goodness has been wont to wink at, or not to impute the
Errors of an honest Zeal; and so loves the strength of his peoples good
affections, that he passes by, or overlooks their failings and infirmities.

The Introduction.
THe simple (says Solomon) believes eveword; whereas he that is wise, will
not be too credulous. Fama mendax, Report has got a very ill Name, and till
she has freed her self from that aspersion, which charge her so much and so
often with speaking falsehoods, they which consider, will not be apt to give
credit unto every thing she speaks: And there is much Reason for it: as it is
true likewise, that if we do not assent unto the reports of many, who are of
known honesty, and therefore dare not make a lie, nor willingly publish any
thing that is false; we our selves deserve not to be believed, even then when
we speak Truths.

Now no Truth is for every ones turn; and therefore this may be questioned by
some, and disliked or slighted by others, especially by such whose Black mouths
and venomed tongues, ( which in good time will doubtless fall upon themselves)
have been long spitting of Poison at the sacred Person presented in this
Narrative; such who care not how false any accusation is, so it be spiteful
enough; having learned a damned Position from that Devil Machiavel, Calumniare
fortiter semper aliquid adhaerebit, Throw Dirt enough upon, or calumniate any
man to purpose, and some of it will stick on him,

And there is no wonder at all in this, if we consider, that it is in vain for
any one in the world to think or hope that he can be beloved of all; for there
was never yet any man to whom some took not exceptions; impossible it is,
either to please or displease all men, whiles some are in love with Vice as
deeply as others with Virtue, and some dislike Virtue, if not for it self, yet
for contradiction sake, and will rather devise then want causes to blast it.

But for him who now writes this, (which long since had been communicated, if
the times had been fit to bear it) his witnesses are in Heaven, and in his own
bosom too, that he dares not knowingly (let the Readers hereof think what they
please) speak or write any thing against, but for Truth, which he undoubtedly
believes what here follows, is, (therefore cannot but speak it) and so presumes
that many-many thousands of these now undeceived Nations will do, and entertain
the report (as it most highly deserves) with much joy and gladness.

And that it may be so received, and not thought to be a fantasy of the
Writers own Brain, he will make have to discover when and how he came by it. In
order to which, the Reader may please to take notice, that the occasion of his
having it offered it self thus. Where first of the Person from whom it was had,
and then of the time when and how he had it.

For the Person first, from whom it was had, He is a Gentleman of a very good
Extraction, a wise and an honest mar, a person of very much Honor and
Integrity, one of a very high Resolution, and of a much tried and approved
Valor, a Bed chamber man to his Majesty in Scotland, taken prisoner at
Worcester (amongst many other Gentlemen of good Quality) and brought to London,
but had his liberty there upon his Parol. And it was he that gave me the
Character of his Majesty, as afterward, with some requisite circumstances
toward the close of this Introduction more fully appears.

For the time when I had it, it was suddenly after his Majesty
(abovementioned) suffered a defeat at Worcester from that very numerous
opposition there made against him; which certainly thousands would have forborne
to make, if they could before have known him aright. And that circumstance of
time invites me (by the way) to revive and relate a very sad story, (I desire
pardon if I lengthen it out too much) because it is such a one as deserves
neither to be written nor read but with abhorrency; however I shall repeat it,
because I fear it is too too much forgotten by the Nation here, though
certainly it is registered and recorded in Heaven, to be reckoned for when God
shall please to do it.

It was about the time when so many of the poor vanquished Scots were brought
Prisoners to London, and not a few of them 'twixt Worcester and that place,
when they were Captives, unarmed* and some of them half naked, when wounded
before, and many of them faint, sick and almost famished (circumstances which
did most highly aggravate the cruelty which was showed them) for when it was
thus with them, above all example of immanitie and barbarousness ever read or
known before (as I suppose) especially by men that dust call themselves
Christians, yet by such, had in cold blood their brains beaten out in several
places as they passed by the English Soldiers, because they went not forward
and faster, when by reason of their extreme lameness and feebleness they were
scarce able to move at all, and nothing done to those barbarous, inhumane
monsters for so doing: though we may say of their cruelty then, what was long
since spoken by the Spirit of God, of that horrid act of Simeon and Levi, who
fell upon the Shechemites when they were sore (and expected not that violence
and fury which they were made to feel) Cursed be their wrath, for it was
fierce, and their rage, for it was cruel. Of which cruelty in those strange
Butcheries, the Relator hereof lived near enough the road where they passed, to
have been an eye witness of some of them, if he could have endured to behold
the sight of men causelessly murdered. And they of the City of Durham, as very
many others inhabiting those most remote Northern parts of England are able to
relate many like horrid, cruel, parallel stories before this time, after the
Scots defeat at Dunbar.

O what a Savage, Cruel, Bloody thing is man when he has lost his Humanity!
for then they who have been inured to shed blood make it but a sport to kill,
as if the life of a man were not worth the valuing; for custom makes that most
hateful and unnatural sin, so familiar to them, as that the horror thereof is
tvrn'd into pleasure; thus they making havoc of men, as fearfully made, as
dearly redeemed, as tenderly cherished and brought up as others, yet, occidendi
causa, occidunt, they kill because they take pleasure in killing, and are no
more troubled at the death of a man, then if a dog had fallen before them.

But the lives of those poor men I named, as the blood of very very many more,
within the circuit of this Nation (to go no further) cry loud for Vengeance,
and the avenger of blood will certainly in his due time return, full answer to
that loud cry. For God (who is Mercy it self) abhors Cruelty above all other
sins; he cannot endure that one man should destroy an other, as the Beasts of
the field, the Fowls of the air, and the Fishes of the sea do. And as every sin
has a tongue, so that of blood outcries and drowns the rest; it is always
clamorous and restless, and will never leave crying out unto God, until it be
washed away with a flood of tears, issuing from bleeding and broken hearts, and
dyed into another color by the blood of Christ; but if not so, it will
certainly, in conclusion, bring woe and misery enough unto them that shed it.

For there was never any drop of Inocent blood spilt upon the face of the
Earth, from the blood of Righteous Abel unto this present hour, or that shall
be shed so long as there be men, and malice, and mischief in the world, but it
swells big as the sea in the eyes of God, and cannot be washed away by all the
waters therein. And further, neither the heat of the Sun, nor the dust of the
ground, shall ever be able to dry or drink it up, till it be either Avenged or
Pardoned: Unless the Earth, and Heavens, and all that are therein can be bribed
to keep silence, and to take no notice thereof. And the Lord, the Lord God of
Mercy, deliver this Land from that, and from all other Blood-guiltiness.

I have done with this most Melancholy, Sad, Bloody Story, which happened (as I
have said) about the time when that Noble Person (before mentioned) was
entreated by some, who much desired to have satisfaction therein, That he would
please (he having had such a particular Knowledge of the King by reason of his
near attendance on Him) to give them a true Character of his Majesty, and to
speak nothing but what they might confidently from his mouth believe and report
as Truth. The Gentleman was very free to it, and assured them (amongst whom was
this Relater) that he would not say any thing more or less as to it, but what
he should report for Truth, if desired as his last words when he came to dye;
which now hear speak thus;

The Character.
I. THat His Majesty was a Prince unto whom the Lord had given a very large
measure of Wisdom and Understanding, far above his Years; for to the great
Admiration of those who there sat in Council with him, and when they thought
that they had spoken unto some good purpose, His great Reason, upon Emergent
occasions, would weigh down all theirs.

II. He said, That while he had the Honor and Happiness to wait upon his
Majesty at St. Johnstons in Scotland (which was during the whole time of his
abode there) he kept both his Eyes and Ears open upon him, and could never
observe nor hear (which was very remarkable) that his Majesty was addicted unto
any sin of Youth.

III. To testify this his Majesty was very careful to have a most Regular and
Exemplary Court, keeping his whole Family therein very excellent and good
Order: And to this end, if he had heard of any Person or Persons in it given to
Swearing, Drunkenness, or to any other Exorbitancies, upon a Serious
Admonition, if they did not Reform, they were showed the way out of his Doors,
not to be taken into his Family any more.

IV. He told us that he had heard the King oftentimes to say thus, (and he
desired that this might be in a special manner remembered by us) That if ever it
should please God to Restore him unto, and to settle him in his Just Rights,
that he would as soon endure a known Traitor about him, as a Debauched man.

V. That his Majesty was very strict in the Observation of his Private
Devotions twice every Day, and would not suffer any occasions to divert him
from those Duties; and that he was as careful likewise to frequent the Public
Ordinances.

VI. That his Majesty retired himself in his Chamber or Closet, where he Fasted
every Tuesday in Memoral of his Royal Father, (that day of the Week forced out
of his Life by the hands of Violence) which day weekly he reserved himself, as
much as he could, from all company and business, whether Public or Private.

VII. That his Majesty was a Prince as Just to make his Word good as any one in
the world could be, for he would never fail to perform any thing he promised
(if possibly in his power) and therefore was more shie in promising, for fear
that he might not be able to make good his Word.

VIII. That his Majesty was a Prince in whose Disposition he had ever observed
a very high measure of Nobleness, Goodness and Gentleness; as good a Friend as
any one could find any where (like Theodosius that good Emperor, who then
thought he had a kindness done to himself, when he had a good occasion offered
him to show courtesy unto others) for his Majesty was always ready to be
doing favors. And as he was so good a Friend, so was he as good an Enemy too,
for he could easily forget and forgive any injuries done unto himself.

IX. That his Majesty knew how and when to take up the State and Person of a
King, and when to lay it down. And further, that when he had any good occasion
to improve his Valor, he was then as bold as a Lion, and when not, as meek as a
Lamb.

X. Lastly, He said, That he looked upon his Majesty as upon a Prince, too good
for Scotland, too good for England, too good for the World, and therefore
thought that his Goodness might hasten his Glory. But then he further added,
That he had some great reason to hope that God had not so wonderfully Qualified
him, and so miraculously Preserved him, but that he had some great things to do
For him, and some great things to do By him.

The Conclusion.
NOw as this and much more was affirmed by the Person of Honor before spoken
of, concerning that most excellent King; so the same in substance was likewise
often attested by many Godly Scotch Ministers, and others taken Prisoners at
Worcester, and since that time by diverse more of good Quality, and of repute
too for Godliness and Honesty, of which thousands in these Nations have heard.

However then it has pleased Almighty God (for causes only known to himself)
to suffer his Majesty to drink so deep of the Cup of affliction (since he was
so violently forced from his own Country, and from his Fathers house,) and
cast wholly upon the Providence of God for his subsistence, which must needs be
a very heavy and grievous trial unto him; for the wants of Kings are by far
more weighty and pressing then those of private men, in respect of themselves,
their high Names, Titles, Places; and in regard of others who look for shelter
and comfort under their shadow, which they cannot afford if their substance be
taken from them. Sapiens miser, plus miser est, quam stultus miser. A Fool in
misery is insensible, because he apprehends not his condition; whereas a wise
man can both feel and aggravate it, (though both many times to little purpose,)
and therefore upon consideration concludes, that it is best to bear what he
cannot remedy. Fortier ille facit, qui miser esse potest. No man more strong
then he that can stoutly stand under, and not be made to buckle under his
heavy Cross, not bear it up only with head and shoulders, as brutish men may
do, but with life and spirit; and certainly they are most happy that can be
most miserable and make least complaint. And such has been the carriage of his
Majesty since he was forced, (as David sometime was to Adullam,) yet has born
all with mavelous Wisdom and Christian Patience for more then eight years
last past, when God preserved him at, and delivered him from Worcester, (not to
speak of his many flittings up and down, to and fro, and his great unsettlement
before that time,) I say that his Majesty in all his Trials has been still
looking up unto that invisible hand from whence all afflictions come: And I
speak not this of my self, but from other credible Witnesses that do affirm it,
having observed the whole tenor of his conversation all along, wherein his
Majesty has highly improved his most heavy pressures, bearing them all with an
even mind, in being as well taught as chastened, and consequently made by far
more perfect through his sufferings, and now long enough in the fire to come
forth pure Gold, wherein his Majesty has been tried to purpose; tried for many
years last past with the want of any certain or known Revenue to support his
Person, and Dignity; tried with many tentations, to divert him (if it had been
possible) from the Protestant Religion, in which he has always stood
constant, firm, steadfast and unmovable, with his head against the storm, not at
all wrought upon by many specious overtures made unto Him, by many subtle and
plausible Arguments pressed upon Him to pervert him from it; yet still has
continued like some fresh Rivers, which (they write) make their way through the
salt Sea, and still retain their savor: And after all such attempts, it may
further and truly be said of Him, what was sometimes written of that Noble
Fabritius, That he would resolve well, and when once he had resolved, you might
as soon have put the Sun out of his course as Fabritius from his resolution.
Which (with many more particulars that might be added) are sufficient to
confirm all those who have made any scruple or doubt to the contrary, that as
his Majesty has hitherto appeared, so he is like to continue a very good and a
gracious Prince.

And we have very great cause further to settle us in this kope, if we
seriously consider of one instance more, which I shall here insert: For as it
was sometimes recorded to the very high commendation of that no less good then
great Emperor Constantine, who when he was told by his Physicians, That there
was no way to cure him of his Leprosy but by bathing his flesh in the blood of
young Infants; his heart abhorred their advice, and he presently answered like
himself, Mal^ semper aegrotare quam tali remedio convalescere; That he had by
far rather continue a Leper still, then be so cured, the remedy was so much
worse then the disease: So when his Majesty has been often told, That the best
way to recover his Rights unto his three Kingdoms, was to make his way by
force and violence with any foreign aid he could get to his assistance, (and
without doubt, if tenderness of Conscience had not awed and kept him from a
sinful compliance with them, if he would but hiss he could not have wanted
help enough from abroad;) He has always manifested such a mavelous regret
against that desperate remedy, upon many serious and sad considerations, as the
effusion of much more blood, (which he desires exceedingly to be tender of)
with diverse other great mischiefs, which must unavoidably follow such a force,
as if he had rather be and remain a great sufferer still, (if that violence may
possibly be avoided) then so settled. And many of his Majesty's greatest
Adversaries have heard enough to acknowledge this to be a truth, if they would
but speak out.

That we may therefore seek out for help before our hurts grow incurable, and
not for ever continue to be our own spoilers, and our own prey, I shall add
this, That though the Body of these three Nations (if they be considered
collectively and together) may not unfitly be resembled by that figure of the
Man in our Almanacks, who seems to be wounded in every part, from the sole of
the foot to the crown of the head; yet I cannot look upon it as past all remedy
or cure; For there is still Balm in Gilead, and Physicians there, by which the
health thereof may be recovered.

In order to which, let us first know, that to sin is not the way to prosper.
And therefore that we may not slatter our selves into ruin, nor be infatuated
to destruction, let our consideration and fear prevent our perishing. And if we
do desire to understand the mind of God aright, we must not take some passages
of Scripture in a literal sense, which the Spirit of God never intended by
them, but that which is quite contrary; and there are many such to be observed
in the sacred Story, like that in the last of the Revelations, He that is
unjust, let him be unjust still. To this end Almighty God speaks often to
sinners, unto whom he intends Mercy, that they should Return, as if before they
had been quite out of their way; Repent, and turn your selves from your
transgressions, so iniquity shall selves from your transgressions, so iniquity
shall not be your ruin. And therefore if we would have mercy and pardon for
sin, we must labor as much as we may to free our selves from guilt, and show
as much forwardness to redress Evils as to acknowledge or grieve for them;
remembering (amongst many more particulars which might be here inserted) that
unquestionable Trath, Non dimittitur peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum; That
there is no remissien without restitution, if it can be made.

And here likewise we of these Nations shall do very well to call to
remembrance our former Vows and Oaths, as that of Allegiance, and other
lawfully imposed on us, and taken by us; as also since those were usually
tendered, The Solemn Protestation, and after that the more Solemn League and
Covenant, which upon serious consideration was commended to the people here,
and by them received and sworn to with hands lifted up to Heaven; and it would
be remembered likewise, what in them both was promised to his late so-so-so much
suffering Majesty,

For Vows, (if lawful and in our Power) when made, they must be kept; Vow, and
pay unto the Lord your God. Jephta was over-strict in this when he had made a
rash Vow, yet he concluded, That he had opened his mouth to the Lord, and
therefore thought that he might not go back from it.

And for Oaths, it is very observable in the case and story of the Gibeonites,
that though they had surreptitiously and by fraud gained a League with the
Israelites, God is very angry with Israel four hundred years after for the
blood of some of them whom Saul slew, though they were but servants, yea,
drudges to the Israelites; the Reason, Because there was a Perjury attending
upon their slaughter, violating that ancient Oath, wherein the Princes of the
Congregation had bound themselves upon Joshua's League with those Gibeonites,
That they would suffer them to live: And though this Oath was extorted by fraud
from Israel, yet because it was solemn, and by no less Name then the Lord God
of Israel, God long after most severely punished the breach thereof with three
years famine upon Israel. All Vows, Oaths. Covenants (if lawful) made on
earth, are registered in Heaven, and God holds it a very high indignity that his
Name should be Sworn by, and the Oath violated. And if the Vows and Oaths of
others may bind us, how much more must cur own.

Now these particulars require a very careful and serious Review, which we hope
will be taken, especially now at last it has pleased Almighty God, and in a
very short space of time, so wonderfully and unexpectedly, to alter and change
the outward Face of things here amongst us, in making us like the Israelites,
when newly returned out of their Captivity, to be like men that dream; or as
sleepers suddenly started and awakened out of their dreams, that cannot
presently consider where they are, or how it is with them. So it has been with
many of us (by the encouragement we have had by some things already received in
hand, which of late we could scarce know how to hope for) which makes us ready
to question or make doubt whether it be so with us in reality, which in deed is
true. Nescis quid vesper serus ferat: We know not what a day may bring forth:
Yet if we observe the Courses of Gods Providence, we may learn better how to
know it. One day cleared the innocence of Joseph from that most unjust
Aspersion which lay so long upon him, and brought him from a Prisoner in Egypt,
to become the Ruler over all the Land of Egypt; and the same day changed his
Fetters of Iron into a Chain of Gold, his Rags into fine Linen, his Stocks
into a Chariot, his Jaile into a Palace, and Potiphars Captive into Potiphars
Lord and Master. Serving and Suffering leads unto Honor; and God at last will
be sure to pay his Children well for their Patience and Pressures. I said but
now, That the great things which God has done for us, done for us already,
have made us like men that dream. O how much did one day bring forth! and
another day may bring forth much more; and blessed be God it is not a Dream we
are in, for God has begun to open a door of Hope unto us, which in good time
may lead us on toward an happy jettlement; and we have great cause to praise
God, and earnestly to pray for those worthy Patriots who have been so
instrumental in it; as for all others who by his Providence shall be again
suddenly entrusted with the great Public affairs and high concernments of
these Nations, that (by his most gracious assistance) as they have a Price put
into their hands, so they may improve it to the utmost advantage, that the end
of their meeting may be Happiness, and the conclusion thereof Peace, which we
may expect, if amongst many other things, which of necessity must fall into
their most serious Consideration, they shall think too, and that very
seriously, of what has been immediately before spoken, as of that which here
follows after.

Secondly, Suppose that if the Condition of things among us should yet continue
as they now for the present are, and these Nations for a time might appear to
be settled in Peace, and so that they might imagine themselves to be very
secure, yet could they never be established in Safety: Because such a Peace
would be like a grievous Sore, skinned over, not cured, and therefore
continually ready to break out again. For his Majesty, or some other of his
Royal Line (and blessed be God there are many of them) will be always laying
Claim to their Rights here, and if they cannot by any fair means find out a way
to them, will then force themselves, in the use of all other endeavors to make
their way. And the Laws of Nations, of Nature, yea of God himself, will
justify them herein. And there is never a one in these Nations who may seem to
oppose this most, nor any other single Person in the world that understands
himself, but will say, That in this case he would do as much.

Thirdly, (which cannot choose but be most heedfully minded) That which is
gotten by Force and Power, must be by Power and Force maintained, which will of
necessity put the people of these Nations to an immense yearly Charge of many
hundred thousand pounds; and when a very heavy burden is settled close upon the
backs of men, the longer it lies, still the heavier it will appear to be: and
people when they have been long heavy laden will grow so extreme weary, as that
they will never be contented, nor yet quiet, till they have their shoulders
eased, especially when they may have hope to exchange a very chargeable and
uncertain Peace, for that which is accompanied with far less charge, and much
more security. There was never any Captive violently bound in affliction and
Iron, that could fall in love with his Chain: neither any people that are born
Free* patiently and long endure either Bondage or Burden, if they can possibly
be removed. I never read of any Fool like him in the Proverbs, that could laugh
when he was lashed, and feel it not. Men who are endued with Reason cannot so
degenerate, as to be like the dull Camels which cry and roar in the evening
when their burdens are taking off, but in the morning make no complaint when
they are laying on.

And therefore if it shall now at last please Almighty God who can do what he
will, and therefore can bring Peace out of Strife and Contention; Truth and
Light out of Darkness; so Order and Settlement out of Confusion (for all things
are so far from being impossible to him that nothing is hard.) I say if the
good Providence of God only wise, shall in his good time so order it, that
after the many turnings and overturnings, the many hopes and fears, the many
expectations and disappointments the three Nations have so long labored under;
and after the long and tyring expectance of his Majesty, he shall at last
return home with the affection, and desire, and invitation of his people, and
upon Honorable and good Terms (fit for a good King to grant, and Loyal Subjects
to desire) which no doubt if they were heartily and humbly offered, would be
most willingly and graciously accepted; so that his Majesty who was driven from
amongst us by force and vilence, might be drawn to us home again by Cords of
Love, managed by fair and gentle and peaceable hands: It would prove (as we
have great cause to hope) a Mercy to these Nations not to be forgotten, and for
which we might never think our selves sufficiently thankful.

For his Majesty, I am persuaded (and so are multitudes of thousands more of my
belief herein) in) that he is led by such Principles both of Goodness and
Honor, (what ever may be fancied by some to the contrary) that if he were so
invited home, He would not longer desire obedience from his People, nor a
blessing from God, then he should punctually perform whatever he should promise
in this case. And when nothing else beside is like to do it, his settlement in
all probability might settle and establish, in good time, and with the content
of all Interests, (if their own wilfulness did not obstruct it) these three
most miserably divided, much impoverished and greatly distracted Nations in
Righteousness and Truth, in Peace and Order; for all these must concur to make
us happy: For what would Peace be to us without Truth and Righteousness, but a
fatting up to slaughter. But all these might center together without that
hereditary and perpetuated charge now lying upon the Nations to make them more
miserable. And for his Majesty, he would no doubt further answer such a free
and a fair call (as has been spoken of) by a reciprocal love, care and
goodness every way manifested unto all his loving and obedient Subjects.

Now these most heedfull premises being put and kept together, and most
seriously thought on, I hope that all (but in a special manner those many
Worthies now entrusted with our Safety and Settlement) as every one beside
among us, who have kept their eyes in their heads, and consequently have seen
and observed the Calamities and Mischiefs, with all other deformed Issues of
our long unsettled Condition, will sit down and consider and follow after the
things that may make for our Peace: Remembering that if they are blessed, and
shall be called the children of God who are Peacemakers, there must be another
Name found out for such as have a Mark set upon them because they cause
Divisions, and are Enemies to it and Disturbers of it.

But I know there are some among us to whom such Arguments as I have used are
as unprofitable as unplausible, who out of self ends, that they may reign
themselves as Kings, have endeavored to keep out any other that bears that
Name. And another great reason for it, because there are not a few of them
whose pale guiltiness cannot abide the thought of seeing his Majesty here,
fearing that their guilt will not abide the touch, (for guiltiness would fain
keep out of sight;) and to this end have not been wanting to persecute him most
maliciously with slanders and reproaches, to make his Majesty (if they could)
less beloved and less desired of his People; such as muffle up the mouths of
their own Consciences, that hereby they might stave off their guilt and fears
from staring them in the face, and more quietly pursue their unrighteous and
unjustifiable Ends; whose word is, Quocunque modo rem, that they resolve to
thrive how ever they get, and think, Vbi utilitas, ibi pietas, there is Piety
where ever there is profit; hence believe Naboths vineyard a very good
purchase, a great penniworth, it lies so convenient for them; loving the
inheritance, when they destroy the Heir: So esteeming the Gold of Toulouse very
precious; the Bread of the Church, though taken from a robbed Altar, exceeding
sweet; not at all considering, that the Table of a wicked man oft-times becomes
his snare, as his prosperity his ruin. But a brutish man knows not, neither
does a fool understand this; when a wicked man grows green, and sits very
contentedly under the shadow of his Gourd, there is a Worm (which he sees not)
prepared to eat it down, and his present flourishing is a forerunner of his
everlasting withering. The Prosperity of a bad man is ever in primis, at the
first: Son, thou had thy pleasures thou have not: They think not of the
Handwriting after their mad merriments, nor of the heavy reckoning after
their great meals. Envy not therefore the Oppressor, nor choose none of his
ways, though they seem never so prosperous, no more then thou would do a
Lackey in his imbroidered Coat, because his bravery is a Livery of his bondage.
The Palate is not always a competent Judge of the food it eats, because there
are feverish and distempered, as well as good and sound Palates that can taste
well of things as they are; and these prefer hard fare much before poisoned
dainties, and course Frieze far beyond infected Velvet, and had rather pine
away by reason of want with their own short meals, (so long as they feed on
nothing but their own food,) then grow fat with the bread of Tears; had rather
labor for little or nothing, then receive the greatest wages that may be
gained by unrighteousness; to be contemned and poor, then suffer any unjust
gain to defile them by cleaving to their fingers. But for all those that dare
do otherwise, deceiving and being deceived; deceiving others, but themselves
most, they will find too late, when their Account is cast up, their Consciences
so filled with the pledges of unrighteousness, that there will be no room left
for God and his consolations to dwell there. From hence at last proceeds the
trouble and disquietness of Spirit in men pressed down under the weight of
their own guilt; for as Virtue and Goodness rewards it self, so to it self is
Sin a punishment. Poena peccati pecasse, especially to such whose Consciences
were bung'd up, hoopt over, when they shall after come to any tenderness of
feeling, (if they do not get them pacified through him who alone can quiet
them,) if once thoroughly awakened, they will be ready to break open the Breasts
of those which bear them, or burn like Wildfire in them; they put guilty men
into such a miserable plight, that they will not know what to do, being
desirous (if it were possible) to run out of themselves, Me fugio -- because
they cannot consider what they shall do, therefore sometimes leap into Hell in
thinking to avoid it; not caring what becomes of themselves, or of any thing
besides; and if they must perish, would have all extinguished in their ruin.

But what ever a desperate wicked man would have, Quod quisque fecit patitur --
the righteous God will render to every one according to his deeds, and is never
wont to suffer the guiltiness of some to hurt the innocence, or to hinder in
the least either the inward or outward peace of others that desire it, long for
it, and can give God no rest until they have obtained it. In order to which, as
Satan has been long acting his part vigorously by his Instruments, animating,
strengthening and encouraging all the Powers he could find or make among us to
do mischief; so must all of us, who desire and labor to know, and love, and
fear God aright, strive together in our prayers, and all other lawful
endeavors, that we may improve all the Interest we can make in Heaven, to
prevent his mischief. Pray we must, but means must be used likewise, for Prayer
without Means is a mockery of God, because God is to be found in the lawful
use of Means, which if we neglect, we tempt God instead of trusting in Him.
Here then we must labor more and more to acquaint our selves with God, who can
work with, or without, or above Means, but ordinarily by them; and because all
means serve him, we (in their lawful use) must never distrust him. When a man's
House is on fire, he deserves to be burnt in it, who (if he be able) does not
arise and help to quench it. And when poor distressed men are at Sea in an
horrible tempest ready to swallow them up, they are worthy of no pity if at
that time they go about to secure their own Cabins, and suffer the whole ship
to sink and perish. What then shall we further say? What do? Assuredly we must
confess that of our selves we know not what to do, and therefore (still
observing and serving the good Providence of God) it will be best for us to
lift up and to keep our eyes upon him, who can do exceeding abundantly above
all we can ask or think; and then, if we can be but fitted for the Mercies we
would have, and stand in need of, (if they be good for us) we cannot want them.
And what shall we further say? Certainly we can neither say nor do better, then
to call to remembrance our former ways and doings which have not been good.
and in what we have not had the grace to do what we should, truly, and fully,
and heartily to acknowledge and repent for all the evils that we have done:
(True Repentance being like a Sponge to wipe off Blots and Blurs from our
Souls.) Here then let us further take to our selves words, and turn unto the
Lord with all our hearts, and say unto him, Take away our iniquity, and receive
us graciously; so will we render the calves of our lips: That we being
thoroughly humbled in his sight, he may exalt us in due time, and restore unto
us all those mercies we formerly sinned away, which we were careless in
keeping, and which we undervalued in enjoying, and to return them unto us, (as
all other heedfull mercies) in mercy, and then they will do us good* These
Petitions, and the like to be sent up unto God in general.

And for our particular and present Conditition, let us make it further our
great business to multiply our Prayers, and to direct them unto the true Object
and Center of Prayer. Almighty God, who alone can hear and help, (yet not so to
multiply them, but that their weight may exceed their number;) where for our
encouragement let us further know, that if we can but petition well, we may
then hope to speed well, and obtain at Gods hands what we ask and what we ask
not, as in the case of Solomon, who because he petitioned for Wisdom which
pleased God well, he had Riches and Honor cast into it. And what shall we now
desire! That God would please to make all those in these Nations understand his
mind better, who have been turned wholly or too much into themselves, and
altogether neglecting that Royal Law, have done many things they would not
suffer, and so they might gain, have not cared how they have gotten. -- That
God would multiply in their room the number of such publick-spirited persons
that tie themselves up to the Rules of Justice, and therefore more mind the
good of Community then their own private and particular advantages, and show
themselves always more forward to contend for Gods rights then their Own. --
That God would please still to increase the number of those whose ends and aims
are firmly bent to close up all those Breaches which the sins of these Nations
have made; and to give a check unto all such whose endeavors are still to make
those Breaches wider. -- That God would please for ever to call in that
Commission formerly given to the destroying Sword which made such havoc in
these Natitions, that keenest and sharpest of all temporal Swords, and which
pierced deepest because drawn from among our selves, and that we may not any
more be delivered into the hands of brutish men, that are skillful to destroy.
-- That God would please to make these Nations after their so much bleeding to
recover their former health and strength, and to live in his sight, by causing
the hearts of all the People which inhabit them, more to bleed for that great
effusion of blood shed and spilt upon them, as for all other heinous sins
committed in them, that they may not be made to bloed afresh by such heavy
Judgments. -- And now his Judgments, his most heavy Judgments have been in
these Nations, that he would please to make the inhabitants thereof to learn
Righteousness, and to learn obedience by the things they have suffered. -- That
God would further please to unite the Hearts of all his People in these
Nations together, as if they were all but one man, that they may jointly,
severally and unfeignedly pray for and pursue after such a Peace and Settlement
as may make us at once both safe and happy. -- And that he would please to
beget and increase a right and a true understanding betwixt his Majesty and
the People of these Nations, that he may not be made further to suffer by any
of their bold and misgrounded prejudices; nor they longer block up the way of
their own happiness against themselves by their causeless fears. -- That God
would stir up the hearts of all the people in these Nations who know how to
pray, unfeignedly to pray for his Majesty, that if it shall stand with the
good pleasure of Almighty God, to settle these Nations by the happy
establishment of his Royal Majesty here amongst us, that he would make him
such a Blessing in Himself, and to these Nations such a Blessing likewise,
that the Generations to come may call him blessed, whereby all such as have
been so presumptuously and wickedly bold, (led hereunto by their own
misconceiving) to utter hard speeches against his Majesty for the time past,
may be convinced and made ashamed, and endeavor by their Subjection, Love and
Loyalty to his Majesty, for to salve and heal up all again for the time to
come. -- And the that God would further please daily to add unto the number of
those Chariots and Horsemen in this our Israel that still may be mighty to
prevail with him, and to scatter those, yea, all those whosoever they be that
delight in War. --

That delight in War: For War as it is sometimes necessary, so it is alvvayes
evil, the vvorst of all remedies that can be thoughton; for if fighting and
killing in this Case have any other end proposed besides Peace and Settlement,
it proves Murder.

I observed but now, that if we desire to be safe and happy by the
establishment of his Majesty amongst us, we must be instant and importunate
with God in his behalf: The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, and he
turns it whithersoever he will. No King can incline his own heart which way
himself lists; and therefore it is the duty of the people that would be happy
under a good Prince, to Petition the Lord for every thing that may concern his
present and Eternal good and welfare, that so he may become a King of Prayers
and a King of Praises. It is an heedful exhortation of the Apostle in his first
Epistle to Timothy, where he says, I exhort that first of all Supplications,
Prayers, Intercessions be made for all men, for Kings, and for all that are in
authority: for Kings first, and there is great reason for it, as will presently
appear.

The Tempter in the Gospel presented unto our Blessed Savior the sight of the
Kingdoms of the world and the glory of them: The Kingdoms and their glory! and
we may confess that there is no such Beauty, Splendour, Bravery, Riches,
Pleasures, Majesty to be found in the world as in the Courts of Princes, who
are Gods Deputies here on earth; there is soft raiment, there are sumptuous
Feasts, rich Jewels, glorious Triumphs, royal State; there is honorable
Attendance, and what not? And all these (no doubt) Satan presented on their
fairest side, to their best advantage: But he did not tell him how many Cares
and anxieties attend Greatness: He did not acquaint him with the abundant
troubles, the great disquiet, and mavelous perplexities which usually attend
early Crowns; all these Satan hides out of the way; nothing may be seen but
what might both please and allure. But most certain it is, that the Crowns of
Gold which adorn the heads of Kings, though they shine and glister, yet all is
not gold in them, because they are in-layed with Briars and Thorns. High Seats
are always uneasy: And there is no good Prince who desires to manage his
Scepter well, if he view it round on all sides, but shall find that there is a
gread deal more attending earthly Diadems beside Pomp and Glory. And for this
reason, First, Prayers must be made for Kings that desire to rule well, because
their troubles, cares and fears are greater then other men's. Secondly, Their
Temptations are likewise greater then those of private Persons, and therefore
they stand more in need of joint, public and private Prayers. And, Lastly,
They must in a special manner be prayed for by their people upon the account of
good, which may be received under them; That they may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.

I have done with my short Narrative concerning the most eminent King, which
might have been abundantly more enlarged by a better Pen, though I conceive
there is no great need of it, in regard that God, who has so turned the
Hearts of the people in general toward his Majesty, will doubtless (and that
speedily) turn the face of the King toward his people in bringing him home
unto them, and then he will be his own and therefore much better Epistle. When
a very great number of the people in these Nations, men of even spirits, sound
minds, incorrupt principles, and of godly and blameless lives, that never cease
Praying for the happy settlement of this Church and State upon the sure
foundations of Truth, and Peace, and Order, and long for it as the morning,
shall not be disappointed of their Hope.

To Conclude then, after all our Miseries we may be yet happy and safe, and
every thing we want and hope for beside that is good for us, shall assuredly be
had, after we have been deeply humbled for, and have thankfully accepted of the
punishment of our former iniquities, and when God shall please to speak peace
unto us, we resolve by his Grace and assistance not to return again to folly;
and labor with all our might to perform and do what we resolve: By which
means all heats and animosities amongst us might be in good time quenched or
cooled, every man's rights and properties settled, Trade encouraged and
increased; and the three Nations in general, who for some years last past by
reason of their strange actings and divisions, have made themselves a Scorn and
contempt unto other people round about them, might regain their honor, and
become both their Envy and Terror; yea, then all Blessings shall overtake and
come upon us, both the blessings of Gods left and right hand. When (which is
first to be considered, though here put in the last place) we contend for the
establishment of True Religion; of Religion (though we may tremble to speak it)
which has been so much prostituted in these Nations unto ends that have not
been good, and made a stirrup to get up to Power or Riches: Oh how many
thousand souls have been and are betrayed by the abuse of that Word, whose use
is Sovereign and Saving! Yet although some, and they too too many under the
mask and show of Religion have been naught, yea and most vile; it is not
possible for any to be good who are not Religious. I say therefore when we
endeavor after that, which above all things ought to be most dear unto us, and
before all other things most to be contended for, the Purity and Power of
Religion, the Purity thereof separated from all dregs or mixture of Error or
Ignorance which do marvellously debase it. And then the Power of it, consisting
in a right understanding of all those things we may and we must know, which
concern God and our selves: And as Religion takes its name from Binding, so
then may we be accounted Religious when we bind our selves, as much as we may,
to search after every thing which God would have us to know, and then to do
what we know; the Practice of Duty being the Life of Duty. In short, when not
the Form, nor the Visard, nor the Face, nor the Show, nor the Name only, but
the Purity and Power of Religion shall shine amongst us, we cannot be less
then an happy people: For this will be the only means to procure, to get and
to keep the presence of God in mercy and for ever to abide with us: And happy
are the people that be in such a case; yea, blessed are the people who have the
Lord for their God.

FINIS.

