THE CHARACTER OF An Informer.

WHEREIN His Mischeivous Nature, and Lewd Practices are Detected.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL P PEN^E printer's or publisher's device

LONDON. Printed for T. P. 1675.

A Schismatic Pamphlett.
THE CHARACTER OF An Informer.
AN Informer (I mean of the baser sort) whose Picture only is here intended to
be drawn) Is one of the Devils Nut hooks; A Priviledg'd Trapan, or a Common
Barretor under pretense of Authority: A Petty-fogging Catterpillar that
scandalizes the Law, by making it accessory to his Rapines and Oppressions; A
new Trapp for the Tongue, that Lime-twigs all that come near him, and puts most
that he converses with, on the Tenter-hooks of an Indictment for nothing.

A mischeivous Vermin, bred out of the Corruption of the Body Politic; that
feeds (like Toads) only on Poisons, and sucks the peccant Humors so long (like
a Horse-leach) till he burst with Venom, or is forced to disgorge by the
Emetick quality of a Halter: He makes good the old Maxim, Summum Jus, Summa
Injuria; and cuts Justice's Balance to pieces with her own Sword; He talks
all Law, and never troubles his head with Equity or Religion, unless it be only
to suppress them, and having no Conscience himself, is resolved to be a Plague
to all those that dare own they have any: He never opens his Mouth but you
shall see it Lyn'd with some old dormant Piece of P^ult^n, whom he Reads merely
as Conjurers do Scripture, to do mischief with it; You would think him bred a
Gla^^er, he is so apt to pick Quarrels; or some broken Merc^ant that his flung
his Soul overboard, to make himself every way a Complete Bankrup^. He will
Court a man to beat him, that he may worry him next Sessions for the Battery,
and dropp dangerous words on purpose to Prosecute you for Concealing them;
Presentiments, Citations, Warrants, Convictions, Seazures, etc. are his
universal Language; and he is better acquainted with the Form of an Indictment,
than his Pater Noster, for he never name; God, but when he Swears by Him.

His Revenue consists in A^tions Popular, and his whole Employment is to go a
Fishing with Pe^al Statut^; he thinks by that to take store of fat Gudge^ns,
but at last catches only a Frogg? For his malitio^s Project; (like Chemical
Attempts of Transmuting Mettalls) seldom answer the trouble and Charge; and
his mighty Incomes of Pe^al^ies can but just purchase Ale enough to make him
d^unk, and afterward he is forced to run on Tick (at a Friends) for Coffee to
make him Sober, if he may be said ever to be so; whose Hair-brained Skull is
perpetually Hurrycan'd with Malice, and in Child bed throws till it is Delivered
of some New-minted Villia^y.

There is nothing in Nature so base and Contemp^able as one of his Quality; a
B^m-Bailey is a worthy Gentleman to him, and the Apparator scorns his Company
more then a Phanatique does a Parso^^: the Boys stare on him as a Monster; Big
bellied Women are ready to Miscarry at the sight of him, and People generally
avoid his Converse as they would do the Pestilence, and indeed they have
reason, for he is one of Gods more grievous Judgments! Squire Keto^ himself
would not endure the Sc^n^al of drinking a Pot with him, were he not in certain
hopes of a future Advantage by him? A Popish Fireball Flinger is not more Hate^
in the City the^ he, only the Justices C^^^^e and H^call C^ze^r, because he
brings the most G^ists to his M^^l, and warrants him a Trade.

The Wise Athe^i^^s (we read) Banish: a Coffin-maker out o^ their City, because
the cause of his Mirth was others sadness; what would they have done with such
a Setting-dogg, (who like a Beast of Prey) lives wholly on mischief, and can
neither eat not drink, without some Law be violated; so that if ever he say any
Prayers, they are only that Men may daily increase their Crimes, and Act more
unlawful things; that his Gains may rise proportionably. For though like a
Cunning Archer, he seem to make the Public Service the Mark of his aim, yet
he squints aside at his own Ends, which are the true Butt all the Arrows of his
Prosecutions are shot at: He pretends himself a Zealot for the Law, And the
Churches chief Scavinger; But is in truth a prostituted Varlet, and for all
him. Episcopacy might lie in the Kennel, and Acts of Parliament (though never
so just and necessary) stop Mustard pots, If he did not hope to get a Spill by
them. And for Twopence Advance, from either Geneva or Rome, I Will undertake the
same Fellow would burn the Comm^^ Prayer, and tear M^g^^ Chart^ to pieces, if
he have not done it alread^,

Whatever boasts therefore he makes of his Loyalty, or Orthodoxness, those that
wear any Eyes about them will judge, so b^^ a Man can scarce make the best
Subject, and that we are like to have a Glorious Reformation* when open
Proph^^eness is Imploped to Correct supposed He^e^ies: A good Cause is
undoubtedly Scan^aliz'd by such v^l^ Instruments, and could not but Blu^h to
see those Prosecute Persons for Ceremonial Nonconform^^^es, who are themselves
so much unconformable to all the Fundamental Laws of Religion and Morality?
Does it not sound excellently to hear one of these Promooting Hectors Cry out,
D^n^ me, before I have done, He make all these Ph^n^tiq^e Sons of W^oores come
to our Church* and serve the Lord God g^llantly. Is not this think you, A fit
Agent to proselyte Dissenters? A rare Saints-Bell to Ring all into the Organs?
Yet examine his Pedigree, and you must confess him descended of an ancient
Stock, being the Son of Abaddon, or a natural By-blow of Belsebubs, whom
without breach of Charity, we may Conclude to be the first Founder of this
Order of Informants, since the Scripture reckons amongst his Titles, That of
Accuser of the Brethren, Nor is he less nobly Allied, For H^nnan and Juda^^
were his two Elder Brothers, and Free of the same Trade, though both Hanged,
Which serves only as an Omen of what at least he deserves, though the times
should prove so unjust as not to give it him. His Younger Years were but an
Apprentiship in Debauchery* and having by Lust and Riot, consumed his
Patrimony, or what he could C^e^t others of, he now Imagines to Retreive a
Fortune by Sp^r^i^g and wasting those that have been either more Pious or
Industrious: He has broke oftener than a Town-Gallant has been Clapped, and
followed more Tricks than a Country Mercer usurps Trades; But all failing, The
Devil in pure pity wished him to this New Employ, and furnished him with a
prodigious Stock of Wickedness to set up with; yet being unwilling to Trust him
without Security, he freely made a M^rgage of his S^ul, and Swears he has
Cheated the Subtle Feind* because it was Forfeited long before. He is now as
eager after his Prey as a half-starv'd Cormorant, and cares not though he Ruin
half a Nation, to supply his own prodigalities, Being so perfectly Mercenary,
That he would accuse his own Father (if he did but know him) of Treason, and
burn his Mother for a Witch, to get Six-pe^^e: He values an O^th no more than a
Gamester, and swallows Perjuries as fast and as easily as a Juggler does Pins
and Daggers.

He Ferrets a Conv^ticle just as a Poll cat does Rabbets in their Buroughs,
and the Rich men there skulke down in their Pews when they see him come in,
dreading him more than a Partridge does a Hawke, or a City Crack a Marshal's
Man. I never before knew the meaning of that Latin Proverb, Lupus in Fabula,
but now I Guess the English to be An INFORMER in a Meeting House, for sure the
sight of him is enough to make a Teacher hoarse; most of the Day he spends
pera^e in blind Alehouses, and little Sallies, to discover who has the
Impudence to serve God, And before Night he is sure to be in the Crown-Office:
A J^stice of Peace can never be at quiet for him; and the honest Constable
looks upon him as his Evil Genius that is perpetually haunting and Egging him
on to Mischief: Yet though he be thus troublesome to others, he is still his
own greatest Enemy, for whilst he Designs harm to others, it redownds to
himself; And Good-men like Cammomile grows the better (perhaps the more
numerous and faster) for his treading them down, He being only as a black
groun^ to set of the lusture of their Merits, since often tims whilst Malice
seeks to wound,; it cures those against whom it is Levelled, and destroys it self,
like the Glass that Reverberating the Serpents Poison Ki^^'d her with her own
weapon.

Just as he gets his Money he spends it, For as he takes Wages to Fight against
God, so he lays it out again in the Service of the Devil, Consuming in Bawdy
houses, what he gets by Surprising Meeting Houses; So that his Rapines not
being able to supply his prodigal Debaucheries, and his Hellish Designs, being
blasted by Heaven, He is either forced at last to cast Anchor in a Goal, or
else is Mowed down as a Noxious Weed by the Sith of Justice: To which deserved
F^te I leave, etc.

I leave him, if in the mean time his guilty Conscience (hitherto* smothere^)
do not before Revive and Condemn him, And he himself save the Ha^gman a Labor,
by preventing Him.

-- Dabit Deu^ His quoque.
Finem,

