THE CHARACTER OF POPERY.
POPERY is a Catholic Shamm; for it cheats those that tamper with it, of their
Understandings, and their Senses, their Consciences, and their Souls: An
Ecclesiastical Juggle; the cunning Knave's Mask, and the filly Bigot's Creed:
Jacob's Ladder reversed, or the Debauchee's En^gine; which he doubts not, but,
if well oiled, will at last carry him to Heaven: For it is a Project, that
offers at saving Men, and their Sins together; nay, in many Cases, to make
their Sins meritorious of Salvation: A Blendure of Ambition and Covetousness,
dressed up in a long Mantle of Hypochrisie, called, Saint Peter's Cloak: A
false Bait, managed by a crafty sort of Fishermen, that pretend to angle Souls
for Heaven; but design only to catch Gudgeons, and grasp Earth, and its
Advantages: Jingling the Keys of PARADISE, on purpose to amuse the Crowd, and
to get Opportunities to pick their Pockets. It Is a strange Farrago of Errors
and Impostures: A Gallimawfrey, composed of contradictory Ingredients: The
highest Superstitions, and yet the rankest Profaneness: Subtilties of the
finest spinning, and most gross Absurdities. It makes its God and then eats
him. It teaches all its Votaries, to Pray, without either understanding the
Words, or yet devout Attention of Mind: To Fast with a Luxurious Dinner of
Fish, Wine, and Sweetmeats, that Heliogabalus, and other choicest Heathen
Gluttons would lick their Lips at. It cries up MARRIAGE for a Sacrament; and
yet, at the same time, bars its Sacred Clergy from it, because it will defile
them. It boasts its self to be the sole Keeper and Interpreter of the
Scriptures; and yet avows, that they are corrupted, and unintelligible: And so,
at once, proclaims her own perfidious Negligence, in not preserving the Sacred
Oracles; and her monstrous Uncharitableness, in not giving Us an Authentic
Explication. It pretends an Infallible Knack of deciding all Controversies; yet
cruelly suffers her Brats to spend their Times in endless Quarrels; witness the
Brawls between her Franciscans and her Dominicans, her Jesuits and her
Jansenists, her most Christian, and most Catholic Doctors.

We may therefore call it a Rope of Sand, held together merely by Interest and
Force: A Babel-Building, erected by diligent Fraud, and aspiring Pride, upon
the Plains of drowsy Ignorance, and easy Credulity; and cemented not only with
the Tears, but the Blood of thousands of Innocents. A devouring MONSTER, begot
in the dark by an incestuous Mixture of Impudence the Son, with Ignorance the
Mother; Suckled by PHOCAS, with the Milk of REBELLION, and Blood Royal; and
Rocked to Sleep by Pope BONIFACE, in the Cradle of a universal Bishopric;
where doting MONKS sung Lullabies to it, with a multitude of lying Legends, and
feigned Miracles. The French Usurper, King PEPIN, and his Son, gave it a new
Coat; and Pope HILDERBRAND taught it to go High-Lone, and trample on the NECKS
of EMPERORS and KINGS. 'Twas always very fond of Babies to play with; and cried
and scratcht most filthily, till it had got Pictures and Images set up in
Churches; which from Lay-men's Books, quickly became their GODS. The Schoolmen
provided it Rattles of Distinction, and abundance of Elder POT-GUNS, to divert
it self, and amuse the World with. The Conventicle of TRENT found it sick of
the Rickets; but applying altogether the Italian Physic, set it again upon its
Legs, though with a Head swelled bigger than before: Yet ever since, it has
been languishing in a Consumption; to palliate which, Fifty Thousand Fathers of
the Society, are always busy with Cordials and Paint, to keep up its Spirits
and Complexion. The DIET it delights in, is Aurum Potabile, and the Blood of
MARTYRS: The Inquisition is its Right-Leg, and Sophistry its Left; and with
these Two Supporters, it bestrides the World.

To express its Essence, and full Latitude in one word, you must call it
ANTI-CHRISTANISM, (whether you take [Anti] to signify against, for, or instead
of, as the Greek Tongue has it; or whether you take [CHRIST] to denote
peculiarlty our Blessed Savior; or more generally, his Vicegerents: or more
largely, his Saints or Catholic Church; who all enjoy the Unction of the Holy
One.] For as this Mock-Religion most impudently pretends its POPE, the greatest
Rebel and Enemy to GOD and CHRIST, under Heaven) to be Vice-God, or Christ's
Vicar or Lieutenant upon Earth: and that he has a Plentitude of Power in
Christ's stead, to Rule the Universal Church: Under which forged Commission,
and kind Sembleance, nothing can tend more against the Person, Honor, Merits,
Offices, and whole Gospel of CHRIST, nothing be more degrogatory to the just
Rights, and Veneration due to Sovereign Earthly Princes; nor yet any thing be
more pernicious to, or destructive of Sincere Christians, than his
Tripple-Crown'd TRAYTOR's Doctrines and Practices.

For Popery, by its Doctrine of Transubstantiation, will have the Body of
Christ to be without the Proprieties of a true Body; and consequently, taking
away the Humane Nature, it denies the Person of our Mediator.

It Invades his Royal Office, by assuming his Incommunicable Titles, by
undertaking to Rescind, and make void his LAWS; Absolving Man from his Duty to
God, by Dispensations, and from the Penalty which Sin has made his due, by
Indulgence; so Bellarmine tell us, That the Pope has a Power to make Sin to be
no Sin. And the Council of Latereran, That the Pope has all Power over all
Powers, as well of Heaven as of Earth. Faciendi peccatum non peccatum.

Con. Lat. Sess. 10. supra omnes potestates tam Coeli quam Terrae.




It Blasphemes the PRIESTLY Office of Christ, whereby at one Oblation of
himself, he satisfied for all Sin, Heb. 10.11. 1 Jo. 1.7. For as if the same
was Insufficient, Popery appoints an innumerable Company of Shaveling Priests,
whose daily business is pretended to offer up Christ afresh, or a propitiatory
Sacrifice for the Quick and the Dead, in their Wicked and Idolatrous Mass. It
also undertakes to Purge away Sins, by other Medicines, besides his precious
Blood. And sets up a Multitude of other MEDIATORS and INTERCESSORS. It opposes
Christ's Prophetic Office, by adding a multitude of Traditions and Inventions,
as necessary to Salvation, to be received with the same Reverence as the Word
of God.

It exalts it self above all that is called God in the World: For its POPE
Crowns and Uncrowns Emperors with his Feet, and Treads upon them as one would
do upon a Viper; Takes upon him to Depose KINGS and PRINCES, to give away their
KINGDOMS to discharge Subjects of their Allegiance and Oaths; and to justify
their Rebellion against, or Assassinations of their Sovereigns.

To speak Truth, POPERY is the Debauchment of all RELIGION; For by Substituting
it self under the Christian Name, it has Subverted the innate Sense and
Worship of the Deity, and maintains Tenets, and imposes Practices, which the
wiser sort of Heathens always blushed at; And at the same time, it has
suppressed, and depraved, and counterfeited Divine Revelations; so that, the
Principles both of Natural and Revealed Religion being thus Corrupted. It makes
its Proselytes but so much the more the Children of Wrath, than they were by
Nature; for she hood-winks their Understandings, degenerates and scars their
Consciences, and lays waste all Morality.

Her design is not the promoting of Christ's Interest, (for that is apparently
prostituted) but the Securing and Agrandizing of a Faction, which under the
Profession of Christianity, might be false to all its Realities. Her Rule is
the Corrupt Inclination of depraved Nature, to which they have thoroughly
Conformed their Practical Divinity; which eases Men of Duty, for which they
have an Aversion, and clears the way to those Sins to which they are disposed,
as though there were no need to avoid them. Thus their Principles are more
pernicious, because more taking; because Men will quickly like that Religion,
because he Loves his Sin; and will, it is to be feared, follow both, though he
Perish for it Eternally.

She has by Various Methods, destroyed (as much as in her lies) the
Credibility of the Christian Religion: As:

First. By making Men to neglect and slight those Sacred Oracles, which
contains firm Demonstrations of its Verity; and to rely upon the vain Sandy
pretense of her Infallibility, for the certainty of Faith.

Secondly, St. Austin. Figmenta mendatum aut portenda fallaciam Spirituum.
By obtruding upon the World her Fabulous Legends, and Lying Miracles, in which
she is so Notorious Falsary, which to every Rational Man appear to have been
only Delusions, and Rank Impostures.

Thirdly, By rendering the Gospel it self unworthy of Acceptance; as she has
modeled, and depraved it, through her absurd, superadded Principles, Idolatrous
Worship, Gross Superstitious Rites, and innumerable Ceremonies, no less various
in themselves, than Burdensome to the Observers.

Fourthly, By reducing our whole Duty (upon the Matter) to certain,
unreasonable, Servile Submissions, to her Haughty, Avaritious Clergy: And by
resolving the Terms of Eternal Happiness, finally, into the Benediction, or
good Pleasure of her vile Fulsome Priests.

So that take her Systeme together, and I see not how either Jew, Pagan, Turk,
or other Infidel, can Honestly entertain the Christian Religion, as she
Teaches it; or if they should so Embrace it, how far they would be Gainers by
the Bargain.

In the Homilies of the Church of England for Whitsunday, you have this
Character given of her; That the Church of Rome is an Idolatrous Church, not
only an Harlot, as the Scripture calls her, but also a Foul, Filthy, Old,
Withered Harlot, and the Mother of Whoredeme, Guilty of the same Idolatry, and
worse than was among the Gentiles.

POPERY in its self, is the vilest Tyranny, that ever Heaven in Judgment
suffered, or Earth in Patience groaned under: That of Dionysius and Nero were
but Flea-bitings to it; They only Challenged a Despotical Power over Peoples
Persons, This assumes an uncontrollable Dominion over their very Consciences
and Souls: And is framed entirely for the Befooling, Enslaving, Despoiling, and
Corrupting of the Laiety, and the Enriching and Agrandizing her Priesthood; who
with the Supple Hams of a Flattering Hypocrisy, first seem to Adore and
Deifie; but as soon as they have gained their point, do really Spurn at, and
Trample upon all Secular Dignity and Authority; for She assumes an Arbitrary
Power to pluck up, and Destroy all Governments, when it is for her purpose.

But still, a fine Convenience or Umbrage of Religion she is, to those who will
live by the Rules of none; And an admirable Color for Ambitious Princes to
enlarge their Empire, to the prejudice of their Neighbors, and pretense of
advancing the Catholic Faith; and to destroy their own People for God's sake,
when ever they shall have Oppressed them so far as to fear them: And as ready
an Engine to excite Subjects to Rebellion against their Lawful Sovereigns, as
often as they will not Dance to the Measures of the Vatican.

To Conclude: As every Religion consists of Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline;
so the Doctrine of Popery is Ignorance and Error: Its Worship, Idolatry and
Superstition: Its Discipline, Rage and Cruelty. Whence fitly does the Holy
Spirit, in Sacred Writ, describe her by those three Titles, The False Prophet,
The Whore, and The Beast: False Prophet, for her Teaching, and enforcing
Errors; Whore, for her Idolatry, Gaudy Dress, and Meritricious Paintings: And
Beast, for her Ravenous and Savage Cruelty.

To Conclude further: She is the Disgrace, and grand Impediment of the Gospel,
the overthrow of Morals, the perperual Disquieter of Civil States, the
Destroyer of Christians, the Scandal of Infidels, and the Pest of the World.
Which therefore, all Mankind are obliged, both in Honor, Conscience, and
Interest, by all Lawful ways to oppose; and Wish, and heartily Pray, for its
Extirpation from the Face of the Earth; which for the Comfort of all that
suffer by, and under it, and to the Terror of all its Abettors,
(notwithstanding their Subtilties, or Violence, to support what Providence has
doomed for Destruction) shall assuredly, in God's due time, be accomplished,
and the KINGS of the Earth shall Burn her with Fire. Amen.

FINIS.

