THE CHARACTER Of a true ENGLISH SOLDIER.

Semper in Bello His maximum periculum est, qui maxim TIMENT. Audacia pro Muro
Habetur.

Salust. Written by a Gentleman OF THE New-raised Troops.

With Allowance. To. L'Estrange.

LONDON: Printed for D. M. 1678.

The Character of a true English SOLDIER.
A True English Soldier, is a free born Son of Courage, voluntarily put
Apprentice to the Art of War: A stock of Heartoak* fit for Laurels to be
grafted on; or a sprig of Valor, that duly pruned by Discipline and
Experience, sprouts up in time into an Hero. Though he take Pay, you cannot
without injustice call him Mercinary: for he serves his King and Country as
much out of Inclination as Necessity; and differs from the common Ruffianly
Soldier of fortune, as a Charging horse from a Cart horse, or a Cock of the
Game from one of Dunghill breed; so unlike, that they scarce seem of the same
Species: For he scorns the vices as much as the power of his Enemies; looks
upon the Camp as a severe School of Virtue, not a Sanctuary of Debauchery; and
lives like a Christian, though he fights like a Turk. He holds it, next to his
Creed, that no Coward can be an honest man; yet never bloodies his Sword but in
the heat of Battle: For in his Quarters he is as peaceable as a Constable, and
associates more lovingly with his Comrades, than Monks in a Cloister: The
reason is, he is stout, not quarrelsome, and delights to have the Sun behold
his Valor, because he resolves to do Actions worthy the Eye of Heaven. He will
never be persuaded, that Success can justify Cruelty, or Victory legitimate a
Rape, or a Storming excuse a Sacrilege: Next to Cowardice and a Mutiny, he
hates nothing so much as Rudeness to the fair Sex, whose weakness he allows to
be their protection; being so honorably merciful to Women in a surprizal, that
the Triumphs of his Civilities can never be equaled but by those of his
Prowess. It Is true, he is a Lover, but it is of Danger and Glory, whom he courts
(as Jove did Semele) in Clouds of Smoke and Thunder; and appears more brave and
lovely to a judicious Ladies eye in a tattered Red Coat or suit of Buff (allow
him but his Arms for Trimming) than your little sprucified man of mode in his
powdered Wig and Cloth of Tissue.

He is so abhorrent from treacherous Murders or crol-blood-Massacres, that when
he looks upon his Enemies dead body in the Field, it is with a kind of noble
pity, no insultation. He attributes the whole glory of a Conquest to God's
mercy and his Generals conduct; and always prepares for Death, though he never
fears it. He thinks not out of his own Calling, when he accounts Life a
continual Warfare; and his Prayers then best become him, when, armed Cap a pe,
he looks as if he had a design to take at once both Earth and Heaven by
violence. Before an Engagement he signs out some such short, but zealous
Ejaculation: Lord, remember me anon, when I shall be too apt to forget thee!
and then falls on as resolutely and unconcerned as to a Feast. He is so
confident of victory, that he always gives the Onset with a Hallo and Shouts
of triumph; and pursues a Charge so furiously, that he is in with his Enemy
almost as soon as his Bullet, ready, if that misses, with the Butt end of his
Musket to do Execution. He fears a Sword no more than an Ague; and counts, the
roaring of Cannons and whistling of Small-shot, m^ke as pleasant Music as the
Base and Treble in Consort. His Courage is natural, not borrowed from the
Inspirations of Drink, or thrust upon him by the necessity of Despair. It Is a
base and malicious scandal to say, That his Valor ebbs and flows with the
condition of his Snapsack, or that he can never fight well unless Beef and
Bag-pudding be his Seconds. It Is true, the Fertility of his Country has inured
him to a plentiful Diet, and he would willingly have his body in good plight,
to keep pace with the vigor of his mind: Yet he can endure the most pinching
Necessities, and, led on by Honor, will hold out a Campaign, though Hunger and
Cold march never so close in the same File with him. He is true Steel, which
may be bent by violence, but in a minute return to its former posture. Thus he
may be overcome, but never conquered: for he will Rally after the Tenth
Repulse, and pluck Victory back by the wing, when she is flying away to the
Enemy. Besiege him never so strictly, so long as the Air is not shut up from
him, his heart faints not: for, like Hannibal, he always either finds a way, or
makes it.

But Valor and endurance of Hardships are but two parts of a Soldier; that
which compleats him is Obedience; in which our true Englishman is singularly
exemplary; never did any so much slight his Enemy, and so revere his Chief. The
Roman Legions could not boast a Spirit at once so fierce and so docile, that
could overflow the Field with mote impetuosity, and retire to his place in the
Camp with less appearance of having ever gone out. The respect he bears his
Officers, is more powerful than the Right of Life and Death they have over him.
He is more apprehensive of their Anger, than of the Law Martial and Ordinances
of War: for he obeys for love, not fear; and resents their displeasure more
terribly than any punishment. He disputes no Orders, but executes them; and
will charge up to a Cannons mouth, or make a Scalado through showers of
Bullets, and the midst of Flames naked, if his Country's Honor, or his
Generals Command require it.

Thus far we have seen him in his private capacity, now behold him when Merit
has entitled him to a COMMAND; you shall find in his action neither a
cowardly or heavy coldness, nor a rash precipitate vehemence; though he does
nothing meanly, yet he does nothing with violence, but softly makes haste, and
advances with an insensible motion. He cherishes his Soldiers as tenderly as a
Father his Children, and had rather save one of their Lives, than kill ten of
his Enemies. He does not train by the Book, dully reckoning up so many Postures
of the Pike and Musket, as if he were counting a Game at Noddy; but, having a
perfect Idea of the whole Art Military, Theorick and Practick, instructs every
one according to his capacity, and prefers or punishes with a just respect to
Merit. He endures equal toil with the meanest Soldier; is the first in giving
a Charge, and the last in retiring his Foot. From his Example they all take
fire, as one Torch lights many. He has learned as well to make use of a
Victory, as obtain it; for then, pursuing his Enemies like a Whirlwind, he
carries all before him, being assured that is the time to complete their Ruin,
when they have lost Force, Wisdom, Courage, and Reputation. He is the universal
Genius that actuates all under his charge, and moves them, as the
Intelligences, without tiring themselves, are said to turn about the Celestial
Spheres. Observe how with his Eyes he leads the whole Army! How a nod of his
Head keeps thousands in their Duty! How only his presence establishes Order,
and drives away confusion! He knows in War there is no admitting of a second
error, the first and least fault being sufficient to ruin an Army; he
therefore makes it his business to prevent faults, not to pardon them; and
makes those that are Precedents of Disorder, Mutiny, Negligence, or Cowardice,
repair their offense to the whole, by being Examples of his Justice.

His Loyalty to his Prince, and his Love to his Sou^diers, are essential parts
of his Soul; he would neither betray the one, nor defraud the other for a
greater Empire than Caesar's; little seeming affronts at home cannot disoblige
him; nor mighty Offers from abroad draw him to a Compliance: He scorns Honor
purchased by dishonorable means, is Shot free against the Enemies golden
Bullets, and impenetrable to Vanity, as well as Fear and Avarice. He at once
subverts discovered endeavors, and guards himself from hidden Artifices.
Neither the Poison brought from afar, nor the neighboring corrupted Air, nor
Stranger, nor Friend, nor Hopes, nor Fears, nor Threats, nor Flatteries, have
power to change the goodness of his Constitution; or warp him from his duty.

He scorns to make a Trade of War by prolonging it unnecessarily for his own
profit or reputation, yet maintains it is never to be given over but on one of
these three, conditions: An honorable and well assured Peace, absolute
Victory, or an honest Death.

But I remember our Noble Soldier's life is Action; he hates many words; and I
am willing enough to comply with his Humor: for when I have said all I can,
it is only his own Sword that can truly write his Character.

FINIS.

