THE Royal Pharmacopoea, GALENICAL AND CHEMICAL, According to the PRACTICE Of
the Most Eminent and Learned PHYSICIANS OF FRANCE, And Published with their
several Approbations.

By MOSES CHARRAS, the Kings Chief Operator in his Royal Garden of Plants.

Faithfully Englished. Illustrated with several Copper Plates.

LONDON: Printed for John Starkey at the Miter within Temple Bar, and Moses
Pit at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1678.

The Approbation of Monsieur Anthony D'Aquin, Counselor in Ordinary to the
King in his Councils, and First Physician to his Majesty.
NOT believing that it could be honorable for France, at a time when by the
care and liberality of one of the most famous Monarchs in the World, all Arts
and Sciences have attained their utmost perfection, that Physic, otherwise in
high esteem, should be beholding to foreign Pharmacopoea's for the preparation
and use of such Medicines which are daily requisite to be prescribed, I thought
it expedient, not only to cause Monsieur Charras to make such Galenical and
Chemical Operations and demonstrations every year in the Royal Garden, as
should be necessary for the instruction of yonng beginners in Physic; but also
to give him the platform and design of a Galenical and Chemical Pharmacopoea,
whereby the preparation of ordinary Medicines should be corrected from several
faults, the number and goodness of particular remedies be repaid with interest
to Strangers, from whose Works we have hitherto borrowed, and the Public be
stored with advantage for the ease and cure of those maladies that afflict
Human Nature. And finding that Monsieur Charras has very worthily acquitted
himself of his charge, and fully satisfied me in my design, I willingly and
freely give him my approbation. From the Camp at Quaivrain, the 29th of June,
1676.

D'AQUIN.

The Approbation of Monsieur de la Chamber, Counselor to the King in his
Councils, Physician in Ordinary to His Majesty, and First Physician to the
Queen.
IN regard that to this present time there has been no perfect Pharmacopoea, we
cannot sufficiently praise those that make it their study: And we have great
reason to hope that this of Monsieur Charras will contribute very much to that
perfection which is wanting, since that besides the diligent inquisition which
he has made after what has been most exactly written, he has highly bettered
the ordinary preparation of Remedies, added a great number of particular
Receipts, and made a most necessary Union of the two Pharmacies, by a clear and
intelligible explanation. So that this Work merits esteem, and cannot but be
very advantageous to those who have any insight in Physic. This is the
testimony which we thought our selves bound to give him in public. From St.
Germains en Lay, July 13. 1676.

LA CHAMBER.

The Approbation of Monsieur de Renaudot, Counselor to the King in his
Councils, and First Physician to Monsieur the Dolphin, and Doctor Regent in
Physic of the Faculty at Paris.
THE Author of this ample and Royal Pharmacopoea, has not only made a faithful
Collection of the most Important Medicines; but he has set them down so
elegantly, and argues with so much force and clearness of wit, that it may be
easily discerned that he has not only been content to borrow from the most
worthy Chief, and Head of Physic, the best part of the Remedies which he makes
use of; but that he has also very happily employed his own judgment to
embellish his own Work. He unfolds the difficulties which he meets with in
reconciling Galenick and Chemical Medicines, which formerly seemed
incompatible, considering the different manners of their Choice, Preparation,
and Composition, that there is no person who may not receive full instruction
from thence, and who will not allow him to be one of the most famous Artists of
his Age. This is the real opinion which I the first Physician to Monsieur the
Dolphin, Doctor Regent in Physic of the Faculty of Paris, have of this Book,
upon a serious consideration, and of which I thought my self bound to give a
public confirmation. From the Castle of St. Germain en Lay, July 10. 1676.

EUSEBIUS RENAUDOT.

The Approbation of Monsieur Esprit, Counselor to the King in his Councils,
and First Physician to Monsieur, the Kings only Brother.
THE Galenical and Chemical Royal Pharmacopoea, is a work of a solid wit, very
clear, and full of all the reflections that can be made upon the two Pharmacies.
The precepts of both the one and the other are handled here with so much method
and order, so much neatness, and with so many learned and new Remarks, that I
find nothing wanting for the absolute perfection of the work. The Author has
attained it, by his study, by the labor of several years, and by the vast
experience he has had, by the strength of his reason, and deep meditations upon
the choice, preparation and composition of Remedies. So that we may say, that
his Pharmacopoea is truly Royal; that there is nothing defective in it, nothing
superfluous; that the beauties of it are singular, and not to be discovered in
any of the ancient or modern Pharmacopoea's, as much esteemed, and as much in
use as they are. Therefore does this Work deem to be made public in the Reign
of one of the most Renowned of our Kings, and under the protection of one of
his most principal Ministers, so zealous in every thing that concerns the
advancement of Arts in this Kingdom, and the public benefit; to which this
Pharmacopoea is absolutely necessary, and will be always very advantageous.
Paris, July 12. 1676.

The Approbation of the Dean and Doctors of the Faculty of Physic in the
University of Paris.
WE the Dean and Doctors of the Faculty of Physic in the University of Paris,
having heard the report of Mr. Anthony Morand, Peter Cresse, Lewis Gallais, and
Peter D'Aquin Doctors of the same Faculty, and deputed by the same to read a
Book entitled Pharmacopee Royale, Galenique and Chymique, composed by Moses
Charras, Apothecary, Artist of the King in his Royal Garden of Plants. That the
said Work may be accounted one of the most accomplished pieces that has
appeared upon the subject, that the discourse is polite, the method easy, that
it contains all the marrow of the Ancients, and the best of what has been
discovered of later Ages; that the Author has inserted several learned
Arguments, and judicious reflections; and lastly, that he was worthy the support
and care of Monsieur the King's chief Physician, by whose order he has
undertaken it, and reformed a great number of good Medicines. For these
reasons, we by common consent have thought it convenient to be made public,
acknowledging that it will be very necessary for all those persons that give
their minds to the study and exercise of Physic. In testimony whereof we have
signed these presents. Paris, July 12. 1676.

A. J. MORAND, Dean.

The Approbation of Monsieur Fagon, Counselor to the King, Physician in
Ordinary to the Queen, and Professor in Pharmacy at the Garden Royal.
MOnsieur Charras in this Pharmacopoea has made so exact a Collection of all
that the Ancients and Moderns have afforded profitable or curious in reference
to Physic, that they who shall read this, may spare themselves the pains of
reading any other; and they will find without all question, considering the
labor of compiling, the method and neatness of the Work, that it answers to
the Grandeur of the Title, and the Reputation of the Author. Paris, July 13.
1676.

Physic Books Printed for John Starkey, at the Miter in Fleetstreet, near
Temple Bar.
1. BAsilica Chymica, and Praxis Chymiatricae, or Royal and practical
Chemistry, in three Treatises. Wherein all those excellent Medicines, and
Chemical Preparations, are fully discovered, from whence our Modern Chemistry
have drawn their choicest remedies; being a Translation of Oswald Crollius his
famous Chemistry; augmented and enlarged by John Hartman. To which is added his
Treatise of Signatures of Internal things, or a true and lively Anatomy of the
greater and lesser World. As also the practice of Chemistry of John Hartman, M.
D. augmented and enlarged by his Son, in Folio. price bound 10 s. 2. The Art of
Chemistry, as it is now practiced; written in French, by P. Thybault, Chemist
to the French King, and englished by W. A. Doctor in Physic, and Fellow of the
Royal Society, in Octavo. Price bound, 3s. 3. Medicina instaurata, or a brief
account of the true grounds and principles of the Art of Physic, with the
insufficiency of the vulgar way of preparing Medicines, and the excellency of
such as are made by Chemical Operation; by Edward Bolnest. Med. Land. in
Octavo. price bound. 1. s. 4. Aurora Chymica, or a rational way of preparing
Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals, for a Physical use, by which Preparation
they are made most efficacious, safe and pleasant Medicines, for the
preservation of the life of Man, By Edward Bolnest, Med. Reg. Ord. in Octavo.
Price bound, 1 s. 6. d. 5. The Chyrurgeons Storehouse, furnished with forty
three Tables cut in Brass, in which are all sotts of Instruments both ancient
and modern, useful to the performance of all Manual Operations; with an exact
description of every Instrument, together with one hundred choice observations
of famous cures performed, with three Indexes. 1. Of Instruments; 2. Of Cures
performed; 3. Of things remarkable: written in Latin by Johannes Saultetus, a
famous Physician and Chyrurgeon of Vlme in Suevia, and faithfully englished by
E. B. Dr. of Physic. In Octavo. Price bound 8 s. 6. The Golden Calf, in which
is handled the most rare and incomparable wonder of nature, in transmitting
Metals; viz. how the entire substance of Lead, was in one moment, transmuted
into Gold Obrizon, with an exceeding small Particle of the true Philosophers
Stone, at the Hague, in the year 1666. Written in Latin by John Frederick
Helvetius, Doctor of Medicine at the Hague, and faithfully englished; in
Twelves. Price bound, 1 s. 7. Medicina Statica, or Rules of Health, in eight
sections of Aphorisms, Originally written by Sanctorius chief Professor of
Physic at Padua, Englished by J. D. in twelves. Price bound, 1 s. 8.
Pharmacopoeia Colegii Regalis Londini. in folio. Price bound 8. s. 9. The
Complete Chemist, or a new Treatise of Chemistry, teaching by a short and easy
method, all its most necessary Preparations; written in French, by Christopher
Geasor, Apothecary in Ordinary to the French King, and the Duke of Orleans; and
from the fourth Edition Revised and Augmented by the Author: now, faithfully
Englished by a Fellow of the Royal Society; Illustrated with Copper Plates. In
Octavo. Price bound 3 s. 6 d.
Physic Books sold by Moses Pit at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1678.
PHarmacopee Royale, Galenique and Chymique, par Moyse Charras, quarto, 1676.
Mayerne de Arthritide, accesserunt ejusdem consilia aliquot medicinalia, octav.
1 s. A Complete Treatise of Surgery, containing Barbet's Surgery;
Minderus of diseases incident to Camps and Fleets, with a Chirurgeon's Chest of
Medicines and Instruments, octav. 6 s. A new way of curing the Gout by burning
with Moxa: With observations and practices relating to women in Travel, octav.
Pet. Paw de Ossibus, quart. 5 s. Pharmacopoea Hagiensis, quart. Kerkringii
Spicilegium Anatomicum, continens observationum Anatomicarum rariorum centuriam
unam nec non osteo geniam foetuum in qua quid cuique ossiculo singulis accedat
mensibus, quidve decedat and in eo per varia immutetur tempora, accuratissime
oculis subjiciuntur, 1670. quart. Fortunius Licetus de monstris ex recensione
Gerardi Blasii, qui monstra quaedam nova and rariora ex ricentiorum scriptis
addidit. Editio novissima iconibus illustrata, 1665. quart. Basilius Valentinus
of natural and supernatural things; also of the first tinctute, root, and
spirits of Metals and Minerals, how the same are conceived, generated, brought
forth, changed and augmented. Whereunto is added Friar Bacon of the medicine of
tincture of Antimony; Mr. John Isaac Holland his works of Saturn, and Alexander
van Suchten, of the secrets of Antimony, out of Dutch, 1671. octav. 2 s. An
Essay about the origin and virtues of Gems, by the Honorable Robert Boil, 1 s.
6 d. Idem Lat. duodec. 1 s. Dr. Lower de Cord, Amsterd. 1671. octav. 3 s. Dr.
Grew's Anatomy of Vegetables, 1672. octav. 2 s. Eugelenus de Scorbuto, octav.
Fred. Deskeri Exercitationes Medicae, octav. Thruston de Respiratione, octav.
Mr. Boil of hidden qualities of the Air, against Hobs; and of attraction by
suction, octav. 2 s. 6 d. Primerose Ars Pharmacentica, duodec. Swalve Alsali,
duodec. Severini Synopsis Chirurgiae, duodec. Ottonis Jachenii Hippocratis
Chymicus, 1671. duodec. Theodori Kerckringii, D. M. commentarius in currum
triumphalem Antimonii Basilii Valentini a se latinitate donatum, 1671. duodec.
Francisci Redi experimenta circa res diversos naturales, speciatim illas quae
ex Indicis adseruntur, 1675. duodec. The six Travels of John Baptista
Tavernier, Baron of Aubonne, through Turkey and Persia to the Indies, during the
space of forty years. Giving an account of the present State of those
Countries, viz. of their Religion, Government, Customs and Commerce. As also
the Figures, Weights, and Value of the Money and Coins severally current
therein. The Second Part, describing India, and the Isles adjacent.
THE Royal Pharmacopoea, GALENICAL AND CHEMICAL.
THE FIRST PART. Concerning the Generalities of Pharmacy.
CHAP. I. Of the Definition and Names both of the one and the other Pharmacy.
PHARMACY is the second part of that part of Physic that attends the Cure of
Diseases, and teaches the Choice, Preparation and Mixture of Medicaments. This
Definition might suffice, did we not know of any other Pharmacy then that of
the Ancients, which is called Galenic. But in regard the Chemical Pharmacy of
the Moderns has many perfections that are peculiar to it, and that thereby the
benefit of the Galenic is much improved, it deserves to have a particular
Definition. I will say then, without swerving from the first general
Definition, that Chemical Pharmacy ought to be defined to be, An Art which
teaches us to dissolve bodies, and by the same means to divide and know the
parts of which they are composed, to the end we may separate the bad, and
preserve the good, and unite them again when occasion requires. For,

Dividit ut purget, purumque exaltet, and arctet. The Name of Pharmacy, which
is common to both, is derived from the Greek word (...); which signifies a
Medicine, in regard it is the work of both to compose Medicines. The word (...)
is compounded of (...) and (...), as one should say, I bring a Remedy. We call
the Galenic Pharmacy, which has been very ancient, that which was known and
practiced by the Greeks, Romans and Arabians, which has been very much improved
by Galen and his Followers, and to this day is very much in esteem. We call the
Chemical Pharmacy, that which was not known but to some few of the Ancients;
but which at present is very much approved and practiced by a very great number
of the Moderns, who have made it their study, and by their continual Industry
have brought to light, and unfolded many Mysteries that lay before concealed in
riddles, and by that success have encouraged others to follow their example.

The most received Etymology of the word Chymistrie, is that which is derived
(...), from Juice, in regard it teaches how to extract the most pure and liquid
parts of Compounds, and to separate them from those parts which are more impure
and gross. Others derive the word from (...), to melt or dissolve; from whence
they also fetch the word (...), which some Lexicons expound to be a Melting or
preparation of Gold and Silver, being substances upon which Chymistrie
practices a vast number of preparations. The Name of Alchymie, which some have
attributed to Chymistrie, is derived from the Arabic word Al, which sometimes
signifies the Excellency of a thing, and sometimes Salt; in which sense it may
signify a dissolving or preparation of Salt, which is one of the most
essential parts of Mixture.

Others have styled Chymistrie the Hermetic science, alleging without ground
that Hermes was the Inventor thereof, to whom for that reason they gave the
Name of Trismegistus, or Thrice great. Some, not improperly, have called it the
Art Distillatorie, in regard that it accomplishes many of its operations by
Distillation. Paracelsus and several others have named it Spagyric Pharmacy,
which is a composition of two Greek words (...), to separate, and (...), to
gather together; for it separates the pure from the impure, and unites and
gathers together the pure parts, when the impure are separated from them. I
omit those other Names which others have ascribed to it, as Pyrotechnie, or the
Art of working by Fire; the Sages or the Philosophers Art; the Secret Art, and
many other Names, which I pass over in silence.

CHAP. II. Of the Subject, Object and End of both the one and the other
Pharmacy.
ALL natural things created may be comprised under the Name of Medicament; and
they are equally the subject, and object both of the one and the other
Pharmacy: So then I say, That Medicament is the general matter that a Student
in Pharmacy ought to consider, and know both externally and internally, and
which he ought to understand how to prepare and mix as occasion requires for
the use of Physic. The exterior knowledge of Medicament is less difficult;
because, that I may speak properly, it is only superficial: Nevertheless it
does not want some difficulty, in regard of the largeness of its extent, and
the vast variety of mixtures which are comprehended under the Name of
Medicament. But the internal knowledge dives into all the parts, whereof
Mixture or simple Medicaments are compounded. And this requires much more skill
and experience than the former. Nor can it be obtained but by preparation, and
by making an exact dissolution of all the parts, which cannot be accomplished
without the help of Chemical Pharmacy.

Though the Body of Man be the remote object both of the one and the other
Pharmacy, it ceases not however to be some part of its subject, in regard it
affords parts which are in truth Medicaments, as the Brains, the Blood, the
Fat, the Hair, etc. which a Student in Pharmacy ought to consider, and
understand how to prepare.

The end of a Physician is twofold, to understand the internal which is the
true knowledge, and tends to the perfect preparation of Medicaments; and the
external, which is the health of Man, for which the Physician chooses,
prepares, and mixes all his Medicines. The first may be also called the Next
End; the other may be termed the Remote End.

CHAP. III. Of the Principles of Chemical Pharmacy.
WIthout making any stay upon the opinion of the Ancient Philosophers, who
founded the principles of all things upon the four Elements, which they
affirmed to be Air, Fire, Water and Earth, I take part with the Chemical
Authors, ancient and modern, who acknowledge no other principles than those
which they meet with by Art in the dissolution of all Compounds. Plants,
Animals, and Minerals, are equally composed of these principles, and we find
them very distinctly in the resolution of their parts; especially of those
whose substance is not extraordinarily compacted. These Principles consist in
five different substances; of which the three principal are called active
Principles; the other two of lesser note, passive Principles. The three first
are called by the Names of Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, by reason of their
agreement with Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury natural. They are called active,
because they include within themselves, a quality, virtue or power that
produces action. Salt is esteemed to be the ground of all savours; Sulphur, of
all odours, and combustibility; Mercury, of all colors. Phlegm and Earth are
the two last principles, which are said to be passive, as well to distinguish
them from the former, as also for that they cannot produce any considerable
action. They are also called Elementary principles, by reason of their
conformity with Water and Earth, which were the grosser Elements of the
Ancients.

In the distillation of Compounds, the insipid Phlegm, which is like Water,
appears usually first of all. Next to that comes the Spirit, to which we give
the name of Mercury: In the third place appears the Oil, which we call Sulphur.
The Salt, under its own proper name, is found last of all, mixed amongst the
Earth; which remaining in the Filtre, after the separation of the Salt, is
looked upon as the last principle.

Nevertheless we find that the Salts of Animals and certain Creatures, rise in
distillation among the other substances, and that in Rectification they also
rise first, by reason of their great volatility, and that there remains but
little fixed Salt among the terrestrial part which is found at the bottom after
distillation. We also find many times that the Phlegm, the Spirit, the Volatile
Salt and the Oil, rise in distillation confusedly together: and that you must
of necessity have recourse to Rectification to separate and purify them. But
though Phlegm and Earth are accounted Passive principles, and have less virtue
than Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, which are the Active principles; yet are they
not altogether to be despised. For besides the necessary rank which they hold
in the composition of Medicaments, they have their particular virtues and uses,
when they are separated from the other principles by distillation, or any other
way of preparation. Which obliges me to discourse of them, as well as of the
rest, according to their order in distillation.

CHAP. IV. Of Phlegm.
Phlegm is a principle reputed to be passive, which most usually rises first in
the distillation of Compounds: especially of such mixed bodies, wherein it
abounds. They who agree the Elements to be principles, suppose Phlegm to be the
Element of Water; which it most resembles, when well separated from the rest of
the principles. Phlegm, though to outward show it appear thin, and almost void
of any consistency, is a substance which most abounds in the composition of
mixed bodies; especially of Plants and Animals.

Phlegm separated from the other substances of the mixed body, does not lose its
virtue. For it curbs the activity of the Spirits, and qualifies the acrimonie
of the Salts, if united to them; it also serves to dissolve them, and all watery
substances. It unites with the Oils, by the help of the Salts. It is proper in
the extraction of several Tinctures, especially of substances, to which it had
been united. It is proper in several Fermentations, Distillations,
Humectations, and several other Operations. It qualifies the heat of the Oils;
and binds and unites the Earth with the Salts, redressing the drieness and
brittleness of the latter. It refreshes and moistens being alone; but easily
receives the impressions of those substances with which it is mixed; it easily
corupts, when mixed with moist substances that are strangers to it; and hastens
their corruption and dissolution. But it may be preserved a long time alone in
a bottle well-stopp'd. It soon evaporates in the open air, but sooner in the
Sun or against the Fire. It usually observes the motion and action of the
Spirits, Oils or Salts, with which it is mixed; and from which at all times it
may with ease be separated. It ascends in distillation in clear clouds, which
presently dissolve into water. In that it differs from the Spirits and Oils,
whose vapors or clouds are much thicker, and harder to be dissolved.

CHAP. V. Of the Spirit.
THE Spirit, denoted by the Name of Mercury, is an airy, subtle; penetrating
substance which usually ascends in distillation after the Phlegm is raised. This
Spirit is more or less subtle and penetrating, according to the nature of the
mixed Bodies out of which it is drawn. For the Spirits of Vitriol, Salt, Nitre,
and Sulphur, are much more piercing than that of Vinegar; and the Spirit of
Vinegar much more penetrating than those of Guiacum and Alum: and by
consequence a Spirit of more force and efficacy will act more powerfully than
one which is weaker. The property of a Spirit is to penetrate, cut, and open
compacted and solid Bodies. It eats, putrifies, breaks, dissolves, and burns
certain mixed Bodies. It coagulates others, as Blood and Milk, and separates the
terrestrial from the watery parts. Certain Spirits being well purified from
their Phlegm, and mingled with water, will cause a heat so vehement therein,
that hardly a Man shall endure his hand in it: nor is it an easy matter to
keep the Vessels from breaking that contain it. The Spirit presently
extinguishes the flame of the Oils; it joins immediately to the Salt, and
sometimes unites it self so closely to it, that nothing but a violent Fire can
separate it. It heats of it self, but being mingled with a small quantity of
cooling liquors, it augments their coolness, and causes them to penetrate. It
dries alone, but moist'ns being mingled with Phlegm, and helps to preserve it.
It gives it its own activity and strength, according as it is mixed with it,
either in a greater, or lesser quantity. It allays and qualifies the Acrimony
of the Salts, and is by them reciprocally qualified. It incorporates with them,
and fixes their Volatility. It is used for Tinctures, and for diversity of
colors, which it changes, and sometimes utterly destroys, according as it is
used. It dissolves Minerals, and precipitates those that were dissolved by
their Salts. It serves for the nourishment of Plants and Animals, and gives
motion to the latter. It dissolves Stones, purifies the Blood; it restores and
renews the radical moisture. It restores the speech to them that have lost it.
It cleanses and purges, being mixed with its Phlegm. It kills all sorts of
Scurfs and Scabs; and asswages all sorts of pains caused by the Salts. In
short, it will give considerable relief to an abundance of Distempers,
especially those that proceed from the acrimony of Salts, if rightly ordered
and prescribed with judgment.

I refer the Volatile Urine Spirits, to the Chapter of Salt, as being more of
the nature of Salt, than of the acid Spirit.

CHAP. VI. Of Sulphur.
SVlphur, acknowledged to be the third Principle, is a homogeneous, liquid,
oily, viscous and combustible substance, which in distillation ascends usually
like Oil after the Spirit; which being purified from the terrestrial and salt
parts, is lighter than the Phlegm, the Spirits, and all the other substances, so
that it swims above them all; but while it still contains those parts of Earth
and Salt, it swims between the other substances, or else it sinks to the
bottom, according as it is more or less intermixed. Sometimes also (...)
happens, that one part of the Oils swims above the Phlegm, another part between
it, and a third part falls to the bottom; as is often observed in the
distillation of ponderous Woods. Sometimes likewise it happens, that the same
compound Body yields Oils distinct in color, that swim one above another, as
is observed in the distillation of Turpentine, where are to be seen Oils of
three different colors, that swim one above another; not to mention the
Spirit, or rather Ethereal Oil that swims above all the rest. The viscosity of
this Principle occasions it easily to stick to those substances that rise with
it in distillation; and particularly to the Salts, or to some other gross and
terrestrial parts: So that there is no way to separate it truly, but by
Rectification, which separates and raises it above all the other Principles.
This Sulphur, being like Oil, is a substance between Spirit and Salt, so that
it may be united to them by Circulation, for the making of Elixirs, Universal
Medicines, and all the rare preparations of Chemical Pharmacy. This sulphurous
Principle being separated from all the rest, not only resists cold, but of it
self never congeals. It is incorruptible, and so preserves those Body's that
are embalmed within it, so that they do not too excessively abound in Phlegm. It
mortifies the acrimony of the Salts; it unites and coagulates with them: It
resists Spirits, and Aquafortis it self, that it can can do no good upon it. It
cherishes the natural heat. It is a great Friend to the Nerves, and facilitates
the motion of the Muscles: It is the Balsom of all things. It is a mollifier,
lenitive, discussive, and an asswager of pain. It increases the Spirits, in
Vegetals and Animals. It is as it were the Soul of Minerals: It is the matter
and foundation of all Odours and scents; and keeps in the middle between the
dryness of Salt, and the moistness of the fluid Spirit.

CHAP. VII. Of Salt.
SAlt is the Spirit, which after distillation usually remains mixed with the
Earth; which being separated, purified, and dried, looks of a white color, of
a dry and brittle consistence. Salt is easily dissolved in moisture, and being
dissolved, it indures the Oil: It may be also joined to the Oil by virtue of
the Spirit. Though this Salt seem to us to be very dry, nevertheless there is
an internal moisture in it, which renders it apt to run with a great fire. Salt
resists Fire, and is purified thereby. It is incombustible, and may be
preserved as long as you please without any loss, or suffering any alteration
of its own nature: The taste thereof is tart and sharp, with a little
bitterness: From whence it has been taken for the foundation of all savors;
though the other Principles are not without them, by reason of some Particles
of Salt that may remain in their substances. It is hot and penetrating; it
hast'ns the running of Metals; it helps to preserve all substances. It
attracts to it self all that are volatile, and fixes them. It strongly unites
with the Spirit, insomuch that if the Spirit exceed it three or four times in
quantity, it ascends with it in distillation. It coagulates certain Liquors. It
purges, cleanses, opens, resolves, dries up, and consumes superfluous humors.
It hinders the consumption of the Oil. It is the Life and Soul of all
substances. Without it the Earth is barren; through the excess of it, it
becomes unfruitful. It preserves Animals in health and makes them fruitful. It
consolidates all substances, especially Minerals; and makes the Spirit
corporeal by joining with it. By the way observe, that the Salt of Animals, as
also of certain Vegetals, is not found among the Earth at the bottom after
distillation: in regard that by reason of its volatile nature it rises like a
kind of Spirit, among the Oil, and with some part of the Phlegm; whence it may
afterward be separated by Rectification. This volatile Salt has some of the
qualities of that which I have already mentioned; but its volatileness carries
it thither, where the other cannot reach of it self without the help of this.
It penetrates in an extraordinary manner, so that neither the Eyes, nor the
Nose can endure the strength of it, in any great quantity; by reason of its
volatileness it cannot resist Fire, which it cannot endure, unless mingled with
some acid Spirit, or with some fixed Salt that surmounts it in quantity. The
volatile Salt is too smart upon the Nose, the Tongue, the Eyes and the Brain by
its penetration; but it neither has the acrimony, nor the bitterness of the
fixed Salt; nor does it leave any considerable heat behind it, either upon the
Tongue, or any other place.

CHAP. VIII. Of Earth.
EArth is the last Principle, and the less esteemed of all. It appears last at
the end of Distillation and Calcination; and when the Salt which was mixed with
it is drawn out of it by Dissolution and Filtration. This Earth thus separated
from all the Principles is called Caput mortuum, or the Dead Head, by the
Chemists, having no other considerable Quality but astriction and dryness. This
Principle however is very necessary in the composition of mixed Bodies: for
while the Sulphur makes it tenacious, viscous and clammy; while the Salt makes
it hard and firm; while the Spirit affords it nourishment and motion; while the
Phlegm is the cause of growth, and tempers all the other substances; from the
Earth it receives a consistence necessary for its preservation: so that there
is no substance in a mixed Body which has not its proper office, and particular
service. The Earth after the dissolution of the mixed Body is that which
troubles all the active Principles, and must be separated from them; for when
it is mixed with them, it hinders their action; It stops the Pores, it
engenders Obstructions, it incorporates with the salts and spirits, and begets
stones in the bladder and reins, and very much contributes to the Original of
several Diseases. The Earth separated from the other substances is often porous
and very light; it easily unites it self with the substances from whence it was
separated. It borrows the weight of the other Principles, especially of Salt
and Spirits which are the heaviest. The use of it in Physic is only exterior,
where there is any occasion to close up and fortify the parts.

CHAP. IX. Of Medicament in general.
MEdicament is defined to be any thing that is capable to change our Nature for
the better. Medicament is divided into Internal and External; and both those
into Simple and Compound. The Simple Medicament is that which is produced by
Nature, though it be in truth composed of all the five Principles already
mentioned. The Compound is that which depends upon several Simples different in
virtue, and mingled artificially together. Sometimes a Compound Medicament may
bear the Name of Simple to distinguish it from another more compounded, which
carries the same Name- Aliment differs from Medicament in this, that being
taken inwardly it nourishes and increases our nature: whereas Medicament can
only alter it, whether outwardly applied, or taken inwardly:

Poison differs from Medicament in this, that it destroys our Nature: but it
may pass for Medicament, in regard that Pharmacy is able to correct and tame
whatever it has of wild and mischievous, and render it wholesome, as well when
given inwardly, as when outwardly applied.

Medicaments differ among themselves, either in their matter, or in their
virtues.

The matter of Medicaments is taken from Vegetals, Animals, and Minerals.

By Vegetals I understand Trees, Shrubs, Brambles, Herbs with all their parts;
all things that belong to, or grow upon them; and in general every thing that
has a vegetative Life, and which receiving nourishment from the Earth by some
sort of Root or other, grows either above, or near the superficies of the
Earth; like the real Plants whose name is common with that of Vegetals. So then
we are to comprehend under the Name of Vegetals, Roots, Stalks, Bark, Wood,
Boughs, Leaves, Flowers, Berries, Cods, Seeds, Gums, Rosins, Juices, Tears,
Liquors, distilling Waters, Kernels, Mushromes, as well those that grow out of
the Earth, as upon Trees and other places; Water-Nuts, the excrescences of
Trees, as Musseltoe, Moss, Cottons, Galls, Thorns, Sugar, Manna, and several
other Plants which it would be too tedious to repeat.

By Animals I understand Fowl, Land-Creatures, Water-Animals, and such as are
accustomed to Land and Water: and not only such as are made use of whole, as
Scorpions, Frogs, Worms, Chestops, little Dogs, Emmets, Cantharides, Lizzards,
etc. but all the parts of the bodies of Animals, which may be used in Physic,
not excepting their excrements and superfluities, as are the brain, the fat,
the blood, the hair, the dung, the urine of Men; the horn, the pizzle, the
stones, the suet, the marrow, the bone of the heart of a Deer; the liver and
inwards of a Wolf; the grease, milt, the yellow stones, and bone in the heart
of an Ox, the foot of an Elk, the lungs of a Fox, the brains of a Sparrow, the
tooth of an Elephant and a wild Boar, the horn of a Unicorn and Rhinoceros. The
ring-bone, hoof, fat and dung of a Horse; the dung of a Mule, or Ass. Musk,
Perles, Bezoar, Shells. The jaw of a Pike, the claws, stones, and juice of
Craw-fish; the blood, and fat of a Wild Goat, and Kid. The heart, liver, trunk,
head, tail, fat and skin of Vipers; the fat, and sperm of a Whale. The liver,
and fat of Eels; the bone of a Toad, the grease of Bears: the grease, and
stomach of a Capon; the feathers of a Wood-cock, and Partridges; the stinking
oil of Bezoarstone. The grease of Hogs, Badgers, Geese, Ducks, and several
other Animals. The dung of Cows, Dogs, Mice, Lyzards, their bones, their skins,
their excrescences, their hair, their urine, their sweat; and in general
whatever appertains to the bodies of Animals.

By Minerals I understand all Metals, Half-metals, and what belongs to Metals.
All sorts of Earths, and Bole-Armoniack; all Stones, Marbles, Flints,
Porphyries, Jaspers, Chrystals, Jacinths, Emraulds, Saphirs, Granats,
Blood-stones, Diamonds, and all sorts of Jewels: Sulphurs, Vitriols, Allums,
Sal Gem, Bay Salt, Water, Rain, Snow, Ice, Hail, Thunderbolts, Dew, Manna of
several sorts, Mortar, Lime, Brick, Oil of Naphta Amber-griece white and
yellow; Jet, Sea-coal and all Bitumens. Talk, Chalk, Bismuth, Zink, and all
Marcasites, the ordinary Earth, Sand, Clay; and in general whatever is drawn
out of the Bowels of the Earth, or Sea; or descends from the Air, being without
Life. Some there are that add to these, Corals and Spunges, which others will
have to be Plants.

Here I might take a fair occasion to make a large Catalogue of all the
principal simple Medicaments, wherewith Vegetals, Animals, and Minerals,
furnish Pharmacy; but the unprofitable confusion and perplexity, which I have
observed in some Pharmacop^a's, have diverted me from it, and have made me
resolve not to speak of them any otherwise in the progress of this Treatise,
than as necessity shall lead me to make more particular Illustrations upon some
that need a peculiar explanation.

CHAP. X. Of the Virtue of Medicaments.
THE Virtue of Medicaments may be defined to be a proper and inseparable
accident, upon which their action depends. So that we may say, that the
Faculties, or Virtues of Medicaments cannot be well known, but by their action
or operation. We observe three Virtues in Medicaments, the altering Faculty,
the purging Faculty, and the strengthening Faculty. The altering Faculty is
known by the manifest alteration which it makes in our Bodies. The purging
Faculty carries away the ill humors, either by expelling them, by making the
passages slippery to make them way, or by attracting them together, and forcing
them out at the usual vents of Nature. We may comprehend under Purgative, the
Diaphoretic Faculty, which sends forth evil humors through the Pores of the
Skin; and the Diuretic, which expells them by Urine. The strengthening Faculty,
or Virtue, fortifies and preserves the Body, or some one of its parts, by a
specific operation.

There are three sorts of Virtues attributed to Medicament. The first sort,
which by the Ancients was esteemed Elementary, and only ought to be attributed
to the Principles whereof it is composed; that is, that it heats, cools,
moistens, and dries; and, still to follow their opinion, sometimes obscurely in
the first degree, sometimes manifestly in the second, sometimes violently in
the third, and sometimes to extremity in the fourth. They also give to each
degree, a beginning, a middle, and an end, which denotes the diminution or
excess of heat, cold, moistness, or dryness.

The second Qualities are the Products of the first: For the property of heat
is to open, rarefie, attenuate, attract, etc. The property of cold is to
thicken, to condense, to stop, to repel, etc. The property of moist is to
moisten, mollify, etc. The property of dryness is to knit, hard'n, and
dissipate humidities, etc.

The third Qualities are hidd'n, and we can only find them out by experience.
As when a Jasper applied to a Wound stops the blood: when a Toad dried, being
held in the hand, stays bleeding at the Nose, and asswages the Toothache, which
is also performed by the Bone in the Fore-leg of the same Toad, when a Stick of
Ash, boiled under a certain Constellation, stops all losses of blood; when a
Hazle-Stick, gathered in its proper season, heals all contusions; when the
Eagle-stone hung about the neck, hinders abortion; and hastens and facilitates
the Birth, being tied to the thigh: as when a straw cleaves of it self to
Amber, or Spanish-wax, Iron to the Lodestone; as when certain Plants tied to a
Horses tail, heal the Farce: and several other effects of the same nature, of
which Philosophers labor to give the natural reason.

CHAP. XI. Of Election, or Choice.
EVery Artist ought to understand the matter of which he intends to make use,
before he undertakes the cure. And therefore with great reason Pharmacy is
obliged to begin its operations with Election.

Election is the discerning and choice of a good Medicament from a bad one. We
may also allege it to be the discerning and distinguishing of every
particular Medicament, when there are several of a various nature mingled
together.

The Ancients by the word Election, did not mean a knowledge as inward and
secret as we could obtain by the help of Chemical Pharmacy, which by the means
of proper dissolvents, resolves the bodies into the principles whereof they are
composed, whereby we gain an inward knowledge of all their parts; but they only
intended a superficial knowledge of the true Character of every drug. Now both
the one and the other of these two skills cannot be principally acquired but by
the help of the Senses, which are Seeing, Smelling, Tasting, Hearing and
Feeling; which are not always necessary altogether, to discern every Mixture
separately, in regard there are some that may be distinguished only by the
Sight, others by the Smell, others by the Taste; others that require a
concurrence of more Senses than one toward a more perfect* Election. And
though that without the Trial of fire, all the Senses together cannot furnish
us with an exact knowledge of all the parts whreof mixed bodies are composed,
yet they afford us enough to discern one mixed body from another, and the good
from the bad; and as much judgment as is required to select them for such and
such occasions, or else to make a separation of them by Chemistry.

Election is made from the Essence, the Substance, or the Qualities of the mixed
body. The Substance mainly conduces to the knowledge of the Essence. The
Qualities assist to the knowledge of both together, adding thereto the trial of
the exterior disposition of the mixed body. By Substance we understand a certain
couching or joining together, or a consistency of matter, which is found out by
the mixture and the proportion of the five principles. Whence it comes to pass,
that some mixed bodies are very heavy; others light, some close, others spungy;
some coarse, others fine; some brittle, others clammy, etc.

The Sight serves to discern colors, and the various external dispositions of
mixed bodies: it discovers also the internal disposition when the body is opened
by breaking, cutting, or otherwise.

The Smelling receives through the Nostrils a certain evaporated substance that
rises from the mixed body, and is carried to the Brain. The difference of
Odours is so great, that it is impossible to relate the variety; but only by
comparison we may guess by the affinity or remoteness of scent, what congruity
one mixed body may have with another. Nor indeed are there above two
differences, the one good, the other bad; though each of these may differ from
their like, in the degrees of more or less.

Feeling serves to distinguish the smoothness or roughness of the mixed body:
but the chief use thereof is to distinguish between heavy and light, hard and
soft. Feeling is also to be made use of, when because there can be no positive
judgment made of the exterior part, there is a necessity of breaking or
cutting into the inside. It serves also to understand the viscousness or
brittleness of a mixed body.

The Taste is a Sense which is as much or more necessary than any of the rest,
by reason of the diversity of Savours in mixed bodies; which proceeds from the
various nature of the Salts, that are mixed in the Composition of their
Substances: and for that Savours are easy to be distinguished and described.

Authors unanimously acknowledge nine simple Savours; of which they will have
three to be hot, three to be cold, and three temperate. The tart, the bitter,
and the salt they place in the rank of hot Savours: The stiptic or sour, the
sharp, the eager, in the rank of cold Savours: The oily, the sweet and the
insipid, they allege to be temperate.

The Hearing is of least use in the election of mixed Bodies. For it only serves
to judge of their parts when they are closed up in their Covers, as the
Eagle-stone; or in their rinds, as Cassia, whether it be moist or dried up; or
in their cods or husks, as several Seeds: unless we may bring it to the sound
of Metals, the knowledge whereof is more useful in the course of common
dealing, than in Pharmacy.

The practice of these Senses has been the rise of several general Rules, not
only for the knowledge of mixed Bodies; but also for the prescription of them,
which ought not to be unknown.

For it is necessary to examine the lightness of Medicaments that purge by
attraction, as Agaric, Colloquintida, Scammonie, and Mechoacan; yet this Rule
admits of some exception. For Jalap, Hermodactiles, and Turbith, are accounted
more rosiny and best, when being dry they feel a little weighty.

It Is necessary to examine the weight of Medicaments that purge by compression,
mollifying and lenifying, as Rhubarb, Cassia, Mirobalans and Tamarinds.

The soft and smooth superficies of a Medicament, is to be preferred before the
hard and rough. Remedies moderately hot, are to be preferred before cold; moist
before dry. Hot and moist excel cold and dry. It Is also necessary to choose
good Scents, and to avoid bad ones: and to act quite contrary in some Hysteric
distempers of Women, who cannot endure the scent of sweet odours, which are
only then to be employed in the lower parts.

Savours perfectly sour are naught: those whose sowreness is accompanied with
a kind of stiptickness or restringency, are less hurtful; bitter and stiptick
are the least hurtful of the three. Sweet is the best of all Savours, insipid
next; acid-sweet holds the third place, bitter-sweet the fourth, sweet and
stiptick the fifth.

CHAP. XII. Of the Place, Number, Bigness, Neighborhood and Time which concur
to the choice of a Medicament.
AS to the Place; we must observe that Plants, which grow of themselves in a
place that is free and proportionable to their nature, are to be preferred
before those which are transplanted, and nourished by Art. That Plants which
grow in the Mountains, especially those that lie to the East and South Sun, are
to be preferred before those of the same sort that grow in Valleys. That a
Plant hot and tart that grows in a moist place, has less heat and less tartness
then that which grows in a dry place. That that plant, which abounds in
superfluous moisture, will be far better in a dry than in a moist place.

The most part of those Rules which are observed in reference to the Native
place of Plants, are to be followed in the choice of Animals used in Physic,
and which serve us for food.

As for Minerals, there is nothing more to be observed, but only to procure
them from such places where they are the fairest and most pure.

As to the Number and Bigness, it is to be observed, That Plants accounted
good, but more especially Fruits, are the better, the less their number is; but
hurtful Plants and mischievous Fruits, have less malignancy, where they are
most abundant. That a Fruit good of it self, is esteemed the better the bigger
it is. The contrary is to be observed in Fruits, and other parts of Plants, as
also in Animals that are hurtful. I say nothing to Minerals at this time.

As to Neighborhood, Misseltoe and Polypodie are to be commended that grow
upon Oaks. Dodder of time, and Dodder it self that grows upon hepatic Herbs.
Champignons growing under rotten Trees, are to be rejected; as also Plants that
grow near Houses of office, and in shady places, where the Sun cannot come;
unless they be such Plants as naturally grow in shady places, as Maidenhair,
Liverwort, and Hart's-tongue.

The Time proper for the gathering of Plants, depends upon the diversity both
of them, and of their parts, as also upon the use which they are to be put to.
Fair weather must be always waited for. Fruits must be gathered when they are
fully ripe; as also Berries and Seeds. Herbs with their tops when they are in
their full vigor, and as near as may be in the full of the Moon. Flowers, when
they are in their full bud, and before they are quite blown, and before the Sun
has withered 'em. Roots must be gathered in the beginning of the Spring, and
when the Herb begins to sprout forth. Woods must be cut after the full of the
Moon. Tears, Gums, Rosins, and distilling Juices, before they are melted by the
rays of the Sun, or washed off by the Rain. Rinds and Barks, when the Plants
are full of sap.

As for their preservation, the parts of Plants and Animals must be dried with
all convenient speed, by laying them in the Sun, which are of a compact and
humid substance; by exposing them to the Air and shade, which are of a thin and
slender substance; by keeping both the one and the other, when they are
well-dry'd, close shut up in Boxes, and those Boxes in dry places, exposed
neither to the Sun, Wind nor Rain.

Rain, which we have placed among the Minerals, ought to be preserved about the
Vernal Equinor; Snow and Ice in their season; the Spawn of Frogs in March. Dew
and Manna in May, gathered from wholesome Herbs. Ambergreese, Amber, Jet, Oil of
Naphta, and all sorts of Bitumens, before they are changed by the Sea or
River-water, by the Sun or the injury of Time.

Animals, the soundest and most vigorous, are to be made choice of; whether
they are to be made use of whole, or in any of their parts. I will not here
speak of their Conservation, which depends upon their Preparation, of which
more in due place.

CHAP. XIII. Of Preparation.
ANimals, which God has subjected to the power of Man, have those advantages
wherewith Men are altogether unprovided. For besides that as soon as they are
born, they are in a condition without help to provide for themselves all things
necessary for their subsistence; as also for their own cures, when they are
sick; that nourishment which is proper for them is always ready, needing
nothing of Art to cook it. Neither boiling nor washing are in use among them,
not being accustomed to eat more, then for those Remedies for which Nature has
designed and prepared them her self. But Men have need of a thousand
Preparations for their necessities. For notwithstanding those advantages which
they enjoy in being advanced to a degree little below that of Angels, to have
Reason and Understanding, and to know that all things were created for their
use; yet are they not able to cure their Distempers, not so much as to nourish
themselves, without the Preparation of Food and Physic. For how much labor
and preparation is required before Corn comes to maturity? How much more before
it can be made into Bread? What toils are requisite to the making of Wine,
Vinegar, Beer and Cider? What pains to provide the very Food appointed for our
nourishment? We must not wonder then if Medicaments so necessary for them, have
need of Preparation, or that there is a necessity for Men to have recourse to
Persons that understand how to know, prepare, and administer them according as
occasion requires.

As to the extent of the matter of Medicament, it is easy to judge that the
number of Preparations cannot but be very great. And so much the more, in
regard the Chemical Pharmacy has very much augmented those, which the Galenists
have for so long time together practiced. Now in regard it is the design of
this Work to comprehend both the one and the other Pharmacy, and that they have
both need of the mutual assistance of each other, I thought it very much to the
purpose to rank them both together, seeing they both aim at the same end, which
is the Health of Mankind.

Preparation, is an Artificial labor whereby a Medicament is brought to that
condition which the use of it requires.

Medicaments are prepared for several purposes; sometimes to augment their
Virtue, sometimes to diminish it; sometimes to separate some evil quality, or
correct its malignity; sometimes to unite them with some other; sometimes to
alter their Nature, or communicate their Virtue; and sometimes to accommodate
them to the habit and constitution of the Patient. Whence it comes to pass that
the same Remedy prescribed to several Persons will require several
Preparations, especially when it comes to be used.

The Preparation of a Medicament is accomplished after three general manners:
by adding, abating, and changing the condition of the Medicin. Oil is added to
Wax to make it softer; a Medicament is infused in some Liquor, to the end it
may communicate its Virtue. Sugar or Honey are added to Powders, for the making
of Compositions. Sulphur is added to Nitre, Nitre to Antimony; Aquafortis to
Mercury, etc. We take away the Kernels from Mirobalans, the Earthy Substance
from Scammony, the moisture from Salts, the Pith from Roots, the white of red
Roses, the yellow part of Saffron, etc. The alteration of Medicaments is
performed several ways, as we shall show by the examples of the following
Compositions.

CHAP. XIV. Of Lotion, or Washing.
MEsues, and the most part of the Ancients, have comprised all Preparations
under four that are principal; Lotion or Washing; Trituration, crumbling, or
beating in a Mortar; Infusion, and Coction or Boiling; of which they have set
forth several sorts. The two first are of the smallest extent; but the two
latter, which are of a larger extent, will furnish us with a great number of
sorts: especially in the Chemical Pharmacy, the explanation whereof deserves to
be better known.

Lotion is performed by plunging or washing a Medicament in water, or in any
other Liquor. It is either slight and superficial, to wash away the dirt, as
when we wash Roots and Herbs; or internal and penetrating, either to carry
along with it the more subtle parts of the Medicament, as when we wash
Litharge, Antimony Diaphoretic, etc. or to carry off some Salt or corrosive
Spirit, as by the forementioned washing of Antimony, as also of Precipitates
and Magisteries: Or to take away some ill quality, as in the washing of Oils,
Suets and Turpentine, etc. or to imbibe into the Medicament some part of the
Liquor wherein it is washed, as in Galen's Sear-cloth; or to communicate some
good quality to it, as by the washing of Tutia in Rose Water, Wax to whiten or
blanch it, Pomatums in Aromatick-waters to give them a good scent; or to
separate some internal part, as when we wash Lapis Lazuli, having first made it
redhot in the Fire.

In Washing there is an operation made use of, which is called Sloping by
inclination, when we pour the Water gently out that swims above the Substance.
This is practiced not only in Lotions, but in Tinctures, and upon several
other occasions.

Washing of Aloes is an improper term; it being only a Dissolution of the more
pure parts of the Aloes, to separate them from the impure. There are several
circumstances to be observed in the Lotion of Medicaments, according to the
diversity of their Substances, which will be more seasonably treated of in the
practice of Lotions, which I will show in the following part of this Work.

CHAP. XV. Of the Purgation of Medicaments.
TO purge or cleanse, among the Apothecaries, are terms synonymous, having both
the same force of signification. And I therefore treat of the Purgation of
Medicaments next to Lotion, because Purgation takes quite away those
superfluities that Lotion cannot carry off. We take from Coloquintida its
grains; from Dates, Prunes, Apricocks, Tamarins, and many other sorts of Fruits
their stones; from Grapes the same; from the cold Seeds, and those of Carthamum
or bastard Saffron, Citrons and many others, their husks; from the Roots of
Eringo's, Fennel, Cichorie, Asparagus, and the like, we take out the pith, and
other superfluities. From green Wall-nuts the rind, and from dry ones the
shells, as also from Almonds and small Nuts; we take off the superfluities from
the Roots of Mountain Spikenard, and Couch-Grass. We make no use but of the
hairy threads of Spikenard; we use the flowery tops of some Herbs, and fling
away the rest; we take away the membranes and fibers out of Castoreum, as also
the unctuous part when it is to be swallowed. We only make use of the oily
part when we use Castoreum for Oils and Ointments. We only take the Body, the
Heart, the Liver of a Viper dried, to powder; and only the Fat, to make
Emplastrum de ranis. Nevertheless sometimes we use the Viper whole, when we
stuff them and preserve them in Spirit of Wine. We throw away the wings and
feet of Cantharides. We only use the reins of the Sea-Stinc's, and throw away
all the rest. We take the tart juices of Granates, Barberies and Citrons, to
make Syrups; or to dissolve certain Minerals. We dry the rinds of Granates. We
condite, dry, distill, and make Syrup of Citron-peel: the Seeds whereof serve
also for many uses; as also that of Barberies, while we throw away the rest as
useless: we cast away the wooden part or rind and the grains of Cassia; and
separate the inward obscure part of Rhubarb; and the cups and rinds of Acorns,
reserving them for other uses. We dispoil the grains of branched Amomum and
Cardomums of their husks. We take away the bark and wooden part of Agaric, and
the terrestrial parts of Scammony, Aloes, and several other thick Juices: as
also the filth that is mixed with several other Gums, which are comprehended
under the name of Juices. We separate Gold from Silver by the Inquart; we purge
and purify both in a Coppel or Ashen-pot, and by several other ways. We take
away the thick of Mercury, and separate the impurities of Metals, Half-metals
and Metallics; as also of Salts and Sulphurs. In short, there are few things
that serve either for Medicament or Nourishment, which have not some parts
which are to be spared.

CHAP. XIV. Of Trituration, or Beating in a Mortar.
TRituration denotes the division of a Medicament into very small parts. The
first, which better agrees with its Name, is meant of Medicaments hard and dry;
the second of Medicaments moist and soft. The one and the other are serviceable
in several Preparations of both Pharmacies. They are serviceable also for
diverse purposes; the chief of which are, to reduce a Medicament into a
condition to be united and mixed with others; or to make it more convenient and
proper to be taken inwardly, or outwardly applied. Trituration of dry things is
variously performed, according to the various nature of the Medicaments. For
Woods must be sawed, cut, bruised, and sometimes rasp'd, and then be put into a
brass Mortar for Trituration. Horns, Hoofs, and Bones must be sawed before they
can be broken into small pieces; or else rasp'd, either to be so made use of,
or else to be beaten to powder. Metals and Metallics must be filled for the most
part, before they can be reduced into powder. But the Chemists use means much
more proper to open and divide them into parts, without any comparison far more
fine and subtle, then they can possibly be, which are divided by any way or
means of Galenic Pharmacy. The Roots of Trees being of the same nature, must be
reduced to powder by the same method.

The dry parts of Plants called Herbs, as roots, stalks, leaves, flowers, dry
Fruits, Berries, Seeds, Excrescencies both of Herbs and Trees with their barks,
may be bruised in a Mortar, without any preceding Preparation, but only of
being cut and broken. The same thing may be done to the tender parts of
Animals, being first dried; as the Flesh, the Blood, and the tender bones of
little Animals, and some of the greater, as the bones of the hearts of Deer and
Oxen. Nevertheless upon some occasions, and for some Substances, there must be
recourse to Addition. As for Example; If you were to pound the Roots of
Birth-wort, Gentian, or any suchlike herbs that are of a clammy Substance,
though they seem to be well dried, they will stick to the Mortar and the
Pestle, unless you mix them with Almonds, or some of the cold Seeds cleans'd,
or some other oily matter, proper to divide their parts, while you pound them,
without which you shall never make them fit for your use. Shavings of Ivory and
Hart's horn may be triturated or beaten in a Mortar among Sugar Candy alone.
Camphire cannot be pulveris'd alone, unless you add some few drops of the
Spirit of Wine, when you beat it, or some of the cold Seeds cleans'd, or a drop
of some oil. The same cold Seeds are serviceable to divide the parts of clammy
Substances; among the rest also, those of the dry, but not greasy parts of
Animals. They help also to reduce into powder Ambergreese, all Bitumens, and
all rosiny Juices dried, as Scammony, Benjamin, Balsom, and the like. The heat
of the Brass-morter and the Pestle help to pulverise Gum- Tragacanth and Gum-
Arabic, as also Venetian-Talk, which will however beat much better if it be
exposed a while before a flaming fire.

Many Minerals and many parts of animals cannot be reduced into fine powder,
till they have been first burnt or calcined in the fire. Precious Stones,
Bole-Armoniac, Earths, Amber, the Adamant, and some parts of Animals may be
reduced into a powder scarce to be felt, which is called Alkohol, being brayed
upon Porphyrie, adding thereto so much Cordial-water as will bind the powder
together, and keep it from wasting in beating. When they are beaten very fine,
spread them upon clean Paper, and dry them in the Sun: And this is that which
the Galenic Pharmacy calls Preparing. Medicaments of a solid substance, as
wood, and several compacted and fibrous parts of Plants and Animals, must be
soundly pounded in a great Iron or Brass-morter: But those Medicaments whose
parts are thin and without fibers; require only a gentle bruising to reduce
them to powder; as Aloes, Agaric, Myrrh, Amydon or dried flower of Wheat,
Mastick, Scammony, and many others. In short, when several Medicaments are to
be reduced to powder, which are appointed for one composition, the nature of
their substance is to be regarded, and those things are to be bruised or beaten
by themselves which either ought or may be so conveniently; and beat together
those that will endure it. Thus you must first begin to powder those whose
substance is most compact and solid, and then add the rest in order according
to their hardness. Which I shall particularly demonstrate how to do, when I
come to speak of the particular Preparations of powders, which are to be mixed
in Compositions.

The second sort of Trituration, which is only of humid matters, is ordinarily
performed in a Marble or Porphyry-morter, or else of some other hard Stone,
with a wood'n, glass, or Ivory-Pestle; though for some things they may be
beaten in an Iron or Brass-morter. This sort of Trituration is sometimes used
for dry Substances that will endure beating, but chiefly for moist and oily
Medicaments and Nourishments; such are Roots, Herbs, Flowers, green Fruit or
newly gathered, watery Berries, oily Seeds and Fruits; and all the soft parts
of Animals; of all which things are prepared sometimes Conserves, sometimes
Cataplasms, Poultisses and Pomatums: Sometimes they are bruised for Decoction,
Infusion or distillation; to extract the Juice, to press out the Oil, to
extract Emulsions, to make Pastes, to be taken inwardly, or applied outwardly;
to make Lozenges, Trochisses, or other Medicines.

CHAP. XVII. Of Cribration, or Sifting.
CRibration, is a separation of the more fine and subtle parts of Medicaments
as well dry as moist, or oily, from the grosser. It is performed through
Instruments proper for that purpose called Bolters or Sieves, which are
composed of two wood'n circles, as it were, enchas'd the one within another, in
the middle of which is nailed and strained a hair-cloth, or a piece of silk if
it be a Sieve, or a piece of Parchment with holes at an equal distance, if it
be a Bolter. Sieves of single hair-cloth, such as we have described, are
serviceable not only to sift gross powders, but also the pulps of viscous and
oily Medicaments, after they have been beaten and re-beaten in the Mortar.
These Sieves serve also to sift Ceruss, rubbing it first upon the extended
cloth, which must be of hair, and receiving the powder upon a sheet of white
Paper. Bolters serve only to sift the grosser sort of Airy-substances.

There are also certain sort of Sieves, which are called Covers, for the
sifting of Powders Aromatic, Cephalic, Cordial, Digestive, Laxative, and
other more precious sorts of Powder, or any that ought so to be finely
pulverized. These Cover'd-sieves are composed of three distinct parts, imbox'd
or inserted together, every one of which is composed of three wood'n-circles,
the middle-most receiving the upper-most and lower-most like a Box-lid. The
middle-most is that wherein the linen cloth or silk is fixed, through which
the Powders are to pass. That part is fixed in the lower part, which is made to
receive the Powder in a skin, which serves for the bottom of it. It is also
covered with the upper part, which embraces it like the Lid of a Box; and being
covered as the under-most with another skin, hinders the Powders from wasting,
while they are sifted.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Infusion.
THE word Infusion comprehends a great many Galenical and Chemical
Preparations, which shall be explained hereafter. Infusion, generally taken, is
a Preparation by which entire Medicaments or their parts, being cut or bruised,
are steeped and infused in some agreeable Liquor. Sometimes it is done with
fire, sometimes without it, according to the thinness or solidity of the
Substances which you infuse. Which also serves for a Rule, as to the length or
shortness of time necessary for Infusion. The variety of Medicaments and the
various intentions of the Physicians, oblige the Apothecaries to use various
Liquors for Infusion; as Common-water, Rainwater, Snow-water; Sea, Mineral,
Rose Water; Wine, Verjuice, Hydromel, Must, Vinegar, Beer, Milk, Whey, several
Juices of Plants, Oils, Broth, Distill'd-waters, Spirit of Wine, etc. Infusion
is made to impart the virtue of one or more Medicaments to the Liquors wherein
they are infused. Sometimes it is also made to correct the evil quality of the
Medicament, or else to augment its virtue, as also to unite in the same Liquors
the different virtues of several Medicaments, infused together for some
particular purpose. Infusion is also made to separate some particular Virtue of
one Medicament, from the rest which it may also have. As when by a quick
Infusion we separate the purgative quality of Rhubarb and Mirobalans, to the
end they may be purely astringent. Infusion of Senna in Fountain Water, may
serve as an Example of simple Infusion, which may be done either with fire or
without fire, and to manifest the communication of its virtue to the Water. The
Infusion of Spurge in Vinegar to take away its purgative quality, may serve as
an Example of correction. The Infusion of Rhubarb or Senna in the Juice of pale
Roses, may serve as an Example of the augmentation of their virtues. The
Infusion of several Medicaments differing in virtues, as must be done to make
Confectio Hamech, may serve as an Example of the union of their virtues in the
Liquor. Of all which things you shall meet with a number of Examples in the
continuance of this Pharmacopoea.

CHAP. XIX. Of Humectation and Immersion.
HVmectation or Moistning, is used at the beginning of Infusion, but more often
practiced for other uses. We moist'n a Medicament, to soft'n it when it is too
dry, as when we moist'n Mountain French-Spikenard, or lay it in some moist
place, that it may be more fit to be made clean: or as when we moist'n
Tamarinds and Cassia, the better to extract the Pulp. We also moist'n certain
dry Medicaments to hinder them from exhaling, while they are beat'n in the
Mortar, as Agaric, Saunders, Coloquinth, etc. as also to color them; as we do
by the same Saunders. We moist'n others while we bray them upon Porphyrie, to
hinder the dissipation of their more subtle parts, as Coral, Pearls, and
Precious Stones. We moist'n other Medicaments, to qualify their acrimonie or
their sharpness, as when we moist'n Coloquinth and Mirobalans with some drops
of Oil of sweet Almonds. We also moist'n others to assist the penetration of
their virtue, as when we moist'n Senna or Rhubarb with some drops of juice of
Lemmons; or as when we moist'n Stomachical, Cordial or Cephalic Medicines,
with Oil of Gilly-flowers, Cinnamon, Lavender, or the like. Others we moist'n
to communicate to them some good quality, as when we moist'n a Medicament with
some Distill'd-waters, or with some proper Decoction; or as when we cause it to
receive the steam and vapor thereof. Irroration, Inspersion and Imbibition are
almost the same things with Humectation.

Immersion follows Humectation, and is either for a small time, with an intent
to separate some superfluity from the Medicament, as when we soak Almonds in
hot water to peel off their skins: and sometimes to take away some of their
virtue; as when we steep Rhubarb a little in some Liquor to abate its purgative
virtue. Or else for a longer time, to take away some evil taste from the
Medicament, as when we steep green Wall-nuts in water and in several changes of
water, to take away their bitterness. Or as when we steep Olives for a long
time in pickle for the same purpose. Or as when we steep Quicklime in water,
to make Limewater. Or as-when we steep the peels of Citron and of many other
Fruits, to hard'n them, render them transparent; and in a better condition to
be condited.

CHAP. XX. Of Nutrition.
NVtrition is usually done by the help of Liquors: It comes something near the
nature of Humectation. It is so called, because it increases the Medicament,
and furnishes it with a kind of nutriture. It is performed two ways; either by
mixing or uniting several Medicaments into one; as when we mingle by little and
little and at several repetitions, Vinegar, Oil and Litharge, and stir them a
long time together in a Mortar, to make the nourished substance of all
together: or as when we do the same thing with Saccharum Saturni, Oil and
Vinegar, or else with the tincture of Saturn drawn with Vinegar mingled with
Oil, to make the Liniment of Saturn. The next way is by adding a Juice, a
Water, or a Decoction to some Medicament, to nourish and augment it, or to give
it some virtue; as when we add the juice of Roses or Cichory, or some hepatic
or purgative decoction to Aloes to nourish it; and afterward over a gentle
fire evaporate the superfluous moisture of the same Juices, till the Aloes
becomes sufficiently nourished and charged. As also when we nourish Sarcocol
with Woman's Milk; or else as when for the Preparation of the Sperniola, which
Crollius so much commends, we feed Myrrh, Olibanum, Saffron and Camphire in
powder with the Distill'dwater of the Spawn of Frogs, which is afterward
reduced into a kind of paste, and laid to dry of it self; repeating the same
Nutriment and the same drying twenty or thirty times.

CHAP. XXI. Of Dissolution; Where occasion is taken to speak of Chemical
Solution.
DIssolution, in Galenic Pharmacy, succeeds Humectation. It serves to render
compact and thick Substances liquid or flowing, by the addition of some Liquor.
Upon occasion we dissolve Electuaries, Opiates, Confections, Powders, Extracts,
Salts, Syrups, and many other Preparations to render them potable. We also
dissolve Manna, Sugar, Honey, several Gums, Tears, Rosins, in proper Liquors.
We dissolve Wax and diverse Emplasters in Oils to make them soft. We dissolve
Gold in Aqua-regalis, or in the Spirit of Salt: Silver, Copper, Mercury in
Aquafortis; Pearls, Corals, Crabs Eyes, and suchlike Substances, in distilled
Vinegar, Spirit of Nitre, or some such acid Juice. Mars or Iron is dissolved in
Water by the help of Tartar, as also in Aquafortis and corrosive Spirits. The
rosinie part of Scammonie; Jalap, Agaric and Turbith, etc. Amber-greese, Amber,
Gum-lack, are dissolved in Spirit of Wine. Gum-Saundarach in the true Oil of
Asps distilled. In short, several other Medicaments may be dissolved in Liquors
which have some correspondency with their substance.

Solution, in Chemical Pharmacy, is the division and dissolution of all the
substances that compose a mixed Body. It is the foundaation of all Chymistrie,
and the encouragement to a great number of noble Preparations which that Art
puts in practice. Under Dissolution, you may compute several other
Preparations, which may more aptly be placed under the title of Coction.

CHAP. XXII. Of Making hot, or Calefaction.
CAlefaction, is the beginning of all operations which are perfected by the
means of heat. It differs from Coction in this, That whatever is boiled has
been well heated, but whatever is warmed has not been boiled. Nevertheless
sometimes we are put to heat again those things which have been boiled. We warm
Infusions, Tinctures, Decoctions, when they are cold, to the end they may be
the better strained. We heat, Baths and Half-baths, when we have occasion for
them. We warm Oils, Ointments, Fomentations, Epithems, Cataplasms, and
Emplasters when we apply them. We warm Powder'd-Nutmegs, Line-seed,
Annise-seed, and many other such Seeds, when we go about to press out the Oil.
We heat water lukewarm to provoke vomiting. We warm Iron and Brass-morters and
Pestles, sometimes to melt certain Gums, as Taccamahacca, Mastic, Ammoniac,
Galbanum, and the like: sometimes to pulverize others, as Tragacanth and
Arabic; sometimes to pulverize Minerals, as Talk: or to dissipate the
superfluous moisture of some Medicaments, and to make them fit to be
pulverized, as Saffron, Tabac, etc. or else to consume some adventitious
moisture of Medicaments composed, and to restore them their consistencie and
dryness; as in Extracts, Salts, and many other Preparations. We warm infused
Dates, Cassia, and Tamarinds, the better to draw out the pulp; we warm Broth to
dissolve Mama, though it may be also dissolved in cold Liquors. We heat the
Vessel of Iron in the form of a horn, when we pour the Antimony in Fusion to
separate it from the Regulus or Tinniedross. We heat our earth'n or
glass-Vessels for fear they should break, when we pour scalding Liquors into
them. We heat the neck of the Limbeck, especially in Winter, which contains the
Antimony and the Sublimate, in the distillation of Oil of Antimony, to melt it
when it is congealed there, and to make it drop into the Receiver. We heat Wax,
Rosin, Suet and Tallows to melt them. We heat Sea-onions, Purslane, Burrage and
Bugloss, and many other Plants, to extract the Juice.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Insolation, or Exposing to the Sun: And of the heat of Dung.
INsolation is the warming of Substances by exposing them to the heat of the
Sun. We usually make use of it for the macerating of liquid Conserves, for the
macerating of Flowers, or Herbs to be put into Oils or Fats; for Tinctures,
Balsoms, to dry the parts of Plants or Animals, which we intend to preserve or
use; to dry Salts; to evaporate Extracts, Juices and Liquors, or to purify
them; to make Wine eager; to assist the Fermentation of Hydromel; to separate
the black rind of Pepper, as they do in the Indies, when they have watered the
ground with salt water to make the Pepper white: to dry Figs, Peaches, Prunes,
and many other Fruits, in hot Countries. It is also serviceable for many other
uses.

Horse-Dung being half putrified and well pil'd up, affords a heat more or
less, according to its quantity, and according as the Substances are either
deeper or shallower buried. For the heat may be greater then the hand of a Man
shall be able to endure. There is no heat which can be better regulated, or be
brought to that equality, as that of Dung, or which approaches nearer to the
Natural heat. It is proper to digest liquid matters, or to advance the
Fermentation of those which have a natural disposition to it. Thereby may be
made a circulation of diverse Substances; thereby may Tinctures be drawn forth,
Eggs may be hatched, and several Distillations made.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Coction and Maturation.
THE Ancients and also the Moderns have defined Coction to be an alteration of
a thing which ought to be boiled. Nevertheless I do not find this definition to
be very exact, if it be not taken in a very general sense, which agrees
indifferently with all sorts of Alterations. Since the Alteration may be
observed in all Preparations which are made with and without Coction, and that
moreover the diversity of those which are made with Coction is so great, that
it is a hard thing to find a definition precise enough to agree with all in
particular. So that without troubling my self to define it more exactly, I
believe it will be enough for me to say, in dividing it, That there are several
sorts of Coctions, and several degrees of every sort, according to the various
Substances of the Medicaments, and the various Intentions of him that prepares
them. The Ancients have set down some sorts of Coction, and among the rest
Maturation, Elixation, Frying, Assation, Torrefaction, and Ustion. But in
regard that besides all these, there are a great number of others which are to
be known and practiced, especially in Chemical Pharmacy, I thought it requisite
to discourse of every one in particular, as shall be seen hereafter.

Maturation is a kind of Coction, sometimes dry and sometimes moist. For we may
roast either before the fire or upon the hot Cinders green Fruits, in some
measure to perfect their maturity, and make them fit to be eat'n. They may be
also baked in an Oven, or boiled upon the fire in Water, in Must, in Honey, in
any Juice, or in any other Liquor. There are also some Fruits, which having
been gathered green, rip'n in keeping; as Medlars, which are for that reason
spread upon straw.

CHAP. XXV. Of Fermentation.
FErmentation ought to be accounted a kind of Coction, being a certain
Ebullition which arises from the confused mixture of two Substances* in
appearance contrary in their action; which the Chemists call Acid and Alcali.
This is an Operation sometimes natural, and sometimes artificial, which happens
to liquid or at least to moist Substances, either by the help of some external
heat, or natural heat which is roused in the matter it self, by the conflict of
Substances which ought to be fermented, and which thereby detect an Acid; which
though but small in quantity at first, becomes however powerful enough to
agitate the volatile parts of the whole matter, to unite with them, and dispose
them to disingage themselves from the Terrestrial and gross parts that incumber
them, and to reject and throw off the one part in scum by Ebullition, and the
other in Sediment by a kind of precipitation, when the matter is liquid. It
becomes also sufficiently prevalent to put them into a condition of being
preserved for some time without those Terrestreities or earthie parts; or else
to be made more pure by the means of distillation, which separates and raises
the Spirits above the heavy and unprofitable Phlegm, which encumbered them
before; and to become at length perfectly pure by rectification.

We have not any subject that more apparently clears this Operation then the
Juice of the Grape: which deserves to be considered, in regard of the several
changes that happ'n to it through Fermentation. Experience teaches us that it
is impossible to separate its pure and volatile parts if they have not endured
Fermentation. Which may be observed in Burnt-wine. For if we take the Juice of
Grapes, and let it boil in a Kettle to the consumption of the third part, which
is the usual Rule, there will arise nothing but the insipid and unprofitable
Phlegm. And though in the boiling it be separated from its earthiness, partly in
the scum, partly in the terrestrial matter that sticks to the sides and bottom
of the Kettle like Lees, the subtle and volatile parts keep still united with
the fixed and tartareous Salt of the same Juice, and the remainder of the
Phlegm; nor can they be separated but by Fermentation, which afterward happ'ns
of it self, without the concurrence of any external heat; if you put the same
Juice in some measure clarified, into a proportionable Vessel, as you would do
ordinary new Wine, and leave it standing six weeks or two months. For in that
time the Acid, that lay hid in the proper Substance of the Juice, assisted by
the nitrons parts of the Air which it has insensibly attracted, cuts and
separates the thick parts of the Burnt-wine from the pure, throwing off the
first by the Ebullition which it raises, partly in froth through the bunghole
of the Vessel, and partly to the sides and bottom; and uniting it self to the
latter, by virtue of a particular inclination, not being able however to
separate the Phlegm which remains, and which will very hardly forsake it. When
the Burnt-wine has thus endured Fermentation, and that it is well purged, if it
be put into a Vessel to still, it fails not to send its Spirit first, and in
greater abundance then the same quantity of ordinary Wine would do, which
appears to have that third part of Phlegm which the Burntwine had lost in
burning. And if you continue the Distillation, after the Spirit is ascended,
the Phlegm which remained in the Burnt-wine shall rise also like that of
ordinary Wine when distilled in the same manner.

This ordinary Wine is more easy to prepare then Burnt-wine; for it requires
no external fire, but only that which is excited by the parts of which it is
composed, which raise the Fermentation in it; which usually begins in the Tub,
where the Juice remains mingled with the grounds and squeezings of the Skins
for some days, and ends afterward in the Vessels, when the settlings are sunk
to the bottom of the Juice. There may be also a Fermentation of the Juice of
Grapes in the Vessel, though the grounds be not mingled with the Juice; as they
never do that put up white and pale Wines. Upon which subject give me leave to
speak my thoughts, which are these, That Wine being composed of a Sulphurie and
Acid Tartareous Substance, mixed with some Phlegm, somewhat of fixed Salt, and
some earthy parts, is exposed to several changes, caused by the disuniting of
its Substances, or by the predominancy of the one above the other. Whence it
comes to pass that much Rain before or during Vintage-time, makes the Wines to
abound in Phlegm, and consequently subject to corrupt. Wine is also subject to
corruption and to become fat and oily, when the volatile Sulphur surpasses the
Tartarous Acid. Which is clearly demonstrated in this, that if you put some
Pints of good Verjuice into a Cask of Wine ready to turn greasy, and in some
measure already become fat, and mingle them together, the Wine will come again
to it self. We may observe also that green Wines, that is to say, those Wines
which abound in Acid, are not so subject to corrupt, as those which want that
Acid: and we find that this Acid at the latter end of the year turns to
Strength.

On the other side we may well judge that the corruption which happ'ns to Wine
through the want of the Acid, does not extinguish the volatile sulphurous part
of the Wine, seeing that those Wines afford almost as much combustible Spirit
as those which are not spoiled.

I am of opinion also that the true and natural alteration of Wine into Vinegar
proceeds from no other cause, but only for that the Acid is increased and
exceeds the volatile; or else because the volatile Spirits being exhaled, the
Acid manifests it self more openly, and more sensibly fixes its impression upon
the tongue and the palate. Which happ'ns to those Wines which naturally abound
in Tartar and by consequence in Acid, as do those of Languedoc, especially when
they leave their Casks open, and that the Wines can attract the nitrous parts
of the air, to increase those Acids that make up one part of their Composition.

There is another natural Fermentation which happ'ns to Substances mixed of
Acids and Volatiles, which are of a soft, but not liquid consistency: which
comes to pass by the conjunction of the Acids with the Alkali's. As we observe
in Treacle and in several other Compositions; upon which I will not enlarge,
for fear of making the Chapter tedious.

Artificial Fermentation is done by adding Acids to the Substances which you
would have fermented. As when we put Leven to Dough, or Yest to certain Plants
or bruised Berries in lukewarm Water, to hast'n the Fermentation, and
afterward to draw forth the Spirits and Volatil-oyls: as in the Fermentation
of Cresses, Scurvy Grass, the lesser Centaurie, Juniper Berries, and of many
other parts of Plants. As for the levening of Bread, that Fermentation cannot
actually separate the terrestrial parts into froth, or precipitate them to the
bottom, as in liquid Substances, for it only op'ns and dilates the Substances;
more strictly uniting the acid with the volatile, so that they may be in a
condition to receive their last Fermentation in the Stomach, and to the end
they may be so well subtiliz'd, that they may with more ease be conveyed to all
the parts of the Body for nourishment, leaving the gross and terrestrial parts
to be thrown off as real excrements.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Digestion, and Maceration.
DIgestion and Maceration are almost the same thing. They require a long time
and a moderate heat for their operation. Scorpions are digested or macerated
whole in Oil of bitter Almonds, to the end that by a little and a little they
may communicate their virtue to them. New Roses brayed with an addition of Salt
are put into a Vessel exactly stopped, and being left for some months to macerate
in a Cellar, there is then an odoriferous Water, Spirit and Oil drawn from
them. The same Roses are a long time laid to macerate, sometimes in Oil, and
sometimes in Hog's Grease, for the making of Oil, and Vnguentum Rosatum. Sliced
Dates are oft'n digested in Hydromel, and the pulp drawn forth to make
Electuarium Diaph^nicon. The heads of Poppies are oft'n digested in Water to
make them soft, a little before their decoction for Syrup. Lead slightly
calcined, Minium, Ceruse and Litharge are digested in distilled Vinegar, there
to be dissolved by little and little, either to preserve the dissolution, or to
make a Magisterie, or else that which they call improperly Salt of Saturn.
Pearls and Corals are also digested in the same Vinegar distilled, in the
Spirit of Nitte or in acid Juices, to dissolve them sometimes for the making of
Syrups, sometimes Magisteries, sometimes Salts, though improperly so called, in
regard they are no more then the Salts of Vinegar distilled. The filings of
Steel are laid to digest in Spirit of Vitriol, to make Vitriol of Mars. The
Spirit of Wine and the Spirit of Vitriol being mingled together by equal
weight, are put to digest in an Iron-Skellet, there to be incorporated and
reduced to a whitish Substance, which is called Salt of Mars. Jalap, Scammony,
Agaric, etc. are laid to digest in Spirit of Wine, there to dissolve the
rosinie part, and to separate the terrestrial. Opium is laid to digest first in
Water, there to dissolve the watery part, and then in Spirit of Wine, there to
dissolve the rosinie part which cannot be dissolved in water. Several other
Substances are also digested in diverse other Liquors; the enumeration of which
would tire the Reader.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Tincture, and Circulation.
TIncture usually calls Digestion to its assistance. It is made use of to the
same purpose as Infusion, and chiefly to impart to some Liquor the Virtue or
the principal Substance of some Medicament. It is called Tincture, because the
Liquor generally becomes colored in the Operation. The pure and rosinie part
of Benjamin is dissolved in Spirit of Wine, which gives it a light purple
color. Coloquinth cleans'd from its grains, cut and digested in Spirit of
Wine, receives a yellow tincture, which Martin Rouland calls The gilded Spirit
of Life. Aloes, Myrrh, and Saffron pulverized and digested in Spirit of Wine,
yield a swarthy-red tincture to make the Elixir proprietatis of Paracelsus. The
Rose, the Violet, Rhubarb, Senna, Cassia, and many other Medicaments impart
their tincture to watery Liquors, to which the addition of some Spirit or acid
Juice, or some fixed Salt, may very much conduce, as well to hight'n the color
of the Tincture, as to make them more strong of the virtue of those Substances
which are steeped therein.

Circulation cannot operate without Digestion, no more then Tincture. It is u^d
for Liquors impregnated with the Substance of Medicaments; or for those that
have substantial Medicaments seaking in them. It is done by putting the Liquors
in a Vessel to circulate, being all of one plece and close stopped at the top: or
else of two pieces, that is, of two Vessels fixed one upon another, and well
luted together* of, which the lowermost must contain the Liquor. The
Circulation is made by a fire of Lamps, or a bed of cinders or sand moderately
hot, or in Dung, or in the Sun. It requires most commonly a continued heat for
some days, and sometimes prolonged to the number of weeks and months. By
Circulation the most subtle matter ascends to the top of the Vessel, and not
finding any outlet, is constrained to fall down again, and rejoyn with the
Substance at the bottom of the Vessel, from whence it was raised. And thus
continuing to ascend and descend in the Vessel, it makes a kind of Circulation,
the Name whereof the Operation bears; and by the several penetrations and
agitations of the Spirit full with the grosser parts, the first become more
thin and in a better condition to act, when they are separated from the latter.
This Operation is principally in use in Chemical Pharmacy. It wholly disposes
the Liquors to the separation of their pure parts from the impure, ripening and
perfecting their active principles, and rendering them fit to be made volatile,
and to be united afterward to other purified Substances, if there be occasion.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Cohobation.
COhobation is a repeated Sprinkling of the distilled Liquor upon the Substance
from whence it was drawn* to the end the said matter may be distilled again.
This Sprinkling is repeated seldomer or oftener, according to the diversity of
Substances which are distilled; and as the purpose of the Artist requires. It
is used most frequently used to open and dissolve the parts of mixed Bodies,
which you define to have distilled, to which the repeated Sprinkling of the
Spirits already drawn forth very much conduces. This Operation may in some
measure be thought to do the office of Circulation, by yielding at length a
Liquor containing the most essential part of the mixed Body. Cohobation is
chiefly used in the distillation of spiritful Aromatic-waters, and the
distillation of their Oils, to have them more pure and in greater quantity.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Elixation.
ELixation is the boiling of a Medicament in some Liquor different from it,
according to the diversity of the Medicament, and the various intentions of the
Artist. It is to endure a longer or lesser time, as the Medicaments are more or
less solid. Generally Fountain or River-water is more used in Elixation: but
sometimes Mineralwaters. Lies* Rainwater, Dew, Snow and Seawater may be used
as well. Milk, Whey, Hydromel, Wine, Vinegar, Beer, diverse Juices of Plants,
Distill'd-waters, Oils, Fats, as also the Urines of several Animals, are many
times more properly serviceable.

The most usual intent of Elixation is to impart the virtue of the Medicaments
to the Liquors: As many times it happ'ns in several Decoctions made for
Apozemes, Potions, Clysters, Fomentations, Baths, etc. as also for Syrups,
Electuaries, Oils, Ointments, etc. Sometimes it serves to take away the Crudity
of the parts of Animals or Plants; to soft'n them; and not only to make the
things boiled, but the Broth it self useful: as in the Elixation of Flesh,
Roots, Herbs, and Fruits which we eat. It is useful also to take away from any
Medicament or Aliment any ill taste, or ill quality, as from Colli-flowers and
Champignons which are boiled in two Waters, the first of which is thrown away,
and with it the hurtful Juice of the Colli-flowers and Mushroom* It also
separates the earthy and gross parts of Medicaments: as in the Elixation of
Salts, Sugar, and Honey, to take off the scum. It serves also for the
preservation of Medicaments, as Syrups, Honeys, and Robbes. Upon Elixation
attend the following Operations.

CHAP. XXX. Of Ebullition, Despumation, Streining, and Filtration.
EBullition (which is a gentle seething to bubbling) is oft'n-times necessary
at the end of Infusions; almost at all times in Elixations, and many times in
Purifications. We boil Decoctions of the parts of Plants and Animals, Syrups,
Unguents, Electuaries, and an infinite sort of other Compositions; some more,
some less.

Despumation, is practiced in several Elixations, especially in that of
Victuals, Sugars and Honeys. However Boiling or Ebullition always precedes*
which separates and raises above the Liquor the gross, terrestrial and viscous
superfluities like a froth.

Colature or Straining, is usually next in order to Ebullition and Despumation.
But it may be done upon other occasions and at other times, like Filtration.
They are both useful in each Pharmacy, in the preparation of an infinite sort
of liquid matters, the dregs whereof are disposed to be separated, either by
Rest, Digestion, Circulation, Fermentation or otherwise. It is useful also in
the separation of filth and other impurities, which are apt to be mixed with
the Liquors. It is also useful to separate the moisture of several Substances
designed to be dried. It also separates the watrie from the oily Substances.

Liquors are strained through hair, through linen, through woollen, sometimes
through a loose cloth, and sometimes through ^ ^^g which we ca^ Hippocrates
Breeches. Liquors are filtered variously: for sometimes we make use of
Cotton-weeks, or Flax, or else of little pieces of white cloth as long as a
Man's hand, and two or three fingers broad, which must be first wet in ordinary
Water; then having wrung the moisture out, and leaning the Vessel that contains
the Liquor upon one side, you must put in a third part of the length of your
cloth into the Liquor you intend to filter, the other part hanging over the
Vessel, so that the clearer part of the Liquor falls into another Vessel, which
is placed below the former to receive the Liquor, if it be of any consequence.
For by this means the Liquor distills through the cotton or cloth, and rids the
Substances of the greatest part of their moisture, if it be superfluous; or
else the oils that swim at the top are separated from the moisture that bears
them, provided you take care from time to time to stoop the Vessel as it
empties. This Filtration is oft'n made use of, for the separation of Waters
used in the lotion of Minerals. Several Liquors are also filtered through a
sheet of brown Paper, extended upon some clean linen, or else made up like a
horn, and put into a glass or white Iron-Tunnel. Sometimes also Liquors are
filtered through a heap of beat'n-glass, placed below a glass-Tunnel. And thus
Spirits of Vitriol, Nitre, Salts, Sulphur, etc. are filtered, when they are
charged with any earthiness, which sometimes mixes with them in luting and
unluting the Vessels. This fort of Filtration is absolutely necessary for these
corrosive Spirits: for they eat and penetrate paper, cloth, or cotton too soon.
Filtration through brown Paper in a glass-Tunnel, is used for watrie Substances
to separate them from the oily, which not being able to pass through the
Paper, remain in the filter, and are drawn forth and separated by putting the
bottom of the Tunnel in the neck of some proper Bottle, and piercing the end of
the Paper with a silver or steel Bodkin, or else with a Scewer. And these are
the most usual ways of filtring and straining.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Clarifying, and Pressing forth.
CLarification happ'ns of it self oft-times to some Liquors; only by
standing-still, especially after Digestion, Circulation, and Fermentation: But
the most common and quickest way of Clarification, especially in Galenic
Pharmacy, is made by Ebullition, Despumation, Streining or Filtration.
Sometimes the whites of Eggs are also made use of; and then they are stirred
and beat'n among the liquid matters, which are to be clarified, before you make
them boil; especially among Sugar, Honey, and Gellies. To which we add white
Wine to clarify them well. Sometimes we pour a little Vinegar, juice of
Lemmons, Barberies, Verjuice, or some drops of Spirit of Vitriol, or Sulphur;
or else Creme of Tartar, Mineral-Chrystal, or Nitre purified, to make a kind of
Precipitation, or at least a Separation of the gross matters from the pure
liquids, and so to dispose of the first as to remain in the Filter.

Expression or Pressing forth sometimes precedes Clarification, especially in
Decoctions, when they are to be separated from their grounds. There is a
greater or lesser strength to be used* according to the intrinsecal worth of
the Medicament, and the Nature of the Substances either thick or thin. The
Expression of the Decoction of the parts of Plants in any Liquor, is generally
the most easy and slightest of all, unless you meet with Laxatives or
Aromatics whose virtue is very considerable. The Pressing of Plants for the
Juice, must be stronger; and some Plants, especially those that are of a
viscous nature, ought to be heated before. The same method is to be observed
very near in the pressing of watery Fruits: the expression of infused Oils,
Unguents and watery Gums must be with an indifferent strength. The expression of
oily Fruits and Seeds, as Almonds, common Wall-nuts, Filberds, Nutmegs, Benne,
the great cold Seeds, those of Annise, Poppies, etc. requires an extraordinary
strength.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Aromatization, and Coloring.
ARomatization and Coloring oft'n meet with Filtration and Clarification. They
are also used in several other Preparations. Aromatization is useful as well to
augment the virtue of the Medicaments, as also to render them more pleasing to
the scent and taste. We mix in Powders Substantial-Aromatics, as Mace,
Cinnamon, Cloves, Saffron, Musk, Ambergreese, and several others. They are also
mixed in Opiates, in Electuaries, Confections, Pills, Trochiskes* as also in
Ointments, and Emplasters. They are also mixed in Infusions, Tinctures,
Elixirs; as also in Decoctions and Syrups. But this must be understood by the
way, That the principal parts of Aromatics, being thin and volatile, cannot
long endure the fire without dissipating those parts. So that they are not to
be mixed till last of all; and great care must be taken to cover the Vessels at
the same time, to prevent the dissipation. To which the Ancients having a great
regard, were accustomed to put their Cordial Aromatic Powders into a Cullender
or Wooll'n-bag, through which they strein'd their Apozems or Decoctions, when
they intended to aromatize them: being of that opinion, That the heat of the
Decoction was sufficient to attract and retain the virtue as it passed through,
and that there was no need of a stronger heat. But now we have ways more proper
and convenient to aromatize all sorts of Remedies, in regard we can put into
them the Oils of several Aromatics, which Chymistrie teaches us to distill, and
which contain the true sulphurie, aromatic and essential part of the Substance.
These Oils incorporated in drops with forty or fifty times the weight of fine
powdered Sugar, are in a condition to be united and effectually mixed in all
sorts of Liquors and Medicines, and to render them more atomatical, pleasing,
and of greater strength, then the Substance of Aromatics used as the Ancients
were wont to do, according to the Precepts of Galenic Pharmacy.

The Coloring of Medicaments is Natural or Artificial. The Natural is
twofold. For either it is such as Nature produces, as White in Snow or Milk,
Red in Blood, Yellow in Gold, Sad color in Lead or Antimony, etc. or such as
length of time, or some other accident alters; as the whiteness of the Hair
through Age, Paleness of the Face through Sickness. Artificial happens either
through Fermentation, as to diverse Juices; or by Digestion, as to Tinctures of
Tartar and Coral; or by Agitation, as in the white colors of Pomatums, or
Galen's Sear-cloth; or by the mixture of different Substances: of which some
may change or height'n the color of the Medicament by its acidity, as diverse
Spirits do; others dye with their own color, as red Sanders, Dragon's blood,
Indigo, Verdigreece, Cochenille, Saffron, and many other things. Or by Washing
and exposing to the Sun, and the Air: as the white color of Wax, Oil of Eggs,
and several other things. Or by Coction, or Calcination, as it happ'ns to
Mercury, Lead and Antimony. In short, the change of color may happ'n to
Medicaments a thousand ways, foreseen, and not foreseen, which it would be
too tedious to relate.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of Frying, Assation or Roasting, Torrefaction.
FRixion or Frying, is usually done in a Drying Pan, with the addition of some
Liquors, especially Oil or Suet. It is done with less Liquor then ordinary
boiling, and upon a quick fire for Meat; but with very little liquor and over a
moderate fire for Medicaments, to prevent dissipation of their good parts. Eggs
are first boiled in Water, and when they are hard, the yolks are taken out,
and fried over a moderate fire, till their oil begins to appear in the Frying
pan; then pour upon them a little Spirit of Wine, and immediately put them into
a coarse Linnen-bag, and press them strongly to get out the Oil. Mirobalans in
powder must be gently fried, pouring upon them a little Oil of sweet Almonds to
temper their asperity.

Assation, is the Coction of Food or Medicaments in their proper juice, without
the addition of any moisture or basting extraordinary. Thus Meat is roasted
upon a Spit, or upon a Grid* iron. We roast Water-nuts, or Saligots,
Chest-nuts, Apples, Pears, and many other Fruits and Roots in their own juice,
either upon the coals before the fire, or otherwise. We bake in the Oven
Squills, Onions, red Pars^ips, and several other Roots and Fruits without the
addition of any moisture. We also bake Meat in the Oven, and dry the parts of
Animals as the Blood, the Secondine, etc. and some Animals whole, as Moles,
etc. We roast Coffee upon a Spit, in a Tin-box; all which several ways may
pass under the Name of Assation.

Torrefaction is an abatement of Assation; it is used in dry Medicaments that
abound in strength. It is chiefly used for Rhubarb and Mirobalans beat'n to
powder, and spread upon a silver-Plate or a thin piece of iron, set upon a
Chaffing-dish. They may be also torrefy'd over a moderate fire, stirring them
oft'n with a Spatula or little slice, till the powder begins to look of a
darkish color; which is a sign that the purgative Faculty is quite gone, and
that the astringent only remains.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of Vstion, Cineration, and Extinction.
UStion or Burning has its differences and degrees, according to the diversity
of the Substance of the Medicaments, and the various purposes of the Artist.
The Ancients made use of this Preparation for Animals, Plants and Minerals.
They burnt the Horns, the Hoofs, the Bones, the Flesh, the Feathers, the Hair
and all parts, not considering, that whatever Animals have of essential in all
their Bodies, consists in their volatile salt and oil, which by Ustion are
dissipated and exhaled. I desire the Reader to take the pains to view my
Preparation of Vipers, and to examine the reasons which I have to condemn in
that particular the proceedings of the Ancients, as also the burning of
Hartshorn and Ivory; an error which some to this day can hardly avoid
committing. Indeed we burn to good purpose several sorts of Wood, as well to
warm us, as to dress our Victuals, and draw out their salts: We also burn
several Plants and their parts to extract the salt: But neither the salt of the
Wood nor of the Plants can be drawn out by bare Ustion, which only reduces them
to coals; so that it is absolutely necessary to reduce that coal into ashes, to
draw forth the Salt. And this is called Cineration, which is done by a long and
continued Ustion, especially of Wood or other parts of Plants. It being
certain, that in the change which Ustion makes of Wood into coal, that the
phlegm, spirit and oil of the Wood are totally dissipated, if the Wood be well
burnt; and that the little moisture which is drawn forth by the distillations
of ordinary coals, is only borrowed from the Earth, or from the Substances
wherewith the Colliers extinguish their coals* and that the hurtful vapors
which ascend from the coals while they burn, proceed from the nitrous and
sulphurie parts, and from those other Substances of which they are composed.
You may know the nitrous and sulphurie parts, which that moisture contains, by
the precipitation which may be made thereof, if you throw Spirit of Vitriol
upon it. We may also allege, That the hurtful vapors that proceed from
ordinary coals, proceed from something else besides its own proper Substance;
seeing that the coals of a fire that go out of themselves in the open air, is
not capable of doing any harm when it is lighted again; nor need we to wonder
at it, in regard those coals contain nothing considerable, but the terrestrial
and salt part which remains in the cinders, after the coal is consumed. It is
also observable, that after you have drawn through a Retort the spirit and oil
of Woods by a long-continu'd fire, and violent too at the end, you shall find
in the Retort the Wood converted into coal, by distillation deprived of all
that phlegm, spirit and oil which it contained; and that though you keep a
violent fire to the same coals in the Retort, provided with a Receiver very
well luted, they will nevern turn to cinders, but preserve their shape of
coals: Nor can they be reduced to cinders without the help of the Air, which
assists the activity of the fire, dissipates that part of the coal, to which
Vanhelmont gives the Name of Gas, makes the coal to lose its shape, and reduces
it to cinders.

You shall find in the latter part of this Pharmacopoea, the way how to
separate the Salt matter from the Terrestrial, which are the two Principles of
which cinders are composed, and which remain in the Coal after the separation
of the other Principles.

The strong Ustion of Minerals, ought to be referred to Calcination. Ustion in a
lesser degree, which is not at all destructive, may in some measure be
comprehended under it, though to speak properly, it only ought to be called a
Heating red-hot; as for Example we heat Tutia red-hot three times in the fire
in a Crucible, and quench it as many times in Rose Water, to repress its
acrimonie; we also heat red-hot in the fire a square piece of Steel, and quench
it as often in water, to make it astringent.

Extinction or Quenching, is practiced upon Minerals that have been heated
redhot in the fire, and are afterward quenched in certain Liquors. This
Quenching or Extinction is made use of to abate their acrimonie, as I have said
of Tutia; or to impart their virtue to the Liquor wherein they are quenched; as
that of Steel to Water; of Bricks to Oil, to make Philosophers Oil: It serves
also to make certain Minerals brittle, as when we quench red-hot Flints in
Water. We call, but improperly, by the name of Extinction, that of Flowing
Mercury, when we take away the fluidness thereof, by the assistance of
Turpentine, or any other viscous matter. But this Extinction is not to be
referred to those of which I have already spok'n, which must be preceded by
Ignition or heating in the fire the Substances you intend to quench.

CHAP. XXXV. Of Calcination.
CAlcination is the turning of a Medicament into Lime, by the help of a violent
fire; it is of great use in Chemical Pharmacy, and chiefly for Minerals, whose
substance is more solid than that of Plants and Animals. Calcination is divided
into Actual and Potential: Actual Calcination is performed by the Fire;
Potential by corrosive Spirits. Minerals require a less or bigger fire,
according to the diversity of their substances, and according to the various
purposes of the Artist. Calcination of Lead into gray powder inclining to
yellow, requires much less fire then other Calcinations of that Metal. The
Calcination of Oyster-shells is much sooner done then that of Lime, which
serves for building. There is less fire required to calcine Antimony into a
gray powder, then to calcine it into a white powder, which is called Ceruse of
Antimony, or Antimony-diaphoretic; or then is required to convert it into
Saffron, Regulus, or Glass. The Actual Calcination of Minerals, is performed
sometimes without addition, as the simple Calcination of Lead, Antimony and
Steel, etc. sometimes by the addition of Sulphur, Nitre and Tartar, etc. The
Potential Calcination of Metals, is also called Immersive. It is made by the
means of corrosive Spirits, which penetrate and dissolve them. So Gold is
dissolved in Aqua-Regalis, or by Spirit of Salt well purged from its phlegm.
Silver, Copper, Mercury, Saturn, Mars, etc. by the Spirit of Nitre, or
Aquafortis, or by other corroding Spirits; and so are all the rest. It is
called Immersive, because the Minerals are steeped in the corroding Liquors, to
the end they may lie in soak there till they are calcined.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Amalgamation, Fumigation, Cementation, Stratification.
AMalgamation, is a Potential Calcination, which is made of Gold and Silver, by
the means of Quicksilver, which being mingled either with the one or the other
of these Metals when it is melted, separates their parts, and for a time so
effectually mixes it self with them, that the whole becomes an unctuous paste
that may be extended upon the hand. This paste being afterward put into a
Crucible and set upon the fire, loses its shape and consistency; for when the
Mercury has forsak'n those perfect Metals by evaporation, they appear at the
bottom of the Crucible, like Lime, much more fine then it could possibly have
been made by any other Operation.

Fumigation, is also a Potential Calcination, by which the Mercury put upon
the fire in a Crucible, the mouth whereof must be somewhat straight, corrodes
and reduces into Lime the thin plates, which hang over it to receive the vapor
of the Mercury. Saturn in plates hung in that manner, so that it may receive
the vapors of Vinegar set upon the fire, will be also corroded by that means,
and the superficies thereof converted into a white Lime, which is the true
Ceruse. This Fumigation is called Evaporatingcalcination* Fumigation made by
the means of Sulphur kindled, is made use of to abate the purgative Faculty of
Scammony, by the penetration of the acid of the same Sulphur into all the parts
of the Substance of the same Scammony, and by the change which it produces by
the uniting it self to it. But this is no Calcinating-fumigation, like those of
Mercury and Vinegar. I let alone those Fumigations which are raised from
Aromatics, which are only exhalations of the more odorific parts of those
sorts of Substances, which never change the nature of those that receive them,
no more then of their form, but only leave the scent of their odours behind
them.

Cementation, is yet another sort of Calcination, whereby the imperfect Metals,
which are mixed with Gold and Silver, extended upon small and very thin Plates,
are calcined and destroyed, so that the perfect Metals become rid of them and
absolutely pure. It is called Cementation, because of the Cement in powder,
with which the thin Plates are strow'd all over, by means of the Stratification
which is used in the Crucible, that is afterward covered and luted
extraordinary close; and then put in a Gradual wheel-fire for some hours, till
the perfect metals are melted, which is the last period of Cementation.

Stratification, or the laying of things in rows or beds, is done by covering
the bottom of the Crucible with a powder for Cementation, upon which are laid
certain thin Plates of Gold or Silver, which must be covered again with the
powder; then lay other thin Plates upon that powder, and then more powder upon
those Plates, continuing so to do alternatively, and ending with the powder
with which you began; then cover the Crucible and lute it exactly, and put it
in the wheel-fire, as has been said already in Cementation. Stratification is
also made use of upon several other occasions, where Cementation is not
necessary.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Fusion, Granulation, Projection, Detonation and Fulmination.
FVsion belongs only to Metals, and Mineral Substances, which are put into a
Crucible, and exposed to a violent fire, till the Substance is melted. The
Salts of Plants are also melted in the same fire to vitrifie them.

Granulation cannot be done without Fusion; and it is consequent to it. It is
chiefly practiced upon Gold or Silver melted together or separately. We softly
pour these Metals into cold water when they are well melted, for then you find
them in grains at the bottom of the Vessel. You may also lay some twigs of a
Broom upon the top of the water, the better to divide the melted Metal, and to
make the grains lesser: There are others that for the same purpose, will run
them through Paper pierced full of holes with a Bodkin, and rubbed with
Orpiment.

Projection is made after the following manner. You must place a Crucible, or
an Aludel upon a round of baked earth about two fingers thick, and sufficiently
broad, which the Chemists call A Culotte, to set the Crucible or Aludel upon.
This Round must be set with the bottom downwards upon the middle-grate of a
Wind-furnace, kindling a Charcoal-fire round about the Round of baked earth,
and the Crucible or Aludel. The Crucible being well fortified with its cover,
and the Aludel with its stopper. The fire must be continued till the Crucible
or Vessel be red-hot; at what time you must throw into either an ounce of that
Substance which you intend to project, making use for that purpose of a Ladle,
or Iron or Copper Spatula with a long handle, able to contain as much as you
are to throw in at a time, but not bigger then the cover of the Crucible or the
Aludel. At the same time you must also cover the Crucible, or stop the Aludel;
and when Detonation is passed, you may open them again, and throw in as much
new matter as at the first time, then cover them again, and continue the same
Projection till all the matter be projected, or that the Vessels are able to
contain no more.

Detonation usually accompanies Projection. It is advanced by the Nitre, which
is the most powerful agent in matters to be projected. It is also succeeded by
Fusion, to which the force of the fire, and the activity of the Saltpeter
compel the Substances. The most familiar happ'ns in the Preparation of
Diaphoretic-Antimony, made by Antimony and Saltpeter: in that of
Sul-Polychrestes, made of Nitre and Sulphur; and that of Flowers of Antimony,
with the same Nitre. Projection ought to be made of a small quantity, and at
several repetitions. For if you should put too much Substance at a time, the
violent activity of the Nitre would break all the Vessels, or make the
Substances run in the fire. Detonation raises the impure and volatile Sulphur
from the matters, partly into the air, and partly immediately above the more
pure mass. The terrestreities are usually found mixed with the volatile parts,
of the impurities whereof they are the cause. But the principal internal
Sulphur is found in the pure mass: which by reason of its weight, quits the
impure parts, to descend to the bottom of the Vessel.

Fulmination, which is also called Fulguration, is much more violent then
Detonation, especially that which is used to one particular Preparation of
Gold. It is so called because it acts like thunder, working its effects from
top to bottom, according as the matter finds resistance at the top. Fulmination
of Gold happens through the union of Aqua-regalis with it in dissolving it, as
also of the Salts of the Tartar, united with it when the Gold was precipitated
into Lime. Whence it comes to pass, that this Lime of Gold precipitated,
retains still some particles of the Salts, especially of the Ammoniac contained
in the Aqua-regalis, to produce Fulmination upon the least heat that should
happ'n to the Lime of Gold. And this Fulmination is no otherwise made then by
the forced division of the Salts from the Gold by the means of the heat. There
is another Fulmination less violent, which is made by the Salt of Tartar, Nitre
and Sulphur, in a certain proportion: which is not so dear as that of Gold, and
is more easy to do; the description whereof is in the third part of this
Pharmacopoea.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Reverberation, Lapidification, and Vitrefaction.
REverberation serves to open, separate and calcine the Substances of mixed
Bodies, by means of a flaming fire, that encompasses and reflects upon the
matter. It also serves to take away the corrosive Spirits of Nitre, Salt and
Vitriol, as also by means of the Retort to separate the volatile parts of
certain Plants and of all Animals. It is two fold; one done with an open fire,
which is that of Calcination; the other with a close fire; as is that of
Distillation.

Lapidification is the converting of more then one Medicament into the form of
a stone. Which comes to pass by the dissolving any Metal in a corrosive Spirit,
and causing the dissolution to boil to the consistency of stone. As when we
dissolve Silver in Aquafortis, and boil that dissolution to the consistency of
a stone, which they call Infernal. Diverse fixed Salts are also converted into
Fix'd-stones. We also turn into stone Vitriol, Alum, Salt of glass, and many
other Salts of Plants, mixed with Bole-Ammoniac, of which is made the Medicinal
Stone. Many artificial Marbles and Jewels may be also made by several
Preparations.

Vitrification by means of a violent fire turns some Substances into glass. It
is practiced upon Metals, Metallics, and several sorts of Minerals: among the
rest upon Stones, Flints and Sands, as also upon the Ashes of diverse Plants.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of Precipitation.
PRecipitation is effected when a Medicament, dissolved by any fixed corrosive
Salt, or by some acid g^awing Spirit, or by some homogeneous volatile Spirit,
quits the dissolvent, and precipitates or falls headlong to the bottom of the
Vessel. To hast'n it, we must make use of Precipitants, which at least in all
outward appearance are of a nature quite contrary to the Dissolvents; and which
may either join with them or make a confusion among them, or weak'n them, and
so by some means or other constrain them to quit the Body which they held in
dissolution. When we have dissolved Pearls or Coral in the Spirit of Nitre, or
Vinegar, we usually have recourse to some fixed Salt, as that of Tartar, the
Liquor whereof being poured upon the dissolution, unites with the acid Spirit
which was in the dissolvent, and constrains the Substance of the Pearls and
Corals which it dissolved, to precipitate to the bottom of the Vessel. When the
flowers of Sulphur have been dissolved with Salt of Tartar, we must have
recourse to some acid Spirit, as that of Nitre or Vinegar, or some acid Salt,
as Alum dissolved in Water, to make the Precipitation. Mercury dissolved in
Aquafortis, or in Spirit of Nitre, is precipitated by Seawater. But because
Seawater contains in its composition an acid part, which in some measure
counterballances the fixed parts, it does not act so powerfully for
precipitation of Mercury as Salt of Tartar, which is void of all acid Spirit,
and therefore proper to embrace the acid Spirit which dissolved the Mercury,
and to compel the one to quit the other. But as it acts with more violence than
Sea Salt, it leaves in the Mercury a kind of a red color. Whence it comes to
pass, that we never use any other then Sea Salt when we desire that the
Precipitate should be white. However there is another white Precipitate to be
made of Mercury, by precipitating it with Salt of Tartar, if you make use
therein of Mercury sublimed and dissolved in Water of Sal-Armoniac: which after
it has corrected the impressions which the Salt and the Vitriol had left in the
Mercury by its sublimation, causes the Volatile Sal-Armoniac to meet with the
Salt of Tartar, which is in some measure homogeneous to it. And in regard the
Dissolution of Mercury sublimated in Water of Sal-Armoniac is done without any
violence, as is also the conjunction of its dissolution with that of Salt of
Tartar, the white which is common to both Salts, suffers no alteration, and the
acrimony of the Salts fails not to be carried away by Lotions. Tartar is also
proper to precipitate all sorts of vitriolated Dissolutions. Bismuth dissolved
with Spirit of Nitre, is properly precipitated with Seawater: But it may be
also precipitated by common-water only poured in a good quantity upon the
Dissolution: which finding it self weakened by the Dissolvent, abandons the
dissolved Bismuth, and gives it opportunity to precipitate to the bottom. The
Dissolution of the rosinie part of Scammony, Jalap, Agaric, and the like made
in Spirit of Wine, as also that of Amber, and several other bituminous
Substances, are easily precipitated by weakening the Spirit of Wine with Water.
Or else you may attain your end by drawing forth the Spirit of Wine by a soft
Distillation, or else causing it to evaporate insensibly: For you shall find
the rosinie or bituminous matter at the bottom, accompanied with an
unprofitable moisture, distinct, which is to be thrown away.

I do not account that Precipitation of Mercury, which is commonly called
Red-precipitate, to be one of these Precipitates: which is only a real
potential Calcination of Mercury, by the means of Strong-water or Aqua fortis,
or Spirit of Nitre, which afterward they evaporate without pouring any
precipitating Salt upon it.

CHAP. XL. Of Sublimation.
SVblimation is practiced upon dry Substances, some of which are either raised
almost altogether, or in part toward the upper part of the Vessel proper for
Sublimation, and that by means of a gradual fire. Medicaments are sometimes
sublimed without any mixture, and the more pure parts are sublimed like
Flowers, leaving the thicker parts at the bottom. In this manner are the
Flowers of Benjamin, Storax, and Arsenic, etc. prepared. Thus may Sulphur be
sublimed with an addition of some other matter: and it is observable that it
will almost all mount up in Flowers, unless it be extraordinarily charged and
load'n with external terrestreities. Sublimation is also used to separate the
volatile Substances from the fixed; as when we sublime in Flowers the volatile
part of Sal-Ammoniac, and reserve the salt part fixed at the bottom mixed among
the acid. Mercury is also very much inclined to Sublimation, and to take
several shapes according to the variety of the Substances with which it is
mixed, which will cause it to act as differently. However it cannot be
sublimated unless it be mixed with corrosive Substances, or at least with such
as may put a stop to its fluidity; nor without borrowing also some particles of
those foreign Substances, to elevate it self and to incorporate with them:
Then it sublimes altogether, provided it be perfectly united with them, and
that you have observed proportions in mixture and degrees of fire.

Fluid Mercury is incorporated with a certain quantity of Salt decrepitated,
and Vitriol dried to whiteness, and it is sublimated by a gradual fire in a
consistence white and corrosive, which is called Sublimate-corrosive; so
become, by reason of the particles of Salt and Vitriol which have been raised
with it in Sublimation, and which make it a most dangerous poison. The same
Mercury sublimate-corrosive mixed and perfectly united with three fourths of
its weight of fluid Mercury takes off the acrimonie of the Salts, and that
little corrosion which might remain in that Mercurysublimate, might perhaps be
altogether carried off, by resubliming it two or three times without any
addition. This Mercury so sublimated is called Sweet-sublimate, or Mercurius
dulcis, the internal use whereof is frequent in the cure of several Distempers,
especially Venereal. Mercury is also sublimated in a very red and shining
consistency, having been formerly well united with a certain quantity of
Sulphur. This Mercury so sublimated we call Cinnabar, and is usually made use
of in Perfums for Venereal distempers. It is useful also in painting, and to
color Spanish-wax. I say nothing of the Preparation of the Flowers of
Antimony, and several other Minerals, which I refer to their proper place.

CHAP. XLI. Of Distillation.
DIstillation is an Elevation attended by a Descension of the watrie,
spiritful, oily or salt parts of mixed Bodies, separated from the gross and
terrestrial by means of the Fire. The natural Ascension or Elevation is that of
Rain, Dew, Mists, which ascend in vapor up into the Air, and being there
gathered in a body together fall afterward by the force of their own proper
weight, either in Springs of Water divided, or else in drops or in lesser
parts, according as the vapors are more or less abounding, or that they are
more or less agitated by the winds; and which in falling make a kind of
Distillation. The artificial Distillation is usually made after general ways:
of which the first is called the Straight, the second the Oblique or Lateral,
the third by Descent. Both the one and the other are made into diverse Vessels
either of Silver, Pewter, Copper, Iron, Earth, Glass; and all by the means of
Fire, or of some borrowed heat. Sreight of Upright Distillation raises up the
vapors high into a Vessel proper to receive them, which must be placed and
luted above that which contains the matters. These vapors thus raised are
converted into Liquor, and distill through the neck of the superior Vessel, into
another set below the neck and called the Recipient. Oblique or Side-ling
Distillation is made in crooked Vessels, which are called Cornutes or Retorts,
to which are fitted Recipients bigger or lesser according to the nature of the
Spirits which are to be drawn forth. These Vessels were invented for the
distillation of ponderous Spirits, as those of Nitre, Salt, Vitriol, etc. as
also for the distillation of other Spirits less weighty, as of Oils and
volatile Salts, which will not so commodiously ascend by an upright
Distillation: such are the Spirits and Oils of Woods; the Spirits, the Oils,
the volatile Salts of Vipers, Hartshorn, Ivory and many other parts of
Animals; as also of certain Plants that abound in Salts and volatile Oils; and
likewise of the Spirits of Tartar, Wax, Amber, and many others. Distillation by
descent is made by the putting the fire round about, and at the top of the
Vessel, which contains the Substances to be distilled, and whose orifice is
below.

This fire acting upon the substances within, by degrees separates the liquid
parts from the gross and terrestrial, and constrains them to descend and distill
into the Vessel placed immediately below, and luted with the Superior; there
being however between the two Orifices of the two Vessels a little thin plate
pierced through with several holes, to hinder the grosser substances from
falling into the Recipient, and to give the Liquors passage, to fall into the
lower Vessel. The use thereof is particularly, for thick matters, especially
Wood. Though this Distillation may serve for thinner Substances; of which you
will find examples in my Chemical Preparations.

There is also a sort of Distillation by descent, which is called per For in
this place it must come from Delique, and not Deliqueo.
Deliquium, or by Draining, which is only the Resolution of Salts into Liquor,
and which is more Natural then Artificial. The distilling of a Vine, cut in the
Spring, may be also called Distillation: also Oil of Petrol, or Naphte, which
distills from the Rocks, and the like. Hither we also refer the Natural Balsom,
and other liquids that distill from Plants of themselves, or by Incision: As
Turpentines, that trickle from diverse Trees, Opium from Poppy, and Scammony
from its Plant.

CHAP. XLII. Of Rectification.
REctification is a new purification and exaltation of the most essential part
of the mixed Body, which was formerly separated by Distillation, or otherwise.
It is in use for Waters, for Oils, for Spirits and Salts, as well fixed as
volatile, distilled or sublimed. It is also used for dry Substances, as also
for Tinctures. Rectification is properly a Distillation, or new Sublimation of
that which had been already distilled or sublimated; and by that means a new
separation of the aquosities, terrestreities, or other impurities, which are
found intermixed in the first Distillation or Sublimation. You may repeat
Rectification so often, till the matter intended to be rectified have attained
its utmost purity. The volatile Salts rise first of all in their Rectification;
the Spirits and volatile Oils follow: the Phlegm appears next, or else it
remains at the bottom of the Vessel with the thick Oil and terrestreities. The
ethereal spirit of Wine and Turpentine ascend first in Rectification: as it
happens also to several other spiritful Waters. The Phlegm follows the spirit of
Wine, if you continue the fire: if not, it remains at the bottom of the Vessel,
The ethereal Spirit of Turpentine, is attended by the unctuous Substances, the
first whereof are less thick and less, colored than the latter: but the
rosinie and thick part lies at the bottom of the Vessel. The watery part of the
Spirits of Salt, Vitriol and Sulphur, ascend first in their Rectification; it
is followed by the Spirits, if the fire be increased and continued; if not, the
Spirits remain at the bottom of the Vessel. The Oils ascend among their Spirits
or Liquors, which were added to them to hinder their Empyreuma, or being
scorched by the fire during their Rectification. Tinctures are rectified by
Circulation and Filtration. Fixed Salts are rectified by Calcination,
Dissolution, Filtration and Coagulation. You may also mingle among them some
small quantity of Sulphur, and burn it in calcining them, if you would cleanse
them well from their superfluous moisture, which causes their dissolution; and
in keeping them, makes them subject to dissolve into Liquor. As many times it
happens to the Salts of Plants, which were not calcinated with Sulphur.
Regulus's are rectified by repeated Fusions, and additions of some little
quantity of Saltpeter. Perfect Metals are rectified by the Coppel, by
Antimony, by Sublimate, by the Inquart, and by other ways, etc.

CHAP. XLIII. Of Extraction, Evaporation, and Exhalation.
EXtraction is a separation of the more pure and most essential parts of
Medicaments from the gross and terrestrial, by the means of some proper
Menstruum. Dissolution, or at least the Addition of some other Liquor,
Digestion and Filtration are almost inseparable from Extraction, This operation
is well made use of for Tinctures, Essences, Balsoms, and several other liquid
Preparations; but chiefly for those that are called Extracts: which are of a
consistence solid enough to be made into Bolus's and Pills. Such are the
extracts of Rhubarb, Senna, Coloquinth, Ellebore, Aloes, and the like, which
are begun by the extraction which is made of their Tincture; and finished
either by the volatile part of the Menstruum, by distillation, if it be worth
while, or by evaporating the superfluous moistures over a gentle fire, or in
the Sun, or in Horsedung. Extracts also of the Juice of green Plants, is made
without any other addition of foreign Liquor. For it is enough to purify
those Juices by Filtration or otherwise, and to evaporate them over a gentle
fire, till they come to their necessary consistency. Such are the Extracts of
Wormwood, Carduus, Centaurie, Spurge, etc.

Evaporation is the elevation and dissipation of the superfluous humidity which
is to be found in any Medicament. It is usually made by the means of Fire,
though sometimes we also make use of the heat of the Sun; it is very often made
use of in several Galenic and Chemical Preparations.

Exhalation is only practiced upon dry things, to raise and dissipate the most
volatile parts; it is made by the means of heat lesser or greater, according to
the various Substance of the Medicaments. It is of use in several Galenical and
Chemical Preparations.

CHAP. XLIV. Of Liquefaction, Melting, and Coagulation, Curdling.
LIquefaction or Melting is practiced upon Wax, Suets, Greases, Rosins, Gums,
Butter, Ointments, Emplasters, Ice, and all Substances that may be coagulated
by the cold, and easily melted by heat. Metals, Metallics, and several Minerals
are well coagulated by cold, and may be turned into Liquor by the heat of fire:
But because this cannot usually be done but by a violent heat, therefore that
Operation is called Fusion, and not Liquefaction.

Coagulation is opposed to Liquefaction and Fusion. And therefore it is called
the Alteration of a liquid matter into a solid, by the privation of heat or the
separation of moisture: as when the fixed Salts have been dissolved in some
liquor, and we evaporate the moisture over the fire, then they remain dry and
coagulated. The same thing may befall them after they have suffered Fusion. It
happ'ns also to Metals, and other Minerals that may be run down, as Sulphur,
Alum, Antimony, Nitre, Vitriol and many others, which run with the fire and
coagulate in the cold. There are also Salts which are called Essential, which
being melted in hot liquors, coagulate in the cold, as that of Carduus. We see
also several dissolutions of Metals, and of several other Minerals made by
strong Waters, which were very liquid while they stood upon the fire; but soon
coagulated in the cold, notwithstanding the moisture which accompanys them. I
pass over the Coagulation of Milk, and that which may be made by the
conjunction of acid Spirits with volatile, whereof I shall show examples in my
Chemical Preparations.

CHAP. XLV. Of Fixation, Congelation, and Chrystallization.
FIxation is opposite to Volatilization, because it fixes and stops that which
was of a volatile nature, and renders it altogether durable in the fire, or
else able to withstand its force for a long time. And here we must observe that
Acids are the most proper principal means which we can make use of to fix
Volatiles. Which I do not believe happ'ns through any antipathy, or contrariety
of Substance that is between them, as many Philosophers are of opinion: for if
that were true, they would certainly destroy one another, which never falls
out. But my sentiment is this, That in regard of the great sympathy and
inclination which they have, straightly to unite with their like parts, that is
the cause that they join with so much swiftness, and with a kind of violence;
and being once united, they are not parted but with great difficulty, and only
when they meet with a Substance which more agrees with their Nature. On the
other side their difficulty to unite proceeds from a certain disposition of the
figures of their parts, which render them incapable to embody and compose a
solid mass together, without making an affault one upon another. For though
Acids and Volatiles seem to have changed their qualities in being mixed and
confounded one within another, though their activity be different, when they
can act separately; yet they preserve their Nature and their first faculty, and
fail not to demonstrate the truth thereof, when they have been frequently
separated. Which may be done with mixing Salt Tartar, or any other fixed Salt
with them. For the acids are more inclined to unite to the fixed Salts, then
the volatile. So that joining very close to the fixed and adhering but very
slightly to the volatile, they suffer the volatiles to be raised by the fire:
and these volatiles are observed to have the same penetration, which they had
before they were joined and mingled with the acids and the same acids may be
still constrained to quit those fixed Salts, when you increase the quantity of
the latter, and that the former find themselves too strongly attacqu'd. For the
fixed Salts being in a condition of themselves to resist the violence of the
fire, without the concurrence of acids, could never hinder the latter from
quitting them, when they are no longer able to resist the fire, but that they
must be raised and carried away with the acidity and force which they had
before they were joined together.

Congelation approaches very near to Coagulation. It happ'ns that several
liquors, and several Substances liquefy'd by heat, congeal in the cold. Such
are the Decoctions of several Meats and Fish, as also of Serpents, especially
of Vipers, the Decoctions of Hartshorn and Elephants-teeth rasp'd, and several
others; as also the Juices and Decoctions of several acid Fruits mingled and
boiled with Sugar: among the rest those of Goosberries, Verjuice, Cherries and
the like* to all which things they are wont to give the Name of Gellies. We may
also rank under the Name of Congelations, Water congealed by the cold, Suets,
Greases melted before the fire, and afterward congealed; as also Wax, Rosines,
Oil of Nut-megs, and several others easily melted at the fire, which always
congeal in the cold; though they may be reckoned also for Coagulations.

Chrystallization is a sort of Congelation which happ'ns to Salts, as well
essential, fixed and volatile, as also to those which are mixed with acids;
when being separated from a good part of their moisture, you let them rest in a
cool place there to chrystallize; and then to be taken out and dried when you
have poured out by Inclination the liquor that swims at the top, which is not
chrystalliz'd. This Chrystallization happ'ns to Cremor Tartar, to the essential
Salts of diverse Plants, to Nitre variously prepared, to Vitriols dissolved,
filtered and evaporated to the very Pellicula or thin skin; and to several
Minerals dissolved by corrosives. It may also happ'n to all sorts of purified
Salts, separated from the greatest part of their moisture, in which they had
been dissolved. We call the small skin or Pellicula, a kind of thin Film, which
appears upon the superficies of the Salts, dissolved in Water, when you have
evaporated the moisture over the fire, and that the greatest part is consumed.

CHAP. XLVI. Of Spiritualization, and Corporification.
SPiritualization is the conversion of the parts of a solid body into Spirit.
It is particularly attributed to Salts, of which almost all the parts are
converted into Spirit by Distillation. Such are Bay Salt, Nitre, Vitriol, Alum,
etc. Several other Medicaments are to be spiritualized, especially Juices, and
fermented Liquors, which render their Spirits volatile and combustible, but not
acid, as are those which we draw from Salts.

Corporification restores to Spirits the same body, or at least a body very
like to that which they had before their Spiritualization. For Example, The
Spirit of Nitre united with Salt of Tartar, or with its own proper fixed Salt,
and set to chrystallize, resumes its former body. Spirit of Vitriol, after it
has devoured Iron, being dissolved in Water, filtered and evaporated, resumes
the form and consistency of Vitriol. There is another sort of Corporification,
which in embodying of Spirits causes them to take a form quite different from
that of their original. For Example, Spirit of Vinegar, having dissolved
Pearls, Coral, Saturn, etc. incorporated, assumes the form of Salt, if you
evaporate the superfluous moisture that accompanies it. And this Salt of
Vinegar will resume the shape of Spirit by Distillation, abandoning to the
bottom of the Vessel the matter with which it was incorporated.

CHAP. XLVII. Of Reduction, and Mortification.
REduction is the re-establishment of mixed Bodies, or their parts in their
natural Estate. As when the Spirits, united and incorporated with certain
Matters, are separated from them and reduced to their former estate by
Distillation. Reduction is very much practiced in Metals: For by that means the
Metals which appear destroyed, by several Corrosions, Calcinations,
Sublimations, and Dissolutions are reduced to the same condition in which they
were, before they had suffered any alteration.

Mortification is a change of the exterior form, and sometimes of the
consistency of the mixed Body. It may be attributed to Mercury, not only then
when being mingled and incorporated with Turpentine, or with other oily
Substances, it loses its motion and fluidness; but after it has undergone
several Chemical Preparations. It may be also applied to Saturn or Lead in
diverse Preparations. It may be also attributed to Animals or Plants, not only
then when motion and growth are taken from them with their Lives, but also when
their parts are dis-joynted, and that they have changed condition and form.

There are practiced in both the one and the other Pharmacy several other
manners of preparing, of which you shall be sufficiently informed in the
following Part of this Pharmacopoea, without giving you the trouble of
multiplying Descriptions in particular Chapters.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of Mixture.
NO Man can undertake the Preparation of any Medicin before he know it: No more
can any Man practice Mixture before he know Preparation. For all Medicaments
are not so simple, so known, so usual, so easy to mix, as Water and Wine.

Mixture is then the third thing a Physician ought to know and put in practice.
It is defined an Artificial mixture of diverse Medicaments, which an Artist has
chos'n and altered by Preparation; and which he unites together to make a
compounded Medicament. And in truth when the Ancients talked of Mixture, they
chiefly meant that Mixture which is made of several Medicaments prepared to
make one Composition. As when to make any Electuary the Artist chooses, weighs
and orders every drug; beats those things which are to be reduced into powder;
strains the Pulps; makes the Decoctions, boyles the Sugar or Honey with them to
a convenient consistency, then mixes the Pulps and the Powders, and makes the
Electuary; and so of other compositions. But I must say, That in both the one
and the other Pharmacy there are continual Mixtures; in regard there are few
Preparations that can be made up without Mixture. And though Mixture seems
easy enough, and that it be truly so to them that well understand all sorts of
Preparations; yet it does not want its difficulties, and requires a great
exactness in a thousand things which are to be observed. As in the ordering of
Medicaments that are to be put into one Composition; the regard which is to be
had to their different Substances; the Preparation which is due to them to
dispose them for Mixture; the proportions requisite for Ingredients, to bring
them to their just consistency, and the form which is intended to be given to
the Medicament; the degrees of heat and boiling; the Vessels and Instruments to
be made use of in Mixture and Boiling: the time and moment necessary, and the
Vessels and place where Medicaments are to be set up and preserved.

The diversity of Diseases, their complication, their accidents unfore-seen,
and the necessity at all times of a quick Remedy, have constrained the
Physicians to invent an infinite variety of Compositions. They must frame
themselves to the nature and constitution of the Patients, and vary the
applications of Medicaments, as well simple as compound, as occasion requires,
to quick'n the slowness and weakness of some, and repress the violence of
others. It behooves them to give them various forms and consistencies, to vary
the taste, and to provide for their preservation, which cannot be done without
making use of Mixture. So that mixture is not to be separated either from the
one or the other Pharmacy: for though Chymistrie does not usually require
either in Preparation, or in the use of Medicines, such a numerous quantity of
Medicaments to be clapped together as the Galenists do; yet the Division and the
Purification of the parts of Medicament, require a skill and dexterity
altogether peculiar, as well for their Mixture as their Union. It behooves the
Chemist to know the dissimilitude of Substances, and how to reduce them to a
kind of homogeneousness; to make Elixirs and universal Medicines of great
virtue, which are beyond the knowledge of Galenic Pharmacy: as not being
accustomed to practice Mixture, but upon Medicaments encumbered with all the
parts of which they are composed.

Here I might seasonably dilate upon many cautions to be observed in the right
Mixture and Union of all sorts of Medicaments: But in regard that in the
following part of this Pharmacopoea I am obliged to speak of the particular
mixture of every Composition, as also of every considerable Preparation, as
well Galenic as Chemical; I thought it more convenient to remit the Reader
thither.

CHAP. XLIX. Of the Composition of Medicaments.
THE Composition of Medicaments cannot be accomplished without mixture. But the
word Composition implies something of well-ordered, proportionate and disposed
to produce those effects which are required upon occasion from the union of
several Medicaments, tending together to one or more purposes. I will not
repeat here the reasons for which the Composition of Medicaments was invented.
It shall suffice me to take notice, That besides the great number of
Compositions which have heretofore been made use of, the Physicians are at
liberty every day to invent more; and that in some there may be a greater, in
others a lesser number of Medicaments. I must also needs say that Preservation
is one of the chief ends of Composition; nevertheless many compounded Remedies
used every day, cannot be kept long; and therefore they are never to be
prepared, but only when there is occasion to use them.

It is not my resolution to insist in general upon all the compounded Remedies
which the Ancients have made use of; and of which they have left several
presidents. It will be enough for me to speak of those, which are in practice
at this day. To which intent I will divide all compounded Remedies into
internal and external. The internal are Juleps, Apozems, Emulsions, Almonds
milks and creams, Restoratives Purgative potions, Altering-physick, Mixtures,
Gargarisms, Prisans, diverse Decoctions, Bolus's* Clysters, Suppositories,
Pessaries, Injections, Wines, Vinegars, and diverse Juices; which may be also
outwardly applied, Robbes, Honeys compounded, Oxymels, Syrups, Loches,
Lozenges, Condites, Gellies, Conserves, Electuaries, Hiera's, Opiats,
Confections, Antidotes, Tablets, Pills, Powders, Distill'd-waters simple and
compound, Feces, Extracts, Rosins, Salts fixed, volatile and essential,
Chrystals, Flowers, Magisteries, Saffrons, Oils distilled and pressed;
Tinctures, Elixirs, Essences, Balsoms, Panacea's, Lime, Stones, Glasses,
Regulus's, Sulphurs, Sublimates, Precipitates, etc. Remedies external
compounded, are Baths, Half-baths as well liquid as by steam, Lotions,
Embrochations, Fermentations, Bags and Caps quilted with Cephalic-powders,
Frontlets, Sinapisms, Vesicatories, Depilatories, or Medicines to take away the
Hair, Cataplasms, Epithemes liquid and solid; Suffumigations, Pomatums, Grains
and Sweet Candles, Caustic-stones, Mucilages, several Balsoms, several Oils, as
well by infusion as expression and distillation; Liniments, Ointments,
Sear-cloths, Emplasters, Pastes for the Hands, Wax'd-linnen-cloths, Sparadraps,
or Linnen-cloths dipped in melted-salves, certain Flowers, certain Magisteries,
certain Limes, and certain composed stones, of all which I shall speak in their
proper place.

CHAP. L. Of Fire, and its degrees.
IT was not without great reason that Fire has been esteemed at all times the
most noble of all the Elements. In regard it is the principal agent of Nature
and of Art in the Production of all things: it foments, it nourishes them, and
gives them growth: it comforts by its light, and penetrates by its subtlety the
most compact of Substances. So that I cannot imagine, by what motive, Persons
that have rendered themselves famous as well by their Chemical Operations as
Writings, and who never could have any reason to mis* doubt the utility of
Fire, should nevertheless go about to blot it out of the number of the
Elements; and instead of making it the author of any considerable production,
should give it the Name of Corrupter and Destroyer. For though I make no
question, but that Fire being kindled in wood or any other combustible, matter
and meeting with a continuity of substance upon which it can exercise its
activity, will destroy, and continue that destruction, till it meet with no
farther matter to act upon: yet all the World must of necessity be convinced,
That besides the continual necessity we have of Fire, as well in the one as the
other Pharmacy, as also for the support of Life, it is in our power to augment
or abate its force at our pleasure; either by laying on or taking off the wood
or coals, or by opening on closing the Pipes that let in the Air and quick'n
the Fire. Neither it is possible for me but to commend and seek the assistance
of Fire in my Profession; and I am also forced to confess that without the
assistance thereof, I had never attained any solid knowledge; and that what I
have acquired would be of no use to me in the most part of my Operations,
should I want Fire to begin, continue or carry them to perfection.

Under the Name of Fire, I understand not only the ordinary Fire lighted, and
acting upon wood, coals, or any other combustible matters; but all Heat that
produces action approaching next to that of Fire. And therefore I shall divide
Fire or Heat into Natural or Artificial. Natural Fire is esteemed to be that
which comes from the Rays of the Sun. Artificial, is that which depends upon
the skill of Men; according to the variety and quantity of the matter
combustible with which they furnish it, and the more or less Air which they
afford it. The one and the other Pharmacy make use of the Natural heat of the
beams of the Sun in several respects: but they more frequently have recourse,
and indeed at all times to Artificial Fire, which is able to do many things
beyond the Natural heat of the Sun.

It is not necessary for me here to dilate upon the heat of the Sun, which we
may seek and find to be more or less excessive, according to the Climates and
Seasons, and the various occasions of it; it being also to be augmented and
re-inforc'd by reflection and repercussion, by the help of a Burning-mirror. I
will only insist upon Artificial heat, and the several degrees of it; of which
we must acknowledge two in general, one for Digestion, and the other for
Separation.

Digestion makes use of several fires, of which the most simple and nearest to
Natural heat, is that of Horse-dung, which may be more or less excessive,
according to the quantity of the Dung, the time when the Dunghill was made,
and the depth of the Vessel's being placed in it. For certain it is, that a man
cannot put his hand in the midst of a great Dunghill of Horse-dung, if it have
had time to rip'n; nor endure a rod of Iron that has been buried but awhile in
such a muck-hill. The heat of Horse-dung is also called The heat of the Horses
Belly.

The Fire of the Air heated by an ordinary fire kindled under a Vessel of Iron
or Earth fit to resist fire, and closed in a close Furnace, capable of
receiving the Vessel which contains the matters, is accounted a moderate Fire.

The fire of a Lamp, is a fire also as moderate as equal; and yet it may be
increased or diminished, according to the bigness and quantity of wicks which
you light; as also according as the Vessels are to be more or less heated. The
fire of Lamps is very much used by those that seek after the universal
Medicine; and for several Operations that require continuance of time and an
equal fire, either for Digestions or Fixations.

The fire of the steam of hot water is a very moderate heat, but it cannot be
continued so equal as that of Dung, the Lamp, or the heated Air. You may also
increase the heat, by causing the water to boil. The use of it is only for
Operations that require not the long continuance of a fire.

The fire of Balneum Mariae, called the Sea-bath, is made use of by plunging
the Vessel that contains the matters into the hot water, as into a Bath. It is
useful for Tinctures, Circulations, Digestions, and Distillations. It is a
little more hot then the evaporating Bath, of which I have already spoken. It
may be so far made use of, as to make the water boil.

The fire of Cinders, improperly called the Cinder-bath, is somewhat hotter
then all the former, if it be made as hot as it may be. The Custom is to make
use of Wood-ashes sifted through a coarse Sieve, to the end they may be put
into a Capsula of Iron, or of Earth able to resist the fire; and then to place
the Capsula upon a Furnace proportionable, and to let down the Vessel
containing the Medicaments into the Cinders or Ashes, so that there remain a
good Thumbs-breadth between the bottom of the Chest, and the bottom of the
Vessel; and that the Ashes may be heaped up round about the Vessel to the
height of the Medicaments. The Vessel may be of Silver, Copper tinned within,
Earth or Glass. The fire is lighted under the Capsula of Ashes, to heat them by
a little and a little, and is continued or increased as occasion requires,
either for digestion or distilling.

The fire of Sand, which bears also the name of a Bath, may be more powerful
then that of Ashes. Whence it comes to pass, that it is called the fire of
Separation, yet it may be more or less hot, as you make use of more or less
fire; or according to the different weight and bigness of the Gravel; so that
if you moderate the heat, it may serve in the place of Ashes.

The fire of the Filings of Iron or Steel, bears also improperly the name of a
Bath. It Is heat may be much more increased then that of Sand; but it is not
much used.

The bare or immediate fire may afford much more heat then all the precedent
fires. It is so called, because the fire immediately gives its heat to the
Vessel, which contains the Matters; as also to the matters themselves, if they
may be exposed, to the fire, without being put into any Vessel. This fire is
very much used in both Pharmacies, and chiefly for several Decoctions and
Distillations; as also in Kitchins to dress Victuals, for which reasons it is
accounted the most common and chiefest of all.

The fire called the fire of the Wheel; as when the fire is put into the
Crucible, or in another proper Vessel; and then the fire is kindled round about
the Vessel, making as it were a Wheel of fire, from whence it had its Name.
This Wheel of fire ought to be at a sufficient distance, at first, from the
Vessel, to heat it by degrees, then insensibly put a little nearer, with an
equal fire round about, and then laid all together close to the Vessel; where
it may be continued, or increased as occasion requires.

There is also another sort of Naked fire, called the fire of Suppression,
which in degree of heat is not much unlike that of the Wheel; and which is made
use of sometimes the better to fix the substances, and sometimes to separate
some substance, which it causes to issue forth by the side, or to descend to
the bottom. The Vessel is heated by a little and a little, environing it at
first, and then covering it altogether with kindled Coals, increasing or
abating the fire, for so long time, and to such a degree, as shall be requisite
to perfect the Operation. Sometimes the fire of Suppression is used at the end
of Distillations made through the Cornute, chiefly of those that are made in
the Sand-Bath; They are also at other times made use of in the middle of
Distillations, the better to draw forth the Spiritful Substances, or Oil, which
resist the fire that is under the Vessel.

The fourth, Naked fire, is that of the close Reverberatory, which is done by
placing the Retort that contains the Substances, in a Furnace fit for the
purpose, over a fire small at the beginning, then continued and increased at
length to a great violence. The fire of close Reverberation, is used in the
Distillation of several Spirits, especially those that are corrosive: It is
made use of for the Distillations of several Oils, and Salts, Volatile; who
have no necessity of a fire so long, nor so great. This fire is called the fire
of Reverberation, because it does not only strike upon the Vessel immediately,
but because it reflects and strikes the heat back again from the top, and round
about. There is also an open fire of Reverberation, which is made in a furnace
that has no covering.

The fifth fire, is that which they call the fire of Flame, or of Fusion: This
is a fire more violent then any spoken of before: and which not only serves for
the Fusion of several Metals, half-Metals, and Metallics, but also for the
Calcination of them, and of several Stones.

There is a sixth fire, which is the fire of great Glass-houses, which is
appointed to vitrifie the Ashes of Plants, Flints, and sandy Substances. This
fire is more powerful then all the rest, because of the greatness, and
thickness of the Furnace, and the quantity of Wood with which it is continually
supplied. It may serve to Reverberate and Calcine diverse Substances. All these
fires, though very much differing the one from the other, may have every one in
particular their several degrees by themselves: So that every fire may be made
variously great or hot, and yet not vary from its kind. We also assign to
violent heats, especially to that of Reverberation, four degrees, of which the
first is only made use of to heat the Vessels by degrees, and the Substances
therein contained: The second is, to heat them a little more, and to make them
almost redhot: The third is, to make them altogether red-hot: The fourth, to
maintain the Vessels and Substances in the same condition, as also to make them
endure a continued fire, as violent as it can possibly be by Reverberation.

The Activity of several fires, of which Chemistry makes use to perfect her
Operations, would be weak enough without the assistance of the Air, which we
may call as it were the soul of fire, and the grand cause of diverse effects,
which we expect from it; in regard, that in an equal quantity of Coal, or other
combustible matter, the fire will be more or less hot, as there is more or less
Air to quicken it. Whence it comes to pass, that we must observe the necessary
rules for the making of Furnaces; and together with the consideration of the
distances of height and breadth, not forget in-lets for the Air, and where to
let it out again: so to make use of it as occasion shall serve, as well to
increase the Heat by opening them, as to abate the Heat by shutting them.

CHAP. LI. Of Furnaces.
A Furnace is called a close place, wherein the Apothecary kindles, proportions
and orders his fire, for all sorts of Compositions, or Preparations, both
Chemical and Galenick. Furnaces have been invented for the convenience of the
Artist; that being master of his fire, he might be able, either to increase or
abate, and use it effectually upon all sorts of Substances, as occasion
requires.

The Structure of Furnaces, is very various, because it depends as much upon
the Nature of the Substances, and the Operation there to be undertaken, as upon
the Genius and Skill of the Artist, who ought to understand as well how to
invent them, as to build them.

The matter whereof Furnaces are composed and built, is very various; and as to
that, there is as much regard to be had to their bigness, as to the place and
use to which they are appointed. Those in great Glass-houses are built of a
thick strong Stone, able to resist fire, as well because of their extraordinary
bigness, as because it is required that they should last long. We also cut and
fit one, two, or more of those thick Stones* and of the same Nature, to make
lesser Furnaces, appointed for other uses. Furnaces more used, are generally
composed of Brick, sometimes squared and long, sometimes molded into portions
of a Circle, whereof some make a fourth, a sixteenth, and some an eighth. These
Bricks are sometimes laid one upon another, without binding them with any
Mortar: especially when the Operation is in haste, or requires no great caution.

These Furnaces may be raised and taken down, according to a Man's pleasure.
But generally they build their Furnaces with Brick, laid and bound with several
sorts of Mortar, according to the diversity of the Earth, and the violence, or
remissness of the heat which the Furnace is to endure.

There are also other Furnaces called Portative-furnaces, because they may be
carried and placed where a Man pleases; which are oft-times all of one piece,
but most frequently of two, three or four, joined and placed one above another;
and and may be also dis-joyn'd as occasion requires. All these Portable
furnaces, as well those that are of several, as those that are all of one
piece, have their place for the ashes* their Grate, their Hearth, their Doors,
their Duomo's, their Registers, and all their other parts, like the Furnaces
which are made of Brick. The materials of these Furnaces are usually a fat
Earth, pounded together with the powder of pots made of Potters-earth, and Sand
proportionably mixed together, with Water sufficient to bring them to a paste.
They are afterward baked in a Potter's Furnace among other earth'n Pots.

All Furnaces are either open or covered: The open Furnaces have no Coverings,
whereas they that are covered have their hollow Coverings like Domo's, that
cover the Substances therein contained, and prevent dissipation. The most part
of Galenic Preparations or Compositions are made in open Furnaces, though the
same Furnaces may serve for several Chemical Preparations. The round shape is
not to be preferred before the square as to the outward form; in regard there
is little difference of the one from the other, as to the action of the Fire;
however the circular figure is to be desired as much as possible for the
interior part of the Furnace: because the heat acts therein with more liberty*
and because therein it imparts it self more equally then in any other figure.
Observe by the way, That the thickness of Furnaces is of great advantage to
preserve the heat of the fire, and resist the coldness of the Air, which
usually dissipates a good part of the heat of Furnaces that are too thin. The
ordering of the Air is also as necessary as that of the Wood or Coal, in the
government of the fire; in regard, as I said before, the letting-in or
keeping-out the Air, increases or abates its force. Whence it comes to pass
that in the distances and proportions, which are to be observed in building
Furnaces, to give the fire that air which is usually necessary, after you have
made convenient doors in those parts of the Furnaces where the air may easily
get out and in, you must have stopples of the same, to stop those out-lets,
when you would moderate the power of the fire, or to open them when you would
increase it. Which may be better apprehended in the following Examples; and
first, in the description of an open Furnace, very convenient for daily use,
and built in that manner that you shall find three different spaces; that is to
say, The place for the ashes, that for the Hearth, and that whereon to place
the Vessel which contains the Substances.

This Furnace must be made of Brick bound together with one sort of lute; which
is usually composed of fat Earth, Sand, the scum of melted Iron, Hair and
Horse-dung kneaded and wrought together with Water. It must have its place for
the Cinders, its Grate, its Hearth, its bars of Iron, the place for the Vessel,
its Doors and Registers. You may also afford it a hollow round Cover, and a
fourth place, which may serve for the fire of Reverberation. This Furnace is
usually square, and ought to be seven and twenty thumbs-breadth or inches high,
and above twenty broad for every square; so that the interior space must be
twelve inches square. The place for the Cinders must be eight inches high, upon
which the Grate ought to be placed from side to side across, taking up about
an inch of the thickness of the height of the Furnace. The Grate must be made
of square Iron-bars ten or twelve A Lig^^ is the third part of a Barley-corn,
or the twelfth part of an Inch.
lignes thick; they are to be made of a length proportionable, and flatted at
the ends where they are to be fixed. But this flatting ought to be irregular,
and only upon the two Angles, so that when the bars shall be placed, one of
their Angles may turn directly upwards, and the other Angle tend in a straight
line to the bottom; and the other Angles face the resembling Angles of the
other bars that are collateral with them. There ought to be but the distance of
four or five lignes between bar and bar, which is wide enough for the air to
enter that is requisite to burn the coal; and close enough to keep the coal
from running through the Grates. In the Cinder-place must be left a door about
the breadth of an ordinary Brick as high as the Cinder-place in the front of
the Furnace. To this door must be fastened a plate of iron about five or six
lignes thick, about three inches broad, and eight inches long, which is to be
instead of a Lintel, upon which a Brick must be laid. There you must go on and
build the Furnace round about, leaving a door for the hearth as large as that
for the under-room. These doors are to be directly one above another. That of
the hearth ought to be six or seven inches high: and to that must be fastened a
plate of Iron as to the door of the Cinder-place, which plate must be covered
with a good Brick. About this height you must leave two holes, each so big as
to put a good large wall-nut through them. These holes must be directly
opposite one to the other, and every one in the middle of the sides of the
Furnace. These holes must also be made quite thorough, to hold a bar of Iron,
if need be, to sustain a Vessel. Then raise the building of the Furnace four
inches above those holes, which is a height sufficient for any ordinary
Furnace, and will serve for all manner of Decoctions. But if you design it for
uses of more consequence, you must continue to build up the Furnace, till it be
raised eighteen inches above the Grate, so that there may be allowed between
eight and nine inches for the height of the hearth, and that the rest may be to
place the Vessel that contains the Substances. Then you must fill up the
interior Angles of the Furnace with good lute mixed with pieces of Brick, so
that the infide may be like a circle. But you must leave in the inside of every
Angle an open hole wide enough to put your finger thorough. These holes must be
hollowed toward the hearth, to let in the air which is necessary to feed the
fire. They are called by the name of Registers, because they serve to govern
the fire. They must have their stopples made of the same materials as the
Portable-furnace, to stop them when you would abate the force of the fire. The
Hearth-place also ought to be built in such manner, that it may the more and
more contract it self the nearer it comes to the bottom; so that the same
bottom may not be above seven or eight inches in diameter: and that as well to
spare coal, as to cause the fire to extend it self toward the middle of the
hearth. The inside of the Furnace insensibly ought to enlarge it self at the
top, for the convenience of larger Vessels, of which you may have oft'n
occasion to make use. These furnaces may be convenient for those Distillations
that have need of a Reverberating-fire, by making on the one side a hollow
notch to put in the neck of the Retort, and covering the furnace with a
proportionable Duomo, that has a hole in the middle; which will serve as well
as the four Registers, which will lie hid under the basis of the Duomo. By this
means you may have a Cover'd-furnace, which may be of use for diverse sorts of
Meltings and Calcinations, if you only make two or three doors to the
Cinderplace; for the air that enters in at those holes will very much enliv'n
the force of the fire. This thought engages me to give you the description of
three Wind-furnaces, by which the Curious may find wherewith to satisfy
themselves, and be able to make those fusions of Metal, which Chemical Pharmacy
may have need of.

Draw a Platform, and build a square of twenty inches in diameter, leave in
the middle of every front of the square an overture of four inches broad: Which
four overtures shall be four doors; then build up with Bricks all the four
fronts of the square, reserving still the thickness of the doors: the thickness
of the walls shall be the breadth of the Bricks, that is to say, about four
inches; then raise the building two foot higher: but as you build, leave in
every corner of the furnace a stopping-hole, beginning at the bottom, and
tending upward toward the corner which is diametrically opposite. This hole
ought to begin about the fifth inch of the building, and ascend within two
inches of the middle of the Grate. These four holes must be strengthened every
one with a Pipe of Iron about two lignes thick, and three foot long, made like
a straight Trumpet; about four inches wide at the exterior mouth, which must be
turned downwards, but contracting and tapering to the upper part, till the hole
be no bigger then to put a Man's finger in. These four Pipes are to be soder'd
with Copper, and to be fixed as you raise the furnace. Upon this Building
raised two foot, you shall lay your flat bars of Iron, six or eight lignes
thick: and four inches broad, which shall bind the four walls of the furnace.
You must put the Grate upon two of these bars of Iron opposite the one to the
other, the bars whereof shall be of the bigness, shape, and flatted at the two
ends, like those described for the former furnace, and are to be ranged and
fixed in the same manner. Then continue the building above the bars of the
Grate, and above the plates of Iron, as well as over all the rest, without
leaving any new door; and raise it ten inches high, which will be room
sufficient for the Hearth, and whereon to place the substances which you intend
to calcine or melt. Then fill the internal Angles of the Hearth-place with
Lute, well-mix'd with pieces of Brick, so that the Internal Figure may be
circular, and then taper again by a little and little till it come to the door,
as I have already said of the preceding Furnace. You must cause a Potter to
make a Duomo Cover, all of one piece, the bottom whereof must rest upon the
inner brims of the Superior part of the Furnace. This Duomo ought to be about
an inch and a half thick, hollowed like a Vault, about six inches in height.
The Furnace ought to have one door beginning at the bottom, about five inches
broad, and four inches and a half high, and a stopple of the same material as
the Duomo, of the same thickness, with two holes bored through it of an equal
bigness toward the middle, somewhat long, and one by the side of the other, and
so made as to receive a small pair of Nippers, to take off, and put on the
Stopple as occasion requires.

The Duomo ought to be open in the middle of the upper part, and the opening
ought to be round, about two inches in Diameter, to serve instead of a
Register. You may set over the opening of the Duomo, one or two Pipes upright,
the one upon the other, about five or six Ligne's thick, their hollowness being
proportionable to the Overture of the Duomo, about three foot in height. The
Coals kindled in a Furnace thus ordered, shall give a violent heat able to melt
or calcine any Minerals, that fire has power over. This furnace will plainly
demonstrate the force of the Air in the operation of fire.

But you shall observe an effect much more powerful, if you build a Furnace
after the following manner. Build a wind-Furnace three foot from a Well, equal
in its dimensions, to that which I have already described, excepting the Pipes
at the four Corners, which you may let alone. Provide a Tunnel of white Latten,
about two Inches in Diameter, the bottom whereof is to be five or six times as
wide as the rest of the Pipe, to give the more free entrance to the Air. This
Pipe ought to be very long, so that it may reach from about half a foot above
the Superficies of the water of the Well, to that part of the floor upon which
the Furnace is built. The upper end of the Pipe must be crooked, and somewhat
Tapering, so that it may enter and fix it self in a new Pipe, which is to be of
ordinary Iron well strengthened, and Tapering toward the head, the hole whereof
must be no bigger then to admit the end of your Finger. This last Pipe must
pass through a hole made on purpose under the border of the Well, level with
the floor, the great hole or end being strongly riveted into the lesser end of
the great Pipe of white Latten. It must be of a sufficient length, and retorted
in such manner, that it may ascend insensibly, with its point ready to pass
through a hole underneath one of the bars of Iron, which are placed above the
doors of the Furnace, and which reaches toward the bottom of the Crucible
containing the substances; which must be placed upon a round of Potters Earth,
placed in the middle of the Grate. You must also make a hole, though never so
small, in the Wall of the Furnaces, opposite to that where the Pipe enters: But
it must be higher then the first, so that it may appear in that part, whither
the wind of the Funnel shall be carried. This Engine produces an effect
altogether extraordinary. For in the midst of that great noise which the
enclosed air makes, in passing and repassing through the Funnels, you shall
perform in less time, and with less Coals, what you should hardly accomplish
with a great Fire, without the help of this, or some such like piece of Art.

The third wind-Furnace is less troublesome then the preceding: and it is to be
received with so much the more applause, considering the last years success of
that which I built in the Chemical Laboratory in the Royal Garden.

This Furnace must be square, two foot high, and two foot in Diameter: It must
have one door to its Cinder-place, in the middle of the front-Wall, close to
the floor, which serves for the Basis of the Furnace. This door must be eight
inches in height, and eight inches in breadth. The Walls of the Furnace, ought
to be about seven inches and a half thick, so that there may remain a void
square place in the middle about nine inches in Diameter. They must be built of
Brick, and good Lute: and when they shall be raised equally to the height of
the door, you must cover the top with two good plates of Iron; then in the
inner part of the Furnace, next to the Walls lay four square Bricks, every one
big enough to cover all the one side, about an inch thick: thus you shall fix
them straight to the Walls with the Lute of the Building; and so order it, that
the inside of the Furnace may be square, and the four Bricks so levelled, may
be able to sustain a frame of Iron, fit to bear such substances as are to be
exposed to the fire in the Furnace. This frame is to be an inch thick, about
nine inches in Diameter, and composed of a square joined together with soder,
or otherwise, each Bar whereof ought to be an inch thick, and an inch broad. In
this square there must be a cross of Iron, in breadth and thickness equal to the
Bars; so framed that it may rest with the half Iron, upon the square, without
exceeding its thickness. This square must be fixed upon the level Bricks: but
before you fix it, provide a round Copper-pipe, soder'd with good soder being
about fifteen Lignes in Diameter, and about six foot long, not comprehending
the two ends, which must be bent; the uppermost of which must be so large, as
only to embrace closely the neck of the bellows, which are to be placed above,
and a little upon the one side of the Furnace. As for the other end, the lower
part of its retorted point ought to taper in that manner, that it may be able
to admit no more then your finger. This lower end must be an Inch longer then
the thickness of the Wall of the Furnace, and so bent that it may penetrate in
a direct Line cross the side-Wall of the Furnace; and that the point not
entering above an inch within the inside of the Furnace, and penetrating one of
the four square-Bricks, may only reach within an inch below the Quadrate of
Iron, whereof I have spok'n. The principal body of the Pipe, ought to run in a
Perpendicular Line, along the middle of the side of the Furnace: and there to
be fixed with Lute, as far as the height of the Furnace will permit. That which
is over and above may remain bare, or else be wrapped up with some matter proper
for its preservation. The lower end of the Pipe must be fixed in the Wall of
the Furnace; so that no outward Air may enter from thence into the Furnace.

After you have well fitted the end of the Funnel, and placed the Iron-square
upon the four straight Bricks, then continue to carry up the building of the
four Walls of the Furnace. But take care in the mean time to furnish the
inside, with square upright tiles, about an inch thick, like to those below, so
that there may be two rows, each of four tiles set one upon another; so that
the void square of the Furnace, may be in all about seven inches in Diameter,
and about fifteen inches high above the square of Iron. In the mean time, you
must prepare a square piece of cast Iron, about eight or ten lignes thick,
proportionable to the void space of the furnace, and which must be notch'd at
the Corners, about the breadth of an inch. This square is to bear the Crucibles,
and other Vessels; and the Notches, or Semi-circles, are made to give requisite
entrance to the wind of the Bellows, to quicken the fire of the Hearth.

Sometimes upon this Iron square, they place a round cake of furnace-earth, a
good inch thick, to bear the Crucible or vessel, containing the substances. You
must also get ready a square of furnace-earth* somewhat thicker and larger then
that of Iron, without any Semi-circles cut in the corners, to cover the upper
part of the opening of the furnace, when the Crucible is placed therein, and
that you intend to increase the fire. At the same time you must have great
double Bellows, like the Goldsmith's, which you must place at a height equal to
that of the height of the Pipe; to the end you enter and join into it, as close
as may be, the nosles of your Bellows; and look that there be not the least
chink, or cleft for the wind to get out, that is to enter into the Pipe. These
Bellows ought to be so placed, that by means of a cord fastened at one end to
the upper board of both Bellows; and at the other, fixed to the end of the
little beam fastened above, it may be easy, by drawing a cord fixed to the
other end, to raise and let fall the Bellows-boards, which rising and falling
successively like an Organ-bellows, keep a continual breath. The wind of these
Bellows, and the structure of this furnace, the door being well-luted, with a
little Coal cause a heat much more violent, then a far greater quantity should
do in the ordinary furnaces. They that have seen the good effects and the
little Coal it consumes, will not blame me for giving you the description and
form of it.

The Athanor or Athannor, is a Furnace that cannot afford heat enough for
operations that require a violent fire; but very convenient for those that may
be done by a moderate fire. The Name comes from the Arabians, who call the Name
of an Oven or Furnace Tannaron. The Greeks have called this Furnace A'(...),
which signifies without trouble. For which reason it is by others called Piger
Henricus, or Lazy Henry. Some have given it the Name of the Philosophical
Furnace, or the Furnace of Secrets. This Furnace is as much used, as it is
variously built not only for its height, breadth, and shape of the place which
is to contain the coal; but also for the shape, number and use of the Furnaces,
which are to be built next the Tower; and which are to be heated by its fire,
as also for the manner of imparting their heat. The first design of those that
invented the Athannor, was, that they might be able to heat with the same fire,
and with little trouble several furnaces at once. Wherein they have suceeded
very well by means of a high Tower, which they have furnished with a Grate and
a Cinder-place, a door and openings necessary for the imparting of heat: and
having kindled the fire upon the Grate, they fill the Tower with Charcoal,
cover it at top, and by virtue of the Charcoal which kindles by degrees, and
which may well burn with an equal heat for twenty four hours and more, they
impart an equal heat at the same time to several Furnaces near the Tower: by
means of the openings made upon the sides of the hearth of the Tower, and those
parts which are next the Furnaces. But though their invention have been
effectually commodious, yet there was afterward a kind of Tower invented, the
coals whereof fall into the hearths of the furnaces which are placed about it,
and which contain the Substances; which by that means are more vehemently
heated, then they would be by a heat that only came side-ways, and only from
the hearth of the Tower. I give you the figure as true as it was possible for
me to do, both of the one and the other of these Athannors, and a particular
Description of the latter as being less known, though much more useful. And
that you may the better understand it, I will make it of one Tower placed
between two furnaces only, of which one may serve for a Balneum Mariae, the
other for the Bath of ashes or sand.

Raise the Tower and the two Furnaces upon a plain ground, which you may build
of Bricks and Lute against any wall. This flat ground must take up five foot
and two inches in length, nineteen inches and a half in breadth, and eight
inches in height. The Tower must be raised and built upon this Platform with
two furnaces, and placed between them both. The height of the Tower must be 3
foot and seven inches, the breadth twenty six inches, and the length equal to
that of the Platform. The height of every furnace must be twenty inches, the
length eighteen, and their breadth equal to that of the Tower. First you must
raise upon the Platform eight inches and a half of massy building for the
Tower only, according to the breadth and length already set down: Upon which
Massie-building, thus raised, begin the outward walls with the inside of the
Tower, and leave the void place for the coals. It will be also expedient at the
same time to raise the two Furnaces which are to be joined to the Tower and to
depend upon the same Building. The Tower must have no opening before; nor must
it have any opening in the sides, in its height above that of the Furnaces.
Only it must have the two Canals appointed for the coals, separated by a
partition wall, the entries whereof must be above the Tower, and the vents must
butt upon the hearth of the Furnaces. The outward-walls of the Tower must be
seven inches thick; the inward not above four; but it must have six in length.
After this raise the walls before and behind to the height of four inches, and
at the same time the middle-wall, which must not be above a Brick broad, and
six inches long. Then provide a thin piece of Iron beat'n out, about two lignes
thick, and two foot four inches in length, which you shall cut in such manner,
that it shall not have above six inches of breadth in the extent of four
inches, which are to cover the breadth of the middle-wall, and that that which
remains beyond the four inches, containing a foot in extent, may have eight
inches of breadth in the end, and on the two sides contract it self like a
Lozenge, to the part where the Plate is not above six inches broad. This Plate
must also be bent in such manner, that the part which has but six inches, being
placed flat upon the middle-wall, and covering it exactly, the two wings may
possess the sloping of the height of the four inches which are allowed to the
middle-wall, and butt upon the side of the Building which ought to be opposite
to the Hearth of the contiguous Furnace; so that the coals may slide easily
a-long that Plate into the Furnace. Then must you neatly make a half-round hole
in the walls to give way to the extent of the wings, and fill up with Lute and
pieces of Brick the under-part of the sloping of the wings, to prop them up and
keep them from bending. Then go on, and raise all the walls of the Tower,
leaving the void space requisite for the Canals, which must every one contain
as much in length and breadth as the middle-wall which separates them. Then
provide bars of Iron flatted and hardened, to correspond with the Plates; and
which resting upon the walls that are next the Furnaces, may be strong enough
and bowed in such manner, that leaving an equal distance of four inches wide
over all the upper part of the sloping of the Plates, they may support the
Building necessary to complete the Tower, which must be in all three foot and
seven inches above the Platform. In building the Tower, take care that the
inside of the Canals be well closed, and that they may somewhat enlarge
themselves toward the bottom, so that the coals at the top may the more easily
slide down; and succeed to those that are burnt. You must also make two
stoppers of Furnace-earth, big enough to stop the overtures of the Canals at
the top of the Tower, after they are filled with coals.

The two Furnaces must have every one their Cinder-place, their Grate, their
Hearth, and must be wide enough to place therein at the top the Balneum Mariae,
and Sand-bath. They must have also doors to their Cinder-place and Hearth,
which must be made in the one and the other, quite joining to the Tower. The
Cinder-place must begin from the Platform described before. The door ought to
be five inches high and four broad. And it must be covered with a Plate of
hardn'd Iron, upon which you must lay a whole Brick, which will serve for a
stay to the door of the Hearth, which ought to be directly over that of the
Cinder-place, and is also to be covered with a plate of Iron and a whole Brick,
as the former. You must also fix the Grate at the same time, and to the same
height, as the Plate put upon the door of the Cinder-place. The inside of the
Hearth ought to be nine inches in Diameter; but the void place above, where the
Baths are to be set, ought to be twelve inches in Diameter. Then go on, and
continue the building of the two Furnaces to their height appointed. Nor must
you forget to fill up with Lute and pieces of Brick the inward corners of the
furnaces, and to taper them by little and little toward the bottom of the
Hearth.

It is also requisite that those furnaces should have their holes or Registers
at the four upper-corners, and their stoppers ready upon occasion to increase
or abate the heat of the fire. At the same time make the stoppers for the doors
of the Cinderplaces and Hearths.

If you are careful to follow all the proportions which I have set down for the
building of this Athannor; if after you have kindled the fires in the Hearths
of these furnaces, you fill the Canals of the Tower, with Coal neither too big,
nor too small; and if after that you stop up the upper-holes of the Tower, and
the doors of the Cinder-places* and Hearths, you may be sure to have an equal
fire, which shall continue for four and twenty hours at least. And this fire
will also heat more fiercely, if you give Air to the furnaces through the
Cinder-place, and Registers.

The other Athannors require not so much circumspection as this, because the
Coals fall not from the Tower, but must from thence impart their heat to the
Furnaces which environ it. This Tower may well be square, but it is usually the
custom to make them round, to the end it may impart its heat to the greater
number of furnaces. These Athannors, are generally placed in the middle of the
Laboratorie. This Tower has but one Canal, but it has a Cinder place, with its
door, a grate, and a little door for the Hearth. There are also Plates of Iron,
fit to stop the breathing-holes of the Tower, when you would hinder the Tower
from communicating its heat to a furnace that has no need of it. I suppose,
that by the exact description, which I have made of the preceding Athannor, you
may easily judge of the building and use of this, so that it may suffice only
to give you the Figure of it.

The first furnace, of which I have given the description; may well serve for
an Example of a Reverberating furnace; But because a Man may have occasion for
a good quantity of Acid Spirits, and Corrosives; and for that one Retort alone
requires almost as much care and fire, as many Retorts together, I thought it
my duty to impart the furnace of Reverberation, which I use my self, to distill
with four Retorts at a time, which is as regular, as commodious, and certain.

These furnaces ought to be two foot and eight inches long, and two foot and
six inches broad, and two foot and four inches high; The form of it ought to be
foursquare; The Cinder-place must be eight inches high, the door must be in the
middle of the Front, six inches broad, and as many high. The Walls of the two
sides must be six inches thick as far as the Cinder-place. The Walls behind and
before need not be above four inches thick, no more then the Walls of the sides
from the Grate upward. You must have bars of Iron a foot long, of the form and
bigness of those of the first furnace, and flatted at the ends, and they must
be laid also five Ligne's one from the other. These bars are to rest upon the
inner part of the side-Walls, and are to make the Grate that is to extend from
the Wall before, to that behind. Upon the door of the Cinder-place, you must
fix a flat-piece of Iron, about seven or eight Ligne's thick, and lay a Brick
upon the plate. There must be a door left for the Hearth, over that of the
Cinder-place; they must be both alike, and both covered with a thin plate of
Iron and a Brick. The Walls must be built of an equal height, for seven inches
above the Grate: and there must be laid two square-bars of Iron, from fifteen
to sixteen Ligne's in Diameter, which ought to be almost as long as the whole
length of the furnace. These bars must be fixed flat-ways, so that they may
divide the inward breadth of the furnaces into three equal distances. These bars
are to bear two Retorts each of them* at the time of the Distillation. Then go
on, and raise equally the Walls of the furnace above the great bars, to the
height of four inches, then leave two openings in the two side-Walls above the
Iron bars, opposite one to the other. These openings ought to be four inches
wide, and be continued to the height of the walls; for they are to receive the
neck of the Retorts, the bodies whereof are to rest upon the bars, with their
backsides one against another. Take care to fill up the inside corners of the
furnace with Lute, and small pieces of Brick, to make them in some manner
circular, and so that the Hearth may slope like those of the foregoing
Furnaces; and that the fire may not fall into the corners, but may always carry
its force to the middle of the Grate. Then equally raise round about, all that
there is to be more of wall, to the entire height of the furnace. Which done
have ready a plate of cast Iron, at least half an inch thick, about two foot,
and two or three inches long, and about twenty inches broad, and lay it upon
the top of the furnace, to cover the void space, when you have fixed the four
Retorts. You must leave three Registers upon each side of the plate: that is to
say* one at each corner of the hinder part of the furnace, and one just
opposite to every Retort; lute all the rest of the circumference of the plate,
and prepare stoppers for all the rest of the Registers and doors, to use upon
occasion, especially at the beginning of the Distillation. Take notice also,
that after you have placed the Retorts upon the bars of Iron, and put their
necks through the openings of the furnace appointed for that purpose, you must
with Lute and pieces of Brick, close all the void spaces, which the necks of
the Retorts cannot fill up, so that there may be in those parts no
breathing-places, but those of the Registers. In this furnace you may give to
the four Retorts all the degrees of fire requisite, and the success will answer
expectation, if you observe the rules which I have prescribed, as I come to
discourse of particular preparations. You may at the same time make use of a
fire for Distillation, by virtue of a square kind of Capsula, made of plates of
Iron raised like walls, which will make an enclosure of about six inches high,
proportionable to the bigness of the Iron-plate, which covers the void place of
the furnace. This square Capsula must be placed upon that plate, and fixed with
Lute to the fides of the plate, and then filled with Sand as much as it will
hold. In this Sand you may set several Vessels, containing such substances as
you would dissolve, digest, or distill; or you may make any other preparations,
which the Artist must fit to the degrees and length of the fire, which the
principal Distillation requires.

You may in the first furnace which I have described make a great number of
Distillations, as well upright as oblique; but it will not serve for those that
are made by descent, unless you change the whole order of the furnace, which
engages me to give the description of another, that is proper for those sorts
of Distillations; which, nevertheless, may be made either bigger or lesser,
according to the quantity of substances you would distill.

Draw the Dimensions of a furnace, round or square, four inches thick, and
twenty inches in Diameter. In the lower-part it must have a door eleven inches
high, and eight broad, upon which you must fix a strong plate of Iron, as is
said already. Provide also a bar of strong Iron, four inches wide, in the
middle whereof must be a round hole of three inches. This bar must be laid
a-thwart upon the middle of the furnace; then provide other bars of Iron of a
sufficient length, of which make a kind of a close Grate, of each side the bar
of bored Iron; then go on with the building and raise it a foot above the
Grate. Then prepare an Earthen Vessel glazed within, and made like a Cucurbit,
with a straight neck, into which put wood, or the substance which you would
distill: Then prepare a cover of Silver, Latten, or of Copper Tinned, so made as
to cover the Orifice of the Vessel, and surround the neck, like a Capsula lid,
the bottom whereof must be bored through with several little holes like a
sieve. Then take another Vessel of glazed Earth, or of Glass, the mouth whereof
must be so disposed, that the end of the neck of the Cucurbit, containing the
substances, may with its bored cover enter in, yet not descend farther into the
body. Then set the Vessel upon its Orifice, and put it through the hole in the
middle of the bar, and so into the Vessel which is to serve for a recipient,
and must be placed underneath. The Cucurbit must be supported by the bar of
bored Iron: and then kindle round about it a fire, at first very gentle, only
to give a soft heat to the substances, and the Vessels, then increase it by
little and little, and from time to time till it cover all the Cucurbit, if the
substances be solid; and when you have sufficiently continued your fire, you
shall find in the Vessel placed below, a liquor containing the most essential
parts of the substance which you have distilled. By this means you may draw
forth a Spirit out of Vitrlol, having calcined it till it become yellow, and
then putting it into the Cucurbit, in little pieces and not in powder, and a
good quantity together; but this Spirit is much inferior to that which is
drawn forth by side-long Distillation.

I dare affirm that the two furnaces of Reverberation which I have described,
are very proper for the Distillation of Acid, and Corrosive Spirits; But that
is no reason why I should not show you the Structure, and use of the following
furnace.

This Furnace ought to be two and twenty inches broad in the square, the walls
four inches thick, so that the void space within ought to be fourteen inches
diameter. This Furnace must have at the bottom, in the middle of the front, a
door for the Cinder-place, four inches square, which ought to be covered with a
good plate of Latten proportionable; then continue the whole Structure six
inches high; then fix the Grate upon Bricks of full measure, set and joined to
the inner-wall of the Furnace, of each side: The bars must be like to those of
other Reverberating-furnaces. Then raise all the walls of the Furnace equally,
nine inches above the Grate; and leave in one of the side-walls an Opening,
sufficient to put through the neck of a Retort; which Opening must be continued
open to the top. Then raise the walls again equally one foot high above the
Opening. Fill the inward-angles with Lute and pieces of Brick, as in the former
Furnaces: do the same thing to the corners all along the upper part of the two
sides of of the Grate. Then provide a flat Duomo, made in such manner, as in
covering the Furnace, to rest upon the inner-brims of the wall. Place the
Retort containing the matters upon a Trevet, made so that the lower part of the
Retort may be raised four or five inches above the Grate. Then with Lute and
pieces of Brick stop up the void parts of the overtures of the Furnace, which
were made for the neck of the Retort* then kindle the fire, and fill all the
void space with coals from the Grate to the top* having first kindled the fire
upon the Grate round about the under-part of the Retort. At the same time cover
the Furnace with its Duomo, and at the same time lute all the joyntures, that
the fire may have no air but through the door of the Cinder-place, and the
little hole in the Duomo. Then fit a recipient to the neck of the Retort; leave
the fire to it self, and do not unlute the Recipient, till four and twenty
hours afterward. You shall find the Spirit as you desire, and in the Retort a
sediment deprived of all its Spirits.

I will not here dilate upon Portable-furnaces, the figure whereof is usually
round and circular, because they have nothing in them that corresponds with the
Furnaces which I have described, especially the first. It will be sufficient to
observe almost the same rules already set down, as well for the Cinder-place,
Hearth, and place for the Vessel, as for the Doors, Openings, Registers and
Duomo. I omit also Lamp-Furnaces, and many others useful for many things, the
Descriptions whereof are to be seen in several Authors. For my part I believe I
have described enough for any Preparation Chemical or Galenic, at least to
serve as a rule for farther invention.

CHAP. LII. Of Lutes.
THE variety of Substances of which mixed Bodies are composed, together with
that of the Furnaces and Vessels which are made use of in Preparation, have put
the Curious upon the Invention of moulds proper for their intentions, and to
satisfy the necessity of all Operations. They have found out several for the
usual building of Furnaces; some to plaster, some to cover all over the
Vessels of glass or earth, which are to contain the Substances, and are for a
long time to resist the violence of the fire; some to join the Vessels one to
another; others to mend the Clefts which happ'n to Earth'n or Glass-vessels,
and to make them as fit for service, as if they had never been cracked. I know
very well that there is no want of Directions for Lutes in most Authors, who
have treated of Chymistrie; but because I will not refer the Reader thither, as
being desirous that an Apothecary should find in this Pharmacopoea all things
that he stands in need of, I will impart those Lutes which I have made use of,
which are both secure and profitable.

If you would build a Furnace for long lasting, and make use of great Stones
fit to resist fire, then for all sorts of Lute there is no better, then a good
Mortar made of Quicklime and Sand. But if you build with Brick according to
the usual manner, use this following Lute.

Take three parts of that fat Earth, which the Bakers make use of for building
their Ovens, one part of River-sand, and one part of Horse-dung, work them all
well together with Water, and make thereof a Mortar, to bind the Bricks, when
you build any Furnaces. This Mortar may be stiffen'd with the dross of Iron and
Glass pounded, as also with salt* Water and many other things, if you would
make it more firm and lasting; but these additions are useless for an ordinary
Building.

If you would raise a Furnace of one or more pieces, without Stones or Brick,
or make Vessels fit to resist the fire, as Capsula's, Retorts, Aladuls, etc.
Make a Paste of two parts of Potters-earth well-dry'd, two parts of brok'n
Butter-pots, both beat'n into fine powder, and one part of River-sand, well
wrought and incorporated together with Water. The Furnaces and Vessels made of
this Paste will be good and durable, if you be careful in the first place to
dry them well in the Air when they are made; and if afterward you bake them
in the Potter's Furnace. The same Paste will serve to plaster withal and cover
all sorts of Vessels either of Earth or Glass. For it is able of it self alone
to contain Substances in a violent fire, when the Vessel it covers is many
times melted or brok'n. You may also make another Paste very near in goodness
to this, and which will serve for many uses. Take six pound of good
Potters-earth dried, two pound of the dead-head of Aquafortis, two pound of
Butter-pots brok'n, one pound of dross of Iron, one pound of Glass, one pound
of Brick, all beat'n into fine powder, two pound of Horse-dung dried and
beat'n, five or six handfuls of Butter well mash'd and beat'n, work them all
together with Water, and make thereof a Paste somewhat solid, which will serve
you for the same uses.

You may also, for the same use, take two pound of Bricks, four pound of
Potters-Earth, and a pound of Lime all beaten to fine Powder, and work them
together with an equal quantity of Oxe-Blood, and water of the dissolution of
the Caput Mortuum, or dead-head of Aquafortis, which will serve for the same
occasions as the forementioned Lutes.

When you would strongly join together the Recipients to the Retort, in the
Distillations of corrosive Spirits; the first Lute which I have described and
appointed for the building of Brick-furnaces, may suffice, if it be strengthn'd
with a large Linen Cloth, bound on with pack-thred. But the Lute will be
stronger if you add Butter well-mash'd and beat'n to it, and if instead of
common-water you work your Lute with Ox-blood, or with the dissolution of the
dead-head of Aquafortis. You may also make use of the last Lutes which I have
described: but then it will be more troublesome to unlute the Vessels when the
Distillation is over.

Amydon, or fine Wheat Flour boiled in Water spread upon Paper and laid on,
may suffice when you only go to fit and lute the helm of the Limbeck with the
Cucurbit, or to join the Recipients to the helm, or to the Retorts; or to lute
Vessels together that contain spiritful Substances that have no corrosion. But
if you would lute them more exactly, then take the Bladder or Bowels of Beasts
newly killed; or moistened in water if dry. They are very useful where the
Substances are very spiritful and corrosive. The closures and joyntures of the
Vessels are to be covered with these Bladders or Bowels squash'd upon them, or
else bound round about them with Pack-thread, leaving them to dry very well
before the fire be kindled under the Vessel. You may also for the same purpose
make use of Fish-glue dissolved in Spirit of Wine, or in Vinegar spread upon a
Linnen-roll, and well bound upon the joyntures.

There is also another Lute very fit to plaster and cover the Retorts round
about, and to make them able to withstand any sort of fire, and also to contain
the matters in case the Retorts should break. Take good Potters-earth pure and
well powdered, as much Bole-Ammoniac, and brok'n Butter-pots finely powdered;
incorporate them with Quicklime newly quenched in a little Milk, and add
thereto the liquor of the whites of Eggs, and Butter mash'd as much as will
bind them all together, and make thereof a soft lute, soft enough to plaster
the Retorts, three or four times, one lay above another, letting the lute laid
on dry very well before you lay on dry any more. This lute will be the
stronger if you mix therewith a quantity of Bull's blood very hot, blendit
well with all the rest.

You may make very good Crucibles with the following Lute or Composition. Take
equal parts of good Potters-earth dried, Stone-Allum, and false Talk, commonly
called The Froz'n-stone, powdered fine and well wrought together with a little
Milk, and reduced to a consistency fit to make Crucibles; which when you have
made, bake them in a Potter's Furnace among other Earth'n-pots.

If you would mend the holes and clefts in Earth'n or Glass-Vessels, and make
them as good as ever they were; Take the whites of new-laid Eggs and beat them
in an Earth'n-pan with small sticks, till they are nothing but froth. Let that
scum stand still and stay till it be turned to a liquor; then mingle it in
Quicklime newly quenched in a little Milk, and make a soft and close Paste to
be spread upon a small piece of fine Linen enough to cover the slit in the
Vessel. Lay that upon the crack of the Vessel, having sprinkled the upper part
of the Linen with Quicklime very finely pulveris'd: at the same time lay on a
new roll of equal bigness plastered with the same Paste upon the powder of
Lime, and then powder the upper part of the second Linen Cloth with powder of
Quicklime again; then lay a third plaistering of the same Paste, with which
you shall cover the upper part and sides of the last Linnen-roll, and then let
it dry at leisure. This Lute, thus laid on, holds perfectly well, and prevents
the cracks from going any farther. There are some that add Glass finely beat'n
to this Paste; some mix therewith powder of Bricks or Terra sigillata. Which
things may strength'n the Lute, and are not to be rejected.

You may also very properly apply to the cracks of the Vessels, Fish-glue
dissolved in Spirit of Wine, and spread upon a little piece of a Pig's or Oxe's
Bladder, and let it dry.

You may also make a Lute very firm, and lasting in the fire for cracks of
Vessels, as also to plaster and cover them. This Lute is made with two parts
of Minium in fine powder; and one part of that which they call the Fat of
Herrings; these things ought to be well incorporated together and spread upon
fine Linen, and laid upon the crack of the Vessel.

To stop your Bottles well and so that no vapor may go out, dissolve Fish-glue
in Spirit of Wine, and make of it a kind of Mucilage, and incorporate with it a
certain quantity of the Flowers of Sulphur, and Mastick finely pulverized, to
which you may add Lime quenched in Milk. These things must be well mixed
together, to plaster the mouth, as also the inside of the neck of the Bottle:
which being dry, nothing never so subtle can pierce it.

There is a Lute common enough very good, which is made of equal parts of
Minium, Ceruse of Venice, good Bole-Ammoniack and Gum Sandarack subtly
pulverized, incorporated with Lineseed-Oyl and reduced into paste. The use
whereof is much the same as of the preceding.

The Hermetick or Philosophical Seal, named improperly Lute, is made use of for
glass-Vessels, that contain some substance, of which you would preserve all the
parts. Those Vessels ought to be somewhat long-neck'd, and strong enough to
endure almost a Fusion, and yet not to suffer the matters therein contained to
be altered. To accomplish this, you must bore the bottom of an Earth'n-pot able
to resist fire, and cause the neck of the Vessel to enter underneath; then
light a fire in the Pot round about the neck, and when it is near Fusion, with
a pair of Tongs heated in the fire, squeeze it, and writh it so, that it may be
so exactly joined, that not the least vapor may get out.

Bottles also with short necks, strong and well-made, may be exactly stopped with
a stopple of Glass, made fit and rubbed round about with Emeril pulverized,
till they fill the hole of the bottle so exactly, that the vapors cannot find
passage to get out. There is a way something like this, when, after you have
stopped the neck of the bottle with a Cork fit and short, and that there remains
a void breathing-place, you fill it up with melted Sulphur, or some one of the
Lutes which I have already described, and cover the Lute with a double piece of
Oxe's Bladder, moistened and strongly bound about the neck of the bottle.
Mastic, Bole-ammoniac of the East, and Borax, finely powdered with the liquor
of the white of an Egg, will make a Lute very proper for this purpose, and for
several other uses.

CHAP. LIII. Of Instruments, or Vessels requisite, as well in the one as in the
other Pharmacy.
THough I might have comprehended Furnaces in the Chapter of instruments, yet
the skill required to make them, together with their bigness, their diversity
of Materials, deserved a particular Chapter. Under the name of Instrument are
comprehended not only the Tools, or Utensils, which both Pharmacies make use
of, but all the Vessels appointed to contain the substances to be prepared,
which are prepared, and are to be preserved after preparation. The Materials of
Instruments are various, according to the use, to which they are designed. Gold
and Silver may serve for the Materials of some* but their dearness makes them
not so frequently in use. Other Metals are very much used, as red and yellow
Copper, Pewter, Lead, Steel, common Iron forged and wrought, as also several
Metals, and Metallics melted alone, or mixed together. Marble, Porphyrie,
Sea-shells, diverse Stones and Jewels, certain Horns, several Bones, diverse
Shells, as also the Eggs and Skins of some Animals; Woods, Roots of Trees,
Shells of certain Fruits, Woollen and Linnen-Cloths, Silk, Hemp, Flax, Rind of
Trees, Horse-hair, Ropes, Pack-thred, Paper; diverse Earths, and Sands, Glasses,
Chrystals, Bitumens; all these are instrumentally made use of by both
Pharmacies, besides a thousand other things too tedious to repeat.

Several Vessels or Instruments are made of Copper or Latten; but those Vessels
that are to contain such things, as are to be taken inwardly, must be Tinned,
to prevent the Metals from imparting their bad qualities to them. The most
usual are Basins, Cauldrons, Brass-pipes for the Mores head, for the
Refrigeratory, for the Rose Water Limbecks, or for other heads of Limbecks,
Stillatories for Spirit of Wine, with their Serpentine, and heads; Vessels for
Balneum Mariae, and evaporating Baths, Lamp-Furnaces with their appurtenances,
Cucurbits, Chafers, Platters, Posnets, Lamps, Funnels, Capsula's, Moulds,
Ladles, Scummers, Spatula's, etc. Several Vessels of Pewter are used, as
Basins, Platters, Dishes, Trencher-Plates, Cucurbits, Vessels for Digestion,
heads or helms of Limbecks, plates of Iron, Pots, Syringes, Ladles, Measures,
Lavers, Capsula's, Ewers, Bottles, Urns, Fountains, etc. Lead is very much used
to make Instruments, as weights and boxes. Several Metals and Metallics are
used mixed together, for great and small Mortars and Pestles, Boylers, Horns of
Antimony, Moulds, Pipkins, burning-Mirrours, etc. Several Instruments of Iron
and Steel, are used as well to contain the Matters, as for several uses; as for
Boylers, Cauldrons, Capsula's, Mortars, Antimony-Horns, Pots, Crucibles, Plates
of cast Iron, or beaten out, Frying-pans, Nippers, Pincers, great and small
Tongues, Forks, Ladles, Hooks, Bars, Grates, Moulds, Trevets, Knives, Scissars,
Hammers, Files, Rasps, Saws, Spatula's, Pestles, Funnels, Capsula's, Lamps,
Conduits, Pipes, Rings, Irons bended round to cut off the neck of the
Recipients, Compasses, etc. We use Jasper, Marble, Sea-shells, and diverse hard
Stones, upon which to bray several Minerals, and to pound some parts of
Animals. We use them also for Mortars, Pestles, Cups, and several other Vessels
appointed for several uses. We make an infinite sort of Vessels of Earth, as
Crucibles, Cucurbits, Capsula's, Aladulls, Boylers, Pots, Covers, Pipkins,
Plates, Dishes, Cups, Bottles, Pitchers, bending-Limbecks, Chaffers, and the
like. Several Vessels are made of Crystal, as Basins, Plates, Platters, Cups,
Bottles, Vases, and Capsula's, etc. But a far greater quantity are made of
Glass. For besides these that I have named to be made of Crystal, which may as
well be made of Glass, we make thereof Limbeck-bells, Pelicans, and many other
Vessels fit for Circulation, Vessels for Distillation, all of one piece,
Matrasses with long Necks of several proportions and forms, Cornutes,
Recipients of all sizes, some without a Pipe, some with one, two, or three
Pipes; ordinary Cucurbits, others with a Pipe, or a straight neck, heads of
Limbecks covered at the top, others uncovered; others without a beak called
blind Limbecks; Mortars, Pestles, Philosophers Eggs, Vessels to separate
liquors, Pipes, Plates, Bibbers, Pots, Dishes, and an infinite sight of Vessels
of all sorts and sizes.

We use Shells for cups, and to contain several Medicines. We make Capsula's,
Spatula's,

Rowlers, and Pestles of Ivory, Cups, Bottles and Boxes, Ostridge-eggs. The
same things are also made of Horn; Bags, budgets, and bottles are made of
Leather. Several boxes of Tortoise-shell; cups, spoons, boxes, and little pixes
of Amber, Jet, and Mother of Pearl. We make use of Wood, and the Roots of Trees
for Casks, Bathing-tubs, Covers, Buckets, Mortars, Pestles, Rowlers, Cups,
Spatula's, Boxes, Presses, Cupboards, etc. We make use of Cloths for strainers,
Hippocrates breeches, and long narrow bags for filtring.

We also use Cloth to cleanse the flowers of Schemanthes. We make bags and
strainers of ordinary Linen; we make our sieves of Linen, Silk, and
Horse-hair. We use Paper to filter several Liquors, to cover bottles, pots, and
to wrap up several Medicines. In short, we make use of a thousand things, and a
thousand inventions, for an infinite number of Vessels, and Instruments
appointed for the use of Pharmacy, of the chief of which I will give you the
Figure, as exact as well cut, as also of the Furnaces which I have described.

CHAP. LIVE. Of the manner of Cutting Glass.
THE incompatibility between the extremity of heat and the extremity of cold,
jointly acting one against the other, and the oft'n breaking of Earth'n and
Glass* vessels, which happ'ns by the pouring any hot liquor into them when they
are very cold, or any very cold liquor into them when they are very hot, has
been the reason that several wary Artists have endeavored to remedy the
exposing of their Vessels to these two combating qualities. Seeing therefore
that they could make good advantage of these two opposites by cutting the necks
and beaks of their Glass-vessels, they have made use of several ways to do it;
of which I shall succinctly describe the most convenient and the most useful.

Diamonds or Emerill will serve to cut the superfluous parts of glass, when
they are thin. But when you would cut off the necks of Recipients, which are
usually very thick, you may scratch the place where you intend to cut, but you
must make use of Fire and Water to perfect your design.

To which purpose you must make use of Iron-rings, about the bigness of your
little finger, the handles whereof must be of the same metal; round and hollow
well-nigh proportionable to the bigness of the neck of the Recipient which you
intend to cut off. Heat the Ring red-hot in the Fire, and having put it over
the neck of the Recipient, rest it upon that place which you intend to cut off;
and when the glass is heated, pour some drops of cold Water upon it, and the
neck will drop off just at that place where it was heated.

You may for the same purpose wind a wiek of Sulphur round about that part of
the neck which you would have cut off, and so order it that the flame may give
an equal heat round about that part; and when the part is hot enough, pour, as
before, some few drops upon it, and the neck will come off.

I have done the same thing oft-times with a wiek dipped in Turpentine, by the
means whereof, using it according to the method of the Sulphur-wiek, I have cut
off the necks of the biggest Recipients, as well as of the less; and of all
sorts of Glass-bottles.

If that part of the neck of the Recipient be not hot enough, and that instead
of separating quite, it only begins to break, you may perfect the work by
resting the end of a red-hot Iron against the crack begun, and so going round
with the same Iron, till the neck falls off.

CHAP. LV. Of Weights, and Measures.
THE Physical-pound never consisted of more than twelve Ounces, taking twelve
Ounces of the ordinary Pound of sixteen Ounces; and is usually known by this
Character lb. The Physical Ounce is thus marked by the Greeks, who make it to
consist of eight Drachms. They figure the Dram like a figure of Three
containing three Scruples. The Scruple is thus marked, which consists of four
and twenty Grains, being the third part of seventy two which a Dram ought to
weigh. The Grain is thus marked Gr. or thus g.

Sometimes the Physical-Pound is divided into two parts, and the Half is thus
marked ss. Sometimes it is divided into four parts, which fourth part is called
Quartarium, known by this abbreviation Quart. j. But most usually the Pound is
divided into several Numbers of Ounces, which the Physicians specify in their
Bills, rarely mentioning Half-pounds or Quarter-pounds. The mark that stands
for Half a pound stands for Half an Ounce, Half a Dram, Half a Scruple, being
preceded by their several Marks.

Herbs, Flowers, and several Roots are not weighed in Vessels, they are only
measured by Fascicles, Manipules, or Pugiles. Fasciculus, or a Bundle, contains
as much as a Man can hold under one Arm bent to the upper part of the Hip, and
is thus marked Fasc. Manipulus, is as much as a Man can grasp in his hand, thus
charactered, M. Pugillus, is as much as a Man can grasp with three Fingers; and
is known by this Character Pug.

CHAP. LVI. Explaining several Physical Terms.
WHEN you find in any Receipt the five opening Roots prescribed, you must
understand the Roots of Asparagus, Smallage, Parsley, Fennel and Butchers-Broom.

The usual Emollient-herbs are Mallows, Marshmallows, Bear-foot, Groundsil,
Beets, Mercury, Violets, Arrach, Pellitorie of the Wall, and Lillies.

By the five Maindenhairs, are meant Adiantum album, White-maidenhair, Adiantum
nigrum or common Maidenhair, English-maidenhair, Ceterack or Spleen-wort, and
Wall-Rue: to which I may add Hart's-tongue.

The three Cordial-flowers are Bugloss, Burrage and Violets; to which others
add Gilly-flowers and Roses.

The four Carminatives, or Wind-dissolving Flowers, are Camomil, Melilot,
Fetherfew and Dill-flowers.

The four great hot Seeds are, Anise, Fennel, Cumin and Caraway-seeds.

The four lesser cold Seeds are Parsley, Smallage, Ameos or Bishops-weed, and
Daucus or Wild Carrot-seeds.

The four greater cold Seeds are Gourds, Citruls, Melons and Cucumbers.

The four lesser cold Seeds are Lettice, Purslane, Endive and Succorie.

The five precious Fragments are Jacinths, Emraulds, Saphyrs, Granates and
Sardonyxes.

The four Cordial Waters are Burrage, Bugloss, Endive and Succorie.

Some add to these Meadow-sweet, Blessed-thistle, Devils-bit, Sca^^ous,
Water-Germander, Sorrel, Vipers-grass and Wood Sorrel.

The Physicians prescribe several Fruits by number, with this mark No. or by
pairs, marked thus Par.

When you find the word Ana, or the Character aa, it signifies of equal
quantity.

By s. a. or ex Art, is to be understood According to Art.

By q. s. is to be undestood, As much as is sufficient.

And for that the Apothecary ought to be the Eye of the Physician, as well in
the Preparation of Remedies prescribed, as in the Administering thereof. It is
very necessary for him not only to understand whatever written or printed
Receipts shall come to his hands, but also to know the proportion and Doses of
every Medicine. To the end that in case any mistake should happ'n by the
carelessness of the Printer or Writer, or that he should not be able to read
some bad Hands, he may be able to judge both of the Doses and Ingredients, make
them agree with the Rules of Pharmacy, and the approbation of judicious
Physicians, and prevent the ill-accidents that may happ'n by false Preparation
and Administration.

I did not think it necessary to insert here several things which may be found
in several Authors; among the rest, the Catalogues of several Medicaments,
which being only some part either of some Plant or Animal, are to be understood
such as are to be preferred before the other parts, when the Plant or Animal is
prescribed, without naming the particular part; as the Seeds of Annise and
Fennel, Roots of Orrice and Jallap, Flowers of Violets and Roses, Fruits of
Melons and Cowcumbers, Juices of the bending Egyptian Beantree, and the
under-growth of Cistus; the Wood Santalum and Guiacum, Gums Galbanum and
Ammoniac; Rinds of Cinnamon and Cassia; and several other parts of Plants and
Animals which are to be understood, when the Plant or Animal is prescribed.
Such as are also Castoreum, Bezoar-stone, Musk and Civet, which are but parts
or excrements; yet ought to be understood, when the Animals are prescribed.
There are also Minerals, which being but species of themselves, yet for their
excellency, retain the name of the genis. Such are Lapis Lazuli, which is to be
understood under the word Lapis; Bay Salt, under the name of Salt; the
Seal'dearth of Lemnos, under the name of Seal'd-earth; the other Seal'd-earths
with their additions, without which they would never be understood. They that
are more curious may be better satisfied, by reading Authors, who have reckoned
up vast number of these things; though here be no great necessity of it, in
regard that use and the Explanation that a Man shall meet with in the
Composition, may suffice. You may also find in the same Authors Catalogues of
succedaneous Remedies, which would be both tedious and troublesome to enumerate.
I will only say this, That you must avoid as much as possible the use of
substituted Medicines, not sparing for any cost to be furnished with the same
Medicaments which are set down in the Pharmacopoeical Compositions, or
prescribed by the Physicians. And then when it is impossible to have all that
the Physician prescribes, then must an Apothecary be careful not only to
substitute Root for Root, Wood for Wood, Juice for Juice, Rind for Rind, Herb
for Herb, Seed for Seed, Oil for Oil, Syrup for Syrup, etc. but also to have
succedaneous or corresponding Medicaments near in virtue and quality, to those
whose defect they are to supply.

The End of the First Part.
THE Royal Pharmacopoea, CONTAINING GALENICAL PREPARATIONS AND COMPOSITIONS.
THE SECOND PART.
The Order and Method of the Second Part.
EVERY Apothecary, who well understands the Generalities contained in the First
Part of this Pharmacopoea, may easily of himself undertake several
Preparations, especially if he have attained the true knowledge of his
Profession.

Nevertheless, I will not omit from time to time to give young beginners, those
necessary directions that concern as well the particular knowledge of the
principal Medicaments, that are put into Compositions, as their Preparation and
just Mixture. But before I go any farther, I must advertise the Reader, once
more, that there is not in this Pharmacopoea, any Receipt, nor description of
any. Composition, either Internal or External, which has not been prescribed by
Monsieur Aquin, chief Physician to His Majesty, or which he has not taken the
pains to examine very carefully, and very often corrected and reduced into a
better regulation, then that wherein the Ancients had left it. He must also
take notice, that instead of a great Number of certain Compositions which are
now quite out of use, with which the most part of Dispensatories are pestered,
and which are more costly then profitable, he shall find in this Book, amongst
the best of Compositions, and most in use, several descriptions of Remedies, as
certain as full of curiosity, and which well deserve to be set down, and to be
prepared and used. This Galenic Pharmacopoea shall be divided into two books;
of which the first shall treat of Preparations, and Compositions Internal; and
the second only of those which are accounted External. I will begin the first
with the most simple Preparations or Compositions, especially those that cannot
be kept any long time, and which may be suddenly prepared, and almost every
foot; and from thence I shall proceed to those that are of greater consequence,
and require more exactness, and whereof the Shops are wont to be still
provided. I shall not make any stay upon certain things that require no great
consideration, but apply my self to things of consequence, not omitting any
thing that may serve for the instruction and advantage of the Apothecary, for
whose sake I have principally undertaken this work. I shall not contradict the
judgment of the Ancient or Moderns; where I shall find their practice fit to
be imitated: But I shall endeavor to find out something better, and more
maintainable, where experience and reason will not otherwise be satisfied.
Nevertheless, i^ shall not be said, that I take delight to blame any Person in
particular, it not being my humor to seek the raising of my Reputation by
defaming others; being fully persuaded, that every Author has cordially
written what he knew, and what he believed to be truth.

I might insert simple distilled Waters* among the Galenical Compositions; but
because they must be attended by several compound Waters, that require more
skill* and that both the one and the other stand in great need of Chemical
Pharmacy, I thought fit to reserve them for the Third part of this Work.

THE FIRST BOOK, OF INTERNAL PREPARATIONS, AND COMPOSITIONS.
CHAP. I. Of Juices.
I Shall not here stay upon Juices or Liquors which may be drawn out of
Animals, as Blood, Phlegm, Urine, Serosities, Sweat, etc. Nor upon those which
may be drawn from their parts by assation, pressing, or otherwise, as the
Gravies, and Liquors of Meats, etc. Nor upon such as are to be drawn from the
stock of Minerals, as Oil of Petroleum, or Naphta, and several bituminous
matters, but only upon the Juices of Plants.

The Juice is the same in Plants, as the blood in Animals: and it may be
defined to be a liquid substance, which making a part of the composition of
Plants, communicates to the rest of the parts, that which is necessary for
their support, as also for their growth. This Juice issues out sometimes of it
self, sometimes it is drawn forth by incision, or some other way more artful.
This Juice is more or less liquid, according to the several concoctions which
it has received from Nature, either in the Plant, or above or without the
Plant. It is sometimes Watery, sometimes Winy, sometimes Oily, Gummy, Rosiny,
Bituminous. It is also sometimes sweet, sometimes bitter, eager, sharp,
insipid. And as sometimes it has no scent, sometimes it is odoriferous,
sometimes it stinks, sometimes it is black, sometimes white, green, blew,
yellow, red, etc. It is also more or less abounding, according to the Nature
and condition of the Plant. Sometimes it is so inwardly united, and so
profoundly concealed among the other substances, as not to be perceived by the
ordinary senses, nor be distinguished but by separating it by the means of
fire. Such are the Juices or Liquors which issue from the dryer sort of Woods
in Distillation, as also the Juices drawn from the Horns and bones of Animals,
though seemingly very dry. The Juice is also sometimes mixed with substances so
viscous, and tenacious, though soft, that it cannot be separated but by the
means of fire. Nevertheless, these juices are not to be taken barely and
purely, for that part which I have called Phlegm, and which I have acknowledged
for one of the five principles, of which every mixed body ought to be composed;
for sometimes they themselves are composed of some or other of the other
principles, which is easy to prove by the separation which the Artist may make
thereof.

In which respect, I am not of the opinion of those that make the Juices, which
issue out of Plants of themselves, to be Excrements. For then the most
essential part of the Plant would be taken for an Excrement; and if it were an
Excrement, it ought to be rejected. And yet we gather very carefully, purchase
very dear, and use to good advantage these pretended Excrements, as Myrrh,
Bdellium, Tacamahacca, Storax, Benjamin, Natural-balsom, and several others
which the Plants throw out of their barks, and which cannot but be accounted
the best part of their composition. But now of those Juices that are to be
prepared, and depend upon the skill of the Apothecary.

These Juices are drawn almost from all parts of the Plants; some by cutting
the bark, to be afterward dried in the Sun, as are the Juices of Scammony,
Aloes and Poppy: Others by bruising and pressing. Thus as well Oils as Aqueous
Juices, are drawn from several Herbs and several Flowers; several Fruits and
several Seeds. Such are the Juices of Carduus, Endive, Succorie, Burrage,
Bugloss, etc. for Herbs. The Juices of Roses, Violets, Peach-flowers, red
Poppies, etc. for Flowers. The Juices of Mulberries, Apples, Cherries, red
Goose-berries, Barberries, etc. for Wine-Fruits. The Juices of Olives, Walnuts,
Small-nuts, Almonds, Pine-apples, Pistaches, etc. for Oily Fruits. The Juices
of the four greater cold Seeds, as also from the Seeds of Poppies, Danewort,
Henbane, Marjoram, etc. for Oily Seeds. The other Juices are drawn by the
addition of some Liquor; which cannot be avoided when the parts of the Plant
are dry by accident, or that they have not moisture enough in themselves. Such
are the Juices of Senna, Rhubarb, Angelica, Liquorice, Hellebore, etc. which
are drawn forth by the addition of Liquor, and which being filtered, are
evaporated over a small fire; to the consistency of an Extract, of which they
bear the name, and of which I shall speak in the Third Part of this
Pharmacopoea.

Generally we bruise in a Marble-Mortar, or made of some hard-stone, with a
Pestle of Wood, the Herbs, the Flowers, the Fruits, the Seeds, out of which we
intend to draw the Juices, and then put them into a strong Cloth, or Bag, and
squeeze out the Juice, either with your hands, or in a Press between two
flat-pieces of Tin, Iron, or Wood. Then we let the Juice stand for some days,
or else we expose it some days to the Sun; and then we pour out the clearest
softly by inclination; and keep it so, or else strain it through Hippocrates
breeches; or through some cloth-strainer, if the Juice be not clear enough, or
if it be aqueous. The Juices of Herbs which are to be first made use of, or
which ought to be clarified and boiled with Sugar, or honey, or to be mingled
and boiled with Ointments, and Emplaisters, have no need of all this care. But
the Wine-Juices of Fruits must be well-clarify'd. For they must first be
exposed to the Sun, then strained, to the end that by that heat and digestion,
and by that straining the grosser parts of the Juice may be separated from the
pure. These Juices are to be run through a bag, or rather through brown-paper,
and they may be boiled up with Sugar or honey, or be kept in bottles filled up
within a small matter of the top; which vacancy must be filled with Oil of
sweet Almonds, to hinder the air from getting in and putrefying the Juice.
However, after that, be careful to stop the bottles well, and to keep them in a
place moderately cool, to make use of as occasion serves: At which time pour
away the Oil, and make use of the pure Juice, throwing away the feces. The
Juices of Roses, and Peach-flowers, require the same care as the Wine-Juices.

Take notice that in drawing forth Acid red Juices, particularly that of
Granates, you must do it in Glass-Vessels, or Gally-pots, or of glazed Earth,
have your hands very clean, and take an especial care that no Iron come near
it, for fear of spoiling the color. The Juice and also the Syrup of Kermes
require the same care, for they lose their color in Vessels of Iron or Copper.

To draw forth the Juice of certain viscous Plants, such as are Purslain,
Burrage, Bugloss, and the like, the best way which I have found, is to put them
whole into a Copper-Bason, tinned within, over a moderate Charcoal-fire, and
there to keep them, stirring them from time to time, till some part of the
Juice be got together at the bottom of the Basin. Then separate this Juice by
inclination; and set the Basin again upon the fire, and continue to keep it
there and to stir the herbs, and to separate the Juice by inclination, till you
have Juice enough. By this means you will have less trouble, have sooner done,
and the Juice shall be much more pure, then by bruising the Herbs. I refer the
Oylie-juices of Fruits and Seeds till I come to speak of Squeez'd-oyls.

CHAP. II. Of Infusions, and Decoctions.
I Thought it best to discourse of Infusions and Decoctions immediately after
Juices, by means whereof the more succulent and essential parts of Medicaments
are imparted to the Liquors. Besides, Decoctions and Infusions are made use of
in so many Galenical Compositions, that I deemed it convenient to give some
general Rules, before I go any farther. They are sometimes made use of to
soft'n and boil Medicaments, and sometimes to take away or correct some bad
quality: but their chiefest use is to communicate their Virtue to some Liquor,
and to unite and assemble in one Liquor the Virtue of several Medicaments
joined together.

Infusions differ from Decoctions in degree of heat, and time in boiling. For
Infusions are oft-times made without fire: and when there is any need of it, it
must be very moderate, and require a long time; sometimes for several hours,
sometimes for several days. Whereas Decoctions are at an end in a quarter,
half, or a whole hour, and that the longest seldom exceed five or six hours. I
have joined these two Preparations together, by reason of the great affinity
which they have one with another; and for that many times Infusions precede
Decoctions.

Decoctions differ according to the Substance of the Mixt-body which you are to
boil. For such Mixt-bodies as are of a compact substance and hard to penetrate,
require a longer boiling, then they that are of a middling substance; and these
again require more boiling then those that are of a tender substance. The same
diversity of Substances requires also less or more Liquor. For there must be
more for Medicaments that require long boiling, then for those that require
less: For a long Decoction requires much moisture. The ordinary proportion is
six times the weight of Liquor to the Substance boiled. But if the matters be
of a compacted substance, you may make use of eight, nine or ten times the
weight in Liquor. And if the Substances are very solid indeed, you may advance
to twelve or sixteen times the weight of Liquor. You must also take notice that
Medicaments of a compact Substance will endure a more violent fire and longer
boiling then those of a middling or a tender Substance: and some there are
which are not put into the Decoction, till you are ready to take it off the
fire. Others there are which have only need of a bare Infusion to communicate
their Virtue to the Liquor. So that it is absolutely necessary for an
Apothecary to know the various Substances of Medicaments, to judge by that how
he ought to regulate their Infusion or Decoction; because that Prescriptions
never mention the regulation of the Decoction, nor the degrees of fire, nor the
length of time requisite for the Decoction, which is all left to the prudence
of the Apothecary.

And now to proceed in order; When you are to make a Decoction of several
Medicaments, you must begin with the most solid, such as are Woods, then put in
Roots and Barks, after that Fruits; next to them Herbs, Berries and Seeds;
Flowers must be reserved to the last. You must rasp, or bruise or cut very
small the Woods, Roots and Barks, slit the Fruits, chop the Herbs, and bruise
the Berries and Seeds, and put in the Flowers as they are.

This Rule however is not so general but that it may have its exception. For a
wood of a thin and spungie Substance requires less boiling then a wood more
close and solid. Barley whole endures as much boiling as wood. On the other
side Aromatic-roots and woods will not endure long boiling; but the better
parts will dissipate. Barks, Fruits and Aromatic-seeds, require only a bare
Infusion. Liquorice-root is put in after the Herbs. The Maidenhairs, or
Capillaries, at the same time with the Liquorice or immediately after. The
Cold-seeds at the same time as the Flowers. The Flowers of the Water-Lilly
endure as much boiling as the Herbs.

You must observe the same order in the Decoctions of Animals; for the Horns
and Bones require longer boiling then the Flesh. Beef requires more boiling
then Mutton, Mutton then Veal or Capon, and both more then young Pullet.

These general Rules will be much more demonstrable in the progress of these
Discourses. And though the various examples of Decoction which you will meet
with, might suffice, I will not omit to give you here certain Examples, which
will serve for certain Decoctions, which have been prescribed without putting
down the Medicaments of which they ought to be composed.

A Cordial Decoction.
. Hordei integri,. Whole Barley, Radicum Scorzonerae, Roots of Vipers-grass,
Borraginis, Borrage, Bugloss. ana. j. Bugloss, ana. j. Foliorum earundem
Plantarum Of the Leaves of the same Plants, Endivia, Endive, Cichorei,
Succorie, Oxytriphylli, an. M. j. Wood Sorrel, an. M. j. Capilli Veneris
Monspeliensis, M. ss. Maidenhair of Montpelier, M. ss. Liquoritiae rasae, ij.
Liquorice sliced, ij. Quatuor Seminum Frigid. maj. mundat. ana. ss. The four
greater Cold Seeds cleans'd, ana. ss. Trium Florum cordialium, ana. Pug. ss.
The three Cordial Flowers, ana. Pug. ss. Fiat ex Art decoctum in lb sex aquae
fontanae ad tertiae partis consumptionem. Make a Decoction according to Art in
six pints of Fountain Water, till the third part be consumed

Wash the Barley and boil it a good quarter of an hour in the water, then put
in the Roots; which must be well-wash'd, the pith taken out, and the outside
pared off, and then sliced. Boil them with the Barley a good quarter of an
hour, then put in the leaves of the Viper-grass, Burrage, Bugloss, Endive and
Succorie, well-wash'd and cut. After you have boiled them a small quarter of an
hour, with all the rest, add the Liquorice scraped and sliced, the Wood Sorrel,
and the Venus-hair slightly cut; let them boil a little, then put in the cold
Seeds well-bruis'd and the cordial Flowers, and having plunged them into the
Decoction, take the Posset from off the fire, and strain the Liquor through
Hippocrates's Breeches or a Wooll'n-cloth, when it is half-cold.

A Pectoral Decoction.
. Hordei mundati, ss.. Cleans'd Barley, ss. Jujubarum, Jujubs, Sebesten. an.
No. xij. Sebestens, an. No. xij. Passularum ab acinis purgatarum, vj. Raisins
of the Sun stoned, vj. Ficus pingues, Fat Figs, Dactylos enucleatos, an. No.
vj. Stoned Dates, an. No. vj. Foliorum Scabiosae, Of the Leaves of Scabious,
Pulmonariae, an. M. j. Lung-wort, an. M. 1. Hyssopi, Hysop, Polytrichii,
Gold'n-Maidenhair, Florum Tussilaginis, an. P. j. Flowers of Coltsfoot, an. P.
j. Glycyrrhizae, ij. Liquorice, ij.

Make a Decoction in four pints of Fountain Water to the consumption of the
third part. Boil the Barley a good quarter of an hour in the Water, then put in
the Dates, the Raisins of the Sun, the Figs, the Jujubs and the Sebestens
sliced. Boil all these Fruits with the Barley for another quarter of an hour;
then put in the Scabious; Lungwort and Hyssop cut: boil them another quarter of
an hour; after which, put in the Liquorice scraped and sliced, the
Golden-Maidenhair, and the Flowers of Coltsfoot; give them a little boiling,
and then take them off from the fire, and strain the Decoction, when it is half
cold.

An Opening Hepatic Decoction.
. Radicum quinque aperientium,. Of the five Opening Roots, Fragariae,
Strawberrie-roots, Bugloss. an. vj. Bugloss-roots, an. vj. Foliorum Endiviae,
Leaves of Endive, Cichorei, Succorie, Lupuli, Hopps, Agrimoniae, Agrimonie,
Pimpinellae, Pimpernel, Cerefolii, Chervil, Taraxaci, an. M. j. Dandelyon, an.
M. j. Capilli Veneris Monspel. Venus Maidenhair of Montpelier, Polytrici, an.
M. ss. Golden-Maidenhair, an. M. ss. Seminis Apis, Seeds of Parsley, Milii
Solis, an. ij. Gromel, an. ij. Semin. quatuor frig. Maj. mund. an. j. The 4
bigger cold Seeds cleans'd, an. j. Glycyrrhizae, ij. Liquorice, ij. Florum
Buglossi, Flowers of Bugloss, Borraginis, Borrage, Genistae, an. Pug. j. Broom,
an. Pug. j.

Make a Decoction according to Art in lb viij. of Fountain Water, to the
consumption of the third part.

Wash the Roots well, take out the pith and scrape their outsides, and having
bruised and sliced them, let them boil half an hour in the Water. Then take the
Hopps, the Endive, Succorie, Agrimonie, Dandelyon, Pimpernel and Chervil shred,
and let them boil about a quarter of an hour with the Roots. Then add the Seeds
of Parsley and Gromel stamped, and having let them boil never so little, put in
the Liquorice sliced and bruised, and presently after the cold Seeds bruised
and the Flowers; put them down into the Decoction, and at the same time take it
off, and strain it when it is half cold.

A Cephalic Decoction.
. Radicum Valerianae majoris,. Roots of the bigger Valerian, Icreos
Florentinae, Florence Orrice, Paeoniae maris, Male-Peonie, Acori very, The true
Aromatical Reed, Visci Quercini, an ss. Misleto of the Oak, an. ss. Foliorum
Betonicae, Flowers of Betony, Salviae, Sage, Majoranae, Marjoram, Calaminthae
Montanae, Mountain-Calamint, Chamadryos, an. M. j. Germander, an. M. j. Seminum
Rutae, Seeds of Rue, Paeoniae maris, Male-Peonie, Baccarum Juniperi, an. ij.
Juniper Berries, an. ij. Florum Rorismarini, Flowers of Rosemary, Stoechados,
Cassidonie, Lavendulae, Lavender, Calendulae, Marigolds, Lillii Convallium, an.
P. j. Lillies of the Valleys, an. P. j. Tartari crudi, j. Raw-Tartar, j.

Make a Decoction according to Art in lb vj. of Fountain Water to the
consumption of the fourth part.

The Raw-Tartar is prescribed in this Decoction, as well to communicate to the
Water the virtue of the Medicaments therein prescribed, as to retain in some
sort their volatile parts; and to prevent dissipation during the Decoction. And
though I do not contradict the opinion of those that would avoid boiling the
parts of Aromatic Plants, especially in uncovered Vessels; nevertheless I
believe we may yet allow something to the ancient Customs, provided there be
requisite care taken. The Roots of Peonie, Valerian, Orrice and Acorus are to
be well bruised, as also the Misletoe of the Oak, and the raw Tartar, and then
put into an Earthen glazed pot, with the quantity of water prescribed: and
having covered the pot, boil the Decoction over a gentle fire, during a small
quarter of an hour; then put in the cut Herbs, and covering the pot, let them
boil a quarter of an hour longer: then put in the berries and seeds, and cover
the pot again, and after having given them four or five wambles more, put down
the flowers into the Decoction, cover the pot, and take it off from the fire;
and when it is half cold, strain it gently from the sediment.

CHAP. III. Of Juleps, and Apozems.
I Shall not go about here to set down the Juleps of Roses, and Violets of the
Ancients, nor any other of the same Nature, as being now out of use; their
consistency and name being now changed into those of Syrups. I shall only say
that the name of Julep has been formerly given to certain liquid compositions,
made with distilled Waters, or slight Decoctions, which are boiled with Sugar,
to a consistency much thinner then that of Syrups: For they had no design to
keep them, but prepared them as they had occasion. The name of Julep is still
nowadays given to certain Remedies, which have some agreement with the Juleps
of the Ancients; but they are less sweetn'd with Sugar, and less fit to keep:
For usually they never put above an ounce of Sugar, or an ounce and a half of
some Syrups, to six or eight ounces of some distilled Waters, of some
decoction, or some other Liquor. We never boil these Liquors with the Sugar or
Syrups, but only mingle them together when they are to be given to the patient,
who may drink them as their ordinary drink, abating some thing of the quantity
of Sugar and Syrups mixed therewith. All these Juleps may be made tart with
Spirits or Acid Juices. But they will not keep above twenty-four hours in the
Summer in a cool place, and not above two or three days in the Winter.

Apozems are Medicines very near the Nature of Juleps: But they admit of a
greater Number of Medicaments, which render them less pleasing. They are seldom
composed of any thing but the Decoctions of the various parts of plants. And
hence it is, that they have derived their Name. For the Greek word (...),
signifies to boil, from whence (...), Decoctum, or, a thing boiled. I could
insert here several Examples, but I refer the Reader to the Decoctions of the
preceding Chapter, which may be called Apozems. We may add purgative Medicines
to these Decoctions, and dissolve therein several Syrups, as they are intended
for this or the other Disease.

CHAP. IV. Of Emulsions and Almond-Milks.
EMulsions are liquid Medicines very pleasing to the taste, whose color and
consistency is very like to that of Milk. They are usually composed of Seeds,
or Oily Fruits, beat'n in a Marble-Mortar, with a Woodd'n-pestle, and then
dissolved in distilled Waters, or in slight Decoctions, which you must strain
and press out, and sweeten with Sugar or Syrups.

Emulsions are prepared for several purposes, especially to temper the
excessive heat of the Lungs, and of all the Breast; to take off the sharpness
and acrimony of the humors, and to assuage the boiling of the Blood, the heat
of the Urine, and the Reins. For which reason they are used not only in
stoppages of the Urine, and in Gonorrhea's, but also in Inflammations of the
Natural parts of those that are troubled with Venereal Distempers. They are
also successfully used to temper the excessive heat of the Entrails, and to
provoke sleep and rest. Emulsions are also very proper to sweet'n the Acrimony
of the Humors in Dysenteries, to assuage pains, and heal Excoriations. Of all
which things it will be convenient to give some examples; and first, for the
Distempers of the Lungs, and Breast.

Amygdal. dulcium mund. j. Sweet Almonds cleans'd, j. Seminum 4. frig. maj.
Mundat. Bombacis, an. ij. The four greater cold Seeds cleans'd* Bombax, an. ij.
Contundantur in Mortareo Marmoreo Pestillo Ligneo, sensim affundendo, aqua
Tussilaginis, Scabiosae, Papaveris, Rhoeados, vel decocti hordei, Passularum
Mundat. and Liquoritiae, lb j ss. Colentur and Exprimantur. Expressioni add
Sir. Violar. et Capill. Veneris, an. j ss. fiat emulsio pro tribus dosibus,
long a pastu sumend. Bruise these in a Marble-Mortar, with a Woodd'n Pestle,
pouring by little and little upon them, Coltsfoot, Scabious, wild Poppy-water,
or decoction of Barley, Ston'd-Raisins, and Liquorice, lb j. ss, strain and
press them out. To the liquor pressed forth, add Syrup of Violets and Venus-hair,
an. j. ss. Make an emulsion for three doses to be taken a good distance before
or after Meals.

If Acrimony of humors, boiling of the blood, want of rest and sleep,
accompany Diseases of the Lungs and breast, you may add to the Emulsions two
drams of white Poppy-seed, and as much Lettice-seed, and change the Syrup of
Violets, and Venus-hair into those of White-poppy and Water Lillies.

And if you would prepare Emulsions against the heat and difficulties of Urine,
whether caused by strange substances contained in the Reins, or in the Ureters,
or in the bladder, or through any ill temper of the parts, or through any
Venereal Malignity: then observe what follows.

. Seminum 4. frig. maj. mundat,. Of the four greater cold seeds cleans'd, Milii
solis Gromel and Papav. Alb. an. iij White-Poppy-seed, an. iij. Contundantur in
Marmoreo Mortareo, sensim affundendo, Decocti Radicum Althea et Nymphaeae, lb
j. ss. Colentur and Exprimantur: Expressioni add Syrupi de Althea and
Nymphaea, an. j. ss. Salis Prunel. iij. fiant tres doses long a pastu
exhibend. Bruise them in a Marble-Mortar with a woodd'n-pestle, pouring by
little and little upon them, a pint and a half of the decoction of the Roots of
Marshmallows and Water Lillies: strain and press them, add to the straining
Syrup of Mallows, and Water Lillies, an. j. ss. Sal-prunella, iij. Make three
doses, to be given a good while before or after Meals.

Emulsions against the Dysenterie may be thus prepared.

. Amygdal. dulc. excorticatarum, j.. Sweet Almonds blanched, j. Seminum Sumach,
Seeds of Sumach, Lactucae, Lettice, Papaveris Alb. White-Poppy, Cydoniorum, an
ij. Quinces, an. ij. Contundantur in Mortareo Marmoreo, sensun affundendo,
decoct. hordei mundat. Portulacae and Veronicae, vel ^q^. Plantaginis, Rosarum,
and Veronicae, lb j. ss Colentur and Exprimantur: Expressioni add Syrup.
Cydoniorum and Papaveris Albi, an. j. ss fiant tres doses horis commodis
ogg^rend^. Bruise all these in a Marble-Mortar, pouring upon them by degrees
one pint ss of the Decoction of cleans'd Barley, Purslain, and Speed-well, or
of the waters of Plantain, Roses, and Speed-well. Strain and press them: To the
straining add Syrup of Quinces and white-Poppy, j. ss make three doses to be
taken at convenient hours.

The Following Emulsions are proper to kill Worms.

. Nucleorum Persicorum Excorticatorum, ss. Of the Kernels of Peaches, the Husks
taken off, ss Seminum Citri, Seeds of Citron, Portulacae, Purslain, Contra
vermes, an. ij. Wormseed, an. ij. Contundantur in Mortareo Marmoreo, sensim
affundendo aquarum stillatitiarum Naphae and Portulacae, an. vj. vel decocti
Radicis Graminis, and Rasurae Cornu-cervi, lb j. Colentur and Exprimantur,
Expressioni add Syrupi de Limonibus, ij. fiant duae vel tres, vel quatuor
Emulsionis doses, long a pastu sumend. Melius succedent, si Lunae decursu
exhibeantur. Bruise them in a Marble-Mortar, pouring upon them by degrees, of
the distilled waters of Orange-flowers, and Purslain, an. vj. or of the
Decoction of the Roots of Grass, and shavings of Hearts horn, lb j. strain and
press them out. To the straining add Syrup of Lemons, ij. make two or three, or
four Doses of Emulsion, to be taken at a good distance from Meals. They will do
better being taken in the Wane of the Moon.

Almond-Milks, Butters are easy to make; known to, and made use of by several
Ladies, that regard their health, and to keep themselves plump.

The usual way is to prepare them of two ounces of blanch'd-Almonds, which must
be stamped exactly in a Marble-Mortar with a Woodd'n-Pestle, afterward
dissolved in eight or ten ounces of the decoction of barley cleans'd, or in the
Water where Veal or Pullets have been boiled. Then strain and press the whole,
and add to the straining an ounce of fine Sugar, and never so little
Rose Water, or if you please, Orange-flowerwater. You may add an ounce of Syrup
of Violets, Water Lillies, or White-poppy instead of Sugar if there be occasion.

CHAP. V. Of Potions, Mixtures, and Bolus's.
POtions are so called, because they are to be drank. The Materials of them are
very various, by reason of the different Indications, Judgments, and insight
of them that prescribe them; for that may be called a Potion which is as ill
prepared, as that which is well prescribed, and as well prepared. Besides
Purgative-Potions are as well to be accounted potions, as those which are
accounted Astringent or Cordial, Sudorific, or Diuretic, etc. As Potions are
not made without liquors; those which are made use of are sometimes simple, as
fair Water, Wine, Milk, Whey, etc. and sometimes waters distilled, Infusions,
Tinctures, Decoctions, Juices, etc. Sometimes several liquors are mingled, one
among another. Sometimes also to these liquors are added Powders, Salts,
Opiates, Confections, Magisteries, Elyxirs, Oils, Essences, etc. Juleps,
Apozems, Emulsions, Almond-Milks, and Diets, may be called Potions as well as
Medicines. We also prepare Potions Emetick, Diaphoretic, Pectoral, Cephalic,
Somniferous, Anodynes, Aperitives, Diuretics, Cordials, Stomachical, Hepatical,
Splenetic, Hysteric, Vulnerary, Arthritick, Carminative, Dysenteric, and for
several other purposes: So that Potions may be made after a thousand fashions
for every Disease, since we may make use of various Remedies and different
Doses according to the intention of the Physician.

That which many modern Physicians call Mixture, may be reckoned in the same
rank with Potions. But Mixtures differ in this from Potions, that their use is
more frequent and longer, and because there is not so much drank of them at a
time; for being composed of powerful Medicines, they operate in less quantity,
and work those effects by repetition, which could hardly be done at once
taking. These Mixtures are usually a mixture of distilled Waters, more or less,
compounded of Elixirs, distill'd-Oyls, volatile, fixed, or Essential Salts,
Spirits, Tinctures, Essences, Extracts, precious Stones, Syrups, and many other
Remedies, well-chosen, and well-proportion'd in their Doses, which are to be
taken from time to time in a little Spoon, in the Intervals between the
Patients meals.

The difference of Mixtures may be very great, according to the diversity and
complication of Diseases, and the Judgment of the Physicians, that prescribe
them. Mixtures are also sometimes made of a more thick consistency, not much
unlike that of ordinary Opiates, which is for the accommodation of such
Patients, as cannot take Remedies in Drink. These Medicines may be composed of
the same Medicaments made use of in the preceding mixtures, excepting the
Liquors, instead whereof we put Conserves or Confections: They are given upon
the point of a Knife, or wrapped up in Wafers, or otherwise.

Bolus's are internal Remedies, usually a little more solid then Opiates;
invented merely for the benefit of such Patients as cannot endure to swallow
liquid drinks, or cannot away with their scent or taste. They are also
profitable to make the best advantage for the swallowing of certain Medicines,
whose weight would keep them always at the bottom of the Glass, were they
mingled in liquor, as in several preparations of Mercury and Antimony: There
may be as much diversity in Bolus's, as in Potions. They make them of
Electuaries, Confections, Conserves, Pulps, Powders, Salts, Oils, Essences,
Extracts, Syrups, and an infinite sort of Medicines, of which there must be
some that are solid and dry enough to thicken those that are too liquid, or too
soft. Bolus's are taken usually a good while before meals, sometimes upon the
point of a Knife, but generally wrapped up in Wafers, powdered Sugar, or powder
of Liquorice, Fruits roasted or raw, or some confection, or other substance
that prevents the Bolus from being either smelt or tasted.

CHAP. VI. Of Gargarismes, Masticatories, and Errbines, or Tents to put up into
the Nostrils.
GArgarisms, are liquid Medicines, designed for Diseases of the Throat, Mouth,
Palate, and Gums, as also to free the Head from excessive moisture. They are
usually composed of distilled waters or decoctions, wherein they mix sometimes
Salts, sometimes Spirits, Syrups, Honeys, Vinegar, and sometimes several
Juices. Gargarisms are never swallowed, but only gargl'd and held for some time
in the mouth, then spit out again, continuing the use thereof as long and as
often as necessity requires. These Gargarisms are as well known, and as usual
as any other sort of Medicine, and there are enough to be found in several
Authors, to spare the swelling of these Sheets.

Masticatories, are also called Apophlegmatismes, because their chief work is
to bring down phlegm from the Brain. For which purpose we make use of several
simple Drugs, and particularly of diverse parts of Plants, as roots of Orrice,
Pellitory of Spain, Cyperus, or English Galenga, true Acorus, or Aromatic-reed,
Grains of Staves-acre, Cubebs, Cardamom, all the Peppers, Mustard, Rocket,
Sage, Rosemary, Mastick, Time, Savory, Tobacco, etc. which Medicines being
chaw'd, by their heat and acrimony have a peculiar quality to draw down phlegm
from the Brain, and to void it by the mouth. Trochisques may be also made
thereof by pulverizing them, and incorporating them with Oxymel, or Syrup of
Cassidony, to hold in the mouth, and to masticate when they are dry: or else to
make thereof a kind of paste, to tie up in a Linen Cloth like a knot and so to
champ them between the teeth.

Errhines are so called, as being Medicines designed to be put up into the
Nostrils. They were invented for the same use as Apophlegmatismes. But they
operate with more force, because they carry their virtue directly to the Brain,
through the Conduits of the Nostrils, and powerfully stir up and move the
Expulsive faculty. Errhines are sometimes liquid, and proper to be snufft up
through the Nostrils; sometimes in Powder, to be either snufft up, or blown
into the Nostrils; sometimes like a thin Ointment, and sometimes like a Tent
small at one end. Liquid Errhines are usually made of the Juices of Marjoram,
Betony, Sage, Roots of Beets, Sow-bread, Orrice, etc. Or of the Decoctions of
the same Plants, or of Lettice, or Lillies of the Valleys. The Powders are made
of Marjoram, Betony, Orrice, Nicotian, Oleander, Coltsfoot, white-Ellebore,
and Euphorbium, upon some extraordinary accounts: Those that are made up in
Liniments will admit the same things into their compositions; and must be
incorporated with Oil of Roses or Orrice, and a little wax, or with Oil of
Laurel. The more solid Errhines are chiefly to stop bleeding at the Nose: They
are usually composed of Balausts, or the Flowers of the wild-Pomgranate-tree,
of Bole of the East, Terra sigillata, Mastick, and Man's-blood or Swines-blood
dried; or of some such kind of astringent Medicaments pulverized, and
incorporated with the white of an Egg or Down of a Hare, to make Tents thereof
to be put up and held in the Nose. Some there are that make an addition of
white-Vitriol.

CHAP. VII. Of Injections, and Pessaries.
INjections are liquid Medicines sometimes injected into the private parts of
Nature, and sometimes into wounds: Clysters may be also called Injections. The
ingredients are different, according to the difference of the Distemper. Wine,
Distill'dwaters, Lime-waters, Sea-waters, Spirit of Wine, Milk, Whey, Oils,
Balsoms, and several other Liquors; as also several Juices, and diverse
Decoctions and Infusions of several parts of Plants, and several Minerals.
Usually Syringes are made use of for the application of these Injections, and
they must be always warmed before they be used. Sometimes several Ingredients
and Preparations are dissolved in these Liquors, as Salts, Powders, Extracts,
Syrups, Honeys, Trochisques, Gums, Elixirs, and several other things, according
as necessity requires. Sometimes also we dip Tents, Feathers and Bolsters into
Injections for the cure of Wounds.

Under the name of Pessaries, are comprehended all Medicines not liquid, which
are put up into the Secret-parts of Women. But by the word Pessary, strictly
taken, is to be understood a sort of solid Medicine, about a fingers length,
sometimes somewhat bigger, which is put up into the Secret-parts with a Riband
fastened to one end. These Pessaries are made pyramidical, round, close and
smooth, for fear of hurting the parts. These Remedies are prepared for several
purposes; the chief of which are to provoke the menstruum's, or to stop them:
to hinder the falling down of the Matrix, to cure Fluxes against Nature, or to
heal Ulcers, or other mischiefs that may happ'n to those parts. The Body of the
Pessary is made of some slight polish'd-wood, or some piece of Linen made up
close and hard; covered with a kind of Sheath of Velvet, or some other
Silk-stuff, the seams whereof cannot hurt. Then fill the Velvet with Cotton or
Wool, that it may be as hard as if it were of Wood or Cork; and daub all the
outside of the Pessary with some Liniment, or some other mixture proper for
your purpose. Pessaries may be also made of Lead, hollow like a little Cane,
and covered with Velvet, like the former. In all which there must be a
difference observed between Maids and Women; as well in reference to the
hardness, as the bigness of Pessaries, appropriating the lesser and softer to
the first.

Aromaticks that are sweet and free from acrimonie are very proper to render
Pessaries effectual: whether it be to consume the vapors of the Matrix, or to
open the passages, and to provoke the menstruums: For we observe that good
Smells seem to comfort that part. For which reason such Liniments where Musk,
Ambergrise, Civet, and other good Smells are mixed, are successfully used upon
those occasions. Though you must be very careful not to let them come near the
Noses of some Persons, upon whom those Sweet-smells would work a contrary
effect. The Bodies of Pessaries prepared to stop the menstruum's, are made up
with astringent powders, very finely pulverized, incorporated with Wax and Oil
of Mastick melted together, filled into some piece of thin Taffaty, and
anointed without-side with the same Oil. These Pessary's are very good to stop
extraordinary losses of Blood, and the falling of the Matrix. If the Pessaries
are designed for the cure of any Ulcer, or any other disease in the neck of the
Matrix, the Pessary must be anointed with some Linement or convenient Medicine
in that part which is most able to reach it.

CHAP. VIII. Of Clysters, and Suppositories.
CLysters, called by the Greeks Enemata, are also Injections, and liquid
Medicines, injected through the Fundament into the Intestines, for the cure or
ease of several Maladies. They are called Clysters or Washings, because their
use is to wash the Intestines.

Clysters are prepared for several purposes, sometimes to cool the Intestines,
sometimes to moist'n them; sometimes to soft'n and soak the hardened
excrements, or to stir up the expulsive Faculty, to dispel the wind, to assuage
pains, to facilitate the Expulsion of the Urine, to draw forth or kill the
Worms, to ease Women in Labor; to provoke their menstruum's, and to appease
Hysteric-passions, to assuage tormenting Gripes, and to make a diversion of
Humors or Vapors, which fly to the Head, Stomach, Breast, Reins, or any other
parts of the Body.

Clysters are usually composed of the Decoctions of Roots, Herbs, Seeds and
Flowers, of different virtue, according to the intention of the Physician. The
Decoctions are for the most part made in fair Water, but many times in Milk,
Whey, Meatbroths, ordinary Spanish-wine, Urine, Oxycrat, Hydromel, and several
other Liquors. And besides the ordinary Roots and Flowers, which are boiled for
Clysters, many times there is an occasion to mix Laxatives, such as are Senna,
Coloquintida, Rhubarb, and many others, and to dissolve therein the
Strain'd-decoctions of Opiats, Honeys, Syrups, Sugar, Salts, Yolks of Eggs,
Turpentine, Oils, Extracts, and many other things, which it would be too
tedious to repeat. The forms of Clysters are so familiar, that it is to no
purpose to insert them.

Suppositories are solid Medicines about the length and bigness of the little
Finger, round and pyramidical. They were invented for the convenience of those
who have an aversion to Clysters, or of such whose Sickness and constitution
will not admit of them. The ordinary ingredient of Suppositories is
Common-honey, Bay Salt, Salt-gemme, or Aloes, or Coloquintida in powder, or
some Hiera, or Laxative Electuary. Sometimes Suppositories of Soap cut round
and small at the end will suffice. Some there are that make use of Muscardins,
or bits of Paste made of Gum-Tragacanth, Rose Water and Musk. So that in these
things every one is at liberty to make choice of what he likes best.

CHAP. IX. Of Wines.
ALL the World knows that the Grape is the Fruit of the Vine; and that Wine is
the Juice of the Grape; but this Juice would not be true Wine, did it not
undergo a Fermentation; and if the subtle parts had not by that means been
separated from the grosser, and by that means were not become capable of
operating as they do: Not that their Fermentation gives to the subtle parts of
the Wine their utmost purity. For that requires other means, as you shall hear
in the third part of this Work; and therefore I shall here at present only
describe the preparation of two sorts of Wine most in use, the first of which
may serve as an Example how to prepare any other.

Vinum Absinthii. Wormwood Wine.. Summitat. floridarum siccarum Absinthii
majoris vel minoris Fasc. j. Incide and immitte in doliolum, quod pintas
Parisienses quinquaginta aut circiter contineat. Impleatur dolium succo
Racemorum recenter expresso, and reponatur in Cella vinaria ad fermentationem,
qua per acta, quod per fermentationem deperditum est Vino suppleatur, and
diligenter dolio obturato, servetur Vinum.. Of the Flowrie drie-tops of the
bigger or lesser Wormwood, Fasc. j. Shred them and put them into a little
Vessel containing fifty pints of Paris, or thereabouts. Fill the Vessel with
the Juice or Vine-clusters newly pressed forth, and set the Vessel into a
Wine-Cellar to ferment. The Fermentation being over, supply the waste of the
Fermentation with Wine: then carefully stopping up the Vessel, keep the Wine.

They that can endure the bitterness of Great-Wormwood, may make choice of it
for the preservation of this Wine: But the nicer sort choose the little, whose
virtues are no less then those of greater. Take the Flowerie-tops, and having
weighed out the quantity prescribed, shred them and put them into a little Bag,
which is to be so fastened to the bung-hole, as to hang in the midst of the
Liquor. Place the Vessel in the Cellar, fill it with the Juice of clusters
newly squeezed, and let it stand for two months, during which time the Wine
will ferment and be fully charged with the smell, taste and virtues of the
Wormwood. When the Ebullition of the Wine is over, fill up with whitewine,
burnt-wine, or Spanish-wine the waste of the Fermentation: Then stop up the
Tub, and keep the Wine for your use.

The Juice of the New-gather'd-grapes is to be preferred before all sorts of
Wine, for the preparation of Wormwood-wine, and of all compound Wines; because
that Juice being newly squeezed forth, by subtilizing and disengaging it self
from its terrestrial parts by Fermentation, penetrates more inwardly the
ingredients which are put into it; and operates more effectually then a wine
could do already fermented, whose subtle parts are subject to dissipation. For
this Juice loses nothing to speak of in its Fermentation with the Wormwood; but
the same phlegm which the ordinary wine loses in its own. And in the mean time
by means of the heat which the Fermentativespirits excite in it, it is better
able to penetrate the body of the wormwood, and to charge it self with its
virtue, then otherwise it would be. By this means also it may be kept a long
while, provided the Vessel were full and close stopped.

Wormwood-wine is very much commended against the Diseases of the Stomach and
Liver, especially proceeding from a cold cause. It dissipates wind and
crudities, it helps and increases the appetite, kills worms, resists
putrefaction; helps concoction and distribution of the nourishment, and
consumes bad humors. It brings down the vapors that rise from the Matrix* and
op'ns its obstructions, and is very proper for the Green Sickness, and to
provoke the menstruums. Take three or four ounces in a morning fasting, for
several days, as you find it requisite.

Vinum Stibiatum, vulgo Emeticum. Stibiated Wine, vulgarly Emetic; or apt to
provoke vomiting.. Vitri aut Reguli Antimonii, vel si lubet, Croci Metallorum,
aut Magnesiae Opalina subtilissime pulveratorum, iij. Vini Hispanici. aut Vini
albi generosi pintas duas Parisienses. In Lagena Vitrea simul collocentur,
probeque obturato vase in loco temperato per ^ctiduum macerentur, and saepius
agitentur, simulque tandem serventur, ut usus tempore Vinum Clarum Antimonium
supernatans, per inclinationem effundi and sumi possit.. Of Glass, Regulus of
Antimony, or if you had rather, Crocus Metallorum, or Magnesia Opalina, finely
powdered iij. Spanish-wine or strong French-white-wine two Paris-pints: Put
them together in a Glass-bottle, and the Bottle being carefully stopped, let
them macerate eight days in a temperate place, and let them be oft'n stirred;
and at length let them be all kept together, that when it is to be used, the
clear wine that swims above the Antimony, may be poured forth by inclination,
and so taken.

Having Glass or Regulus of Antimony, or Magnesia Opalina, well prepared and
finely beat'n upon a mortar, it is an easy thing to prepare Emetic-wine. For
it is sufficient to get a good Glass-bottle, and to put the prepared Antimony
into it, and to pour the prescribed quantity of wine into it, then to stop up
the Bottle, to set it in a temperate place, to shake it from time to time for
seven or eight days together, and to keep the wine and the Antimony together in
a Bottle well-stopp'd, to make use of as occasion serves, pouring out by
inclination, and taking the clear wine that swims above the Antimony, to such a
quantity as is requisite; taking care not to raise the bottom, for fear some
part of the Antimony should mix with the wine. Upon which this observation is
to be made, That the prescribed dose of wine and Antimony need not be too
religiously observed. For though there should be a little more or a little less
of the one or of the other, it would not signify much, since oft'n Experience
teaches us that the wine takes to it self no more of the virtue of the
Antimony, then it is able to receive; and that the lying with the Antimony one,
two or more months, as the wine might do, renders it nothing more strong then
that which has lain but eight days, if it be oft'n shak'n.

You shall observe also that the same powder of Antimony, upon which the wine
has staid a long time, and which has imparted its Emetic and Purgative Quality
to it, is still able to impart as much virtue to more new wine, if macerated
with it, and that after that wine is sufficiently strong of the Antimony, and
spent, the same Powder will serve again several times for the same use. And
that if you be but careful always to pour out the wine gently, and to take
always only the clear, you shall find very near the same weight of the powder
as at the first maceration; which is more confirmed by the trial which we make
of Cups of Regulus of Antimony, which will give a Purgative and Emetic Quality
to the wine, which shall be filled and kept in them but for some few hours: and
then again bequeath the same virtues to new wine in the same space of time, and
will still afford the same qualities to other wine, as long as the life of one,
or several men continues to make trial of it, without perceiving in the Cup any
diminution of its weight or virtue.

Emetic Wine purges upwards and downwards ill humors, especially those that
are bred in the Stomach. It operates with more or less violence according to
the constitution of those that take it, or according to the superfluity or
small quantity of matter which it meets with. And therefore it is much more
proper for persons that are full of humors, then for those that are not so
much troubled with them, and it is better at the beginning then at the end of a
sickness, when the Patient is weak. It may be given alone from one, to two,
three, or four ounces, a good distance before Meals, according to the Age,
Strength, and Nature of the Disease. It may be mingled also among Purgatives.
Where note, that if the Purgatives are too strong and exceed in quantity the
Emetick-wine, then it acts as they act, and works only downwards. But if it
surmount the Purgatives in quantity and strength, it constrains them to work as
that does, upwards and downwards.

Emetic-wine is never given to those that are narrow-Chested, nor to those that
are hard to vomit, or if there be any fear of any Inflammation of the Bowels.

CHAP. X. Of Vinegars.
WE may say of Vinegar, that the first Original of it is the Juice of Grapes,
as well as of Wine. But the Juice of the Grape must be made Wine by
Fermentation before it can be turned into Vinegar. And though Vinegar may be
made of Beer or Cider, as also of water; I hold, that good and true Vinegar is
only to be made of Wine. Some attribute the only cause of the acidity of
Vinegar to the dissipation of the volatile Spirits of the Wine. But it seems
that they have not sufficiently examined this business. For they that know the
Nature and Original of acids, and the effects which they are able to act upon
Salts and Spirits, especially upon volatiles, will as much attribute to them
the turning of Wine into Vinegar, as to the absence of the volatile Spirit of
Wine. For although before this alteration, some part of the Spirit of Wine may
chance to be dissipated, yet we are to believe, that the corruption which
happens to wine, happens through the disproportion of its parts, and that the
excess of the acid is the chief cause of turning wine into Vinegar. For so long
as the phlegm, the volatile and tartarous parts which contain the acid, keep
nigh a just proportion together, the Wine continues good. But when any one of
those parts predominates, there must of necessity happen some corruption, which
proves to be more or less according to the Quantity and Nature of the part
which predominates, which causes very great differences in the decay of the
Wine. For when the Wine decays through excess of phlegm, it grows greasy, and
turns. But though the phlegm be able to enervate the force of the volatile part
of the Wine by its own corruption, and by its excess, it cannot nevertheless
destroy it, as it destroys almost entirely the tartarous acid part. Whence it
comes to pass, that though no good Vinegar can be made of Wines grown greasy,
and turned; Yet in Distillation you may draw from hence as much volatile
Spirit, as from Wines neither greasy nor sour. And you might draw from hence
altogether quite as much, but that the abundance of phlegm, which caused the
corruption of the Wine, in part takes up the place of the volatile Spirit. The
excess of the volatile Spirit happ'ns very rarely to Wine, and though it should
exceed the other parts in quantity, as it is very able to preserve it self
without them, it would never corrupt them, but would make the Wine violent and
reaking, so that it would be less serviceable for common use, and would
intoxicate sooner: But when the Tartarous part surmounts, it draws to it the
nitrous part of the Air, which is in some sort Homogeneous to it, and
multiplying it self by a little and a little, instead of chasing away the
volatile Spirit, which it has surmounted in quantity, it unites it self
strictly to it, to make it in some measure conformable to its own Nature, while
the phlegm is no longer able to temper the acid which has got the upper hand of
it. Vinegars by their acidity slack'n the activity of the Salts, and volatile
Spirits; joining themselves to them, and altering their action; and are
successfully made use of in Distempers caused by the Salts, and volatile
Spirits, or by humors that participate of their Nature, chiefly Choleric
humors, to which purpose acid Fruits and Juices are usually administered with
good success.

Acetum Rosatum. Vinegar of Roses.. Rosarum Rubrarum exungulatarum Siccarum, lb
j. Aceti acerrimi, lb viij. Vase Vitreo been obturato excipiantur per quindecim
aut viginti dies insolentur; deinde colentur and exprimantur. Colatura cum pari
Rosarum Pondere in eodem vase iterum per idem tempus insoletur, coletur and
exprimatur, and servetur acetum.. Of dry red Roses, the white being nipt off,
one pound; of very tart Vinegar, lb viij. Put them into a Glass-Vessel well
stopped; set them in the Sun for fifteen or twenty days, then strain and press
them out. Let the straining be again set in the Sun during the same time, with
the like weight of Roses. Let it be strained and pressed out, and let the
Vinegar be kept.

Take the great buds of Provence-Roses, and cut away the white part at the
bottom. Dry the red part in the hot Sun, if it may be done, at least in the
Air, as soon as possible may be. Take a pound of Roses thus dried, and put them
into a strong glass-bottle; upon which you must pour eight pints of good
Vinegar, and having stopped the bottle, expose it to the Sun for fifteen days or
three weeks; then strain and press out the whole, and return the straining to
the same Vessel, over a pound of fresh Roses; then stop up the bottle, and
expose it to the Sun as long as before: then strain the Vinegar and squeeze the
Roses, and keep the Vinegar for your use. You may, if you please, leave the
Roses in the Vinegar, and strain it only when you have occasion for it.

Vinegar of Roses is as much used in Diet, as in Physic. It cuts, cleanses,
tempers, it gives an appetite, it provokes sleep being applied to the
Forehead, it removes the Acrimony of the fixed Salts, it moderates the
activity of the volatile, it kills the Worms, stays Vomiting, stays the
Operation of Purgatives, cools Inflammations, assists Expectorations, and
loosens Phlegm, stops the Piles being taken inwardly, and applied outwardly;
resists Putrefaction, and is good to smell to in noisome and Pestilential
seasons. It is mixed among several Liquors, as also in Liniments, Unguents and
Emplaisters.

Vinegar of Roses may serve as an example for the making of several Vinegars,
made of Flowers, as of Elder, Gilli-flowers, Rosemary, Sage, Marigolds, etc.
But because these flowers do not abound so much in moisture as the Rose, you
may take the pains to dry them, or at least to half-dry them, not to dissipate
their good parts.

Acetum Scilliticum. Vinegar of Squills.. Scillas duas molis mediocris, quarum
corticem externum, and cor medium cultro Arundinaceo eximes, Laminas inter cor
and Corticem existentes in parts divides, and soli per multos dies ad humidi
superflui consumptionem expones. Harum lb j. in lagenam capacem immittes,
illique superfundes Aceti Albi Acerrimi, vel potius Spiritus Aceti, lb viij.
Lagenam obturabis, and per quadraginta dies radiis Solaribus expones. Colatis
deinde, and expressis Laminis, Acetum servabis ad usum.. Two Sea-Onions of an
indifferent bigness, peel off the outward Rind, and take out the heart with a
knife made of a Reed; the thin slices between the outmost skin and the heart
divide into parts, and expose them for many days to the Sun, till the
superfluous moisture be consumed. Of those put a pound into a large stone-Jug,
and pour upon them eight pints of very sharp White Vinegar* or rather Spirit of
Vinegar. Stop the Jug, and set it in the Sun for forty days. Then having
strained and squeezed the thin slices, keep the Vinegar for your use.

They that have traveled into Spain and Portugal, have there met with two
sorts of true Sea-Onions, one of which being white, is called the Male; the
other being red is called the Female. The white is usually somewhat the lesser:
it is in taste like the red one, but a little thought more tart: However the
virtues of both are the same. These Squills are Onions that grow by the
Seashore, the Root whereof is large, short, close, and bended. In the Months
of August and September, they put forth a round, sleek, shining stalk
altogether bare, of a whitish color enclining to Grideline, as big as a Man's
finger, about two Cubits high, surrounded at the top with several little
white-flowers enclining to purple, growing like an Ear; after which follows a
black-seed like that of ordinary Onions which is ripe in October and November.
The leaves of both Squills are like those of a Flower-de-luce, but bigger; they
begin to sprout forth in November and December, and grow dry and die in May or
June. The white is accounted better then the red because of the color.

The drying of the slices was only intended to correct any ill quality which
may be in them; for as much as all that is dissipated by the Sun, is only a
superfluous moisture, void of any considerable virtue; and therefore care is
taken to prevent that superfluous moisture from taking away the strength of the
Vinegar, and causing it to putrify, in regard there is phlegm enough in the
Vinegar without having any need to multiply it.

Dioscorides and Matthiolus most highly applaud the virtues of Vinegar of
Squills, and affirm that by taking three ounces every Morning, two hours before
any eating, and taking a little walk after it, it will preserve a Man many
years in perfect health. That he shall never have any Disease in Mouth, Throat
or Stomach. That he shall have a voice always clear and clean, respiration
free, quick sight, hearing good, an excellent complexion. That he shall be free
from Windiness: That all the parts of the body shall do their Offices: That he
shall be always fit for business, never have an ill breath; shall digest
whatever he eats, and turn it into good nourishment, and have a kindly
evacuation of the Excrements. That it will recover the Pthysical, though far
gone; very much help the Epileptic, abating the effects of the Disease, and
quite taking them at length away, if the Disease be new. That it will give ease
in the Gout, and diseases of the Joints; open obstructions of the Liver,
Spleen, Mesentery, and other parts: and in short will procure soundness of
health, and a prolongation of Life. But because our Physicians seldom prescribe
this Vinegar, I have not made Trials enough to confirm what those great Men
have writt'n.

Acetum Theriacale. Treacl'd Vinegar.. Radicum Angeliae,. Of the Roots of
Angelica, Valerianae Majoris, the bigger Valerian, Meu Athamantici, Athamantic
Spignel, Imperatoriae, Master-wort, Gentianae, Gentian, Vince-toxici,
Swallow-wort, Carlinae, Carline-Thistle, Zedoariae, Setwall, Tormentillae,
Tormentill, Bistortae, an. j. ss. Snake-weed, an. j. ss. Cortices Citri sicci,
Rind of dry Citron, Seminis ejusdem, Seed of the same, Baccarum Juniperi,
Juniper Berries, Cardamomi minoris, Lesser Cardamoms, Cubebarum, an. j. Cubebs,
an. j. Foliorum Rutae, Leaves of Rue, Scordij, Water-Germander, Dictamni
Cretici, Cretan Dittany, Cardui Benedicti, Carduus, Centaurii minoris, Lesser
Centaury, Florum Aurantiorum, Orange-Flowers, Rosarum rubrarum, an. M. j.
Red-Roses, an. M. j. Radices and Semina Contusa cum foliis incisis excipiantur
Lagena Vitrea satis ampla, illisque superfundantur Aceti Acerrimi vel potius
spiritus Aceti lb xij. Obturetur Lagena, and per dies duodecim radiis Solaribus
exponatur, sapius agitando; postea colentur and exprimantur omnia, serveturque
Acetum ad usum. The Roots and Seeds being cut, put them into a Glass-bottle,
large enough and pour upon them twelve pints of the most sharp Vinegar, or
rather Spirit of Vinegar, and expose them to the Sun twelve days, oft'n
stirring them* then strain and squeeze out the ingredients, and keep the
Vinegar for use

The Composition of this Treacled-Vinegar is a mixture of the virtues of
several choice Medicines, really Theriacal, and able to furnish the Vinegar
with all the good qualities expected from it. And to facilitate the
preparation, I have thought fit to give a brief Description of the Medicaments,
in the choice whereof there may be some doubt.

Authors describe several sorts of Angelica, of which the two principal are,
the Bohemian, and that which grows upon the high Mountains of France, Spain or
Italy. Some prefer the Bohemian; but that may be more for the rarity of it then
for any virtue extraordinary above that of our Mountains; the stalk whereof is
above a Cubit in height, knotted in several parts, hollow and having many
Branches; the Leaves long and dented, the color dark-green, with ombels of
white Flowers: The root is large* round, about a foot in length, divided into
parts like a beard; white within, and somewhat dark without. The Seed is large
and flat: It is of a thin substance; of a smell and taste very Aromatic. The
Great Valerian grows in the Mountains of Pontus, as also upon some Mountains of
France. It has a soft, broad, smooth Leaf, very jagged. The Stalk is smooth,
soft, hollow, inclining to red, somewhat knotted, about two Cubits high. The
Flowers are small and white* inclining to purple, and growing in Tufts. The
Root is half creeping, as big as a man's finger, having of each side and all
a-long the lower part several little white Roots that run into the Earth. The
taste is very Aromatical, and the scent piercing, and much like that of Nard.

Meum or Spignel, called Athamantic, from the Mountain Athamas in Thessalie,
where it grows very plentifully, abounds also upon several Mountains of France.
The Leaves are small and long like those of Anise. The Stalk is about a Cubit
high, or sometimes more, with ombels of flowers at the top. It has several
Roots packed together, black without and white within, as big as a Man's
little-finger, covered toward the bottom with a kind of hairy excrescence like
the stalk of Sea-holly. It is of a thin substance, but of a smell and taste
very Aromatic.

Imperatoria grows upon the high Mountains of France, Italy and other parts.
The Leaves are broad, somewhat pointed, indented and jagged, growing from the
Root by three and by three, at the end of a long tail: They are strong and
rough to handle, as is also the stalk, that inclines somewhat to red, being
about two Cubits high. The Flowers are white and in ombels. The Seed in shape,
taste and smell is very like to the Seseli, or Hartwort of Marseilles. It has
several roots, which are neither very long nor big, lying on the ground,
knotted, dark-colour'd and rugged without, somewhat green within, of a sharp
taste, thin substance and very Aromatical smell.

Gentian grows upon high Mountains in moist places. The Leaves are large,
broad* and inclining to red, somewhat resembling the leaves of Plantain; but
much more like to white Ellebore. The Stalk about the bigness of a man's
finger, is very smooth* five or six foot high, and parted by knots; whence
spring forth leaves by two and two, less then those which are next the root.
The Flower is yellow, the Seed flat and smooth; the Root very much like that of
Marshmallows; but much bigger and thicker. It is also very yellow and very
bitter.

Swallow-wort grows usually in Mountainy-places; the stalks are about a cubit
high, smooth, round, limber, and difficult to break. The leaves are dark-green*
long* pointed at the end, somewhat like those of Ivy. The Flowers are white,
shall, and stinking. After which succeed round, long knobs full of red-seed,
somewhat broad and downie, in shape like a Swallow. The Roots are small and
odoriferous, and very much commended against Poisons.

The Carline-Thistle grows upon high Mountains. The Leaves are large, broad*
rough, prickly, pointed, displayed, and extended like branches. It has no
stalk* but lies upon the ground, producing a little above the Root a round,
hoary, prickly head that spreads into a large Flower of a yellow color. The
Root is about tyhe bigness of a Man's fist, and somewhat more: it is about a
foot long* and runs directly into the ground. It is somewhat dark colored
without, and white within, of an indifferent substance. The taste is not
displeasing, insomuch that the Countrey-People feed upon it. The smell is very
Aromatic.

The Plant of Zedoary is not described by Authors, yet the Root is very much in
use. It is somewhat inclining to red, a little flat, as long and as thick as a
Man's little finger, having a kind of resemblance to ginger, but less knotty.
The taste is a little bitter, but Aromatical. It is commended for a great
Cordial, and good against Poison.

Tormentil called Heptaphyllon, because that the Leaves grow sev'n and sev'n
together, has several creeping-stalks, round and smooth. The Leaves like those
of Cinqfoyle. The Flowers yellow, but very small. The Root short, as big as the
little finger, black without, red within, environed with strings; the taste is
astringent, and the smell somewhat Aromatie.

Snake-weed grows generally in the Mountains; the Leaves are long, fibrous, and
like those of the lesser Dock. The upper part is dark colored and spotted: the
Stalk is not very big, thrusting forth some kind of Leaves at the top, which is
beset with little Purple-flowers in the form of a Spike, being about a cubit in
length. The Root is red within, dark-colour'd without, beset with little
threads; of a very compact substance* in taste and smell like that of Tormentil.

The Lesser-Cardamom is esteemed the best. We have no Description of the Plant
that produces it, no more then of the other Cardamoms. The form of the Cod of
the Lesser is triangular, resembling that of the Fruit of Ben. The Seeds* are
set in order and well-crowded into the Cod, within a little as big as those of
Amomum, of a purplish color, separated by little membrains, and filling all
the Cod. Their taste is biting and very Aromatic.

The Plant of Cubebs is not well known yet: we believe it to resemble
black-Pepper, and that it creeps up and supports it self upon Trees that grow
next to it. They grow in Java. The Seeds of Cubebs are clustered together like
those of Ivy, but they have a little tail which black-Pepper has not. Their
taste is biting and Aromatic. You must cut off the tail with a pair of
Scissers, and throw it away.

The true Dittany is no where to be met with but in Candy, upon the Mountain
Ida. It has many stalks very smooth and woollie, as also are the Leaves, by
reason of the cotton that covers them; they are of a round figure, about the
bigness of the Nail; the Flowers are purplish, and like our ordinary Violets.
They are intermixed with the Leaves, especially at the top of the stalks like
those of Scordium. Which I affirm to be true, as having oft'n had the real
Dittany in flower, contrary to the opinion of several Writers, who affirm that
Dittany never flowers: For which they may be excused, as having never seen any
Dittany, but what was gathered before the Dittany came to be in flower, and
consequently took it to be always the same. And I believe it is for the same
reason that you shall never find the Flowers but only the Leaves of Dittany
prescribed by Physicians, which in my opinion are not to be rejected; nor are
they to be separated from the Leaves, no more then those of Scordium, Calamint,
Germander, Ground Ivy and other Aromatical Herbs. The Roots of Dittany are very
numerous, small-cluster'd together, dark-colour'd without. They are accounted
good for nothing: the Leaves and Flowers are very Aromatical in taste and smell.

All the Simples in this composition of Vinegar must be put in dry. You must
bruise the Roses, Citron-rinds, and all the Seeds or Berries; you cut must the
Herbs, and put them all into a large strong Glass-bottle, and pour out upon
them twelve pints of excellent Vinegar, stirring the Ingredients, so that they
may be equally steeped in the Vinegar. Then stop up the Bottle, and expose it
to the Sun for forty days; at the end whereof strain and press out the
Ingredients, and put up the Vinegar in a Bottle close-stopp'd.

The virtues of this Vinegar are extraordinary, especially against the
Pestilence and in all contagious and Epidemic Distempers. It is very good to
resist Poison and contagious Air, and to cure the bitings of venomous Beasts.
It resists putrefaction and kills the Worms. It cuts and attenuates thick
matters, and helps digestion. It is administered both inwardly and outwardly.
The dose of it is one or two full Silver-spoons full in Wine, Broth or any
other convenient liquor. It is mingled in Potions, and also in liquid Epithems.
It is put up into the Nostrils, applied to the Temples, to the Stomach and
Wrists. It may be dipped in a sponge, and carried in a little Box with holes in
it to smell to in sickness-time, or against any ill scents.

Acetum Febrifugum, sive Aqua Prophylactica Sylvii de le Boe. The
Fever-vanquishing Vinegar, or Water for prevention of Sylvius de le Boe..
Radicum Petasitidis, ij.. Of the Root of Butter-Bur, ij. Angelicae, Angelica,
Zedoariae, an. j. Zeodoarie, an. j. Foliorum Rutae Hortensis, iiij. Leaves of
Gard'n-Rue, iiij. Melissae, Baume Scabiosa, Scabious, Calendulae, an ij.
Marigolds, an. ij. Nucum jugland. immaturar. incisorum, lb ij. Green-Wall-nuts
cut, lb ij. Pomorum Citriorum recentium incis. lb j. New Pome-Citrons sliced,
lb j. Contundantur prius Radices, deinde cum reliquis omnibus in Aceti
distillati lb xij. per noctem macerentur, postea lento igne cinerum fere ad
Pharmacorum siccitatem distillentur, prolectumqu^^ ^^tum in Lagenis Vitreis
asservetur. Bruise the Roots first, then with the rest of the ingredients, let
them macerate all night in xij. pints of distilled Vinegar. Then let them be
distilled with a gentle fire of embers till the ingredients be almost dry;
keep the Vinegar so gotten, close stopped up in Bottles.

The Butter-Bur grows in moist places in Mountains: in the Springtime it puts
forth a tender stalk, hollow and pithie, about a Palm and half high; having at
the top several flowers, small and clustered like those of Olives, somewhat
pyramidical and fair to the sight: the Leaves come forth after the stalk is
fallen. They are fastened in the middle to a long tail about a cubit long,
thick and full of pith. They hang like a hat turned the wrong way: they are
large and round, and somewhat whitish underneath; upon one side cleft to the
very middle; which cleft coming to close, makes the Leaf resemble a Champinion
upon its stalk. The Root is large, dark-colour'd without and white within, of a
bitter and unpleasing taste, and a strong and unsavory smell.

The Roots being well-scrap'd must be well-bruis'd in a Marble-mortar with a
wood'npestle among the green Wall-nuts, Citrons and chopped Herbs; then put them
into a Glass-cucurbit of a sufficient bigness, and pour upon them xij. pints of
good Spirit of Vinegar that did not yield above three pints at a distillation:
then fit and lute on a head upon the Cucurbit and leave the ingredients in
digestion all night, and the next day distill them with a moderate fire of
embers, till the Ingredients are dry; taking care that they do not burn at
last; and you shall have a Distill'd-vinegar as clear Water.

Sylvius the Dutchman extols this Vinegar for the cure of all sorts of Agues,
as well intermitting as continual. He would have the patient mix it in his
ordinary drink, in Distill'd-Waters, in Apozemes, in Mixtures, Potions, Broth,
etc. It provokes very gentle Sweats, it qualifies and takes off the acrimonie
of the Choler, it quenches thirst, corrects the bitterness of the month, and
stays vomiting. It is very much commended against the Pestilence, and in all
Epidemic-diseases. It may be also put up the Nostrils, applied to the Temples
and Wrists; or be dipped in spunges to be smelt to for the comfort of the
Noble-parts.

This Vinegar must not be used in Diseases occasioned by Acids; for there you
must have recourse to the fixed or volatile Salts.

CHAP. XI. Of Robs.
THE Arabic word Rob, which the Modern still retain was given to the Juices of
Fruits depurated, and boiled to the consumption of two Thirds; or rather to the
consumption of three Fourths of their moistures. The Name of Sapa is given
particularly to the Juice of Grapes depurated and boiled after the same manner.
And therefore there was no ground for them that would make the Name of Sapa
common to all Robs. For though the Sapa be in effect a Rob, yet we acknowledge
for a Sapa no other Rob then that of the Juice of Grapes. Defrutum, is a
diminutive of Sapa; being only depurated and boiled to the consumption of the
third part. And is properly that which we call Burnt-wine. It might be an easy
thing to prepare Robs of the Juices of several Fruits depurated; but
considering that it is not for Apothecaries to trouble their Shops with
Remedies little in use, it shall suffice to set down the most necessary.

A Rob, or Simple Sapa.
. Succi recentis Vvarum albarum perfect maturarum lb xxx. Coque igne lento in
vase fictili vitreato, vel in Aheneo, stanno intus. obducto, donec tertia
tantum pars succi supersit. Si vero Defrutum optaveris, ad tertiae tantum
partis consumptionem coque.. Of the new Juice of white Grapes perfectly ripe lb
xxx. Boil it over a gentle fire in an Earth'n-glaz'd-vessel, or a Copper-vessel
tinned within, till the third part of the Juice only remains. But if you desire
a Defrutum, boil it only to the consumption of the third part.

You must not expose the Juice of the Grapes to the Sun, nor use (...) artifice
to purify it before you set it upon the fire, to make a Rob or Defrutum. (...)
on the contrary you must avoid it, because that Depuration would never come to
pass without the Fermentation of the Juice, whereby it would change its nature
and become Wine, and would lose all its volatile Spirits in boiling. Whereas by
avoiding Fermentation, those Spirits are nowhere settled or concentered; so
that while they are upon the fire there exhales nothing but a gross and
unuseful phlegm. Which may serve for an Item to those, who preparing the
Defrutum or Sapa, may be ignorant of the reasons why we take the Juice of
Grapes newly pressed out, and not the good Wine, which because it is more pure,
they might probably think proper to be preferred before the new Juice.

The Juice of Grapes is differently boiled in Languedoc, Provence, and other
places, for sometimes they only boil it to a Defrutum, and call it burnt-wine.
Sometimes they continue and boil it to the consistency of a Sapa, which comes
near the ordinary Syrups: sometimes till it be as thick as soft Electuaries,
and this they call Raisine, or the Grape-Confection, and use in the conditing
several Fruits. In all which things they thus proceed.

They take a good quantity of white Grapes perfectly ripe, take out the stones,
squeeze and press out the Juice in a clean cloth. Then for example they take
about thirty pints of this Juice, putting it at the same time into a great
Earthen Vessel well-glaz'd, or in a Cauldron, or Copper-Bason tinned within
side; and setting the Vessel upon a moderate fire, they cause the Juice to boil
softly till the third part be consumed, which is the boiling allowed to
burnt-wine. Then they take the Vessel off from the fire, and stir the
burnt-wine continually with a stick till it be quite cold; which they do to
evaporate some superfluous humidity, which might remain in the burnt-wine. Then
they cover the^ Vessel, and letting it stand till the next day, they pour forth
by inclination the clear liquor into a proportionable Vessel, leaving the
settlement at the bottom. Then they set the Vessel in the Cellar for six or
seven weeks, to ferment like the new Wine. After which, to make up that little
burnt-wine which the fermentation had dissipated, they fill up the Wine with
other burnt-wine reserved on purpose, or else they put in Spanish-Wine, or good
White Wind, and stopping up the Vessel, keep it in a cool place for use.

But if instead of burnt-wine, you desire a Sapa, you must boil the juice of
red Grapes, till there be but a third part left; Then stir it with a stick till
it be quite cold, and let it rest all night in the Vessel, the better to
purify it self from its Lees. But then instead of putting this depurated Wine
into a Cask, you must let it boil again over a little fire, in the same Vessel
very clean, till the half be consumed; then take it off the fire, let it cool,
and stay two or three days; then pour out the clear liquor by inclination, and
leave the feces at the bottom of the Vessel as before. By this second boiling,
the Juice will be reduced to two thirds, and will be of a consistency not
unlike that of ordinary Syrups.

You may also return the same Sapa upon the Fire again, and consume about a
fourth part, over a very gentle fire, if you desire it should be boiled to the
consistency of Electuaries; or for the preserving of Conditements. You may
Aromatize these Juices thus differently boiled by mixing with them, when they
are cold, some drops of Oil of Cinnamon or Cloves, incorporated with
fine-powder'd Sugar.

That which they call burnt-wine in Languedoc and Province, is a preparation
very like that of Spanish-wine. This Wine is to be looked upon as an Alimental
nourishment, as well as the Sapa or the Raisine. It breeds good and quick
nourishment, and is proper to restore lost strength, to fortify the Heart,
Stomach, and all the other noble parts, to create an Appetite and help
Digestion. The Dose of the burnt-wine is from one ounce to four, that of the
Sapa, from one ounce to two. That of the Raisine much the same. The burnt-wine
is also made use of in Clysters instead of Decoctions, chiefly in Colicks
proceeding from Wind and Acids.

Rob Cydoniorum. A Rob of Quinces.. Succi Cydoniorum ad maturitatem vergentium,
lb xviij. Coque igne lento in vase fictili vitreato, donec Tertia tantum pars
superfit. Refrigeratum Rob, quiet and decantatione fecibus liberatum, Oleorum
Cinnamomi and Caryophillorum ana guttis tribus, Saccharo pulv^^izato exceptis,
Aromatizetur and servetur.. Of the Juice of Quinces enclining to be ripe lb
xviij. Boil them over a soft fire in an Earth'n glaz'd-Pot, till only the third
part remain. When the Rob is cold, and freed from its feces by settlement and
inclination, take of Oil of Cinnamon and Cloves, an. three drops, mixed with
powdered Sugar, and Aromatize it, and then keep it for use.

Take a good quantity of Quinces half ripe, rasp them one after another into
Earthen Pipkins, all but the inward hard Core. Let them settle two or three
days, then squeeze them through a new strong Cloth, gently at first, afterward
very strongly. By that means you will have a Juice of Quinces very clear. Of
which take eighteen pints, and put them into an Earth'n glazed Pipkin, or into
a skillet of Copper Tinned, and let them boil over a gentle fire, till two
thirds are consumed. Then let them cool, and set the Rob aside in the skillet
for two or three days; then pour the clear Liquor into another very clean
Vessel, and add to it the Oils of Cloves and Cinnamon, incorporated with an
ounce of fine-powder'd Sugar, to mix them the better together, and when they
are well mingled, put them up into a bottle well-stopp'd, and keep them for use.

The Rob of Quinces is indu'd with all the principal virtues that are
attributed to the pulp of the Quinces. It is recommended to fortify the
Stomach, to help the weakness of retention in the Stomach, and Intestines. To
create an Appetite, and help Digestion. It is given with success in Diarrhea's,
Dysenteries, Lienteries, the Choleric Disease, and Internal Fluxes of Blood.

Rob Mororum seu Diamorum. Rob of Mulberries, or Diamorum.. Succi Mororum Rubi
Humilis arv^^sis,. Of the Juice of Mulberries, of the low-field Bramble. Succi
Mororum mori arboris nigrae semi-maturorum, Of the Juice of Mulberries of the
black Tree, half-ripe. Mellis Narbonensis despumati, an. lb iij. Of clarified
Honey of Narbonne, an. lb iij. Coquantur igne lento in vase fictili vitreato ad
debitam consistentiam, illisque permisceantur Spiritus Vitrioli vel Sulphuris,
gutta, xx. Boil them over a gentle fire in a Glazed Earth'n Vessel, to a due
consistence, and mix with them twenty drops of Spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur.

This Rob may be made with these two Juices, or with either of the two
separately without any addition of Honey; but besides that the Honey increases
their detersive and cleansing quality, it makes the Rob more delightful, and
fitter to be preserved for a longer time. The two sorts of Mulberries must be
gathered before they come to their maturity; that the Rob may be more detersive.

You must squeeze out the Juice through a strong Cloth, let it settle two or
three days; then pour the clear Liquor by inclination into another vessel,
weigh the quantity prescribed and boil it over a small fire in a glazed
Earth'n-pot, with the Honey clarified before, to a consistence like that of
Syrups. Then let the Rob cool, scum it well, and add to it the Spirits of
Vitriol or Sulphur, and so put up it in a glass-bottle, or a gally-pot
well-stopp'd for your use.

This Rob is chiefly for the cure of Ulcers and Inflammations in the Mouth,
Tongue, and Throat. For it is very proper to qualify the Acrimony of the
humors, to cleanse, stop up, and consolidate; sometimes this Rob is taken
alone by the spoonful. But it is most frequently mixed in cooling and detersive
decoctions.

Rob Baccarum Sambuci. Rob of Elder-Berrier.. Succi Baccarum Sambuci, tribus
diebus per residentiam depurati, lb vj. Aut quantum libuerit. Coque igne lento
in vase fictili vitreato, ad duarum* partium Consumptionem. Add si volueris
Sacchari vel Mellis despumati portionem aliquam.. Of the Juice of Elder-berries
clarified by three days settlement, six pints; or as much as you please. Boil
them in a glazed Earth'n-Pipkin over a soft fire to the consumption of two
parts. Add if you please some little quantity of Sugar or clarified Honey.

You must take the Elder-berries when they are fully ripe, take from them all
their little stalks, squeeze them through a strong Cloth, and draw out their
Juice; let them settle for three days, separate them from their feces, and boil
them over a soft fire in an Earthen-Vessel well-glaz'd, to the consumption of
two thirds, or to the consistence of a Rob. Let it cool, and take off the scum
if there be any. To make the Rob more pleasant and fit to keep* longer, you may
add a third or a fourth of its weight of fine Sugar, or clarified Honey.

This Rob is very much commended for the cure of Diseases of the Brain,
particularly of the Epilepsie and Palsy. It is accounted a Specific against
Hysteric Passions, and for Dysenteries. It may be taken alone in a spoon
fasting, or mixed in Potions. The dose is not certain: but you may take from
half an Ounce to an Ounce at a time.

The other Robs which are prepared of the Juices of several Fruits merit no
farther mention here, because they are converted into Syrups, which the
sweetness of the Sugar renders more pleasing then all the Robs that can be
prepared.

CHAP. XII. Of Sweetmeats.
THE difficulty of accommodating Medicines to the taste of Patients, and the
desire of pleasing them, and to have at all times ready some parts of Plants of
which they may stand in need, have been the principal occasions of inventing
Sweetmeats. It happ'ns also that the liking which Patients take to them when
sick, gives them a desire to continue the use of them when they are well.

And the healthy themselves have so far taken their part, and made Sweetmeats
so common, that there is no good City, where there are not some who make it
their Trade and Calling to make all sorts of Sweetmeats. But though it be not
the Apothecaries business to make for the healthy, yet they are obliged for the
benefit of the sick to condite several sorts of Plants which are not within the
knowledge or practice of the ordinary Comfit-makers.

If all the parts of Plants were to be had at all times, or if they were all of
an equal perfection, there would be no great trouble to make provision of any
Sweetmeats, nor need we make any conditement but upon occasion. But as they
must have time to grow, increase, come to perfection, and then decline again,
we must choose the best time for the virtues or qualities of the Plant which we
intend to candie. Herbs, Fruits, Stalks, Flowers and Seeds cannot be fit but
in their Season. Roots that may be had at all Seasons of the Year, yet are not
fit to be condited till the Spring of the Year, when they begin to put forth
their Leaves: for then they possess to themselves all that the Plant has of
virtue; besides that they are then more tender and more juicie then at any
other Season. Sometimes the Flowers are condited before they are blown; Seeds
and Fruits half ripe: And sometimes we stay till every one of these comes to
their perfect maturity. Sometimes the Roots, Flowers, Fruits, and other parts
of Plants are condited whole, sometimes cut in pieces, either for convenience,
or to separate what is to be thrown away. Sometimes they are to be reduced into
a paste, and boiled with Sugar or Honey. But Sweetmeats are so common that I
think I need not give many Examples thereof.

Radices Eringii conditae. Eringo-Roots condited.. Radicum Eringii mundatarum
and in parts dissectarum quantum volueris: coque ad mollitiem in aquae
communis sufficient quantitate; in decocto dissolve Sacchari albissimi pondus
Radicibus aequale: Coque ad Syrupi crassioris consistentiam; despuma,
calidumque Syrupum Radicibus in vase fictili vitreato positis superfunde. Post
dies aliquot decantatum Syrupum ad priorem consistentiam recoque, calidumque
radicibus superfunde. Idque ter, quaterve repete, and tandem ita Syrupum coque,
ut in debita consistentia possit in posterum cum Radicibus asservari.. Of these
Roots as many as you please; wash them well, then take out the pith and the
outside, then boil them in fair Water till they are sufficiently tender. Then
take them out of the Water, lay them upon a white Linen Cloth, and dry up the
moisture as much as may be. Then weigh them, and take the same weight of fine
Sugar, and boil it with the Decoction of the Roots, scumming it from time to
time, till the Sugar have acquired a consistency a little thicker then that of
ordinary Syrups. Then put the Roots into a Pot of glaz'dearth, and pour the
Syrup upon them fiery hot; some few days after pour this Syrup by inclination
into a Basin, and reboyl it over a soft fire, till it have acquired its first
consistency; then pour it hot a second time upon the Roots. A while after boil
the Liquor a third time, and pour it upon the Roots again. Repeat this again if
need be; and at length so boil the Syrup that it may be kept for the future
with the Roots.

Eringium or Sea-Holly is a Plant well-known: the Roots whereof must be
gathered in the Springtime, when the Herb begins to appear.

Eringo-roots are opening and diuretic. They are also great friends to the
Stomach, Liver and Spleen. They are sometimes mixed in Opiates and other
Medicines.

The Example of this Root may serve for the conditing of Succorie, Burrage,
Bugloss, Comfrey, Elecampane, Satyrion, Scorzonera or Vipers-grass, and several
others; from all which you must take off the small rinds and superfluities.
They may be condited whole that have no pith, or are not very big; and cut into
slices those that are overlarge.

Cortices Malorum conditi. Citron-Peels condited.. Corticum Malorum Citreorum
in frusta ^blonga incisorum quantum libuerit, per dies quindecim Aquae marinae
committantur; educantur, postea ex illa aqua, and in Fontanam ejiciantur, in
eaque saepius renovata relinquantur, donec salsedinem deposuerint. Bulliant
tandem leviter in nova aqua, ut siquid supersit salsedinis auferatur. Tunc in
recenti aqua ad sufficientem teneritatem coquantur, deinde linteo mundo quantum
fieri potest exsiccati in vase novo fictili vitreato ordine collocentur. Illis
saccharum in proprio Corticum decocto ad debitam consistentiam coctum calide
superfundatur, illiusque coctio and superfusio repetatur, ut in superiori
Radicum Eringii conditura diximus.. Of the Peels of Citrons as many as you
please; cut them into long slices about an inch or an inch and a half broad:
range them one by one in a clean Barrel, cover them with Salt Water, and leave
them in that Water for fifteen days, or longer if you please; then take them
out, and steep them in Fountain Water for several days, shifting and
re-shifting the Water, till you can perceive nothing of saltness in them. Then
boil them gently in Fresh Water, to take away any thing of Salt that might
remain. Then throwing away that water, boil them in fresh water, till they are
sufficiently tender. Then take out the Peels out of the water, and with a
Linen Cloth dry them as well as you can. Then weigh'em, and take twice the
weight of fine Sugar, and boil it in the last Decoction of the Peels to the
thickness of Honey. Then having laid the Citronpeels one by another in an
Earth'n-glaz'dpan, pour the Sugar upon them scaldinghot, so that they may be
altogether wellcover'd* leave them so for some days, and then pour out the
Syrup by inclination into a Basin, and repeat Coction and Superfusion as is
directed in the Conditing of Eringo's.

The difficulty of conditing Citron-peels without causing them to lose their
shape, or so as to keep them from falling to pieces or into paste, is the
reason that we are forced to make use of Salt Water, which preserves their
Rinds entire, fair and transparent.

If you would preserve these Peels dry, take them out of the Syrup, let them
drain; then boil fine Sugar in the Water to the consistency of a solid
Electuary; put in the Peels, and let them boil till the Sugar be again gently
boiled to the consistence of a solid Electuary. Then take out the Peels,
letting the Sugar drain off, and lay the Peels upon twigs in a Stove, to be
there entirely dried.

You may make good use of the first Syrup which served to condite the
Citron-peels, being very much esteemed under the Name of The Syrup for
preserving the Citronpeel, the virtues whereof are very near as good as those
of the Peel, to strength'n the Heart, Stomach, and all the Noble-Parts.

You may also boil in the Water new Citron-peel, till it be almost reduced into
paste; beat it afterward in a Marble-mortar, and pass it through a Hair-Sieve,
adding thereto the weight of it in powder-Sugar; then boiling it over a
gentle-fire in a Glaz'd-earth'npipkin, and at the end putting a little Juice of
Citron, to give it a pleasing acidity.

^n the same manner Quinces, Pears, Apples, Abricots, Peaches, Plumbs and many
other Fruits may be reduced into Pastes of the like nature. In the same manner
may the Stalks of Lettice separated from their Rind, the pulpie-part of Melons,
long-Gourds, Cucumbers, Hartichoak-bottoms, and many other pithie parts of
Plants be condited. You may also put them into Salt Water and condite them
whole, as I have directed for Citron-peel.

You may also make use of a clear Lie instead of Salt Water to condite green
Almonds. And though they become extraordinary pale, yet by boiling them
afterward in fair Water, they recover a color more green then that which they
had before, and you may then preserve them dry or liquid, without fear of
altering their color. Conditements in Honey are not so much used as those in
Sugar, as being more acceptable in all Sweetmeats: besides that Honey is not
so proper for dry Sweetmeats. And though in Languedoc and Provence during the
cold weather they preserve Almonds dry with Honey, and to make a Sweet-meat
sometimes red, sometimes white, which they call Nogat, or Tourron; yet it is
not a Sweet-meat that can be kept long: for the Honey will give and at length
dissolve altogether, when the moist air has had time to penetrate it.

The preserving of Olives is very different from all others; especially because
it is done without either Sugar or Honey. Their Preparation consists chiefly in
taking away their natural bitterness, to render them pleasant to the taste, and
in preserving them long in their beauty and goodness. They that regard not
their beauty, only slit the green Olives in two with a Knife, and bruise them
gently, and soak them in fair Water, which they shift oft'n till their
bitterness be almost all taken away. Then they put them into Pots of Glass or
Earth-glaz'd with some small bunches of Fennel, or some pieces of dry Citron or
Orange-peel, and cover them with a Water indifferently salt, wherein they keep
them to eat, as they have occasion. But they that desire to preserve the color
of their Olives, and to keep them entire, make use of a Lie made of the ashes
of Oak-wood, Vine-branches or the like: or else of Quicklime, steeping their
Olives therein four and twenty hours, or till they have quite lost their
bitterness. Then they put their Olives into an indifferent Salt Water, adding
to them sweet Fennel, Citron or Orange-peel cut into little slices, or some
such other Aromatic, as they shall like best. They also pour in as much good
Oil upon the Water as may swim about a fingers-breadth above it, the better to
preserve the whole.

CHAP. XIII. Of Gellies.
WE give that nowadays the Name of Gelly, which the Latins called Gelatina.
Gelly is usually made of Juices extracted by pressing, or by decoction of
several Fruits. They are also made by the long boiling of different Animals, or
of their parts. These Juices must be clarified by Despumation or otherwise, and
be sweetened with Sugar, to make them pleasing to the Palate. They must be also
boiled to the consistency that a Gelly ought to have, which is not to be too
fluid when it is cold, and not to stick to the Trencher or Plate when you drop
a few drops to try the consistency. Gelly is so named, because it is
transparent like Ice, and because it congeals in the cold, and melts in the
heat. However it differs from Ice, because it never becomes hard like that, but
remains always soft, unless it freeze in extremity of weather.

Gellies are so common among the Ladies, that I shall only give you the
Examples of two or three made by Decoction.

Gelatina Cydoniorum. Gelly of Quinces.. Cydoniorum ad maturitatem accedentium,
lb viij. in frusta incide cum Cortice and Seminibus, and in aquae communis lb
xx decoque ad dimidiae circiter partis consumptionem: decoctum cola and Cydonia
exprime. Colaturam Ovi albumine cum Sacchari lb vj. clarifica; and clarum
liquorem ad Mivae consistentiam coque, Pixidibusque ligneis vel Vasis vitreis,
aut fictilibus vitreatis reconde.. Whole Quinces not fully ripe, and cut them
into five or six slices, and weigh out eight pound, and boil them in twenty
pints of Water, to the consumption of half. Strain the Decoction, and squeeze
the Sediment well; and when it is almost cold, clarify it with the white of an
Egg, with six pound of fine Sugar, after the ordinary manner. Then boil the
clear liquor over a gentle-fire, to the consistency of a Gelly. Then take the
Skillet from the fire, and when the Gelly is half-cold, Aromatize it with four
drops of Distill'd-oyl of Cloves, and two drops of Oil of Cinnamon, incorporated
first with fine powder'd-Sugar. The whole being well mixed, and the Gelly well
scumm'd, pour it out into Glasses, or Glaz'd-pots, or else into Woodd'n-Boxes
or Moulds, moistened beforehand. The Latins call the Gelly of Quinces Mivam
Cydoniorum.

This Aromatization is to be preferred before that of the Ancients, who direct
you to put Cinnamon, Cloves, Cardamoms, Saffron, Trochisques of Gallia Moscata,
Ginger, Mastich, lignum Aloes, and Musk in powder tied up in a knot, and to
steep them in the Gelly while it boyles; not considering that besides the harsh
and unpleasing taste which the grosser part of all this Mixture of Drugs would
give the Gelly, their Aromatic and volatile part would dissipate, and leave
nothing behind but the ill-qualities of the Terrestrial. You may also, besides
the Oils of Cloves and Cinnamon prescribed for Aromatization, add some drops of
the Essence of Musk and Ambergrise, for those that love sweet Scents. There are
some that take out the Seeds from the Quinces when they make the Decoction for
the Gelly. Others on the contrary make use of the Seeds, Cores and Rind,
reserving the pulp of the Quinces to condite, or to make Marmalate.

You may also make a Gelly of Rennettings or other good Apples, cutting them
into quarters, boiling them in Water almost to a mash, and straining the
Decoction through hair-sieve without pressing the Apples. For this Decoction
thus strained through the Sieve reverst, and re-passt through a Bag, mixed with
the weight in Apples of very fine Sugar, and boiled over a gentle fire to a due
consistency, makes a Gelly as pleasant as sightly, to which you may add at the
end of the Decoction some drops of the Juice of Citrons wellclarify'd to give
them a sharp taste. You may also cut the rind of candy'd Pome-Citron into small
pieces, and lay at the bottom of the Glasses or Boxes where you put your
Gellies, which being poured hot upon these pieces, will become by that Mixture
much more acceptable then without it.

Gelatina Cornu Cervini. Gelly of Hartshorn.. Rasurae Cornu Cervini lb ss,
Aque communis lb vj. Coque lento igne, in va^* fictili vitreato, ad duarum
partium consumptionem. Cola and exprime, Colaturam clarifica Ovi albumine cum
Sacchari optimi vj. Vini albi iiij. Succi Citri j. Et coque igne lento ad
Gelatina melior is consistentiam.. Half a pound of the havings of Hartshorn,
and boil it over a gentle fire in six pints of Fountain Water in a
glaz'd-earth'n Pipkin to the consumption of two thirds of the Water. Strain out
the Decoction, squeezing the Hartshorn well; then clarify the straining with
the white of an Egg, adding six ounces of fine Sugar, four ounces of white
Wine, and one ounce of Juice of Citrons. After which boil the clarified Liquor
over a gentle fire, to the consistency of a Gelly, rather too soft then too
strong, which you must empty hot into Glasses or Pots, and there let it cool.

You may Aromatize this Gelly with some half a drop of the Essence of Citron,
Cloves or Cinnamon, incorporated with fine powdered Sugar.

This Gelly of Hartshorn is never prepared but upon occasion. For it cannot be
kept above four or five days in Winter, and two in Summer; and then you must
keep it in a Cellar. Some nice Persons may disapprove the boiling of the Wine
and the Gelly, believing that the Spiritous part dissipates in boiling. But in
regard the Gelly cannot be clarified without the Wine, there is no care to be
taken for the dissipation of the Spirit, so much the rather because that the
Gelly being most frequently prepared for those that are in Fevers, we may be
glad of the dissipation of those Spirits.

Gelly of Hartshorn may be called a Medicinal-nourishment: For it breeds good
nourishment, and strength'ns the Heart and Stomach. It is used in all sorts of
Fevers, especially the putrid, and in all Epidemic-diseases; and is highly
approved in all weaknesses, and want of retention in the Stomach and Bowels.

In the same manner may be prepared Gelly of Vipers, and of the parts of other
sorts of Animals.

CHAP. XIV. Of Conserves.
ROOTS, Herbs, or Flowers are usually the foundation of all Conserves. Their
preparation therefore not being very difficult, and requiring no tedious
Discourses, I will only give you two or three Examples, by which you may
prepare all sorts of Conserves.

Conserva Radicum Helenii. Conserve of Roots of Elecampane.. Radicum Helenii
recentium mundatarum quantum libuerit; coquantur ad mollitiem in sufficient
quantitate Aqua Fontanae; deinde pinsentur, and per Cribrum inversum
trajiciantur. Decoctum coquatur lento igne cum Sacchari duplo Radicum pondere,
ad Electuarii solidi consistentiam. Illique tantisper refrigerato, trajecta
pulpa permisceatur; refigerataque conserva vase idoneo recondatur.. What
quantity you please of the new Roots of Elecampane, wash them well, and cleanse
them from their little rind, and from all superfluities; cut them into great
pieces* boil them in six times their weight in Water over a moderate fire, till
they are sufficiently tender. Then bruise them in a Marblemortar with a
woodd'npestle, and strain the pulp through a Hair-sieve reversed. In the mean
while boil twice the weight of fine Sugar in the Decoction of the Roots, to the
consistence of a solid Electuary; and when it is half cold, incorporate the
pulp therein, and put up the cold Conserve in fit vessel.

Some let the Decoction be quite cold before they incorporate the pulp. Others
put it hot into the pot, to the end there may be a crust proper to preserve the
Conserve. However you must not cover the pot till the Conserve be quite cold,
for fear the superfluous moisture which rises with the Conserve, not finding
vent, should fall upon the Conserve and putrify it.

This Conserve, as also that of many other Roots may be done without boiling
the Roots, as also without boiling the Sugar. For you may stamp the raw Roots
in a Marble-Mortar, press the pulp through a hair-sieve reversed, and
incorporate it with twice as much the weight of fine-Sugar in powder, and the
Conserve shall be made. But besides that the raw Roots are more difficult to
stamp and strain, and more fibrous then those which are boiled, the Conserve is
also more displeasing and coarse. In the same manner may be prepared the
Conserves of all pithy Roots.

Conserve of Elecampane, cuts, and powerfully loosens Phlegm from the Lungs, the
Reins and Stomach, it serves for expectoration, helps Digestion, and creates an
Appetite. You may take it alone, or mixed in Opiates, Loches, or Tablets: you
may take from half an ounce to an ounce.

Conserva Rosarum mollis. Soft Conserve of Roses.. Rosarum Rubrarum recentium
exungulatarum, lb j. Sacchari Albissimi, lb ij. Fiat ex art Conserva. Take one
pound of red Rose-buds, cut off the white part at the bottom with a pair of
Scissors. Stamp them exactly in a Marble-Mortar, mixing with them by degrees,
two pound of fine powdered Sugar.

This mixture will make a body not unlike that of a soft Electuary, of a dark
red color and pleasing to the taste. You may at the latter end add some drops
of Spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur, which will heighten the color of the
Conserve, and make it look more red. After this you may put it up in a bottle
well-stopp'd, and expose it to the Sun for several days, stirring the Conserve
from time to time with a woodd'n Spatula, the better to unite the Roses with
the Sugar, and to consume the superfluous moisture.

But if you desire a Conserve of Roses more pleasant, and more sightly, this is
the way. Give a gentle wamble to about a pint of Rose Water, and having taken
it off the fire, cast into it a pound of large red Rose-buds, cleaned as
before, and having well-steep'd them, strain the Liquor through a clean
Linen Cloth, squeeze the Roses with your hands, and beat them well in a
Marble-Mortar. In the mean while boil two pound of fine Sugar in the Water
where the Roses were steeped, to the consistence of a solid Electuary, and when
it is well boiled, mix the Roses therein perfectly well-stamp'd; stir them for
some time the better to make the mixture, and to evaporate the superfluous
molsture. Then put them up in a pot, and cover them well, when they are quite
cold. This way makes the Roses very tender, and makes them fit to be the better
and more easily stamped. The Rose Water increases the good Scent and virtue of
the Conserve: and the mixture of the Roses with the Sugar becomes more exact.
The Conserve is more sightly, and retains its virtue and its beauty longer,
then by the ordinary preparations.

There is also another preparation of Conserve of Roses not inferior to this,
which is done by putting the Rose-buds cut into a glass- Cucurbit, in
Maceration in Balneo Mariae, between lukewarm and boiling hot; keeping them
there till they are sufficiently tender, boiling the Sugar with the Rose Water,
and observing the same Method, as for the former Conserve.

The principal use of Conserve of Roses, is to stop defluxions from the Brain
falling upon the Lungs. It is also good to stay coughing and spitting of Blood:
to strengthen the Stomach, Heart, and Brain, to stay vomiting and looseness of
the Belly; to keep the Breath sweet, to provoke sleep; to which purpose it is
usually applied in a frontal to the Forehead. This Conserve is to be taken
fasting from one dram to two, often mixed with Confections, Powders, Essences,
and other Conserves. Sometimes it is outwardly applied upon the Heart and
Stomach in a solid Epitheme, alone, or mixed with other Medicines.

Conserva Rosarum solida. Solid Conserve of Roses.. Rosarum Rubrarum
mundatarum, and ad Solis Radios celeriter siccatarum, j. in Pulverem subtilem
redigantur, postea irrorentur dragma Semis Spiritus Sulphuris. Tunc. Sacchari
Albissimi, lb j. Aquae Rosarum, iiij. Coquantur simul ad Electuarii solidi
consistentiam. Deinde pulvis Rosarum immisceatur, and ubi fere refrixerint,
formentur Tabellae vel Rotulae ad usum. Take an ounce of red-Roses cleans'd,
and hastily dried in the Sun, powder them very fine, and sprinkle them with
half a dram of Spirit of Sulphur in some glass-Vessel, mixing them well with
a woodd'n Spatula. Then boil a pound of fine Sugar in four ounces of Rose Water
to the consistency of a solid Electuary, and incorporate the Roses therein,
being taken off the fire, stirring them well with a woodd'n-Pestle. And when
you observe a film upon the Conserve, pour it out upon a sheet of Paper, or a
Pewter-platter to make Tablets thereof.

This is called hard Conserve of Roses, which will be of a good color, and
grateful to the taste; the virtues whereof are much the same with those of the
liquid Conserve. It is also very convenient to carry in the Pocket.

They are deceived who think that the Roses ought to be dried in the shade to
make them look the fairer. For experience and reason have taught me, that red
Roses so dried are never sightly in color, but become very brown. And
therefore it is not without cause, that you are here directed to dry them
hastily in the Sun. For being suddenly dried they look fair and are full of
virtue, because the red-Roses abound in superfluous and viscous moisture, which
is not easily separated, unless it meet with some powerful Agent to constrain
it; such as is the Sun by means of his heat. Whereas if you dry them in shade
only, the action of the Sun being too weak, and slow, the Roses in that space
of time, wither and turn black. However, you must be careful to take them out
of the Sun, when they are sufficiently dry; for after that, the Sun does but
burn them, and make them change color.

You must be careful also to put the Roses in a Glass-bottle well-stopp'd to
preserve them in their virtue and beauty, which you may do for a year or two
together.

Conserva Violarummollis. Conserve of Violets liquid.. Violarum recentium
mundatarum lb ss. Sacchari Albissimi, lb j. ss. Fiat ex art Conserva.. Half a
pound of new Violets very clean, and beat them exactly in a Marble-Mortar; and
when they are well-beaten, boil over a soft fire in six ounces of distilled
Water of Violets, a pound and a half of fine Sugar, to the consistency of an
Electuary. Then take the Sugar off the fire, and when it is half-cold, mix the
stamped Violets therewith.

At the same time pour this Conserve into a pot, that the film or crust may
grow over it, which will very much preserve it. And when it is cold cover the
pot very close, and keep it for your use.

This Conserve may serve as an example for those of Burrage, Bugloss,
Water Lillies, and suchlike flowers as abound in moisture.

The moisture of the Violets is the reason of putting more Sugar into Conserve
of Violets, then into Conserves of Flowers less moist. And the method of
boiling the Sugar is much better, then to mingle the Violets in powder with the
Sugar: in regard the Flowers seem better mixed in the boiled Sugar, and for
that by putting the Conserve hot into the Pot, the crust that grows over it
resists the penetration of the Air, and makes the Conserve keep much longer.

Conserve of Violets is very cordial; It is very much esteemed in Diseases of
the Liver and Spleen. It qualifies the Acrimony of the humors, and makes them
slippery. It is admirable in Diseases of the Breast, and to cool the boiling of
the Blood.

CHAP. XV. Of Syrups.
JUleps were the forerunners and the occasion of the invention of Syrups. For
the Ancients finding, that the superfluous moisture of Juleps hastn'd their
putrefaction, bethought themselves of consuming it by boiling, and to reduce
them to a thicker consistency, giving them the name of Syrups. The word Syrup
is derived from (...), to draw, and (...), which signifies Juice.

All Syrups are pleasant Compositions, made of Waters, Juices, Tinctures, or
Decoctions boiled with Sugar or Honey, to a consistency somewhat thick, and fit
to keep. The Juices that compound Syrups, are usually drawn from several parts
of Plants, sometimes by expression, sometimes by the impression of their
succulent substance into any Liquor. They may be also drawn from the parts of
Animals, as Syrup of Tortoises. Tinctures, Infusions, or Decoctions, made use
of in the composition of Syrups, are as so many means, to impart the virtues of
different Medicines to the same Syrups.

Besides the design of long-keeping, our Artists had a desire to have the
virtue of one or more Medicaments closed together in a small Room. But the
number of Syrups is so great, that should we prepare them all, the shops would
not be big enough to hold them. For which reason I shall not fill this Volumn
with Syrups that may be let alone, as being out of use, or such as may be
prepared when prescribed. I shall only therefore here set down such Syrups, the
use whereof is confirmed by the practice and prescriptions of the Physicians,
and which deserve to be prepared for their virtues, and advantages which the
sick receive thereby.

Syrupus e Succo Citri. Syrup of the Juice of Citron.. Succi acidi recentis
defaecatissimi Malorum Citreorum, lb iij. Sacehari Albissimi, lb vj. Fiat ex
art Syrupus. Take three pints of the Juice of Citron extremely well purified,
and put it into a Glass, or glazed Earth'n* Vessel, then dissolve therein six
pound of fine Powder Sugar; stirring it all the while till the Sugar be wholly
incorporated with the Juice.

Continue stirring as well when it is off, as when it is upon the fire.

Make use of no Vessels for the Preparation of this or any other Syrup composed
of Acid Juices, but such as are made of glass, or glazed Earth.

There is another way of making this Syrup, by taking six pound of white and
dry fine Powder Sugar, clarifying it with the white of an Egg, and six pints of
Fountainwater, and then boiling it over a fire, to the consistency of a solid
Electuary; and after that, when it is off from the fire, pouring into it three
pints of Juice of Lemons, wellclarify'd, and stirring the Syrup with a Woodd'n
Pestle, till it be almost cold.

The Ancients believed that the quantity of the acid Juices of Fruits in
Syrups, ought to be greater then that of the Sugar, and that the same Juices
required a longer boiling, as well to consume one part of their moisture, which
they thought superfluous, as also to make a consistence necessary for the
Syrups which were composed of them. For this reason they boiled their Juices a
long time. I confess that the acid Juices evaporated in a glass-Vessel in
Balneo Mariae, do lose of their aquosity, and that the Juice which remains in
the Vessel, is more acid, then the Juice before the watery part was evaporated.

But besides that, there is no need of so much Acidity, they lose of their
beauty, and become less cooling by being boiled. Moreover the watery part is not
unprofitable in the composition of these Juices, in regard it is very
refreshing, and for that by the means thereof, the acids are more conveniently
conveyed to the remote parts, without any offense to the parts, by reason of
their Acrimony.

And for as much as the Syrups, which are only composed of acid Juices and
Sugar, require not a consistency altogether so thick as that of other Syrups,
they must not be kept so long upon the fire, for fear of changing their
quality. This Syrup may serve for an example for all Syrups composed of the
acid Juices of Fruits, and Sugar.

Syrup of Citrons cools and moistens very much, it quenches thirst, and
sensibly cools the heat of choleric-Fevers. It strengthens the Stomach and
Bowels, weak'nd by the hot intemperature of humors, it resists putrefaction
and contagious Air. It is good against Worms, Poison, and Pestilent and
Epidemic Diseases. The Dose is usually from half an ounce to an ounce, in a
glass of Ptisan, or some other Liquor. It serves as a foundation for some
compositions, and is mixed in Potions and other Medicines.

The Syrups of Granates, red-Currans, Barberries, Verjuice, and the like are
prepared after the same manner.

Syrupus e Succo Oxytriphylli. Syrup of the Juice of Wood Sorrel.. lb iiij.
Succi Oxytriphylli depurati, Sacchari Albissimi, ana. Fiat ex art Syrupus.
Take four pints of the Juice of Wood Sorrel well-purify'd; pour them into a
glass- Cucurbit, cover it with its Alembic slightly luted, place it in Balneo
Mariae, and distill with a moderate fire about half the moisture. Then take away
the Cucurbit, and let it cool. That done, pour out the acid Juice, which
remains by Inclination, and pass it through a brown-Paper, to separate the
Terrestreities gathered in Distillation. Then weigh out two pints of this
clarified Juice, and dissolve therein four pound of fine powdered Sugar, and
give the whole a little wamble over the fire. Take it off, scum it, and put up
the Syrup, when it is cold.

You may also clarify the fine powdered Sugar with the white of an Egg and
fair Water, boil it to the strong consistency of a solid Electuary, and
afterward incorporate the Juice of Wood Sorrel prepared as I have said, and
make a Syrup as you do of the Juice of Lemons.

Wood Sorrel, otherwise called Oxytriphyllum, and Allelujah, is a Plant
well-known. If the Juice were as acid as that of Citrons, two pints of Juice
would be enough for the four pound of Sugar prescribed. But because it is much
less acid, and much more watery, there is a necessity of separating by
distillation one part of its aquosity, to make its acidity somewhat like that
of the Juice of Citrons.

The Syrup of Allelujah cools very much. It is very useful to quench thirst, to
cool the heats of the Stomach and Liver. It is very much commended in Burning
Fevers, Malignant and Epidemic Distempers. It comforts and strengthens the
Heart, and cures the Inflammations of the Mouth, Tongue, Palate, and Throat. The
distill'd-Water of the Juice may be very properly mixed with the Syrup, or you
may drink the Water alone. The Dose is the same with that of the Syrup of
Citrons.

Syrupus Cinamomi Regius. Royal Syrup of Cinnamon.. Aquae Cinnamomi stillatitiae
supra novum Cinnamomum electum cohobatae and iterum distillatae, lb j. Sacchari
Albissimi in aqua Melissae soluti and in Electuarium solidum cocti, lb ij. Fiat
ex art Syrupus. Take two pound of very fine Sugar, and boil them in eight
ounces of Balm-water, to the consistence of a solid Electuary, and when it is
almost cold, mix it with the Cinamon-water, and put up the Syrup in a bottle
well-stopp'd.

The Preparation of the Cinamon-water, which is the foundation of this Syrup,
is to be seen in the Third Part of this Pharmacopoea, whither I refer the
Reader.

Cinnamon is the Rind of a tree, as big as an Orange-tree, which grows in the
Island of Ceylon in the East Indies. The branches spread out of the body very
straight, thick, in good order, and without knots. They cut those branches from
the Trunk, when the Tree is in sap, and take off the Rind, which is the true
Cinnamon, which at first is flat, without color, and having little taste or
smell: but as it dries it rolls up like a Parchment, and losing its superfluous
moisture, which stifled the best part of its good qualities, recovers its
pleasing and penetrating smell, and its no less agreeable and biting taste. The
best is of a pale purple brisk color, smooth within and without, and of a
substance indifferently compact. It is not subject to rott'nness, for it will
keep a long time, provided it be well put up. The Wood is without any
considerable virtue, no more then the Flowers which are white and
sweet-scented, and followed by a Fruit in shape and bigness much like an Olive,
which are full of a green, sharp, bitter-oylie Liquor, but little regarded.

The Syrup of Cinnamon is a Cordial that operates quickly. It is administered
successfully in weaknesses and sounding fits, to recall the dissipated Spirits.
It very much strengthens the Stomach, and the Brain, and all the Noble-parts.
It stirs up the Appetite, helps Digestion, expels Wind, sweetens the Breath,
facilitates the Travels of Women, provokes the Menstruums, and remedies
Obstructions of the Matrix. You may take from two drams to an ounce, either in
a Spoon, or mixed with Opiates, or other Medicines.

Syrupus Coralliorum. Syrup of Coral.. Coralliorum rubrorum in subtilissimum
pollinem supra Porphyritem redactorum, iiij. Succi Berberini defacatissimi, lb
iij. In Cucurbit^^ vitream immissae in Balneo Cinerum horis quadraginta stent,
per vices Spatula lignea agitando; Deinde filtretur Liquor, and cum Sacchari
Candi subtiliter pulverati duplo pondere fiat in Balneo Mariae moderate calido
ex art Syrupus. Take four ounces of red-Coral well-chosen, break it upon a
Porphyrie-stone till it be reduced to perfect dust, moistning it now and then
with Rose Water. When it is dry, put it into a glass- Cucurbit, and pour upon
it three pints of Juice of Barberries well-clarify'd; put the Cucurbit in a
Bath of Ashes moderately hot, for forty hours, stirring the Ingredients from
time to time with a Woodd'n-Spatula. Then filter the Liquor through a
brown-Paper; weigh it, and having returned it into a glass- Cucurbit very
clean, and set the Cucurbit upon a lukewarm Balneo Mariae, dissolve in this
Liquor double the weight of fine Sugar Candy finely powdered. When the Syrup is
cold put it carefully up in a glass-bottle.

Coral, called also Lith^dendron, or the Petrified Tree, is taken by some for a
Mineral, by reason of the hardness of its substance resembling that of stone;
but it may pass for a Plant among those that consider how it grows like a Plant
in the bottom of the Sea. Nevertheless, we are not to credit those who have
affirmed that Coral fructifies, and brings forth Berries, for which they took
the Grains of Coral rounded about. No more then to those that believed that
Coral was soft in the place where it grows, and that it grows red and hard,
when it is taken out of the Sea, and exposed to the Air. For they that fish for
it have assured me, that it neither bears Berries, nor Seed, and that it is of
the same color, and as hard at the bottom of the Sea in every part of the
Plant, as when it is drawn up. I confess there are three sorts of it, red,
black, and white; but without question, the red surpasses all the rest in
virtue. It must be of a lively color, pure and clean, solid, weighty, smooth,
and easy to break.

The Syrup of Coral is commended against all weaknesses of the Stomach, Liver,
and Bowels, and for the cure of Diseases that proceed from thence, particularly
to stay Vomitings, Diarrheas, Dysenteries, Lienteries, Hepatic Fluxes, to stop
the loss of Blood in Men and Women, at Mouth, Nose, or any other part. The Dose
is from half an ounce to an ounce, to be taken alone in a spoon, or with other
convenient Liquors.

Syrupus Cydoniorum. Syrup of Quinces.. Succi Cydoniorum purissimi, Succhari
Albissimi, ana. iiij. In vase fictili vitreato, lento igne, ad Syrupi
Consistentiam coquantur. Remotus ab igne and semi-refrigeratus Syrupus si
libuerit aromatizetur Oleorum Cinnamomi and Caryophillorum an. guttii, Saccharo
pulverato prius exceptis. Take equal parts, viz. four pints of Juice of Quinces
well-clarify'd, and four pound of Sugar, and put them together into a pot of
glazed Earth, and boil them over a soft fire to a good consistence of a Syrup.
Then take the Syrup off the fire, and aromatize with Oil of Cinnamon and Cloves,
ana two drops, incorporated with an ounce of fine powdered Sugar.

If you would prepare a Syrup with less Juice of Quinces, and by consequence
less astringent. You may prepare this Syrup in the same manner as that of
Lemons, and put but one pint of Juice of Quinces to two pound of Sugar. But
because astriction is chiefly expected from the foregoing Syrup, the quantity
of the Juice must be equal to that of the Sugar, according to the prescription.
For thereby the Juice finding it self concentered and despoiled of the greatest
part of its superfluous moisture in the boiling, which was necessary to bring
it to the consistency of a Syrup, renders it more astringent, and fit for the
use to which it is designed.

The virtues of it being to restore the weakened force of the Stomach, to stay
vomiting, to help Digestion, to create an Appetite, to digest bad humors, and
to fit them for expulsion. It strengthens the Bowels, and is used with success
in Lienteries, Diarrhoea's, and all sorts of Fluxes of the Belly, caused by
acrimonious humors, or weakness of the Parts. The usual Dose is an ounce. It
may be taken alone, or mixed in Potions, or in a Ptisan to drink at any time.

Syrupus Antepilepticus, D. D. D'Aquin. Syrup against Epilepsie, D. D.
D'Aquin.. Visci Querci. Misletoe of the Oak, Radicis Paeoniae majoris, Roots of
bigger Piony, Seminis ejusdem, ana. ij. Seed of the same, an. ij. Radicis
Valerianae majoris, Roots of the bigger Valerian, Angelicae, Angelica,
Imperatoriae, Masterwort, Iridis Illyricae, Illyrian Orrice, Dictamni Alb. ana.
j. White Dittany, an. j. Foliorum Betonicae, Leaves of Betony, Ruta, Rue,
Florum Lillii convallium, Flowers of the Lilly Convally, Tilia, and
Linden-tree, and Lavendula, an. M. j. Lavender, an. M. j. Tartari Alb.
Monspeliensis pulversati, jss. White Tartar of Montpelire pulverized. j ss.

Bruise the Misletoe, as also the Roots and seeds of Piony, beat the Tartar in
a Mortar, shred the Leaves of Betony and Rue, and put them together with the
Flowers into a Mattress of a sufficient bigness. Then pour upon them three pints
of the distilled Water of black-Cheries, and as much of the Water of the
Flowers of the Linden-Tree, and stopping up the Mattress keep it twenty-four
hours in a lukewarm Balneum Mariae; then let the Bathe boil two or three
hours. After which having drained and squeezed the whole, clarify the Liquor
with the white of an Egg, mixed with four pound of Sugar, and boil it to the
consistency of a Syrup, which done, aromatize it with Oils of Cinnamon and
Lavender, an. three drops, and keep the Syrup in a Glass-bottle.

This Syrup is not only proper for the Epilepsie for which it is designed, but
for all Diseases of the Brain. The usual dose is one ounce alone, or in some
Cephalic-liquor. It may be mingled also in Potions, Opiates, and many other
Liquors.

Syrupus Hydragogus, D. D. D'AQUIN. A Syrup to draw forth watery humors, by
Monsieur D'AQUIN.. Radicum Mechoachan,. Roots of Mechoacan, Ireos Nostratis,
French-Orrice, Ebuli Recentis, Vulgar Dwarf-Elder, Medullae Seminis Carthami,
The Pulp of the Seed of Carthamum, Folliculorum Sennae Orientalis, Seed-Bag of
Eastern Senna, Foliorum Soldanellae siccorum, an. j ss. Dry-leaves of
Sea-Bindweed, ana. j ss. Turbith Gummosi, Gummie-Turbith, Hermodactylorum,
Hermodactyles, Jalapae, Jalap, Rhei Electi, an. vj. Picked Rhubarb, an. vj.
Radicum Valerianae major. Roots of the Bigger Valerian, Eringii, Eringo's,
Enulae Campanae, Elecampane, Assari, Asarabacca, Corticis Rad. Capparis, The
Bark of the Root of Capers, Tamarisci, Tamarisk, Santali Citrini,
Yellow-Saunders, Seminis Ebuli, Seed of Dwarf-Elder, Baccarum Juniperi, an. ss.
Juniper Berries, an. ss. Foliorum Ceterach, Leaves of Ceterach, Agrimoniae,
Agrimonie, Chamaedryos, Germander, Florum Genistae, an. M. j. Flowers of Broom,
an. M. j. Limaturae Chalybisnodulo inclusae, Filings of Steel tied in a Bag,
Tartari alb. Monspel. contusi, an. ij. White Montpelier-Tartar, an. ij.

Break the Yellow-Saunders, bruise the Roots, Barks, Berries and Seeds, beat
the Tartar in a Mortar, shred the Senna-bags, put the Filings of Steel in a
little Linen Cloth slightly tied, and having put them all into a Cucurbit of
Earth well-glaz'd within, mingle the Flowers with the rest. Then pour upon them
two pints of Succorie-water, and of the Juices of the Roots of Elder, and
Leaves of Chervil well-clarify'd, of each three pints, so that the Ingredients
may steep in the Liquors; cover the Cucurbit, and set it over hot embers for
four and twenty hours; at the end whereof boil the whole for an hour and a
half. Then drain and squeeze them strongly out, and having clarified the Liquor
with the white of an Egg with 4 pound of fine Sugar, boil it again over a soft
fire to the consistency of a Syrup, adding at the end of Tartar-vitrioliz'd and
Sal-Polychrestes, ana ij. When it is cold, aromatize it with three drops of
Distill'd-oyl of Cinnamon incorporated with an ounce of fine-powder'd Sugar.

Eastern-Senna is accounted the best; the Leaves are like those of
bastard-Senna, but more pointed and longer. The least bruised, the freeest from
sprigs and dead leaves is always the best: it ought (...) be of a pale-green
color, soft to feel, of a strong scent, but not displeasing. The Flowers are
small and yellow, like those of Bastard-Senna. The Seed-bags are the Cods,
which the Plant produces, flat, light, like a Half Moon, broad and long, about
half a finger's breadth, of a pale-green color inclining to red. They contain
the Seed, pale-green, long and flat, resembling a Heart. But the Bags are more
purgative then the Leaves, and more proper to purge Waters.

Turbith is the Bark of a Milkie-root, which is chos'n by its weight,
dark-colour'd without, white within, and clean from its pith, which is hard and
fibrous. The mark of Gum is but fictitious and added to it; for that little Gum
that is in it cannot be perceived till the Turbith in powder has been macerated
in Spirit of Wine, and so dissolved and separated from its grosser parts.

Mechoachan is a great and almost insipid Root, of an ash color without,
whitish within, brought in slices from New-Spain, where it grows in the Island
of Mechoacan. The newest is to be chos'n.

A Hermodactyle is a little Root made like a Heart, reddish without and very
white within; of a heavy and close Substance, but easily powdered, about the
bigness and somewhat resembling Anacardium, or the Roots of Satyrion: The
whitest, fullest grown, and without Worm-holes is to be chos'n.

Jalap grows in New-Spain. A Root about the bigness of Mechoachan. It is
brought to us in little round pieces, of which the newest, most weighty, and
gummy are the best.

The best Rhubarb is of a firm-wheighty Substance, spotted with red when it is
brok'n, of a bitter-astringent taste, and a good scent.

They that will be so curious as to examine the qualities and quantities of all
the Simples prescribed by the Chief Physician to his Majesty of France, for the
Composition of this Syrup, will have no reason to question the virtue thereof
in purging serous humors from all parts of the Body, particularly Hydropical,
for the cure whereof it was chiefly studied.

It may be given alone from one ounce to two in proper Liquor.

Syrupus Anti-Nephriticus, D. D. D'AQUIN. A Syrup against Gravel, and pains in
the Kidneys, by D. D'AQUIN.. Radicum Altheae,. Roots of Althea, Ononidis,
Rest-Harrow, Fragariae, Straw-berries, Bardanae, Burdock, Nymphaeae,
Water-Lilly, Quinque Aperientium, an. j ss. Five Openers, an. j ss. Fructuum
Alkekengi, Fruit of Alkekengi, Cynosbati, an. iij. Sweet-Bryer, an. iij.
Seminum Bardanae, Seeds of Burdock, Milii Solis, Grommel, Sileris montani,
Lovage, Quatuor Frig. major mundat. Four Greater Cold-seeds cleans'd, Nucleorum
Mespillorum and Persicorum, an. j. Kernels of Medlars and Peaches, an. j.
Foliorum Saxifragae, Leave of Saxifrage, Pimpinellae, Pimpernel, Cerefolii,
Chervile, Virgae Aureae, Gold'n-Rod, Hyperici, St. John's-wort, Capilli
Veneris, an. M. j. Maidenhair, M. j. Tart. albi pulverati, ij. White Tartar
pulverized, ij.

After you well washed and cleans'd all the Roots from their external and
internal superfluities, and bruised and sliced them well, put them into an
Earth'n-pot glazed withinside, with two ounces of Montpelier-Tartar pulverized;
and having poured upon them ten pints of the Distill'd-water of Pellitory of
the Wall, let them boil over a soft fire for the space of a good hour: After
which add to the Decoction the Fruits of Sweet-Bryar and Alkekengi well-cut,
and boil them a quarter (...) an hour among the Roots; then add to them the
Seeds of Burdock, Grommel and Lovage, slightly pounded, and the Leaves of
Chervile and St. John's-wort cut. Boil the whole about a quarter of an hour,
after which put in the Maidenhair; and having put them down into the Decoction,
cover. the Pot, take it off the fire, and when the Decoction is half-cold,
drain and squeeze it out. Then clarify the Liquor with the white of an Egg
with four pound of fine Sugar, and boil them over a soft fire to the
consistence of a Syrup. When it is cold, aromatize it with six drops of
Distill'd-oyl of Anise, incorporated with an ounce of fine-powder'd Sugar, and
put up the Syrup in a Bottle well-stopp'd.

The Diuretic virtues particularly known to belong to every one of the Simples
made choice of for the Composition of this Syrup, demonstrate the good effects
which may be expected from their union. Nor can we otherwise believe but that
this Syrup will give considerable ease to those that are troubled with Gravel
in their Reins, Ureters or Bladder, or any thick or viscous phlegm, which
stopping the Urinary-pipes, stops the ordinary course of the Water; or to those
that are subject to relapse into these Distempers. For prevention whereof, let
them continue the use of this Syrup for several days, taking every morning an
ounce in three or four ounces of white wind. In the pains take from an ounce to
two ounces in Emulsions or any other Liquors.

Syrupus de Absinthio. Syrup of Wormwood.. Summitatum Absinthii majoris
Sccarum, lb ss. Rosarum rubrarum exungulatarum, Tartari albi Monspeliensis, an.
ij. N^^dis Indicae, iij. Succi Cydoniorum nondum perfect maturorum, Vini albi
austeri, an. lb iij ss.. The tops of Wormwood gathered when it is in flower,
and dry them, half a pound; red-Roses cleans'd from their white bottoms, two
ounces; Indian-Nard three Drachms: put them all into a Vessel of Earth glazed
within-side, having a narrow mouth, and then adding two ounces of
Montpelier-Tartar, pour upon them of the Juices of Quinces not perfectly ripe,
and austere white wind, of each three pints and a half. Then with a
woodd'n-Spatula thrust down the Wormwood, Roses and Spikenard into the Liquors,
and having covered the Vessel, set it upon hot embers for 24 hours. Then boil
the Ingredients gently till the Liquors be a third part consumed. Drain and
press out the Decoction, and clarify it with the white of an Egg and four
pound of Sugar, and boil them over a gentle fire to the consistence of a Syrup
a little thicker then ordinary. Let the Syrup cool, and then mix with it half a
Dram of Oil of Wormwood, incorporated with two ounces of powdered Sugar; or
else with two ounces of the tincture of the tops of Wormwood drawn with the
Spirit of Wine. Then keep the Syrup in a Bottle well-stopp'd.

Here give me leave to answer the objections some have made against the
preparations of this Syrup. For they say, That in the Decoction of the
Wormwood, Roses and Spikenard, their volatile parts dissipate with the
spiritous part of the Win^; and that to preserve them, the Infusion and
Decoction of this Syrup must be made in a Cucurbit of glass, covered with its
Head in a Sand-bath, and that the ten first ounces of the Distill'd-waters must
be kept apart, as also the two next pints that follow, continuing the
Distillation till there remains but one pint of moisture in the Cucurbit. Then,
say they, that which remains in the Cucurbit must be pressed out, and the Liquor
clarified and evaporated till it be reduced to four ounces; that those 4 ounces
must be dissolved with 2 pound of Sugar, and the ten ounces of the first Water
reserved apart, and that after they have boiled a very little while, the Syrup
is made: Only the two last pints of the second Water must be reserved to mingle
with the Syrup, when occasion requires.

The dissipation of the volatile parts of the Wormwood, Roses, and Spikenard
with the Wine, seems at first a specious Argument. But upon examination, we
shall sind that the Remedy proposed is worse then the mischief sought to be
prevented, besides the trouble of the Preparation. For, besides that the
volatile parts, the loss whereof is so much feared, are not such as the design
of the Syrup requires, which is principally to strength'n the Stomach, Liver
and Bowels, which is the office of the material and grosser parts of
Medicaments, and chiefly of their fixed salt, you shall find a greater
dissipation of the good parts in the preparation of these Authors, then in that
of the Ancients. For though they keep the first ten ounces of the
Distill'd-water; they take away two pints of that which follows next, the
virtue whereof is no more to be found in the Syrup. Then again, they dissipate
many of the considerable parts by clarifying the rest of the Decoction, and
causing it to evaporate to four ounces, whereby it is impossible to concenter
the virtues of so many ingredients, especially for one Syrup. Then the boiling,
how soft soever, which afterward they allow the Syrup to unite the four ounces
of the first Water; carries off the most subtle parts of the Spiritous-water,
which they took so much care to preserve. Whereby the deficiency of their
Preparation easily appears.

Yet I must confess the Ancients might have done better with less trouble, had
they gone according to the prescription here set down. For though we cannot
boast by this means to preserve all the Spiritous parts of the Wormwood, Roses
and Spikenard, no more then those of the Wine; nevertheless a good part are
retained, and the addition of the Distill'd-oyl of Wormwood sufficiently
supplies the defects of those Spirits which the Wormwood lost in Distillation.
Besides all this, the green-sowrewine, which we use instead of the ripe-wine
prescribed by the Ancients, the unripe Quinces, and the Tartar being ordered as
we have done, the Acid part which abounds in all these, uniting with the fixed
Salt of the Tartar it self, will stop the motion of the greatest part of the
volatile Spirits which were subject to dissipation, and enable them to resist
the heat of the Infusion and Decoction. And these volatiles thus retained,
finding themselves joined to the terrestrial and fixed parts of the other
Medicaments, will be able to second and assist their operation: which they will
do more powerfully, when they meet with the sulphurie parts of the
Distill'd-oyl of Wormwood.

But to satisfy those who believe that all the spiritous part of Wine is
absolutely necessary in this Syrup, and fear that the Coction may have
dissipated some parts; That dissipation may be supplied by adding to the Syrup,
boiled a little more then ordinary and cold again, two ounces of the Tincture
of the tops of Wormwood, drawn with the Spirit of Wine. Which re-inforc'd by
the Oil, will render the Syrup much more effectual.

If the Greater Wormwood be too bitter, you may may make use of the Lesser for
Persons that are more nice, observing still the same Preparation.

Spikenard is brought from the East Indies. It is a Root that shoots up many
hairyspikes set together of a brownish-colour. There is nothing appears above
the ground but the stalk, for the spikes grow even with the Earth, about an
inch and a half long, of a strong scent, like that of Galingale, the taste
whereof is bitter and biting.

Syrup of Wormwood strength'ns the Stomach and Liver, creates an Appetite,
helps digestion, kills Worms, corrects the acidities of the Stomach, expels
winds, fortifies the Bowels, stops Looseness, and is profitable in
Hysteric-distempers. The dose is one or two spoonfuls in a morning fasting,
either unmixed, or in Wine, or any other proper Liquor. It is also used in
Potions, Opiates, Pills, and several other Medicaments.

Syrupus de Althaea. Syrup of Marshmallows.. Radicum Althaeae, ij.. Roots of
Marshmallows, ij. Graminis, Meadow-grass, Asparagi, Asparagus, Glycyrrhizae,
Liquorice, Vvarum passarum, Raisins of the Sun, Cicerum rubrorum, an. j. Red
Cich-pease, an. j. Summitatum Althaeae, Tops of Althea, Malvae, French-Mallows,
Parietariae, Pellitorie of the wall, Pimpinellae, Pimpernel, Adianti vulgaris,
Common Maidenhair, Capilli Veneris Monspeliensis, an. M. j.
Monpelier-Maidenhair, an. M. j. Quatuor Semin frigid. Minorum, and Four Lesser
Cold-seeds Majorum, an. ij. Greater, an. ij.

Wash and cleanse the Roots of Althea, Asparagus and Meadow-grass, from their
dirt, pith and strings, slice them well; and having boiled the Grass-roots a
good quarter of an hour first in 8 pints of Water, put into the Decoction the
slic'd-roots of Althea and Asparagus, and let them boil soundly for half an
hour; then add the dry Raisins cut, and the* Cich-pease whole; when they have
boiled a little while, put in the tops of the Mallows, Althea, Pellitorie and
Pimpernel slightly shred, and boil them about a quarter of an hour among the
rest: after that add the Liquorice sliced, and the Maidenhairs cut, and when
they begin to boil, put in the Cold-seeds: thrust them down into the Decoction,
and take the whole off the fire, and let them drain a quarter of an hour
afterward. Then clarify the Liquor with the white of an Egg and four pounds
of Sugar, and let them boil over a moderate fire to the consistence of a Syrup,
a little more then ordinary. Stir the Syrup softly from time to time, the
better to evaporate the superfluous moisture, and put up the Syrup when it is
quite cold.

This Preparation differs from that of Fernelius and some other Writers; the
quantity of the Roots and Raisins being here changed from half an ounce to an
ounce; the Plantain is left out, and eight pints of Water prescribed instead of
six. All which quantities are too small for four pound of Sugar. And Plantain
known to be an astringent herb, is not to be admitted among opening,
slippery-making Roots. And ten pints of Water are but little enough to extract
the virtues of so many Medicaments, and yet retain the just consistence of a
Syrup.

Some think this Preparation impossible, by reason of the viscosity of most of
the particular Ingredients; but they that observe my method, will find not only
the possibility, but the success which they suspect.

The Cich-pease are prescribed whole, because their opening quality abounds
enough without-side without being brok'n: which if they should be, their
terrestrial part being open, might prevail above their aperitive Faculty.

Some would have the Roots, Herbs, and other Ingredients put into a little Bag,
and so boiled, believing their Mucilaginous part would remain in the Bag; by
which means the Syrup would be less viscous, and more easily prepared. But the
difference of the Substances requires different degrees of boiling; and
therefore it would be ill-done to boil them one among another equally, whereby
the virtue of the one might be dissipated before the virtues of the other were
fully imparted to the Liquor: besides that there be others whose terrestial
parts would remain in the Syrup, especially the Cichpease. And then again,
though all the Ingredients were of the same nature, it would be a difficult
thing for them, being so stopped up, to communicate their virtue equally; which
in regard it could not be done otherwise then by squeezing the Ingredients,
would render the Syrup more mucilaginous.

Syrup of Althea is very much esteemed for discharging the Reins and Ureters of
gravelly-flegmatic and tenacious Substances. For it moderately op'ns and makes
all the passages slippery; tempers the shapness of them, as well as of the
Urine it self: and cools the heat that burns in the passages. It is no less
commended in Diseases of the Breast, and Gonorrhea's. It is to be taken fasting,
alone, or in Decoctions, Emulsions, Whey, White Wind, etc. The usual dose is an
ounce, though you may take two upon occasion.

Syrupus Aperiens Cachecticus, D. D. D'Aquin. A^ Opening Syrup against
ill-habit of Body, by Monsieur D'Aquin.. Radicum Apii,. Roots of Parsley,
Foeniculi, Fennel, Petroselini, Stone-Parsly, Rubiae Tinctorum, Dyers-Madder,
Aristolochiae tenuis, an. ij. Thin-Birthwort, an. ij.

Wash and cleanse the Roots of Parsley, Fennel, Stone-Parsly, Madder and
Birthwort, and having bruised them and put them into an Earth'n-vessel glazed
within, with a straight mouth, moist'n them with Vinegar of Squills, and having
covered the Pot, keep them in maceration 24 hours in some hot place, as over a
Baker's Oven; then let them boil over a gentle fire in eight pints of water,
where Steel has been quenched, to the consumption of the fourth part. Then

. Foliorum Arthemisiae,. The Leaves of Mugwort, Absinthii, Wormwood,
Agrimoniae, Agrimonie, Pulegii, Pennyroyal, Chamaedryos, an. M. j. Germander,
an. M. j. Rutae, M ss. Rue, M ss.

Shred them and put them in, and when they have boiled about a quarter of an
hour among the Roots, add thereto

Injice, Epithymi, Dodder of time, Florum Matricariae, Flowers of Featherfew,
Chaemomillae, Camomile, Hyperici, an. P. ij. St. John's-wort, an. Little
Handfulls, ij.

After some few bubblings, take it off the fire, strain and squeeze out the
whole; clarify the straining with five pound of Sugar, and boil them over a
gentle fire to the consistence of a Syrup.

Si purgante^^ cupias, If you desire it purgative, boil it still to the
consistence of a soft Electuary. Then. Rhabarbari electi minutim incisi,.
Choice Rhubarb small cut, Foliorum Orientalium, an. ij. Indian-Leaves, an. ij.
Radicum Jalapa, Roots of Jalap, Mechoachana, Mechoachan, Hermodactilorum, and
Hermodactyles, and Brioniae albae contusarum, an. j. White Bryony bruised, an.
ij. Tartari Vitriolati, vj. Tartar-vitrioliz'd, vj.

Infuse all these in a Glaz'd-earthen-vessel for four and twenty hours over hot
embers in three pints of Balm-water, and let them boil about a quarter of an
hour. Strain and press out the Infusion, and clarify the Liquor. Then mix it
with the Syrup boiled to the consistence of a soft Electuary, and boil it again
to the consistence of a Syrup. When it is cool, aromatize. it with four drops
of Oil of Cinnamon incorporated with half an ounce of fine Sugar, or with as
much of the Tincture of Saffron; then put it up and stop it well.

This Syrup is a collection of choice Medicaments, which has had good success
in opening obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Mesenterie and Matrix. It purges
gently viscous and tenacious humors, which are the original of Cachexies,
Dropsies and quotidian Agues. It is very proper to cure pale Complexions, and
against suppression or irregularity of the Menstruum's. And though the
Chalybeat-water does but a very little matter augment the virtue of the Syrup,
yet you may reinforce it with Tincture, Salt or Vitriol of Mars, if th^^ be
occasion.

Either of these Syrups the first or ^^e Purgative, may be taken alone, or
mixed with Distilled waters or White Wind, or any proper Decoction, from one
ounce to two.

Syrups de Arthemisia. Syrup of Mugwort.. Radicum Apii,. Of the Roots of
Parsley, Foeniculi, Fennel, Petroselini, Stone-Parsly, Enulae Campanae,
Elecampane, Ireos Nostratis, French-Orrice, Paonia, and Peonie, and Rubia
major, an. j. The Bigger Madder, an. j. Foliorum Arthemisia, Leaves of Mugwort,
Pulegis, Peny-royal, Calamintha, Calaminte, Origani, Organy, Melissa, Balm,
Dictamni Cretici, Cretan-Dittany, Sabina, Savine, Persicaria, Arsmart,
Majorana, Marjoram, Chamadryos, Germander, Chamapityos, Ground Ivy, Hyssopi,
Hyssop, Hyperici, St. John's-wort, Ruta, Rue,

Matricaria florida, Double Featherfew, Centaurii minoris, Lesser Centaurie,
Betonicae, Betonie, Prassii albi, an. M. j. White-Horehound, an. M. j. Seininum
Anisi, Seed of Annise, Foeniculi, Fennel, Dauci, Wild-Carrot, Petroselini,
Stone-Parsley, Ocymi, Basil, Ruta, an. iij. Rue, an. iij. Tartari albi
Monspeliensis, ij. Tartar white of Montpelier, ij.

Wash, cleanse and bruise all the Roots, and infuse them with the Tartar
pulverized four and twenty hours over hot embers in an Earth'n-glaz'd-vessel
well-cover'd, in three pints of clear Hydromel newly made. Cut the Herbs and
bruise the Seeds, and put them in another Earth'n-glaz'd-pot by themselves in
ten pints of the same Hydromel, covering the Pot and setting it upon hot embers
for twelve hours. Then boil the Infusion of the Roots over a gentle fire for
half an hour. Having so done, mix the Infusion of the Herbs with it, and boil
both together for a good quarter of an hour. After that take the Decoction from
the fire, and when it is half-cold, strain and squeeze it well, and having
clarified the Liquor with the white of an Egg in five pounds of Sugar, boil
them over a moderate fire to the consistence of a Syrup, and aromatize it with
six drops of Distill'd-oyl of Cinnamon, incorporated with an ounce of fine
powdered Sugar. But this mixture must not be made till the Syrup be quite cold.

Hydromel is preferred before Water and the powdered Tartar added, as well the
better to penetrate the Ingredients, as to bind their volatile parts, and to
hinder dissipation during the Decoction. The Aromatization of the Syrup with
Oil of Cinnamon is beyond the method of the Ancients, who were wont to boil the
Cinnamon in their Decoctions, not considering that the sulphurie and volatile
parts of the Cinnamon dissipate in boiling, and leave in the Decoction only some
terrestrial parts of the Cinnamon, inferior to the smell and sharp and
penetrating taste of the Oil of Cinnamon.

The Preparation of this Syrup is different from those which may be met with in
several Pharmacopoeas: But you will find that the change is much for the
better, and that I have observed the best rules of Pharmacy.

This Syrup is chiefly made use of in the Diseases of Women: to open
obstructions of the Matrix, to dispel Wind, to repress vapors and to quiet
suffocations, as also to provoke and regulate the menstruum's, and evacuate the
impurities of the Matrix. It is good against obstructions of the Spleen, Liver
and Bowels, as well for Men as Women. The dose is from one ounce to two, alone,
or in White Wind, in Opening-waters or Decoctions. It is also sometimes mixed i^
Pills, Opiates and other Medicines.

Syrupus de Cichorio compositus cum Rhabarbaro. Syrup of Cichorio compounded
with Rhubarb.. Hordei integri,. Whole Barley, Radicum Apii, Roots of Parsley,
Foeniculi, Fennel, Asparagi, Asparagus, Tartari albi crudi, an. ij. Raw white
Tartar, an. ij. Foliorum Cichorii, Leaves of Cichorie, Taraxaci, Dandelion,
Endivia, Endive, Sonchi Levis, Smooth Sow-thistle, Lactuca Sativa; and
Gard'n-Lettice, and Sylvestris Spinas in dorso ferentis, Wild-Lettice with
prickles, Hepaticae, Liverwort, Fumariae, Fumitorie, Lupuli, an. M. j. Hopps,
an. M. j. Capill. Ven. Monspeliensis, Venus-Hair of Montpelier, Polytrici,
Gold'n-Maidenhair,

Adianti vulgaris, Common-Maidenhair, Ceterach, Spleenwort, Glycyrrhiza,
Liquorice, Baccarum Alkekengi, Alkekengi-Berries, Seminis Cuscutae, an. vj.
Dodder-seed, an. vj.

First boil the Barley whole with the Tartar beat'n to powder in ten pints of
Water for half an hour, then adding the Roots of Parsley, Fennel and Asparagus,
well-cleans'd from dust and pith, and sliced or bruised, let them boil another
half hour; next put in the Alkekengi-Berries bruised, and the Herbs cut, and
boil them a quarter of an hour among all the rest: After that put in the
Liquorice cleans'd and sliced, the Dodder-seed, and the Maidenhairs, and having
let them boil a little while, take the the Decoction from the fire, and when it
is half-cold, strain and press it forth. Clarify it with the white of an Egg
with six pound of Sugar, and boil it over a moderate fire to the consistence of
a Syrup between soft and solid.

Interim, In the mean time,. Rhubarbari electi incisi, vj.. Of choice Rhubarb
cut, vj. Tartari albi Monspel. j. White Tartar of Montpelier, j. Spica Narda,
vj. Spikenard, vj.

Infuse them in three pints of the Distill'd-water of Succorie in an
Earth'n-glaz'd-pot, narrow-mouthed and well covered over hot coals for 24
hours; then let them boil a few bublings, and having strained and pressed the
whole, and clarified the Liquor with the white of an Egg and four ounces of
white Sugar, put this to the Syrup, while it is hot; and if it be not then
thick enough boil it on to a good consistence, and put it up when it is quite
cold.

Some there are that reserve a part of their Decoction to infuse the Rhubarb
and Spikenard into it. But considering that a Liquor charged with the virtue of
so many Ingredients is not in a condition to receive a new that of the Rhubarb
and Spikenard, and that of necessity it must leave a good part in the Sediment,
certainly the Succoriewater here prescribed, is much more proper at this time,
not being pestered with any other qualities than what is natural to it.

There is no Syrup more in use in all places then this of Succorie-compos'd:
Though by what miscarriage I know not, none of the Pharmacopoea's have yet
agreed in the Composition. But this you may be certain is right: and by the way
take notice, That the Tartar is added here also for the better penetration of
the simples, to impart their virtue to the Water more effectually, and to stop
the dissipation of their volatile parts.

The remarquable virtues of this Syrup, have caused some to give it the Name of
The Balsom of the Liver and Spleen, the obstructions whereof it powerfully
op'ns, as also of the Pancreas and Mesenterie. It is recommended against the
Jaundice and Cachexies; as also to soft'n and discuss the hardness and swelling
of the Belly which happ'ns to little Children through obstructions caused by
the Worms. It is successfully used in Apozems appointed to prepare bad humors
for digestion, especially choleric ones, and to open the passages necessary for
their evacuation. It is purgative, compounded with Rhubarb, for which reason it
is given sometimes alone to little Children, sometimes mixed with Purgative
infusions, especially in Diarrhea's, Lienteries, Dysenteries, and other
choleric Distempers that harrass the Intestines. And it has this good quality,
that as it purges the ill humors, it strength'ns all the lower parts of the
Belly. The dose is from one ounce to two.

They that desire a simple Syrup of Succorie may prepare it with equal parts of
fine Sugar and Juice of Succorie depurated by settlement, clarified together
with the white of an Egg, and boiled to the consistence of a Syrup.

Syrupus Roborans. A Strengthening Syrup.. Rhabarbari elect. incisi, iiij..
Choice Rhubarb cut, iiij. Baccarum Myrti contusarum, Mirtle-berries bruised,
Rosarum Rubrarum exungulatarum, an. iij. Red-Roses cleans'd, an. iij. Tartari
Alb. contusi, j. White-Tartar bruised, j.

Slice the Rhubarb, bruise the Berries, beat the Tartar in a Mortar, and put
them with the Roses cleans'd from their whites, into a Glaz'd-earth'n-pot with
a narrow mouth, in six pints of Water wherein Steel has been quenched. Cover
the Pot, and set it over hot embers for 24 hours; then let them boil a little;
which done, strain and press the Sediment strongly. Clarify the Liquor with
the white of an Egg and four pound of Sugar, and boil them up over a soft fire
to the consistency of a Syrup.

Though the Purgative-vertue of Rhubarb may not seem necessary for the purposes
of this Syrup, yet it had been ill-left out; in regard it may, as it were,
insensibly evacuate some ill-humours, while it is more terrrestial parts
assisted by other Medicaments, fortify the parts that were weakened and
relaxed. The purpose of the Tartar is the same as before.

This Syrup is highly esteemed for the strengthening and restoring the Stomach
and Liver debilitated. It is very much used in the cure of Diarrheas,
Lienteries, Dysenteries, and Hepatic-fluxes; it creates an Appetite, and helps
Digestion. It is good to help the retentive Faculty of the Stomach, and in
losses of Blood. You may take it fasting, alone, or mixed with proper Liquors.
The usual dose is an ounce, which you may enlarge to two.

Syrupus Myrtinus. Syrup of Myrtle.. Baccarum Myrti,. Myrtle-Berries,
Mespillorum ad maturitatem vergentium, and Medlars near ripe, and Radicis
Symphiti majoris, an. iiij. Root of Greater Cumfrey, an. iiij. Suntali Citrini,
Yellow-Saunders, Fructuum Oxyacanthae recentium, Fresh-Barberies, Granorum
Sumach, Seeds of Sumach, Balaustiorum, and Double Flowers of
wild-Pome-granates, And Rosarum rubrarum mundatar. an. ij. Red-Roses clean
picked, an. ij.

Take the Myrtle-Berries dry, the Medlars when they are almost ripe, bruise
them well, as also the Sumach-seeds, the Barberries, the Pome-granate flowers,
the Yellow-Saunders, and the Roots of great Confrey, and putting them all
together with the Roses clean-pickt into an Earth'n-glaz'd-pot; pour upon them
three pints of fair Water, and of the Juice of Quinces and wild-Pears, of each
two pints. Thrust down the Ingredients into the Liquors, cover the Pot and set
it four and twenty hours upon hot embers, at the end whereof boil the Infusion
a good quarter of an hour, and when it is half-cold, strain and squeeze it
strongly out; and having clarified the Liquor with the white of an Egg with
five pound of the finest Sugar, boil them over a moderate fire to the
consistence of a Syrup.

Syrup of Myrtles cools, dries and binds, for which reason it is successfully
made use of to stay thin Defluxions upon the Lungs, and to stop the coughing
which proceeds from thence. It is also very proper to stay Loosenesses,
Spitting and vomiting of Blood, and all other internal Haimorraghia's. It stops
the excessive flowings of the menstruum's, and all want of retention in the
Stomach and Bowels. It is highly esteemed for the cooling of Inflammations, and
healing Ulcers of the Mouth, Tongue or Throat. It is taken alone from one ounce
to two, or else in Distill'd-waters or proper Decoctions.

Syrupus Jujubinus. Syrup of Jujubs.. Jujubas, No. lx.. Jujubs, No. lx. Hordei
mundati, Barley picked, Glycyrrhizae, Liquorice, Capilli Veneris Monspel. an. j.
Venus-Hair of Montpelier, an. j. Violarum recentium, M. j. Fresh-Violets, M. j.
Seminum Malvae, Seeds of Mallows, Cydoniorum, Quinces, Papaveris albi,
White-Poppie, Melonis, Of Melon, Lactuca, an. iij. Of Lettice, an. iij.

Put the picked Barley with six pints of Water into an Earth'n-glaz'd-pot, and
let it boil over a gentle fire for a good half hour; then put in the Jububs
sliced, and let them boil a good quarter of an hour; then add the Liquorice
scraped and bruised, the Venus-Hair cut, and the Seeds bruised, and let them
bubble a while. Then add the fresh-Violets, thrusting them down into the
Decoction, at the same time taking off the Pot from the fire; and when the
Decoction is somewhat cool, strain it, and having clarified the Liquor with the
white of an Egg with three pound of fine Sugar, boil it over a gentle-fire to
the consistence of a Syrup.

Should the Decoction of the Ingredients prescribed for the making of this
Syrup be made without regard had to the viscosity of the Seeds, and without
following exactly the order to be observed in the boiling, it would be so
clammy that the Syrup could never keep long. Much less would it keep, and much
more irregular would the consistence be, if as the Ancients did, you should add
Gum-Tragacanth. For two drams of that Gum were enough to make it as thick as a
Loohc, and keep it from being transparent. But observing my method, the virtue
which is required in the Ingredients, will not fail to remain in the Syrup, and
the consistence will be proper.

Syrup of Jujubs is chiefly made use of for Persons that are troubled with a
dry cough, and are troubled with hot and thin Defluxions upon the Aspera
Arteria or Rough Artery, or upon the Lungs; for it thick'ns thin phlegm, and
qualifies the acrimonie thereof, and helps to expectorate. It is taken from
half an ounce to an ounce, alone, or else in Pectoral-Ptisanes, Juleps,
Apozems, or mixed with Looches.

Syrupus Florum Tussilaginis Simplex. Simple Syrup of Flowers of Coltsfoot..
Florum Tussilaginis recentium, lb j ss.. Fresh Flowers of Coltsfoot, lb j ss.

Put the Flowers into an Earth'n-pot glazed within, having a straight mouth;
and covering the Pot, set it upon hot cinders for twelve hours, at the end
whereof give the Infusion some few bubling-boilings, strain it and press it
out. Then putting the like quantity of fresh Colts foot Flowers into the same
Pot, pour upon them the strained Liquor. Cover the Pot and set it upon the hot
embers, as long as before; then letting the Infusion boil a little, strain it,
squeeze it, and clarify the Liquor with the white of an Egg with four pound of
fine Sugar, and let it boil over a soft fire to the consistence of a Syrup.

The Syrup of Flowers of Coltsfoot is highly extolled to cut and loos'n
tough-flegm from the rough Artery and Lungs, for which reason it gives great
ease to those that are Asthmatic, and such as cannot freely breath. It is taken
alone by intervals fasting, from two drams to half an ounce. It is also mixed
in Looches, and Pectoral Ptisanes.

Syrupus de Tussilagine Compositus. Compound Syrup of Coltsfoot.. Radicum
Tussilaginis, lb ss.. Roots of Coltsfoot, lb ss. Foliorum and florum ejusdem,
an. M. iiij. Leaves and Flowers of the same, an. M. iiij. Capilli Veneris
Monspel. M. ij. Montpelier Venus-Hair, M. ij. Glycyrrhizae. j. Liquorice, j.
Aqua Fontanae, lb viij. Fountain Water, lb viij.

Gather the Roots toward the end of Winter, the same Flowers and Leaves, when
they are shot forth. Dry the Roots and Flowers, and keep them till the Leaves
are ready. Then bruise the Roots well, and boil them for half an hour in eight
pints of Fountain Water. Then adding the Leaves cut, let them boil a quarter of
an hour with the Roots. Then put in the Liquorice scraped and bruised, the
Venus-hair cut, and the Flowers. Give them a gentle boiling, and at the same
time take off the Decoction from the fire. Strain it and press it when it is a
little cool. And having clarified the Liquor with the white of an Egg with five
pound of the finest Sugar, boil it to the consistency of a Syrup, a little
thicker then ordinary, by reason of the viscosity of the Coltsfoot.

The different substance of the Ingredients that compound this substance,
require different spaces of b^^ling: so that we cannot either infuse or boil
them all together at the same time, unless we should despise the principal
rules of Pharmacy, which teach us to begin our Decoctions and Infusions with
the most solid Medicaments.

The same virtues may be attributed to this Syrup, as to the former; only we
may believe that it acts with more force, by the Conjunction of the Roots and
Leaves of Coltsfoot, the Liquorice, and the Maidenhair. But in lieu of that,
it is somewhat more unpleasant. The Dose and use is much the same.

Syrupus Antiasthmaticus, D. D. D'AQUIN. An Anti-Asthmatic Syrup of Monsieur D'
AQUIN.. Hordei Mundati, ij. Picked Barley, ij. Radicum Petasitidis, Roots of
Butter-Bur, Enulae Campana, Elecampane, Apii Parsley, Faeniculi Fennel,
Liquoritiae, and Liquorice, and Vvarum Damascenarum Mundatarum, an. j ss. The
best and biggest sort of Raisins of the Sun, an. j ss. Dactylos Enucleatos No.
xij. Stoned Dates, No. xij. Jujubas, Jujubs, Sebesten, ana. No. xxx. Sebestens,
an. No. xxx. Foliorum Tussilaginis, Leaves of Coltsfoot, Pulmonaria, Lungwort,
Summitatum Hyssopi, Tops of Hysop, Prassii Albi, White Hore-hound, Capill. ven.
Monspel. an. M. j. Montpelier Maidenhair, an. M. j. Seminum Anisi, Seeds of
Anise, Bombacis, an. ss. Cotton-Tree, an. ss. Florum Tussilaginis, Flowers of
Coltsfoot, Pedis cati. an. M. ss. Cats-foot, an. M. ss.

Boil the picked Barley half an hour in nine pints of Water, then adding the
Roots cleans'd and cut, boil them half an hour longer: next put the Dates
stoned and cut, with the Jujubs, Sebestens, and Raisins stoned, and having
boiled them among the rest, for a quarter of an hour, put in the Herbs shred,
and let them boil another quarter; add then the Liquorice and Seeds bruised,
the Maidenhair and Flowers, and after some few bublings, take the decoction
from the fire. Strain it being somewhat cooled. Then clarify the Liquor with
the white of an Egg and five pound of fine Sugar, and boil it over a gentle
fire to the consistence of a Syrup.

This Syrup is very proper to cut and loosen cold, viscous and tough phlegm,
from all the parts serving to respiration. It principally helps those that are
Asthmatick, and those that are troubled with inveterate Coughs, for it opens
the passages and removes the phlegm that stops them. It may be called the Balsom
of the Breast, and particularly for old Men. Take a spoonful at a time every
foot by night or day, so that you may be said to be fasting, and continue it as
occasion requires.

Syrupus Resumptivus, sive de Testudinibus. The Resumptive Syrup, or Syrup of
Tortoises.. Carnis Testudinum Nemoralium, lb j.. Of the flesh of
Wood-Tortoises, lb j. Cancrorum fluviatilium viij. River-Crabs, viij. Hordei
Mundati, Picked Barley, Carnis Dactylorum and Pulp of Dates, and the Passularum
Damascenarum, an. ij. Fairest largest Raisins of the Sun, an. ij. Jujubas and
Jujubs, Sebesten, an. No. xij. Sebesten, an. No. xij. Glycyrrhizae rasae and
contusae, j. Liquorice scraped and bruised, j. Nucleorum Pineorum,
Pine-Kernels, Pistaciarum Mundatarum, Pistaches cleans'd, Seminis Bombacis,
Seed of the Cotton-Tree, Melonis, Melon, Cucumeris, Cucumber, Citrulli,
Citrulls, Florum Nymphaeae, and Flowers of Water-Lilly, and Violarum, an. ss.
Violets, an. ss. Seminum Lactucae, Seeds of. Lettice, Papaveris Albi, an. ij.
White-Poppy, an. ij.

Take the flesh of Wood-Tortoises, parted from the Bones, the Skin, and the
Entrails, and the River-Crabs; put them into a glazed Earth'n-Pot, with two
ounces of picked Barley. Pour upon them six pints of Fountain Water, and having
covered the Pot, boil the whole over a gentle fire for two hours. Then add the
Fruits cleans'd and cut, and boil them with the rest for a quarter of an hour.
After which, put in the Pine-kernels, the Pistache's, and the Seeds bruised,
next to them the Liquorice and the flowers of Nymphaea, and lastly, the
Violets; and having given them some few Bublings, take the Pot from the fire,
and when the Decoction is somewhat cool, strain and clarify it with the white
of an Egg and three pound of Sugar. Then boil it to the consistency of a Syrup.
And when it is cold aromatize it with six drops of Oil of Anniseed,
incorporated with an ounce of fine powdered Sugar.

This Syrup is not so much in use; whether it is for the difficulty of getting
Wood-Tortoises, or for the aversion that several sick people have to those sort
of Animals; or else for that it will not keep long: as being only to be
prepared upon occasion and for particular Patients.

However, the virtues of it are very considerable to restore strength to
Persons wasted, and extenuated by long sickness: It helps the Ptisical, and
those that labor under a Marasmus, for it moist'ns, and cools, and
extinguishes preter-natural heat. It is to be taken between Meals in a spoon,
from half an ounce to an ounce, continuing the use of it for a good while and
often. It may be also mixed in Juleps or Emulsions.

Syrupus Nymphaeae. Syrup of Water Lillies.. Florum mediorum Albissinorum
Nymphaeae, lb ij. The middle whitest flowers of Water Lillies. lb ij.

Take only the white part of the Flowers of Nymphaea, and weigh out two pound,
and having put them into an Earth'n-pot glazed within, with a narrow mouth,
pour upon them nine pints of boiling Water; thrust the Flowers down into the
Water, and having covered the pot, set it upon hot embers for twenty four
hours: then letting the infusion buble awhile, strain it out, and pour it hot
upon the same quantity of fresh Flowers of Nymphaeae, put into the same pot;
and having covered it, repeat the same infusion, boiling and straining; then
clarify the Liquor with the white of an Egg, and four pound of Sugar, and boil
it to the consistence of a Syrup, adding at the latter end of the boiling four
ounces of clarified Juice of Granates. This Syrup may be a little better boiled
then ordinary to prevent the viscosity of the infusion from spoiling the Syrup.

Syrup of Water Lillies cools and moistens very much, for which reason the use
of it is very proper, as well in continued as intermitting Fevers. It qualifies
the boiling of the choler, and appeases the pains that proceed from thence,
particularly those of the Head. It quenches thirst and allays Venereal desire.
It provokes a soft sleep, and is good against the heat of the Reins, and
Genitals. It thick'ns the humors, and takes away their acrimony. It may be
taken alone from half an ounce, to an ounce and a half. But usually it is mixed
with distilled waters, Emulsions, or in Decoctions, like a Julep.

Syrupus Papaveris Albi. Syrup of white-Poppies.. Capitum Papaveris Albi ad
maturitatem vergentium, sed adhuc virentium incisorum, lb iiij.. Of the heads
of White-Poppies enclining to ripeness, but yet green, and cut, lb iiij.
Capitum papaveris Nigri ejusdem maturitatie. lb ij. Heads of Black-Poppies of
the same ripeness, lb ij.

Gather the heads of both the Poppies before they be ripe. Throw away the tail,
and the small Crown upon the top of every head. Cut them, and put them into an
Earth'n-pot glazed within, and pour upon them fifteen pints of boiling water,
cover the pot, and set it upon the hot Embers for four and twenty hours, then
having boiled them a quarter of an hour, strain and press them out; Clarify
the Liquor with the white of an Egg, and six pound of fine Sugar, and boil it
to the consistence of a Syrup.

The use of Syrup of white-Poppy is very frequent, being very proper to ease
pains and stay defluxions, which interrupt sleep. It takes away the acrimony of
the humors; and by insensible transpiration expels thin, sharp, and corroding
humors. It mortifies acids, stops the violence of Coughing, allays the motion
of Phlegm, and gives great help to those that spit blood. The Dose is from half
an ounce to an ounce in proper Liquors.

This Syrup is to be in every thing preferred before the Diacodium of the
Ancients.

Syrupus Papaveris Rhaeados. Syrup of wild-Poppy, or Corn-Rose.. Florum
Papaveris Rheaedos recentium, lb j.. Flowers of wild-Poppy, new-gather'd, lb j.

Put them into a glazed Earth'n-pot, and pour upon them four pints of boiling
fountain water, cover the pot and set it for 6 hours over hot embers; then
having caused them to boil a little while, strain and press them, and pour the
liquor upon the same quantity of Poppy-Flowers put into the same Vessel; let
them macerate and boil as before; then strain and press them again, and having
clarified the Liquor with the white of an Egg, with four pound of Sugar, boil
it up to a Syrup somewhat thicker then ordinary, by reason of the excess of
superfluous moisture in the Flowers of red-Poppy.

The Syrup of the Flowers of red-Poppy, is commended in Diseases of the Breast,
more especially in Pleurisies, chiefly where sharp, acrimonious, and thin
humors are to be staid and carried off. It hinders the coagulation of the
blood, it assists expectoration, expels choler by transpiration, and causes
sleep. The Dose is from half an ounce to an ounce, or an ounce and a half at
most, either alone, or in distill'd-Waters, Decoctions, or mixed with other
Syrups.

Syrupus de Rosis siccis. Syrup of dry Roses.. Rosarum Rubrarum exungulatarum
siccarum, lb j.. Red Rose-buds picked and cleans'd from their white bottoms and
dried, lb j.

Put them into a glazed Earth'n-pot, and pour upon them six pints of boiling
fountain water, cover the pot, and keep it upon the hot ashes one or two hours,
and having given the infusion two or three bublings, strain and press it forth.
Clarify the Liquor with the white of an Egg, and four pound of fine Sugar, and
boil it to the consistency of a Syrup, adding toward the end one dram of Spirit
of Sulphur or Vitriol.

Syrup of dry-Roses fortifies the Stomach, Liver, Spleen, and Bowels. It stays
Vomiting, and all want of retention upwards or downwards. It is also very
proper to stay defluxions that fall upon the Breast, to cleanse and heal little
Ulcers in the Mouth and Throat, and to stop internal Bleedings. The Dose is
from half an ounce to an ounce, either alone, or in Gargarisms, Juleps, or
common drink.

Syrupus Florum Tunicae sive Caryophillorum hortensium. Syrup of
Clove-gillowflowers.. Florum Caryophillorum hortensium purpureorum mundatorum.
lb iij.. Clove-gillow-flowers picked and cleans'd, lb iij.

Take only the red part of the body of the Clove-gillow-flower, cutting off the
white bottom with a pair of Scissors; Weigh out three pound of the Flowers thus
cleans'd, and having put them into a Vessel of Earth glazed within, with a
straight mouth, pour upon them nine pints of boiling Fountain Water. Thrust
down the Flowers with a Woodd'n Spatula; cover the Pot and set it upon the hot
embers for six hours, at the end whereof let the infusion boil a little, then
strain and press the Flowers, and pour the hot Liquor upon the same quantity of
fresh Flowers, put into the same Vessel. Macerate, boil, strain, and press them
as before. Then clarify the Liquor with the white of an Egg, with six pound of
fine Sugar, and boil it in the same Vessel over a gentle fire to the
consistence of a Syrup.

Syrup of Gillow-flowers is as odoriferous as pleasing to the taste. It is very
good to strength'n the Heart, Brain, and all the noble parts. For which reason
it is highly commended against the Palpitations and Faintings of the Heart,
weaknesses of the Stomach, Pestilential Air, Malignant Fevers, and Epidemic
Diseases; as also to quick'n the Spirits, and strength'n the Memory. It may be
taken in several Liquors, or in your usual Drink, or mixed with Opiates, and
several other Medicines. The Dose is from half an ounce to an ounce.

Syrupus Melissophylli Compositus. Compound Syrup of Balm.. Radicum
Scorzonerae,. Roots of Vipers-grass, Dictamni Albi, White Dittany, Buglossi,
Bugloss, Pentaphylli, mundatarum, an. ij. Cinque-foil well-pickt, an. ij.
Tartari Albi pulverati, j ss. White Tartar pulverized, j ss. Foliorum Melissae
recentis, M. iij. Leaves of fresh Balm, M. iij. Menthae, Mint, Scabiosa,
Scabious, Succisae, an. M. j. Devil's bit, an. M. j. Seminum Citri, Seeds of
Citron, Ocymi, Basil, Oxalidis, and Sorrel, and Cardui Benedict. an. iij.
Carduus Benedictus, an. iij.

Cleanse the Roots, and having bruised them in a Marble-Mortar, put them
together with the white-Tartar into a glazed Earth'n-Vessel, in eight pints of
Fountain Water* and let them boil gently for a good half hour; then add the
herbs cut, and the seeds bruised, and let them boil a good quarter of an hour
with the Roots. After that, strain and press out the liquor, clarify it with
the white of an Egg, with half a pint of Juice of Balm, and four pound of fine
Sugar, and boil it to a Syrup. When it is cold aromatize it with four drops of
distilled Oil of Balm, or with Oils of Citron, and Orange-peels, ana Gut. ij.
incorporated with fine powdered Sugar.

The several parts of Plants so judiciously elected that makes up the
composition of this Syrup, evidently demonstrate its efficacy to strength'n the
Heart, and to defend it, as well as the rest of the Noble Parts against
Pestilential Air, and Diseases. It prevents the putrefaction of the humors,
keeps them from engendring. It cherishes the the Natural heat, creates an
Appetite and helps Digestion. The dose is from half an ounce to an ounce,
either alone or mixed with Potions, Opiates or other Medicines.

Syrupus de Stoechade correctus. Syrup of Cassidonie correct.. Florum
Stoechadis Arabicae siccorum, iiij.. Dry Flowers of Arabian-Cassidonie, iiij.
Summit. sicc. Betonicae, Dry tops of Betonie, Salviae, Sage, Thymi, Thime,
Calaminthae, an. j ss. Calamint, an. j ss. Florum Calendulae, Flowers of
Marigolds, Rorismarini, Rosemary, Lavendulae, and Lavender, Lillii convallium,
an. j. Lilly of the Valleys, an. j. Seminum Rutae, Seeds of Rue, Paeoniae,
Peonie, Dauci Cretici, an. ss. Cretan Wild-carrot, an. ss. Tartari albi
pulverati, j. White Tartar pulverized, j.

Cut the Herbs, bruise the Seeds, beat the Tartar in a mortar; and having mixed
them with the Flowers and put them into a glass-Cucurbit, pour upon them four
Pints of good Spanish-Wine, and as much of the distill'd-water of flowers of
the Tilet-tree. Fit an Alembic to the Cucurbit, and a small Recipient to the
Beak of the Alembic, all well-luted. Let the Ingredients macerate cold for four
and twenty hours. Then place the Cucurbit in a Sand-Bath, and with a moderate
fire draw forth by Distillation 2 Pints of Sulphurie-Aromatic-Water, and put it
up in a Vessel well-stopp'd. After that, let the Vessels cool, and having
unluted the Alembic, strain and press out all that remains in the Cucurbit; and
having clarified the Liquor with the white of an Egg with four pound of fine
Sugar, boil it over a gentle-fire to the consistence of a solid Electuary: and
when it is almost cold, mix and incorporate with it the two Pints of reserved
Aromatic-distill'd-water, together with distilled Oils of Rosemary, Lavender,
Cinnamon and Cloves, of each two drops mixed with an ounce and a half of
finepowder'd Sugar, and put it up in a Glass-bottle well-stopp'd.

The addition of some Cephalics, and of certain distilled Oils instead of some
Aromatics, the leaving out the dry Raisins, and the new way of Preparing this,
may perhaps surprise those who had rather err with the Ancients, then either to
seek for, or follow a better method.

But certainly this Method must be approved by those who shall take the pains
to compare this Preparation with those which are to be found in several
Dispensatories.

For they shall find here no Ingredients but what are proper to second the
intention for which they are prescribed, and whose virtues could not be better
embodied together then by this Preparation. I say they must acknowledge, That
the most effectual virtues of the parts of Plants here prescribed, consisting
of a volatile Sulphur, there was no better way to separate them then by
Distillation, while that which is more fixed, is incorporated in the liquor
that remains at the bottom of the Cucurbit. So that by this Preparation all the
pure parts of the Ingredients, as well fixed as volatile, are united together,
and embodied in the Syrup.

Syrup of Cassidonie is very proper to fortify the Brain, Stomach, and all the
Noble parts. It is chiefly made use of in Apoplexies, Palsies, Epilepsies, and
other cold Diseases of the Brain. It attenuates thick humors, cuts and loos'ns
clammy and viscous phlegm: op'ns obstructions, especially of the Brain: by
little and little it consumes cold Rhumes; it heats and strength'ns the cold
parts, and gives great ease to those that are troubled with the Asthma's. The
dose is usually from half an ounce to an ounce, alone or mixed with proper
Liquors.

Syrupus Lientericus D. D. D'AQUIN. A Syrup against the Lientery, by Monsieur
D'AQUIN.. Summitat. Absinthii Majoris,. The tops of the bigger Wormwood,
Rosarum Rubrarum Exungulatar. an. M. iij. Red-roses picked, an. M. iij.
Limaturae Chalybis Nodulo inclusae, ij. Filings of Steel tied up in a little
cloth, ij. Rhei Elect. and Chosen Rhubarb, and Corticis Myrobalanorum
Citrinorum, an. j ss Rind of yellow-Mirobalans, an. i ss. Tartari Alb.
pulverati, j. White-Tartar pulverized, j. Santali rubri contusi, ss. Red
Saunders bruised, ss.

Bruise the Wormwood, cut the Rhubarb, red-Saunders, and the bark of the
Mirobalans, and loosely tie up the filings of steel. Then put the whole into an
Earth'n-pot glazed within, with a straight mouth; and having poured upon them
three pints of the Juice of Plantain, and as much of the Juice of Roses, cover
the pot, and set it upon hot embers for four and twenty hours. After which,
boil the whole over a little fire, for a good quarter of an hour; then strain
and press out the Liquor, clarify it with four pound of good Sugar, and boil
it to the consistency of a Syrup.

This Syrup is very powerful to stay Lienteries, for which purpose it is
particularly prescribed. It strengthens the Stomach, Liver, Spleen, and all the
Bowels. So that it is proper against all defects of the retentive faculty,
either upward or downward, and against all Diseases that proceed from
feebleness of the Bowels. It qualifies the acrimony of the humors, and stops
internal Fluxes of Blood. The Dose is from half an ounce to an ounce and a
half, alone or mixed in proper Liquors, and may be taken several days together
if occasion require.

Syrupus Chalybeatus Aperiens Catharticus D. D. D'AQVIN. A Chalybeat opening
purging Syrup of Monsieur D'AQUIN.. Limaturae Chalybis in Nodulo laxo and
suspenso ligatae, vj.. Filings of steel tied in a loose hanging knot, vj.
Radicum Foeniculi, Roots of Fennel, Ciehorei, and Succory, and Rubiae
Tinctorum, an. iij. Dyers-Madder, an. iij. Tartari Albi contusi, ij. White
Tartar bruised, ij.

Cleanse and bruise the Roots, beat the Tartar in a Mortar, and put them
together into an Earth'n-pot glazed within, with a straight mouth, and let the
steel hang down, tied in a linen cloth. Then pour upon them nine pints of
boyling-water, wherein a good piece of red-hot steel had been quenched seven
times at least, and covering the pot, set it upon the hot embers for twelve
hours; which done, let them boil for a whole hour.

Addetisque, Then add, Foliorum Rutae, Leaves of Rue, Rumicis, Pointed-docks,
Lupuli, Hops, Agrimoniae, and Agrimony, and, Capill. Ven. Monspeliensis, an. M.
iij. Maidenhair of Montpelier, an. M iij.

Boil the whole again to the consumption of the third part, strain and press
them and keep the straining.

Interim, In the mean while,. Foliorum, Sennae Orientalis mundatorum, vi. Take
Leaves of Eastern Senna wellpickt, vj. Seminis Carthami contusi, iiij. Seed of
Spanish Saffron bruised, iiij. Tartari Vitriolati, j. Tartar Vitrioliz'd, j.

Macerate them apart in another Vessel for twelve hours, in four pints of
steel-water, poured boiling hot into the Vessel. Then give them a gentle
boiling, and strain and press out the Liquor. Clarify this Liquor with the
white of an Egg, and half a pound of Sugar, and set this clarified Liquor by it
self. Then clarify the Liquor of the first Decoction with the white of an Egg,
with six pound of fine Sugar, and boil it to the consistence of a solid
Electuary. At which time, add the purgative infusion clarified and boil it to a
good consistency of a Syrup. Which being cool may be aromatiz'd with six drops
of Oil of Cinnamon, incorporated with an ounce of fine Sugar.

They that will be careful to prepare this Syrup, and make trial of its
virtues, will acknowledge that it was not without reason, that his Majesty's
first Physician commanded me to insert the Receipt into this Pharmacopoea.

This Syrup is very proper to open Obstructions of the Spleen, Liver,
Mesentery, and Pancreas, as also those of the Matrix, and to loosen and carry
off the viscous and tartarous matters, that caused the Obstructions. It is made
use of with success to cure Cachexies, Dropsies, retentions of the Menstruums,
and the Jaundies. The Dose is from half an ounce to two ounces, given alone, or
mixed with proper Liquors.

Syrupus Anti-Scorbuticus, D. D. D'AQUIN. An Anti-Scorbutic Syrup of Monsieur
D'AQUIN.. Radicum Filicis Maris,. Roots of Male-fern, Angelicae, Angelica,
Eringii, Eringo's, Raphani Rusticani, an. iij. Horseradish, an. iij. Corticum
Citri, Peels of Citron, Aurantiorum, an. ij. Oranges, an. ij. Foliorum
Melissae, Leaves of Balm, Fumariae, Fumitory, Scolopendrii, Spleenwort,
Cocleariae, Scurvy Grass, Becabungae, Brook-lime, Nasturtici Aquatici,
Watercresses, Nummulariae, Money-wort, Mentae, an. M. iij. Mint, an. M. iij.
Seminum Nasturtii hortens. Seeds of Gard'n-Cresses, Cardui Benedicti, Carduus
Benedictus, Citri, an. j. Citron, an. j. Florum Tunicae and
Clove-gillow-flowers, Genistae, an. M. j. Broom-flowers, an. M. j. Tartari Alb.
contusi, ij. White-Tartar beaten, ij.

Bruise the Roots, and boil them over a soft fire, with the Tartar powdered, in
nine pints of steel'd-water. Add then the Herbs cut, and the Seeds bruised, and
let them boil all together for half an hour, then put in the flowers, and
having thrust them down into the Decoction, take it off from the Fire, and
strain and press out the Ingredients when they are half-cold. Clarify the
Liquor with the white of an Egg, and six pound of fine Sugar, and boil it up to
the consistence of a Syrup. When it is quite cold, aromatize it with three
drops of Oil of Cinnamon, and as much Oil of Cloves incorporated with an ounce
of fine-powder'd Sugar.

The little skill which the Ancients had in Scorbutic Diseases, is the reason
that specific Remedies for those Diseases are so rare in Dispensatories, and
that several Physicians find them so difficult to cure. For which reason his
Majesty's chief Physician thought fit to communicate to the World this Receipt,
the Ingredients whereof being as exactly chos'n as dos'd, cannot but produce
good effects, as well for the ease as for the cure of these Distempers, which
are very frequent in the Northern Countries, especially in Sea-Towns.

This Syrup effectually purifies the Mass of the Blood, quick'ns its
circulation, increases the spirits that enliv'n it, to the want or numness
whereof, we have good reason to attribute all the symptoms that accompany
Scorbutic Diseases. And because these Distempers are a long time a-growing, and
for that the whole Mass of the Blood is infected, it will not be amiss to
continue the use of this Syrup, not only to get the upper hand of the
Distemper, but to prevent its return. You may take one or two spoonfuls at a
time, Evening and Morning, and also between Meals.

Syrupus Violatus Violaceus. Syrup of Violets Violetted.. Florum Violarum
recentium emundatorum, lb iiij. Take four pound of Violets deep-colour'd, newly
gathered and very clean.

Put them without bruising into a fine tin-vessel large and deep enough, with a
fit cover, and pour upon them three pints of boiling Fountain Water, Which make
eight pints Physic measure.
Paris-measure; let the flowers soak well in the water, and having covered the
Vessel, set it six hours in a warm Balneum Mariae, and then strain and squeeze
the Infusion strongly, and pour it hot upon four pound of fresh Violets, put in
clean into the same Vessel, covered and kept as long in Balneo Mariae as
before. Strain and squeeze the infusion, and you shall have a tincture
altogether Violetted, charged equally both with the color, smell, taste, and
virtues of the Violets. Put this tincture into a Basin of fine Tin, large and
deep, and set the Basin over a moderate fire, with double the weight of fine
Sugar in powder, stir the whole with a Woodd'n-spatula, till all the Sugar be
dissolved, and continue the Basin upon the fire, till the Syrup has only boiled
two or three simpers. Take the Basin off the fire, and when the Syrup is quite
cold, scum it, and put it up.

For the better keeping of it, cover the top of it, with fine-powder Sugar,
which with the superficial moisture of the Syrup will make a kind of a crust
that will preserve the Syrup two years together, provided the Pots were dry
when the Syrup was put up, and that they be well-cover'd.

I confess that Syrup of Violets violetted, is so common in Shops; and so
frequently made by the Ladies, that it might seem superfluous to insert it
here; but not having met with any true Preparation yet, I thought fit to set
down this Preparation, which experience will make you confess to be the better,
and much superior to any other.

Some there are that add a spoonful or two of Juice of Citron, that the Violet
color of the Syrup may look a little more red. But beside, that those acids
will hinder the Syrup from keeping long, that addition is altogether needless,
in regard the color of the Syrup will be better without it, and those acids
may alter the quality of the Violets.

Syrup of Violets thickens thin humors that fall from the Brain upon the
Lungs, and corrects their acrimony. It cools the heat of the Liver and Stomach,
as also of most Fevers, particularly choleric, adding some drops of spirit of
Sulphur or Vitriol, or some other acid, and mingling it with Fountain, or
River-water, or with some other proper Liquor. The pleasant taste of it makes
it as much in use among those who are in health as among the sick; It is taken
alone from half an ounce to an ounce, or else mingled in Juleps, Apozems,
Emulsions, Looches, and many other remedies.

Formerly they made a laxative Syrup of Violets, composed of several infusions
of whole Violets; but the Syrup proved very unpleasing, ineffectual, and more
fit for Clisters then to be swallowed, and therefore not fit for this place.

Syrupus de Pomis simplex. Simple Syrup of Pippins.. Succi Pomorum redolentium
depurati, lb ij.. The Juice of fragrant Apples clarified, lb ij. Sacchari
Albissimi, lb iiij. The whitest Sugar, lb iiij.

Having pressed out the Juice from the Apples, set it in the Sun to clarify,
then pour it out by inclination and filter it. That done, put the Juice and the
Sugar together over a small fire, and there incorporate them to the consistence
of a Syrup.

The Syrup may serve as an Example for several simple Syrups whose foundation
is the Juice of any Fruit, such as are Cherries, Barberries, Red-Currans,
Respiss, Granates, Verjuice, etc.

You may also make the Syrup of Apples without fire, if when you have pared the
Apples you cut them into thin slices, throwing away the cores, and lay the thin
slices in a new Hair-sieve, set in a silver or white-earth'n-bason, covering
the Pippins with their thickness in Sugar, and continuing these layers of
Pippins and Sugar till the Sieve be full. For then covering the sieve with
another Plate or Basin, and leaving the whole two or three days in a cool
place, you shall find in the lower Basin a very pleasant Syrup, well-colour'd
and of a good consistency. This Syrup thus made without fire undergoes no
alteration, being endu'd with all the good qualities that can be expected.

Syrup of Pippins is accounted a very high Cordial, and very proper against
Palpitations of the heart, especially when they proceed from
melancholie-vapours rising from the Spleen. It is also very proper to comfort
all the Noble Parts, quench thirst, and qualify the heat of Choleric-Fevers.
It is to be taken by respites of time, either alone or mixed with Decoctions or
other proper Liquors.

Syrupus de Pomis Compositus. Syrup of Pippins compound.. Succi Pomorum
redolentium, lb iiij.. Juice of fragrant Pippins, lb iiij. Borraginis, and Of
Borrage, and Buglossi depuratorum, an. lb ij. Bugloss clarified, an. lb ij.
Folliculorum Sennae Orientalis incisorum, iiij. Seed-bags of Senna of the East
cut, iiij. Tartari albi Monspeliensis contusi, ij. White Montpelier-Tartar
bruised, ij.

Bruise the Pippins in a Marble-mortar with a Wood'n-Pestle, squeeze out the
Juice, and having exposed it for some days to the Sun, filter it; cut the
Senna-Seed-bags, and put them into a Glaz'd-earth'n-pot with two ounces of
Tartar pulverized; pour upon them the purified Juices: coyer the Pot, and set
it upon the warm embers for 24 hours: then letting the Infusion simper a while,
strain and press it out, and having clarified the Liquor with four pound of
very white Sugar, boil it up to a Syrup. When it is perfectly boiled and quite
cold, mix with it the Tincture of two drams of Saffron in powder, extracted
with three ounces of Distill'd-oyl of Balm.

I have said already, that for the more easy extracting the Juices of viscous
Plants, you must put them whole into some Vessel, and having set them for some
time over a moderate fire, pour out the Liquor at several times by inclination;
which method must be used for extracting the Juices of Borrage and Bugloss here
mentioned; and the Juice will be clear enough: though if you would have it
clearer you may expose it to the Sun, and filter it.

The Ancients tied Saffron in a little Linnen-bag, and soaked it in the Syrup
during the Decoction, pressing it out from time to time, and leaving it in the
Syrup when it was put up in the Pot, not considering that the long boiling of
the Saffron, though tied in a Bag, could not be done without a manifest
dissipation of the most volatile parts; that by those reiterated expressions a
good part of the terrestrial and unprofitable part of the Saffron passed
through the cloth, mixed with the Syrup, and made it muddy; and that at length
being left among the Syrup in the Pot, not being able to impart that virtue to
it which it had lost, it occasioned its putrefaction. Whereas the Tincture
communicating the most essential parts of the Saffron to the Syrup, contributes
to its preservation and beauty.

Some there are that propose the Extract of Saffron, which is better then the
Knot. But because the Tincture is the base of the Extract, and for that the
Tincutre cannot be reduced into an Extract without some dissipation of the
subtle parts of the Saffron, there is more reason to make use of the Tincture.

The principal qualities of the compound Syrup of Pippins, are gently to purge
choleric and melancholy humors: for which reason it is made use of in
Distempers caused by those humors, particularly in Madness and Hypochondriac
passions. It is good also in Quartan-Agues, and to purge sharp and scalding
humors that cause the Scurf and Itch, and most Diseases of the Skin. It may be
taken alone from one ounce to two or three. But more frequently dissolved in
Liquors, as the Decoctions of Apozemes, Tinctures, and Laxative Infusions.

Syrupus Florum Persicorum. Syrup of Flowers of Peaches.. Florum Persicorum
recentium quantum libuerit.. Of the Flowers of Peaches as much as you please.

Bruise them in a Marble-mortar with a Woodd'n-pestle, and squeeze out the
Juice in a Press, and having purified it by standing, and clarified it with the
white of an Egg and an equal weight of Sugar, boil it over a gentle fire to the
consistency of a Syrup.

The Preparation of this Syrup is not only easy, but keeps within it all the
most considerable qualities and virtues of the Flowers; which is chiefly in
their Juice.

For more exactness you may dry the Sediment, burn and reduce it to ashes, and
by Lixiviation, Filtration, Evaporation and Chrystallization extract the
Fix'd-salt that remains behind, and mix it with the Syrup when it is boiled.

This Syrup is principally commended to purge the serosities that trouble the
Brain, Nerves, and Muscles, and which not only cause Rheumatisms, but the
Apoplexy, Palsy, Convulsions, and other Diseases of the Brain. It also purges
choleric humors, op'ns obstructions, cuts the thick matters in the Mesenterie,
Pancreas, Liver and Spleen. It is very proper also to kill Worms, and resist
the putrefaction of the humors. The dose and administration is much the same
with those of Compound Syrup of Pippins.

Syrupus Rosatus Solutivus. Syrup of Roses Solutive.. Succi defaecatissimi
Rosarum pallidarum, Sacchari albissimi pulverati, an lb viij.. Of the purest
Juice of pale Roses, The finest powder Sugar, an. lb viij.

Gather your Roses newly blown betimes in the morning, bruise them in a large
Marble-mortar with a Woodd'n-pestle, and having pressed out the Juice, fill it
into Bottles; stop them and expose them to the Sun for some days: and when the
grosser part of the Juice is fallen to the bottom of the Bottles, pour the
Juice into a wooll'n-Bag to strain it. Then weigh out eight Pints of this clear
Juice, and put it into a Glass-Cucurbit, with the same weight of fine-powder'd
Sugar. And having fitted a head to the Cucurbit, and fixed a Recipient to the
beak of the Alembic, distill out about three pints of good strong Rose Water.
Then let the Bath cool, and having unluted the Alembic, you shall find in the
Cucurbit a fair Syrup of Roses, fragrant, pleasing and full of virtue. Pour it
out by Inclination into a Pot, leaving at the bottom of the Cucurbit that
little feces which remains.

Though that the Purgative-quality of the Roses consists chiefly in their
fix'd-salt, and some small portion of their less volatile Sulphur, which a
moderate boiling cannot much diminish; nevertheless it is convenient to
preserve and save as much of all the good parts of the Medicament, as much as
may be. And therefore you need not wonder that you meet not here with that
lofty, long and troublesome way of the Ancients, who in the composition of this
Syrup repeat infusion to the ninth time. Not considersidering that by that
great and unprofitable cost, the Roses lose their most Spiritous and fragrant
part, and that a great part of the infusion is wasted in the Strainers,
Vessels, and other Instruments used in the preparation; and that in the end
they will have a Syrup less pleasant, but not so efficacious, as this which is
here prescribed; the preparation whereof seems to me to be most fit to be
observed, since that together with saving a good part of the Rose Water, you
have a Syrup, wherein are all the qualities of the Roses that can be desired.

Syrup of Roses solutive purges very gently all the serosities contained in the
Bowels, or dispersed into several parts of the body. It is very useful in
Epidemic Distempers. Yet there are several Women and Virgins that cannot abide
the use of it. The Dose is much the same with that of the compound Syrup of
Pippins, or Peach-flowers.

Syrupus Rosatus Compositus cum Senna and Agarico. Compound Syrup of Roses with
Senna and Agaric.. Foliorum Sennae Orientalis mundatorum, iiij.. Leaves of
Oriental Senna cleans'd, iiij. Agarici electi incisi, ij. The best Agaric cut,
ij. Tartari Albi contusi, j. White-Tartar powdered, j. Succi Rosarum Pallidarum
depurati, lb vj. Juice of Pale-Roses clarified, lb vj.

Put the Senna, Agaric, and Tartar into an Earth'n-glaz'd-pot. Pour upon them
six Pints of the Juice of Pale-Roses clarified, and having thrust the
Ingredients down into the Juice, cover the Pot and set it 24 hours upon hot
embers; then letting the infusion boil awhile, strain it and press it forth:
and having clarified the Liquor with the white of an Egg and four pounds of
fine Sugar, boil it over a gentle-fire to the consistence of a Syrup. When it
is quite cold, aromatize it with six drops of Distill'd-oyl of Anise, and two
drops of Oil of Cloves, incorporated with an ounce and a half of fine powdered
Sugar.

This Syrup purges much more then ordinary Syrup of Roses; it purges Choler,
Phlegm and Melancholy. It kills and expels Worms. It op'ns the Passages; it
cuts, attenuates, and loos'ns tough and viscous humors; and draws phlegm from
the remote parts. The dose is from one ounce to two. It is to be administr'd
like other Purgative Syrups.

According to this method you may prepare a Compound Syrup of Roses with Senna
and Rhubarb without Agaric, not so proper to purge phlegm, and draw it from the
remote parts, but to purge gently choleric humors and strength'n the parts.
But in regard this Syrup is not much in use, you may supply its defect by
adding to Syrup of Roses solutive an Infusion of Senna and Rhubarb, when
occasion requires. The proportion of Senna and Rhubarb must be equal to that of
the Senna and Agaric prescribed above.

Syrupus Emeticus. An Emetic Syrup.. Vitri Antimonii absque additione parati,
and Nitro correcti, iij.. Glass of Antimony prepared without addition, and
corrected with Nitre, iij. Succi Cydoniorum purissimi, lb vj. Of the purest
Juice of Quinces, lb vj.

Powder the Glass of Antimony very small. Put it into a Glass-Cucurbit; and
havin poured upon it six Pints of Juice of Quinces very well clarified, cover
the Cucurbit, and let them macerate for 24 hours in a Bath of ashes moderately
hot; filter the liquor through a sheet of brown Paper, and return it into the
same Cucurbit, with two pound of fine Sugar; then boil it in the Ember-bath
hotter then ordinary, to the consistence of Syrup. When it is quite cold,
aromatize it with two drops of Oil of Cinnamon incorporated with half an ounce
of fine-powder'd Sugar, and keep the Syrup in a Bottle close-stopp'd.

Thought the Antimony be the foundation of this Syrup, and that Vitrification
and Correction be Chemical Operations, and beyond the verge of Galenic
Pharmacy; nevertheless it is here very properly made use of, and this Emetic
Syrup with as much reason here inserted. Nor is it to be wondered that six
Pints of the Juice of Quinces should be prescribed to extract the virtue of
three ounces of prepared Antimony, or that the Proportions of Liquors used in
Infusions or Decoctions according to the Rules of ordinary Pharmacy are not
here observed: For the Antimony thus prepared being in a condition to act in a
very small dose, is as able sufficiently to impart its virtue to a good
quantity of Liquor, which Liquor being afterward united with the Sugar, and
there concentered by boiling, renders the Emetic Syrup no less pleasing, then
powerful to operate in a much less dose then Emetic Wine, or any other Liquors,
wherein usually several Preparations of Antimony are infused, but not
concentered.

This Syrup is called Emetic, because of its effects, which are chiefly to
excite vomiting, to empty the Stomach of ill-humours which are sometimes too
obstinately fixed. And it is observable that Syrup after it has provoked
vomiting, many times procures some stools, proceeding either from the
Excrements of the Stomach or Bowels. It happ'ns also sometimes that some
Persons never vomit, but that this Syrup works altogether downward, which is so
much the less trouble. There is no Preparation of Antimony that works with more
gentleness or less trouble then this Syrup: It may be given to all Ages and
Sexes, sucking Children and old Men, in distempers caused by plenitude,
particularly when there is a collection of bad humors in the Stomach. The dose
is from two drams to an ounce, or at most to an ounce and a half for very
strong Bodies. It is given alone, or mixed in white Wine, Broth, or any other
proper Liquor. It is also mixed with Purgatives diminishing the dose, and
proportionating it to that of other Remedies.

Syrupus de Rhamno Cathartico. Syrup of Purging-Thorn.. Baccarum Fruticis
illius qui nomen fert Spinae Cervinae, aut Infectoriae, seu Rhamni Cathartici,
quantum libuerit.. Of the Berries of the Shrub called Hart's-Thorn,
Stayning-thorn, or Purging-Thorn, as much as you think fit.

Put them to macerate into a Glaz'd-earth'n-vessel over hot embers for two or
three hours, stirring them every-foot with a woodd'n-pestle. Then, having
pressed them out, take six Pints of their pure Juice, and four pound of Sugar,
and boil them together over a soft fire to the consistency of a Syrup. Take it
off the fire, scum it and let it cool, and aromatize it with four drops of
distill'd-Oyl of Cinnamon, and as much Cloves incorporated with an ounce and a
half of fine Sugar in powder, and put up the Syrup well-stopp'd.

The Purging-Thorn is a low shrub, the trunk whereof is about as big as a
Man'sleg; from whence grow several thornie-branches, with leaves like those of
the Crabtree. The Berries are as big as Juniper Berries well-grown; green at
first, afterward when they are ripe, black and shining. These Berries grow in
clusters, having five or six Seeds within, long and triangular, the Juice
whereof is somewhat dark greenish and bitter.

This Syrup powerfully carries off the serosities of all the habit of the Body.
It is used in Cachexies, and in diseases of the Joints, but particularly for
the cure of watery Dropsies and Rheumatisms. The usual dose is from half an
ounce to an ounce. It is taken alone or mixed in Decoctions, or other proper
Liquors.

I could here add several other Preparations of several other Syrups; but I am
persuaded that the Preparations and Rules already set down will afford
instruction sufficient to any Apothecary to prepare the rest which are here
omitted.

CHAP. XVI. Of Honeys.
I Thought fit to treat of Honeys immediately after Syrups, because that their
Preparation and their consistency are not much unlike the one to the other. The
extraordinary sweetness, the pleasing taste of Sugar, the plenty of it and its
aptness to suck up foreign moisture, are the reasons that Honey is nowadays
less in request then formerly. For though that Honey may be said to be a
collection and an extraction of the most pure parts of Flowers, Fruits, and
other parts of Plants, and that the Dew and Influence of the Stars may very
much contribute to its composition, and that there may be reason enough to
prefer it before Sugar, which is the Juice of only one single Plant:
nevertheless it is nowadays less used then Sugar. So that we prepare for the
Shops not above five or six sorts of Honeys, the most part whereof are
appointed for Clysters: Two sorts of Oxymels, and one Hydromel.

It Is true that good Honey is oft'n made use of, and preserved likewise before
Sugar in the Compositions of several Medicaments, and particularly of certain
Opiats, which are to keep long, as Treacle and Mithridate; because the parts of
Honey are more united and more viscous then those of Sugar, and because it is
more fit to bind the Ingredients with which it is mixed, and to resist
putrefaction longer then Sugar.

Mel Rosatum. Honey of Roses.. Succi Rosarum Rubrarum, Mellis optimi, an.
parts aequales.. Of the Juice of Red Roses, The best Honey, an. equal parts.

Bruise the Fresh red-Roses in a Marble-mortar, squeeze out the Juice and
expose it to the Sun in Bottles for some days to purify, then pass it through
a Wooll'n-bag, and having mixed it with equal parts of pure Honey, clarify
both together with the white of an Egg: scum it when it is cold and put it up.

Red-Roses are of an earthy and compact substance, so that they will endure a
longer and fiercer boiling then other Roses, without endangering the
dissipation of their good parts.

You may instead of the Juice make use of the Infusion of Red-Roses, two or
three times repeated, and prepare it like the Infusion of the Flowers of
Nymphaea for the Syrup. You may also use Honey of Roses laxative with the Juice
of Pale Roses, observing the same method set down for Syrup of Roses solutive.

The Honey of Roses first mentioned, cleanses, closes and fortifies: therefore
it is used for all diseases of the mouth, taken alone or in Gargarisms. It is
also mixed in Lotions and Vulnerarie Injections. It serves also in Opiates to
cleanse and whit'n the Teeth; and is frequently used in astringent and
cleansing Clysters. The proportion of Honey of Roses in Lotions, Injections,
Gargarisms or Clysters, is two or three ounces to a Near as big as our whole
Pint.
Chopine of liquor, Paris-measure.

Mel Anthosatum. Honey of Rosemary-flowers.. Florum Recentium mundatorum, lb
ij.. New Flowers of Rosemary clean-pickt, lb ij.

Bruise the Flowers well-pickt and cleans'd in a Mortar with a woodd'n Pestle,
and pass them through a Hair-sieve; then incorporate them with treble their
weight of good Honey hot and scumm'd, without the addition of any other Liquor.
When it is cold put it up.

The Flowers of Rosemary are of a Substance very thin and full of moisture, so
that if they should be boiled in Water or in the Honey, their better part would
be lost: and if the Honey should be charged with any extraneous moisture, by
increasing the moisture of the Flowers, it would occasion putrefaction.

Anthosate-Honey thus prepared enjoyes all the virtues of the Rosemary-flowers,
and is of a due consistence, and may be as well swallowed as dissolved in
Clysters.

You may prepare a Honey with a Decoction of Rosemary-leaves, and use it in
Clysters instead of Anthosate-Honey: But it is better to mix the Leaves of
Rosemary in the Decoction of Clysters, then to pester a Shop with a Honey so
little used; besides, the apprehended danger which the heat of the pure
Decoction of Rosemary-leaves may cause to the Bowels.

Honey of Rosemary-flowers prepared as above, may serve instead of conserve of
Anthos or Rosemary-flowers prepared with Sugar. It may be swallowed in all cold
Diseases of the Brain: It strength'ns the memory, and disperses the Vapors
that cause Vertigo's. It is also used in cold diseases of the Stomach and
Intestines; particularly in windy Colicks and fits of the Mother, swallowed or
taken in Clysters.

Mel Mercuriale. Honey of Herb-Mercury.. Succi Mercurialis quiet defacati, and
Mellis optimi, an. parts aequales.. Of the Juice of Mercury softly purified,
and The best Honey, an. equal parts.

Clarify them with the whites of Eggs according to Art, and boil them to the
consistence of a Syrup somewhat thicker then ordinary*

There are some that instead of drawing forth, and depur^ting the Juice of
Mercury, only make a kind of Decoction; and they boil the Honey as if they made
use of the Juice, but they use a greater quantity of the Decoction.

Honey of Mercury mixed with Clysters mollifies and soaks tough matters, that
settle in the Bowels. It loosens the Belly, and provokes the Menstruums. It is
very much used in Hysteric Distempers, and in all sorts of Colicks. The Dose is
from one ounce to three, in proper Liquors or Decoctions.

Mel Violatum. Honey of Violets.. Violurum recentium, lb iiij. Take fresh
Violets, lb iiij.

Boil them for a good hour in twelve pints of fair-water; strain the Decoction,
squeezing the Violets. Then in the strained Liquor boil four pound of new
Violets, proceeding as before. Boil yet four pound more of fresh Violets in the
Liquor, and having strained and pressed the Decoction, and mixed the Liquor
with twelve plnts of good Honey, clarify it with the whites of Eggs; boil it
to the consistence of a Syrup somewhat thicker then ordinary, scum it, and put
it up.

The volatile part of the Violets, which is subject to dissipation, is very
useless in Honey of Violets, which is only for Clysters, whose principal virtue
is to moisten, and render the Bowels slippery. The Dose and use of Honey of
Violets, are the same with those of Honey of Mercury.

Mel Vulvariae. Honey of stinking Arrache.. Foliorum Vulvariae, Fasc. ij. Take
of the Leaves of stinking Arrache, two little bundles.

Cut them and boil them in sixteen pints of Fountain Water, to the consumption
of the third part, and having strained and well pressed the boiled Herbs, boil
the same quantity of fresh Arrach in the Liquor, proceeding as before; then
having mingled sixteen pints of the best Honey with the Liquor, clarify it
with two whites of Eggs, and boil it to a just consistence. Scum the Honey and
put it up.

Though Honey of Arrach be not so much in use, it deserves to be placed among
the Honey's. For it is very effectual in Hysteric-distempers; above all to
appease the violent commotions of the Matrix. It is also very useful in windy
Colicks. The dose in Clysters is from two ounces to three.

Mel Nympharinum. Honey of Water Lillies.. Florum Nymphaeae, rejecta part
interiore lutea, lb viij.. Of the Flowers of Water Lillies, leaving out the
yellow inside, lb viij. Aquae Fontanae, lb xvj. Fair Water, lb xvj.

Boil them over a gentle-fire to the consumption of the third part. Strain and
press out the the Liquor: boil the same quantity of fresh Flowers again in the
Water. Strain and press out the Liquor, and having mixed with it sixteen pints
of the best Honey, clarify it with whites of Eggs, and boil it to a just
consistency.

Honey of Water Lillies is only made use of in Clysters: It moist'ns,
mollifies and cools the Bowels exceedingly. The dose is the same with that of
Honey of Violets.

Oxymel Simplex. Simple Oxymel.. Mellis optimi, lb iiij.. Of the best Honey, lb
iiij.

Put it into a glaz'd-Earth'n-pot, let it boil some few bublings over a gentle
charcoalfire; when it is a little cool scum it.

Addetisque, Then add, Aceti Albi Optimi lb ij. Of the best White Wind Vinegar,
lb ij.

Boil both together to the just consistency of a Syrup.

It is not necessary to boil Water with the Honey, as some pretend to raise the
scum, for it may be scumm'd without any addition. Nor is the Water e're a jot
more necessary to qualify the sharpness of the Vinegar, in regard that
sharpness is not only the thing we desire, to maintain the effects expected
from the Oxymel; but always remains last in the Decoction of the Vinegar.
Besides, we must believe, that the Water which they would add, can be but a
trouble, and that in the consumption which is to be made of it, it would but
help forward the dissipation of some volatile part of the Honey.

This Oxymel is good to loosen tough and viscous phlegm, as well in the Mouth
and Throat, as in the Stomach and other parts of the body, where it may stick.
It may be taken in a spoon a little at a time. But it is better in Liquors to
make Gargarisms, adding more or less of the Liquors, as you desire the
operation stronger or weaker; For the Liquors abate its activity. It is also
mixed with Looches and Syrups to abate its activity, and to assist them to cut
and loosen phlegm from the Lungs and Stomach. The Proportion of this Oxymel in
Liquors, is from an ounce and a half to two ounces, in a pint of a detersive
decoction, or in some proper distill'd-water.

Oxymel Scilliticum. Oxymel of Squills.. Mellis Optimi, lb iiij.. Of the best
Honey, lb iiij. Aceti Scillitici, lb ij. Vinegar of Squills, lb ij.

Let them boil gently, and scum them, then boil them over a very gentle fire to
a just consistence.

The Preparation of Vinegar of Squills is already set down in the Chapter of
Vinegars.

You may guess at the virtues of the Oxymel, by what I have spoken concerning
the qualities of the Vinegar.

Hydromel Vinosum. A Winy Hydromel.. Mellis Albi Optimi, lb iiij. Take of the
best white-Honey, lb iiij. Aquae pluvialis circa veris Aequinoctium collectae,
lb xx. Rainwater saved at the time of the vernal Aequinox, lb xx.

Boil them gently together in a Copper-Vessel tinned within, stirring them from
time to time, till the third part of the moisture be consumed, or rather, till
an Egg being cast into the Hydromel will not sink but swim at top. The Hydromel
being thus boiled and settled, pour out all the clear Liquor into a small Cask,
and put it in the Sun, or else in some hot place, for forty days, or else till
the Fermentation be over. Fill up the waste of the Fermentation, or what the
Cask wants of being full, with other Hydromel, or good Spanish-wine; and having
stopped up the Vessel, set it in a Cellar, or some very cool place.

By this means, the Hydromel will have a taste like that of Malmsey, which
having left its earthy parts and being exalted by Fermentation, will yield an
inflammable spirit, like to that of Wine.

Sometimes we make compound drinks of Pectoral decoctions, sweetened with
Honey, scum'd, clarified, and boiled to a thinner consistency then the
preceding Hydromel, and which bear the name of Hydromel, because Water and
Honey are their foundation; but these Hydromels are seldom prepared but for
present use.

Winy Hydromel is a Medicinal nourishment, as pleasing as profitable. It
comforts and strengthens the Noble Parts, and affords good nourishment, being
made use of by the healthy as well as by the sick.

CHAP. XVII. Of Looches.
LOoches are Internal compositions, of a consistency between Syrups and soft
Electuaries, and chiefly appointed for Diseases of the Lungs. The Greeks call
them (...), and the Latins Linctus, or Lambatives. The Name of Looch, though
Arabian, has been always most in use. They are made thicker then Syrups, to the
end that staying in the Throat, their virtue may have time to penetrate into
the Breast, through the rough Artery, and to be imparted to the parts that want
it, there to concoct and digest the phlegm, and fit it for expectoration, to
stop and thick'n the Rheum when it is too thin, and to cut and attenuate phlegm
that is tough and obstinate. Nevertheless though they are much in use, they are
seldom prepared, but when prescribed, in regard the Medicaments that compose
them are ready at all times, and for that their mixture is not difficult.
However, I will produce two Receipts, the composition whereof may be kept for
some time, if you please, or be prepared upon occasion.

Looch Sanum Reformatum. A sound reformed Looch.. Hordei Mundati, j.. Picked
Barley, j. Radicum Petasitidis, and Enulae Campana, an. ss. Roots of
Butter-bur, Elecampane, an. ss. Passulas Damascenas Mundatas, Large Stoned
Raisins, Ficus recentes siccas, New dry Figgs, Dactylos-pingues Enucleatos, Fat
Dates stoned, Jujubas, Jujubs, Sebesten, ana. No. xij. Sebestens, an. No. xij.
Foliorum Hyssopi, Leaves of Hysop, Calaminthae, Calaminth, Capil. Ven.
Monspeliensis, Venus-hair of Montpelier, Adianti Vulgaris, an. M. j. Common
Maidenhair, an. M. j. Seminum Malvae Seeds of Mallows, Althaeae,
Marshmallows, Bombacis, and Cotton, and Papaveris albi, an. ij. White-Poppy,
an. ij.

Boil the pickt-Barley in a glaz'd-Earth'n-pot, over a soft fire, in six pints
of Fountain Water, for half an hour; then add the Roots cleans'd and bruised,
let them boil with the Barley a good quarter of an hour; after that, put in the
Fruits cleans'd and sliced, which must boil a little while with the rest; which
done, put in the Hysop, Calamint, and cold seeds bruised. After they have
boiled a little while, take off the Decoction from the fire, and when it is
half-cold, strain it and press it lightly; and having clarified it with the
white of an Egg, with two pound of fine Sugar, boil it to the consistency of a
Syrup, a little thicker then ordinary. The Syrup being half cold,

Permisceantur, Add thereto, Pinearum, and Amygdalarum dulcium emundatarum
contusarum and per cribrum trajectarum, an. vi. Kernels of Pine-Apples, and
Sweet Almonds cleans'd, beaten to powder, and sifted, an. vj. Glycyrrhizae
mundatae, Liquorice cleans'd, Gummi Tragacanthi, and Gum-Tragacanth, Arabici,
and Radicis Ireos subtiliter pulveratorum, an. iij. Arabic, and Root of Orrice
beaten into fine powder, an. iij.

Incorporate them with the Syrup, and when all the Ingredients are cold,
aromatize it with Oils of Annise, and Fennel, of each three drops, mixed with
an ounce of fine powder-Sugar; then put up the Looch in a Gally-pot
well-stopp'd.

The picked Barley being put into the Decoction, is the reason why fine-Sugar is
prescribed instead of Pennets, usually prescribed in the common Receipts of
this Looch, whose Foundation is the Decoction of Barley. The Roots of
Butter-bur, and Elecampane augment the cutting quality of the other
Ingredients, and facilitate expectoration. The Seeds of Mallows, Marshmallows,
Cotton, and white-Poppy, serve to thick'n and stop thin defluxions from the
Head upon the Breast, and producing the same effects, as the seeds of Fennel and
Line, prescribed in other Receipts, do not give the Looch that unpleasing taste
or smell as they do. You may leave the Liquorice out of the Decoction, in
regard it is mixed in Powder to a sufficient, quantity in the Looch. Lastly, the
distilled Oils of Annise and Fennel are better then the Seeds boiled in the
Decoction, that destroys their Volatile and Sulphury part, which is the
principal.

This Looch cannot but be of great virtue to thick'n and stop thin defluxions
from the Head upon the Lungs, as also to cut and loosen those that are already
got into the Muscles of the Larynx, to cleanse and mollify the parts that
serve for Respiration.

It may be taken in the Day and Nightime, every foot, about the bigness of a
little Nut at once, with a little stick of Liquorice scraped and bruised at the
end. These Medicines must be kept a long time in the Mouth, and swallowed
slowly.

Looch Pectorale. A Pectoral Looch.. Mucilaginis Gummi Tragacanthi in Aqua
Rosarum extractae,. Mucilage of Gum-Tragacanth, extracted in Rose Water,
Sacchari Candi, and Penidiati, pulveratorum, an. ij. Sugar Candy, and Penedite,
powdered, an. ij. Liquoritiae, ss. Liquorice, ss. Ireos Florentiae, ij.
Florence-Orrice, ij. Radicis Enulae Campanae, j. Root of Elecampane, j.

Put a dram of Tragacanth powdered into a dish with 2 or. 3 ounces of good
Rose Water, set it over hot embers, stirring them from time to time with a
Woodd'n-Spatula, till the Gum-Tragacanth be well dissolved, and reduced into a
white-Past. Powder the Sugar Candy, and Penidiate in a Marble-mortar with a
Woodd'n-Pestle; and adding to them the Mucilage, the powders of Liquorice,
Orrice, and Elecampane, unite them together with equal parts of Magisterial
Pectoral Syrup, and Syrup of white-Poppies, and reduce them to a consistency
between a Syrup and a soft Electuary, which you may, if the Physician thinks
fit, aromatize with distilled Oils of Annise, and Fennel, an. two drops,
incorporated with half an ounce of fine powdered Sugar.

The Virtues of this Looch come very near to those of the sound Looch.
Nevertheless, you may change, increase or abate any of the Medicines, according
to the condition of the Disease, and the Patient who is to make use of the
remedy

There is a preparation of Cassia with Sugar, to which the Ancients have given
the name of a Looch, but it is rather to be put among the soft Electuaries,
then among the Looches.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Tablets, or Solid Electuaries.
THE use of Tablets so nearly resembles that of Looches, that they may well be
ranked in the next place; and so much the rather, because that Tablets are
frequently prepared for diseases of the Breast, and are more frequently used
then Looches. Tablets are sometimes more, sometimes less compounded, and their
composition is different, according to the purpose for which they are
compounded. Sugar is the ingredient most plentifully used in their composition;
as well to please the taste of the Patient, as to bind and incorporate the
other Drugs, which could not be reduced into a Solid form by the Sugar, did it
not exceed them in quantity: unless you make use of the mucilages of
Gum-Tragacanth; for they are able to bind several Medicaments without any
mixture of Sugar. Tablets are made of a solid consistence, that they may be the
more easily carried about in the Pocket, and that they may be held a long time
in the Mouth, and that they may not be so soon dissolved as Syrups or Looches.

For the Preparation of Tablets, we use to dissolve Sugar in some Liquor, to
clarify or scum it if there be occasion, to boil it to the consistence of a
solid Electuary, and to mix with it while it is hot, sometimes Powders,
sometimes Conserves, Conditements, Confections, Fruits beat'n in a mortar,
distilled Oils, and sometimes Salts and Spirits, The proportion of the Powders
to the Sugar cannot be well-limited, because of the various nature of the
Powders, and the various purposes for which the Tablets are made. We use to put
three ounces of Powder to one pound of Sugar, for solid Purgative-Electuaries.
We also put sometimes the same quantity of Powder to every pound of Sugar for
Pectoral Lozenges. But most frequently an ounce, or an ounce and a half serves
turn, especially if the Medicament be of a strong scent or taste, or that
operates in a small quantity. An ounce or an ounce and a half of Powder serves
turn to a pound of Sugar for Cordial Lozenges; and almost the same proportion
holds for Stomachical, Aperitive, Hepatic-Tablets.

But there must be great care taken in reference to Pulps, and other soft or
liquid Substances, which are to compound Lozenges, which are usually mixed when
the Sugar is boiled. For besides that they may occasion some augmentation of
the quantity of the Powders, you may either boil the Sugar the more before the
mixture, or slack'n boiling upon the fire after the Ingredients are mixed, to
consume the superfluous moisture that may be therein. In all which things the
Artist must be guided more by his judgment then by any Rules that can be
prescribed.

Saccharum Rosatum. Sugar of Roses.. Sacchari albissimi contusi, lb j.. Fine
white Sugar grosly-beat'n, lb j. Aquae Rosarum fragrantissimae, iiij. The most
fragrant Rose Water, iiij.

Pour the Rose Water upon the Sugar, and boil them in a Posnet over a soft fire
to the consistence of an Electuary. Take the Skillet from the fire, stir the
Sugar with a Spatula, and when it begins to coagulate, pour it out upon a sheet
of white Paper, or upon a Tin-dish to make Tablets. You may also mix with the
same boiled Sugar an ounce and a half of red Roses pulverized, sprinkled with
some few drops of Spirit of Sulphur or Brimstone. And these Tablets are called
Conserve of dry Roses, or the Rock-Conserve.

Sugar of white Roses is detersive with a little astriction. It is very much
used in all diseases of the Breast, as well for its pleasant taste, and ease
which it gives: You may take it day and night at all hours. Sugar of Roses is
also mixed in Powder with Asses, Goats or Cows-Milk, and taken in a morning
fasting. The dose is from two drams to an ounce, according to the quantity of
Milk and the Palate of the Patient.

Tablets of red Roses are more binding. It is good to strength'n the Ventricle
and the Liver, and to stop thin Rhumes that fall from the Head upon the Lungs.
They are taken after the same manner as ordinary Sugar of Roses.

Tabellae de Althea Simplices and Compositae. Simple and Compound Lozenges of
Marshmallows.. Pulpae Radicum Althaeae per setaceum trajectae, iiij.. Of the
Pulp of the Roots of Althea passed through a Hair-sieve, iiij. Sacchari solidi,
lb j ss. Loaf-Sugar, lb j ss. Aquae Rosarum, vj. Rose Water, vj. Fiant ex Art
Tabellae. Make Lozenges according to Art.

Choose out large well-grown Roots of Marshmallows, wash them and take off the
rind, and having cut them into thin round slices, boil them over a soft fire
with Fountain Water in an Earth'n-glaz'd-pot, till they be very tender. Then
bruise them in a Marble-mortar with a woodd'n-pestle, and pass four ounces of
the pulp through the wrong side of a Hair-sieve. Put a pound and a half of fine
Sugar with six ounces of Rose Water into a Skillet, and boil them to the
consistence of a solid Electuary, wherein you must dissolve the pulp; then
setting the Skillet over the fire for a very small time to evaporate the
superfluous moisture, make your Lozenges.

Quod si compositas volueris, If you desire them compounded,. Pulpae
praedictae, ij.. Of the foresaid Pulp, ij. Seminis Papaveris alb. contusi,
Seed of white Poppy beat'n, Pulveris Ireos Florentiae, Powder of
Florence-Orrice, Diatragacanthi frigidi, and Glycyrrhizae, an. iij. Cold
Diatragacanth, and Liquorice, an. iij. Sacchari albissimi in Aqua Rosarum
soluti, and in Electuarium solidum cocti, lb j. Whitest Sugar dissolved in
Rose Water, and boiled to the consistence of a solid Electuary, lb j.

Boil the Sugar and the Rose Water to the consistence of a solid Electuary:
take the Skillet from the fire, and first mix the Pulp prescribed, after that
the Powders; and make your Lozenges of what form or bigness you please.

You may mix with the Powders a dram of Magisterie of Sulphur. You may also in
the same manner make several other Pectoral-Lozenges.

Talbets of Althea are used to remedy old and new Coughs, and in all diseases
of the Breast; especially to carry off the acrimony of the humors, and to stay
Defluxions. They are to be taken at all times, like Tablets of Sugar of Roses.

Succus Liquoritiae Niger. Black Juice of Liquorice.. Extracti Liquoritiae
consistentiae mollioris,. Extract of Liquorice of a softer consistencie,
Sacchari opt. pulverati, an. lb ij. Fine-powder'd Sugar, an. lb ij. Gummi
Arabici soluti and colati j. Gum- Arabic dissolved and strained, j.
Mucilaginis spissioris Gummi Tragacanthi in Aquae Rosarum extractae, j ss.
Thicker Muscilage of Gum-Tragacanth, extracted with Rose Water, j ss.

Beat them and incorporate them well together in a Marble-mortar with a
woodd'npestle, and make them into Rolls, Tablets or Lozenges as you please.

The Gum- Arabic must be passed through a Hair-sieve, being first powdered and
dissolved in Rose Water.

I have placed this Composition among the Tablets, as well for its Consistency,
as for the Form of making it up.

There are several Preparations of the Black Juice of Liquorice, as well in
Spain as in several Towns in France; and the quick vent there is for it, causes
the Women to deal in it. But I take the Receipt which I have set down to be
superior to theirs, in regard it contains all the virtue and good taste that
can be expected.

The use of it is too familiar to want directions.

Succus Liquoritiae Albus. White Juice of Liquorice.. Pulveris Liquoritia
mundatae,. Clean-powder of Liquorice, Radicis Ireos Florentiae, vj. Roots of
Florence-Orrice, an. vj. Amyli, ij. Flower of Wheat pounded, ij. Sacchari opt.
subtiliter pulverati, lb j. The best Sugar finely-powder'd, lb j. Moschi
Orientalis, Oriental Musk, Ambragrisea, an. Gr. iij. Ambergrise, an. Gr. iij.

Incorporate all these together with a muscilage of Gum-Tragacanth extracted in
Rose Water, mixing and beating them together in a Marble-mortar with a
woodd'npestle into a solid paste. Make them up into Rolls or Tablets, and dry
them by the fire upon a white sheet of Paper.

This Composition is improperly called by the Name of Juice of Liquorice; since
there is nothing but the Powder of Liquorice in it. But in regard that custom
has prevailed to continue the Name, we thought it convenient to place it here.

This Juice of White Liquorice is more pleasing then the Black, but much
inferior to it in virtue. Yet it is as much or more in request, because of its
acceptable taste and smell.

Manus Christi Perlata. Manus-Christi Pearl'd.. Succhari albissimi in frusta
dissecti, lb j.. Finest white Sugar brok'n into pieces, lb j. Aqua Rosarum
fragrantissima, iiij. Fragrant Rose Water, iiij.

Boil them together over a moderate fire to the consistence of a solid
Electuary, and when they are half-cold, incorporate with them half an ounce of
Oriental-Pearl, and make up your Tablets according to Art.

These Tablets are called by the Name of Manus-Christi or Sugar of Roses
Pearl'd, by reason of the Ingredients whereof they are composed. Their
principal virtue is to comfort and fortify the Heart and Noble-parts: they may
be taken alone, at any time; but their chief use is in Juleps and
Cordial-Potions.

Tabellae Cachecticae, D. D. D'AQUIN. Tablets for those that are troubled with
an Ill-habit of Body, by D. D. D'AQUIN.. Diaphoretici mineralis, and Oculorum
Cancrorum praeparatorum, an. ss.. Diaphoretic-mineral, and Crab's-eyes prepared,
an. ss. Margaritarum praeparatorum, ij. Pearls prepared, ij. Salis Martis, ss.
Salt of Steel ss. Olei Cinnamomi stillatitii, Gut. ij. Distilled oil of
Cinnamon, Drop ij. Sacchari opt. pulverati, viij. Double-refin'd Sugar
powdered, viij.

Dissolve over hot embers a dram of Gum-Tragacanth in four ounces of
Orangeflower Water, and reduce it into a muscilage, wherewith to unite and bind
all the Ingredients prescribed. Then beat them into a thick paste, to make your
Tablets of the weight of two drams each for a dose, and dry them in the shade.

These Tablets are of incomparable virtue to open gently all obstructions of
the Bowels, particularly of the Spleen. For which reason they are given with
great success in Hypochondriac distempers and Cachexies: as also to cure the
Green Sickness, and difficulty of making Urine* They may be taken when you
drink Mineral-waters, if they do not pass through quickly as they should. The
dose is one Tablet in a morning fasting, two hours before you eat any thing
else.

Tabellae Cardiacae. Cordial Lozenges.. Sacchari albissimi in Aqua florum
Arantiorum soluti, and in Tabulati solidiorem consistentiam cocti, lb j..
Double-refin'd Sugar dissolved in Orange-flower Water, and boiled to the
constency of a solid Electuary, lb j. When the Sugar is boiled, take it off the
fire; and when it is half-cold,

Permisce, Mingle with it, Confectionis Alkermes perfectae, j. Confection of
Alkermes perfect, j. Corticis exterioris Citri minutissime incist, and
Antimonii Diaphoretici, an. ij. Outward-peel of Citron cut very small, and
Diaphoretic Antimony, an. ij. Olei Cinnamomi stillatitii pauco Saccharo
excepti, Gut. j. Distill'd-oyl of Cinnamon mixed with 2 drams of fine-powder
Sugar, Drops j.

Mix them well together, and pour out the whole upon a Plate of fine Tin, or
upon a sheet of white Paper to ma^e your Tablets of what bigness you please.

These Tablets are admirable to cherish the Natural-heat. They restore an
extraordinary vigor immediately to all the parts, ^allying the scattered
Spirits. They power* fully strength'n the Heart and Brain. They are an
incomparable preservative against Pestilential air, they correct ill-smells of
the Mouth and Breath. They are useful to those that are in want of a
Provocative to Venerie. They may be taken at any time, but especially fasting,
from a dram to two. But you may take half an ounce when you desire a more
powerful operation, especially they that have weak Backs, to whom they will be
of more force by adding half a dram of Amber-grise and a scruple of Musk.

Tabellae Stomachicae. Stomachical Tablets.. Sacchari albissimi, lb j..
Double-refin'd Sugar, lb j. Aquae Stillatitiae corticum Citri, iiij.
Distill'd-water of Citron-peels, iiij.

Boil them over a moderate fire to the consistency of a solid Electuary.

Deinde add, Then add, Nucem Moschatam Saccharo conditam contusam, and per
Cribrum trajectam, Pulpae Pistaciarum, vij. One Nutmeg condited with Sugar,
powdered and passed through a Sieve, Pulp of Pistaches, vj. Corticum recentium
exteriorum Citri, and Arantiorum minime incisorum, Cinnaniomi electi, and Macis
subtiliter pulveratorum, an. ij. New outward Citron and Orange-peels cut very
small, Choice Cinnamon, and Mace finely powdered, an. ij.

Beat the Nutmeg in a Marble-mortar with a woodd'n pestle and six drams of pulp
of Pistaches, and pass them through the wrong side of a Hair-sieve; cut the
peels very small, powder the Cinnamon and Mace. Then put in first the Nutmeg
and Pistaches, after that the Peels, then the Powders; and when they are all
well-incorporated make up your Tablets.

These Tablets are of a most pleasing scent and odor. They are called
Stomachical, because of their incomparable virtue to strength'n the Stomach, to
increase the Appetite and facilitate Concoction and Distribution of the
Nourishment. They are marvellously effectual to expel Wind and hinder the
putrefaction of the Humors. The dose is two drams fasting and just after
meals, the use whereof you may continue as you see cause.

Tabulae contra Vermes. Lozenges against the Worms.. Rhabarbariel^cti,. Choice
Rhubarb, Seminum Citri mundatorum, Seeds of Citron Cleans'd, C^^^ra Vermes,
Worm-Seed, Portulacae, Purslane, Caulium, and Genist^ subtiliter pulverati, an.
iij. Coleworts, and Brom finely powdered, an. iij. Mercurii dulcis pulverat.
ij. Sweet Merc^^y powdered, ij. Sacchari Albissimi pulver^^. xvj. Double
refined Sugar powdered, xvj.

Beat all the Ingredients into fine powder, mix and incorporate them very well
together with mucilage of Gum-Tragacanth drawn with Orange-flower Water, and
having reduced the whole into a paste somewhat solid, make up your Tablets each
weighing a dram, of which give one or two to a Child in a morning, fasting, and
three or four at a time to Persons of riper Years.

These Lozenges kill Worms in the Stomach and Bowels. They may be taken at any
time in a morning fasting, but the best time is the three last days of the Moon.

Tabellae de Croco Martis Simplices. Single Lozenges of Crocus Martis.. Cr^ci
Martis Nigri, junctione Sulphuris cum Chalybe c^^de^te parati, and subtiliter
pulverat. j.. Crocus Martis prepared by applying a a Cake of Brimstone to Steel
sodering hot and powdered, j. Pulveris Cinnamomi elect. ij. Powder of picked
Cinnamon, ij. Sacchari optimi pulver^^. iiij. Double-refin'd Sugar powdered,
iiij.

Incorporate them in a Marble-mortar with Mucilage of Gum-Tragacanth, veduce
them into an indifferent thick paste to make your Lozenges, each of the weight
of two drams or thereabout, which are to be dried in the shade.

These Tablets are chiefly against the Retention or Irregularity of the
menstruums, drinking after it three or four ounces of white Wine or some
Hysteric-water, and waking upon that for half an hour, not eating any thing in
two hours afterward. It may be taken for several days, and the use of it
renewed upon occasion.

Tabellae de Croco Martis Compositae. Compound Tablets of Crocus Martis.. Croci
Martis Aperientis, ij.. Opening Crocus Martis, ij. Cinamomi acutissimi, The
most biting Cinnamon, Rhabarbari Electi, Chos'n Rhubarb, E^c^lar^^ ^ry^^i^, and
Croci opt. subtiliter pulverat^rum, an. ij. Hard'n'd white Juice of
Bryony-root, and The bestSaffron finely-powder'd, an. ij. Sacchari Albissimi in
Aqua Art^misia s^lut. and in Electuarium s^lid^^ c^cti, ix. Double-refin'd
Sugar dissolved in Mugwort-water, and boiled to a solid Electary, ix.

When the Electuary is half-cold incorporate the powders, and make up your
Tablets, each weighing about two drams.

These Tablets are highly esteemed for provoking the menstruums, and freeing
the M^tri^ from impurities. They open the obstructions of the Liver, Spleen,
and all the Bowels, and are an excellent Remedy against the Green Sickness,
Cachexies, Jaundice, Dropsies; as also Lienteries. For by opening obstructions,
they facilitate the distribution of the Nourishment. The dose is from two drams
to half an ounce. They must be taken in a morning fasting, drinking after them
two or three ounces of Wormwoodwine, or else as much Mugwort-water, and walking
upon that for half an hour; it may be taken for fifteen days together, and
longer if necessity requires. Two hours after the Patient is at liberty to eat.

Tabellae Magnanimitatis. Lozenges of Magnanimity.. Pulpae Pistaciarum.. Pulp
of Pistaches, Radicum Satyrionis conditarum, Condited Roots of Satyrion.
Conservae Florum Rorismarini, and Confectionis Alkermes cum Ambra and Mosco
paratae, an. ss. Conserve of flowers of Rosemary, and Confection of Alkermes
prepared with Amber and Musk, an. ss. Truncorum Viperinorum, and Hepatum,
Bodies of Vipers, and Livers, Margaritarum Orientalium praeparatarum, an. iij.
Oriental Pearls prepared, an. iij. Seminis Erucae, ij. Seed of Rocket, Renum
Scincorum, Reins of Land-Crocodiles, Cardamomi minoris, Lesser Cardamoms,
Radicis Galangae, an. j. Root of Galanga, an. j. Caryophyllorum, Cloves,
Cinnamomi, Cinnamon, Macis, Mace, Ambrae Griseae, an. ss. Ambergrise, an. ss.
Moschi Orientalis, ss. Oriental Musk, ss. Sacchari in Aqua Florum Arantiorum
soluti, and in Electuarium solidum cocti, lb j. Sugar dissolved in
Orange-water, and boiled to a solid Electuary, lb j.

Beat the Pistaches, Satyrion-roots and Conserve of Rosemary-flowers in a
Marblemortar; and strain the Pulp through the wrong side of a Hair-sieve.
Pulverize the Bodies and livers of Vipers, and Land-Crocodiles; the Root of
Galanga, the Cardamoms, Cloves, Mace, Ambergrise and Musk, mix them with the
prepared Pearls, and when the Sugar boiled in Orange-flower Water to a solid
Electuary is half-cold, incorporate the Pulp, Confection and Seeds; and make
your Lozenges about two drams each.

These Lozenges are highly esteemed for those that are cold in the act of
Venerie. Take one or two at a time at Night or Morning, drinking after it two
or three ounces of Spanish-wine. They may be eat'n also in the Daytime between
Meals, one Lozenge at a time, using them as long as necessity requires. In the
mean time the Patient must take care to keep a good Diet, and to avoid
melancholy.

CHAP. XIX. Of Powders.
THE Name of Powder is given to dry Substances, when either by Art or Nature
they are reduced into distinct particles, one from the other. This Natural
reduction happ'ns to Wood through rott'nness, as also to several Roots, and to
Lime after it is burnt. But these Natural Powders are not the subject of this
Chapter, which is to treat only of Artificial Powders, whose Substance may be
divided into smaller or grosser parts, according to their diversity, and the
necessity of the Apothecary. The way to make this Reduction I have spok'n of in
the Chapter of Trituration. The necessity of Powders is allowed both by the
Galenic and Chymic-Pharmacy, without which the most part of Medicines are not
to be prepared; but setting aside particular Powders prepared for particular
Medicines, in this Chapter I shall only treat of those that go under the
general Name of Powders, and are so acknowledged to be, as being most usually
prepared and kept.

Pulvis Viperinus. Powder of Vipers.. Corpora Viperina cute spoliata, Capite
and Cauda mutila, exenterata, servatis Cord and Hepate, and in umbra siccata,
quantum libuerit.. The Bodies of Viper's flayed (the Head and Tail cut off, the
Entrails taken out, reserving the Heart and Liver) as many as you please.

Wash the Bodies, Hearts and Livers with white Wine, and hang them up to dry in
the shade. When they are perfectly dry, cut them very small with a pair of
Scissors into a large Brass-mortar, and having beat'n them to powder, sift them
through a Silksieve, and keep the powder for your use.

The great applause that the greatest number of Naturalists have given to
Vipers, the gross mistakes of the Ancients, as well in relation to the parts of
their Bodies, as the nature of their Venom, and the great use that has been
made of them for this many Years, and particularly in this Age, have encouraged
me briefly here to describe the principal marks that distinguish them* from
other Serpents, and give us an assured knowledge of them.

The Viper's Head, considering the proportion of her Body, is flatter and
larger, then the Head of any Serpent. The end of the Snout turns up like a
Pig's. The length of the Body is not above half an Ell, and the bigness not
above an Inch. It has two large Teeth, crooked, hollow, transparent and very
sharp, about 2 The twelfth part of an Inch.
Lignes long, and as big as a little Pin toward the point, and a little more
toward the bottom, which other Serpents have not. They are strongly joynted
into the foremost bones forward from the Scull, flexible in their joynting, and
fixed upon each side of the upper-Jaw. Below adjoining to the root of these
great Teeth, are others much a-like in shape and figure, but slenderer and much
looser. These great Teeth lie generally bowed toward the Throat of the Viper,
but she can raise them, and make use of them to bite when she pleases, either
in revenge or to kill her prey. The bottom of these great Teeth is environed
with a little bag, containing, to the quantity of a drop, a Juice slimy,
yellow, insipid and harmless, which proceeds from a great number of
slimy-kernels, which the Viper has incluster'd behind each Eye toward the
Temples, which is let out and kept in, as in a Receptacle, to discharge the
superfluities of the Brain, to moist'n the Ligaments that belong to the
Articulation of the great Teeth, and to preserve their flexibility, and to
nourish the other Teeth. The Viper has but one row of Teeth upon each Jaw,
whereas other Serpents have two. The neck is not so long, and less thick; the
Tail is also shorter then that of other Serpents, especially that of the
Female. The Viper has no stinking smell in any part of her Body, whereas the
inwards of other Serpents are so noysom as not to be endured. The Viper creeps
very slow, nor can it shoot forwards as other Serpents do; though it be very
quick and nimble to bite Man or Beast when provoked. Some have vainly affirmed
that being hung by the tail it cannot rear it self. But though it cannot do it
so quickly as other Serpents, however it will be sure to raise it self, and lay
hold upon the Pincers with which you hold her by the tail. The Teeth of the
Male are like those of the Female in number and shape, contrary to the opinion
of the Ancients, and his Natural-parts doubly covered with hard and sharp
points. The Female has also a double Matrix, though the first entrance be not
so. The upper part of the Body of both are of two colors, the ground whereof
is generally of a gray, more clear or more dark, or else of a yellow more
inclining to gold'n, or to red. This Ground is very proportionably variegated
with long spots of a brown color inclining to black. The long Scales a-thwart
the Belly, which serve them to creep withal, are of the color of polished
Steel. The Viper also differs from other Creatures in this, that she brings
forth her Young-ones alive, whereas other Serpents lay Eggs, which they sit
upon and hatch.

This Powder is very much enlivened with the volatile Salt, wherewith the
Vipers abound, which enables it to force its virtues through the Pores, though
never so closeshut, to the most remote parts of the Body. It is a singular
Medicine to cure Scabs, Itches and Erysipelas; and particularly the Leprosy.
It restores plumpness of Body to Persons wasted with long Agues and tedious
Diseases. It gives remarkable relief to the Ptisical and Consumptive, preserves
the Natural-heat, assists Concoction, and distribution of the Chylus. The use
of it is very wholesome in Epidemic distempers, and to prevent and overcome
Venomes that act by a malignant occult quality, particularly that of the Viper,
and all sorts of Serpents. It is to be taken fasting in Broths, Wine, or any
other Cordial Liquor; or else incorporated with some Syrup, or in some
Confection like a Bolus. It may be also mixed in Opiates, or in liquid or solid
Electuaries, as also among other Powders. The dose is from ten to twenty or
thirty grains, as also to a dram. It works insensibly, not provoking Sweat,
unless the dose be great. It may be also taken for a good while together.

Pulvis Comitissae Cantii, seu de Chelis Cancrorum. The Countess of Kent' s
Powder: or, The Powder of Crabs-Claws.. Extremitatum nigrorum pedum majorum
Cancrorum marinorum, iiij.. The black extremities of the feet of large
Sea-Crabs, iiij. Oculorum Cancrorum fluviatilium, River-Crabs-Eyes,
Margaritarum Orientalium, and Eastern-Pearls, and Coralli Rubri praeparatorum,
an. j. Red-Coral prepared, an. j. Succini Albi, White Amber, Radicis
Contrayervae, Root of Contrayerva, Viperinae, seu Spanish-Counterpoyson, an.
vj. Contrayervae Virginianae, an. vj. Lapidis Bezoar, iij. Bezoar-Stone, iij.
Ossis e Cord Cervi, iiij. Deer's Heart-bone, iiij. Croci, ij. Saffron, ij.

All these being finely powdered, let them be sprinkled with an ounce and a
half of Spirit of Honey, and mixed with Gelly of Vipers. Make up your
Trochishes, dry them in the shade to be powdered when use requires.

Take the Sea and the River-Crabs in the Month of June, while the Sun is in
Cancer. Take and cut the Flesh from the extremities of the Claws, bruise the
Claws and Crab's-eyes in a Brass-mortar first, then grind them upon a Porphyrie,
moist'ning them with some Cordial-water; and spread the Powder upon clean
Paper, to be dried in the shade. Prepare the Pearl, Coral, and Amber-grise in
like manner. Beat the Bezoar in a Brass-Mortar, and mix all the Powders. Then
in a glaz'd-Earth'n-pot over a very gentle fire, boil four large Vipers, well
prepared, in a pint of Balm-water, till the Broth be reduced to the consistency
of a Gelly. Strain it and press out the Vipers. Then put the Powders into a
great Marble-Mortar; and when they have sucked up the Honey prescribed, add at
several times the Gelly of Vipers, till the whole Mass be become thick and
solid enough to make Trochishes, to be dried and used as before.

The Gelly of Vipers, is not only to unite and bind the Powders together, and
reduce them to a proper Paste and fit solidity, but to impart to the
Composition, the Cordial, and Poyson-resisting virtue of the Vipers, though the
Ancients neglected the Gelly of Vipers, and refused it as Impertinent.

I might have placed this Composition in the Chapter of Trochishes, but I
thought fit to imitate the English, from whence first it came, and who gave it
the name of Powder.

This Powder is very famous, and in high request in England, against Epidemic
Distempers, particularly against the Smallpox, and Measles. It is also highly
commendded for the Plague, as well to preserve, as cure. For it strength'ns the
Heart, and all the Noble-parts, against the malignity of these Diseases,
against Pestilential-Air, and preserves them from all sorts of Infection. Nor
is it less esteemed in France, by Persons that know the virtue of it, and who
have often tried it with good success. The Dose and manner of using it, is the
same with that of the Spirit of Vipers.

Pulvis Aromatici Rosati. Powder of Aromatic Rosatum.. Rosarum Rubrarum
exungulatarum siccarum, xv.. Dry red-Roses cleans'd from their white bottoms,
xv. Glycyrrhizae Rasae, vij. Scraped Liquorice, vij. Cinnamomi Acutissimi, v.
Quick-biting Cinnamon, v. Ligni Aloes, Lignum Aloes, Santali Citrini, ana. iij.
Yellow Saunders, ana. iij. Caryophyllorum, Cloves, Macis, Mace, Nardi Indicae
Indian Spikenard, Gummi Arabici, Gum-Arabic, Tragacanthi, an. ij ss.
Tragacanth, an. ij ss. Nucis Moschat^, Nutmegs, Cardamomi minoris, Lesser
Cardamom. Galangae, an. j. Galanga, an. j. Ambrae-Griseae, ij. Amber-grise, ij.
Moschi Orientalis, j. Oriental Musk, j.

According to the general Rules of Trituration, bruise and pound the Wood first
in a brazen-Mortar, then add the Galanga, Liquorice, and Spikenard: which must
be beaten for some time with the Wood: next add the Cinnamon and Gums; Lastly,
the Cloves, Nutmegs, Cardamoms, Mace, and Red-Roses: beat them among the rest,
and sift the Powder through a fine silk-sieve. Then beat apart in a little
Mortar the Amber-grise, and Musk, mixing with them, never so little Oil of
Nutmegs, to prevent them from sticking to the Mortar, and having sifted them
through the same sieve, mix them with the rest of the Powders; which will be
then fit to be put up for use.

Were there a greater quantity of Gum-Arabic, and Tragacanth in the Powder, the
best way would be to beat them apart in a large brazen-Mortar heated, but being
so little, they may be conveniently enough beaten with the rest. It is not
worth while to stand to cut the Woods, or the Spikenard, when you may do as
well by beating them in the large Mortar, with the rest of the Drugs.

This Powder is highly esteemed for strengthening the Brain, and Stomach. It
dissipates the superfluous moisture of the Entrails, resists Putrefaction,
creates an Appetite, stays Vomitings, and want of retention in the Intestines,
and is very proper to strength'n and restore such as are newly recovered from
sickness. The Dose is from half a scruple to half a Dram in Wine, Broth, or any
Cordial-Liquor. It may be reduced into a soft or solid Electuary, with a
proportionable quantity of Sugar, or mixed with Opiates, Potions, or other
Medicines.

Pulvis Diarrhodon emendatus. The Powder Diarrhodon, reformed.. Rosarum
Rubrarum exungulatarum, j ss.. Red Roses cleans'd, j ss. Santali Citrini, and
Yellow-Saunders and Rubri, an. iij. Red, an. iij. Ligni Aloes, Lignum Aloes,
Cinnamomi, Cinnamon, Rapontici, Rhubarb of Pontus, Nardi Indic^,
Indian-Spikenard, Rasurae Eboris, Shavings of Ebony, Ossis e cord Cervi, The
bone of a Deers-heart, Crooi, Saffron, Mastices, Mastick, Cardamomi minoris,
Lesser Cardamom, Gummi Tragacanthi, and Gum-Tragacanth, and Arabici, Arabic,
Succi Glycyrrhizae, Juice of Liquorice, Seminis Anisi, Seed of Annise,
F^niculi, Fennel, Ocymi, Basil, Melonum, and Melons, and Cucumeris, mundatorum,
and Cucumbers, cleans'd and Margaritarum praeparat^rum, ana. j. Prepared
Pearls, an. j. Ambrae-grisiae, Gr. viij. Amber-grise, Gr. viij. Moschi
Orientalis, Gr. iiij. Oriental Musk, Gr. iiij.

Make a Powder according to Art.

They who will compare the Receipt of this powder, with that which is to be
found in several Dispensatories, under the name of an Abbot, will find that the
Doses are reformed; that the Yellow-Saunders is put instead of the White, the
shavings of Ivory* in the stead of Spodium or burnt-Ivory, Rhaphontic instead
of Rhubarb, and that several Seeds are left out, which gave more trouble to the
Artist, then virtue to the Medicine. There is no question, but that
Yellow-Saunders is better than White, and that Rhubarb whose purgative virtue
is not proper upon this occasion, ought to give place to Raphontic, whose
qualities agree with the purposes for which this powder was designed. There is
nothing superfluous in this powder, and the Doses and proportion of the
Ingredients are such, that the effects cannot but be answerable to what Writers
have attributed to this composition.

This powder is of great use to fortify the Stomach, create an Appetite, and
expel Wind. It is particularly appointed for maladies of the Liver and Spleen,
Jaundies, Ptisicks, difficultness of the Intestines, Weaknesses and Faintings
of the Heart. It also consumes the superfluous moistures of the Stomach. The
Dose and manner of using this powder is the same with the preceding.

Pulvis Diamargariti Frigidi. Powder of cold Diamargaritum.. Margaritarum
Orientalium praeparatarum, ss.. Oriental Pearls prepared, ss. Rosarum rubrarum
exungulatarum, Red-Roses cleans'd, Florum Nymph^ae, and Flowers of
Water Lillies, Violarum, an. iij. Violets, an. iij. Ligni Aloes, Lignum-Aloes,
Santali Rubri, and Saunders Red, and Citrini, Yellow* Radicis Tormentillae,
Roots of Tormentil* Dictamni Albi, White Dittany, Pentaphylli, Cinqu^foyl,
Baccarum Myrti, Myrtle-berries, Gran^rum Kermes, Grains of Kermes, Seminis
Melonum excorticati, Seeds of Melons husk'd, Endivi^, and Endive, and Oxalidis,
Sorrel, Rasurae Eboris, and Shavings of Ebony, Cornu Cervi, Hartshorn, Coralli
Albi, and Coral White, and Rubri pr^paratorum, an. ij. Red prepared, an. ij.
Ambrae-Grisiae, and Amber-grise, and Foliorum Auri, an. ss. Leaves of Gold, an.
ss. Moschi Orientalis, Gr. iiij. Oriental Musk, Gr. iiij.

Make a Powder according to Art.

There is no composition in request, the Receipt whereof varies more in all
Dispensatories then this Powder, that bears the name of no Author. However, I
am persuaded that this very Receipt is not inferior to any of the other, as
well for the choice as for the Doses of the Ingredients. This Powder carrie^
the name of Pearls, which are the foundation of it, and are used in greater
quantity here, then any other of the Ingredients. It is called cold, because it
admits of many cold Ingredients, or else but moderately hot, and to distinguish
it from another which is named the hot, which is not now in use. The
preparation of this Powder is like the former.

The principal use of cold Diamargaritum is to strength'n the Noble-parts,
restore their languishing force, to cure fainting and Swouning-fits, in Fevers,
and other Diseases. It is given to Asthmatic, and Consumptive persons, and to
those that are wasted and brought low by long sickness. The Dose and manner of
using, are the same with other Cordial-powders, which I have already set down.

Pulvis Laetificans. A Powder creating Cheerfulness.. Semini^ Ocymi
Caryophyllati,. Seeds of Clove-Basil, Croci, Saffron, Zedoariae, Zedoary, or
Set-wall, Santali Citrini, Yellow-Saunders, Caryophyllorum, Cloves, Corticis
exterioris Citri sicci, Outward peel of Citron, dry, Galangae, Galanga, Macis,
Mace, Nucis Moschatae, Nutmeg, Storacis Calamitae, an. ij ss. Calamite Storax,
an. ij ss. Rasurae Eboris, Shavings of Ivory* Seminis Anisi, Annise-seed,
Thymi, Thyme, Epithymi, Dodder of Thyme, Margaritarum Orientalium praeparat,
Oriental Pearls prepared, Ossis e cord cervi, an. j. Deer's Heart-bone, an. j.
Ambrae-Grisiae, Ambergrise, Moschi Orientalis, Oriental Musk, Foliorum Auri et
Leaves of Gold, and Argenti, an. j. Silver, an. j.

Make a Powder according to Art.

It imports not to know the Name of the Inventor of this Powder, the Receipt
whereof agrees indifferently well in most Dispensatories. You may follow this
which I have here set down; the Preparation being the same with the former. You
must know, that though the Leaves of Gold and Silver may contribute some virtue
to this, and other compositions; yet they are here chiefly used for Ornament.
For which reason they are not usually pulverized and jumbl'd with other
Ingredients, but cut in little distinct bits, for beauty's fake, as Pills, and
Cordial-Opiates are wrapped up in them to take away the ill taste.

This Powder is highly esteemed to correct the cold and moist temperature of
the Stomach and Liver, to help Digestion, and restore the Appetite. It is also
very proper against Weaknesses, and Palpitations of the Heart, to restore a
good habit of Body, and to bring a good color into the Face, to keep the
Breath sweet, restore decayed Strength, and dissipate Melancholy that proceeds
from an Internal or no real cause. The Dose is the same with the preceding
Powders.

Pulvis Diatrion Santalon. Powder of the three Saunders.. Santali Citrini,.
Saunders Yellow, Albi, et White, and Rubri, Red, Seminis Violarum, Seeds of
Violets, Rosarum Rubrarum Exungulatarum, an. ss. Red Roses cleans'd, an. ss.
Rapontici, Pontic Rhubarb, Rasurae Eboris, Shavings of Ivory, Succi
Glycyrrhizae, an. ij. Juice of Liquorice, an. ij. Gummi Tragacanthi, ^t Gum
Tragacanth, and Arabici, Arabic, Seminum Endiviae, Seeds of Endive, Portulacae,
and Purslain, Melonis excorticati, an. j. Melons husk'd, an. j.

Make a Powdor according to Art.

They that desire to make the Powder more red, beginning with the Saunders,
must moisten them with Rose Water, and beat them a long time, and moisten them
often, till they are sufficiently colored, and when they are dry, add the
other Ingredients, and perfect the Powder, which must be sifted through a fine
silk sierce.

I am of opinion that the Amydon, or flower of pounded Wheat, together with
some part of the Seeds were with judgment left out; for besides that the
Amydon signifies nothing, the excess of Seeds might cause putrefaction in the
powder.

This powder is highly commended against Diseases that proceed from weakness,
or ill habit of the Liver; to temper the heat of the Entrails, to digest and
discuss matters gathered together at the end of Agues. It is also very proper
in faintings of the Heart, Jaundies, and Ptisicks. It is given inwardly in
Potions, Opiates, and Electuaries, and outwardly applied in Epithems, Frontals,
and Liniments.

Pulvis Pannonicus. The Hungarian Powder.. Boli Armenae, and. Bole Armonack,
and Terrae Lemniae, an. j ss. Lemnian Earth, an. j ss. Margaritarum
Orientalium, Eastern Pearls, Lapidum Hyacinthorum, Stones, Jacinths,
Smaragdorum, Smaragds, Saphyrorum, et Saphyrs, and Rubinorum, et Rubies,
Coralli Albi, et White-Coral, and Rubri, praeparatorum, Red prepared, Radicum
Tormentillae, Roots of Tormentil, Doronici, et Doronicum or Wolfs-bane, and
Dictamni Albi, White Dittany, Santali Citrini, Yellow Saunders, Rasurae
Vnicornis, et Shavings of Unicorns-horn, and Eboris, an. ss. Ivory, an. ss.
Corticis Citri exterioris sicci, et Dry outmost Citron-rind, and Seminis
Acetosae, an. iij. Seed of Sorrel, an. iij. Cinnamomi acutissimi j. Biting
Cinnamon, j. Caryophyllorum et Cloves, and Croci, an. ss. Saffron, an. ss. Folia
Auri purissimi, No. xxv. Leaves of purest Gold, No. xxv.

Rasp the Vnicorns-horn, and Ivory; beat the Pearls, Stones, as also the Coral,
and Bole-Armonac in a Mortar, then grind them upon a Porphyrie-stone, till the
Powder is not to be felt, moistning them now and then with Rose Water: make
them into Trochiskes and let them dry in the shade. Beat the Vnicorns-horn and
Ivory, in a great Brazen-Mortar, with the Saunders and the Roots; then put in
the Cinnamon, dry Citron-Peel, and then the Cloves, and Sorrel-seed, and sift
them them through a silken sierce. Dry the Saffron and beat it apart; then
having mixed all the Powders with the Stones, Corals, Bole-Armonac, and
Terra-sigillata, cut the Leaves of Gold in small bits. Mix an ounce and a half
of this Powder with twelve ounces of fine Sugar dissolved in Rose Water, and
you may boil it up to the consistence of a solid Electuary, and make it into
Tablets.

Unicorns-horn is reckoned among the number of Medicaments, which being but a
part of a mixed body, bears the Name of the whole; so that when the Unicorn is
only set down, the Horn is only prescribed. This Creature is by the Greeks
called (...), by the Latins, Vnicornis. Writers vary very much about the
description of this Animal. The most part make it in the body to resemble a
Horse, and that he has one horn wreathed like a Periwinkle-shell, sometimes
longer, sometimes shorter, fixed at the upper part of the forepart of the
Head; straight and pointed at the end. However, none of them affirm that they
have seen the Creature which they describe, nor do they say where he is bred.
And therefore some question whether the Unicorn spoken of in the old Testament,
were a Beast like that which our Naturalists have described under the shape of
a Horse, and whether it did not mean the Rhinoceros, by that which our
Interpreters call a Unicorn, though the straight and twisted shape, and white
color which the Naturalists attribute to the Unicorn's-horn, is nothing
agreeable to that of the Rhinoceros, which is not twisted, but crooked from the
bottom, with the end turned upward; and besides is of a brown color. But among
all these contests of Natural Philosophers, my thoughts are that there is no
such Unicorn in the World as they have described; but that this white, hard,
heavy, twisted horn, hollow within, and from one to two else long, which we use
in Physic, is the horn of a great Fish which is found in Groynland, which the
Islanders call Narwall. This horn serves him as a defense against other Fish,
and to kill the greater Whales, of which he is so fearless, that he will
endeavor sometimes with a great impetuosity, to bore a hole in a great ship.
The horns of this great Fish were formerly very rare, and the Fish that bare
them very little known. But the frequent fishing in those Seas, have rendered
them less rare in England, Holland, Germany, Denmark, and other places; and
without seeking any farther, I have one by me at this present, longer and
bigger then that in the Treasury of St. Dennis.

The rarity of this Horn was the reason that it was so much esteemed in former
times, and that they attributed such extraordinary virtues to it, as well in
resisting poison, as against the Smallpox, Measles, and all Epidemic
Distempers. Insomuch, that we see in the Cabinets of great Persons long pieces
of this horn adorned and enchac'd in Gold, as being still esteemed a most
precious rarity, and of an inexhaustible virtue, that imparts it self without
wast to all Liquors wherein it is infused, like Regulus or Glass of Antimony.
But though the volatile salt with which this horn abounds, may produce the
effects expected from it; yet the virtue once imparted to any Liquor by the
horn is lost for ever to that part; as it happens to Hartshorn or Ivory, whose
parts are much of the same nature with this Unicorn's-horn, which being boiled
or infused loose all their virtue.

Doronicum is a Plant which many of the Ancients described under the name of
Aconitum Pardalianches, Plantaginis folio, the Leaves being like Plantain, but
yellower. The Flowers are like those of the Corn-Marigold. The Root here
prescribed is knotty and bearded, of a sweetish taste, and viscous substance. It
kills Leopards, Wolves, and Dogs, and the most part of four-footed Beasts,
though it is not hurtful to Man, but rather a great Antidote against Poisons.

This Powder is very much used in the North-parts, especially in Germany, where
it is used in Malignant Fevers, and all Epidemic Distempers, and against all
sorts of Poisons. It prevails wonderfully against the Smallpox, for it expels
the malignity forth, and strength'ns the Noble-parts. They usually dissolve it
in some Cordial-water, sweetn'd with Syrup of Gillow-flowers, Lemons or
Granates, and take it fasting from half a scruple to half a dram. The Tablets
taken one in a morning fasting, produce almost the same effect against
Pestilential-Air.

Pulvis Antipilepticus, D. D. D'AQUIN. An Antipileptic Powder by Monsieur
D'AQUIN.. Radicis Paeoniae maris, in eunte vere, and decrescente Luna
collectae, and. Roots of Male-Piony gathered at the beginning of the Spring, in
the decrease of the Moon, and Seminis ejusdem, Seed of the same, Radicis
Dictamni albi, Roots of white-Dittany, Visci Quercini, Misletoe, Rasurae Cranii
Hominis violenta morte perempti, Shavings of a Man's Skull that died a violent
death, Vnicornis, Of Unicorn's horn, Eboris, Of Ivory, Vngulae Alcis, an. j.
Hoof of an Elke, an. ^ Margaritarum Orientalium, Oriental Pearls, Lapidum
Hyacinthinorum, and Jacinth-Stone, and Coralli Rub. praeparatorum an. ss. Red
Coral prepared, an. ss. Seminis Ocymi Caryophyllati, Seeds of Clove-Basil,
Florum Tiliae, Flowers of Tylet, Betonicae, Betony, Lillii Convallium, an. ij.
Lilly Convally, an. ij. Ambrae-Grisiae, ss. Amber-grise, ss. Orientalis Moschi,
Gr. vj. Oriental Musk, Gr. vj. Folia Auri purissimi, No. xv. Leaves of finest
Gold, No. xv.

Procure the Ingredients true, take only the end, or tip of the Elk's-Horn, and
rasp it, and prepare the Powder as before.

The Elke by the Latins called Alce, is a Creature that breeds in the Woods of
the Northern Countries, particularly in Norway, as big as a large Horse, of a
fallow color, and somewhat shaped like a Heart, but bigger and fuller-body'd.
He has a Leg long and slender, and a foot cloven like the Heart; but his Horns
are flat and broad, like those of a fallow-Deer's, and hairy toward the lower
end. Some Natural Philosophers report this Beast to be so swift, that it were
impossible to take them, did not they that hunt them observe the time, when
they are troubled with the falling sickness, which oft-times happens, and then
take them before they have strength enough to put their left foot in their
Ears. For if they give them time, they immediately recover, rise, and run for
their lives. Which is the reason that the Elk's-Hoof is said to have power
alone to cure the Epilepsie, being either taken inwardly, or hung about the
Neck of the Patient.

Children born in the Southern Countries are more subject to Epilepsies, then
those that are born in the Northern Climates; and more subject to Worms, which
oft-times cause their Epilepsie. These Epileptic Powders are of great use, both
for little and great. They prevail greatly against the Apoplexy, Palsy, and
all Diseases proceeding from abundance or overflowing of humors in the Brain.
The same Dose as of other Cordial Powders is usually given in Cephalic Waters.
They may be also mixed with Opiates, Tablets, or other Remedies.

Pulvis contra Rabiem. A Powder againg Dog-madness.. Foliorum Rutae,. Leaves of
Rue, Verbenae, Vervain, Salviae Minoris, Lesser Sage, Plantaginis, Plantain,
Polypodii, Polipody, Absinthii Vulgaris, Vulgar Wormwood, Menthae, Mint,
Arthemisiae, Mugwort, Melyssophylli, Balm, Betonicae, Betony, Hyperici, St.
John's-wort, Centauri Minoris, an. parts aequales. Lesser Centaury, an. equal
parts.

Gather all these Herbs about the Full of the Moon in June, when every one of
them flourishes in its greatest virtue; and in fair Weather, make them up into
little bundles, bind them about with Paper, and hang them in the Air out of the
Sun to dry. When they are quite dry, beat them in a large Brazen Mortar, and
sift the Powder through a silken sierce.

This Powder was invented by Monsieur Pirou, and the Receipt is in a Treatise
of the biting of a Mad-dog, writt'n by Monsieur Palmerius, a Physician of
Paris, who affirms that he has often tried it, and seen the wonderful
Hydr^ph^bia, a Distemper occasioned by the biting of a mad-dog.
effects of it, and that they that used it, had been cured of the * Fear of
Water, so that they never had the Distemper; and that they that had it, had
been freed from it by taking this Powder, provided they had not been bit in the
Head, in the parts above the Teeth, or that they had not washed the part bitt'n
with Water; in which cases he believes there is little hopes of cure.

Though the being plunged into Seawater, is accounted an infallible remedy
against the biting of mad creatures, and that those who are near it, generally
have recourse thereto: Yet this Powder deserves to be prepared for those that
live at a distance from it. And I have had the opportunity formerly to prepare
it exactly at Mr. Noel Simard's in Blois, where I was a witness of the great
vent he had for this Powder, especially into the Country, and have heard the
great applause that was given to it. He ordered it to be taken mixed with half
a dram of Powder of Vipers, in half a glass of good White Wind, in the Morning
fasting, repeating the Dose for nine days one after another, and sometimes
fifteen, for more security; and he assured me, that all that had taken it were
cured. Monsieur Palmarius advises to augment the Dose for strong Persons; which
I am persuaded may be done, there being no Ingredient in this powder, to hinder
the augmentation of the Dose. There are some that advise the Patient, at the
time of taking this powder, to lay bruised Parsley upon the place bitt'n, which
is no bad counsel.

Pulvis pro Dentifricio. A Powder for a Dentifrice.. Radicis Ireos Florentiae,.
Root of Florence-Orrice, Lapidis Pumicis, Pumice-Stone, Cornu Cervi, ustorum,
Hartshorn burnt, Coralli Rubri praeparati, Red-Coral prepared, Ossis
Interioris sepiae, The inner-Bone of the Cuttle-fish, Cremoris Tartari tenu
issime Pulveratorum, an. j. Creme of Tartar very finely pulverized, an. j.
Moschi Orientalis, Civet, an. ss. Oriental Musk, Civet, an. ss. Oleorum
stillatitiorum ligni Rhodii, Caryophyllorum, Distilled Oils of Lignum Rhodium.
Cloves, Cinamomi, an. Gut. ij. Cinnamon, Drops ij

Mix them all well, and keep the Powder for use.

You must be careful to reduce all the Ingredients into an impalpable powder,
for fear of fretting the Gums. You may easily incorporate the Musk pulverized,
the Civet, and the distilled Oils, with the rest of the powders, without any
fear of their being too clammy. No less easy will it be to reduce this powder
into an Opiate by the mixture of equal parts of Syrup of Mulberries and Kermes,
to give it the consistency of an Opiate.

I know there is no want of powders and Opiates to whit'n the Teeth. But not to
slight private Receipts, nor such as are in the Dispensatories, I dare be
confident that this is as good as any to cleanse and whit'n the Teeth, whether
made use of in powder or reduced to an Opiate. For it not only cleanses and
whitens the Teeth, but fast'ns them, and keeps them from Rotting. The Syrups
must be mixed with the Powders in a Marble-mortar.

Pulvis alius compendiosior ad idem. A more compendious Powder for the same..
Lachrymarum elegantium Sanguinis Draconis, and. The Neat Tears of Dragon's
Blood, and Aluminis Romani usti, subtilissime pulverat. an. ij. Roman Alum
burnt, most finely powdered, an. ij. Moschi Orientalis, Gr. iiij. Oriental
Musk, Gr. iiij.

Mix them occording to Art for use, or else reduce them into an Opiate with
equal parts of the aforesaid Syrups mingled with the Powders.

This powder, though composed of fewer Ingredients, is not inferior to the
former, though not so cheap, because of the dearness of the Dragon's Blood in
Tears. The richer sort, that value not expense, may add powder of Pearls, which
will make the Opiate and powder never the worse.

The use of this powder is to rub the Teeth gently, Morning and Evening, or at
any other time.

Pulvis Cephalicus Odoratus. An Odoriferous Cephalic Powder. Radicis Ireos
Florentiae, viij.. Root of Florence-Orrice, viij. Santali Citrini, iiij.
Yellow-Saunders, iiij. Florum Lavendulae, Flowers of Lavender, Rosarum
Rubrarum, and Red Roses, and Summitat. Majoranae, an. iij. Tops of Marjoram,
an. iij. Styracis, Storax, Benjonis, ana. ij. Benjamin, an. ij. Takamahackae
Odoratae, Odoriferous Takamahacka, Florum Lillii Convallium, an. j. Flowers of
Lilly of the valleys, an. j. Caryophyllorum, ij. Cloves, ij. Laudani, Laudanum,
Acori Very, et The true sweet smelling flag, or Acorus, and Cyperi Rotundi, an.
j. Round-rooted Cyperus, an. j.

Make them into a Powder thicker then ordinary; to which for the richer sort
add of Musk, Civet, and Ambergrise, of each ten or twelve Grains.

This powder is usually applied, as well outwardly, as inwardly, which is the
reason you need not beat them very small. The principal use of it is for
Quilted* caps; the virtue of it is to strength'n the Brain. It may be also
sowed up in little cushions, or bags, and worn* upon the Stomach or Heart,
carried in the pocket, said upon the pillow in Bed, or put among cloths and
linen in Chests, for the same purpose.

Pulvis contra Vermes. A Powder to kill Worms.. Seminis contra Vermes,.
Wormseed, Citri mundati, Seed of Citron cleans'd, Genistae, Broom's Portulacae,
Purslain, Caulium, Coleworts, Rhei Electi, Choice Rhubarb, Scordii, Water
Germander, Centauri minori, Lesser Centaury, Radicis Gentianae, Root of
Gentian, and Rasurae Cornu cervini, an. j. Shaving of Hartshorn, an. j.

Reduce them all into a very fine Powder to be kept for use; when you use it,
add some few Grains of Mercurius Dulcis.

This powder contains a collection of all that Physic has of specific against
the Worms. The Dose is from half a scruple to half a dram, and as far as a
dram, for those that are of Age. It may be given in Wine, in Scordium, or
Water-Germander, Purslain, or Orange-flower-water, or in a roasted Apple, in
some Syrup, or Conserve. It may be mixed in Opiates and Potions. It may be
given with some grains of Mercurius Dulcis, but then care must be taken that
the Mercury be well mixed, and that it do not sink to the bottom of the Glass,
If their be occasion, this Powder may be made purgative, by mixing with it some
Grains of Rosin of Scamony or Jalap; which oft-times succeeds very well, the
Worms being thereby carried away which the powder has killed. The three last
days of the Moon are to be made choice of, if possible to give this, and all
other Remedies against the Worms, as proving then most successful.

Pulvis Digestivus. A Powder for Digestion.. Pulveris Viperini,. Powder of
Vipers, Seminis Faeniculi dulcis, Sweet Fennel-Seed, Anisi, and Seeds of Anise,
and Coriandri, an. j. Coriander, an. j. Dauci, and Wild-Carrot, and Ameos
Creticorum, an. ss. Bishops-weed of Candy, an. ss. Corticis exterioris Citri
sicci, Outward rind of Citron dried, Cinnamomi acutissimi, an. iij.
Sharp-biting Cinnamon, an. iij. Caryophyllorum, Cloves, Macis, an. j. Mace, an.
j.

Make all these into powder to mix with equal or double the weight in Sugar.

This Powder is not unpleasant, half a spoonful or a spoonful may be taken just
after meals as long as necessity requires. It cherishes the Natural-heat,
fortifies the Stomach, helps Concoction, expels wind, preserves the Appetite,
and restores it to those that have lost it; corrects the noysom steams of the
Stomach, and the ill-smells of the Mouth. The adding of two drams of Ambergrise
to this Composition will increase all its virtues.

Pulvis contra Abortum. A Powder against Abortion.. Margaritarum Orientalium
praeparatarum,. Oriental-Pearls prepared, Rasurae Vnicornis, and Shavings of
Unicorns-horn, and Eboris, Ivory, Succini albi, White Amber, Coralli Rub.
praeparatorum, Red-Corral prepared, Mastiches, Mastick, Seminis Plantaginis,
Seed of Plantain, Granorum Kerme^* Grains of Kermes, Santali Rubri,
Red-Saunders, Terrae Lemniae, and Seal'd-Earth, and Radicis Tormentillae, an.
ss. Root of Tormentil, an. ss. Macis, j. Mace, j. Caryophyllorum, j. Cloves, j.

Make all these into a powder according to Art, mixing therewith six Leaves of
pure fine Gold. When the Patient takes it, sweet'n it with an equal or double
weight of Sugar.

This Powder has been given to strength'n the Infant in the Womb, and to
prevent Women from crying out before their time.

It is to be taken fasting, in an Egg, in Broth or some Syrup or astringent
Confection, and the use of it may be continued as occasion requires. During
which time it is necessary for Women that take it to keep their Bed. The dose
is from half a Scruple to a Scruple, to those that are to continue the use of
it. But half a dram or a whole dram may be given to strong Women, if there be
occasion, and when the danger is great. The same dose may be given against
weaknesses, and want of Retention in the Stomach; as also in case of Diarrheas,
Dysenteries, Lienteries, and other Diseases that proceed from weakness of the
Stomach. The Preparation is the same with the rest.

Pulvis ad difficilem Partum. A Powder for Women in Childbirth.. Testiculorum
Equi in clibano, ex Art siccatorum,. The Stones of a Horse baked in an Ov'n
according to Art, Cinnamomi acutissimi, Sharp-biting Cinnamon, Nucleorum
Dactylorum, Date-Kernels, Boracis, Borax, Croci, and Saffron, and Foliorum
Sabinae siccorum, an. ij. Leaves of Savine dried, an. ij. Trochiscorum de
Myrrha, j. Trochishes of Myrrh, j.

Make them into powder according to Art.

Put the Horse's Stones into a Glaz'd-earth'n-pot with a Cover well-luted on,
set the Pot in a Baker's Ov'n when the Bread is taken out, and let it stand
till the Stones are so dry that they may be powdered. These Testicles thus
dried may be kept in a Box close shut, to be made use of as occasion requires:
for they may be left out as well as the Trochiskes of Myrrh and the Savine,
where the Persons are too nice, or where there is not so much strength required
in the Operation.

Pulvis Hystericus. A Hysteric Powder.. Verrucarum ad genua Equorum enascentium
Verno tempore avulsorum, aut sponte procidentium, j.. The Warts that grow
within-side of a Horses Leg, cut away or falling off of themselves in the
Springtime, j. Assae Faetidae, Assa-fetida, Cornu and Vngulae Hirci, an. j.
Horn and Hoof of a Goat, an. j.

Reduce all these into a gross powder. Cast about a Scruple of this Powder upon
live-coals, to sit and receive the smoke into the parts affected, through a
Tunnel.

This Powder is the most quick and certain Remedy that is against Suffocations
of the Matrix.

Pulvis Jovialis Hystericus. Hysteric Powder of Jupiter.. Magisterii Jovis
Anglici, aut Bezoardici ejusdem,. Magisterie of English-Jupiter, or Bezoardic
of the same, Matris Perlarum, and Mother of Pearl, and Coralli Rubri praeparat.
an. j. Red-Coral prepared, j. Olei stillatitii Succini rectificati, j.
Distilled Oil of Amber rectified, j.

Reduce these into powder, and mix them for your use.

This Powder cannot be too much commended, for the great help it gives against
the most violent and most desperate suffocations of the Matrix, and for
preventing its return. The dose is a Scruple in Hysteric-water, in the height
of the Fit: and it may be taken three mornings after, to prevent its return.

Look for the Preparation of Magisterie and Bezoar of Jupiter in the third part
of this Pharmacopoea.

Pulvis Sperniolae Crollii. Powder of Frogs-Tedders, by CROLLIUS.. Myrrhae
electae,. Choice Myrrh, Thuris masculi, an. ij. Male-Frankincense, an. ij.
Croci opt. ss. The best Saffron, ss.

Gather the Sperm of Frogs in the Month of March, three days before the new
Moon, at what time the Sperm stinks least, and is most proper to be distilled.
Distill it in Balneo Mariae through a Glass-Alembic: Or rather at the same time
gather a greater quantity of Frogs-Sperm, and put it into a trasparent
Linen Cloth; hang up the Bag and set a Vessel for the liquor to drop into it.
Put the Liquor into a Glass-bottle, and set it in the Sun to puriefi, pouring
out from time to time the liquor that is clear, and changing the Bottles, and
putting the Liquor still in the Sun till it be all perfectly clear. Then powder
the Myrrh, Frankincense and Saffron very fine, put the Powders mixed together
into a Plate of glass or white Earth, and having moistened them with the
Frog-water, and reduced them to a paste, spread them in the Plate covered with
a clean Paper and dry them in the shade: when the paste is dry, moist'n it
again with the same Liquor, and dry it again, and repeat the same Preparation
twenty or thirty times over; and the more the better. At last reduce the mass
into a very fine powder, and add to it three drams of Camphire powdered with
some few drops of Spirit of Wine: Keep this Powder in a Glass-bottle very well
stopped.

This Powder is an excellent Medicine to stop internal Haemorraghia's; for the
coldness of the Frog-water coagulates the Blood. It also stays Vomiting and
Spitting of Blood, and Bleeding at the Nose. It stops the progress of hot
Gouts, and asswages their pain. It cools the Inflammation of Erisipela's,
applying it soaked in Vinegar upon the part. In two hours it mortifies a
Whitlow, much more if it be steeped in the Spermwater. It stays the Fluxes of
Blood in Women, being taken in Plantain-water. The Water of Frogs-Sperm alone
asswages of the Gout, mixed with a little Alum. The Dose of the Powder is from
three to five Grains in proper Liquors.

Pulvis Dysentericus. A Powder against the Dysenterie.. Terrae Lemniae,.
Seal'd-Earth, Boli Armenae, Bole-Ammoniac, Rosarum Rubrarum, Red-Roses,
Balaustiorum, Pomegranate-Flowers, Radicum Tormentillae, and Bistortae, Root of
Tormentil, and Snake-weed, Lacrymarum Sanguinis Draconum, Tears of Dragon's
blood, Coralli Rubri praeparati, Red-Corral prepared, Lapidis Haematites, an.
j. Boodstone, an. j. Seminum Portulacae, Seeds of Purslane, Plantaginis, and
Plantain, Sophiae Chirurgorum, and ss. Flixe-wood, Caryophyllorum, an. Cloves,
and Macis, an. ij. Mace, an. ij.

Reduce all these into powder according to Art.

This Powder is not only highly commended against the Dysenterie, but against
all defects of Retention in the Intestines and Stomach. The Dose is from one
Scruple to one dram, or two when given to strong Constitutions. It is given in
Wine, or in some astringent Water or Decoction. It may be also taken like a
Bolus in some Syrup in an Egg, or some astringent Confection. For the Rich you
may add six Grain of Ambergrise, and half a Grain or a Grain of Laudanum, if
you desire more powerfully to stop the motion and acrimonie of the Humors: It
may be taken oft'n, if occasion requires, but still fasting.

There are some that beat Rye-flower in a Mortar, with Juice of ripe
Elder-berries, and make a Cake of it, which they dry in an Ov'n and reduce to
powder, the use whereof is much the same with this Dysenteric-powder.

Pulvis contra Haemorrhagiam. A Powder against a violent Flux of Blood..
Lapidis Haematitis,. Blood Stone, Nuclei Lapidis Aetitis, Kernel of the
Eagle-stone, Terrae Vitrioli, post distillationem remanentis, lotae, Earth of
Vitriol that remains after distillation, washed, Boli Armenae, Bole-Armonac,
Thuris masculi, Male-Frankincense, Caudae Equinae, Smooth-leav'd Horse-tail, or
Joynted-Rushes, Centinodiae, Knot-grass, Terrae Lemniae, Seal'd-Earth, Cornu
Cervi usti, and Hart's-Horn burnt, Gypsi, ana. parts aequales. Parget, ana.
equal parts.

Reduce all these into a powder for use.

This Powder is not to be taken inwardly. However it fails not to stop the
blood of Wounds, Veins or Arteries applied alone, or incorporated with the
white of an Egg or Vinegar, being bound upon the place with a Fillet. It stops
Defluxions upon the Eyes, being steept in the white of an Egg or Vinegar, and
applied to the Temples. This Powder deserves to be prepared, and to be kept
always in readiness upon all unexpected occasions.

Pulvis Diatragacanthi Frigidi, Correctus. The Corrected Powder of
Cold-Diatragacanth.. Gummi Tragacanthi electi, ij.. Choice Gum-Tragacanth, ij.
Arabici opt. x. Arabic the best, x. Glycyrrhizae, and Liquorice, and Amyli,
an. ss. Flower of Wheat, an. ss. Seminis Papaveris alb. iij. Seed of white
Poppy, iij. Quat. frigid maj. mund. an. j. Four greater cold cleans'd, an. j.

Pulverize the Gums in a large Brass-mortar heated, as well as the Pestle, in
such a quantity that you may be sure to have the Dose prescribed when they come
to be sifted. Bruise one part of the Seeds with the Liquorice, another with the
Amydon, another with the Gums, after they have been sifted: by which means you
shall re-sift the whole Powder again with the Seeds.

We find in other Receipts of this Powder three ounces of Penidiate, more
Cold-Seeds by half, as also Camphire, which are all left out. They that know
that Sugar boiled in Pennets and mixed in Powders, presently causes their
putrefaction, and that it reduces the powder to a kind of paste, cannot think
it amiss to leave it out: besides that its virtue is not considerable, and for
that this Powder is never used but mixed with Sugar, or with Compositions mixed
with Sugar. Nor can they disapprove the abatement of some part of the
Cold-Seeds, to prevent it from rendering the Powder greasy and clammy.
Especially considering that if you design to keep the powder, it is better not
to put the Seeds in at all till you are just going to use it.

This Powder stops Defluxions from the Brain upon the Breast, thick'ns the thin
humors, smooths the roughness of the Aspera Arteria and the Lungs, and is of
great use in all Diseases of the Breast. You may make Tablets thereof by adding
an ounce and a half or two ounces of this Powder to a pound of Sugar boiled to
a solid Electuary. It is also mixed in some sort in Looches to remove in some
measure the sharpness of Laxatives. It is never given alone, and therefore it
is needless to limit the Dose, which must be regulated by that of the
Compositions wherewith it is to be mixed.

If you would make this Powder more detersive, and more effectual to unloosen
phlegm and facilitate expectoration, add to it the double of its weight of
Orrice finely-powder'd; and by adding as much Sugar Candy powdered as there is
Gum-Tragacanth, you have the Simple-powder of Diaireos. Remember however that
it is not good to put Sugar in Powders till you are ready to make use of them.

Pulvis Sternutatorius. A Sneezing-Powder.. Foliorum Marjoranae siccorum,.
Flowers of Marjoram dried, Salviae, Sage, Betonicae, Betonie, Florum Lillii
Convallium, an. j. Flowers of the Lilly of the Valley, an. j. Radicum Ireos
Florentiae, Roots of Florence-Orrice, Ellebori albi, White Ellebore, Pyrethri,
Pellitory of Spain, Seminis Nigellae Romanae, an. ij. Seeds of Roman-Nigella,
an. ij. Summitat. Pulegii Regalis, and Serpilli, an. j. Tops of Pennyroyal,
and Mother of Thyme, an. j.

Make a Powder according to Art.

This Sneezing-powder produces good effects in Apoplexies, Epilepsies,
Lethargies, and other Diseases of the Brain that proceed from a cold cause: For
it op'ns the passages for the cold humors that besieged it, excites and
enliv'ns the Natural-heat, and enables the parts to expel superfluities, that
hindered them from performing their ordinary functions.

In extraordinary drowsinesses and sleepy-Lethargies, two drams of Euphorbium
may be added to the Composition of this Powder. But not unless there be very
great necessity, for fear the extraordinary operation of the Euphorbium cause
so violent a defluxion of Rhume as will be difficult afterward to stop.

Pulvis Cornachinus. The Cornachine-Powder.. Scammonii purissimi sulphurati,
ij.. The purest Scammony sulphurated, ij. Antimonii Diaphoretici, j ss.
Diaphoretic-Antimony, j ss. Cremoris Tartari, ss. Creme of Tartar, ss.

Reduce them all into a fine powder for use.

This Powder was called Cornachine, by reason that Cornachinus a Physician of
Pisa was the Inventor, and has made a great Commentary upon it. The wonderful
effects of it have been the reason that some Persons have attempted to alter
the Composition by adding or abating. For some, instead of preparing Scammonie
with the vapor of Sulphur, imbibe it several times in Tincture of Roses
sharpened with Spirit of Wine or Spirit of Sulphur, reduce it into a paste with
Oil of sweet Almonds, and dissolve the Creme of Tartar in a Decoction of
Mechoacan, and chrystallize it to put it into this Powder. But not to find
fault with their good Intentions, this I can be bold to say, That upon an
infinite company of Trials I have made, I dare affirm that this Powder prepared
as here prescribed, fails not to answer full expectation. And therefore it is a
vain thing to keep such a stir about the preparation of Scammonie; it being
enough to spread it upon a piece of paper, and hold it over a little
burning-Sulphur. Which done, do but prepare the Powder right and observe the
Doses, and you need not fear the working.

Some call it The Earl of Warwick's Powder; others Antimony-diagridiated;
others Powder of Three.

This Powder operates, quickly, safely and pleasingly. It gently purges
superfluous Humors from the Bowels, and roots up the cause and matter of
Agues, and many other tedious Diseases. The Dose is from half an scruple to
half a dram, and sometimes to a whole dram. It is to be taken in a morning
fasting, in white Wine, in Broth, or some Hepatic-decoction. It may also be
taken in the Yolk of an Egg, in a little Syrup, or in some Confection.

Pulvis Nephriticus. A Nephritic-Powder.. Oculorum Cancrorum Fluviatilium,.
River-Crabs Eyes, Ossium petreorum Percarum, and Stony-bones in the heads of
Perches, and Asellorum minorum, Lesser Whitings, Millipedarum siccarum, Dried
Cheslops, Sanguinis Hirci praeparati, and Goats-blood prepared, Seminis Milii
Solis, an. j. Seeds of Gromel, an. j

Grind the Crab's-eyes and Fish-bones upon Porphyrie, moist'ning them with
Turnipwater, observing the preparation of Precious-Stones. Take the Blood of a
young Goat bred upon the Mountains, and there having fed upon Aromatic-herbs,
dry the Blood in the Sun, spread upon Plates, till it be fit to be pulverized
with the Cheslops and Gromel-seed. Then sifting all the Powders together, the
powder is finished.

The Ingredients of this Powder are very diuretic: the principal virtue whereof
consists in the volatile-salts wherewith they abound. And it is observable that
there is nothing ac^^ in the whole Composition. For the mixture of acids among
fixed or volatile Salts many times does but increase the Stone, by reason that
by their proportional conjunction the Stones are formed in the Body: so that
there is nothing but the predominancy of the volatile or fixed Salt above the
acid, or of the acid above the fixed or volatile Salts that oppose the growing
of the Stone in the Body, or dissolve them when they are come to a Substance.
The Dose of this Powder is from a scruple to half a dram. It is taken usually
in White Wind; and the use of it may be continued as occasion requires.

They that will be careful to prepare this Powder, need not care for that which
goes in most Dispensatories under the Name of Lithontripon, or Lithontripticon,
which is only a numerous collection of Medicaments much differing in quality,
some of which are more proper to coagulate and shut up, then to dissolve and
open.

CHAP. XX. Of Opiates, Electuaries, and Confections.
THE Name of Opiate, by right, ought not to be given but to soft Compositions,
where Opium is an Ingredient. But many times Confections, Antidotes, and
Electuaries are comprehended under that Name; so that there are some
Compositions called Opiates, wherein there is no Opium at all; as well as the
Names of Electuaries, Antidotes and Confections, to Compositions where Opium is
mixed. But not to examine the Liberties which the Writers have taken, I will
only say, That Opiates, Confections, Antidotes and Electuaries, are internal
Remedies variously composed of Pulps, Powders, Liquors, Sugar, and Honey, and
most frequently reduced to a soft consistency to be put up close in Pots for
use. Only solid Electuaries are to be excepted, of some of which I have spok'n
in the Chapter of Tablets, having reserved the rest to be here inserted among
Purgative-Electuaries.

It is a difficult thing to prescribe any just proportion for the Pulps,
Powders, Sugar, or Honey, which must compose these Opiates and Electuaries; or
to give a general Rule for the quantity of Liquor necessary to suck up the
virtue of diverse Medicaments, boiled or infused therein; as for the boiling of
the Sugar or Honey; in regard the quantity of the one or the other may be
augmented or abated, according to the nature of the Ingredients, the purpose of
the Physician, and the Palate and constitution of the Patient. For though the
most usual proportion for Opiates, soft and solid Elelectuaries Laxative, be
about three ounces of Powder to a pound of Sugar, or Honey, and an ounce and a
half or two ounces of Powder for Confections, or solid Cordial-Electuaries;
this proportion is not always to be observed. For regard is oft'n-times to be
had to the price, scarcity or nature of the Ingredients of the Powder, or the
quantity or thickness of the Pulps which are to be made use of in the stead of
Sugar or Honey, to the palate and constitution of the Patient, to the hardness
of the Composition, or the easiness or difficulty to give them their due
consistence; or to the making the Composition more purgative or Laxative.
Wherein there is a great exactness to be observed, especially in the Doses of
Laxatives and Narcoticques. For therein you must observe to a grain the
quantity of Powder which an ounce of Electuary can contain. To which purpose
the Apothecary mu^^ be very careful justly to weigh every thing, and to make a
true mixture, so that all the parts of the Composition may equally partake of
the Powder and the Ingredients that compose it. Which general Rule may suffice
to those who will take the pains to observe my Method in the particular
Preparation of these sorts of Compositions, whereby they will find the reasons
wherefore the proportions are not always to be the same.

Theriaca Andromachi Senioris. The Treacle of Andromachus the Elder..
Trochiscorum Scilliticorum, xij.. Trochishes of Squils, xij. Viperinorum, Of
Vipers, Magmatis Hedychroi, The Dregs of Hedychroum, Piperis longi,
Long-Pepper, Opii Thebaici, an. vj. Theban-Opium, an. vj. Rosarum Rubrarum,
Red-Roses, Succi Glycyrrhizae, Juice of Liquorice, Seminis Buniadis, Seed of
wild Navew, Scordii, Scordium, Opobalsomi, Opobalsamum, Cinnamomi and Agarici,
an. iij. Cinnamon and Agaric, an. iij. Costi, Costus, Nardi Indicae,
Indian-Spikenard, Dictamni Cretici, Cretan-Dittany, Rhapontici, Rhaponticum,
Radicis Pentaphylli, Roots of Cinqfoyle, Zinziberis, Ginger, Prassij Albi,
White-Hore-hound, Stoechadis Arabicae, Arabian-Cassidonie, Schoenanthi,
Sweet-Rush, Seminis Petroselini Macedonici, Seed of Macedonian Stone-Parsly,
Calaminthae Montanae, Mountain Calamint, Cassiae Ligneae, Cassia-Wood, Croci,
Saffron, Piperis Albi, White Pepper, Nigri, Black, Myrrhae Trogloditidis,
Ethyopic-Myrrh, Thuris Masculi, Male-Frankincense, Terebinthinae Chiae, an. j
ss. Turpentine of Chio, an. j ss. Radicum Gentianae Roots of Gentian, Acori
very, True sweet smelling Flag, Meu Athamantici, Athamantic-Spignel, Valerianae
majoris, Bigger Valerian, Nardi Celticae, Celtic-Spikenard, Amomi Racemosi,
Amomum with Clusters, Chamaepityos, Ground Pine, Comae Hyperici, Hair of St.
John's-wort, Seminis Ameos, Seeds of Bishops-weed, Thlaspeos, Treacle-Mustard,
Anisi, Anise, Foeniculi, Fennel, Seseleos Massiliensis, Hartwort of Marseilles,
Cardamomi minoris, Lesser Cardamom, Malabathri, Indian-Leaf, Comae Polii
montani, Hair of Mountain-Poley, Chamaedryos, Germander, Carpobalsami, Berries
of the Balsom-Tree, Succi Hypocistidos, Juices of the Excrescence of Cistus,
Acaciae verae, Of true Acacia, Gummi Arabici, Gum- Arabic, Styracis Calamitae,
Mountain-Calamint, Terrae Lemniae, Lemnian-Earth, Chalcitidis, Chalcitis,
Sagapaeni, an. j. Sagapenum, an. j. Radicum Aristolochiae tenuis, Roots of thin
Birthwort, Comae Centaurii minoris, Hair of the Lesser Centaurie, Seminis Dauci
Cretici, Seed of Cretan-Wild-Carrot, Opopanacis, Opoponax, Galbani, Galbanum,
Bituminis Judaici, Bitumen of Judea, Castorei, an. ss. Castoreum, an. ss.
Mellis opt. despumati, lb xxviij. The best clarified Honey, lb xxviij. Vini
Generosi, q. s. Strong Wine, q. s.

I have here inserted this Receipt of the Treacle of Andromachus the Father,
not only in reverence to Antiquity; but because I am verily persuaded that if
care be taken rightly to choose all the Ingredients that compound it, and to
make a more methodical Preparation then the Ancients did, that the Medicine may
prove of great virtue.

I have delivered my thoughts upon this particular Receipt in the Treatise of
Treacle, which I have printed at Paris in the Year 1668. whither I might refer
the Reader. But to spare him that pains, I will here epitomize in a few words
the Observations which I there made upon this Treacle Methinks that in the
Preparation of Trochiskes of Squils he has done very well to imitate Zwelfer,
to make use of the Root of white-Dittany pulverized instead of the Vetches, in
regard that all Physic acknowledges the Cordialvertue of this Root, and that it
is very proper to make the Squills sit for Trochiskes. Whereas the Vetches are
of a very gross substance, have no Cordial-vertue, and are seldom used but in
Cataplasmes; and never in any other internal Remedies then Trochiskes.

In the second place I am absolutely constrained to disallow of the ancient
preparation of Trochiskes of Vipers, which was prescribed in that manner,
because they had then no true knowledge of the Nature of Vipers, nor of their
Venom, and because that the Havoc which Hannibal's Vipers made in the Roman
Ships, gave them occasion to think, very impertinently, that all the parts of
the Vipers were venomous, and that it was impossible for them to have their
Cordial and poyson-resisting virtue, without overcoming by some Preparation
that ill imagin'd-Venome, and of which they were so afraid in their ridiculous
preparation of the viperine salt. And this was that which obliged them to whip
them, before they cut off their Heads, and their Tails, and not to make any use
at all of their Hearts, and their Livers; as also to boil the Trunks flayed,
and quite dis-embowel'd in Water with Salt and Dill, till the flesh came from
the Bone; and to mix the same flesh, so boiled, with a fifth part of
Bisket-bread powdered, to make Trochiskes: Not considering that the provocation
of the Vipers by whipping could not but alter and deprave all the parts of
their bodies, so far it was, from sending to the Head, as they pretended, a
Venom which is not to be found in any part of the body, when the Viper is
dead, nor when it is living neither, nor of which you can observe any ill
effect, if she be not provoked when she bites. Neither had they considered that
the Heart and the Liver have as much virtue as the flesh, or that the addition
of Salt and Dill, are no way necessary; in regard the flesh of those Animals
have no Venom; that they only served to make an impression of heat and
Acrimony; and that the Salt was opposite to their precepts of making choice of
the breedingplace of the Viper, directing that no use should be made of those
that bred upon the Seashore, by reason of the Salt things upon which they fed.
Nor did they observe that they could not boil Vipers in Water, till the flesh
came from the bone, but that all the best part of their Juice and virtue must
go into the Broth, as they might have seen by boiling their ordinary food. And
lastly, they did not foresee that the Addition of a fifth part of the
Bisket-bread powdered, void of any virtue, could not but be a burden to the
Viper's flesh, which was already deprived of its best parts; and that that
quantity of Bread made up a moiety of the substance and weight of the
Trochiskes when they were dry.

They who would not fall into these errors, and who in some measure to be
conformable to Andromachus, would prepare Trochiskes, must not forget to make
use of the Hearts and Livers of the Vipers, with their bodies dried in the
shade, and reduced into fine powder. Let them then make a paste, somewhat
solid, of this powder, with Malmsey, wherein they have dissolved never so
little Gum-Arabic powdered, and make it into flat, thin Trochiskes, which they
must dry in the shade, and afterward anoint with Balsom of Peru, as well for
their preservation, as to give them a fragrancy.

If any object, that Andromachus never knew that the Vipers-bone was used in
Trochiskes; I answer, that if he had perfectly well known the parts of which
they are composed; or if he had understood as I do, that there is both a
volatile salt and oil in the bone, and that more plentiful then in the flesh,
he would not have omitted the use of them, and never have crumm'd his Bread
into Trochiskes. I am persuaded also, that if he were now alive; if he had been
present at all the truths which I have discovered, and had been convinced of
the truth of the reasons which I have delivered in my Book of Experiences upon
the Viper, he would infallibly have for saken his own preparation, and have
adhered to mine, and caused them to change their opinion, who innocently lead
him into a mistake.

In the third place, forasmuch as most of the Ingredients that make up the
composition of Trochishes of Hedychroum, are also used in the composition of
Treacle; and for that these drugs cannot be beaten apart, nor the Trochiskes be
made and dried in the Air, without a great loss of their weight, as also of
their virtue, considering also after all this, that the same Trochiskes are to
be powdered themselves among other Medicaments of the Treacle; It may not be
amiss to let the making of Trochiskes alone, dispensing the proportion of Drugs
required for their composition, among the Ingredients prescribed for the
composition of the Treacle; and so to powder the whole together, as things
appointed for one and the same composition.

In the fourth place I cannot allow the opinion of the Ancients in the mixture
of the Medicaments of the Treacle, whereby they direct the dissolving the Gums
in Wine, to strain them through a cloth, and to boil them afterward to a
consistency somewhat thick, to mix them afterward in the composition; since
there are several good reasons opposite to that Method. 1. Because there is no
necessity to dissolve and strain the Gums which should be pure. 2. Because we
cannot dissolve them in Wine, strain them, and boil them to that consistency
which they direct, without a great dissipation of the volatile parts whereof
they plentifully consist, and wherein lies their principal virtue. 3. Because
by that means the spiritous part of the Wine dissipates, and the watery and
Terrestrial part only remains. 4. Because that after the dissolution and
straining of the Gums, though you may have augmented the weight, yet it is
impossible regularly to observe the dose which the Author has prescribed. And
lastly, because that after you have put in the Gums very pure, by beating them
among other Medicaments, the Powder becomes much better, by reason the viscous
parts of the Gums stick to the light and dry parts of the other Ingredients of
the Powder, which otherwise would be subject to dissipate, and by this means
unless the Powder be too fatty, it beats better, and is made with less wast of
its quantity and virtues.

As for the Opium, had it we in Tears that were pure, such as distills from the
heads of the Poppy in the Country of Thebes, and such as Andromachus might have
had in his time, it would be enough to beat it among other Ingredients, like
the Gums in Tears. But by reason of the impurity of that which is brought to
us, it is very proper to prepare it in extract, according to the method which I
shall prescribe when I come to speak of extracts; and to dissolve these
Extracts in a little Wine, like that of Liquorice, and the Juices of Acacia, or
the undergrowth of Cistus, as also Chalcitis, or the Stone that tryes Brass,
and to strain through a Cloth these Extracts or Juices dissolved, to separate
and cast off the impurities, to the end they may be mingled afterward in the
whole mass of the Treacle.

In the fifth place, I see nothing that should oblige us to imitate the
Ancients in the despumation of Honey, by adding Wine to it; as well to prevent
the spiritous part from flying away in the Ebullitions necessary for the
despumation, and to the end the grosser part of the Wine may not remain among
the Honey; as for that it is impossible that the Honey should be kept so long
upon the fire, till the foreign moisture be consumed, without a remarkable
dissipation of its Aromatic parts, which are not the least. And for as much as
we never put into Treacle any Honey but what is perfectly fine, I can find
nothing more proper then to allow it a small Ebullition without any Addition,
and after it is taken off the fire and cool, to scum it, and strain it through
a hair-sieve. In regard that little boiling is sufficient to put it into a
condition to suck up about two pints of Wine, which are enough for the
dissolution of the Juices prescribed for this quantity of Treacle, and to give
all the Ingredients mixed and united together, the consistency of an Opiate.

As for the Opo-Balsamum, or the Oil of Nutmegs, which may be used in its
stead; one part of the one or the other may be very properly mixed with the dry
Medicaments, when you make the powder without any fear that it should be too
fatty. The surplusage must be incorporated with the Turpentine.

The Trochiskes of Squills must be beaten among the rest of the Ingredients,
which are to be pulverized. The Saffron dried in a Stove, or by a moderate
fire, may be beaten apart or with the rest of the Ingredients.

The Extracts being made and dissolved in wine, as also the Juices and the
Powder being ready, the Turpentine must be melted with the Opo-Balsamum, or the
Oil of Nutmegs, in Balneo Mariae, or over a very moderate fire. Fill three or
four pints of Honey, scum'd and warmed, into a large basin, mix therewith the
Powdered Saffron, if it were beaten apart; if not, mix therewith some part of
the Powder, stirring the whole with a large woodd'n-Spatula; then add some
pints of warm Honey; and after that put in some part of the dissolved Extracts
and Juices, and continue adding successively, sometimes the Powder, sometimes
the Honey, and sometimes the dissolved Juices and Extracts, till the mixture of
all things be perfectly completed. After that, mix the Turpentine, and the
rest of the Opo-Balsamum or Oil of Nutmegs incorporated: Stir the whole as long
as you can, till the union and mixture of the whole be perfectly completed.

When the composition is quite cold, put it up into an Earth'n-Vessel glazed
within, a third part larger then to contain the quantity of the Treacle, that
it may have sufficient room to swell, which the Treacle will do during
Fermentation, which you may hasten by putting the Vessel into a warm place.
Stir the Treacle with a woodd'n Spatula twice a week, about a quarter of an
hour together every time, for the two first months, and repeat the same
stirring once a Week for the next four months; which make in all six months;
the time which all Writers judge necessary for the Fermentation of this
Treacle. By this means you shall not only make a perfect Union of the
substances, but also of the virtues of all the Medicaments, and then you may
safely make use of this Treacle.

The considerable quantity of Opium in this composition, is the reason that it
sensibly shows its Anodyne, or pain-easing, thickning, soporiferous qualities,
especially when it is new, though the force of the other Medicaments is not
diminished, which serves as a curb to its operation. Treacle being composed of
a great quantity of hot Medicaments, ought to be very much esteemed for the
cure of cold Diseases, and of all those where the Natural heat is feeble and
languishing, especially among the rest, of Palsies, Epilepsies, Convulsions,
and all cold Diseases of the Head. It is proper against all Weaknesses, and
want of retention in the Stomach, and Intestines; against the Diarrhea,
Dysentery, Lientery, Morbus Cholera, and all sort of Cholicks; against Agues,
and particularly the Quartan; against the Worms, against all sorts of poison,
the Pestilence, Small Pox, the Measles, and all Epidemic Diseases; against the
biting of maddogs, and all sorts of Venomous Animals; against want of sleep,
and griping pains in Children; against Hysteric-passions, the Jaundies, and an
infinite sort of other Diseases.

It is taken in Bolus, and you may drink a little Wine after it if you please,
or else dissolve it in Wine, or in Cordial-water. The Dose of it for Children,
is from one grain to three or four, and sometimes six: For grown people, from a
scruple to a dram; and two drams for strong constitutions, and upon urgent
occasions. It may be laid upon the Stomach or Heart, like an Emplaister, or
Epitheme, as well to strengthen, as to resist any malignity, and to kill Worms.
It is also to be laid upon Carbuncles, and Buboes Pestilential or Venereal. It
is also to be mixed with Spirit of Wine, and with Oils and Ointments, to be
laid to the Chine of the Back, and upon the weakened parts. It is also laid to
the wrists, and soles of the Feet in the fits of intermitting Agues, and
particularly the Quartan. It is mingled in Opiates, and in diverse potions. It
is given as an infallible remedy to hinder the too great effect of purgative
Medicines, and all sorts of superpurgations.

But because the mixture of so many several Ingredients in one only
composition, has for a long time displeased many Persons who are able to judge;
and for that they have believed with good reason, that there might be a Treacle
composed of fewer drugs, and more effectual then that of the Ancients. And for
that I am well informed that several Physicians, but more especially
Apothecaries, have earnestly wished that such a one might be invented and
published; Monsieur D'Aquin the King's chief Physician has been pleased to give
me the Receipt of a Treacle ordered according to his own way, to impart on his
behalf to public view; wherein you shall find Medicaments, not only
well-dos'd, and well-proportion'd, but also admirably well-chosen, and which
will certainly work all the good effects which can be expected from an
excellent Treacle, provided you take care to have sound and good Ingredients,
and prepare them well, and observe the method which I shall set down.

Theriaca Reformat D. D. D'AQUIN. A Reformed Treacle of Monsieur D'AQUIN..
Truncorum, Cordum, and Hepatum Viperinorum siccorum, xxiv.. The Bodies, Hearts,
and Livers of Vipers dried, xxiv. Trochiscorum Scilliticorum, Trochiskes of
Squills, Extracti Opii Thebaici, an. xij. Extract of Theban-Opium, an. xij.
Radicum Contra-yervae, Roots of Spanish Counter-poyson, Viperinae Virginianae,
Virginian Vipers-grass, Angelicae, Angelica, Valerianae majoris, The greater
Valerian, Meu Athamantici, Cretan Spignell, Gentianae, Gentian, Aristolochiae
tenuis, Slender Birthwort, Costi, Costus, Nardi Indicae, Indian-Spikenard,
Nardi Celticae, Celtic-Spikenard, Cinnamomi, Cinnamon, Olei Nucis Moscatae per
expressionem Extracti, Oil of Nutmegs pressed, Croci, Saffron, Dictamni Cretici,
Cretan-Dittany, Folii Indi, Indian-Leaf, Scordii, Water-Germander, Calaminthae
Montanae, Mountain-Calamint, Polii Montani lutei, Yellow Mountain-Poley,
Chamaepityos, Grand Pine, Comarum Centaurii minoris and Hyperici, Hair of the
Lesser Centaury, and St. John's-wort, Florum Stoechadis Arabicae, Flowers of
Arabian Cassidony, Granorum Amomi Racemosi, and Berries of Amomum, and
Cardamomi minoris, Lesser Cardamoms, Seminis Petroselini Macedonici, Macedonian
Stone-Parsley, Ameos, Bishops-weed, Seseleos Massiliensis, Seseli of Massilia,
Myrrha Troglodytidis, an. viij. Ethiopian Myrrh, an. viij. Resinae Styracis
electae purissimae, The purest Rosin of Storax, Opopanacis, Opopanax, Sagapeni,
Sagapen, Castorei, an. iv. Castoreum, an. iv. Extracti Mellaginei Granorum
Juniperi, lb lxxij ss. Mellaginous Extract of Juniper Berries, lb lxxij ss.
Vini Malvatici, lb j ss. Malmsey-wine, lb j ss.

There is no need of preparing Trochiskes of Vipers for this Treacle, it being
enough to hang up the Bodies, Hearts, and Livers of the Vipers, to dry in the
open Air out of the Sun, and to take the weight prescribed. The Trochiskes of
Squills are prepared with the Powder of the Root of White-Dittany, as I shall
show in the Chapter of Trochiskes. Draw the Extract of Opium according to the
method which I shall give in the Chapter of Extracts in the Third Part of this
Pharmacopoea, and reduce it into an indifferent solid consistence.

The Root of Contra-yerva, or Spanish-Counter-poyson, grows in Charcis a
Province of Peru. It is smaller then that of Orrice, reddish without, white
within, knotty and fibrous. The smell is like that of Figg-leaves. The word
which signifies in Spanish, Counter-poyson, comes from the Spanish Yerva, by
which name the Spaniards call white-Hellebore, with the Juice whereof the
Spanish Huntsmen are wont to poison their Arrows in the Country where the
Contra-yerva grows. The taste of the Root is Aromatic, accompanied with a kind
of Acrimony.

The Virginian Vipers-grass, is a kind of Contra-yerva, which grows in that
part of Virginy possessed by the Spaniards in the Northern Tract of America; it
is very Aromatic, and much esteemed in England against Poisons, and all sorts
of Venomes. For which reason it is added to the Root of Contra-yerva of Peru,
in the Countess of Kent's Powder, to which these two Roots do give its
principal virtue.

What I have already said of the Roots of Angelica, Spignel and Gentian,
speaking of Theriacal Vinegar, needs no repetition.

I cannot change my opinion as to what I have already said of slender
Birthwort, in my Discourse upon Treacle. And say moreover, that for this, or
the Treacle of Andromachus, you are to use no other Birthwort, then that which
by Writers is called Pistolochia, Polyrrhizon, or the bushy-rooted Birthwort,
because it is of a slenderer substance then all the rest, and in particular
more abounding in virtue, then the Clematitis, or Spanish climbing Birthwort,
which Matthiolus, and some others, his followers take for the slender Birthwort.

For it is not enough, that Dioscorides, Matthiolus, and Theophrastus, knew but
three sorts of Birthwort, the long, the round, and the Clematitis: That the
Clematitis has a slenderer Root then any of the three; That Matthiolus believed
that it was to be made use of in the Treacle before the long or the round, and
that it has in some places been put into the Treacle instead of the slender
Birthwort; it ought also to have been inquired whether there were no other sort
of Birthwort in Europe; whether the Clematitis, had any other more evident
marks of slenderness, then all the other Birthworts; and whether it surpassed
them in virtues, that we might certainly know it to be that to which
Andromachus has given the name of slender? Then it might have been seen that
there are several other sorts of Birthwort, besides the three of Dioscorides,
Matthiolus, and Theophrastus, and the Clematitis which Matthiolus, and some
others take for the slender Birthwort: that instead of being slenderer then the
rest, the stalks thereof are thicker and higher; the Leaves, Flowers and
Fruits, larger and bigger, and the Roots much longer then those of all the
other sorts of Birthwort, and in particular much bigger then those of
Pistolochia or Polyrrhizon, or bushy-rooted Birthwort, of which all the parts
are much more slender, then that of Clematitis, and all the other sorts. It
might have been observed that the bushy-rooted Birthwort, which I have made
choice of, has a taste, smell, and color, both External and Internal, much
more like to those of the long and round Birthwort, then to that of the
Clematitis; which on the contrary differs much from the rest, especially in
taste and smell. As for the virtues, though that Matthiolus believed that it
was to be made use of in the Treacle, for the slender Birthwort, in regard the
Clematitis was the most slender that he knew, you shall find nothing in better
Authors to support his opinion; On the contrary, you shall find, that the
Clematitis is inferior to the bushy-rooted Birthwort in virtue.

We shall find in Dioscorides, upon whom Matthiolus grounds his writings, that
after he has extolled the virtues of the long and round Birthwort, at last,
says he, Clematitis is thought to have the same effects, but it is inferior in
virtue. But he does not say, as his Commentator does, that it is to be put into
the Treacle. We shall find that Ruellius, after he had extolled the virtues of
the Birthworts, and above all, those of the bushyrooted, concludes in these
words: That which is called Clematitis is thought to work the same effects, but
more slowly. We may find in Daleschamp, that Clematitis is proper for the same
uses that all the other Birthworts are, but that it is inferior in virtue. And
the same Author citing Galen, where he speaks of Birthworts, says, that the
Clematitis is much more odoriferous, for which reason it is used in fragrant
Ointments; but that in Physic the Operation is less effectual then that of the
rest. And the same Author, quoting Aegineta, puts Clematitis among the
Medicaments that evacuate Choler, which is no effect expected from the virtues
that Treacle ought to have. You shall meet with Clusius also citing the same
Galen to the disadvantage of Clematitis; as also Bauhinus, speaking by the
mouth of Dioscorides, and saying, Clematitis is thought to do the same, but it
is inferior to the forementioned in virtue. And the same Bauhinus urging
Galen, thus says; That which is called Clematitis is more fragrant, therefore
it is used in Ointments, but in Physic it is much weaker. You may find in
Lobel, the same Citations of Dioscorides and Galen, to the decrying of the
Clematitis. In particular he speaks thus,

Polyrrhizae Aristolochiae, etc. The Roots of bushy-rooted Birthwort, not
mentioned by Dioscorides, and unknown to his Commentator, Rondeletius brought
into use, utterly neglected through ignorance of the Plant, and yet to be
preferred before the other two, as well for its pleasing Acrimony, as for its
more effectual operation in Physic, and therefore by Andromachus and Galen,
recommended as more fit for Treacle; For he that observes the taste and savor
shall find the Clematitis, much more ineffectual, which the Latins took to be
the slender Birthwort, mentioned by the ancient Writers of Treacle. Afterward
you shall find him thus discoursing. Not less known, nor less common is the
Clematitis, which grows of it self in the cold Fields and Vineyards in the
other parts of France, in all Italy, Germany, and Flanders. It grows like a
Vine-Branch, about a Cubit long, with a yellow Flower, the stalk about a Cubit
in length, the Fruit oblong, about the bigness of a small Egg, with a broad
seed within, the Root small and fragrant. This is of less virtue then the rest,
and less in use, unless it be with the omniscient Apollo, and Matthiolus, that
follow the Rabble of vulgar Apothecaries; who when they never saw the long and
bushy-rooted, and were persuaded that there was no Plant wanting in Italy, were
easily persuaded that the Clematitis was the true long Birthwort.

I need not here recite what Dodoneus has written of the climbing the
bushy-rooted Birthwort, as being conformable to Bauhinus, Daleschamp, and
others. Nor is it necessary to search for any better or more certain
Authorities, to maintain what I have said for the bushy-rooted Birthwort. And
therefore I will say no more, but that I had done ill not to have chosen it for
the slender Birthwort of Andromachus, and for that which is to be used in
Treacle, or had I taken it for the Plant to be used in the absence of the
other. For which use they that choose the Clematitis, honor it beyond its
deserts; all its parts being very far from Tenuity or slenderness, and
therefore both in that, and in its virtues inferior to the Pistolochia, or
bushy-rooted Birthwort.

Having gathered this Birthwort in the beginning of the Spring, when it begins
to sprout up, wash it and cleanse it from all its superfluities, and hang it up
in an Airy place out of the Sun, to dry, and so to be afterward mixed with the
other Ingredients.

As for Costus, I believe the three sorts which Authors have described, may be
reduced into one. And I follow Clusius in this, who says, I am of this opinion,
that there is but one sort of Costus. And Bontius, a Dutch Physician, affirms
the same thing after Garcias ab Horto. For though Dioscorides, and several
others after him, have described three sorts of Costus, the Arabian, Indian,
and Syriac, and that they have strained themselves to give several shapes to
these sorts of Costus, and beyond whatever Dioscorides has written, upon whom
they all depend. Nevertheless, it is certain, that in Europe we see but one
sort of Costus, which is generally received and approved by all, and which has,
as it were in contraction, all the marks which Dioscorides has given to all the
three sorts, except some kind of sweetness, which length of time may have in
some measure dissipated. For the taste of a Plant fresh-gather'd, is different
from that which has been kept along time.

The Costus which is brought to us, is a good thick Root, of the bigness of a
Man's fist, and sometimes twice as big, and might well be a foot long, if it
were brought to us entire; the outside is of the color of Ashes, the inside is
white, enclining to the color of Box. It is very fragrant, and at first taste
is somewhat sweet, but afterward it tastes bitter with a kind of Acrimony, but
altogether Aromatic. Costus is rather light then ponderous, not being of a very
compact substance. If we might take Costus for the rind of a shrub resembling
Elder, as some would have it to be, we should then choose that sort of Costus
which is called Corticosus, or Barky; which is a Bark white all over, very
fragrant, and of an Aromatic taste, having the resemblance, but not the taste
nor color of Cinnamon. This Barky Costus seems to me not to differ much from
the true Costus, either in virtue or good qualities.

Few Persons in France can aver that they have seen in the Indies the true
Plant of Spikenard, which grows in great abundance in Java. Bontius says, that
it grows upon the Mountains about fourteen leagues from Batavia, and that there
is no going thither for fear of Tigers and Thieves, which are very numerous in
those parts. I can safely say, that I my self have gathered the False Nard upon
the Mountain Genevre, upon the Borders of the Dauphinate, next to Piemont, and
found the Ears, or Spikes, crowded together in a round cluster, underneath and
next the superficies of the Earth, having little Roots very slender underneath;
the whole very much resembling the figure of the true Indian-Nard, described by
Matthiolus and others. The Ears or Spikes of the False Nard are somewhat bigger
then those of the Indian-Nard, the hairy fibers scattered, and standing like
bristles, and of a brown color. They have almost no smell or taste; in the
middle is a woody part that serves all along for a foundation to the hairy
part. The Ears of the true Indian-Nard are somewhat less, having no woody part;
the fibers are of a yellow color enclining to purple: it begins from the
little Root, and being knit together, forms a kind of a Spike, or Ear, which
keeps a-long time, very like to that of Cyperus; the taste is very Aromatic,
with some bitterness and acrimony, drying the Tongue and leaving behind it a
kind of pleasing scent. The little Roots of Spikenard under the Ear, are to be
thrown away as of no use. The fairest are to be chosen which must be gently
shak'n in the hand to shake off the dust; and the inner part must be drawn out
at the upper part of the Ear or Spike, which is usually more pale then all the
rest, which must be thrown away: the Spike thus cleans'd is to be made use of.
You may also cut them before you go about to bruise them, according to the
opinion of some. But it is better to let cutting alone, since the hair may be
bruised, and reduced to Powder without it, among the other Ingredients.

Cinnamon well-chosen, as I have already given directions, needs no other
Preparation.

The pressed Oil of Nutmegs, abounds so much in virtues, that we need not look
after Natural Balsoms, for the most part sophisticated to put into Treacles, or
any other internal compositions. I reserve the Preparation thereof, to the
Chapter of Oils drawn by the Press.

It is not without reason that I have said, That the most part of Balsoms which
are sold for natural, are sophisticated: For we may be sure that the real Balm
of Judea would be excessively dear, could we be assured that it were right; and
that if we had not great cause to believe, that that which is brought to us is
no other then a supposed Balsom. As for the Balsom of Peru, though it is
probable, that we may have it right from thence, because it is more plentiful
and cheap; yet it is very liable to be counterfeited, and I could give the
Description of one that has been taken for true by many Apothecaries and
Druggists of France, who having found there the principal marks which the
right one ought to have, and finding it to be at a high rate, have purchased
considerable quantities of it: though I make no question but the cunningest of
them all was deceived. But I rather choose to omit this Description, then to
give any one the least occasion to cheat. I give this advice to those that may
or have been couz'ned, and who because they may have this counterfeit Balsom at
four Livres the pound, prefer it in the ancient Treacle before the press't Oil
of Nutmegs that costs three or four times as much.

Cretan-Dittany is a Plant which has a great number of stalks covered with a
white woolly down, and very much tufted; the leaves are also round and thick,
the flowers are purplish, and very like those of Violets, but of a more clear
Violet-colour, and appear among the leaves at the tops of the stalks; the seed
lies in the cup of the flower, when the flower is gone. You must endeavor to
get fresh Dittany, gathered when it was in flower, if it may be had; otherwise
you must be content with the leaves well cleans'd.

The Indian leaf, called Malabathrum, is not a leaf without a root growing upon
the water, like the Sea-Lintel, as some Writers would have it to be; but it is
the leaf of a great Tree growing in the Country of Cambaya, and in several
other parts of the Indies. The ends of the boughs which are often fixed to the
leaves apparently demonstrate, that it is a Tree which bears them. This leaf is
very large, and resembles that of the Citron-Tree; of a pale green color,
having three strings separated by equal Intervals, running along from one end
to the other of the leaf. The upper part is smooth and shining, the under part
rough; the taste of it is Aromatical, participating of Nard, Mace, Cloves and
Cinnamon. It differs very much in smell, taste, bigness, and the disposal of the
ribs from the Laurel-leaf, for which some have taken it without any ground at
all. The leaves which are whole and green are always the best.

The true Amomum is well known, and is brought to us in bunches, about the
length of three or four Thumbs: This bunch has a rib that serves for support to
the husks, which are round, and as big as stones of Grapes of the color of
white Ashes, smooth, and thicker clustered then usually Grapes are, being fixed
against their Basis like the Grains of Pepper. The bunch is in part covered
with six leaves like the Pomgranateleaf, of which three are longer and grow
farther out then the other three, which inter-divide them. The shells are full
of a purplish-seed, almost square, and very like in all things to the seeds of
Cardamoms: These grains, or seeds, joined together make a round Figure,
separated nevertheless by very thin skins, but so close thrust together, that
the entire little Globe seems to be composed but of three parts, though the
seeds may be easily separated by pressing them between your Fingers: the husks
and the skins must be thrown away, there being nothing to be made use of but
the purplish well-grown seeds, rejecting those that are black and withered. The
taste of these grains, is tart, piquant, and very Aromatic, and remains a good
while in the Mouth.

The smaller Cardamom here prescribed, is the most excellent of all; The seeds
of it are apiece, in little triangular husks, of the color of white
Ashes, like the husks of Amomum; the seeds are also of the same color and
taste, and divided into three parts by very thin skins. They are to be chosen
and cleans'd like those of Amomum.

The seed of Macedonian Parsley is of a pale green color, small, somewhat
longpoynted and flat, of a sharp and very Aromatic taste and of a pleasing
smell. They must be very well cleans'd from dirt and other superfluities.

The seed of Ameos, or Bishop's-weed, is between that of common Parsley and
Smallage; it is almost round, and very like to that of Sand-dust, of which it
bears the Name. We have two sorts brought us, the taste of which is very
Aromatic and bitter. But the Ameos of Creet, the taste and smell whereof
participates of those of Time and Basil, is to be preferred before the other.
This seed is to be cleans'd like the former.

The seed of Sesili, or Hart-wort of Marseilles, is alittle smaller then that
of wild-Fennel, and very like it in Figure. It is of a pale green color, of a
sharp Aromatic and somewhat bitter taste. It must be chosen new and well-grown,
and must be well cleans'd.

Myrh is a Rosiny-Gum, which being new is of a yellow green color, enclining
to red, fatty, fragrant, sharp, biting and very bitter; being full of whitish
spots when it is broken, like the spots upon a Man's Nail. It must be chosen
very pure, and as transparent as may be; and the bigger Tears are to be
preferred before the lesser.

We may be certain that the Tree which produces Storax, yields abundance of
Tears. But I cannot believe that the Storax which is brought to us, or which
they pretend to bring hither out of the East is the right Storax. The high
price which it has been sold for those many years, has encouraged the
wickedness of those Cheats; and the trial I have made thereof has so far
convinced me as not to trust them any more.

It is not with Galbanum, nor salt Ammoniac that these Tears are to be
counterfeited, as some have thought in regard the strong and noisome scent of
the one and the other, could never compose that sweet and pleasing scent which
they are careful to give to these Tears which are vended for Storax. But most
certainly they are counterfeited with some white Tears of Benjamin, or with
some Rosiny Gum without scent, or which is easily out-scented by the Storax. To
which purpose I have thought fit to publish what I have experimented, which is,
that having Storax in Tears, whose smell, taste, color, and figure, were such
as are required in true Storax, I undertook to soften one Tear in my hand
intending to incorporate it afterward with other drugs of a resembling
substance. I was astonished when I found all the good scent of the Storax to be
lost in my hand; and that same Tear was not fit to impart any thing of good
scent or virtue to an Aromatic Balsom which I was making. Thereupon, trusting
neither to the Storax made up like bowls, which is increased with liquid
Storax, nor to that other Storax sold in Shops, light, and very full of
Saw-dust, I chose a Storax of a delicious scent, full of Grains, or little
Tears, and free from dirt, out of which I extracted the Gum in the following
manner.

Having put eight ounces of this Storax into a Skillet, with twelve ounces of
good White Wind, I stirred the whole gently with a Spatula, and when I found
that the Storax was sufficiently dissolved, I presently poured it out hot as it
was, into a close-woven strong linnen-bag, and having bound it hard just above
the ingredients, I pressed it between two hot plates, and drew out two ounces of
pure Gum, as fair as it was fragrant, and which is in every thing superior to
the sorts of Storax in tears which are brought to us. I made use of this Gum in
my Balsom with great satisfaction, and use it upon several other occasions for
Medicines, both Internal and External. They that meet with such Storax as I
have described, may take my advice, and purify it by this means.

Opopanax is a Gum dissolvable in any watery Liquors, which flows after incision
from one of the Fennel-like Plants, called, All-heal, or Panax Heracleum. It
comes out of the Plant liquid and white, but by degrees it becomes white and of
a Gold-colour without-side. Opopanax is to be chosen new, in pure drops, fat,
and white, at least within, of a sharp bitter taste, and a strong scent.
Sagapenum called also Serapinum, because it smells somewhat like the Pine, is a
Gum dissolvable in moist Liquors like Opoponax. It proceeds also from one of
the Ferula's, or Fennel-like Plants, of a sharp and somewhat bitter taste, of a
strong and unpleasant smell, white without and within, while it is new, but
afterward it grows somewhat reddish without; and in time it becomes of a dark
color, both within and without, like other Gums, especially those that are of
a watery substance. The purest and the newest drops are to be made choice of.

I cannot be beaten out of that rational opinion that the Bags or Cods, which
the Castors carry in that part, where we see the Testicles of all other
four-footed Animals, contain the true Castoreum that is to be put into this
Treacle, and into all other Medicines where Castoreum is prescribed. Nor is it
to be wondered that while I acknowledge the principal matter contained in the
Bags for the right Castoreum, I have taken the whole for the real Testicles, as
well in regard of the situation of those bags, as for the Apellation of Fibri
Testes, or Castor-stones, which many Writers have given them. Considering also,
that when I had discovered the real Testicles, serving to Generation, their
smalness, and their privation of scent, caused me to neglect and throw them
away, as altogether useless in Physic; especially when upon examination of the
Cods that contain the Castoreum, I observed their figure, both external and
internal, accompanied with several Fibers and Membranes, as also a substance
very conformable to that of the Testicles of other Animals, which may be
pulverized when they are dry. The unctuous part contained in a little distinct
Vesicle in the same principal Tunicle that contains the Castoreum, not being
capable to divert us from that thought, especially taking the Castor for a kind
of amphibious creature, that may be termed a Monster, as being one half like a
Land-Animal, the other like a Fish. I am persuaded also that they who should
see these Bags situated as they are in the body of the living Animal, as also
out of the body, and dried, as they are sold to us, would absolutely take them
for the real Testicles, unless they had examined things so strictly as the
Gentlemen of the Academy-Royal, in their Anatomy of a Castor some years since,
of which they have set forth a very exact description. But it is not the name
of Testicles improperly given to these Purses, that hinders them from the true
Castoreum, or from being put into the Treacle, and indeed as being to be
preferred far before the true Testicles.

As for the choice of Castoreum, and the place where those Animals are taken
that carry it, though most Writers prefer those of Pontus, I make no question,
but that the Castors which are taken up and down upon the Rivers of France,
Swedeland, Poland, Germany, Canada, and over all the West Indies, may be every
jot as good. For I could never observe any difference but only between the true
Castoreum, and the counterfeit, which is not interdivided within with Fibers
and Membranes, and is nothing but a mixture of certain stinking Gums, mingled
with Powder of Castoreum, and the unctuous Juice which is found in the common,
and principal Vesicles that enclose the Castoreum, which together make a
tenacious mass, very much unlike the fleshy-substance of the true Castoreum,
which may be easily reduced to Powder, and is only to be used in Treacle.

If France did not produce Saffron endowed with all the good qualities that can
be expected, we should be obliged to Foreign Countries. But because we have
very good, with which we also furnish Germany, Swedeland, Poland, and other
parts, we should do ill not to make use of it. Of all the Saffron that grows in
France, that which grows in those Provinces that lie most to the South, seems
to be preferred before any other, because of the Nature of the soil. For all
Aromatic Plants, that grow in such places, are to be preferred before those
that grow toward the North. The yellow part upon which the hair of the Saffron
grows, is to be clipped off with the point of a pair of Scissors, and that part
of the Hair is to be made use of which is of a scarletcolour.

Celtic-Spike, called by the Latins Spica Celtica, grows upon the
Pyrenean-Mountains, and upon the Mountains of Tyrol in Germany. It is a small
Plant but very Aromatic, which is brought to us in little Sheaves or Bundles,
having no appearance of any Spike, but in its Root. I suppose also that the
name of Spike was given to it, because it smells very like to Spikenard. The
virtue of the whole Plant is concentered in the Root. The Leaves, the Flowers,
the strings, and all the other superfluities are to be thrown away. The Roots
also must be spread in a moist place, and must be moistened themselves to make
them less brittle, before you make them clean. Otherwise when you go about to
pick out the superfluities with the point of a Penknife, the Root would break
if it were too dry.

As for the Preparation of the Extract of Juniper Berries, I refer you to the
Chapter of Extracts in the third Part of this Pharmacopoea.

As for the mixture of all the ingredients for this Treacle, you must observe
the same method, as for that of the Ancients; only I will say this for the
Extract of Juniper Berries, that it does not only perform the same thing as the
despumated Honey, for the mixture and preservation of all the ingredients, but
it very much augments the virtue of the Treacle, which is nothing inferior to
that of the Ancients, and works in all respects much more powerfully; there
being in the whole composition, not one ingredient but what is chosen with
Judgment. The Dose and use of the ancient Treacle may serve as a rule for this.

Theriaca Diatessaron. Diatessaron Treacle.. Radicum Gentianae,. Roots of
Gentian, Aristolochiae rotundae, Round Birthwort, Baccarum Lauri,
Laurel-berries, Myrrhae Electae, an. ij. Choice Myrrh, an. ij. Mellis opt.
despumati, and The best clarified Honey, and Extracti Baccarum Juniperi, an. lb
j. Extract of Juniper Berries, an. lb j.

Make an Electuary according to Art.

This Treacle was invented particularly for the Poor. It is called Diatessaron,
because it consists but of four Ingredients that make up the Powder; which
being mixed with the Honey and Extract, make a very Sovereign remedy against
Poison.

The Preparation of this Treacle is very easy; for there is no more to do, but
to mix the Powder of the four ingredients, with the Honey and the Extract, and
then to put up the composition for your occasions.

This Treacle is not to be despised; it is good against all contagious
Diseases, biting of venomous Beasts, the Apoplexy, Convulsions, and all cold
Diseases of the Head, as also against Worms, to fortify the Stomach, and open
all Obstructions of the Bowels. The Dose is the same with the other Treacles.

Mithridatium Damocratis. Damocrates' s Mithridate.. Myrrae Troglodytidis,.
Ethiopian Myrrh, Croci, Saffron, Agarici, Agaric, Zinziberis, Ginger,
Cinnamomi, Cinnamon, Nardi Indici, Indian-Spikenard, Thuris Masculi,
Male-Frankincense, Seminis Thlaspeos, an. ij ss. Treacle Mustard Seed, an. ij
ss. Seseleos Massiliensis, Hartwort of Marseilles, Opobalsami, Opobalsamum,
Schoenanthi, Camels-Hair, Staechadis Arabicae, Arabian Cassidony, Costi,
Costus, Galbani, Galbanum, Terebinthinae Chiae, Chio-Turpentine, Piperis longi,
Long-Pepper, Castorei, Castoreum, Succi Hypocystidis, The juice of the
Undergrowth of Cystus, Storacis Calamitae, Calamite Storax, Opopanacis,
Opopanax. Folii Indi, Indian-Leaf, Cassiae Ligneae, Cassia-Wood, Polii Montani,
Mountain-Poley. Piperis Albi, White-Pepper, Scordii, Water-Germander, Seminis
Dauci Cretici, Seed of Cretan wild-Carrot, Trochiscorum Cyphaeos, Trochiskes de
Cyphi, Bdellii, an. j ss. Bdellium, an. ij ss. Nardi Celtici, Celtic-Nard,
Gummi Arabici, Arabian Gum, Petroselini Macedonici, Macedonian Stone-Parsley,
Opii Thebaici, Theban-Opium, Cardamomi minoris, Lesser Cardamom, Seminis
Feniculi, Fennel-seed, Radicis Gentianae, Root of Gentian, Rosarum Rubrarum,
Red-Roses, Dictamni Cretici, an. x. Cretan Dittany, an. x. Seminis Anisi,
Anniseed, Radicis Acori Very, Roots of true Acorns, Ari, Wake-Robin, Valerianae
majoris, The bigger Valerian, Sagapeni, an. vj. Sagapen, an. vi. Meu
Athamantici, Athamantic Spignel, Acaciae Verae, True Acacia, Ventris Scinci,
The belly of the Land Crocodile, Seminis Hyperici, an. v. Seed of St.
John's-wort, an. v. Mellis Opt. despumat. lb xix. The best clarified Honey, lb
xix. Vini Opt. q. ss. The best Wine, q ss.

I have inserted this Receipt for Mithridate, that I might not be complained of
for omitting so famous a Composition. And though there be as much reason for
the reformation of this Mithridate, as for that of the ancient Treacle; yet I
thought it not necessary for the latter, since the reformation of the Treacle
may serve for both, at least may serve as a good assistance to ingenuity.

A smaller quantity of Opium is here prescribed than for the Mithridate, and
the Trochiskes of Vipers and Squills are quite left out.

Agaric is an Excrescence growing like a Mushroom, upon the Trunks or upon the
bigger boughs of old Trees. There are two sorts, the Male and the Female. The
Male is yellowish, heavy and compact, and more fit for Dyers than for Physic.
That which is called the Female is most sought after. The best is found upon
the Larchtree, by the Latins called Laryx. The Ancients talked of Agaric
growing in a Province of Sarmaria called Agaria, either from the Agaric, or
else from the River Agarus that waters it. We at this time make use of that
Agaric which grows upon the high Mountains of the Dauphinate, which are the
ancient Alps, or upon the Mountains of Trent; though we are not to despise
that which comes from the East, or from any other place, provided it have the
principal Marks which are to be sought for in Agaric, which are whiteness,
lightness, cleanness, bigness, friability, penetrating scent, and extraordinary
bitterness. Agaric is one of those Medicines that purge with violence and by
attraction. So that it may be as well left out of the Mithridate as out of the
Treacle; by reason of the opposition of its virtue to the Cordial, and
Alexipharmacal Quality of the other Medicines.

Ginger is very well known; and though there are reckoned two sorts, Male and
Female, yet Physic makes no difference, but only chooses the newest and the best
grown, white within, which is brought from the East Indies; that which comes
out of America not being so much in esteem, principally because of its dark
color.

Male Incense called Olibanum is well known in Shops; it is a Gum which must be
chosen in large Tears; white, pure and weighty, of a sharp and bitter taste,
and of a penetrating smell. I know not why they should give it the name of
Male, but only to distinguish the large and fair Tears from the common ones.

Writers describe Opobalsamum to be a thick whitish transparent juice or
Liquor, in smell resembling Turpentine, but much more pleasing. It ought to
distill forth after incision made in the Dog Days, of the Branches of a Shrub
called Balsamum, the wood whereof is called Christo-Balsamum, the Branches
whereof are brought to us in straight pieces, but very brittle, and unequally
knotted. The Bark of the wood is somewhat reddish without, but greenish within,
and the wood underneath is whitish and full of pith. This wood when it is new,
being broken, yields a smell very like to that of Opobalsamum, the taste
whereof is bitter and somewhat tart. The most esteemed Plant of Balsom grows in
Judea, and Arabia Felix, and by cultivation in the Gardens of the Grand Signior
in Egypt. It also grows in Peru, but inferior in goodness and beauty. There
is no Opobalsamum properly of Judea, which is not very dry; so that we cannot
observe the essential Marks which Authors ascribe to it; which are, that if you
put a drop into water or Milk, it seems as if it would presently dissolve in
those Liquors, but it afterward swims a-top, and you may gather it together
with a straw or a Needle; and that if you pour a drop upon a piece of Cloth,
you may take it off again without leaving the least spot or stain. The same
Writers represent Opobalsamum to us, to be so penetrating, that the force and
sharpness of the smell is hard to be endured; so that not meeting nowadays
with any of these qualities, we have great reason to question whether we have
the right or no, and to be sorry that a Liquor so famous should be so little
known to us. Which confirms in my opinion, that it is better to make use of
pressed Oil of Nutmegs both in Treacle and Mithridate, and in other Medicines
where Opobalsamum is prescribed, than to make use of imposed Opobalsamum which
we have so much reason to question. So much the rather, because that pressed
Oil of Nutmegs is of a nature between Gummy and Oily, and pressed from a Fruit
very aromatical and full of virtue; and for that its taste, smell, and
penetration render it worthy of so good a place.

The word Schoenanthos is Greek, and signifies the Flower of a Reed, which is
the best part of that Plant; for though the taste and smell of that Reed assure
us, that it is not void of virtue, yet we must believe that the Flower has
something more of considerable in it, for beauty, taste, and smell being that
of all Flowers, which longest preserves all its good qualities, notwithstanding
its smallness and thinness, so that having been kept several years, it still
fills the Nostrils with a strong scent, and the mouth with a sharp and Aromatic
taste. The odoriferous Reed that bears this Flower grows in Nabatea a Province
of Arabia, where it is so plentiful, that they littre their Camels and other
Cattle with it. The hight of this Reed is about a foot, the Root small slender
and full of knots. The Plant is tufted and composed of several clustered rows,
of a pale green color, intermixed with some long straight leaves, and pointed
like the Reeds, near to the points whereof are to be found those little
Flowers, which are of a whitish color enclining to Purple, disposed in double
ranks.

The Flowers of the Odoriferous Reed are not to be made use of till they are
very well cleans'd; which I do thus. After I have sifted through a coarse Sieve
the dust which is usually found among these Flowers, I spread them upon a sheet
of Paper, then I lay upon them a new coarse coarse cloth well scattered with
hair, somewhat longer and bro^der then my hand. Then taking up the piece of
cloth you shall find many Flowers sticking to the cloth, which mustbe picked off
and kept apart: And this must be done till you have as many flowers as you
stand in need of.

Galbanum, is a Gum dissolvable in watery Liquors, like Opoponax and Sagapenum;
it also flows after incision from one of the Ferula's or Fennel-leav'd-Plants,
called Fennel-Gyant. The biggest Tears are to be chosen, pure, white, thick, of
a sharp and bitter taste, and a strong and unpleasing smell.

Of all the Turpentines that flow from several Trees, and which we acknowledge
for liquid Rosins, that which flows from the Turpentine-Tree is esteemed the
best; It ought to be transparent, of a whitish color enclining to green, of an
indifferent strong smell, and not displeasing. The best Turpentine is brought
from the Island of Chio; it is usually not so thin as those of Venice, and
other places.

The long Pepper consists of many small grains, as it were set together in
Rows, and not open and separate; of an Ash Color, when it is ripe. The Leaves
are like those of the long Pepper, but of a paler green, and thinner;
longer-pointed, and with a shorter foot-stalk. The taste of long-Pepper, is
like that of black-Pepper, but more moderate in heat and dryness; it ought to
be new, and well-grown, and the foot-stalk ought to be cast away.

The Juice of the undergrowth of Cistus, is drawn from a small excrescence,
rising from the Male and Female Cistus, Ledum, or sweet Cistus, with upright
stalks covered thick with Leaves, scarce a foot high; that with Sea-Purslain
Leaves is of a yellowish color. The roots are as big as two or three thumbs,
sometimes a finger, sometimes the whole hand in length, somewhat bigger at the
top then bottom, and representing a Pomegranate-flower at the top. They grow
and flourish toward May. They are tender and Juicy, and yield a black acid
Juice, which is depurated by being boiled over a small fire, in an
Earth'n-glaz'd-Vessel, to the consistence of an Extract somewhat solid, called
Juice of Hypocistis.

The Tree called Cassia Lignea, is almost like to that which bears the Cinnamon,
and they grow together in the Island of Ceylon. These two Barks, though born by
different Trees, are boiled and dried after the same manner, and their taste
and scent is almost alike; their color, shape, and thickness, differ almost in
nothing, but the Cassia Lignea is of a fatter, more muscilaginous substance,
which dissolves by chewing in the mouth, whereas the Woody-part of Cinnamon will
not dissolve, though you chew it never so long.

The seed of Cretan-Daucus, or Wild-Carrots, is to be preferred before any
other; it is long like that of Cummin-seed, but not so big: the color is white
with a Velvet superficies, the taste and smell are pleasing enough; however it
is somewhat sharp, and hot, but very Aromatic.

There are two sorts of Mountain-Poley, one whose flowers, and all the upper
part of the Leaves and Stalks is of a Gold-colour, the other white. Both the
Plants are covered with a tufted Cotton, especially the yellow; whose taste and
smell are very Aromatic, so that they fill the mouth at the same time with a
mixture of several Aromatics. The yellow-Poley is to be preferred before the
other.

The true Carpobalsamom is extremely scarce, or to say more truly, it is not to
be had nowadays, according to those marks which Authors give of it. For they
describe it to be fixed to the Plant with a cup; to be large, weighty, picquant
and sharp in taste, covered with a small Membrane of a deep yellow-colour,
inclining to red; lined within, with other Membranes thicker then that without,
and which contains within a yellow Honey-like substance, with a pleasing scent
like to that of Opobalsamum. But the Grains that we meet with in shops, have
none of these marks: and though time might wear away some of these marks, yet
it could not annihilate them all. Which makes me to doubt of their Legitimacy,
and to substitute Cubebs in their place.

Cubebs, for color, form and bigness, are very like black Pepper-corns, except
that they have a little footstake which fastens them to a rib like the bunch of
a Grape: Their taste is biting and glowing, very bitter, but very Aromatic:
They grow in the Island of Java upon Shrubs that climb upon other Trees like
Ivy. Some Authors have written, that the Inhabitants boil them before they will
suffer them to be transported, fearing they might be sown, and grow in some
other place: But the little vent they have for them, and the small price they
are at, utterly destroys the vanity of such a conjecture. They are good to heat
and fortify the Stomach, to open obstructions of the Spleen, to correct the
cold intemperature of the Matrix, and to excite Venery.

Trochiskes de Cyphi, you shall find in the Chapter of Trochiskes.

Bdellium comes from Bactriana, where it is produced by a black Tree as big as
a white Olive Tree, the leaves whereof are like to those of an Oak. Bdellium is
a Gum, to which Authors have ascribed for marks to be clear and yellow, like
Wax or strong Glue, to be bitter, fat, and to smell like Vnguis Odoratus, when
it is burnt.

The true Acorus is brought us from Lithuania; it is a Root that crawls upon
the Earth, and is nourished by certain strings that belong to it: It is very
knotty, about a finger in bigness; of a white inclining to flesh-colors, of a
biting and bitter taste, of a thin light substance, of a strong scent, but very
pleasing.

The true Acacia is the thick juice of the fruit of a great Thorn-tree that
grows in Egypt, the Flower whereof is white, and the fruit contained in Husks
like Lupins. This juice is of a high color, and beautiful red, of a compact
substance, but which will easily break by striking upon it, when it is very
dry: It is brought to us in Bowls done up in thin Bladders; it must be clear,
and shine within when it is broken. The taste should be styptic, stinging, and
very Aromatic.

The Sea-Scinkes, are little Animals like to Lizards, or rather like to little
Crocodiles, by which name they are called; they live part in the Water, part
upon the Land: They go upon four legs very short, and very small; their Snouts
are more pointed then a Lizards, and their Tails are thin and short: They are
beautiful to look upon, being covered with scales disposed in a wonderful order
of Silver-colour, sometimes dark'nd to a Gold-colour, especially upon the
Backs. They are never so big as Crocodiles, and they breed in Egypt upon the
Red Sea; in Lybia, and in the Indies: The reins or the belly of these Scinkes
are chosen for Mithridate, though the other parts have their virtues also.

For the mixture of this Treacle, it is the same with that of Ancient Treacle.

As to the Virtues of Mithridate, they are almost the same with those of
Treacle, though somewhat inferior in all things, particularly against the
bitings of Serpents, to which the flesh of Vipers is principally necessary; as
also to assuage pain, and procure rest: but then it wants that quantity of
Opium which is in the Treacle.

Confectio Alkermes Regia. Royal Confection Alkermes.. Succi Pomorum
redolentium,. Juice of fragrant Apples, Aquae Rosarum fragrantissimae, an. lb
iss. The most fragrant Rose Water, an. lb iss. Serici crudi mundati and minut.
incisi, lb j. Raw Silk cleans'd and cut small, lb j. Omnia Matratio been clauso
excepta horis 24 in Balneo Mariae digerantur: Tepide deinde sericum torculari
exprimatur; Liquor vero cum sacchari opt. lb ij. ad Electuarii solidi
consistentiam, coquatur. Ab igne tunc removeatur Electuarium and in illo succi
recentis Kermesini spissioris lb j. dissolvatur and postmodum promisceantur,
Put them together into a Mattress well stopped, and digest them for twenty four
hours in Balneo Mariae: Then squeeze the warm Silk in a Press, and boil the
liquor to the consistence of a solid Electuary with lb ij. of the best Sugar:
Then take the Electuary from the fire, and dissolve therein lb j. of the new
thicker juice of Kermes: after that mix therewith, Margaritarum Oriental.
praeparat. Oriental Pearls prepared, Santali Citrini, Yellow Saunders,
Cinnamoni Acutissimi, an. j. Biting Cinnamon, an. j. Ambrae Grisiae cum olei
Cinnamomi Stillatitii Gut. iij. pulveratae, ss. Ambergrise pulverized with
three drops of distilled Oil of Cinnamon, ss. Lapidis Lazuli usti, loti, and
laevigati ij. Lapis Lazuli burnt, washed, and made smooth, ij. Foliorum Auri,
j. Leaves of Gold, j. Moschi Orientalis, ss. Oriental Musk, ss.

Many Writers have attributed great virtue to raw Silk. But though the use
thereof had been at all times unknown in Physic, my judgment is, that it is
too fragrant, that it has too much beauty, that it affords too many
conveniences to humane Life, that there are too many wonders in the first
Original, progress, labor and metamorphoses of the worm which produces it, to
be despised. And so much the rather, for that we know that all the parts of
Animals, as also of their Excrements and Productions, are impregnated with a
volatile Salt; and because I am so far convinced of the extraordinary virtues
of Volatile Salts, that I may be bold to call it the right hand of all Physic.
For which reason, and for the continual use which several great and famous men
have made of raw Silks in their Medicines, I say that it was not without
sufficient grounds prescribed among those other ingredients that make up this
Composition.

That is called Raw Silk, which was never boiled, but is still as it were in
the grain, out of which the worm has been but newly taken, four or five days
after that little Artist has finished its work. For at that time this Silk is
very pure, provided you take away the outward wrapping and the inward tunicle
of the grain, which is next the worm. This Silk thus cleans'd will not fail to
impart its virtues to this Confection, or wherever else it shall be
prescribed.

For the methodical preparation of this Confection, you must pulverize apart
the yellow Saunders and the Cinnamon very finely, and prepare the Pearls upon
Porphyrie. You must heat red-hot and three times quench the Lapis Lazuli in
Rose Water, where it must also soak for 24 hours, then prepare it upon
Porphyrie like the Pearls. Powder the Ambergrise and the Musk together, mixing
therewith three drops of Oil of Cinnamon, which will hasten the pulverization,
and prevent them from sticking to the Mortar; and when they are pulverized, mix
them with the other Powders* In the mean time having taken away all the
superfluities of the raw Silk, put it into a Mattress, and pour upon it the
juice of Apples clarifi'd, and the Rose Water prescribed, and having stopped
the Mattress keep it four and twenty hours in Balneo Mariae lukewarm. Then
having strained and strongly pressed out the Silk, dissolve in the Liquor two
pound of fine Sugar, and boil them together in a glazed earthen Pipkin, over a
moderate fire, to the consistence of a solid Electuary, when you have taken it
off the fire mingle with it a Pint of the pressed grains of Kermes, new and
perfectly ripe. After which add thereto by degrees the Powders, and last of all
the Leaves of Gold, and having put up the Confection in a Gally-Pot close
stopped, keep it for your use.

You might melt the Ambergreese in a small part of the hot Syrup, with which it
is to be incorporated, but it could not be well done, without some dissipation
of the sweet odor, as also of the virtue of the Ambergreese, besides that the
beauty of the color of the Confection would be quite spoiled. And therefore
the best Preparation of Ambergreese upon this occasion is to powder it. You
will find in this Receipt the weight of the Pearls, yellow Saunders, Cinnamon
and Ambergreese augmented beyond what you shall find in the most part of other
Receipts: But besides that these ingredients are not to be spared in a
Composition so highly esteemed, the increasing of the quanitty of the Powders
serves to render the Confection much better then it is wont to be.

As for the leaves of Gold, I should have agreed with them, who affirm that
these leaves afford no considerable virtue to this Confection, nor to any other
Compositions, because the Gold cannot communicate its virtue without having
been first digested in the Stomach, and there changed its nature; and I should
have thought that this Gold in leaf had rather been for ornament then for any
virtue, had not the following Relation caused me to alter my opinion.

Monsieur Peter Couder, Apothecary at Milhau in Rouvergue, a very honest man,
and very skilful and knowing in his Art, and my very good Friend assured me,
that some years since he was sent for to a Lady of very high Quality, aged
about threescore years, whose Face was extremely full of red Pimples and
Pustulas, and who was troubled with a stinking breath; and that by the advice
of several famous Physicians, he gave her for her ordinary Diet, Pullets that
had been shut up in a Chamber eight days, and were fed with a Paste made of
Vipers, boiled in a little water with Wheat in an earthen glazed Pot covered,
continuing to feed the Pullets in the same manner, till they were good to eat:
That the Lady having dyeted six months upon these Pullets, he dyeted her with
Capons for the other six months, which besides the Paste of Vipers with which
they were crammed, were also fed with Leaves of Gold mixed among their Food;
and that the Lady having continued the use of those Capons, at the end of the
last six months found her self perfectly cured of both her Distempers, insomuch
that having lived from that time to the Age of fourscore years, her body being
entombed and taken up again four years after she was buried, was found to be as
entire, as when she was first laid in her Grave.

In the mean time Monsieur Couder, resolving to search in the Capons-dung, for
about eight marks in Leaves of Gold, which they had swallowed from time to
time, carefully caused the Dung to be swept together, and calcined the
Excrements, and made use of Quicksilver to make an Amalgama of the Gold if
there were any, and after he had exhaled the Quicksilver Amalgama'd with the
Gold, and had afterward forced it to fusion with the addition of a little
Borax, he recovered about two marks in Gold, which had the weight, but the
color was much paler then that of ordinary Gold.

Upon which my judgment is this, that this great diminution of weight and
change of color, could not happen to the Gold, but that some of its parts were
changed into the proper substance of the Capons, and that this could not
happen, till the Gold was dissolved in the Capons Stomach, by the operation of
their volatile Salt, joined with the acid Liquor which is naturally in that
part, doing almost the same thing which a Regal-Water would have done. So that
we cannot but think that Leaves of Gold in Compositions cannot but be very
commendable and useful; for besides the beauty and the conceit which they may
put into the Head of the Patient, they may add their virtue to that of the
other Ingredients.

They that live far from the places where Grains of Kermes grow, may make use
of a trusty Friend, to send them the Syrup of Kermes prepared after my Method;
with which they may at any time make the Confection. You may also make a
Confection without Amber or Musk, chiefly for Women that are afraid of sweet
scents.

This Confection is without question one of the best Cordials that ever Galenic
Physic invented. For it repairs and recreates the Vital and Animal Spirits; it
ceases Palpitations of the Heart, and Swounding-fits. It fortifies the Brain
and all the Noble Parts very much; It is an Enemy to putrefaction,
re-establishes the languishing and decayed strength, drives away melancholy and
sadness, and restores and preserves both body and mind in a good estate. It is
taken upon the point of a Knife or dissolved in Wine, or in Broth, or in any
Cordial or Cephalic Liquor. It is also mingled among Opiates or Electuaries
both soft and solid. The usual Dose is from one Scruple to one Dram. It is
also mixed in Epithemes prescribed for the Heart and Liver.

Confectio de Hyacintho* Confection of Jacinths.. Lapidum Hyacinthorum,.
Jacinth-Stones, Coralli Rubri, Red-Corral, Boli Armenae, and Bole-Armoniac, and
Terrae Sigillatae, an. ij ij. Sealed Earth, an. ij ij. Granorum Kermes, Grains
of Kermes, Foliorum Dictamni Cretici, Leaves of Cretan-Dittany, Radicis
Tormentillae, Root of Tormentil, Seminis Citri Mundati, Seed of Citron
cleans'd, Croci, Saffron, Myrrhae Troglodytidis, Aethiopian-Myrrh, Rosarum
Rubrarum, Red-Roses, Santalorum omnium, All the Saunders, Ossis e cord Cervi,
The Bone of a Deers heart, Rasur ae Cornu Cervi, and Eboris, Shavings of
Hartshorn, and Ivory, Seminis Acetosae, Seed of Sorrel, and Portulacae, an. v
j. Purslain, an. v j. Lapidum Saphyrorum, Saphyrs, Smaragdorum, Smaragds,

Topaziorum, Topazes, Margaritarum Oriental. Eastern-Pearls, Serici Crudi,
Raw-Silk, Foliorum Auri, Leaves of Gold, and Argenti, an. viij. Silver, an.
viij. Moschi Orientalis, Oriental-Musk, Ambrae Grisiae, an. Gr. xx.
Amber-grise, an. Gr. xx. Syrupi Florum Tunicae, lb vj viij. Syrup of
Clove-gillow-flowers, lb vi vii.

Make a Confection according to Art.

The great vent which several Cities have for this Confection, Alkermes,
Treacle, and some other compositions of the same Nature, has not been
sufficient to satisfy the Avarice of certain Jumblers, who not content to
foist into this composition several Ingredients altogether unuseful, in the
place of the true ones, which are usually dear, make use of a Syrup
extraordinarily boiled, to one entire pound of which they add an ounce, or at
most an ounce and a half of Powder: for which they by their good wills would
only take the Bole, if the Saffron-colour, the taste of Myrrh, and the beauty
of the Gold-Leaves, were not requisite for them to conceal their cheat. So that
we need not wonder that they sell this confection and several others so cheap,
and yet they make more profit far, then they who compound the Medicines right.
They never seek after the true fragments of Jacinths or other precious Stones,
the Oriental Pearls, nor the Bone in the Deer's-Heart; but being perfect cheats
sell for considerable rates, that which is good for nothing but to fill their
own Pockets.

But to make it as it should be, make choice of the true fragments of Jacinths,
Saphyrs, Emraulds, Topazes, and Oriental Pearls, which you shall find among the
Lapidaries, together with red-Corral. You may prepare all these things
together, or apart upon Porphyrie; in the same manner you may prepare the
Eastern-Bole, and the Terrae Sigillata; bruise together in a Brass-Mortar, the
bone of the Deer's-Heart, the Shavings of Hartshorn, and Ivory, the Sandals,
the Root of Tormentil, the Grains of Kerms, the Cretan-Dittany, the Red-Roses,
the Myrrh, the Seeds of Citron, Sorrel, and Purslain. Beat the Saffron apart,
being dried before; beat also the Musk, and Ambergrise apart, adding to them
some part of the Citron-seed reserved for that purpose: then mix all the
Powders except the Saffron, which must be first put into a Marble-Mortar, there
to be mixed with a wood'n-Pestle, in some ounces of the Syrup prescribed, the
consistence whereof ought to be no thicker then that of ordinary Syrups; then
add thereto by degrees the other Powders, joining them, and intermixing with
them together, at several repetitions all the Syrup, the quantity whereof ought
to be but four times the weight of the Powder, whereas if it had been to have
been boiled to the consistence of a soft Electuary, the Powders would have
sucked up six times as much in weight of Syrup, by reason of the dryness of the
most part of the Ingredients. And therefore care must be taken, that neither
the Physicians nor the Patients be deceived in the little Doses of this
Confection, because of the small quantity of Powder which they contain, when
the Syrup is more boiled then it should be. When the Powders and Syrups are
mixed together, add the Leaves of Gold and Silver, and put up the Confection in
a white-Earth'n-Pot well-stopp'd.

Some may wonder that Syrup of Clove-Gillow-flowers is here prescribed, instead
of Syrup of Lemons, which all Writers prescribe. But when they shall find by
experience, that this last being made use of fails not to work upon the Earths
and Stones at the same time, to raise a great effervescency, and to cause the
Electuary to swell, so as to make it run over if the pot be not very large, and
by degrees to dark'n the color, especially if you put in any Ir'n Spatula;
they will without doubt approve this change, in regard that Syrup of
Gillow-flowers being very proper to strength'n the Heart, the Brain, and all
the Noble-parts, and to second the good effects of this Composition, is also as
fit to unite and embody all the Ingredients, imparting at the same time, its
lovely purple-colour, and its delightful smell, without the fear of any
effervescency, or alteration, which the acid of the Syrup of Lemons causes to
the Earths and Stones, and at the same time to the whole confection.

If it be objected, that the Acid of the Syrup of Lemons serves to open the
Stones, considering that the Juice of Lemons, which is the foundation of the
Syrup, is able to dissolve them; I answer, that that Juice making but a third
part of the Syrup, and being very much weak'n'd by the addition of the Sugar,
can act but very feebly, nor touch any more then the superficies of the
fragments, and so the success would answer but ill to the intentions which they
might have, considering also that the sole Preparation of the Stones upon the
Porphyrie, reduces them to that condition wherein they ought to be, to qualify
in the Stomach the sharpness of the acids, which they meet with there.

The bones of Deer's-hearts are not so scarce, but that you may meet with them
with little pains and expense; but if they were not to be had, you might in
their place use the Hartshorn, when the Velvet-Head begins first to appear,
and which are much better then the bones of the Hearts of Oxen, which some
commend in their room.

The Shavings of Hartshorn is here very properly preferred efore Hartshorn
burnt; because the Shavings enjoy all the good parts, which the Hartshorn
looses in Ustion. For it not only contains the muscilaginous and Cordial part,
which it affords to Gelly's, but the volatile Salt, Spirit, and Oil, which we
draw forth by distillation, all which parts vanish in Ustion.

As for the Philosophical Ustion of Hartshorn, which some have allowed, I
cannot think any better of it; for though it be done with a heat less violent,
yet the most part of the Juice is thereby lost, and a good part of the volatile
salt, Spirit and Oil which it contained before.

The virtues of Confection of Jacinth are very little inferior to those of
Confectio Hamech. It has this also particular, that it closes more, and that it
is more proper to kill Worms.

It is taken in Bolus alone, or mixed with other Powders, or Opiates, or else
dissolved in Wine, or in Broth, or in some Cordial Liquor. The Dose is from a
Scruple to a Dram, and sometimes two. It is also outwardly applied in liquid
and solid Epithemes.

Electuarium Diascordium Emendatum. A Reformed Diascordium Electuary..
Scordii,. Water-Germander, Rosarum Rubrarum Exungulatarum, and Red-Roses
cleans'd from their Whites, and Boli Armenae, an. j ss. Bole-Armenian, an. j
ss. Resinae Styracis, Storax, Cinnamomi, Cinnamon, Cassiae Ligneae,
Cassia-Wood, Foliorum Dictamni Cretici, Leaves of Cretan-Dittany, Radicum
Tormentillae, Roots of Tormentil, Bistortae, Snakeweed, Gentianae, Gentian,
Galbani, Galbanum, Succini, Amber; Terrae Lemniae, an. ss. Lemnian Earth, an.
ss. Extracti Opii, Extract of Opium, Piperis Longi, Long-Pepper, Zinziberis,
Ginger, Seminis Oxalidis, an. ij. Sorrel-seed, an. ij. Mellis Rosati colati,
and in Electuarii mollis consistentiam cocti, lb iij iiij. Honey of Roses
strained and boiled to the consistence of a soft Electuary, lb iij iiij. Vini
Malvatici, ij. Malmsey, ij.

Make an Electuary according to Art.

It was well done to make use of Red-Roses cleans'd in this Electuary, and to
put in Honey of Roses, instead of common Honey, to preserve the room of
Conserve of Roses, which Fracastorius, Author of this Electuary had
prescribed. The reason of this change was, for that though Conserve of Roses
may be beaten, and passed through a sieve turned the wrong way, it has however
those thick parts that will make the body of the Electuary seem to be ill
united, and will remain at the bottom of the Mortar, when you dissolve the
Electuary in any Liquor. Whereas the dry Roses pulverized with other
Ingredients, cause the body of the Electuary to seem more uniform, and will
preserve their virtue a longer time, by means of the Honey which encloses it.
On the other side, the Honey of Roses being impregnated with the virtue of the
Red-Roses, is at least as proper for mixture, union, and preservation of the
Powders, as common Honey, and fortifying the virtue of the Red-Roses, renders
the Electuary more odoriferous and pleasant, then otherwise it would be.

With as good reason is the quantity of the Water-Germander augmented, as well
because it is a Plant that abounds in virtue, as for that it gives the name,
and serves as a foundation to the Electuary, and therefore ought not to be less
in quantity then any other of the Ingredients used in the Powder.

The Rosin of Storax, is here preferred before Storax in Tears, for the reasons
given in the Reformation of Treacle.

The Gum-Arabic is left out, which could only serve as a Glue to the Electuary,
and Amber is put into its place, whose Cephalic, Cordial, and Hysteric virtues
are esteemed by all Authors.

The Preparation of this Electuary will be found to be very easy, if after you
have well-chosen and cleans'd all the Ingredients, without taking care to
dissolve any Gum in Wine, according to the custom of the Ancients, you reduce
them only into Powder in a great Brass-Mortar, among the other Ingredients, and
having passed them all through a silk-sieve, and dissolved the two drams of
Extract of Opium, in two ounces of Malmsy, or good Spanish-Wine, you
incorporate the whole with Honey of Roses clarified and boiled to the
consistence of a soft Electuary.

This Electuary is very little inferior in virtue to the Treacle, and indeed
is to be preferred before it in Diseases, where too much heat may be dangerous.
It is particularly used in Malignant Fevers, in all Epidemic Diseases; and is
very much commended not only as a cure, but a preservative against the
Pestilence. It is very much esteemed against the Worms, and against all
putrefaction, against Windy-Cholics, want of retention in the Stomach, against
Diarrhea's, Dysenteries, and all the difficulties of the Intestines, to stop
Fluxes, to assuage Pains; the ordinary Dose being from one Scruple to one Dram.
It is taken in Bolus, or dissolved in Wine, Broth, or any Cordial-Liquor.

Opiata Salomonis. Salomon's Opiate.. Citri Saccharo conditi, viij.. Citron
condited with Sugar, viij. Conservae Oxytriphylli, Conserve of Wood Sorrel,
Florum Rorismarini, and Flowers of Rosemary, and Buglossi, an. ij. Bugloss, an.
ij. Mithridatii veteris, j. Of Mithridate, j. Rosarum Rubrarum Exungulat.
siccarum, Red-Roses dried and cleans'd, Radicum Enulae Campanae, and Roots of
Elecampane, and Dictamni Cretici, Cretan-Dittany, Seminis Contra-Vermes,
Wormseed, and Citri mundati, Seeds of Citron cleans'd, Cardui Benedicti,
Carduus Benedictus, and Rasurae Cornu Cervi, an. ss. Shavings of Hearts. horn,
an. ss. Corticis Citri sicci, Dried Citron-rind, Santali Citrini,
Yellow-Saunders, Radicis Gentianae, Root of Gentian, Ossis e Cord Cervi, an,
ij. Bone of a Deer's-heart, an. ij. Cinnamomi, Cinnamon, Macis, Mace,
Caryophyllorum, and Cloves, and Cardamomi minoris, an. j. Lesser Cardamoms, an.
j. Grana Juniperi in Aceto scillitico per noctem infusa, No. xxiv.
Juniper Berries infused a whole night in Vinegar of Squills, No. xxiv.

Make up the Opiate with Syrup of the Juice of Citrons.

Foubert was the first that published this Opiate, and would have you to
believe that one Solomon was the first that made it. It is so set down in
Reneus and Bauderon. The quantity of the Ingredients is however different in
some things. Particularly the Bone of Deers-heart is not mentioned in any of
the Editions of Bauderon, whether it were to spare cost, or out of
inadvertency, I will not determine. No matter who was the Author of this
Opiate, but we may be assured that it ought to have its place in this
Pharmacopoea. It may be also observed, that this Receipt is somewhat different
from the rest, but the alterations are certainly for the better.

The Sugar in Powder is here very unnecessary, because all the Ingredients are
to be incorporated with Syrup of Citron, which has in it self Sugar enough
without needing any more in the Opiate. Red-Roses dried are to be preferred
before the Conserve, for the reasons given in the Diascordium. The Conserve of
Wood Sorrel is preferred before Sorrel, because it is a Cordial incomparably
much better. The dry Root of Elecampane is put instead of the Conserve, but in
lesser quantity, out of regard to the Sugar, which makes at least two thirds of
the Conserve; as also to the moisture and weight of the Roots, when it is used
instead of the Conserve. The Leaves of Cretan-Dittany, much augment the force
of the Opiate. The flowers of Rosemary and Bugloss, will become almost
impalpable in beating in the Mortar.

To prepare this Opiate, cut the dry Citron-peel, and beat it in a great
Brass-Mortar with the Saunders, then add the Roots of Elecampane, Dittany, and
Gentian, the bone of Deer's-heart, the shavings of Hartshorn, and mingling by
little and little all the Seeds, and other Ingredients which are to be
pulverized, and also the infused Juniperberries infused the night before in
Vinegar of Squills. Pass the Powder through a silksieve; Bruise the Citron-rind
condited in a Marble-Mortar with the Conserves of Rosemary and Bugloss-Flowers,
and pass them through a hair-sieve, the wrong side uppermost. Then moist'n this
Pulp with about twice as much the weight of Syrup of Citron, such as is sold in
the Shops, in which mixture incorporate the Mithridate, and by little and
little, and alternatively the Powders, and the rest of the Syrup, the
proportion whereof may be three times the weight of the Powder, though the
Author prescribes no more then to give the Opiate its due consistency. There
is no fire to be used for the mixture of this Opiate, which is to be put up
close in a white Gally-pot for use.

This Opiate is good against the Pestilence, and all Epidemic Diseases. It
strength'ns the Heart and Stomach, kills the Worms in the Stomach and Bowels,
resists putrefaction, stays Vomiting, creates an Appetite, and helps digestion.
It is much used in Languedoc. The Dose and manner of taking it is the same with
Diascordium, and Confection of Jacinth.

Antidotum Orvietanum. An Orvietan Antidote.. Radicum Scorzonerae,. Roots of
Vipers-grass, Carlinae, Carline-Thistle, Imperatoriae, Masterwort, Angelicae,
Angelica, Bistortae, Snakeweed, Aristolochiae tenuis, Thin Birthwort,
Contra-yervae, Contra-yerva, Dictamni Albi, White-Dittany, Galangae, Galanga,
Gentianae, Gentian, Costi, Costus, Acori very, True Acorus, Seminis Petroselini
Macedonici, Seed of Macedonian Stone-Parsley, Foliorum Salviae, Leaves of Sage,
Rorismarini, Rosemary, Galegae, Goats-Rue, Cardui Benedicti, Blessed Thistle,
Dictamni Cretici, Cretan-Dittany, Baccarum Lauri, and Juniperi, an. j. Berries
of Laurel, and Juniper, an. j. Cinnamomi, Cinnamon, Caryophyllorum,
Gillow-flowers, Macis, an. ss. Mace, an. ss. Viperarum siccarum cum cordibus
and Hepatibus, and Dried Vipers with the Hearts and Livers, and Theriacae
Veteris, an. iv. Old Treacle, an. iv. Mellis opt. despumati, lb viij. Best
clarified Honey, lb viij.

The good effects that the Orvietan well-prepar'd has formerly produced, has
given occasion to diverse cheats, to use all their endeavors to make the World
believe, that either they or some of their Predecessors have been the sole
inventers thereof, and that only they had the true Receipt. Insomuch that
several of these Impostors have overspread Provinces and Kingdoms, and under
the fraudulent appearance of some good success, by pantalooning and buffooning
it, before the credulous people in public places, have caught them by their
Money, and got considerable sums together, by the extraordinary vent of their
supposed Orvietan. Considering the great quantity whereof, it was impossible
for them to have found the necessary Ingredients, or to have had time to make a
just Preparation, if they had either been willing, or had been able. Whence it
has come to pass, that in several places they have not been able to secure
themselves upon their Stages from the Poisons that have been brought them, by
Persons that were not of their own confederacy, no more then from the bitings
of Asps and Vipers, with which they had not been before familiar. Had these
Impostors met with distrustful persons that took delight to discover their
Impostures, they had not overrun so many Countries, nor cousen'd such a World
of people; nor would they have had such easy Licenses to prepare and sell
unpunished a Medicine that ought not to pass the hands of any but Men of credit
and understanding.

All the Leaves and Roots must be dried and pulverized together in a great
Brass-Mortar, beginning with the most solid. Pass them through a silk-sierce
covered, and having scumm'd the Honey, without any addition of moisture, add
some part of the Powder to it, and continue to mingle alternatively sometimes
the Honey, and sometimes the Powder, till the whole be incorporated, and
reduced to the consistency of a soft Electuary, which you must let alone to
cool, and then put up in a Pot close stopped for your use.

The proportion of Honey is larger here then for the Treacle of the Ancients,
because there is neither Oil of Nutmegs, nor Balsom, nor Turpentine, nor any
other juice to officiate for the Honey; and for that otherwise, the dryness of
the Powders would predominate over the Honey, suck up the Moisture, and drying
the Electuary, would give way for the Air to enter and corrupt the whole Mass.

Orvietan thus prepared is of great efficacy against all sorts of Poisons,
against the Smallpox, Measles, and all sorts of Epidemic Diseases. It is also
proper against all cold Diseases of the Brain and Stomach, and against all
Windy-cholicks. The Dose is from a Scruple to a Dram, and sometimes to two, for
strong persons. It may be taken upon the point of a Knife, or wrapped up like a
Bolus, or dissolved in Wine, or some Cordial Liquor.

Electuarium de Satyrio. Satyrion Electuary.. Radicum Satyrii succulentarum in
aqua Naphae ad mollitiem coctarum, iv.. The Juicy-roots of Satyrion boiled very
soft in Orange-flower-water, iv. Radicis Eringii conditae, Root of Eringo's
condited, Pistaciarum mundatarum, Pistaches cleans'd, Confectionis Alkermes cum
Moscho and Ambra, an. ij. Confectio Alkermes with Musk and Amber, an. ij. Nucis
moschatae conditae, Nutmegs condited, Zinziberis conditi, an. j. Ginger
condited, an. j. Renum Scincorum, Kidneys of Land-Crocodiles, Priapi, and
Pizzle, and Testiculorum Cervi, Stones of a Deer, Pulveris Viperini, an. vj.
Powder of Vipers, an. vj. Ambrae Grisiae, Ambergrise, Seminis Erucae, Seeds of
Rocket, and Fraxini, Ash, Piperis longi, and Long-Pepper, and Cardamomi
minoris, an. j ss. Lesser Cardamoms, an. j ss Moschi Orientalis, ss Oriental
Musk, ss Oleorum Cinnamomi, and Oils of Cinnamon, and Caryophillorum, an. gutt.
vj. Cloves, an. drops vj.

We shall meet within several Dispensatories several Receipts of Diasatyrion,
or Electuaries resembling it in name and qualities. But you shall hardly find
one whose Ingredients are more proper to produce the Effects expected from such
a Composition, or whose quantities are more regular.

Take the Roots of Satyrion well grown, casting away the Fibers and withered
parts. Cleanse them from their Rind and all superfluities, and boil them gently
in Orangeflower water, in a glazed earthen-Pot covered, 'till they are
sufficiently tender; then bruise them in a Marble Mortar, and pass them through
a Hair-Seve turned the wrongside uppermost. In the same manner beat and fifth
the condited Eringo-Root, the Pistaches, the Nutmegs and the Ginger; Rasp the
Harts-Pizzle, cut the Stones small, being both dried by fire in a Chimney, and
beat them in a Brass-Mortar with the Pepper, Cardamoms, Seeds, Scinc's reins,
and Vipers dried; and pass the powder through a silk-Sieve covered; bruise the
Musk apart, mixing with it never so little Sugar candy'd; and the Ambergreese
also apart, mixing with it some drops of Oil of Cloves; then mingle the Pulps
with the Confection of Alkermes, all the Powders and Oils, in a Marble-Mortar
with a wooden-Pestle, adding as much Syrup of Gillowflowers as is requisite to
give the whole a due consistence of an Electuary: Then put it up close for use.

This Electuary is very proper to restore decayed strength; it fortifies and
heats those that the Latins call frigidos and maleficiatos, frigid and
bewitched: It multiplies Seed, and provokes and disposes people to Lust. It may
be used by both Sexes; but the Musk and the Ambergrise must be left out, when
given to Women that cannot away with sweet scents; the Dose is from one dram to
two. This Electuary is to be taken fasting Morning and Evening in Bolus,
drinking after it a Glass of Spanish-wine, wherein you may also dissolve the
Electuary. It may be used as often as occasion requires; and if it be
extraordinary, take half an Ounce.

Philonium Magnum. The great Philonium, or Painasswager.. Seminis Hyosciami,
and. Seed of Henbane, and Papaveris Albi, an. v. White Poppy, an. v. Extract.
Opii, ij ss. Extract of Opium, ij ss. Cassiae ligneae, Cassia-wood, Cinnamomi,
an. j ss. Cinnamon, an. j ss. Seminis Apii, Seed of Parsley, Petroselini
Macedonici, Macedonian stone-Parsley, Feniculi, Fennel, Dauci Cretici, Cretan
wild Carrot, Costi, Costus, Myrrhae, Myrrh, Castorei, an. j. Castoreum, an. j.
Croci, Saffron, Pyrethri, Pellitory of Spain, Nardi Indicae, an. j. Indian
Spikenard, an. j Mellis optimi despumat. ix. Best clarified Honey. ix.

Wonder not that Euphorbium is left out of this Composition; especially since
the Ancients made use of it, pretending it was a true Corrector of Opium. But
they that understand the nature of Euphorbium, and know that it is a Gum very
hot, very biting, and very violent in its operations, when it is used but in a
small quantity, will never question but that it has great need it self of being
corrected, and finding that it is never to be mixed but among Remedies that may
temper its heat, qualify its acrimony, and refrain its violence will never use
it at all in any Remedies whatsoever to be taken inwardly. Its extraordinary
concussion of the brain, caused by the least particle of Euphorbium taken at
the nostril; and the violent and long continued sneezings which it provokes,
are enough to make any person fear the violence of a Gum so terrible to those
who have beheld its effects. And the more reason they will have to fear them,
when they consider that Euphorbium is one of the most violent Purgers that are
to be found amongst simple Drugs, so that the weight of two grains will make an
extraordinary havoc. The heat of Costus, or of any of the other ingredients
that make up this Opiate, is inconsiderable to that of this Gum. And it is no
wonder that Opium so often used to stop the violent effects of purgative
Medicines, is not powerful enough to tame the violent effects of Euphorbium.
Nevertheless there is some probability that the apprehension which the Ancients
had of the coldness of Opium, moved them to have recourse to extraordinary hot
Remedies, to counterballance that vainly imagined coldness; not considering
that all the parts of Opium, except the earthy, are hot, as they will find that
examine them.

Pulverize those Ingredients that are to be pulverized, and pass them through a
silk'n-Sierce covered. Dissolve the Extract of Opium in about an Ounce of good
Malmsey, and having incorporated it with a small quantity of scumm'd Honey
warm, add by degrees sometimes the Powder, and sometimes the Honey, till the
whole be dispensed, and that all the Ingredients are well mixed and united
together. Then when the Opiate is cold put it up in a white earthen Pot.

Philonium appeases all inward pains that happen to the Stomach, Belly,
Hypochondrium's, Liver, Spleen, Reins, and Matrix, especially proceeding from a
cold cause. It dissipates the Hiccup and Ventosities, moderates the violence of
Coughs; is highly esteemed against Dysenteries, and internal fluxes of blood;
it remedies difficulties of Urine; it relieves against Pleurisies, stops
Fluxes, restores the weak and languishing. Above all things, it is highly
commended against Cholicks. It may be taken in Bolus, or dissolved in Wine, or
in Cordial water. The Dose is from half a Scruple to half a Dram. It is
commonly made use of in Anodyne Clysters, from half a Dram to two. It is also
used in Narcotick Liniments, mixed with Vnguentum populeum, or other Medicines.

Electuarium de Baccis Lauri. Electuary of Laurel Berries.. Baccarum Lauri,
and. Laurel Berries, and Foliorum Rutae siccorum, an. x. Dried Leaves of Rue,
an. x. Sagapeni, Sagapene, Opoponacis, an. ss. Opoponax, an. ss. Seminis Ameos,
Seeds of Bishops-weed, Cumini, Cumin, Nigellae Romanae, Roman Nigell,
Ligustici, Libistick, Carvi, Caraway, Dauci Cretici, Cretan wild Carrot, Acori
very, True Acorus, Origani, Origany, Amygdalarum amararum, Sweet Almonds,
Piperis longi, Long Pepper, Nigri, Black Pepper, Mentastri, Wild Mint,
Castorei, an. ij. Castoreum, an. ij. Mellis opt. despumat. triplex pondus. Of
the best despumated Honey, treble the weight.

The Berries of Laurel must not be inferior in quantity to the Leaves of Rue,
because they are the foundation of the whole. The quantities of the Sagapenum
and Opoponax are alike, because they are alike in qualities. The rest require
no alteration.

The Preparation of this Electuary is very easy. For having pulverized the
Gums among the dry Ingredients, and passed the whole through a silk'n Sierce
covered, incorporate the Powder at several intervals, by little and little,
with three times the weight of warm purified Honey: And put up the Electuary
when it is cold.

This Electuary is very much recommended for the ease and cure of windy
Cholicks, and particularly the Iliac passion. It is proper in all difficulties
of Urine, and against Hysteric passions. The Dose is from a scruple to a dram,
and sometimes to two: For Clysters it is generally prescribed from half an
Ounce to an Ounce in proper Decoctions.

Electuarium Micleta. Electuary of Micleta. Mirabolanorum Citrinorum,.
Mirabolans yellow, Chebulorum, Chebula, Indorum, Indian, Bellericorum, and
Bellerica, and Emblicorum mundatorum, an. v. Emblica, an. v. In pulverem
redigantur and leviter torrefiant, deinde Reduce them into Powder, and parch
them, then. Seminum Nasturtii,. Seeds of Cresses, Anisi, Anise, Cumini, Cumin,
Carvi, Caraway, Feniculi, and Fennel, Ameos, an. iij. Bishops-weed, an. iij.
Terantur, pauco aceto irrorentur, and siccentur, tunc Bruise them, sprinkle
them with a little Vinegar, dry them, then. Spodii ex Ebore,. Spodium of Ivory,
Balaustiorum, Pomegranate Flowers, Sumach, Sumach, Mastich. Mastich, Gummi
Arabici, an. ij ss. Gum Arabic, an. ij ss.

Take away the Kernels from the Mirabolans, and make use of the dry pulp that
covers them, which you must pulverize, and lightly parch in an Iron-Skillet or
Pan over a small fire, stirring the Powder often with a Spatula. Pulverize the
Seeds grossly, and sprinkle them with good Vinegar, and then having dried them,
pound them outright in a large Brazen Mortar among the Pomegranate Flowers, the
Spode, the Sumach, the Gum Arabic, and the powder of Mirabolans, and pass them
all through a silk Sieve. Pulverize the Mastich apart, which must be chosen in
tears, which may be easily done, by adding some few drops of water to keep it
from sticking to the Mortar and Pestle. Mix the Powders very well, and
incorporate them at several repetitions with four times as much the weight of
warm Syrup of Mirtles, and the Electuary will be well made, and fit to be put
up in a proper Pot to be kept for use.

The Spode which is but calcined Ivory, is not to be made use of in
Compositions, which require the principal parts of the Ivory, that consist of
its volatile salt, spirit and oil, which are wholly dissipated by Calcination:
But the principal operation of this Electuary being founded only upon the
astringency of the Ingredients that compound it, and the terrestrial and
restringent quality of the Ivory remaining after Calcination, it may be here
prescribed well enough to the purpose.

This Electuary is very binding, and proper for the cure of Dysenteries, and
all sorts of Fluxes of the belly; it serves to stay all internal Fluxes of
blood, as also of the Hemorrhoids; it is also good to stay vomiting, and the
inordinate flowing of the Menstruums, the Whites, and old Gonorrheas, difficult
to cure. The Dose is from half a dram to two drams. It may be taken upon the
point of a Knife, or in Bolus; or else dissolved in red Wine, or some
astringent Liquor. It is also prescribed in astringent Clysters from half an
Ounce to an Ounce.

Electuarium Aperiens Catharticum D. D. D'AQUIN. An opening purging Electuary
of Monsieur D'AQUIN. Foliorum Sennae Orientalis Mundatorum, iiij. The cleansed
leaves of Oriental Senna, iiij. Diacrydion, Diagridion Trochischorum Alhandal
Trochisks of Alhandal, Agarici Electi, Chosen Agaric, Rhabarbari, and Rhubarb,
and Seminis Violarum, an. j ss. Seeds of Violets, an. j ss. Sagapeni, Sagapeni,
Myrrhae, Myrrh, Ammoniaci, an. j. Ammoniac, an. j. Antimonii Diaphoretici,
Diaphoretic Antimony, Mercurii dulcis, and Mercurius dulcis, Pulveris trium
Santalorum, an. vj. Powder of the Three Saunders, an. vj. Salis Martis, and
Salt of Iron, Tamarisci, an. ss. Tamarisks, Mellis opt. absque Liquoris
additione despumati, lb vj. The best Honey despumated without the addition of
Liquors. lb vj.

After you have carefully chosen and cleansed all the Ingredients of this
Electuary, and got the Sagapenum, the Myrrh, and Ammoniac in pure tears,
pulverize the Gums among the other dry Medicaments. But if you find them a
little too clammy, mix no more then the Powder can well bear without being too
viscous, and reserve the rest of the Gums to melt in a great Brass-Mortar
heated; and there incorporate them first with some small portion of the
despumated Honey prescribed for the Electuary, then mix the Salts, and continue
adding by degrees, sometimes the Honey, sometimes the Powders, till all the
Ingredients are perfectly well united, adding at the latter end the Mercurius
dulcis, and the Diaphoretic Antimony: by this means the Electuary will be well
made and fit to be put up in a close Pot.

Monsieur D'AQVIN gave me the Receipt of this Electuary to impart it to public
view, as a Remedy very proper to open obstructions of the Liver, Spleen,
Pancreas, Mesentery and the Matrix, and at the same time to void the tenacious
humors that gather in those parts, for want of their wonted passage. The good
effects of it will also appear if it be rightly administered in Cachexies,
Quartane Agues, Hypocondriac distempers, and Dropsies; and particularly in the
Diseases of Women, as the Green Sickness, retention of the Menstruums, and in
all the Maladies and Symptoms that proceed from obstructions of the Matrix. The
dose is from two drams to half an ounce; and to six drams to Hydropsical
persons that are of age, where a less dose does not work effectually. It may be
given in Bolus, dissolved in proper Liquors, or mixed with other Medicaments.
But then regard must be had to the nature of the purgative Medicines with which
it is joined, and the Dose of this Electuary must be proportioned accordingly.

Electuarium Catholicum duplicato Rhabarbaro. Catholicon, or universal purging
Electuary with a double quantity of Rhubarb.. Polypodii Quercini contusi,
viij.. Polypody of the Oak bruised, viij. Seminis Feniculi, j ss. Fennel-seed,
j ss. Coquantur igne moderato in aquae communis lb viij. ad dimidiae partis
consumptionem; colentur and exprimantur; colatura cum sacchari opt, lb iiij.
coquatur ad Electuarii mollis consistentiam: ab igne remotis add Pulparum
Cassiae and Tamarindarum Orientalium inspissatarum, an. iiij. Boil them over a
moderate fire in lb viij. of common water, to the consumption of the half part,
strain and press them. Boil the strained Liquor with lb iiij. of the finest
Sugar, to the consistence of an Electuary: when they are taken off the fire,
add to them Pulps of Cassia and thickened Oriental Tamarinds together, an.
iiij. Deinde sensim permisce Pulveres sequentes. Then by degrees mingle the
following Powders.. Rhabarbari Electi, and Foliorum Sennae Orientalium
mundatorum, an. iiij.. Choice Rhubarb and Leaves of Oriental Senna cleansed,
an. iiij. Seminis Violarum and Seeds of Violets and Anisi, an. ij. Anise, an.
ij. Glycyrrhisae rasae, j. Scraped Liquorice, j. Seminum quatuor frig. maj.
mundat. an. ss. The four greater cold Seeds cleansed, an. ss.

You will find that this Electuary differs in many things from that of the
Ancients, as also of the Moderns: But the difference seems to be very rational.
In the first place the quantity of Polypodie prescribed by the Ancients, is
removed and added to the Decoction; that by imparting to the Electuary the
virtue of all the Polipody to prevent an inconvenience, which is, that the
Polipody being of it self very dry, and being moistened with the Decoction that
remains among the Sugar, swells and becomes by that means thicker than the rest
of the Electuary, and is less pleasing to the taste and more difficult to be
dissolved.

The taking quite away the two drachms of Sugar candi'd, and so much Sugar
pennet, as the Ancients had prescribed in this Electuary, will be no wonder to
those, who shall consider how little they avail in so small a quantity. Whereas
the Rhubarb doubled in its quantity renders the Electuary not only more
effectual, but answers the proportion of the Powders, and supplies the place of
the Polipody cut off. Nor must we disapprove the choice here made of
Violet-seed, instead of the dried Flowers; in regard this Seed contains the
principal virtue of the Plant: whereas the Flowers together with their color
have lost whatever they had of good. Upon which take this advertisement, that
certain Violet-flowers, which they dry in great quantities in Languedoc, and
which they sell for Violet-flowers are no other then the Flowers of that Plant
which Authors call Viola Tricolor or Flos Trinitatis, in English Pansies, or
Hartsease, whose quantities are very different from the true Violets.

There are some that beat the Rhubarb apart, but there is no necessity for
that, in regard it may be very well beaten among the other dry ingredients. The
Liquorice must be scraped, and the Senna and Annise very well cleans'd, and
beaten all together with the Rhubarb, the Violet, and cold Seeds, and passed
through a silk'n-seirce. The Powder being made, bruise the Polipody very well,
and boil it over a moderate Fire in lb. viij. of Water, as prescribed, adding
at the last the Fennel bruised. Then strain the Decoction, and press out the
sediment. Take sixteen ounces of good Cassia and extract the pulp, and pass it
through a hair-sieve reversed, to get four Ounces, which you must reserve.
Moisten with the Decoction, six ounces of Oriental Tamarinds, and having held
them for some time over the hot Embers, beat them in a Marble-Morter with a
Wooden Pestle, and pass the pulp through a hair-sieve reversed, repeating the
same operation till all the pulp be passed through, except two ounces of Lee's.
Then evaporate the moisture of the pulps, stirring them from time to time with
a wodden Spatula till they are sufficiently thickened. Then boil the Sugar with
the rest of the Decoction, to the consistence of a soft Electuary, and having
put the pulps into a Basin, pour upon them some part of the Syrup, and having
incorporated them together, add at several repetitions, sometimes Powder,
sometimes Syrup, till all the ingredients are perfectly mingled. And when the
Electuary is cold put it up in a Syrup-pot.

This Electuary is called Catholicon, because it is an Universal purger of ill
humors out of the body; as being composed of Medicaments of which some are
proper to purge Phlegm, others Choler, and others Melancholy; for, though I do
not believe that any simple or compound Medicament is able to purge Choler, or
any other single humor, and separate it from the rest which are in the Bowels
and Stomach, yet may we believe this Electuary to be an Universal Purger very
effectual and very gentle. Which makes it often used in continued and
intermitting Agues, in Dysenteries, Diarrheas, and defects of retention in the
Stomach and Bowels. It may be given to all Ages and Sexes, particularly to
Women with Child; because as it gently purges off the ill humors, it
strengthens all the parts and leaves no bad effects behind it. The Dose is from
two Drachms to an Ounce. It is given in Bolus, or dissolved in some distilled
water or proper decoction. It may be also mixed with other Medicaments, or
dissolved in Glisters, and then the Dose is from an Ounce to an Ounce and a
half.

Electuarium Lenitivum. Lenitive Electuary.. Hordei Mundati,. Cleans'd French
Barley, Polypodii Quercini, Polypody of the Oak, Fol. sennae Oriental. mundat.
Cleans'd leaves of Oriental Senna, Passularum purgatarum, an. ij. Stoned
Raisins, an. ji. Jujubarum, Jujubs, Sebesten, Sebesten, Tamarindorum, and
Tamarinds, and Prunorum Dulcium enucleatorum, an. j. Sweet Prunes stoned, an.
j. Mercurialis, j ss Herb Mercury, Violarum recentium, and Capill. Ven.
Monspeliensis, an. M j. Fresh Violets, and Venus-hair of Montpeliter, an. M j.
Glycyrrhizae, ss Liquorice, ss Coquantur ex art in Aquae communis lb ix. In
Colatura expressa dissolve, Boil them according to Art in lb ix. of ordinary
water: in the Liquor strained and pressed, dissolve Sacchari optimi, lb ix. Of
the best Sugar, lb ix. Coque ad Electuarii mollis consistentiam: ab igne
remotis add, Boil them to the consistence of a soft Electuary: Take them off
the fire, and add, Pulparum Cassia, Pulps of Cassia, Tamarindorum, Tamarinds,
Prunorum Dulcium, Sweet Prunes, Conservae Violarum, and Conserve of Violets,
Pulveris Sennae mundat. an. vj. Powder of Senna cleans'd, an. vj. Rhei Elect.
and Choice Rhubarb, and Seminis Anisi pulveratorum, an. j. Anniseed powdered,
an. j.

In regard it is uncertain who was the Author of this Electuary, it happens
that the Receipts of it are very various in dispensatories, and that the
quantities of the Ingredients are ill proportioned. For they that understand
the nature of the Ingredients of this Electuary and their preparation and
proportion, can never think six ounces of Sugar, set down in several receipts,
enough for the Pulps and Powders in this Electuary; and that there was reason
to augment it too two pound. They will also acknowledge that the Rhubarb is
added with as good judgment, to make the Electuary more effectual, though left
out by others.

Boil the cleansed Barley in the water for a good hour, together with the
bruised Polypody; then add the Fruit, cleans'd and cut, and then the Mercury,
which must boil with the rest above a quarter of an hour; then put in the
Senna, Liquorice, Venus Hair, and Violets, and having given them some bublings,
take the Decoction from off the Fire, and when it is half cold, strain and
press is forth, and having added to it, two pound of Sugar, boil them together
to the consistence of a soft Electuary, and when it is off the Fire,
incorporate by little and little the Pulps, Powders, and conserve of Violets
stamped in a Marble-Mortar and passed through a hair-sieve, and when the whole
is well mixed and cold, put it up.

The virtues of this Electuary are very near the same with those of Catholicon,
but somewhat inferior: However it is more proper to soften and make the
passages slippery. The dose and manner of taking are almost the same with those
of Catholicon; but it is more commonly used in Glisters then otherwise.

Electuarium Lenitivum, pro Clysteribus. Lenitive Electuary for Glysters..
Polypodii Quercini contusi, lb iij.. Polypody of the Oak bruised, lb iij.
Foliorum Malvae, Leaves of Mallows, Altheae, Marshmallows, Violanae,
March-Violets, Parietariae, Paritary of the Wall, Mercurialis, and Mercury, and
Senecionis, an. M iiij. Groundsel, an. M iiij. Florum Camomil. and Flowers of
Camomil, and, Melilot. an. M ij. Melilot, an. M ij. Coquantur ex Art in aquae
communis lb xxx. Colatura cum mellis communis lb xxxx. coquatur ad Electuarii
mollis consistentiam; deinde dilue Boil all these according to Art in lb xxx.
of ordinary water; boil the strained Liquor with lb xxxx. of common Honey to
the consistence of a soft Electuary; then mix Pulpae prunorum dulcium, lb iiij.
Pulp of sweet Prunes, lb iiij. Cassiae, and Cassia, and Tamarindorum, an. lb
ij. Tamarinds, an. lb ij. Postmodum add pulveres sequentes, Then add the
following Powders,. Radicum Brioniae,, Roots of Briony, Hermodactylorum,
Hermodactyles, Liquiritiae, Liquorice, Foliorum Sennae Orientalis, Leaves of
Oriental Senna, Summitatum Gratiolae, Tops of Hedg-Hysop, Seminis Violarum, and
Seeds of Violets, and Anisi, an. xx. Anise, an. xx. Rhabarbari, and Rhubarb,
and Agarici, an. ix. Agaric, ix.

This Electuary, which may be called Lenitive for Glysters, will work good
effects, and may be long kept, if following this Receipt, you are careful to
prepare it rightly. I know there are some persons that do not so much regard
it; who rather choosing to sell bad Glysters then good, make up their Lenitive
with the worst Ingredients in their Shops, insomuch that they will put in the
Sediments of the Infusions of their Roots, mingling the Pulp of Prunes with a
little Honey, and giving that the Name of Lenitive Electuary. But these bad
Examples are to be laid aside, as well for the easiness of the preparation, the
smalness of the expense, as for the good which they may do, and the facility of
being detected by the color and consistence, wherein it very much resembles
Catholicon.

Bruise the Polypody, and boil it in the water for a good hour; then boil the
Herbs, being cut, for half an hour, after which add the Flowers; and having let
them bubble a while, strain and press out the Decoction; wherein having
dissolved the Honey prescribed, and having passed them through a Hair-Sieve,
boil them over a moderate fire to the consistence of a soft Electuary: Scum it,
and when it is half cold, mix the Pulps first by degrees, and then the Powders,
observing the same method as for other soft Electuaries. When it is cold, put
it up close.

The use of this Lenitive is so familiar, that I need not insist upon it; being
only used in Clysters, to which purpose it is dissolved in some proper
Decoction with Honeys, Sugar, Oils, or other Remedies. The Dose is from half an
Ounce to an Ounce, and sometimes to an Ounce and a half.

Electuarium Diaprunum, Simplex and Compositum. Electuary of Prunes, Simple and
Compound.. Pruna Damascena recentia and matura, No. C.. Damasus Prunes new and
ripe, No. C. Coquantur igne lento in Aquae, lb iij. Boil them over a soft fire
in three pints of water, Deinde per Cribrum inversum trajiciantur, and pulpa
igne lento inspissetur and servetur. Then pass them through a reverst Sieve,
and thick'n the Pulp with a gentle heat, and keep it. In decocto prunorum
leviter coquatur, In the decoction of the Prunes gently boil Seminis violarum
contusi, j. Violet-seed bruised, j. Colatura cum Sacchari opt. lb ij. ad
Electuarii mollis consistentiam coquatur, Boil the straining with two pound of
the best Sugar, to the consistence of a soft Electuary, Parum refrigerato
permisce, When it is a little cold, mix Pulpa praedict. prunorum, lb j. Of the
foresaid pulp of Prunes, lb j. Pulpae Cassiae, and Pulp of Cassia, and
Tamarindorum, an. j. Tamarinds, an. j. Et tandem sequentia pulverata, And then
these following powders,. Rhabarb. Elect. and. Choice Rhubarb, Seminis
Violarum, an. j. Violet-seeds, an. j. Rosarum rubrarum exungulatarum, Red roses
cleans'd from their white bottoms, Santali Citrini and Rubri, Sanders Yellow
and Red, Rasurae Eboris, Shavings of Yvory, Succi Glycyrrhizae, an. vj. Juice
of Liquorice, an. vj. Sem. 4. frig. mag. mund. an. j. Four cold seeds cleans'd,
an. j. Quod Compositum sive Laxativum fieri poterit, si Electuarii cuique
librae adhuc Calenti, Diagridii subtiliter pulverati ss permisceatur. Which may
be made Compound or Laxative, if to every pound of the Electuary yet warm, you
add half a dram of Diagridion finely pulverized.

The Dose of Rhubarb and Violet-seed was judiciously augmented, to render it a
little more purgative. The seeds of Endive, Barberries and Purslane, were on
purpose left out, as useless; as also the Gum-Tragacanth, which was only a Glue
to the Electuary: The yellow Sanders was preferred before the white; as also
the shavings of Yvory before Spodium, for the reasons already recited. The rest
of the Ingredients were not changed, but their Dose only augmented, to the end
the just proportions of Powder might be found in the Electuary, which must be
thus prepared.

Having put the Prunes into an Earthen-glaz'd Pot, boil them over a soft fire
in three pints of water, till they are very soft; then leave the Decoction in
the pot: pass the Prunes through a Hair-Sieve reverst, to get the Pulp, the
superfluous moisture whereof you must evaporate in a Dish over a soft fire,
stirring it from time to time with a Spatula, till it be conveniently thick. In
the mean time, prepare an ounce of Cassia, and an ounce of Tamarinds, as I have
already directed, and mix them, and set them by with the Prunes: Then gently
boil the Violet-seed bruised in the reserved Decoction of Prunes, the Liquor
whereof must be afterward strained; and having added thereto two pound of good
Sugar, boil them over a soft fire to the consistence of a thin Electuary. When
it is half cold, mix first the Pulps, and then the Powders; and when the whole
is well incorporated, and cold, put up the Electuary for use.

If you would prepare a Compound Diaprunum, and more Laxative, mingle half a
dram of Diagridion finely powdered with every pound of Electuary warm, and take
care that the Union and mixture be very exactly made.

Simple Diaprunum is rarely prescribed, as being not purgative at all; but the
Compound is used to purge choleric Serosities: It is used in continued and
intermitting Agues, that proceed from superfluity of choler; it is also
prescribed in diseases of the Breast, the Kidneys, and Bladder; for it makes
the passages slippery, and gently carries away the matters there detained, and
tempers the heat of the parts where they were lodged. It is sometimes taken
alone, sometimes mixed with other Purgatives in Bolus, or dissolved in
Medicines, or other proper Liquors. The Dose of the Laxative is from one Dram
to five or six, and sometimes to an Ounce for strong Constitutions. The Simple
Diaprunum is given from two Drams to an Ounce, in Diseases that require not
much Purgation.

Electuarium Diaphoenicum. Electuary of Dates.. Pulpae Dactylorum in
Hydromelite coctorum, per cribrum inversum trajectae and inspissatae, and. Pulp
of Dates boiled in Hydromel, passed through a Sieve reverst, and thick'nd, and
Penidiorum recenter paratorum, an. lb ss. Penedice newly prepared, an, lb ss.
Amygdalarum dulcium excorticatarum, iij ss. Sweet Almonds, the skins taken off,
iij ss. Turbith electi, iiij. Chosen Turbith, iiij. Diagrydii, j ss.
Diagrydion, j ss. Zinziberis, Ginger, Piperis Albi, White Pepper, Macis, Mace,
Cinnamomi, Cinnamon, Foliorum Rutae siccorum, Dry-leaves of Rue, Seminis
Feniculi, Fennel-seed, Dauci, an. ij. Wild Carrot-seed, an. ij. Mellis
Despumati, lb ij. Clarifi'd-Honey, lb ij.

I know no ill quality in the Dates, that should oblige Mesue and his
Disciples to seek for a Corrective, and to macerate them three days in Vinegar
before you put them into the Electuary. This Correction is as needless as that
of Coriander in Vinegar: But the Ancients have fallen into many such Errors,
for want of understanding the parts that compose mixed Bodies: But our Moderns
are become more Judicious. Fernelius was the first that rejected this
Maceration, and directed the boiling them in Hydromel; which others induced by
reason of sense imitated. The other Medicaments are well chosen, and well
proportioned in the Receipt which Fernelius has given of this Electuary.

Having cleans'd the Dates from their inward skin and stones, weigh out about
seven Ounces; and having cut or bruised them in a Marble-Mortar, boil them over
a gentle fire in a glazed Earthen-pot in two pints of Hydromel, till they are
sufficiently tender: then beat them in a Marble-Mortar with a Wood'n-Pestle,
and pass the Pulp through a Hair-sieve reverst, and set it aside. Peel off the
Almond-skins with the point of a Knife: Pulverize together, in a great
Brass-Mortar, the Turbith, Ginger, Pepper, Mace, Cinnamon, Leaves of Rue, the
Fennel, and wild Carrot-seed, mixing therewith as many peeled Almonds as the
Powder will bear, without growing too fat. The Scammonie must be powdered apart
in the same Mortar, mixing some Almonds with it. Sift both the Powders through
a Silk-Sieve; and having well mixed them, set them aside. Those Almonds that
remained must be beaten in a Marble-Mortar with the Dates, and passed through
the same Sieve: Then take two pints of Honey clarifi'd and boiled to the
consistence of a soft Electuary, the Pennets and the decoction of Dates, and
boil them together over a gentle fire, to the consistence mentioned; and when
it is half cold, mix the Pulps with it by degrees. You may also set the whole
over a very soft fire, and stirring it gently with a Wood'n-Pestle, evaporate
the superfluous moisture; then taking it off the fire, mix the Powders by
degrees, as before.

This Diaphoretic purges alike both Phlegm and Choleric Humors: It is useful in
continued and intermitting Agues; as also against pains in the Stomach that
proceed from abundance of Humors. It is very proper to carry away Hydropical
Humors, and the Serosities which cause the Sciatica, Rhumatismes, and
defluxions upon the Eyes, upon the Teeth, and upon other parts. It may be taken
in Bolus, or dissolved in Liquors, or mixed with other Remedies. The Dose is
from one Dram to half an Ounce, and sometimes to a whole Ounce for strong
Constitutions.

Benedicta Laxativa. The Blessed Laxative.. Turbith Electi,. Chosen Turbith,
Radicis Esulae minoris aceto praeparatae, an. x. Roots of Pine-spurge prepared
with Vinegar, an. x. Hermodactylorum, Hermodactyles, Diagrydii, Diagrydion,
Rosarum Rubrarum, an. vj. Red Roses, an. vj. Caryophyllorum, Cloves, Spicae
Nardi, Spikenard, Zinziberis, Ginger, Croci, Saffron, Macro-Piperis, Long
Pepper, Amomi, Amomum, Cardamomi minoris, Lesser Cardamom, Seminum Apii, Seeds
of Smallage, Petroselini, Parsley, Carui, Caraway, Feniculi, Fennel, Asparagi,
Asparagus, Rusci, Butchers-broom, Saxifragiae, Saxifrage, Milii solis, Gromel,
Sal Gemmae, Sal Gemmae, Galangae, Galanga, Macis, an. j. Mace, an. j. Mellis
opt. despumat and cocti, lb ij ss. The best Honey despumated and boiled, lb ij
ss.

Make an Electuary.

Though the smalness of the Root of Pine-spurge may dishearten Apothecaries
that complain of their time and pains, it is however to be preferred before the
Roots of any of the other Spurges, especially the bigger, whose ill qualities
are published by Mesue, and other Authors. The use which I have made all my
life, and which I have seen made with good success for this Composition, and
the frequent experience and advantage I have made of the Extract drawn from
this Plant, without adding any Corrective, confirm me in the Opinion of not
employing any other Root, but that of Pine-spurge.

And though I find no necessity of preparing the Root with Vinegar, yet out of
Reverence to Antiquity, I think that after you have well washed and cleans'd
these little Roots, instead of steeping them 24 hours in Vinegar, as some do,
it will be enough to sprinkle them only, so much as will serve to moisten them;
for should they be soaked in Vinegar, their Milky Juice, wherein resides their
chiefest virtue, being thereby dissolved, there would only remain the
Terrestrial and unprofitable part: But observing my Method, the Roots being
impregnated with the virtue of the Vinegar, will preserve all their good
qualities.

They that consider how little ten drams of Powder'd-Sugar will advantage this
Composition, will think it but reasonable to leave it quite out, and approve
the Prescription of two pound of despumated Honey, instead of a pound and a
half; in regard that there being no Liquor prescribed in this Electuary, a
pound and a half of Honey will not be enough for the quantity and dryness of
the Powders.

Pulverize all the Ingredients together in a large Brass Mortar, beginning with
those which are hardest, and sierce them through a Silk-sieve, but beat and
sift the Scammony apart, and mingle it afterward with the Powders: Then take
two pound of fair Honey clarifi'd, and boiled to the consistence of a soft
Electuary; and having heated it a little, incorporate the Powders with it, as
already directed, and when the Composition is cold, put it up.

The Blessed Laxative purges Phlegm and Serosities, but particularly those of
the Joints. It is also very much recommended to carry off the impurities of the
Reins and Bladder, as also of the Matrix. The Dose, and manner of taking, is
very near the same with that of Diaphoenicon, but it is more commonly used in
Clysters, then taken inwardly.

Electuarium Caryo-Costinum. Electuary of Cloves and Costus.. Costi,. Costus,
Caryophyllorum, Cloves, Zinziberis, Ginger, Cumini, an. ij. Cumin, an. ij.
Diagrydii, Diagrydium, Hermodactylorum, an. ss. Hermodactyles, an. ss. Mellis
opt. despumat. viij. Honey despumated, viij.

In most Dispensatories, we meet not with above six ounces of Honey prescribed,
with an equal proportion of Powder: But because this Composition is not much
used, because all the Ingredients of the Powders are heating and unpleasnt, and
for that the whole becomes dry if long kept, it was thought convenient to
augment the Dose of Honey to a fourth part: And as for the Wine, because they
that prescribe it would have it boil and consume with the Honey, you cannot
think that any thing else will remain but the flegmatic and terrestrial part.
So that it is better to leave it quite out; since it suffices to take very pure
Honey, boil it a little, and scum it off the fire; and when it is half cold, to
incorporate the Powders with it, observing the same Rules as for other soft
Electuaries.

This Electuary is proper to purge Choleric and Melancholic Serosities. It is
used in Cachexies, in Maladies that proceed from Viscosity of Humors: It opens
Obstructions, and dissolves Tumors in the Bowels: It is often used to purge
the Gouty, especially when the Humor of the Gout is cold. The Dose is from two
drams to half an ounce in Bolus, or dissolved in proper Liquors.

Confectio Hamech Correcta. Confection of Hamech Corrected.. Polypodii quercini
contusi,. Polypody of the Oak, bruised, Passularum mundatarum, and Raisons
stoned, and Prunorum Damascenorum, an. iiij. Damask Prunes, an. iiij. Coquantur
ex art in seri lactis vaccini lb xij. In decocto percolato, and calido infunde
super calidos Cineres per horas 24. Boil them in an Earthen-Pot, in twelve
pints of Whey made of Cows-milk. In the strained and hot Decoction infuse over
the warm Embers for 24 hours, Mirobalanorum Citrinorum, Of Mirobalans yellow,
Chebularum, Chebula, Indorum contus. Indian bruised, Seminis Violarum contus.
Violet-seed bruised, Coloquintidis minutim incis. Coloquintida shred small,
Agarici contus. and Agaric bruised, Foliorum Sennae mundat. an. ij Leaves of
Senna cleans'd, an. ij. Foliorum Absinthii, and Leaves of Wormwood, and Thymi,
an. j. Thyme, an. j. Rosarum Rubrarum, Red-Roses, Seminis Anisi, and
Anise-seed, and Feniculi, an. vj. Fennel-seed, an. vj. Bulliant deinde lento
igne per semihoram; and semirefrigerata, manibus diligenter fricentur, colentur
and fortiter exprimentur; Colaturae add succi Fumariae depurati lb ij.
Sacchari and Mellis Norbonnensis an. lb iij. and coque ad Electuarii mollis
consistentiam. His refrigeratis add, Let them boil over a soft Fire for half
an hour; and being half cold, rub them well between your hands, then strain and
press them out hard. To the straining add lb ij. of clarifi'd Juice of
Fumitory, of Sugar and Honey of Narbon, an. lb iij. and boil them to the
consistence of a soft Electuary. To these when they are half cold, add Pulparum
Cassiae, Pulps of Cassia, Tamarindorum and Tamarinds, and Mannae electi, an.
iiij. Choice Manna, an. iiij. Illisque tandem permisce Pulveres sequentes. To
all which, lastly, add the following Powders.. Rhei Electi,. Picked Rhubarb,
Agarici albissimi, Whitest Agaric, Foliorum Sennae mundatorum, and Leaves of
Senna cleans'd, Diagrydii, an. jss. Diagrydion, an. jss* Myrobalanorum
Citrinorum, Mirobalans yellow, Indorum, Indian, Emblicorum, and Emblic, and
Bellericorum, Belleric, Epithymi, and Epithyme, and Seminis Fumariae, an. j.
Seed of Fumitory, an. j. Cinnamomi, Cinnamon, Gingib. and Ginger, and Seminis
Anisi, an. iij. Anise-seed, an. iij.

The diversity of Receipts, the ill-proportion'd Quantities, the ill Method
which the Ancients prescribed for this Composition, have a long time troubled
the minds of the Apothecaries, especially those who believing it a Crime not to
follow punctually the Traditions of their Ancestors, durst not make use of
Understanding Physicians, who were able to prescribe any thing more just. For
they might well believe, that a great number of Drugs, of a various substance
and quality, required diversity of Infusion, and boiling; and that various
means and different times were to be made use of, to extract and impart their
virtues to the Confection. They might also have considered, that it was
impossible to continue an Infusion of Medicaments in Whey for five days, but
that it must grow sour, and receive a notable alteration. But they that will
stick to this Receipt, and carefully observe the directions for preparation,
will find that there is no Ingredient but what is good, and well proportioned;
and that the virtue of every one in particular, will not fail to show it self
in the Entire Composition.

Confectio Hamech purges Phlegm, and both sorts of Choler, particularly salt and
sharp Humors: For which reason it is prescribed for the cure of Scurfs,
Itches, Eresipela's, Cankers, and corroding Ulcers; as also for scald Heads,
and other Diseases caused by sharp and burning Humors. It is good against the
Worms; as also in Venereal Distempers, and Quartan Agues. The excessive
bitterness, is the reason that it is rather given in Bolus, then dissolved in
Liquors. The Dose is from a dram to half an ounce, and sometimes an ounce for
strong Constitutions.

Hiera Picra Galeni. Galen' s Hiera Picra.. Cinnamomi Elect.. Choice Cinnamon,
Mastiches, Mastich, Asari, Asarobacca, Santali Citrini, Yellow Saunders, Croci,
an. vj. Saffron, an. vj. Aloes Succotrina, xij ss. Aloes Succotrine, xij. ss.
Mellis despumat. and cocti, lb v viij. Honey despumated and boiled, lb. v.
viij.

The high value which Galen put upon this Composition, and its extraordinary
bitter taste, caused him to give it the Name of Hiera Picra, or Holy Bitter.
You may either keep the Powder apart, or mix it with Honey, and reduce it to an
Electuary.

Bruise the Saunders, Asarabacca, Cinnamon, and Spikenard, cleans'd and cut in
a large Brass-Mortar, and sift them through a Silk-sieve. Beat the Saffron
apart, having first dried it in a Paper before the fire: Beat the Aloes in a
great Mortar, mixing with it some few drops of Oil of sweet Almonds: Afterward
mix the Powders together, and incorporate them with the Honey moderately hot,
and put it up when it is cold.

Some use but three times the weight of the Powders in Honey: But Experience
tells us, that the dryness of the Powders requires more; besides, that the
Honey qualifies the excess of the bitterness of the Composition.

This Hiera is very proper to loosen thick and viscous humors from the
Stomach; to open the obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Pancreas, and
Mesentery: It keeps the Belly free, causes the Haemorrhoids to flow, provokes
the Terms of Women, dissipates the vapors of the Matrix, and cleanses the
impurities thereof. The dose is from half a dram to two drams: It is taken
rather in Bolus, then dissolved in Liquors, by reason of its bitterness: It is
used in Wind-expelling and Hysteric Glysters, from half an ounce to an ounce;
and sometimes put into Suppositories, to render them more effectual.

Hiera Diacolocynthidos. Hiera of Coloquinth.. Colocynthidos mundat..
Coloquinth cleans'd, Agarici Elect. Choice Agaric, Staechados Arabicae, Arabian
Cassidony, Marrubii Abbi, White Harehound, Chamaedryos, an. x. Germander, an.
x. Opoponax, Opoponax, Sagapen, Sagapen, Seminis Petroselini,
Stone-Parsley-seed, Radicis Aristolochiae rotundae, Root of round Birth-wort,
Piperis Albi, an. v. White Pepper, an. v. Cimamomi, Cinnamon, Spicae Nardi,
Spikenard, Myrrhae, Myrrh, Folii Indi, Indian-leaf, Croci, an. ss. Saffron, an.
ss. Mellis despumati and cocti, lb iiij. Honey despumated and boiled, lb iiij.

This Hiera takes its Name from the Coloquinth, which is the principal purging
Ingredient, whose virtue is augmented by that of the Agaric, Opoponax, Sagapen,
and Myrrh. The other Ingredients are put in chiefly to expel Wind, open
Obstructions, and fortify the parts against the violence of the Purgatives.

In the Composition of this Hiera, the Ancients are no more to be followed,
then in that of Treacle; I mean, as to the dissolution of Opoponax and Sagapen
in Wine, for the reasons already alleged: Nor is it necessary to reduce the
Agaric or Coloquinth into Trochisques, under pretense of Correctives, of which
there are enough in this Composition. It will be sufficient to beat and pass
them among the other Ingredients through a Silk-sieve, beginning the Powder
with the Birth-wort and Spikenard, which may be beaten sometime together,
adding some part of the Gums; proceeding next with the Cinnamon, the Pulp of
Coloquinth cut, the Agaric, adding to them also some part of the Gums, and then
all the rest of the Drugs, and the remainder of the Gums. Beat them all into a
very fine Powder, because of the Coloquinth, which would stick to the Stomach
or Bowels if it were too big. The Powders must be incorporated with the warm
Honey, as before.

There are great virtues attributed to this Hiera, of which the chief are to
cure Epileptics, Madmen, and those that are troubled with Vertigo's, and
continual diseases of the Head. It is accounted an Excellent Remedy against:
Asthma's, Pleurisies, and for those that have lost their Voice: But there is
some probability of its being too hot to be used in these distempers, unless
their causes be judiciously considered. It is also made use of in Convulsions
and Lethargies, to dissipate the pains of the Joints and Kidneys, and those
that are caused by Rheumatismes, and the Gout; to assuage pains of the Stomach,
and qualify the sowrness that engender there; to loosen and carry off
melancholy humors, and to ease the pains of the Intestines and Matrix, caused
by Slimy and tartarous humors. The dose, and manner of taking, are like those
of Hiera Picra, as well to be taken inwardly, as to be dissolved in Glysters.

Electuarium de Psyllio Correctum. Electuary of Flea-wort Corrected.. Polypodii
quercini contus. lb ss.. Polypody of the Oak bruised, lb ss. Passularum
Damascenarum purgatarum, Foliorum Sennae Orientalis mundatorum, and Seminis
Violarum contus. an. iij. The fairest Raisins of the Sun stoned, Leaves of
Oriental Senna cleans'd, and Seed of Violets bruised, an. iij. Epithymi, and
Tartari Albi Monspeliensis contusi, an. ij. Epithyme, White Tartar of
Montpelier bruised, an. ij. Coquantur in succorum depuratorum Apii, Boil them
in the clarifi'd Juices of Parsley, Borraginis, Borrage, Buglossi, Bugloss,
Endiviae, and Fumitariae, an. lb ij ss. Endive, and Fumitory, an. lb ij ss.
Deinde colentur and exprimantur: Then strain and press them: In majori part
colaturae infundantur, In the greater part of the straining infuse Seminis
Psyllii integri iij. and ex illis extrahatur ex art Muscilage, and servetur,
Of Flea-wort-seed whole iij. and out of these extract a Muscilage, and set it
aside, Reliqua Decocti part humectentur, With the other part of the Decoction
moisten, Tamarindorum Oriental. x. and Medulla librarum duarum Cassiae
Orientalis, quorum pulpa extrahatur and igne lento inspissetur, ita ut
uniuscujusque pulpae inspissatae vij. supersint. Of Oriental Tamarinds x. and
the pulp of two pound of Cassia Oriental; the pulp of which is to be drawn out,
and thick'nd with a slow Fire, so that of each pulp thus thickn'd vij. may
remain. Servato vero Mucilago cum Sacchari opt. lb iiij. igne lento ad
Electuarii mollis consistentiam coquatur, semique refrigeratis Pulpae and
Pulvis sequens permisceantur. Let the reserved Mucilage be boiled to the
consistence of a soft Electuary, over a soft Fire, with lb iiij. of the best
Sugar, and when they are half cold, add the Pulp and Powder following..
Diagrydii elect, iiij.. Choice Diagrydium, iiij. Rhabarbari opt. and Seminis
Violarum, an. ij. Rhubard choice, and Violet-seeds, an. ij. Rosarum Rubrarum,
Red-Roses, Liqueritiae mundat. Cleans'd Liquorice, Santali Citrini, and Rasurae
Eboris, an. j. Yellow Sanders, and Shavings of Ivory, an. j. Sem. quat. frig.
maj. mund. The four greater cold Seeds cleans'd, Anisi, Seeds of Anise,
Foeniculi, and Papaveris Albi, an. ij. Fennel, and White Poppy, an. ij.

Electuary of Flea-wort is not mentioned in all Dispensatories, but those
Descriptions which we meet with are very unlike, confused, irregular, ill
proportioned and intricate, some being swelled with four Compositions of
Troquishes to no purpose. Which obliged Monsieur the Kings first Physician to
prescribe and order this for the public good.

First, boil the Tartar and Polypody well bruised in the clarifi'd Juices for
an hour; afterward the Raisins cut and Violet seeds bruised, a quarter of an
hour, then boil the Epithyme and Senna, for a quarter of an hour longer among
all the rest. That done, infuse the Flea-wort seed in about two thirds of that
Liquor four or five hours over a very soft Fire in a glazed Earthen Pipkin,
stirring it often with a Wooden Spatula, the better to draw forth the
Mucilages, and when they are sufficiently thick, strain them through a strong
Cloth, and press out the Sediment. Moisten the Pulp of Tamarinds and Cassia
prescribed with the rest of the Decoction, and having beaten them in a Marble
Mortar, pass them through a hair Sieve, to get the Pulps, which after you have
mingled together, set them over a gentle Fire, and evaporate their superfluous
moisture, stirring them often with a Spatula till they are sufficiently
thick'nd. Then boil the Mucilages and Sugar prescribed to the consistence
mentioned. But look well to the viscous substance of the Mucilages, which will
make you think the Sugar is boiled enough when it is not: Yet have a care of
boiling it too much, lest you lose the lubricity of the Mucilages.

The preparation of the Powder is the same as before.

This Electuary is very proper to purge Choleric and Serous Humors: It is
profitable in all sorts of Agues, against Diseases of the Head, and Vertigo's
proceeding from Choleric Humors; It helps against the Jaundice, and all
Diseases of the Liver and Spleen: It is to be taken as other Laxative
Electuaries: but the Dose is less, viz. from a dram to half an ounce, because
of the larger quantity of the Scammony.

Electuarium Anti-hydropicum D. D. D'AQUIN. An Electuary against the Dropsy,
of Monsieur D'AQUIN.. Rhabarbari elect.. Choice Rhubarb, Foliorum Sennae
oriental mundatorum, Leaves of Oriental Senna cleans'd, Seminis Genistae,
Broom-seed, Radicum Brioniae, Roots of Briony, Jalopae, Jalap, Mechoacan,
Mechoacan, Scammonii, Scammony, Gummi Guttae, and Gum Guttae, or, Gutta Gamba,
and Trochiscorum Alhandal, an. j. Trochisks of Alhandal, an. j. Extracti totius
Esulae, Extract of the whole Spurge, Opopanacis, Opopanax, Sagapeni, Sagapen,
Ammoniaci, and Salis Martis, an. vj. Ammoniac, Salt of Steel, an. vj. Elaterii,
ss. Elaterium, ss. Succorum Radicis Ireos nostratis, and Juices of the Root of
French Orrice, and Radicis Sambuci ad extracti mollioris consistentiam
inspissatorum, an. lb j. Root of Elder thick'nd, to the consistence of a soft
Extract, an. lb j. Extracti mollioris granorum Juniperi, and Syrupi de Rhamno
Cathartico, an. lb j ss. Soft Extract of Juniper Berries, and Syrup of
Purging-Thorn, an. lb j ss.

Evaporate the Juices of the Roots of Orrice and Elder over a soft fire, to the
consistence mentioned: Pulverize in a large Brass-Mortar the Rhubarb, Jalap,
Mechoacan, Briony, Broomseed, Trochisks of Alhandal, Senna, and the Gums all
together; all but the Scammony, and Gutta-gamba, which must be pulverized
apart; and having mixed all the Powders together, and added to them the Salt of
Steel, moderately the Syrup of purging Thorn; then incorporate, first by
degrees, the Juices and Extracts thick'nd, and after that the Powders, as
before directed for soft Electuaries.

They that understand the particular virtues of the Ingredients of this
Electuary, cannot but acknowledge that they are all judiciously chosen, and
that they must be very effectual for the purposes for which this Electuary is
designed, which are for the cure of the Dropsy, and particularly that which is
called Ascites, when the water is got between the Flesh and the Skin, where it
will not fail to succeed, provided the Liver and Spleen, and other principal
Bowels, are not too much corrupted; and that the Patient stick close to the
Remedy. The dose of this Electuary is from one dram to half an Ounce: It may be
dissolved in White Wind, or some opening Liquor, but the best way is to take it
in Bolus, by reason of its bitterness.

Electuarium Diacarthami. Electuary of Bastard-Saffron.. Medullae seminis
Carthami,. The Pulp of Carthamus-seed, Pulveris Diatragacanthi frigidi, Powder
of cold Diatragacanthum, Hermodactylorum, and Diagrydii, an. j. Hermodactyls,
and Diagrydion, an. j. Turbith Electi, j ss. Choice Turbith, j ss. Zinziberis,
ss. Ginger, ss. Mannae granulosae, ij ss. Manna in Grains, ij ss. Mellis
Rosaticolati, and Carnis Cydoniorum conditae, an. ij. Honey of Roses strained,
and The condited substance of Quinces, an. ij. Sacchari solidi in aqua soluti,
and in Electuarium solidum cocti, xx ij. Sugar dissolved in water, and boiled
to the consistence of a solid Electuary, xx ij.

This Receipt of Diacarthanum is somewhat different from those which are to be
found in many Dispensatories; sometimes under the Name of Arnoldus de Villa
Nova, Nicholas the Florentine, and sometimes without a Name; in some there is
Sugar Candy, but less Manna, less Scammony, and less fine Sugar; in others, no
Sugar Candy, but more Scammony, more Manna, and Sugar; in others, more Powder
of Diatragacanth, less Carthamus-seed, less Ginger, and Mel Rosatum. Therefore
I have here produced a Receipt, wherein the Sugar Candy is omitted as useless,
and the quantity of the Manna augmented, as also in some small measure that of
the Sugar, to supply the defect of the Sugar Candy, and to keep a due
proportion with the Scammony, and other Ingredients.

Neither what Holy Writ delivers to us concerning Manna, white, sweet, and like
Coriander-seed, which God rained down from Heaven to feed the Israelites, nor
what we have spoken other-where of a certain sort of Manna, which being raised
in Summer from the vapors of the Earth, and digested in the Air, is condensed
by the cold, and shows it self in certain hot Countries, before Sunrise, upon
Plants, Trees, Rocks, and upon the Earth it self, as in some parts of Provence
and Languedock, and melts and disappears when heated by the Rays of the Sun,
cannot convince me to be of the Opinion of those, who would have the Manna
which we make use of, to be a Honey of the Air, or a kind of Dew, since Reason
and Experience testify the contrary.

For if Manna were a Dew raised from the vapors of the Earth, and condensed by
the Cold, as they assure us, it would certainly melt, and be dissipated by
heat, which our Manna does not, but rather condenses and dries in the Sun.
Moreover, it would be certainly found upon all Plants, Trees, Rocks and Earths
wherever it were exhaled, whereas it is only found upon the ordinary Ash,
called in Latin, Fraxinus; and upon the wild Ash, in Latin, Ornus; and upon
some of those Trees but very little, upon others none at all. Nor should we
meet with such large Tears, nor so long, and some that show the very print of
the leaf upon which they grew. Nor should we find the leaves of Ash so often
mixed with it; nor could we keep it whole years together, as we often do upon
occasion.

As little prevails with me what sundry Greek, Arabian, and Modern Authors have
written, that the Manna which is brought to us in such quantities, grows in the
Kingdom of Naples, and particularly in Calabria; and that it is a white, sweet
juice or liquor, condensed by the Beams of the Sun, and distills either
voluntarily, or by Incision from the branches, boughs, and very leaves also of
common and wild Ashes, before and during the Dog Days. And that the other
Manna, less plentiful, grows about Briancon in the upper Dauphinate, distilling
from the Trees of that Country; that both the one and the other Manna ceases
not to distill, though you cover the Boughs with Linen, or any other stuff: And
that if Manna were a Honey of the Air or Dew, it were impossible to gather it,
or to keep it without melting or dissipating, nor to gather it in the heat of
the Sun, as they do that Manna which is brought to us: For all Manna of the Air
that appears in the morning condensed by the cold, vanishes when it feels the
heat of the Sun.

Alcomarus, a Neapolitan Physician, well insighted into these truths, has wrote
largely and very much to the purpose upon this Subject, in a Treatise which he
printed in the year 1561. whose Reasons are maintained by Costaeus in his
Commentaries upon Mesue.

Joseph Donzellus, a Neopolitan Physician likewise, in his Pharmacopeutial
Theater, printed at Naples in the year 1667. confirms what Alcomarus has wrote
before him, when he tells us, that Manna is a juice which distills from the Ash,
condensed by the heat and benign temper of the Air, and that it ought to be
ranked in the number of Gums that distill from Trees, dissolve in moisture, and
coagulate with heat, being far different from the Arabian Manna, which is only
a Dew that melts with heat: And describing that Manna that grows in Calabria,
which is that which we every day make use of; and discoursing with Battista
Ferrarius, a Physician of the Country, he speaks that which I thought fit here
to Epitomize.

There are three sorts of Manna in Calabria; the first called Manna di Corpo,
the second Manna Forzata, or Forzatella, and the third Manna di Fronda. These
Manna's are no Dews, but a juice that distills from the common Ashes, called
Fraxini, or the wild ones called Orni; these Manna's are gathered in a hot
settled season, when no Rain falls; and they begin to distill when the Sun
enters into Cancer, which is about the twenty first of June. The first and
fairest Manna issues forth voluntarily, from the body or biggest branches of
the Tree, in a Chrystalline liquor, forming it self into Tears bigger or
lesser, as the part of the Tree is more or less full of it. They are careful to
gather this Manna the next day after it is distilled forth; for in that time it
hardens by little and little, and becomes white; but if it should rain in the
night, or any Mists should rise, it would melt and come to nothing. They begin
to take it off from the bark of the Tree with a thin-pointed knife by Sunrise,
putting it, as they gather it, into glazed Earthen-pots; then spreading it upon
white paper, they expose it to the Sun, till it cease to stick to the fingers,
least the Manna should dissolve by the means of any superfluous moisture, and
lose its whiteness. This gathering continues from the twenty first of June,
till the latter end of July.

The second called Forzata, or forced, is drawn forth in the Month of August,
when the first Manna ceases to flow voluntarily; for the Country People would
the bark of the Trunks, to the wood it self, with very sharp Instruments; and
so from Noon, till ten a Clock at Night, you shall see the Manna flow from
those wounds, so that you shall sometimes see it clotted together at the bottom
of the Tree like little sticks of Wax: They never gather it till the next day
after Incision. This is not so well esteemed, as being more yellow then the
first, and apt to turn brown, being kept any time, though nothing less
purgative.

The third is called Manna di Fronda, or of the Leaves, flowing voluntarily
from the leaves of the Ash like little drops of water, as appears like a kind
of sweat upon the nervous part of the Leaf, during the heat of the day, and
extends it self all over the Leaf, though the drops are bigger at the stalk,
then at the end, or point. These drops harden, and become white in the Sun, and
are somewhat bigger then Grains of Wheat. In August the great leaves of the Ash
will be so laden with these drops, as if they were covered with Snow: They do
not labor so much to gather this Manna, because of the dissiculty to separate
it from the Leaves, though it be no less purgative then the other.

These Truths are confirmed also by Mr. John Ray, of the Royal Society of
London, in his Catalogue of English Plants, printed at London in the year 1670.

Besides all these, Mounsieur Nicholas Marchand, a Member of the Royal Academy
of Sciences, Herbalist to the King, and Director of the Plantation of the
Garden-Royal, has confirmed all these things to me, as one that has been an
Eyewitness, to the end I might be able to speak with more assurance. I have
also understood the same thing from several other persons who have lived
several years in Calabria, that there is no reason in the world to question it.

The Diagrydion must be bruised apart, mixing some of the Carthamus-seeds with
it, and passed through a Silk-sieve. The Turbith, Hermodactils, Ginger, and the
rest of the Carthamus, must be beaten together in a large Brass-Mortar; and
being passed through a Silk-sieve, must be mingled with the Diagrydion and
Diatragacanth newly prepared. Beat the condited substance of the Quinces in a
Marble-Mortar with a Wooden-pestle; and having passed it through a Hair-sieve
reversed, mix it with the Mel-Rosatum, and Manna; then having dissolved the
Sugar in six ounces of water, and boiled it to the consistency mentioned, put
the Honey, the Pulp of Quinces, and the Manna into it; and having given them a
soft boiling, to evaporate the superfluous moisture of the Honey of Roses, and
Quinces, take them off the fire, and stir the whole with a Wooden-pestle; and
when it begins to coagulate, mingle the powders as exactly as you can; and when
all is incorporated, take out the Pestle: Then having separated the Mass in the
Basin, take it in your hands, oiled before with Oil of Sweet-Almonds, and
spread it upon a sheet of white paper a little oiled, and make a kind of a Cake
about half the thickness of your little finger, which you shall cut into
Tablets of half an ounce a-piece; and when they are cold, put them up in a Box.

These Tablets are proper to purge Phlegm, and a yellow Choler; for which reason
they are useful in Diseases that proceed from the abundance of those humors;
as Palsies, Epilepsies, and most Diseases of the Brain; Rhumatismes, Gouts, and
Quotidian Agues. They are to be taken in distilled waters, or proper
Decoctions. They may be also made up in Bolus, or eaten alone, or mingled with
purgative Syrups. When they are given alone, the Dose is from two drams to six.

You may keep apart the Powder of this Electuary, and give it from half a dram
to a dram, or a dram and a half.

Electurium de Citro Solutivum. Solutive Electuary of Citron.. Foliorum Senna
Orientalis mundatorum, vj.. Leaves of Oriental Senna cleans'd, vj. Turbith
electi, v. Choice Turbith, v. Corticis Citri Saccharo conditi, Citron-rind
condited with Sugar, Conservae florum Buglossi, and Violarum, Conserve of
Flowers of Bugloss, and Violets, Pulveris Diatragacanthi frig. and Powder of
cold Diatragacanth, Diagrydii, an. ss. Diagrydion, an. ss. Seminis Feniculi
dulcis, ij. Sweet Fennel-seed, ij. Zinziberis, ss. Ginger, ss. Sacchari opt. in
aqua Buglossi soluti, and in Electuarium solidum cocti, ix. Fine Sugar
dissolved in Borage-water, and boiled to a solid Electuary, ix.

This Electuary bears the name of Citron-rind condited, though it afford it no
purgative virtue, and only serves to strengthen the Stomach, and the Noble
parts, during the Operation of the purgers. The Prescription differs in several
Dispensatories; but this is approved as well by Du Rencri, and the Compilers of
the Pharmacopaea Londinensis, so that I thought it not convenient to alter it.

This Electuary may pass for an Universal Purger, for it purges phlegm, and also
both cholers, strengthening the parts withal: the Purgatives are sufficiently
corrected, so that this Electuary is often given in Tertians, and half
Tertians; to cleanse the Stomach from its impurities, to discharge the
Hypochondriums, restore the Appetite, and a good habit of body, and to fortify
the bowels. The manner of taking and dose of this Electuary are very near alike.

Electuarium do Succo Violarum. Electuary of Juice of Violets.. Seminis
Violarum, and Diagrydii, an. j.. Violet-seeds, and Diagrydion, an. j.
Liquoritiae and Rosarum Rubrarum, an. ss. Liquorice and Red-roses, an. ss.
Seminum quat. frig. maj. mundatorum, an. ss. The four greater cold seeds, an.
ss. Succi recentis Violarum, ix. New juice of Violets, ix. Sacchari optimi, lb
j ss. Finest Sugar, lb j ss.

Pulverize the Violets, Liquorice, Red-roses, cold Seeds, and Diagrydion, as
before: Dissolve the Sugar grossly powdered in a Copper-Skillet tinned within,
in nine ounces of Juice of Violets newly pressed out, and boil them together
over a soft fire to the consistence of a solid Electuary: Then take the Posnet
from the fire, gently stirring the Sugar, till it begins to coagulate, at which
time incorporate the Powders with all the care and exactness that may be.

This Electuary is chiefly to purge such persons as have a nice and tender
Breast, and subject to Inflammation. It is also proper for those whose Liver
and Entrails are heated: For the Juice of Violets, assisted by the oyliness of
the Seeds, qualifies the Acrimony and sharpness of the Diagrydion, and prevents
it from heating the parts, while it carries away the ill humors: The dose and
manner of taking, is much the same with that of Diacarthamum.

Electuarium de Succo Rosarum. Electuary of Juice of Roses.. Succi Rosarum
depurati and Sacchari opt. an. lb j ss.. Juice of Roses clarifi'd, and the
finest Sugar, an. lb j ss. Coquantur igne moderato in Electuarium solidum, cui
semi-refrigerato permisce pulverem sequentem. Boil them over a gentle fire to a
solid Electuary; and when they are half cold, mingle the following Powder
therewith.. Scammonii Elect. ix.. Chosen Scammony, ix. Trium Santalorum, and
The three Sanders, Mastiches, an. iij. Mastich, an. iij. Subtiliter
pulverizentur and Saccharo ex Art permisceantur. Beat them to a very fine
powder, and mix them according to Art.

The Prescription of this Electuary differs as much in most Electuaries as that
of Diacarthanum; for some augment the Saunders, others the Scammony; others
abate the Juice of Roses, others put in Spodium instead of Mastich, others
prescribe Camphire, and every one pretends to Reason; but not to blame others,
I believe this not to be inferior to any of them.

You must be careful to have your Juice of Roses perfectly well cllrifi'd; and
having boiled it as directed, take it from the fire, and stir it gently with a
wooden-pestle till it begin to coagulate, at what time mix the Powders, as
before.

This Electuary is chiefly recommended to purge choleric humors; but that
hinders not but that it may also purge other humors that may be mingled
therewith. The dose and manner of taking this Electuary is the same with those
of the precedent Electuaries.

I could have swelled this Chapter with a great many more Electuaries, with
which Dispensatories are full crammed. But believing that the instructions
which I have given may serve as a sufficient rule whereby to undertake and
accomplish any other that may be prescribed, I thought fit to forbear, leaving
every one to prepare such remedies, and to follow such directions as he likes
best.

I might have added a Chapter of Junkets or Sweet-meets, called in Latin
Tragemata, or Bellaria; but their consistence is almost the same with solid
Electuaries, as also their foundation, which is Sugar. But because they are not
much used in Physic and may be prepared at any time with proper Powders, Sugar,
and Mucilages of Gum-Tragacanth, I am unwilling to enlarge too far.

CHAP. XXI. Of Trochisks.
IN imitation of the Greeks, all those who have written of Pharmacy, have given
the name of Trochisks to a dry Composition, the chief Ingredients whereof are
usually reduced to a fine powder, then being incorporated with some liquor, are
made into a mass, of which are formed certain small Cakes, to which you may
give what Figure you please, being then to be dried out of the Sun, or at
distance from the Fire. However you may add several pulps and viscous matters
to the composition of Trochisks, but there is no reducing those substances into
a mass, or to the shape and dryness of Trochisks, unless you mix powders very
finely beaten among them. They are also called Pastils, Rolls, Cakes, and
Lozenges. Trochisks were invented, as well to preserve a long time the virtue
of certain Medicaments, as to unite together the virtue of several. To which
purpose having finely powdered the Ingredients which are to be powdered, they
are to be incorporated with some juice, syrup, or other viscous Liquor, to make
thereof a solid paste, out of which are formed little Trochisks, flat, round,
triangular, square, long or otherwise; which being spread upon paper, and dried
out of the Sun, and at a distance from the Fire, to the end they may be dried
in all parts alike, may be put up in Boxes or Pots for use.

Formerly a great number of Trochisks were prepared, as appears by the ancient
Dispensatories which are full of them. But because the Moderns have rejected so
great a number, we thought it convenient to satisfy our selves with those
which are only in use.

Trochisks are prepared for several purposes, some to close and bind, some to
fortify the parts, some to cut and purge, some to cleanse and incrassate;
whence it comes to pass that they are prescribed in all Diseases of the Breast
and Lungs. Others for Diseases of the Eyes, and were called Sief by the
Arabians. Others which are particularly called by the name of Pastils, were
invented for Perfumes, which are usually composed of odoriferous Gums, mixed
with Woods, or other Aromatic Drugs pulverized and incorporated with Mucilages
of Gum-Tragacanth.

Trochisci de Agarico. Trochisks of Agaric.. Zinziberis albi contus. ij.. White
Ginger bruised, ij. Vini albi, iiij. White Wind, iiij. Infundantur frigide
horis viginti quatuor, and colentur: postmodum, Let them infuse cold for twenty
four hours, then strain them: afterward.. Agarici electi in pulverem redacti,
lb ss.. Choice Agaric reduced into Powder, lb ss. Pr^dicto liquore humectetur
and ex illa fingantur Trochisci in umbra siccandi. Moisten it with the foresaid
Liquor, and make of it Trochisks to be dried in the shade.

To prepare these Trochisks right and to have them white, you must stay for
fair warm and dry weather, and be careful to pick your Agaric very clean and
very white through all its substance, very light and very brittle, and to
reduce it into powder with a very small Rasp: In the mean while infuse coldly
two drams of white Ginger, very well cleans'd from its Bark, and well bruised,
for four and twenty hours in four ounces of white Wine; then having strained
the Infusion, moisten the Powder of Agaric with the Infusion, and beating them
together in a Marble-Mortar with a wooden-Pestle, reduce it into a solid mass;
and make of it little Trochisks, which you must spread upon white paper in a
hair-Sieve reversed, and dry in the shade in the open Air.

They that undertake to prepare these Trochisks right, fail in the preparation;
for instead of preserving their white color, they so order it that they are of
a very dark color, which happens either because their Agaric is not well
chosen, or because the Ginger was infused warm, or because the paste was too
moist, or because the Trochisks were exposed to the Sun or Fire.

Some there are that add to these Trochisks, Sal gemmae as an incentive, and
Ginger in substance as a corrective; and make use of simple Oxymel instead of
an Infusion of Ginger to reduce Agaric into paste. This preparation might be
admitted, if you could preserve the white color of the Agaric, which is very
much to be regarded.

The principal use of Trochisks of Agaric, is to purge Phlegm, though at the
same time they also purge other humors, when they are mixed with it. They cut
and loosen viscous and tenacious humors, and open obstructions of all the
Bowels. They are prescribed to carry off old pains in the Head, to heal
distempers in the Eyes, Ears and Teeth; to cleanse the Stomach, Reins, Liver,
Spleen and Matrix; to kill Worms and to ease the pains of Asthmaticks, and
those whose viscous matters stop the Conduits of Respiration. Their dose is
from one scruple to a dram. They are seldom given alone, being more frequently
prescribed in infusion then in substance; unless when they are to be put into
Pills or Opiates, or other suchlike Compositions.

Trochisci Alhandal. Alhandal Trochisks.. Pulpae Colocynthidis electa and
mundat^ quantum libuerit, forcipe minutim incide, guttis aliquot Olei
Amygdalarum dulcium irrora and in subtilem pulverem redige. Ex pulvere
Mucilagine Gummi Tragacanthi excepto fac Massam, ex Massa Trochiscos in umbra
siccandos. Siccos iterum subtiliter tere, nova Gummi Tragacanthi mucilagine
excipe, no^os Trochiscos singe in umbra sicca and ad usum serva.. The choicest
^^ulp of Coloquintida, cleans'd as much as is fit, cut it very small with a
pair of Scissers, moisten it with some few drops of Oil of sweet Almonds and
reduce it into fine powder. Of the powder make a Mass with Mucilage of
Gum-Tragacanth, of the Mass Trochisks to be dried in the shade. When they are
dry powder them again, and mix them with more Mucilage of Tragacanth: Make new
Trochisks; dry them in the shade, and keep them for use.

Choose out the Apples of Coloquinth very white and well grown; and throwing
away the grains cut the pulp very small, and having slightly moistened it with
some drops of Oil of sweet Almonds, bruise it in a Brass-Mortar, and poss it
through a Silk-Sieve. In the mean time pulverize one or two drams of
Gum-Tragacanth very white, and infuse it upon hot Embers in five or six ounces
of good Rose Water till it be altogether dissolved and reduced into a thick but
soft Mucilage: Then put the powder of Coloquinth into a Marble-Mortar, and
having moistened it with some part of the Mucilages beat it together with a
woodden-Pestle, and reduce it to a mass somewhat solid, of which you shall make
little Trochisks, and dry them in the shade. When they are dry pulverize them
again; and having passed the powder through a Silk-Sieve, incorporate it with
new Mucilage of Gum-Tragacanth, for a mass to make Trochisks like the former;
which are to be dried in the shade and put up for use.

Some add Gum Arabic and Bdellium to the Tragacanth, to extract Mucilages
necessary for the composition of these Trochisks. But the principal intention
of them that added them being only to stifle and abate the violent operation of
the Coloquinth, and to separate all the small parts from it, by beating and
rebeating it, and passing it twice through the sieve, the Gum-Tragacanth may
very well suffice alone, and the two other Gums may be very well omitted.

These Trochisks purge phlegm, and thick, and viscous humors, particularly of
the Brain, Breast, Flesh, and Joints; so that they are often prescribed in
Epilepsies, Apoplexies, Vertigo's, and old diseases of the Head; against
Asthma's, and Coughs, stoppage of the Lights, Sciatica's, Rhumatisms, and all
Maladies of the Joints; but particularly against Dropsies, especially that
called Ascites, Colicks caused by viscous and tenacious humors. Their
excessive bitterness is the reason that they are never prescribed but in Bolus.
Their violent operation also causes them to be seldom prescribed, but only to
be mixed with gentle Medicines. However the infusion of these Trochisks is
given alone, made in white Wine for those that cannot endure the bitterness of
the taste; and it succeeds very well. The usual dose is a scruple of Trochisks
bruised, infused in four ounces of white Wine, the liquor whereof must be drank
passed through coarse paper, and the dose repeated three times for three
several days. But when these Trochisks are given in their proper substance, the
dose is from a grain to seven or eight, or at farthest ten for very strong
Constitutions, and in extraordinary Diseases; especially in those where nature
is over burdened and is not able to help her self.

Trochisks of Alhandal are put into several compositions, especially Pills; and
they may be used wherever Coloquinth is prescribed in substance, and so much
the rather, because the Coloquinth being there finely powdered is less apt
stick to the Stomach and Intestines.

Trochisci Bechici Albi. White Trochisks against Coughs.. Sacchari albissimi
subtiliter pulverisat. lb jss.. Finest white Sugar finely powdered, lb jss.
Amyli, Amylum, or Starch of Wheat, Ireos Florentiae, Florence Orrice,
Liquoritiae mundatae subtilissime pulverat. an. j. Liquorice cleans'd finely
powdered, an. j. Ambrae Griseae, Amber-greese, Moschi Orientis, an. gr. iiij,
Eastern Mosch, an. gr. iiij.

Pulverize very finely a dram of Gum-Tragacanth very white, dissolve it upon
hot Embers in five or six ounces of good Rose Water, and reduce it to a
mucilage, and set it by. Choose out the best Liquorice, and scrape off the
rind, so that nothing appear but what is very yellow; pulverize it very finely
apart, as well as the Amydon or Amylum, the Florence Orrice, and the fine
Sugar. Pulverize together the Musk and the Ambergreese, mixing therewith about
two drams of Sugar Candy to facilitate the division of the parts. Then mix all
these powders in a Marble-Mortar, and having incorporated them with as much of
the mucilage of Gum-Tragacanth as is requisite to reduce them into a paste
somewhat solid, form it into Trochisks, or little sticks to be dried in the
shade and kept for your use.

Some call these Trochisks by the name of Juice of white Liquorice; the Receipt
whereof is not to be found in the Dispensatories. Sometimes also they alter the
Ingredients, mixing therewith Sugar Candy, or Penedite; and increasing or
abating the quantity of the rest.

These Trochisks are used against salt and sharp defluxions that fall upon the
Brain and upon the Lungs. They give ease to them that are troubled with violent
Coughs, or suffer any oppression upon their Lungs; they may be taken at any
time, holding them in the Mouth till they melt. They are also good to preserve
the Breath sweet and grateful to the smell.

Trochisci Bechici Nigri. Black Trochisks against Coughs.. Succi, sive extracti
Liquoritia inspissat. ix.. Juice or Extract of Liquorice thickened, ix.
Pulveris Ireos Florentiae, Powder of Flurence Orrice, Amyli, and Wheat-Starch,
and Liquoritiae mundat, an. ij. Liquorice cleans'd, an. ij. Cinnamomi
acutissimi, j. Biting-Cinnamon, i. Sacchari albissimi, Sugar refined, Candi,
and Candy, and Penidiati pulveratorum, an. lb j. Penidiate pulverized, of each,
lb j.

Make a solid Paste of all with Mucilage of Gum-Tragacanth, extracted with
Hysopwater, and form it into Trochisks to be dried in the shade.

These Trochisks are called black because of their dark color. They are not so
pleasing as the preceding. They that would prepare them well, should make use
of Extract of Liquorice prepared as I shall direct in its proper place. But
they that will not take that pains, must take good Liquorice, and having
dissolved it in some Pectoral-water, and filtered it, must evaporate it
afterward to the consistence of an Extract.

These Trochisks are much used in Diseases of the Lungs, especially where there
is any occasion to cut and loosen Phlegm, and to hasten expectoration: They are
to be taken as the former, but less at a time.

You may add to the composition Eastern-Bole, Terra-Sigillata, and Poppy-seed,
or Extract of Opium, if you would make them more fit to stop defluxions from
the Brains upon the Lungs: and make them like to Trochisks of Terra-Sigillata,
or Karabe. These Trochisks may be prepared at any time; and therefore it is
better to prepare them often, then let them be spoiled.

Trochisci Albi Rhasis. White Trochisks of Rhases.. Cerussae aqua Rosarum
lotae, ijss.. White-lead washed in Rose Water, ijss. Sarcocollae lacte muliebri
nutritae and siccatae, vj. Sarcocol moistened with Womans-milk and dried, vj.
Amyli, ss. Pounded Wheat-flowre ss. Gummi-Arabici, and Gum-Arabic, and
Tragacanthi, an. ij. Tragacanth, an. ij. Camphorae, j. Camphire, j.

Choose out good Ceruse of Venice, and bray it upon Porphyrie with Rose Water,
as you grind Pretious-stones; and when it is reduced into a Powder not to be
felt, extend it upon White-paper and let it dry. Then beat the Sarcocol very
fine, being moistened with Womans-milk, and having reduced it into a Paste,
extend it and expose it to the Air to be there dried, then beat it and sierce
it through a silk-sive. Beat the Gums apart in a brass mortar hot, and pass the
same through a silk-sieve. Pulverize also the Camphire apart, adding never so
few drops of Spirit of Wine: then beat the Amylum and prepared Ceruse, and
having mixed them with the other Powders, pass the whole through a Silk-Sieve,
and having put the Powder into a Marble-Mortar, moisten it with-Rose-water, and
having reduced it into a solid Paste, make thereof little Trochisks to be dried
in the shade, and kept for use. But because these Trochisks being dry are
almost as hard as a stone; by the conjunction of the caseous part of
Womans-milk, and the Sarcocol with the dry Ingredients that make the Powder; It
will do better to keep the Powder when it is made, then to form it up into
Trochisks; in regard it will easily keep so, and that it is an easy thing
afterward to put Rose Water or Womans-mik to it, when you have occasion to use
it.

You may also moisten the Sarcocol with Rose Water; if you prepare the Powder
in Winter, for then the Milk will grow sour and corrupt before the Sarcocol be
dry.

The Arabians call these Trochisks by the Name of Sief, and the Latins and
French have given them the name of Collyrium, as being chiefly proper for
Diseases of the Eyes, of which they qualify the Inflammations, cleanse the
Ulcers, and stop and dry up the defluxions. They are also used in Injections
for Inflammations and Ulcers of the Ureters and Bladder, particularly in
Gonorrheas. For which two sorts of uses the Powder is dissolved in distilled
waters, or in decoctions or other specific Liquors. The Dose is half a dram, or
at most a dram of Trochisks or Powder to four ounces of Liquor: The Dose is
also to be varied, when you mingle with it Turbith prepared, Salt of Saturn,
Magnesia Opalina, Aloes, Vitriot, etc. according to the intent of the Physician.

Trochisci Aliptae Moschatae. Odoriferous Musk Trochisks.. Labdani purissimi,
iij.. Of the purest Ladanum, iij. Resinae Storacis, jss. Gum-Storax, jss.
Benjonii, j. Benjamin, j. Ligni Aloes, ij. Ligni Aloes, ij Moschi Orientalis,
ss. Oriental-Musk, ss.

The lignum Aloes must be pounded apart in a great Brass-Mortar, and passed
through a silk'n sieve. The Ambergriese must be also powdered apart, mixing
with it never so little Oil of Nutmegs; and the musk, by mixing with it never
so little Sugar, candy'd. It may be also ground with the powder of Lignum
Aloes. Could you get Laudanum very pure, you might melt it in a great hot
Brass-Mortar, as well as the purified Rosin of Storax, and the Benjamin if that
were in Tears; and then there would be no need of Rose Water or mucilage of Gum
Tragacanth, for these melted Gums would easily suffice to bind together the
powder of Aloes, Musk and Ambergriese, and which is a Bitumen easy to melt.
But the impurities of Ladanum and Benjamin oblige us to beat and sift them
through a silk-Sieve, and to make use of some moist or viscous matter, to unite
the whole mass for to make the Trochisks. Prepare the Rosin of Storax as I have
directed before; and incorporate it with the other Ingredients pulverized in a
marble-mortar, heated before, using therein as much mucilage of Gum-Tragacanth
as is necessary to reduce the whole into a gentle Paste, to make the Trochisks
which are to be dried in the shade.

The name of Alipta Moschata was given to these Trochisks, because of the
mixture of odoriferous and musky Drugs in the composition. The Camphire
prescribed in other Dispensatories is omitted; by reason that its displeasing
smell would surmount the scent of all the other Ingredients. However it may be
added in the preparation of these Trochisks, when they are for Women that do
not love sweet smells.

These Trochisks are very much esteemed for their fragrancy. They are good in
the sickness-time against the pestilential air. But they are more frequently
used to strengthen the brain and the noble parts. They may be carried in a
small Box with holes, or burnt upon a Coal like a perfume to perfume a Chamber,
Linen or Clothes. They may be also pulverized and mixed with Rose Water, or
Orange-flower water, and poured upon a hot Chasing-dish to perfume Bed-chambers
or Dining-rooms.

Trochischi Galliae Moschatae. Trochisks of Gallia Moschata.. Ligni Aloes
optimi, v.. The best Lignum Aloes, v. Ambrae Griseae, iij. Ambergriese, iij.
Oriental. Mosc. j. Oriental Musk, j.

With mucilage of Gum-Tragacanth extracted with Rose Water, make up these
Trochisks, and dry them in the shade.

The Ambergriese and Musk must be ground upon Porphyry; and the Lignum Aloes
finely powdered. But be careful to moist'n the ends of your Fingers, with never
so little Oil of sweet Almonds, when you make up the Trochisks, to make the
Paste stiff, and the Trochisks little, that they may be soon dry, and lose as
little as is possible of their scent and virtue.

These Trochisks are commended by all Authors to strength'n the Brain, the
heart, the Stomach, and all the Bowels, to stay vomiting, to facilitate
transpiration, and keep the breath sweet. They are to be held in the mouth, and
there gently dissolved: or else pulverized and put with Rose Water or
Orange-flower water upon a Chasingdish of dying Embers, to receive the Vapors,
or to perfume Chambers, Linen or Clothes. You may add to the Paste of these
Trochisks some small quantity of Willow-Coal powdered very fine, and form them
into Bracelets or Beads, to be dried, strung, and worn, or else to be laid
among Clothes.

Trochisci de Karabe. Trochisks of Carobs.. Karabes, j.. Carobs, i. Cornu-cervi
usti, Hartshorn burnt, Gummi Arabici, Gum Arabic, Tragacanthi, Tragacanth,
Acaciae verae, True Acacia, Hypocistidis, Undergrowth of Cystus, Balaustiorum,
Pomegranate Flowers, Mastiches, Mastich, Coralli Rubri, Red Coral, Gummi
Laccae, Gum-Lac, Sem. Papav. nigri, an. viij. Black Poppy-seed, an. viij.
Thuris, Frankincense, Croci, an. ij. Saffron, an. ij. Extracti Opii, Extract of
Opium,

Bruise the Pomegranate Flowers, the true Acacia, and the Undergrowth of Cystus
in a great Brass-Mortar, if they be dry, with the Poppy-seed. Bray the
red-Coral upon Porphyry, together with the Hartshorn burnt, and the Carobs,
moistning them in water of Mouse-ear, Rupture-wort, or some astringent Water.
Beat the Gum-Tragacanth in a Brass Mortar heated. Beat the Mastic, the Gum-Lac,
the Frankincense and Saffron apart, and sift them through a silk-sieve, as you
must do the rest of the Powders. Incorporate the Extract of Opium with about an
Ounce of mucilage of Flea-wort, and having mixed all the Powders therewith,
beat them together in a great Mortar, adding as much mucilage as is requisite
to reduce the whole into a solid paste, which is to be formed into little
Trochisks, and dried in the Sun.

These Trochisks are good against all internal fluxes of blood, and
particularly against spitting of blood; for Ulcers in the Lungs, Dysenteries,
and Cholicks. They are to be finely powdered, and given in astringent Waters or
Decoctions, at a distance from eating. The Dose is from a Scruple to a dram.

The Hartshorn burnt may pass well enough here, because there is nothing
required but the astringent quality which remains in the earthy part after
ustion. The ustion of the Coral is altogether to be rejected, as not to be done
without altering its good qualities: and the burning of the Poppy-seed is
altogether erroneous, as destroying altogether the virtue of the seed.

Trochisci Gordonii. Trochisks of Gordonius.. Seminum quatuor frig. maj. mund..
Four greater cold Seeds cleans'd, Papaveris Albi, White Poppy-seed, Malvarum,
Seeds of Mallows, Bombacis, Cotton-tree, Portulacae, Purslain, Cotoneorum,
Quinces, Myrthillorum, Myrtles, Gummi Arabici, Gum-Arabic, Tragacanthi,
Tragacanth, Nucleorum Pineorum mund. Pine-Kernels cleans'd, Pistaceorum,
Pistaches, Sacchari Crystallini, and Crystall'd Sugar, and Penidiati,
Penidiate, Glycyrrhizae mundat. Liquorice scraped, Hordei mundat. Barley
cleans'd, Amygdalarum dulcium, Sweet Almonds, Mucilagin. sem. Psyllii, an. ij.
Mucilage of the seed of Fleawort, an. ij. Boli Armenae, Bole Armeniac,
Lachrymarum sang. Draconis, Tears of Dragons blood, Rasurae Eboris, Shavings of
Ivory, Rosarum rubrarum, and Red Roses, and Myrrhae electae, an. ss. Choice
Myrrh, an. ss.

Pulverize apart the Bole Ammoniac and Dragons-blood in Tears; mingling with
them as much of the cold Seeds as the powder will bear. Beat together in a
great Brass-Mortar the shavings of Ivory, the Liquorice, the Parsley, the
Myrtles, the Myrrh, the red Roses, the Mallows, Quince, Purslain, Poppey, and
Cotton-seeds; you may also mix the Gum-Arabic and Tragacanth together, and as
much of the cold Seeds as the powder will bear, and having sifted them through
a silk-Sieve, and the Sugar Candy and the powders pulverized, then cut very
small the Pine-Kernels, the Pistaches, and the Almonds with a Shoemakers Knife,
then beat them in a Marble-Mortar with a wooden-Pestle, till the whole be
hardly to be felt. Then mix all the powders, and incorporating them with the
cold Seeds, the Almonds, the Pine-Kernels, and the Pistaches beaten, add of the
Muscilage of Flea-wort and Hydromel, as much as will suffice to reduce them
into a good Paste; of which when the Trochisks are made, dry them in the Sun.
But in regard these Trochisks are not to be kept, by reason of the unctuous
Seeds and Fruits that compound them, and are only to be made when occasion
requires; therefore the best way is not to make them into Trochisks, but to
administer the moist Mass, when it is fully prepared.

Gordonius the Author of these Trochisks extols them for the cure of Ulcers in
the Reins; and for those that piss Blood, as also for the Diabetes, the
Strangury, Gonorrheas and Ulcers of the Bladder and Ureters. The Dose is from
one Dram to two mixed in Hydromel, in Milk, or in some proper distill'd-water,
or Decoction. It is also used for Injections into the natural parts of men or
women, mixed in the same manner. These Trochisks are also proper for the most
part of Diseases of the Breast, as well to stay Defluxions, as to qualify
their Acrimony.

Trochisci de Rhabarbaro. Trochisks of Rhubarb.. Rhabarbari optimi, x.. The
best Rhubarb, x. Amygdalarum amararum excorticatarum, ss. Bitter Almonds
peeled, ss. Rosarum rubrarum exungulatarum, iij. Red Roses cleans'd, iij.
Radicis Rubiae Tinctorum, Root of Dyers-Madder, Spicae Nardi, Spikenard,
Absinthii Majoris, The bigger Wormwood, Asari, Asarabacca, Seminis Apii, and
Seeds of Parsley, and Anisi, an. j. Anise, an. j.

Take off the skins of the Almonds with the point of a Knife, beat them in a
large Brass-Mortar with the Rhubarb, Madder, Asarabacca, Spikenard, Wormwood,
Roses, Parsley, and Aniseeds, and sift the Powders through a Silk-sieve, and
mingle them afterward with Juice of Eupatorium or Agrimony depurated and
reduced to the Consistence of Honey, beating the whole for some time together,
to unite the Ingredients the better, and bring them into a kind of a solid
Paste, and make it into little Trochisks; which must be dried in the shade, and
so kept for use.

These Trochisks are used at the end of long sicknesses, especially the
Jaundise, Dropsies, and Cachexies. It serves also for the cure of those that
are troubled with Pains, Swellings, and Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and
Mesentery. They are given in Powder in White Wind, or in some other proper
Liquor, from a Scruple to a Dram. They may be also mixed in Tablets, Opiates,
and Potions.

Trochisci de Capparibus. Trochisks of Capers.. Corticis Radicum Capparum, and.
Of the Rind of Caper-Roots, and Seminis Agni Casti, an. vj. Seed of the Chaste
Tree, an. vj. Gummi Ammoniaci, iiij. Gum-Ammoniac, iiij. Amygdalarum amararum
mundatarum, Bitter Almonds peeled, Seminis Nigella, Seed of Fennel Flower,
Nasturtii, Cresses, Summitatum Calamintha, Tops of Calamint, Radicum Acori
very, Roots of true Acorus, Aristolochiae Rotundae, Round Birthwort, Cyperi,
Cyperus, Foliorum Ruta, and Leaves of Rue, and Scolopendrii siccorum, an. ij.
Spleenwort dried, an. ij. Succi Eupatorii ad mellaginem inspissati, q. s. Juice
of Agrimony, q. s.

Having pressed out and depurated the juice of Agrimony, boil it over a soft
fire to the consistence of Honey. Then beat together in a great Brass-Mortar
the Caper-Roots, the true Acorus, the Cyperus, the Birth-wort, the Seeds, the
bitter Almonds, the Calamint, Rue and Spleen-wort, according to the method of
Trituration, and sift them through a Silk-sieve. Then heat the Brass-Mortar and
Pestle; and having melted the Gum-Armoniac, and mixed it with some part of the
juice of Agrimony, incorporate the Powders with it by degrees, adding as much
juice of Spleen-wort as is necessary to make a paste solid enough to make up
the Trochisks, which are to be dried in the shade and kept for use.

The Trochisks are proper to cut and attenuate thick and tartarous humors, and
to open the obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Pancreas, and Mesentery, as also
to soften their hardnesses, and those of all the lower part of the belly; and
to dissipate the flatuosities of the Hypochondrium and Intestines. They are to
be given in powder mixed in convenient Liquors, or among other Medicines like
Opiates or otherwise. Their Dose is from a Scruple to one Dram.

Trochisci de Myrrha. Trochisks of Myrrh.. Myrrhae Electae,. Choice Myrrh.
Lupinorum Excorticatorum, an. v. Lupin's shal'd, an. v. Foliorum Rutae
siccorum, Leaves of dry Rue, Dictamni Cretici, Cretan Dittany, Mentastri, Wild
Mints, Pulegii Regalis, Pennyroyal, Seminis Cumini, Cumin-Seed, Radicis Rubiae
Tinctorum, Root of Madder, Assae Fetidae, Assa-Fetida, Sagapeni, Sagapene,
Opoponacis, an. ij. Opoponax, an. ij.

Beat all together the Lupines cleans'd from their Hulls, the Madder-Roots, the
Leaves of Rue, wild-Mint, Pennyroyal, Dittany, Cumin-Seed, and Myrrh. Choose
out the purest drops of Assa Fetida, Sagapene, and Opoponax, and melt them by
degrees in a brazen-Mortar heated, mixing therewith about an Ounce of the juice
of Mugwort, wherein the powders are to be incorporated, so that the whole may
be reduced into a paste, fit to be made up in Trochisks; which must be dried in
the shade and kept for use.

These Trochisks are highly recommended against the Retention of the
Menstruums. For they subtilize the blood, and hinder the coagulation. They also
cut thick and viscous matters that cause Obstructions, and by that means they
open the passages of the Matrix. They bring away the Afterbirth and dead
Child. They are to be powdered and given in a Decoction of the Berries of
Juniper, or some other Hysterical Plant. Their Dose is from one Scruple to a
Dram. They may be also powdered and incorporated with Oil of Petroleum or
Amber, and tied in a knot to be held to the Nose against Hysteric Vapors.

Trochisci Diarrhodon. Trochisks of Roses.. Rosarum rubrarum recentium
exungulatarum, j.. New Red-Roses cleans'd from their bottoms, j. Rasurae
Eboris, Shavings of Ivory, Santali Citrini, and Saunders Yellow, and Rubri, and
Red, and Radicis Liquoritiae mundat. an. iij. Root of Liquorice cleans'd, an.
iij. Mastiches electae, ij. Chosen Mastich, ij. Croci, j. Crocus, j. Camphorae,
gr. xij. Camphire, gr. xij. Aquae Rosarum, q. s. Rose Water, q. s.

This Receipt is not inferior to any that are to be met with in any
Dispensatories, though the difference be great, as well in reference to the
ingredients, as the quantities: Beat together in a great Brass-Mortar the
shavings of Yvory, Sanders, and Liquorice, and sift them through a Silk-sieve:
Triturate the Mastick and the Saffron severally apart, as also the Camphire,
observing what I have formerly directed. Choose out the large buds of fresh
Red-roses, and having cut off the ungulous part or bottoms with a pair of
Scissars, beat them in a Marble-Mortar with a Wood'n-pestle, till they are
almost impalpable; then mixing the Powders therewith, beat the whole for some
time, adding as much Rose Water as is necessary, to make the Mass solid enough
for the forming of little Trochisks to be dried in the Sun.

These Trochisks strength'n the Stomach very much, as also the Liver and
Bowels: They dissipate the pains and old maladies thereof, and are given with
success in Dysenteries and Cholical Passions. Their dose and manner of taking
are very little different from those of the Trochisks preceding.

Trochisci de Camphora. Trochisks of Camphire.. Rosarum Rubrarum mundatarum,
and. Red-Roses cleans'd, and Mannae Calabrinae, an. ss. Calabrian-Manna, an.
ss. Santali Citrini, Yellow-Saunders, Liquoritiae mundatae, Liquorice cleans'd,
Rasurae Eboris, an. iij. Shavings of Yvory, an. iij. Semin. quat. frig. maj.
mundatorum, The four greater cold seeds cleans'd, Gummi Arabici, Gum-Arabic,
Tragacanthi, Tragacanth, Nardi Indicae, Indian-Spikenard, Ligni Aloes, Lignum
Aloes, Croci, an. j. Saffron, an. j. Camphorae, ij. Camphire, ij.

Beat together in a great Marble-Mortar the Yellow-Saunders, Lignum-Aloes,
Liquorice, shavings of Yvory, the Spikenard, the Red-Roses and Spikenard, and
sift them through a Silk-sieve. Beat apart the Manna and Camphire, adding at
last never so small a drop of Spirit of Wine. Make choice of Manna in Tears;
and having beat it in a Marble-Mortar with a Wood'n-pestle, add thereto about
an ounce of Muscilage of Flea-wort; and mixing the Powder therewith by degrees,
and what is wanting of the Muscilage, beat the whole to a solid Paste, fit to
make little Trochisks, and dry them in the shade.

These Trochisks are prescribed in Burning-Fevers, to quiet the boiling of the
blood and choler, to moderate the heat of the stomach and liver, and to quench
inordinate thirst. They are prevalent also against the Jaundice, Ptisic, and
Hectic-Fevers. Their dose and manner of taking is the same with the former:
They are also put into Hysteric Glysters, from one to two drams, pulverized and
mingled with proper Decoctions.

Trochisci Hedychroi. Trochisks of Sweet Perfumes.. Mari,. Herb Mastich,
Amaraci, Sweet Marjoram, Aspalathi, Thorn-Bush, Asari, an. ss. Assarabacca, an.
ss. Shoenanthi, Camels Hay, Calami Aromatici, Aromatic Reed, Costi, Costus,
Xylo-Balsami, Xylo-Balsamum, Opobalsami, Opobalsamum, Cinnamomi, an. vj.
Cinnamon, an. vj. Myrrha, Myrrh, Folii Indi, Indian-leaf, Nardi Indicae,
Indian-Spikenard, Croci, Croci, Cassia Ligneae, an. j ss. Cassia-wood, an. j
ss. Amomi, iij. Amomum, iij. Mastiches electae, ij. Choice Mastich, ij.

Having well chosen and cleans'd all these Ingredients, beat them together in a
Brass-Mortar; and having sifted the Powder through a Silk-sieve, incorporate
them with good Malmsey, till the Past is become solid enough to make little
Trochisks, which are to be dried in the shade.

Marum, or Herb Mastich, grows in certain Islands near Toulon in Provence, and
is planted also in Gardens. This Plant is very much about the bigness of Thyme,
which it resembles, having several little round branches, somewhat woody,
covered with a kind of Hoary Down, toward the top especially: The leaves are
green, somewhat inclining to white, very small, and pointed like the Head of a
Pike: The tops are tusted like those of Lavender, full of little Purple-flowers
very odoriferous: The taste of it is sharp and biting, and leaves a bitterness
in the mouth: The flowery tops are only made use of in these Trochisks.

Aspalathus is the wood of a Thorn-tree, or Bush, ponderous, massive, and
unctuous; somewhat sharp and bitter to the taste, of a purplish color, and
somewhat spotted; in virtues, taste, smell, and figure, much resembling
Lignum-Aloes, but that Lignum Aloes is of a browner and duller color: And
indeed, when Aspalathus is not to be had, Lignum Aloes may be very well used in
its stead. The newest Calamus Aromaticus is the best, in regard it is subject
to rot if it be long kept.

These Trochisks are good to expel Venom, and for the cure of all those
Diseases for which the Ancient Treacle is prescribed: They are to be taken and
dos'd like other Theriacal Trochisks.

Trochisci Cypheos. Trochisks of Cyphi.. Pulpae Vvarum Damascenarum,. Pulp of
the fairest and largest Raisins, Terebinthinae Chiae, an. j. Chio-Turpentine,
an. j. Myrrhae electae, Choice Myrrh, Schoenanthi, an. ss. Camels Hay, an. ss.
Cinnamomi, iiij. Cinnamon, iiij. Calami Aromatici, Calamus Aromaticus, Bdellii,
Bdellium, Spicae Nardi, Spikenard. Cassiae Ligneae, Cassia-wood, Cyperi,
Cyperus, Granorum Juniperi, an. j. Juniper Berries, an. j. Aspalathi, gr. 54.
Aspalathus, gr. 54. Mellis optimi Malvatico diluti tantillum. Of the best Honey
mixed with Malmsey, never so little.

Reduce into very fine Powder, in a Brass-Mortar, the Myrrh and Bdellium among
the Camels Hay, the Cinnamon, Acorus Verus, Spikenard, Cassia-wood, Cyperus,
Juniper Berries, and Aspalathus, as also the Saffron, if you cannot beat it
apart; and having separated the skins and the stones of the Raisins from the
Pulp, pass it through a Hair-sieve reversed, without any addition of Wine, or
any other moisture. The Turpentine being of a consistence solid enough, needs
not to be dried over the fire; but rather that way is to be avoided, for fear
of dissipating its best parts, which are its spiritous and Ethereal Oil: Nor
will there be any need of Honey or Oil, since the Turpentine, and the Pulp of
Raisins, will be sufficient to mix the Powders, if rightly ordered; and the
Trochisks will be the better, and drier.

The virtues of these Trochisks are very like to those of Mithridate: And their
dose is from one scruple to one dram, in some proper Liquor.

Trochisci Scillicitei. Trochisks of Squills.. Scillae pane prius involutae and
in clibano coctae, lb j.. Of Squills first wrapped in Dough, and baked in an
Oven, lb j. Radicis Dictamni Albi subtiliter pulverati, viij. Root of white
Dittany finely powdered, viij.

Choose out well-grown, firm, weighty Squills, of a moderate bigness, taken out
of the Earth when the leaves are past, and wrapping them up in a piece of Paste
made of Wheat-dough, about a finger thick, put them into a Bakers Oven among
the Houshold-bread, and leave them there till the Bread be baked; then draw
them, and when they are cold, take them out of the Paste, and peel off the red
skins, which will be almost dry; and only reserving the thin slices, throw away
the Core, and the Root: Then weigh out the quantity of the slices prescribed,
and beat them in a Marble-Mortar with a Wooden-pestle, mixing by degrees the
Powder of the Root of Dittany sifted through a Silk-sieve; and having beaten
the whole together, and reduced it into a Mass, fit your Trochisks, make them
up, and dry them in the open Air.

Wonder not that the Chiches which the Ancients made use of in these Trochisks
are omitted, in regard they have not any good qualities to second the virtue of
the Squills, nor of any ingredients in the Treacle, for which these Trochisks
are principally prepared: But the Dittany is well prescribed in the room of
them, as being not only fit to give a body to the Squills, but also to impart
its cordial and Alexipharmacal virtue to the Trochisks, and consequently to the
Treacle.

Nor can I hold with Swelfer who prescribes the Juice or Pulp of Squills in the
Treacle, instead of the Trochisks. For it is not to be thought that the baking
of the Squills wrapped up in Dough, can cause any dissipation of their virtue; in
regard it is apparent, that they abound in superfluous moisture, which it is
very convenient to abate, and that the baking is as it were a maturation of its
parts, by which their Acrimony is manifestly carried off.

Whereas he says, it is a difficult thing to make Trochisks of eight ounces of
Dittany, and twelve of Squills, by reason of their superfluous moisture; I can
affirm, that I have several times experimented the contrary, and that they may
be easily dried in the Air, without the help of Fire or Sun's heat.

As to the diminution of the substance of the Squills in drying, I confess with
him, that it is great enough, but not so much as he would make us believe; for
out of the twelve ounces of Squills, and eight of Dittany, there remains ten of
Trochisks well dried: Nor is the virtue lost, but concentered with that of the
white Dittany. The white Squills are the best, if they can be had.

The use of the Trochisks is in Treacle; their virtue is Alexipharmacal, to
which the Root of Dittany contributes very much; but their chiefest virtue is
to cut and attenuate viscous and tenacious humors: For which reason they are
prescribed with success against Apoplexies, Epilepsies, and Diseases proceeding
from abundance of Phlegm: They may be taken like other Trochisks.

Trochisci Viperini. Trochisks of Vipers.. Truncorum hepatum, and Cordum
Viperinorum in aere libero extra solis Radios siccatorum quantum libuerit.. Of
the Trunks, Livers, and Hearts of Vipers dried in the open Air out of the Sun,
as much as you think fit.

To prepare these Trochisks right, if the Winter have been mild, take up your
Vipers at the end of April, or beginning of May, never minding the Sex; for the
Males are as good as the Females, whatever the Ancients or Moderns have
written, since they are most extraordinarily active, vigorous, and fleshy; and
in some respect they may be preferred before the Female which are full of Eggs,
that suck and emacerate them. They allege frequency of Coition, which is not
to be heeded, as proceeding from an abundance of Spirits, and is a mark of the
vigor and good Constitution of the Creature. Casting therefore away the
drooping Vipers, and such whose Eggs are grown big, choose out those that stir
most, and are most vigorous; and without whipping or provoking them, cut off
their heads close to their necks and their tails, close to the place where
their Excrement comes out: Strip off their skins; and having taken out all
their Entrails, except the Heart and Liver, dry them in the Air; and when they
are dry, after you have cut them very small, beat them in a great
Brazen-Mortar, and fifth the Powder through a Silk-sieve. In the mean while, put
a little Gum-Arabic powdered into a large three ounces of excellent Malmsey, of
which take a sufficient quantity to incorporate the Powder of Vipers; and then
beating the whole together in a Marble-Mortar with a Wooden-pestle, reduce it
to a uniform and solid Paste, fit to make Trochisks; upon which you may set
your Seal, and then dry them in the shade, anointing them afterward with
Balsom of Peru, to give them a pleasant scent.

The Trochisks thus prepared, may be kept much longer then the Powder, because
that the dissolution of Gum-Arabic in Malmsey, renders the Trochisks compact,
closes the Pores, and hinders the penetration of the Air, to which the Balsom
contributes not a little.

These Trochisks are very prevalent against Poisons, particularly against the
biting of Serpents, and all sorts of venomous Animals: They are often
prescribed in malignant Fevers, and Epidemic diseases, and all such as proceed
from the corruption of the blood: They are particularly prescribed for the
Composition of Treacle, to which they serve for a Foundation, though the Vipers
dried, with their Hearts and Livers may very well suffice, without the trouble
of making Trochisks. Their dose is from half a scruple to half a dram, though
you may give a dram to persons of a strong Constitution. They are taken in
Wine, or in Cordial Waters, or Decoctions, or else mingled in Potions, Opiates,
or other Remedies.

CHAP. XXII. Of Pills.
PIlls are so called from their round figure, like to that of little Balls.
They are also called Catapotia, because they are usually swallowed whole. They
were invented to comply with those that could not swallow dissolved Medicines,
or were only for a small dose; as also to be provided of a Remedy, that by
staying long in the Stomach, might have time to draw off the bad humors from
the remote parts. Pills are also made for several uses; some to purge, some to
fortify the Brain, Stomach, or some other part; sometimes for diseases of the
Breast; sometimes they are composed of pain-asswaging, and sleep-procuring
Medicines; sometimes of Hysterics, Openers, and Antinephriticks. Laxative Pills
have usually Aloes for their Basis: As for Coloquinth, Scammony, Agaric,
Turbith, Hermodactiles, Senna, Rhubarb, and other Laxatives, they are variously
prescribed; as also several Gums and Spices, according to the prudence and
intent of the Physician. Anodynes, and sleep-procurers, have generally Opium
for their Foundation, which is many times attended with ingredients that tend
to the same end, but always of Aromatics proper to fortify the Noble parts
during the operation of the Pills. Aloes is also the Foundation of fortifying
Pills.

The bitter and ill taste of Pills, and their unpleasing smell, forces us to
cover them with Gold or Silver, to wrap them up in Sugar, or in Wafers, or in
some sweet-Meat. They may be also made bigger or lesser, in compliance with the
Patients desire.

There are several ways to make Pills, according to the variety and nature of
the Ingredients that compose them. Hard and dry Ingredients are to be finely
powdered; fat Gums are to be dissolved and melted; Juices are to be depurated
and thick'nd. The Mass is also ^^riously made up; for sometimes you must
incorporate the Medicaments pulverized in a great heated Mortar, by beating
them together without any addition of Liquor; and sometimes you must make use
of Syrups, Honeys, Juices, or any other Liquor. The mass of all sorts of Pills
ought to be beaten a good while in a great Brass-Mortar, to the end the Union
of the Ingredients may be the better made: For which reason some have derived
the name of Pill from Pila, a Mortar, as if it were never to be beaten enough.
Yet there are Pills prepared of Extracts that have no occasion to be beaten at
all.

The Mass of Pills must not be so solid as that of Trochisks: For it ought to
be of such a consistence that you may roll up the Pill with your Fingers, being
anointed before with some Oil to keep the Pills from sticking to them. All
which things may be better understood by the particular Preparation of the
Masses of Pills which follow.

Pilulae de Hiera simplices. Simple Hiera-Pills.. Cinnamomi electi,. Choice
Cinnamon, Santali Citrini, Yellow Saunders, Asari, Asarabacca, Spicae Nardi,
Spikenard, Croci, Saffron, Mastiches, an. iij. Mastich, an. iij. Aloes
succotrinae elect. L. Aoes succotrine, L.

Beat in a great Brass-Mortar the Saunders, Spikenard cleans'd and cut, the
Asarabacca and Cinnamon. Triturate the Mastich apart, mixing therewith never so
small a drop of water. Beat the Saffron also apart, being dried before: unless
you think it better to triturate it in a small Brass-Mortar heated, where it
will dry at the same time. Make choice of the purest Aloes succotrine, of a
good scent, shining, transparent and of a purplish color; and mixing with it
some few drops of Oil of sweet-Almonds, beat it to powder in a large
Brass-mortar heated, and sift it through a Silk-sieve, as you must all the rest
of the powders, which must be well mixed together; and having put them into a
large Brass-mortar heated, incorporate them with as much Mel Rosatum as is
requisite to reduce the whole into a mass indifferently solid; which must be
beaten in a Brass-mortar heated for a good while, till you perceive that all
the Medicaments are exactly mixed. After which having taken the mass out of the
Mortar, make it into a kind of a round Loaf, a little high, and lay it two or
three days in the air; then wrapping it up in a Skin a little oiled, keep the
mass for use. When you have occasion for it, make the Pills of what bigness you
please, as the Patient desires; anointing your Fingers with Oil of
sweet-Almonds, when you roll up the Pills. Then roll them up in Leaf-gold or
Silver, in powder, Wafers or otherwise.

These Pills purge gently choleric and flegmatic humors of the Stomach and
Intestines. They keep the Belly open, and help the retention of the Menstruums.
Their Dose is from a Scruple to half a Dram: though you may give a Dram at a
time, and more, if you desire they should work more strongly. But because they
ought to work slow and moderately, and are to be repeated more then once, the
best way is to take the lesser Dose. They are taken just before meals, and are
therefore called the Gormandizing Pills. You may also take them rising, or
going to Bed, or at any hour.

Pilulae de Hiera cum Agarico. Hiera Pills with Agaric.. Specierum Hierae
simplicis jam praescriptae, j ss.. The Powders of simple Hiera already
prescribed, j ss. Agaric. Trochiscati, ss. Agaric Trochiscated, ss.

When you have prepared the Powder appointed for the last Pills, it is but
mixing half an Ounce of Trochisks of Agaric with an Ounce and an half of the
same Powder, observing the same Preparation.

These Pills work more strongly then the simple Pills, as well in cutting the
Humors, as in drawing from the remote parts. For while they cut and loosen the
thick Phlegm from the Stomach, they also draw the same from the Head, and carry
it downward. You may take these Pills like the former just before Meals in a
small Dose. But it is better to augment the Dose from one Dram to four
Scruples, and take them rising or going to Bed a good while after Supper, when
there is a necessity of an entire Purgation.

Pilulae de Agarico. Agaric Pills.. Agarici Albissimi,. Of the whitest Agaric,
Turbith Electi, Choice Turbith, Specierum Hierae Simplicis, an. ss. Powders of
Simple Hiera, an. ss. Trochiscorum Alhandal, Trochisks of Alhandal,
Sarcocollae, an. ij. Sarcocoll, an. ij. Radicis Ireos, Orrice-Root, Foliorum
Prassii Albi, Leaves of white Hore-hound, Myrrha Electae, an. j. Choice Myrrh,
an. j.

Choose out your Agaric very clean, white, light, and brittle; new Turbith,
cleans'd from its Heart, and white within; beat them together in a large
Brass-Mortar, somewhat heated, with the Orrice-Root, the Trochisks of Alhandal,
the Myrrh, the Sarcocol, the white Hore-hound, never minding the fatness of the
Gums; for without that be, they cannot hinder the waste of the Powder. Sift the
Powder through a Silksieve; then mixing with it the Hiera-powder, make it into
a solid mass with Burntwine, and then beat the mass till the mixture be exactly
made.

The Mass of these Pills must be somewhat softer then that of the Hiera,
especially if you intend to keep it long; because the most subtle parts of the
Burnt-wine being subject to dissipate, the Mass will become dry in a small
time; which if not foreseen, you must be forced to beat the Mass again, and
moisten it with more Burnt-wine: wrap it up in an oyl'd-piece of Leather, like
the former.

These Pills purge very strongly thick Phlegm out of the Stomach, and the lower
part of the Belly; as also from the Brain: They disburthen the Lungs, and give
ease to the Asthmatic, and those that are troubled with old Coughs, through
toughness of Phlegm. The dose is from a scruple to a dram, as also to four
scruples, for them that are of a strong Constitution. They are to be taken
after the first sleep, or early in the morning.

Pilulae Aggregativae sive Polychrestae. Aggregative, or Polychrest Pills..
Aloes Succotrinae. Aloes Succotrin, Turbith Electae, Choice Turbith, Diagrydii,
an. vj. Diagrydion, an. vj. Rhabarb. Elect. Choice Rhubarb, Myrobalanorum
Citrinorum, an. ss. Yellow Mirobalans, ss. Trochiscorum Alhandal, Trochisks of
Alhandal, Agarici Albissimi, Whitest Agaric, Polypodii, Polypody, Myrobalanorum
Chebulorum, Indorum, an. ij. Mirobalans Chebulae, Indian, an. ij. Rosarum
rubrarum mundat. Red-roses cleans'd, Mastiches, Mastich, Epithymi, Epithyme,
Zinziberis, Ginger, Salis Gemmei, and Sal-Gemmae, Seminis Anisi, an. j.
Anniseed, an. j. Succorum Eupatorii and absinthii ad mellaginem inspissatorum,
an. ss. Juices of Agrimony and Wormwood, thick'nd to the substance of Honey,
an. ss.

These Pills are called Aggregative, or Polychrest, because they congregate and
purge several bad humors together, drawing them from all parts of the body.

Pulverize together in a great Brass-Mortar the Turbith, Rhubarb, Polypody,
Mirobalans, Trochisks, Ginger, Roses, Agaric, Epithyme, Anise, and Sal-Gemmae,
and sift them through a Silk-sieve: Pulverize the Diagrydion apart, mixing with
it some few drops of Oil of Sweet-Almonds. Pulverize also the Mastich apart,
mixing with it never so small a drop of water. Press forth the Juices of
Agrimony and Wormwood, clarify them and thick'n them to the consistence of
melted Honey, or of a soft Electuary. Beat the Aloes apart also, and having
mixed all the Powders very exactly together, make them up into a Mass with the
thickn'd Juices, and Syrup of pale Roses, beating all together in a large
Marble-Mortar, till the Ingredients are perfectly mixed.

I am not of their opinion that would have the Juices of Wormwood and Agrimony
dried, till fit to be powdered, and so sifted among the other Powders. For
besides that they may be exactly mixed according to my method, I see no reason
to dry them so; since it cannot be done without a considerable waste of their
virtue. Considering also that having consumed all the moisture of those Juices,
you must not only be constrained to make use of some alien moisture to give the
Mass its due Consistence, but also put that whose moisture is consumed to no
purpose into the Composition. For you must multiply the Dose of the Syrup of
Roses, of which the lesser quantity is always to be preferred before the
greater, unless you intend by augmenting the quantity and weight of the Mass,
that we should proportionably increase the Dose of the Pills. Nor is it to be
wondered at, that instead of two Drams of each of those Juices we have set down
half an Ounce, having a regard to the moisture that remains in them, after they
are only boiled to the Consistence of Honey.

These Pills purge universally all the ill humors of the body. They are
prescribed for the Cure of Diseases of the Head, Stomach, Liver, and all the
Bowels, the Obstructions whereof they open, and carry off all the ill humors.
They are prescribed also in long and complicated Agues, and in several
obstinate Diseases. Their Dose and manner of taking is the same with
Agaric-Pills. They are also to be kept in an oiled Skin.

Pilulae de Ammoniaco Quercetani. Ammoniac Pills of Quercetan.. Extracti Aloes
Succotrinae cum succo Rosarum parati, iiij.. Extract of Aloes Succotrine
prepared with Juice of Roses, iiij. Gummi Ammoniaci purissimi, vj. The purest
Gum-Ammoniac, vj. Myrrhae elect. ss. Choice Myrrh, ss. Pulveris Diatrion
Santalon, Powder of the three Saunders, Mastiches elect. an. j ss. Mastich
chosen, an. j ss. Croci, Saffron, Salis Fraxini, Salt of Ash, Absinthii, an.
ij. Wormwood, an. ij.

Reduce into very fine powder apart the Myrrh, the Mastich, and the Saffron.
After which having moderately heated a large Brass-Mortar and Pestle, melt
therein the Gum-Ammoniac, and having softened it with never so little Vinegar
of Squills, add thereto the Extract of Aloes prepared, as directed in the Third
Part of this Pharmacopoea among the Extracts. Then add the Salts of Wormwood
and Ash, the Myrrh, the Mastich, and the Saffron pulverized, and mixed with the
Powder of Saunders, and as much of the pale Roses as is necessary. And to make
the mixture more exact, beat the whole Mass in the same Mortar, till the Mass
be rather a little too soft then too hard, as being apt to dry if kept too long.

These Pills are highly commended for the purging of ill humors from all parts
of the body. They are administered with good success in Obstructions of the
Liver, the Spleen and Mesentery, and long Agues that proceed from thence. They
are effectual in Cachexies, and particularly to carry off the impurities of the
Matrix, and to give the retained Menstruums the ordinary course. Their Dose is
from one Scruple to two: And sometimes to a Dram for strong Constitutions. They
are to be taken in a morning fasting, and may be re-taken and continued as
occasion requires.

Pilulae Cochicae. Cochiae Pills.. Specierum Hierae simplicis,. Powders of
simple Hiera, Turbith electi, Choice Turbith, Trochiscorum Alhandal, Alhandal
Trochisks, Diagrydii, an. ss. Diagrydion, an. ss. Olei Stillutitii Stoechados,
vel Distilled Oil of Cassidony, or Lavendulae, j. Lavender, j.

Make up the Mass with Juice of Wormwood, thick'nd to the Consistence of Honey.

There are several Receipts of these Pills under the Names of Great and Lesser,
which differ very much as to the Ingredients and Doses. Cassidony is prescribed
in some, omitted in others, as also the Turbith. The Powder of Hiera is
sometimes in a lesser, sometimes a greater Dose. But the distilled Oils of
Cassidony or Lavender are quite left out, while they only use Syrup of
Cassidony or Wormwood to incorporate all the rest. But we thought that the
distilled Oils of Stoechas, or Wormwood would afford more virtue then the five
Drams of dry Stoechas, serving to no other end then to swell up the Mass of the
Pills. We thought also that it was to no purpose to vary the Doses of the dry
Medicaments, of which these Pills are composed, in regard they all tend to one
end, and help to assist one another. We have also chosen the liquid Extract of
the Wormwood before the Syrup, the better to fortify the Stomach and Liver,
during the Operation of the Pills, and more proper to make them keep.

These Pills purge very powerfully all ill humors. And they deserve to be used
as well for the easiness of their Preparation, as for the good Effects which
may be expected from them, by cleansing the Head, Stomach, and all the Bowels
from their superfluities: And they are to be taken in the morning fasting, or
after the first sleep.

Pilulae de Cynoglosso. Pills of Hounds-tongue.. Myrrhae electa, vj.. Choice
Myrrh, vj. Olibani, v. Olibanum, v. Radicis Cynoglossi siccae, Root of
Hounds-tongue, Seminis Hyoscyami Albi, Seed of white Henbane, Extracti Opii,
an. ss. Extract of Opium, an. ss. Croci, Saffron, Castorei, Castor, Resinae
Styracis, an. j ss. Rosin of Storax, an. j ss.

Gather the Root of Hounds-tongue in the Springtime, when it begins to put
forth its Leaves, and having cleans'd and dried it, powder it very finely with
pure Castor and the Henbane-seed; beat the Saffron apart, as also the Myrrh and
the Olibanum; and having prepared the Extract of Opium somewhat soft, heat a
large Brass-Mortar with a Pestle, and melt the Rosin of Storax therein; and
having incorporated the Extract of Opium with it, add the Powders thereto,
mixing as much Syrup of Cassidony, as will serve to reduce the whole into a
Mass somewhat soft, which must be beaten a good while in the Mortar, to make
the Mixture perfect. Then put up the Mass in an oiled Skin.

Critics make Objection against this Preparation, because of the Seeds of
Henbane. I confess the whole Plant of Henbane is accounted very Narcotic, and
that of all the sorts they never use in Physic any but that which bears the
white Seed. I know likewise that the Roots of Henbane eaten, deprive men for a
time of their sense and reason: But besides that the Seed is that part of the
Plant which operates most gently, and for that the use of it is very frequent
in Perfumes to be held in the Mouth for the Toothache, the quantity here
prescribed is so small, and so well corrected, that there is no fear of any ill
Effect.

These Pills are very much commended for stopping the Defluxions from the Brain
upon the Breast and lower parts, as also upon the Eyes and Teeth. They ease the
pains thereof, procure sleep, and carry off the Acrimony of the Humors that
interrupt it. They are to be taken at a distance from eating-time, and at any
hour as occasion serves. The ordinary Dose is from two Grains to ten. You may
also dissolve a Scruple or half a Dram in Glysters to give ease in Dysenteries,
or violent Cholicks.

Pilulae Foetidae. The Stinking Pills.. Sagapeni,. Sagapen, Ammoniaci,
Ammoniac, Opoponacis, Opoponax, Bdellii, Bdellium, Trochiscorum Alhandal,
Alhandal-Trochisks, Seminis Rutae, Rue-Seed, Aloes Succotrinae, Aloes
Succotrine, Epithymi, an. v. Epithyme, an. v. Turbith electi, ss. Turbith
elect, ss. Diagridii, Diagrydion, Radicis Esulae aceto praeparat. Spurge-Root
prepared with Vinegar, Hermodactylorum, an. ij. Hermodactyles, an. j.
Zinziberis, j ss. Ginger, Cinamomi, Cinnamon, Spicae Nardi, Spikenard, Castorei,
an. j. Castoreum, an. j.

Cleanse and wash the Spurge-Root, and having sprinkled it slightly with
Vinegar, dry it, then beat it in a great Brass-Mortar among the Turbith, the
Hermodactyles, the Ginger, the Cinnamon, the Spikenard, the Castor and the
Trochisks, to which you may add the Bdellium, and some small part of the Gums
which are to be in tears. Beat the Saffron apart as also the Diagrydion and
Aloes as before directed. Then draw forth and depurate about four ounces of the
Juice of Leeks, and having mingled them with their weight in Honey, boil them
together to the consistency of a soft Electuary and take off the Scum. Then
heat the great Brass-Mortar and Pestle, and having melted the Gums which were
not put into the Powder, and incorporated the weight of Honey prepared, add the
Powders by degrees, and as much Honey as is necessary to reduce the whole Mass
to an indifferent consistence; and beat it a good while in the Mortar.

Euphorbium is known to be so violent and mischievous in its operation that no
man can wonder I should leave it out in these Pills, though I find it in all
the Receipts of the fetid Pills in other Dispensatories. We had also the more
reason to omit it, in regard we do not find that these Pills have any want of
Ingredients conducing to the purposes for which they were designed, which are
to purge vigorously and carry away ill Humors, as consisting of Trochisks of
Alhandal, Diagrydion, Spurge-Roots, Hermodactyles and Aloes, whose virtues are
corroborated by the Opoponax, Sagapen, Ammoniac and Bdellium; which at the same
time serve also as Correctives to those violent Purgers.

Fetid Pills are chiefly commended for the purging of thick and viscous Phlegm,
and to remedy those Diseases that proceed from it, as Gouts and Rheumatisms,
and all Diseases of the Joints. These are also good against Diseases of the
Stomach and Intestines, which proceed from the same Humors. They are also
prevalent against the Leprosy, and all deformities of the Skin, but
particularly to provoke the Menstruums, to cleanse the Matrix, and dispel the
vapors thereof. Their Dose is from a scruple to a dram. They are taken as
other Pills; and sometimes tied up in little knots to smell to, to repress the
Vapors of the Matrix.

Pilulae Ruffi. Ruffins Pills.. Aloes Succotrinae electae, ij.. Aloes
Succotrine, ij. Myrrhae, j. Myrrh, j. Croci, ss. Saffron, ss.

Pulverize the Aloes, Myrrh and Saffron, every one apart, and having mixed the
Powder in a great Brass-Mortar, reduce it into a Mass with as much good Malmsey
as shall be needful to bring it to a good consistence, and after you have
beat'n it a good while put it up.

Some have given these Pills the name of Pestilential, others have called them
Common Pills. They gently and as it were insensibly purge off the Impurities of
the Stomach, they prevent the putrefaction of Humors, for which reason they
are very much commended in the Sickness-time, and against Epidemic distempers.
They may be taken before Dinner, or going to Bed, or in the Morning fasting.
Their dose is different, according to the intention for which you take them:
For if it be only to keep the Belly open, the dose is from a scruple to a dram;
but if it be for stronger Operation, you may give a dram, or a dram and a half
to persons of a strong Constitution, to be taken after the first sleep, or in
the Morning early.

Pilulae Aureae. Golden Pills.. Aloes Succotrin.. Aloes Succotrin, v.
Diagrydii, an. v. Diagrydion, Rosarum rubrarum mundat. Red-roses cleans'd,
Seminis Apii, an. ij ss. Parsley-seed, an. ij ss. Mastiches, Mastich, Seminis
Anisi, Anniseed, Feniculi, an. j ss. Fennel-seed, an. j ss. Trochiscorum
Alhandal, Alhandal Trochisks, Croci, an. j. Saffron, an. j.

Beat together the Parsley, Anise, and Fennel-seeds, with the Trochisks of
Alhandal, and Red-roses, and sift the Powder through a Silk-sieve. Pulverize
apart the Diagrydion, Mastich, and Saffron; then having well mixed all the
Powders, incorporate them with as much Syrup of Roses as is necessary to make
the mass of a good consistence, which must be beaten a good while.

The Epithete of Golden is given to these Pills, because of their color; they
purge gently Flegmatic and Choleric humors from all parts of the body; they
are prescribed to cure the Diseases of the Stomach and Intestines, especially
when they are replete with Wine: Their dose is from a scruple to a dram, to be
taken after the first sleep, or early in the morning.

Pilulae sine quibus. Pills without which I would not be.. Extracti Aloes
Succotrinae cum succo pallidarum Rosarum parati, xiiij.. Extract of Aloes
Succotrin prepared with Juice of pale Roses, xiiij. Diagrydii, vj. Diagrydion,
vj. Agarici Albissimi, Whitest Agaric, Rhabarbari electi, Choice Rhubarb,
Foliorum Sennae mundat. an. ss. Leaves of Senna cleans'd, ss. Rosarum rub.
exungulatarum, Red-roses cleans'd, Summitatum Absinthii, Tops of Wormwood,
Seminis Violarum, Seeds of Violets, and Cuscutae, Dodder, Mastiches, an. j.
Mastich, an. j.

Bruise in a great Brass-Mortar the Rhubarb with the Senna, the Agaric, the
Red-Roses, the Wormwood, the Dodder, and the Violet-seeds: Pulverize apart the
Diagrydion, and the Mastich; and having depurated about four ounces of the
Juice of Fennel, and boiled it to an Electuary with its weight in fair Honey,
heat the great Brass-Mortar and Pestle; and having melted the Extract of Aloes
therein, and incorporated it with some part of the Syrup of Fennel, put in the
Powders by degrees, adding thereto as much of the Syrup of Fennel as is needful
to reduce the whole to a sufficient mass, and beat the whole a good while in
the Mortar.

These Pills are variously prescribed in several Dispensatories, especially as
to the quantities of the Medicaments: But they that will take the pains to
consider this Receipt, must acknowledge that it is not inferior to any of the
rest, provided it be well prepared.

The good effects which these Pills have wrought, have won them the Title of
Sine quibus esse nolo, Without which I would not be. They purge Phlegm
wonderfully, and both Cholers; they are very prevalent against Diseases of the
Head, especially those of the Eyes and Ears: They are to be taken after the
first sleep, or in the morning fasting. Their dose is from a scruple to a dram,
and sometimes to four scruples.

Pilulae de Rhabarbaro. Rhubarb-Pills.. Specierum Hierae picrae, x..
Composition of bitter Hiera, x. Rhabarbari Electi, Rhubarb chosen,
Myrobalanorum Citrin. Yellow Mirobalans, Trochiscorum Diarrhodon, Trochisks of
Roses, Succi Absinthii inspissati, an. iij. Juice of Wormwood thick'nd, an.
iij. Succi Glycyrrhizae, Juice of Liquorice, Mastiches, Mastich, Seminis Apii,
Parsley-seed, Faeniculi, an. j. Fennel-seed, an. j.

Beat in a large Brass-Mortar the Rhubarb, Mirobalans, Parsley and
Fennel-seeds, the Trochisks, and the Juice of Liquorice, if dry; and having
sifted the Powder through a Silk-sieve, and mixed the Powders of Hiera with it,
incorporate them in the great Marble-Mortar, with the Juice of Wormwood boiled
to the consistence of Honey, and as much Syrup of Fennel as is needful to
reduce the whole mass to a good consistence, and then beat it a good while in
the Mortar.

There is as much difference in the receipt of these Pills, as in any other
that are met with in Dispensatories; which diversities require an Examination
of this, the Ingredients whereof being as well chosen as proportioned, I make
no question will not fail to produce the good effects expected from them.

These Pills gently purge gross and viscous humors. It is often prescribed for
the cure of long and painful diseases; for they open the most obstinate
obstructions of the Liver and Spleen; they work good effects at the beginning
of a Dropsy, and are of great advantage at the end of Tertian and Quotidian
Agues. Their dose is from a scruple to four, taken in the same manner as
Pilulae sine quibus.

Pilulae Stomachicae. Stomach-Pills.. Aloes Succotrinae elect. j ss.. Aloes
Succotrine chosen, j ss. Rosarum rub. exungulat. and Red-roses cleans'd, and
Mastiches elect. an. ss. Choice Mastich, an. ss.

Pulverize the Aloes, Red-roses, and Mastich apart; then mix them well, and
incorporate them in a great Brass-Mortar with as much Syrup of Wormwood (...)
is necessary to reduce them to a mass of a reasonable consistence, and put it
up, being sufficiently beaten together.

There are several Receipts of Stomach-Pills to be met with in Dispensatories,
but the plainest of all seems to be the best.

These are called Stomach-Pills, because they cleanse the Stomach from all
fowlness, strengthening it, and rendering it capable to perform all its
Functions. They are also called Pills before Meat, because they are usually
taken before Meals, and require no Regiment at all. They cause but little
Evacuation at a time, and are therefore given i^ a small dose, from one scruple
to half a dram. You may take them as often as you find occasion.

Pilulae Hystericae. Hysteric-Pills.. Facularum Brionia,. The Faecula, or white
Juice of Briony, Myrrhae Electa, Choice Myrrh, Vitrioli Martis, Vitriol of
Iron, Salis Arthemisia, an. ij. Salt of Mug-wort, an. ij. Castorei electi,
Choice Castor, Rutae, Rue, Camphorae, an. ij. Camphire, an. ij. Extracti
mollioris Aloes cum succo Arthemisiae parati, x. Soft Extract of Aloes prepared
with juice of Mugwort, x.

Beat the Castor cleans'd, together with the Rue and one part of the Myrrh, the
rest of which must be beaten, as also the Camphire, mingling with the latter a
drop or two of Spirit of Wine, the more easily to powder it. You must have the
Extract of Aloes ready, as I shall direct in due place, and when it is brought
to a consistence somewhat soft, put it into a great Brass-Mortar; and having
mixed with it the Vitriol of Mars, the Salt of Mugwort and the white juice of
Briony pulverized, with the rest of the Powders, reduce the whole into a Mass,
which must be carefully beaten in the same Mortar for a good while. If the
Extract of Aloes should want moisture to suck up the Powders, supply the defect
with honey of stinking Arrach, adding what is requisite.

The Extract of Aloes should be prepared with juice of Roses, according to some
Receipts of these Pills; but we thought it more convenient to make use of Juice
of Mugwort, to avoid the contrary effects which the sweet scent of Roses might
produce in some Women.

You shall find in the small quantity of Drugs which compose these Pills, more
satisfaction as to the purposes, for which they were invented, then in any
other Receipts. For it is not generally the great number, but the choice of the
Ingredients that makes the goodness of the Composition.

These Pills are not only Specificks to suppress the Vapors that rise from the
Matrix, and to calm the disorders and symptoms that many times happen; but also
to carry off its impurities, and to provoke the Menstruums retained; to which
purpose they must be taken for several days. The Pills must be taken in a a
morning fasting, drinking after them three or four ounces of Mugwort-water, and
walk gently upon it for an hour, not taking any thing in two hours after. The
Dose is not above half a dram, because of the continuance in taking.

Pilulae Mesentericae, D. D. D'AQUIN. Mesenteric Pills of Monsieur D. D.
D'AQUIN.. Extracti Aloes cum succo Fumariae parati, and. Extract of Aloes
prepared with Juice of Fumitory, and Gummi Ammoniaci elect. an. j.
Gum-Ammoniac, chosen, j. Croci Martis aperientis, and Opening Crocus-Martis,
and Diagrydii, an. ss. Diagrydion, an. ss. Myrrhae elect. Select Myrrh, Croci,
and Saffron, and Salis Tamarisci, an. ij. Salt of Tamarisk, an. ij. Salis
Martis Riverii, ij. Salt of Mars of Riverius, ij.

Having pulverized the Myrrh, the Saffron and the Diagrydion every one apart,
and prepared an Extract of Aloes somewhat soft, with the Juice of Fumitory, as
I shall direct among the Extracts; moderately heat a great Brass-Mortar and
Pestle, where after you have gently melted the Gum-Ammoniac in tears, and well
incorporated it with the Extract of Aloes, add the Powders by degrees, mixed
together before with the Crocus-Martis, and Salts of Mars and Tamarisk: adding
to them as much Syrup of Succory composed with Rhubarb as shall be necessary to
reduce the whole into a Mass of a midling consistence, which must be beaten a
sufficient time in the great Mortar. Put up the Mass in an oil'd Skin.

Monsieur the Kings chief Physician has given the name of Mesenteric to these
Pills, because they powerfully open the obstructions which they meet with in
the Mesentery. They are very prevalent against the obstructions of all the
other Bowels. For they dissolve the tartarous matters, and purge very gently,
yet fortify the Nutritive parts. For which reason they may be prescribed with
success in Cachexies, Dropsies, Chronical intermitting Fevers, retentions of
the Lunary Purgations, etc. Their dose is from one scruple to a dram if you
desire they should work soundly: otherwise half a dram i^ enough for Persons of
midling complexions that must continue to use them.

Pilulae Mercuriales. Mercurial Pills.. Rhabarb. electi,. Select Rhubarb,
Trochiscorum Alhandal, Alhandal Trochisks, Diagrydii, and Diagrydion, Mercurii
sublimati dulcis, an. j. Sweet-Mercury sublimate, an. j. Terebinthin^ Venetae,
oleo proprio stillatitio dilutae, q. s. Venice-Turpentine washed in its own
distilled Oil, q. s.

Beat in a great Brass-Mortar the Rhubarb with the Trochisks of Alhandal,
mixing therewith some cold seed cleans'd: Pulverize apart the Scammony, and the
Mercurius Dulcis, and having sifted the Powders through a Silk-sieve, and well
mixed them in a great Marble-Mortar, incorporate them with the
Venice-Turpentine washed in a little of its own distilled Oil, and reduce the
whole into a mass of a good consistence, which must be beaten a good while in
the same Mortar.

There are no Pills nowadays more used then the Mercurial; and though there
be a great number of Receipts in most of the Dispensatories at this time,
particular Receipts of private persons are yet far more numerous, though not so
well ordered. I omit the various preparations which they use, and the different
Correctives or Assistants which they mix with their Mercury: But I dare be
confident, that this Receipt, though but a plain Composition, is as well
proportioned as can be desired, and that a better can hardly be found.

These Pills are chiefly designed for the cure of Venereal distempers. They
draw the virulent humors from all parts of the body, and carry them off by the
Stool, though sometimes they raise a Salivation to some tender persons, send
forth out some part of the Venom at the Mouth, wherein the Prudence of the
Physician is very requisite to quicken or retard the effects, as occasion
requires; and to let Nature take its own course, according to the Constitution
of the Patient, and the state of the distemper. The dose of these Pills is from
one scruple to two, to be taken generally in the morning fasting, and to be
continued as necessity requires.

Pilulae ad sistendam Gonorrhaeam, Pills to stop a Gonorrh^^.. Radicum
Bistort^,. Roots of Snakeweed, Tormentill^, Tormentil, Nymphaeae, Water-Lilly,
Baccarum Heder^, Ivy-Berries, Seminum Lactuc^, Seeds of Lettice, Rutae, Rue,
Agni Casti, Chast-Tere, Succini, Amber, Sanguinis Hirci, Goats-blood,
Mastiches, Mastich, Olibani, Olibanum, Lachrymarum sanguinis Draconis, Tears of
Dragons-blood, Nucis Moschata, an. ss. Nutmegs, an. ss*

Beat together in a great Brass-Mortar the Roots of Tormentil, Snake-weed, and
Water-Lilly, with the Ivy-Berries, the Seeds of Lettice, Rue, and Agnus Castus,
the Goats-blood, the Dragons-blood, the Amber, and the Olibanum: Pulverize the
Mastich apart, and having well mixed all the Powders, heat a great Brass-Mortar
and Pestle, and incorporate them with the Venice-Turpentine, and reduce the
whole into a mass of a good consistence, beating it for a good while in the
same Mortar.

Dragons-blood is a Gum that comes forth out of a Tree, when it is cut or
bored, that grows in the Ca^^^y-Islands, and produces a fruit like a Cherry, of
a sowrish taste, and a yellowish color. The Gum when it is bruised is of a
Crimsen and bloody color, whence it has the name of Dragons-blood. But have a
care of the counterfeit Dragons-blood, which is only made of Cherry-tree and
Almond-tree Gums, dissolved and boiled in the tincture of Brazile-wood, which
gives it a red color, and is used by none but Farriours.

The number of Astringent is no less then that of Mercurial Pills, and every
one may esteem and prepare those he likes best; but there is no question to be
made of this, provided the Ingredients be right, and that it be carefully
prepared; provided also, it be not given till the malignity of the distemper be
over, and that it be time to stop the Gonorrhaea. These Pills are to be taken
morning and evening, but still upon an empty Stomach, and continued for several
days, especially if the Vessels be debilitated. The dose is from half a dram to
a dram.

But because we meet many times with obstinate Gonorrhaea's, difficult to cure,
I thought fit to insert here the following Receipt; the Pills are very proper
to eradicate all the ill impressions of Venom, that other Remedies could not
overcome.

Pilulae contra Gonorrhaeam virulentam. Pills against a Virulent Gonorrhaea..
Antimonii Diaphoretici nuper parati, and. Diaphoretic Antimony newly prepared,
and Cinnabaris Nativae, and Mineral Cinnabar, and Antimonii, Of Antimony,
Terrae Sigillatae, Terra Sigillata, Radicis Ireos Florentiae, Root of
Florence-Orrice, Liquoritia, Liquorice, Succini Albi, and Oculorum Cancrorum
praeparatorum, an. ss. White-Amber, and Crab's-eyes prepared, an. ss. Myrrhae
electae, Select Myrrh, Olibani, Olibanum, Mastiches, and Croci, an ij. Mastich,
Saffron, an. ij.

Make choice of the cleanest Mineral Cinnabar, and the most weighty you can
meet with; grind the white Amber and Crab's-eyes upon Porphyrie: Pulverize the
Myrrh apart, as also the Mastich in drops, the Olibanum, the Saffron, the
Cinnabar Mineral, and Cinnabar of Antimony, as also the Diaphoretic Antimony:
beat together in the great Brass-Mortar, the Roots of Orrice and Liquorice; and
having sifted and well mingled them, heat the great Mortar and Pestle
moderately hot, and incorporate them with Turpentine, to reduce the whole into
a convenient mass; and then beat the mass together again for a good while.

These Pills work wonderful effects for the cure of Gonorrhaea's, especially
when general Remedies have preceded: They are to be taken Morning and Evening
upon a fasting Stomach, and continued, according as the distemper is, for some
Weeks: For which reason the dose is but half a dram at a time, though two
scruples or a dram may be given, to make them work more quickly, and with more
force. The effect of these Pills is imperceptible, till used for some time.

Pilulae de Terebinthina cocta. Boiled Turpentine-Pills.. Terebinthinae Venetae
in aqua Raphani, vel baccarum Alkekengi ad duritiem cocta, iiij..
Venice-Turpentine boiled to a hardness in water of Radishes, or
Alkekengiberries, iiij. Liquoritiae mundatae subtiliter pulveratae, j.
Liquorice cleans'd and finely powdered, j.

Boil the Turpentine over a soft fire in the distilled water of Radishes, or
Alkekengiberries, or some other Diuretic Plant, till it be so hard, that you
may make it into Pills: Then pour away all the water from the Turpentine, and
before it be cold, incorporate with it the Liquorice finely powdered; and
having wrought them well together, put up the mass for use.

These Pills are very much used upon retention of Urine, whether caused by
Phlegm, or Gravel, or any Venereal Malignity. They are also good at the
beginning of Gonorrhaea's, to make them run. They are taken in a Morning
fasting, from one dram to two, and may be taken several days together.

Pilulae pro morbo Colico D. D. D'AQUIN. Pills against the Colic of Mounsieur
D' AQUIN.. Aloes elect. in succo Rosarum pallidayum dilutae and inspissatae,
iij.. Select Aloes steeped in Juice of pale Roses, and thick'nd, iij. Agarici
elect. j ss. Select Agaric, j ss. Extracti Rhabarbari, j. Extract of Rhubarb,
j. Hepatis Lupi praeparati, vj. Wolfs-liver prepared, vj. Summitatum Absinthii,
ss. Tops of Wormwood, ss. Pulveris Diarrhodon Abbatis Powder of Roses of the
Abbot, Salis Absinthii, and Nucis Moschatae, an. j ss. Salt of Wormwood, and
Nutmeg, an. j ss.

Look for the preparation of the Extracts of Aloes and Rhubarb in the following
Part. Take the Liver of a Wolf newly killed, and having taken out the Gall, and
washed the Liver in White Wind, put it into a glazed Earthen-pot; and having
well luted on the Cover, set it in a Bakers Oven, after the Bread is drawn:
Close the Oven, and leave it there for some hours. Then unlute the Cover, and
turn the Liver: Lute the Cover on again, and put the Pot in once more when the
Bread is drawn, and let it stand as long as at first; and thus do so often,
till the Liver be thoroughly dry, to be kept in a dry place for fear of
corrupting. Beat in a great Brass-Mortar the Wormwood, with the Agaric and
Nutmegs, and the Wolfs-Liver; and having sifted the Powder through a
Silk-sieve, heat the great Brass-Mortar and Pestle, and melt therein, by
degrees, the Extracts of Aloes and Rhubarb; and incorporate them afterward
with as much Syrup of Succory as is requisite to reduce the whole into a mass
of a good consistence, which must be afterward well beaten in the same Mortar.

The good effects which are wrought by these Pills for the cure of Colics,
especially those of Poictou, obliged Mounsieur D'Aquin, his Majesty's Chief
Physician, to add the Receipt of them to many others in this Pharmacopoea for
the Public Good. They gently purge choleric and serous humors, the gathering
together and Fermentation whereof they divert and prevent, as being the usual
cause of Colics: They that are subject to them, are to take every other day
one, and to continue them till they are cured. These Pills keep the Belly open,
and carry off gently and insensibly the humors that cause them. The dose of
these Pills may be augmented to a dram, if you intend a strong Evacuation. They
must be taken in a morning fasting.

Pilulae Catholicae Poterii. Universal Pills of Poterius.. Aloes Succotrinae,
ss.. Aloes Succotrine, ss. Myrrhae Electae. ij. Select Myrrh, ij. Mastiches
Electi, j. Select Mastich, j. Croci, ss. Saffron, ss. Magnesia Saturninae
meteorisatae, j. White-flowers of Antimony, j.

Choose your Ingredients well; and having pulverized every one apart, sifted
them through a Silk-sieve, and well mixed them, incorporate them with as much
Syrup of Roses Solutive, as is requisite to give the Mass its due consistence,
and beat the whole in the same Mortar for a good while.

I thought fit to insert these Pills, because of the good effects which they
may produce. The white Flowers of Antimony, disguised by Poterius under the
Name of Magnesia Saturnina meteorisata, are only a powerful Spur to the other
Ingredients: And though they are very Emetic alone, yet thus mixed, they lose
that quality, and purge only by Stool. The preparation of these Flowers you
shall find in the Third Part of this Pharmacopoea.

Poterius, the Author of these Pills, commends them highly against Colics,
Asthma's, Megrims, Vertigo's, Epilepsies, and also for the ease of the Gout:
Their dose is from fifteen grains to twenty four: They are to be taken in a
morning fasting.

Pilulae Hydropicae Bontii. Bontius' s Hydropic Pills.. Aloes Succotrinae, ij
ss.. Aloes Succotrin, ij ss. Gummi Guttae subtiliter pulverat and cum Vino
Malvatico dissolut. lavigati, and siccati, j ss. Gutta-gauma finely powdered,
dissolved with Malmsey, smoothed, and dried, j ss. Diagrydii eodem modo parat.
j. Diagrydion so prepared, j. Gummi Ammoniaci Electi, j ss. Select
Gum-Ammoniac, j ss. Tartari Vitriolati, ss. Tartar Vitrioliz'd, ss.

Beat the Aloes in a great Brass-Mortar, and sift it through a Silk-sieve: Pick
out the purest Gutta-gauma, and the fairest Diagrydion; and having grownd them
very fine upon Porphyry, either together, or apart, with about the same weight
in Malmsey, set them to dry: Then having made choice of pure Ammoniac in tears,
and moderately heated the great Mortar and Pestle, melt the Gum therein; then
mixing the Tartar vitrioliz'd with all the Powders, and moistning the Ammoniac
with about as much the weight of Syrup of Roses Solutive, incorporate them by
degrees, still adding as much more of the Syrup as is requisite to bring the
mass to its due consistence, which must be afterward beaten a good while in
the same Mortar.

You shall find the preparation of vitrioliz'd Tartar in the Third Part of this
Pharmacopoea.

These Pills were invented by Bontius, formerly Physician to the Prince of
Orange, who commends them highly for the carrying off all Hydropic waters. They
are very effectual to open Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and all the
Bowels. It is to be taken in a morning fasting, from half a scruple to a
scruple.

Pilulae Tartareae Bontii. Tartar-Pills of Bontius.. Aloes Succotrinae elect.
iij.. Aloes Succotrine selected, iij. Lachrymarum Gummi Ammoniaci pauco aceto
scillicito dilutarum, j ss. Tears of Gum-Ammoniac dissolved in a little Vinegar
of Squills, j ss. Tartari Vitriolati, ss. Tartar vitrioliz'd, ss.

Having finely pulverized the Aloes, heat a Brass-Mortar to melt the
Gum-Ammoniac, being there dissolved in a little Vinegar of Squills; then
incorporate the Aloes, and the Tartar vitrioliz'd, and reduce the whole mass to
its due consistence, beating the same a good while together.

There are several Receipts of Tartar-Pills; among the rest, one that consists
of many Ingredients, in Quercetan, which perhaps might be to be preferred
before this, if multiplicity of Ingredients made a Receipt good or bad. However
we have chosen this, as being plain and easily prepared; for these Pills purge
wonderfully both the one and the other Choler, and thick and tartarous humors,
carrying them off from the remotest parts of the body. They are prescribed with
success against Madness, and melancholy distempers, that arise from the
Hypochondriums, against the Leprosy, Cankers, Quartan Agues, and Venereal
distempers. For by opening the obstructions of the Bowels, and voiding the ill
humors, they purge the whole mass of the blood. The dose is from a scruple to
a dram. They are to be taken in a morning fasting, or just before Dinner.

Pilulae Tartareae Schroderi. Schroder's Tartarous Pills.. Aloes Lucida in
Succo-Targorum extract. j.. Bright Aloes extracted, with Juice of Strawberries,
j. Lachrymarum Gummi Ammontaci, ij ss. Gum-Ammoniac, ij. Magisterii Tartari
purgantis in aqua Buglossi aliquoties soluti and coagulati, Purging Magistery
of Tartar dissolved and coagulated in Bugloss-water, Extracti Gentiana, an. ij.
Extract of Gentian, an. ij. Salis Martis subdulois, Salt of Mars sweet'nd,
Extracti Croci, an. j. Extract of Saffron, an. j.

Make up the Mass with Tincture of Tartar.

Having chosen the Aloes Succotrine, very transparent, draw forth the Extract
with Juice of Strawberries, as I shall direct in the preparation of Extracts,
where you shall also meet with those of Gentian and Saffron. Magistery of
Tartar, and tincture of Tartar, are to be found in their proper place, together
with the preparation of the Salt of Mars of Riverius, which is most proper for
these Pills, in regard that the Acid of the Spirit of Vitriol, necessary for
the dissolution of Mars, cannot be better sweet'nd then by the Volatile of the
Spirit of Wine, which is there made use of.

Schroderus writes, that after he had had the Receipt a good while, and found
the Excellency of its Virtues, he was resolved to communicate it to public
view, as a proper Remedy to carry off tartarous and muscllaginous humors from
the lower part of the Belly, to cleanse the Liver, Spleen, and Matrix from
Obstructions, and to cure all Diseases that proceed from thence. Take them in
the Evening before Supper, about half a scruple weight, and the next morning
expect they should work.

Pilulae de Sagapeno Camilli. Sagapen-Pills of Camillus.. Lachrymarum Sagapeni,
vj.. Tears of Sagapen, vj. Ammoniac. iij. Ammoniac, iij. Extracti Trochisch.
Alhandal, j. Extract of Trochisks of Alhandal, j. Diagrydii, ss. Diagrydion,
ss. Salis Gemmae, j ss. Sal-Gemmae, j ss.

Powder the Diagrydion and Sal-Gemmae, and having heated the Brass-Mortar and
Pestle, melt the Gums by degrees: Then incorporate therewith the Extract of
Alhandal, and the Powders, adding thereto as much Syrup of Violets, sharp'nd
with a little Spirit of Vitriol, as will suffice to reduce it to a good
consistency. These Pills are applauded by Camillus, and after him by Quercetan,
for the cure of a Quartan Ague, taking about the bigness of a Pea at the
beginning of the Fit: For they insensibly dissolve viscous and tenacious
humors, and carry them off by Stool.

I have not inserted certain Pills set down, and commended by Quercetan, having
Euphorbium for their Foundation: For though that Quercetan's preparation of
Euphorbium be as good, and as judicious as any that was ever invented; and that
it be true, that the Acrimony of the Euphorbium, fixed to its volatile parts
wherein it abounds, cannot be more properly carried off, then by mixing those
Acids among it which he does, as Juice of Citron, or Spirit of Vitriol.
Nevertheless, though the Volatiles may seem to have changed their nature, when
joined to the Acids, and intermixed with their smallest particles; this strict
Union may at first hinder that operation which they were capable of before in
separation, but cannot destroy their first nature: So that when the Acid joined
to the Euphorbium meets in the Stomach with any new Volatile, not failing to
mix with that as it had mixed with the Euphorbium; and the latter finding it
self freed from the Union which it had with the Acid, is in that time in a
condition to exercise its first Nature, and make the same havoc it would have
done before it was joined, which cannot be helped, unless it meets with some
new Acids in the Stomach, which may, as it were, inebriate it so, that it may
suffer it self to be carried off by the other Laxatives, and voided with the
Excrements, before it has done all the mischief it would have done. These
reasons make me steadfast in my Opinion, that it is better not to give
Euphorbium by any means inwardly, then to endeavor to change its nature, which
it is impossible to destroy, though it may be altered for a time.

I was unwilling to swell this Chapter with any more Receipts of Pills, which
have been formerly more in use, and which every one has his liberty to choose as
he pleases. For besides that there is nothing particular in their preparation,
I think I have already produced enough sufficiently to furnish any Apothecaries
Shop.

THE SECOND BOOK, OF EXTERNAL PREPARATIONS, AND COMPOSITIONS.
CHAP. I. Of Oils Extracted by Pressing.
THe Health of Man being the Common End for which all Medicines both Internal
and External are made use of, and there being so great a Sympathy between them,
that many which are ranked among the number of the former, may also serve for
the same uses as the latter, it is impossible to divide Internal from External
Compositions so well, but that there may be some ground of Exception. As may be
observed in Confection of Alkermes, which is usually given inwardly to
strengthen the Heart and noble-parts; and which you may also for the same
purpose, very advantageously apply outwardly like an Epitheme upon the Heart
and Stomach: Or mixed in Oil of Scorpions, invented against Poisons; which is
chiefly made use of by way of Unction upon the Heart, Liver and Temples.
However it is also taken inwardly for the same intent; not to speak of other
mixed Bodies and other Compositions, which may prove useful both outwardly and
inwardly given. So that it is no wonder if among the Compositions which have at
all times been ranked among external, we meet with some that may be accounted
internal, as being oft-times taken inwardly. Particularly many Oils, especially
Sallet-oyl, which besides the general external use that is made of it in
dressing Meat, is often given to drink alone or mixed with other Medicaments.

Having by this means begun External Medicines with Oils, I must say that the
name of Oil has been given to certain fat, oily, combustible Liquors, that flow
either naturally out of Rocks, as Petroleum; or from Plants, as Opobalsanum; or
which is drawn by Art from diverse mixed Bodies, especially those which are of
the number of Vegetables, the diversity whereof is as great as the variety of
substances from whence they are drawn. I do not comprehend under Oils the Fat
of Animals, though Unctuous and Inflammable, and that it be put sometimes in
the Composition of several Oils, among several other parts of Animals; having
designed this Chapter principally for Oils drawn forth by Pressing, or by
Decoction; or for those to which we communicate the virtue of one or more mixed
Bodies, which are called either Simple or Compound. Referring Distilled Oils,
and their Preparation to the third part of this Pharmacopaea.

Fruits, Berries, and Seeds are the parts of Plants that usually abound most in
Oil; though the other parts are not quite destitute of it. But among all Fruits
the Olive is that which yields most, and of which there is the greatest plenty
everywhere. This Oil is as much used in Diet as in Physic, wherein the general
use of it has been the reason it has received for excellency and priority of
distinctions sake, the name of Oil, without the addition of Olives. This is one
of those Oils that are drawn forth by pressing. The use of it is chiefly to
retain or receive the virtue of several sorts of Plants or Animals, of which it
afterward bears the name, serving as a foundation to a good part of the Simple
and Compound Oils, which are used to be prepared in Shops by Infusion or
Decoction.

Most Authors are of opinion that Oil that has been longest made is to be
preferred before any other for Physical uses, so that sometimes they prescribe
Oil of a hundred years old. However the Inhabitants of the Countries where the
Oil is made, generally prefer new pure Oil before any other; especially for
Diet, because it is usually more sweet and more acceptable to the taste: and
though they do not despise that of two, three and four years old, they know by
experience, that Oil which has been kept beyond that time, grows at length so
thick, and becomes so greasy, that it is only fit for Unguents, Emplaisters,
or to make Soap.

The Ancients prescribed the making of two sorts of Oil, and that the most
usual being drawn from Olives very ripe, there should be another drawn from
green Olives before they come to maturity, to which they give the name of Oleum
Omphacinum, which they affirm to be much more astringent and cooling then the
other, and which they made use of in the composition of Oils and other Remedies
that required those qualities. But we should be now at a great loss to find
this Omphacine-Oyl, because that green Olives are not in a condition to afford
much Oil, and for that in the Countries where Olives grow in greatest abundance
they know not what it is to draw forth Oil from Olives that are not fully ripe.
But though we have not this Omphacine-Oyl of the Ancients, the Oil which is
made of ripe Olives, cannot be inferior to it; in regard we may endue it with
qualities very near to those which are attributed to Omphacine, by the means of
Lotions or Infusions impregnated with the qualities which they desire, provided
the Oil be pure, and clarifi'd from all its bad qualities.

Oleum Amygdalarum dulcium. Oil of Sweet-Almonds.. Amygdalarum dulcium
putaminibus, and cute membranosa purgatarum, quantum libuerit.. Sweet-Almonds
cleans'd from their Husks and Membranous-skins, what quantity you please.

Choose out new Almonds, well grown, out of their shells, well dried, and
having sisted the dust from them through a coarse Sieve, put them into
hot-water; and keep them there till their Husks are well soaked, that you may
slip them off with your fingers; and having taken off the membranous-skin, wipe
them in a Linen-cloth, and spread them abroad to dry. Then put them in a
Marble-Mortar, and beat them with a Wooden-Pestle, till the Pulp be very thin
and begin to yield Oil; put this Pulp into a Bag of new strong linen: and after
you have tied the mouth of the Bag, and put it between two thin Tin-plates, or
of Wood lined with white Latten, put the whole into the Press, squeezing it
very gently at first, but afterward with a considerable strength, leaving the
Bag in the Press till the Oil have time to drop forth. They who should be too
impatient at first, and should press the Oil of Almonds too strongly at the
beginning, would force the Feces of the Almonds through the Bag; and the Oil
would come forth thick, which by observing my directions never happens.

The Ancients were wont to heat the Almonds and such other Fruits in Balneo
Mariae, or otherwise, after they had beat them, and before they put them into
the Press, to get the more Oil. I confess that more Oil may be had this way,
but it will be more unacceptable to the taste and less cooling. However for
some persons not so nice, the beating of the Almonds may be omitted, provided
they be well shaken in a Bag of new coarse Cloth: by reason that then the
Almond-pulp is less subject to pass through the Bag, as being hindered by the
rind, that gives it a firmness; nor is the Oil less pleasing to the taste, or
less sightly to the eye.

Oil of Sweet Almonds is very much commended against the roughness of the
Aspera Arteria, and the Lungs. It appeases Colicks, especially the Nephretic,
cures all retentions of Urine, facilitates the Labors of Women in Childbed,
and appeases their pains after delivery; asswages Coughs in young or old, and
the Gripes of little infants. In a word, it is generally proper for all
internal Maladies, where there is occasion to mollify, assuage, make slippery
or to qualify the heat or acrimony of humors. It is used both inwardly and
outwardly. It is given alone fasting; it is also mixed with Looches Syrups,
Emulsions, and Potions. The dose is from half an ounce to as ounce, and
sometimes to two: it is also used in pain-easing, and lubrifying Clysters from
two to three ounces. It is also used externally alone, or mixed with Pomatums
or in Liniments, as well to smooth the Skin, as to soften and relax the Muscles
of the Breast, when they are oppressed.

Oleum Amygdalarum amararum. Oil of Bitter Almonds.. Amygdalarum amararum
quantum libuerit.. Bitter Almonds what quantity you please.

This Oil may be prepared in the same manner as the sweet Almonds; but because
they are seldom taken inwardly, the beating of them may be omitted without
Scruple: otherwise they may be beaten and after that moderately heated; and the
Plates may be also heated, when you put them into the Press: But they must be
gently pressed at first, as I said of the former. Their bitterness lies only in
their gross and terrestrial part; so that the Oil is as sweet as that of other
Almonds, the bitterness remaining in the foeces: Which though neither hurtful
to men, nor to the most part of other Animals, is yet the most dangerous Poison
that Poultry can meet with.

Oil of bitter Almonds is very much esteemed against hardnesses, inflammations,
and stranglings of the neck of the Matrix. It also gives great ease to those
who are troubled in their Kidneys, by any gathering together of Phlegm, Gravel,
or Stone, or are pained through difficulty of Urine. It is good against pains
in the head, deafness, noise in the Ears, to take away the blemishes of the
Face, and roughness of the Skin, and white Scurfs. It is used outwardly alone,
or mixed with Pomatums; and inwardly administered from half an Ounce to an
Ounce alone, or mixed in Emulsions or other Beverages. It may be also mixed in
Clysters to expel wind, like as Oil of sweet Almonds.

Oleum Nucum Juglandium, and Avellanarum. Oil of Wallnuts and Filberts.

Oils of Wallnuts and Filberts, are to be prepared in the same manner as Oil of
sweet Almonds. You must also forbear to heat the Pulps, especially when they
are to be taken inwardly, or to be used for Cosmetics. For by that means they
will be more agreeable to the taste and smell, and be also more refreshing.

Oil of ordinary Wallnuts is recommended against all sorts of Cholicks,
especially windy. It is also good against crushing and pricking of the Nerves,
against the Itch, Tetters, and Swellings. It is also outwardly applied to
anoint the Face against Sun-burning in the Month of March, by way of
prevention: To which purpose they anoint the Faces of young Children newly
born. The Dose and uses of it are much the same with those of Oil of sweet
Almonds: Yet sometimes they use four Ounces, or half a Pint at a time in
Clysters, for violent Cholicks, mixing it with Urine and Spanish-Wine.

The Virtues of Oil of Filberts are very near the same with that of common
Wallnuts. It is used against pains in the Joints, as well in Beverage, as in
Unction; as also against the biting of Serpents, about an Ounce at a time: it
is applied alone, or mixed with Bears-Grease, or among Pomatums to make the
Hair grow.

Oleum Crysomelinum, seu ex Nucleis Malorum Persicorum and Armeniacorum. Oil of
the Kernels of Peaches and Abricots.

The Oils of the Kernels of Peaches and Apricots are drawn by the Press in the
same manner as the Oils already mentioned.

The Virtues of both these Oils are very near the same. They are highly
applauded against Pains, Obstructions, and Noises in the Ears; as also against
Deafness, being put into the Ear with a little Cotton dipped in them. They
appease the pains of the Hemorrhoids, and dissipate swellings which are caused
by them in those parts: They are good to cure Wounds and Ulcers growing in
those places. They are highly commended against Worms in Children great and
small, being taken from two Drams to an Ounce. For which purpose the Kernels of
Peaches and Almonds beaten, and given in a flowring Emulsion, are very much
approved and experimented against the Jaundise in both Sexes, repeating the use
of them.

Oleum Balaninum. Oil of the Nut-Ben.

The Nut-Ben, called by the Greeks Balanus Mirepsica, by the Latins Glans
Vnguentaria, affords its Oil by pressing, in the same manner as the other
Fruits beforementioned. The Nut-Ben is in some sort triangular, covered with a
whitish, thin, smooth, and brittle rind: The substance of the Fruit is white,
so is also the Oil; and it is not only without scent, but very proper to
receive any scent that you have a mind to give it; and it has this peculiar
quality, that it does not grow Musty like other pressed Oils, but may be kept a
long time in a good condition: For which reason Perfumers use it, to receive
and preserve the Odours of certain Flowers, which they would otherwise make no
advantage of.

The Virtues of this Oil are highly esteemed, and among other things to take
out freckles and scars from the face, and other parts of the body, applied
alone, or mixed with Pomatums. It asswages pains in the Ears, and dissipates
the buzzing in them, being mixed with Goose-grease, and put into them: It is
proper to open the Obstructions, and to soft'n and digest the hardnesses of the
Liver, Spleen, and other Bowels, being taken inwardly: It is used against cold
diseases of the Nerves and Joints, as also against the Gout, applied upon the
parts affected. The dose is from half a dram to two drams, in White Wind, or
some other Liquor.

By the same Method, Oils may be extracted out of several Fruits of the same
nature, and Seeds of like substance; as Pistaches, Pineapple kernels, the four
greater cold Seeds, Kernels of Oranges and Citrons, Sesamum,
Palma-Christi-seed, seeds of Piony, Mustard, Hemp, Dwarf-Elder, Henbain,
Lettice, Poppy, Carthamum, etc. which have every one their particular virtues,
though seldom ready prepared in Shops, but upon occasion.

Oleum seminis Anisi per expressionem. Pressed Oil of Anniseed.

You must be careful to have your Anniseed new, very dry, well grown, and to
make it very clean, and to beat it, and sift it through a close Hair-sieve.
Take a pound of this Powder, and having filled the hollow of a Plate, that may
be set with the brims in the lower part of a Hair-sieve, cover the Plate with
the lower part of the Sieve; and keeping one hand upon the Sieve, which must
then touch and cover the Plate filled with the Powder, and the other under the
bottom of the Plate, of an instant turn the whole so, that the Powder may fall
upon the Sieve, and be covered with the Plate; and the same time have a
Copper-posnet ready to that bigness, that the bottom of the Sieve may rest
within-side, but not go down to the bottom: then put in three pints of water;
and having placed the Skillet upon a Furnace, as the water boils, let the
Powder of Anniseed receive the vapor for a quarter of an hour, or till the
boiling vapors of the water have well penetrated the Powder, and till you can
no longer endure the heat of the Plate that covers it: At what time having a
strong close Cloth-bag ready, put the powder immediately into it, and having
tied the Bag, press it between two hot Plates in a Press, with all the speed
and strength that may be. By this means a pound of powder of Anniseed will
yield an ounce and a half, and sometimes two ounces of Oil, very sweet,
pleasing, and having the true taste of Anniseed.

The preparation of this Oil may be seen in a Treatise of Chemistry, which I
composed and set forth in another Name, about twelve years since: But I am sure
it is not to be found in any Author that ever wrote before; so that I dare
pretend to be the sole Inventor.

Oil of Anniseed is very much extolled for expelling Wind contained in the
Belly, and for appeasing Colics that proceed from thence: It is proper to
strengthen the Stomach, to assist Digestion, and the distribution of the good
Juice of the Nourishment to all parts of the body. This Oil thus prepared, is
less subtle, and less penetrating, then that which is drawn by Distillation;
however, it has less Acrimony, and it may be also given in greater quantity,
even to half a dram in Wine, or some other proper Liquor: It may be also
applied, by way of Unction, upon the Stomach, Navel, and lower parts of the
Belly, in Windy Colics. You may also put a drop or two in Childrens Broth that
are troubled with griping pains.

Oleum Nucis Moschatae. Oil of Nutmegs,

The Preparation of this Oil is altogether agreeable to that of Anniseed. So
that if you be but careful to choose full grown Nutmegs, fat and weighty, to
sift the Powder through a close Hair-sieve, to follow punctually my Directions
for the pressed Oil of Aniseed, you shall succeed better then by any other way,
and have an Oil of a very fair color, and a very good smell; and more by half
then from the same quantity of Anniseeds. This Oil looks liquid and clear as
any other Oil at the time of the Expression, while it is warm; but it
coagulates as soon as it is cold, and then appears of a yellow color enclining
to red, and of a solid consistence.

I have formerly given a Preparation of Oil of Nutmegs, according to my method,
in a Treatise which I made upon Treacle, where I blamed those who following the
Precepts of the Ancients, content themselves with heating the Nutmegs beaten,
and to press them hot, because that heating cannot be done without a
dissipation of the most subtle, most volatile, and most odoriferous part of the
Nutmegs, without a remarkable diminution of some part of the Oil, and without
obscuring and spoiling the color of it. Nor can I subscribe to those who
having placed Oil of Nutmegs among the Number of pressed Oils, would have it
prepared without fire; believing that they never considered what they wrote,
and because they never prepared, nor never saw this Oil prepared. Others have
made use of my method, but to little purpose; but those I let alone.

Oil of Nutmegs is good against all humidities and coldness of the Stomach, and
the Noble parts. For by its moderate heat it dissipates and strengthens the
parts both at the same time: it stays vomiting, restoring the Stomach and
Bowels to their Functions. It is prescribed to correct the stinking of the
breath that proceeds from foulness of the Stomach; to help digestion, create an
appetite, and excite venereal vigor. It is taken inwardly in meat-broth from
six Grains to a Scruple. It is also made use of to anoint the hollow part of
the Stomach, having first melted it in a Spoon. To excite Coition, the Natural
parts may be anointed therewith. It is also good against cold Fluxes of the
Brain, anointing the Temples and Sutures of the head; and against Colicks,
anointing the Navel. It is also good for the ground of Balsoms, as well in
respect of its odor, as of its virtue to fortify the Brain and Noble parts,
or to suppress the vapors of the Matrix.

Oil of Mace, endu'd almost with the same Virtues, may be also drawn by the
press. You may also extract the Oils of both by Distillation. But I refer these
Preparations to the third Part of this Pharmacopoea.

Oleum Ovorum. Oil of Eggs.

Having chosen out new-laid Eggs, or at least those that are not stale, what
number you please, boil them in Water till they are very hard, and having taken
off the Whites and the Shells, crumble the Yolks into small pieces, and fry
them in a Drying Pan over a moderate Fire, stirring them from time to time with
a Spatula, or a long Ladle; then leave off and hold them there till they begin
to grow red, and to yield their Oil; then after you have slightly sprinkled
them with Spirit of Wine, put them into a Linen-Bag very well warmed, and
having tied it, and put it into the Press very hot between two hot Plates,
squeeze out the Oil with all the speed you can, and keep it for your use.

The Oil of Eggs is highly esteemed to take away Scars, and other Deformities
of the Skin; and particularly those that remain after the Smallpox or burning.
It asswages the pains of the Ears, and those of the Hemorrhoids; causes the
Hair to grow; cures Scabs and Tetters; dissolves and carries off Tumors in the
Mouth; and is very proper to heal rifts and chops in the breast, hands, feet,
and fundament. It cleanses Ulcers and appeases their pains, as also of all the
nervous parts. It is also advantageously laid upon new Burns and Scaldings.

They that fear the bad impression which the Oil of Eggs may receive in the Pan
during the frying of the Yolks, may do better to make use of a glazed
Earthen-Vessel, for torrefaction of the Eggs, especially if the Oil be intended
for the Face: For which purpose, the better to take from the Oil any impression
of an Empyreuma, to render it more cooling, and by whitening it, to make it fit
to be mixed in Pomatums, you may prepare this Oil in the Month of May, and
expose it to the Dew night and morning, stirring it from time to time, and keep
it there till the strong scent be gone, and it will look of a white color. The
Ladies of Languedoc are not ignorant of this preparation.

Oleum Laurinum. Oil of Lawrel-berries.. Baccarum Lauri recentium perfect
maturarum, quantum libuerit.. New Lawrel-berries perfectly ripe, what quantity
you please.

The Berries being bruised, and put into a Kettle, let them boil in a
sufficient quantity of water for half an hour; strain them, and press them out
very strongly. When the Oil is cool, scum it off, swimming upon the water like
fat: Then bruise the pressed Pulp again, and boil it in the remaining water,
adding a small quantity of fresh water to it, for about half an hour; strain
it, and press it, as before, and having gathered the Oil that swims at the top
of the water, keep it apart.

This Oil is not easily prepared but in hot Countries, and where there is an
abundance of Laurels. The Ancients, and many of the Moderns, would have the
Lawrelberries to be beaten, before you put them into the water to boil; others
would have you to boil them whole, provided they be new, and very ripe: I
believe that either Method may be good; and that the Berries whole, having the
greatest part of their Oil in their Superficies, and their Rind very tender,
will easily afford their Oil without any contusion; and that by boiling them
again, the same Berries will yet yield more Oil. But I think it better to
bruise them after you have drawn off the first Oil, that you may the more
easily obtain that which remains from the more compact part of the Berries:
However, the first Oil will be the greenest, the most pure, and the best; so
that it will be convenient to keep the two Oils apart.

The same Method may be observed for the preparation of oils of Lentisk,
Myrtle, and other Oleaginous Berries.

Oil of Lawrel-berries corrects the cold intemperature of all the parts of the
body, as well that which is single, as that which is accompanied with Phlegm and
cold Flatuosities: It softens, attenuates, opens, and discusses; it remedies
the cold affections of the Brain, Nerves, and Joints, as also those of the
Stomach, Intestines, Liver, Spleen, Reins and Matrix: It is good against the
Palsy, weakness of the Nerves and Muscles, the shivering of Agues, anointing
the Spine of the Back therewith: It asswages the pains of Sciatic Gouts, and
those of the Ears, and inveterate distempers of the Head. It causes sharp
humors to expire, driving them to the Superficies of the skin; for which
reason it prevails against Scurfs and Tetters. It is also good to kill Worms
and Fleas. It may be taken inwardly, to ten or twelve drops, in some proper
liquor; but the chiefest use of it is for Exterior Liniments. It may be also
mixed in Clysters, from half an ounce to one, and sometimes two ounces, in
Colics that proceed from wind, or flegmatic and cold humors.

CHAP. II. Of Oils prepared by Infusion, or Decoction.
Oleum Absinthii. Oil of Wormwood.. Absinthii majoris recentis contusi, lb j..
Of the fresh bigger Wormwood bruised, lb j. Succi ejusdem, iiij. Juice of the
same, iiij. Rosarum Rubrarum siccarum, ij. Red-roses dried, ij. Olei communis,
lb iiij. Common Oil, lb iiij.

TAke a pound of large Wormwood, when it is mounted up into Flower, and bruise
it in a Marble-Mortar, and put it into a glazed Earthen-pot, with the Juice of
the same Wormwood, and Roses, and Oil prescribed: Then after you have well
stopped the Pot, place it over a Bakers, or a Cooks Oven, or else in the hot
beams of the Sun: Where after it has stood three days, set the Vessel in Balneo
Mariae; and having let it boil for half an hour, strain the whole, and press it
forth by main strength. Then return the Oil pressed forth into the same Pot,
with the same quantity of Wormwood, with its Juice, and the other Ingredients,
as before; and having stopped the Pot, and kept it in Maceration, as before, let
it boil in Balneo Mariae again, and strain, and press it, as at first,
repeating all the same Operations a third time: Then after you have left the
Oil to settle for four and twenty hours, separate it from the Faeces and
moisture, and keep it for your use.

Oil of Wormwood is highly commended against all cold diseases of the Stomach,
for it heats and strengthens very much, assisting it to perform its duty, and
restoring the Appetite; it dissipates Wind, and appeases the Colicks caused
thereby; it kills Worms, and cures the infirmities of the Ears, by stopping
them with Cotton dipped in some few drops thereof. It is applied by way of
Unction upon the Stomach and Belly: It is also put into Clysters, from one to
two or three ounces.

They that live in hot Countries, where the Beams of the Sun are very violent
in May and June, when Wormwood is in its chiefest strength, may do well to make
use of the Sun for Maceration: But in parts remote from the Sun, which enjoy
not that heat, we are constrained to make use of the heat of Fire, as well for
this as for many other Macerations, which are necessary to be done.

I know there are some persons also so exact in the preparation of this, and
other Oils, as to put the Ingredients into a Glass-Cucurbit, covered with its
Alembic* and to set the Cucurbit in Balneo Mariae, to draw away all the
moisture that will ascend, to mix it again with the pressed Oil, and separate
it afterward. But because Oil of Wormwood, and suchlike, are only used in
Exterior Ointments, I cannot find but that the dissipation of the Volatile
parts, very difficult to be preserved, is a thing to be more looked after;
besides, that by this method you cannot fail to communicate to the Oil whatever
the Wormwood and Roses have of good qualities, and most proper for the
intentions for which this Oil of Wormwood was invented.

Oils of Mint, Sage, Dill, Rue, and the like, are to be prepared after the same
manner.

Oleum Rosatum Simplex. Simple Oil of Roses.. Rosarum Rubrarum recentium
contusarum, lb ij.. Fresh Red-roses bruised, lb ij. Succi Earundem, lb ss.
Juice of the same, lb ss. Olei communis, lb v. Common Oil, lb v.

Put them all together in a glazed Earthen-pot covered; macerate them for forty
days in the Sun, if possible; then boil them in Balneo Mariae, press them, and
keep the Oil for use.

This Oil requires no great trouble, as being made with the only Maceration of
the Roses. The virtues and uses are the same with those of the following Oil.

Oleum Rosatum Compositum. Compound Oil of Roses.. Rosarum rub. recentium
contus. lb j.. Fresh Red-roses bruised, lb j. Succi Rosarum Rubrarum, iiij.
Juice of Red-roses, iiij. Olei communis, lb iiij. Common Oil, lb iiij.

Put them in a glazed Earthen-pot with a narrow Orifice, and after you have
well stepped it, set it in Maceration in the beams of the Sun for four days; then
having boiled the Ingredients for an hour in Balneo Mariae, strain and press
them. Return the Liquor pressed forth into the same Vessel again, repeating the
same operations thrice in all; and when you have so done, purify the oil, and
keep it for use.

For want of a hot Sun, set the Pot upon a Bakers or Cooks Oven. Nor is the
dissipation of the Volatile parts of the Roses to be feared, during the
macerations and boilings prescribed; by reason those parts are so imbody'd with
the watery and terrestrial part, that a severer heat then that of a boiling Bath
is not able to separate them. And we find demonstratively that Red-Roses do not
impart their sweet scent till after they are dried; for which reason we expose
them to the heat of the Sun, which acting only upon the superfluous moisture of
the Roses, does no damage to the scent, nor to any of the good qualities which
we desire. And if there remain any moisture after boiling the Oil, it will be
easy to separate it because it falls to the bottom.

This Oil is good to dulcifie, and dissipate fluxions that fall upon the
External-parts. For it extinguishes inflammations, hinders the descent of the
humors, and appeases pains. It tempers the heat of the Stomach, and the heat
of the Reins. It asswages the pains of the Head, as also deliriums, and
provokes sleep, ducifying the sharp humors that interrupt it by their
Acrimony: It must be warmed before you anoint the parts with it. It may be also
inwardly given against the Worms and in Dysenteries, from half an ounce to an
ounce. It is good to anoint the part upon Fractures and Dislocations of Bones.
It is mixed with equal parts of Vinegar of Roses to anoint the Head after
shaving; to abate the Vapors that ascend in burning-Fevers, which cause want
of sleep and Deliriums. This Oil is also mixed in pain-easing and dissolving
Liniments and Cataplasmes, and to soften Emplaisters to give them the
consistence of a Sear-cloth.

The preparation of this Oil may serve as a rule for the preparation of those
of Nymphaeae or Water Lillies, Lillies, Violets, Chamomile, Melilot, Elder,
Myrtle and the like.

Oleum Jasmini. Oil of Jessomines.

Take little Floks of white-Cotten carded, or else little pieces of Cloth
whitened with Alum, which have no bad smell; and dip them slightly in oil of
Ben drawn without Fire, and having spread them in a Basin of white Earth, Tin,
or Silver, strew them over with Jasmin-flowers newly gathered about a
fingers-breadth high: then covering the Basin with a Basin like the former,
wrap them up in Woollen or coarse linencloth. At the end of four hours take
away the first Flowers, and put in fresh; renewing the same operation every
three or four hours ten or twelve times. Then put the pieces of cloth or floks
of Cotton in a Press, and press out the oil without any heat at all. This oil
will be impregnated with the scent of the Flowers and keep a long time, so the
Viol be well-stopp'd.

The odours and virtues of Flowers of Jessomin are so volatile, that they will
endure no heat; so that it is to no more purpose to infuse or boil them, then
it is to pretend to impart their scent to any substance by the means of Fire or
Distillation. Which engaged Artists to seek out other ways and means wherein
they have so well succeeded, that they are now able to impart their scent to
Oils, Pomatums, Gloves, and other Substances; observing the preceding method.

You may also instead of pieces of cloth, or floks of cotton dipped in Oil of
Ben, make use of the Fruit of Ben it self, grossly bruised, spreading it in a
Basin, and covering it with Jasmine-flowers, after that with another Basin,
proceeding in every thing as before, and the Oil thus drawn without fire from
the Ben thus perfumed, will be as odoriferous, and keep as long.

You may also make use of Sweet-Almonds bruised or their Oil: But still the
Fruit of Ben, or its Oil is better; because that the Oil of Almonds being
subject to grow rank, will spoil the scent of the Jasmins.

The Ancients and some of the Moderns direct the preparation of Oil of
Jessomines to be made by diverse Infusions of the Flowers in Oil of
Sweet-Almonds, or Oil of Olives, and to proceed after the same manner as for
Oil of Roses: But the little virtue and less use of the Oil thus prepared will
not permit any Artist to spend his time upon this preparation.

They also who have endeavored to extract Roses by distillation, proceeding as
in the distillation of Roses, certainly will no longer adhere to that which is
so remote from daily experience.

Oils of Orange, Citron-flowers, Violets, Clove-Gillow-flowers, Roses and many
others, may be extracted after the same manner, as that of Jessomines. Not but
that these and other Flowers of a more compact substance will also yield their
oils by distillation.

Oil of Jessomines is principally esteemed for its pleasing and delightful
smell. And it is rather made use of for the pleasures of those that are in
health, then for the cure of the Sick; though the recreating scent may be of no
small efficacy to fortify the Brain and noble-parts.

Oleum Cydoneorum. Oil of Quinces.. Cydoneorum nondum maturorum contusorum, and
Olei commums; an. lb iij.. Quinces not fully ripe, bruised, and common-oyl, of
each, lb iij.

Take the Quinces not fully ripe, and having bruised them in a Marble-Mortar,
put them into an Earthen-pot glazed within, with a narrow mouth, together with
the oil prescribed, and having covered the Pot, keep it upon hot Embers for
four and twenty hours, and in a boiling Balneo-Mariae for one good hour. Then
strain and press forth the matters with a forcible strength. Then putting in
the same quantity of fresh Quinces into the pressed oil, and having repeated
the same operations once again, separate the oil from the feces and moisture,
and keep it for use.

Oil of Quinces is of a very temperate quality. It fortifies and closes; for
which reason it is an excellent remedy against weaknesses of the Stomach,
Liver and Intestines. It also strengthens the lower region of the Belly, as
also the Nerves and Muscles relaxed. It stays Vomiting; and is prevalent in
case of Disenteries, Diarrheas, Lyenteries: It stops immoderate Sweats being
applied upon the Breast, and all along the spine of the Back. It is principally
made use of for outward Unction, though it may be taken inwardly if prepared
with any oil well chosen. It may be also mixed from one ounce to two in
astringent and detersive Clysters.

Oleum de Capparibus. Oil of Capers.. Corticis Radicum Capparum and Fructuum
eorundem, an. iiij.. The Rind of the Roots of Capers, and Fruit of the same,
an. iiij. Corticis Radicum Tamarisci, and summitatum ejus Floridarum, an. ij.
Rind of the Root of Tamarisk, and Flowr'd-tops of the same, an. ij. Foliorum
Rutae recentium, Fresh Leaves of Rue, Cicutae, Hemlock, Ceterach, Ceterach,
Seminis Agni Casti, and Seeds of Agnus-Castus, and Oculorum Genistae, an. j.
Broom-Buttons, an. j. Aceti fortis, and Strong-Vinegar, and Vini Albi, an. lb
ss. White Wind, lb ss. Radicis Cyperis and Root of Cyperus, and Gentianae, an.
ss. Gentian, an. ss. Olei Communis, lb iij. Common-oyl, lb iij.

Neither new nor old Dispensatories afford a description of oil of Capers
rightly prescribed; and therefore the Kings first Physician thought fit that I
should produce a new one, which has certainly all the virtues that Authors have
attributed to this oil.

Bruise the Roots of Capers, Tamarisk, Cyperus, and Gentian grossly, cut the
Leaves and Stalks of the Plants; squash the Broom-Buttons and Capers in a
Marble-Mortar, and in a little Brass-Mortar, beat the Seed of Agnus-Castus. And
having put the whole into a glazed Earthen-pot with a straight-neck, among the
Oil, Vinegar, and White Wind prescribed, cover the Pot and keep it upon the hot
Cinders, for four and twenty hours; after which set it in a boyling-Bath till
the Wine and Vinegar be almost consumed. Then strain and press the whole with a
violent strength, and when the oil is well separated from the feces, put it up
for use.

Oil of Capers is very much commended against all pains of the Head, Spleen,
and to dissolve schirrous humors that grow there. For it powerfully cuts,
attenuates and discusses tenacious and rebellious humors. It opens the Pores
of the Skin, and the parts which are underneath it; and dissipates the
ventosities which are therein contained. The Region of the Spleen may be
externally anointed with it.

The various Ingredients of this Composition might seen to require a different
method for their Infusion and Decoction. But the cutting, opening and
discussive qualities here desired cannot be grounded upon the volatil-parts
which easily dissipate, but rather upon the fixed, which lying long upon the
Body, have time to produce their effects. The infusion for twenty four hours,
preceding the coction, sufficiently opens the Ingredients of more compact
substances, whereby they are in a better capacity to impart their virtue to the
oil. Besides that the infusion being made over a moderate fire in a close
vessel, and the Acid-parts of the Vinegar binding those few volatile-parts
which they meet with in some few Medicaments, there is no fear of dissipation;
so that there is no need of different infusions and decoctions, especially the
compositions being only intended externally.

Oleum Mastichinum. Oil of Mastich.. Mastichis electa, vj.. Select Mastich, vj.
Olei Rosati, lb ij. Oil of Roses, lb ij. Vini Generosi, ij. Strong-wine, ij.

Having made choice of new clear Mastich, and grossly pulverized it, put it into
a strait-mouth'd earthen glaz'd-pot, and after you have poured upon it the oil
and the Wine prescribed and covered the pot, put it into a boiling Maries-Bath;
and keep it there till the Mastich be altogether dissolved in the oil. Then
take the Vessel from the Fire, strain the dissolution through a small
linen-bag, let it settle for some time, and having separated that little
watry-moisture that may remain behind, keep the oil for your use.

The oil of Mastich is fit to fortify the Brain, the Nerves and Joints. It is
good against weaknesses of the Stomach, and to stay Vomitings: it strengthens
the Liver and appeases the pains of it. It is highly applauded against
Dysenteries and Lienteries, whether you anoint the Stomach and Belly therewith,
or mix it in Clysters from one ounce to two.

The oil of Mastich has no need either of long or violent coction, it being a
Gum that easily dissolves in oil by reason of the similitude of their
substance. That little Wine which is prescribed serves only to prevent the bad
impression which the Mastich and oil may receive from the Fire during coction.
It was not thought convenient to put four ounces of Wine to a pint of oil, and
three ounces of Mastich, as some direct, nor to boil it to the consumption of
the Wine: which is not to be done without a remarkable disposition of the
volatile-parts of the Mastich, and a great alteration of the oil: nor can there
be any thing expected from the Wine whose volatile-part is soon consumed, the
watery and terrestrial parts which remain being good for nothing.

Oleum Nardinum. Oil of Nard.. Spica Nardi minutim incisae and contusae, iij..
Spikenard cut small and bruised, iij. Vini Generosi, iiij. Strong-wine, iiij.

Take six ounces of Spikenard, and having bruised them in a great Brass-Mortar,
put them into a strai^t-mouth'd Earthen glaz'd-Pot, and having well moistened
them with four ounces of good Strong-wine, cover the Pot and let them infuse in
a temperate place:

Deinde superfundantur Then add Olei Communis, lb jss. Common-Oyl, lb jss.

Stop up the Pot, and keep it in a boiling Maries-Bath till the Wine be almost
consumed. After that strain and press the whole strongly, and having separated
the oil from the Feces, put it up for use.

The dryness and hardness of the Spikenard is the reason of its being ordered
to lie in maceration two hours, to soak, supple and open it, for the more easy
penetration of the Oil. But why the Ancients should prescribe but six ounces of
Oil to three of Spikenard is to me a wonder: For it is impossible that six
ounces of Oil can imbibe and retain all the virtue of three ounces of
Spikenard. It being certain that when a Menstruum is sufficiently satiated with
the substance which it is put to dissolve, it can receive no more, especially
when the substances are dry and able to imbibe a far greater quantity of the
Menstruum; so that they had no reason to put nine Ounces of Spikenard to a
pound and a half of Oil, since three ounces are enough to charge that quantity
of Oil. Now though Spikenard be none of the meanest among Aromatics, and that
there may be some fear of a dissipation of its volatile parts during coction;
yet when we consider, that though it be kept twenty years it still preserves
its strong scent and taste, and that it is of a substance more compact then any
other Aromatic, we cannot believe that by this Infusion and Coction in a
boiling Bath it can lose any considerable part of its substance, but rather
that it would be a difficult thing to impart the virtue of the Spikenard by a
lesser heat.

This oil is proper to heat, attenuate, and digest, being a moderate closer; so
that it is very useful against cold and windy affections of the Brain, Stomach,
Liver, Spleen, Kidneys, Bladder, and Matrix: It unstops and purges the Brain,
being dipped with Cotton, and put up the Nostrils, or into the Ears, the pains
whereof it asswages. It is good against the Palsy, and shakings of the Nerves;
against Tumors, Suffocations, and Stranglings of the Matrix, being used as a
Pessary. It is also made use of by way of Injection, to assuage the pains of
the Bladder.

Oleum Hyperici. Oil of S. John' s Wort.. Summitatum floridarum Hyperici ad
maturitatem vergentium, lb ij.. The Flower-tops of S. John's Wort inclining to
ripeness, lb ij.

Bruise them in a Marble-Mortar, and put them into a streight-mouth'd glazed
Earthen-pot:

Tunc superfundantur, Then add, Olei communis, lb iiij. Common Oil, lb iiij.
Vini generosi, lb ss. Strong Wine, lb ss.

Cover the Pot, and let it stand upon the hot Embers for four and twenty hours;
then remove it into a Boiling-bath for two hours, stirring the Ingredients from
time to time with a wooden Spatula; then strain and strongly press out the
whole. In the mean time, having put the same quantity of the tops of S. John's
Wort into the same Pot, and poured the: pressed oil upon them, repeat the same
Maceration, Coction, Straining and Pressing; and after you have well strained
and pressed forth the whole, renew all the same operations a third time to new
tops of S. John's Wort; then having* separated the oil from the faeces and
moisture, incorporate it over a gentle fire with two pound of
Venice-Turpentine, and when it is off the fire, mix with it three ounces of
tincture of Saffron, and keep the oil for use.

You shall ^ind the preparation of Tincture of Saffron in the Third Part of
this Pharmacopoea.

Oil of S. John's Wort may be prepared without adding either Turpentine or
Saffron, and it is called Hypericon Simple: But this is much better in all
respects.

I might have here spoken against some descriptions of oil of S. John's Wort,
which are to be met with in sundry Authors; but I thought it sufficient to give
a true one, not doubting but it will be preferred before any of those, the
defects whereof the meanest Apothecary may easily understand.

Oil of S. John's Wort thus prepared, may be accounted an Effectual Balsom; it
heats, attenuates, dissipates and dries: whence it comes to pass, that it is
very proper against all pains that proceed from cold, particularly against all
sorts of infirmities in the joints, the Sciatica, and all sorts of Gouts, as
also to ease the pain of the Teeth. It is an excellent thing to heal all sorts
of wounds, together with those of the Nerves, for it glutinates and cicatrizes;
it likewise cures Burns: It is good against Worms, and the Convulsion: It is
used externally to anoint the parts where there is occasion: It is also mixed
in Vulnerary Injections, in Digestives, in Cataplasmes, and many other External
Remedies.

Oleum Irinum. Oil of Orrice.. Radicum Ireos recentium minutim incisarum, and.
New Roots of Orrice cut very small, and Florum ejusdem, an. j ss. Flowers of
the same, an. j ss. Olei communis, lb v. Common Oil, lb v.

Scrape and cut very small the Orrice-roots, by reason of the solidity of their
substance; then put them together with the Flowers lightly cut, into a glazed
Earthenpot; and having poured upon them the oil prescribed, and covered the
Pot, let it stand over hot Embers for twenty four hours, and afterward in a
boiling Bath for two hours; then strain and forcibly press out the whole:
Reiterate twice the maceration and decoction of new Roots and Flowers, doing in
every thing as at first; then separate the oil from the faeces, and put it up.
This oil thus prepared, will be very much impregnated with the good scent and
virtues of the Orrice.

There are some that in making the Infusions and Coctions of this Oil mingle
therewith a Decoction of the Roots and Flowers of Orrice. But this Decoction
would be so far from communicating any virtue, that it would be but a charge,
in regard the Roots and Flowers have moisture enough, so that if you still add
more, by consuming it among the Oil, the scent and virtue of the whole would be
notably diminished.

Oil of Orrice powerfully heats, mollifies, attenuates, digests, and dissolves.
It penetrates, concocts, and ripens matters that are gathered together,
dissipates pains in the Ears, corrects the stinking of the Nostrils, ripens
Phlegm, comforts the Asthmatics, and asswages the vehemence of coughing, being
applied to the breast. It discusses the swellings of the King's Evil, and
hardnesses of the Spleen and Liver; as also those of the Joints, the pains
whereof it eases. It asswages the griping pains of the Intestines, especially
those of the Ileon. It is good against the Dropsy, and esteemed a specific
against the Poison of Hemlock, and Champignons, taken inwardly about two or
three ounces. The same quantity may be also used in Clysters against Diseases
of the Intestins.

Oleum Lumbricorum. Oil of Earthworms.. Lumbricorum terrestrium crassiorum
lotorum, and Olei communis, an. lb iij.. Large Earthworms, and Common Oil, an.
lb iij. Vini albi, lb ss. White Wind, lb ss.

Choose out large Earthworms, and put them in an Earthen-pot covered for three
days, to the end they may empty themselves of the Earth which they had
swallowed; wash them well, and having dried them in a clean Linen-cloth, put
them into an Earthen glaz'd-pot, and having poured the Oil and Wine prescribed
upon them, and covered the Pot, let it stand upon the hot Embers for 24 hours;
then for an hour in the boiling Bath, or till the greatest part of the moisture
be consumed. After which having strained, and forcibly pressed the whole,
separate the Oil from the faeces, and put it up.

Some add more Wine, but to little purpose; in regard that the moisture of the
Worms is such, that the half-pint of Wine is more then enough already for their
maceration and coction, and to impart their virtue withal to the Oil.

The Oil of Earthworms is chiefly used against pains of the Joints. It is very
proper for the cure of Wounds, shrinking of the Nerves, and other Infirmities
of the Nerves and Muscles. The use of it is only external.

Oleum Castorei. Oil of Castor.. Pinguedinis in Cistide vero Castoreo adherenti
contentiae,. Of the Fat in the Vesicle adhering to the true Castoreum, Vini
generosi, an iij. Strong Wine, an, iij. Olei communis, lb j. Common Oil, lb j.

Macerate them in a glazed Earthen-Vessel close shut for 24 hours, then set
them in a Bath between lukewarm and boiling hot till the Wine be consumed:
Then having strained and separated the Oil from the faeces, keep it for use.

The Unctuous Liquor contained apart in a Vesicle within the Bags of the
Castoreum; seems to have been chiefly designed for the preparation of this Oil,
by reason of its fat substance which has some resemblance to Oil, which the
fleshy substance of Castoreum has not.

The scent of this unctuons part is penetrating and noysom, and very like that
of the fleshy part, so that the virtues of it are not much inferior,
especially for external application; and certainly the three ounces here
prescribed must be as much or more effectual, then one ounce of the fleshy
part, which some Authors have thought enough for the same quantity of oil.

We meet with, in some Authors, descriptions of an Oil of Castor, composed of
several Aromatics, and some watery Gums, the virtue of which they pretend to
extract by adding a great quantity of Wine; not considering that watery Gums,
though dissolveable in Wine, cannot incorporate with the oil, but only give it
some impression of their virtue, to which the quantity of Wine so excessive is
but injurious, in regard the Wine must be consumed, and in consuming, it
certainly carries with it the best part of the Gums, as also of the Aromatics,
which is still the more Volatile. For that reason they had done much better,
not to use above an ounce of Wine, and only enough to prevent the Empyreuma of
the substances; and to endeavor by a long Maceration, and a slow boiling, to
extract the virtues of those Aromatics; and some few drops of the distilled
oils of the principal Aromatics which they prescribe, would work a better
effect among the oil of Castor, then all the Macerations and Decoctions of oil
of Castor which they could prescribe.

Oil of Castor is highly commended in cold diseases of the Brain, against the
tremblings and contractions of the Nerves, Convulsions, and the Palsy, being
applied by way of Unction upon the Nerves, and principally all along the
Backbone. It is a singular Remedy also against the tremblings and quiverings
of Agues.

Oleum Scorpionum Simplex. Simple Oil of Scorpions.. Olei Amygdalarum amararum,
lb iij.. Oil of bitter Almonds, lb iij. Scorpiones vivos, No. Lx.
Live-Scorpions, No. Lx.

Put the Oil of Almonds into a glazed Earthen-pot with a close mouth, and then
set the Pot in a boiling Mary's Bath; and when the oil is very hot, plunge into
it sixty the fairest and most vigorous live-Scorpions that can be got, and
adding thereto eight ounces of good Wine, and having stopped the pot, let it boil
till the moisture be almost consumed: then strain and press the Scorpions very
well; and after you have separated the Oil from the Feces, put it up for use.

It is a hard matter rightly to prepare Oil of Scorpions but near those places
where the Scorpions breed, because they cannot be carried far, but the most of
them will die by the way; and therefore it is better to entrust some faithful
friend to make it upon the place, then to employ decayed and languishing
Scorpions, or such as died by the way, which besides the diminution of their
virtue, may chance to be putrifi'd. In the mean time, I do not find that the
Precepts of the Ancients for the preparation of this Oil had much of judgment
in them, who direct a Maceration of the Scorpions in the Oil during the
Dog Days, and then to strain and press the Oil: For it is impossible that the
Sun should heat the Oil in such sort, as to enable it to penetrate the
Scorpions, which are covered with a scaly hard skin, especially in our Climate;
where though the Sun were able to heat the oil to such a degree as to wake it
penetrate the Scorpions, it could not be able to consume the viscous moisture
which is in their bodies, which coming to putrify, alters the good qualities
of the Animals, and causes the Oil to stink insupportably; which being
considered, this Preparation must certainly be adjudg'd the best in all
respects.

Oil of Scorpions is esteemed against detention of Urine: some Authors believe
it able to dissolve the Stone in the Kidneys, as also in the Bladder, being
applied outwardly, or injected into the Bladder. It is made use of with success
against the stinging of Scorpions; it is also very good against the Plague and
Poison, not only by outward anointing, but taken inwardly from half a dram to
two drams.

Oleum Scorpionum compositum. Compound Oil of Scorpions.. Olei veteris, lb vj..
Old Oil, lb vj. Foliorum Hyperici recentium, M. iiij. Fresh Leaves of Saint-
John's wort, M. iiij. Summitatum Chamaedryos, Tops of Germander, Calaminthi,
Calaminth, Cardui Benedicti, an. M. j. Carduus Benedictus, an. M. j.

Gather the Saint-John's-wort, Germander, Calamint, and Carduus-Benedictus
prescribed, and having bruised them in a Marble-Mortar, put them into a
strait-mouth'd glazed Earthen-pot, and pour upon them six Pints of Oil of two
or three years old, well depurated. Stop the Pot, and expose it to the Sun for
twelve days; and after that set it in Balneo Mariae lukewarm for three days;
then let it boil for an hour, and having strained and pressed out the whole,

Tunc Then. Florum Hyperici Recentium rejectis stipitibus contusorum, M. vj..
Flowers of Saint-John's-wort, fresh and cleans'd from their Stalks. M. vj.

Bruise them in a Marble-Mortar, put them in the Pot, and pour upon them the
pressed oil of the first infusion; and having well-stopp'd the Pot, expose it
to the Sun for twelve days; at the end whereof, having kept the Pot three days
in the lukewarm Bath, and afterward in the boiling Bath for the space of an
hour, strain and forcibly express the whole as at first.

Expressioni eodem vase exceptae add To the Expression in the same Vessel add
Granorum Hyperici floribus spoliatorum, semine turgentium, contusorum, M. ix.
Of the round heads of Saint John's-wort, without the Flowers, full of seed, and
bruised, M. ix.

Repeat Insolation, Maceration, Coction, Straining, and Pressing as before:

Hisque peractis, Which done,. Foliorum Scordii recentis, M. j ss.. Leaves of
Water-Germander, M. j ss. Calaminthae, Calamint, Cardui Benedicti, Blessed
Thistle, Verbeniae, Vervain, Dictamni Cretici, and Tops of Cretan Dittany, and
Comarum Centaurii minoris, an. M. ss. Lesser Centaury, an. M. ss. Radicum
Zedoariae, Roots of Zedoary, Dictamni albi, White Dittany, Gentianae, Gentian,
Tormentillae, Tormentil, Aristolochiae Rotundae, an. iij. Round Birthwort, an.
iij.

Bruise them all, put them into the Pot with the oil pressed forth, stop the
Pot and keep it three days in the lukewarm Bath; afterward let it boil an
hour, and strain and press forth the Ingredients.

Tunc, Then, R. Scorpiones trecentos diebus Canicularibus captos. R. Three
hundred Scorpions taken in the Dog Days.

Put them in the Pot that served for the other Infusions, and set it upon very
hot Embers, often stirring the Scorpions, and stirring them one upon another,
till the Scorpions begin to sweat and be angry, then pour upon them the last
Expression, and having stopped the Pot, keep it 24 Hours in the lukewarm Bath;
and afterward having let it boil about an hour, strain and strongly press the
Scorpions; then throw them away, and keep the Oil.

Tandem, Lastly, R. Cinnamomi Electi, ix. R. Select Cinnamon, ix. Styracis
Calamitae, Calamite-Storax, Benzoyni, an. vj. Benjamin, an. vj. Baccarum
Juniperi, Juniper Berries, Santali Citrini, Yellow Saunders, Theriacae,
Treacle, Mithridatii, an. ss. Mithridate, an. ss. Rhabarbari, Rhubarb, Myrrhae
Electae, Select Myrrh, Aloes Succotrinae, an. iij. Aloes Succotrine, an. iij.
Nardi Indicae, Indian Nard, Nigellae Romanae, an. ij. Roman Fennel-flower, an.
ij. Junci Odorati, Camels-hay, Cyperi, Cyperus, Croci, an. j ss. Saffron, an. j
ss.

Beat all these together, except the Treacle and Mithridate, and put them into
the Pot with the Treacle and Mithridate, and the Expression of the oil; then
stop the Pot, and keep it four and twenty hours in Balneo Mariae lukewarm;
after that, cause the Bath to boil for about half an hour, and then strain and
press the whole violently through a strong close-woven linen-cloth; and having
separated the oil from the feces, keep it in a Bottle close-stopp'd.

The Quantities of the Ingredients that compound this oil, are very like to
those in the Receipt which Matthiolus has left us. The greatest alteration is
in the oil, which is here with great reason augmented to half as much again.
For besides that it is impossible that three pints of oil should imbibe and
retain the Virtues of so many Ingredients, the greatest part of the oil would
be wasted in so many re-iterated strainings and expressions: and it is well if
after all is done, you find five pints of the six here prescribed. You shall
find also the times and number of the Infusions lessened; and it had not been
amiss to have taken away more, considering the various parts of the Hypericon,
which are to be used; which being not to be gathered, but at several times,
force us to prolong the Infusions, and to stay till the Dog Days, which is the
time appointed to take the Scorpions. As to the Treacle and Mithridate, which
Matthiolus would have left in the oil after all the other Operations are ended,
I say, that besides that they are able to communicate their virtue to the oil
without leaving it in the substance, certain it is that they would lie like Mud
at the bottom of the oil, without any addition to the virtue of the oil;
whereas according to this Method the oil will be pure and sightly, and
altogether as effectual. It is also very proper to reserve all the Aromatics
till the last Infusion, and give them less heat, to avoid the dissipation of
their principal volatile parts. Nor is there any need of Wine, in regard the
Hypericon and other Plants afford all that moisture which is requisite, for all
the Insolations, Macerations, and Coctions prescribed; besides that this
moisture is also augmented by that of the Scorpions, which afford enough not
only for their boiling, but also to hinder the dissipation of the Sulphury
parts of the Aromatics.

This oil being applied to the Arteries of the Temples, the Wrists, the Feet,
the Nostrils, the Region of the Heart, and the Pit of the Stomach, by often
anointing, every three hours, and taken inwardly twice a day, from half a
scruple to half a dram, is highly commended against all sorts of Poisons and
Venoms, especially those that are not corrosive; against the bitings of Vipers
and Asps, and all sorts of venomous Animals; to preserve from and cure the
Pestilence. It is also successfully made use of against the Smallpox, the
Meazles, and in all Epidemic Diseases: As also against the Epilepsie, the
Palsy, and most part of the Infirmities of the Brain. But particularly against
Worms, and against the Poison of Wolfs-bane, and other Aconites.

Oleum Vulpinum. Oil of Foxes., Vulpem adultam, pelle exutam, exenteratam, and
in parts dissectam,. A young-grown sat Fox, flayed, disimbowell'd, and cut
into pieces, Salis communis, iiij. Common Salt, iiij. Aquae Fontanae, q. s. ad
Vulpis coctionem. Fountain Water, as much as will serve to boil the Fox.

Boil the pieces in an Earthen-pot glazed within, and covered, over a gentle
fire, till the flesh come from the bones; strain the broth, and throw away the
squeezed flesh of the Fox.

Tunc Then. Summitatum Thymi, and. Tops of Thyme, and Anethi recentium, an. M
ij. Dill fresh gathered, M ij. Salviae, Sage, Rorismarini, and Rosemary, and
Chamaepityos, an. M j. Ground Pine, an. M j. Olei communis, lb iiij. Common
Oil, lb iiij.

Return the Broth into the Pot; and having put in the Herbs, and the Oil
prescribed, cover the Pot very close; and after you have let it stand 24 hours
in the lukewarm Bath, make the Bath boil for two hours together; then having
strained and strongly pressed out the whole substance, and separated the Oil
from the Feces, put it up for your use.

Though the Ancients in the preparation of this Oil, boiled the Fox in Oil,
adding water and salt requisite; yet the Method of boiling the Fox first in
water and salt, is in my opinion much better, as well to prevent the alteration
of the Oil by the fire by a long Coction, as for the more plentiful extraction
of the succulent Juice of the Fox, which dissolves more easily in salt without
oil, then if the oil were mingled with it. As for the Aromatic Herbs, their
virtue exhales far less, being sufficiently imparted to the oil by their
Infusion, and boiling in the oil and broth, then if you should have put them in
at the beginning to boil with the Fox, as the Ancients direct.

Oil of Fox powerfully digests and discusses cold humors that fall upon the
nervous and membranous parts. It is proper against all cold infirmities of the
Joints, against Rheumatismes, Sciatica's, and cold Gouts. It may be applied hot
upon the parts alone, or mixed with other Unguents, or proper oils.

Oleum Viperinum. Oil of Vipers.. Viperas viventes magnas pingues and vividas,
No xij.. Live Vipers, large, fat, and vigorous, No. xij. Olei communis
purissimi, lb ij. Pure common Oil, lb ij. Vini Albi generosi, ij. Strong
White Wind, ij.

Pour the oil into a glazed Earthen-pot with a narrow mouth, and let it boil in
a hot Bath till you cannot endure your finger in it; then plunge the Vipers,
one after another, into the oil: when they are stifled, pour in the Wine
prescribed, cover the Pot, and set it a-boiling, till the moisture of the
Vipers be almost consumed; then having strained and strongly pressed forth the
whole, and separated the oil from the feces, keep it for use.

Oil of Vipers is principally commended against the deformities of the skin, as
Tetters, Scurf, and Leprous Ulcers. It is also highly esteemed against those
Ulcers which are caused by the Venereal Poison. The use of it is External, used
alone, or in Liniments, or in Pomatums. It is also recommended to assuage the
pain of the Emrods, and to facilitate the delivery of Women, the whole Region
of the Belly being anointed therewith.

Oil of Serpents may be prepared after the same method, proportionating the Oil
to their largeness and thickness; and you may make use of it for the same
purposes, though you cannot expect the same effects as from Oil of Vipers.

Oleum Lacertarum. Oil of Lizards.. Olei expressi Nucum jnglandium depurati, lb
iij.. Pressed Oil of Wallnuts depurated, lb iij. Vini Albi, iij. White Wind,
iij.

Put them into a glazed Earthen-Pot with a narrow mouth, set it in Balneo
Mariae, and boil the Ingredients till you cannot endure the heat with your
Finger.

Tunc Then Accipe Lacertas, viventes, virides, and vividas, No xij. vel xv. vel
xx. pro ratione magnitudinis. Take live, green, vigorous Lizards No xij. or xv.
or xx. as they are in bigness.

Suffocate them in the scalding Oil, and having well-stopp'd the Pot, boil them
to the consumption of their moisture, then strain and press them, and reserve
the pure oil.

It Is impossible to limit the number of Lizards, by reason some are bigger some
less; and therefore it is left to the judgment of the Artist to take no more
than will suffice for the oil. But take heed of the Directions of the Ancients
in the ^^mposition of their oil, as well as of those of Vipers and Serpents,
who after they (...) stifled these Animals in the oil exposed them to the Sun.
For they presently putrify, and infect the oil with an insupportable stink, so
far they are from communicating any virtue to it: which is prevented this way.

Oil of Lizards has been recommended from time to time to make the Hair grow.
It is a specific to cure the descent of the Intestines or Burstness. To which
purpose, first put up the Bowel in its place, and anoint the part with this oil
warmed: Then laying upon it the Pannicle that invelops the Intestines of any
Animal whatever, moisten it with this oil, and strew it over with some
astringent powder, binding on a good Pillow to keep the Bowel tite. This passes
current for a certain Remedy, the Trial whereof can do no hurt.

Oleum Myrrhae per deliquium. Oil of Myrrh by draining.. Ova Recentia No xij.
vel quantum libuerit.. New-laid Eggs No xij. or what you please.

Harden the Eggs in boiling-Water, take off the Shells, and slit the Eggs full
in the middle from one end to the other; then put into the Concavities of the
Whites powder of Myrrh finely pulverized; then join both pieces together, and
having bound them lightly together with a string, hang them up in a Cellar, or
a cool place, with a Vessel under them, for the liquor to drop into them, which
will be a dissolution of a good part of the Myrrh in the watery part of the
white of the Eggs. Pour this Liquor into a little Glass-Cucurbit, and having
placed it in a Balneo Mariae lukewarm, evaporate about a fourth part, which is
only the superfluous moisture, that would have putrifi'd the oily Liquor, by
any long continuance with it.

Oil of Myrrh is recommended against all deformities of the Skin. It is used
with advantage to take away blemishes and scars in the Face; as also to cure
the Itch, Tetters, and Ulcers. It is only for external uses, either alone, or
mixed with Pomatums and vulnerary Injections.

Both the old and new Dispensatories are crammed with Receipts of several other
Oils, highly commended by the Inventer, but I thought it not convenient to
swell this Pharmacopoea with any more to little purpose.

CHAP. III. Of Balsomes.
THe great Affinity that Balsoms have with Oils, is the reason that I thought
it requisite to treat of their preparations in the next place. Balsoms are
either Natural, or Artificial: Those which are Natural I pass over, as having
no need of preparation. Artificial Balsoms are compound Remedies, most commonly
externally applied, some of which are of a consistence more solid then that of
ordinary Ointments, and are prepared principally for their good odor, and to
recreate and fortify the Noble parts: Others are more liquid, of a consistence
between Oils and Liniments, the principal use whereof is for wounds, though
they are prepared for the most part of diseases, for which Liniments and
Ointments are prepared.

There are also distilled Balsoms composed of several Aromatics, and diverse
distilled Oils; but these are rather Chemical then Galenical, and rather for
inward then outward application; and it would be to little purpose to insert
preparations in this Pharmacopoea, seldom used, which may be found in a great
number of Dispensatories.

Pressed Oil of Nutmegs, by reason of its solidity, when it is grown thick, is
the most usual Basis of all odoriferous Balsoms, to stop the fluidity of the
distilled Oils which compose them, and to prevent the Balsom from running about
the Pockets of those that carry them. But in Balsoms where odor is not minded
so much as the saving of expense, sometimes white Wax is used, and sometimes
Lambs or Kids fat; sometimes Deer's or Veal-Marrow, and sometimes Manna in
Tears. And because it is sometimes desired that these substances should be
altogether void of scent, to the end that not being able to impart of
themselves, they may be fit to receive the odours of distilled oils, or other
Aromatic substances, we make use of Spirit of Wine tartariz'd, which we pour
upon the oil of Nutmegs, or upon the Wax, Fats or Marrows, about a
fingers-breadth above the Matters, and after three days digestion, draw off the
Spirit of Wine with a gentle fire, by that means finding a white matter at the
bottom void of scent.

Balsamum Apoplecticum. Apoplectic Balsom.. Olei Nucis Moschatae expressi, j..
Press oil of Nutmegs, j. Resina Styracis, ij. Rosin of Storax, ij. Balsami
Indici, Indian-Balsom, Ambregrisiae, an. j ss. Ambergrise, an. j ss. Zibethi
Very, iiij. True Civet, iiij. Moschi Orientalis, j. Oriental Musk, j. Olei
succini rectificati, ss. Rectified oil of Amber, ss. Olei Cinnamomi
stillatitii, j. Distilled oil of Cinnamon, j. Oleorum stillatitiorum
Lavendulae, Distilled oils of Lavender, Majoranae, Marjoram, Rutae, Rue,
Caryophyllorum, an. gr. xv. Cloves, an. gr. xv. Citri, Citron, Arantiorum, and
Oranges, and Ligni Rhodii, an. ss. Lignum Rhodium, an. ss. Gagatis, gr. vj.
Agate, gr. vj.

Having finely powdered the Musk and Ambergrise in a little Brass-Mortar,
mixing therewith the least drop of one of the distilled oils, melt the oil of
Nutmegs in a Silver-spoon over a very soft fire, and when it is melted, and
half cool again, incorporate with it the Rosine of Storax, the Balsom of Peru,
the Musk and Ambergrise; then add the Civet, and the distilled oils, and having
well mixed them, the Balsom is made.

They who have a warm hand, and can have the patience, may mix all the
Ingredients in the palm of their hands, first melting the oil of Nutmegs by
degrees, by tempering it, and pressing it with a Silver-Spatula against the
palm of the hand; then mixing first the Storax and Balsom, afterward the Musk,
Ambergrise, and Civet, and lastly, the distilled Oils; by this means the Balsom
will be less in danger to lose its subtle parts, then by making use of the fire.

This Balsom bears the Name of Apoplectick, by reason it is a great Remedy
against Apoplexies, and all diseases of the Brain, which it powerfully
fortifies, together with all the Noble parts. It is also highly recommended for
its excellent Odor, as being not only delightful, but a great preservative
against ill smells and pestilential Air. It operates in a small quantity, never
carrying above half a grain at a time, when only for the odours sake: But
several times as much may be used in diseases of the Brain, to anoint the
Temples, and Sutures of the head, or to put into the Ears with a little Musk'd
Cotton.

Balsamum aliud Apoplecticum. Another Apoplectic Balsom.. Olei Nucis Moschatae
expressi, and. Pressed oil of Nutmegs, and Carae Albae, an. j. White Wax, an.
j. Oleorum Rorismarini, Oils of Rosemary, Salviae, Sage, Lavendulae, Lavender,
Succini, Amber, Rutae, Rue, Majoranae, Marjoram, Gagatis, Jet, Caryophyllorum,
an. j. Cloves, an. j. Balsami Peruviani, ij. Balsom of Peru, ij.

This Balsom is to be prepared like the former, the first way; though it might
be done the second, not making above the eighth part at a time.

This Balsom has not so pleasing a scent as the former, but it is of great
virtue against all diseases of the Head, and against Pestilential Air. It is
also good to suppress the vapors of the Matrix.

Balsamum Hypnoticum. A Balsom to provoke Sleep.. Olei Nucis Moschatae
expressi, and. Pressed oil of Nutmegs, and Vnguenti Populei, an. j. Unguentum
Populeum, an. j. Medull^ Cervinae, Deer's Marrow, Olei Rosati, and Oil of
Roses, and Nymphaaeae, an. iij. Water-Lilleys, an. iij. Oleorum expressorum
seminis Hyoscyami, and Pressed oils of Henbane-seed, and Papaveris Albi,
White-Poppies, Extracti Opii, and Extract of Opium, and Croci, an. ij. Saffron,
an. ij. Ambraegrisiae, Ambergrise, Moschi, Musk, Zibethi, and Civet, Olei
stillatitii Ligni-Rhodii, an. gr. viij. Distilled oil of Lignum-Rhodium, an.
gr. viij.

Moisten the Extracts of Opium and Saffron with never so little good Spirit of
Wine, then incorporate them by degrees over a gentle fire with the oil of
Nutmegs, Deers Marrow, and Poplar ointment; after that, add the oils, and
lastly the Ambergrise, pulverized and incorporated with the Civet. This Balsom
was invented gently to provoke Sleep, and to assuage the pains of the Head that
accompany continual Fevers, and sometimes intermitting: To which purpose, put
up a small quantity into the Nostrils, or into the Ears, you may also anoint
the Temples and Wrists, and rub the Soles of the Feet: It may be also used
among Medicaments for Frontals, dry or moist, rubbing the outside of the
Frontal with it, which ought to be applied to the Forehead, and ought to
contain the Ingredients of the Frontal.

Balsamum Stomachicum. A Balsom for the Stomach.. Olei Nucis Moschatae
expressi, ij.. Pressed oil of Nutmegs, ij. Absinthii Vulgaris, Oils of common
Wormwood, Mastichini, Mastich, Nardini, and Nard, and Cerae Albae, an. vj.
White Wax, an. vj. Oleorum Stillatitiorum Absinthii, Distilled Oils of
Wormwood, Mentae Crispae, Crisped Mint, Cinnamomi, Cinnamon, Caryophyllorum,
Cloves, Thymi, and Thyme, and Macis, an. j. Mace, an. j.

The preparation of this Balsom requires no more, then to melt the white Wax
and the Oil of Nutmegs over a very gentle fire, and to incorporate the Oils
prescribed, when they are off from the fire.

It is very proper to heat and fortify the Stomach, so that it may be
advantageously made use of to stay Vomiting, help Digestion, create an
Appetite, assuage pains of the Stomach, Colics, and Dysenteric Gripes: It is
also very effectual in cold distempers of the Brain and Nerves, the parts being
anointed therewith.

Balsamum Uterinum. A Balsom for the Womb.. Sevi Hircini, ij.. Goats Tallow,
ij. Lachrymarum Galbani, and Tears of Galbanum, and Assae-faetidae,
Assa-faetida, Pinguedinis in Cystide Castoreorum contentae, an. j ss. The fat
contained in the Vesicle of the Castors, an. j ss. Oleorum Stillatitiorum
succini, Oils distilled of Amber, Gagatis, Jet, Rutae, and Rue, and Subinae,
an. ij. Savine, an. ij.

Heat a Brass-Mortar to a moderate degree of heat, and having incorporated them
with the unctuous part of the Castor, and the distilled oils, melt the Goats
Tallow in a small Drying Pan, and when it is half cold, mix all together.

This Balsom applied hot to the hollow pit of the Navel, covering the part at
the same time with the half of a Wall-nut-shell, is an excellent Remedy against
the vapors of the Matrix, the pains whereof it asswages. You may also put up
never so little into the Nostrils, and anoint the outside of the throat
therewith. It is also good to provoke the Menstruums.

Balsamum pro puerulis dentientibus. A Balsom for Children breeding Teeth..
Butyri Mayalis non saliti, iij.. May-Butter without any Salt, iij. Pinguedinis
Gallinae, and Hen's fat, and Anatis, an. ij. Duck's fat, an. ij. Succi
Cancrorum fluviatilium contusorum cum aqua florum Cyani extracti, and Juice of
River-crabs bruised, extracted with water of Blew-bottle flowers, and
Mucilaginis Radicis Althaae, an. ij. Muscilage of the Root of Althea, an. ij.

Beat two or three River-crabs in a Marble-Mortar with a wooden-Pestle, and
having moistened them with a little Blew-bottle water, press out two ounces of
the Juice: Prepare also two ounces of Muscilage of Marshmallow-roots, put them
together with the May-Butter, Hens and Ducks Grease, into a glazed Earthen-pot,
and boil them over a gentle fire, to the consumption of half the moisture; then
strain them, and add,

Sacchari Candi subtiliter pulverat. iiij. Sugar Candy finely powdered, iiij.
Vitellum unum Ovi, One Yolk of an Egg, Moschi, and Musk, and Ambraegrisiae, an.
gr. vj. Ambergrise, an. gr. vj.

Incorporate them well together, and the Balsom is made.

This Balsom has been experimented for its Excellency, to soften the Gums of
Infants, whose Teeth are ready to cut: Their Nurses must be careful to anoint
them often. The use of it is no way inconvenient, for being pleasing to the
taste, it can do no harm, though it be swallowed.

Balsamum Egregium pro Manibus. An Incomparable Balsom for the Hands.. Saponis
Veneti ex succo Limonum diluti, lb ss.. Venice-Sope dissolved in Juice of
Lemons, lb ss. Mellis Virginii albi, ij; White Virgin-Honey, ij. Talci Veneti,
Venetian-Talk, Sacchari-Candi, and Sugar Candy, and Radicis Ireos subtiliter
pulveratorum, an. ss. Root of Ireos, or Orrice, purely powdered, an. ss. Salis
Tartari, Salt of Tartar, Boracis, and Borax, and Spermatis Cete recentis, an.
ij. Sperma-Cete, an. ij. Balsami Peruviani, j. Peruvian-Balsom, an. j. Olei
Ligni-Rhodii, Oil of Lignum-Rhodium, Cinnamomi, Cinnamon, Caryophillorum, an.
ss. Cloves, an. ss. Moschi Orientalis, Oriental Musk, Ambraegrisiae, an. gr.
xij. Ambergrise, gr. xij.

Cut the Soap small, and put it into a glazed Earthen-pot, and dissolve it over
a gentle fire in two ounces of Juice of Lemons; then add the Honey, the
Sperma-Cete next, with the Balsom: then take the Pot off the fire, and by
degrees incorporate the Powders; and lastly, the Musk, Ambergrise, and
distilled oils.

The Talk is easily powdered, being first laid before a quick fire for a
quarter of an hour, and then beaten in a Mortar heated with a hot Pestle, and
then sifted.

This Balsom whitens, cleanses, and smooths the Skin, beyond any paste or
Pomatum that can be prepared. It Is enough to rub the hands with it; nor is
there any need of washing afterward.

Balsamum Sulphuris commune. Common Balsom of Sulphur.. Olei nucum juglandium
expressi, lb ss.. Pressed oil of Wall-nuts, lb ss. Florum Sulphuris, j. Flowers
of Sulphur, j. Salis Tartari, ij. Salt of Tartar, ij. Vini Albi, ij.
White Wind, ij.

Put the Flowers of Sulphur, and the Salt of Tartar, into a small
glass-Cucurbit, and pour upon them the Oil, and the White Wind: mix them well
together, and set the Cucurbit over a gentle fire of Digestion for eight hours,
stirring the Ingredients from time to time; then augment the fire, and boil the
Balsom till the moisture be almost consumed. Take the Cucurbit from the fire,
and when the Cucurbit is cold, separate the Balsom by Inclination from the
Faeces, and keep it in a Glass-bottle strong, and close stopped.

The Salt of Tartar is added to assist the dissolution of the Flowers of
Sulphur, and to heighten the red color of the Balsom.

This Balsom of Sulphur is highly commended to digest, and discuss crude
matters gathered together in any part of the body. It is only used externally,
and it is the Basis of Emplastrum Diasulphuris.

Some make use of Oils of Sweet-Almonds, white Poppy-seeds, or Turpentine,
instead of Oil of Wall-nuts.

Others also that make it a Compound Balsom, add Myrrh, Aloes, Saffron, and
several other Ingredients; which since there is no necessity of them, I omit
for brevities sake.

Balsamum Sulphuris Anisatum. Balsom of Sulphur with Anniseed.. Florum
Sulphuris, j.. Flowers of Sulphur, j. Olei seminis Anisi expressi, vj. Pressed
Oil of Anniseed, vj.

Put them into a Mattress, stop it exactly, and set it in digestion over a
moderate fire, till the Flowers of Sulphur be almost quite dissolved in the
Oil. Take off the Mattress; and when the Ingredients are cool, separate the
Balsom by inclination from the Feces, and put it up in a Bottle well stopped.

The volatility of the Oil of Annise requires that the Mattress should be well
stopped; but you must be careful, in the time of digestion, to shake the
substances often to hasten the dissolution of the Flowers.

Distilled Oil of Anniseed would do better; but being more volatile, and
subject to dissipation, and it being impossible to shut the Mattress so close,
but that the Balsom would be wasted in quantity, we are forced to use the other.

Some believe this Balsom little inferior to natural Balsom, because it
moderately heats, and dries, and preserves from Corruption. It is highly
recommended in infirmities of the Breast, chiefly against Coughs, Asthma's,
Pleurisies, and Ulcers of the Lungs: It is very good against weaknesses and
indigestion of the Stomach, it restores the Appetite, dissipates Wind. It is
highly recommended also against the Pestilence, and all Epidemic Diseases,
Venereal Distempers, continual and remitting Fevers. It is taken inwardly in
convenient Liquors, from three to ten or twelve drops. For infirmities of the
Stomach, and Colics, you may anoint the Stomach and Navel therewith.

Balsamum Arcaei. Arceus' s Balsom.. Sevi Hircini, lb ij.. Goats Grease, lb ij.
Terebinthinae Venetae, and Venice-Turpentine, and Gummi Elemmi, an. lb i ss.
Gum Elemmi, an. lb i ss. Axungiae Porci, lb j. Hogs fat, lb j.

Melt the Gum over a very gentle fire, cut before into small pieces; then add
the Turpentine, the Goats Tallow, and Hogs Grease; and when they are all well
dissolved, strain them through a new Cloth, to separate the filth of the Gum,
if there be any: When it is cold, put it up for use.

. Arceus's Balsom is very much esteemed and used to incarnate and consolidate
all sorts of Wounds and Ulcers; as also for Fractures and Dislocations of the
Bones, and to heal Contusions, and hurts of the Nerves. This Balsom is very
much used, though the Receipt be in few Dispensatories.

Balsamum Hispanicum. The Spanish Balsom.. Frumenti integri,. Whole Wheat,
Radicum Valerianae, and Roots of Valerian, and Cardui Benedicti contusarum, an.
j. Blessed-thistle bruised, an. j. Vini Albi, lb j. White Wind, lb j.

Put them into a narrow-mouthed glazed Earthen-pot, and set it, being close
stopped, 24 hours in Maceration; then adding six ounces of Oil of S. John's Wort,
boil them in a hot Balneum Mariae, to the consumption of the Wine, then strain
and press out the whole.

Postea Afterward. Thuris electi, subtiliter pulverati, ij.. Select
Frankincense finely pulverized, ij. Terebinth. Venet. viij. Venice-Turpentine,
viij.

Melt them together, by degrees, over a gentle fire, and mix them with the
aforesaid Oil; and so the Balsom is made.

Fabricius ab Aquapendente made great use of this Balsom, and with good
success; so that some have made him the Author of it. It is wonderfully
esteemed for the cure of all sorts of Wounds, as also which happen to the
nervous parts, which some affirm it will cure in four and twenty hours,
observing the following directions. First, wash the wound with good cold
White Wind, then anoint the wound with this Balsom hot; if the wound be deep,
syringe it with the hot Balsom, and bind the sides of the wound with Ligatures,
Swaths and Bolsters, anointing at the same time the sides, and round about the
wound with the Balsom; then lay upon it a Bolster steeped in strong Wine, and
pressed out again, and upon the top of that another dry one.

Balsamum viride Metensium. The green Balsom of Metz.. Olei seminis Lini
expressi, and. Oils of Line-seed pressed, and Olivarum, an. lb j. Of Olives,
an. lb j. Laurini, j. Laurel-Oyl, j. Terebinthinae Venetae, ij.
Venice-Turpentine, ij.

Melt them together over a very gentle fire in a Drying Pan; when they are
cold, mix therewith by degrees,

Olei stillatitii baccarum Juniperi, ss. Distilled Oil of Juniper Berries, ss.
Viridis aeris subtiliter pulverat. iij. Verdigrise finely powdered, iij. Aloes
Succotrinae subtiliter pulveratae, ij. Aloes-Succotrine finely powdered, ij.
Vitrioli Albi, j ss. White-Vitriol, j ss. Olei Caryophyllorum, j. Oil of
Cloves, j.

Mix the Powders first, and then add the distilled Oils; and when the whole is
well incorporated, the Balsom is made.

Schroderus sets down this Balsom in his Book, saying, that Mounsieur du Clos,
a Physician of Metz, imparted it to him for an Excellent Receipt, as indeed it
is, for all sorts of wounds, either by Sword or Bullet, being first washed with
warm Wine, and then anointed with this Ointment also warm, laying over all the
Styptic Plaster which I shall hereafter describe. It cleanses, Incarnates and
Cicatrizes: It is also singular against the cure of venomous Beasts, and
fistulous and malignant Ulcers.

Balsamum Samaritanum. The Samaritan Balsom.. Olei Communis,. Common Oil, Vini
generosi, an. Parts aequales. Strong Wine, an. Equal parts.

Boil them together over a very gentle fire in a glazed Earthen-pot, to the
consumption of the Wine.

This is the Balsom which the Samaritan in the Gospel is said to have made use
of; and though it be plain, it is not to be despised, being of excellent use to
consolidate slight and green wounds.

Balsamum Balsaminae, Balsom of the Balsom-Apple Plant.. Florum, Foliorum, and
fructunin Balsaminae, an. iiij.. Flowers, Leaves and Fruit of the Balsom-Apple
Plant, an. iiij. Radicum Consolidi majoris, Roots of larger Consound,
Aristolochiae Rotundae, Round Birth-wort, Valerianae majoris, an. ij. The
bigger Valerian, an. ij. Visci in folliculis Vlmi reperti, The Slime found in
the little Bladders of the Elm-leaves, Succi Cancrorum fluviatilium, Juice of
River-Crabs, Foliorum Pervincae, Leaves of Perwincle, Saniculae, Sanicle,
Summitatum floridarum Hyperici, and Flowry-tops of S. John's Wort, and Galei
lutei, an. j ss. Yellow Ladies Bed-straw, an. j ss. Olei Olivarum, lb iiij.
Sallet-oyl, lb iiij.

Bruise those Ingredients which are to be bruised in a Mortar, and put them in
a Glass-vessel well stopped; set the Pot twelve days in the Summer-Sun, then boil
the Ingredients in a hot Bath, to the Consumption of the moisture; after that,
strain and press the whole; and having separated the Oil from the Faeces,
incorporate with it half a pint of distilled Oil of Gum-Sandarach.

This Balsom must be kept in a Glass-bottle very close stopped; it is commended
for the cure of all sorts of wounds, especially those of the nervous parts. It
is very good to cure Burns: It appeases the pains of the Emrods, reunites and
consolidates the clefts of the Breasts, especially if you add never so little
Camphire. It takes away scars from the Skin, being mixed with Oil of Eggs.

Balsamum dolorem levans. A Balsom easing Pain.. Foliorum Vrticae urentis,.
Leaves of the Burning-nettle, Plantaginis, Plantain, Mercurialis, and Mercury,
and Majoranae, an. M iij. Marjoram, an. M iij. Olei nucis Juglandis expressi,
lb x. Pressed Oil of Nutmegs, lb x. Vini-Albi, lb ij. White Wind, lb ij.

Beat the Herbs in a Marble-Mortar, and put them with the Oil and Wine into a
narrow-mouthed glazed Earthen-pot; cover the Pot, and set it upon the hot
Embers for twenty four hours; then cause the Ingredients to boil gently, till
the Wine be almost consumed; then strain and press the whole, and having
separated the Balsom from the Faeces, put it up for use.

This Balsom is particularly recommended to appease pains in the Joints, as
well those that proceed from any wound, sting, or bruise, or from the falling
of any sharp humor upon any part: It gives present ease by anointing the part,
especially if the part be opened.

CHAP. IV. Of Embalmings of Dead Bodies.
THe Corruption and Stench which arises from the Coffins of Princes, and Great
Personages, though Embalmed after their Decease, has given me occasion to
believe, that such accidents could not proceed, but either from the
covetousness or ignorance of those that undertake the Embalming: And therefore
I have here made bold to impart to public view, that method which I have
observed in Embalming the Bodies of several considerable Persons of both Sexes,
and of some Princes also; to the end, that they who have care of their
Reputation, and will spare nothing to acquit themselves with an Honesty
becoming their Employment may find success.

It is not necessary that I should here dilate upon the manner of Embalming
Bodies, which the Egyptians and other Nations made use of heretofore, and of
which many Authors have written; among the rest, Peter Belon, of the Country of
Main, in a Treatise entitled, De Medicato Funere; Printed at Paris in the Year
1553. For though we meet with Remarkable Evidences of the Art of the Ancients
in this particular, yet we are ignorant both of the Ingredients and Quantities
which they made use of.

The Name of Mummy is given to Bodies Embalmed with Aromatic Drugs, or else to
such as are covered and dried in the Sands of Lybia by the heat of the Sun;
sometimes also to the Liquor, which flowing from the Coffins of great Princes
Embalmed, dries in the Sepulcher, and becomes as hard as the Embalmed Flesh.

The Corruption of Dead Bodies, proceeding from their superfluous moisture,
augmented by that of the Ambient Air, there is therefore great care required to
consume and suck up that superfluous moisture, and to prevent the Air from
entering in. Quicklime is very fit to consume the moisture of dead bodies, and
to hinder the penetration of the Air; but because it is apt to consume the soft
parts of the Flesh, and to leave only the Skeleton, it is not to be meddl'd
withal, but where there is an intention only to preserve the bones of the body.
Dead bodies also disimbowell'd, may be preserved in a strong Pickle, or in
Spirit of Wine well rectified, providing a fit Vessel that may be close stopped;
but because that is only for a time, and that more lasting means are required,
some persons perhaps may not think their time ill spent to find them here.

The Aim which I have always had to preserve the external shape of the dead
body, especially of the Face, and that to Perpetuity, has ever kept me from
making use of Oak, Bark, Ashes, or Lime, which they too frequently make use of,
that prefer their Gain before their Reputation. For though that Bark-dust, dry
enough of it self, seem very proper to suck up superfluous moisture, it is
unable to communicate of it self any good quality to the dead body wherein it
is put, but is rather subject to the putrefaction of the moisture which it has
sucked. As for Ashes, though the Salt which they contain is esteemed very fit
to preserve the dead bodies, yet there is not enough; so that it rather serves
to dissolve the fleshy and fat parts, then to hinder their corruption. I shall
therefore set down those ways, which by Reason and long Experience I have found
most proper, and which Mounsieur D'Aquin, his Majesty's Chief Physician,
desired me to impart to public view.

Though it might be expected that dead bodies might be preserved in a Coffin of
Lead, wrapped up in a Powder composed of equal parts of Myrrh, Aloes, and
Specific Salts, not sparing for Powder, nor good Spirit of Wine, and sodering
up exactly the Joyntures of the Coffin, as once I did for a Lady of Great
Quality, who so ordered it before her death; yet the most sure and certain way
is this.

Open the Scull behind, about the breadth of the palm of the hand, or
thereabouts; and having taken out the Brain, and filled and stuffed the Scull
with the Powder aftermention'd, clap on the piece again, and sow it fast.

Then make an Incision of the skin, and fatty part, from that part of the
Breast, where the Ribs meet below the Navel, and another Incision across, in
the same skin and fat part, about a foot and a half long, so as to lay open the
Region of the Liver, Spleen, and Stomach; and having separated the whole from
the Sternum with a Razor, on both sides in the Muscilaginous parts, and raised
the Sternum against the face of the body, take out the Tongue, the Eyes, the
Lungs, the Heart, the Liver, the Spleen, the Stomach, the Intestines, and all
the parts contained in the hollow of the body: Make also two or three Incisions
all along in each Arm, and each Leg, according as the body is more or less fat
and fleshy. Make also more and deep Incisions in the Buttocks and Thighs, and
from the Neck to the Buttocks in the Back, separating the skin and the fat
parts with a Razor; make also five or six in the Neck, and two in the soles of
each Foot, and the palms of each Hand: Some bodies are so fat and fleshy, that
you must be forced to pare off some part of the fat and flesh, and mingle them
with the Entrails, though there is no necessity for it, where Cost is allowed.

After you have well sucked up the blood and serosities with Spunges, bath and
wash the parts with good Spirit of Wine, and then rub them with good Spirit of
Salt: Then fill every hole and Cranny, all the spaces between the fat skin and
the flesh, the Mouth, the Throat, the Eye-holes, and Nostrils, with the
following Powder.

Pulvis ad implendas Cadaverum Cavitates. A Powder to fill the Concavities of
Dead Bodies.. Myrrha,. Myrrh, Aloes, lb xvj. Aloes, lb xvj. Salis Tartari, and
Salt of Tartar, Tamarisci, Tamarisk, Asphalti, Asphaltum, Summitatum siccarum
Absinthii, Dry tops of Wormwood, Scordii, Water-Germander, Centaurii minoris,
Lesser Centaury, Radicum siccarum Imperatoria, Dried Roots of Master-wort,
Gentianae, Gentian, Angelicae, Angelica, Carlinae, Carline-thistle,
Aristolochiae rotundae, an. lb iij. Round Birth-wort, an. lb iij. Cardamomi
Vulgaris, Vulgar Cardamom, Piperis Longi, Long Pepper, Zinziberis, an. lb iiij.
Ginger, an. lb iiij. Cinnamomi, Cinnamon, Caryophyllorum, Cloves, Labdani,
Labdanum, Acori very, an. lb ij. True Acorus, an. lb ij.

All this Powder will be but little enough if the body be large, and that you
Embalm all the Entrails; for you must not leave the least Cavity unsought, but
fill every corner, and every vacuity, as full as the skin will hold; then
sprinkle the Powder, with good Spirit of Wine, to the end it may imbody; and
having sowed up the skin where it was opened, anoint the whole body with
Peruvian Balsom, and strew as much Powder upon it, as will make a Crust about a
fingers-breadth thick.

Pulvis ad Cadavera Loricanda. A Powder to put up Dead Bodies.. Styracis,.
Storax, Benjamin. Benjamin, Ireos Florent. an. lb iiij. Florence-Orrice, an. lb
iiij. Summitatum Marjoranae, Tops of Marjoram, Florum Arantiorum, and Flowers
of Oranges, and Lavendulae, Lavender, Tacamahaccae odoratae, an. lb ij.
Odoriferous Tacamahacca, an. lb ij. Ligni Rhodii, Lignum-Rhodium, Acori very,
an. lb j. True Acorus, an. lb j. Labdani, Labdanum, Cassiae Caryophyllatae, an.
lb ss. Cassia perfumed with Cloves, lb ss.

Strew this Powder over the whole body, anointing it first with Balsom of Peru,
till it come to be about a finger thick; then wrapping the body up in a
Sear-cloth, and putting it up in a Leaden-Coffin, you may carry it as far as
you please, and preserve it to Eternity.

If the design be to keep the body for some time, or to show it for some Weeks
in a Bed of State with the face uncovered, the body apparelled, and with Gloves
and Shoes on, prepare a white Linen odoriferous Sear-cloth, which must be cut
into long Swathes, three or four fingers broad, with which the Arms, Legs and
Thighs must be swathed by themselves, and afterward the whole body, applying
the Swathes sloping upon the Powder; by this means you may cloth the body as
if it were living, comb out the hair, and keep the face covered, provided you
be careful to wash it often with Spirit of Wine well rectified, and to lay upon
it Linnen-cloaths dipped in the same Spirit, at such times as the Corpse is not
publicly exposed. You may also fill a Pillow fullo f the Aromatic Powder last
described, and put it under the head of the body, and lay other little Cushions
by the sides, and at the feet of the said body.

Tela Cerata Aromatica. An Aromatic Linen Sear-cloth.. Cerae Albae, lb vj..
White Wax, lb vj. Olei expressi nucis moschatae, Pressed Oil of Nutmegs,
Oleorum stillatitiorum Lavendulae, Distilled Oils of Lavender, Corticis
Arantiorum and Citri, an. ij. Orange and Citron-peels, an. ij.

Melt the Wax over a very gentle fire in a Tin-Bason, large above, and narrow
below; then having well mixed the Oils, dip therein a fine Linen Cloth equally
spun.

As for the Brains and Internal parts, you may Embalm them with the first
Powder. To which purpose, having washed the Intestines, and made long and deep
Incisions in the Heart, Lungs, Liver, Spleen and Kidneys, and made ready a
Leaden-Barrel, cover the bottom with a good quantity of the Powder; then range
the Intestines well filled with the Powder one by another, not sparing to fill
all the Concavities between them with the Powder, till the Barrel be quite
full: then soder up the Barrel exactly, by which means all those parts will
turn into a Mass, fit to be preserved as long as the Barrel it self. You may
also, if you are so desired, put the Heart in a Leaden box by it self.

Nor will the body be less preserved, if after it has lain in State as long as
is requisite, you rub the uncovered parts with Balsom of Peru; and then
strowing the Powder upon them, cover them up with the Sear-cloth, and so put
the body into a Coffin well soder'd.

CHAP. V. Of Ointments, Liniments, and Sear-cloths.
Ointments, Liniments, and Sear-cloths, are compound Medicaments, principally
appointed for Unctions and exterior applications upon diverse parts of the
body. Liniments, Unguents, and Sear-cloths, differ chiefly in their
consistency, of which Unguents keep the middlemost. Oils are the usual
Foundations of Ointments, Liniments, and Sear-cloths: To them are added Wax,
Greases, Tallows, diverse parts of Plants, Animals, and Minerals, as well for
the virtues which they afford them, as to give a consistence to the Oils, and
to compose the Remedies which by a long stay upon the place affected, may
communicate their virtue to it: Not but that Liniments and Ointments may be
composed of several sorts of Fats and Greases, without Oil or Wax, as among the
rest Pomatums are made, and sometimes without Oil, without Fat, or without Wax,
as Vnguentum Egyptiacum: But you shall meet with many more Ointments, of which
Oil is the chief Foundation, and which receive their consistence from Wax, then
which are made without either Oil or Wax. But a true Sear-cloth cannot be made
without Wax, as being that which gives it its Name.

The ordinary proportion of Oil and Wax in the Composition of Ointments, is
three ounces of Wax to twelve ounces of Oil; and if you are to mix any Powders,
you may put in from one ounce to two, and sometimes you may exceed the
proportion. In the Composition of Sear-cloths, four ounces of Wax are put to
twelve ounces of Oil; but for Liniments, two ounces of Wax is enough for twelve
ounces of Oil. But regard must be had to the Season, for in Summer you must put
in something more Wax then in Winter. And because that Ointments contain also
in them Rosins, Tallows, Suets, and Gums, which are partly put in the place of
Wax, the Artist must be very skilful in rightly proportioning and mixing the
Ingredients, that the consistence may be true, and sightly to the Eye; and
which is more then all, in governing his fire, according to the nature of the
Ointments: For all which things, observe the Following preparations.

Unguentum Rosatum. Ointment of Roses.. Axungiae Porci Masculi purgatae and
sapius lotae,. Barrow's-grease cleans'd, and often washed, Rosarum rubrarum
recentium contusarum, an. lb iiij. Fresh Red-roses bruised, an. lb iiij.

Put the Grease and the Rose-buds into a narrow-mouthed glazed Earthen-pot,
cover it well, and set it in a Bath, between lukewarm and boiling, for six
hours; then cause the Bath to boil for an hour, and having strained and
strongly pressed out the whole, mix with the strained Ointment,

Rosarum pallidarum recentium contusarum, lb iiij. Pale Roses newly blown,
fresh gathered, and bruised, lb iiij.

Stop the Pot again, keep it in a Bath between lukewarm and boiling-hot for
six hours, and after that let it boil a good long hour; then strain and press
out the whole again with a good strength: Separate the Oil from the Feces, and
put it up.

If you desire to give the color of the Roses to the Ointment, about a quarter
of an hour before you strain it the last time, throw in two ounces of the Roots
of Alcanet, or somewhat more, if you intend to height'n the color, and stir a
little in the Ointment: If you would keep the white color of the Ointment, and
the sweet scent of the Roses, make use of Damask-Roses, without any Alcanet.

Though the Receipts of Vnguentum Rosatum in the Dispensatories be all very
near the same with that which Mesue has left us, and that the Zealots of
Antiquity may keep to them, without erring in their Profession; yet we do not
find it to be much followed by the Apothecaries now adays, for every one
prepares this Ointment after their own method: some make use of Roses blown,
others only of the Blossoms; some make use of red, others pale Roses; some
prefer the white, others the Damask-Roses: Others put in the Roses whole,
others bruise them: others after they have mingled the Roses and Boars-grease
together, expose them to the Sun to macerate. But leaving every one to his own
judgment, I shall only add this, that the Receipt here set down is not
inferior to any, either for virtue, or good scent.

It is agreed, that Barrow's-grease is more firm, and to be preferred before
that of Sows. The Skins and Tunicles must be picked out, and the fat washed
with clean water, then melted in a glazed Earthen-pot, and strained from time
to time through a clean Linnencloth, in order to the preparation of the
Ointment.

You may, in imitation of the Ancients, add a sixth part of the weight of Oil
of Sweet-Almonds, if you would give it the consistence of a Liniment; but there
are few persons that had not rather that the ointment should have its true
solidity. You may also make use only of the red Roses; but certain it is, that
the pale Roses here prescribed, render the Ointment more odoriferous.

An Ointment of Roses may be also made without fire, as Pomatum's of Jasmin are
prepared. Take two Galley-pots, large and flat, pour into each of them melted
Barrow'sgrease well washed and prepared, as for ordinary ointment of Roses, so
that there may be left in the hollow of the Pots the thickness of a small
fingers breadth. Fill the vacuities of the two Pots with Damask-Rose leaves
gathered early in the morning, and newly blown; then covering the Pots one with
the other, set them in a Cup-board close shut, and keep them there till toward
Evening: then throwing away those Roses, put fresh in their places; and
covering the Pots, as before, leave them till next morning. Continue doing
thus, till you perceive the Grease to be sufficiently impregnated with the
scent of the Roses, and you shall have an Ointment very white, and very
odoriferous, which may bear the name of Pomatum of Roses, and must be kept in a
Glass or Galley-pot close stopped. In the same manner may be prepared Pomatums of
Violets, Gilloflowers, and all sorts of odoriferous Flowers.

Ointment of Roses is very much approved against all sorts of external
Inflammations, particularly Flegmons, Erysipela's, and Tetters; against the
pains of the Head, to provoke sleep gently, temper the heat of the Stomach,
Liver and Kidneys, appease the pains of the Emrods, to discuss heat in the
Face, and to cure Pimples and little Ulcers that happen therein; as also to
repress sharp serosities, to suppress inflammations in the Private Parts of Men
or Women, and to cure the heats and pimples that usually torment Children in
their Swadling-cloaths. Vnguentum Rosatum is also used for the Basis of
Ointments, and Pomatums for the Itch.

Unguentum Album, sive de Cerussa. White Ointment, or Ointment of White-Leud..
Olei Rosati, lb iij.. Oil of Roses, lb iii. Cerae Albae, ix. White Wax, ix.
Cerussae Venetae, lb j. Venetian-Ceruse, lb j. Camphorae, j ss. Camphire, j ss.

Make choice of very white Venetian Ceruse, weighty and brittle, and pulverize
it, by rubbing it upon the bottom of a Hair-sieve reverst, receiving the Powder
upon a paper underneath: then putting the Powder into an Earthen-Pipkin, large
enough, wash it several times in clean water often changed, stirring the Powder
with a wooden-Spatula, and pouring out the water by inclination, when the
Powder is settled at the bottom.

When the water grows insipid, wash the Ceruse at last with Rose Water, leaving
it in the water for five or six hours; at the end whereof, pour it out by
inclination, and dry the Ceruse in the shade upon a paper: Then put the Wax
broken, and the Oil, into a glazed Earthen-pot, and set the Pot in a
boiling-Bath. When the Wax is melted, take the Pot from the fire, and stir the
dissolution with a wooden-Pestle, till it begins to thick'n, at which time mix
the Ceruse in Powder, stirring the Ointment till it be almost cold. Melt the
Camphire in a small portion of the Oil, and incorporate it with the Ointment
when it is cold.

You may also, if it be desired, at the same time add the Whites of Eggs, being
careful to stir the Ointment, to make an exact mixture of the Ingredients.

This Ointment is in all Dispensatories, but the quantity of the Medicaments is
very different, not only in reference to the proportion of the Oil with the
Wax, but also for that of the Ceruse. As to the proportion of the first, I find
it conformable to the general Rules of Ointments; but that of the Ceruse cannot
pass for other then irregular, though I yield to it here, as well for that the
quantity is not over-large, as because it is that which chiefly gives its
color and principal virtue to the Ointment.

Nor can I agree with them, who instead of washing the Ceruse with water, boil
it with Vinegar distilled, and having dried it, make use of it in this
Ointment: For I know that Vinegar distilled will open it, and reduce it to an
Acid-sugar-like, white, Chrystalline substance, in appearance like Salt; and
that also by long digestions, separations, and superfusions of the Vinegar
distilled, you may reduce all the Ceruse into a kind of Salt. But this Salt is
not a true Salt of Ceruse, but rather a Salt of Vinegar, incorporated with the
Ceruse which it has dissolved: And besides that, this Vinegar distilled being
consumed among the Ceruse, cannot make any separation of its parts, as being
confused with the total of the Ceruse at the time it is dried: Certain it is,
the Ceruse is so far from being the more cooling, that it fails not to retain
great impressions of the Acrimony of the Vinegar: which induces me to prefer
the Lotion of Ceruse, before the boiling it in Vinegar distilled, as some of
our Moderns have directed. For though the addition of Vinegar distilled might
take place, were this Ointment prepared for the cure of Ulcers proceeding from
a salt, burning choler, or some fixed or volatile salt, in hopes that the Acid
of the Vinegar might dulcifie those salt substances by joining strictly with
them; yet we must not look for such an effect from Ceruse boiled with Vinegar,
after the Phlegm and the Acid of the Vinegar are dissipated, because that in
their room there remains only in the Ceruse the fixed salt, and corrosive of
the Vinegar: whereas I have great reason to believe, that the Ceruse, being
freed by Lotions from all the Acrimony of the Acids which had reduced it into a
Calx, and from all the ill impressions of the fire which it might have
contracted, is very fit to suck up and mortify the choleric and salt humors,
as also the Acids which may have caused the Ulcers. However this hinders not,
but that when the nature of the humor which causes the Ulcers is understood,
we may have recourse to Specifies, and use them either apart, or mixed with
this Ointment, as occasion and judgment require.

As to what some object, that the Lotion of the Ceruse may carry off some part
of the Sugar-like salt dissolved by the Vinegar, when the Lead was reduced into
Ceruse; I say, that can only be some very little part of the Ceruse fixed to
some remainder of the Salt of Vinegar, the loss whereof cannot but prove
advantageous, by reason of the acrimonious parts joined with it. I also affirm,
that Ceruse coming out of Calcination, is not a substance dissolveable in
water; nor is there any fear, that either the common, or Rose Water, should
deprive it of any part of its proper substance, in regard it can only be
dissolved by Vinegar, or by some other corrosive; and that it is only by their
means that it takes the Figure of Salt, or of Vitriol of Ceruse, which is
merely a dissolution, mixture and corporification of its substance with the
corrosive Spirits, since the Lead may be separated from the same Salt, and the
same Lead be again reduced into Ceruse, and thus metamorphos'd as often as you
please.

As for the Whites of Eggs prescribed in several Receipts of this Ointment, I
think they may be better mixed when there is any occasion; and that it is
better to let them alone in the preparation of this ointment, which is to be
kept for some time, but will be putrifi'd by the Whites of Eggs. It may not be
amiss also, to prepare this ointment without Camphire, and to mix it only upon
occasion, by reason of the aversion which some have against the ill scent.

This ointment is good to cure Erisypela's, Burns, Scurfs, and the most part of
deformities of the Skin, which proceed from salt phlegm, or burning Choler. It
is also very proper to allay the Itch, and hot intemperature of Ulcers: it
dries up galling and peelings of the skin, the rednesses which happen to
Children, upon their Thighs, and in other places: It is also good for bruises,
and to consolidate slight wounds; for it cools, closes, dries, and manifestly
cicatrizes where it is applied.

Unguentum Populeum. Oil of Popler.. Gemmarum Populi nigrae contusarum, lb i
ss.. Buds of black Popler bruised, lb i. ss. Axungiae Porci masculi, lb iiij.
Barrow's-grease, lb iiij.

Gather the Popler-buds when they begin to open, and show the points of their
leaves; bruise them well in a Marble-Mortar, then melt the grease over a gentle
fire in a glazed Earthen-pot large enough, and mingle the Buds with it; stop
the Pot close, and put it in a Cellar, or cool place, till the Months of May or
June, that all the Herbs are fit to be boiled; then set the Pot in a boiling
Bath, and mix therewith

Foliorum contusorum Violaria, Bruised Leaves of March-Violets, Vmbilici
Veneris, Kidney-Wort, Rubi, Bramble, Papaveris nigri, Black Poppy, Mandragorae,
Mandrake, Hyoscyami, Henbane, Solani, Nightshade, Lactucae, Lettice,
Sempervivi majoris, and minoris, and Greater and lesser Housleek, Bardanae
majoris, an. iiij. Greater Burdock, an. iiij.

Let them boil with the same heat, stirring them from time to time, and
covering the Pot again, till the moisture of the Herbs be almost consumed; then
take the Pot from the Bath, strain and press out the Ingredients with a good
strength, and when the liquor is cool, separate the Oil from the Feces, and
keep it close stopped.

Some expose the first Infusion of the Popler to the Sun; but a cool place
seems more proper for an ointment which is required to cool, considering that
there is no more intended then to preserve the virtue of the Poplers, till the
other Herbs can be provided, the Nightshade being a late Herb.

Some there are that add Wine to the Ointment while it is boiling, others Juice
of Nightshade, and Rose Water: But if you are careful to get all the Herbs
ready at a time, and to have them fresh, they will afford moisture sufficient
to boil the ointment, and there will be time enough to charge it sufficiently
with the color and virtue of the Simples. Others would have the Herbs to lie
in Maceration eight or ten days, before the ointment be boiled. But that would
be time spent in vain, because that fresh Herbs well bruised, impart their
virtue sufficiently, during the time of their boiling, without any necessity of
Maceration beforehand, either upon, or off the fire; and for that the Rosiny
part of the Popler-buds dissolving easily in the ointment, impart their whole
virtue at the same boiling.

As to the Opinion of some, that all the Ingredients of this Ointment are cold,
it cannot be so thought, in regard that the taste and Aromatic smell of the
Popler-buds, and their rosinous and combustible part demonstrate them to be
hot, as well as the Burdock. However, that hinders not this ointment from being
properly numbered among the cold ointments, since the hot Plants hinder not the
cooling virtue of the principal Ingredients, but rather assist their
penetration: Considering that Remedies which are accounted purely cold, being
used alone, produce not those good effects as when mixed with some hot
Medicine, though but in a small quantity. We observe also, that very hot
Remedies are sometimes succesfully made use of for the cure of Burns; as Spirit
of Wine, and Juice of Onyons, instead of this Ointment, which is so highly
approved for that intent.

Oil of Poplar alone, or mixed with Oil of Roses, applied upon the Forehead and
Temples, provokes sleep gently, asswages the pains of the Head in Fevers, and
tempers the heat of them, being laid to the Wrists, or to the soles of the
feet. It is used to abate the Inflammations of the Reins, and to cure Burns,
Erysipela's, and all sorts of heats, and to discuss the Milk in the Breasts; to
which purpose it is mixed with Honey, yellow Wax, and many other Medicaments.

Unguentum Pompholygos. Ointment of the Soil of Brass-Oar.. Olei Rosati, xx..
Oil of Roses, xx. Succi Granorum viridium Solani, viij. Juice of the green
Berries of Nightshade, viij.

Bruise the Nightshade-Berries in a Marble-Mortar, press out the Juice, and put
the quantity prescribed, with the Oil of Roses, into a glazed Earthen-pot;
cover the Pot, and boil them together till the Juice be almost wholly consumed;
separate the Oil, throw away the Feces,

Deinde in oleo liqua Then Melt in the Oil Cera Albae, v. White Wax, v.

After that, take the pot from the fire, stir the ointment with a wooden-Pestle
till it begins to thick'n; and when it is well cold,

Refrigeratis permisce Mix therewith Cerusae lotae pulverati, iiij. Ceruse
washed and powdered, iiij. Plumbi leviter usti and pulverati, Lead slightly
burnt and reduced into Powder, Pompholigis vel Tuthiae Alexandrinae
praeparatae, an. ij. Soil of Brass-Oar, or Tutia of Alexandria prepared, an.
ij. Thuris subtiliter pulverat. j. Frankincense finely pulverized. j.

Stir the Ointment till it be quite cold, and then put it up.

The Receipt of this Ointment agrees in most Authors as to the number and names
of the Ingredients, but the doses are very various. But this Receipt is regular
in all things, and you cannot fail of a right preparation, observing this
method.

As to the preparation of the Lead, take a large Iron Ladle, and melt in it
about a pound of Lead, stirring it from time to time with a long Iron Spatula,
till it be reduced into a greyish Powder, which you must sift through a
Silk-sieve, till you have the quantity prescribed.

Pompholix is a white light Powder that sticks about the tops of the Furnaces
where they melt and refine Copper, like Flower of Meal, and sometimes in little
Poulses, or Blisters. They call it also Nil, and Nihili. Tutia comes from the
same Copper, and at the same time as Pompholix: But the weight of it causes it
to stick about the lower part of the Furnaces, where it gathers together about
the thickness of a half Crown, like grains at the top, and of a dark
Ash Color. It Is thought that the virtues of Tutia and Pompholix are very much
alike, as both arising from Copper, but the true Pompholix is certainly to be
preferred by reason of its lightness. The Greeks call Tutia by the name of
Spodium, which the Arabians have given to the Roots of Reeds burnt, and some of
our Moderns to burnt Ivory.

To prepare Tutia right, it must be heated red hot in a Crucible, and quenched
as often in Rose Water, after which grind it upon Porphyry, till it be scarce
to be felt.

Ointment of Pompholix cools and extinguishes the heat of Ulcers, tames their
malignity, appeases their pain, cleanses and heals them all together,
especially those of the Legs.

Unguentum Ophthalmicum. An Ointment for the Eyes.. Butyri recentissimi, xvj..
Newest Butter, xvj.

Melt it in a Copper or Latten Drying Pan over a very soft fire, till the
Butter ceases to spatter; then by degrees, and at several times, mingle with
the Butter

Aceti Rosati acerrimi, iiij. Sharpest Vinegar of Roses, iiij.

Boil them again over the same fire till the Butter cease to spatter; pour the
whole into a Brass-Mortar, and

Mingle with it Tutiae Alexandrinae ter in Aqu^ Rosarum extinctae and
praeparatae, iiij. Tutia of Alexandria thrice quenched in Rose Water, and
prepared, iiij.

Stir the whole continually, till the Ointment be cold.

The reason why you must pour the Vinegar upon the Butter by degrees, and when
it ceases to spatter, is because that if you should pour it too hastily upon
the Butter, it would cause so great an Ebullition, that the Butter would run
over, and be lost; which it will not do, if you observe these Directions.

They who consider, that in making Butter for ordinary use, there is no way so
to separate the serous and Cheesie part, but that some portion will remain in
the Butter, which will be offensive in ointments prepared for the eyes, will
not wonder that the Butter should be thus prepared, to consume the serous part
by boiling the Butter, and stopping the Cheesie part in the Strainer, which
could not be done by Lotions, or any other way. Besides, the ointment prepared
with Butter thus boiled, will keep a long time, and is less subject to smell
with age.

As for the addition of Vinegar, and boiling the Butter in a Copper or Latten
Drying Pan, there is no fear that the ointment should thereby receive any
offensive quality. For besides that after the moisture of the Vinegar is
consumed, the Earthy part remaining in the Strainer with the Cheesie part of
the Butter, the ointment receives a virtue very proper to strengthen the Eyes,
it becomes fit to cleanse, by means of the particles of Copper or Latten with
which the Butter is impregnated by means of the Vinegar which dissolves them,
and of which there is no danger, since the Tutia, which is the foundation of
the ointment, is a production from Copper, and Verdigrease, which is the rust
of Copper, are succesfully made use of in infirmities of the Eyes; as also
Vitriol, whose natural Corrosion is augmented by the particles of Copper, with
which it is impregnated in the bowels of the Earth: Upon which this observation
is to be made, that although the Eyes are very sensible and tender parts of the
body, yet they easily endure those things which neither the Stomach nor the
Tongue can bear, such as are diverse Remedies drawn from several Minerals, and
several parts of Plants and Animals, when they cannot endure oil which we daily
make use of in Diet.

We find in several Authors descriptions of Ophthalmic ointments, and several
persons have several particular Receipts which I cannot find fault with: But I
can assure them of the Excellency of this ointment, by the long Experience I
have had of it, and the daily trials which I make of it. It is a wonderful
Remedy to allay the Inflammations, to appease the pains and itching of the
Eyes, and to cleanse and cicatrize the Pustula's of the Eyes and Eyebrows. It
is highly approved to dry up blear Eyes, especially in old people, and to stop
and dry up defluxions that cause blearness, and to prevent the Eyebrows from
sticking one to another. The Patient going to bed, is to put into the corner of
the Eyes about the quantity of a little Pea, and at the same time to shut his
Eyes till the ointment be fully melted. At first it will cause a smarting in
the Eyes, but it will presently be gone. Trial will certainly confirm what I
say to be true.

Unguentum Nutritum. The Nourished Ointment.. Lithargyri Auri subtiliter
pulverat. lb ss.. Litharge of Gold finely powdered, lb ss. Aceti fortis, viij.
Strong Vinegar, viij. Olei communis, lb j ss. Common Oil, lb j ss.

Having pulverized the Litharge, stir it a long time in a large Brass-Mortar,
with as much Oil as will serve to moisten it moderately; and when they are well
incorporated, add a little Vinegar, and continue stirring till the Vinegar
appear no more; then put in more oil, still stirring the ointment: and so
continue to add, first Vinegar, then Oil, by little and little successively,
till the Litharge have sucked up the prescribed quantity of both, and that both
have acquired the due consistence of an ointment: and in regard the Oil exceeds
the Vinegar, put in every time more Oil then Vinegar. Due patience, and
continual stirring, will not only bring it to a due consistence, but to a
whiteness like that of Ceruse-Oyntment.

Nourished Ointment is also called Crudum, or Raw, because it is not boiled;
and Ointment of Litharge, because Litharge is the Foundation; and
Triapharmacum, or a Medicine of Three, because it is compounded of three
Ingredients.

As for those that choose to prepare and stir this Ointment in a Leaden-Mortar,
pretending to augment its virtue, I think they rather do ill then well; since
Litharge being only Lead Metamorphos'd, mixing with the ointment, affords it
that virtue which is to be expected from Lead abundantly enough, without
seeking after an Imaginary Virtue from the touch of the Mortar; besides that
the bad color which the Lead will give it, may be sufficient to divert an
Artist from any such course.

They that will make a dissolution of Litharge in Vinegar, may quickly, and
without trouble, get ready an Vnguentum Nutritum of a good consistence, and at
least as effectual as that which I have set down, by incorporating cold the
dissolution with an equal quantity of Honey. You may also equally dissolve in
Vinegar, Minium, and white Lead, and mix the dissolutions with the oil; but
these ointments soon putrify, because of the Aquosity of the Juices: So that
they are never prepared, but upon occasion.

Nourished Ointment is good to mortify Scabs, Tetters, and other Infirmities
of the Skin. It is also used for the cure of Ulcers, particularly those which
are caused by salt phlegm; because that the Litharge joined to the Acid of the
Vinegar, fixing upon the salt humor, mortifies it, and cicatrizes the Ulcers.
This Ointment cools and dries very much: It may be kept several Months, if well
prepared.

Unguentum desiccativum Rubrum. A red drying Ointment.. Olei communis, lb ij..
Common Oil, lb ij. Cetae Albae, lb ss. White Wax, lb ss.

Melt them together over a gentle fire; take them off, and stir them together
with a wooden-Pestle till they begin to thicken; and when they are half cold,
add the following Powders.

. Lapidis Calaminaris, and Boli Armenae, an. iiij.. Calaminaris-Stone, and
Bole-Armoniac, an. iiij. Lithargyri Auri, and Litharge of Gold, and Cerusae
Venetae, an. iij. Ceruse of Venice, an. iij. Camphirae, j. Camphire, j.

Grind the Lapis Calaminaris and Bole-Armoniac upon a Porphyry, sift the Ceruse
through a Hair-sieve reversed, and pulverize the Litharge very fine, and mix
all the Powders with the ointment, stirring it continually till it be quite
cold: Then add the Camphire pulverized, with a drop or two of Spirit of Wine,
and the Ointment is made.

This Desiccative Red Ointment, though much in use, is left out however by many
Authors; neither have they that mentioned it, observed the proportion of
Quantities: For should we put five ounces of Wax to one of Oil, as the Ancients
direct, the Ointment would be of too solid a consistence; and therefore we have
regulated the proportions of the Wax and Oil as for other Ointments, putting in
but one part of Wax to four parts of Oil; by which means the Wax and the Oil
will easily suck up the Powders, notwithstanding the largeness of their
quantity, and make this Ointment far more solid then the usual sorts of
Ointments.

This Ointment cools, dries, strengthens and closes. It also stops defluxions
that fall upon the parts, and digests and consumes the superfluous moisture of
Wounds and Ulcers which it cicatrizes.

Unguentum Stypticum. The Restrictive Ointment.. Olei communis, lb iiij..
Common Oil, lb iiij. Myrtillorum siccorum contusorum, lb i ss. Whortle-berries
dried, lb i ss. Aluminis Rupei. lb ss. Roch-Alum, lb ss. Succi Myrtillorum, and
Juice of Whortle-berries, and Sorborum immaturorum, an. lb j. Green-Services,
an. lb j.

Put the Whortle-berries into a large Earthen glazed pot, and pour in the oil
prescribed: then put the Alum dissolved in the Juices, together with the
Juices; and having covered the Pot, set it in a boiling-Bath till the moisture
be almost quite consumed: then strain, and strongly press out the whole; and
having separated the Oil from the Feces,

. Olei illius, lb iij.. Of that same Oil, lb iij. Cerae Albae, ix. White Wax,
ix.

Melt the Wax in the same Pot in the same Bath: Then take off the Pot, stir the
ointment with a wood'n-pestle; and when it begins to thick'n, and grow half
cold,

. Nucum Cupressi,. Cypress-Nuts, Myrtillorum, Whortle-berries, Balaustiorum,
Pomgranate-flowers, Corticum Granatorum, and Glandium, Rinds of Granates, and
Acorns, Acinorum Vvae, Grape-stones, Ossis ^ crure bovis calcinati, Bone of an
Oxes Thigh calcined, Granorum Sumach, Grains of Sumach, Mastiches, Mastich,
Acaciae, Acacia, Aluminis usti, and Burnt-Alum, and Corticis mediani
Castanearum, an. vj. Middle-rind of Chestnuts, an. vj.

Calcine the Oxe-bone in an ordinary fire, burn the Alum over a gentle fire
till it be perfectly dry; then beat them together in a great Brass-Mortar, with
the rest of the Ingredients, except the Mastich, which must be beaten apart;
and having sifted the Powders thus prepared, mix them with the ointment,
stirring it till it be perfectly cold.

You shall meet with, in certain Authors, certain Descriptions of this Stiptic
Ointment, as also of an Ointment called the Countesses Ointment, very much
esteemed in practice. But if you examine all the Receipts, you shall find
several mistakes that deserve to be reformed, and acknowledge that it was not
done amiss, to produce a better, and more Methodical. The Astriction which the
Ancients would give to the oil, by washing it with Alum-water, cannot be very
great, since the principal Astriction of the Alum lies in its terrestrerity,
which never ascends in Distillation; and that the water drawn by that means
alone, or in Distillation, is nothing but a phlegm, which contains very little
Spirit, and has no Astriction, neither in appearance, nor real. You shall also
find, that the Astriction of Alum cannot be imparted to the ointment, but by
the terrestrial part; and that the choice, quantity, and use which is here made
of the Alum, as of all the other Ingredients, are undeniably more regular, then
any thing that is to be met with in the Dispensatories, in reference to this
ointment.

The terrestrial and astringent part of the Oxe's Thigh Bone being only
necessary for this ointment, the dissipation of the phlegm, spirit, salt, and
volatile oils is not regardded, no more then the consumption of the watery and
spiritous parts of the Alum, since there is no need of the terrestrial.

They who have this ointment well prepared, need take no care for the
Countesses ointment, the preparation whereof is troublesome, and the virtues
much inferior.

The Styptic ointment applied to the Reins, strengthens them, as also the
Ligaments of the Matrix, the descent whereof it hinders, and prevents abortion,
anointing the entrance thereof, and the lower part of the Belly. It is also
succesfully used to close the Neck of the Matrix after lying in, and to
consolidate such tearings of the parts as happen sometimes after difficult
Labor. It is also very proper against the Relaxation of the straight Gut,
applied without, and put into the Fundament, and to stop unreasonable losses of
blood in Women, applied to the Region of the Reins, the Liver, and all the
Belly: It is also laid upon the Stomach to stay vomiting. This ointment causes
no heat at all, and may serve in word upon all occasions where there is need of
closing and consolidation.

Unguentum Pomatum Officinale. A Pomatum-Oyntment for the Shops.. Radicum Ireos
Florentiae, iij.. Roots of Florence-Orrice, iij. Santali Citrini, and Yellow
Sanders, and Benjonii, an. j. Benjamin, an. j. Resinae Styracis, iij. Rosin of
Storax, iij. Ligni-Rhodii, and Lignum-Rhodium, and Florum Lavendulae, an. j.
Flowers of Lavender, an. j. Acori Very, and True Acorus, and Caryophyllorum,
an. ss. Cloves, an. ss.

Beat them all in a great Brass-Mortar, sift them through a coarse Hair-sieve,
and put them into a fine little Linnen-bag, yet big enough for the Ingredients
to lie loose in it.

. Axungiae Porci maris purgatae and lotae, lb iij.. Barrow's-grease cleans'd
and washed, lb iij. Saevi Hoedini recentis, lb j. New Kids Tallow, lb j. Poma
recentia cortice, and part interiore liberata and in parts secta, No xij. New
Pippins pared, cor'd, and cut into pieces, No xij. Aquae Rosarum, lb ss.
Rose Water, and lb ss. Florum Aurantiorum, iiij. Orange-flower-water, iiij.

Put all these together, with the Sack of Aromatics, into a narrow-mouthed
glazed Earthen-vessel close covered; set the Pot in a boiling Bath, till the
moisture be almost all consumed: Then strain and press the whole with a
moderate strength; let the Pomatum cool, and having separated it from the
Feces, keep it in a Galley-pot close stopped in a cool place.

The Ingredients of this Pomatum are so proportioned, that the odor may be
pleasant, the color white, and the consistence proper. And though the most
part of Apothecaries have some particular Receipts, I believe there are not
many who will reject this.

This Pomatum is chiefly used for such Deformities as happen to the Nose, and
for chaps of the Lips, Breasts, Feet, Hands, and other parts of the Body. It
serves also to soften and moisten the over-driness of the Skin.

You may also make a red Pomatum for the Lips, according to the following
Receipt.

Melt in a Silver, or white Earthen-pot, in a hot Mary's Bath, an ounce of
white Wax bruised, as much Oxe-Marrow, and three ounces of the first Pomatum;
and having added a dram of the rind of the root of Alkanet, sprinkled before
with a little good Spirit of Wine, keep the Vessel in the same Bath, stirring
the Pomatum from time to time, till it look very red; then strain it through a
fine Linen Cloth, and put up the Pomatum. You may also prepare a Pomatum of
Oil of Eggs in the same manner.

Melt in Balneo Mariae, in a white Earthen-vessel, an ounce of white Wax, as
much Sperma-Cete, with four ounces of Oil of Eggs very pure, choosing the
beginning of May for this Operation; and having covered the Vessel with a white
Linen cloth somewhat close spun, expose it to the open Air for several Months,
and till the Pomatum be perfectly white. This Pomatum is very proper to
preserve the beauty of the Complexion, to take away scars of the Face, and fill
up the holes of the Smallpox, especially if you wash your face with Frog-spawn
water, with never so little Borax dissolved in it, and if you wash the part
once a day with Spirit of Wine. It is also very effectual to cure chops in the
Lips, Breasts, and Fundament, especially if you add to it a little distilled
Oil of Wax.

Unguentum Martiatum. The Martiate Ointment.. Radicum Altheae, and Enulae
Campanae,. Roots of Althea, and Elecampane, Seminis Faenugreci, and Cumini, an.
iiij. Seeds of Fengreek, and Cumin, an. iiij. Nardi Indicae, ij. Indian-Nard,
ij. Foliorum Rorismarini, Leaves of Rosemary, Lauri, Laurel, Rutae, Rue,
Marjoranae, Marjoram, Ebuli, Danewort, Sabinae, Savine, Menthae hortensis, and
Garden-mints, and Aquaticae, Water-mint, Mentastri, Wild-mint, Basilici, Basil,
Salviae, Sage, Primulae veris, Primroses, Polii Montani, Mountain-Poley,
Calaminthae, Calamint, Artemisiae, Mugwort, Absinthii majoris, Greater
Wormwood, Origani, Organy, Betonicae, Betony, Brancae Vrsinae, Brank Ursine,
Herbae venti, Black French Horehound, Costi Hortensis, Cost-Mary, Sambuci,
Elder, Millefolii, Mill-foil, Chamaedryos, Germander, Hyperici, S. John's Wort,
Centaurii minoris, Lesser Centaury, Tetrahit, Jews Iron-wort, Cardui Benedicti,
Blessed Thistle, Abrotani Maris and Feminae, Southernwood Male and Female,
Caprifolii, Woodbine, Yvae Moschatae, Sea-Ground-pine, Florum Stachados
Arabicae, Flowers of Arabian Cassidony, Chamaemili, Camomile, Buphthalmi, an.
M. j. Oxe-eye, an. M. j.

Bruise them all, and put them into a narrow-mouthed glazed Earthen-Vessel, and
having poured upon them sixteen pints of Common Oil, stop the Vessel close, and
set it to macerate upon the hot Cinders for 24 hours. Then increase the fire,
and boil the Ingredients, gently stirring them from time to time with a wooden
Spatula, till the moisture be almost all consumed; afterward strain and press
the whole strongly out, and having separated the Oil from the Feces

. Cerae flavae, lb v.. Yellow Wax, lb v. Butyri Mayalis, May-Butter, Axungiae
Vrsi, and Gallinae, Bears-grease, and Hens-grease, Medullae Cervinae, and Deers
Marrow, and Terebinthinae Venetae, an. viij. Venice-Turpentine, an. viij.

Melt the Wax first in little pieces, then add the Butter, the Greases, the
Marrow, and Turpentine; and when the Ointment is half cold,

. Styracis Liquidae, iiij.. Liquid Storax, iiij. Myrrhae, Myrrh, Olibani, and
Olybanum, and Mastiches pulveratorum, an. ij. Mastic in Powder, an. ij.

Mix them with the rest, and stir the Ointment till it be cold.

The Receipt of this Ointment in the Dispensatories is much alike. But if you
examine them well, you will find that with great reason several Simples either
of a cold or temperate quality are omitted, that rather hinder the good effects
of the hot, then communicate any virtue to the Ointment; and that those which
are introduced in their stead, deserve to take their place.

Vnguentum Martiatum is highly commended, and succesfully used in all cold
diseases of the Head, the Stomach, the Liver, and all the other Bowels, and of
all the parts of the Body, particularly against Convulsions, and Relaxations of
the Nerves, the Sciatica, and all sorts of Gouts, and Rhumatismes that proceed
from cold causes: It softens and dissolves hardnesses, especially of the Liver
and Spleen, the Nerves and Joints, and appeases their pains. It is highly
commended in Dropsies and Tympanies, the Belly being anointed therewith: It is
made use of sometimes alone, sometimes mixed with Spirit of Wine, Oils, and
other Ointments; and also with Treacle, to anoint such parts of the Body as
have need thereof.

Unguentum de Althaea. Ointment of Marshmallows. R. Radicum Althaeae recentium
and minutim incisarum, vj.. Roots of Marshmallows fresh, and cut small, vj.
Seminum integrorum Lini, and Fenugraeci, Whole seeds of Line, and Fenugreek,
Laminarum scillae minutim incisarum, an. iiij. Slices of Squills cut very
small, an. iiij. Aquae Fontanae, lb viij. Fountain Water, lb viij.

Put them together into a Copper-tinn'd-vessel, and pour upon them eight pints
of common water; let them macerate over a very soft fire for 24 hours, stirring
them from time to time with a wood'n Spatula; then let them boil gently,
stirring them often, till the Muscilages are sufficiently thick; and having
strained and pressed them through a strong close woven Cloth, mix-with the
pressed Muscilage eight pints of common oil; then boil them again over a gentle
fire, till the superfluous moisture of the Muscilages be consumed: and having
strained them again,

. Cerae fl^vae, lb j.. Yellow Wax, lb j. Colophoniae, and Colophony, and
Resinae, an. lb ss. Rosin, an. lb ss.

Cut them in little pieces, and melt them, and if you observe any Feces at the
bottom of the Vessel, strain them again, or at least separate by Inclination
the clear from the impure, while the substances are very hot; then stir the
Ointment, and when it grows thick,

. Terebinthinae Venetae,. Venice-Turpentine, Galbani puri, Pure Galbanum, Gummi
Hederae pulveratae, an. ij. Gum of Ivy powdered, an. ij.

Incorporate them together, and mix them with the rest, stirring the ointment
till it be quite cold.

The preparation of the Muscilages necessary for this ointment, has been a
stumblingblock to many Authors, the most part of which have prescribed
excessive quantities of Simples, from whence to extract the Muscilages,
pretending to extract them with a very small quantity of water. Some fearing to
mistake, have altogether omitted the quantities, as well of the roots, as of
the water, prescribing only a certain quantity of Muscilages. Others ignorant
of these kinds of preparations, direct the same Simples to be well bruised,
believing erroniously, that there is no other way to extract Muscilages. But
laying aside these different preparations, I believe an Artist may find here
sufficient satisfaction, as well for the quantities of the Simples necessary
for the Muscilages, as for the quantity of the water, and the method of
preparation.

Ointment of Marshmallows, moistens, softens, and gently heats: It is proper
to expel wind, and cause a transpiration of the serosities that fall between
the Muscles of the Breast. It asswages pain in the sides, softens the hardness
of the Bowels and Nerves, and the Tumors that happen to the parts of the body,
particularly the Parotides, or swellings under the Ears, and about the Neck; it
is used alone, and sometimes mixed with other Ointments, Oils and Cataplasmes.

Unguentum Basilicum. Basilicon Ointment.. Cerae flavae,. Yellow Wax, Sevi
Arietini, Rams Tallow, Resinae, Rosin, Picis Navalis, and Ship-Pitch, and
Terebinthinae Venetae, an. lb j. Venice-Turpentine, an. lb j. Olei communis, lb
v. Common Oil, lb v.

Cut the yellow Wax, the Tallow, the Rosin, and black Pitch into little pieces,
and melt them together in the Oil, in a Copper Basin, over a gentle fire; then
strain them through a coarse piece of Linen, and incorporate the Turpentine
with the straining, and the Ointment is made.

Some Authors have prescribed not above half the quantity of the Oil, not
considering that so small a quantity cannot suffice to give a total consistency
to the Ointment, whereby it would prove so solid, as not easily to be got out
of the Pot. Others leave it to the judgment of the Artist to proportion the
quantity; but it was better to regulate the proportion for young beginners for
the preparation of an ointment, as much or more in use then any other.

The Name of Basilicon, or Royal, is given to this ointment, as well for the
virtues, as the frequent use. It is also called Suppurative, because it digests
and hastens Suppuration. It operates very gently, and asswages the pains that
are felt while the matter is ripening; it cicatrizes also wounds when the
matter is come forth. It is spread alone upon Linnen-folds, and sometimes mixed
with yolks of Eggs, Turpentine, or other Ointments, Oils and Emplasters.

Unguentum Egyptiacum. The Egyptian Ointment.. Aeruginis Aeris, x.. Rust of
Brass, x. Aceti Acerrimi, xiiij. Strong Vinegar, xiiij. Mellis Optimi, xxviij.
The best Honey, xxviij.

Bruise the Rust of Brass, dissolve it in the Vinegar, pass it through a
Hair-sieve, and boil them both together with the Honey to the consistence of a
soft ointment.

The inconveniences which I suffered formerly, when, according to the method of
the Ancients and Moderns, I was wont to beat the Verdigrease dried, the small
dust whereof getting into my Eyes and Nostrils, caused a most insupportable
Corrosion. These inconveniences, I say, caused me to seek out some way to avoid
them: Thereupon, finding it so easy to incorporate Verdigrease with Vinegar
and Honey, I thought I might as well dissolve the Verdigrease in Vinegar, or at
least steep it in such manner, that it might pass through the Hair-sieve with
the Vinegar, and leave upon the Sieve the little pieces of Copper and Feces of
the Grapes that used to be mixed with it: which succeeded so well, that ever
since I have practiced that way which I was desirous to impart to public view.

For the preparation therefore of this ointment, take eleven ounces of
Verdigrease instead of the ten ounces here prescribed, to supply the waste of
the little pieces of Copper, or the Feces of the Grapes which are usually mixed
with it. Put them into a Copper Drying Pan, and hold them over a gentle fire,
and having very well bruised them with a wood'n-pestle, and steeped them in the
Vinegar prescribed, pass the whole through a Hair-sieve; and if any of the
Verdigrease remain in the Sieve, return it into the Pan, bruise it, and steep
it in some portion of the same Vinegar, and pass it again through the Sieve,
till only some useless pieces of the Copper and Lees of the Grapes remain
behind. Then boil the dissolution with the Honey prescribed over a gentle fire,
stirring it from time to time till it come to the consistence of a soft
ointment, and look of a red color.

Some say, that an Egyptian Physician invented this ointment, and gave it the
name; others, that it was called Egyptiacum, because of its color. However it
were, the principal use of it is to consume rotten flesh, and superfluities of
Ulcers that hinder the growing of the live flesh: It operates vigorously, and
with some pain: For which reason the ointment of the Apostles is made use of in
its place, when there is no reason for any such violent effects. Usually it is
enough to anoint the Tents and Linen Rolls with this ointment.

Unguentum Apostolorum. The Apostles Ointment.. Cerae Citrinae, iiij.. Yellow
Wax, iiij. Resinae, Rosin, Terebinthinae, and Turpentine, and Ammoniaci, an.
xiiij. Ammoniac, an. xiiij. Lythargyri Auri, ix. Litharge of Gold, ix. Olibani,
Olibanum, Aristolochiae rotundae, Round Birthwort, Bdellii, an. vj. Bdellium,
an. vj. Myrrhae, Myrrh, Galbani, an. ss. Galbanum, an. ss. Opopanacis,
Opoponax, Viridis Aeris, an. ij. Verdigrease, an. ij. Oleicommunis, lb ij.
Common Oil, lb ij.

Beat the Birthwort-root, as also the Litharge, Myrrh, Bdellium, and
Verdigrease in a large Brass-Mortar; melt the Opoponax, Galbanum, and
Gum-Ammoniac in a Brass-Mortar heated, and incorporate the Turpentine with them
when they are melted. In the mean while, cause the Rosin and Wax to be cut into
small pieces, and melted with the Oil: Then take out the mixture of the Gums
and Turpentine out of the Mortar while it is hot, and put it into a Copper
Drying Pan; and holding the Pan over a gentle fire, incorporate the Wax and the
Rosin, stirring the whole with a wood'n-Pestle till the Ingredients are well
united: Then take the Pan from the fire, stirring continually till the ointment
begin to thicken; then mix first the Verdigrease to give the ointment its green
color, afterward add the other Powders mixed together before; and when all
the ingredients are well incorporated, and cold, put up the ointment for use. I
think there cannot be a better method for this preparation, as well to preserve
the virtue of the Ingredients, as for their well mixing. But if any other
Artist have found a better way, he may do well to communicate it as frankly as
I have done this.

It is called Vnguentum Apostolorum, rather from the number of the Medicaments,
then for any use that the Apostles made of it. The Ancient, and most part of
the Modern Receipts of this ointment, prescribe no more Wax then Rosin and
Turpentine: Many Authors also direct the boiling of the Litharge with some part
of the Oil, and almost all prescribe the boiling and dissolving the Gums with
the Vinegar. True it is, that the ointment may be prepared without augmenting
the weight of the Wax, whether you boil the Litharge in some part of the oil or
no, or whether you mix the Gums after you have boiled and dissolved in the
Vinegar; but I think it better to proceed otherwise: For the augmentation of
the Wax is not to be disapproved, considering that if you follow the usual
proportion of ointments, two pints of oil require six ounces of wax: and it
were well prescribed, but that some consideration must be also had to the
Rosin, Gums, and Litharge, and other Powders that give some substance to the
ointment: Nor is there any fear that the augmentation of the wax should, whose
virtues are so well known, diminish the virtues of the ointment.

The Apostles Ointment is very much used to cleanse Wounds and Ulcers, for it
consumes putrefaction and superfluities, and causing the sores to look well,
afterward dries and cicatrizes them.

Unguentum Aureum. The Golden Ointment.. Olei communis, lb ii ss.. Common Oil,
lb ii ss. Cerae Citrinae, lb ss. Yellow Wax, lb ss. Terebinthinae Venetae, ij.
Venice-Turpentine, ij. Resinae, Rosine, Colophoniae, an. i ss. Colophony, an. i
ss. Olibani, Olibanum, Mastiches, an. j. Mastich, an. j. Croci, j. Croci, j.

Pulverize apart the Olibanum, Mastich, and Saffron; and having melted over a
gentle fire the Wax, Rosin, and Colophony in the Oil prescribed, take the
Vessel from the fire, and mix the Turpentine, stirring the ointment gently till
it begin to grow thick; at which time mix the Powders, continually stirring the
ointment till all the Ingredients are well united.

This Ointment is thus called from its Golden color, especially if the Rosin,
Wax, and Colophony be of a good color, and pure; and if the Saffron be new.

The use of it is chiefly to incarnate and cicatrize Wounds and Ulcers.

Unguentum Mundificativum de Apio. A Cleansing Ointment of Parsley.. Foliorum
Apii, M iij.. Leaves of Parsley, M iij. Hederae terrestris, Ground Ivy,
Absinthii majoris, Bigger Wormwood, Centaurii minoris, Lesser Centaury,
Chamaedryos, Germander, Salviae, Sage, Hyperici, S. John's Wort, Plantaginis,
Plantaine, Millefolii, Millfoil, Vincae pervinc^, Perwincle, Consolidae
majoris, and Bigger Consound, and Mediae, Midling-Consound, Betonicae, Betony,
Caprifolii, Woodbine, Verbenae, Vervain, Veronicae, Speedwell, Galei lutei,
Yellow Ladies Bed-straw, Centinodiae, Centinody, Ophyoglossi, Adders-tongue,
Pimpernellae, M ij. Pimpernel, M ij. Olei communis, lb viij. Common Oil, lb
viij. Picis Albae, Black Pitch, S^vi Arietini, Rams Suet, Cerae Citrinae, and
Yellow Wax, and Terebinthinae, an. lb ij. Turpentine, an. lb ij.

Gather the Herbs, if it may be done, all the same day, when they are in their
full virtue, and bruise them in a Marble-Mortar. Melt the Wax, Pitch, and Suet
in a Copper-pan tinned within, over a gentle fire in the Oil; put in the
bruised Herbs, and boil them together gently, stirring the ingredients from
time to time with a wooden Spatula; and when the moisture is almost all
consumed, strain and strongly press out the whole; when the straining is cold,
and separated from the Feces and moisture,

. Pulveris Myrrhae Electae, and. Powder of Select Myrrh, and Aloes Succotrinae,
an. iiij. Aloes Succotrine, an. iiij. Aristolochiae Rotundae, and Round
Birth-wort, and Radicis Freos Florentiae, an. ij. Root of Florence-Orrice, an.
ij.

Incorporate all these finely powdered with the whole, and the Ointment is made.

There are several Modern Receipts of this Ointment, but various, both in
respect of the ingredients, and manner of preparation. But if you examine this,
I believe you will find it rightly prescribed in all respects, and as rightly
and methodically prepared.

Some for the preparation of a cleansing Ointment, content themselves to
extract the juice of some of these Plants, and to boil it among the Oil, and
other Medicaments which are apt to melt. But besides that the juices alone are
not able to impart their virtue to the Medicine, unless assisted by those other
parts of the Herbs from whence they are drawn, we know by experience that they
cannot communicate neither to this nor any other ointment their green color,
unless the Herbs be boiled whole.

This Ointment is proper to cleanse all sorts of Ulcers and Wounds, dissipate
excrementitious serosities, and to prevent them from breeding. It is also
esteemed against the biting of Mad-dogs.

Unguentum Mundificativum de Resina. A Cleansing Ointment of Rosine.. Olei
communis, lb j.. Common Oil, lb j. Resinae, Rosine, Terebinthinae, and
Turpentine, and Mellis communis, an. lb ss. Common Honey, an. lb ss. Cerae
flavae, iij. Yellow Wax, iij. Myrrhae Electae, Select Myrrh, Sarcocollae,
Sarcocoll, Farinae Lini, and Flower of Lineseed, and Fenugraci, Fengreek,
Thuris, and Frankincense, and Mastiches, an. j. Mastic, an. j.

Cut the Wax into small bits, and melt it in the oil prescribed over a gentle
fire, and having separated the filth, and stirred the ointment till it be half
cold, add the Honey and Turpentine first, then the Flower of Lineseed and
Fengreek, and lastly the Gums finely powdered, and incorporate all well
together.

This Ointment was invented, by reason of the difficulty to get the Herbs that
compound the Mundificative of Parsley, at all times.

This ointment is as it were a Deputy in the place of the Parsley-oyntment, and
is almost as much in use, and not much inferior in virtue.

Unguentum Agrippa. Agrippa' s Ointment.. Radicum Brioniae, lb ij.. Roots of
Briony, lb ij. Cucumeris Asinini, lb j. Wild Cucumber, lb j. Scilla, lb j.
Squills, lb ss. Ireos, iij. Orrice, iij. Filicis, Fern, Ebuli, and Danewort,
and Tribulorum aquaticorum, an. ij. Water-Caltrops, an. ij.

Having cleans'd, washed, and bruised the Herbs in a Marble-Mortar, put them
into a narrow-mouthed glazed Earthen pot, and pour the prescribed oil upon
them; then cover the Pot, and keep it four and twenty hours upon hot Embers;
after that, boil the ingredients gently, stirring them from time to time with a
wood'n Spatula, and covering the Pot still when you have done, till the
moisture of the Roots be almost consumed; then having strained and pressed the
whole strongly forth, and having purified the oil, mix with it

Cerae Citrinae, xviij. Yellow Wax, xviij.

Then take the Vessel from the fire, and stir the ointment till it be almost
quite cold.

The impossibility that four pints of oil should retain the virtue of all the
Roots here prescribed, according to the Ancients, has caused an alteration of
six pints of oil, and the weight of the Wax to be augmented.

I have not inserted this ointment here, though said to be made by King
Agrippa, who lived in the time of S. Paul, for the frequent use that is made of
it, but for its virtues that recommend it for the cure of the Dropsy, by
anointing the Belly with it; and the Splenetic, by anointing the part where the
pain lies. It is also good to dissolve hard and knotty swellings that happen to
the Nerves, and to appease the pains in the Kidneys. It also loosens the Belly
of Children, and tender Persons, applied to the Region of the Stomach and Navel.

Unguentum Neapolitanum. The Neapolitan Ointment.. Axungia Suillae, lb ij..
Sows-grease, lb ij. Argenti vivi, lb j. Quicksilver, lb j. Terebinthinae
Venetae, iiij. Venice-Turpentine, iiij. Axungiae Viperina, Vipers fat, Olei
Laurini, and Oils of Laurel, and De Spica, Spike, Cerae Flavae, and Yellow Wax,
Styracis Liquidae, an. iiij. Liquid Storax, an. iiij.

Pass the Quicksilver through a piece of Shamoys-leather, and incorporate it
with the Turpentine, stirring both together in a large Brass-Mortar for a good
while; and when the Turpentine has well devoured the Quicksilver, add the
Liquid Storax, and by degrees the Sows-grease, with the Wax melted in it; then
add the Vipers fat, and the Oils of Laurel and Spike, and after you have
stirred them a long time, and well incorporated the whole, put up the ointment
for use.

There are several Receipts in several Dispensatories of this ointment, and
under a great many names, with a large number of Ingredients; but we thought
fit to take no more then those that are sufficient to produce the effects
desired from this Ointment.

Some, the more exactly to mix the raw Mercury with this ointment, dissolve it
in Aqua fortis, and afterward evaporating it over a gentle fire, mix the
Mercury thus dried with the remaining part, or else evaporate the Aqua fortis
thus charged among the other Medicaments. But besides that you may very easily
and effectually mix the Quicksilver with this ointment, if you will but take
the pains to stir it well with the Turpentine, and afterward with the Storax,
and other Ingredients; it is very inconvenient to introduce the corrosive
quality of the Aqua fortis into the ointment, the bad effects whereof tender
Constitutions will be sure to feel.

As for the Dose of the Mercury, you may augment or diminish it according to
the various purposes of the Physician, and the Constitutions of the persons for
whom the ointment is prepared: So that when you are to anoint persons of a
strong Complexion, who resist the penetration of the Mercury, you may augment
the quantity to a third, or a half, and that of the Turpentine proportionably,
the better to make the mixture: whereas for tender persons, four ounces, or a
lesser quantity of Mercury is sufficient; or when you only design the ointment
to kill Fleas, or cure the Itch.

This ointment is very much used for the cure of the Pox, especially when the
venom thereof is spread over the whole habit of the body. The principal virtue
of it lies in the Mercury, which attenuates, dissolves, and dulcifies thick
phlegm, which is the Seat of the Venereal Venom, and brings it generally forth
by Salivation. The usual custom is to anoint with this ointment the Arms, the
Legs, the Thighs, the Buttocks, and the Spine of the Back; and because that
Mercury is accounted a very great Enemy to the Nerves, the best way is to add
to this ointment such Remedies as may in some measure counterbalance its bad
effects; such are Oils of Laurel, Spike, Vipers fat, Liquid Storax, and
Turpentine, which fortifying the Nerves, serve also to assist the penetration
of the Mercury: Not that all these Medicaments are sufficient to hinder
altogether the bad effects of the Mercury, but we may certainly believe, that
they do very much abate them. They may be also entirely carried off, or at
least the greatest part of them dissipated after the Expulsion, by making use
of powerful Diaphoretics; and among the rest, volatile salts of Animals, in the
number of which is Salt-Ammoniac, of which I my self have seen the wonderful
effects, upon a person very coarsly handled by the Mercury; which is to be
attributed to the volatility and penetration of those Salts, which being
dispersed by the heat of the Stomach through the whole habit of the body, and
divided at least into as many Particles as there may be of Mercury, seeking to
get out through the pores of the skin, carry along with them such Particles of
the Mercury as they meet with in the way, and drive them out mixed and
dissolved in the sweat which they have provoked.

Ceratum Refrigerans. A Cooling Cerate.. Olei Rosati, lb j.. Oil of Roses, lb
j. Cerae Albae, iij. White Wax, iij.

Break the Wax, and put it with the Oil into a glazed Earthen-pot, and set the
Pot in a hot Mary's Bath, till it be well melted in the Oil; then taking off
the Vessel, stir the ointment without intermission with a wood'n-Pestle till it
be cold, adding in the mean time two ounces of fair water, and continuing the
same stirring: when the first water is sucked up, add more, continuing to add
more water, and stir, till the ointment be white enough, and that you find it
have water enough; then pour out all the water by inclination, and put up the
Cerate for use. Some there are that mix an ounce of Vinegar distilled to make
it more piercing.

This Cerate is very frequent in Shops. It is good to be applied, by way of
Unction, upon all parts that have need of cooling: For which reason it is very
serviceable against heats of the Reins, Flegmons, Erysipela's, and Tetters. It
is highly approved for appeasing the pain of the Emrods, to cure peelings of
the Skin, to allay inflammations of the Thighs, and other parts of the bodies
of little Children, and fat pursie people, and to cure chaps, and other sores
at the end of Women's Breasts. It serves also for the cure of Burns, alone or
mixed with other ointments, and to temper the heat of the Hypochondriums. It is
also mixed with ointment of Ceruse, when there is occasion to dry or close.

Ceratum Santalinum. A Cerate of Sanders.. Olei Rosati, lb j.. Oil of Roses, lb
j. Cera Alba, iiij. White Wax, iiij.

Put them together into a glazed Earthen-pot, and melt the Wax in a hot Mary's
Bath; take the Pot off the fire, and stir them with a wooden-Pestle till the
ointment be half cold; then

. Rosarum Rubrarum, xij.. Red Roses, xij. Santali Rubri, x. Red Sanders, x.
Albi, and White, and Citrini, an, vj. Yellow, an. vj. Boli Armenae, vij.
Bole-Armoniac, vij. Spodii, ss. Spodium, ss. Camphorae, ij. Camphire, ij.

Bruise the Sanders in a great Marble-Mortar, moistning them from time to time
with Rose-watert, o give a red color to the white and yellow Sanders, and
increase their scent; and having passed them through a Silk-sieve, heat the red
Roses dried in the same Mortar; then mix the Powders with the Spodium, and the
Bole-Armoniac brayed upon Porphyry, and the Camphire beaten with never so
little Spirit of Wine; incorporate all together with the ointment, and put it
up for use.

It is good for the cure of Flegmons, to allay the hot intemperatures of the
Stomach, Liver and Reins; to which purpose it is applied alone, or mixed with
equal parts of ointment of Roses: Sometimes the Forehead and Temples are
anointed therewith, being mixed with Popler-oyntment, and a little Opium
somewhat liquid, as well to provoke sleep, as ease the pains of the Head.

Ceratum Stomachicum. A Cerate for the Stomach.. Olei Cydoniorum, lb j ss.. Oil
of Quinces, lb j ss. Cerae Albae, vj. White Wax, vj. Mastiches Electae, and
Choice Myrrh, and Rosarum rubrarum, an. xx. Red Roses, an. xx. Foliorum
Absinthii Siccorum, xv. Dried leaves of Wormwood, xv. Nardi Indicae, x.
Indian-Nard, x.

After you have melted the white Wax, with the Oil of Quinces, in a glazed
Earthen-pot over a gentle fire, and stirred it till it begins to thick'n,
incorporate with it all the other ingredients very finely powdered.

You may melt the Mastich in some part of the Oil, and mix it afterward with
the dissolution of the Wax, if the Mastich be very clean. But because it is
generally foul, we are obliged to beat it apart in a Brass-Mortar, sprinkling
it with some drops of water, and to pass it through a Silk-sieve; and then this
Powder is easily mixed with the rest.

The Ancients prescribe, after the melting the white Wax in Oil of Roses, to
wash the mixture several times in Rose Water; and then having melted it again,
to wash it again with Juice of Quinces, and thick Wine. But because these
Lotions add very little Astringency to these sorts of Remedies, it is much
better to make use of the Oil of Quinces wherein the Juice of Quinces has
boiled, and to let alone the Oil of Roses.

It is called the Stomach-Searcloth, because it is chiefly used in distempers
of the Stomach, which it strengthens, helps digestion, gives an appetite, stays
vomiting, expels wind, digests bad humors, and facilitates their expulsion;
for which reason it is applied hot to the Stomach.

Ceratum Diasulphur. A Cerate of Sulphur.. Olei Nucum Juglandium expressi, lb
j.. Oil of Wall-nuts pressed, lb j. Florum Sulphuris, ij. Flowers of Sulphur,
ij. Salis Tartari, j. Salt of Tartar, j.

Digest them all together in a Sand-bath moderately hot, till the Flowers of
Sulphur are dissolved in the Oil: Pour out by inclination the clear liquor into
a Brass Fryingpan tinned within, and over a gentle fire melt therein

Cerae Citrinae, iiij. Yellow Wax, iiij. Colophoniae, iij. Colophony, iij.

Then taking the Pan from the fire, and stirring the Ingredients till they are
half cold, incorporate

Myrrhae Elect. subtiliter pulverat. ad pondus omnium, and factum erit Ceratum.
The full weight of all the Ingredients of Myrrh finely powdered, and the
Searcloth is made.

This Sear-cloth is very proper to soften and dissolve scrophulous Tumors, and
all sorts of exterior gatherings together of cold Matters hard to dissolve. It
is also a Specific to dissolve Tumors in the Testicles, caused by some
Venereal Venom, and to cleanse all sorts of Ulcers. It is to be spread upon
Linen, or upon Leather, and applied to the parts affected; but when it is
applied to the Testicles, make use of a Purse and Swathing-bands.

CHAP. VI. Of Emplasters.
EMplasters are Compositions outwardly applied, but more solid then Ointments,
so as to be made into hard Rolls, or Langates, when they are boiled, and cold;
and are kept wrapped only up in Paper. Emplasters were invented to make a longer
stay upon the parts then Oils and Ointments, and because they keep much longer,
without any diminution of their virtue. Oils, Fats, Wax, Pitch, dry Rosins,
Turpentine and Gums, are the usual Ingredients of Emplasters, to which are
sometimes added Litharge, Ceruse, Verdigrease, several Powders, and several
Liquors.

There are no absolute Rules for the proportion of the Ingredients, but what
are to be observed in the particular Receipts of several Plasters, in the
preparation of which you shall find what is to be practiced, as well for the
particular ordering of every Medicament, as for the boiling and mixture of the
whole. Emplasters are used for the cure of Wounds and Ulcers, to assuage pain,
strengthen, stay Defluxions, Vomitings, Emrods, for Suppuration, Dissipating,
Dissolving; and for many other purposes too long to recite.

Emplastrum Album, sive de Cerusa. The white Plaster, or Plaster of Ceruse..
Cerusae Venetae, and. Venetian-Ceruse, and Olei Rosati, an. lb iiij. Oil of
Roses, an. lb iiij. Aquae Fontanae, lb ij. Fountain Water, lb ij. Cerae Albae,
viij. White Wax, viij.

Take white, weighty, pure and brittle Ceruse, and rub it to powder over a
Hairsieve reversed: Then put it into a large Copper-Vessel, broad at the top,
and conic toward the bottom, and tinned within, and incorporate the oil and
water prescribed, cold as they are, with the Powder, stirring them with a
strong wooden Spatula, about two foot long, and two fingers broad at one end;
then set the Pan over a Charcoal-fire lighted in a proper Furnace, and boil the
Ingredients, stirring them without intermission, till they begin to sink to the
bottom of the Vessel, not so much by the diminution of the heat of the fire, as
the consumption of the water that kept them so high: Then taking the Pan from
the fire, try the consistence of the Syrup, (and if it be not sufficiently
boiled, set it on again, to evaporate by continual stirring that little
moisture that may remain, and hinder the Plaster from thickning as it ought.
When it is sufficiently boiled, melt the Wax into it, still stirring it till it
be almost cold: Then take out the whole mass, and upon a smooth Table
moistened, make it up into little rolls, as thick and long as your finger, and
cover them with Paper.

Though this Plaster may be made with no more then three pound of Ceruse,
according to the old Dispensatories, and boiling it very gently, and without
making use of any moisture; yet I am of opinion, that the augmenting the weight
of the Ceruse, augments the virtue of the Plaster; and that the addition of
the water preserves the whiteness of it, and facilitates the preparation.
Minium is left out, in regard the Plaster is intended to be white, though you
may make use of Litharge well prepared, and it will be almost as white as that
made with Ceruse.

According to the directions above-giv'n, while the water serves as an
Intermedium between the Oil, the Ceruse, and the Fire, keeping the Ingredients
raised, and as it were suspended, and prevents the ill impressions which
otherwise they might receive, you may boil the Plaster in an hour, or an hour
and a half, and have it as white and as good as can be desired; and not being
subject to the long and troublesome Preparation of the Ancients, there is no
fear of that ill success that usually attends it. Nor is there any need of
washing the Ceruse, since the Water boiled with it, and preserving the good
qualities of the Ceruse, during the Coction of the Emplaster, produces a better
Effect then all the Lotions that can be expected.

Some add and boil distilled Vinegar in this Emplaster, pretending to open the
Ceruse, and make it more fit to incorporate with the Oil: But that care is to
little purpose, since that Ceruse, and all Limes, or Calx's of Lead, easily
incorporate with Oil, by the means of boiling and stirring, without the help of
the Vinegar.

As for the addition of Bay Salt, I think there is no reason for it; for that
would but make the Plaster cause smarting and stinging, which is principally
designed to heal the deformities of the Skin, to dry up Peelings and
superficial Exulcerations, to cicatrize Wounds and Ulcers, and allay
Inflammations. It is also approved for the cure of Scalds and Burnings.

Emplastrum Palmeum. The Diapalma Plaster.. Lithargyri Auri preparati, and.
Litharge of Gold, and Olei Communis, an. lb iij. Common Oil, an. lb iij.
Axungiae Suillae, and Sows Grease, and Decocti tenuiorum Ramorum Palmae vel
Quercus, an. lb ij. Decoction of the tender Boughs of Palms o^ Oak, an. lb ij.

Boil the tops of the Branches of Palm or Oak, bruised or cut very small, over
a gentle fire, in three pints of Water, to the consumption of the half; and
having pressed out the whole, reserve the strained Decoction. Choose the
Litharge of Gold of a deep color, greasy to handle, and having bruised it in
a large Brass Mortar, and steeped it in two or three pints of Water, pour out
the thick Water hastily into another Vessel, which Water will be charged with
the most subtle part of the Litharge, while the grosser descends to the bottom
of the Water: then beat the Litharge in the Mortar again, steep it in the first
Lotion, or in fresh Water, and having poured out the troubled Water, by
Inclination, into the fine Litharge at the bottom of the Vessel; do this again,
till there remain at the bottom of the Mortar nothing but only the impure
Litharge, that will not be beaten smaller: Then let the Lotions settle, and
pour out the Water by Inclination, and dry the Powder. Take the quantity of
this Powder prescribed, and mix it cold in such a Copper pot as is described
for the Ceruse Plaster, stirring it with the Oil, Grease, and Decoction of
Palm branches; and when they are well incorporated together, boil them over a
good fire, in a proper Furnace, stirring them continually with a wood'n
Spatula, and keeping an equal heat during the Coction;

Sub finem, addendo, Toward the end whereof, add, Chalcitidis nativae, vel
Vitrioli ad rubedinem calcinati, and in portione Decocti diluti, iv. Of Natural
Chalcitis, or Vitriol calcined to redness, and steeped in some part of the
Decoction, iv.

Then boil them all together to the consistence of an Emplaster.

If you desire the Plaster should look white, add double the weight of white
Vitriol.

This Method of Boiling the Tops of the Palm-branches, and consuming the
Decoction with the Plaster, is superior to any other; for while it imparts
thereby the Virtue of those Ingredients to the Emplaster, it hinders the bad
Impressions of the fire, and boyls the Emplaster in less time.

There is no Plaster more in use then that of Diapalma: It is made use of for
the cure of Wounds, Ulcers, Tumors, Burns, Contusions, Fractures, Childblains,
and to lay upon Cauteries, as well in Plaster, as in Saradrap, and is almost
an Universal Remedy for all sorts of external Sores. Sometimes it is reduced to
the consistence of a Ceruse, by mixing with it a third or fourth part of its
weight in Honey, by the name of Diapalma dissolved, or Cerate of Diapalma.

Emplastrum Diachylon Simplex. Simple Diachylon Plaster.. Radicum Altheae
mundatarum, and minutim incisarum, vj.. Roots of Marshmallows, cleans'd and
cut small, vj. Seminum integrorum Lini, and Fenugreci, an. iv. Whole Seeds of
Line, and Fengreek, an. iv. Aquae Fontanae, lb vj. Fountain Water, lb vj.

Macerate them twenty four hours over a very soft fire, stirring them from time
to time; then boil then over a gentle fire, to the consistence of a thick
Muscilage: which done, strain and press them out strongly. Then

. Olei Communis, lb iv.. Common Oil, lb iv. Lithargyri Auri, lb ij. Litharge
of Gold, lb ij.

Mix the Oil with the Litharge cold, in a Vessel like the former; and having
added and well incorporated the Muscilages, stir the whole without
intermission, and as swiftly as may be, as well to keep the Litharge from
falling to the bottom, as to procure the Plaster its due whiteness. Continue
boiling and stirring till the Mass begins to sink, which is a sign that the
greatest part of the Muscilages is consumed; then slack'n the fire to half the
heat, and only to evaporate the superfluous moisture, which being consumed,
the Plaster is sufficiently boiled to the whiteness and consistence it ought to
have.

Some would have the Muscilages added by degrees, and at the end of the
Coction: But beside that it is a more tedious way, it is most certain, that the
Muscilages will bind the Litharge with the Oil much better, and keep it from
burning, not burning themselves, which they would do, if only put in at the
end; and by their assistance the Plaster becomes much more white, and of a
better consistence.

It is called Diachylon, from the mixture of the Juyces of the Roots of Althea,
and Seeds of Line and Fengreek. It is called White, from its color.

I need not give you the Receipt of Emplastrum Diachylon Ireatum, which may be
made at any time, by mixing an ounce of fine Powder of Florence Orrice, with a
pound of Diachylon; which is highly recommended to soften and dissolve
Hardnesses and Schyrrous Tumors of the Liver, Spleen, and all the Bowels; to
discuss scrofulous or Kings-Evil-Humours, and the old remainders of Apostemes.
It allays the heat of Wounds, conglutinates those which are not very deep,
cures the Inflammations of the Neck of the Matrix, being put up like a
Pessarie, eases the Gouttie; and, in a word, is proper wherever there is
occasion to mollify and cool.

Emplastrum Diachylon compositum Gummatum. Compound Diachylon Gumm'd.. Radicum
Altheae, mundatarum and minutim incisarum, iv.. Roots of Marshmallows,
cleans'd and cut small, iv. Ficuum, and Figgs, and Passularum pinguium
mundatarum and pariter incisarum, and Fat Raisins cleans'd and cut small, and
Seminum integrorum Lini, and Fenugreci, an. ij. ss. Whole Seeds of Line, and
Fengreek, an. ij. ss. Aquae Fontanae, lb vj. Fountain Water, lb vj.

Put them all together into a glazed Earthen pot, and set the pot over a very
soft fire for twenty four hours, stirring the Matters from time to time with a
wood'n Spatula: then augmenting the fire, boil the whole gently, still stirring
them, till the Muscilages are become very thick; strain and press them, and
reserve the Muscilages.

Eodemque tempore, And at the same time,. Succorum Scillae, and Ireos
Nostratis, an. iv.. Juyces of Squills, and French Orrice, an. iv.

Wrap a large Squill in Wheaten paste, and put it into a Bakers Oven among the
Bread; throw away the paste and the dry skins, and beat the moist slices in a
Marble Mortar, with a wooden pestle: then strain and press out the juice
through a small Linen bag. Rasp or bruise the Orrice, newly gathered, in a
Mortar, and squeeze out the juice through a Linen bag.

Tunc in Muscilaginem redige, Then reduce into a Muscilage Ichthyocollae
minutum incisae, j. Of Mouth-Glew or Water-Glew, cut small, j.

Put it into a glazed Earthen pot, and pour upon it four ounces of the
foregoing Juyces: keep the pot over a very soft fire, stirring the Ingredients
with a wooden Spatula, till the whole be reduced into a just Muscilage, and
keep it apart.

Tunc, Then,. Lithargyri Auri preparati, lb ij.. Litharge of Gold prepared, lb
ij. Oleorum Chamomillae, Oils of Camomil, Ireos Nostratis, and Anethi, an. xvj.
French Orrice, and Anise, an. xvj.

Put the Litharge in a proper Copper pot, and incorporate it, from the fire,
with the Oils and the first Muscilages, stirring them continually with a wooden
Spatula, and boil them together, as I directed in the white Diachylon: When
they are almost boiled, slacken the fire, and add the Muscilages of the
Water-glew, incorporated with the Oesipus, stirring them continually, till the
moisture of the Muscilages be almost consumed, and that the Composition be
sufficiently thick:

Tunc, Then,. Terebinthinae Venetae, vj.. Venice Turpentine, vj. Resinae Pini,
Pine Rosine, Cerae Flavae, and Yellow Wax, and Oesipi humidi, an. iv. Moist
Grease of Wool, an. iv. Galbani, Galbanum, Sagapeni, and Sagapen, and Bdellii
in Vino dilutorum, trajectorum and ad Mellis densitatem coctorum, an. ij.
Bdellium dissolved in Wine* passed through a strong Cloth Sieve, and boiled to
the thickness of Honey, an. ij.

Mix the Oesipus with the Water-glew as before. Melt the Wax and Rosin in the
hot Consistence: Incorporate the Gums with the Turpentine, and having mixed the
whole, set it over a gentle fire, till the superfluous moisture of the Gums be
consumed; then take the Pan from the fire, let the Plaster cool, and make it
up into Rolls, to be covered with Paper.

The most part of the Receipts of this Emplaster in the Dispensatories, not
containing above the half of the Receipt of this, order an ounce and half for
the Dose of every sort of Muscilage, not having determined the quantity of
every part of the Simples out of which they are to be extracted; nor having
considered, that so small a quantity of Muscilage cannot communicate much
virtue to an Emplaster which requires more then the simple Diachylon, in the
Composition of which, they have ordered Muscilages in a larger quantity. For
which reasons, we have prescribed the quantity of the Ingredients out of which
the Muscilages are to be extracted, and so ordered it, that the Plaster may
have its due soliditie, and that the Mass may be considerable.

Could you get Gums in tears, perfectly pure, you might soften and melt them in
a Brass Mortar, heated with a hot Pestle, and mix them in the Composition being
incorporated with the Turpentine, without keeping the Plaster long upon the
Fire: But being foul, and hardly to be got clean enough for internal Medicines,
there is no better way then to dissolve, strain, and thicken them, as is
directed; especially considering, that it is a very difficult thing to powder
these Gums, especially if they be now; and that for these purposes there is no
great regard to be had to the dissipation of their subtle parts.

This Plaster is used in all cases where the simple Diachylon is prescribed;
but it operates with much more efficacy then the other, because of the powerful
Ingredients which are added. The principal Virtues of it are, to digest,
dissolve, discuss, and ripen all sorts of Tumors.

Emplastrum de Mucaginibus. Emplaster of Muscilages.. Radicum Altheae
mundatarum, and minutim incisarum,. Roots of Marshmallows, cleans'd, and cut
very small, Corticis medii Vlmi pariter incisi, The middle Rind of Elm, cut in
the same manner, Seminum integrorum Lini, and Whole Seeds of Line, and
Fenugreci, an. j. ss. Fengreek, an. j ss. Aquae communes, lb ij. ss. Common
Water, lb ij ss.

Put them into a glazed Earthen pot, and let them macerate for twenty four
hours over a very soft fire, stirring them often with a wooden Spatula; then
augment the fire, and boil them to a sufficient thickness. Mix with this
Muscilage

Oleorum Chamomillae, Oils of Camomil, Liliorum, and Lillies, and Anethi, and
Dill, and Medulla cruris Bovis, an. j ss. Marrow of an Oxes Thigh, an. j ss.

Boil the Muscilages again, with the Oils and the Marrow, over a very gentle
Fire, for fear of burning the Muscilages, till the moisture be almost all
consumed.

Tunc, Then,. Cerae Citrinae, xx.. Yellow Wax, xx. Terebinthinae, ij.
Turpentine, ij. Ammoniaci, Ammoniac, Galbani, Galbanum, Opopanacis, Opopanax,
Sagapeni, an. ss. Sagapen, an. ss. Croci subtiliter pulverat. ij. Saffron
finely powdered, ij.

Melt the Wax in the hot Oils where the Muscilages were boiled; then take the
whole from the fire, and when it is almost cold, first add the Turpentine with
the Gums incorporated, being melted or dissolved as before directed; then
lastly add the Saffron, and make the Plaster into Rolls.

The Virtues of this Plaster are much the same with the former; but it has
this particular, not to suppurate Swellings which can be cured by dissolution:
And therefore it is very much used to dissolve Contusions in the Head, Breasts,
and other Parts, when you desire to hinder Suppuration, the Matters not being
disposed to that purpose. However, it will ripen those that may be conveniently
brought to Suppuration.

Emplastrum Polychrestum. A Plaster for many Uses.. Olei Communis, lb ij..
Common Oil, lb ij. Aquae fontanae lb j ss. Fountain Water, lb j ss. Cerusae,
and Ceruse, Lithargyri Auri, and Litharge of Gold, and Argenti, an. lb ss.
Silver, an. lb ss.

Powder the Litharge and Ceruse, and having incorporated them with the Oil and
Water cold, boil them i^ a Copper pan tinned within, as directed for the
Diapalma; and when the Water is almost consumed, and the Ingredients boiled to
the thickness of an Emplaster,

. Cerae Citrinae, and. Yellow Wax, and Terebinthina Venetae, an. viij.
Venice-Turpentine, an. viij.

Melt the Wax in little pieces; then take off the Pan from the fire, and add
the Turpentine, and when the plaster is almost cold, make it up into Rolls.

This Plaster is called Polychrestum, because it is proper for many
Infirmities; particularly, for all sorts of Ulcers and Burns, Chops and Clefts
in the Breasts, Hands, Feet, and Fundament, whether proceeding from
Childblains, or otherwise. It is also used for the cure of Wounds, and to
discuss and dissipate the remainder of Apostemes. It is also proper to make a
Saradrap to dress Cauteries.

Emplastrum Nigrum. The Black Plaster.. Olei Communis, lb j.. Common Oil, lb
j. Vini, and Wine, and Aceti, an. lb j. Vinegar, an. lb j. Lithargyri Auri, and
Litharge of Gold, and Cerusae Venetae, an. viij. Venetian Ceruse, an. viij.

Incorporate the Ceruse and Litharge with the Oil cold; then mix them with the
Wine and Vinegar, boil them in a Copper tinned Pan as before, over a gentle
fire at first, but so increased as to consume the moisture. Stir the
Ingredients with a wooden Spatula, and continue to boil them over a moderate
fire, till they look of a dark color, and their consistence be a little
thicker then that of ordinary Emplasters.

Deinde, Then,. Cerae Flavae, lb j.. Yellow Wax, lb j. Colophoniae, Colophonie,
Pices Navalis, and Black Pitch, and Terebinthinae Venetae, an. lb ss.
Venice-Turpentine, an. lb ss. Lapidis Magnetis preparati, Magnet-stone
prepared, Plumbi usti, and Burnt Lead, and Myrrhae Electae, an. ij. Select
Myrrh, an. ij.

Melt the Wax, Pitch, and Colophonie in the hot Composition; then take the Pan
from the fire, and add the Turpentine, and when the Mass is half cold, mix the
Adamant ground upon Porphyrie, moistning it with a little Water, or some
Vulnerarie Decoction; and the Lead burnt in a Crucible, with equal parts of
Sulphur, to make the Plaster look more black; and the Myrrh powdered.

This Plaster is highly commended for the cure of all sorts of Wounds, as well
made by Cuts or Thrusts, as bruising. It is also used for the cure of Ulcers,
especially those that are old and obstinate, being very proper to cleanse and
consolidate.

Emplastrum Cephalicum. A Cephalic Emplaster.. Gummi Tacamahaccae sublimis,.
Odoriferous Tacamahacca, Benzoyni, Benjamin, Sytracis, Storax, Mastiches,
Mastich, Hederae, Gum Ivy, Olibani, Galbanum, Labdani puri, an. ij. Pure
Labdanum, an. ij. Cinnamomi, and Cinnamon, and Terebinth. Venetae, an. j.
Venice-Turpentine, j. Caryophyllorum, and Cloves, and Nucis moschatae, an. ss.
Nutmegs, an. ss.

Beat together in a large Brass Mortar, and sift through a Hair Sieve, the
Cloves, Cinnamon, and Nutmegs. Beat the Tacamahacca, Gum Ivy, Benjamin,
Mastich, Olibanum, apart by themselves, and sift them through a Hair Sieve.
Melt the Labdanum first of all in a hot Brass Mortar, with a heated Pestle;
then the grains of Liquid Storax: after that add the Powders by degrees, well
mingled together before, and reduce the whole into a Plaster, beating the Mass
as long as the heat of the Mortar and the Ingredients will permit.

You may beat and sift the Labdanum, if it be very dry; but it is not much
matter, if you observe my Directions. You might also melt the most part of the
Gums in the hot Mortar, if they be clear and pure, or if you made a less
quantity of Plaster; but the best way is to pulverize them. You may also add a
little more Liquid Storax, if you desire the Plaster softer. The hardness of
the Mass when the Mortar grows cold, requires a continual heat, while you
continue to beat the Ingredients, and to heat the out side when you take them
forth: and for the same reasons the Plaster must be rolled while it is warm.

This Plaster is very much used in Languedock and Provence. It strengthens the
Brain, stays Defluxions, and draws forth the Serosities and thick and viscous
Humors that annoy it: which you shall find true by trial, contrary to the
Opinion of those who say, that Emplasters stop the Pores of the Skin. This
Plaster is usually laid upon the Mould of the Head, and therefore called by
some Emplastrum pro Commissuris, A Plaster for the Sutures. It is also applied
to the Temples, to stay Defluxions that fall from the Eyes and Teeth, and to
ease their pain.

Emplastrum Stomachicum. A Stomach Plaster.. Styracis Electae,. Select Storax,
Tacamahaccae odoratae, an. iv. Odoriferous Tacamahacca, an. iv. Succini, Amber,
Caryophyllorum, Cloves, Nucis Moschatae, Nutmegs, Mastiches, and Mastich, and
Aloes Succotrinae, an. j. Aloes Succotrine, an. j. Cinnamomi, ss. Cinnamon, ss.
Styracis liquidae, q. s. Liquid Storax, q. s.

Bruise together in a large Brass Mortar, and sift through a Hair Sieve the
Cinnamon, Cloves, Nutmegs, and Amber: Beat apart, and sift through the same
Sieve the Tacamahacca, Mastich, and Aloes. After that, having heated a large
Brass Mortar and Pestle, melt the Rozen and Storax, and having incorporated
them with about four ounces of Liquid Storax, add by degrees the Powders, well
mingled before; and after you have beaten the Ingredients for some time, to
unite them well, take the Mass out of the Mortar while it is warm, and roll it
up before it be cold.

There are several Receipts of Stomach Emplasters, composed of a great number
of Ingredients, but very ill proportioned, and must in all things give way to
this; of which all the Ingredients, as odoriferous as full of virtue, are very
proper to strengthen the Stomach, assist Digestion, stay vomiting, and
dissipate Flatuosities, and create an Appetite. This Plaster is to be spread
upon Leather, or Silk, like a Scutcheon, and laid warm upon the Stomach, and
may be worn for a longer or less time, as necessity requires

Emplastrum Nicotianae. The Tobacco Plaster.. Sevi Arietini,. Rams Tallow,
Picis Albae, and Black Pitch, and Resinae, an. lb j ss. Rosin, an. lb j ss.
Cerae Citrinae, lb j. Yellow Wax, lb j. Nicotianae recentis contusae, lb iij.
Fresh Tabacco-leaves bruised, lb iij.

Bruise the Tobacco leaves in a Marble Mortar, with a wood'n Pestle; and having
boiled them with the Rams Suet, Pitch, and Rozen, over a gentle fire, in a
Copper pan tinned, stirring them from time to time, till the moisture of the
Nicotian be almost consumed, strain and strongly press forth the Composition:
then let it cool, and having thrown away the Foeces remaining at the bottom,

. Gummi Ammoniaci puri, and. Gum Ammoniac pure, and Terebinthinae Venetae, an.
viij. Venice Turpentine, an. viij.

Melt the Gum Ammoniac in a Brass Mortar heated, and incorporate it with the
Turpentine, and mix them with the other Ingredients, off from the fire; and
when the Mass is almost cold, make it up into Rolls.

Nicotian being the foundation of this Plaster, and the Ingredient that gives
it its principal Virtue, it is but reason that it should be used in a larger
quantity then is prescribed in several Dispensatories: and to the end it may
equally communicate its Color and Virtue, in stead of making use of the Juice,
as the Ancients did, the better way is to put in the Leaves whole, and bruised,
according to the foregoing Directions.

This Plaster is recommended to mollify hard internal Tumors, particularly
those of the Liver and Spleen, although they should prove to be Schirrous;
whence it has acquired the name of The Hepatic and Splenetic Plaster.

Emplastrum de Cicuta. The Hemlock Plaster.. Olei Sambuci, lb ij.. Oil of
Elder, lb ij. Succi Cicutae, lb j. ss. Juice of Hemlock, lb j. ss. Lithargyri
Auri, lb j. Litharge of Gold, lb j.

Boil over a moderate fire the Litharge of Gold powdered, with the Oil and
Juice prescribed, stirring them continually with a large wood'n Spatula, till
the moisture be almost consumed, and that the Mass have the consistence it
ought to have:

Tunc, Then,. Succi Cioutae ad Mellaginem inspissati, lb ss.. Juice of Hemlock
thick'nd to the substance of Honey, lb ss.

Boil the Juice to the thickness of Honey, and over a gentle fire evaporate the
superfluous moisture.

Postea jungatur, Afterward add, Gummi Ammoniaci Aceto Scillitico soluti
trajecti, and lento igne spissati, lb j. Gum Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar of
Squills, passed through a strong cloth, and thick'nd over a gentle fire, lb j.

Stir the whole continually, till the Emplaster have acquired a laudable
consistence, and be fit to be made up in Rolls.

You may also make a Plaster of Hemlock, making the same preparation of it as
of Nicotian, and mixing it with the same Medicaments as are prescribed for the
Nicotian Plaster, and observing the same Doses.

The Hemlock Plaster may produce the same Effects as that of Nicotian, being
used for the same Infirmities; and it may be as well called The Hepatic and
Splenetic Plaster.

Emplastrum Diaphoreticum. A Diaphoretic Plaster.. Cerae Flavae, xvj.. Yellow
Wax, xvj. Myrrhae Electae, Select Myrrh, Colophoniae, an. iv. Colophonie, an.
iv. Succini Citrini, iij. Yellow Amber, iij. Terebinthinae, Turpentine, Gummi
Ammoniaci, and Gum Ammoniac, and Galbani in Aceto dissolutorum, trajectorain,
and spissatorum, an. ij. Galbanum, all dissolved in Vinegar, passed through a
strong Cloth, and thick'nd, an. ij. Sandaracae, j. Sandarach, j. Thuris and
Mastichis, an. ss. Frankincence and Mastich, an. ss.

After you have powdered the Myrrh, Amber, Frankincense, and Mastich, every one
apart, and passed them through a Silk Sieve, dissolve the Ammoniac and Galbanum
in Vinegar, strain through a course Cloth, and thick'n them over a gentle fire.
Melt the Wax and Colophonie in a Copper pan, and when the Ingredients are half
cooled, put in the thick'nd Gums incorporated with the Turpentine; and a while
after, add the Powders, and the Emplaster is made.

This Plaster is good to draw forth Scrosities that lie in the Flesh, through
the pores of the Body; so that you shall find them in drops upon the Plaster
and the Skin. It is a Specific against the Sciatica, the Tumors under the
Ears, Swellings of the Hands and Feet, and all Tumors that require not
Suppuration. It is also prevalent against the Scorbutic Hardnesses of the Legs,
Nerves, and Joints; against Contusions, to discharge them of the Scrosities
that fall upon them at the time of Fractures and Dislocations, and to allay the
pains thereof.

Emplastrum de Galbano. The Galbanum Plaster.. Galbani, vj.. Galbanum, vj.
Emplastri de Meliloto, and Emplaster of Melilot, and Diachyli simplicis, an.
iij. Simple Diachylon, an. iij. Cerae Flavae, ij. Yellow Wax, ij. Terebinthinae
Venetae, j. Venice Turpentine, j. Croci Pulverati, vj. Saffron pulverized, vj.

Dissolve the Galbanum in Vinegar, pass it through a strong Cloth, and thick'n
it over a moderate Fire: Melt the Wax, cut in pieces, with the Diachylon and
Melilot, over a soft Fire: then add the Turpentine, incorporated with the
Galbanum. Then take it off the fire, stir it till it begins to grow thick, and
lastly add the Saffron powdered.

This Plaster has been very much experimented for the softning and dissolving
of hard and schirrous Tumors; to assuage the Pains of the Shoulders, the
Breast, the Sides, the Nipples, the Hypochondrium, Liver and Spleen, caused by
Flatuosities or cold Humors: For, it softens, asswages, digests, dissolves,
and powerfully discusses Matters gathered together in those Parts.

Emplastrum de Meliloto. Melilot Plaster.. Summitatum floridarum Meliloti,
iij.. The flowrie Tops of Melilot, iij. Radicis Iridis, Root of Orrice, Seminis
Fenugreci, Fengreek-seed, Foliorum Absinthii, Leaves of Wormwood, Gummi
Ammoniaci, Gum Ammoniac, Myrrhae, an. j. Myrrh, an. j. Radicum Cyperi, Roots of
Cyperus, Altheae, Marshmallows, Nardi Celticae, Celtic Nard, Baccarum Lauri,
Laurel Berries, Florum Chamomillae, Flowers of Camomil, Croci, an. ss. Saffron,
an. ss. Cerae Citrinae, lb j. Yellow Wax, lb j. Resinae, Rosin, Picis Albae,
White Pitch, Sevi Hircini, an. iv. Goats Tallow, an, iv. Terebinthinae Venetae,
and Venice Turpentine, Olei Absinthii, an. iij. Oil of Wormwood, an. iij.

Dry and pulverize the Saffron apart; beat the Roots, Seeds, Berries, Herbs,
Flowers, and also the Gums, being chosen very pure, and pass them through a
Silk-sieve: Melt the Wax over a gentle fire in a Copper-pan, together with the
Rosin, white Pitch, and Goats Tallow, after which add the Turpentine and Oil of
Wormwood; then take the Pan from the fire, let it cool a little, then
incorporate the Powders by degrees, and when all the Ingredients are well
united, make up the Plaster in Rolls, and paper it up for use.

The most part of the Receipts of Melilot in the Dispensatories are very much
perplexed, as well for the great number of Medicaments, the irregular
proportions, as the various and irrational preparations: And therefore I am
persuaded this Receipt will be admitted before others, when the regularity of
the proportions, and the easiness of the preparation shall be examined.

This Plaster is chiefly recommended to thicken and discuss hard and condensed
matters: among the rest, the inveterate hardnesses of the Spleen, Liver and
Stomach, and all the Bowels. It is also proper to bring down the extension of
the Hypochondriums, to dissipate Flatuosities, and appease the pains that are
caused thereby.

Emplastrum de Betonica. The Betony-Plaister.. Foliorum virentium. The green
leaves of Betonicae, Betony, Lauri, Laurel, Plantaginis, Plantain, Apii, and
Parsley, and Verbenae rectae contusorum, an. M iij. Vervain rightly bruised,
an. M iij. Resinae, Rosin, Picis Albae, White Pitch, Terebinthinae Venetae, and
Venice-Turpentine, and Cerae Citrinae, an. lb ij. Yellow Wax, an. lb ij.

Bruise the leaves in a Marble-Mortar with a wooden Pestle; melt the Wax, Pitch
and Rosin over a gentle fire in a tinned Copper-Pan, and afterward the
Turpentine; and then having mixed the bruised Herbs with them, boil them
together, stirring them continually over a gentle fire, till the moisture of
the Herbs be almost all consumed: Strain the Ingredients hot through a New
Cloth, and press them strongly forth; when the straining is almost cold,
separate and throw away the Feces, and melt it again over a soft fire: Take it
off; and when it begins to thicken, and to be half cold,

. Mastiches, and. Mastich, and Olibani subtiliter pulverat. an. ij. Olibanum
very finely powdered, an. ij.

Mix them with the Composition, and make up the Plaster into Rolls.

This Plaster bears the Name of Betony, as being the principal Ingredient.
There are several Receipts, some less, some more compounded. Some only make use
of the Juices of these Plants: But certainly the Herbs bruised and boiled among
the other Ingredients, are incomparably better for the reasons already
alleged. Some use black Pitch, though inferior to the white, as well because
it discolours the Plaster, as for that it has lost much of its good parts by
the burning of the branches of the Trees from whence it was drawn; whereas
white Pitch flows of it self from the Tree, and possesses all those volatile
parts which are dissipated in the other.

The use of this Plaster is to heal wounds of the Head, which it cleanses and
cicatrizes. It also fetches out of the pores of the Skin the serosities that
stay in several parts of the body, especially those of Sciatica's and
Rhumatismes. It also dissolves Contusions, and soften Corns in the Feet.

Emplastrum Manus Dei. The Plaster of Gods Hand.. Olei communis, lb viij..
Common Oil, lb viij. Lithargyri Auri praep. lb iiij. Litharge of Gold prepared,
lb iiij. Cerae Citrinae, lb ij. Yellow Wax, lb ij. Terebinthinae Venet. lb j.
Venice-Turpentine, lb j. Galbani, Galbanum, Opoponacis, Opoponax, Ammoniaci,
Ammoniac, Sagapeni, Sagapen, Myrrhae, Myrrh, Olibani, Olibanum, Mastiches, an.
viij. Mastich, an. viij. Olei Laurini, vj. Oil of Laurel, vj. Lapidis
Calaminaris, Lapis Calaminaris, Magnetis, Loadstone, Aristolochiae longae and
rotundae, an. iiij. Long and round Birthwort, an. iiij.

Grind the Lapis Calaminaris and Loadstone upon a Porphyry moistened with some
vulnerary water, and dry them. Beat together in a large Brass-Mortar the two
Birthworts, and the Myrrh and Mastich apart; sift all the Powders together
thorough a Silk-sieve; then put the full weight of the Galbanum, Ammoniac,
Opoponax, and Sagapen, well bruised, into an Earthen glazed pot, and dissolve
them over a gentle fire, in about two pints of good Vinegar; strain them hot
through a strong Cloth, and having well pressed them, return that which remains
in the Cloth over the fire; and having dissolved it in new Vinegar, strained
and pressed it as before, evaporated by degrees over a gentle fire the
superfluous moisture of the Vinegar, and boil the Gums till they are
sufficiently thick, at which time incorporate the Turpentine, and keep the
whole apart.

Then having put the Litharge of Gold prepared in Powder in a Copper-Pot
tinned, incorporate it cold with the Oil, stirring them continually with a
large wood'n Spatula; then mix therewith three pints of common water, and boil
them together over a good fire, stirring them without intermission, till the
whole has acquired the consistence of a solid Emplaster: At which time melt the
Wax; and then taking the Pot off the fire, when the whole is somewhat cold, add
the Gums incorporated with the Turpentine, and Oil of Laurel, and lastly the
Powders, and be sure that all the Ingredients be well united together.

Manus Dei Plaster is very famous, and has been much used for a long time, so
that many Ladies of Quality take the pains to make it, and distribute it to the
Poor, whom I advise to be careful of the directions here given for its
preparation: For it is not enough to have a good Receipt, if the Medicine be
spoiled in the preparation. The addition of the water causes the Plaster to be
sooner boiled, keeps the Litharge from sinking, and the Oil from burning.

Which occasions me to give this farther Item, that you must stay till the
Litharge and Oil have acquired the consistence of a solid Plaster, before you
add the Wax; otherwise by the addition of the weight of the Wax, which you must
be constrained to augment, the Plaster would prove too soft.

This Plaster is every day succesfully used for the cure of all sorts of
Wounds, Ulcers, Contusions and Tumors: It mollifies, digests, dissolves, and
brings to suppuration such matters as require it: For it never suppurates those
which may be dissipated by transpiration, or otherwise; and when it has ripened
and drawn the matters forth, it draws no more, but cleanses, cicatrizes, and
consolidates altogether.

Emplastrum Andreae a Cruce. The Plaster of Andrea Cruce.. Resinae, xij..
Rosin, xij. Gummi Elemmi, iiij. Gum Elemmi, iiij. Terebinthinae Venetae, and
Venice-Turpentine, and Olei Laurini, an. ij. Oil of Laurel, an. ij.

Break the Rosin and Gum Elemmi, and having melted them together over a gentle
fire, add the Turpentine, and Oil of Laurel; and when they are all well
incorporated, strain the whole through a Cloth, to separate the filth that may
be mixed with the Gums; then let the Plaster cool, and roll it up.

This Plaster is used for wounds of the Breast, for which it serves without a
Tent. It is also proper to cleanse and consolidate other wounds and Ulcers, to
dissipate Contusions, strengthen the parts in Fractures and Dislocations of the
bones, and to draw forth from the Pores such serous humors, as are the cause
of the Sciatica and Rhumatismes.

Emplastrum Magneticum Angeli Salae. Angelus Sala's Magnetic Plaster..
Sagapeni,. Sagapen, Ammoniaci, and Ammoniac, and Galbani, an. iij. Galbanum,
an. iij. Cerae Flavae, Yellow Wax, Terebinthinae, an. iiij ss. Turpentine, iiij
ss. Magnetis Arsenicalis, iij. Arsenical Magnet, iij. Terrae Vitrioli lotae, j.
Earth of Vitriol washed, j. Olei succini, ss. Oil of Amber, ss.

Angelus Sala, the Author of this Plaster, prepares it thus.

After you have dissolved the Gums in twenty ounces of Vinegar of Squills over
a moderate fire, pass them through a strong Cloth, and boil them to the
ordinary consistence of Emplasters, melt the Wax in a Copper-Pan with the Oil
of Amber, and having taken them off the fire, incorporate with them the
Turpentine, Earth of Vitriol, and Arsenical Magnet finely pulverized, together
with the Gums thickn'd, and the Plaster is made.

Magnes Arsenicalis. The Arsenical Magnet.. Antimonii Hungarici,. Hungarian
Antimony, Sulphuris Flavi, and Yellow Sulphur, Arsenici Chrystallini, an. ij.
Chrystaline Arsenic, an. ij.

Pulverize two ounces of pure Antimony, as much yellow Sulphur, and as much
Chrystaline Arsenic; and having mingled them together, put them over a
Sand-bath moderately hot, keep the Cucurbit there till the Ingredients are
altogether dissolved, which you shall know by putting into the substances a
small iron rod, for then they will stick to the rod and rope like Turpentine,
but of a red shining color, and like to Marcasites: Then let the Matters cool,
break the Cucurbit, and keep the mass to be pulverized, when occasion requires.

There are some, who to prepare Earth of Vitriol, sublime it with equal parts
of Salt-Ammoniac: But besides that it is a difficult thing so to sublime the
acid and salt parts either of the one or the other, but that there will remain
some portion among the Earth, there is no need of adding Salt-Ammoniac to the
Vitriol, nor any thing else to obtain the Earth, in regard you may easily find
it at the end of the Distillation. As for washing the Earth of Vitriol, which
some contend against, I think the Authors judgment is to be followed, who
prescribes it washed. Besides, I am of opinion, that a dry Earth deprived of
all the parts necessary to compose a mixed body, is more proper to receive and
impregnate it self with new substances, then if it had all that is required to
make up the body of a real Vitriol; considering that it is not intended to cut
or attenuate, but to suck up, or draw to it self the superfluous matters of the
wounds, which may have some similitude of substance with the acid or salt parts
which are found in the composition of the Vitriol. And to show that this Earth
still retains a Magnetic faculty, we find by experience, that being exposed to
the Air for some time, especially in the night, it rebecomes Vitriol, and is
able to afford almost the same Spirit, and the same parts which it had before
Distillation.

The Author of this Plaster cries it up highly, and affirms, that being
applied upon Bubo's and Pestilential Carbuncles, it ripens them quickly, opens
them, and draws at the same time the Venom from the center to the
circumference, by its magnetic faculty and similitude of substance, not
permitting the wound to close, till all the venomous matter be drawn forth. He
also assures us, that it makes the wound fit to be cleans'd and consolidated,
when all the virulent matter is drawn forth. It also perfectly cures the
King's Evil, drawing the scrofulous matters from the remote parts of the body,
perfecting it is work in five or six weeks; after which, it closes up the part
without the use of any other Remedy: However, the Patient must be careful to
purge, during the Cure, and to use Specific Decoctions, and other internal
Remedies proper for the distemper. Being laid to old, putrid, and obstinate
Ulcers, it draws out the Venom in two or three days, and causes a black Scab,
which is to be softened with Butter, which being taken off, you shall find the
flesh underneath very clean and lively.

The Arsenical Magnet is only a gentle Caustic, which operates with ease and
success.

Emplastrum Divinum. The Divine Plaster.. Lithargyri Auri praep. lb i ss..
Litharge of Gold prepared, lb i ss. Olei communis, lb iij. Common Oil, lb iij.
Aquae Fontanae, lb ij. Fountain Water, lb ij.

Boil them together to the thickness of an Emplaster.

Deinde permisce Add then Lapidis Magnetis praep. vj. Magnet-stone prepared,
vj. Gummi Ammoniaci, Gum-Ammoniac, Galbani, Galbanum, Opoponacis, and Opoponax,
Bdellii, an. iij. Bdellium, an. iij. Myrrhae, Myrrh, Olibani, Olibanum,
Mastiches, Mastich, Viridis Aeris, and Verdigrease, and Aristolochiae Rotundae,
an. i ss. Round Birth-wort, an. i ss. Cerae Flavae, viij. Yellow Wax, viij.
Terebinthinae, iiij. Turpentine, iiij.

Dissolve the Ammoniac, Galbanum, Bdellium and Opoponax in Vinegar over a soft
fire, and thicken them as before directed; prepare the Magnet, as before
directed: Beat the Olibanum, Mastich, Myrrh and Birthwort apart, and having
boiled and thickened the Litharge, Oil, and Water, as before, then melt the Wax
in the hot Composition; and when the Pan is off the fire, and the matters half
cold, add the Gums thick'nd and incorporated with the Turpentine; then the
Magnet mixed with the Birthwort, Myrrh, Mastich, and Olibanum; and lastly, the
Verdigrease; and having well stirred and mixed all the Ingredients together,
make up the Plaster into Rolls.

The virtues and uses of this Plaster are much the same with those of Manus
Dei: It is nevertheless more cleansing, and accompanied with some Acrimony, by
reason of the Verdigrease which it contains. Nevertheless, they may be used for
the same purposes, the one as well as the other, and the one instead of the
other.

Emplastrum Paracelsi. Paracelsus.. Olei communis, lb ij.. Common Oil, lb ij.
Lithargyri Auri, lb j. Litharge of Gold, lb j. Cerae Flavae, lb ss. Yellow Wax,
lb ss. Terebinth. venet. iiij. Venice-Turpentine, iiij. Gummi Ammoniaci, and
Gum-Ammoniac, and Elemmi, an. ij. Elemmi, an. ij. Olei Laurini, i ss. Oil of
Laurel, i ss. Bdellii, Bdellium, Opoponacis, Opoponax, Galbani, Galbanum,
Mastiches, Mastich, Myrrhae, Myrrh, Thuris, Frankincense, Aloes, Aloes, Radicis
Aristolochiae Rotundae, Root of round Birth-wort, Lapidis Calaminaris, an. j.
Lapis Calaminaris, an. j.

Having incorporated the Oil and the Litharge in a large Plaister-Pan, and
mixed with them about a pint and a half of water, boil them together, stirring
them continually with a large wood'n Spatula; and when they are boiled, melt
the Wax in them: then take the Pan from the fire, and mix first the Gummi
Elemmi, melted with the Oil of Laurel, and strained through a Linen Cloth;
after which, add the Ammoniac, Galbanum, Bdellium, and Opoponax dissolved in
Vinegar, strained through a strong Cloth, and well thick'nd over a soft fire,
and incorporated with the Turpentine; then add the Birthwort-root and
Calaminaris finely powdered; and lastly, the Powders of Myrrh, Aloes,
Frankincense, and Mastich; and having well incorporated the whole, make up the
Plaster into Rolls.

The virtues of this Plaster are much the same with those of Manus Dei, and
the Divine Plaster, nevertheless it dries and cicatrizes more.

Emplastrum de Linamento. A Plaster of Lint.. Linamenti veteris minutim
incisi, viij.. Old Lint cut small, viij. Olei communis, and Common Oil, and
Aquae Fontanae, an. lb iij. Fountain Water, an. lb iij.

Boil the Lint in the Oil and Water prescribed over a gentle fire, till a third
part of the water be consumed; then strain and strongly press out the whole.

Expressioni add To the straining add Cerusae Venetae pulverat. lb ij.
Venice-Ceruse, lb ij.

Boil them together in a Copper-Pan over a moderate fire, stirring them
continually, to the substance of ordinary Plasters; then

In illis liquefiant Melt in the hot Composition Cerae Citrinae, xij. Yellow
Wax, xij.

And when the whole is half cold,

. Myrrhae,. Myrrh, Mastiches, Mastich, Olibani, an. iij. Olibanum, an. iij.
Aloes electi, ij. Select Aloes, ij.

Powder them very finely, and mix them with the rest; and when all the
Ingredients are well incorporated, make up the Plaster into Rolls.

Emplastrum Ischiadicum. A Plaster for the Sciatica.. Cerae Citrinae,. Yellow
Wax, Picis Albae, and Pitch white, and Nigrae, and Black, and Terebinthinae,
an. iiij. Turpentine, an. iiij. Gummi Ammoniaci, and Gum-Ammoniac, and Florum
Sulphuris, an. ij. Flowers of Sulphur, an. ij. Olibani, Olibanum, Ireos, and
Orrice, and Fenugreci pulveratorum, an. j. Fengreek powdered, an. j.

Powder the Orrice, Fengreek, and Olibanum apart; and having mixed them with
the Flowers of Sulphur, melt the Ammoniac, the purest you can get, in a large
Brazen-Mortar heated, and incorporate it with the Turpentine; then having
melted the Wax and the Pitch in a small Copper-Pan over a gentle fire, and
passed them, mingle therewith the Ammoniac incorporated with the Turpentine;
when the Composition is half cold, mix the Powders, and make up the Plaster
into Rolls.

This Plaster is very effectual against Sciatic Gouts, drawing forth the
serosities which are usually the cause of those Evils, and eases the pains
thereof. It is also very proper against Rhumatismes, and discusses pains that
are caused by serosities gathered in the Flesh. You must be careful to take off
the Plaster night and morning, and to wipe the part affected, before you lay
it on again.

Emplastrum Stomachicum. A Stomach-Plaister.. Gummi Tacamahaccae sublimis,
iiij.. Odoriferous Tacamahacca, iiij. Labdani puri, Pure Labdanum, Benjamini,
Benjamin, Succini, and Amber, and Resinae Storacis, an. ij. Rosin of Storax,
an. ij. Styracis Liquidae, j. Liquid Storax, j. Olei Nucis Moschatae, ss. Oil
of Nutmegs, ss.

Pulverize very finely apart the Amber, Benjamin, and Tacamahacca; prepare the
Rosin of Storax, as for the Treacle: Heat a large Brass-Mortar and Pestle, and
having melted the Labdanum therein, incorporate with it the Rosin of Storax,
the Liquid Storax, and by little and little, the Powders in the last place; and
having beaten the Mass as long as the heat of the Mortar, and the Ingredients
will permit, take it out, and make it into Rolls, to be covered with Paper.

This Plaster is of a pleasing scent; it wonderfully fortifies the Stomach,
dissipates Wind, gives an Appetite, assists Concoction of the Nourishment, and
stays Vomiting, being laid upon the pit of the Stomach.

There are several Stomach-Emplasters in several Dispensatories, but far
inferior in virtue and odor.

This Plaster may be used instead of the Mastich-Plaister, if you only add to
its Composition two ounces of Powder of Mastich.

Emplastrum pro Matrice. A Plaster for the Matrix.. Galbani purificati and
spissati, iiij.. Galbanum purified and thickn'd, iiij. Tacamahaccae, and
Tacamahacca, and Cerae Citrinae, an, iij. Yellow Wax, an. iij. Myrrhae Electae,
and Select Myrrh, and Terebinthinae, an iij. Turpentine, an. iij. Assa-Faetida,
j. Assa-faetida, j. Pinguedinis in cistide Castorei contentae, ss. The fat
contained in the bag of the Castor, ss. Oleorum stillatitiorum Succini, and
Distilled Oils of Amber, and Rutae, an. j. Rue, an. j.

The Impurities usually mixed with Galbanum, constrain us to dissolve it with
the Assa-Faetida in good Vinegar, and to pass them through a Cloth, and to
thick'n them over a very soft fire: After which, unite these Gums with the
Turpentine, to incorporate the whole with the Turpentine cut into little
pieces, and melted over a very soft fire in a Copper-Pan; add the Castors fat,
and a while after the Myrrh and Tacamahacca powdered; lastly, the distilled
Oils, and then stir and incorporate the whole well together with a
wood'n-Pestle, and the Plaster is made.

This Plaster, as it is here prescribed, is composed of Ingredients well
selected, and well proportioned, and the preparation is not difficult. It is
proper to quiet the irregular motions of the Matrix, to suppress the vapors,
and prevent the Suffocations by them caused. It is to be spread upon Leather
proportionable, and laid upon the Navel, letting it lie on as long as is
necessary. Sometimes you may put a grain of Musk or Cotton upon the middle of
the Plaster before you lay it on, or else put up at the same time some few
grains of Musk or Civet wrapped in Cotton into the Neck of the Matrix.

Emplastrum Oxycroceum. Oxycroceum-Plaister.. Cerae Citrinae,. Yellow Wax,
Picis Navalis, and Black Pitch, and Colophoniae, an. lb j. Colophony, an. lb j.
Terebinthinae, iiij. Turpentine, iiij. Gummi Ammoniaci, and Gum-Ammoniac, and
Galbani aceto dissolutorum, trajectorum and spissatorum, Galbanum dissolved in
Vinegar, strained and thick'nd, Croci, Saffron, Myrrhae, and Myrrh, and Thuris
subtiliter pulveratorum, an. iij. Frankincense very finely pulverized, an. iij.

Having finely pulverized apart the Saffron, Myrrh, Frankincense and Mastich,
and dissolved in Vinegar, strained and thick'nd over a gentle fire the Galbanum
and Ammoniac, melt the Wax over a fire as gentle, adding thereto the Pitch, and
Colophony, being well chosen: Then take the Pan off the fire, and add the
Galbanum and Ammoniac, incorporated before with the Turpentine; a little while
after add the Powders, and mix the whole well.

This Plaster takes its Name from the Saffron and Vinegar which is used for
the dissolution of the Gums: It softens, and dissolves hardnesses, asswages the
pains of the Nerves and Muscles, dissipates Contusions, fortifies the parts in
Fractures and Dislocations of Bones; causes the Serosities there gathered
together to transpire, prevents new ones from flowing down, and helps very much
the Generation of Callosity in the Fractures of Bones.

Emplastrum contra Herniam. A Plaster against Burstness.. Pellem Arietinam
recentem cum sua lanae in parts dissectam; coque igne moderato, in sufficient
quantitate aquae, donec pellis omnino in aquae dissolutae fuerit. Coletur
decoctum, lanaque fortiter exprimatur. In expressione coquantur Granorum
alborum visci quercini, vel alteri^s Arboris astringentis, vj.. Take the skin
of a Ram newly killed, with the Wool, cut in pieces; boil it over a moderate
fire in a sufficient quantity of water, till the skin be altogether dissolved
in the water: Strain the Decoction, and strongly press forth the Wool. In the
straining, boil the white Berries of Mistle-toe, or for want of them, of any
other astringent Tree, vj. Lumbricorum terrestrium in vino lotorum iiij. ad
ipsorum dissolutionem. Earthworms washed in Wine iiij. till they are
dissolved. Deinde colentur, and exprimantur; expressio vero cum Lithargyri Auri
praeparati, and Oleorum Cydoniorum and Myrtillorum, an. lb j. in Emplastrum
coquatur. Then strain and press them out, boil the strained and pressed liquor
with Lytharge of Gold prepared, Oils of Quinces, and Whortle-berries, an. lb j.
over a gentle fire in a Copper-Pan, stirring them continually to the thickness
of an Emplaster. In illis deinde Liquefiant, In these melt, being cut into
little pieces, Cerae Citrinae, lb j. Yellow Wax, lb j. Picis Navalis, Black
Pitch, Rosine, Rosine, Terebinthinae, an. lb ss. Turpentine, an. lb ss. Deinde
addantur, Then take the Pan off the fire, and add, Gummi Ammoniaci,
Gumm-Ammoniac and Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar, strained and thick'nd, and
incorporated with the Turpentine, Galbani, Myrrhae, Myrrh, Thuris,
Frankincense, Mastiches, and Mastich, and Sanguinis humani vel Porcini
exsiccati, an. iiij. Man's or Hogs blood dried, an. iiij. Aristolochiae longae
and rotundae, Birth-wort long and round, Symphyti majoris and minoris Cumfrey
greater and lesser, Gallarum, Galls, Gypsi, Plaster, Boli Armenae, and
Bole-Armenian, and Mumiae, an. iij. Mummy, an. iij.

Fiat Emplastrum.

After the Gums mix the Powders of Man's Blood, Birthwort, Cumfry, Galls,
Mummy, Plaster, and Bole-Armenian sifted through a Silk-sieve; and lastly, the
Myrrh, Frankincense, and Mastich pulverized apart, and incorporate the whole
well together, by which means the Plaster will be of a due consistence, and
keep long.

The nonplus which the most part of Apothecaries are at in the Composition of
this Plaster, by reason of the irregular Receipts, and ill proportioned
quantities in most Dispensatories, requiring something better ordered, I could
not forbear to give the satisfaction of this Receipt and Preparation.

This Plaster, taking its name from the use, is to be applied to the part,
after the Intestine is put up, and must be kept on with a Truss. By fortifying
the part relaxed, it causes the Intestine to stay in its place; and by
continuing it, the parts resume entirely their natural strength. It is also of
great use in Fractures and Dislocations.

You may also prepare an Emplaster against Burstness with less Ingredients,
more astringent, and more effectual.

Emplastrum aliud contra Herniam. Another Plaster against Burstness.. Exuvias
Anguillarum non salitas, and in aqua Calcis L^tas, quantum libuerit. Coque in
Lixivio donec dissolvantur, and crassescant instar glutinis.. Eel-skins never
salted, newly flayed, and washed in Limewater, what you please. Boil them over
a gentle fire, in clean Lie of ordinary Cinders, till they dissolve and grow
thick like Glue. Postea accipe, Then take, Glutinis illius trajecti, iiij. Of
this Glue being strained, iiij. Lapidis Haematitis, Boodstone, Sacchari
Saturni, Saccharum Saturni, Stanni Vsti, an. iij. Burnt Pewter, an. iij. Gummi
Ammoniaci in aceto acerrimo soluti, trajecti, and spissati, ii ss. Gum-Ammoniac
dissolved in strong Vinegar, strained and thick'nd, ii ss. Olei Myrrhae
stillatitii, ss. Oil of Myrrh distilled, ss.

Put all these together, with the Glue finely powdered, into a glazed
Earthen-pot, and boil them all together over a very gentle fire, stirring them
continually, till they have acquired the consistence of an Emplaster, and
adding at last the distilled Oil of Myrrh.

This Plaster is one of the best that ever was invented to cure a Rupture,
applied like the former.

Emplastrum pro Fracturis and Luxatione Ossium. A Plaster for Fractures and
Dislocations of Bones.. Radicum Altheaemundatarum and minutim incisarum, vj..
Roots of Marshmallows cleans'd and cut very small, vj. Aquae Fontanae, lb
iiij. Fountain Water, lb iiij. Infundantur horis viginti quatuor super ignem
exiguam, saepius agitando spatula ligneu, deinde lento igne coquantur ad
Muscilaginis sufficientem spissitatem; colentur and fortiter exprimantur,
serveturque Muscilago. Interea, Infuse them 24 hours over a soft fire, stirring
them often with a wood'n-Spatula: Then boil them over a gentle fire, to the due
thickness of a Muscilage: Then strain and press out the Muscilage with a good
strength, and set it aside. Then. Radicum and foliorum Fraxini, and, Roots and
leaves of Ash, and Consolidae majoris, Greater Cumfrey, Baccarum and foliorum
Myrti, and Berries and leaves of Myrtle, and Foliorum salicis, an. M j. Leaves
of Willow, an. M j. Contusa omnia coquantur igne lento, ad dimidiae partis
consumptionem in Bruise them all together, and boil them to the consumption of
the half part in Aquae Extinctionis Fabrorum, and Smiths water, and Vini
austeri sub finem additi, an. lb ij. Sour Wine added toward the end, an. lb ij.
Postea colentur and exprimantur, deinde After that strain and press them out;
then. Lithargyri auri, and. Litharge of Gold, and Argenti praeparatorum, an.
viij. Silver prepared, an. viij. Minii, ij. Minium, ij. Olei Rosati, and Oils
of Roses, and Myrtini, and Myrtles, and Saevi Hircini, an. lb j. Goats-Suet,
an. lb j.

Melt the Goats-Suet among the Oils in large Plaister-Pan, and having
incorporated them first cold, with the Minium and Litharges powdered, and
afterward with the Decoction and Muscilages, boil them over a moderate Fire,
stirring them continually with a large Wooden-Spatula to the thickness of
Emplaisters.

Tunc Then. Cerae Citrinae, viij.. Yellow-Wax, viij. Terebinthinae, iiij.
Turpentine, iiij.

Melt the Wax in the Composition, and taking the Pan from the Fire, when it is
somewhat cold, mix the Turpentine.

Deinde permisceantur, Lastly add to the whole,. Boli Armenae,. Bole Armenian,
Terrae Sigillata, Seal'd-Earth, Olibani, Olibanum, Myrrhae, and Myrrh, and
Mastiches subtiliter pulveratorum, an. iij. Mastich all very finely powdered,
an. iij.

Incorporate them well together and the Plaster is made.

This Plaster is one of those that are ill-proportion'd in the Prescriptions
of the Ancients. For seven Ounces, two Drams of Minium and Litharge did not
make the just proportion for eighteen Ounces of Oils or Suet prescribed for
this Emplaister: Besides that they made use of too great a quantity of
Muscilages, and Decoction in the boying of the same Ingredients. Which forced
me to seek for a true proportion of Medicaments, and to give a more exact
Prescription then that of the Ancients.

The name of this Emplaister denotes the Virtues and Uses. It fortifies the
parts by its astriction, prevents the flowing of humors, and causes the growth
and perfection of the callous flesh requisite in Fractures.

Emplastrum de Ranis cum Mercurio. Plaster of Frogs with Mercury.. Ranas
Viventes, No xij.. Live Frogs, No xij. Lumbricorum terrestrium purgatorum,
iiij. Earthworms purged, iiij. Radicum Ebuli, and Roots of Dwarf-Elder, and
Enula campanae, an. iij. Elecampane, an. iij. Schoenanthi, Camels Hay,
Stoechadis Arabicae, and Arabian Stoechas, and Matricariae, an. M j. Fetherfew,
an. M j. Aceti Fortis, Strong Vinegar, Vini austeri, an. lb ij. Austere Wine,
an. lb ij.

Bruise the Roots of the Dwarf-Elder and Elecampane, and put them into a glazed
Earthen-pot with the Vinegar and Wine, and after you have let them boil a
while, put in the live-Frogs, and then the Worms. Cover the Pot, and boil the
whole over a moderate fire for half an hour: Then having strained and pressed
out the whole,

. Lithargyri auri praeparati, lb ij.. Litharge of Gold prepared, lb ij.
Pinguedinis Porci, and Barrows fat, and Vituli, an. ix. Calves fat, an. ix.
Oleorum Camomillae, Oils of Camomile, Anethi, Dill, Liliorum, Lillies, Laurini,
and Laurel, and Spicae, per infus. and decoct. parat. an. lb ss. Spike,
prepared by Infusion and decoction, an. lb ss.

Melt the Greases in the Oils, and incorporate the Litharge with this mixture
cold; and then with the Decoction reserved, in a Plaister-pan; then boil them
over a moderate fire, stirring them continually with a wood'n Spatula, till the
moisture being almost all consumed, the whole have acquired the thickness of
ordinary Emplasters.

In illis deinde liquefiant, Then melt therein, Cerae Citrinae, lb j. Yellow
Wax, lb j. Axungiae Viperinae, iiij. Vipers fat, iiij.

Melt the Wax first, and then the Vipers Grease, and when the whole is half
cold,

. Pulveris Olibani, iij.. Powder of Olibanum, iij. Euphorbii, i ss. Euphorbium,
i ss. Croci, ss. Saffron, ss. Mercurii vivi, lb j. Quicksilver, lb j.
Terebinthinae, and Turpentine, and Storacis liquidae, an. iiij. Liquid Storax,
an. iiij.

When you have mixed the Powders, immediately after put in the Quicksilver,
having well united it in a great brazen Mortar with the Turpentine and Storax,
and mix the whole exactly together.

The Opinions of Authors are very various, as well concerning the quantities of
the Ingredients, as the preparation of the Plaster. But I suppose this
prescription and preparation will give satisfaction, without farther insisting
upon the bad proceeding of the Ancients.

Some of our Moderns prescribe, that the Mercury should be dissolved in Aqua
Fortis; and that the moisture of it should be evaporated with some part of the
Vipers-Grease, and Oil of Lillies. But that cannot be done, but that the
Mercury would retain the most part of the sharp and corroding parts of the Aqua
Fortis, which would then come to be mixed in the Plaster; which makes me
believe, that there is no Rational Apothecary will practice that, since the
Quicksilver may be perfectly united with the mass of the Plaster, according to
my method.

This Plaster is succesfully used to assuage the pains of the Shoulders, Arms,
Thighs, Legs, and all the parts of the Body, that proceed from any Venereal
Venom: For by fortifying the parts, it draws the venom outward, by turning it
into a kind of sweat, and raising an easy flux. It also dissolves Nodes, and
venereal Tumors that happen upon any part of the body: It is also laid to
Wolfs, and other cold Tumors, either alone, or mixed with other Plasters,
tending to the same effect.

Emplastrum Stipticum. A Stiptic Plaster.. Minii,. Minium, Lithargyri Auri,
and Litharge of Gold, and Argenti, and Silver, and Lapis Calaminaris, an. lb
ss. Lapis Calaminaris, an. lb ss. Olei Lini, and Lineseed-Oyl, and Olivarum,
an. lb i ss. Oil of Olives, an. lb i ss. Laurini, lb j. Oil of Laurel, lb j.
Decocti Aristolochiae, Decoction of Birthwort, Longae and rotundae, lb iij.
Long and round, lb iij.

Incorporate the Litharges, Minium, and Lapis Calaminaris, with the Oils, cold,
in the first place, and then with the Decoction in a Plaister-pan, and boil
them together over a moderate fire, stirring them continually to the ordinary
consistence of Emplasters.

Deinde add, Afterward add, Cerae Flava, and Yellow Wax, and Colophoniae, an.
lb j. Colophony, an. lb j. Terebinthinae, and Turpentine, and Sandaracae, an.
lb ss. Sandarach, an. lb ss. Opoponacis, Opoponax, Sagapeni, Sagapen, Galbani,
Galbanum, Ammoniaci, Ammoniac, Bdellii, an. iij. Bdellium, an. iij. Succini,
Amber, Olibani, Olibanum, Myrrhae, Myrrh, Aloes, Aloes, Aristolochiae, longae
and rotundae, an. i ss. Birthwort, long and round, an. i ss. Mumiae
Transmarinae, Beyond Sea Mummy, Magnetis, Magnet, Haematitis, Boodstone,
Coralli, albi and rubri, Coral, white and red, Matris Perlarum, Mother of
Pearls, Sanguinis Draconis, Dragons blood, Terrae sigillatae, Sealed Earth,
Vitrioli Albi, an. j. White Vitriol, an. j. Florum Antimonii, and Flowers of
Antimony, Croci Martis, an. ss. Crocus Martis, an. ss. Camphorae, j. Camphire,
j.

First melt the Wax and Colophony; then taking the Pan from off the fire, add
the Opoponax, Sagapen, Galbanum, Ammoniac, and Bdellium dissolved in Vinegar,
strained and thick'nd, and incorporated with the Turpentine; and the whole
being half cold, mix first the fine Powders of Birthwort, Mummy, Magnet,
Boodstone, Corals, Mother of Pearl, Sealed Earth, Vitriol, and Crocus Martis;
and lastly, those of the Sandarach, Amber, Olibanum, Myrrh, Aloes, Dragons
blood, and Camphire, and incorporate the whole exactly.

This Plaster is recommended for the cure of all sorts of Ulcers, in
whatsoever part of the body; for it cleanses, dries, and quickly consolidates
them, preserving them from putrefaction, and hindering all excrescence of ill
flesh. It is proper to heal cuts and contusions of the Nerves: It draws bits of
Iron, Wood, Lead, or any other such kind of substances, out of wounds: It is
good against the bitings and stingings of all sorts of venomous Animals: It
ripens all sorts of Apostemes; cleanses and heals all sorts of Ulcers, as well
old as new; dissolves and heals the swellings of the King's Evil, asswages the
pains of wounds and bruises, and keeps for several years, being well prepared.

Emplastrum ad Pedis Equini Punctionem. A Plaster to cure the pricking of a
Horses Foot.. Cerae Citrinae, viij.. Yellow Wax, viij. Picis Albae, White
Pitch, Gummi Elemmi, Gum-Elemmi, Terebinthinae Venetae, an. iiij.
Venice-Turpentine, an. iiij. Cinabaris vulgaris subtilissime pulveratae, Vulgar
Cinabar very finely pulverized, Sanguinis Draconis, Dragons blood,
Aristolochiae, longae and rotundae, an. ss. Birthwort, long and round, an. ss.

After you have bruised the Birthwort-roots in a Marble-Mortar, and pulverized
the Dragons blood and Cinabar apart, melt the yellow Wax over a soft fire, with
the white Pitch, Elemmi, and Turpentine; strain them through a Cloth, and when
the Ingredients are half cold, incorporate the Dragons blood and Cinabar, and
unite the whole well together.

This Plaster is a certain cure for the pricking of Horses Feet newly made in
Shooing, pouring a little of the Plaster melted into the hole; for then you
may Shoe the Horse again, without any fear of any Aposteme or Ulcer.

Emplastrum Vesicatorium. A Vesicatory Plaster.. Cantharidum sine alis and
capitibus pulveratarum, ss.. Cantharides without wings or heads powdered, ss.
Picis Albae, and White Pitch, and Terebinthinae, an. ij. Turpentine, an. ij.
Myrrhae, and Myrrh, and Mastiches subtiliter pulveratorum, an. ss. Mastich very
finely pulverized, an. ss.

Beat the Cantharides apart, as also the Myrrh, and the Mastich, and having
mixed the Powders, gently melt the Wax, white Pitch, and Turpentine; and when
the substances are half cold, incorporate the Powders very well.

This Plaster is called the Vesicatory, or Blister-Plaister, because that
being laid upon any part of the body, it raises the skin, and makes Bladders
full of serosity. It works in two or three hours, or sooner, according to the
hardness or softness of the Skin: Then open the Bladders, and anoint the part
with fresh Butter, to keep the Pores open, to let out the serosities which the
Plaster has drawn together.

This Plaster is not only used in Lethargies, Apoplexies, and other diseases
of the Brain, being applied to the Shoulders, or brawny parts of the Legs and
Arms, and to the sutures of the Brain; but it is used also in distempers of the
Eyes and Teeth, applied behind the Ears.

You may also make a very effectual Blister-Plaister, by incorporating the
Powder of Cantharides with Crumbs of Bread moistened in Vinegar, and spreading
this mixture upon Leather. But this Plaster is not to be used but upon
occasion; for being kept, it grows as hard as a stone, and the Cantharides lose
their virtue.

Emplastrum Cerae cum Cymino. A Plaster of Wax with Cumin.. Cerae Flavae, lb
ij.. Yellow Wax, lb ij. Resinae, and Rosin, and Olei Rosati, an. v. Oil of
Roses, an. v. Terebinthina Venetae, Venice-Turpentine, Pulveris Cumini, and
Powder of Cumin, and Boli Armenae, an. iij. Bole-Armenian, an. iij. Florum
Camomillae, Flowers of Camomile, Meliloti, and Melilot, and Rosarum Rubrarum,
Red Roses, Myrtillorum, and Whortle-berries, and Sanguinis Draconis, an. j.
Dragons blood, an. j.

Having beaten together in a large Brass-Mortar the Cumin-seed,
Whortle-berries, Roses, Camomile, and Melilot, and the Bole-Armenian, and the
Dragons blood apart, and passed the whole through a Silk-sieve, melt the Wax
and Rosin over a soft fire, among the Oil of Roses; then add the Turpentine,
and let the Ingredients cool; and when the Composition is half cold, mix the
Powders, and incorporate the whole exactly.

Though this Plaster be not much in use, yet are the virtues of it never the
less: For it is very proper to dissipate Contusions, and Flegmatic Tumors: It
asswages the pains of the Sides, and Sciatic Gouts: It strengthens the parts in
Fractures and Dislocations of the Bones, and draws forth the serosities through
the Pores. It is also very proper to assuage the pains of the Liver, Spleen and
Stomach, from whence it expels Wind, and dissolves Noxious Substances.

Emplastrum de Alabastro. The Alablaster Plaster.. Massae Emplastri de. Of the
Mass of Plaster of Cerussa, and White-lead, and Cerae Albae, an. viij. Yellow
Wax, an. viij. Alabastri praeparati, ij. Alablaster prepared, ij. Succini
praeparati, Amber prepared, Sanguinis Draconis, Dragons blood, Coralli Rubri,
Red Coral, Cranii Humani, and Man's Scull, and Cornu Cervi ustorum, an. j.
Burnt Hartshorn, an. j. Terebinthina, and Turpentine, and Styracis Liquidae,
an. i ss. Liquid Storax, an. i ss.

Having calcined the Man's Scull and Hartshorn, grind them together upon
Porphyry, with red Coral and Alablaster; bruise the Amber apart, and the
Dragons blood; and after that, having melted the Plaster of Ceruse with the
white Wax, and having added thereto the Turpentine and Liquid Storax, mix the
Powders, and incorporate them well together.

This Emplaster is very much recommended against Abortion of Great-belly'd
Women, whence it may be called, Emplastrum ad faetum retinendum. For it
strengthens the Ligaments of the Matrix, and the parts to which they are fixed.
This Plaster is to be spread so that it may cover the Loins, and the Os
Sacrum, and may be worn and renewed as often as need requires.

You may also lay another Plaster upon the Navel.

Emplastrum de Sperma-Ceti. Plaster of Sperma-Ceti.. Cerae Albae, viij.. White
Wax, viij. Spermatis Ceti, iiij. Sperma-Ceti, iiij. Gummi Ammoniaci in aceto
soluti, trajecti and spissati, ij. Gum-Ammoniac dissolved in Vinegar, strained
and thickened, ^ ij.

Having dissolved the Gum-Ammoniac in Vinegar, strained and thickened it, melt
the white Wax in a Silver Spoon by the heat of a Balneum Mariae, between
lukewarm and boiling-hot; after that, having added and melted the Sperma-Ceti,
and mixed it with the Gum-Ammoniac, the Plaster is made. You may, in respect
to the nioer sort of Ladies, leave out the Gum-Ammoniac, because of the ill
scent, and instead thereof put in an Ounce of the pressed Oil of the cold Seeds,
which will be much to the same effect.

This Plaster is chiefly for the convenience of Women newly brought to Bed,
that cannot give their Children Suck: For being applied to the Breasts, for
some time it carries away the Milk, asswages the pains that are caused by it,
and dissolves the curdlings and hardnesses thereof, as well as those which
proceed from the King's Evil.

Emplastrum ad Fontinellas. A Plaster for Issues.. Olei Rosati, and. Oil of
Roses, and Aquae Rosarum, an. lb ij. Rose Water, an. lb ij. Cerusae Venetae,
and Venetian Ceruse, and Lithargyri Auri praeparati, an. viij. Litharge of Gold
prepared, an. viij. Coquantur ex art in Emplastrum: Deinde add, Boil them to
the thickness of an Emplaster: Then add, Cerae Albae, vj. White Wax, vj.

Melt the white Wax cut into pieces, and incorporate it exactly with the rest.

This Plaster has no ill smell, and does not stick very close: One Sparadrap,
or Plaster, will serve several days, being wiped Morning and Evening, and laid
on again. It may be put also to the same uses as Plaster of Ceruse.

Emplastrum ad Ganglia. A Plaster against all sorts of Tumors.. Radicum and
Foliorum recentium Bardanae,. Fresh-gather'd roots and leaves of Burdock,
Cicutae, Hemlock, Levistici, Lovage, Angelicae, Angelica, Cucumeris Agrestis,
Wild Cucumber, Scrofulariae, Figwort, Filipendulae, Dropwort, Illecebrae,
Wall-pepper, Gratiolae, and Hedg-Hysop, and Chelidonii major. an. i ss. Bigger
Celandine, an. i ss. Purgata and contusa omnia in Having cleans'd and bruised
them all, in Succorum Cicutae, and Juices of Hemlock, and Chelidonii majoris,
an. lb ij ss. Bigger Celandine, an. lb ij ss. Lento igne coquantur ad dimidiae
partis consumptionem, deinde colentur and exprimantur. Expressio vero cum Boil
them over a gentle fire, to the consumption of the third part; then strain and
press them out. Then boil the Expression with Oleo Lumbricorum, lb iiij. Oil of
Worms, lb iiij. Lithargyri auri lb ij. ex art coquatur, assidue movendo
spatula lignea ad Emplastri spissitatem. Litharge of Gold lb ij. incorporated
cold with the Oil of Worms, stirring them continually with a wood'n Spatula, to
the consistence of an Emplaster. In illis deinde liquefiant, Then melt therein,
Cerae Citrinae, and Yellow Wax, and Picis Albae, an. lb j. White Pitch, an. lb
j. Terebinthinae, and Turpentine, and Styracis Liquida, an. lb ss. Liquid
Storax, lb ss. Ab igne remotis permisce When they are off the fire, mix
Galbani, Galbanum, Ammoniaci, Ammoniac, Bdellii, Bdellium, Opoponacis, and
Opoponax, and Sagapeni in aceto dissolut. traject. spissatorum and portione
Emplastri seorsum prius exceptorum, an. ij. Sagapen dissolved in Vinegar,
strained and thick'nd, and incorporated with the Turpentine and Liquid Storax
apart, as before, an. ij. Deinde Then. Radicum Ireos Florentiae,. Roots of
Florence-Orrice, Sigilli Beatae Mariae, Wild Ellebore, Cyclamini, Sow-bread,
Coronae Imperialis, and Crown-Imperial, and Serpentariae, Dragon-wort, Seminum
Angelicae, Seeds of Angelica, Paeoniae Maris, Male-Piony, Nasturtii, Cresses,
Euphorbii, Euphorbium, Olibani, Olibanum, Mastiches, Mastich, Tacamahaccae
odoratae, and Sweet Tacamahacca, and Sulphuris vivi, an. i ss. Quicksilver, an.
i ss. Camphorae, ss. Camphire, ss.

Mix the Roots and Seeds finely powdered first, and presently after the
Quicksilver, Gums, and Camphire powdered apart; and in this order incorporate
the Drugs exactly together, and the Plaster is made.

The virtues of this Plaster are to digest and dissolve all sorts of unnatural
substances, especially those which are cold, and hard to be dissolved, gathered
together under the skin in the external parts of the body, such as are Wolfs,
the King's Evil, Nodes, and Ulcerous Callosities: For which purposes there is
hardly to be found a Plaster of greater efficacy then this; as also for all
sorts of Tumors and Substances gathered together in the external parts, from
what cause soever proceeding.

Emplastrum aliud ad Ganglia. Another Plaster for the same.. Gummi Ammoniaci,.
Gum-Ammoniac, Galbani, Galbanum, Opopanacis, and Opoponax, Sagapeni in aceto
solutorum, colatorum and spissatorum, and Myrrhae electae subtiliter
pulveratae, an. iij. Sagapen dissolved in Vinegar, strained and thick'nd, and
choice Myrrh very finely pulverized, an. iij. Olei Laurini, and Oil of Laurel,
and Spiritus Vini, an. j. Spirit of Wine, an. j. Sulphuris Vivi, Quicksilver,
Salis Ammoniaci, and Salt-Ammoniac, and Vitrioli Romani, an. ss. Roman Vitriol,
an. ss. Euphorbii, ij. Euphorbium, ij.

After you have dissolved, strained and thick'nd the Gums to the consistence of
an Emplaster, and taken them from the fire, add to them the Oil of Laurel, and
Spirit of Wine, and after that the Myrrh, Quicksilver, Salt-Ammoniac, Roman
Vitriol, and Euphorbium finely pulverized, and incorporate them all exactly.

Though this Plaster consists of less Ingredients then the former, yet the
virtue is no less to produce the same effects.

I might here insert several other preparations of Emplasters, did I not
believe I had produced enough, as well for the full instruction of young
Beginners, as to give satisfaction in reference to all those purposes for which
Emplasters were provided.

CHAP. VII. Of Cataplasmes.
THough it be not the Custom to make any provision of Cataplasms in Shops, and
that they are only prepared when need requires, by reason of their superfluous
moisture which soon corrupts them; yet the necessity which there is of them
sometimes, has obliged me to afford them a Chapter.

The name of Cataplasm is given to an External Medicament, in consistence not
unlike that of Cerats; receiving into its Composition diverse Liquors and
different parts of Plants, Animals, and Minerals, some liquid, others dry, and
many times Oils, Ointments, and other both external and internal Compositions;
according to the difference of the Infirmities and purposes, for which this
sort of Medicine is prepared. The principal Office of Cataplasms is to appease
pains, to soften, dissolve, discuss, cause transpiration, and suppurate matters
gathered together in the external parts of the body.

The most common Cataplasm, and most in use to assuage pains, dissolve and
dissipate Tumors newly come, especially Flegmatic, is this that follows:

. Micae panis Albi recentis, iiij.. Crum of new White-bread, iiij. Lactis
recenter mulcti, lb j. Milk new from the Cow, lb j.

Fry them over a gentle Fire in a small Drying Pan, stirring them often with a
Wood'n-Spatula till they are as thick as a Poultess; then taking them off the
Fire,

Add Add Vitellos Ovorum, No iij. Yolks of Eggs, No iij. Olei Rosati, j. Oils
of Roses, j. Croci subtiliter pulverat. j. Saffron finely beaten, j.

Mix the Yolks of Eggs, the Oil of Roses, and the Saffron with the Poultess,
and the Cataplasm is made.

Si major dolorum s^datio requiratur, If a more powerful asswagement of pain be
desired, mix therewith Extract. Liquidioris Opii, ij. permisceantur. Liquid
Extract of Opium, ij.

You may also prepare a Cataplasm to soften and bring to suppuration such
matters as are disposed thereto, proceeding this way.

. Radicum Liliorum, and. Roots of Lillies, and Altheae minutim incisarum, an.
iij. Marshmallows, cut very small, an. iij. Foliorum Malvae, Leaves of
Mallows, Altheae, Marshmallows, Senecionis, Groundsell, Violariae,
March-Violets, Parietariae, Pellitory, Brancae Vrsinae, an. M. j. Brank-Ursin,
an. M. j.

Boil the Roots first in six Pints of Fountain Water; sometime after put in the
Leaves, and continue boiling them, till they are perfectly tender. Strain the
Decoction, and beat the settlement in a Marble-mortar with a Wood'n-Pestle, and
pass the Pulp through a Hair-sieve reverst.

Colaturam and Pultem secretam, cum The Straining and Pulp put into a small
Drying Pan, with Farinae Lini, and Meal of Linseed, and Fenugraeci, and
Fengreek, and Olei Liliorum, an. iij. Oil of Lillies, an. iij. Coque igne
lento, saepius agitando ad debitam spissitudinem. Boil them all together over a
gentle fire, stirring them often, to a due consistence.

You may also prepare a Cataplasm proper to cut, digest, dissolve, discuss, and
cause transpiration, according to the following Receipt.

. Radicum Cyclaminis,. Roots of Sow-bread, Brioniae, Briony, Cucumeris
silvestris, an. ij. Wild Cucumbers, an. j. Foliorum Absinthii, Leaves of
Wormwood, Mercurialis, an. M. ij. Herb Mercury, an. M. ij. Florum Camomilla,
and Flowers of Camomile, and Meliloti, an. M. j. Melilot, an. M. j.

Boil the Roots first, then the Leaves in four Pints of common Water, adding at
length two Pints of White Wind, till they are sufficiently soft. Strain them,
and pass the sediment beaten through a Hair-sieve. To the Decoction and
Poultess add

Farinae Fenugraci, and Meal of Fenugreek, Lupinorum, Lupines, Pulveris
Absinthii, Powder of Wormwood, Cumini, Cumin, Feniculi, and Fennel, and
Baccarum Lauri, an. j. Laurel-berries, an. j. Fiat Cataplasma. Mix them into a
Cataplasm.

The Preparation of this Cataplasm being like the former, I have not been
particular in it. And I believe these three Preparations to be sufficient for
further instruction.

CHAP. VIII. Of Fomentations, Baths, and Half-Baths.
THE Distemperatures which happen not only to the parts, but also to the whole
habit of the body, and the troublesome pains that Wind, Defluxions,
Fermentations, Worms, the Stone, Contusions, Fractures, Dislocations, and many
other accidents cause to several parts of the body, have begot the use of
Fomentations, Baths, and Half-Baths, which are external liquid Remedies,
sometimes plain, sometimes composed of several Medicaments.

The name of Local-Baths is given to Fomentations, because they are generally
applied to the part affected; and work the same effects upon one, as Baths and
half-Baths might do upon several parts at a time. And though Baths and
half-Baths are often used for the ease and cure of Distempers that fall upon
single parts of the Body, yet the good effects of Fomentations, their easiness,
and the little trouble there is in them, are the reasons that they are more
frequently made use of then Baths or half-Baths, which require more room,
bigger Vessels and more trouble. For which cause they are never used, but where
Fomentations have not succeeded, or where the excess and nature of the Disease
require more effectual Remedies then Fomentations.

There may be prepared as many sorts of Fomentations as there are diversity of
Distempers. The Roots, Leaves, Flowers and Seeds of most Plants, boiled in
Water, or in other proper Liquors are the usual foundation, and substance of
Fomentations. Certain Minerals and parts of Plants, particularly Salts and
Greases, not to mention Oils that may be mixed with them, are frequently added,
and oft-times make a part of the Liquor necessary for the Fomentation.

I shall only give two or three examples which may suffice for the preparation
of all others that may be prescribed.

Fotus Antipleuriticus. A Fomentation against the Pleurisy.. Radicum Altheae,
and. Roots of Marshmallows, Liliorum, an iiij. Lillies, an. iiij. Foliorum
Malvae, Leaves of Mallows, Altheae, Marshmallows, Violariae, March-Violets,
Senecionis, Ground-sell, Brancae Vrsinae, an. M ij. Brankursin, an. M ij.
Florum Camomillae, Flowers of Camomile, and Meliloti, an. M. j. Melilot, an. M
j. Seminum integrorum Lini, and Whole Seeds of Line, and Fenugraeci, an. j.
Fengreek, an. j.

After you have well cut, and mixed the Roots and Leaves with the Flowers and
Seeds, and put them into two Bags of fine Linen, both of an equal bigness, and
large enough to cover the part affected, and quilted them both, boil them in
ten pints of Commonwater till the Substances are very tender; then take off the
Decoction from the Fire, and when it is half cold, take out the two Bags, and
pressing them between your hands, to drain out the Water, apply one Bag warm to
the pain, and cover it with a double Napkin; and when it has lain a quarter of
an hour apply the other in its place, and do thus from quarter to quarter of an
hour as often as there is occasion.

After you have so done, wipe the part and anoint it with Oil of Lillies, or
Ointment of Althaea, laying a Linen Cloth upon it, and covering it with a
double Napkin well-warm'd. You may also repeat the same applications as often
as need requires.

Fotus Antinephriticus. An Anti-Nephritic Fomentation.. Radicum Raphani
Hortensis,. Roots of Garden-Radishes, Foliorum Nasturtii Aquatici, Leaves of
Watercresses, Becabungae, Brooklime. Berulae, Water-Pimpernel, Parietariae,
and Pellitory, Violariae, an. M ij. March-Violets, an. M ij. Axungiae
Viperinae, ij. Vipers Fat, ij. Seminum Lini, and Linseed, and Fenugraeci, an.
j. Seed of Fengreek, j.

Having cut the Roots and Herbs, and mixed them with the Seeds, put them into
two Bags, and proceed in every thing else as before. Otherwise you may dip
Sponges or Wool in the Decoction, and apply it to the part affected.

Fotus Stomachicus. A Fomentation for the Stomach.. Radicum comusarum Cyperi,.
Bruised Roots of Cyperus, Tormentillae, Tormentil, Bistortae, an. ij.
Snakeweed, an. ij. Foliorum Absinthii Majoris, Leaves of bigger-Wormwood,
Scordii, Garden-Germander, Mentae, and Garden-Mint, Costi Hortensium,
Garden-Costus, Calamintae, Calamint, Origani, and Organie, Marjoran, ae an. M
ij. Marjoram, an. M ij. Nucum Cupressi, Cypress Nuts, Tartari Rubri,
Red-Tartar, Balaustiorum, and Pomgranate-flowers, Rosarum Rubrarum, an. j ss.
Red-Roses, an. j ss.

Mix them all together and put them into Baggs, and boil them over a gentle
fire in six pints of Chaly-beate water, to the consumption of the third part,
adding toward the latter end three pints of sour Red-wine, to preserve the
Spirits, and keep it covered to hinder the dissipation of the Aromatical parts
of the Plants.

Whole Baths and half Baths have been made use of time out of mind; and they
differ in this, that whole Baths are for all the body except the head; and are
more for pleasure then for the cure of Diseases; whereas half Baths are but for
half the body and only those parts which are below the Stomach, and are rather
for cure then pleasure.

Generally plain River-water is made use of lukewarm for Baths of pleasure;
with an addition to smooth the skin, sometimes of Milk, sometimes of
Oyly-fruits made into Pastes, or else of sweet smelling flowers. But to add
virtue to Baths or half Baths, decoctions proper for particular distempers must
be prescribed, which are many times the same Ingredients used in Fomentations.
But then the quantity of Ingredients must be proportioned to the quantity of
Water: And the Bath must be kept in a heat as near to natural as may be; so
that the patient may endure it with pleasure. It is also necessary that the
Patient should purge before hand; though purges may be successfully given in
the Baths themselves. Nor is it good to stay in the Bath above one or two hours
at a time, though you may go into it two or three times a day, and also in the
night time if there be occasion.

But because the Ladies oftener use these Remedies then Men, as well for their
particular Distempers as to preserve the beauty of their skins, I will
communicate to them one Bath of which I have known the good effects, as-well in
smoothing the wrinkles and shrivelings of the skin, and the chaps of Women's
Bellies and Breasts after lying in, as to beautify and whiten the skin and
continue its plumpness, and a sound disposition of body.

Put two pound of Rice well cleans'd and peeled into an Earthen-pot varnished
within, and of a good bigness, and having boiled them over a gentle fire in
Milk, to the entire dissolution of the Rice, beat apart in a large
wood'n-mortar with a wood'n-pestle four pound of Almonds blanched, two pound of
the Cold-seeds, and a pound of white Poppy-seed, and reduce it into a Paste,
hardly to be felt, to be mixed with the Rice dissolved in the Milk.

Then heat as much River-water as is needful for the Bath, and dissolve in it
half a pound of Rock-allum: then let the party go into the Bath with a pound
and a half, and first rub those parts which have most need, and then the rest
of the body, and when all the Paste is spent, let her stay there two hours or
more: then change the water, and continue this Bath Morning and Evening for
seven or eight days. Coming out of the Bath anoint the wrinkl'd parts with a
Cerate made of Oil of Eggs ij. White-wax four ounces, and as much Lead melted
and well washed, and reduced into a Cerate by incorporation. I leave the Ladies
to the Experience of this Bath, for I know not how to praise it enough.

CHAP. IX. Of Evaporating Baths, and Dry Baths.
THE same Ingredients serve for Evaporating Baths, as for Baths, half-Baths,
and Fomentations.

The principal ends of Evaporating Baths are to ease pain, soft'n, open, and
attenuate, or to close and fortify; by raising the Vapors, and causing them
to ascend to the part affected.

The most frequent use of evaporating Baths are in Diseases of the Fundament
and Matrix, and also for Infirmities of the Ears and Teeth. Generally the
Patient is ordered to sit in a Chair with a hole bored in it, and closed round
at the bottom. Sometimes Funnels are made use of, especially for Diseases of
the Matrix, as also for the Ears and Teeth. Care must be taken for to moderate
the heat of these Baths, and to continue or renew them as occasion requires.

As for dry Baths called Stoves, they may be made use of for some particular
part of the body, but their chief use is for the whole body. There is no other
heat made use of for these, but that of Coals, Bricks, or some other heated
Substances. Which are variously made use of, and in various Vessels, which
every one may invent as their Genius prompts them. Only care must be taken,
that the Bath be proportionable to the Disease and the strength of the person
that uses it. These Baths are very convenient for moist complexion'd persons,
not only in Venereal Distempers, but also in Rhumatisms, universal or
particular pains of the Members, as also in Palsies.

CHAP. X. Of Epithemes.
EPithemes are either liquid or solid: Liquid Epithemes may pass for
Fomentations, only the difference is, that Epithemes are only to temper the
extraordinary heat of the Liver, and to fortify the heart against the
malignity of Diseases, and are only applied to one or other of the Bowels,
whereas Fomentations are applied to all the parts of the body.

Slight Cordial and hepatic Decoctions, simple and compound distilled Waters,
Vinegar, juice of Citrons, Cordial and hepatic Powders, Confections of Alkermes
and Jacinths, as also Treacle and Mithridate, are the ordinary matter of liquid
Epithemes, of which I shall give two Examples, one for the Heart, the other for
the Liver.

. Aquarum Cardui Benedicti,. Waters of Carduus Benedictus, Buglossi, Bugloss,
Borraginis, Borrage, Rosarum, an. ij. Roses, an. ij. Aquae Theriacalis,
Treacle-water, Succi Citri, an. ij. Juice of Citron, an. ij. Confectionis
Alkermes, ij. Confection of Alkermes, ij. De Hyacintho, j. Of Jacinths, j.
Pulveris Diamargariti frigidi, ij. Powder of cold Diamargarite, j.

Mix all together, and make an Epitheme, to dip Wollen-cloaths in, being
lukewarm, to be applied to the Region of the Heart, alternately for an hour or
two.

. Aquarum Nimpheae,. Waters of Water Lillies, Portulacae, Purslain, Oxalidis,
and Sorrel, Solani, an. ij. Nightshade, an. ij. Aceti Rosati, j. Vinegar of
Roses, j. Pulveris Diarrhodon Abbatis, and Powder of Diarrhodon of the Abbot,
and Diatria Santali, an. j. Diatria Santalin, an. j. Trochiscorum de Camphura,
ss. Trochisks of Camphire, ss.

Make an Epitheme to be applied lukewarm to the Region of the Liver.

You may observe the manifest ease which the sick receive from these
Applications in restless burning Fevers, and from thence judge of the advantage
and benefit afforded by them.

Confections of Alkermes and Jacinths, Mithridate, Opiate of Solomon,
Diascordium, Conserve of Roses, Gillow-flowers, Bugloss, etc. and Powders of
Diamargariton, Diarrhodon, Diatria Santali, etc. as also the Oil of Scorpions
of Matthiolus are the ordinary Ingredients of solid Epithemes, the use whereof
is only for the Heart and Liver. They are laid on after the application of the
liquid ones, and suffered to lie as long as they will hold on. The usual method
of Prescription is this,

. Conservarum Tunicae, and. Conserve of Clove-Gillow-flowers, and Rosarum, an.
ss. Roses, an. ss. Confectionis Alkermes, and Confection of Alkermes, and De
Hyacintho, an. ij. Jacinths, an. j. Theriacae probatae, and Approved Treacle,
and Pulveris Diamargariti frigidi, an. j. Powder of cold Diamargariton, an. j.

CHAP. XI. Of Bags and Caps quilted with Powder.
THe inconvenience of wearing Plasters long upon the Stomach, and especially
in tedious Diseases; and the obstinate Diseases caused by the excess of the
moisture or coldness of the brain, was the reason of the invention of quilted*
Caps and Stomachers: For which those Aromatic Powders already set down may
serve as the examples of Receipts sufficient; I shall only add that these
Powders need not be too finely beaten, to the end they may preserve their
virtue the longer, and may not be subject to get through the Taffaties of which
the Caps and Stomachers are made.

CHAP. XII. Of Perfumes.
BOth the healthy as well as the Sick may equally receive benefit or mischief
from good or bad smells. And though good smells are generally sought for, yet
bad scents are not always to be rejected, as being necessary for the cure of
some Distempers, that sweet smells are the cause of in some persons.

Take three drams of Florence-Orrice, three drams of Benjamin, one dram and a
half of good Storax, a dram of Lignum Rhodium, half a dram of yellow-Saunders,
half a scruple of Aromatick-Reed, as much Flowers of Benjamin and three Cloves,
mix this Powder in six ounces of good Rose Water, and three ounces of
Orange-Flower-water, and having kept them in the cold in a Mattress for twenty
four hours or more, pour out some part of the mixture into a Perfuming-Pan
moderately heated, and keep the rest for use in the Mattress, or else in a
strong-glass close stopped. You may, if you please, add to this Composition
some few grains of Musk and Amber-greese.

To make Pomanders or Bracelets, take eight ounces of Willow-coal, two ounces
of Labdanum, two ounces of Mastick in tears, and two ounces of yellow-Amber,
and having mixed these Powders, incorporate them with Muscilage of
Gum-tragacanth extracted with Rose Water: Then make up the Pomanders of what
figure you please, and dry them in the shade. They that will be at the cost may
add to these Pomanders odoriferous-Tacamahacca, as also Musk and Amber-greese.

These Pomanders are not only good to burn, but also to perfume the Caps and
Linen of those that having cold and moist Brains are subject to defluxions and
Rhumatisms. They may also take the fume into their Mouths and up their Nostrils.

Women also that are troubled with the suppression of the Menstruums and
Hysteric Passions may sit over the Smoke of these Pomanders.

It is also good for those that are troubled with Asthma's and thick and
viscous Phlegm, to receive the smoke of these Pomanders at the Mouth and
Nostrils. But they are naught for those that are troubled with spitting of
blood, and Ulcers of the Lungs.

Sometimes it is enough to burn Amber, Mastich, or Tacamahacca alone, or some
other Gum of the same nature; or else Cephalic, pectoral or Hysteric Plants,
according to the judgment of the Physician.

The Fume of Cinnaber is sometimes used to raise a Flux in Venereal Cures,
especially when it cannot be done by friction, or other Preparations of Mercury.

But though Mastich, Olibanum, Benjamin, Labdanum, Calamus Aromaticus, or some
other Aromatics are mixed with it to hinder the bad Effects of the Cinnaber, I
think the best Correction is to let it alone if possible. The fume of Cinnabar
is used with less danger for the Cure of stubborn and Venereal Ulcers, so they
be remote from the Head and Mouth.

CHAP. XIII. Of Frontlets.
THE cruel Torments caused by pains in the Head occasioned the invention of
Frontlets; which serve in fortifying the brain, to discuss, suppress, and cause
transpirations of the Vapors, qualify their heat, and assuage their pricking
Torture.

Frontlets are sometimes made of dry Ingredients, as Roses, Flowers of Elder,
Water Lillies, Sanders, Corianders bruised, Betony, Marjoram, or Lavender cut,
Kernels of Peaches and Abricots.

Sometimes it suffices to bind to the Forehead and Temples Linen that is
dipped in Rose Water, Vinegar, or Elder-water. Sometimes the green Leaves of
Water Lillies, Gourds, Lettice, Purslain, and Vine-Leaves, etc. especially for
those Distempers of the head that attend burning Fevers. But the most effectual
Frontlets are made of Conserves of Flowers, Extracts, Seeds, Ointments,
Powders, and other proper matters made into a Paste, and spread upon fine
Linen, to be laid to the Forehead and Temples.

. Conservae Rosarum Rubrarum,. Conserve of Red-roses, Nympheae, an. vj.
Water Lillies, an. vj. Seminis Papaveris albi contusi, White-poppy seed
bruised. Pulveris Diatria santalon, and Powder of Diatria Santalon, Vnguenti
Populei, an. j. Popler Ointment, an. j.

Make a Frontlet to be applied cold to the Forehead and Temples.

. Conservae Violarum,. Conserve of Violets, Rosarum, and Roses, and Nympheae,
an. ss. Water Lillies, an. ss. Pulveris trium Santalorum, and Powder of the
three Sanders, and Coriandri, Corianders, Nucleorum Persicorum, contusorum, and
Peach-kernels bruised, and Extracti Liquidioris Opii, an. j. Liquid Extract of
Opium, an. j.

Sometimes it is enough to apply to the Forehead and Temples equal parts of
Ointment of Populeum and extract of Liquid Opium: or to make a Frontlet of the
Kernels of Peaches or Abricotts bruised in a Mortar with about a sixth part of
Bay Salt, and as much Powder of Roses.

Frontlets to stop thin and sharp defluxions upon the Eyes, are made by
incorporating equal parts of Bole-Armenian, Seal'd-Earth, Mastick and Dragons
blood in Powder with whites of Eggs; then reduce it into a Paste and spread it
upon Tow, to be applied to the Forehead and Temples.

CHAP. XIV. Of Lotions.
LOtions are a sort of Remedies between Fomentations and Baths.

Cooling and sleep-procuring Lotions are prepared in restless Fevers. To which
purpose we boil in Water the Roots, Leaves, and Flowers of Water Lillies, the
Leaves of Lettice, Purslain, Willow and white Poppies, and the cold Seeds, to
wash the hands and feet of the Patient from time to time.

Sometimes the head is to be washed with a clear Lie made of the Ashes of
Vinetwigs, to cleanse off the greasiness of the hair. Sometimes Lotions are
prepared for the cure of the Scurf. Among the rest that of the simple Decoction
of Watercresses in common water; or that of the compound Decoction of the
Roots of Orrice, Assarabacca, Leaves of Ivy, Wormwood, Fumitory, Celandine,
Scabious, creeping Thime and Marjoram, Laurel-berries and Lupins, boiled
together in a clear Lie of Juniperwood. This Lotion is to be continued for
several days in the wain of the Moon, after the use of general Purgers and
Diaphoreticks. Sometimes to these Decoctions are added the Dungs of Pigeons,
Geese, and Sheep; the Roots of Patience and Ellebore, Coloquintida, Euphorbium,
Verdigreese, and several other penetrating Medicaments, where gentler Remedies
will not prevail.

There is a Lotion also to be made of the Decoction of Lupins, Staves-acre,
Wormwood, and lesser Centaurie in Vinegar, to wash the head, and sometimes the
whole body, to kill Lice and Vermin.

To make the Hair grow, and to keep it from falling off, the Decoction of the
Maiden hairs, and Female Southernwood is an excellent Lotion.

Several Lotions are made to cure the Itch, Tetters, Warts, and other
Deformities of the Skin, not only of the Decoctions of the Roots and Leaves of
Elecampane, Sowre-Dock, Scabious, Fumitory; but also of the Dissolutions of
Mercury made in strongwater, or Spirit of Nitre, mixed with a good quantity of
ordinary water, to wash the hands, arms, legs, and feet, not coming near the
head, nor any other part of the body which the Mercury may prejudice.

The head may also be washed with Spirit of Wine, or the Queen of Hungaries
Water, to strengthen the Brain, dissipate the superfluous moistures thereof,
and heal Contusions. It is good also to wash the other parts of the body with
the same Liquors in Rhumatisms, and to appease pains of all sorts. It is good
also for Burns, adding a little Vitriol, or some few Grains of Verdigreese.

Ulcers and Wounds are also to be washed with Tinctures or Decoctions of
Birthwort, Gentian, Centaury, Periwinkle, Wormwood, Gold'n-Rod, Sanicle, etc.
in the juices of the same Plants or in White wine; adding sometimes Powders of
Myrrh, and Aloes; of which, when the Wounds are deep, Injections are to be made.

I omit the Imbrocations or Aspersions of the Ancients, as altogether out of
use.

CHAP. VII. Of Collyriums.
COllyriums are liquid Remedies appointed for Infirmities of the Eyes. Which
name is particularly attributed to Trochisks of Ceruse of Rhasis, dissolved in
specific Waters. Dry Powders also and Ointments, used for the same Effect, are
called by the same name: and improperly some liquid Remedies prepared for the
cure of Venereal Ulcers.

There are many that boast themselves to have exquisite Receipts of this
nature, and therefore I shall only give two or three Examples of such as I have
had successful experience of.

. Magnesiae Opalina subtilissime pulveratae, and. Magnesia Opalina very finely
powdered, and Tutiae Alexandrinae praeparata, and Tutia of Alexandria prepared,
Salis Saturni albissimi, an. j. Whitest Salt of Saturn, an. j. Aquarum
stillatitiarum, Distilled Waters of Euphrasiae, Eybright, Feniculi, Fennel,
Rosarum, and Roses, Chelidonii majoris, an. j. Bigger Clandine, an. j.

Mix them together and make a Collyrium. Heat this Collyrium lukewarm, and
wash the Eyes as often as you think fit, to cure them of redness and
inflammation, and to consume the Pin and Web.

. Sacchari Candi, j.. Sugar Candy, j. Radicis Ireos Florentiae, iij. Roots of
Florence-Orrice, iij. Tutiae Alexandrinae praeparatae, ij. Tutia of Alexandria
prepared, ij. Sarcocollae, Sarcocol, Vitrioli Albi, and White-Vitriol, Aloes
Succotrinae, an. j. Aloes Succotrine, an. j. Caryophyllorum, j. Cloves, j.
Aquarum Stillatitiarum, Distilled Waters of Euphrasiae, Eybright, Feniculi,
Fennel, Rosarum, an. viij. Roses, an. viij. Vini Hispanici, lb ij.
Spanish-Wine, lb ij.

Having pulverized the Ingredients, and mixed them with the Waters and
Spanish-wine, put them into a Glass-bottle close-stopp'd, and expose them to
the Sun for 15 days, stiring them very often; or else set them in a moderate
sand-Bath as long, and keep the pure Liquor in a bottle close-stopt.

That which follows is a Powder which may be called a dry Collyrium, very
proper to consume the serosities of the Eyes, and the Pin and Web, provided
they be not under the tunicles of the Eyes.

. Sacchari Candi, ij.. Sugar Candy, ij. Tutiae praeparatae, and Tutia prepared,
and Stercoris Lacertae, an. j. Lizards-Dung, an. ij. Vitrioli albi usti,
White-Vitriol burnt, Aloes Succotrinae, and Aloes Succotrine, Salis Saturni,
an. ss. Salt of Saturn, ss.

Pulverize and mix them all together for a dry Collyrium.

Blow the weight of two or three grains at a time into the Eye. It may be also
mingled with Ophthalmic Waters for a liquid Collyrium.

Lanfrancus uses this Collyrium for the cure of Venereal Ulcers.

. Vini Albi, lb j.. White Wind, lb j. Aquarum Plantaginis, and Waters of
Plantain, and Rosarum, an. iij. Roses, an. iij. Auripigmenti, ij. Orpine, ij.
Viridis Aeris, j. Verdigreese, j. Myrrhae Myrrh, Aloes, an. ij. Aloes, an. ij.

Mix them for use.

You must be careful in preparing this Collyrium to powder the Orpiment,
Verdigreese, Myrrh and Aloes, very finely before you mix them with the Liquors.
You may also dulcifie the Collyrium with three or four times the weight of
Rose Water, Plantainwater, or Night-shade-water, when it is to be used,
especially in injections, for Gonorrhea's when the venom is over; only take
care that the Spermatic Vessels be neither ulcerated nor over-weaken'd.

I pass over in silence several other External Remedies little in use;
believing it to be now high time to make an end of these Galenical
Preparations, and that I have not forgot any thing which to the best of my
Judgment deserved to be taken notice of, or which I may not have occasion to
speak of in the next Part.

The end of the Royal Galenic Pharmacopoea.
THE THIRD PART OF THE Royal Pharmacopoea, CONTAINING CHEMICAL PREPARATIONS.
The Order and Method of the Third Part.
THE great correspondence between the one and the other Pharmacy* and the
mutual helps which they daily afford each other, obliged me to set down at the
beginning of this Work such general observations as might contribute to the
understanding of both; and therefore I will only lightly and occasionally touch
upon what I believe I have already explained: Only give me leave to make
application, and declare the use of the whole, while I speak of Chemical
Preparations in particular.

Chemical as well as Galenick Pharmacy acknowledges Vegetables, Animals, and
Minerals, for the matter upon which all its operations are to be grounded, and
of which she prepares Remedies proper for the ease and cure of Diseases. But
whereas the Galenick Pharmacy separates those parts which it believes hurtful
or unprofitable by ordinary means; and is contented to cleanse, wash, infuse,
boil, stamp, or mingle, according to occasion, those parts which it judges to
be the best; Chemistry pierces farther into the bowels of mixed bodies,
artificially to separate all the parts which compose them; and thus displaying
the pure substances, puts them into a condition to produce with efficacy all
that can be expected from them.

This hinders not however, but that in this concord of matter and end, which is
found to be between both the one and the other Pharmacy, Chemistry, as much
exalted as it is, makes use of the same Instruments and Vessels which the
Galenick employs, though it makes use of a great many more; while the
industrious discover new ones every day, when they design to make a separation
of mixed bodies to the height of exactness.

I have divided this Third Part into Three Books: In the First, I treat of the
Preparation of Vegetals, which are the first mixed bodies that seem to present
themselves first to the eyes, upon the superficies of the Earth, which are
familiar to us, and from which we draw abundance of Remedies. I make Animals
the subject of the Second, not only because that being for the most part
nourished by Vegetals, their different parts seem in some measure to partake of
their virtues, and to impart them to a great number of Remedies wherein they
are used; but because we feed upon several of them our selves. I have reserved
Minerals for the subject of the Last Book; because that being as it were all
hid in the bowels of the Earth, they are not so familiar to us, and require
more labor, and a more vehement f^^^, and much more skill than Vegetals or
Animals.

But because my main end is to show the most f^re and easy ways to accomplish
all Chemical Operations, I will sincerely communicate those which I practice
every day; and displaying without any reservation Preparations fit to be known,
I shall endeavor to explain my self in such so^^, that apprehending those
which I shall give, it may be no difficult thing to perfect others which I may
omit; provided you observe the operations of Artists, and want neither
Ingenuity, Instruments, nor other necessary means.

Furthermore, I have this hope, that having founded my Preparations upon
Experience and Reason, and having avoided the prolixities of other Authors,
there will be no cause to complain of my method, as having fixed the virtues,
doses, and uses upon the principal parts of which mixed bodies are composed,
upon the various alterations which they undergo in Preparation, and the success
which I have observed upon several trials which I have made, upon a thousand
occasions.

The First Book: Containing the CHEMICAL PREPARATION OF VEGETALS
CHAP. I. Of the Distillation of Vegetals in general.
THE Extent of the Number of Vegetals being no less than that of the Surface of
the whole Earth, and their Differences, Form, and Virtues being no less
unlimited than their Number, it is no wonder, if Chemistry having labored from
time to time to invent what she judged expedient for the preparation of mixed
bodies, find continual occasion to put those means in practice, and to add
thereto several new ones to obtain its ends.

Distillation, as familiar as it is, is one of the principal operations of
which it makes use for the separation and purification of the parts of
Vegetals, as also of Animals and Minerals. And though the Galenick Pharmacy may
have some knowledge thereof, and have made use thereof for a long time for the
ordinary preparation of waters, however it cannot boast of having attained the
perfection of that operation, no more than of having gained the knowledge of
separating and distinguishing the parts that compose the mixed bodies. For not
having followed other than the ordinary ways, nor having had recourse to other
than the most simple and most common Instruments and means; and neglecting
besides those numerous operations of Chemistry, they fail of their purposes,
not being able to dissolve those mixed bodies which they submit to Distillation.

The reading of Mesues, Avicenn, Serapion, Rhases, and all the ancient Greek
and Arabian Authors, will sufficiently justify these truths, so that we must
be forced to confess, that Galenick Pharmacy would soon loose those advantages
which it enjoys, did it not borrow several exquisite preparations from
Chemistry.

And for as much as the various nature of Vegetals, their different
composition, and the more or less compactness of the parts, constrain the
Artist to vary not only his Fire, but the Vessels and Instruments which he
makes use of, more especially in Distillation; I will set down the various
methods which the Apothecary ought to use; nor will I forget to show how he is
to act when he is obliged to distill several parts of a different substance
together, and to mix together some parts of Animals and Minerals.

The principal effect of Distillation is to dissolve by heat the fluid parts of
mixed bodies, and above all of Vegetals; to separate them from the rest in
vapor, and to embody them again, and to cause them to trickle drop by drop
from the holes which the Artist has prepared to give them passage forth.
Chemistry acknowledges three sorts of Liquors, which it draws from Vegetals by
Distillation, the Watery, the Spiritous, and the Oily Liquor. Among which there
is sometimes a fourth observed issuing out of certain Plants; that is to say, a
volatile Salt. The Watery humor, under the name of Phlegm, is easily separated
from the other parts of the mixed body, when you move it by the heat of the
fire. It is usually most plentiful, but least efficacious; nevertheless it is
not to be despised, for besides that it is able to temper the activity of the
other substances, it contains some essential parts of the mixed bodies, which it
carries with it in Distillation; so that it may be kept sometimes for several
months together without corruption, sometimes from one year to another, and
produces good effects, as may be observed in the distilled waters of Plants,
that have neither taste nor smell. The Spiritous part is the most essential
part that can be drawn forth by Distillation, and which all Chemistry
acknowledges for an active principle, under the name of Mercury. There is
usually to be met with, in this Spirit, a kind of acidity, with the scent of
the Plant it self. It will keep a long time, and produces effects much more
powerful than any that can be expected from the Watery humor. The Oily
substance, which Chemistry acknowledges for one of the active principles, under
the name of Sulphur, rises usually in Distillation among the Watery and
Spiritous Liquors. It is burnable, and swims upon the top of the other
substances, when it is pure; but it falls to the bottom when it is laden with
any Salt or Terrestrial parts. This substance encloses within it self whatever
the Aromatic Plants contain of most virtue. It is of a strong scent, and
piercing taste, and may pass for the Quintessence of the Aromaticks. It may be
preserved a long time, provided you do not expose it to the injuries of the Air.

CHAP. II. Of the Distillation of Roots, and the various substances that may be
drawn from them.
WE find some Plants without Stalks, some without Leaves, others without a
Flower, others without Seed, and without several other productions, which are
reckoned to be of the number of Vegetals; but we find no Plant without some
Root, from whence all the other parts draw matter for their nourishment,
growth, and substence. And we may say, with reason enough, that it is as
impossible for them to be what they are without the Root, as for the Root to be
what it is without the production of the Seed; at least by some kind of Root
able to produce its species, as in those of Saffron, etc. Nor can this Root
subsist, nor produce all its parts, without the assistance of the Earth, which
serves instead of a Matrix; without the heat of the Sun, which affords it
necessary heat; nor without the help of the Water, which conveighs to the Root
whatever the Earth contains necessary for its subsistence, and for the growth,
distribution, and perfection of all its parts. We must be also convinced, that
the Root, especially of Herbs that dye every year, can never impart those
virtues to the Plant which it does, did it not possess them before. And
therefore there we usually meet with all the principal virtues contracted
together, which it is able to impart to the rest of the parts of the Plants;
provided you gather them in time, when the Root is fit for production, which is
at the end of Winter, or the beginning of Spring.

But though these considerations oblige an Artist to a particular esteem of the
good parts and qualities which several Roots possess, and to endeavor to make
several Chemical Preparations thereof; yet Distillation is one of those
operations which it least employs, and which indeed is never practiced but upon
some Aromatic Roots, the principal parts whereof are easy to be drawn forth,
and from whence I think it expedient to begin the Examples of Distillation,
which I have proposed to give in this Work.

Distillation by descent is not to be used upon these Roots, for besides that
it would consume the best of the substance of the Root; the violence of the
Fire would manifestly alter their good qualities. But straight Distillation is
to be made use of for this purpose; and you must also make choice of proper
Menstruums and Dissolvents, wherein you may not only dissolve those parts of
the Root which are pure and fit to be dissolved, but also cause the vapors to
ascend together in Distillation, and then condensed into Liquor, to fall down
into the Recipient ready prepared. For this purpose you may make use of
Cucurbits of Glass, of Potters Earth, or glazed Earth, with Glass-heads, to
distill a small quantity of Roots. But when you distill any considerable
quantity, you must make use of a Refrigerant, lesser or bigger, or of Vessels
of Copper Tinned within, covered with their Moors head, and furnished with
their Serpentine, which passes along a Vessel filled with cold water.

You must follow the same method for the Distillation of the Roots of Valerian.
Masterwort, Angelica, Spignel, the Carline Thistle, and other Aromatic Plants,
which are full of odorous, spiritful, and volatile parts, accompanied with some
Oil, and some volatile and fixed Salt.

For example: Take three pound of any one of these Roots dried, and having
grossly stamped them, and put them into a great Cucurbit of Glass, pour upon
them six pints of distilled Time-water, and as much White Wind; having made
choice of such a Cucurbit that about a quarter of it may remain empty. Then
having fitted and luted on a Glass-head, and a Recipient for the beak of the
head, leave them three or four days in digestion, over a very gentle Fire of
Embers, or over a Cook's or a Baker's Oven. After which, having placed the
Cucurbit in a Sand-Bath, make your Distillation with a moderate fire; which you
must continue till the Water, that trickles forth, be almost without taste or
smell; at which time let the Vessels cool, strain and press out the matters
which remain in the Cucurbit, and having clarifi'd the Liquor, evaporate the
superfluous moisture, till it come to the consistence of an Extract, which you
must keep apart by it self in a Pot close stopped. You may may also dry the
sediment, burn it, and reduce it into Ashes, to make a Lie thereof, after you
have filtered it, and consumed all its moisture, to the coagulation of a Salt,
to mix and keep among the Extract. You may do well to rectify the Liquor
distilled, and in a Bath of Ashes or Sand, with a very moderate heat, to draw
out the more subtle Spirit, which will be accompanied with some odorous Oil
that swims at the top; which you must separate and keep apart, in a little
Glass Bottle very well stopped, as a very precious Essence. The Water which
remains at the bottom of the Cucurbit, being good for nothing, may be thrown
away. The Extract thus prepared, containing nothing considerable in it self but
the fixed Salt part of the Root, all the good parts being ascended in
Distillation, cannot alone produce any extraordinary effects; however it may be
of use, by giving it dissolved in its own Spiritful Water, which you may also
enliven with its own Spirit, charged with its own volatile Salt, and mix it
with some few drops of its own distilled Oil, incorporated with a dram of Sugar
finely powdered, by means whereof you may mingle this or the like Oils with any
sort of watery Liquor.

The substances which I have spoken of, powerfully resist the putrefaction of
humors, and bad Air; so that they are used in all Epidemick distempers, and
against the Pestilence. You may mingle and give them together, as I have said
already, all these different substances, every one according to their just
proportion; according to the nature of the sickness, and the constitution and
condition of the Patient. The dose of the Spirit, well rectified and mingled
with its volatile Salt, is from a scruple to a dram. The dose of the Spiritous
Water, from two ounces to six, and sometimes eight. That of the Oil, from two
to seven or eight drops. And that of the Extract, charged with its fixed Salt,
from half a dram to two drams. All these different parts tend to the same
purpose, which is to fortify the Heart, the Brain, and all the noble parts of
the Body; to expel by sweat, or by insensible transpiration, the malignant
humors that are capable of being expelled through the pores of the Body. And
you shall feel the effects according to the quantity of the dose administered.
The Extract is somewhat purgative, by reason of its fixed Salt. For which
reason it may be very well mixed among Purgers, in sicknesses where the other
good parts, that I have spoken of, are useful.

You may incorporate the distilled Oil with the pressed Oil of Nutmegs, to make
a Balsom to carry in your pocket, in some little Box of Gold, Silver, or Ivory.
Giving to the Balsom the name of the Root of the Herb out of which the Oil was
drawn; and making use of them not only for their pleasing scent, but also to
fortify the noble parts, especially the Head, by putting it up the Nostrils,
and rubbing the Temples and Sutures of the Brain with it.

CHAP. III. Of the Distillation of Juicy Herbs, esteemed to be Cold.
THough we may have some reason to prefer the Juice of moist Herbs, and without
scent, before the Water which is to be drawn from them; and that we must
confess, that the fixed Salt, which Herbs may have, does not usually ascend in
Distillation; yet it would be a difficult thing to be without these Waters,
where there is an intention to please those Patients that cannot endure the
taste of Juices or Decoctions. Besides, these Herbs are not always to be found,
in regard they are dead all the Winter; nor will the juice or decoction keep
many days without spoiling, unless you can rid them of their superfluous
humidity that causes the corruption, or change their consistency from liquid
into thick; or unless you scum, clarify, and boil them with Sugar or Honey, to
keep them like a Syrup.

These Herbs are not to be distilled by descent, nor side-ways, because that by
those ways there could be no reasonable separation made of the pure parts from
the impure; and that it would be a hard matter to prevent the latter from
running and mixing with the former. For these reasons we only make use of the
straight Distillation, which is only able to raise in vapor the most subtle
Liquor of the Herbs, which fails not afterward to embody in the upper part of
the Limbeck, and to descend again, and so trickle into the Pipe which is fixed
into the Recipient. You must vary your Vessels and your fire according to the
various nature of the Herbs which you distill; for you neither make use of such
large Vessels, nor so great a fire, for those that are of a thin substance and
cold in their quality, as for those whose substance is thick, and composed of
hot parts. We make use for the first of Glass Vessels, or of Vessels made of
Potters Clay, and varnished or glazed within. Yet the Distillation may be made
in Balneo Mariae, or the Evaporating Bath. But the latter must be distilled in
Vessels of Copper Tinned; of which there are some called Refrigerants, which
above the upper part, that receives the vapors that the fire sends up from the
substances, contain a small quantity of cold water, to condense those vapors,
and cause them to descend into the Recipient. The others, called great Vessels,
are covered with a Moors-head, so called by reason of its form, to which there
belongs a Beak, to which the Serpentine is joined, variously writhed, which
passes along a Tunnel filled with cold water. These great Serpentines are
esteemed before Refrigerants, because the vapors being raised, meet with more
coolness, and are more easily condensed, passing thwart such a great quantity
of cold water, than if they were only cooled by as much water as the
Refrigerant could contain of it self. These latter consist of two parts, of
which the lowermost, that contains the substances which are to be distilled, is
round and flat, and not above eight inches high. The upper part made like a
Cope or a Judges Hood, proportionable at the bottom to the wideness of the
Vessel below, which it ought to enchase, must be wider and more exalted than
the ordinary Heads; you must also there fit on and sodder a kind of Box of
Copper, higher and bigger, to serve as a Wall, which is to contain a good
quantity of fresh and cool water, which environing all the Head, and being
emptied and filled from time to time, facilitates the dissolution of the
vapors, and prevents the scent of burning too, which the distilled Waters
easily contract, in those Vessels which are called Rosaries, because the common
people use them for the Distillation of Roses; making use for the most part of
Leaden heads, not considering that the vapors rising from the substances, and
meeting in the inside of the Head, gnaw and fret off some particles of the
Lead, which manifestly change the quality of the Waters that corroded them; the
taste whereof is sweetish, and the powder white, which precipitates it self by
degrees to the bottom of the Water; and is a certain sign, as well as the tart
taste and greenish powder, which is found in the bottom of Waters distilled in
Copper Vessels not Tinned, that certain particles of Copper are corroded off,
and dissolved in those Liquors.

Now for as much as Tin is the only metal able to resist the usual vapors
which rise from Herbs in their Distillation, and the only metal that will not
be corroded nor dissolved; therefore great care must be taken, to Tin very well
the inside of Copper Vessels; and indeed it would do better to make the Head of
Lattin, instead of Copper Tinned. Yet a Leaden Head is very proper for the
Distillation of Nightshade, Plantane, white Roses, and other such like, which
are designed for Collyriums, and other outward uses, because the parts of the
Lead which join thereto, increase the virtue of the Waters.

The heat of the Balneum Mariae, or the Evaporating Bath, being not of force
enough to heat the quantity of matter contained in those Vessels, especially in
the two first, to make a dissolution, they generally make use of an immediate
fire of Coals; but you must be very careful to govern it well; which it is
impossible to do, if you have not Vessels proportionable to the bigness of the
Vessels that contain the matters; and if you know not how to open and shut the
doors and the Regiters just in the nick of time, to augment or abate the heat
of the fire upon occasion. Nevertheless, sometimes the Bath of Ashes or Sand
will serve turn, under the Rosary, especially when you would distill Herbs
entire or chopped, without any addition of moisture; or when you would distill
the Juice of any Plant, whose cooling quality a fire too violent might chance
to alter.

The best method of distilling Herbs to purpose, that abound in moisture, is to
draw out the Juice and distill that, when you have purified it. It will not be
necessary for me to lay down in this place, the method how to draw forth and
purify all sorts of Juices, having already done it in the first Chapter of the
Second Part of this Pharmacopoea, speaking of the Galenical preparation of
these Juices. But it may not be amiss to make some reflection upon the various
nature of Juices, which depends upon the nature of the Herbs from whence they
are drawn, and to have regard not only to the variety of the substances which
compose them, but chiefly to the quantity of those that predominate in every
one of them; to fit himself with Vessels, and order his fire in such manner, to
the end he may find in the distilled Water, that which should ascend by
Distillation, and at the same time be master of the Salt parts that usually
remain in the sediments of the Juice, or in the setlings of the Herbs from
whence it was drawn.

You may to very good purpose put into Cucurbits of Glass, or Potters Earth, or
glazed Earth with Glass heads, the purified Juice of the Leaves of the
Water-Lilly, the greater and lesser Housleek* Wall-Penniwort, Lettice, Garden
Nightshade, and such like Herbs that abound in moisture, have very little Salt
parts, and less Sulphury; the Distillation whereof is made in Balneo Mariae, or
the Evaporating Bath, when you seek rather for the refreshing quality, than the
preservation of the Waters distilled. But when you would cause the most
essential part of those Herbs to ascend by Distillation, then you must make use
of the Bath of Ashes or Sand, moderately heated. For by this means the Water
rises with some spiritful volatile parts, somewhat saltish, and accompanied
with some acidity, which serves to preserve and render it efficacious. You may
also search for the fixed Salt in the settlement of the Herbs, to macerate it
in their distilled Water, though the small quantity you will find is hardly
worth your trouble.

You may distill also the Juice and also the Leaves of these Herbs entire, or
chopped, by a Rosary covered with a head of Lattin, or Copper Tinned, placed in a
Bath of Ashes or Sand; and draw off the good Waters, provided you take care to
order your fire, in Distillation; and be careful not to roast or scorch the
substances when their moisture is almost consumed.

There is not much difference to be observed in their virtues, no more than in
the use of the Waters which are drawn from these Herbs. They are inwardly made
use of to allay the heat of Fevers, and assuage the heat of choleric humors,
as also to provoke sleep, giving from two ounces to seven or eight, alone or
mingled with some proper Syrrup, in manner of a Julep. They are also made use
of outwardly, as well to cool and smooth the complexion, as to dissipate
redness, to cure Erysipela's, and to extinguish all manner of volatile fires,
and external inflammations. The Water of Garden Nightshade is with good success
applied to the last of these distempers; but it is never taken inwardly, unless
in Gargarisms.

CHAP. IV. Of the Distillation of Sorrel.
THE great affinity which the several sorts of Sorrel have with Herbs already
treated of, may be a reason sufficient enough for you to distill them with the
same fire, and to make use of the same Vessels: But because these Plants
contain in their Juice an essential Salt, acid, tartarous, more plentiful, but
very different from that of the Herbs of which I have spoken in the foregoing
Chapter, the separation of which I have omitted, as of which there is no
advantage to be made without a most particular care; it is requisite you should
know how to draw forth this essential Salt.

After you have drawn forth a good quantity of the Juice of Sorrel, gathered
just when it begins to run up into Seed, at which time the moisture thereof is
best digested, and the good qualities thereof in their chiefest force; you must
purify the said Juice, and having filled therewith three quarters of several
Glass Cucurbits, and covered them with their heads, and placed them in a Sand
Bath, upon a moderate fire, distill the Water forth till the Juice in every
Cucurbit be two thirds diminished. Then letting the Bath cool, and having
stopped up the distilled Water, pour out the Juice that remains in the Cucurbits
by inclination into a Linen Bag, to separate it well from the Feces; and
putting the clear Liquor into a clean Glass Cucurbit, covered with its head,
make a new Distillation, by a Balneum Mariae, between lukewarm and boiling;
which you must continue, till the Juice remaining in the Cucurbit, come to be
as thick as the consistence of a Rob; at which time let the Vessels cool, and
afterward carry the Cucurbit into a Cellar or a Vault, where the essential
Salt of the Sorrel will christallize in a few days, and stick to the bottom and
sides of the Cucurbit. Then by inclination pour forth into a little Cucurbit,
the Liquor that swims above the Salt; and evaporating it in Balneo Mariae, till
it prove as thick as the former, put it also into the Cellar to chrystallize.
You may dry and keep both the one and the other in a Glass Bottle well stopped,
or dissolve them and keep them in the distilled Water, to render it of more
virtue. You may also, the better to purify it, dissolve it in a quantity of
the Water distilled; then filter that Liquor through a brown Paper, and having
evaporated the Water to the thin skim, by a moderate heat, chrystallize the
Salt in a Cellar, put it in a Bottle close stopped, and keep it for your use.

This Salt contains in it the best and most essential part of the Sorrel. It
opens obstructions of the Bowels; it cuts and attenuates thick and viscous
humors, and by that means sensibly redresses the distempers of the Liver and
Spleen; it excites an appetite, and helps the digestion. The dose is from half
a scruple to half a dram, in its proper Water, or in some Broth. The distilled
Water is good to cool the heat of choleric Fevers especially. It is also put
into Cordial Waters, and the same dose is given of the Water as of the Salt.

CHAP. V. Of the Distillation of hot Herbs, bitter, and without scent; and of
some other Preparations that may be made at the same time.
YOU may distill Fumitory, Hops, Succory, Blessed Thistle, and other Herbs
juicy, bitter, and without scent, proceeding according to the same method as in
the Distillation of Sorrel. You may also make use of the same Vessels, and
distill with the same fire. But because there is much use made of the distilled
Water of these Herbs; and for that they contain in them a plentiful Salt,
between nitrous and tartarous; and for that you may also without altering their
qualities, make them endure a hotter fire; you may, to good purpose, make use
of a Refrigerant, or a large Vessel covered with a Moors-head, and its
Serpentine that runs athwart a Pipe filled with cold water, to distill their
Juice, which you must have purified in the same manner as that of Sorrel.

But because the essential Salt, which chrystallizes in the Juice that remains
at the bottom after Distillation, is usually foul and clouded, as well by
reason of the Terrestreities that abound more in these Herbs than in the
Sorrel, as by reason of some sulphury particles that accompany those bitter
Herbs, especially when they are in their full virtue; you must not only be
careful to filter the Juices with all the exactness that you observe in the
filtering of Sorrel, but to seek out also other ways to purify those Salts
more perfectly. Wherein, that you may obtain your end, and save the Salt which
remains in the sediments of the Herbs, from whence you have drawn the Juice,
you must dry that sediment; then having burnt it, and reduced it to. Ashes,
make a Lixivium of the Water distilled from the same Herbs, and having
dissolved the chrystalliz'd Juice, then strain the whole through a course
Paper. Then putting the filtered Liquor into a Glass Cucurbit, with its head,
draw forth the Water by a Balneum Mariae, till you observe in that which
remains in the Cucurbit, a small film swimming upon the Liquor, and covering it
like a little skin. Then give over Distillation, and let the Vessels cool; and
after you have let the Cucurbit remain four or five days in the Cellar, pour
forth into a little Glass Cucurbit by inclination the Liquor which remains; and
having again evaporated it to the Pelliculae, dry that Salt with the former,
and keep it for use, in some Glass Bottle very well stopped, or dissolve and
keep it in its own distilled Water.

The Salt which you draw from the settlement of those Herbs, finding it self
deprived of its nitrous volatile part, consumed by the Ustion and incineration,
contains only the fixed tartarous Salt part. Whereas the Salt which remains at
the bottom of the Vessels after Distillation, is equally composed of the
nitrous, volatile, and tartarous fixed, which are the principal substances of
those Herbs. Nevertheless, the conjunction of the fixed tartarous Salt of the
settlement, agrees very well, being united to the other two, the virtue whereof
it sensibly increases.

The Waters of Succory, Hops, and Fumitory are very much commended for
purifying the mass of the Blood, and for curing the distempers of the Liver and
Spleen, as also those of the Stomach which proceed from the putrefaction of
humors. However they operate with more force when their Salt is dissolved in
them. The dose whereof is from half a scruple to half a dram, and sometimes to
one dram. The dose of the Water from two to six or eight ounces. The Salt is
also sometimes given in Broth, or other Liquors; or else mingled with other
Salts, or with Opiates, or with other Remedies.

Blessed Thistle abounding more in nitrous sulphury parts, than those Herbs I
have mentioned; the Salt and Water which is drawn from thence, work also more
effectually. Now because the more volatile Salt and sulphurous parts of this
Plant, easily ascend with the Water in Distillation, and being joined
therewith, are able to insinuate themselves into all the little Veins and Pores
of the Flesh, and to attenuate the gross and thick humors that are contained
therein. It is no wonder, that this Water should be every day given to provoke
Sweats, and to carry away the subtle humors that accompany Fevers, especially
such as are malignant, sending them forth in moist vapors, or by insensible
transpiration.

CHAP. VI. Of the Distillation of Wormwood.
VUlgar Wormwood, which is known for the largest of all, is more bitter than
Succory, Hops, Fumitory, or Carduus Benedictus. It abounds more in fixed Salt.
It contains a sulphury, oily, and somewhat volatile Salt part, which Succory,
Hops, and Fumitory have not; and of which Carduus has much less; which cannot
be separated to the purpose from the fixed parts, but by upright Distillation,
and after you have added a good fair quantity of common water, or to do better,
of its own proper Water. For though you may draw forth the Juice of Wormwood,
while it is yet very young, and before it is grown up into Stalks, and then
distill it as you distill the Herbs already spoken of; nevertheless, the
confusion of the parts, and their defect of digestion, hinder the success of
the Distillation. Whereas you may bring it to better perfection, if you stay
till the Wormwood is grown up into Stalks, and that it is between flow'ring and
seeding; at what time the Plant has made its principal digestions, and is in a
condition to afford the Artist all the good parts which he can look for.

The most part of the Authors who have wrote of the Distillation of Wormwood,
advise to make use of Fermentation. But my opinion is, that it is much better
to let it alone, because the acid extraneous Fermentative, which you must be
obliged to make use of, to procure the Fermentation pretended to, and the
length of time which it* would take up, would give way to the fixation or
dissipation of the chiefest part of the sulphury and volatile parts which you
look for; whereas you shall save all, proceeding otherwise.

Gather a good quantity of the Plants of Wormwood, about the full of the Moon,
when they are between the Flower and the Seed, and after they have separated
and thrown off all that they had of hard and woody, weigh them into twelve
pounds, bruise them well in a large marble Mortar with a wooden Pestel, and
having put them into a large Copper Vessel Tinned within, pour on forty Pints
of River-water, heated between lukewarm and ready to boil; or if you would do
better, pour on the same quantity of distilled Wormwood-water, as hot as the
former. Let not the substances take up above two thirds of the Vessel; then
place the Vessel upon a Baker's Oven, buried in Sand as high as that part which
contains the substances; then having covered the Vessel with a Blind-head, and
well luted the jointures of both Vessels, leave it there for the space of four
natural days; at the end whereof, having unluted the head, and set the Vessel
upon a proper Furnace, cover it with a Moors-head with its Serpentine, and make
a quick Distillation with Coal, but moderate, and distill it so long till the
Water have neither taste nor smell; then letting the Vessels cool, strain and
press out that which remains in the Vessel, and having clarified the Liquor
with whites of Eggs, and strained it through a woollen Cloth, evaporate the
superfluous moisture over a gentle fire, and continue evaporation till it have
attained the consistency of soft Electuries, or that of Pills. Then dry, burn,
and reduce to Ashes the settlement of the Distillation, and having made a
Lixivium or Lie, and separated the fixed Salt by the usual ways, keep it apart,
or dissolve it and preserve it in the spiritous Water. You may also rectify
all the distilled Water in Balneo Mariae, and receive the spiritous Liquor and
volatile Salt, which will first ascend with the oily part; then having
separated those two Liquors by a Glass Tunnel, or otherwise, preserve them
apart in Glass Bottles well stopped. After that, continue the rectification, and
receive and stop up the odoriferous and spiritous Water, which will follow the
two separated Liquors; casting away the watery and unprofitable part that
remains in the Vessel after rectification.

The principal virtues which Authors attribute to Wormwood, is to cut and
attenuate phlegmatic humors that gather in the Stomach, and to assist nature
to expel them. It is very proper against diseases of the Liver and Stomach, the
weaknesses whereof it corrects, exciting the appetite* and helping digestion.
It is also good against the Worms, and diseases of the Matrix. And in regard
that Wormwood, without any preparation, has all these virtues, we may well
believe that the purer parts thereof, which Chimistry undertakes to separate,
being delivered from the grosser and more earthy, will produce much more
efficaciously all the effects that can be expected from it.

The same method is to be observed in the Distillation of all other hot Plants,
bitter and odoriferous; as also of those which having scarcely any thing of
bitterness, and containing less fixed Salt, are recommendable for their oily,
odoriferous, and some volatile Salt parts.

CHAP. VII. Of the Distillation of Scurvygrass, Cresses, and other moist
Plants, accounted Antiscorbutick.
THough the most part of those who have written concerning the Chemical
Distillation of Plants, recommend Fermentation to be used to to all
Antiscorbutick Plants, as well as for Wormwood and the like; and though perhaps
I may not be of an opinion contrary to those, who loving tediousness and
trouble, think it the best way; nevertheless the desire I have not to waste
time, and to avoid trouble, when it may be done with advantage, have obliged me
to a method more easy, and which I esteem better.

All the World agrees, that Scurvygrass, Watercresses, and Garden Cresses,
Rocket, Brooklime, and such like Herbs, that have a sharp, picquant, and in
some measure Aromatic taste, abound in Spirits and volatile Salts; that those
Salts and volatile Spirits are very subtle, and the most essential parts of
those Plants; and that the chief design of the Artist ought to be, to separate
them from the other parts, and to make good use of them. The subtlety of these
good Spirits is the reason why they are so subject to dissipation* and that it
is so difficult a thing to pass those Plants through all the degrees necessary
to Fermentation, without loosing more of the good parts than the Artist, with
all his care, knows how to retrieve, after that Fermentation. For which reason,
my opinion is, that instead of having recourse to any extraneous matter to
advance Fermentation, we ought to content our selves with a proper Menstruum,
which by dissolving and then joining themselves to the most essential parts of
these Plants, may also carry them away with it in Distillation, without
changing their nature, but augmenting rather than diminishing their virtue.

For the better success wherein, having gathered the quantity which you intend
of one of these Herbs when it is in Flower, having slightly chopped it, and
having put it in a Copper Vessel Tinned within, pour upon it White Wind, as
much as will cover the Herbs and three fingers over and above; in such manner
nevertheless that the substance shall not take up above a third part of the
Vessel; then having placed it upon a proper Furnace, and covered it with a
Moors-head well luted, and having its Serpentine to it, running athwart a Pipe
filled with cold water, and having also luted the Recipient to it, leave the
Vessels in that condition, without any fire, for twenty-four hours; after which
kindle the fire in the Furnace, and having begun Distillation with a continued
fire of Coals, so order it, that the drops that trickle down one after another,
yet not too fast, may cause the spiritous and volatile parts of the Plant to
ascend and distill by degrees with those of the Wine, and that all the fixed
and particularly the Salt parts may remain among the settlement, at the bottom
of the Vessel, to be separated afterward by straining and pressing the whole
sediment; and to the end they may be reduced to an Extract, after you have
clarified the Liquor which contains them, and evaporated the superfluous
moisture over a very gentle fire. This Distillation is to end, when the drops
that fall are almost insipid, which is a sign that all the spiritous matter is
ascended.

But to the end you may have the Spirits of these Plants more full of virtue,
more pure, and in greater quantity, after you have emptied the Vessel, and set
apart that which was contained therein, you shall put into it as much of the
same Plant, as at first, and pour upon it all the Water which you have
distilled, and as much good White Wind as of the same Water. Then having
covered the Vessel with his Moors-head and Serpentine joined to it, and having
luted them as well as the Recipient, proceed by Maceration and Distillation, as
the first time. After that, you shall still do better, if after you have set
aside the settlement with the former, you put fresh Herbs into the Vessel, and
having poured upon them all the spiritous Water distilled, you make a new
Distillation. For having carefully luted the Vessels, and well ordered your
fire during Distillation, you shall have a Water well charged with the Spirit
and volatile Salt of the Herb which you have distilled; of which you may
afterward make rectification in a Matras, or large big-bellied Bottle with a
long neck, covered with its head and well luted, with a Recipient well luted to
it, placed in a Sand Bath under a moderate fire, keeping apart in a Glass
Bottle close stopped the Spirit charged with the volatile Salt, that ascends
first; and keeping apart also the spiritous Water that follows the same Spirit;
continuing the Distillation till the drops that fall are almost insipid. As for
the settlements, draw from them an Extract, according to the method already
described. And that you may save all that the Plant has good for any thing, dry
the settlement, and having reduced it to Ashes, make a Lie with common water
and filter it, and having evaporated the superfluous moisture, mix the Salt
with the spiritous Water distilled, or which is better, with the Extract. In
regard its principal virtue is to purge away the most gross matter by seige or
by urine, for which purpose the fixed Salts principally serve.

This Extract is given alone in a Bolus, or dissolved in some proper Liquor,
from half a dram to two drams, and also to half an ounce; or else mingled with
purgatives, abating the dose of the Extract, and proportionating it to their
strength and quantity.

The Spirit and volatile Salt of Scurvy Grass, Cresses, and other Herbs of the
same nature, and the spiritous Waters drawn off afterward, are powerful
remedies, and very specific, for the ease and cure of Scorbutic distempers;
the cause whereof is attributed to thick and cold Serosities, difficult to be
dissolved, which are mingled with the mass of the Blood, and slack'n its
circulation; whence ensue all the noisome symptoms that attend upon that
distemper.

The dose of the Spirit well rectified, and charged with its volatile Salt, is
from half a scruple to half a dram, and also to one dram. The Spirit may be
given in its own proper Water, in Wine or Broth; and the use thereof may be
continued as occasion requires, taking it sometimes several times in a day,
though in a lesser quantity. The effect of these remedies is to consume and
dissipate the most obstinate Serosities of the Blood, either by sweat or
insensible transpiration; to purify the whole mass of Blood, and restore that
activity which is necessary to circulation; to fortify the noble parts,
especially the concoctors of nourishment; and to remove all putrefaction.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Distillation of Baume.
BAlm is an Herb so pleasing in its scent, and also in its taste, and so
recommendable for its virtues, that it well deserves to have its place among
the Distillations of other Herbs. The greatest part of those who have written
of Distillation, would have some other Liquor mixed with it, by reason of the
little moisture it has when it is in Flower; but that would but do it an
injury, in regard there is as much moisture in the Plant it self as needs to be
desired.

You must take care to gather a good quantity of Balm, when it is young,
tender, and juicy; to the end you may either extract the Juice by Distillation,
as I have already showed, or distill it whole, or chopped in the Rosary, till its
moisture be almost all ascended. Either way you may distill as much as you have
occasion for, and keep it in Bottles well stopped, till there be more Balm in
Flower and Seed, which you must bruise in a Marble Mortar with a wooden Pestle,
or else cut very small; then having filled the two thirds of a Copper Vessel
Tinned within side, pour upon it the distilled Water which you have ready, till
it swim about three fingers breadth above the Herbs; after which having covered
the Vessel with the Moors-head, well luted, and having joined to it also its
Serpentine and Recipient, after a maceration of twenty-four hours over a very
gentle heat, make the Distillation with a continued Charcoal fire; but so
ordered, that the Distillation may be no more violent then I have already
prescribed for Herbs almost of the same nature, continuing it till the Water
that distills have almost lost its savor and smell. You may also empty out
that which remains in the Vessel, and put in fresh Balm; and having separated
and set aside that little Oil that swims upon the top of the Water, pour that
Water upon the fresh Balm, and make maceration and digestion, as before; by
which means you shall have an odoriferous Water, containing in it all that the
Balm has of volatile, and most spiritous; and besides that, some little Oil
that swims upon the top of it, and which deserves to be preserved with the
rest; as well for its pleasant smell, as for the good effects which it may
produce, in distempers of the Brain, and in those of the Heart, the Stomach,
and the Matrix; as also by reason of the mixture that may be made hereof with
the pressed Oil of Nutmegs, to use instead of a Balsom, like the Oil of
Aromatic Roots. It may be mixed from two drops to seven or eight, with some
drams of fine powdered, to divide all the parts, and make it fit to be mixed
with all sorts of moist Liquors, particularly with its own Water, as the most
proper to second all its virtues.

The Water is prescribed with good success in melancholy distempers, in
malignant Fevers, suppression of Women's Courses. The dose and way to take
Balmwater is the same with the preceding Waters.

There may be an Extract made of that which remains at the bottom of the Vessel
at every Distillation, proceeding in the same manner as in the preparation of
other Herbs; that is, by drying, burning, and reducing to Ashes the sediment,
to fetch out the Salt, either to keep it apart, or mingle with the Extract. The
Extract is given in the same dose, and serves for the same uses as the former;
for in regard it contains only the fixed parts of the Balm, it is chiefly
proper to fortify the principal parts, and the parts of concoction, to take
away the sharpness of acids, to cut and loosen gross and viscous humors; to
resist putrefaction and putrifi'd humors, which it helps to purge away by
stool and urine.

CHAP. IX. Of the Distillation of Myrtle Leaves.
THey that inhabit the Southern parts of France, where Myrtle grows in great
abundance in the Woods, find among that great quantity of Leaves whatever is
requisite for their Distillation. For they stamp and press the tops in the
beginning of the Spring, for the Juice, which they may either distill alone, or
with the Leaves bruised. But because in these Northern parts, we have none but
what we are forced to plantand bring up with care and industry, which is not
enough to afford that quantity which might be desired, we must make use of that
little we have, and supply the best we can the defect of moisture, without
which we cannot well perfect Distillation.

For example, take three pound of the Leaves of Myrtle newly gathered, and
having bruised them in a Marble Mortar with a wooden Pestle, and put them into
a Glass Cucurbit, pour upon them six pints of the Juice of Knotgrass, or
Rupturewort, and having covered the Cucurbit with its Glass Cover, luted the
joints with Amydon, or paste of fine Flower, and fitted the Recipient to its
beak, keep the whole in digestion over a Cook's Oven, during twenty-four hours;
at the end whereof set the Cucurbit in a Sand Bath, and make a Distillation
with a moderate fire, continuing it till the Water have neither favor nor
smell; then take care to separate and keep that little Oil which swims at the
top of the distilled Water, and which would be more plentiful in hot Countries.

Could you get another equal quantity of Myrtle Leaves, you might after you had
emptied and kept that which remains in the Cucurbit, put the fresh Myrtle
Leaves in the Room of it, and having poured the distilled Water upon them,
observe the same maceration and Distillation as before; and by that means you
shall have a Water much more efficaclous, upon which will swim a small quantity
of new Oil, which you must add to the former; then draw forth the Extract from
the remains, and the Salt from the settlement, after you have reduced it to
Ashes, as I have said before; and keep them apart, or mingle them together.

The distilled Water of the Leaves of Myrtles, is very much commended for
weaknesses of the Stomach and Bowels, and the distempers that attend it, as
also for spitting and other losses of Blood. It is given either alone from two
ounces to six, or else mixed with half* an ounce of Syrrup of Myrtles, or some
other Astringent. It is also good to close up the natural parts of Women after
lying-in, as well taken inwardly as applied by fomentation to the parts. You
may reinforce the Water with a drop or two of its Oil, having incorporated it
with a dram of fine powdered Sugar. You may also make use of the Oil in
Balsoms, which are prepared to comfort and fortify the noble parts, for the
smell is sweet and very Aromatic; you may also make use of it to anoint the
parts, having first fomented them with the Water. The Extract preserving in it
self the impression of the terrestrial part of the Leaves, may produce good
effects in all distempers that have need of closing and fortifying. The dose is
from half a dram to two drams, either dissolved* in its own Water, or in some
other Liquor; it may be mingled also in Opiats, or in other Remedies.

I believe that these Distillations of Herbs which I have set down, will afford
sufficient examples for all the rest, without any necessity of multiplying any
more; so that it will be* time now to come to the Distillation of Flowers.

CHAP. X. Of the Distillation of Flowers in general.
FLowers are esteemed the fairest production among Vegetals. They are the
ornament of Gardens, the delight of the Country, the recreation of the Sight,
the desire of the Smell, the hope of the Seeds and Fruits that are to follow,
and the substance of several exquisite Remedies, every day prepared by the one
and the other Pharmacy. Flowers are those parts of Plants which to us seem to
be most pure, which are least charged with earthinesses, and most easy to be
dissolved; the different substances whereof Chemistry separates with less
trouble and violence. Nevertheless there is more care to be used in
Distillation of them, then of any other part of the Plants, in regard their
parts are very open, and for that the principal parts are very subject to
dissipation; besides, that there are some Flowers that will not endure
Distillation at all, nor the least touch of the fire, without a manifest
alteration of their qualities, especially those that yield any sweet odor,
which is the thing most carefully to be preserved. For this reason it is, that
the Artist ought above all things to dive into the most secret knowledge of the
parts that compose the Flowers, before he goes about to distill them, to the
end he may be able to fit his fire, and to choose the most proper Vessels and
means to separate to the purpose, and at the same time to preserve in their
purity the several substances which are to ascend and descend in Distillation,
and to save as much as in him lies, the good fixed parts, which oftentimes
remain at the bottom of the Vessel.

We many times make use of the same Vessels for the Distillation of Flowers as
for that of Herbs, but because the delicacy of the substance of Flowers,
renders them usually more apt to receive the impression of the fire then Herbs
are, there is great care to be taken, so to order the fire that it may not
alter the good qualities of those which you desire to separate from the rest by
Distillation; or that it should not cause to ascend with the good ones those
that should stay at the bottom of the Vessels; or least that by too much
continuing the fire or augmenting it, you scorch the substances at the bottom
of the Vessel, and cause the whole Distillation to smell of burning too. For
the avoiding of all which inconveniences, I will endeavor to show you the most
proper ways.

CHAP. XI. Of the several Distillations of Roses.
THE different methods which are to be observed in the Distillation of Roses,
proceeds rather from the diversity of spirits, places, opportunities, and and
means to do it, then from the variety of the sorts of Roses, or the different
proportions of the parts that compose them; in regard there is not any sort of
Rose which may not undergo all the Distillations which are to be invented or
practiced upon all the rest. We find in the parts that compose Roses, the five
different substances which Chemistry acknowledges to be in the composition of
mixed bodies, viz. the Watery, Spiritous, Sulphury, Salt, and Earthy parts.
Nevertheless they are variously proportioned in every sort, whence proceed the
differences principally observed in the color, smell, and savor. For the
volatile substances abound more in some, and the fixed in others. The Red
Roses, commonly called Provence Roses, abound more in earthy parts, and fixed
Salt, then all the other Roses. They have also many watery parts that are united
to the foregoing, so that the spiritous and sulphury lie very deeply concealed,
and appear not till after the watery parts have quitted their station. For which
reason, it is not usual to distill these Roses till they have lost their
superfluous moisture; and not then neither, without mixing them with other
Aromaticks.

Pale Roses are they which we most often distill, and upon which we not only
practice several Distillations, but also upon which both the one and the other
Pharmacy exercise most preparations, and extract most remedies. They contain
much moisture, attended with several volatile spiritous particles, a few salt
ones, and some few oily and sulphurous; both the one and the other very
odoriferous. They have also less earthy pa^^^ then the Red ones, but as much
fixed Salt; which being united with the more gross sulphury parts, and more
deeply lodged, and not having passed the fire of Calcination, which the most
part of Salts endure in their purification, purge most gently bad, but above
all, phlegmatic humors. I have said in the second Part of this Pharmacopoea,
speaking of the preparation of Syrrup of Roses with Sugar and the Juice of
Roses, that in making the decoction in a Glass Cucurbit, in Balneo Mariae, and
covering it with a Glass head well luted, you may save then the vapors which
rise from the Juice of Roses, which would otherwise dissipate, and draw out a
very good Rose Water. But because the Shops have need of a much larger quantity
of Rose Water then can possibly be drawn forth this way, recourse must be had
to other means.

They that will distill Pale Roses, or make any other preparations thereof,
must be careful to gather them soon after the rising of the Sun, and if
possible, in fair weather, that they may not be charged with any extraneous
moisture, and that the several substances that are to be drawn forth by
Distillation may be altogether pure.

The most gentle method, but the slowest for the Distillation of Roses so
cleans'd, is to bruise them, and fill about two thirds of a large Glass
Cucurbit, and having covered it with its head well luted, to make the
Distillation in Balneo Mariae, between lukewarm and boiling, or in an
evaporating Bath boiling, till the Roses are almost dried in the Cucurbit. For
by this means you shall have a Rose Water very odoriferous, but a small
quantity.

You may also put equal parts of Roses stamped and the Juice of the same Roses
in one of the same Glass Cucurbits covered with a head well luted, and make a
Distillation thereof in a Bath of Ashes or Sand. For by well ordering your
fire, especially toward the end, you shall have a Rose Water, at least as good
as the first; and from the remains may draw a purgative Extract, as good as any
other that may be drawn out of the Rose.

And to content those that would preserve the color of the Roses in the Water
distilled, take a handful of dried shred Provence Roses, and having sprinkled
them with never so little good Spirit of Sulphur or Vitriol, or the Juice of
Limons, fill the hollow of the Canal of the Glass head with it, before you fit
and lute it to the Cucurbit; for then by well ordering your fire during the
Distillation, you shall have, without changing the good smell, or qualities
expected, a Rose Water of a fair color, and as much or more Vermillion then
the Roses from whence they were drawn. By means and ways not much unlike to
this, you may in distilling all sorts of Waters of the same nature, give them
the color which you desire; as also, if you please, the scent of Musk,
Ambergreese, or any other Aromatic, by pulverizing them, and putting them
wrapped up in a little Cotton, into the Canal or beak of the head.

You may also put into a Rosary of Copper well Tinned, the Rose-leaves, whole
or bruised, and add also as much as you please of the Juice of the same sort of
Roses, and make the Distillation in a Bath of Ashes or Sand; for then ordering
your fire prudently, you shall have an excellent Rose Water. You may also save
the Extract, as before.

Some Ladies distill Rose Water by descent, with a great deal of ease,
spreading the Roses about an inch thick upon a fine Linen Cloth, tied upon the
top of a large Glass Pot, or else of glazed Earth, and applying over it the
bottom of a flat Dish of white Lattin, or of some other Vessel of some such
kind of substance, proportionable to the extent of the Roses, having the inside
of its hollowness covered with Ashes about half an inch thick, and the upper
part of the Ashes covered with soft burning Coals. For by this means the heat
of the fire penetrating the Ashes and the Dish, and warming the Roses, distills
the Water into the Pot. This Water in truth is not so good as that of which I
have given you the preparation; nor will it continue so long; and yet it is not
to be rejected.

Some there are that would have the Roses put into a Cucurbit of glazed Earth,
and applying thereto a Cover of white Lattin, or Copper Tinned, and pierced
with little holes, turn it upside down, and place it in a proper Furnace, and
adding a Recipient underneath its orifice, light a fire round about the
Curcurbit, and make the Distillation by descent, as we distill Wood. But this
is the way to burn the Roses; and the Water would very much want the good
qualities which it ought to have. Besides, it would but be an injury to the
Distillation, when there are so many better ways, and more to the purpose.

They that have need of much Rose Water, may instead of Cucurbits, or Rosaries,
distill their Roses in great Vessels of Copper Tinned within, and covered with
their Refrigerant and their Moors-head, with a Serpentine running athwart a
Pipe of cold Water, proceeding as I have already showed in the Distillation of
Herbs; bruising the Roses, and moistning them with the Juice of other Roses, or
the distilled Water which you may have saved the year before, and making
Distillation over a continued fire of Charcoal* but very moderate. You may also
pour the distilled Water upon other Roses put into the same Vessel, to make a
new Distillation, and also repeat the same operation several times to have an
excellent Rosewater.

But because it is necessary for us to employ our greatest care to find out all
the good parts of mixed bodies; and for that it is possible, in distilling
Roses, to raise a sulphury and inflamable part, and by the same means also a
most odoriferous Oil, though not much in quantity; it will not be from the
purpose to show you which way to go about it.

For example, take forty pound of Pale Roses cleans'd, and having bruised them
well in a Marble Mortar with a wooden Pestle, and strewn the whole quantity by
degrees with two pound of gray Salt powdered, put the whole, if you can, into a
large Pitcher of Potters Earth, or at least into two; and having stamped and
crushed the Roses into a soft mass, so close as not to be penetrated by the
Air, and having so ordered it, that the Pitchers may be quite full, stop them
up with a good Cork stopple cut fit, and closed with yellow melted Wax, to
prevent air from entering in; then set the Pitchers in a Cellar five or six
weeks; after which, when you come to open them, you shall perceive the Roses to
have a kind of a smell of Wine intermixed with acid; which is a sign of their
fermentation, and of the aptness of the spiritual parts to separate from the
terrestrial, and to ascend in Distillation. Then take out a pound of these
Roses, and having put them into a Glass Cucurbit, stop up the Cucurbit as
exactly as before, and cover it with a Glass head well luted; and having well
fitted and luted the Recipient, make a Distillation in Balneo Mariae, between
lukewarm and boiling hot, continuing the same till the moisture of the Roses be
almost quite distilled off. After which, having emptied the settlement out of
the Cucurbit, put in the room thereof the quantity of seven or eight pound of
the Roses enclosed in one of the Pitchers* and having stopped up the Cucurbit as
before, and poured upon the Roses the Water of the first Distillation, put on
the head again, well luted as well as the Recipient, and set the Cucurbit in a
Bath of Sand, and with a moderate fire make the Distillation, till the humidity
of the Roses be almost all distilled. After which, the Vessels being cooled,
and the settlement emptied out, put more sermented Roses into the Cucurbit, and
so pour the distilled Water upon them, and renew the Distillation till you have
no more Roses left. Then putting one part of the distilled Water into a Matras
with a long neck, covered with its head well luted, and having fitted a
Recipient to it, well luted after the same manner, make a rectification in
Balneo Mariae with a moderate fire; and having distilled about the twelfth
part, which is the spiritous and inflamable part, put it up into a Bottle very
well stopped; keeping very carefully apart the Water that remains in the Matras,
which will be very odoriferous. Then continue to rectify, at several
repetitions, all the Water distilled, and having mingled together all that is
ascended of spiritous, make a new rectification in an Evaporating Bath, in a
Matras with a long neck perfectly well luted; by this means you shall have an
inflamable Spirit* which may be called an Ethereal Oil of Roses, charged with
their volatile Salt; as much to be commended for its pleasant and penetrating
odor, as for its virtues. Add the remains of this rectification to the rest
you have made, and keep them together in Glass Bottles well stopped, as a
Rose Water much better then you can draw forth by ordinary means.

Keep these Bottles for some days in the Cellar, where the Oil will ascend by
degrees to the top of the Water, and swim above it in little flakes, almost
like Snow; whence you may separate it by straining it through a fine Linen
Cloth, and taking up the Oil with a little Silver Spoon. Put this Oil at the
same time in a double Glass Bottle well stopped, and keep it for your use,
returning the Water into the Bottles whence you took it out, and stopping them
up close again.

The dissolution which the Ethereal and inflamable Spirit of Roses makes of the
oily parts, during fermentation, and the similitude of the substance between
them, is the reason that it unites to it several parts thereof in Distillation;
and that you find much less Oil among the Rose Water after rectification, then
by proceeding otherwise. And therefore, they that rather desire the Oil, then
the inflamable Spirit, will sooner obtain their desire, by re-distilling
several times their Rosewater upon new Roses; for by that means they may
separate much more Oil, then from a greater quantity of Roses after
fermentation.

Some, to extract the ardent Spirit of Roses, content themselves with some days
maceration; after which, having added an equal weight of Wine to that of Roses,
they make the Distillation. This is truth is a shorter and more easy method.
But then the inflamable part of the Spirit must be rather attributed to the
Wine then to the Roses; whose Spirit is not able to disingage it self from the
other substances, as not having been sufficiently fermented. Nevertheless this
method is not to be rejected for the preparation of the ardent Spirit of
several parts of Plants; which loose much of what they have of use, in staying
too long for their fermentation; or may be subject to considerable alterations
of their qualities, by the addition of other assistants which are made use of
to advance fermentation. But for this I think it best to let it alone; provided
care be but taken of proceeding as I have directed; because the Roses have in
themselves that acid which is necessary to provoke fermentation, without being
put to borrow any ascititious ferment, or that there should be any fear of any
considerable dissipation of their volatile parts. We must also believe, that
that acid having left the proper substance of the Roses, after it has
disengaged the volatile Salt and sulphury Spirits from the grosser substances,
unites it self strictly to them, and is to be found mixed with them, after the
separation of the rest by Distillation from the grosser parts, unable to ascend.

The use of Rose Water, both inwardly and outwardly, is so well known, that it
is needless to insist upon it. The ardent Spirit of Roses is so odoriferous and
so peircing, that one drop alone is enough to perfume a full Glass of common
water. It is excellent against weaknesses, faintings, and palpitations of the
heart. The dose is from three or four drops to fifteen, twenty, and thirty, in
its own proper Water, in Wine or Broth, or in some other Cordial Liquor. It is
also applied to the Stomach, to the Region of the Heart, to the Temples, to the
Wrists, and to the Soles of the Feet in fainting fits. It is given with success
in malignant Fevers. It may be used also to provoke sweat, given in seven or
eight ounces of Carduus-water. The Oil works the same effects as the Water; but
be not too prodigal of it, because of its rarity. It is given inwardly, from
one or two to five or six drops; being incorporated with some few drams of fine
Sugar powdered, and dissolved in its own proper Water, or in the same Liquors
as the Spirit. You may also incorporate it with pressed Oil of Nutmegs, and
make thereof a Balsom of Roses very odoriferous. The Oil and Spirit of Roses
are equally useful for men and women; only it must be kept from them who cannot
endure sweet smells.

You may draw by the ordinary way from the remains of all the Distillations, a
purgative Extract; and by burning the sediment, and reducing it to Ashes,
extract the Salt to keep it apart, or mingle with the Extract. The dose of the
Extract is from half a dram to two or three drams, to be given either in a
Bolus or else in some proper Liquor. It is also mingled with other purgatives,
putting in more or or less according to the quantity or dose of those things
which you mingle with it. The dose of the Salt is from half a scruple to half a
dram, and sometimes one dram, in some proper Liquor.

Musk Roses (called Damask Roses), Dogs Rose, White Roses, and all the other
sorts, may be distilled in the same manner as the Pale Roses; and you may
extract* from thence almost the same substances; though you may observe in them
considerable differences, as well in their quantity as quality, by reason of
the several proportions of the parts that compose every Rose, and their several
knittings and compactures; the difference whereof is sensibly manifested by the
diversity of smell, color, and form.

CHAP. XII. Of the Distillation of Lavender Flowers.
THE Flower of Lavender has too little Juice to think of distilling it to the
purpose, without adding to it some other Liquor. For what you could draw from
thence in a Glass Alembick, or a Balneum Mariae, or in a Rosary in a moderate
Bath of Ashes, would hardly recompense the time and trouble you must expend.
Only you must be careful in pouring upon the Flowers some proper Liquor, but
above all to choose the Water of the same Flower, which you may have left of the
last year; or for wnat of that, some other Cephalic Water.

Having gathered your Lavender upon a fair day, about noon, when it is well in
Flower, take only the Flower in the Ear, and so cleanse it, that the hard
bottom of the Flower, which helps to sustain and form the Ear, may be taken
away, and only the pure Flower remain. For example, take six pound of the
Flowers, thus cleans'd, and having put them into a great Copper Vessel Tinned
within, placed in its proper Furnace, and having poured upon them twenty pints
of their own proper Water, or some other Cephalic, cover the Vessel with a
Moors-head well Tinned within, furnished with its Serpentine Tinned in the same
manner, and running along a Tunnel of cold water; then having luted well all
the jointures, and the end of the Serpentine with the Recipient, kindle in the
Cinder-place of the Furnace a very small fire, enough only to warm the
substances, and to maintain them in their moderate lukewarmness; and having
continued them so for three or four natural days, kindle a Charcoal fire in the
Hearth-place of the Furnace, so that the Water which distills may fall, not in
drops, but in a continued string, till you have drawn out by Distillation about
two thirds of the Water which you have made use of. Then let the Vessels cool,
and having separated them, and put the Oil that will swim upon the spiritous
distilled Water into a Bottle apart, and having also strained and pressed out
that which remains in the Vessel, put in again the like quantity of fresh
Flowers; and having poured upon them not only the spiritous distilled Water,
separated from its Oil, but also the Liquors pressed out of the substances
which remained after Distillation, put on the Moors-head again, with the
Serpentine and Recipient, and lute them all well, and after a maceration of
three or four days, distill off the Water and the Oil as before, and make the
same separation. You may also pour the same Water, and the Liquor pressed from
the remains, upon fresh Flowers, if you have them ready, and make a new
Distillation, and repeat the same several times. Though it be true, that after
two or three cohobations of the Water upon the fresh Flowers, the Water will be
charged as much as is necessary with the spiritful parts of the Flowers of
Lavender; there being no advantage in these reiterated cohobations, but to draw
forth the greater quantity of Oil.

You may draw forth an Extract from the remains of these Distillations,
proceeding after the same method which I have already described. You may also
extract a Salt from the sediment pressed, dried, burnt, and reduced into Ashes,
though it will not be very much, no more then in any other odoriferous
Cephalic Flowers, which abound more in sulphury and in some volatile Salt
parts, then in fixed Salt.

The dose and use of this Extract and Salt is almost the same with them that
went before. The distilled Oil of Flowers of Lavender is very much commended
for the Epilipsie, Apoplexy, and Palsy, and in general, for all diseases of
the Brain* giving from two drops to seven or eight, incorporated with fine
powdered Sugar, and dissolved in its own Water, or in some other Cephalic
which may assist its virtues. You may also put it up into the Nostrils, apply
it to the Temples, and to the Sutures of the Skull; and also incorporate it
with Oil of Nutmegs, and make a Lavender Balsom, to mix with Apoplectick
Balsoms, at other distilled Oils are mingled.

If instead of the distilled Water of Lavender, or any other Cephalic, you use
the like quantity of good Wine in Distillation of these Flowers, you may draw
forth an ardent Spirit very penetrating.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Distillation of Flowers of Rosemary.
THE Flowers of Rosemary, well cleans'd from their Cups, and whatever there is
of green in the Flower, are of a substance so little compacted, and the parts
which you design should ascend in Distillation, are so subtle, so volatile, and
so loose from the grosser parts, that I see no reason for those that have
allowed it the preparation of the Queen of Hungary's Water, which is the most
common Distillation of the Flowers of Rosemary, to make a maceration for three
days in the Spirit of Wine, or to put themselves to the trouble to seek out
Vessels proper for that use, and after that to proportion a fire of digestion,
during all that time, seeing that one maceration made in the cool of the
morning, in the Cucurbit which you use for Distillation, is of power sufficient
to cause the Spirit of Wine to penetrate into the very heart of the Flower; as
also for that the volatile parts ascend more easily with the Spirit of Wine. I
believe rather that these far fetches about, were only invented to puzzle young
beginners, and to make that Distillation seem hard to them which is very easy,
especially when you have good Spirit of Wine, and Rosemary Flowers that are
every way in their prime.

Having caused your Rosemary Flowers to be gathered in a fair day, two or three
hours after Sunrising, and having cleans'd them from all the green part, weigh
out four pound, and put them into a large Glass Cucurbit with a strait neck,
and having poured upon them six pints of Wine well rectified, after you have
pressed down the Flowers into the Wine, and covered the Cucurbit with its head,
lute well the jointures, and place it in a Sand Bath, and having fitted and
luted a Recipient to the beak of the head, leave the Vessels in that condition
all night long; in the morning kindle a fire under the Bath, and order it so,
that while the Spirit distills, the head may not be so much as warm; you may
also cover the head with a Linen Cloth, doubled several times, and dipped in
cold Water, and re-dip the Cloth and cool the head from time to time, to hast'n
the dissolution of the vapors that ascend. Continue this Distillation till you
have drawn forth about four pints of Spirit, which will be very pure, and
charged with the best and most volatile substance of the Flower. Then cool the
Bath, unlute the Vessels, and put the distilled Spirits into a Bottle well
stopped; then strain and press forth the Liquors that remain in the Cucurbit;
and having clarified the Liquor, and returned it into the Cucurbit, covered
with its head, and the Recipient ready, renew the Distillation in the same Sand
Bath, and continue it so long till you see the Liquor very near as thick as a
Rob. After which, having cooled and unluted the Vessels, turn out the Liquor
into a Pipkin well glazed, and boil it over a gentle fire to the thickness of
an ordinary Extract; keep every Liquor apart, the first of which will prove the
best, and the most piercing.

This is the Spirit to which our Moderns have given the name of the Queen of
Hungary's* Water; by reason of the wonderful effects which a Queen of Hungary
received by it at the age of seventy-two years. This is that Water, the great
reputation whereof, and the great vent for it at Paris for many years since,
has caused several persons, as ignorant as wicked, to prepare it after their
manner, in the Provinces where Rosemary Flowers abound, and where you may have
the Spirit of Wine very cheap; and who instead of making use of the Flowers of
Rosemary well cleans'd, as they might easily do, leave a great part of the
Herby part, which makes the scent of the Water stronger, but more tart and
unpleasing, as well as the taste; and who instead of the Spirit of Wine well
rectified, make ordinary Aqua Vita serve their turns; deluding by means of the
strong scent of the green parts mingled with the Flower, upon the credulity of
persons not able to distinguish the ascititious strong scent from that of the
Flowers, which ought to be sweet and pleasant; and imposing the sharp and harsh
taste of the same parts for the penetrating taste of the Spirit of Wine well
rectified. Neither is it to be wondered at, that these abusers of the people to
their faces, should gain so much by this Water, and sell more then they that
prepare it with so much fidelity and skill, who are not able to sell it at so
low* a rate, without great loss.

The Spirit of the Flowers of Rosemary well prepared, is good against all cold
distempers of the Brain. It is also an excellent remedy against the cold
diseases and affections of the Nerves and Joints, against Rheumatisms and cold
Gouts. It dissipates the pains of the Head caused by Phlegm, dissolves the
vapors that cause Vertigo's, fortifies the memory, helps deafness and noises
in the Ears, as also weakness of sight. It heals contusions of the Head and all
parts of the body, and prevents the coagulation of the Blood in those parts;
dissolving the coagulation, and causing it to transpire. It asswages the
Toothache, it fortifies the Stomach, preventing the looseness and weakness of
that and of the Bowels, by taking away the sharpness of the acids, which are
usually the cause thereof. It creates an appetite, helps digestion, and opens
obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and all the Bowels, as also of the Matrix,
the vapors whereof it suppresses. It claims a power to preserve and revive the
natural heat, and to restore the functions of all the parts of the body, and to
make old men young, that is to say, to ease them of a great many of those
diseases that attend upon old age.

It is given inwardly from a scruple to one dram, in Wine or some Cephalic
Water or Cordial. Some drops may be snufft up into the Nostrils, laid to the
Temples, and to the Sutures of the Skull. It is applied upon contusions by the
means of little pillows dipped therein. It is applied to Rheumatisms, and to all
sorts of pains and defluxions, as also about the Eyes to fortify the sight,
and dropped into the Ears for the cure of such distempers as happ'n therein. It
is made use of to wash the Face, the Neck, the Arms, the Hands, alone or mixed
with the Water of wild Tansie, Lillies, Water Lillies, the Spawn of Frogs, and
such like, to preserve the complexion of the Beauty, and prevent wrinkles. In
short, there is hardly any remedy is to be found, that produces so many and so
good effects, as this Spirit.

The Liquor which is pressed forth and distilled, not possessing the more
volatile parts of the Flower of Rosemary, which the first Distillation has
taken away, and finding it self charged with the watery part which ascends with
the Spirit of Wine that remains at the bottom of the Vessel, is neither in
truth so pure, neither has it the same virtue as the first Spirit. But it
deserves to be preserved, in regard it also contains several parts less
volatile of the Flowers, which the last Spirit of Wine carried with it, and
which may produce good effects, by staying longer in the Stomach then the
former. It may serve for the same uses as the former, especially inwardly; but
then the dose must be doubled, by reason of the watery part which is mingled
with it. There may be also an Extract prepared of the Liquor which remains,
which is very serviceable in Cordial, Stomachical, and Cephalic remedies,
given in the same dose as the other Extracts.

You may distill the Flowers of Petty Mugget, Sage, the Line-tree, French
Lavender, and the like, proceeding according to the same method set down for
the distilling of Rosemary and Lavender Flowers.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Distillation of the most odoriferous Waters which are to be
drawn from the Flowers of Vegetals.
THE methods which I have set down for the Distillation of the several parts of
Plants, are much better then any of those which Chemistry usually puts in
practice. But in regard the Commands of Monsieur D'Aquin, First Physician to
the King, have engaged me to communicate to public, several things which I
thought to have reserved to my self, I freely impart what I have found to be
best and most curious in these particulars.

You must be careful to distill Dew in its season, and keep the spiritous Water
in a Bottle well stopped. You must be careful to gather together in the month of
May or June, in fair weather, good store of Cows-dung or Ox-dung, dried of it
self in the meadows, where those creatures have been seeding. This Dung
contains in it the first principle of the Herbs which the Oxen or Cows have
eaten; but it has lost the seminal virtue; the smell thereof being somewhat
like the smell of Musk. The use thereof is well enough known, since the* Water
has been distilled from time to time, and goes by the name of the Water of a
thousand Flowers, because of the great number of Herbs and Flowers that were in
the first matter of the Dung from whence it was distilled. Make choice in their
season of such Flowers as you would distill, and having laid them in beds or
layers in a great and large Cucurbit, with equal portions of this Dung dried
and pulverized, and having watered every layer one after the other, with the
spiritous Water of Dew, and continued the watring and the stratification till
the substances take up almost the half of the Cucurbit, cover it with its
Glass-head, and having carefully fitted and luted it, together with the
Recipient to its beak, make a Distillation thereof only by the heat of the Sun
in the Summer, till the moisture be almost all distilled out. Then about
midnight, or at least two hours before Sunrising, unlute the Vessels (the
choice of this time being absolutely necessary, if you intend to preserve a
good odor in the Water); and having at the same time got ready new Flowers in
another Cucurbit of the same likeness, and poured the distilled Water upon the
Flowers, put on the head, and after you have well luted it, as well as the
Recipient, make a Distillation thereof in the Sun, as at the first time. Then
unlute the Vessels in the night, cohobate or sprinkle the distilled Water upon
new Flowers, till the Water be perfectly odoriferous. You must so order it,
that neither the head nor the Recipient may be exposed to the Rays of the Sun
during Distillation, and that only the Cucurbit may be hot. You must also cover
the head with a Linen Cloth, several times doubled, often dipped in cold
water, to advance the* dissolution of the vapors that ascend with the matters.
Cows-dung and Spirit of Dew, are very necessary in the first Distillation of
Flowers, but not in the latter. And in case it be a difficult thing to have the
heat of the Sun so strong, as in some Northern Climates it may fall out, there
an Evaporating Bath must serve turn, or a Bath of heated Air, if you have the
convenience. By this means you shall have Waters perfectly odoriferous; of
which one ounce will afford more good scent then ten times as much of those
that are distilled the ordinary way.

CHAP. XV. Of the Distillation of ardent Spirits very odoriferous, which may be
drawn from odoriferous Flowers and Herbs.
WE must believe, that though the Flowers have in themselves those advantages
which we do not observe in other parts of the Plants which produce them, they
are nevertheless very subject to dissipation, by reason of the tenuity of their
substance. And though we may in some measure reap the advantage of their good
scent, and of many other excellent qualities which they contain, by the several
helps of Chemistry daily practiced. However it is a very difficult thing to
draw from all sorts of Flowers ardent Spirits well scented, if you do not
search in the Plant it self for the basis and foundation of the odor of the
Flower; and if you make not use of fermentation, which is as it were the Soul
of the Spirits of Vegetals, as putrefaction is the Soul of their Oils.

You must add to wild Roses their fruit called the Hep, containing the Seed;
and to the manured Roses theirs, well bruised. To the Flowers of Sage,
Rosemary, Marjoram, Mint, Betony, Balm, Lavender, Thyme, French Lavender,
Gillow flowers, Violets, Jelsomine, etc. their Seeds well bruised. To the
Flowers of Lillies, Flower-de-luces, Piony, Angelica, etc. their Roots and
Seeds bruised and stamped. To the Flowers of Oranges, Limons, and Citrons, the
Fruits well stamped. To the Flowers of Petty Mugget and Elder, their Berries
well stamped.

There is no necessity to add any moisture of another nature, to any of these,
which have moisture enough in themselves, or in their Fruits or Berries. But
there is a necessity of adding a little Spirit of Wine, or some other Liquor,
as also a little Leaven of Bread or Yest, when the Flowers mingled with the
Seeds have not moisture enough in themselves to make up a mass reasonably soft,
and fit to be fermented. To accomplish your design therefore, you must stamp
the Flowers with their parts which are to sustain them, and be as it were a
foundation to them; and if they be but soft enough to be penetrated by the acid
ferment, which naturally breeds therein, put them into a great Pitcher of
Potters Earth, and fill it well, often pressing and squeezing the substance
down; but if the mass be not soft enough, add to it a little Wine, or Water of
the Flower distilled the ordinary way* having first steeped a little Leven
therein to hast'n fermentation; then having carefully stopped the Pitcher with a
Cork and yellow Wax melted, give it time to ferment, which will dispose the
spiritous parts to separate from the gross; and when the Spirits have attained
a kind of scent like Wine, and somewhat sour, make the Distillation thereof in
Balneo Marioe, in a Glass Cucurbit, covered with a well luted head, and receive
the ardent Spirit into the Recipient, after you have fitted it and luted it
well. By this means you shall have an ardent Spirit, extraordinarily charged
with the odor of the Flower; which you may afterward distill, if you please,
upon new Flowers, without the addition of other parts, and keep it a long time
in its perfect goodness, in a Bottle very well stopped. Roses afford so great a
plenty of odor, that it is no wonder, that a man need take so little care for
the conjunction of the parts, of which I have spok'n, for the Distillation of
their ardent Spirit. But though you may draw from them that Spirit, proceeding
as I have said when I have spoke of their Distillation, yet that Spirit will be
more powerful and more plentiful by adding their Hep to them.

But because it is not always possible to have ready* the Seeds, Berries,
Roots, and other parts of Plants, which may serve as a foundation for the
Flowers which you intend to distill, you must have recourse to some extraneous
substance, though homogeneous, which joining its Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury to
the Flowers, may retain and unite to it self their odor, and whatever they
have of sulphury and inflammable, by means of the fermentation; and which
serving them for a foundation, may afford and join its Spirits to those of the
Flowers in Distillation.

Manna, Sugar, and Honey are equally proper for these uses. You may make use of
that which you have next at hand. The proportion must be one part of one of the
three, to six parts of the Flower, out of which you would extract the
inflamable Spirit. You may make an exact union, by adding also, if it be
necessary, a small quantity of some other liquor, and a little Leven,
proceeding over and above in the same manner for fermentation and Distillation
of the Flowers with the Seeds and other parts of the Plants, according to the
method already prescribed. You must be careful to lute exactly the jointures of
the Vessels, as well in fermentation as in Distillation, to save all the
Spirits. You may do well to distill them also upon new Flowers, to the end they
may be the stronger in scent and other good qualities.

You may according to this method, draw forth the odorous and inflamable Spirit
from all sorts of Aromatic, as also from all odoriferous Plants.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Distillation of Seeds and Berries; and in the first place of
Anniseseed.
GEnerally we make Infusions and Decoctions, rather then Distillations of most
Seeds, which being accounted cold, or at least temperate, abound in watery and
muscilaginous parts, dissoluble in homogeneous Liquors, or which have a
superfluity of oily parts accompanied with an aquosity, which may easily be
separated from the grosser by expression, and without fire, extracting the
emulsion thereof with proper Liquors. We acknowledge the Seeds of Mallows,
Marshmallows, Quinces, Fleawort, etc. to be watery muscilaginous Seeds; those of
Cucumbers, Melons, Gourds, Lettice, etc. to be oily. Sometimes we squeeze out
an Oil by expression from hot Seeds. But not to speak of preparations here,
which I have spok'n of in the Galenick part, I will only show you the Chemical
Distillations of the most principal Seeds, beginning with Anniseseed.

You may proceed several ways to the Distillation of Anniseseed, according to
the different intentions which you propose to your self. For sometimes it is
enough to mix two or three pound with fifteen, twenty, or thirty pints of Aqua
Vitae, and to make a simple Distillation by a Refrigerant, or in a Vessel of
Copper Tinned, covered with a Moors-head, and fitted with a Serpentine, to have
a Spirit of Wine strong of the Anniseseed, which is called Anniseseed-water.
But if you desire to have by the same Distillation, the Water, Spirit, and Oil,
charged with their volatile Salt, you must proceed thus:

Take for example, twelve or fifteen pound of Anniseseed, while it is yet
green, or at least the greenest you can get; and having bruised it, and put it
into a great Copper Vessel well Tinned within, pour upon it Rain or
River-water, or which is better, distilled Anniseseed-water, till it swim above
the Seed four good fingers breadth. At the same time, place the Vessel upon its
Furnace, and having covered it with its Moors-head, and fitted and luted on the
Serpentine, crossing a great Pipe full of cold water, and also fitted and luted
a Recipient to the Serpentine, kindle a small fire in the Cinder or
Ember-place, enough only to heat the substances never so little, and only to
cause the Water insensibly to penetrate the substance of the Anniseseed.
Continue this heat for the space of three natural days, to make a kind of
putrefaction of the Anniseseed. After which, having kindled a fire in the
Hearth-place of the Furnace, begin your Distillation, and continue it with a
moderate fire, till two thirds of the Water be distilled off, which you put
with the Anniseseed into the Vessel; at which time take away the fire, and
having unluted the Recipient, and separated and set apart in a double Glass
Bottle well stopped, the Oil that will swim upon the spiritous Water distilled;
when the substances are cold, empty the Vessel, and strain and press out the
remainder. Then, having put into the Vessel as much more bruised Anniseseed as
at the first, and poured the distilled Water upon it, and the Liquor pressed
out of the remainder; cover, lute, and fit the Vessel, Serpentine, and
Recipient, as before; and proceed in all things as in the first Distillation;
and separate the Oil from the spiritous Liquor. You may pour the distilled
Water and Liquor upon the new Anniseseed; repeating the same as often as you
find it convenient. For by this means you shall have as much more Oil, and a
spiritous Water more plentifully charged with the scent and good qualities of
the Anniseseed.

The reiterated sprinkling of the distilled Water upon the new Seed, is that
which makes more Oil then you would have by the sprinkling of new Water, which
would always retain to it self some little quantity. Nor would it be amiss to
take the same course upon other occasions. Nevertheless you may, if you please,
separate that little Oil from the Water distilled, by putting it in a double
Glass Bottle very well stopped, and exposing it to the hot Sun for some days.
For by this means that portion of the Oil which is mixed among the Water, and
gives it a whitish color, will ascend to the top of the Water, and gather
together at the neck of the Bottle, from whence you may separate it.

Some there are, that mingle an ounce of Niter, or Sal Tartar, or raw Tartar in
powder, with every pound of Anniseseed, when they go about to distill it;
pretending this way to get more Oil. But they that consider the aptness of Oils
to join themselves to the fixed Salts, as you may observe in the making of
Soap, may well think, that these Salts, not being able to mount, fail not to
retain to themselves some part of the Oils; so far are such practitioners from
obtaining a larger quantity of Oil by that device.

And because we distill Anniseseed rather for the Oils sake, then for its other
good parts, you may draw forth more then is usual, by putting the Anniseseed
bruised, with its Water distilled, into a Glass Cucurbit, covered with a strong
Vessel well luted, and placing the Cucurbit in Horse-dung, as high as the
substances, leaving it there for fifteen days, or three weeks. For by the
putrefaction which will happ'n to the Anniseseed, the oily parts will be better
separated, and you shall have more Oil then by any other way.

The Oil and spiritous Water of Anniseseeds is very much commended in all cold
distempers of the Stomach and Bowels, and particularly in windy Cholicks; it is
no less commended for the creating an appetite, and helping digestion. It is
very successfully used in distempers of the Breast, when there is any occasion
to cut and loosen the viscous Phlegm that sticks to the Lungs. They are also
very proper to increase milk in Nurses, to dissipate the wind of Dropsies, to
stay the irregular motions of the Matrix, and to facilitate the Birth; to
assuage the sharp pains of little Infants, and to ease the pains and noises in
the ears, proceeding from wind and cold humors. The Oil is given in its proper
Water, from two drops to seven or eight; being incorporated with powdered
Sugar. The Stomach or Navil may be anointed therewith; it may be dropped into the
Ears, mixed with Oil of sweet or bitter Almonds, or with some Cephalic Water.

The Seeds of Fennel, Caraways, Cummin, Dill, Hartwort, Smallage, Bishopsweed,
and the like, may be distilled the same way as Anniseseed; and you may draw
from every one, according to its kind, substances not much unlike to those
which you draw from Anniseseed. But you must expect less Oil; the chief reason
whereof is, because you never make use of these Seeds when they are green, but
when they are dry, and sometimes very old.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Distillation of the Seeds of Scurvygrass, Mustard, and
Cresses.
IT is not to be wondered at, that the Spirits, Oil, and volatile Salts of
Plants, ascend usually one among another in Distillation, in regard they have
very much affinity and aptitude to join together, and that it is also
impossible to separate them in such manner, but that they will retain some
particles the one of the other; besides, that there will be some Phlegm mixed
among them. The volatile Salt, more especially, is ofttimes so intermixed with
the other substances, that it is a very difficult thing to part it; or discern
it either, unless it be very plentiful, and manifest it self by the smell.
Sometimes there is so small a quantity in several watery Herbs, accounted cold,
that there is no way to discover it, much less to separate it. You may observe
in the Distillation of several hot Seeds, particularly of Spoonwort or
Scurvygrass, Mustard, Cresses, and such like, the mixture of their Oil, Spirit,
and volatile Salt; which are their most considerable parts. You may also make a
separation thereof, but not purify them so, but that there shall remain in
every one of them some particles of one another. So that it is no great
difficulty to understand the parts that predominate in those Seeds, because
that while you champ them, they fill your Palate with their piercing and
penetrating parts; which are the certain evidences of their volatile parts,
more especially of the salt and sulpury, that are so smart upon the sense of
smelling, and ascend to the Brain with a more than ordinary violence.

Several ways are to be used for the Distillation of these Seeds. For some,
after they have well bruised such a quantity of Seeds, as they intend to
distill, and have filled therewith two thirds of a large Pitcher, made of
Potters Earth, pour upon* It Rain or River-water lukewarm, till it swim two or
three fingers breadth above the Seed; then having stopped the Pitcher exactly,
they set it three natural days upon a Bakers Oven, there to ferment; then
having poured it all out into a Coppel Vessel Tinned, with all the jointures of
the Moors-head, Serpentine, and Recipient well luted. They make a Distillation
thereof, over a moderate fire: And in the first place, they draw forth the
Spirit, Oil, and volatile Salt, mixed together; together with a little Phlegm,
which they will raise along with them; then continuing the Distillation for
some time, they draw forth a Water yet more charged with the three principles,
very proper not only in Scorbutic Distempers, but also to pour again upon more
new Seeds, to make a new Distillation. They separate the Oil, and keep it apart
in a double Glass-Bottle well stopped; as also the Spirit, which is well laden
with the volatile Salt, of which the Oil also is not unprovided.

Others pour good White Wind upon the bruised Seed, instead of Rainwater or
River-water, and giving the Wine but just time to penetrate the Seed, they only
make a maceration from the cool of the evening till morning; then they distill
the whole, as before.

Others having well bruised one sort of these Seeds, and put them into a Glass
Cucurbit, they pour upon them the Spirit of Wine well rectified; then having
covered it with its head well luted, and fitted a well luted Recipient to the
beak, they make the Distillation thereof in Balneo Mariae, or else in the Bath
of Ashes, with a moderate fire; and they draw out an Oil and a Spirit very
penetrating, and very strong of the volatile Salt of the Seed.

But these Seeds may be distilled to very great purpose, without any addition,
and without bruising; by filling therewith two thirds of a Cornute or Retort of
Potters Earth or Glass luted; for having placed it in a Furnace of
Reverberation covered, and having fitted and exactly luted a Recipient to its
beak. The Distillation may be made by a gradual fire, very small at the
beginning, but augmented by degrees, for ten or twelve hours together, to
extremity of heat. By this means you shall find in the Recipient, the Oil,
Spirit, volatile Salt, and Phlegm mingled together, which you may afterward
rectify in a Bath of Sand, with a moderate fire, in a Mattras with a long
neck, covered with its head exactly luted, and furnished with a small Recipient
fixed to it in the same manner. By which rectification the volatile Salt will
mount first, and coagulate like a white Chrystalline substance; from whence you
may take it out if you please, unluting the head, and putting another luted in
its place, and shutting up the Salt with great care and speed into a strong
Glass-Bottle, so stopped that no part of it may exhale, nor the moisture of the
Air dissolve it into Liquor. Then go on with your rectification, separating and
keeping apart the Spirit charged with the volatile Salt, which will always
ascend first, as well as the volatile Oil, which will swim at the top, while
the greatest part of the watery substance remains at the bottom of the Mattras,
with the thickest and grossest part of the Oil, which may be thrown away by
reason of its thickness and ill smell, though it may be well enough outwardly
applied against cold pains.

It will be needless for me here to set down the virtues, doses, and uses of
the Spirits, volatile Salts, and Oils drawn from the Seeds, no more then those
of the spiritous Waters which follow in Distillation; in regard the same
proportion will hold which I have already set down, speaking of substances,
almost of the same nature, drawn from Scurvygrass. Yet I may say, that there is
something to be got from these Seeds, better digested and more subtle then that
which you can draw out of the Herbs, which have not attained to the perfection
of Seeds. We ought to believe also, that the Spirit, volatile Salt, and Oil of
these Seeds, may produce good effects in all manner of cold diseases of the
Brain, and in those of the Nerves and Muscles, as also in Palsies. In which
cases, you may not only use with success, in anointing the parts, the rectified
Oil, but also that which was never rectified, and apply it either alone, or
mixed with Vnguentum Martiatum or Human Grease, or with Oil of Vipers, or the
Philosophers Oil, Oils of Laurel, St. Johnswort, and the like.

Some use Leven to advance the fermentation of these Seeds. But there is no
need of it, by reason of the abundance of subtle parts whereof they are
composed, and their great inclination to quit the terrestrial parts, which are
not many.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Distillation of Elder-Berries.
I Do not undertake to speak here of all Preparations that may be made of the
greatest part of the parts of Elder; nor to give this shrub all the Encomiums
it deserves, of which several others have sufficiently discoursed. For, not
being willing to depart from my subject, I shall only content my self here to
set down the particular Distillation of the Berries, and the way to save all
their parts.

Having caused a good quantity of Elderberries to be gathered when they are
full ripe, and having cleans'd them and bruised them, press out the Juice; and
having filled therewith a little oaken Barrel, set it in the Cellar to ferment:
as if it were Wine. And then when you perceive that the Juice has acquired a
winish odor, somewhat intermixed with acid, tap the Barrel a little above the
Faeces, and having drawn out the clear juice, put it into a Copper Vessel
Tinned within, and having covered it with a Moors-head well luted, and having
fitted to its beak a Serpentine luted, crawling along a Pipe filled with cold
water, and a Recipient at the end of the Serpentine, make the Distillation with
a moderate fire; and keep apart the ardent and penetrating Spirit, which will
first ascend, till you have distilled about two thirds of the Juice which was
put into the Vessel. At which time give over the Distillation, and put up the
distilled Spirit very close; and then having cooled the Vessels, pour out by
inclination into a woollen Bag, the Juice that remains in the Vessel, to
separate it from the sediment. Then, putting the clear Liquor into an Earthen
Pipkin glazed within, evaporate the superfluous moisture over a very gentle
fire, which you must continue till the Juice be as thick as an Extract, which
is to be put up into a Glass Pot well covered.

In the mean time take care to expose to the Sun, or to the Air, the sediment
of the Berries, to separate the Grains, which you may make good use of by
stamping them, and pressing out an Oil proper to provoke an easy vomit; which
may be given from half a dram to a dram and a half, in Broth, in Beer, or in
any other proper Liquor.

The Spirit of Elder is very much commended against cold distempers of the
Brain. It is Diaphoretick; it purifies the mass of the Blood, and facilitates
circulation; it resists the putrefaction of humors, and expels the malignity
of Fevers and Poison. It eases those that are troubled with the Gout and
Dropsy. It opens the obstructions of the Matrix, and suppresses the vapors
thence arising. It is given in its own proper Water, or in some Water of the
same nature, from half a dram to two drams. The Extract may be also given in
the same dose* in Bolus or dissolved in its own Water, or mingled with the
Spirit, for the same distempers for which the Spirit it self is commended. You
may also burn and reduce the sediment to Ashes, and extract a Salt from it, to
mingle with the Extract, or to dissolve in the distilled Water, to augment its
virtues. You may also make the same preparations of the Berries of Dwarf-Elder,
or Danewort.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Distillation of Juniper Berries.
THE Berries of Juniper, being of a substance that contains not much of
moisture, you cannot draw forth the Juice to distill, as you do from
Elder-Berries. Whence it comes to pass, that you must have recourse to some
foreign moisture, and to vary your method according to the several substances
which you desire to draw from thence. For if you have a design to raise an
ardent Spirit from these Berries, you must cause them to undergo a
fermentation; and also add a small quantity of Leven, Honey, Sugar, or Manna,
to the Liquors necessary for the requisite dissolution and separation of the
subtle and volatile from the gross parts. But this is to be considered, that
while you excite and cause this ardent Spirit to rise, you shall not compass so
much Oil as otherwise you might do, because the fermentation carries the
greatest part of it into the ardent Spirit. Nor is there any doubt to be made,
but that the Leven changes the nature and qualities of that which remains after
Distillation; so that the Extract drawn from thence, will not be so well
qualified. But because the virtues expected from the ardent Spirit will be much
inferior to those which you will meet with, by proceeding otherwise in the
Distillation of the Berries; and for that by using a small quantity of Spirit
of Wine instead of Water, you may with more ease extract a Spirit as subtle,
and of as great virtue, as that which is to be expected from fermentation; I
think it the better way to follow that method.

Take five or six pound of Juniper Berries, fully ripe, and full grown; and
having bruised them in a Marble Mortar with a wooden Pestle, fill up the best
half of a Glass Cucurbit; and having poured upon them the Spirit of Wine well
rectified, till there remain but one third part of the Cucurbit empty, cover it
with a Vessel of Rencounter, and having perfectly luted the jointures, put it
in Sand, or upon a Bakers Oven, and leave it there for three natural days,
which will suffice for the penetration of the Wine into the Berries, and for
the dissolution of their most volatile parts; then having unluted and taken off
the Vessel of Rencounter, and in its place luted on a head upon the Cucurbit,
and fitted a Recipient to its beak, make the Distillation in a Sand-Bath, with
a moderate fire, and you shall have a subtle inflammable Spirit, charged with
the best and most volatile parts of the Juniper Berries.

But you shall do better, and save at the same time all the best parts of the
Juniper Berries, proceeding after this method: After you have bruised a good
quantity of these Berries, and filled about the two thirds of one or more large
Pitchers of Potters Earth, pour in water between lukewarm and boiling hot, and
stop them up well; and having let them stand eight days upon a Bakers Oven,
make the Distillation in a Copper Vessel Tinned within, and covered with a
Moorshead carefully luted, having both the Serpentine and Recipient joined to
it; proceeding in the same manner as in the former Distillations; and
continuing the Distillation till the Water that distills be almost insipid. By
this means you shall have a Water charged with the volatile Salt and spiritous
parts of the Berries, accompanied with a volatile Oil, white and odorifereus,
which will swim at the top, which you may separate by a Cotton-week, or by a
Tunnel, or by some other Vessel proper for these separations, and keep apart in
a double Glass Bottle well stopped. You may, if you please, rectify the Water
in a Sand Bath, in a Cucurbit of Glass covered with its head well luted, and
cast away the part which is purely watery, which remains at the bottom of the
Cucurbit after Distillation; or else pour upon new Berries the Water of the
first distilling, and repeat maceration and Distillation as before. And by this
means you shall have more Oil, and the Water will be more spiritous, and more
abounding in volatile Salt.

But for as much as all the good parts of the Berries do not ascend in
Distillation; but that there remains considerable parts among the Water at the
bottom of the Vessel, especially a kind of substance like Honey, accompanied
with the grosser Sulphur and fixed Salt of the Berries; therefore when the
Vessels are cool, strain and press out the remainder, and having clarified the
Liquor, pour it into a glazed Earthen Pipkin, and evaporate the superfluous
moisture over a very gentle fire, till that which remains be as thick as an
Extract, which will be very acceptable to the taste, and somewhat Aromatical.
You may also dry the Lees of the Expression, and having burnt and reduced it to
Ashes, make a Lie with the Water; and having filtered it, and consumed it to
the coagulation of Salt, mix it with the Extract, keeping them together in a
Gally-Pot well stopped.

The Oil and spiritous Water of Juniper Berries, is very proper to free the
Reins and Ureters from Gravel and viscous matters, which stop the passages, and
hinder the Urine from having its course. They are also very useful in all cold
maladies of the Brain, and in scorbutic distempers. They are good to fortify
the Stomach, create an appetite, help digestion, resist the putrefaction of the
humors, and to kill the Worms in the body; as also to expel windy Chollicks,
and all cold maladies of the Bowels.

The Oil is especially commended against bad Air, the Pestilence, and all
Epidemick diseases; nor is it less to be preferred against diseases of the
Matrix. The Oil is given in its spiritous Water, when it is not rectified, or
else in Wine or Broth, from two drops to seven or eight, in the morning
fasting, or a good while before meals. And you may continue the use thereof as
you see occasion; as also of the spiritous Water, which must be given in a
lesser or greater quantity, as it shall be more or less rectified. The Oil is
also outwardly applied with success in diseases of the Nerves, especially in
case of contractions. The Navel also may be anointed with it in Cholicks. It
may be put into the Ears, to help deafness, and noise therein. It may be also
put up the Nostrils; and the Temples and Sutures of the Skull may be anointed
with it, in case of Epilepsies and Apoplexies, etc.

As for the Extract of the Berries, Helmont had reason to cry it up for an
excellent Purge, in regard it is really so, especially when its fixed Salt is
added to it; for by fortifying the Stomach and the Bowels, it gently purges off
bad humors. The dose is from two drams to half an ounce, either in Bolus or
dissolved in some proper Liquor. It is also sometimes mingled in Opiats, or in
other opening and purgative medicines.

In the same manner you may make a Distillation of the Berries of Savine, Ivy,
Myrtle, and the like.

CHAP. XX. Of the Distillation of Wheat, Rye, Barley, etc.
THE daily use of these Grains for the nourishment of men and beasts, gives us
to understand, that they contain substances as essential as subtle, and proper
to be conveyed to the most hidden and secret parts of our bodies; and their
ability to produce their like, which they have common with all other Seeds,
persuades us, that they contain eminently, and as it were in the Epitome, all
the best part of the Plants that bears them, since they produce Plants that
perish every year, only are perpetuated by their means.

The Mechanics are sufficient to justify these Truths, not only in the baking
of Bread, but in the brewing of Beer. For the artificial fermentation which the
Baker procures in his meal, by reducing it into Dough, with hot water and the
mingling of Yest or Leven with it, and afterward by baking the Dough in his
Oven, when the parts have been well divided by ferment, is that whereby the
Bread becomes agreeable to the taste, and good to eat; though it has need of
the heat of the Stomach, and of its acid, or natural ferment, to produce the
last fermentation, and by that, the most especial division of all its
particles, that the most pure and most subtle may be conveyed to all the ports
of the Body that have need thereof, and the thicker parts be expelled into the
Bowels, and by them be thrown out, as unprofitable Excrements.

As for the Beer, after the Brewers have artificially given to the Grain a
beginning of Germination; and afterward joined in one center, in the same
Grain, the disposition which it had to germinate, they steep it in gross; then
adding three times as much more not germinated, but steeped as the other, they
pour upon the whole first Water half boiling hot, and then cold, to separate
and dissolve, as much as in them lies, the volatile parts of the Grain, and to
give the whole a temperate heat. Afterward when they have given it its
necessary raising, and stirred the whole with proper instruments, they cover
the Vessels diligently that contain the matters, and leave them so for four or
five days, till the vapors that rise begin to smell strong, and have a winish,
subtle, and penetrating scent, which is a certain mark of a perfect
fermentation. Then is the true time to distill the substances in a Vessel
covered with a Moors-head, and to have an inflammable Spirit, charged with the
Salt and volatile Sulphur of the Grain, and altogether as subtle and
penetrating as that of Wine, perhaps equally well rectified. I could give a
more exact description of this particular, and might also advise those that
would be diligent in this part of Distillation, to be careful to provide
themselves of Rainwater, falling at the time of the Equinoxes, especially the
Vernal; but I thought it needless, because they may find in several Authors,
especially in a Chemical Treatise of Monsieur Le Fevre, all the light that they
have use of upon this occasion.

I will only say, that there is a way with far less trouble to separate the
parts, of which Wheat, Rye, Barley, or any other Grain of the same nature are
composed, by filling about two thirds of a crooked or bending Limbeck with the
Grain which you intend to distill, and making the Distillation in a close
reverberating Furance, with a gradual fire, following the Rules of Art. For by
this means you shall find in the Recipient, the Spirit, the Salts, and the
volatile Oils, descended through the beak of the Cornet, intermixed with a good
quantity of the Phlegm, of which you may afterward make a rectification upon a
Sand Bath in a Matras, or Bottle with a long neck, covered with its head well
luted, and by repeated rectifications procure a volatile white chrystalline
Salt, or at least a Spirit very penetrating, containing the volatile Salt,
which will be dissolved therein. Which may well happen, by reason of the great
disposition which the volatile Salts have to dissolve themselves in Liquor, or
else to dissipate. Thus you shall also have a volatile Oil, very penetrating,
united to some particles of the volatile Salt.

You may attribute to the ardent Spirit, drawn from these fermented Grains,
almost the same qualities as to that of Wine, and it may also serve for the
same uses. The Salts and the volatile Spirits are very proper in all distempers
where there is a necessity of cutting and attenuating hurtful humors, and to
expel them through the pores of the flesh and the skin, by sweat or insensible
transpiration. They are also very useful in Epidemick diseases, as also in
those of the Breast, especially in Asthma's and Pleurisies; for they powerfully
loosen Phlegm which stops up the conduits of respiration, and help
expectoration. They dissipate also the vapors that sometimes gather in those
parts, and are sufficient to produce an Asthma, without the concurrence of
Phlegm. They dissolve the coagulated Blood which causes the Pleurisy, provided
it be given in time, and before the extravasated Blood be turned to
putrefaction. The dose is from half a scruple to half a dram, in Wine, Broth,
or any other proper Liquor. They are mingled also with Syrrups, or Opiats. The
use thereof may be also continued, only giving less at a time. The volatile Oil
is chiefly applied externally, by anointing the parts that are attacked with
Rheumatisms, or any cold pain. It serves also to recall and dispierce the
Spirits through the members of Paralytick persons.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Distillation of Pulse.
AMong the several Spirits which are to be drawn from Pulse, in a close
reverberating Furnace, there is chiefly to be got a volatile Salt, more
distinct, and in greater quantity, then from any other Grain appointed for the
nourishment of man; and also with more ease then from most of the other parts
of Vegetals, excepting from some Antiscorbutick Seeds or Roots. And I believe,
that men would be more diligent in the search of it then they are, were they
not diverted from it by the sight of such a quantity of fixed Salt, as usually
they draw from their Husks, when they burn them to Ashes, and when they take
the same course as in extracting the fixed Salt out of the other Plants. But if
they make a serious reflection upon the various nature of Salts, and upon the
great inclination which acids have to unite themselves entirely to the fixed
Salts, and upon the power which they have to stay and fix the latter for a
time, I believe they would be of the same opinion with me: an opinion common
with several modern and judicious Chemists; which is, that all the Salts of
Plants, which Chemistry has at all times acknowledged for fixed, would neither
prove to be Salts, nor in so great a quantity, nor would, as they do, resist
the violence of the fire, if the acid Salt of the part of the Plant, reduced to
Ashes, together with that of the Air, and that of the combustible matters*
which they make use for Ustion and calcination of the substances, did not stop
the Salt naturally volatile, joining it self entirely to it, and making it
capable to resistthe flame. Though to speak more truly, these Salts, as united
as they are, would not be so permanent against the fire, had they not embraced
and united in their conjunction, the most Alkoliz'd or purer part of the Earth,
from which they seem nevertheless to have been well separated by filtration;
and if they had not taken that Earth for the foundation of their union.

We are to believe also, that the acid Salt is not altogether so necessary in
the composition of all mixed bodies, especially in the composition of Plants,
that without it they can neither attain the production, growth, or perfection
of their parts* that nothing can be perfect without its assistance; that this
is the bond of all other substances, without which it were impossible for them
to have any firmness or consistence; or that all the productions of the world
would return to their ancient Chaos, if once deprived of this acid Salt, which
they make to be the Soul and upholder of nature. But to return to our business,
which is the Distillation of Pulse, without undertaking to set down the
Distillation of every one in particular, I will fix upon that of Beans, which
is in truth the grossest sort of Pulse, but which yields to none of the rest,
as well for its subtlety and penetration, as for its abundance of volatile Salt.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Distillation of Beans.
TAke about five or six pound of Beans whole and dry, and having put them into
a Cornute of Potters Earth, or Glass environed with lute, so that about the
third part remain empty, place it upon a close Furnace of Reverberation; and
having fitted and luted it to a very large Recipient, and stopped the Register
of the Duomo, or Cover of the Furnace, kindle a small fire in the Cinder-place,
enough to warm by degrees the Cornute and the Beans, and having kept it thus
for a good hour, begin to kindle a fire in the Hearth-place, ordering it so
that it may give no more heat then that in the Cinder-place; and having so
continued it for a good hour, increase the fire by degrees from hour to hour,
but not to excess. During which time you shall see descend into the Recipient,
the watery part of the Beans, in a very great quantity; after which give a
little air to the Register of the Duomo, upon the Recipient side, and increase
your fire from time to time, till you perceive the great Ball to be filled with
white Clouds, which will dissolve by little and little, and insensibly, into
Liquor, the Oil and spiritous Salt part descending to the bottom of the Vessel.
Then keep an equal fire for two good hours, and give a little air to the
Register; after which you may open it altogether, giving a more violent fire,
and at length a flaming fire, which you must continue till you perceive no more
vapors in the Cornute, and that the Recipient be clear. At which time stop up
the Register of the Duomo, and the doors of the Furnace, and let the Vessels
cool; then, having unluted the Recipient, you shall find a great quantity of
Phlegm mingled with the Oil, the Spirit, and the volatile Salt of the Beans,
which will be so penetrating, that you will not be able to hold your Nose nor
your Eyes over the mouths of the Vessels. Then quickly pour out all the Liquors
into a Bottle with a very long neck; and having covered it with its head
perfectly well luted, and fitted a beak to the Recipient, place the Recipient
in a Bath of Sand in an airy place, out of the Sun and far from any heat, but
what is necessary to heat the Sand and the substances; by means whereof you
will see the volatile Salt ascend by little and little, and coagulate it self
very white and chrystalline in the inside of the head, which you must cover
with a Linen Cloth several times doubled and dipped in cold water, to hinder the
dissolution of the Salt, which will turn into Liquor with the least heat,
sooner than any other volatile Salt; so that it is a hard thing to keep it
otherwise then in Liquor. But with art and speed you may take it out of the
head in a white chrystalline form, and preserve it also for some time in a
Bottle very well stopped. But you must have ready another head to put on in the
place of that which you take off, to continue, after you have well luted the
jointures, the rectification of the substances, while you draw forth and put up
the first Salt. And by that means you will receive into a little Recipient the
rest of the volatile Salt, dissolved in some small portion of Phlegm, and the
most volatile oily part of the Beans, which you may separate and keep apart,
while the useless Phlegm and stinking part of the Oil remain at the bottom of
the Matras.

The volatile Salt of Beans, is a most powerful Diaphoretick, and may pass for
the most subtle and penetrating volatile Salt that can be prepared. It may be
given for the same uses, and in the same dose, as the other volatile Salts of
which I have spoken, and be given with success for the same distempers. The
virtues of the Oil are very near the same with those of the Salt. You may give
it from two drops to ten or twelve, mingled with fine powdered Sugar, and
afterward ^mix'd in some proper Liquor. It is good to anoint Paralytick
Members, and such as are attacked with Rheumatisms; to anoint the Navel and
Stomach of those that are troubled with the Chollick, and to kill the Worms. In
diseases of the Brain and Matrix, it is good to put up into the Nostrils, and
to anoint the Temples.

The Distillation of Beans gives me an occasion to relate an Experiment of my
own upon this subject, to justify what I have said in the foregoing Chapter,
about the fixation which happens to the Salts of Plants, by the conjunction of
acids, in the Ustion and calcination which is made of the same Plants, when
there might be another way to preserve their volatile Salts, by separating them
from the substances by Distillation. I burnt on purpose in a Crucible, and
reduced to Ashes a pound of dry Beans, like to those which I distilled in the
Cornute, yet perceived not, during the Ustion, any scent of volatile Salt, as
it happens in burning Animals entire, or in their parts. Making use of a
violent Charcoal fire for six hours, to reduce these Beans into Ashes, I found
at the bottom of the Crucible about six drams of white Ashes, of a Salt taste,
like a Lie, picquant and caustic. But making use of the same fire to burn to
Ashes the sediment of six pound of Beans, out of which I had drawn the volatile
Salt by Distillation, I could hardly get an ounce of Ashes, and not so white
neither as the former, and of a taste much less picquant and Salt. So that I
was convinced that there was no finding the volatile Salt in the last Beans,
which was drawn off by Distillation; and that their Salt could not be so tart
as the Salt of those which had not been distilled, of which the acid and
volatile Salt composed the chiefest substance; which makes me believe, that the
strong odours that rise from Animals in their Ustion, and which is a sign of
the dissipation of their volatile Salt, proceeds only from the want of acids,
the small quantity whereof not being able to stop the volatile Salts, they are
constrained to fly away, when they are exposed to the violence of the fire.

Pease, Kidney-Beans, Vetches, Lentils, and other Pulse, may be distilled the
same way, and the same substances may be drawn from them, though they have less
volatile Salt then Beans.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Distillation of VVoods.
WOods are not only the most solid parts of Vegetals, but also those which
afford the most acid Salts, as is manifest by distilling them in the Cornute;
which gives us occasion to make two or three observations very considerable.
The first of which is, that the acid, which they contain in great quantity,
binds and fixes the volatile Salt in such manner, that it is a difficult thing
to distinguish it by the scent, which is mingled therewith, from the acid
Spirit, the Oil, and the Phlegm. Whereas the volatile Salts of Animals and
Beans, predominating over their acid, immediately affect the Eyes and Nose of
them that unlute the Recipient, into which they are fallen with the volatile
Oil, the Spirit, and the Phlegm. The second observation is, that it is harder to
separate the volatile Salt of Woods in their Spirit, or acid Salt, their
volatile Oil and their Phlegm, then to separate that of Animals, Beans, or
Antiscorbutick Seeds, from the other substances* which are drawn forth with it
by Distillation, because the volatile Salt of Woods is found to be half fixed
by the acid which exceeds in quantity. Whereas in the Distillation of Animals,
Beans, and Antiscorbutick Seeds, the acid is found in less quantity, then the
volatile Salt. The third observation is this, that the Salt which may be drawn
from that which remains in the Cornute by calcination, is not so plentiful, nor
of that strength, as that which may be drawn from the like quantity of the same
Wood reduced to Ashes, because the volatile Salt of the latter is retained,
during the Ustion, by the acid of the same Wood, as also by that of the Air,
and the substances that reduced it to Ashes.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Distillation of Lignum Rhodium.
I Begin the Distillation of Woods with that of Lignum Rhodium, otherwise
Rosewood; so called, not that it bears Roses, but for that the smell of it is
very like to that of Roses.

Having rasp'd into small pieces a good quantity of this Wood, and having
filled about two thirds of a little Vessel, pour upon it Rainwater or
River-water, and having quite filled the Vessel, stop it well, and leave the
substances in that condition for about fifteen days. Then put one part of the
Wood and the Liquor into a Copper Vessel well Tinned within, and having covered
it with a Moors-head Tinned in the same manner, and having luted the jointures,
and fitted to it a well luted Serpentine, running athwart a Pipe of cold water,
together with a Recipient, make a Distillation with a moderate fire, and
continue it till about two thirds of the Water, which you put into the Vessel,
be drawn off. Then having cooled the Vessels, and separated and put up into a
little Glass Bottle well stopped, that little quantity of odoriferous Oil that
will swim upon the Water, and set the same Water aside, renew and continue the
Distillation of that which remains, proceeding in every thing as you did
before, till you have distilled all that you put up in the first Vessel. By
this means you shall have a volatile clear Oil, of a yellow color, the scent
whereof will be very like to that which you draw from Roses by Distillation;
and a Water not much different in scent and virtue from that of ordinary
Rose Water.

The quantity of Liquor which is necessary to be made use of in this
Distillation, makes so great a diffusion and division of the acid and salt
parts, which ascend in Distillation, that you cannot discern them among the
Water, either in taste or smell, though they be certainly there, but in a less
quantity then if you had distilled the Wood alone in a Cornute; which you must
not do however, unless you value not the beauty and good scent of the Oil and
Water, which you may draw from the Wood by this way which I have set down.

This distilled Oil of Lignum Rhodium is esteemed as well for its pleasing
scent, as for its medicinal virtues. Some there are that prescribe it in
diseases of the Mouth and Throat, as also for those of the Reins and Bladder,
mixing it for those uses with fine powdered Sugar, and steeping it in its own
proper Water; making use of it as well in Gargarisms for diseases of the Mouth,
as in drink, from two or three to ten or twelve drops, in five or six ounces of
its own proper Water. But the chiefest and most advantageous use of it is in
Balsoms, called Apopletick; where this Oil agrees marvellously well with Musk,
Ambergreese, and the good scent of all sort of Aromaticks, Oils, and Essences
that are wont to be mingled with it. It is also the best Succedany that can be
made use of in the place of the true Oil of distilled Roses. You may in the
same manner distill Sassafras, Lignum Aloes, Santal-woods, and the like.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Distillation of Guaiacum.
YOu may proceed in the Distillation of Guaiacum after the same manner as in
the Distillation of Lignum Rhodium, especially if you desire a proper Oil to
give inwardly. But because this Oil is generally outwardly applied, and for
that there is great reckoning made of the acid Spirit which may be drawn forth
by the Cornute, it is but convenient that I should show the preparation of it.

Having put into a luted Cornute about six pound of Guaicum rasp'd, or if you
please, grossly cut, yet small enough to put in through the beak of the Cornute,
put it into a close Furnace of Reverberation, and having fitted and luted to it
a large Recipient, kindle a small fire in the Cinder-place, enough only to heat
by degrees the Furnace and the Cornute. And having continued it very moderately
for a good hour, translate the fire into the Hearth-place of the Furnace; where
after you have kept it as long, increase it by degrees, till you perceive the
watery part of the Wood descend into the Recipient; then open a very little the
Register of the Duomo toward the side of the Recipient, and continue and
increase the fire a little, till you see white vapors come out of the Cornute
like Clouds, which are a sign that the acid Salt and oily parts of the Guaiacum
begin to come forth; at which time open also the Cover to the Duomo, and
increase the fire more and more, till the great Recipient to look clear, by
which you may guess the Distillation to be completed. Then stopping up the
Register of the Duomo, and the doors of the Furnace, and letting it cool at
leisure, together with the Cornute, unlute the Recipient, and you shall find an
acid Spirit, charged with the volatile Salt part of the Guaiacum, mixed with a
dark ill scented Oil, and much Phlegm. Then pour the whole into a large Tunnel,
lined with wet waste Paper, through which the Phlegm and Spirit charged with the
volatile Salt will pass, and drop into the Bottle out of the Tunnel; and the
thick Oil will stay in the Paper, which you must afterward set to drop into
another Bottle, piercing the small end of the Paper with a Bodkin, and keeping
the Oil apart for your use.

For curiosity-sake you may burn to ashes the coal of the Guaiacum, remaining
in the Cornute after Distillation, and having extracted the Salt by the usual
ways, separate that which is merely terrestrial, and may be well called the
Caput Mortuum. But this would waste more Coal then the profit would turn to;
only the Salt may be useful in Purgatives, especially in Venereal distempers.

You may also distill Guaiacum, and such like Woods by descent, and draw forth
almost the same substances as by sloping Distillation, but not so pure; by
putting the Wood cut into a Cucurbit, covering it with an Iron Cover, with
several little holes made in it, made like the Cover of a Box, so that it may
just fit the or^fice of the Cucurbit; which you must afterward turn upside
down upon its Cover, and place it upon a Furnace built on purpose, such an one
as I have described in the first part of this Pharmacopoea, in the Chapter of
the Furnaces. For after you have set a Recipient under the Cornute, fit for the
neck of it, and carefully luted the jointures of the Vessels, and heated by
degrees the body of the Cucurbit, you shall find at length in the Recipient,
the Phlegm, Oil, and Spirit, charged with the volatile Salt of the Guaiacum, in
as great a quantity as by the Cornute; which you may separate in the same
manner as those that went before.

You may make choice of which of these three methods you please for the
Distillation of the Wood of the Hasell or Wood-nut, called Corylus by the
Latins, by others Lignum Heracleum; and also of the Woods of Box, Oak, Ash,
Cyprus, Cedar, and other Woods. The Oil of Guaiacum distilled is very much
applauded in Diseases of the Bladder, with an addition of Water, following the
method prescribed in Oil of Lignum Rhodium. To purify the mass of the Blood;
so that some do affirm that by continuing the use of it for several weeks, from
four to ten or twelve drops, in its own Water, from three or four to seven or
eight ounces, it is able to expel and carry away through the pores of the skin,
the Veneral venom, especially if it be not too much inveterate, without making
use of Mercury, the use whereof is not always so proper. It is good for the
cure of Veneral Ulcers that happen in the mouth. Some are of opinion, that the
Tablets which may be made of it, are very proper to hinder people from growing
over fat, and to make them lean that are too fat* continuing the use of them.

The Oils of Guaiacum distilled through the Cornute, are never made use of
inwardly, by reason of their ill scent; but outwardly they are successfully
applied for the cure of all sorts of Ulcers, especially Venereal; to cleanse
wounds, and to consume proud flesh; as also for the opening or exfoliation of
the Bones, and against their putrefaction.

The Spirit of Guaiacum is Diaphoretick, by reason of the volatile Salt with
which it is charged in Distillation. It is given in Venereal distempers, and in
Rheumatisms, from a dram to half an ounce; in a Glass full of the decoction of
the same Wood, or of some Cordial-water, when there is a necessity to expel by
sweat or insensible transpiration, the sharp serosities which are the cause of
those distempers. It is also proper for the cure of petty Ulcers in the Mouth
or Gums, as well in Venereal as Scorbutic diseases. The same Spirit expels by
Urine those serosities, which are not to be expelled by the pores.

You may if you please, rectify the Spirit and Oil of Guaiacum, over a
Sand-Bath moderately hot, in a Glass Cucurbit covered with its head, and having
separated the almost insipid watery part, which will first ascend, receive and
keep apart the spiritous acid and somewhat salt part, which will succeed, and
which will be attended with an oily volatile, which contains also its part of
the volatile Salt, and which may be also separated and kept apart as well as
the acid, and may be administered inwardly, incorporating it with fine powdered
Sugar, and mixing it in some proper Liquor.

It will be needless here to show you the Distillation of the Rhind of
Guaiacum, in regard you may proceed after the same manner, and make use of as
many ways, as for that of the Wood. And though the Bark may work as
efficaciously and in less quantity then the Wood, yet the virtues thereof are
altogether the same.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Distillation of (...). foot
THey that only mind the dark color, the bitter taste, and noisome smell of
(...), may not only despise it, but have an aversion to it. But they that will
take the pains to make a strict examination of all its parts, and to make an
exact separation and purification thereof, will find therein qualities
considerable enough to merit the pains of Artists. For they will not only find
the five different substances which are usually observed in Vegetals,
especially in Woods, but also the real marks of the existency of their volatile
Salt, and the fixation of one part of the same volatile Salt with the Oil, by
virtue of their own natural disposition. As you shall see in the following
Distillation of (...).

Having made choice of (...), the greenest, the blackest, the most solid, the
most glittering, and the biggest pieces you can get, and filled about two
thirds of a great Cornute of Fullers-Earth, and luted it round; place it in a
Furnace of Reverberation, and having covered it with its Duomo, and stopped up
the Register, kindle a fire of the first degree in the Hearth-place, shutting
up the doors of the Cinder-place and Hearth-place, keeping a fire for two or
three hours together, or till the liquor which distills from the Cornute begin
to grow acid; at which time put a large Recipient to the beak of the Cornute,
and having carefully luted the jointures, increase the fire by little and
little from degree to degree, giving air proportionably to the Register of the
Duomo, and to the door of the Cinder-place; and you shall perceive the acid
Spirits come forth of the Cornute in white Clouds, which will appear by degrees
more thick, when the Volatile Salt comes to be mingled with them, and more
still when the Oil comes first in great quantity. During which time, open the
Register at times more and more, increasing the fire from degree to degree, to
the utmost extremity of heat, opening altogether the Register of the Duomo, and
the door of the Cinder-place, and continuing the same fire till no more come
forth of the Cornute, but that the Recipient become clear. After which having
stopped up the Register and the doors of the Furnace, and letting the Vessels
cool of themselves, unlute the Recipient, and you shall find there the acid
Spirit, the volatile Salt, the Oil, and a part of the Phlegm mingled together,
and which have need of being rectified. To which purpose, having put the whole
into a Matras with a long neck, placed in a Sand-bath and covered with its
head, perfectly well luted, and having fitted to it and well luted a Recipient,
kindle a very moderate fire under the Sand-bath, by means whereof the volatile
Salt will ascend first into the head, white and Christalline; which you must
draw forth and put up close and carefully in a double glass bottle well
stopped; fixing and luting on another head in the place of the former. And then
continuing the same fire, the spirit will ascend with the rest of the volatile
Salt, already dissolved, and will be attended with some part of the most pure
and most volatile Oil, while the thick and unprofitable Phlegm remains at the
bottom of the Matras.

The volatile Oil of (...) is a powerful Diaphoretick, partaking much of the
qualities of those Oils which are drawn from Animals. The Spirit partakes much
of the virtues of the volatile Salt, a great portion whereof it contains. The
volatile Salt is given from five or six, to fifteen or twenty Grains, and the
Spirit from half a scruple to one dram; both the one and the other in proper
liquors. The Oil is also given from two drops to seven or eight, incorporated
with fine powdered Sugar, and dissolved in Wine, to the same purposes, as the
volatile Salt. It is highly prized in Ointment, to cure Ring-worms and other
diseases of the Skin.

In the mean time burn that which remains in the Cornute, and draw forth by the
ordinary ways a fixed Salt, which is very good to cure open Cancers, applying
it as follows* Having steeped this Salt in Vinegar, leave it to dissolve into
liquor in the Cellar; then anoint the Cancer once or twice, to fetch out the
venom like a smoke; afterward continue to perfect the cure with the distilled
Oil, which will bring a scab or crust upon the Cancer, that will fall off of it
self in five or six days, by which you may give a shrewd guess at the Cure.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Distillation of Fruits. And first of Gourds, Coucumbers,
and Melons.
THough Fruits in their Composition, have the same Principles which we observe
in all other parts of plants; the difference however which is in their
qualities, and the knitting together and proportion of their substances, being
as various as the substance of the plants which produce them, we cannot
prescribe any Rules so certain, as to be properly adapted for the distillation
of these Fruits. Trees, Shrubs, Bushes, and also certain plants produce fruits.
But though the trees exceed in greatness all other Vegitals, and produce their
Fruits in greater abundance, better digested, and in greater perfection. Yet
there are no fruits in Europe so big as those produced by certain plants that
dye every year, and among the rest the Round and long Gourds, whose
extraordinary bigness, softness, and swift decay, and the weakness and moisture
of the plants that bear them, demonstrates to us, that the principal and most
abundant part of their composition consists in an ill concocted Phlegm, and that
they contain very little Spirit or volatile Salt, and little appearance of Oil,
but only in their seed when it is very ripe. So that as there is nothing to be
expected from a mixed body beyond what it contains, there is nothing to be
hoped for from these Fruits in Distillation, but only a clear water containing
very little Spirit and volatile Salt, only enough for its preservation. And
therefore it is sufficient to bruise them well; and having put them into a
Cucurbit of Glass, or Earth glazed within, and covered with its head, make a
distillation thereof in Balneo Mariae, or in a Bath of Ashes with a very
moderate fire, as I have showed before in the distillation of cooling herbs.

You may do the same thing with Coucumbers and Melons; But because the scent of
the latter shows that they contain more volatile parts than Gourds or
Coucumbers; you may ferment them a little, and thereby loosning the bonds of
the volatile spiritous and inflamable part, will cause it to ascend first in
distillation; which hinders not but that you will have after all, a very fair
water, whose refreshing virtue will partake much of that of Gourds and
Coucumbers. To which effect, bruise a good part of that which is fit to eat,
and having fitted two thirds of a glass Cucurbit, cover it with a vessel of
Rencounter well luted, and having left it to digest in a Sand-bath, or upon a
Bakers oven for two or three days, lute on a glass head upon the Cucurbit,
instead of the vessel of Rencounter, and having fitted and luted to it a small
Recepient, make a distillation in Balneo Mariae, or in a bath of Ashes over a
very moderate fire, separating the volatile odoriferous and ardent spirit,
which will first ascend, and keeping the water apart which will succeed, by
continuing the Distillation, till there remain in the Cucurbit but a third part
of what you put in to distill.

The distilled waters of Gourds and Coucumbers, the inflamable spirit and water
of Melons, are used as well to smooth, beautify and preserve the complexions
of Ladies, as for other uses. In continual and intermitting Colerick Agues and
Fevers, these waters are used to cool the heats, and provoke sleep, giving them
inwardly; or applying them to the Forehead and Temples.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Distillation of Citrons.
THe advantages which may be made of the different parts of Citrons, is the
reason that sometimes we distill them all together; and sometimes only those
that are proper for our purpose. The good scent, and the sharp and pleasing
taste, as well of the outward rind, as of the acid part of the Citron,
sufficiently show the difference of the pure parts which they contain, and
withal that their separation is not so difficult, but that you may bring it to
pass by ways common enough.

You may put the Citrons cut or bruised into a Glass Cucurbit, filling the one
half, and having fitted and luted to it a Recipient, let them macerate for four
and twenty hours; and distill them afterward in Balneo Mariae, or in a Sand or
an Ash Bath, with a very moderate fire.

Sometimes Citrons are distilled whole, being first well bruised, mixing them
with Pigeons, Crum of white bread, with the cold seeds and Poppy seeds bruised,
with Borax, Alum, Milk, or other proper liquors, to obtain a spiritous water,
the use whereof is to cleanse, soften and prevent the wrinkling of the Skin, as
also to beautify and make clean the complexion. The juice of Citrons is never
distilled alone; it being sufficient for the most part only to purify it well,
when you would make use of it to dissolve Pearls, Coral, or such like
pretious-stones: or make it into Syrup, Tablets, or any other Galenical
composition. You may nevertheless separate the most watery part in Balneo
Mariae, or an evaporating Bath in a Cucurbit of glass covered with its head,
and find in the bottom of the Cucurbit a juice more acid then ordinary.

As for the rind of Citron, you may use it as it is, being well cut, or else
take only the outward yellow rind, pared off with a knife. Take either the one
or the other, and put it into a glass Cucurbit and pour upon the substance Rain
water distilled till it come to be above the rind about three or four fingers;
then cover the Cucurbit with a vessel of Rencounter or a meeting vessel, having
carefully luted the joyntures. Then macerate the whole during eight or ten
days, upon a Bakers Furnace, and proceed to distillation in a bath of Ashes, or
a Sand bath over a moderate fire. By which means you shall draw forth a water
accompanied with a small quantity of yellow Oil, that will swim at the top, and
will be both of them very odoriferous; especially the oil, the taste whereof
will be very sharp and penetrating.

The Oil of Citrons may be given from two drops to seven or eight, mixing it
with some drams of fine powdered Sugar, to dissolve it in five or six ounces of
its own water. This mixture must be taken a good while after meals, in
pestilential or Epidemick distempers; and upon all occasions where there is a
necessity of provoking sweat, and to expel Malignant Serosities by insensible
transpiration. It is also to be commended against all cold diseases of the
Stomach. There is a Balsome also to be made of it, mixing it with Oil pressed
out of Nutmegs, very proper against infectious Air, as for its pleasing scent.
Some commend this Oil to be used as well in Ointments, as to be taken inwardly,
against the biting of Vipers and all sorts of Serpents. To which purpose I
believe it to be very useful, in regard of its great virtue to fortify and
comfort the Noble parts; for being taken inwardly, and assisted with its water,
it expels by sweat the malignant spirits, which may have insinuated themselves
into the mass of the blood, through the holes which the Serpents teeth have
made.

The distillation of Orenges and their parts is the same with that of Citrons.

But I cannot but admire at the proceeding of a certain German Doctor, named
Frederick Hoffman, who in a book which he set forth at Hale in Saxony, in the
year 1675. under the Title of Clavis Pharmaceutica Schroderiana, has made a
real Dutch quarrel with all the French Nation, and with me in particular,
without any ground, reason or foundation, and upon false surmises. This Doctor,
and Author of a book (of which, it may be truly averred, that whatever is good
in it, is taken out of the writings of the deceased Doctor Michael) speaking of
Citron, and wanting matter, after he has repeated a Story, recited by Atheneus,
of a man that having eaten a Citron which a woman gave him, was cured of the
bad effects of the biting of an Asp, proceeds in his 444, 445, 446, pages in
these words.

The truth of this Story is confirmed by a Studient of Physic in Paris, almost
mortally wounded by the biting of a Viper, and cured by the wholesome diet of
Pome-Citrons. This Student being present in the company of several Physicians,
desputing about the nature, virtues, and venom of Vipers, in an Apothecaries
House, who at that time had good number of them brought him home from the
adjacent parts, and mingling discourses pro and con with the rest, snatches up
in his hand, as he had often times done before without any prejudice, a Viper
laid upon the table, and having been rudely pinched and angered by the French
Apothecary a little before, though unknown to him, thereupon the Viper handled
and in wrath, turus his head, while the Student was earnest in his discourse,
and gave him a wound in his right thumb, no bigger than for a small needle to
enter. Whereupon the Student flung away the Viper, but never minded the wound.
But within less then a quarter of an hour, dismal symptoms followed, as
Swoonings, Convulsions, continual vomitings, looseness, gripes, and Iliack
passions, with a numness of the Extreme parts, his arm of a saffron color
swelled and grew black and blew, and his eyes sunk in his head. Yet his thumb
was least swelled, only under the end, neither did one drop of blood trickle
from the wound. This unexpected and sudden tragical mischance, variously
divided the advice of the present Physicians. One was for Treacle, another for
Orvietan, a third for a strong Cautenzation. The poor young Gentleman, wracked
with pains, yet fuil of courage, called for volatile Salt of Vipers with a
little Treacle; but to no effect, for he presently threw it up again: neither
did Clisters do him any good, the whole frame and Economy of nature being
quite out of order. It happened by accident that a noble Forraigner, pitying
the condition of the Student, gave him a Pome-Citron: which not so much by the
smell but by swallowing the acid juice thereof, it is an incredible thing to
relate, what present ease it gave. Presently all the symptoms ceased, as if
heaven it self had sent a remedy from above. Though the Frenchmen out of the
accustomed vanity of their humor took little notice of it. As for the Patient,
though weak'nd with his former pains, he went home to his study, and taking an
Electuary, made of Confectio Hamech, and Hyacinth, and now and then eating his
Pome-Citron, not only slept well that night, but soon after perfectly recovered.

From this observation, many Phoenomena's of Nature, not yet so exactly known,
come to be made more plain. For from hence the nature of the poison is easy to
be made apparent, how it is infused by Vipers into man; whether it act upon the
mass of blood or upon our Archeum. What are the actions of the Archeum in
producing and curing diseases; how medicaments by the benefit thereof perform
their operations; and in particular how the acid juice of Citrons fixes and
mortifies the venom of a Viper.

The French Apothecary, in whose house this Tragedy began, has set out a
Treatise, or else somebody else for him under the name of Charas, entitled the
Experiences of the Vipers of Paris, wherein he affirms that that venom acts
upon the mass of the blood, fixing it and hindering Circulation, and presently
after, poison like an acid, fixes the blood.

But if that were the reason, how could the juice of Limons afford such present
ease? which he affirms to have a fixing power; for then the venom would be
more fixed, and by the absolute hindering of circulation, death would ensue. And
therefore we affirm that the venom lies in the slimy humors contained in the
Verticles of the teeth, beyond the known quantity, as the experience of the
more curious modern Italians have made evident; such as D. Redi the chief
Physician of Florence; which humor being drank in any Liquor does no harm; but
if the fury and anger of the beast be once infused into it, then upon a wound
made by the long sharp teeth in the superficies of the body, presently the mass
of blood striving to expel that unwelcome stranger, makes such a strong
resistance as disturbes all the functions of the body, laboring under the
Tyranny of the venom, till by assimulating to it self it have ruined all the
substance of the spirits and vital liquors; until some remedy, by an innate
quality, like this of the juice of Citron, in such a concourse of diseases and
symptoms, be found ready, having an extraordinary and supereminent quality to
appease the rage of the incensed and angered mass of blood.

I had transcribed the whole story, which I have published in my book of New
Experiences upon Vipers upon occasion of this Vipers biting the finger of a
German Gentleman, and not a Student in Physic, as our new Author would have
him to be; but that I thought it would swell my book too much, to insert twelve
pages, which this story takes up: or if I did not think it more proper to
confine my self to the most necessary remarks, which I have made upon this
subject; being well assured, that the Quotations of my Antagonist, are false,
both in reference to my book, and the truth of the Story.

He is not ashamed in the first place to attribute to the Citron alone, the
cure of the Vipers biting; though we must absolutely believe the contrary, as
well in regard of the truth of what happn'd upon this biting, as for the
reasons which I shall enforce. Afterwasds he speaks of me, saying that the
Student in Physic, was at the house of a certain Apothecary, where several
Physicians were met to discourse upon the nature and power of the venom of
Vipers. I find I live too far off to be so well known to the Doctor as I have
the honor to be to several persons, altogether as eminent for their quality,
and their great reputation among learned men; and those not only at home but
abroad.

He would in some measure make me guilty of the biting of the Viper, when he
says that the Gentleman took up in his hand from the table a Viper, which I had
incensed and provoked contrary to his knowledge. As if I had had a design
maliciously to cause the Viper to bite the Gentleman: whereas you shall find in
my relation, how much he was persuaded to let the Viper alone, and the danger
laid before him to which he exposed himself. However he would needs do it, to
show that he feared the Vipers of France, as little as the Serpents of Germany.

This author, continuing his discourse, and relating what happened after the
biting, conceals one very remarkable circumstance, that there was no yellow
matter upon the wound where the tooth had gone in: as there would have been
doubtless, had the Viper had his full bite. It was cunningly done of him, not
to speak of the absence of this yellow juice, since he would have that to be
the seat of the Vipers poison; and then they that desire to be of his side,
would be forced to stagger in their opinions, when they should come to know
that all those symptoms happened without any participation of the yellow juice.

Nor is he content to conceal the absence of the yellow juice, which would
destroy that seat of the poison which he endeavors to set up. For he strains
by several Artifices to persuade people into a belief of the impotency and
unprofitableness of the volatile Salt of Vipers, though indeed and in truth it
was the only thing that saved the Gentleman, not only in the first symptoms
that he had, but also in the latter. For in speaking of the latter, out of a
design to attribute to the whole Citron, the entire cure, he multiplies the
number, by adding the swelling and yellow color, which contrary to truth, he
says, happened to his arm; and yet the more to contradict himself he says, that
the finger was not swelled, but only toward the end.

Then speaking of the perplexity wherein the Physicians were, he asserts that
among other remedies thought upon, there was a strong Cauterism prescribed.
Whereas in the Relation which I have made, I only mention an Iron Spatula,
heated red hot and held several times to the wound, to keep the pores open; and
to facilitate, by that means, the transpiration of the venom: but so far was
it from cauterizing, that it never touched the part. Which makes me wonder that
a person that calls himself Doctor, should conceive such a thought and make so
bad an interpretation of things.

He goes on and says, that the Patient called for volatile Salt of Vipers in
Treacle water, and that those and all other remedies signified nothing. True it
is, that we gave him a dram of powder of Vipers in Treacle water, and Carduus
water, but having thrown up that, and all other remedies which we gave him, I
proposed to the company to give him volatile Salt of Vipers in Carduus water,
believing that by reason of the little stay which that Salt makes in the
stomach, the heat of it would send a good part thereof to the most remote parts
of the body, especially there where the venom entered, that in passing through
all the parts, it might work some good effect. I say moreover, that though this
Gentleman presently after threw up a good part of the Salt again, yet we did
not forbear to give it him every quarter of an hour; and we found, that after a
manifest relaxation of the symptoms, the most considerable ceased after the
eighth repetition of the medicine, which stayed with him altogether; nor did I
suffer the Gentleman to be carried home till then.

Notwithstanding all which, the Doctor, having very much despised the volatile
Salt of Vipers, and all the other remedies which were made use of, brings a
Gentleman* from behind the Hangings; and says, that in pity he gave a Citron to
the Patient, and that he had no sooner tasted of its acid juice, but that he
received an incredible benefit, as if (says he) that Jupiter himself had
reached down his helping hand. These big words might surprise those that had
not read my Book, or who, not knowing the virtue of the volatile Salt of
Vipers, nor how far the strength of this Citron might extend; might perhaps be
more ignorant of the nature of the Venom of Vipers. But when they shall
understand, as it is very true, and as many credible persons can witness, that
the volatile Salt of Vipers caused all the first Symptoms to cease, and that
neither the Thumb nor the Arm, nor any of the other parts were swelled, while
the Gentleman was at my house; that he used this volatile Salt, and that the
Citron was not given him till he got home, and as a Medicinal nourishment among
other remedies; that all this prevented not pains in his Navil; that his Eyes
were not sunk, his Face pale, or his Lips swelled; and that the swelling of his
Thumb began after he had eat of the Citron; that the use of it did not prevent
the spreading of the venom into his hand, from his Hand to his Arm, from his
Arm to his Shoulder, and from his Shoulder to the Region of the Liver, and that
it began also to gain upon the Region of the Heart, increasing and getting
ground till the morning of the fourth day, insomuch that there was great fear
of a Gangren; lastly, when we shall consider, that it was only the volatile
Salt of Vipers, given about half a dram at a time for three or four days one
after another, that manifestly defeated all the last symptoms; we have great
reason to declaim against all that the Doctor has so falsely and unadvisedly
averred, and to find fault with his want of belief, or contempt of so clear a
truth.

Which they will have more reason to do, that understand the story of a Viper
that bit a young man in the Chemical Laboratory of the Royal Garden of Plants
in the year 1671, while I was making my public Experiments, to justify,
against all the asseverations of Signor Redi, that the only incensed spirits of
the Viper, did cause the venom to work at the time of the biting, and that the
yellow juice of the Gums is but only a bare froth, not only very innocent, but
altogether incapable of producing any bad effect; and of which I have given the
reasons in the Continuation of my New Experiences upon the Viper, added to my
Experiences printed two years before, which are not to be gainsaid. For there
you will find that I was so far from having recourse to the juice of Citron to
fix the venom, according to the ridiculous opinion of this Doctor, that I made
use only of the Head, the Neck, the Heart, and the Liver of the Viper, lightly
boiled upon the Coals, causing the young man that had been bitten, immediately
to eat them, giving him after that a dose of the volatile Salt of the Viper;
and that after I had given him in the evening the like quantity of the same
volatile Salt, he slept quietly all the night, not having any either of the
first or last symptoms that happened to the German Gentleman; so that he
returned the next morning to the Laboratory, where he had been bitten; where
all the company saw him well, and working as if no such mischance had befaln
him. From whence it may be gathered, that the venom of the Viper, being
altogether spiritous, cannot be fixed, and that only the volatile Salts, or
those substances which contain a good quantity of it, are able to meet and
encounter the incensed spirits, and joining with them by a kind of similitude
of substance, to draw them forth, and issue out with them through the pores of
the body, by reason of the sweating which they cause, or the insensible
transpiration which they procure.

Nevertheless the imposture of the Doctor had been more specious, and more
nearly approaching to reason, if instead of attributing the cure of the biting
of the Viper to the acid juice of the Citron, he had fixed it either upon the
Oil, the Spirit, or the volatile Salt of the Rind of the same fruit. For though
their virtue be much inferior to the volatile Salt of the Viper, nevertheless
they tend very near to the same end. And I doubt not, but that in fortifying,
as they do, the Heart and Brain, they may in some measure resist the malignity
of the Viperous venom; though they may not be strong enough to overcome it.

But after all the care which the French took for the cure of a German
Gentleman, and the beneficial success of their management, who cannot but
wonder, that a Doctor, whose conscience must continually accuse him of having
averred things contrary to the truth, should be so inconsiderate as to say,
That the French, out of their accustomed levity, took no notice of it? When all
the Nations of the World applaud the vigilance, the judgment, and the sharp
wits of the French; their aptness to apprehend things, and to perfect
themselves in all the Sciences, their sincerity and fidelity, and their natural
inclination to esteem, oblige, and serve all manner of Strangers.

Nor was it enough for this Doctor to quarrel with the whole French Nation in
general, but he must assail me in particular; and endeavor to take from me,
and attribute to another, a Work wherein no person was concerned but my self;
believing that by naming me, and abusing my Book of New Experiments, and
insinuating [ or else somebody else for him] he should be able to deprive me of
the right of my own Composition, which I owe to my own labor and reflections;
as if the worthy and virtuous persons that met at my house were the Authors of
my Book. More then that, not content to have invaded my privilege, he
endeavors to make my Book speak that which is not there, and what I never had
in my thoughts, while he would have the venom of the Viper, which I say is
spiritous, to be acid; though I have declared against those that are of this
opinion, as may be seen in my Book of New Experiences upon the Viper, p. 97.
where I say thus, As to what remains, there are some who have thought that
these provoked Spirits, have within them a secret acidity, apt to coagulate the
blood, and to hinder circulation, whence proceed mortal events. But this acid
having perhaps produced in the mass of the blood, by means of the parts
themselves that come to dissolve and disunite themselves, when they are
infected with venom, and that the corruption steals into them, as into milk,
which grows sour, and corrupts of it self, without the mixture of any acid;
there is no necessity to look for any coagulating acid in the Spirits of the
Viper, which no man dares taste to try the truth; and so much the less, for that
this acid may naturally befall the blood of the bitten Animal, without seeking
for it in the Viper, from whence it may be flown. For I never writ more, as he
pretends, to prove that the principal effect of Venom was to fix. But I said in
the 96th page, That the provoked Spirits of the Viper meeting with the Blood,
and Spirits contained in the Blood of the Animal bitten, strive and endeavor
to make themselves a passage, and disturbing the particles which compose the
Blood, cause a kind of coagulation or confusion, which troubles its ordinary
circulation, and by that means hinders the communication of the Spirits to the
principal parts, upon which depends their substance and their life. And by this
privation they are constrained to yield, as having been either assailed in
their fortress by these provoked Spirits, and consequently insected; or rather,
because these Vip'rous Spirits are become masters of the Avenues, and have
stopped up the passages by which the Blood and Spirits held a communication
together. I say moreover, that the coagulation which happens sometimes, and not
always, in some part of the blood of the bitten Animal, proceeds rather from
the disturbance which the Spirits give to the Blood, and from the stop which
they make of its ordinary circulation, and by the same means from the subtler
parts of the Blood, abandoning the thicker, with an endeavor to pursue their
ordinary course, which the provoked Spirits have interrupted, then from any
acid; since the blood of the bitten Animal looses its color and consistence in
all the substance, so that it is but rarely coagulated, and only in some petty
part, which is with more reason to be imputed to the corruption which happens
to it, when it has lost its ordinary motion, then to any coagulating acid,
proceeding either from the provoked Spirits or the body of the bitten Animal.

But to the end you may understand how erroneous the opinion of this Doctor is,
who without defining the nature or quality of Vip'rous Venom, and without
demonstrating how, or upon what parts of the body it produces its effects;
after he has only said, that this story puts us upon the consideration of
several Phoenomena's of Nature, yet never enlarging at all upon them, he would
^ain have the acid juice of Citron to be able to fix this Venom; for as it is
all spiritous, invisible and impalpable, it is impossible to stop it, but by
substances very spiritous, and much more comfortable to its nature, than the
acid juice of Citron possibly can be, the operations whereof are very slow, and
the parts ponderous, and no way able to transport it self with a requisite
speed to the parts remote from the stomach, especially to the extremities of
the body, where the venom entered. I say, that then it would follow that the
Vipers venom must not only be of a Salt substance fixed or volatile, but also
perceptible and to be felt, like the Salts which we daily prepare, to be
stopped and fixed by the acid juice of Citron; which would also fail of its
effect, unless it could meet with the other in the same place. For though acids
are entirely disposed to a strict conjunction with Salts both fixed and
volatile, they can never do it, while there is but the least distance between
them and the Salts.

And because the entrance of the provoked Spirits is usually very remote from
the Center, that the Archeum cannot send the juice of Citron to the remote
parts in the same condition wherein it was when it descended into the stomach;
since it must be concocted, then changed into Chylus, from the Chylus into
blood, before it can be distributed to the parts; and that the provoked
Spirits, during all this while have time and to spare to take their full
progress, and to make all their destruction, before they come to the stomach,
then which the juice of Citron, taken in at the mouth, can go no farther; and
that the quantity of Spirits which may happen to come thither is not very
considerable, though they should consist of a Salt fixed or volatile, fit to
mingle with the acid juice of Citron; I have great reason to believe that this
Doctors opinion, cannot but be thought very absurd by the most judicious
persons, and that all the world will have cause to wonder, that a person who
would be accounted a great Doctor, and who boasts himself to have a key to the
works of one of the most expert men in Germany, should fail in his discerning
faculty, and that without any solid reflection upon the nature of Spirits or of
Acid, which he would make use of so little to the purpose, he should set up
things so ridiculous, so unmaintainable, and so far from likelihood and truth.

With as much reason it may be wondered, that in imitation of Signior Redi, he
should averr, that the poison of a Viper lies in the yellow juice of the gums,
and that confounding one part of my reflections, with those of that Author,
which are opposite to me upon this occasion, he should start up an imagination
of Anger, or a furious Idea which happening to the Viper when she bites any
person with her teeth, which he relates to have three points, though
erroneously, that same imagination of choler is presently enclosed in that
yellow juice, and that the bad effects of it remain as well during the life as
after the death of the Viper. He would also have it, that the Archeum,
perceiving a strange Enemy, becomes enraged, disturbes all the Functions, and
renders like to it all the substance of the Spirits and vital Liquors, till
recourse be made to the juice of Citrons, to which he attributes a never
failing faculty, to appease and correct the deliriums of the Archeum kindled
with rage, without explaining himself any other way either upon the nature of
the Vipers venom, its operation, or upon the qualities of the juice of Citron;
and never so much as arguing upon the means, by which he pretends that this
should produce effects beyond its force and activity.

The Doctors anticipation in favor of Signior Redi's opinion, upon the juice
of the Vipers and the confused Idea, which he borrowed from my attributing the
venom of that Animal to the provoked Spirits, were doubtless the apparent
reason that made him make a bad construction of both. I see likewise that he
rather chose to spare himself all manner of pains, and by following the custom
of the ancients, to say that the juice of Citron fixes the Vipers venom by an
occult and potestative quality, then to make any experiment, or to examine the
parts of the same juice, and of the juice of the Viper, which he would have to
be the seat of the venom; or to endeavor to understand the nature of provoked
Spirits, of which he heedlesly makes a union with the yellow juice to perfect
the poison. For he should have considered that the juice of Citron, has a power
to corrode, and also to unite fixed and volatile Salts, if it can but come at
them; but that all its power nothing avails, when there is the least distance
between it and them. He ought to have considered that the insipid taste of the
yellow juice, its thickness, its viscosity and slimness, manifestly declare,
that there is no Salt either fixed or volatile in it; nor that it is able to
enter in at such small holes as the teeth of a Viper make; much less to
penetrate, and be carried with that swiftness to the most remote parts of the
body bitten; I say, he ought to have been convinced, that such a penetration,
such a rapid motion can be attributed to nothing else but to the spirits; and
that only to those provoked Spirits, of which I have spoken, we ought to impute
the venom and the cause of all these mortal symptoms that follow the biting
of the Viper: that the yellow juice is to be absolutely excluded, and to be
looked upon as an innocent slime in all respects, as I have made appear several
times before a great number of Witnesses; and that it is a ridiculous thing to
believe that the provoked Spirits should concenter and stay with the yellow
juice after the death of the Viper, or produce any ill effect. Besides, he
should have considered, that though the yellow juice did abound in volatile
Salt, or that it were altogether Salt; the juice of Citron, taken at the mouth,
not being able to get near it so soon, nor without being very much altered, as
it is very evident, could neither operate upon it, or make any fixation; and
that it would have been better for him to have kept silence with the Disciples
of Pithagoras, then to have opposed and adulterated, as he has done, the truths
contained in my book of the New Experiences upon the Viper; or to have troubled
himself to have writt'n upon matters that never passed through his hands, and
which are altogether beyond his knowledge.

As to what remains, I have too much esteem for the German Nation; and in
particular too high a veneration for a great number of curious and learned men
which Germany has produced, and to whom all Physic is so much obliged, for
many excellent pieces which they have published, to act as this new Author has
done; who that he might the better as^ail me, has fallen upon my whole Nation.
I believe there is no disinterested Physician in Germany, but will blame his
behavior, and who seeing my first and last writings upon the Viper, and
comparing them with what my antagonist has so rashly affirmed, but will confess
my reply to be very rational and moderate, and that I could do no less then
what I have done. I am persuaded also that a good number of the Physicians, to
whom I had the honor to be particularly known in Germany and in several other
Foreign Countries, will do me the right to undeceive those that think I have
any need of a borrowed pen, to compose those little works which I have
published, or which I shall publish for the future under my name.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Distillation of Raspiss, or Framboises, and Strawberries.
THe distillation of Raspiss and Strawberries is one of the plainest that is
made of Fruits. For when you expect no inflammable Spirit from them, it is
sufficient to take them when they are fresh gathered, and having bruised them,
to put them into a glass Cucurbit covered with a head luted on with past of
fine wheat flower, and after you have fitted a small Recipient to it; make a
distillation in Balneo Mariae, between lukewarm and boiling hot, and you shall
have a water very pleasing to the taste and scent. But if you desire an ardent
Spirit, you must have recourse to fermentation, which those fruits are very
subject to, and without any addition, whether you draw forth and only make use
of the juice, or bruise the Fruits, as I have said already. For having filled
up with either the one or the other, two thirds of a glass Cucurbit, and having
fitted and luted on to the top a vessel of Rencounter, if you set the Cucurbit
three or four days in Sand-bath with a moderate heat, or upon a Bakers Oven,
the moderate heat will insensibly warm the substances, so as ^o dispose them to
act reciprocally one upon the other, especially the volatile, sulphury,
inflammable, and Salt part upon the Acid, so that separating it self by degrees
from the more gross parts, and surmounting the Acid, it will be in a condition
quite to forsake it, as well as the phlegm.

You shall understand when the fermentation is at the height by the winy scent
which you shall perceive when you unlute the Vessel of Rencounter. Then without
loosing time, having poured the fermented matter into a Glass Cucurbit, and
having covered it with its head well luted, set it in Balneo Mariae, or in a
Bath of Ashes or Sand, but moderately hot, and there will in the first place
ascend a volatile inflammable Spirit, very odoriferous, which you must keep
apart in a double Glass Bottle well stopped. After which you may have some small
quantity of Water, somewhat odoriferous; the virtues whereof will be much
inferior to those of the Spirit.

The Water and Spirit of Raspiss and Strawberries, serves more for beautifying
and preserving the Complexions of Ladies then for any other use; and yet they
may be administered with success to comfort and fortify the noble parts,
especially the Heart and Brain.

You may in the same manner distill black Cherries, bruising their Stones well
among all the rest, and make use of their Spirit and their Water in Epilepsies,
Apoplexies, and other Diseases of the Brain.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Distillation of VValnuts.
THE Distillation of green Walnuts is easy enough, especially to those who
following the method of the ordinary Pharmacy, after they have bruised them
well, and filled a little more then half a Copper Vessel, or of the body of a
Refrigerant well Tinned, and poured upon it Fountain or River-water, some three
or four fingers breadth above the substance, make a Distillation of it with a
continued moderate fire, as of other common Waters, till they have drawn out
about two thirds of the moisture which they put in. But Apothecaries that are
careful to prepare their medicines as they ought, are glad to go a little
farther then this Distillation; for by pouring the distilled Water upon new
green Walnuts, they repeat the Distillation; and having burnt the settlement,
and reduced it to Ashes, they extract a Salt by the ordinary ways, and dissolve
it among the distilled Water, to give it more virtue, and to make it keep the
longer.

But though this Distillation be not to be despised, yet there is still a
better, whereby you may preserve the principal parts of the green Walnuts,
according to the following method: Take a good quantity of bloomings of the
Walnut-tree, and having bruised them in a Marble Mortar with a wooden Pestle,
squeeze out the juice, which you must distill in Balneo Mariae, or in a
Sand-Bath, in Vessels of Earth or Glass, and keep the Water. After which, when
the green Walnuts come to half their maturity, take as many a^ you please, and
having bruised them in a Marble Mortar, fill about two thirds of the same
Vessels of Glass or Earth, pouring upon them the distilled Water of the
bloomings, two or three fingers breadth above the substances; then setting them
to macerate for the space of four and twenty hours, make the same Distillation
as of the juice of the bloomings; and keep the Water till the green Walnuts
have attained to their full bigness, yet so that they may be soft and fit to
condite, at which time take as many as at first, and having also bruised them,
and put them into the same Vessels, pour upon them the Water of the first
Walnuts, and make a Distillation of the same as before; and by this means you
shall have a very good Water of Walnuts; which you may render more efficacious,
if after you have reserved and dried the sediment of the Distillations, you
burn them to Ashes, and having extracted the Salt, you mix it among the Water.

This Water is called by the name of the Water of Three Nuts, by reason of the
three subsequent Distillations at three several times. It is Diaphoretick. It
is accounted Cordial; and chiefly commended for the cure of intermitting and
malignant Fevers. It fortifies the Stomach and Brain. It is good against the
suffocations of the Mother, and against Cholicks, caused by wind and phlegmatic
matters. The dose is from three or four ounces to seven or eight.

Some there are, that after they have dried the green Rind of ripe Walnuts,
distill it with a Cornute in a gradual fire, and draw from it a Spirit charged
with volatile Salt, and a dark colored thick Oil, with much Phlegm; of which
they afterward make a rectification in a Matras with a long neck, and draw
from it a Spirit containing a volatile Salt, and a clear purple colored Oil,
very much commended against poison, and particularly against the Pestilence.
Giving the Spirit from seven or eight drops to twenty and thirty, in the
distilled Water of Walnuts; and the Oil from two drops to eight or ten;
incorporated with fine powdered Sugar, afterward dissolved in the same Water.

You may also distill in the same manner, the dry Shells of Walnuts, and draw
from them substances not unlike the former; the Oil whereof is chiefly used to
mortify Ulcers, and kill Tetters.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the various substances of Grapes.
THE passionate Idolatry of the Ancients, and the pleasing taste which they
found in Wine, made them set up a God to be the Guard of their Vineyards and
their Productions, and worshipped him with several Ceremonies. But they would
have much more multiplied their superstitions, if they had known all the
various substances which this lovely Plant contains. For it may be said, that
Chemistry draws more good, curious, and different Remedies from that Plant,
then from any other mixed body in the whole stock of Vegetals.

Nature, the Sun, Time, and something of Art concur together for the perfect
maturity of Grapes: But we must make use of Vessels, Time, and Art, for the
first and more gross separation of the various substances, without which they
would remain in confusion, and we should receive from Grapes no other advantage
then to eat them as they come from the Vine, or dried in the Sun; though they
are useful in Physic, alone or with other medicaments, setting apart the stone
contained in the fruit, and the woody part of the Cluster to be distilled in a
Cornute without any forerunning preparation.

It is then in the Juice of the Grapes that these various substances are at
first confusedly mixed; and of which the fermentation that happens in the Cask,
makes the first division; which is of the clear liquid part, that obtains from
thence the name of Wine, from the tartarous part, which sticks to the sides of
the Cask, and the feculent part, which falls to the bottom, by the name of
Lees. Nevertheless, the separation of these three various liquors hinders not
but that they are every one composed of various part* upon which the Chemists
find work enough to exercise themselves, and reason enough to confess, that it
is not for nothing that I have said, that Grapes surpass all other mixed bodies
in quantity and goodness of Medicinal Remedies.

Experience and reason demonstrate to us the truth of this fermentation, in the
reciprocal operation and reoperation of the volatile, salt, and sulphury parts
with the Acid; as also in this, that from that operation and reoperation
rebounds the union and preservation, and not the destruction of the pure
substances; the spiritualization of those which are inclined to it, and the
conjunction of those which are not opposite, and the rejection and separation
of those that are burthensom to them. Which is apparent from this, that the
more acid parts of the Juice, having united to themselves as much of the
volatile Salt as they can bear, and made together one compact and chrystalline
body, mixed with some terrestreity, they stick to the insides of the Vessel, and
become that which we call Tartar, while the part less acid, and the most part
of that which remained of volatile, saltish, and inflammable in the Juice
uniting themselves together, and receiving into their company the watery part of
the same Juice, make a composition, which is the Wine; and that by working and
reworking, they cause the rest of the Earth to precipitate to the bottom of the
Cask; which nevertheless retains to it self some small quantity of Acid, and a
considerable part of the volatile Salt, in part inflammable, as experience
teaches us.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Distillation of Wine.
THE general reflections which I have made upon the different substances which
the Grape includes within it self, seem to me sufficient and proper enough to
make such as apply themselves to the study of Chemistry to understand, that
they ought to regulate their operations according to the different composure
and proportion of the parts which compose mixed bodies, and according to the
first separations which Nature makes of them, especially upon this occasion. I
think it also fit to exhort them, never to leave off for the tediousness of the
labor, nor to give over upon any ill success that may sometimes befall them;
but to study the more why things have ill succeeded, in regard that many times
it may prove to be their own fault.

Now out of regard to the lightness and subtlety of the volatile and
inflammable part of Wine, to the quantity of Phlegm that is mixed with it, and
the small quantity of Acid that remains at stake with it, we must proceed more
gently, and make use of other Vessels, and another sort of fire for
Distillation of those parts, then for that of the tartarous part, which having
much less of phlegm, is half fixed, because of the excess of its Acid, and the
union which it has made with the most considerable part of the volatile Salt,
which it has drawn with it, as it were for a support. Which is the reason, that
we never distill Wine after the same manner as its Lee, which having less
Phlegm, but more volatile Salt hidden within it, requires a particular method
for its Distillation. Let us then proceed to the Distillation of Wine.

Having filled with good Wine a little more than half a Vessel of Copper Tinned
within, and having placed it upon a proper Furnace, cover it with a Moors-head
Tinned within likewise; and having fitted and luted its Serpentine to it, with
its Tunnel of cold water, and joined and luted a Recipient to the Serpentine,
make your Distillation with a moderate fire, which you must continue till the
Water loose its taste, and will not burn at all. By this means you shall have a
Water called Aqua Vita, the quantity whereof will not be above the sixth part
of the Wine which you put into the Vessel. They that are curious may evaporate
the remainder by degrees to the consistence of Honey, and draw from it through
a Cornute, in a close Furnace of Reverberation, the acid Spirit, which lay in
the Wine before Distillation; which will be still charged with a good quantity
of Phlegm, and attended with a dark colored stinking Oil, of little use. After
which you may burn to Ashes that which remains in the Cornute, and extract from
it a fixed Salt by the usual way.

Aqua Vita is too well known for me to describe the virtues or use thereof.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Distillation of the Spirit of Wine.
THe dearness and scarcety of Wine, is the reason that we distill less wine at
Paris, then in any other Provinces of the Kingdom, where it is far cheaper. In
the most part of which, the abundance of Tartar which is found in the Vessels,
hinders not the strong wines from yiedling an excellent Spirit, and in greater
quantity then the small wines, where the Tartar has not time to coagulate it
self, and to harden in the Casks, which usually last no longer then the wine
which you put into them, although those wines do not want their Tartar neither.
For the abundance, the goodness and the beauty of Tartar, proceed rather from
the reiterated Fermentations which several new wines have made successively,
and for a good number of years, in strong Casks and made to last a long time,
then from the soil or climate where the wine grows. In regard that the Tartar
of Germany is altogether as good as that of Lanquedock, and which is also
thicker, by reason of the largeness and thickness of the pipes which they make
use of. Besides that the Tartarous part naturally separating from the wine,
neither impares the strengh nor the quantity of the Spiritous volatile, and
inflammable part of the wine. Of which this is enough to convince us, for that
the wines of Lanquedock intoxicate sooner, as having more Tartar, than those
whose Tartar had not time to coagulate. However the choice of the Spirit of
wine is rather to be made by its purity, then from the place where the wine,
from whence it was drawn, grew: so that if you intend to have it pure, you must
be careful to to purge the wine well from its phlegm, and to get good natural
wine and good Aqua Vitae.

Some there are, that during the distillation, fix at the top of the vessel
which contains the wine or the strong water, a piece of course paper several
times doubled, or some piece of course cloth, through which while the Spirits
pass, the phlegm stops and is forced to precipitate back again. Others there
are, that make use of a sponge dipped in oil for the same purpose. But both the
one or the other are mistak'n, in regard that part of the phlegm that
accompanies the Spirit, will pass through the the paper, the cloth, and the
oil; of which the Spirit of wine may carry with it some particles, which may
alter the good properties of it.

These difficulties have caused the new Artists to invent a vessel, by means
whereof you may have, at the first dash, a spirit of wine as pure, as if it had
been rectified several times by those ways which I have set down; of which the
trial which I have daily made, obliges me to give the description of two
figures; setting aside, upon this occasion the use of the long neck covered
with its head, which is to be refused, in regard of the length of time which it
takes up to rectify a small quantity of Spirit.

The body both of the one and the other of these Vessels is to be of red Copper
tinned within, having two openings, of which the biggest and the principal,
being in the upper part, must be accompanied with a neck, fit to receive
exactly the lower part of the Serpentine; and the other opening, being upon the
side a very little below the neck, must have a small neck fit to receive upon
occasion one part of the Cyphon, or small pipe, as in the first figure, or the
beak of a funnel, as well to power in that way the Aqua vitae into the vessel,
as to draw back the phlegm by means of the Siphon, when the water is distilled.
The Serpentine may be made of Latin so long as it carries but one glass head,
which must clasp the upper part of the Serpentine, made like a Tunnel. But the
Serpentine must be of Copper, when it carries a large Refrigerant, and it must
be supported with a pillar of hollow Copper, thick and of good bigness, and
strong enough to support the Refrigerant, and fortify the Serpentine in its
windings. The Refrigerant is also to be of Copper tin'd only withinside, in
that part where the vapors are to ascend, dissolve themselves into Spirit, and
drop into the Recipient. I refer the Reader to the figures I have made thereof.

By this means the Aqua vitae meeting with a close pipe, twisted and very high
raised, and not able to ascend so high, nor with that ease as the Spirit of
wine, by reason of it is own weight, is constrained to fall back again into the
Vessel whence it was first raised; provided you order your fire well. And for
that intent, after you have placed the Vessel upon a Furnace built on purpose,
and of a due proportion, filled with good Aqua vitae for about two thirds of
the Vessel, and all the jointures of the Vessel and the Recipient being
perfectly well luted, and the Refrigerant filled with cold water, kindle in the
Hearth-place of the furnace a soft Charcole fire, but all alike, and continue
it, till the Spirit of wine cease to come pure; which you shall know by this,
if after you have burnt never so little in a silver spoon, there remain any
moisture at the bottom. At which time nevertheless, having changed your
Recipient, continue the distillation, till the water that distills ceases to
burn. By which means you shall have an Aqua vitae, which you may afterward
mingle and rectify with the rest. The Spirit of wine rectified this one time,
being fixed, not only consumes quite away, but will also fire Gunpowder being
cast upon it in a little spoon. A man has also the satisfaction to rectify in
this Vessel several pints in a day, without much trouble, with little care, and
little expense.

Some there are that have given to this Wine the titles of Essence most subtle
and incorruptible, sulphur Celestial, Bezoardick vegetal Sulphur, the
Philosophers key, Raymund Lullies heaven, The Ethereal body composed of water
and fire, etc. But setting aside all these encomium's, I dare affirm that this
Spirit is very proper to warm and penetrate; as also to cut, subtillize,
dissolve, to cause transpiration and dissipate ill humors, making use thereof
inwardly or outwardly in Distempers that require such effects. That it is a
menstruum and a dissolver very proper for several uses, not only the most
common, but such as Chemistry can be without. So that I may not only call it
incorruptible, but able to preserve the bodies which it keeps within it self,
and to resist all putrefaction. It is very successfully used against Gangrenes,
and to remove all corruption from the parts. It opens the passages and
facilitates the communication of the Spirits, and quick'ns the circulation of
the blood. It is very much recommended against Rhumatismes. It is one of the
best remedies that can be used against burnings, of which it stops the
progress; not by fixing the acid, which some would impute to the particles of
the fire, though they equally depend upon the volatile Salt and acid of the
substances which burn, but rather by surmounting the same acid by its quantity,
added to that of the volatile Salt of the substances burnt, which the acid did
counterbalance, by which the violent operation of the fire is enfeebl'd, the
fury of the Archeum appeased, and nature strengthn'd.

This spirit nevertheless, though very pure to outward appearance, contains yet
some particles of phlegm, which you may less'n, by rectifying the same Spirit,
upon the sixth part of its weight of Salt Tartar well dried, and putting it
into the same vessel where it had been rectified, after you have well separated
its moisture, and distilling it over a moderate fire, till it ascend more pure.
You may after that dry the same Salt again, and having poured upon it more
spirit of Wine, distill it again as the first time, and make a greater
consumption of the watery parts. For by this means you shall have a Spirit of
Wine of a good scent, and much stronger then it was, to which some give the
name of Tartariz'd. But you may make it yet more pure, by putting it into a
Mattress with a long neck, covered with its head well luted, and rectifying it
again in Balneo Mariae lukewarm, not drawing off above three fourths; then
setting aside the sediment, you may rectify it three or four times more, still
setting apart the sediment. For by this means you will have a Spirit
extraordinarily pure and much more effectual than the ordinary Spirit of Wine;
so that ten or twelve drops of the latter, taken inwardly in some proper
liquor, will operate more strongly and suddenly, than a spoonful of the former.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Spirit of Wine Tartariz'd.
SOme persons, only regarding the outside of the title of Tartariz'd, which
Authors have given to the Spirit of Wine, thought it enough to rectify but
once that Spirit over Sal Tartar, to give it the name of Tartariz'd. Not
considering, that they could not lawfully give it that name, unless in its
rectification it had carried off, and united to it self a considerable quantity
of the most pure and volatile particles of the Tartar mixed with it; which is
not to be done but by long digestions and reiterated cohobations.

Some there are who put into a Glass Cucurbit two Pints of Spirit of Wine to an
ounce of raw Tartar grossly beaten, and distill it in Balneo Mariae with a
moderate heat, till it have done ascending pure. They also applaud the
rectification of the same Spirit in the same Bath, with a dram of new Tartar
bruised after the same manner; and having calcined the residence of the two
Distillations, till they become green or blew, and mingled it afterward with
Spirit of Wine rectified, they distill the whole with a more powerful fire,
pretending thereby to gain a Spirit of Wine Tartariz'd. Nevertheless I do not
understand how the Spirit of Wine should be able to carry off from these nine
drams of Tartar, any thing but the Phlegm, and some small portion of their Acid;
considering that the Salt part which the same Acid had fixed, neither could
unite nor ascend with the Spirit of Wine. And therefore to bring your design to
pass, my opinion is, that you ought to give the Wine its Ferment, and follow
that method which I shall show you, and which I have found to be the best.

Having made choice of good new Wine well fermented, and put for example four
ounces in a glass Cucurbit, large and high, pour the Wine upon it little and
little, whence will follow an ebullition or fermentation, caused by the
operation and reoperation of the Acid part of the Wine upon the Sal Tartar, and
of the Sal Tartar upon the same Acid. Continue pouring out this Wine by little
and little upon the Salt, till the ebullition cease, which will be a sign that
the Salt and the Acid are mutually reconciled, and then the cohobation of the
Salt upon the Wine must cease. At which time, having so ordered it, that about
a third part of the Cucurbit may remain empty, place it in a Sand-Bath, and
having exactly luted the jointures, and fitted to its beak a small Recipient,
luted in the same manner, distill the Spirit with a strong Charcoal fire, to
the end the Salt of Tartar, which is somewhat slow to mount, and which
otherwise by reason of its own weight would remain among the sediment, may be
forced to rise and accompany the Acid, in the union which it has made with the
Spirit of Wine; and continue the Distillation with the same fire, till there be
no sweetness left in the Spirit of Wine that distills forth, or till the Phlegm
succeed the Spirit. At which time you must put up the Spirit of Wine in a
Bottle exactly stopped; and believe withal, that it contains more volatile
Salt of Tartar, then any other Spirit of Wine, whatever other preparation or
purification, or whatever other Instruments you could use. For the Spirit of
Wine that has been once well rectified, or charged with its own proper volatile
Salt, and is unprovided of its natural acid ferment, or of some other near of
the same nature, can never volatize with it any other Salt. But the hungry
acid, that naturally resides among the other substances of green and austere
Wine, is in a good condition to load it self with the volatile Salt of Tartar,
which an Acid less in quantity would keep in its own bounds.

After the distillation of this Spirit, having by boiling evaporated the
insipid phlegm of the sediment, and reduced it to a consistency of Honey, you
may if you please, distill it through a Cornute, according to Rule; and draw
from it a Spirit accompanied with a stinking tartarous Oil, not worth looking
after; while that of the Sal Tartar, which has not been volatiz'd, remains at
the bottom, and becomes augmented by a small quantity of fixed Salt, which lay
concealed in the Wine, though very clean and very pure, as is evident by
calcining the sediment, and extracting the Salt by the common ways. Nor is it
possible to hinder the union of this Salt from that of the Tartar which you
made use of, by reason of the conformity of their substance, no more then that
augmentation, when the acid of the Wine finds any matter to feed upon, as there
it happens; where meeting the fixed Salt of the Tartar, it gathers and unites
to it, and embodying it self with it, increases the quantity of it, in the same
manner as if it had been only dried and calcined in the fire with it; according
to the Chemical Physical Axiom, Every corrosive is coagulated by corrosion, and
fixed in Alkali. Nevertheless, after that, though in this operation there be a
kind of combat between the volatile Acid and the fixed Salt, and that in this
conflict, one part of the volatile Acid fixes it self, and augments the
quantity of the Salt of Tartar, which the same acid could not carry off the
first time; however at length it becomes victour, by the assistance of the pure
Sulphur of the volatile Salt of the Wine; for it carries off, and absolutely
volatizes the fixed Salt of the Tartar, which was before united with the Wine,
if you proceed as follows:

Having well calcined the sediment of the first distillation, and dissolved,
filtered, coagulated, and well dried the Salt, you must weigh it, then having
put it into a Cucurbit, pour upon every half ounce a pint of new fermented
Wine, green, austere, and well purged; and having covered the Cucurbit with its
head perfectly well luted, and fitted and luted also a Recipient to it, set in
a Sand-bath, and make your distillation over a fire like to the first,
proceeding in all things after the same manner, and carefully putting up the
distilled Spirit in a Bottle well stopped. Then having again calcined the
sediment, and extracted, clarified, coagulated, and dried the Salt, pour upon
it again as many pints as there are half ounces, and distill them. Then pour
more Wine upon the Salt which remains, and renew the distillation, till you
perceive that the Salt which remains among the sediment be not worth the
trouble of any more distillation. Nevertheless you must not believe the Sal
Tartar to be the cause that so little remains, but the fixed Salt of the Wine;
though the greatest part thereof were volatiz'd in the distillations among the
Tartar. Nor is it to be doubted, but that by often reiterating the infusions of
the Wine upon the sediment and distillations, the Salt may be totally volatiz'd
to the utmost grain.

But for as much as the Spirit of Wine, which has volatiz'd and carried away
the Salt Tartar, is charged with much phlegm, there is a necessity of rectifying
it well; which may be done according to Art in the Vessel which I use for the
rectification of the Spirit of Wine, luting exactly the jointures of the head
and Recipient; or else in a Matras with a long neck, covered with its luted
head, and placed in a Bath of Ashes or Sand, over a moderate fire.

The smell and taste of this Tartar, gives evident and undoubted proofs of the
Sal Tartar which it has raised and volatiz'd, in the repeated distillations
made of the Wine upon the fixed Salts of the same Tartar. We may also very
lawfully call it Tartariz'd, since it contains in it a true Salt of Tartar,
which the Acid of the Wine has separated, volatiz'd, and united to it self. I
say, that this Spirit has a better claim to this title, then that which was but
barely distilled upon the Salt Tartar; and that if it carried away nothing of
this Salt, it would receive no other advantage, then that of the diminution of
its watery part. You may also give to this Spirit of Wine the title of
Alkalify'd; because it contains within it self a true Sal Alkali volatiz'd; and
in regard that some have taken this preparation for a real volatization of Sal
Tartar.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Distillation of Tartar.
TArtar is a substance embodied, and as it were petrified to the sides and
bottom of the Vessel which contained the Wine, being separated from the Must by
fermentation, which changed the same Must into Wine. This Tartar, thus
altogether separated from the Wine and the Lee, is nevertheless composed of the
five substances which Chemistry acknowledges in the composition of all mixed
bodies ^ for it contains the Phlegm, the Acid part, the volatile and fixed Salt,
the Oily and Terrestrial, as is evident by its distillation. And though the
union of its parts, and the solid consistency which they have taken, he not
proof against the heat of the fire, but they are dissolvable not only in hot
water, but in cold, (like Lime) when they have past through the fire; their
union nevertheless is fast enough, not to dissolve in the Wine, which environs
them in the Vessel; where they increase every year by the conjunction of the
Tartar of the new Wine, which is refill'd into the Vessels, and left there to
ferment.

You may make use in this distillation of raw, fair, and glistering Tartar,
grossly stamped, or if you please, pulverized, washed and dried; or else of
Cream of Tartar; and put four pound of one of the two into a large Cornute of
Fullers Earth environed with lute, and having placed it upon a close Furnace of
Reverberation, kindle therein a soft fire, and continue it so long till almost
all the watery part of the Tartar be distilled. After which, having fitted and
exactly luted to it a large Recipient, increase the fire by degrees, and at
length to the utmost degree of heat, and so great, that after the Recipient
shall have been along time filled with white Clouds, which will dissolve in
small drops, mingled with the Spirit, all the liquor may be gathered together
at the bottom of the Recipient, and shall be become altogether very clear. At
which time, having taken away the fire, stopped up the ports and Register of
the Furnace, and let the Cornute cool, you must unlute the Recipient, and
having put two pound of Bread Biscuit pulverized, into a large Matras with a
long neck, and poured upon it all the liquor contained in the Recipient, cover
it with its head well luted, and having fitted and luted to it a small
Recipient, make a rectification in Balneo Mariae, or in a Bath of Ashes over a
moderate fire, which you may repeat once or twice upon new Bread-Biscuit; by
which means you shall have a pure and penetrating Spirit, very proper for all
the uses for which it is designed.

I have said, that you may in this distillation make use of raw Tartar grossly
bruised; because the terrestrial part, which is usually mixed with it, not
ascending at all in distillation, hinders not the volatile parts from rising.
Though they that will both pound and rash it may, or else make use of Creme of
Tartar. I also never put above four pound of raw Tartar into a Cornute; because
that by swelling at the beginning of the distillation, it might burst the
Vessel were it fuller, and if there were not space enough to give it room when
it swells.

You may according to the practice of some, pour the liquor of the Recipient
into a Cornute of course Paper moistened, placed within a Glass Tunnel, to the
end, that the Spirit having passed through the Paper, and the black and
stinking Oil being there stopped, you may put them both apart in Bottles. But
besides, that in rectifications, the Spirit unites and rises with some
particles of the volatile Salt, which the Oil had seized, you may have at the
same time a volatiz'd Oil, yellow, pure, and easy to separate; the virtues,
the internal and external use whereof, are much more considerable then all that
can be expected from the stinking Oil, which you may reserve.

Nevertheless some have pretended to affirm, that there can be no volatile Salt
mingled with the Spirit of Tartar; alleging, that if it were so, some
ebullition would appear, and some heating of the Vessel when you pour an acid
upon the same Spirit; and because that does not happen, therefore there is no
volatile Salt. But the consequence is very ill grounded; for the acid Spirit of
Tartar having fixed the volatile Salt which it raised; and the same Salt
finding it self overmaster'd, and as it were enchain'd by that Spirit, which
hinders its action, cannot after that stir up any heat or ebullition, whatever
acids you lay upon it; as may be observed in the preparation of Tartar
vitrioliz'd. For though the conjunction of the Oil of Vitriol with the Sal
Tartar, presently and for some time excite great ebullitions and much heat, as
well in the matters as in the Vessels, nevertheless these accidents quite
cease, so soon as the Sal Tartar finds it self sufficiently charged with the
acid; nor must you expect after that, any ebullition or heat, whatever acids
you pour upon the Salt. This may convince us also, that the acid part of
Tartar, naturally inclined to unite it self with the Salt, fails no^ to carry
away with it in distillation, as much as it can, as does the acid part of new
green Wine, of which I have spok'n in the foregoing Chapter. We may also be
assured, that the Spirit of Tartar would never be a good Diaphoretick, as it
is, if it did not borrow that quality from the volatile Salt, which it carries
away with it in distillation.

The Spirit of Tartar is very much recommended, to expel from the circumference
to the Center, by sweet or by insensible Transpiration, a crimonious or
corroding humors, which are the usual cause of scurfs, Erisipela's, and many
other diseases of the Skin. It is used also with success, to provoke sweats in
Rheumatisms, distempers of the throat, Pleurisies, as also in venereal
distempers, it produces good effects in all obstructions of the Liver, of the
Spleen and all the bowels; and particularly in Cachexies, dropsies, jaundies,
and stoppage of the courses. It is given from one scruple, to one dram and also
to two, in convenient Liquors. It is mingled with other Spirits, and among the
rest with equal parts of the Spirit of Treacle Campher'd, and Spirit of
Vitriol, which mixture is called by the name of simple mixture, and is commonly
used in the Northern Countries.

For the same distempers you may make use of the oil rectified, and give it
from two drops to eight or ten, incorporated with a little fine powdered Sugar,
and dissolved in proper Liquors. It may be also mingled with oil of nutmegs, to
make a balsome thereof to smell to, as well in histerick diseases, as in those
of the brain and against pestilential Air.

Nor is the black mass that remains in the Cornute after distillation, to be
accounted a Caput Mortuum, in regard that among the Earth, which is the first
principle, it contains the most part of the Salt, which one part of the fixed,
in uniting it self to it; which you may save, by separating it from the Earth
by leviviation, filtration, and coagulation, of which you may make use as well
in the corroding and dissolving of mixed bodies, and for the precipitating
those which are dissolved by the acids, as also for several other cases, as you
may observe in the subsequent discourses.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Distillation of Vinegar.
I Do not here undertake to speak of a great number of Liquors, become eagre,
by natural or artificial fermentation, to which some authors have improperly
given the name of Vinegar. But I keep my self close to that of real Vinegar, or
rather, wine become eager by the alteration of the parts, and the predomination
of the acid above the rest. Nor will I trouble my self with the opinion of
those, who have believed either without reason or experience, that the wine
would not have become eager but by the total destruction and dissipation of the
volatile and inflammable part. Only I will say this, Vinegar being composed of
much Phlegm, of little volatile Salt, but much fixed, and good store of acid,
both the one and the other united and mixed with some terrestreities; yet
Chimistry has ways to separate and display the existence of all the parts.

In the alteration which happens to good wine, when it turns to Vinegar of it
self, the acid part having united to it and fixed the volatile Salt of the
wine, and finding it self more ponderous than the Phlegm permits it to ascend
first in distillation, and the Phlegm last. This may be made out in pure Vinegar
and not counterfeited, particularly in that of Languedock and Provence. In
those Countries I say, where the Vinegar is not counterfeited, in the
distillation of Vinegar, you shall be sure to draw forth at the beginning an
insipid Phlegm, though mixed with some very little quantity of the volatile
Spirit: but at Paris, you shall hardly draw any distinct Phlegm from Vinegar, by
reason that the Vinegar-makers do so counterfeit it. Whence it comes to pass
that we rather take all that ascends in distillation, then trouble our selves
to deflegmate the Vinegar; and that we rather take heed that the settlement do
not scorch at the end, and give the Spirit the scent of burnttoo.

The better then to bring your purpose to pass, fill with the best wine Vinegar
that can be got two thirds of a Cucurbit of Potters Earth, able to withstand
the force of the fire, and having covered it with its head slightly luted,
place it upon a fit Furnace, and having kindled a moderate fire, and fitted a
Recipient to the beak of the head, begin and continue the distillation, till
you have drawn out about two thirds of the Vinegar which you put into the
Cucurbit; then putting in fresh Vinegar heated before, in the place of that
which you have drawn off, continue the distillation, and keep in some great
bottle all the distilled Spirit together; pouring in again fresh warm Vinegar
into the Cucurbit, and pursuing your distillation, with a moderate heat, till
you have a sufficient quantity of Spirit, and that the sediment increasing and
thickning, constrains you to change your vessel, and to pour out the residence
into a Cornute, for the extraction of the last Spirit, which will be attended
with a stinking black oil, leaving at the bottom dry faeces, containing the
fixed Salt and the Terrestrial part of the Vinegar.

Generally we make good provision of the first Spirit, for the great use
thereof in the dissolving of Pearl, Coral, Crabs eyes, Lime of lead, and
several other substances of the same nature; not to speak of the inward and
external applications, in most maladies, and in some Compositions.

We separate the last Spirit from the stinking oil, by means of a Cornet or
horn of wast paper moistened in water, as we do oil of Tartar, and use it in
the dissolution of certain metals or metallic substances, which the first
Spirit of Vinegar is not able to penetrate. Some give it the name of Radical
Vinegar. The oil is good against Histerick vapors, by reason of its ill smell;
but the chiefest use thereof is to cleanse Ulcers.

The mark or settlement of Vinegar we calcine in a Crucible, to separate
afterward the Salt by dissolution, filtration and coagulation; you may also if
you please, turn it into Christals. Some barely dissolve this Salt in the first
or second Spirit to redouble their sharpness: But they might make a more inward
Union, by putting four ounces of this Salt into a Cornute of Glass, and having
poured upon it a pound of the one or the other of these Spirits, and placed the
Cornute in a close Furnace of Reverberation, make the distillation with a
gradual fire, and reiterate cohobation and distillation, till the Spirit have
carried away all the Salt. This Spirit is called Alkalify'd, or Radical, and
that much more justly than the second Spirit of Vinegar, for being more pure
and intimately united with its proper Salt, it is more powerful to dissolve
Metals.

We also prepare a Spirit of Vinegar with equal parts of good honey and good
Vinegar, which we afterward digest together for fifteen days in a glass
Cucurbit, large and high, covered with its head, and placed upon a Bakers oven,
and then distilling it after in Balneo Mariae, or in a Sand-bath with a
moderate heat, you shall draw forth a Spirit, which you may rectify once or
twice to make it more subtle and penetrating, as also very proper for the
dissolution of Pearls, Coral, and such like precious Stones.

In the same manner you may distill an acid Spirit from Spanish wine turned
sour, as also from Beer, Cider, Perry, or any other such kind of fermented
sour juices.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Distillation of Sugar.
SUgar is variously distilled; for some after they have put it into a large and
high glass Cucurbit, covered with its head, and placed in a Sand-bath, make a
gradual fire, soft at the beginning, and somewhat quicker toward the end; and
draw forth a spiritous acid water accompanied at length with an Oil that swims
at the top, which they set apart, rectifying and separating, in an evaporating
bath, the watery part from the spiritous. Others mixing the Sugar poudred with
equal parts of Glass or Flint bruised or brok'n to pieces, and putting the
whole into a large glass Cornute very well luted, and placed in a close
reverberating Furnace, make a distillation thereof with a gradual fire, very
violent toward the end, and they draw forth a Spirit and an oil mixed with a
good quantity of Phlegm, which they rectify five or six times upon the residence
calcined, to take away the scent of the fire from the Oil and the Spirit. But
there is a distillation to be made of Sugar very curious and very profitable,
and by that means to convert it, and make it ascend altogether in an
inflammable Spirit, proceeding according to the following method.

Take a pound of unrefin'd Sugar, and an ounce of Beer yest, and having put
them together in a barrel, or in any other wooden vessel, pour upon it eight
pints of boiling water; then having well mixed the whole and stopped the Vessel
carelessly, leave it in that condition for four and twenty hours, at what time
the substances will begin to boil, and soon after they will boil so fiercely,
that they would go near to break the Vessel were it close stopped, or that the
substances had not room enough for their quick and violent fermentation. At
which you need not wonder, considering that the Sugar, containing in it a great
quantity of Ferment, and having therewithal to furnish other substances, it is
particles finding themselves extraordinarily moved by addition of the yest, and
the mixture of the boiling water, bestir themselves with much more violence
than substances which have less of natural fermentation to forward and redouble
their fermentation. Then you must empty all the liquor into a glass Cucurbit
covered with his head perfectly well luted, with a Recipient fixed to it, and
make a distillation in Balneo Mariae or in in a bath of Ashes or Sand with a
moderate fire, and you shall draw forth an inflammable Spirit, followed by a
Phlegm, which may be separated by Rectifications. Then putting the residue into
the first vessel, and pouring the Phlegm upon it, cover and stop the whole
slightly up; and leaving it in a Cellar for two months, make a new distillation
in the first Cucurbit, covered with its head luted, and you shall have an
inflammable Spirit which you may rectify as at first; and you will find that
the two rectified Spirits put together will weigh as much as the Sugar, when it
was first used. By which it appears, that it was all converted into volatile
and inflammable Spirit.

The virtue of the inflamable Spirit of Sugar, are very near the same with the
Spirit of ordinary Wine; for it equally warms, cuts, dissolves and dries. But
it is chiefly used for diseases of the breast. It has also this peculiar
quality to mix and unite it self perfectly with Aromatic distilled Oils, which
usually swim at the top of the waters. and makes them fit to be united with all
sorts of Liquors. The dose is from half a dram to two, in convenient Liquor.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the distillation of Manna.
I believe I have sufficiently explained the nature of Manna in the second part
of this work, to disabuse those who have hitherto taken it for a kind of dew.
For all that which we usually see, is nothing else but a condensed juice
falling from two sorts of Ash-trees that grow in Calabria, and is condensed by
the heat of the Sun, as are diverse other juices and tears or gum-drops,
distilling from other trees in several parts of the world. For which reason I
add the distillation of Manna to that of the parts of Vegitals, and I put it
next to that of Sugar, because the parts thereof are much of the same nature,
and for that it contains as much or more ferment than Sugar.

There is no necessity of mixing any thing with Manna, when you go about to
distill it. It is sufficient to put it as it is brought us, into a Cucurbit of
Glass, leaving three fourths, or at least two thirds empty, and having covered
it with its head very well luted, and fitted to its beak a Recipient luted in
the same manner, make a distillation thereof in a Sand-bath with a moderate
fire, and you shall draw forth a water almost insipid, which you are to keep
apart. Then having altered the Recipient, and augmenting the fire by degrees,
and distilling it till you can distill no more, you shall find in the Recipient
an acid Spirit, which you must rectify, to take away the Empirema, or scent of
the fire, acquired in the first distillation. You may also keep it apart, or
mix it with the first water, to make it more efficacious, and more apt to
provoke Sweats, which is one of its many properties. It is also used to
dissolve Sulphur, and to draw from thence a tincture good for diseases of the
breast. The water may be given, reinforced with its Spirit, from a dram to half
an ounce in the water of Meadow-sweet, or blessed Thistle, or in any other
convenient Liquor; and the tincture of Sulphur may be given from three to four,
to ten or twelve drops in any Pectoral Liquor.

Manna may be also very properly distilled in a Cornute, in a bath of Sand,
with a soft fire at the beginning, then increased by degrees, and continued
till nothing distill from the Cornute: then sprinkle upon the Residue the
distilled Liquor several times and repeat the distillation as often, and you
shall have a spiritous water, containing all the best of the Manna, and not
only an excellent sudorifick, but a wonderful specific against all sorts of
intermitting Agues, giving it at the beginning of the fit, in the same dose and
in the same Liquors as the former.

You may also draw out of Manna an ardent Spirit, making use of beer yest,
boiling water, and the same digestions and distillations, as for the
inflammable Spirit of Sugar.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Distillation of Cinnamon.
THe deerness of Cinnamon, and the difficulty to have it good, is the reason,
that we do not usually distill the oil in France; and that many are contented
only to draw out a Spiritous water, impregnated with its oily volatile Salt,
because the use of it is more common, then that of the oil, which many rather
choose to send for out of Holland, then to trouble themselves to distill it.
Nevertheless I will here insert the method which is to be used for the
distillation both of the one and the other, beginning with that of the water.

Take a pound of the best Cinnamon you can get, and having slightly bruised it
and put it into a Copper vessel well tinned within, pour upon it three pints of
good white wine, and as much distilled Balm water; then having covered it with
its Refrigerant tinned likewise and well luted, and having also fitted and well
luted a Recipient to it; after a maceration of twelve hours, put it upon a
proper furnace, and having filled the Refrigerant with cold water, begin the
distillation with an immediate quick coal fire, to loosen the Spiritous oily
and volatile Salt part, and to cause it more quickly to ascend; and continue
the fire, till the water be almost insipid; keeping however apart of the first
and second pint of water, which you shall distill; as also of the third which
follows; as being, from degree to degree, one better than the other. Take care
in the mean time to change the water in the Refrigerant every foot; to the end
that the ascending vapors may the sooner dissolve into water. It will be so
much the better also if the Refrigerant be not too high raised, to facilitate
the distillation of the oily part of the Cinnamon, which cannot but with great
difficulty ascend very high, no more than the oil of the most part of other
Aromaticks. You may make use of the last water for the distillation of new
Cinnamon, instead of the Balm water which I directed, and keep the two first
pints of distilled spiritous water each of them apart or mixed together.

The Spiritous water of Cinnamon is good, speedily to comfort and fortify the
more noble parts, and principally the heart. For which reason it is given with
success in swooning and fainting fits. It excites the natural heat of the
Stomach, it helps digestion, stays looseness, expells wind, and eases Coliques,
which are caused thereby. It is much commended also to facilitate the birth, to
strengthen women in labor, and to ease their pains. It is also very good to
provoke the Courses, and to expel the vapors that rise in the Matrix. It is
given alone from a quarter of a spoonful, to a spoonful when there is any
necessity. But it is better to keep to the lesser dose, especially when you
take it oft'n.

To distill the oil, after you have made choice of a pound of excellent
Cinnamon, slightly bruised, and put it into a Copper Vessel well tinned,
moist'n it with a little good whitewine, and pour upon it six pints of Fountain
water. Then having covered the Vessel with a Refrigerant well luted, let it
stand and macerate till morning, and then make the distillation, observing the
same method in all things as in the distillation of Cinnamon Water, only that
there will be no need to keep the distilled water apart, and that you must take
away the fire when the water is almost insipid; at which time let the distilled
water cool and settle, and separate from it that Oil which will be fallen to the
bottom, putting it up in a glass Bottle perfectly well stopped. Then having
pressed and strained out the residue in the Vessel, and put in the room thereof
a pound of good new Cinnamon slightly bruised, pour upon it not only the
distilled water which you separated from the oil, but also the liquor pressed
out of the sediment; and having covered the Vessel with its Refrigerant, and
proceeded in all things as in the first distillation, you shall find at the
bottom of the distilled water, a little more oil, which you must separate and
put very charily. You may then squeeze the residence again, put new Cinnamon
into the Vessel, and pour upon it the distilled water and the squeezings, and
repeat maceration and distillation in the same manner as before, and renew the
same operation for several times one after another, and you shall have every
time more and more oil; because that the water which is once sufficiently
charged with the oil, more easily permits that which it has raised with it in
distillation to precipitate to the bottom. You may also make use of this
distilled water instead of that of Cinnamon. But if after you have put it into
a Glass Bottle well stopped, you expose it for some days to the Sun, if it be
Summer, or upon a Bakers Oven at another time, you shall find some small
quantity of Oil, which will be precipitated to the bottom.

Some there are, that for this distillation would have you to put among the
Cinnamon, about an ounce of Niter, or Sal Tartar, or raw Tartar; believing that
the Salts, by piercing the Aromaticks, will separate a larger quantity of Oil
from the terrestrial parts. But as I have said before, the great dispositions
which the Salts have to unite with the Oils, rather occasions a diminishment
then an augmentation of the Oil.

The virtues of the Oil of Cinnamon are much the same with that of the
Spiritous Water. Nevertheless it works in a less quantity, being of a substance
more pure, more subtle, and more substantial. And therefore you must not give
above one or two drops at a time. It is also more proper then the Water to mix
in Opiats, Tablets, and Pills, and many other solid medicines; and among the
rest in odoriferous Balsoms, to be carried in the Pocket; though it is mixed
sometimes in liquors, being incorporated with a little fine powdered Sugar, or
dissolved in some small quantity of the inflammable Spirit of the same Sugar.

CHAP. XL. Of the Distillation of Cloves.
THE Clove is not so dry a substance as the Cinnamon; it contains also much
more Oil, as you may perceive by bruising it, but much more by distilling it,
which may be done much after the same manner as Cinnamon. But the best way is
to make a kind of putrefaction first, to make a more entire dissolution of the
parts of the Clove, and to make the volatile Salt and oily part more apt to
leave the terrestrial part. But you must not observe the same method for the
distillation of Cinnamon, whose subtle parts being much less in quantity, and
much more subject to dissipation, will not endure a long maceration, without a
notable diminution of their quantity, and a great alteration of their proper
substance.

Take for example a pound of Cloves, and having grossly bruised them, and put
them into a glass Cucurbit, and poured upon them four pints of Fountain Water
lukewarm, cover the Cucurbit with a Vessel of Rencounter, perfectly well luted.
Then having put it twelve or fifteen days upon a Bakers Oven, unlute the
Vessel, and pour the substances into a Copper Vessel Tinned within, covered
with its Refrigerant; and having placed it upon a proper Furnace, and having
exactly luted all the jointures, as also those of the Recipient, make a
distillation with an immediate quick Coal-fire; shifting as occasion requires,
the water of the Refrigerant; and continue it till you have distilled about two
thirds of the moisture which you put among the Cloves. After which, letting the
Vessels stand till they are half cold, separate by inclination, the spiritous
Water that swims above the Oil in the Recipient; and having put up the Oil in a
strong Bottle well stopped, unlute the Vessel, and pour the distilled Water
upon the remains; then lute on the Refrigerant again, and renew the
distillation as before. By this means you shall have a certain quantity of Oil,
which the first distillation could not raise, which you may add to the first,
keeping the distilled Water apart for other uses.

You may also, after a maceration of the powder of Cloves for twelve or fifteen
days, make a distillation thereof in a Glass Cornute, placed in a Sand-Bath
over a moderate fire; and having made the same separation of the Oil, and the
same cohobation of the Water upon the residue, make a new distillation, to the
end you may save all the Clove contains of volatile oily Salt.

Some there are, who never adding any moisture to the Cloves; but having grossly
beaten them, and put them into a glass Cornute, distill them in a Sand-bath,
with a gradual fire, and extract from thence a spiritous water, and a volatile
salt Oil. But the Empyrema, or fierce scent and quality which the Oil contracts
this way, is the reason that this method is not so much observed.

Nevertheless, Cloves may be distilled by descent to very good purpose, if
after you have stretched a fine Linen Cloth upon a large glass Tunnel, placed
upon a proper big-bellied Viol, and fastened it round about the Tunnel, and
spread about an ounce of powder of Cloves, upon the Cloth, you cover with ashes
the hollow of a Silver or Lattin-plate, proportionable to the mouth of the
Tunnel, and having put upon the ashes the live embers of a small quick fire,
squeeze the bottom of the plate upon the powder of Gillowflowers. For by
continuing to lay a few fresh Coals upon the ashes that lie in the Plate, the
Oil and spiritous Water of the Cloves will distill by little and little into
the Viol, and the powder will remain dry and insipid upon the Cloth. After
which, having put fresh powder upon the Cloth, proceed in the same manner as
before. And you may continue this operation by making use of seral Vessels at a
time, till you have as much as you desire.

You would have but very ill success, should you distill Cinnamon in the same
manner, whose subtle and volatile parts would dissipate, instead of falling
down, and leave nothing but some few drops of insipid water.

Oil of Cloves is very much commended to fortify the heart and the brain, and
all the noble parts. It is given with good success in cold diseases of the
stomach, and the intestines, in those of the matrix, as also to hasten the
circulation of the blood, and to ease those that are troubled with the Scurvy.
It is given from one to two or three drops, incorporated with fine powdered
Sugar, and steeped in some proper liquor. It may be also mingled in Bolus's,
Pills, Opiats, Tablets, and several other medicines. It may be also used in
odoriferous Balsoms, and so anoint the stomach, having incorporated it with
pressed oil of Nutmegs. Dipped in Cotton it is put into rotten teeth to assuage
the pain. The spiritous water of Cloves may serve almost the same uses, giving
almost the same dose as of the spiritous water of Cinnamon.

Nutmegs and Mace may be distilled in a small Copper Vessel Tinned, and covered
with its Refrigerant, proceeding as I have directed in the first distillation
of Cloves. But the small quantity will neither pay for the Spice nor the
workmanship; beside, that it is more easy and more beneficial to extract those
oils by the Press, without any farther trouble. Nor need I trouble you with
those preparations here, having already given directions in the Galenick
preparations.

You may also in the same manner distill with a Refrigerant Cubebs, Amomum,
Cardamums, Pepper, and such like Aromaticks.

CHAP. XLI. Of the Distillation of Camphire.
THose Authors who have written of the Distillation of Camphire, have labored
and taken a great deal of pains, in my judgment, altogether in vain. For out of
the hopes which they had to be able to prepare something better then what
nature had perfected, after they had toiled themselves without success, yet
being willing to make the best of a bad Market, they put to public view
distillations hardly to be maintained. And I think they had done better, not to
have undertaken to distill it, in regard that as it is brought to us, it
surmounts in purity, subtlety, volatility, and penetration, all that can be
extracted by distillation, whatever care, skill, mixture, or whatever Vessels
they can make use of. Its transparency and whiteness equalling that of Snow;
its sharp and picquant taste, its extraordinary strong smell, its volatility,
its quick dissipation, its inflammability in the very water, and its total
consumption of its self, without leaving any faeces in the Vessels where it is
set on fire, sufficiently testify the purity and the subtlety of its parts. So
that we may safely say, that all the inventions of Chemistry are not able to
enhance the purity or the perfection which nature has given to Camphire; nor to
separate any gross part; and that the greatest kindness we can do it, is to
leave it in its own natural condition, and not to bestow upon it any
preparation, which will but destroy or alter its good qualities.

For if the distillations which Authors have proposed, be well examined, it
will be found, that after the inevitable dissipation of the greatest part of
the Camphire intended to be distilled, and after a considerable expense, as
well for the substances as for the Vessels and the fire which must be used,
that which shall be distilled, or if they so please, rectified, shall not come
near those perfections which the Camphire had before distillation. For which
reason I thought it needless to give any directions in it. It being enough for
me to tell those that desire an oil, or oily liquor from Camphire, that they
must dissolve it in oil of sweet Almonds, or in Spirit of Wine or Turpentine,
which may be done in a Matras perfectly well luted, placed in Balneo Mariae, or
in a Bath of Embers, over a very moderate fire. Nevertheless pure Camphire will
work more efficaciously then all these liquors.

Some make use of Aqua Fortis, or Spirit of Niter, to turn the Camphire into an
oily substance, which swims above the Spirits. But this preparation is not at
all to be regarded; for besides the violence of these corroding Spirits in
dissolving the Camphire, they convey a great quantity of their particles into
it; the acrimony whereof is too much to be suspected, especially when it is to
be given inwardly.

Camphire is very much esteemed in times of contagion, as also to resist ill
air, and the putrefaction of humors. It is very good against the vapors of
the Matrix, as well taken inwardly, as held to the nose, or dissolving it in
Clysters. The ancients believing it cold, commended it to extinguish the heat
of lust, and to hinder generation; which occasioned the Proverbial Verse,

Camphora per nases castrat odore mares. Camphire but only to the Nostrils held,
By scent alone the lustful Male does geld.
But because sense and reason manifestly convince us, that it is hot, we must
absolutely impute all the effects which it produces, to the subtlety and
penetration of its parts. The dose is from one grain to three or four, beaten
first, and dissolved as it were in a little Spirit of Wine or Oil of sweet
Almonds, then steeped in some proper liquor. It is also mingled in hysteric
Clysters, from three or four grains to ten or twelve. It may be put also about
a grain into hollow teeth, or else dissolved in Spirit of Wine for a Gargarism,
to ease the pain of the toothache.

CHAP. XLII. Of the Distillation of Turpentine.
I Will not undertake to set down here in particular, all the different methods
of distilling many sorts of Gums, in regard that the distillation of Rosin,
which is a liquid Gum, may suffice for all. Take, for example, two or three
pound of Turpentine, and having put them into a large glass Cornute, placed in
a Sand-bath, and having fitted a well luted Recipient to it, begin the
distillation with a moderate fire. So shall you presently draw forth an acid
Spirit accompanied with water, and an ethereal volatile inflammable Oil, very
clear, to which will succeed another of a pale yellow, and by and by another of
a perfect yellow, and lastly another which will be red. You may if you please
receive all these Oils apart, and put them up in several bottles well stopped.
But if you make use of a long bottle for a Recipient, without changing it till
the end of the distillation, you shall perceive all these Oils as it were
swiming one above another; of which the red at the bottom shall be surmounted
by the yellow, the yellow by the Lemon color, the Lemon color by the white,
and the white at length by the ethereal, provided your fire be rightly ordered.
These Oils have very near the same virtues, but they operate more or less,
according to the degree which they keep higher or lower in the Recipient, and
according as they are paler or deeper colored. The lowest degree, which the
deepest colored keep in distillation, being a certain sign of the weight of
their substance, and their inability to imitate the activity and penetration of
those that keep above.

You shall find in the lowest part of the Cornute the thickest part of the
Turpentine, which is that which some Authors call Colophonium, from whence you
may extract the very hindmost acid Spirit, increasing the fire, and at length a
dark colored Oil; but it will be better to let it alone, and to keep that
Colophonium, and to make use of it in Ointments and Emplaisters, and other
external remedies.

Some there are, that in the distilling of Turpentine, mingle water with it;
others cover it with fine Flax, to hinder its swelling, and to prevent it from
running into the Recipient through the beak of the Cornute. But there is no
need of being so cautious, provided your fire be well ordered, especially at
the beginning of the distillation.

The volatile Salt of Turpentine, which lies concealed in the acid part of the
Ethereal Spirit, and in the Oils which come forth first of all, contribute very
much to the virtues which are attributed to them, the principal whereof are to
open the passages of the Urine, to temper the heat thereof, to prevent the
breeding of the Stone, and to stop Cono^^hea's. It is also very much commended
in all diseases of the Breast; in those of the Stomach, Liver, and Spleen; as
also to dissolve inward Contusions, which come by falls, and to heal wounds and
internal Ulcers. Outwardly they are applied for the cure of Fistula's, Chops,
and Ulcers of the Lips, Nipples, and Fundament, as also of all sorts of wounds,
particularly of the Nerves, and to cleanse and heal Ulcers, as well old as new,
dissolve Contusions, assuage pains, and dissolve swellings. It is commended
also against deafness, by putting some drops into the Ears.

CHAP. XLIII. Of the Distillation of Mastich.
SOme there are that would persuade you to mingle with Mastich equal parts of
the powder of Flints, together with a little Salt, and the help of a Cornute,
with a gradual fire, to draw forth a white liquor, a yellow oil, and at last a
red oil; which they would have you afterward to rectify in a little Cornute,
and separate the dark colored oil, that will remain at the bottom after
rectification.

Others mingle with the Mastich Bole Armonaick powdered, and having made a
paste thereof with the Spirit of Wine, and then leaving it to macerate for
fifteen days, distill it through a Cornute with a naked fire; and having drawn
out a volatile Oil that will swim above the other liquor, and a heavy Oil fallen
to the bottom, rectify it again upon new Bole Armoniack and new Salt.

Some there are that after they have filled two thirds of a Cornute with
Mastich in powder, and poured upon it as much Spirit of Salt, as is sufficient
to moisten it well, distill it through a Cornute in a Bath of Sand, with a
gradual fire well governed; and first they draw forth a little Phlegm,
afterward a fair and clear Oil, mingled with the Spirit of Salt which shall be
distilled; after that a yellow one, and lastly a red Oil. They also keep every
one of these liquors apart, and rectify them afterward.

Some there are, that after they have drawn forth a tincture from the flowers
of white Mullein, and St. Johnworts, with Spirit of Turpentine, leave it to
digest fifteen days upon the Mastich, altogether as heavy as the tincture, and
having drawn forth that Spirit by the help of a Sand-fire, and cohobated the
same two or three times upon the Mastich, and at length changed the Recipient,
they draw forth a yellow Oil, and in the last place a red; and then having
calcined the mark or sediment, extract a Salt from thence, which they mingle
among the Oils.

Now you have the liberty to choose which of these distillations you like best,
or to invent any other. For my part I think the best way is, to follow the same
method for Mastich as I have set down for Turpentine. For as much as if you
govern your fire well, you shall have first a watery liquor, a little acid,
accompanied with some particles of volatile Salt; after that yellow Oil, and
lastly a red one, which will have no need of being rectified, and which without
all that trouble, and altering the qualities of the Mastich by the mixture of
strange substances, will contain the most essential part of the Gum, and which
will be most able to second the design of your distillation.

The distilled Oil of Mastich is very much commended in weakness of the
Stomach, and looseness of the Intestines; to heal and consolidate wounds and
Ulcers as well of the Lungs as also of the Breast, and other inward parts of
the body; to stop up the orifices of the Veins and Arteries, and to stay all
losses of blood. It is given in proper liquors from four or five, to twelve or
fifteen drops. It is also outwardly applied as well upon the Stomach as upon
the belly, to second internal remedies, as also in wounds of the Nerves, and
all the other parts, to consolidate and heal them; making use of it also by way
of injection, among vulnerary decoctions, when the wounds are very deep. It is
also made use of by way of unction to fortify the members, and in fractures
and dislocations of the bones.

Ordinary Rosin, Black Pitch, Olibanum, Gum Elemmi, Sandarach, Tacamahacca,
Sarcocolle, Euphorbium, and the like, may be distilled in the same manner as
Turpentine and Mastich.

CHAP. XLIV. Of the distillation of Benjamin.
COnsidering the Rossony substance of Benjamin, an Artist, would be apt to
regulate his distillation according to that of other Rossins; but its pleasing
scent, and the dilicacy and volatileness of its principal parts require
particular cautions. For if you be not very exact, you will rather cause a
destruction, then a legal preparation. They that would bring their business to
pass must proceed this way.

After you have put a pound of good Benjamin powdered, into a large Cornute of
Glass, the neck whereof must be of the longest and largest size, pour upon it
three pints of good Spirit of Wine, stirring them and incorporating them well
together: Then having fitted and luted to it a Vessel of Rencounter, keep the
Cornute for four and twenty hours, with the neck upright, upon a Bakers oven,
stirring the substances from time to time, to hasten the dissolution of the
Benjamin in the Spirit of Wine. After which, place the Cornute in the
Sand-bath, fitting to its beak, instead of a Vessel of Rencounter, a half Ball
luted, with a wet Vessel, and with a moderate fire distill first the Spirit of
Wine, after which the flowers of Benjamin will rise; but as soon as they
appear, set a new Recipient, well dried, in the room of the former, and lute it
slightly, that you may be able to draw out from time to time, the flowers that
shall fall into it, as also those which shall stop in the neck of the Cornute,
putting up those Flowers in a glass bottle well stopped, and then putting the
Recipient into its place again. But then lute it up very exactly, when you
shall perceive a thick liquor to distill from the Cornute, which will be the
first oil of Benjamin, which you shall distill with the same fire: which if you
continue, you shall have an acid liquor, and after that a yellow clear and
odoriferous oil, and then the last oil greasy and thick.

These are the substances that are to be drawn out of Benjamin by distillation.
Yet are they not many times desired altogether at one time. For sometimes it
may be enough to have the Flowers or the tincture: they that desire only the
Flowers, may sublimate them with little trouble, putting in two or three ounces
of Benjamin powdered, into a long pot of potters earth, placed in a Sand-bath,
and covered with a long Cornet of thick paper, the mouth whereof must be
proportionable to the circumference of the pot. For having tied and fastened
the bottom of the pot round about with pack-thread; the heat of a moderate
fire, which you must kindle under the Sand-bath, will cause the light flowers
of Benjamin to rise, and stick to the inside of the Cornute, white and slimy
like Snow, and in long Crystal pointed drops; the scent whereof will be as
sweet and delectable, as the substance subtle and penetrating, and which may be
truly called the true volatile sulphur'd Salt of Benjamin.

Neither is the preparation of the tincture of Benjamin so very difficult,
since you may find it in the dissolution of Benjamin made in the Spirit of
Wine, before distillation. For having poured out by inclination that
dissolution, and put it up in a glass bottle well stopped, you may call it the
true tincture of Benjamin.

It may be said, that this tincture contains all the good parts of the
Benjamin, which the Spirit of Wine has dissolved, and that the faeces that
remain at the bottom, are only some strange bodies which the Spirit of Wine
could not dissolve. We may be sure also that the Spirit of Wine which rises
first in the distillation of Benjamin, fails not to carry off some particles of
the volatile Salt of the same Benjamin, with which the sulphury part has a
particular congruity, as you may perceive by its good scent, and by the good
effects which it produces, being taken inwardly, from half a dram to two drams
in proper waters or decoctions, especially when you would provoke sweating; or
make use of it for a Cosmetick instead of the Tincture, for it cleanses,
scowres, and penetrates better then that. You may also dissolve in this Spirit,
the Flowers, and buttery substance of Benjamin, which is much of the same
nature with the Flowers, and draw from thence a tincture, more pure subtle, and
which will work in a less quantity then the simple tincture of Benjamin, or the
Spirit of Wine drawn out of it. There is no doubt also to be made, but that the
Flowers of Benjamin are the most essential part of it; and that the principal
virtues expected from them are, as well to subtillize bad humors, and to
expel them through the pores of the Skin, as also to cut, loos'n and expel by
the ordinary ways those which are thick and viscous, and particularly those of
the breast; giving these Flowers from three or four grains, to ten or twelve in
convenient liquors, or mixing it with Trochick Looches, or other pectorall
remedies. It is also mingled to good effect in odoriferous compositions. For
which purpose the yellow oil is principally made use of, which comes forth
after the acid part. As for the greasy thick oil, that comes last of all, it is
only fit to cleanse and consolidate old Ulcers. Nor would it be worth looking
after, but that it follows the other substances, with little expense.

Storax may be distilled in the same manner, as Benjamin.

CHAP. LXV. Of the distillation of Myrrh.
Myrrh being a rosiny Gum, the watery parts whereof counterballance the oily,
requires a method altogether particular for its distillation. Which that you
may the better effect, having made choice of and beaten very small a pound of
that Rosiny Gum, and put it into a large glass Cornute, pour upon it four pints
of good Aqua vitae, stirring them together at that instant, and from time to
time, during a maceration of twelve hours. After which having placed the
Cornute in a Sand-bath, and fitted and luted a half ball to it, begin your
distillation with a very soft fire at the beginning, increasing it by degrees,
and especially toward the end, the better to draw forth all the oily part of
the Myrrh, setting aside the Spirit that will ascend first in distillation, and
reluting afterward the half Ball, to receive the rest of the distillation.
When all is thus distilled, and the vessels are cold, having separated the
superfluous moisture of the Aqua Vitae, from the oily part of Myrrh, and
incorporated the latter with the same weight of Vitriol calcined to whiteness,
you shall rectify it into a little glass Cornute, in a Bath of Sand, over a
very moderate fire, and you shall have an oil less thick, and much more pure
than it was before; by reason that the vitriol retains the more thick and
earthy parts. But because the Vitriol fails not to impart some Acrimony to that
oil, and that it is not so pure as may be desired, mix it with its weight of
the bone of an Ox or Sheep calcined into powder, and four times as much
Fountain water, and having put them together into a glass Alembick all of a
piece, and having fitted and luted to its beak a little Recipient, in a
Sand-bath over a moderate fire, you shall draw forth a yellow clear oil, and
very proper for all its uses, which are chiefly to kill the worms, resist
venom, and the putrefaction of humors, to open obstructions of the Bowels,
and particularly those of the Matrix. It is given from two or three drops, to
seven or eight, incorporated with powdered Sugar, then dissolved in its proper
Liquors. It is also mingled in Pills, Opiates, and other Medicines.

There are some that think it enough to dissolve Myrrh in Aqua Vitae or in
Spirit of Wine, and to draw forth an extract of that juice, after they have
filtered it.

I have set down the preparation of oil of Myrrh by a mistake among the
Galenick oils.

CHAP. XLVI. Of the Distillation of Gum Ammoniack.
THe name of Ammoniack was given to this Gum from the temple of Ammon, where
the ancient Heathen went to consult the Oracle of Jupiter, as being the natural
place where this Gum grew. The watery and viscous substance whereof requires a
particular method, not much unlike to that of Myrrh,

According to the opinion of some, you may very well mix Bole Armoniack, Brick,
and powdered Flints with Gum Ammoniack, Galbanum Oponax and other watery Gums of
the same nature, before you put them into the Cornute to make distillation. But
though these Gums do easily swell in the Cornute, when the heat of the fire
presses them more then they can endure, by which means they may probably get
into the beak of the Cornute, and drop into the Recipient: nevertheless, they
may be distilled without any such mixture, or without any such fear of ill
success, provided you proportion the fire and vessels to the quality of their
substance.

They that have Furnaces and Vessels proper whereon to place a Cornute, and to
make distillation of the ingredients, by means of a hot air enclosed, may make
use thereof to good purpose upon this occasion. But because all men have not
these conveniences, the same thing may be done by other means, as in Balneo
Mariae mixed with Saw-dust, the Cinder-bath or Sand-Bath, provided you govern
your fire, and that your Cornute be big enough.

Put then a pound of Gum Ammoniack into a glass Cornute, large, deep, and fit
to contain eight or ten times as much of the same Gum. Take which of the baths
you please, and having placed the Cornute upon it, and fitted and luted a large
Recipient to its beak, begin the distillation with a moderate fire, till you
see the work of the distillation very far advanced; and that all the danger of
the swelling of the Gum be over, at which time you may by a little and little
increase the fire, and at length make a violent fire to make the last oil of
the Gum descend from the Cornute into the Recipient, concluding the
distillation when the Recipient is absolutely very clear. Then letting the
Vessels cool, and having unluted the Recipient, you shall find an acid Spirit
containing the volatile Salt of the Gum, mixed with much Phlegm together with a
thick stinking oil. Of all which substances you are to make a Rectification,
pouring them upon a pound of bones calcined into powder and put into a glass
Cuturbit, which is to be covered with a head well luted, and placed in a
Sand-bath over a very moderate fire. For by this means the more gross parts of
the Oil, and the more watery parts of the first Distillation will remain at the
bottom, while the pure and volatile substances rise up to the head, and drop
from thence into the Recipient. You may also make another Rectification upon
new bones calcined into powder, of the whole Distillation, and at length
separate the distilled volatile Oil from the spiritous part, wherein you will
not fail to meet with the volatile Salt of the Gum, provided the Vessels were
carefully luted in the first distillations, and both the Rectifications.

The Spirit of Gum Ammoniack is very proper to open obstructions of the Liver,
Spleen, and all the bowels; for which reason it is with success made use of in
dropsies, Icterical distempers and Cachexies; as also for stoppage of the
Urine. But particularly in diseases of the matrix which proceed from the
retention of the menstruums, and the obstruction of the Vessels. It is given,
after general remedies, in the morning fasting from five or six to fifteen or
twenty drops, in white wine or some other proper liquor continuing the use, as
occasion shall require. The oil is given for the same purposes, from two drops
to seven or eight, incorporated with powdered Sugar and then dissolved in some
proper Liquor. It is given in all sorts of Collicks, as well to be swallowed
down as in Clisters, wherein it may be mixed from eight or ten, to twenty or
thirty drops. It is good also to facilitate the birth, and by anointing the
nostrels to suppress the evaporations of the Matrix, for which purpose you may
use the oil which is not rectified.

CHAP. XLVII. Of Chemical Tinctures of Vegetals.
Chemistry gives the name of Tincture to the extraction or separation which is
made of the color of one or more mixed bodies, and the impression which it
makes in any liquor or proper menstruum. This extraction or separation of
color, contains with it a portion of the most pure substance of the mixed body,
which having quitted its own proper body, has dissolved and united it self to
the menstruum, and has imparted to it its color and its virtues. Tinctures of
Vegetals are very common in Galenick Pharmacy. But they are never prepared but
just when they are to be used. Or if you would keep them any time, fill them
into Bottles filled up with a little Oil, to prevent the air from getting in.
But the end of Chemical Pharmacy being to make preparations more pure and
durable, then those I have spoken of, makes use of menstruums less subject to
corruption, and makes choice of them in such sort, that they may have some
correspondence with the substance out of which you would draw the Tincture; and
that she may be able equally to preserve the good parts and qualities as well
of the menstruums as of the mixed bodies whence the tincture is to be drawn.
Nevertheless it sometimes suffices to draw out the Tincture of certain Herbs or
Flowers with their proper Waters distilled, adding some small quantity of the
Spirit of Sulphur or Vitriol, to assist the penetration of those waters. But
then you must dissolve a reasonable proportion of Sugar candy'd, or other very
fine Sugar, into these filtred tinctures, to preserve them for some time in
Bottles well stopped. But the Spirit of Wine is to be looked upon, not only as
the most usual menstruum, for the extraction of the Tincture of the most part
of Vegetals, and particularly of those whose moisture is not very much, but as
the most analogous and most proper to receive and cherish within it self, their
most pure and most essential parts; provided you take care, that nothing be
dissipated during maceration; and to keep these Tinctures in Bottles well
stopped.

For example, put what quantity you please of the cleans'd tops of Wormwood,
into a Matras or Cucurbit, with a straight neck; then pouring upon it good
Spirit of Wine, some three or four fingers above the Wormwood, cover the Matras
or the Cucurbit with a small Vessel of Rencounter exactly well luted; and
having let them macerate for seven or eight days over a Bakers Oven, or in some
place moderately hot, strain and press the ingredients, and separate the
greenish Tincture, containing in it the most pure and most essential parts of
the Wormwood; which may be filtered and kept in a double Glass Bottle well
stopped, to be given, as occasion serves, from one scruple to two drams, in
Wine or in any other liquor, for diseases of the Stomach, Liver, and Matrix.

The same method may be used to draw forth the Tinctures of several Woods,
Barks, Roots, Gums, Berries, and Aromatic Seeds. And also for those of
Saffron, and other Cordial and Cephalic Flowers, and certain Rinds of Fruits;
giving them in the same doses, and also very near for the same uses as the
Tincture of Wormwood, already spoken of.

In the same manner also are prepared several Cephalic, Cordial, Stomachical,
Antiscorbutick Tinctures, etc. composed of several parts of Vegetals, variously
dos'd; in regard that Chemistry begins several of its preparations by
Tinctures, as you shall find by the sequel of these pages.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of Elyxirs.
ELyxirs approach very near to the nature of Tinctures, from whence they borrow
the principal of their composition. The opinions of Authors are various
touching the Etymology of the word Elyxir. For some derive it from (...) and
(...), comparing these medicines to an extraction of Oil, which they look upon
as one of the most essential parts of mixed bodies. Others would have the word
to come from the Verb (...), by reason of the great benefit which is received
by Elyxirs. Others derive it from the Arabic word Alechsiro, which signifies
an artificial Extraction of a certain Essence. But not to stay too long upon
the word, I say, that Elyxirs are spiritous liquors, designed for internal
uses, and containing the most pure substances of choice mixed bodies, made use
of in their composition, and which is imparted to them by the means of infusion
and maceration. The Spirits drawn from Vegetals, or their spiritous waters, are
usually the ground of Elyxirs, and the menstruums made use of to dissolve and
retain the true essence of the medicaments, which are admitted into their
composition. Nevertheless the Spirit of Wine is the most convenient of all. For
which reason it is more made use of then any other menstruum; especially when
there is any occasion to dissolve and unite to the Elyxir, any oily or gummy
substances, particularly those of Aromaticks, which would remain with the
sediment after infusion, had they not met with some analogus liquor, proper to
unite with them. This hinders not, but that sometimes spiritous waters less
penetrating, may be mingled with this Spirit to take of its sharpness, when it
is charged with these substances, and to make the Elyxir fit to be taken
inwardly when it is to be given alone; sometime also some little Sugar or some
Syrrup may be added to it, to make it more pleasing to the taste. But there is
no necessity of taking away the strength of this Spirit, no more then of the
Elyxir, when you have no design to give it alone; but that you keep it to give
it in liquors proper to its use; and then the dose of these Elyxirs is but from
five or six drops to fifteen or twenty; whereas when the Spirits are weakened,
you may give it to one or two spoonfuls at a time, adding to it spiritous
waters, and sweetning them either with Sugar or Syrrups.

For Example, prepare an Elyxir Camphir'd, by digesting and dissolving half an
ounce of Camphire in four ounces of Spirit of Wine, either in Balneo Mariae, or
in a Bath of Ashes; over which they must be set in a little Matras, covered
with a Vessel of Rencounter perfectly well luted; to which dissolution is given
the name of Elyxir, of which not above twenty drops at most are to be taken at
a time, in Wine or some Cordial-water, to provoke sweat, fortify the heart,
resist the malignity and venomous quality of the air, to ease the Gout, and to
be mainly serviceable in all diseases of the brain. You may also put it into
hollow teeth, dipped in Cotton, to appease the toothache.

There is an Elyxir of Citron to be prepared after the following method. Put
into a Matras half a pound of Rind of a Citron, pared and shred very small; and
having poured upon it two pints of good Spirit of Wine, and half a pint of
clarified juice of Citron, cover the Matras with a small Vessel of Rencounter
carefully luted; and having kept it for four and twenty hours over a Bakers
Oven, and strained and gently squeezed the whole, mingle therewith the weight
of the distilled water of Vipergrass, and a pound and a half of fine powdered
Sugar, then having passed the whole through a sheet of Cap-paper, you may add
if you please, a dram of the tincture of Musk and Ambergreese, which will prove
a very delightful Cordial Elyxir, which may be taken from half a spoonful to
two whole spoonfuls, to comfort and strengthen and fortify all the noble parts.

In which preparation, I cannot but approve the opinion of Schroderus and
Rolfincius, concerning the juice of Citron, which they have put into their
Elyxir, to give it an acidity, as pleasing to the taste as proper to temper the
heat, and take off the sharpness of the Spirit of Wine; contrary to the opinion
of Frederick Hoffman, who in contradiction to the writings of Schoder upon this
occasion, whose Book he had undertaken to comment upon, and was wont to swear
to the truth of his Masters words; yet would take the juice of Citron quite
away from this Elyxir, designed for distempers of the heart, and to resist the
venom of the pestilence, without giving any reason for his so doing. But the
Doctor forgot that he made the juice of Citron the only Alexipharmacon against
the poison of the Viper, to exclude it so idly out of this Elyxir.

CHAP. XLIX. Of Elyxir Proprietatis.
THE reputation of this Elyxir is too great, and its effects too well known,
not to merit here a particular Chapter. All Authors attribute to Paracelsus the
invention of this medicine; but the imperfect knowledge which he has given of
it, and above all things his silence touching the menstruum which is to be made
use of* have very much perplexed those that have come after him, and have been
the occasion of the diversity of descriptions which we find up and down in so
many Authors. Nevertheless that which Crollius has set forth, has been the
best received. Though there may be great reason to disapprove the Spirit of
Sulphur, which he has put in to draw out the Tincture of the Myrrh, the Aloes,
and Saffron, since that Spirit is enough to burn the most pure substance of the
Drugs, and by that means to disappoint the Artist and Patient of all the good
effects which they expect from this Elyxir.

And therefore I see as little reason, that for the purposes aforesaid, the
liquors drawn from the dissolution of certain Salts of Vegetals or Minerals,
called by the name of Alkahest, should be more advantageously made use of;
because that Myrrh, Aloes, and Saffron, are not proof against the natural
acrimony of these Salts, which would destroy and consume their most pure and
most essential parts. And therefore my opinion is, that upon this occasion, as
in all other of the same nature, we must be careful to find out menstruums
which agree in similitude of substance, with the matters whose most essential
part you endeavor to separate. And for as much as Myrrh, Aloes, and Saffron,
are composed of watery parts mixed with Oily, there can be no faileur in their
extraction, if congruous menstruums be made use of, such as I have been wont to
use for this preparation.

Having put into a glass Cucurbit with a straight neck, equal parts of choice
Myrrh, Aloes, Succotrin, and pure Saffron, finely beaten, and having slightly
sprinkled them with some small quantity of Spirit of Sulphur, tempered and
qualified with equal parts of Spirit of Wine, pour upon them the distilled
water of Balm, about three fingers above the substances; then having well
stirred the matters, and covered the Cucurbit with a little Vessel of
Rencounter carefully luted, let them macerate for fifteen days over a bakers
Oven, stirring them from time to time, the better to dissolve the watery
substance of the drugs in the Liquor, that is to say, that which will dissolve
in the aqueous substance. Then having unluted the Vessels, poured out by
inclination, filtered and set apart the tinctured liquor that swims above the
powders, put in the room thereof about a third part more of Spirit of Wine then
you put before of Balm-water; and having carefully luted the Vessels, continued
maceration anew for two months, and stirred the ingredients from time to time
as before, filter the liquor also, wherein you shall find the strength and most
essential part of the drugs; upon which you may again pour new Spirit of Wine,
and reiterate maceration; but this last residence will not be worth the
trouble. Then mix this tincture with the first which was drawn with the
Balm-water, and having put them into a Cucurbit covered with its head well
luted, and placed in a Bath of Ashes, draw forth with a very moderate fire
about two thirds of the liquor, then letting the Vessels and the ingredients
cool, pour into a double glass Bottle that which remains in the Cucurbit, and
having stopped the Bottle, keep it for your use.

But to gratify the inventions of the most part of Authors, who will have the
Spirit of Sulphur to make up one part of the composition of this Elyxir; you
may pour upon a a certain quantity of this liquid concentered together, the
third or fourth part of its weight of Spirit of Sulphur, and let them macerate
together for two months over a Bakers over, in a Mattress covered with a vessel
of Rencounter exactly well luted. During which time the acid of the Spirit of
Sulphur, will mortify the most part of the bitterness of the Aloes and Myrrh,
and uniting it self with this concentered liquor, will bring the Elixer to
perfection, and make it proper for the uses for which Authors recommend it, and
particularly Crollius, who will have this Elixer to be the Balsom of the
Ancients, and to contain all the virtues of natural Balsom, necessary for the
preservation of the bodies, especially of old men; he commends it as a
wonderful remedy against all diseases of the Lungs, against contagious
distempers and pestilent Airs, to strengthen and assuage the pains of the
stomach and head, to cure vertigo's, strengthen the memory, break the stone in
the Reins, to be a preservative from the Gout and Palsy, to cure quartain
Agues, to preserve Youth, and lengthen out old age, to cure and consolidate
wounds and inward Ulcers; and in a word, by an occult quality to overcome all
diseases, as well hot as cold. The dose is from five or six to twelve or
fifteen drops in wine, or in any other proper liquor.

But for as much as this Elixir prepared with the Spirit of Sulphur, is not
proper for all sorts of persons, and particularly for those whose distempers
are to be imputed to the excess of Acids, which the Spirit of Sulphur may
increase; you may do well to keep one part of the concentered Tincture apart,
to mingle with it upon occasion, the third or fourth part of this weight of the
volatile Salt of Hartshorn well rectified, or some other Spirit of the same
nature, which may qualify the sharpness of the acids by uniting with them; and
divert the bad effects of the Sulphur, as I have seen practiced by judicious
Physicians, well skilled in the grounds of diseases.

CHAP. L. Of Extracts of Vegetables.
THe name of Extracts is given to the purest part of Vegetables, separated from
the grosser, and dissolved in some proper menstruum by the means of digestion;
and afterward reduced to a thick consistence by distillation, or by
evaporation of the moisture of the Menstruum. Generally Extracts are begun by
the Tincture of the substances; the Tincture is converted into an essence;
which is a consistence between a Tincture and an Extract; and at length the
Essence is converted into an Extract. Extracts may be also made of diverse
juices, by evaporating the superfluous moisture, particularly of the juices of
several fruits, berries and herbs. But more Extracts are prepared by pouring
the menstruums upon the parts of the Vegetals, whence you intend to draw them,
then by making use of their juice. Many times also strange liquors must be made
use of to extract and separate the more pure substance from several thick
juices, which carry the resemblance of an Extract, as Opium, Aloes, Scammony.
etc.

Some there are who have written against the preparation of Extracts, in regard
of the danger which they say there is of loosing the most essential part of the
matters. Which opinion may hold in reference to certain Aromaticks, the thin
and volatile parts whereof cannot endure the fire; and therefore dissipate in
the evaporation of the liquor; or else ascend in distillation, when your design
is to save the fixed parts. But all the parts of Vegetalls are not subject to
these dissipations; besides that many times there may be no occasion to look
after any but the fixed parts. Now for as much as the separation of the pure
parts from the impure is very necessary in all Extracts; that this cannot be
done, without dissolving them in some proper menstruum, and that the use of
several Extracts is as convenient for sick people, as fit to second the
intention of the Physicians, we should do them injustice not to let them have
their place among Chemical preparations.

Now the better to succeed in the preparation of Extracts, it requires a
diligent study to know the nature of the substances of the parts of Vegetalls
which are intended for extraction; that there may be a proper menstruum made
use of, which may have some analogy and correspondence with their pure parts;
and by dissolving them may unite them to it, and separate them from the grosser
parts. In reference to which I am not of their opinion, who rejecting upon this
occasion, the Spirit of Wine, make use only of the Spirit of dew, or distilled
rainwater for a Menstruum in all sorts of Extracts. Because it is impossible
for them to dissolve all sorts of substances, especially the Gummy; for which
purpose Chemistry can use nothing so proper as the Spirit of Wine. Not but that
Spirit of dew or distilled rainwater may be useful in other dissolutions of
pure parts, especially of several Flowers, and some herbs, whose principal
parts are watery.

These sorts of Menstruums may be made use of for the preparation of the
Extract of the Flowers of Saffron, Gillowflowers, little Centaury, Carduus,
Wormwood, and several Aromatic Gums, though Spirit of Wine is more proper in
all those extractions, making use of a very moderate fire, to recover the
Spirit, and shutting the Spirit up close, for fear of loosing any of the good
properties which it may have carried along with it; or to make use of, upon
occasion, instead of some preparation of the same nature.

CHAP. LI. Of the Extract of Opium.
Opium being a juice drained from the heads of Poppies cut when they begin to
grow ripe, and condensed by the beams of the Sun, in Greece where they grow in
great abundance, was by the Country called (...), or (...), for its excellency;
as being a juice very much to be valued, and which produces greater effects and
in less quantity, then any juice drawn from Vegetals. But the difficulty of
getting Opium drained of it self without any mixture, and the foulness of that
which is brought to us, which to say truly, is but a Meconium, or the juice of
Poppy thickn'd, have constrained the Chemists to find out ways to purify it. So
that when we come to the preparation of the Extract of Opium, there are three
different substances to be taken notice of it, wherein are concealed the five
that Opium has common with several other parts of Vegetals. The difference of
the two first, forces me to make use of two several Menstruums, and to
proportion each of the two to the substance which it is to dissolve.

Having cut very small and put into a Mattress, half a pound of the best Opium,
which is to be had, and poured upon it two pints of rain or river water,
stirred the ingredients, and stopped up the Mattress, keep it ten or twelve
hours in a Sand-bath, over a moderate fire, stirring or shaking it every foot.
Then increasing the fire of the Bath, to the end the Ingredients may boil a
while, pour out by inclination upon a filter of Cap-paper the Liquor that swims
uppermost; and having filtered it, set it aside. After which having poured out
two pints of more water upon the sediment, stopped up the Mattress, and repeated
the same shakings, maceration, ebullition and filtration of the liquor that
swims uppermost, and which will contain the rest of the watery Spiritous and
Salt part of the Opium; and mixed this liquor with the former; pour upon the
sediment in the same Mattress, two pints of good Spirit of Wine, which will
presently color it self, when it begins to dissolve the Gummy substance of the
Opium, which is consentaneous to it, and which could not be dissolved by the
water. Then having covered the Mattress with a little vessel of Rencounter
carefully luted, and having continued the aceration and stirring of the
Ingredient as before, but over a much slacker fire, filter the liquor, and put
it up as before. After that having poured upon the lees, a pint of new Spirit
of Wine, and having done in all things as before, you shall find the Gummy
substance of the Opium altogether dissolved in the Spirit of Wine, while the
terrestrial part of the Opium remains upon the Filter, or at the bottom of the
Mattress. And though it be impossible absolutely to despoil it of its other
substances, yet there will remain so little, that it may be well accounted a
Caput Mortuum.

Then pour the first and second Tinctures of Opium both together, into a glass
Cucurbit, and having placed it in a Sand-bath, and covered it with its head
perfectly well luted, and fitted a small recipient to its beak, luted in the
same manner, with a moderate fire draw forth the Spirit of Wine; which may
serve for new extractions of the Gummy parts of Opium, or else to assuage the
tooth ache. Then having unluted the head, and poured into a little Pipkin, well
glazed, all the Liquor which remained in the Cucurbit, evaporate by degrees the
superfluous moisture over the same Sand fire, and bring the whole mass to the
consistence of an Extract, which will contain all the pure parts which the
Opium had, which consist in a volatile Salt and Sulphury Spirit, in a part
gummy oil, half volatile, and in a little other Salt, half fixed by the
conjunction of some little Acid which the Opium contains; the whole being still
accompanied with some small quantity of Phlegm. This in my judgment is the
purest and best extraction of Opium that is yet invented. In the preparation
the use whereof I dare promise good success, by the innumerable trials which I
have made of it for a long time, and which I make every day.

Nor is it to be wondered at, that this long experience of mine did not move me
before to contradict, as now I do that torrefaction, which several Authors,
very famous men, have practiced, upon Opium, to consume the greatest part of
its Sulphur, which they believed to be dangerous, but which indeed is one of
the best and most effectual parts of the Opium; not considering that by that
torrefaction the greatest part of the volatile Salt would be consumed with the
Sulphur, and that by that means the other substances would loose the greatest
part of their activity. For though we may safely say, that the oil and Sulphury
substances resist the penetration of the Acids, nevertheless we are to believe
that the Acids naturally uniting themselves to all sorts of Salts, as well
fixed as volatile changes their nature and their action (...) fixing them, and
that while we employ these acids in the dissolution of Opium, we cannot but
expect effects very different from those which the Opium might produce, when it
has undergone no such like alteration.

The examination of the pure parts, which we separate from the Opium, in
drawing forth the Extract, gives us to understand that it would be a vain thing
to search for cold substances in Opium, or to attribute those powerful effects
to them which Opium is capable of, though given in a small quantity.
Considering that it is not the property of cold substances to work, like Opium,
by grains or half grains, nor to do that which cannot be rationally expected
from substances not absolutely hot. And though I know no modern Author so weak
in judgment, as to accuse Opium of coldness, nevertheless I will give you one
remarkable experiment which I made upon my self, about a year since, of which
this is the Relation.

Discoursing in my shop one Summer day about eight a clock in the morning with
a Physician of Provence, upon the nature and effects of Opium, and being
desirous to demonstrate to him that the sleepy quality, which had been till
that time attributed to Opium, was not such as it was imagined to be, I took a
good piece of Opium and cut in the middle before him, taking out of the middle
a little piece of the purest, weighing twelve grains good weight, I made a pill
of it, and swallowed it before him, notwithstanding, all his persuasions to the
contrary. After that I fell to my business in the shop, as I used to do, and as
if I had taken no such thing till dinner time, at what time I sat down, and
having eaten my ordinary meal, I found my self satisfied, and returned again to
my business in the shop till two a clock in the afternoon; and then going up to
my Chamber I laid my self down upon Chaires, intending to have gone to sleep:
but though I found no inclination at all to sleep; yet because I lay at ease, I
lay so till six or seven a clock in the evening. At which time, being called up
about business, I rose, but perceiving my self doz'd with the vapors of the
Opium, when I was got upon my feet, I laid down again upon the Chaires till
nine a Clock. At which time not having any stomach, I resolve'd to eat no
supper, the better to understand the extent of the effects of the Opium.
Thereupon I went to bed, and lay that night in a very pleasing repose, but that
which is most remarkable, I had no desire all this while to close my eyes; and
that I lay all the while awake, as if I had been up. True it is, that all the
time that I lay, as well in my bed, as upon the Chaires, I felt from time to
time an itching over every part of my body; which was a certain sign of the
Diaphoretick* faculty of the Opium; and which perhaps might contribute
something to keep me awake, though I felt no trouble at all therein. Rising the
next morning at my accustomed hour, I felt the vapors no more, but all the day
long I felt the same itching as before, though my stomach were very good. The
next might I slept as did before I took the Opium; not being disturbed by any
kind of itching; upon the morrow morning, which was the third day, my face was
observed to be swelled, without any redness, or any pain; however I went all
about the City where I had business, though the swelling did not fall before
noon.

I could never have spoken so confidently of the effects of Opium, had I not
tried it upon my self twice, taking once before the weight of six grains, and
this time twelve. For finding my self to be of a good constitution, and one
that was not troubled with any predominating humor, which might alter the
natural effects of the Opium, I do hence conclude that there ought to be more
credit given to what I protest to be really true, as to what I have tried upon
my self, then to experiments made upon six persons, whose different distempers
and constitutions, cannot but very much alter the effects of the Opium. Besides
that it is not usual to give it them into so great a dose, as to whom I never
give but from half a grain to one or two. And if you observe it, you shall
seldom find that they cause sick people to sleep to the least excess, how
fearful so ever we be of its sleepy quality.

The result of all the Reflections which I have made at several times upon my
experiment, especially upon those which I have made in the exhibition of Opium,
is, that the Diaphoretick quality which I sensibly perceived to be in it, is an
effect of its volatile Salt, which being united and concentered with its
Sulphur, and forcing it to follow and assist it is motions, drives toward the
pores of the skin the fluliginous and corroding humors, which break the sleep,
and cause pains. But though we cannot expect to see such visible effects of
Opium, given from one to two Grains, as if you give it in twelve, yet we may
judge of the nature of it, by what it does in a great dose.

As to the remarkable effects which it produces every day given but one grain
or half a grain at a time, especially when it is given for the ease of pains,
or to stay defluxions, we cannot rationally attribute them to any thing else
but to the volatile Salt and Sulphur, which the same Salt has united to its
self. There is also great reason to believe, that from the close union of this
salt with the sulphur, and their just proportion, there arises a certain secret
ferment, able to augment it self, by uniting to it the Homogeneous particles
which it meets with in the stomach, and to judge that the said ferment, by their
conjunction, produces those effects which it could not do without it.

As to what concerns the Narcotick Vapors which may arise from Opium, and
which must be attributed to its Sulphur, they cannot be very considerable in
regard we give so small a quantity; which we cannot imagine can be able to stop
up the passages of the Spirits, nor of the humors which distill down upon the
parts. But we are rather to believe, that the ease given to pains, and the
stopping of defluxions proceeds from the just proportion of the Salt and
Sulphur of Opium, and from the secret ferment which they contain; and that
being united with the homogeneus particles which they have met, and having
subdued and mortified those that were the cause of the pain, and particularly
the acids, they produce their great effects, though given in so small a
quantity; and that though this Salt and this Sulphur assisted by their natural
ferment, cannot expel the humors so far as they might, if given in'a larger,
dose, yet they may stop and prevent their effects, as we see every day. We must
believe also that this Salt and this Sulphur thus united, would not quit their
operation, had they been given in a greater dose, though we are always to
proportion it to the temper and condition of the Patient. And that so much the
rather because experience has taught me, that a person whom I have mentioned in
my treatise of Treacle, who had accustomed himself by degrees to take the
Extract of Opium, and to augment the dose to half a dram, and to take it three
times a week, was wont every twenty hours after he had taken it, duly to have
the benefit of nature, and to go nine or ten times to the stool; which is a
manifest effect of the force of the union of the volatile Salt with the
Sulphur, and of their natural ferment, which having united to its self and
finding it self fortified with the homogeneous Salt particles which it has met,
produces at length those effects, which might seem to be above its strength, by
means of those particles uniting to its self and fixing the acids. And all this
while there happ'ns no extraordinary sleep either from a greater or or lesser
dose, unless it be occasioned by any ill disposition of nature, as to
Lethergies; which causes the credulous to impute those bad effects to Opium, of
which it is altogether innocent.

CHAP. LII. Of Laudanum.
THE name of Laudanum is given to several preparations, or compositions, which
have Opium for their foundation, the use whereof is too common to make a
particular Chapter of them. The most part of the Ancients, and also some of the
Moderns, have put in practice the torrefaction of Opium, and make use of Acids
to draw forth out of it an Extract for the preparation of Laudanum. They have
also added several tinctures of Aromaticks, and some Cordial-powders, of
Magisteries, of precious Stones, distilled Oils, several Cordial or Cephalic
Extracts, certain volatile Salts, and diverse other preparations of Animals or
Minerals. But not to repeat what I have said in the foregoing Chapter against
the torrefaction of Opium, and use of powerful Acids, I think that the
preparation of Opium, which I have set down, is that which ought not to give
place to any Laudanum whatsoever; and that the plain preparation of Opium there
taught, is beyond all the artifices they can use to Laudanum; considering that
we may use whatever other remedies are convenient.

But to allow something to the name and laudable effects which we may expect
from Laudanum, I will here insert that description which to me seems the most
reasonable that I have met with in Authors, which I took out of the Epistle of
Monsieur Joel Langelot, a learned man, and Physician to the Duke of Holtsatia,
addressed to the Gentlemen of the German Society, imprinted at Hamburgh, in the
year 1672. There he directs you to put into a glass Cucurbit, low enough, a
pound of good Opium cut very small; and after you have poured upon it ten pints
of the juice ^^wly drawn from very ripe Quinces, and added thereto an ounce of
Sal Tartar well dried, to expose the Cucurbit to a soft heat for a day or two,
or till you perceive little bubbles appear above the Liquor, which is a sign
that the ingredients are ready to ferment. He directs you then to add four
ounces of powdr'd Sugar, and to make use of a moderate heat to advance
fermentation; by means whereof the Opium must rise and totally dissolve;
advising withal to keep at a distance from the vapors that will ascend. He
says also, that then the impure volatile and scummy part swimming at the top of
the liquor, the earthy part will stay at the bottom, and that the pure
transparent liquor, as red as a Ruby, will keep in the middle; that you must
separate it, filter it, and thicken it with a slack heat, to the consistency of
an Extract; that then you must dissolve this Extract in the Spirit of Wine; and
that having filtered it, and digested it for a months time, to rip'n it, and
bring to perfection, as he terms it, in that celestial fire, the crudities of
the Opium, you must thick'n the whole again to the consistency of an Extract,
of which he promises wonderful effects upon all occasions, where Laudanum is to
be used; giving at a time not above a quarter, or at most but half a grain.

This preparation of Laudanum deserves to be approved, because there is nothing
in it capable to vitiate the nature of the Opium. For besides that there is not
in the juice of ripe Quinces any thing of powerful acid, there is but as much
as needs to assist fermentation. And that which is there concealed, is not only
counterbalanc'd by the Sal Tartar, and successively by the Sugar, but also
wholly qualified by the volatile Salt of the Spirit of Wine, being added
thereto with discretion. As for the vapors that rise from the Opium during
fermentation, it is impossible to make them good, for besides their bad smell,
they are not to be endured no more then those of the Spirit of Wine, when it
^erments in the Vessel. As to the small dose of Laudanum, it must be imputed to
the union and close binding up of the parts of the Opium by fermentation* and
their last composition in reducing them to an Extract.

Neither in the one nor the other Pharmacy is there any remedy more proper for
so great a number of diseases, nor of which the use is of greater extent, then
that of Laudanum, or the Extract of Opium, which I have described in the
foregoing Chapter. For it procures rest, expelling the sharpness of the humors
that interrupt it, the motion whereof it stops. It fortifies Nature and the
parts, whereas other Narcoticks do the contrary. It corroborates all the
bowels, cherishes the natural heat, restores the retentive faculty being
debilitated, stops all losses of blood in men or women, as also excessive
menstruums, all sorts of Fluxes of the belly, and other thin and corroding
defluxions either upon the Eyes, the Teeth, the Ears, the Throat, the Lungs,
the Stomach, and all other external or internal parts. It asswages all pains of
the head that proceed from attenuated humors, taken inwardly or applied to the
Forehead and Temples. It dissipates the wind and noises of the Ears. It eases
the Toothache. It stops vomiting after evacuation, as also the violent
purgations and fermentations of humors. It gives ease to windy and choleric
Cholicks, and all sorts of griping pains of men or women, as well swallowed as
mixed in Clysters. It is a sovereign remedy in Dysenteries, as well to hinder
the fermentation of the humors, as to remove their acrimony, after necessary
purgations. It is made use of also with good success in all diseases of the
Reins and Bladder, to assuage the pains thereof, as of Gonorrhaea's, and to
strengthen the Spermatick Vessels. It asswages the pains of all sorts of Gouts
and Rheumatisms, those of Ulcers and burns, and in general all sorts of pains
that can happen in any part, to any person, of whatever age of sex, at any
time, or whatever the cause may be, especially after the use of general
remedies, without which the use of Laudanum would do but little good.

CHAP. LIII. Of the Extract of Aloes.
IN Shops the thick juice of the Plant of Aloes is taken for Aloes it self,
which is usually brought us out of Arabia or Egypt, dried and wrapped up in
skins, and of which we see three sorts. The least of which is called by the
name of Aloes Caballin, or Horse-Aloes; by reason of its foulness; for which
reason it is only used in medicines for Horses; whereas the middle Aloes being
a little more clean, and in color resembling the Liver, carries the name of
Heppatick, and the purest and best retains the name of Succotrin, or Socotrin,
as being gathered in great abundance in the Island of Socotra. This is the only
Aloes to be made choice of to make the Extract, and to be used upon all
occasions where Aloes is prescribed; the chief marks to know the goodness
whereof, are to be of a purple color and shining transparency, when it is
broken in pieces, and to be of a grateful scent.

In Aloes there are two principal substances, of which the one being watery and
salt, is easily dissolved in liquors conformable to its nature; whereas the
other, which is gummy, is never so properly steeped in any thing, as in the
Spirit of Wine. You may dissolve the first in fair water, like Opium; but
usually those liquors are made use of which are most proper to second its
virtues, or at least to fortify the stomach and bowels, during its operation;
such are the clarifi'd juices of pale Roses, Violets, Succory, Bugloss,
Burrage, Fumitory, etc. The method to be observed both in the one and the other
Extraction, is so like to that which I have directed for that of Opium, that it
would be superfluous to give new directions. I will only say this, that the two
most common Extracts of Aloes, which are prepared in Shops, are made the one
with the juice of pale or red Roses, the other with Violets, under the names of
Aloes Rosatum, and Aloes Violatum, in both which you are at length equally
obliged to make use of Spirit of Wine, if you intend to put into the Extract
the gummy part of the Aloes, though some are contented with the watery and salt
part, reserving the gummy for vulnerary Balsoms, which is the most advantageous
use that can be made of that part.

The two Extracts of Aloes, which I have mentioned, are very near the same in
reference to their virtues and uses. But that which is made with the juice of
Roses is somewhat more purgative then that which is made with the juice of
Violets. And here I will take occasion to make the composition of Pilula
Angelicae, which the Apothecaries of Frankfort have sold for a long time under
the name of Frankfort Pills; and keep as a great secret, for fear others should
make advantage of them.

Take for Example a pound of good Aloes powdered, and having dissolved in
Balneo Mariae, or in a Bath of Ashes or Sand, the watery part in juice of
Violets, newly pressed forth; and the gummy in the Spirit of Wine, and filtered
and mixed the two dissolutious into a glazed earthen Pipkin, evaporate the
superfluous humidity over a very soft fire, till it become as thick as Honey;
then adding the double of its weight of new juice of Violets, evaporate the
moisture with the same heat, till the mass be so thick that you may make it
into Pills, which will operate the same effects, as those whose reputation is
so great, under the name of Frankfort* Pills; whose chiefest virtue consists in
the qualification which the juice of Violets gives to the acrimony of the
Aloes; which is the reason that most Authors forbid the use of it to persons of
either Sex, who are subject to the Haimorrhoids, spitting blood, bleeding at
nose, or any other Flux of Blood whatsoever, or to those who are troubled with
ulcer'd lungs, or whose lungs are wasted with hectic Fevers; as also to women
with child, for fear of opening the Vessels; and other accidents which the
Aloes might produce. Whereas, setting aside these precautions, they recommend
the Extract of Aloes for the preservation of health, to cleanse the stomach of
corrupt humors, which lie in the Tunicles, to open obstructions of the Liver,
Spleen, and all the Bowels, expelling the filth thereof at the same time, and
fortifying their parts.

Some, besides the juice of Violets add to their Aloes the juices of Roses,
Fumitory, Burrage, and Bugloss. Others make an augmentation of the juices of
Carduus, Cammomel, Germander, and Speedwell; imagining that those juices were
some part of the ingredients of the Frankfort Composition. But though the most
part of these juices may be made use of in diseases of the stomach, spleen, and
liver; besides the unnecessary addition they would make to the weight and mass
of those Pills, they could not all together, so far nor so effectually qualify
the acrimony of the Aloes as the juice of Violets, while they changed the true
receipt of the Pills.

These Pills are usually made up very small, not to weigh above half a grain
apiece. They are taken in a Wafer or roasted Apple, or in some sweet-meat, from
five or six to fifteen or twenty grains, just going to dinner, or rather to
supper; for in regard they do not work till ten or twelve hours after they are
taken, the Patient has time enough between to sleep.

CHAP. LIVE. Of the Extract of Rhubarb and Senna.
THE greatest part of the purest substance of Rhubarb, being watery and salt, as
also that of Senna, watery menstruums must be made use of for their extraction.
But after you have extracted that substance, you must make use of the Spirit of
Wine to dissolve the gummy substance which remains in the sediment. To which
purpose having bruised or cut very small a pound of good Rhubarb, and put it
into a glass Cucurbit, pour upon it four pints of the distilled water of
Succory or Endive; then having placed the Cucurbit in a Bath of Sand, and kept
a very moderate fire under the Bath for ten or twelve hours, strain and squeeze
out the tincture forcibly. Then returning the sediment into the Cucurbit, and
having poured upon it two pints of new Succory-water, renew the maceration in
the same Bath, and with the same heat for six hours; then having strained and
pressed out the substances, and returned the sediment again into the Cucurbit,
pour upon it a pint of good Spirit of Wine; and having covered it with a Vessel
of Rencounter carefully luted, put it into the same Bath, and renewed
maceration for six hours, strain the whole and press it out very hard. Then
having mixed this Tincture with the former, and passed the whole mixture
through a sheet of Cap-paper, pour the filtered liquor into a glazed Pipkin,
and evaporate the superfluous moisture over a very gentle fire, which must be
continued till the principal substance of the Rhubarb remains at the bottom of
the Pipkin about as thick as the consistence of an Extract. And to make
advantage of all the good parts of the Rhubarb, having dried the sediment and
reduced it to ashes, you may draw forth a small quantity of fixed Salt, to
incorporate with the Extract, which you must put up in a close pot well stopped,
to use upon occasion, at which time you may mix with it a drop or two of oil of
Camomile or Cloves.

There is no necessity of cutting or bruising the leaves of Senna to make the
Extract, it being sufficient to cleanse them well before you use them,
observing moreover the same method as for the Extract of Rhubarb.

The Extract of Rhubarb is one of the most gentle and wholesome Purgatives that
are. For by emptying the stomach and bowels of ill humors without any
violence, it fortifies all the parts which they possessed, and resists the
malignity of the same humors. It goes for a specific purger of choler,
especially among those who think there are medicines that purge by Election:
though there be no medicament able to separate them the one from the other,
when they are mingled together, and to purge out one alone by its self, unless
the rest that are mixed with it issue forth at the same time. This Extract is
chiefly prescribed in Diarrhea^s, Lienteries, Disenteries, Icterical
distempers, Cachexites, and in other diseases of the stomach, liver and spleen,
as also in tertian and other Agues proceeding from choler, and to kill worms:
the dose is from half a Scruple to half a dram, in Bolus or in Pills.

The Extract of Senna is chiefly to purge melancholy humors; though that
hinders not but that it may purge choleric humors, or any ill humors
gathered together in the stomach and bowels. The dose is the same, as for the
Extract of Rhubarb.

CHAP. LV. Of the Extract of Coloquintida.
COloquintida is a kind of Gourd, about the bingess and shape of an Orange;
light and white when the rind is taken off, and of an extraordinary bitter
taste. It contains two principal substances, the one a watery Salt, and the other
Gummy. Which last is here more abundant then in Rhubarb. So that some Authors
make use of nothing but the Spirit of Wine for its extraction; and among the
rest Martin Rulandus, who making frequent use of the tincture of Coloquintida,
drew it forth with the Spirit of Wine, and called it the Golden Spirit of Life.
But because it is requisite that the Extract should contain an equal proportion
of both the substances, the best way will be to proceed in this manner.

Having cleans'd the Coloquintida from all its grains, and cut the Pulp very
small, put a pound thereof into an indifferent large Cucurbit; and having
placed it upon a Bath of Sand, and poured upon the Coloquintida six pints of
good new white wind* covered the Cucurbit with its head, and well luted it, and
fitted a Recipient to its Beak, kindle a fire under the Bath, which you must
keep very slack for ten or twelve hours. Then having unluted the vessels,
strained and forcibly squeezed out the infusion, and set it apart, return the
sediment into the Cucurbit, and pour upon it a pint of good Spirit of Wine, and
all the Wine which was made use of in the former tincture, and which was
distilled into the Recipient. Then covering the Cucurbit with a vessel of
Rencounter perfectly well luted, and having macerated the whole for twelve
hours in a Bath like the former, but with a little more heat, strain and press
forth the tincture with a good strength, and having mixed it with the former,
and passed both through a Sheet of Cap-paper, put it again into a Cucurbit, and
having covered it with a head carefully luted, and fitted a Recipient and well
luted it to the beak, draw back again in a Sand-bath with a moderate fire the
Spirit of Wine, which will serve another time for the like Tinctures: then
taking off and unluting the vessels, pour all the liquor that remained in the
Cucurbit into a glazed Pipkin, and evaporate the superfluous moisture by
degrees in a Sand-bath, with a moderate heat, till it have acquired the
consistence of a Rob: then letting it cool, shut it up close in a bottle, to
mix it upon occasion with other purgative Extracts, at the end of their
evaporation, or for other uses. You may also continue evaporation, and reduce
this Rob to a real Extract of Coloquintida.

Some in the preparation of this Extract make use of Troquisks of Alhandal,
which are made of the pulp of Coloquintida powdered, and Muscolages of Gum
Tragacanth, intending thereby to qualify the sharpness and the violent
operation of the Coloquintida, as to thick'n and multiply the Extract which is
not over abounding of it self; which is not amiss for them that so intend it.

The principal virtue of the Extract of Coloquintida, is to expel the
serosities of the remote parts of the body. For which purpose it is very proper
for the cure of Hydropicks, where gentler medicines will not prevail. It is
also commended in diseases of the joints, and in Rhumatismes, and against the
Gout, mixing it with other Extracts, especially with that of Rhubarb to
quallify its activity, and fortify the parts at the same time. It is given
alone in Pills, from two or three grains to eight or ten, or mixed with other
Extracts, and then the dose is proportioned with respect to the quality of the
rest.

CHAP. LVI. Of the Extract of Tithymal.
I Will not in this preparation, nor any where else, imitate the Ancients in
the infusion which they make of the root of Tithymal, for fear of carrying off
by that powerful acid, that which is chiefly sought for in this Extract, which
is to purge serosities, and particularly Hydropick waters; believing that this
preparation may be better made, without making use of any such acid, if this
method be observed.

Having gathered in the month of May, in fair weather, what quantity you please
of the whole plant of the lesser Essula or Spurge, wash it well, then bruise it
in a Marble Mortar with a wood'n Pestle, and fill about two thirds of a glass
Cucurbit, then pouring upon it good new white wind, till it swim above four
good fingers breadth above the herbs, cover it with a vessel of Rencounter well
luted; then having kept it for four and twenty hours upon a Bath of Sand, over
a very moderate fire, strain and press out the infusion, and keep it apart,
then return the sediment into the Cucurbit, and having poured upon it good
Spirit of wine till it surmount the ingredient only one good fingers breadth,
cover the Cucurbit again with a vessel of Rencounter, and having well luted the
jointures, keep it five or six hours in the same Bath, then having again
strained and pressed out the last infusion, and having mingled the liquor with
the former, pass them through a sheet of Cap-paper; then put them into a clean
Cucurbit, placed in a Sand-bath, having covered it with its head, and well
luted the jointures, as also those of the Recipient fitted to the beak, and
recover the Spirit of wine with a moderate fire; Then pouring out the remainder
into a glazed Pipkin, placed in the same Bath, gently evaporate the superfluous
moisture, till that which remains do become as thick as an extract. Then
letting it cool, aromatize it with some few drops of oil of Anniseseed, Cloves
or Cinnamon, and keep it till occasion.

The Extract of Spurge is a powerful Hydragogue or drawer forth of water; and
therefore is made use of with success in dropsies, from half a scruple to half
a dram, in Bolus or Pills, repeating the use, and increasing the dose according
to occasion.

You may prepare several other Extracts proper to purge waters, and among the
rest those of the Roots of Orrice, Briony, and Elder; drawing forth the juice,
depurating the juices, and causing them to evaporate. softly in a glazed
pipkin, to the thickness of Extracts: or by macerating these roots, well
bruised in white wind, for ten or twelve hours, straining and pressing out the
infusion, and filtring and evaporating the liquor to a necessary consistence.
The dose and use of these Extracts are much the same with those of the Root of
Spurge.

There is also a water purging Extract to be prepared more violent then these,
with the clarified juice of the fruit of the wild Coucumber, evaporated over a
small fire, in a glazed earthen pipkin, to the consistence of an Extract. Which
Extract is called Elaterium, the dose whereof is not above two, three or four
grains at most. I omit those Extracts which may be drawn from the leaves or
seeds of Sea Bindweed, Spurge Laurel, Dwarf Bay, Hops and Elder: the
preparation whereof would be easy enough, were they much in use.

You may also dry and burn the sediment of these Extracts to draw forth a Salt
out of them, and to mix with them, when they are perfectly prepared.

CHAP. LVII. Of the Extract Rosin, or Magistery of Scammony.
ALthough in distilling Scammony through a Cornute, you may draw fine
substances out of it, which are usually extracted out of several other parts of
Vegetals, yet we seldom put our selves to the trouble, in regard the medicines
would not be extraordinary. And therefore it is sufficient to make use of the
Rosiny part, which is useful upon many occasions, being once separated from the
Terrestrial part. For the accomplishing whereof, after you have made choice of
pure Scammony light and very Rosiny, beat it small, and put a pound thereof
into a glass Cucurbit, and pour upon it good Spirit of Wine, four fingers
breadth above the Scammony, cover the Cucurbit with a vessel of Rencounter, and
having carefully luted the jointures, and well shak'n the matters to facilitate
the penetration of the wine, place the Cucurbit in a Sand-Bath, never so little
heated, and keep it there for twenty four hours, every foot stirring or shaking
the whole. Then having poured out by inclination, and set apart the colored
and clear Tincture, which swims at the top of that which is not dissolved, pour
in as much new Spirit of wine as at the first time, and stopping the Cucurbit
again with its vessel of Rencounter, renew the digestion again in the same Bath
for the same time, stirring it as before, which will suffice for the entire
dissolution of the Rosiny part of the Scammony; then pass this Tincture through
Cap-paper, and having made the Cucurbit very clean, pour it together with the
first clear Tincture into the Cucurbit, which after you have covered with its
head well luted on, and fitted and luted a Recipient to the beak, you must
place in a Sand-Bath, and with a moderate fire draw back about two thirds of
the Spirit of Wine. After which having unluted the vessels, you shall find at
the bottom of the Cucurbit the Rosiny part of the Scammony of a color
inclining to purple, transparent, and as thick as well boiled honey; which may
be called the Extract of Scammony; above which you shall see the more watery
part of the Spirit of wine, which must be separated by inclination; then gently
warming the Cucurbit, pour out the Rosin into an Earthen glazed Pipkin, and
having covered it with a paper, expose it to the Sun, or set it over a Bakers
oven to dry, so that you may powder it, when you come to use it.

You may have a Magisterick of Scammony by emptying into a glazed Earthen
Pipkin, some part of the Tincture of Scammony, and pouring upon it eight or ten
times the weight of cool fair water. For by that means the Spirit of wine which
dissolved the Rosiny part of the Scammony, being weakn'd by the water, is
constrained to forsake the same substance; whence it comes to pass that the
Liquor looks like milk, and that the Rosiny substance precipitates to the
bottom, being separated from the liquor; the rest swimming above the liquor, or
adhering to the sides of the Tincture, whence it may be separated, after you
have poured out the liquor by Inclination.

The chief virtue of Rosin of Scammony is to purge choleric and phlegmatic
humors. The dose is from five or six to twelve or fifteen grains, mingled in
some conserve, like, a bolus, or else in proper liquors. But you must be very
careful to grind it very small, and to mix with it a fourth part of Almonds,
or of some cold seed well cleans'd to devide the parts of the Rosin, and to
prevent it from sticking to the Tunicles of the stomach, when it swims above
the liquor which may cause griping pains, and over-purgation.

CHAP. LVIII. Of the Extract Rosin, or Magistery of Jallap.
JAllap consisting of more earthy and watery salt parts, and less Rosiny, then
Scammony, you will do well to employ two distinct Menstruums to dissolve and
extract the two distinct substances; contrary to the judgment of most part of
Authors, who looking after the Rosony substance of the Jallap, and neglecting
the rest, make use of only Spirit of Wine for its Extraction. But that you may
not loose any of the good parts of the Jallap; after you have beat a pound very
small, and put it into a glass Cucurbit, pour upon it four pints of white wind,
and having blended them well together, and covered the Cucurbit with a vessel
of Rencounter well luted, set it four and twenty hours in a Sand-bath over a
very gentle fire, stirring the substances every foot, without unluting the
vessels, unless at the end. At what time having taken off the vessel of
Rencounter, put a head in its place, and fitted and luted a Recipient to the
beak of the head, increase a little the fire of the Bath, to cause the
Spiritous part to distill, which you must keep. Then having unluted the
vessels, and strained and squees'd out, filtered and set aside the liquor,
return the sediment into the Cucurbit, and pour upon it a pint of good Spirit
of wine, together with that which was before distilled and set aside. After
which having carefully shaken the Ingredients, and covered the Cucurbit with a
vessel of Rencounter, keep it four and twenty hours over a soft fire in a
Sand-bath, then unluting the vessel of Rencounter, pour forth by inclination
the clean clear Tincture that swims upon the sediment; upon which, after that,
pour another pint of good Spirit of wine; cover the Cucurbit with its vessel of
Rencounter, and set it in the same Bath, and renew Maceration for the same
time. Then having filtered and mixed the last Tincture with the former, you may
if you please mingle both with the first of all, and having poured them into a
glazed earthen Pipkin, evaporate the superfluous moisture over a very gentle
heat, till the settlement be thick enough, and that it may be properly called,
as it is a true Extract of Jallap. To which you may very properly add the fixed
Salt, extracted from the sediment dried and reduced to ashes.

But if you would have the Rosin or Magistery of Jallap apart, you must look
for it only in the two last tinctures, drawn forth with the Spirit of wine,
proceeding as I have directed for the Magistry of Scammony.

The virtues and dose of the Rosin and Magistery of Jallap are much the same
with those of the Rosin and Magistery of Scammony. The Extract also tends to
the same end. But you may increase the dose to half a dram, as well by reason
of its moisture, as of the other parts of the Jalap, which increase the weight
and quantity of the Rosin.

The same method is to be observed in preparing the Extracts of Rosins, and
Magesteries of Agarick, Mechoacan, Turbith, Hermodactiles, Ellebore, and such
other Roots, the parts whereof resemble those of Jallap.

CHAP. LIX. Of the Panchymagogue Extract.
THere is no Chemical Composition more varied in Authors then this Extract, as
well in reference to the simple Ingredients, as to their dose and proportion.
But setting all disputes aside, and leaving those Extracts to themselves, I
will here produce one, which as to the doses, and preparation of the
ingredients, seems to me very reasonable.

Take two ounces of the Extract of Aloes, and as much of the Extract of
Rhubarb, one ounce of the Extract of Senna, much of each of those of Scammony,
Jalop, Agarick, and Coloquintida, and half an ounce of that of black Hellebore.
Prepare each of these Extracts as I have directed in the foregoing Chapters;
but let them be no thicker then Honey. Having put together and well mingled
these Extracts, in a little glazed earthen Pipkin, placed in a Sand-bath over a
very moderate fire, evaporate by degrees the overplus of the superfluous
moisture, stirring them gently from time to time with a Spatula, till they are
come altogether of a good consistency of an Extract. At which time having taken
off the Pipkin from the Bath, and let the Extract stand till it be almost cold,
incorporate into it four drops of the distilled Oil of Cloves, and as much of
each of the Oils of Fennel, Lavender, and Marjoram. The Extract will then be
perfect, and fit to be put up close in a Galley-pot, or some other Vessel, or
oil'd skin, to use upon occasion.

Proceeding according to this method, there is no fear of the separation of the
Rosiny substances, from the concentered watery salt ones; which might happen to
this Extract, if the Rosins were not powdered and mixed with some Almonds, or
some cold Seeds in grinding them, or if they were not dissolved anew in Spirit
of Wine. For experience and reason plainly show us, that these different
substances unite exactly together, and remain united so long as the Extract
keeps its usual consistency; and that the Rosiny cannot be separated from the
watery substances, but by dissolving the latter in some watery liquor, which is
not able to dissolve the Rosiny. And though it were impossible to mix these
Rosins in a watery and salt Extract, thick and cold, without putting them in, in
powder before, when they are dry, nor to reduce them well into powder without
mixing some seed or some oily matter apt to divide the parts; yet it is
certain, that being once well mingled with the Extract, they cannot separate of
themselves. Neither in this preparation is the dissipation of the principal
parts of Aromaticks to be feared, in regard that instead of an Extract, which
some Authors would have drawn to mix in this, we make use of their distilled
Oils, which contain in a small room their principal virtues; and because these
Oils cannot dissipate themselves, as being mixed when the Extract is almost
cold.

Now whereas Zwelfer pretends to draw forth with the Spirit of Wine, the
Extracts of parts of Plants, whose substance contains a mixture of watery, salt,
and Rosiny; I persist in my first opinion, which is, that the former ought to
be extracted in watery liquors, before we make use of Spirit of Wine for the
extraction of the latter; considering that that Spirit being well rectified, as
it ought to be, has not force enough to extract the first. I wonder also, that
a person who having been an Apothecary, and one that in his writings brings in
question the sufficiency of his Brethren, did not foresee, that he exposed
himself to their censure, while he only pretended to make use of the Spirit of
Wine for the extraction of these mixed substances; and more, by affirming, that
the volatile Salts easily unite themselves to the Spirit of Wine, since the
trials that Apothecaries make thereof every day, make it manifest, that these
Salts do not dissolve in Spirit of Wine, as being all inflammable, and that the
same Spirit dissolving the oily particles which are mixed among the same
volatile Salts, preserves in its own body the same Salts without dissolution,
and that it hinders also dissipation by swimming above them, provided the
bottle be well stopped. Besides that he himself confesses, that the Spirit of
Wine cannot dissolve the fixed Salts, which are with the volatile, which is the
chiefest substance which the watery part of these parts of Plants contains.

This Extract is called by the name of Panchymagogue, or universal purger of
humors, because it purges in general all bad humors out of the body. It is
given in Pills, like other Extracts, from half scruple to half a dram, or two
scruples.

CHAP. LX. Of Dregs.
WE may put Dregs among Chemical preparations of the worst invention, which may
be better let alone, then be prepared with wast of time; especially following
the opinion of those who have written first thereof. The name of dregs is
rightly given to the filth, that separates and falls to the bottom of several
liqours. But by the name of dregs we are here to understand only a white mealy
substance, fallen down and gathered together at the bottom of the juice, or
liquor of certain Roots, as of Briony, Aron or Wake-Robin, Iris. etc. This
white and mealy substance, being separated by Inclination from the liquor; is
dried in the shade or in the Sun; and though I advise no person to make these
preparations, I will not omit to set down the method of making them.

Take the Roots of Briony, Orrice or any other root well grown and newly
gathered, and having well washed and cleans'd them from their outward rind,
rasp them very small, and having pres'd out the juice through a very strong
cloth, let it stand two or three days in an earthen Pipkin. Then by inclination
pour out the clear liquor, that swims above the white substance, which is
become Dregs. This is afterward to be dried in the Sun, or in the shade at
leisure, or if you are in have, in a Bath of Sand, with a very moderate heat.
By this means you have the Dregs of the root made use of. Which cannot be other
then a substance void of virtue being despoiled of the virtue of the juice,
which is separated rom it: and which cannot produce the effect of Extracts
drawn from the juice of those Roots; I say moreover, that the powder of these
Roots cut in little round pieces, and dried with the juice, is much better then
the dregs any way prepared.

The Extract drawn from the juice of the Root of Bistort or snake weed is
called particularly by the name of Chersa or Ghersa. Of which they do not only
separate the liquor that swims above the feces, but also dry it with the feces,
dividing it into little vessels, and exposing it to the Sun, till it is fit to
be powdered.

CHAP. LXI. Of the Salts of Vegetals.
THE preparation of some Salts of Vegetals which I have occasionally set down,
when discoursing of the distillation of some sorts of Plants, not being enough
to give all the might necessary for such a subject, so considerable and of so
large an Extent, I thought it convenient here to make some new Reflections, and
at the same time to communicate my method to public view; not only in
reference to preparations that pass for common, but also those which having
been known but only to few people, have been concealed or counterfeited by
those that had the true knowledge thereof.

Formerly it was not believed that the Salts of Vegetals were volatile, because
that that which is drawn from them by usual means, does not exhale with the
fire, but rather endures Fusion, then to quit the bottom of the vessel where it
is put. However they would not have fallen into such an error, had they well
understood the nature of Salts, especially of those which are drawn from
Vegetals. For we must believe, that there are two sorts of them, the one of an
acid, the other of a salt taste; that each of these Salts are naturally
volatile, as well while they are mixed together in the mixed body, and as it
were in confusion among the other principles, as when Chemistry has separated
them by Art one from another. But in regard of their great inclination to unite
together, they do it so soon as they are separated from the other principles;
and uniting as soon as they can that small quantity of earthiness which serves
to strengthen their union, they compose together a fixed Salt which most part
of the ancients, and several of the moderns believe to be of it self, and
naturally such. Not considering that the quality of fixed did not happen either
to the one or the other of these Salts, but by the union of the volatile with
the acid, and of both together with some particles of earth, which served them
as a foundation.

I believe moreover, though it cannot be said, that there is any Plant which
has not its proper Salt, yet there is no possibility to distinguish it, or to
qualify it to be such, until it be separated from the other substances, and
that ustion and incineration of the substances being the most proper ways to
bring it to pass, the sulphury part flies away by that means, as also the
watery, which tempering and weakening the acid Salt, hindered its strict union
with the volatile Salt. I say moreover, that the acid and volatile Salts
finding themselves thus disengaged from their principal oppression, and
assisted by the acid particles of the fire, which have much conformity with
them, unite by degrees, but very strongly and strictly one to the other; that
the small quantity of earth which is mixed among them, promotes their union, so
far it is from hindering it; and that the Salt which proceeds from this union,
is properly a body composed of acid and volatile Salt, and some particles of
earth which passed through the filter with them after they were dissolved in
Water.

I also say, that in the ustion and incineration of the Plants, there is a
colliquation or rather melting of the substances, and particularly of the
Salts, without which they could not act, nor re-act as they do one upon
another, to complete their intimate union, or make such a composition as we
find. The qualities whereof appear to us very different from those which are
observed to be in the same Salts when they are separated. That the generation,
consistence, and form of all Vegetals depends upon these two Salts; and though
that they may severally subsist the one without the other, and be of themselves
incorruptible, when they are so put up that the air cannot corrupt them; yet
they much better maintain and uphold one the other, when they are entirely
united; and that we may say of them, that they are like the two Poles of
Nature; the foundation, cement, and sustainment of all animated or inanimate
beings; and that there is no generation or production without them.

CHAP. LXII. Of the Salt of Carduus Benedictus.
THE ustion and incineration of the parts of Plants, is not always necessary
for the union of the acid with the volatile Salt, to compose a fixed Salt, in
regard we find by experience, that without their help we can draw from Carduus
Benedictus, Wormwood, Sorrel, Centaury, and many other Plants, a Salt composed
of acid and Alkali, much resembling the nature of fixed Salts; though not so
able to resist the fire, as that which you may draw from the same Plants by
reducing them to Cinders. And though it is not to be exposed to the fire
without some remarkable diminution of its quantity, and chiefly of the watery
part, which was incorporated with it, and without some dissipation of the acid,
which was not entirely united with the volatile, or had surmounted it in
quantity; nevertheless, this Salt not having suffered the violence of the fire,
ordinarily made use of for the ustion and incineration of these Plants, and
containing in it self their most essential part, is much better for physic
then that which has suffered incineration, in regard it still contains one good
part of the Sulphury substance of the same plant, whence it was drawn, and that
it has in part the favor and scent of it, so long as the watery part of the
plant which is incorporated with it, does not fail to abate it is acrimony.
These Salts are called Essential Salts, because they contain the most Essential
parts of the plant. They are generally of a dark color, unless calcined in a
Crucible, or that you dissolve, filter and coagulate them again; though it be
much better to keep and make use of them in their dark color, then to
dissipate their Sulphury part by Calcination, and withal the scent and taste
of the plant which they retained.

The presidents which I have set down for the Extraction, depuration and
evaporation of the juices of plants, thereby to extract their Essential Salt;
as also for their Ustion, incineration, lixiviation, filtration, and
coagulation, thereby to extract their fixed Salt, having no need of repetition,
I shall not any farther enlarge this Chapter.

The Essential Salt of Carduus Benedictus, containing much of the sulphury
parts of the plant, is proper to provoke sweats, being given especially in its
own water. It is an enemy to worms, and resists the putrefaction of humors, and
the malignity of Fevers. That which is drawn from the ashes of the same plant,
has almost the same virtues, but the effects are rather purgative, then
Diaphoretick. This latter, being more fixed, is much more proper to mortify the
acids, which excite fermentations in the stomach and lower parts. The dose of
both these Salts, is from half a scruple, to half and sometimes a whole dram,
in its own water, in broth, in wine, or in any other convenient Liquor.

CHAP. LXII. Of the Essential Salt, Cream or Crystal of Tartar.
THere is no mixed body among Vegetables, which abounds so much as Tartar, in
volatile Salt, and acid Salt, for to speak properly these two Salts are, very
nigh, the whole considerable substance of Tartar, in regard there is no notice
to be taken of the water or earth that is found therein. Tartar has the juice
of Grapes for father, Fermentation for its mother, and the Cask is the Matrix.
It is to be looked upon as a remarkable example of the natural union of the
volatile Salt salt with the acid Salt, and of the change of the first into
fixed by the union of the latter; as also, as an example of the Lapidification
in our bodies by the conjunction of acid and volatile Salts, and of them two
with some terrestrial particles.

This change of the volatile Salt salt of Tartar into fixed, is much more
natural, and done with less violence, then that which happ'ns to the Salt of
plants by incineration. Nor does it suffer any other heat then that which its
own acidity causes, after it has raised the fermentation. It is also in the
reciprocal action upon one another of this acid Salt with the volatile Salt
salt, and the volatile sulphury Salt of the juice of the Grapes, during
Fermentation, that the same volatile sulphury Salt unites to it the greatest
share of the watery part of the same juice, and as much of the acid Salt as is
requisite for its perfection, and for its alteration into wine: and that
another part of the volatile Salt salt unites it self with the rest of the
acid, and some small quantity of the Terrestrial part of the juice, and that
being fixed and lapidifi'd, it sticks like Cyrstal to the heads and bottoms of
the Casks; and and that another portion of the volatile sulphury Salt mixed with
a little of the Salt salt, some of the Terrestrial part, some remaining part of
the wine, and a very little acid, descends to the bottom of the vessel, and
makes the Lee.

But it is not enough that nature has made all these different separations and
unions of substances in the same Cask, and that she has bestowed considerable
preparation. Chemistry must make an improvement upon all these things, and by
new separations and purifications, she must bring forth the concealed and
confused substances, and give them perfections beyond what nature has afforded
them.

The first and most simple preparation of Tartar is that of its purification,
which may be more or less perfect as you your self desire it to be. For after
you have made choice of the purest, the most shining and the most Crystalline
Tartar, and powdered it very small, sometimes it is enough to stir this powder
in fair fountain or riverwater, and to wash it over and over again, till there
be no filth remaining, but that it come out as clear as it went in.
Nevertheless this Lotion will not bring Tartar to its height of purity; only it
separates the woody and terrestrial parts, provided they be not Sandy, and
makes the Tartar more fit for the uses to which it is designed. Yet some prefer
Tartar thus cleans'd before that which is dissolved in boiling water, believing
that the heat of the water diminishes the substance, or changes the virtues.

The second and highest putrefaction of Tartar is the reduction of it into
Cream or Crystal, Which may be thus done. For example, put three or four pound
of Tartar washed as I have directed, into a clean copper Kettle, over a good
Charcoal fire, in ten times as much fair water, and having let them boil for a
good quarter of an hour, stirring them from time to time with a wooden Spatula,
and taking off the scum, strain them through a woollen cloth, and then strain
that liquor again, till it be all perfectly clear. Then letting it cool, you
shall find a kind of a Cream swimming above the water, like a crust, and the
rest of the essential Salt of Tartar sticking like pieces of Crystal to the
sides and bottom of the vessels, which you must gather together, wash and dry,
to use, if you please, in that condition. But if you desire to make it more
beautiful, boil it in a large possnet in new fair water; and when it is
altogether dissolved, and the water so far wasted, that you may perceive the
Cream to settle at the top like a thick skin, take off the Possnet gently from
the fire; and letting the Liquor be quite cold without touching it, the Cream
at the top will be very thick, and the clear and white Crystalls will stick to
the bottom and sides of the Possnett, which having washed and dried, you may
keep for use.

The great quantity of Crystal of Tartar which is made in those Countries where
Tartar is very common, is the reason that there they make use of
Copper-vessels; though it were better to boil your Tartar in Possnets of
Pewter. For though the Tartar be not able presently to penetrate and dissolve
much of the Copper; yet during that small stay it makes in the Vessel, it
fetches off some particles that certainly mix among the Cream or the Crystalls;
as may be observed in the Crystal of Tartar prepared in those places, the
substance whereof is dusk and the white color enclines somewhat to the color
of Copper: whereas that which is prepared in Pewter Vessels, is perfectly
white, and very transparent.

The separation which the woollen bag makes of the parts of the Essential Salt,
is the reason that it appears almost all in powder, at the bottom, and upon the
sides of the Vessel; and that to have it in Crystalls, after you have boiled it
and dissolved it in fresh water, you must take it off so gently from the fire;
to the end that the liquor, not being stirred, the parts of the Essential Salt,
may not be brok'n, and that the Crystals may be fair and whole.

In the mean while, we have great reason to admire in the Essential Salt, the
force of the acid, proportionably mingled and united with the volatile; in
regard that making a new body with it, it is not dissolvable in cold water, but
only in boiling hot, and that it separates again and Crystallizes its self as
the water grows cold. However this union is not so inseparable, but that it may
be brok'n by art: for besides that by putting these Crystals to the fire, and
causing some portion of the acid part to dissolve in a Crucible or a Cornute,
the Salt which remains, having lost its acidite and having changed its nature,
becomes dissolvable in the water, though fixed and permanent in the fire. This
union may be also broken, by adding to these united Salts some new acid; which
being not of the Nature of the former, hinders not but that they may be
dissolvable in water, as they were when separated; nevertheless, without
restoring its nature to the volatile Salt, which is almost equally fixed,
provided the acid do not exceed the necessary proportion.

The same union may be brok'n by dissolving this Essential Salt in water, and
mixing with it Salt of Tartar, such as is prepared by Calcination. For by that
means, the acid being mastered by the other Salts, and not being able to close
with so great a quantity, which it could neither stop, nor contain, resumes its
former nature, so that they become together all of them dissolvable in water.

The principal use of Cream or Crystal of Tartar, is to cut and digest thick
and viscous humors, and to dispose them to purgation. It is successfully used
in obstructions of the Liver, the Spleen, and all the bowels; and the use
thereof may be continued for several days, as occasion requires. It is given
from a scruple to a dram, in Broth, or dissolved in some hot liquor.

CHAP. LXIV. Of Crystal of Tartar Chalybiate.
THE opening virtue of Vitriol Salt, concealed in Steel, being able very much
to augment that of the Cream or Crystal of Tartar, I thought it to the purpose
to put them together, and by that means to make a composed Medicine, called by
the name of Cream or Crystal of Tartar Chalybeate: for the preparation whereof
some having bruised, boiled and dissolved a pound of Crystal of Tartar in ten
pints of water, add thereto, toward the end, three ounces of the filings of
Steel, and having well stirred the said filings or dust, strain it hot through
a woollen cloth, and after they have let the water cool, they separate and dry
the Crystalls, laden with the vitriolick part of the Steel, which they have
dissolved.

Others observing the same proportion of water, Steel-dust, and Crystal of
Tartar, and putting them together at the beginning over the fire, cause them to
boil about a quarter of an hour, in other things observing the same method as
before.

There are some, who after they have dissolved a pound of Crystal of Tartar in
boiling water, think it enough to throw in an ounce of Vitriol of Mars, or Iron
prepared with Spirit of Vitriol, as I shall direct in place, then letting that
liquor cool, they take off the Crystals that stick to the sides and bottom of
the Vessel, and keep them for use.

Some having very judiciously powdered four ounces of Crystal of Tartar, and
two drams of Vitriol of Mars, moisten them, and reduce them into paste, with
about two ounces of some Cordial water; then drying it, powdring and adding to
it some few drops of distilled oil of Cinnamon or Cloves, they give it the name
of Cyrstal of Tartar Chalybeate. You may choose which of these preparations you
please.

Crystal of Tartar Chalybeate is looked upon as a specific remedy for the cure
of several Chronicall distempers, and among the rest, of obstructions of the
Liver and Spleen, Jaundies, quartane Agues, Hypochondriacal Melancholy,
suppression of the Menstruums, Cachexies, and all distempers that come from
obstructions of the Matrix. It is not used till after general remedies;
especially Purgatives. The dose is from half a scruple to half a dram in broth,
or in some other hot liquor, in a morning fasting; and it may be continued as
the Physician sees requisite.

CHAP. LXV. Of Crystal of Tartar Emetick.
THE choice which is made here of Crystal of Tartar to envelop and as it were
to concenter in its self the vomitive faculty of Antimonie, cannot but seem
very reasonable to those, who considering that the acid part of this Crystal
qualifying the violence of the vomitorie, renders the effects more gentle, so
that after a vomit or two, and that the stomach is thereby discharged of some
part of the ill humors, the rest falls downwards and works upon the matters
which it meers with in those parts.

Crystal of Tartar being the Base of this preparation, I would not place it
with those of Antimony, though the principal effects of it proceed from thence.
The same reason obliges me not to speak here of that which concerns the
Antimony, nor of the composed water which is to be made use of for the
preparation of this Crystal.

Take four ounces of Crystal of Tartar, and as much Crocus Metallorum, prepared
with Salt of wormwood, as I shall direct in the preparations of Antimony, and
having finely powdered them and put the powder into a great Matras, pour upon
them four pints of Aqua Benedicta of Serpoulet of Mynsich, of which I shall
give you the receipt in the last part of this work. Then having stopped up the
Mattress, set it for three or four days in a Sand-bath over a very moderate
fire, stirring the ingredients from time to time. Then augment the fire of the
Bath, to the end the liquor may boil a little, and pass it hot through a
woollen cloth, leaving the Crocus Metallorum at the bottom of the Matras. Then
when the liquor is very cold, separate and dry the Crystals; after they are
dry, powder them and keep them for your use.

This Crystal is one of the most gentle and most excellent Vomits that can be
prepared. For which reason it is given to all sorts of sexes and ages, and to
persons the most nice and tender; and with much more safety then any other
vomitory drawn from Antimony or any other Minerals. It is made use of very
successfully in Lethargies, Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Ravings and Rovings of the
fancy, and in all other distempers of the brain. In diseases of the stomach,
Vomitings, Jaundise, Dropsies, in Quartane, Tertian, Quotidian, and continued
Choleric Agues. It is good also to empty the stomach of poisons and other
Morbifick matters. The dose of this Crystal is from three or four to eight or
ten grains, in broth or in some other hot liquor.

But though this Emetick Crystal work much more gently, then almost all other
Emeticks; nevertheless you must not neglect the precautions to be observed,
when Vomits are given; of which the principal are, not to give them to persons
who are subject to spitting of blood, Ulcers in their Lungs, narrow chested,
their Lungs inwardly ulcer'd; nor to such as are hard to vomit, nor to women
with child. You must be careful also to give the Patient fat Broth, or Flesh
when the vomit begins to work, to ease the operation, and make it work more
kindly.

CHAP. LXVI. Of the fixed Salt of Tartar, and its dissolution in Liquor.
IT is not seasonable here to contest about the fixed quality which the
Ancients and Moderns have given to Sal Tartar, when they prepared it by the
ordinary ways, making use of a violent fire. But we should do ill to believe,
that this Salt was of it self such, in regard it is naturally very volatile,
and that it would continue in that condition, if as I have said in another
place, the volatile acid Salt, which makes one part of the composition of
Tartar, did not fix it, by making a strict union with it during its
calcination. This alteration however, as considerable as it is, is not at all
destructive, in regard you may restore to the greatest part of this Salt its
first volatility, if you free it from its chains, by separating or augmenting
the acid, so that it may master it, or if you prevent its union with it. Yet
their conjunction is not without a notable advantage, because that by fixing
the volatile Salt, it hinders dissipation, and for that it is serviceable for
several uses, where the volatile Salt alone cannot produce the same effects,
not being able to withstand the fire.

You may reserve the sediment of the Spirit and Oil of Tartar, of which I have
spok'n, and having calcined it in an open fire, extract the Salt by the
ordinary ways. But they that neither mind the Spirit nor the Oil of Tartar, may
put some pounds of raw Tartar into a bag of large paper, and having tied it
fast, and laid it in water till it be well soaked, put it in the middle of a
Hearth of a great Furnace half full of Charcoal well kindled, and having
covered it well, keep a good fire for two long hours. The fire being quenched,
the Tartar will remain calcined in a black lump, composed of an acid Salt,
united with a volatile Salt which it has fixed, and some earthy part of the
Tartar which has mingled with it. Afterward boil this mass in a good quantity
of water, and having passed the Liquor through a sheet of Cap-paper, returned
it into the Vessel and boiled it again with the sediment in fresh water,
refilter'd it and mixed the same liquor with the former, evaporate the
superfluous moisture over the fire, and the Sal Tartar will show it self at the
bottom of the Vessel very white and fixed, which you may keep as it is, in a
double glass Bottle well stopped, or set it in the Cellar or some moist place,
till it be dissolved into a liquor, which is improperly called Oil of Tartar,
in regard it is only a Sal Tartar dissolved; the dissolution whereof you may
hasten by adding only as much water as is necessary to keep the Salt in
dissolution.

They that desire to make Salt of Tartar, or any other Salts of Plants,
accounted fixed, to look more white, and to preserve them in their beauty and
dryness, so that the moisture of the air may neither penetrate nor dissolve
them, after they have consumed their superfluous moisture, may mingle them with
about a third part of their weight of their Sulphur in powder, and cause it to
burn and consume over a good Charcoal fire, and having made a Lie and filtered
it, evaporate the liquor to a film, in a glass Cucurbit over a Sand fire. Then
letting the substances cool, separate and dry the Crystals, and evaporate again
the liquor that swims at the top, to a film, to gain the Salt which is
contained therein.

It is no wonder that these Salts, simply calcined, cannot resist the
penetration of the air; for having had in their calcination as much acid as was
requisite for their fixation, but not to fill up all the little intervals which
the operation of the fire had left there, they have their pores open, and
subject to any penetration, especially that of the air, when environed by it.
But when they meet an acid more powerful, such as that which rises from the
Sulphur, which was mixed and burnt with them in their last calcination, they
fill themselves in such sort that having no more vacuities, the acid of the air
cannot break the strict union which is between them.

Not that it is the best way to expose these Salts to such strong and frequent
calcinations, which cannot be done without some notable diminution of some of
their best parts, and among the rest of the spiritous Sulphur, as is observable
in the dissipation of the scent and savor of the Plant, which happens always
to Salts thus calcined, which would preserve a good part of them, if they were
not so exposed to the violence of the fire. Whence it comes to pass, that there
is great reason to prefer the essential Salts, which may be drawn from Plants
with a moderate and gentle fire, before those that undergo the violent fires of
calcination.

Salt of Tartar is as it were a model of all the fixed Salts of Plants. There
is none more used, either in the one or the other Pharmacy, especially in
Chemistry, which uses it not only among opening and purging medicines, and to
mortify the acids which cause the fermentations in our bodies; but also in the
dissolutions and precipitations of several substances, especially of Minerals.
Not to mention external applications as useful to take away scars and blemis^^s
in the face, as for specific remedies in all diseases of the skin, caused by
the acids.

There are some who after they have beaten equal parts of Tartar and Niter
together, put the powder into a great Iron Mortar well heated, and setting it
over a fire of kindled Charcoal, calcine the powders immediately, and find at
the bottom a black Salt, which they put off for Salt of Tartar, though the
fixed Salt of the Niter make above half of it.

There is a Crystalline Salt also to be prepared, with equal parts of Salts of
Tartar and Niter, well purified, dissolved in Rose Water heated, then filtered,
coagulated, and crystalliz'd after the ordinary manner; this by some is called
by the name of Sal Tartar Niter'd, very proper to open obstructions of the
Liver, Spleen, Kidneys, and Ureters; as also to assuage inflammations of the
mouth and throat, given in proper liquors from half a scruple to half a dram.

CHAP. LXVII. Of Tartar vitrioliz'd.
THough the boiling and great heat, which is perceived in the vessel and in the
substances, at the time of the conjunction of the Salt or Liquor of Tartar to
the rectified Spirit of Vitriol, is taken by many for an effect of the Antimony
which they believe there is, between the Acids and the Alkales; yet I dare
presume to say, that the great inclination which these Salts have to unite
reciprocally together, compelling them to act and react, one upon the other,
with an extreme quickness, and some sort of violence, is the cause of that
boiling and heat which follows. For as the boiling and heat ceases, when the
Salts have reciprocally penetrated and satisfied each other, so that neither
happens afterward, whatever superaddition you make of the one or the other to
the two proportionally united: It would be ill done to impute that to any
Antipathy, which if it were, would prove the destruction of the one or the
other of these Salts, or of both together; which never happens. So that if you
put the Tartar vitrioliz'd into a Cornute, and urge it with a quick fire, you
shall draw forth the Spirit of vitriol almost in the same condition as when you
first made use of it, and find the Salt of Tartar at the bottom of the Cornute
without any significant alteration. This Effervancy has urged some to give to
Tartar vitrioliz'd the name of a Magistery, though you perceive no
precipitation, in the conjunction of the acid Spirit with the fixed Salt; but
only a Coagulation which proceeds from the inward union, and corporification of
the Spirit of Vitriol with the Salt of Tartar.

They are also in a great error, who fear lest the most volatile part of this
Tartar vitrioliz'd, should be dissipated in that great heat and boiling of the
substances, seeing it is most certain that nothing rises but an insipid water;
and that reason and experience teach us, that the volatile and fixed Salts,
having a mutual inclination to join to acids, embrace them, and mix themselves
both very straight and closely together; So that it is a difficult thing to
separate them; as may be verified in the conjunction of volatile Salts of
Animals to Acids; where the hear and effervescency, though very considerable,
cause nothing to ascend but a water very insipid and without scent. Though some
have adviz'd the use of small funnells, to pour the acids gently upon the
volatile Salts, and to stop the orifices of the Vessels, fearing to little
purpose, the dissipation of one part of a Salt whose volatile nature the Acid
changes in a moment into fixed, by the strict union which it makes with it.

There is some difference in Authors about the proportion of the Salt of Tartar
with the Spirit of Vitriol for the preparation of Tartar vitrioliz'd. For which
the surest rule is to cease to pour the one upon the other, when the Ebullition
ceases. For that is a sure sign that the fixed Salt, and the acid Spirit have
sufficiently penetrated and satisfied one another, and that they are mixed to
their due proportion.

This Salt and this Spirit is to be mixed in a large and high glass-Cucurbit,
that the Ebullition may have room enough. You may either pour the Spirit of
Vitriol upon the Liquor, or the Liquor upon the Spirit. Only you must be
careful to pour the one upon the other very gently, to stir the liquors from
time to time, the better to unite them well, and not to pour any more, when the
Ebullition ceases. At which time place the Cucurbit in a Sand-bath over a very
moderate fire, and gently evaporate the superfluous moisture to attain a thin
film, that you may have the Tartar vitrioliz'd white and Crystalline; or else
to the total consumption of the moisture, that you may have it in Mass or in
white powder.

Yet you may shorten your work very much, by putting what quantity you please
of very white and very dry Salt of Tartar in powder, in the bottom of a
glass-Cucurbit, pouring gently upon it as much good Spirit of Vitriol, as it
can suck up, and forbearing to pour any more when you perceive the Ebullition
cease. For by this means you have a Tartar vitrioliz'd very white and dry,
never needing to evaporate any superfluous moisture. This preparation may also
serve for a general example not only of the union of Alkali's with acids; and
of the great alteration which happens to their scent and their other qualities
by their conjunction; but of the change of liquid into solid; which manifests
it self in Spirit of Vitriol, which unites it self and makes but one body with
the Salt of Tartar.

Tartar vitrioliz'd is an excellent digestive; it cuts and opens. The great use
of it is to open obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and all the Bowels, as also
of those of the Matrix. The dose is from half a scruple to half a dram in
convenient liquors. It is also mixed with Opiates, and among other opening and
purging remedies.

CHAP. LXVIII. Of Salt of Tartar Foliated.
SEveral Authors have treated of this preparation, under several names and
methods, which nevertheless tend all of them almost to the same end or
signification. Their principal end being to satiate, as I may so say, the fixed
Salt of Tartar with the acid of Vinegar, and to fill up the vacuums remaining
as well in the one as in that of the Spirit of Wine, to unite them more closely
together. Some advise to imbibe the Salt of Tartar several times in good Wine*
and as often to draw off again by distillation the watery part, and to repeat
these operations, till the Vinegar put in, distills as acid as when it was
first made use of. But the following method is more short and easy.

Put the Salt of Tartar into a large glass Cucurbit, and gently pour upon it as
much Spirit of Vinegar as the Salt can suck up, so that the Salt and the Spirit
may find themselves reciprocally penetrated and satiated one by another, and
that there be no effervency in the substances. For by this means you shall do
more at one, then you could do at several times; so that the Salt of Tartar and
the acid of Vinegar being intimately united, you may easily evaporate
some-portion of the watery part of the Spirit of Vinegar in a Sand-bath over a
moderate fire, and you shall find at the bottom of the Cucurbit a black
substance, the same that would have appeared after all the repeated operations
before mentioned. Then letting the substance cool, you shall dissolve it in
good Spirit of Wine, and having passed it through a sheet of gray paper, put it
into a Cucurbit, or into a glazed earthen Pipkin, and evaporate the Spirit in a
Bath of Ashes or Sand, over a very gentle fire, till the substance be fully
dried. Then dissolve it again and having refilter'd it, evaporate this Spirit,
as you did the former. Renew all these operations still, till you find the
substance white, dry, and in distinct leaves at the bottom of the vessel; which
is the reason that some Authors have given it the name of Salt of Tartar
Foliated, or Foliated earth of Tartar.

Salt of Tartar charged with the acid of Vinegar, partakes much of the virtues
of Tartar vitrioliz'd. But the addition of the Spirit of wine makes some
alteration. For as the acid exceeding the volatile Sulphur, was the cause of
the changing of Wine into Vinegar, so the volatile Sulphur of wine here added,
qualifies the eagerness of the acid of the Vinegar, and changes the nature of
the composition, whence arises a new effect and a virtue altogether particular.

In the mean time take notice that in the union of the acid of Vinegar with the
Salt of Tartar, there is a precipitation of the latter terrestrial part of the
same Salt, which would be otherwise almost inseparable; and that in the
dissolutions, and filtrations made with the Spirit of wine it remains in the
filter, and the mass becomes perfectly cleans'd from all impurity.

You may dissolve this Salt in some Cordial water, and having Crystalliz'd it
and dried it by the ordinary ways, keep it in a double glass bottle well
stopped; or put it up, when you have reduced it into leaves; or set it in a
damp Cellar, and thereby dissolve it into a kind of purple colored liquor.

This Salt is of a middle nature between fixed and volatile. It is moderately
hot, and very proper to purify the mass of the blood; and to purge gently
Tartarous humors, which are the cause of several obstinate distempers. It is
given from five or six, to eight or ten grains; or else altogether as many
drops, when dissolved, either in broth, or in any other proper decoction. You
may make use of this Salt to penetrate and open several Mineralls, and to
extract Tinctures, especially from Iron, adding Spirit of Wine, or some other
Menstruum.

CHAP. LXIX. Of the volatile Salt of Tartar.
SAlt of Tartar being naturally volatile, there is no great study to be used to
change its nature, rather we must take care to hinder the acid part of Tartar
from fixing the volatile; or else find out means to separate them, when they
are united and fixed together. The Ancients and most part of the Moderns, not
knowing the great inclination which the volatile and fixed Salts have to join
with acids, nor the indissolubility of their union when contracted together: we
need not wonder at their ill success, in searching after this volatile Salt;
and that the greatest part of Authors have rather chosen to suppress it, and
thereby tacitly to testify that it was not within their knowledge, then to
manifest how ill they had improved their time and pains, being not able to
write any thing of certainty in this particular.

Certain it is that the acid and volatile Salts which are naturally found in
Tartar, are not to be separated one from another, but with great difficulty;
but that they are always inclined to unite themselves as strictly as it is
possible together; especially in Calcination, which dissipates the watery part,
that sensibly divided and separated their parts and manifestly closes up the
terrestrial part, which serves as a means to their union. And though that by
this violent fire which consumes the watery part, the acid suffer a notable
diminution, yet there is enough behind to maintain the union, which they
contracted, while they acted one upon the other, during Calcination. So that to
break this union, by separating or surmounting the acid which remains, and
keeps the volatile within its parts after Calcination, some of the Moderns make
use of a new acid, to unite it self to that fixed Salt. And that with very
great reason: for the Salt of Tartar having lost in Calcination much of the
acid parts which stopped it; and there being only enough remaining to preserve
the quality of fixed; the most fixed part of this Salt, finds it self half
starved for want of acid, (which happens naturally to all fixed Salts) whence
it comes to pass that swiftly uniting it self to this new acid, whose parts are
ready to fill all the vacancies which the action of the fire had left empty,
This new union is the cause that the more volatile part of the Salt of Tartar
resumes its natural liberty and volatility, and soon makes it self manifest by
its smell, and by all the marks Essential to volatile Salts. Which is not to be
wondered at, since that to restore to the volatile Salts of Animals the
volatility which the acids have suppressed in fixing them, we have recourse to
the fixed Salts, which are only able to force the acid Salts to abandon the
volatiles, to unite themselves to them: whence it comes to pass, that these
volatiles disingage themselves, and appear withal the qualities of which they
are capable.

The moderns direct, that after you have calcined to blackness two or three
pound of raw Tartar, and put them into a great Iron pot, to pour common water
into it, about a fingers breadth above the substances; afterward to set the
pot over a very gentle fire, and when the substances are well soaked and only
lukewarm, to strew thereby degrees about half a handful of raw Tartar finely
powdered; so that you shall perceive several bubbles to rise upon the liquors.
Then continuing to strew new powder of Tartar by degrees, and from time to time
upon the liquor, the Fermentation will increase, the bubbles grow bigger and
multiply, and heap together, like clusters of Grapes. In the mean time you are
so to manage the fire, so that it may not exceed in heat those that are
generally used for Fermentations, and to strew your powder very moderately, and
not to strew too much at a time, for fear the substances boil over the sides of
the vessel; and not to cast in any more powder when the ebullition ceases.
After which, this liquor is to be put into a Cucurbit of Iron very large and
very high, which being covered with its head well luted, with a Recipient well
fitted and luted on, distillation is to be made in a Sand-bath over a very
moderate fire, especially at the beginning, applying from time to time cold wet
clothes about the Cucurbit to suppress the boiling of the liquor: at length you
must augment the fire to cause the volatile Salt to ascend, and rectify the
distilled liquor as much as is necessary for the separation of the Salt, and to
have it in all its beauty and purity. These writers assure us, that this
Fermentation makes so entire a division of the parts, as well of the raw
Tartar, as of the Calcined, that after distillation, there is not to be found
in the Sediment any Salt at all either volatile or fixed.

The raw Tartar and the Salt of Tartar calcined, proceeding from the same
substance, and being of the same nature in their original, it is a difficult
thing to determine which of the two volatizes soonest in Fermentation,
especially ascending in great quantity, and none remaining among the sediment,
as these writers believe. But my thoughts are, that in this confusion into
which the fermentation puts the parts, to dispose them to separation, the acid
of the Tartar fails not to unite it self to as much of the fixed Tartar as it
can compass, and that the portion of Salt which is united to it, is no more
troubled to preserve its union, then that which separating from the juice of
grapes in Fermentation, creates the principal parts of the substance of Tartar,

The Salt of Tartar may be also volatiz'd by means of the black distilled oil
of Tartar; of which you may take one part, and having incorporated it with
twice as much of its weight of purified Salt of Tartar, put this mass into a
glass Cornute; and having exactly stopped it, and set it five or six months
over a Bakers oven, or in any other place, moderately hot, open the mouth of
the Cornute, and joining to its beak a great Recipient carefully luted, you may
draw forth in a Bath of Sand with a gradual fire a volatile Salt smelling like
urine, white, Crystalline, and of a very penetrating scent, accompanied with a
small quantity of the same Salt, which is found dissolved into liquor, mingled
with some little oil, almost as penetrating as the Salt it self.

Now though we may say that the oil of Tartar contains in it much of the
volatile Salt, as do several other oils, and that the volatile Salt which we
draw out of it may proceed from it; nevertheless there is great likelihood that
the Salt of Tartar affords the greatest part of it; because the volatile Salt
ascends in very great quantity, because you have more then you put in oil; and
because there remains nothing but an oily coal, representing chiefly the feces
of the oil, and weighing much less then the Salt of Tartar made use of. I am of
opinion also that the great digestion having made an opening and division even
to the smallest particles of those two substances, and brok'n the particular
union of the Salt Tartar, with some portion of the acid, and some particles of
earth, like to that which the oil had made with some part of the volatile Salt,
and having also disordered all their parts and given them another situation in
their new union, it is easy then for the volatile Salt, and the most pure part
of the oil to manifest themselves with all their qualities, and to quit these
chains that have now no longer power to stop them. To which we may add that the
secret ferment of the volatile Salt concealed in the oil of Tartar, having had
time sufficient to raise and increase it self, has not only gained the upper
hand of the acid part, but has in some measure converted it into its own proper
substance, taking advantage of the conjunction of the oil of Tartar, upon which
the acids have no power, not being able to unite when they are alone, and to
which they cannot unite but by means of the Salts: considering also that the
acids not being able without great difficulty to break the union which the
Salts easily make with the oils, are enforced to change figure, and to conform
to the nature of Salts, to the end they may share in the union which the same
Salts have contracted with the oils.

The use of Alum, which some of our Moderns employ for the volatizing of Salt
Tartar, deserves to have its place here, notwithstanding some little disputes
may arise, touching the diversity of the substance of Sal Tartar from that of
Alum; wherein the scrupulous will soon be satisfied, if they consider, that
Alum yields nothing of evil or prejudicial, in distillation; and that the
spiritous water thereof is used with success, given inwardly in diseases of the
mouth and throat. The Moderns use this method.

They mingle three pound of Sal Tartar, very dry and well purified, with the
full weight of raw Alum in powder; and having put them into a great Earthen
Cornute well luted about, and placed it in a close Furnace of Reverberation,
they distill it with a gradual fire, soft at first, but at last increased to
the utmost violence of heat; by which means, when the Vessels are cold, you
shall find in the Recipient very much volatile Salt of Tartar, the scent and
taste whereof will be very keen and penetrating; and the spiritous water of
Alum mixed with it; which you must rectify by the ordinary way, to have the
volatile Salt in its purity and perfection.

The same modern Writers, to take away all objections against the watery and
spiritous parts of the Alum, which rise with those parts that ascend from the
Salt of Tartar in distillation, direct instead of raw Alum, only to make use
of its Caput Mortuum, which after you have beaten and mixed with an equal
weight of Salt of Tartar, well dried and in powder, you may draw forth the
volatile Salt by a Cornute, doing as you did with the raw Alum.

The Acid contained in Alum, is so weak and inconsiderable, that there is very
little reason to attribute to it the volatilization of Salt of Tartar, but
rather to its fixed part that remains after distillation; considering that
according to the opinion of the moderns, it produces this effect without any
participation with the Acid. As to the reasons of the volatilization of this
Salt by the means of Alum, my Opinion is, that the terrestrial Salt of the
latter, being mixed with the Salt of Tartar, meeting there the remainder of the
Acid which had fixed this Salt, and finding it self more porous and more dry
then it, sucks it up, or at least diminishes it in such sort, that not being
able to retain so large a quantity in its pores, it forsakes the greatest part,
which being at liberty, becomes volatile as it was naturally.

I have said in another place, that the most acid substance of the juice of the
Grape, unites it self with a good part of the volatile Salt for the composition
of Tartar; and that the Lee that lies at the bottom of the Casks, abounding in
volatile Salt and sulphury Spirit, contains but very little acid, which would
not be enough to fix but very little of the volatile. For which reasons it is,
that the volatile Salt may be easily drawn from this Lee; and that there is no
need of borrowing foreign assistance for that purpose. To which intent, having
separated by filtration and expression the Wine which accompanies the more
thick part of the Lee, where the volatile Salt lies hid in the terrestrial
part; and having distilled this Wine to make advantage of its volatile and
inflammable Spirit, dry the thick part very well in the Sun, or over a Bakers
Oven; and having pulverized it, sprinkle it with its proper Spirit, or some
other well rectified, and having moderately moistened it, let the whole mass dry
of it self, where you dried it before; then fill with it two thirds of a large
Cornute of Potters Earth, and having placed it in a close Furnace of
Reverberation, and fitted and well luted to its beak a large Recipient, make
distillation; beginning with a gentle fire, increasing it by degrees for ten or
twelve hours to the utmost violence. After which, the Vessels being cold and
unluted, you shall find in the Recipient the volatile Salt of Tartar mingled
with the oily part, and much phlegm, which you must empty both together into a
large Matras with a long neck, and having placed it in a Sandbath, covered with
its head well luted, with a Recipient luted to it as exactly, make
rectification with a moderate fire, using the same method as for the
rectification of other volatile Salts; you shall then perceive, that the
volatile Salt of the Tartar mounting first, will stick to the inside of the
head in a white and crystalline form; whence it must be separated with as much
art as celerity, to hinder as much as may be its separation and mixture with
the oily part, which will follow next to this volatile Salt, and ascend with
the Phlegm, that will have dissolved and carried with it the rest of this
volatile Salt.

The sprinkling of the Spirit of Wine, well rectified, upon the dry Lee, is not
so absolutely necessary, that the volatile Salt cannot be drawn out, but by the
help of this Spirit. But there is this advantage in it, that by embracing some
part of the acid of the Lee, and taking it along with it in its dissipation, it
frees the volatile Salt, so that you have it in greater quantity by that means,
then otherwise you could do.

The volatile Salt of Tartar is very proper to purify the mass of the blood,
and to expel through the pores fuliginous and sharp humors; to mortify acids,
and prevent fermentation; and to cause those humors to transpire, or else to
carry them off by siege or urine. It may be successfully used for the cure of
intermitting Agues, especially the Quartane; for the cure of Dropsies,
Jaundise, Cachexies, Scurvy, and the most part of Chronical diseases of men and
women. It must be taken a good while before meals, from ten or twelve grains,
to twenty or thirty, in convenient liquors, or in Bolus mixed with Conserves,
or other medicines. It is very specific to Gangrenes, taken inwardly, or
applied to the Gangrene it self. It is recommended for the dissolution of
several Minerals.

I might have here inserted other preparations of volatile Salt of Tartar; but
I think I have given enough. Besides that I am very well assured, that the
latter is no way inferior either for its truth or easiness of preparation, to
any that can be added to it.

As to what remains, the examples which I have given of volatile, white, and
crystalline Salts, which may be extracted according to my method, not only from
the Lees of Wine and dried Beans, but also from any other Pulse, and many
antiscorbutick Plants, may serve to rectify the errors of those, who have
thought that to be true which Zwelfer has maintained in his fifteenth Classis,
and his 688 page of his Royal Pharmacopoea, printed at Dordreckt in the year
1672; where after several discourses tending to the same end, he concludes in
these words, Quare vero verius comprobatum manet, etc. Wherefore it remains a
Maxim truer then Truth it self, That no substantial existing volatile Salt, can
by Art be extracted from Vegetals, as from Animals it is every day done; only a
fixed Salt; and not that neither, unless incineration precede. For the
experience and trials which I have made of those things which I have preferred,
will utterly overthrow all his assertions; and at the same time destroy all the
pretended reasons which he has brought to uphold his opinion. For though it be
a difficult thing to believe, that such a person as he, who has been accounted
learned and experimented in his Art, should be deceived in matters that may be
thought to pass so frequently through his hands; nevertheless it appears to be
true, that he has not made sufficient reflections upon what he has put to the
Press; and that he would not have been so positive in his assertion, had he to
the bottom examined the nature of these very things whereof he has treated.
Otherwise he might have had this, among other considerations, that Soot, which
is scarcely composed of any thing else but the Salt and oily parts of the wood,
which the violent operation of the fire has carried up and fixed to the sides
of the Chimney, affords in distillation by a Retort, very much volatile Salt,
which cannot be accounted other then a real volatile Salt of Vegetals. And it
is a convincing proof, that this Author forgot himself upon this argument; in
regard that he falls into a manifest contradiction, in the same Classis, p. 19.
where he undertakes, contrary to his declared judgment, to set down a method
how to prepare a volatile Salt of Tartar, which all the world knows to be one
part of a Vegetal. Though his method, very troublesome as it is, only tends to
unite the fixed Salt of Tartar with the most subtle acid Salt of the air, which
he pretends to join together; and that all which he draws from thence comes
nothing near to the virtues of the true Salt of Tartar, of which I have showed
you the preparation.

CHAP. LXX. Of Oily Volatile Salt.
THE high praises which Silvius, a Physician of Leyden, has given to oily
volatile Salt, and the frequent use which he made of it in the cure of several
diseases, having raised in many persons a desire to know the preparation of it,
may give them an occasion to complain of this learned man, in regard that
having communicated to public view so many excellent writings, yet he omits to
impart a receipt, of which he makes such frequent mention therein. Nevertheless
it was the judgment of some, that the consideration of those distempers for
which he made use of it, and the examination of other remedies which he
prescribed for the same, or for diseases of the same nature, might give some
insight to understand what this preparation should be, and that it might be
infallibly found out, by making a proportional union of oily substances with
spiritous and salt volatiles. To which purpose some there are who having
incorporated certain drops of distilled Oils with fine powdered Sugar, dissolve
them in spiritous Aromatic waters; afterward mixing therewith some volatile
Salt of Animals or Vegetals. Others believe they reach the intention of
Sylvius, by dissolving some portion of volatile Salt in the spiritous and oily
water of Marjoram, Lavender, or some other Plant, odoriferous and containing a
certain Oil in it. Others mix the oily Spirits of Aromaticks with the volatile
Salts, or their salt Spirits, which are nothing else but the same Salts
dissolved in some portion of Phlegm. But to know the proportion of the several
substances that compose an oily volatile Salt, I cannot direct you better then
by imparting the receipt which Monsieur Telingius, Physick-Professor at Ryntel,
has communicated to us, in his Book enituled, Prodromus Praxeos Chymiatricae,
printed at Ryntel in the year 1674, where you may find it, page 342.

Take, says he, an ounce of Aromatic Spirit, (whereof he gives you afterward
the receipt) two drams of volatile Salt Armoniack, and six drops of tincture of
Cloves; and having mingled them well in a Bottle, and stopped them well, let the
mixture stand all night, and then separate by inclination the clear liquor from
the powder, that will be precipitated to the bottom; by which means you shall
have a volatile oily Salt, or an Aromatic Spirit charged with a volatile Salt,
or a volatile Salt tempered of a pleasing smell and taste; which by reason of
the fineness of its parts, is very proper to attenuate and discuss bad humors,
and to expel them through the pores. It is used with success in all sorts of
cold distempers, especially those that proceed from some acid juice or ferment,
whose boiling and the effects thereof it prevents. The dose is from five drops
to ten, in proper distilled water.

The Receipt of his Aromatical Spirit is this:

Take two ounces of good Cinnamon, one ounce and a half of red Roses, six drams
of Anniseseed, and as much Fennel-seed; half an ounce of Galanga-root, as much
Cloves, two drams of Cardamum, as much of the seed of Barberries, two scruples
of Santal Citron, as much Nutmegs, and as much of Cubebs; bruise the
ingredients, all but the Roses, and having mixed them, and put them all
together into a glass Cucurbit, and poured upon them six pints of good Spirit
of Wine, and one pint of Rainwater, cover the Cucurbit with its head well
luted; then place the Cucurbit in a Sand-bath, and having fitted a Recipient to
the beak of the head, digest the ingredients over a very slack fire for four
and twenty hours, and then distill them, observing the same method as for the
Spirits of all sorts of Aromaticks. This Spirit heats, attenuates, and dries;
fortifies the heart and stomach, and is proper in all sorts of cold diseases.

The different substances of the Spices made use of in this Aromatic Spirit,
might seem to require different macerations. But considering, that the most
subtle parts of the Aromaticks easily separate from the grosser, the contusion,
the four and twenty hours digestion, and the penetration of the Spirit of Wine,
are enough to remove all scruples in this particular.

The Second Book: Containing the CHEMICAL PREPARATIONS OF ANIMALS.
CHAP. I. Of Medicines extracted out of the Body of Man.
VEgetals, the preparations whereof were the subject of the preceding Book,
are not the only things which God has created for the service of Man; for He
has not only ordained for him in several Animals, a good part of that which is
necessary and proper for human sustenance; but He has furnished him with the
means and art to extract out of every one of them in particular, several
excellent remedies; and not only so, but he has given to man a peculiar
knowledge of many other medicines contained in his own Body in his life time,
and in the Bodies of other men after their deaths, far superior to those that
are comprehended in the bodies of any other creature whatsoever. So that
Chemistry need not want work, while busied in those copious Preparations which
include not only the Scull, and other Bones of Men, the Blood, the Fat, the
Flesh, and Mummy, which is the Body embalmed and dried, but also the Nails, the
Hair, the Urine, and other Excrements, even to the very Secondines of Women. So
that it may be said, that there is not any part or excrement, no superfluity in
Man or Woman, which Chemistry cannot prepare for the cure or ease of the most
diseases and pains to which both are subject.

Artists extract from the parts of Man and Animals, substances not much unlike
to those of Plants though not in the same proportion; for Animals have less of
Earth, less of Acid, and much more volatile Salt then they. Animals have also
much more Oil then some, and less then others. The little Acid which is
contained in Animals, and consequently the want of power to put a stop to more
then some small quantity of the volatile Salt that very much abounds in
quantity, is the reason that we must not wonder that when there is nothing to
hinder it from abandoning the other substances, there should be so little
trouble to separate it, and to make it come forth in the first place into the
Recipient, then to ascend from the bottom of a Matras with a long neck to the
top of the head in rectification, as will happen in the making of the
preparation.

As to what concerns the Oil, being of it self volatile enough, and
participating very much of the nature, and also of the proper substance of this
Salt, it so falls out that the oil follows next as well in rectification as in
distillation. I say moreover that though there be Animals which eat one another
for their nourishment, and that man himself, lives in part upon the flesh of
several Animals, yet we must look upon the Plants as the most considerable, and
principal nourishment of the most part of Animals, especially of those that
serve for the food of men; and believe that it is from the volatile Salt of the
plants, that the most part of Animals, especially men, receive theirs. We are
also to believe that the quality and quantity of the volatile Salt of Animals
proceeds from the exaltation which the natural heat of the stomach makes of the
substances which serve for their nourishment; and that this volatility is
absolutely necessary for them, to the end they may he quickly and equally, as
they are, conveyed to the remote parts from the stomach, as well as to those
which are near it. Nor is there any doubt but that the principal parts of man,
are abundantly furnished with volatile Salt, in regard that not only the parts
that are without sense, as the Nails and Hair, but also the most vile
excrements of the body contain in them a very considerable quantity.

CHAP. II. Of the preparation of Man's Scull.
I Cannot well approve Ustion or Calcination of a man's scull, nor the magistery
which some Authors direct us to make of it; in regard it cannot be burnt or
calcined without dissipating the best parts, nor reduced into a Magistery
without depraving the virtues of it. And therefore I will not trouble my self
to set down the description of it, being absolutely of opinion, that it would
be much better to rasp the scull and make it into powder, according to the
Galenick method, then to use other destructive means, so far from the true
preparation of so good a remedy; it being impossible for a calcined scull to
have any other considerable virtue, but only to mortify or suck up certain
acids.

The best Chemical preparation that can be made of a man's scull, is that of its
distillation. For which purpose having got two or three sculls of men hanged or
put to some other violent death in a healthy condition of body, bruise or saw
them into small pieces, and put them into a Cornute of Potters-earth very well
luted, never minding whether it be more or less full, in regard the
distillation may be equally made, provided the rest of the operation be
regular. Place this Cornute in a close Furnace of Reverberation, and having
covered it with its Duomo, and lighted in the ashes hole a soft Charcoal fire,
shut the Register of the Duomo, the door of the fireplace, and that of the
hole for the ashes almost quite close, and keep an equal soft fire for two
hours, or till you perceive the Duomo to be never so little hot: at which time
remove the fire out of the Ashes-hole into the fire place; and having increased
it a little, fit a large Recipient to the beak of the Retort, luting the
closures very carefully, and giving sometime after never so little air to the
Register of the Duomo, and so continue the same fire for two hours, or till the
Phlegm begin to distill into the Recipient. Then giving a little more air, and
increasing the fire one degree hotter, you shall perceive the volatile Salt
Spirits accompanied with the oil to come forth out of the Cornute in white
Clouds. Then keeping an equal fire for two hours longer, increase it one degree
of heat more, opening the Register of the Duomo more and more by proportional
Intervalls; till at length having set it quite open, and augmented the fire to
the utmost degree of heat, continue it so till no more Clouds coming out of the
Retort, the Recipient is become altogether transparently clear. At which time
let the Vessels cool, and then unluting them you shall find the Oil, and the
Spiritous Salt and volatile part of the scull together with much Phlegm
descended to the bottom of the Recipient. Of which several substances make a
Rectification, by putting them together into a Mattress with a long neck placed
in a Sand-bath, and covered with its glass-head perfectly well luted, observing
the same method as for the volatile Salts of Vegetals.

Some there are that separate the oil from the other substances before
Rectification, filtring the two latter substances through a sheet of course
paper, upon which the oil stops, and which they reserve alone for external
uses; not considering that this oil contains in it very much volatile Salt,
that the qualities and virtues of it are almost the same with those of the
Salt, and may be employed for the same internal uses, especially being well
rectified. Which is the reason that it is much better to leave it with the
other substances in Rectification.

The same Authors thinking to rectify this volatile Salt the more exactly, give
direction after the Salt and watery liquor is put into a Mattress with a long
neck, to pour upon them by little and little through a small glass Funnel
Spirit of Salt, till the Ebullition cease; pretending, after they have filtered
and put the liquor into a glass Cucurbit covered with its head, and made the
watery part to ascend by a Sandbath, to raise the volatile Salt to the head or
to the sides of the Cucurbit, being fixed by the Spirit of Salt. But they have
not well considered of the action and reoperation of that acid Spirit with the
volatile Salt; nor did they foresee that being by that reciprocally fixed, the
volatile Salt is no more in a condition to raise it self. Considering that by
their own confession, they cannot after that effect what they aim at, but by
adding and uniting to those Salts so mingled, double their weight of Salt of
Tartar, or some other Alkali of the same Nature, which by uniting it self to
the acid may give the Salt it is former liberty.

All Authors who have wrote of the scull of man, simply prepared, have highly
recommended it for the cure of all diseases of the brain, and particularly of
the Apoplexy and epilepsy. But the oil and volatile Salt of the Scull, being
not only freed from their earthy and watery part, but highly purified by
Distillation and Rectification, are capable of producing effects incomparably
more powerful, of which the smartness and penetration of their savor and smell
are unquestionable marks. Besides, we are to understand that the heat of the
stomach causes them to pass with as much ease as swiftness, not only to the
brain, but to all the most remote parts of the body. The oil as well as the
Salt may be both taken inwardly. But the Salt is to be preferred, because it is
a little more volatile, more pure, more sightly, and less displeasing to the
taste and smell. The dose is from six, eight, and ten grains, to twenty and
thirty in some water, decoction, Conserve or Cephalic Opiate. The dose of the
Oil rectified is from two or three drops to eight or ten, in some liquors,
Conserves or Opiates. But it must be incorporated first with fine powder Sugar,
if you intend to unite it well with those liquors. You may also use it to
anoint the Temples, or the ^utures of the scull, or put it up into the
Nostrlils.

Substances very much like to those which are extracted from the scull of Man,
may be drawn out of all the bones, observing the same method in their
distillation.

You may also prepare an Extract or an Essence of the scull of Man, according
to the following direction. After you have rasp'd very small some pieces of the
scull, put them into a Mattress, and poured upon them Cephalic Magistrial
Spirit of Wine, as I have ordered it in the last part of this Pharmacopoea,
till it rise four good fingers above the Powder, stop the Mattress carefully;
and having set it to macerate for fifteen days over a Bakers oven, strain and
squeeze out the liquor strongly in a Press, and then putting it into a Cucurbit
with its head well luted, place the Cucurbit in Balneo Mariae, and fitting a
small Recipient to the beak, draw forth the Spirit till the liquor have
acquired the consistency of Honey, then put up both the one and the other in
proper vessels.

Some make use of distilled Vinegar for this Extraction, though it be very ill
done, for it changes the nature of the volatile Salt of Man's scull by fixing
it. Nor is there any fear but that the Spirit of Wine will sufficiently
penetrate the substance of the scull so rasp'd, without any need of Spirit of
Vinegar, or any Corrosive, since we see that the juice and the most pure
substance of Hartshorn easily dissolve in the water, where you have boiled the
shavings, though more grossly rasp'd then the man's scull is wont to be.

This Essence or Extract is commended for the cure of the Epilepsy. It is given
in some Cephalic water from half a scruple to half a dram. You may also mingle
with it, from half a scruple to a dram of the water drawn from the Extract.

CHAP. III. Of the Chemical Preparation of Human Blood.
I Am not of their opinion, that the Blood of Man, gulp'd down warm as it runs
out of the Veins, is a specific remedy against the Epilepsie. For besides the
detestation of such a cruel Beverage, and that the Blood running from the
person let blood, does not contain in it any part which is not like to those of
the Blood of the person which is to drink it; we are to believe, that the
Blood, being once out of its proper Vessels, alters extremely in an instant,
how careful soever we might be to preserve it in its natural condition; and
that it would be so far from being conveyed into the Veins or Arteries, just
as it was swallowed, that it would change its nature in the stomach, and lose
both its color and its natural consistence. So that there is no reason to
expect from it any other effect then what may be expected from ordinary food.

But by the way of distillation, and separation of the pure parts of Human
Blood, most effectual remedies may be prepared against the Epilepsie, and all
diseases of the Brain, and that by the following directions.

In the month of May take a considerable quantity of healthy young men's blood,
let blood in that season, who are not red hairs. Put this blood at the same
time into one or more Cucurbits of Earth, of which three quarters must be
empty, and having fitted to them their heads and their small Recipients, draw
off all the watery part in an Ember-Bath with a moderate fire, till that which
remains in the Cucurbit he quite dry, but not burnt. To which purpose you must
have great care of the fire, especially at the end. Then having cooled the
Vessels and put up the distilled water, put into a great glass Cucurbit the dry
blood in the other Cucurbits, and having set the Retort in a close Furnace of
Reverberation, and fitted and luted to it a large Recipient, make a new
distillation with a gradual fire, soft at first, but afterward very violent,
and by that means you shall have a new water with the Oil, and the volatile
Salt will presently follow and accompany, issuing out of the Cucurbit in white
Clouds, and dissolving themselves into the Recipient. Then letting the Vessels
cool, turn out all the substances in the Recipient into a Matras with a long
neck, cover it with its head exactly luted; lute also a small Recipient to the
beak, and make a rectification in a Sand-bath with a moderate fire, according
to my former directions for volatile Oils and Salts of Plants. This
rectification may be also repeated, if you desire a more exact purity.

There are some, who observing that the water drawn from blood, distilled in a
Cucurbit, is of no great virtue, only spread the blood upon several Plates, and
let it dry in the Sun, or in some Stove as quick as they can, after which they
distill it in a Retort the ordinary way.

All Writers extol the volatile Salt of Man's blood for the cure of the
Epilepsie. Helmont also affirms, that the use of it cures persons that are
grown in years. It is also very effectual in all other diseases of the brain.
It purifies the mass of the blood, especially in Scorbuticks, making it fluid,
and helping circulation. It is very proper to suppress and dissipate vapors
that rise from the Stomach, Spleen, and other Bowels. It is no less effectual
against the vapors of the Matrix; to contend with the malignity of Fevers,
though contageous, as also for the cure of the Dropsy, and to ease the pains
of the Gout. The virtues of this volatile Salt and rectified Oil, are very like
to those which are drawn from the Sculs of men. The rectified Oil is also made
use of in external unction of those that are troubled with the Gout and
Rheumatisms, and of great advantage against the Palsy.

The blood that flows from women after labor, is distilled according to the
same method.

I might here speak of Tinctures, Extracts, and other Preparations of Mummy,
which some Authors have set down and very highly commended. But I think that
these two preparations of Human Blood, Men's Skulls are incomparably much better
for all intents and purposes, being drawn from parts that have suffered no
dissipation, then such whose operations must be upon subjects that have
received great alterations by the injury of time, or the deceit of Men.

CHAP. IV. Of the Distillation of Urine.
THE salt and smart taste of man's Urine, and its strong smell, especially if it
be kept awhile, make it manifest that all the parts of the Body out of which it
was made, abound in volatile Salt, since there is so great a quantity in this
excrement. We usually make choice of the Urine of young men that drink Wine, as
being to be preferred before that of any other persons; but we proceed
variously in the extraction of the volatile Salt. For we may putrify Urine in
Horsedung for thirty or forty days, the better to separate its salt volatile
parts. And then having poured out by inclination the liquor that swims above
the sediment, make the distillation in Balneo Mariae; or in an Ember-bath, with
a very moderate heat, and rectify afterward the distilled liquor three or
four times, making use of a Matras with a long neck for the last rectification
of the Salt. But though this method may be very well followed, yet the noisome
smell which the Urine contracts in putrefying, and the long time this
preparation takes up, have made some Writers to leave out putrefaction. For now
they only evaporate the superfluous moisture of the Urine in a Balneum Mariae,
or a bath of Ashes, over a very moderate fire, till it be become as thick as a
Rob. Then they distill it in a Sand-bath, in a large high Cucurbit, covered
with a head well luted, and a Recipient also luted to it in the same manner.
Then they rectify the distilled liquor in the same Bath, in a long Matras,
covered with its head carefully luted; and they draw from it a volatile white
crystalline Salt, very penetrating, attended by a liquor almost as subtle and
penetrating, which is only the overplus of the volatile Salt dissolved into a
small parcel of Phlegm, which they keep apart in double glass bottles perfectly
well stopped.

The volatile Salt of Urine powerfully mortifies the acids that usually raise
the fermentations in our bodies, and are the causes of several diseases. It is
very much esteemed against all obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and
Mesentery; to purify the mass of the blood, cure the Scurvy, Cachexies,
Jaundise, and Hypocondriack diseases. It is prescribed with good success in
Lethargies, Apoplexies, Epilepsies, and Convulsions, as also in suffocations of
the Matrix. It is highly commended against difficulty of making water, to
dissolve the Stone in the Reins and Bladder. The Salt of Urine also that
distills like a Spirit, is used to extract the tincture of diverse Stones, and
of calcined Flints, and in this preparation it becomes blue. And this is
ascertained to be a specific remedy against the difficulty of making water,
being given from a scruple to a dram in some proper liquor. The Salt of Urine
is also steeped and used in Liniments to assuage all sorts of pains, especially
those of the Gout and Rheumatisms. The Salt of Urine is given from ten or
twelve grains to twenty or thirty, in white Wine or some other liquor. It is
also given against suffocations of the Matrix, to dissipate the vapors that
arise from the lower parts, and to surcease the symptoms that happen in
diseases of the head.

Man's Dung, to which some have given the name of Western Civet, when being
dried in the Sun it has lost its smell, and acquired a good scent, does not
want its virtues. For being distilled in a Retort, with a gradual fire, it
affords an Oil that is particularly recommended for the cure of ulcerated
Erysipela's, scald heads, and all manner of scurss and scabs. It is also good
to mortify and kill Cancers, and to assuage the pains of the Gout, being
applied to the part.

I might here recite the several distillations of the Fat, Hair, Nails, and
many other parts and excrements of man; but that I fear to tire the Reader,
considering that their preparations are not extraordinary, and that the
instructions and examples which I have already given, together with those which
I shall mention in speaking of other Animals may suffice, and satisfy them who
have any knowledge of Chemistry.

CHAP. V. Of the Distillation of the Viper.
THE distillation of Vipers is the best and most usual preparation that
Chemistry performs. All the parts of the body may be made use of, or only such
as you like best; considering that you extract out of all the same phlegm, the
same Oil, and the same volatile Salt. It is only better to dry in the shade
those parts which you intend to distill, then to put them into a Retort with
all their moisture; which would very much exceed that which usually comes forth
in the distillation of the dry ones. Take then the heads, the tails, the
hearts, the livers, the truncks, the skin, and if you please the fat, the
kidneys, and all the entrails of many Vipers, male or female, and having cut
all their parts into small pieces, fill a large Retort of glass or earth almost
quite up to the top, well closed with lute, then having placed it in a Furnace
of Reverberation covered with its Duomo, fitted a large Recipient to the beak
of it, and shut up the Register of the Duomo, and the door of the fireplace,
kindle a gentle fire in the Cinder-place, and keep a fire for two hours, only
to heat the Retort and the Furnace; then removing the fire into the
hearth-place, keep the fire in the same heat for two hours longer, at the end
whereof increase the fire one degree, giving never so little air to the
Register of the Duomo; and having continued the fire so for two hours more,
increase the fire to the third degree for the same time. After which, having
set the Register of the Duomo wide open, give the fire its utmost violence of
heat; and continue it so till nothing come out of the Cornute, and that all the
vapors in the Recipient be converted and dissolved in Salt or Liquor. At which
time cease distillation. Then let the Vessels cool, and unlute the Recipient,
and when the Salt is well dissolved in the liquor, pour it out into a Matras
with a long neck, and having placed it in a Sand-bath, and covered it with its
head, and luted a small Recipient to it, make rectification of it with a gentle
fire, and you shall see the volatile Salt white and crystalline, mount to the
top of the head, which is to be put up in a double glass Bottle carefully
stopped, and continuing rectification, separate and keep apart the Oil, and the
rest of the volatile Salt, dissolved in some portion of the phlegm, that dropped
forth together into the small Recipient, rejecting at last, that which lies at
the bottom of the Matras, after you have caused all the volatile Salt and oily
parts to ascend.

As for that which remains in the Cornute after distillation of the Vipers, it
may be easily perceived by the volatile Salt and other substances drawn from
thence, that there is nothing considerable remaining behind, and that the small
quantity of fixed Salt which might be met with there, is not worth the trouble,
and therefore it is better neither to imitate the Ancients nor the Moderns, who
not understanding the extraordinary quantity of the volatile Salt of these
Animals, thought to do wonders by making use of calcinations to extract forth a
Salt, which the same calcination had dissipated.

The specific quality of the volatile Salt of the Viper, to overcome the venom
of the biting of the Viper, or of any other sort of Serpents, and many other
creatures, is not the only virtue it is endued with, as being a sovereign
remedy against the Pestilence, the Measles, and the small Pox, all sorts of
malignant Fevers, and epidemick distempers. It is an utter enemy to all
putrefaction, curing Agues that are caused thereby, as are the most part of
intermitting Agues; and mortifying the acids which it meets with, it is a
wonderful specific against a Quartan Ague. There is not a medicine to be found
more proper to purge the mass of the blood, to give it its natural fluidness,
and help circulation; whence it comes to pass, that it is very proper to cure
Scorbutic diseases, and to cause the transpiration of those sharp and
fuliginous humors that cause Scurss, Scabs, Erysipela's, Itches, scald heads,
and all diseases of the skin. It is also the most powerful remedy in nature for
the cure of the Leprosy, the spots whereof are upon the back of the Viper, and
seem to bear its signature. For it opens, penetrates, cuts, attenuates, expels
thorough the pores, and drives to the very extremities of the body, the
impurity that infects the mass of the blood, and all the habit of it. It very
much assists and fortifies nature, and disposes her to perform all her
functions as she ought. For by the means and help of this Salt she sends
necessary nourishment to all the parts of the body, as also to those that are
deprived of it by some accident, and expels by Urine, Stool, and other means,
all the ill humors of the body. It opens all the passages of the head, and
frees it from cold and viscous phlegm, that hinders the communication of the
Spirits. So that it is of wonderful use in Lethargies, Apoplexies, Convulsions,
Palsies, and other cold diseases of the head. No less useful is it in
swoonings, and palpitations of the heart, in Asthma's, Plurisies, new and old
Coughs, and other maladies of the breast. It strengthens the stomach, and helps
digestion. It opens obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and all the bowels. It
dissolves coagulated blood, and prevents internal Apostemes, especially at
their first growing, as also external, being applied thereto, or else the Oil
alone. In a word, there is hardly in all Physic a more universal medicine, or
that can afford quicker or more effectual relief to any disease. The dose and
manner of using, both internal and external, are very much like to those of the
volatile Salt of man's Skull; and so it is with the Oil, whose virtues it very
much imitates.

Now though the volatile Salt and Oil of Vipers drawn through a Retort, be the
most essential part, and that there remains in the Cornute but only a little
fixed Salt, very deeply mixed with the terrestrial part of the Viper; yet they
that desire this fixed Salt may compass it, if after they have powdered that
residence, which is as black as a coal, they put it upon a Tyle, or some other
Vessel in a Potters Oven, and there leave it till it be thoroughly calcined. For
after that, by making a Lie, filtring it, and evaporating the moisture, the
fixed Salt will appear at the bottom of the Vessel, though but a very small
quantity, while the terrestrial part, which is a real Caput Mortuum, remains
behind in the filter. The virtues of this Salt are much inferior to those of
the volatile, of which it neither has the smell, penetration, or savor. For it
has a taste like Lie, and leaves a kind of a biting tartness in the mouth,
which the other does not; yet it may be mixed among purgative and diuretic
medicines,

As to the fixation of volatile Viper Salt, which has been attempted to have
been done with acids, and among others with Spirit of Salt; though it be of no
great necessity, yet it may be of some virtue and use upon some occasions, and
especially for persons who have lost their taste, and for want of acids have
wat'rish and unsavory relishes in their mouths. For though we may say, that
the savor and shape of Salt thus fixed very much resembles Bay Salt,
nevertheless it is not one and the same thing, for the volatile Salt, as much
altered as it is to outward appearance, keeps its own nature entire, as appears
by this, that mixing it with double its weight of Sal Tartar, or any other
fixed Salt, and putting them into any proper Vessel, it sublimes with its first
force and purity, while the acid of the Spirit of Salt having quitted it, to
unite it self to the Tartar, remains at the bottom of the Vessel with the same
Salt, the little use of this volatile Salt of fixed Viper, and the easiness to
fix it in a moment upon any occasion, by mixing it with some acid, are the
reasons why I do not set down any particular preparations here. For it is
enough only to pour upon this volatile Salt by degrees a small quantity of
Spirit of Salt, while it is dissolved in its own phlegm, and to continue
affusion, till the Ebullition cease, and then to evaporate the superfluous
moisture till it be as dry as Salt.

I omit several Salts, Essences, Extract, and Opiates of Vipers, with several
other Chemical remedies of which Vipers are the foundation; fully believing
that there is in the volatile Salt of Vipers a full collection to be had at all
times in a short abridgment of all that can be expected from the trouble of so
many other preparations.

As to the contests that have happn'd touching the Vipers venom, which I
attributed to only incensed or enraged Spirits of that Animal; though I think I
have explained my self enough upon that subject, as well in my first, as in my
second book of Experiments upon the Viper: yet I cannot but speak my thoughts
upon what Monsieur Denis has uttered in his fixed Memorial of the Arts and
Sciences, in reference to these two Treatises, immediately after I published
the last. For though he seemed very earnest to see my book, that he might make
his reflections upon it, and seems to profess a great deal of sincerity. Yet
the Event makes it appear that he has neither considered my book, or rather,
not so much as read it, but out of a design to suppress what is most material
in it: and to elude whatever he thought to the prejudice of Monsieur Redi who
had wrote against my opinion.

In short this Author shows himself highly prejudiced against me in favor of
Monsieur Redi, to whom he gives the Title of first Physician to the Duke of
Tuscany, to to give the honor of a borrowed dignity. For not content to
suppress the very Title of my very second Book, he attributes to him all that I
have writt'n against the passages of the Gall, through which the Ancients
pretended that the yellow juice was conveyed to the Gums of the Viper; and
shows his prejudice yet more, while he would set up that Italian Physician for
the Author or Inventer of the slimy kernells of the Viper. Though in his own
writings he never talks but at random, and by conjecture of two slimy kernells
only, which he imagines to be fixed under the vesicles of the yellow juice,
where there are no such things. Whereas I have showed in my first Book, by the
exact descriptions which I have given, and draughts which I have caused to be
drawn to the life, that there are a great number of kernels clustered as it
were in a heap together behind the holes of the eyes, and upon the sides of the
Temples of the Creature, far from the bottom of the vesicles, and that Monsieur
Redi is extremely deceived in his pretended discoveries, and that without doing
me much injustice as M. Denis has done, he cannot deprive me of the advantage
of having been the first inventor of those kernells.

But it is evident that he had no other design in his Memoires, by maintaining
the situation of the slimy kernells under the bottom of the vesicles, then to
defend against all truth, the opinion of Monsieur Redi, concerning the
pretended malignity of the yellow juice; for were he not wedded to the worst
party to the prejudice of experience, he needed nothing but his eyes to have
undeceived himself, and to have brought him to reason. Whence it appears, that
it is merely out of cunning when he says he is of my opinion touching the
nature of the Gall, which is nothing to the controversy, to insinuate more
dexterously that he is not of my opinion, as to the nature and qualities of the
yellow juice; taking no notice of my convincing arguments, to justify that it
is nothing venomous, nor of the experiments which I have published, and which
were tried in public, whereas Monsieur Redi's are only particular and upon his
own report.

But this is not all, for Monsieur Denis not content to suppress, as much as in
him lies, whatever he observed in my last book disadvantageous for Monsieur
Redi, he goes about to betray truth it self, and to father opinions upon me
which I never so much as thought of. But not being able to do that fairly, he
takes upon him to quarrel about Terms, pretending that when I spoke of enraged
Spirits, I meant a substance purely spiritual, and that by the Idea of
vengeance and anger, which I attributed to Vipers, I meant that those creatures
had passions like to those which are raised in men, upon violent changes that
happ'n in their Animal Spirits. But this trick takes little or no effect among
rational men. For no man can think by my discourses that I ever questioned but
that the venom of the Viper was a material substance, but that I thought it so
fine and subtiliz'd, that not falling under the discernment of sense, it might
with reason be called Spiritual, or to say better Spiritous, to distinguish it
from the yellow juice whose parts are discernable enough. So that by enraged
Spirits I meant the most subtiliz'd and most agitated part of the humors, that
unite together and separate themselves from the Mass in that violence of
action, through an extraordinary impression which the objects make upon the
body. And when I averred those Spirits had no determinate place, when the
Creature was unprovoked; I thought it but rational, because perhaps they might
not be then in being, or if they were, they are so mixed with the rest of the
humors that they have no particular place, but only when they unite from the
rest and ascend to the brain when the Creature is provoked. However had I not
thought them local, I could never have affirmed that they pass from the throat
of the Viper that bites into the blood of the other Animal, where it causes all
that disturbance which is remarkable.

But all men of judgment may easily understand that I made use of those
figurative speeches, that I might the better clear my thoughts to the
apprehension of all the world, intending by the word Imagination only the
Organick part of the brain of that Animal, where these Spirits separated from
the rest of the blood muster themselves up together. By the Idea of Vengeance,
their flying to the Organs appropriated for their defense; and by Choler, the
tumultuous and violent agitation wherewith those little bodies pass from one
body to another. And when I said that this venom looses it self when the anger
of the Creature is over, I meant no other but that the violent motion of the
humors ceasing, they recover their natural condition, and ceasing to be
enraged, are not able to separate themselves, to work those tragical effects
which are the consequences of their commotion.

So that it is no wonder, that Monsieur Denis having suppressed my real
Experiments, should obtrude upon me such as never were in my thoughts to make
or put down in writing, when he affirms it to be one of my observations, that
in swallowing the blood of the Viper, or by pouring it into a wound, no unhappy
accident fell out. But it may be observed that integrity is not the thing which
he aims at in his writings, and that he rather chooses to vent whatever comes
into his thoughts, then to trouble himself with the examination of truth. Had
he only made a succinct repetition of what he found most remarkable in my
experiments, and recited in short the reasons that confirm my opinion, as the
Gentlemen of the Academy of London have done me the honor to do, he had done
me but justice; but that was not his purpose; for to favor the part which he
has chosen to defend, he has attributed to another that which belongs to me,
and overturning the whole sense of my writings talks of that which is not
material, with saying a word of that which was most conducing to knowledge. So
that I have the same reason to give him the same rebuke as formerly Martial
gave Posthumus, his Advocate, who instead of pleading his cause about the three
Goats which his neighbor had stolen from him, talked about the bush, of
nothing but Sylla and the war of Mithridates. Since that instead of keeping
close to the truth contained in my books, of which he undertook to speak, he
has suppressed them to speak of Monsieur Redi, and attributing that to him which
was in truth mine he has altered the property of his friends writings, and
drawn consequences quite contrary to the sense and meaning of the Author.

In the mean time neither the ill grounded opinions, nor irrational writings of
any of Mr. Redi's Copartners, shall ever make me change my opinion touching the
Vipers venom lying in the enraged Spirits, excluding the yellow juice and all
the rest of the parts of the body. The great number of trialls which I have
made thereof, and my own reason, will not permit me to doubt any farther upon
this subject, and more effectually convince me, then any other writings which
they have publishe either before or since mine.

CHAP. VI Of the Chemical preparation of Hartshorn.
THE great eagerness of the Heart to devour Vipers, whose parts are so subtle,
his swiftness, his Annual renewing of his Head, and the great age which he
lives, make it manifest that this Creature is endu'd with very considerable
principles of life, and that consequently his parts must be very useful in
Physic. We see that his body affords a good number of Medicines both to the
one and the other Pharmacy; and that Chemistry finds work enough to exercise it
self upon, especially in relation to the Horns, the various conditions whereof
require variety of preparations. The first time proper for the preparation of
these Horns is from about the middle to the end of the Spring. For then it is
that they abound in subtle and volatile parts, which not being able to afford
sufficient nourishment to those of the preceding year, loosen them from their
place, and thrust out others in their stead, at the same time almost that the
sap rising in the Spring up into the Trees, produces fresh leaves and fruits
instead of the growth of the former year. The subtle and volatile parts
abounding very much, thrust out in a short time small shootes, very tender at
first, and indeed for some weeks, as being full of a Sanguinolent Juice; but
which hard'n from day to day, growing bigger and bigger from the beginning of
the Summer, till they have attained their full growth, and that their time
comes to fall off again.

Take these young Shoots when they are about seven or eight Inches high, and
having cut them into slices about the breadth of a half Crown put them into a
glass Cucurbit, and set it in a Balneum Mariae, and having luted a head and a
Recipient to it, distill the liquor with a moderate fire, till the pieces are
become dry. This is called Harts-head water; and is very much recommended for
for the furthering of women in Travel. It is good also to fortify the heart and
noble parts against malignant Fevers. You may make double advantage of the
pieces that remain in the Cucurbit. For having beaten them to powder, keep it
apart, or put them into a Cornute of Earth, and having placed it upon a bed of
Sand in a close furnace of Reverberation. and fitted and luted a large
Recipient to the beak, make the distillation with a gradual fire according to
the rules. For by that means you shall have a volatile Salt, an oil and much
Phlegm, which is to be rectified afterward in a Mattress with a long neck, like
the volatile Salt of Vipers. The water of Harts-head is to be taken at a
distance from meals, from a spoonful to two. You may also at the same time add
to the same dose, a scruple or half a dram of the powder, or from four to seven
or eight grains of the volatile Salt.

Ustion was the usual preparation which the Ancients practiced upon Hartshorn;
and of which some of our Moderns make use, though to very little purpose,
unless when the Terrsterial part is only desired, and that you have no need of
the oil or volatile Salt, which are dissipated by Ustion or Calcination. But
though this be rather a destruction then a preparation, the necessity which
there may be of the Terrestrial part in several Rectifications, as also in that
of its own volatile Salt, or else to serve as a remedy to bind and mortify
Acids, occasions me to say, that to have it in that Condition, after you have
sawed the horn in long pieces, you may set them upon a Tile in some Potters
oven, and there keep them while the Pots are baked, till they be calcined to
whiteness. You may also calcine those pieces in a close Furnace of Reveration,
putting them between the Cornute and the Duomo, and leaving them there during
the distillation of some corrosive Spirits, especially of Vitriol, which
requires a long continuation of the fire. The Hartshorn being thus calcined,
it is enough to powder it grossly, if it be only for Rectifications. But if it
be to be taken alone, or mixed with other astringent remedies, it must be
ground upon Porphyry, moistning it with some Cordial water, as you grind
precious Stones, till it be scarcely to be felt.

At this day we use another Calcination of Hartshorn much less destructive,
which is called the Philosophical way, by reason of the gentle and industrious
men by which they bring it to perfection. To which purpose after the Hartshorn
is sawed into long pieces, they tie every one of the pieces at the end with a
pack-thread, and fasten the pack-thread to a stick of a sufficient length, and
lay them a cross within side of a large Refrigerant of Copper tinned within, so
that the long pieces of Hartshorn hanging down in the neck of the vessel may
for so long time as is requisite, receive the vapors of the liquor boiling
that ascend from the vessel, where Carduus, Scabious, Bawme, or any other
Cordial plant is distilling. But because the Hartshorn must receive these
vapors for three or four days together to be thoroughly calcined, and the
distillation of an herb cannot endure so long, it must be hung again over new
distillations of the same nature.

Now the volatile Salt of the Hartshorn being inwardly and closely united with
the other parts, and with them constituting a very solid body, the vapors of
the boiling water cannot well make any great dissipation: whence it comes to
pass that though they carry along with them the watery and muscolaginous part,
yet neither the oil, nor the volatile Salt suffer any considerable dissipation
so that there remains a very considerable quantity of both after Calcination
thus ordered. So that it is incomparably better then that which is calcined by
a violent and immediate fire; which consuming all the volatile leaves only the
Terrestrial part, and that little Salt which the acid of the Combustible
matters has fixed.

This Hartshorn is as white and easily powdered as the first. It may be also
ground in the same manner upon Porphyry, and serve for the same uses from half
a scruple to half a dram, and sometimes a whole dram, mixing it in proper
liquors, or among other Medicines, especially if you design to close up and
strengthen; to mortify acids; resist poisons, or kill worms.

Nevertheless we must believe that Hartshorn simply rasp'd, and powdered, not
having passed the fire, nor suffered any dissipation of its good parts, is yet
better then Hartshorn calcined Philosophically, especially if you have no
design to qualify acids.

As for Magisteries of Hartshorn, which some Authors have described, in regard
they are not made, but by dissolving and precipitating it with corrosive
Spirits and Salts, which. by their violence destroy its best parts, I think it
far better to let those preparations alone, and to use in their stead,
Hartshorn rasp'd, and finely powdered.

The separation of the most pure substances of Hartshorn from the impure, are
the most advantageous preparations that can be made of it. For that purpose
having sawed it into small pieces, distill it through a Cornute in a close
Reverberating Furnace, with a gradual fire, as in the distillation of man's
Skull; in the same manner the distilled substances may be rectified. But
because the volatile Salt is chiefly sought for, besides those ways which I
have prescribed for the distillation of man's Scull, you may mix it with Hearts
horn calcined and grossly powdered, and so rectify it three or four times; that
leaving there behind all its impurities, and the smell of the Empyrema
contracted in distillation, it may ascend more pure and more white into the
head, and be in a condition to be longer kept, in a double glass Bottle well
stopped. The doses and uses of the volatile Salt and Oil of Hartshorn are the
same with those of man's Skull.

Hartshorn calcined, and very grossly powdered, is properly made use of, in the
distillation of Marrow and Suet of a Heart, or man's Fat, and all the unctuous
parts of Animals, by melting those substances over a gentle fire, and
incorporating with it as much as that can suck up, and afterward putting them
into a Cornute, and distilling them in a close Furnace of Reverberation, with a
gradual fire, but much more violent then that which is used for the
distillation of the same Hartshorn.

Pieces of Ivory may be distilled through a Retort, in the same manner as
Hartshorn, and a volatile Salt and Oil drawn out of it, the virtues whereof are
very like those of Hartshorn. Then you shall find in the Retort the pieces of
Ivory very black within and without, if the fire were to the last degree of
heat. Those pieces of Ivory the Painters make their true Velvet black, which
they can never do of Ivory burnt in the fire; where the pieces are neither
truly nor equally black, but of a mixed color. You may also quench those pieces
of Ivory upon a Tyle, and put them and leave them in a Potters Oven, till they
are calcined to a white color, which is that which the Ancients called Spode,
that being deprived of its volatile Salt and Oils, is of no more worth then
Hartshorn calcined in an open fire. The reasons which I have given for the
blackness of woods distilled through a Cornute, and why they cannot be turned
to Ashes, how violent soever or long continued the fire may be, while they are
shut up and kept from the air, the same reasons, I say may be given for the
blackness of Ivory; to which I refer the curious Reader, to spare the trouble
of a repetition.

Hearts blood may be also distilled after the same manner as man's blood. The
ribs also and other bones of a Whale after the same manner as Hartshorn. The
volatile Salt and Oil approaching very near to those of the same parts of other
Animals. Yet there are some Physicians who attribute to them a specific virtue
for the ease and cure of the Gout, giving the Salt inwardly, and outwardly
applying the Oil upon the parts aggrieved.

CHAP. VII. Of the Preparation of Toads.
TOads that seem to be abhorred and abominated by all mankind, have yet their
virtues, which are very considerable. I omit the command which some pretend
that the Toad has over the Weesel, and the necessity which he imposes upon that
creature to put himself whether he will or no into his mouth, which the Toad
opens on purpose to stifle the other. I meddle not neither with the
Philosophical discourses of some upon the cunning of that creature in fighting
with the Spider; only I must say, that besides the good parts that Chemistry
draws forth by distillation, the body of a Toad dried, is useful in the cure
and ease of a good number of diseases.

The drying of Toads is the first and most common preparation in use, as well
for their Chemical distillation, as Galenical prescription. And to this
purpose, having tied a packthred to their hinder leg, and hanged them up in an
airy place, leave them there not only till they dye of themselves, but till
they are quite dry. Then if you intend to distill them Chymically, cut them in
pieces, and put them into a Retort of Potters earth or glass, well luted, and
place it in a close Reverberating Furnace. Then having exactly luted a large
Recipient to the beak, you shall draw forth with a gradual fire a volatile Salt
with an Oil, together with much phlegm, which will be all together in the
Recipient; of which you must afterward make a rectification in a Sand-bath
with a moderate fire, in a Matras with a long neck covered with its head
carefully luted, observing in all things the same method as for the
rectification of the pure substances of the Viper. Whose virtues those of the
Toad are very like to, as also the dose and uses. Nevertheless the volatile
Salt of Toads is particularly recommended for the cure of the Hydropical,
especially being mixed with a little of that fixed Salt, which may be drawn by
ordinary ways from the sediment in the Cornute after distillation.

The whole body of the Toad dried, and held under the armpits, in the hand, or
behind the ear, or hung about the neck, is accounted a specific to stop
bleeding at the nose. It stays the menstruums, or irregular losses of blood in
women, being applied upon the Naval. The bone of the left leg before, which is
called the Toads arm, held against the tooth, asswages the pain, according to
Van Helmont, and the experience of some moderns. The powder of the whole Animal
put upon Buboes, or pestilential Carbuncles, draws forth the malignity, as it
does also in Venereal shankers. It fetches out the water from the Dropsical,
being laid to the reins, and given in White Wind from a scruple to half a dram.
Helmont recommends very highly Amulets composed of the powder of a dried Toad,
and the stuff which he disgorges dying as he hangs, falling into a Cup of Wax
set on purpose to receive it. Affirming that those Amulets are specificks as
well to preserve from, as to cure the Pestilence.

Some Authors attribute all the virtues of a Toad to a Stone, or Bone, which is
sometimes found in the head of those Animals, which are large and old, and is
called a Toad-Stone.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Preparation of Frogs.
FRogs not having any thing venomous in them, when they are cut to pieces, may
be put into a glass Cucurbit, placed in Balneo Mariae, and covered with its
head; so with a soft heat you shall draw forth a water, accounted very proper
to appease internal pains, especially of the Reins, Ureters, and Bladder. After
which distillation, put that which remains in the Cucurbit into an earthen
Retort, well luted; and having placed it in a close Reverberating Furnace, and
fitted a large Recipient to the beak, and exactly luted the jointures, make a
distillation with a gradual fire, proceeding as in the distillation of Vipers,
and you shall find a volatile Salt and Oil, mixed with much phlegm at the bottom
of the Recipient; of this make a rectification according to the rules already
given, and attribute to the Oil and volatile Salt, very near the same virtues
as to that of Toads.

You may also burn the Frogs in a pot, and reduce them to Ashes, to stop the
bleeding of wounds, by strewing it upon them; and bleeding at nose, by putting
it into the nostrils. They are also mingled in medicines proper to make the
hair grow. They are also given inwardly from a scruple to a dram in proper
liquor, to stop Gonorrhaea's, after the virulency is carried off.

Some Authors commend Toads eaten against the venom of Serpents. They apply
them also alive upon pestilential sores to suck out the poison; they also
attribute particular virtues to the heart, liver, gall, and fat, and some other
parts of Frogs. But chiefly they esteem their sperm, gathered in March in the
full of the Moon, and distilled in Balneo Mariae between lukewarm and boiling,
which water they give inwardly in vomitings, losses of blood, internal
inflammations, and outwardly apply it to cure redness of the face, and kill the
Itch occasioned by sharp acid Salt humors. Crollius makes use of it also for
his powder called Sperniola; the water of Frogs distilled without fire is
highly commended for preserving the complexion of Ladies.

CHAP. IX. Of the Distillation of River-Crabs.
THE refreshing and moistning quality of River Crabs rendering them highly
extolled for restoring those that are Physical and those that are dried and
wasted with lingering agues, and long sickness we endeavor to preserve their
natural moisture by distilling them. For that reason we do not study to
separate their volatile Salt, though they are not unfurnished with it, as may
be seen by distilling them through a Cornute in a close Reverberatory,
proceeding in the same manner as for the distillation of other Animals or their
parts, and rectifying the distilled substances in a Sand-bath in a Matras with
a long neck.

The most ordinary distillation of Crevisses is this; having first bruised them
well and put them into a glass Cucurbit, covered it with its head and well
luted the jointures, place it in a Sand-bath over a gentle fire, and draw forth
the water till the substances in the Cucurbit are almost dry; then letting the
Bath cool and unluting the head, pour out the distilled water upon the
sediment, and luting up the Cucurbit renew the distillation as at first;
reiterate afterward Cohobation of the distilled water upon the matters five or
six times, the better to open the solid parts of the Crevisses, to loosen them,
and make the volatile parts ascend with the water.

After distillation perfected, calcine the Mark in an open fire, and having
reduced it to ashes, make thereof a lie, and draw forth the Salt by ordinary
means. After which having mingled this Salt with the distilled water, it is not
only proper for the restoring of Physical persons, but to open the passages of
the Urine; insomuch that some affirm it to be able to break and dissolve the
stone in the Kidneys and bladder. The dose is from one spoonful to three or
four, at a distance from times of meals; and the use of it may be continued as
necessity requires.

They who only look after the Diuretic virtue of Crevisses, calcine them in
the open fire, without distilling them, and having burnt them to ashes, make a
lie, out of which they draw a Salt very proper for their purpose, though in no
great quantity because of the dissipation of the volatile Salt by the open
fire. This Salt is given in a morning fasting from a scruple to half a dram in
white wind or some other diuretic liquor.

The stones improperly called Crabs eyes, which are found in the heads of large
Crevisses, when the Sun is in Cancer, containing very much volatile Salt and
some little fixed, are not only diuretic but very proper to mortify the acids
of the stomach. There is a volatile Salt and oil to be drawn from them, as from
the parts of other Animals. Their tincture is also made use of drawn from them
with white wind, and given with substances grounded upon Porphyrit, from a
scruple to a dram, either in broth or some other liquor.

CHAP. X. Of the Distillation of Storks.
THat you may save all that Storks have good in them; after you have pulled off
their feathers, and taken out their entrails, cut them into small pieces, and
put them into a glass Cucurbit placed in a Sand-bath, the Cucurbit being
covered with a head luted with Amydon, and a small Recipient luted to the beak.
Then distill the water with a moderate fire, till the matters in the Cucurbit
are almost dry. Having put up this water apart, put all that was in the
Cucurbit into a Retort of Potters Earth or glass, encompassed with lute, and
having placed the Cornute in a close Reverbaratory, fitted a large Recipient to
the beak, and luted the jointures, make the distillation with a gradual fire,
proceeding as in the distillation of other Animals, or of their parts. You
shall have by that means a volatile Salt and Oil mixed with the phlegm, at the
bottom of the Recipient, which you must rectify in a Sand-bath in a Matras
with a long neck, covered with a head carefully luted, as for the rectification
of other volatile Salts and Oils.

The volatile Salt of Storks is highly applauded against all sorts of poisons
and Epidemick distempers. It is also accounted a specific remedy against the
Epilepsie. It is given fasting in its own proper water from eight or ten to
twenty or thirty grains, and the use of it may be continued as occasion
requires. The distilled Oil is also made use of for the same distempers, from
two or three to nine or ten drops, incorporated with fine powdered Sugar in
their own water, or some other Cephalic liquor. At the same time you may also
anoint the Nostrils and Temples with this Oil, and apply it outwardly to anoint
paralytick members, and the pained parts of the Nerves and Joints; to which
purpose they sometimes make use of the melted fat of these birds. The powder of
the inward part of the stomach of the Stork, is highly extolled against all
sorts of poisons, given in some Cordial liquor from one scruple to a dram. With
the same success you may take dried dung of these Birds, to which purpose the
Salt and volatile Oil of the same dung is much more prevalent. But it must be
in Holland, Switzerland, or some other Countries where these Birds build at the
top of the Chimneys, where you may have enough of their dung to distill.

Some of the Ancients burned these Birds, as also Swallows for their Ashes
sake, believing to find therein all the virtues of those Creatures in a short
compass. But dissipation of the volatile Salt and Oil must divert Artists from
those destructive ways.

CHAP. XI. Of the Preparation of Bees and their Honey.
FRom Bees may be drawn through a Retort almost the same substances as from
other Animals. But the little use of these substances separated is the reason
that we only burn those little Animals to cinders to mix them with Pomatums, of
which the fat of Leaves, and oil of small Nuts is generally the foundation: the
use whereof, is to anoint those parts where they intend the hair should grow,
which is almost the only use made of these little Animals. Though some there
are that never burn them, but only reducing them to powder, make the same use
of it, as of the Ashes.

All the World consents, that Honey is the choice and collection which the Bees
make of the most pure, most delectable and most odioriferous parts of Plants;
particularly, of their Flowers and Fruits: and that Wax is a Body composed of
the more gross, more solid, and more tenacious matter which is mixed among the
substances from whence they draw their Honey. The Honey which they gather from
the sides of Mountains in hot Countries that lie to the East, and there is more
care to be taken of the place from whence you have it, then to trouble your
self to purify it for its distillation; the best way being only to hang the
Combs in a bag of transparent Cloth, in a place that is close and naturally
hot, and to let the honey drop of it self, by which means you neither take away
its whiteness nor its other good qualities either by fire or other ways.

Some, when they go about to distill Honey make use of Gravil or Flint-stones,
or some such Matter: But beside that, I know by experience, that those things
putrify, in some sort with the Honey, and break the Cucurbit; it is much
better to let it alone. For example, put two pound of Honey into a Cucurbit of
Copper well tinned within and very high, and having placed it upon a little
Furnace, covered with its head, Lute the jointures; and fit a small Recipient
to the Beak: Then kindle under it a Fire so small, that may not cause the Honey
to boil, yet may keep it a little more then lukewarm. By that means the clear
and Odoriserous water of Honey will ascend, attended by the Spirit, which you
shall know by its Acid taste, and by its color enclining to yellow, which will
grow deeper and deeper, especially, if you insensibly increase the Fire;
whereby at length the Oily part of the Honey will ascend which is the last
part you are to expect in Distillation. You may keep a part the clear and
Odoriferous Water that ascends first, separate the Oil from the Spirit, by the
means of a sheet of Cap-paper moistened, put into a Glass Funnel, and rectify
the Spirit, by consuming the watery part which is mixed with it, in an
Evaporating Bath.

The water of Honey is opening and Diuretic, especially when enliv'ned with
its Spirit. The one and the other mixed together are good to make hair grow, as
also to heal several Diseases of the Eyes, especially, Suffusions, or Pinns and
Webbs. It is used also to take out spots from the Face; and the Spirit well
rectified alone serves to dissolve Iron, or Mars, Saturn or Lead, and some
other Metals. The little Oil that is to be drawn out of Honey, is the reason
that we seldom continue the Distillation to the height for that purpose. As we
as seldom burn the remains in the Cucurbit to draw forth the Salt, in regard it
is but little and the virtues not extraordinary.

Some Writers prescribe certain ways to draw Vinegars out of Honey; But I find
no way more rational, but to let the Hydromel fermented sour of it self, as I
have showed in the Galenical Preparations, which will happen in a small time,
provided you leave the hole of the Tunnel that contains the Hydromel open.

CHAP. XII. Of the Distillation of Wax.
TAke two pound of pure yellow Wax, of a fragrant smell, and such as was
separated by fire from its faeces, cut it into little pieces, and having melted
it in an Iron or Copper skillet, over a very gentle fire, incorporate with them
as much ashes of good new wood as their substance will receive; then having put
this mixture into a large glass Retort, place it in a Sand-bath in a Capsula or
Kettle proportionable, so that the Cornute may be quite encompassed and covered
with Sand, except the neck. Then putting a small covering over the Capsula or
Case of the Retort, and fitted and exactly luted a half Baloon to the neck of
the Receiver, make your distillation with a gradual fire, soft at first, and
violent at length; letting it so continue till no more come forth of the
Retort. Then giving the Sand time to cool and unluting the Receiver you shall
find a thick'nd oil like Butter, the Phlegm the Spirit and some little volatile
Salt, and after you have stirred the substances in the Receiver, to dissolve
the volatile Salt in the liquors, pour them out by inclination into a Bottle,
and having melted the thick oil over a very gentle fire, pour it out into a
glass or gally pot to keep it for use; or else empty it into a skillet, and
having melted it over a very soft fire, incorporate with it the powder of
Quicklime newly powdered of it self, as much as the substance will contain;
then put all this into the Retort being made clean, and setting in the
Sand-bath and distilling it as before, you shall have an oil of Wax very clear,
with some almost as white as water, mixed with some little Spirit of Phlegm,
which you may separate with a glass Funnel or otherwise.

The volatile Salt of Wax may be rectified in a Bolthead or Mattress with a long
neck in a Sand-bath, as well as other volatile Salts when you distill a
considerable quantity of Wax. The dose of which is from eight or ten, to
fifteen or twenty grains, in white wine or some other liquor, as being a good
Diuretic and Diaphoretick. The curdled or thick'nd oil is good to lay upon
clefts and chops of the breasts, hands, feet, and fundament. It is also good for
Childblanes, and to dissolve hard and skirrous swellings. In all which cases
you may use the clear oil, which is besides very Diuretic, the dose being from
three or four to nine or ten drops, incorporated with fine Sugar, and steeped
in white wind, or in some other liquor.

The Spirit has the same virtues, but operates with less efficacy.

CHAP. XIII: Of the Distillation of Cheslops and Earthworms.
I Put the distillation of Cheslops and Earthworms together, as well because
there is the same way of proceeding to be observed, as also for that their
virtues are very near the same. These little Animals contemptible in
appearance, abound no less, considering the proportion of their bodies, in
volatile Salt and Oil, then the most part of other Creatures, though they are
very full of moisture. You must put them into a Retort, and place that in a
close Reverberatory, with a large Receiver carefully fitted and luted to the
neck, and so with a gradual fire draw forth the volatile Salt and Oil, mixed
with very much Phlegm, of which Rectification must be afterward made in a
Sand-bath, with a moderate fire in a Bolthead with a long neck covered with its
head perfectly well luted; which you have taken off, and put up the volatile
Salts which will first ascend; continue Rectification, and separate and put up
the Oil also, and the rest of the volatile Salt dissolved in some portion of
the Phlegm and distill them afterward into a small Receiver fitted and luted to
the neck of the head.

Some persevering in the mistake of the Ancients, burn to ashes these worms and
Cheslops, as well to keep them so for use, as to extract a Salt out of the
ashes; not foreseeing the dissipation which the fire makes of the volatile Salt
of these Animals, of which there remains none behind, but what the acid of the
combustible matters has fixed. Some there are also that having distilled
Cheslops and Earthworms, in a Cornute, dissolved the volatile Salt in the
watery part, and separated that liquor from the oily with a wet sheet of
Cap-paper in a glass Funnel, pour drop by drop into it Spirit of Salt or
Vitriol till the effervescency cease; whence it comes to pass, that not only
the volatile Salt is united to the acid, but also their being corporifi'd and
changed into fixed Salt, whereby the volatile as Diaphoretick as it was,
becomes only Diuretic.

This change cannot surprise those who know the great disposition which the
volatile Salts have to unite to acids, and the common change of nature that
will happen to them for a time by that union. Nor do they wonder more, that
when you add to this Salt thus fixed, the double of its weight of fixed Salt
drawn from Tartar well calcined, the acid should quit the volatile to unite its
self to the fixed Salt, and restoring the volatile to its former liberty,
should permit it to sublime as it does to the top of the head, when you give it
a proportionable heat.

The volatile Salts of Cheslops and Earthworms are equally Diaphoretick, and
very proper to purify the mass of blood, and to expel its impurities by
transpiration. They powerfully mortify acids, and are therefore recommended for
the cure of Ulcers, Cancers and the Scurvy: to ease the pains of Gouts,
Rhumatismes, and all pains that torment the Muscles and Nerves. The doses and
manner of taking these Salts, are much like those of the Salts of other
Animals; as also their oil, the virtues whereof tend very near to the same end.

Some there are that leaving the Earthworms and Cheslops for two or three days
to empty themselves between two earthen pans, wash them with white wind, and
having dried them in an oven, the great heat whereof is over, pulverize them
very finely, and give the powder from a scruple to a dram in white wind, or in
some other liquor, against stoppages of Urine, as also to cure those other
diseases for which their volatile Salt is recommended.

The worms that breed in the stomachs and entrails of men may be distilled in
the same manner, and volatile Salts and Oils drawn from them, not much inferior
in the same virtues, and which you may make use of instead of Earthworms.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Distillation of Cantharides.
NO question but Cantharides are in their whole substance very sharp and
corrosive; for being bruised and applied to any part of the body, they raise
blisters, and ulcers too, if they lie long. And being taken inwardly, they make
a strange havoc, causing inflammations of the inward parts, especially in the
Raines, Bladder, and Vessels adjoining to them, which sometimes cease not
without pissing of blood. Yet this malignity is no hindrance but that they are
often prescribed outwardly, observing necessary cautions; and but that by
Distillation they produce volatile Salts and Oil, that produce greater effects
in smaller quantities then any other volatiles that are prepared.

Take dry Cantharides without cutting off either their heads, their wings, or
their feet, and fill up about three quarters of a glass or Earthen Retort luted
round; then place it in a close Reverberatory, and having exactly fitted and
luted a large Recipient to the neck, make a distillation with a gradual fire,
as for other Animals or their parts; and you shall find in the Receiver a
volatile Salt and Oil, accompanied with much phlegm, which you must empty into a
Mattress, with a long neck, and having placed it in a Sand-bath covered with its
own head carefully luted, with a small Recipient fitted and luted in the same
manner to the neck, make a Rectification of the substances with a moderate
fire, which will presently cause the volatile white and Crystalline Salt
ascend, which you must stop up with as much speed as care, in a bottle of glass
perfectly well stopped, putting on another head in the place of that taken off;
the Commissures of which having carefully luted, continue the fire and draw
forth into a small Recipient, the Oil and the rest of the volatile Salt
dissolved in some little Phlegm, which it has carried away with it. Which done,
separate the Oil from the Liquor, and keep each apart in double glass bottles
well stopped.

The volatile Salt of Cantharides is one of the most powerful Diuretics that
are to be met with, so that it is affirmed to be able to break, and dissolve
the stone in the Kidneys and Bladder. It is so penetrating and so sharp, that
it raises little blisters upon the tongues of those that taste it. So that it
is not to be taken but tempered in Liquors, or perfectly well mixed in Opiates,
or other soft medicines from one or two grains, to five or six at most. The
effects are much more advantageous and with much less hazard, then those of
Cantharides given in the simple substance, to raise the vigor of either sex to
amorous performance. For which purpose the Oil is very proper, mingled with
equal parts of distilled oil of Cloves, and twelve times as much pressed oil of
Nutmegs, to anoint the soles of the feet, the Testicles, and the Perineum,
provided their strong smell can be endured. The liquor containing the rest of
the volatile Salt may be made use of for the same uses as the Salt it self,
proportioning the dose, according to the greater or less quantity of Phlegm that
it contains.

CHAP. XV. Of the Distillation of Emmets.
PUt into a Mattress proportionable as many Emmets as you can catch in Harvest
time, and pouring upon them Spirit of Wine well rectified three fingers above
the Emmets, stop the Mattress exactly well, and set it over a Bakers Oven till
the Emmets be quite changed into liquor. At which time having unstopp'd the
Mattress, and poured out the liquor into a glass Cucurbit, cover it with its
head, and lute the Commissures exactly; and having placed it in a Sand-bath,
and fitted and luted a small Recipient to the neck, make distillation with a
very moderate fire, till there remain behind but very little liquor in the
Cucurbit. Then having cooled and unluted the Vessels, pour out and keep the
spiritous water distilled, and full of the volatile Salt of Emmets into a
double Viol well stopped to keep for use.

This spiritous water is very much recommended to revive and strengthen the
natural heat, to provoke lust; for which purpose they add to it certain
Aromaticks, as Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, etc. It is also very good to restore
persons that are wasted with Atrophies. It is given from half a spoonful to a
whole spoonful, alone or mixed with a little Wine, or with a third or fourth
part of Cinnamon Water.

Emmets may be also put into a Mattress, which being well stopped, and lapp'd
about with dough about a fingers breadth, is to be put and kept in a Bakers
Oven all the while the great Loaves are baking; after that the liquor is to be
strained out and kept in a double Viol well stopped, as a most special remedy
against deafness.

They are also to be infused and boiled afterward over a gentle fire in
^allet-Oil, then strained and kept to anoint the parts of nature, to advance
Giture. There may also a volatile Salt and Oil of Emmets be drawn, by
distilling them in a Retort, like the Cantharides, which are almost for the
same purposes.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Preparation of the Peacock.
THE Peacock which is accounted one of the most beautiful birds, and one of
those that live longest, has not for nothing gained the Title of a Medicinal
Bird, in regard that not only his body contains several remedies proper for
Physic; but because his flesh will keep longer then that of any other Animal.
Peacocks broth is accounted a particular Remedy for the Pluri^y. However this
is certain, that from the whole body of the Peacock, from his Excrements, and
especially his dung, many specific Remedies against the Epilepsy are to be
drawn, not to speak of those other virtues attributed to other parts of the
body.

Pick the Peacock well, and draw him, then ^ut him to pieces, and put him into
a Cucurbit of Glass placed in a Sand-bath; cover the Cucurbit with its head,
and having luted the closures with Amydon, and fitted a small Recipient to the
neck, you shall draw forth a water, very fit to fortify the brain, and preserve
it against such diseases as it is subject to. This Distillation being at an
end, take that which remains out of the Cucurbit, and put it into an earthen
Retort luted all over; set the Retort in a Reverberatory, and having exactly
fitted and luted to the beak a large Receiver, you shall with a graduated fire,
draw forth a volatile Salt and an Oil together with much Phlegm, which must be
rectified in a Mattress like the former. The Rectification will yield a white
Crystalline volatile Salt, and a clear oil of great virtue, especially against
the Epilepsy, in the same dose and after the same manner as other volatile
Salts of the same nature; and making use of the Oil to anoint the Temples,
futures of the scull, and to put up into the Nostrills.

As for Peacoks dung, after you have well dried and bruised it, put it into an
Earthen Retort, luted all over, and place it in a close Reverberatory; then
having fitted and luted a large Recipient to the neck, you shall draw forth
substances very like to those which the Peacock it self yields in Distillation,
which must be also rectified in a long Mattress, to be used for the cure of the
Epilepsy. The volatile Salt and oil of Peacock and his dung is also very proper
to cure vertigoes* and to suppress the vapors which cause it.

It is believed that the dry dung of the Peacock, to the weight of a dram being
infused in white wind, then strained and given to drink every morning fasting
from the new to the full of the Moon, is a specific remedy against the
Epilepsy and Verticles. The fat of this foul is also recommended against
Colicks, and the feathers burnt, suppress the vapors that rise in the Matrix.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Preparation of Castor.
YOU may through a Cornute distill all the parts of the Castor, as we do those
of other Animals, and rectify all the substances drawn from them in a Mattress
with a long neck. But the convenience of Salts drawn from other Animals and
there nearness in virtue to those which might be drawn from this Animal, make
us forbear any such preparation. So much the more because the transcending
qualities which are known on all hands attributed to the substances contained
in the vesicles of that Creature, which for their excellency are called
particularly Castoreum, cause us to neglect the other parts. These qualities,
together with the dearness of the cods or pouches, together with the nature of
the substances enclosed therein, is the reason that we never expose them to a
fire of Reverberation, to separate the volatile Salt and Oil which might be
drawn forth by a Retort. And therefore having taken off the unctuous part that
lies in the bladder by it self at the top of the bags, and set it by, we bruise
or cut very small the fleshy substance, and putting it into a Mattress
proportionable, pour upon it Spirit of wine well rectified, till it swim four
fingers above the substances; the having perfectly stopped the Mattress, we
place it up on a Bakers oven, leaving it there to digest for fifteen days or
three weeks, or longer if you please, stirring the Ingredient from time to
time, the more effectually to impregnate the Spirit of Wine with their most
Essential parts, which will be at length something of a high color. Then
having strained and squeezed the substances, we keep this Liquor in a double
glass bottle, under the name of Tincture of Castor: but if you desire a
Distillation, pour out all the matters contained in the Mattress into a glass
Cucurbit, and having placed it in a Sand-bath, and covered it with its head
carefully luted, and also fitted a small Recipient luted as exactly, draw forth
the Spirit with a moderate fire, till you have driven all the Spiritous part to
ascend. By which means you shall have that which they call the Spirit of
Castor, which you will find to have raised along with it in its Distillation,
the most pure and most volatile substance of that part of the Animal, which
else had remained in the Tincture. The virtues Doses and manner of taking are
much alike, in regard they are of greater prevalency in all cold diseases of
the brain and stomach, but particularly against those of the Matrix. The dose
is from half a dram to two, and sometimes and upon certain occasions to half an
ounce mixing them in Cephalic, Hysteric or Stomach waters. Sometimes they are
put up the Nostrils, or used to anoint the Temples and Wrists.

As to what remains in the Cucurbit, having filtered it, and put it into an
Earthen Pipkin well glazed within, and the Pipkin upon a very soft fire,
evaporate by degrees the superfluous moisture to the ordinary consistence of
Extracts, then letting it cool, put it up in a Gally-pot close stopped, and
keep it for your use. This Extract containing in it all the pureless volatile
parts of the Castor, deserves to be saved, to be dissolved in Spirit of Castor,
or in Cephalic or Historick Liquors, or to be taken in Bolus, from half a
scruple to half a dram, for the same diseases for which the Tincture and Spirit
are prescribed.

As for the Uncturus part which is found in a Bladder by it self, at the upper
end of the Bags or Cods, Chemistry takes no notice of it in preparation. But it
may be by the Galenick Pharmacy properly used to make oil of Castor, as I have
said in its due place.

I could have filled this Book with several other Chemical preparations of
Animals, or their parts, but I believe I have produced enough to satisfy those
who apply themselves to Chemistry, and to enable them to undertake and to
accomplish with success all those preparations of Animals. And therefore I
proceed to Minerals.

The Third Book: Containing the CHEMICAL PREPARATIONS OF MINERALS.
CHAP. I. Of the Preparation of Earths and Bolus's.
I Began the first Book of this Third Part with the Chemical Preparation of
Plants. For finding them upon the surface of the Earth which produces them,
they present themselves first to my Eyes. Immediately after I treated of the
Preparation of Animals, for whose sake the Earth produces those Plants. It
behooves me now to show you the way how to prepare the Earth it self: that it
may afterward proceed to the preparation of those mixed Bodies which it
encloses within its Bowels, and of those other Substances that depend upon
them; and which may be placed in the Number of Minerals. I do not here
undertake to speak of that Natural Chemistry which is continually practiced in
the Earth, to bring forth those Productions which we see, and which lie
concealed from us; but only of such Chemical Operations as may with advantage
be made upon the Substance it self, and the mixed Bodies that belong to it, of
the most part whereof the Earth is esteemed to be the Mother and the Nurse.

There is a fixed Salt to be drawn from an untilled Earth, naturally barren,
observing this Method; Having dug a hole about two foot deep, and taken out
some bushels of the bottom Earth, put the Earth into a convenient tub, and
having soaked and stirred it in three times as much Rainwater as there are
measures of Earth, leave the Earth to settle for two or three days; then having
poured out the water by inclination, and strained it through course Paper,
evaporate the superfluous moisture in a Caldron, or an iron kettle over a
moderate fire, and you will find the Salt of Earth at the bottom of the Vessel.
You may make this Salt white and crystalline, by putting it into a Crucible,
and exposing it to a violent fire for a good hour, stirring it from time to
time with an iron Spatula; then having dissolved it in Rainwater, and filtered
that water, you may coagulate it again.

The qualities of this Salt are very like to those of Sea Salt, so that you may
also draw from it a Spirit almost of the same nature.

In regard the Lotions of Earth, and their preparation upon Porphiry, are the
same with those of Galerice Pharmacy, I will only say by the by, that over much
Lotion carries away what the Earths have of Salt and Spiritous; and that
Lotions not being made use of but to separate their Sandy parts, or their other
impurities, you may without altering the virtues of those Earths, do as well by
beating them in a Mortar, and sifting them thorough a silk Seirce, which the
Sand nor other impurities cannot pass thorough* you may moist'n clay Moulds
with Cordial waters or decoctions; or the Boles that you grind upon Porphyry,
or knead them into little Loaves, provided you do not wet them too much.

From Clay Earths dried, especially those of Lemnos, you may extract a Phlegm
and Spirit, somewhat tartish, commended to provoke sweat, distilling it
thorough a Retort in a close Reverberatory. You may also prepare Magisteries of
this Earth, dissolving them in Spirit of Salt, or Niter, and precipitating them
with Salt of Tartar dissolved into Liquor, which uniting it self to those acid
Spirits, causes them to abandon the body which they had dissolved; or else by
pouring fair water upon them, which weakening those Spirits, produces the same
effect. But the violent operation of those Spirits upon the Earth, being as
little advantageous, as the dissipation of its Salt and Spiritous parts, which
happens by the conjunction of the same Spirits, and by the Lotions which must
be used to carry off their Acrimony, I am certain that these Clay Earths being
taken out of their own place, and sifted thorough a silk ^ive, are incomparably
much better. For they retain their particular quality to dry up and close, to
resist the putrefaction of humors, poison, and the malignity of Fevers, to
dissolve curdl'd blood and provoke sweat. They are also of great force against
Dysenteries and Diarrhea's.

CHAP. II. Of the Preparation of Waters.
I do not undertake here to speak of the use of water, no more then of the
necessity of its union with the Earth, for the generation and production of
mixed bodies. But because it is usually placed among the number of Minerals, it
behooves me to speak of its principal preparations. Both the one and the other
Pharmacy make use of Fountain and River water for several uses, with any
preparation of them at all; in some places they are forced to make use of well
and standing water instead of others. But Chemistry observes something more
excellent in Rain water, more especially at the time of the Equinoxes and
chiefly the vernal. All Rain water is generally more sweet, more thin, more
light then any other water, because the Sun has raised it, and composed it of
the most subtle vapors of the water, and that it has had time to purify it
self, and to subtilize it self by passing thorough the air before it fall upon
the ground. The Spring is also the time wherein the air most filled with
universal Spirit, the effects whereof are so potent for the production of all
things, and that it abounds most in invisible volatile Salt, which animates all
sublunary substances.

Yet the purity of Rain water is not such neither, but that you may let it
settle for two or three days, and that you must filter it, before you make use
of it, and distill it in Balneo Mariae, or evaporating Baths, when you intend
to augment its subtility and penetration. To which purpose it is enough with a
moderate fire, to draw off but half of the moisture; then having emptied and
kept apart the residence, and poured in more Rain water, continue this
Distillation till you have enough water subtiliz'd and charged with the most
volatile Salt of Rain water; after which having put all the Residencies
together, or in several glass Cucurbits, in the same Bath, evaporate the
moisture, till only the fixed Salt of the Rain water remain at the bottom dried
and mixed with some Terrestreity.

Some to have a more Spiritous water, shut up the rain water in a Mattress, and
having sealed it Hermetically, set it to digest or putrify for thirty or forty
days, the better to precipitate the feces, and to make the Spiritous part more
fit to forsake the watery, and to ascend first in Distillation.

Snow being only rain congealed in the Air by the cold, and the volatile Salt
part being by that means stopped, you may after the same manner draw forth a
water, not only like in color, savor, and virtues, like that of Rain water,
but also more penetrating, because that Snow abounds more in Salt. And that is
the reason there is more Salt found after the Evaporation of Snow then Rain
water.

The distilled waters of Rain or Snow, are very proper to penetrate the
substances of several mixed bodies, especially those of Vegetalls, and to draw
forth their Tincture; which they will do more effectually if you add to them
their fixed Salt. It is said also that the Spirit which may be drawn from this
fixed Salt, is good to dissolve Metalls, especially Gold.

The nature of dew very much resembles that of Rain water, or Snow, but it is
more subject to dissipation. For proceeding only from the Exhalations of the
earth, and not ascending so high as the vapors that cause Rain, it is in less
quantity, and remains not long. For being only in the middle of the Spring,
when the Sun approaching toward the Solstice, the air is clear and serene, and
not at other seasons, or when the air is covered with Clouds* which hinder the
Rays of the Sun from drawing up the Exhalations of the Earth, or turn to Rain;
and not falling neither in windy weather; you must be very diligent to gather
it when it falls, or which is better, to receive it into Basins and other
Vessels as fast as it falls, and put it up at the same time into bottles well
stopped, to make use of it in that condition, or to draw from it a Spirit,
having digested it for forty days in a Mattress with a long neck hermetically
sealed, and observing the same method as for Rain water, though you must not
think to find the same fixed Salt at the bottom of the vessel as Rain water
would have yielded, the extreme volatile of the Spirit of dew, causing it to
ascend in Distillation.

It is a custom with some to evaporate over the fire the Sea water, and the
water of the brackish fountains in the French Country, and in other places that
they may get the Salt, which remains after Evaporation; but they never use to
distill it for the waters sake, but only upon the Sea, when they want fresh
water: though that which they do draw from thence be accompanied with a kind of
Acrimony, because of the volatile particles of the same Salt which rise in
Distillation.

I shall not speak here of the Distillation of Mineral waters, because it is
not necessary for their use, and for that we never spend them but in their
natural condition. Nor shall I speak of the method to be observed for the
discovery of the several substances which impart their principal virtues to
Mineral waters, for which the curious may find all necessary instruction, in a
book of Observations upon the Mineral Waters of France, written by Monsieur Du
Clos, Physician in ordinary to the King, published in the year 1675. after a
great number of experiences by him made upon that subject. Nor is it necessary
to speak of the artificial waters that may be made by dissolving in Rain,
River, or Fountain water diverse Salts and other Spirits, accomodating them to
the malidies and temmperature of the Patients, the just and certain Composition
whereof renders the use of them much more advantageous, then that of Mineral
waters, which are made use of like one Saddle for all Horses. It being
impossible to know the precise quantity of particles which they have taken
along with them of the several Mineralls which they have met with in the
Entrails of the earth: though by their smell, color, and other distinctions
which may be made, some considerable knowledge may be had of Mineralls which
communicated their principal qualities to them, and that some judgment may be
given from the advantages, which a good number of persons have found by them in
diseases of the same nature which you desire to cure.

CHAP. III. Of the Preparation of Stones, and precious Stones in general.
I Will not examine the reasons upon which some men have grounded the solidness
and hardness of stones, or precious stones, or the cause of their
lapidification. For their attributing the cause thereof to the proportionate
union of the Alkali's with the Earth, or of both of them with Acids, or with
water or juices that have a ferment in them, or a petrifying seed, is of little
moment. Though we find wood, bones, and other substances to petrifie in some
waters, and stones that are hid in the bodies of certain Animals, as also of
men, besides that the Birth has been petrified in the wombs of some women. Nor
does it signify much that they have attributed another cause to the Acid of
the air, of which we see apparent effects in Earths, which lying upon the
superficies of Plains and Mountains, petrifie in succession of time. Or that
they would add thereto the natural disposition which some stones have to resume
their shape of stone, after they have lost it, like Plaster; or to communicate
that inclination to substances mixed with them, as Lime does. My chief
intention is here to treat of the principal intentions that Chemistry practices
upon stones, and precious stones.

The Mechanic imitating Chemistry, calcines in proper Furnaces, with a violent
and long continued fire, several common stones, as certain River Flints, and
certain stones whereof they make Lime for building, and those whereof they make
Plaster. Chemistry sometimes calcines certain precious stones, keeping them
some hours in fusion over a violent fire, as is often practiced upon crystal;
sometimes she mixes with them Niter, Salt of Tartar, or some other Salt, when
she would calcine them to draw the liquor from them, as to have the liquor of
Crystal. Sometimes she only heats them two or three times red hot in the fire,
and quench them as often in Water, as is practiced upon Lapis Lazuli; sometimes
she dissolves them in corrosive liquors, as the Saphir in that of Vitriol, and
some other precious stones in distilled Vinegar, and which is that which they
call Solntion, or potential Calcination, which is attended by other operations,
of which in due place. She also makes Magisteries of these Stones, though to
little purpose, in regard their virtue is much inferior to the stones from
whence they are extracted.

CHAP. IV. Of the Preparation of Lime.
ALL the world knows, that the Stones whereof Lime is made, cannot produce
those effects which are remarkable in them; without having passed the fire, and
being reduced into that condition by calcination. It Is known also, that the
violent operation of the fire consumes all their moisture, and that they have
not acquired the virtue of binding in one mass, and petrifying together Sand
and other substances, till after they have been calcined and soaked in water.
We must also confess, that the Lime is not free from the impressions of the
fire which it has undergone. Yet we have no reason to conclude from thence,
that its caustic quality proceeds from little fiery bodies, which they would
have to be enclosed within it. For if that were true, Tyles and Bricks, which
suffer as much violence of fire, would not be without those little igneous or
fiery bodies. Those stones which are not of the same nature as those of which
they make Lime, would have the same caustic quality, have endured the same
fire as the Lime-stones, and sometimes a much longer time, Iron, Copper,
silver, Gold, and several other substances would be also Caustic, after they
have endured the fire as long, and renewed it as often. But since there is no
such thing, and that they are not able to burn, but when they come just out of
the fire, we must search in the proper substance of the Lime, and no where else
for its Caustic quality, and particularly its half Spiritous Salt, the
subtility and penetration whereof manifests it self very apparently, though it
cannot be separated from its Terrestrial part to reduce it into a Mass* like
other Salts.

It Is then the dryness of this Salt, and the Terrestrial part, and their great
inclination to join with the water which has its natural acid with it, which is
the sole cause of their heat and effervescency when they join together, which
makes them act reciprocally one upon another. Whence proceeds the particular
quality which the Lime has, to bind and petrify all bodies that are mixed with
it, so that we are not to impute that action, no more then the Caustic quality
to the little bodies of fire, the necessity whereof is so much the less
maintainable, because we see by experience that Quicklime is not heated at all,
by pouring upon it the Spirit of wine, or oil, though both the one and the
other are very combustible, but that on the contrary they put out the heat
which happens to Lime by its conjunction with the water. As to the Caustic
effects of Lime, they are to be attributed to the Solidity, and incroaching
resemblance of the parts of its own proper Salt, which are little different
from those of the fire, to which they pretend to attribute those effects.

The most simple preparation of Quicklime is that of its Elixiviation, not that
we can separate the Salt from it, as from other Lies. But we dissolve in water
the Spiritous desiccative Salt, which it is also burning when is concentered
with any Analogous substance. To which purpose having put two or three pound of
good Quicklime into a great Peuter Basin, pour upon it by little and little,
Rain or River-water, as much as suffices to open the Lime, and dispose it to
dissolution. Then pour on more at several times, till the water be about five
or six fingers above the Lime, stirring the substances often with a wooden
Spatula, to the end the Spiritous Salt part of the Chalk may be well dissolved
in the water. After this letting the whole settle for some hours, pour out by
Inclination and filter the clear water; which must be kept in double bottles
well stopped for use. For this is called Limewater. Then you may pour upon the
same Lime as much more fresh water, as at the first time, and stir it, after
that giving it leave to settle, filter it also and keep it apart. Repeat the
same operation the third time, to take away utterly from the Lime all its Salt
part. Having so done, you may if you please dry the settlement of the Lime, and
keep it as an extraordinary good and gentle Dryer. It is easy to judge which of
these waters is most effectual; and therefore they are to be kept both apart,
the one for lesser, the other for greater causes, as well against Gangrenes, as
maladies of the Eyes, and the most part of Ulcers.

There is also another water made of Lime which the Moderns Phagedenick, or the
Canker-water, which is nothing but a mixture of three pints of the first water
with three pints of good Spirit of wine, and half an ounce of good sublimate
corrosive. But this proportion is not so regular but that you may augment or
abate of the dose of either* especially of the sublimate. Some also add as much
Arsenick in Powder as sublimate, as also some drops of Spirit of Vitriol. This
water is highly esteemed for stopping that Gangrene and its accidents, and for
the cure of malignant and corroding Ulcers: to which purpose the bottle must be
always well shak'd to thick'n the water: though it must not be done when
applied to the eyes: for then the water must be clear and tempered with
Ophthalmick Waters. It is also made use of for the cure of Eryfipela's, red
swellings called Flegmons, burns, and all sorts of inflammations, tempring it
with convenient waters.

You may make an Ophthalmy water with half a pint of the first water, one pint
of the second, and a pint and a half the third, and three drams of Salt
Ammoniack, putting all together into a Copper vessel, and there leaving it,
till the liquor have acquired a blew color; then having filtered this water
thorough a sheet of paper, keep it in a bottle well stopped for your occasions.
The particles of Copper dissolved in this water, and mixed with the Sal
Ammoniack produce a good effect, and make an excellent water for diseases of
the eyes.

Schroder highly extolls the Spirit of Quicklime, to break and dissolve the
stone in the kidneys and bladder, giving it in whitewine, or broth, from two
drops to five or six. And for its preparation he prescibes, that having ground
the Quicklime upon a Porphyry, you should imbibe it with the Spirit of good
wine, distilling it, and cohobating or sprinkling eight or ten times in an
Alembick of Glass exactly luted, and set it in a Balneum Mariae, or an
evaporating Bath; and that having mixed ten ounces of this Lime dried with an
ounce of Salt of Tartar, and eleven ounces of the Caput Mortuum of the same
Salt well dried, you should put this mixture into a large Retort luted all
over, and distill it with a gradual fire in a close Reverberatory, having
fitted to the neck of the Retort a large Receiver, having a little Spirit of
wine in the bottom, and a little Pipe underneath the part where the neck of the
Retort ends, with a little Recipient to it. So that the Phlegm being distilled
into the small one, by increasing by degrees the heat of the fire, the Spirit
may follow, and entering in vapors into the great Recipient, may there dissolve
and mix it self with the Spirit of Wine. And then having at length lighted and
burnt the latter, you may find at the bottom the Spirit of Lime, proper for the
uses above mentioned.

Others, to put themselves to less trouble and care, having finely ground the
Quicklime, and sprinkled it with as much good Spirit of Wine well rectified, as
it can well suck up, fill therewith about the third part of a large Retort well
luted about, and having set it in a close Reverberatory, and fitted and
carefully luted a large Recipient to the neck of it, make the distillation with
a gradual fire, and after they have drawn forth the Spirit of Lime with the
Spirit of Wine, and fired and consumed the latter in some Vessel, find at the
bottom that of the Lime, which they keep in a double glass Bottle close stopped.

The Caustic quality of the Lime agrees very well with that of the corrosive
Salts, when you intend to make Caustic stones. For the preparation of which,
having finely powdered a pound of Quicklime, and having mixed it with two pound
of Salt of Tartar newly prepared and powdered, calcine them together for two or
three hours, in a large Crucible over an open fire; afterward make a Lie
thereof, which having filtered and evaporated, till the Salt remain dry at the
bottom of the Vessel, put the same Salt in a German Crucible over a violent
fire, till it come to run, at which time pour it into a Skillet of smooth
Copper, heated before, where you may cut it while it is hot, into little
pieces, fit for Cauteries, putting them up as speedily as you can into double
glass Bottles, exactly well stopped.

You may also prepare stones for Cauteries, with the strong Lie whereof black
Soap is made, which is composed of Quicklime and corrosive Salts. You may also
prepare them with equal parts of Quicklime and Ashes made of Wine-Lees burnt,
macerated together in water for some days, then filtered and boiled into
Cauterizing stones. You may also prepare them by making Lies of the Ashes of
Ash, Oak, Vine-twigs, or Bean-shells, mixed with Quicklime, filtring them, and
coagulating them into stones, as I have already said.

CHAP. V. Of the Preparation of the Stone of Judea, and that of Linx.
THE great number of Remedies every day prepared to open the passages of the
Reins and Ureters, and other conveyances for the Urine, is the reason that the
stone of Judea nor that of Linx are so frequently prepared. Of which the former
called also the Stone of Phaenicia, and Syria is of a white Ashy color, of a
tender and crumbling substance, of the bigness and shape of an Olive, but
sometimes a little longer, and upon the outside equal and proportionable
streaks quite through the length. The latter called also Belemnites, because
its Pyramidical figure in some sort resembles an Arrow, is equally as brittle,
but not of the same color, and without streaks. However I thought good to show
you their preparation, which may serve as an example for other stones that are
not unlike them in substance.

Having finely powdered both the one and the other of these stones, and mixed
them with their weight of Sulphur beaten in a Mortar, make them red-hot in a
Crucible over a good Charcoal-Fire, and so by degrees at several times make
projection of this mixture, before you put in any more, continuing your fire
till all be projected, and that the Sulphur be all consumed; then having beaten
the Residence over again in a Mortar, and put it into a glass-Cucurbit, make a
mixture of two parts of Vinegar distilled, one part of good Spirit of Salt, and
one other part of good Spirit of Honey well-rectify'd, and pour it upon the
residence swimming above it about four fingers. Then having placed the Cucurbit
in a Sand-bath, and covered it with a Paper, kindle underneath a good soft
fire, only enough to give the substances a lukewarm heat, stirring them from
time to time with a wooden Spatula, till you find that the Menstruum be
sufficiently impregnated with the substance of the stone which it has
dissolved. After which having poured out by inclination, and set apart the
liquor that swims at the top; pour upon the residence, the like quantity of the
same fresh Menstruum, placing the Cucurbit again in the same bath, keeping it
there as long as at the first time. Then mixing this liquor with the former,
and having filtered them, evaporate the superfluous moisture to the thin filme,
if you desire a Crystalline Salt; or to the dryness of the residence, if you
only desire a Coagulated Salt at the bottom of the Cucurbit.

This Salt is highly esteemed for breaking the stone in the Reins and Bladder,
and to give great releif in all stoppages of Urine. You may give it from six to
twelve or fifteen grains in Diuretic liquors. It may be also turned into
liquor, by exposing it to the air; and make use of it, augmenting or abating
the dose according to the proportion of liquors mixed with it.

Men would go upon wrong grounds, did they believe that these Stones afford all
that quanty of Salt which is found at the bottom of the vessel, after these
Menstruums made use of; for the Salt which they contain is very little: nor can
we reasonably ascribe that which we draw from them but to the Salt part of
Menstruums incorporated with the proper substance of these stones which they
dissolved; the same thing befalling them, which may be observed in Quicklime,
and Pearls, when they are dissolved in Vinegar distilled, or in some other
corroding Spirit; of which you more certainly prove the truth, by pouring upon
these dissolutions, the liquor of Salt of Tartar, or any other Alkali; for you
shall find by the conjunction of these Salts with the acids, the latter having
abandoned the proper substance of the Stones which they had dissolved, will
show it self by precipitating in powder to the bottom of the vessel like a
Magistery. And if any be so curious as to dry and weigh it afterward, they
shall find that it weighs within very little as much as the stone weighed
before it was dissolved in the menstruum.

CHAP. VI. Of the Preparation of the Bloodstone.
THE Boodstone may pass for the substance of Iron, not only because it has
its properties, but also because you may extract that metal out of it. It had
this name given it, either because of its virtue to stop bleeding, or because
the color of it resembles blood, though it be mixed with brown streaks
somewhat larger then those of Cinnabar.

Galenick Pharmacy only moistens the boodstone with some Astringent water,
and grinds it into powder upon Porphyry, to make and dry it into Trochishes.
But Chemistry goes farther, making thereof considerable preparations, among the
rest Distillations, Sublimations, Tinctures, and Extracts.

This Stone may be distilled alone through a Retort, after the ordinary manner,
and an acid martial Spirit drawn out of it with a gradual fire, like to that of
Vi^iol. But you may expect other advantages, observing the following method*
Having finely powdered two pound of Boodstone, and two pound of
Sal-Armoniack, mingle them together, and put them into a large Cucurbit of
Potters-Earth well luted about, and having covered it with its head, and
exactly luted the Commissures, place it upon a proportionable Furnace; then
having fitted and exactly luted a Receiver to the neck of the head, make your
distillation with a naked fire, very soft at first, but increasing the heat by
degrees, to the utmost violence at last; and by this means you shall find in
the Recipient a nurinous Spirit, very penetrating, and of a yellow color, and
upon the sides of the Cucurbit above the substances, the Flowers, having the
color and smell of Saffron; for which reason it is called the Philosophers
Aromatic.

Advantage may be afterward made of that which remains in the Cucurbit; for
having put it into a Retort daubed over with lute, and having placed it in a
Furnace of close Reverberation, you shall extract by the ordinary ways a
martial Acid Spirit, containing in it also some small quantity of that of
Bay Salt, which made one part of the composition of Sal-Ammoniack. You may also
extract a tincture of the Flowers; to which purpose having put them into a
Matras, pour upon them Spirit of Wine well-rectify'd, about four fingers above
the substances. Then having exactly luted the Matras, set it seven or eight
hours in digestion upon a Bakers Oven; then filter and put up the tincture;
which you may after that reduce into an Extract, by drawing off the greatest
part of the Spirit of Wine through a glass-Alembick in a Cinder or Sand-bath,
over a moderate fire.

The Acid Spirit of the Boodstone participating very much of Mars or Iron is
very opening, and of great virtue to unstop the obstructions of the Liver, the
Spleen, and all the Bowels: it is also very diuretic. The urinous volatile
Spirit proceeding chiefly from the Sal-Armoniack is diaphoretick, and very
proper to purify the whole mass of the blood. For which reason it may with
great advantage be made use of in malignant Fevers, the Scurvy, and in diseases
of the Head. The dose both of the one and the other is from five or six to
twelve or fifteen grains in proper liquors. The volatile Salt, the Tincture,
and Extract are highly esteemed to mortify Acids, and cure diseases of which
they are the causes. The dose of the Tincture is from eight or ten to twenty or
thirty drops: of the Salt and Extract from half a scruple to half a dram,
mixing them in proper liquors, or else in Bolus.

CHAP. VII. Of the Preparation of Crystal.
IT may be said of the most part of Preparation which writers would have
practiced upon Crystal, that they are only impertinent occasions to give men
trouble, and to waste Co^es, and to make us of other Materials and vessels
without any hopes of profit or advantage. As we may observe by the Salt,
Magistery, Liquor, Elixir, Essence, and some other preparations of this nature
which they have labored to make of Crystal. For which they have made use of
the utmost violence of fire, to which they would have the Crystal exposed for a
long time, and for several times, for the actual calcination of it in an open
fire; and then they have made use of Salts and corroding Spirits to dissolve
it. But we must be assured that the Salts and the liquor which we draw from
thence, are nothing else but the Salts or corroding Spirits embodied, which
have corroded and dissolved the proper substance of the Crystal. For the ashes
of the burnt-Lees of wine, the Salt of Tartar, the Niter, the Bay Salt, or
Sal-Ammoniack, mixed with the Crystal when it is calcined in the Crucible in an
open fire, and the Vinegar distilled, or the Spirit of Niter, which some make
use of for the potential Calcination of Crystal, after it is actually calcined,
doing an extreme violence to the whole substance, cannot but change the
qualities of it in an extraordinary manner, while they are really the thing
which is called Salt of Crystal, and the principal substance of the liquor that
bears that name; and for that the substance of the Crystal is totally dissolved
therein, and in a condition to be separated when you would make a Magistery
thereof, or satisfy curiosity.

Whence it is easy to judge that the best preparation of Crystal is that which
does least violence to nature, and changes least the properties of it. For this
reason it may be very fitly made use of, after you have ground it upon
Porphyry, and reduced it to a powder almost impalpable, or after you have
several times made it red hot in the fire, and quenched it as often in
diuretic waters, enlivened with Spirit of Salt or Vitriol; for by this means
you may have a liquor, very fit to be made use of to open the passages of the
Urine; and a powder of Crystal quenched, good against weakness of the stomach
and intestines, or to qualify the sharpness of Acids, and the Acrimony of the
humors.

As to the Tincture which is forcibly extracted out of Crystal, after you have
calcined it a long time with corroding Salts, and put it with them in fusion,
we must attribute the red color rather to the union, which the long digestion
has produced of the most volatile parts of these Salts, with the Sulphury
Spirit of wine, then to the substance of the Crystal dissolved in those Salts;
in regard the same thing happens* to Salt of Tartar digested with Sulphury
Spirit of wine, without any Crystal being mixed with it.

But after all these considerations, there is great reason to fear, least the
Chemical preparations which may be made of Crystal after its being reduced to a
Lime, may not rather incline the matters which they meet with, in the passages
of the Urine to Petrification, then dissolve or drive them forth, as it is
intended they should do. For it is a hard matter to persuade a man, that the
petrifying Ferment of these sort of Limes change their nature by the
preparations which others make of them; or that they may not produce effects
quite contrary to those for which they seem to be absolutely provided.

I see no necessity for me here to set down particular preparations of Flints;
for besides that they require no other, but the same as Crystal, there is as
much reason to fear the effects of their petrifying Ferment, as of that of
Crystal.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Preparation of Coral.
NO man contests but that Red Coral carries the preeminency above all other
Coralls. And therefore that all Authors have practiced their principal
preparations upon this Coral; touching which I am of the judgment, as in
reference to Crystal that it is better to stick to those preparations that are
more simple, and less destructive.

The ordinary Pharmacy very judiciously reduces Coral into powder almost
impalpable, grinding it upon Porphyry as it does other precious Stones. But it
may be better done by making use of the Engine which Monsieur Joel Langelot, a
most worthy Physician to the Duke of Holsatia imparted to us, the figure
whereof I have given you in this Pharmacopoea.

For Coral having nothing in its substance which can serve to the purposes for
which it is made use of in Physic, there is nothing required but to open the
body of it well, and all its parts, and to divide them almost into Atoms, which
may be done by means of that new Engine; the effects whereof are so much the
more recommendable, as being a great furtherance to all other preparations,
which whether well or ill done, are attempted upon this mixed body.

Actual Calcination of Coral, and reiterated Extinctions merit the name rather
of destruction then of lawful preparations, as I have already made out in the
Chapter of Crystal.

Solutions made in acid Spirits more or less corroding, to extract the Salt or
Magistery, are as little to the purpose, because it is a potential Calcination,
and for that there is no reason to expect any real Salt out of Coral, but only
the Salt of the Menstruum embodied with its proper substance. And because the
Magistery which may be forced to precipitate in these dissolutions, is only the
most earthy part of the Coral, it must give way to Coral finely powdered, that
has suffered no torture, nor lost any thing of its substance.

As for the numerous preparations of the Tinctures of Coral, with which some
Authors are stuffed; though we may find some that have some appearance of Truth,
and benefit, yet can they not be altogether entitled Legitimate, especially
when the Coral is exposed to the violence of the fire, or to corroding Salts or
Spirits. For besides that it is impossible that the Coral should communicate
its color which it has lost by the violence of the fire, or corroding Spirits,
we must not look upon the red color which appears in ordinary Menstruums to be
other then an effect of long digestion. We must believe also that it is not a
small matter to separate the red color of Coral, and to carry it into another
subject with its principal virtue.

The Freturation of Coral by means of the Engine of Monsieur Langelot, is
incomparably much better, then all the Calcinations that can be made use of.
For without changing the nature or the qualities of the Coral, it facilitates
its dissolution, and provides a way to accomplish what is intended by means of
more gentle Menstruums. Among the rest by the Spirit of Honey and Turpentine;
by juice of Lemons, Barberries and the like, by those of several woods, by
those of Salt and Vitriol dulcified, and united with Spirit of wine, and by the
last enlivened with Flowers of Sal Ammoniack, or some other Salt, and they may
more easily after this in a Cornute extract the specious Tincture of Coral,
then as some have practiced by mixing it with equal parts of Sugar Candy. And
therefore raw Coral beaten to an impalpable powder, and given in some Liquor or
otherwise, is far superior then all the Tinctures of it; though these are
least to be rejected, where the Coral has been dissolved with less violence,
and whose Menstruum was less corroding, and may be the most securely taken
inwardly.

The little esteem I give to these Tinctures has kept me from swelling this
Chapter with their preparations, of which you may see a great number in
S^roderus, Grullengius, and several other Books. I shall only insert that which
Monsieur Langelot* has some while since imparted to public view, as well for
the particular esteem which I have for his learning and knowledge, as for the
softness of the Menstruum which he makes use of, the virtues of the fine
Tincture which seem to appear in his preparation, and the hopes I have of it is
success upon the word of such a Man.

This Author says, that having for some years before poured upon certain whole
fragments of Coral an oil which he thought to be the gentlest among those which
are drawn from Vegetables, with a design to try whether or no he could draw any
Tincture from them, a good while after perceived that neither the Oil nor the
Coral had suffered the least change, and so being out of all hopes, neglected
the vessel that contained them. But the winter being passed, and he busy about
other Operations which he was experimenting in a Furnace of digestion, he
remembered himself, and put the Vessel containing the Coral into the same
furnace; and about a month after stirring the substances as he was wont to do,
he perceived that the red color of the Coral was somewhat height'nd, and that
the Coral was grown softer, though the Oil were not changed at all. Then
continuing digestion with the same heat of fire, he found some days after that
the Coral was dissolved, and turned into a Muscilaginous kind of substance, and
that very red, though the Oil that swam above it had not changed color. He
says morever that he could not change the said Oil, nor unite it with the
Muscilaginous matter, what ever stirring or digestion he used afterward. For
the Cil remained at the top, and the Muscilaginous matters descended to the
bottom. He affirms moreover, that finding the oil to be of the same scent and
taste as before, he poured it into another vessel, and having poured the
Muscilaginous matter, the Spirit of wine Tartariz'd, and so leaving a very
little while to digest, the whole substance dissolved into a very red Tincture;
which he attributes to long digestion, and the great effects which volatiles
are able to produce, when you have put a stop to them. Some think that he made
use either of the distilled oil of Anise, of Citron peel, or Juniper berries to
soften the Coral, and to dispose them to yield their Tincture.

I cannot boast to have tried this preparation, but I intend it in a little
time; I believe also that the success corresponding with the writings of
Monsieur Langelot, as there is great probability of it. This Tincture of Coral
ought to pass for the best and most legitimate that ever was invented, and that
with much more reason, those virtues may be attributed to it, which have been
allowed to the other Tinctures, as well to strengthen the heart and liver, as
well to open the obstructions of the latter, and to redress all its distempers,
as to purify and renew the whole mass of the blood, and to give notable relief
in diseases that happen from its alteration. It is no less prized against
weakness of the stomach, and of the intestines, which cause vomitings,
Diarrheas, Dysenteries, or Lienteries, and in all losses of blood either in men
or women.

CHAP. IX. Of the Preparation of Pearls.
THE engendring of Pearls in the Shells of certain Fish very much resembling
the nature of Oysters, seems to make it reasonable that we should place them
among Animals; if their whiteness, luster, hardness, weight, and solidness of
their parts, did not place them in the rank of the most precious stones. These
qualities have been the reason that Physic has from time to time conceived a
very good opinion of them, and has believed that their virtues, if not
superior, yet are not inferior to those of any precious stones. This conceit
has encouraged several Chemists to make several preparations of them, and has
caused them to fall into errors as dangerous, if not more then those which
concern Coral. Operating here upon a substance of far greater price, and not
only more pure, and brought to a higher perfection by nature then Coral, but
which is much more qualified to receive with ease all sorts of good or bad
impressions.

Ordinary Pharmacy grinds Pearls upon Porphyry, moist'ning them with Rosewater,
or some Cordial-water, and like Coral and other precious stones. This
preparation, though very plain, is much better then some which the Chemists
have invented, provided you break the Pearls whole upon the same Porphyry, and
that you continue to grind them, till they are pulverized to an exact fineness.
To which purpose there is nothing like Monsieur Langelots Engine. For Pearls
retaining something of the nature of Animals, and being of a substance in part
volatile, they complete their dissolution in the heat of the stomach, or rather
by the operation of the Archeum, especially when they are finely pulverized, so
that by a quick digestion, what they contain of most essential, is suddenly
conveyed to the heart, and to the parts which have need thereof.

But to satisfy those that believe that Pearls are in a better condition to
impart their virtues when they are dissolved into liquor, they must understand
that Pearls may be dissolved in the juice of Lemons, well purified by
digestion; which may easily be brought to pass, by putting into a Mattress or a
glass Cucurbit, about an ounce of Pearls well ground upon Porphyry, and pouring
upon it the juice of purified Lemons depurated, three fingers above the
substances, and placing the Vessel in a temperate Sand-bath, where it is to be
left three whole natural days, stirring the substances from time to time; after
that pour out the clear liquor by inclination, filter it and put it up in a
Bottle, mingling with it the same measure of Spirit of Roses. This liquor is to
be taken in Cordial-waters from eight or ten drops to twenty or thirty. You may
pour new purified juice upon the Pearls that remain in the Vessel, and having
made maceration, proceed in all things as before; and reiterate the same
operations, till the Pearls are almost quite dissolved.

For the Salt and Magistery of Pearls, of which some Authors make so great an
account, they are neither the one nor the other more to be valued then those of
Coral. For the first is nothing but the Salt of Vinegar distilled, embodied
with the substance of the Pearls which it dissolved; and the latter only the
terrestrial part of the Pearls, deprived of their pure substance, which the
Dissolvants and Precipitants have got to themselves.

The Oil or Liquor of Pearls, drawn forth for want of its Salt, is no better,
for the same reasons; no more then the Essences, Tinctures, Arcanums, Flowers,
or Spirit, which are drawn forth by the help of corroding Menstruums, which are
rather Destructions then Preparations.

Pearls beaten to fine powder are recommended to strengthen and comfort the
heart and the Noble parts, to resist Poison, the Pestilence, malignant Fevers,
and to restore persons that are feeble and languishing. It is given in Cordial
waters or in broth from half a scruple to half a dram. It is mixed in Tablets,
Opiates, Potions, and several other remedies. The virtues and use of Pearls
dissolved in the juice of Lemons, and in Spirit of Roses, are very near the
same.

This occasion of Pearls obliges me to tell my thoughts of the Chemical
preparation of Emraulds, Saphires, Jacynths and other precious Stones; which
is, that their substance being excessively hard, especially if they be fine and
clear; and not being to be dissolved but by potent Corrosives, it is much
better to let them alone upon your finger, in regard it is impossible to use
those violent means without destroying the good qualities of the stones. I
think it also much better to grind them upon Porphyry, like Pearls, till they
are exactly fine, to which purpose you may make use of Monsieur Langelots
Engine, to make use of them so upon all occasions. Though if credible Authors
may be believed, the Stones have a quality to impart their virtues without
preparation being worn in Rings, about the neck or arms, tied upon the legs or
thighs, or others applied to other parts of the body, like other stones of less
value, as the Eagle stone, the Nephetick stone, and several others.

CHAP. X. Of the Preparation of Talk.
TAlk, with the addition of Venetian, shining and silver-like, when it is
divided as it may be into tender scales, but almost of a Sea green when it is
quite whole, is that which of all the true or false Talks is most esteemed, and
about which a great number of people have exercised themselves from time to
time, especially to draw forth an oil, which is esteemed to be beyond all the
Cosmeticks in the world and is thought to lie concealed in its substance,
because of its sweetness, and unctuosity which may be perceived by handling it,
though it do not daub the fingers at all. I pass by the opinion that some have,
that Talk red or yellow, contains in it self a Mine of Gold, and that a proper
menstruum may be drawn from it for the transmutation of Metalls into Gold or
Silver, and for the fixation and Tincture of Mercury; as also that it contains
an universal medicine, able to cure all diseases that are taken to be
incurable. I shall only say that the preparation of a true oil of Talk is no
less difficult then the Transmutation of imperfect Metalls into Gold or Silver,
of which many have, and still do boast, though the Talent which they pretend
to, is not able to free them from the miseries that usually attend them to the
end of their lives.

Calcination of Venice Talk, of all its preparations has been most sought
after, and for which they have made use of all sorts of fires, the most tedious
and most violent, even those of glass Houses. Exposing the Talk, sometimes
alone, sometimes mingled with Silver, Copper, Lattin, Sulphur, Lime, Tartar
Salts, and other corroding substances. For though there be in England a Talk
proper to be calcined alone and to be reduced in less then an hour to a very
white and crumbling Lime, and that there be in France of those false Talk's
that will not endure the fire; yet they can never promise to themselves the
same thing from that of Venice, but by exposing it above a quarter of an hour
to a flaming fire, and making an Iron Mortar almost red hot together with one
end of the Pestle; and then indeed they may reduce it in a small time to powder
and that very fine, which may be presently sifted through a silk'n seiree, fit
to be mixed with Pomatums and other Cosmeticks.

This Talk thus pulverized may be strewn among shell snailes, and left in a
glazed Pipkin till they have sucked it up all; then having bruised them, with
all their shells, and put them into a Glass Cucurbit, covered with its head,
distill the whole mass, and there will come forth a water, very proper to clear
Complexions of Ladies.

They who mingle Salts among Talk, to assist and forward Calcination, are wont
to expose it to the moisture of a Cellar, after they have exposed it, or else
in the open Air, to procure a Liquor, which they call oil of Talk; But very
improperly, in regard that Liquor is nothing but a Salt dissolved in the
moisture that has got within it, and is impregnated with particles of the Talk,
which it has corroded and dissolved.

Crollius, and some other Modern Authors in imitation of him, thinking to do
better, direct you to prepare a Spirit of Vinegar of Span-ish Wine, and to have
it more penetrating, to choose that which distills from the last half of the
Vinegar; and after you have divided the Venice-Talk into thin pieces, to put
them into a Mattress and moisten them well with Spirit of Vinegar, till the
substances are at length become Mucilaginous, and as it were Oil, to the end
you may thereby know the dissolution of the Talk. After this they direct you to
put the whole into a Luted Cornute, set in a close Reverberatory; to which
having fitt'd a large Ricipient, first with a gradual fire they draw off the
Spirit of Vinegar, then the white Oil; the effects whereof are to beautify the
Complexion, and will remain above a month after single Unction.

The little likelihood of succeeding in this Operation, hinder me from making
the Experiment; and therefore I will neither promise nor warrant any real Oil
of Talk. Nor will I undertake to Calcine true Venetian-Talk in half an hour
with a small fire, and to make it spungy, and in a condition to be rubbed
between the fingers into an Impalpable Powder, as Monsieur Morhosius, in his
Epistle Treating of the Transmutation of Metals, dedicated to Monsieur Joel
Langelot, assures us. Though I will not deny the possibility, since there is
some reason to hope that so Famous a Man will one day Communicate in Public a
Preparation of so much Curiosity.

CHAP. XI. Of the Preparation of Common Salt.
SAlt generally taken, is as it were the Foundation, Soul, Subsistence, and the
Principal Secret of the Life and Preservation of all mixed Bodies; there being
no mixed Body that has not its proper Salt, more or less in quantity, and which
does not lose it is principal Qualities, when it loses its Salt. But we are to
look upon the Sea Salt as the most abundant in Nature, and as the Foundation
and Seed of all other Salts. For being dissolved in a vast quantity of Water,
and in a posture ready to be conveyed to all parts of the Earth, either through
the Subterraneal passages, or by the ^ins proceeding from the vapors raised by
the Sea; all other Salts borrow from it their Principal parts, not altered from
it, but only in the change of Form, and the Situation of these parts, or by the
Dissolvable substances that are mixed with it, and make the diversity of Salts.
For Vitriol, Niter, Alum, and Sal-Armoniack, have all of them some parts of the
Sea Salt for their Foundation; nor are they diversified, but by the strange
bodies which they have met with and dissolved, or they are Artificially
bleaded. Sal-Gemm ought to be accounted a real Sea Salt, deprived of the most
part of its moisture, and coagulated by the Subterraneal heat, or by that of
the Sun. That which is drawn from Salt Fountains, is much of the same nature
with Sea Salt, as coming from the Sea through Subterraneal passages: their
great difference consisting in the manner of separating their moisture;
considering that we make use of fire to evaporate fresh water, of Fountain
Salt; whereas in hot Countries, they make use of the heat of the Sun to consume
the moisture of the Sea; which Salt is most esteemed, because it suffers less
alteration in its parts, then that which has endured an ordinary fire.

The use of Sea Salt is much more for the seasoning of Meats, then for Physical
preparations; and the first preparation of it, is to purify it: To which
purpose, having dissolved it in Fountain, or River Water, and filtered this
Dissolution through coarse Paper, evaporate the moisture in some Iron-Kettle,
or Caldron, till the Salt remain white and Crystallime at the bottom of the
Vessel. This way of purifying serves not only to separate the Earthy parts of
the Salt, but it qualifies its Acrimony, and makes it fitter for all sorts of
uses, especially for nourishment; above all if you reiterate Dissolution,
Filtration and Coagulation.

But because that notwithstanding the first and second evaporation of the Salt,
there still remains some particles of water in its proper substance, and that
the strict Union of the Acid with the Alkali, the close binding of the parts,
and the Cubick figure of the grains of Salt, so straightly enclose these
particles of water, that having exposed these grains to the fire they cannot
get out, but by offering violence to their bonds, and by causing the parts of
the Salt to leap with a kind of flashing; and for that overmuch of that leaping
and flashing of the Salt might chance to break the Glass, where the Salt is put
to distill, there is a kind of Calcination or drying used, which is called
Decrepitation, because of the crackling of the Salt while it is over the fire:
and because that Crackling is either more or less according to the bigness of
the grains, having dried the grains of Salt in an Oven after the bread is out,
bruise it in a Mortar, and put it in a pot that is able to endure the fire, and
placing it in a Furnace over a good Coal-fire, and stirring it from time to
time with a long Iron Spatula, let it stand so till the Salt has done
crackling, which is an evident sign of the dissipation of the particles of
water, which were mixed confusedly among the Essential parts of the Salt. Which
you may sooner bring to pass, if when you beat the grains of Salt in a Mattress,
you beat them so small, that the Alien particles of the Water may the more
easily issue forth. As touching the fusion of Salt it is more facil, then
necessary. For they that will have it so need no more but put the Sea Salt
powdered into a Crucible, and expose it to a Melting or Fusion-Fire, which
hinders not but that you may at any time dissolve it in water, both before and
after this operation.

CHAP. XII. The great Inclination that Sea Salt has to Fusion.
THE impossibility for any Cornutes of Earthor Glass to continue this Salt in
Fusion long without breaking, and the strict union of the Spirits with the
other substances, while the Salt is in Fusion, enforce us to make use of other
substances, by the mixture whereof we divide the parts of the Salt, and
preventing Fusion, constrain it to surrender its Spirit by the ordinary ways.

Not but that you may extract an acid Spirit of Salt without Addition, if after
a perfect Decrepitation of the Sea Salt, and after you have kept it a long time
over the fire, you expose it afterward to the Air for several days; for the
more fixed part of the Salt having lost over the fire the most part of its
Acid, and being as it were famished easily impregnates it self with the Acid
Salt of the air which embodying with this Salt, augments its quantity. And
because the acid Salt of the Air is naturally more volatile then the acid of
the Sea Salt, and because it easily separates it self without the helf, it is
no difficult thing to distill it without Addition. But the Spirit which is drawn
from it, being almost nothing else but this acid of the Air, there is no reason
to call it the Spirit of Sea Salt, nor to account this Preparation, no more
then such an augmentation of this Salt for any great Mystery; in regard the
same corporifying and augmentation happen to Alum, Niter and Vitriol, by the
conjunction of a new acid, when you have drawn off its Spirit; and for that
Lead, Antimony and several other more compacted bodies then Sea Salt, augment
by means of the Air, which pierces into their pores instead of the other
substances which the fire had driven away.

Take two pound of Sea Salt well-dry'd and powdered, and eight pound of
Potters-Earth, or Bole, or earth of Blois, pulverized in the same manner; and
after you have well mixed one of these Earths with two pound of Salt, put the
whole into an Earthen Cornute well luted, so large that about a third part may
remain empty: place the Cornute in a close Reverberatory, and stop the Register
of the Duomo; kindle a small fire of Coals in the fireplace, enough to heat by
degrees the Furnace and the Cornute; and having continued it so for an hour,
begin to increase the fire insensibly, and after that from degree to degree;
opening by little and little the Register of the Duomo on the side of the neck
of the Retort; and when the phlegm distills, keep the fire in the same condition,
till you see certain white vapors come forth from the neck of the Cornute. At
which time fit a large Recipient to it, and having carefully luted the
closures, increase the fire still by little and little, and proportionably open
the Register of the Duomo, increasing yet more the fire from degree to degree
to the utmost violence, t^ll you see that no more vapors come forth of the
Cornute, and that the Recipient becomes clear. Then giving the Vessels liberty
to cool, and having unluted the Recipient, you shall find a yellow acid Spirit,
of a very pleasing color, accompanied with some phlegm, and in the neck of the
Recipient some little volatile Sal fixed to it.

You may also instead of drying the Sea Salt, dissolve it in water, and having
made a kind of a pickle, imbibe the same Earths or Bole in it; then having made
a Paste of it, somewhat solid, make it up in little Balls as big as will go
into the mouth of the Cornute; and having perfectly well dried them in the Sun
or in the open air, fill the two thirds of a Cornute; then observing my last
directions, you shall draw forth a Spirit like that already mentioned.

Some there are that cohobate this Spirit upon that which remains in the
Cornute, and after they have made the mass into little Balls and dried it, they
make a new distillation, reiterating several times the same cohobations and
operations, the better to separate the spiritous part of the Salt from its
body. And for that this Spirit contains very much phlegm, you may pour it out
into a small glass Cucurbit, and having placed it in Balneo Mariae, and covered
it with its head, and fitted to it a small Recipient, rectify it over a gentle
fire. For by this means the phlegm ascending first, will leave the acid Spirit
at the bottom, which will be more or less penetrating, according to the
quantity more or less of phlegm which you have separated by rectification. It Is
requisite to save this phlegm, for notwithstanding the soft heat of the Bath, it
has carried with it some of the acid volatile particles of the Salt; which not
only render it diuretic, but also proper to allay the heat of choleric
Fevers. You may also concenter this Spirit by rectifying it in a Sand-bath,
when you desire to make it fit for the dissolution of Gold.

There is also a Spirit of Salt to be prepared, by mixing two pound of Alum,
burnt to powder, with three pound of Salt well dried and powdered, and
distilling them together through a Cornute the ordinary way. But the Spirit
participates as well of the one as the other; however it may serve for several
precipitations, and is a powerful opener and diuretic.

You may also mix equal parts of Sea Salt and Salt of Niter, well dried and
powdered, with four times as much of their weight of Bole, or Potters earth
Pulverized, and after you have put them into a Retort, set them into a close
Reverberatory. Thereby you shall draw forth a Spirit composed of two Salts,
commended not only for the cure of the Dropsy, and to consume the proud flesh
of Ulcers, but for the immersive calcination of Gold and Silver.

Some Authors have pretended to prepare a Spirit of Salt impregnated with the
virtues of Coral, mixing with the Salt the Coral ground upon* Porphyry, instead
of Potters-Earth, or those other substances which are made use of in the
distillation of it; but the acid part of the Salt acting more inwardly upon the
Corals then it could do upon the Earths, corrodes them, and in corroding
embodies it self with their parts; so that resting in the Cornute, there can be
nothing expected but an unprofitable phlegm; and therefore it is more to the
purpose separately to make use of the Salt, and the Corals, as occasion
requires, then to mix them to no advantage.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Dulcifying of the Spirit of Salt.
THE inconvenience which the acidity of the Spirit of Salt may bring to some
persons, especially those whose diseases proceed from acids, have enforced most
Artists to have recourse to diverse fixed or volatile Salts, which they have
mixed with this Spirit to qualify their sharpness and sweeten their effects.
For besides that they mix with this Spirit Salt of Wormwood, and many other
Salts of Plants, as also with the volatile Salts of Animals, to fix them, while
it fixes it self and incorporates with them; they mix it also with equal parts
of Spirit of wine, the volatile and Combustible Salt whereof inwardly uniting
it self with the acid parts of this Spirit, makes one Composition of two, of a
sweet and pleasing odor, and of a taste less acid, the use and virtues whereof
are incomparably better appropriated to the diseases and to the habitude of
several persons then the ordinary Spirit of Salt. For which reason it is called
the sweet or Dulcified Spirit of Salt. For the preparation whereof, fill about
two thirds of a Glass-Cucurbit, with equal parts of Spirit of Salt and Spirit
of Wine, and having placed it in a Sand-bath, and covered it with its head
perfectly well-luted, with a Receiver luted in the same manner, begin your
Distillation with a moderate fire, which you must continue, till the whole be
almost distilled. Then having cooled the Vessels, and poured out the distilled
Liquor into a new Cucurbit, re-distil it in the same Bath, and reiterate the
same operation the third time. By which means these two Spirits being perfectly
well-united together will produce effectually the advantages expected from
their Union.

All Authors highly recommend the Spirit of Salt to open the passages of the
Urine, to cut and loosen Viscous and Tartarous Matters, and to open the
obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and the rest of the Bowels. For which reason
it is successfully prescribed in Dropsies; and in diseases that proceed from
obstructions of the Vessels. In all which cases the Dulcified Spirit is highly
to be preferred before the other. Both the one and the other are very good to
quench Thirst, giving them from five or six to twelve or fifteen drops, in some
proper Liquor. Or else you may put as much as will yield a pleasing sharpness
in your ordinary drink. This Spirit is very good to kill Childblains in the
hands or feet, before they come to be ulcerated; anointing the part affected
with a Feather. It is also good to cleanse and make white the Teeth, to take
off the rottenness of the Bones, and to consume the proud flesh of Wounds and
Ulcers. The first Spirit of Salt well-rectify'd is used for the dissolution of
Gold. It is useful also for the precipitation of Minerals dissolved in
Aquafortis or with Spirit of Niter. But you must not impute this precipitation
to the weight nor the force, nor to any justle or shog which it gives the
Aquafortis, or to the matters dissolved, as some have thought, but through the
Conjunction of the acid of this Spirit to the volatile and Sulphury Alkali of
the Aquafortis, or Spirit of Niter, which constrains the latter to abandon
that part of the Mineral which it had dissolved.

And to show you that neither this nor any other precipitation happens through
the weight or force, or any shog or justle, which this or any other Spirit can
give to the Dissolvant or the matter dissolved, but that it is the reciprocal
conjunction of Alkali's to Acids, or the en^eebling of the Dissolvent, or the
addition of some new Matter, which the Dissolvant may penetrate afresh, which
causes the precipitation; we find that the Spirit of Salt not being able to
unite it self but with the volatile Alkali of the Aquafortis, is not able to
precipitate any more then what the Alkali had dissolved; whence it comes to
pass that the precipitation is neither very quick nor copious, because the acid
part of the Aquafortis still retains that part of the Mineral which it had it
self dissolved, not being able to unite with the Spirit of Salt. But if after
the Spirit of Salt has done working upon the Mineral dissolved you pour upon it
the Liquor of Tartar or the fixed Salt of Niter, with which the acid of the
Niter has a great willingness to unite, there will presently follow a new
precipitation, which will be more plentiful then the former. By which you may
understand the true cause of the principal Precipitations, examples whereof you
shall find in the following discourse.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Preparation of Salt of Niter.
SAlt of Niter commonly called Saltpeter, or Salt of the stone, by others the
Dragon, Cerberus, Salt of Hell, by reason of the violent effects which it is
able to produce, is accounted a Sulphury Salt, because of its quick disposition
to fire such substances whose parts are mixed with Brimstone upon the fall of
the least spark of fire; though of it self it will not take fire in a Crucible
red-hot; unless you mix some Coal with it, the substance whereof contains
something of Sulphur. We find in Niter three sorts of Salts, a volatile
Sulphury Salt, a volatile Acid, and a fiz'd Terrestrial. Nevertheless the
natural union of these three Salts is not so firmly knit, but that an Artist
can separate them at his pleasure.

We find in France three sorts of Saltpeter, the one fixed to certain Rocks or
Walls in little white Crystals, the other mixed among the Earth of certain
Cellars, or some old Stables, and the third among Rubbish or the Ruins of old
Walls.

The Salt-Peter-Men put these Earths or any other substances containing the
Saltpeter in great Cauldrons over the fire, with as much water as is
convenient, and having made lies of the Salts, they filter them, then they
Coagulate the Salt, which they dissolve, filter, and coagulate again, not only
to make it more pure, but as much as in them lies to separate it from the Salt
of the Earth; which is usually mixed among it, and which lying under Peter the
Salt, very much partakes of the taste, shape, and nature of the Sea Salt. The
easiness to procure Saltpeter fine, is the reason why we never trouble our
selves to depurate it. It being enough to choose it white, transparent, in long
Crystals full of Angles, in length forming a kind of a Cylender. This Salt is
of a Saltish acid taste, with some bitterness. Besides all these marks the
purity of it is known by putting some little piece of it under Coals well
kindled, and then if it consume almost all* away immediately, so that there
remain upon the Coals only a little white Salt, which is the fixed Salt of the
Niter. The Saltpeter first Chrystalliz'd, and which is drawn from the first
water, is that which has all the true Marks, and is esteemed the best.

The purifying of Niter makes it fit for all uses, especially to be taken
inwardly. It is also the beginning of all its other preparations; of which the
most frequent is that of its Calcination, the which is done more or less,
according to the quantity, more or less, of its parts which you intend to
separate. That which is done for the preparation of Mineral-Crystal is the
slightest. For then it sufices only to put one pound of the best Niter in a
Crucible, set upon a Trevet in a Furnace, in the midst of live-Coals; where
having melted it, cast upon it at several times one single ounce of Flower of
Brimsto^e, which you must cause to burn and consume upon the Niter; then pour
it out spreadingly over the bottom of a clean Iron Skellet or Kettle, and
having cooled it, and broke it to pieces, put it up in a Glass or Gally-pot
well stopped. They have also given the name of Sal Prunella to Mineral Crystal,
because it is an excellent remedy against inflammations of the throat, especially
the Squinancy, which some call Pruna or Prunella, especially when those
diseases are caused by volatile Salts, and have but newly seized the Patient.
For the acid of the Niter uniting it self with the volatile Salts, changes
their nature and prevents their Effects. This Crystal is also called by the
name of Mineral Anodine, because it is good to assuage pain, particularly those
that are caused by fixed and volatile Salts. It is opening, diuretic, and
proper to cut viscous and Tartarous humors. It is mixed among purgatives as a
Vehicle; and in diverse Menstruums to assist in the extractions of the Tinctures
of mixed bodies, and to highten the color. It resists putrefaction of the
humors, and quenches thirst and the burning of Fevers, taken in a small
quantity in convenient Liquors.

They who have been acquainted with the heat of the most volatile and Sulphury
part of Niter, thought they did well to burn a top of it the flowers of Sulphur
to consume and carry that part away with them; which is grown into custom, and
is not to be rejected, because of the good use which is made of it every day:
though instead of that, you may make use of Niter it self very pure and in
Crystals.

CHAP. XV. Of the Fixation of Niter.
All Salts in general being separated from other substances, though dissolvable
in in Liquors, carry the name of fixed, though they be in a condition to endure
the fire. Which cannot be done but by stopping their volatile part with acid
Spirits or Salts, or with other substances, which may incorporate with them,
out of their particular disposition to unite together. Niter being composed of
a volatile Sulphury Salt, an Acid Salt somewhat volatile, and a fixed Salt, it
is a hard thing to find one Salt or one Spirit, able to fix all parts at a
time. For if you mix only volatile Salts, some part of the other Salts will
dissipate with them. And if you make use of new acids to stop the Salts, the
excess of the acids will cause the dissolution, and change the nature of the
whole. So that go which way you will to work, in fixing the Niter, you must
lose a good part of its volatile part.

According to Glauber you may put three or four pound of good Niter in a large
Iron-Crucible placed upon a Trevet in a proper Furnace, and having kindled
Coals round about it, and forced the Niter to Fusion, cast upon it about half
an ounce of powder of Coals, which will immediately take fire, and begin to
dissipate the volatile parts of the Niter. This half ounce of powder being
consumed, throw on as much more, and renew the same projection and consumption,
keeping the same fire, till there be little or no acid part left in the Niter,
nor any thing at all combustible, till the powder of Coals take fire no more,
and the Niter look of a greenish color enclining to blew. Then take the Niter
out of the Crucible, while it is yet hot, you may if you think good put it up
as it is in a double-glass bottle exactly stopped. Or else you may dissolve it
in water, and having made a Lie, Filter it and Coagulate the Salt, which you
may put up as you did the former. This Salt having lost in its Calcination with
its Combustible volatile, almost all that it had of acid, you cannot
Crystallize it in that condition, as you may Crystallize Mineral Crystal, which
having endured only a slight Calcination, contains almost all its acid upon
which depends Crystallization. However you may easily restore to it its
Crystalline figure, by pouring Spirit of Niter upon its filtered Dissolution,
till Ebullition cease. For by consuming afterward this liquor to a Film, and
leaving it to cool, you shall find Crystal like those which the Niter had
before it was put into the Crucible, and the weight and bulk of the Niter
augmenting the Spirit which is impregnated with it.

Glauber directs that having calcined the Niter, as I have showed, with powder
of Coal, having taken it out of the Crucible, and put it into some convenient
vessel, you should expose it to the moisture of the Air, or Cellar, till it be
dissolved into Liquor, to which he gives the name of Alkahest, pretending to
make a Universal Menstruum thereof, by means of which to extract Tinctures from
all sorts of mixed Bodies, as well Vegetables as Animals and Minerals. But
though it may be made use of for the Menstruums of several Minerals; yet there
are others much more gentle for Vegetables and Animals.

Some persons dissolve Niter thus calcined in Spirit of Vinegar, filtring the
Dissolution and Coagulating the Salt, reiterating three times, Dissolution,
Filtration and Coagulation. Then having dissolved this Salt in good Spirit of
Wine; and having put the Dissolution into a Glass-Cucurbit covered with his
head well-luted, with a Receiver well luted to it also, they draw forth the
Spirit of Wine in a Sand-bath with a moderate fire, to the dryness of the
Residence, and find at the bottom of the Cucurbit a Scaly Earth like Talk,
meltable in the fire like Wax, containing the fixed Salt of Niter, impregnated
with the acid of the Vinegar. Which remedy he recommends to open the
obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Mesentery, giving from one Scruple to
two in opening Liquors, or else mixed with Purgatives.

CHAP. XVI. Of Salt Polychrestes.
I Add to the fixation of Niter the preparation of Salt Polychrestes, because
that by its means the Niter becomes fixed, losing all that it had of volatile.
The invention of this Salt is not so ancient as the word Polychrestes, which
several Authors formerly gave to Pills, and other Compositions proper to purge
several bad humors at a time; for we find but some new Writers who have
mentioned it, and proposed the use of it, though it be now more common in
Paris, then a great number of other preparations with which the ancient Volumes
are filled.

To prepare this Salt after the ordinary manner, take equal parts of good
Sulphur and Niter in Crystals; and having coarsely powdered them, set a large
Crucible upon a Trevet in the midst of the fireplace of a Wind-Furnace, where
having kindled a good Coal-fire round about it, and heated the Crucible
red-hot, throw in about an ounce of the powder, which will take fire
immediately, and the Sulphur consuming it self, will carry away with it the
volatile part of the Niter; the flame being over, make the same projection of
the powder into the Crucible, which you must reiterate from time to time, still
giving the Sulphur time to consume it self, and stirring the substances by
intervals with a long iron-Spatula. Thus continue to do, till you have
projected all the powder, or that the Crucible can contain no more. After which
having continued the fire for two or three hours, leave the Crucible to cool,
take out the powder and dissolve it in water; and having filtered and
evaporated the dissolution over the fire, till it be covered with a film, leave
it to cool, then having poured out by inclination the liquor that swims at the
top, into a small Cucurbit, you shall find the Salt Polychrestes at the bottom,
and about the sides of the Vessel, whence you are to take it forth and dry it.
Afterward evaporate it in a Sand-bath over a moderate fire, the liquor which
you poured into the small Cucurbit, till it be covered with a film; then take
out the substance and dry it, as you are to do the first. Thus you must do with
the liquor that swims above the Salt; to make the best advantage of that which
remains; afterward mingle and keep all the Salts for your use.

The dissipation of the acid and Spiritous part of the Niter, during its
Calcination with the Sulphur, is the reason that the Crystals which you take
forth lose the form which those of the Niter had, before they were put into the
Crucible. Nor could you have it in Crystals, had not the Salt retained some
part of the acid of the Sulphur, during its Calcination with it.

But for as much as the Salt Polychrestes prepared in this manner, contains in
it only the fixed part of the Niter, and some part of the acid of the Sulphur,
and that it cannot act in this condition but only by the Salts, like Salt of
Tartar, and other fixed Salts. You may make it besides that partly
Diaphoretick, and partly Diuretic, by adding and incorporating four ounces of
Salt Armoniack, with a pound of Salt Polychrestes prepared as I have shown, and
crystallizing them together again in a glass-Cucurbit placed in a Sand-bath
over a moderate fire. For the proportionable union of these two substances,
will produce a composition much more deserving the name of Polychrestes, then
that whereof I have described the preparation. For whereas the first works with
Acrimony enough, and does not take the right Road of the Bowels, the Salts of
the latter being reciprocally dulcified by uniting themselves together, operate
in all things with much more gentleness. Not but that they easily penetrate the
parts of the body, which have need of their operation; especially the parts of
the Urine, the Veins, the Arteries, and also the fleshy parts, without leaving
any impression of Acrimony.

Both the one and the other of these Salts are mixed together from half a dram
to a dram among several remedies, especially among Purgatives to quicken their
virtue, mixing them in five or six ounces of Liquor. They are also given alone
from two or three drams to five or six, in two or three pints of River-water,
or in some Ptisan, to be drank at several draughts as you drink Mineral-Waters,
for the cutting and loosening of gross humors, when you would expel them by
the ordinary ways

CHAP. XVII. Of the Spirit of Niter.
YOU should, according to the directions of some bruise, in a Mortar and mingle
together two pound of Niter, and six pound of common Bole, and having made up a
paste somewhat solid with a water impregnated with Niter, which it has
dissolved, make little Balls thereof; and having dried them, distill them
through a Retort according to the ordinary Method. But the best way and least
troublesome is this. Having beaten in a Mortar and mixed together two pound of
very good Niter in fair Crystalls, and four times as much the weight of
Potters-Earth, exactly dried and beaten to powder, put them into an Earthen
Cornute or Retort well luted about, so large that the substances may not fill
above two thirds of the vessel, and having placed it in a close Reverberatory,
and fitted and well luted a large Recepient to the neck, make your distillation
with a Gradual fire, increasing it from three hours to three hours, and at
length to the utmost violence of heat; continuing it so, till you perceive an
apparent diminution of the redness of the Spirits in the Recipient, and that
the heat of the Receiver be sensibly abated, which will fall out after you have
given the last fire for three hours. After which, having stopped up the
Register of the Duomo, and the Doors of the fire and Cinder place, and left the
Furnace and the Vessels to cool, unlute the Recipient, moistning the Lute with
a wet cloth, and taking it away from the neck of the Cornute, empty the Spirit
of Niter into a double Glass bottle, which must be carefully stopped, and keep
it for your use. You may receive apart the watery part of the Niter which comes
out first in Distillation, forbearing to lute the Recipient till you have drawn
it forth. And by this means you will have a Spirit of Niter that will work with
much much more force, then that which is mixed with its Phlegm.

The Sulphury Salt part of the Niter, being joined to the acid part comes forth
out of the Cornute in red vapors, and dissolves it self into Spirit; which has
occasioned several writers to give it the name of Salamanders blood. Niter is
also the only Salt that yields its Spirit in redvapours, the Spirits of all
other Salts coming forth in white vapors. They that receive all together in
one Recipient all that comes out of the Cornute or Retort in distilling Niter,
find almost as much weight of the Liquor, as they had put in Niter into the
Cornute. So that they who believed that all the Niter passed off into Spirit
had no reason to think so. For besides that the Earth which is mixed therewith
yields, for its own part, much Phlegm is this distillation, as also in that of
the Spirit of Salt, it fails not also to unite to it and to retain in the place
of its Phlegm the fixed part of the Niter. Whereas it cannot do this while it is
alone, but unless it be mixed with its proper fixed Salt, or with that of the
Tartar, or with some other of the same nature. By which you may judge of what it
wants to resume its natural condition, since that if you would have it resume
the body from whence it issued forth, you cannot do it without joining to it a
fixed Salt of the same nature with that which remained in the Cornute at the
time of the Distillation.

The Spirit of Niter is highly recommended against Malignity of Fevers, as also
to suppress the Vapors that rise from raw Nitrous, and Tartarous matters; and
to calm the boiling of the humors, by reason of its volatile Sulphury Salt
united with its Acid. It is also an excellent remedy against Cholicks. It opens
the obstructions of the Liver, Spleen and all the Bowels; it dissolves curdl'd
blood; and expells by sweat, or by insensible transpiration, the humors that
are to be that way expelled; which makes it highly esteemed against false and
real Pleurisies, against Rheumatisms and all sorts of moving pains, and the
Dropsical Tympany. The dose is from half a scruple to one scruple, and also to
half a dram in proper Liquors.

The sharp and gnawing parts of the Spirit of Niter render it fit for
Corrosion, as also for the dissolution of all Metals, except Gold. Into which
it cannot enter alone, because of the smallness and shape of the pores not able
to give entrance to the parts of that Spirit, the bigness and shape whereof are
very unfit for that purpose. Though you may bring it about, if you add the
fourth part of its weight of Salt-Ammoniack, of Sea Salt or Sal-Gemmae, which
causing a new change of its parts, or forming them into subtle points, or a
figure capable to enter into the pores of the Metal, make it fit to penetrate
and dissolve the substance. It also dissolves several Minerals, and changes the
emetick and purgative virtue of some into Diaphoretick, particularly Antimony.

The same Acrimony rendering this Spirit in some measure unfit for internal
uses, you must have recourse to the Spirit of Wine, which is to be mixed with
it in equal parts, and a distillation to be made thereof in a Sand-bath in a
glass Cucurbit, covered with its head carefully luted; which must be renewed
three times, to make an exact union of the parts of the Spirit of Niter with
those of the Spirit of Wine, proceeding after the same method as for the
dulcifying the Spirit of Salt. And from this union arises a composed Spirit,
not only more agreeable in its smell, but more sweet to the taste, and more
gentle in all its operations, and more agreeable to our natures, and which is
more than all this, more fit to show its diaphoretick virtue then the ordinary
Spirit of Niter. The gentle qualities which it has, have given it the name of
sweet or dulcified Spirit of Niter. The preparation whereof may be very
properly made in Vessels called Twins, or double Pelicans) the figure whereof
you may see among the rest) placing these Twins in a Sand-bath over a very
moderate fire, filling about half the body up with each of these two Spirits
mixed in equal parts; luting well all their orifices and closures, and making a
mutual and continual distillation of the Spirits for three days together, which
must be accompanied with a continual cohobation of that which distills, upon the
substances which shall lie successively in the bottom of the Vessels. You may
give this Spirit in the same, and also in a larger dose then the former, in
convenient liquors.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Aqua-Fortis's, and Regal Waters.
THere is a greater difference to be seen in the choice, and in the doses of
the substances, which are made use of for the composition of Aqua Fortis's,
then in the manner of preparing them, which is almost the same. For though they
be generally compounded of nothing but Saltpeter and Vitriol, and that Niter
be the foundation of them all their quantities nevertheless are not alike in
all Authors; besides that they mingle sometimes Alum, sometimes Verdigreese,
sometimes Antimony, Arsenick, Sublimate, and Sal-Ammoniack, Sea Salt,
Sal-Gammae, etc. without Vitriol or with Vitriol. Some also only dry and beat
the Niter and Vitriol in a Mortar; others make use of the latter without
calcining it to whiteness. Some also put two parts of Vitriol to one of Niter.
Others put equal parts both of the one and the other. Some there are also that
put the whole weight, or the half of their weights, in Bole or Brick beaten
small; so that every Artist follows his own method. Which shall not hinder me
from setting down here the most common preparation of Aquafortis, that seems
to me to be the best for corrosion and dissolution of the most part of Metals,
and some Minerals that resemble them in their Nature.

Having calcined to whiteness, and powdered two pound and a half of common
Vitriol, and dried and beaten in a Mortar the like quantity of good Saltpeter,
mingle them together, and put them into a large Cornute of Potters-Earth,
covered over with lute; and having placed it in a close Reverberatory, and
fitted and carefully luted a large Recipient to its neck, begin your
distillation with a very soft fire, then increase it from degree to degree to
the utmost violence of heat; and so continue it till you perceive the brown
red-colour of the vapors in the Recipient to abate: and the heat of the same
Recipient to slack'n. At which time having stopped the Register of the Duomo,
and the doors of the Cinder and Hearthplace, leave the Vessels to cool; then
having unluted the Recipient, and taken out the Aquafortis, put it up in a
double glass-Bottle perfectly well stopped.

The malignity which Niter and Vitriol contract, when they are united, and
distilled together, is the reason that the Aquafortis drawn from thence, is
much more dangerous, then the Spirits drawn separately from Niter and Vitriol.
And therefore this water is never given inwardly; the principal uses of it
being for Immersive Calcination, and for the separation of Metals, whence it
is called the Caustic Water, or Water of departure. And though we should do
ill to say, that all the Corroding Spirits of Vitriol, may ascend in the usual
time alloted for the Distillation of Aquafortis; in regard that Vitriol
endures the fire some days before it part with its last Spirits. Nevertheless
we must believe that those of Niter carry away a good part with them, and as
much as is necessary to augment their Corrosive quality. While the mixture of
Vitriol with Niter serves to a double end, in regard that by imparting its
Spirits, it keeps the parts of the Niter divided in the Cornute, and hinders
Fusion, which would retain and concenter the Spirits, and break the Retort.

The malignity of Aquafortis prevents the use of the Salt which remains in the
Cornute after Distillation. For though that some famous Authors have very much
esteemed it, under the names of Duplicate Salt, or the Twofold Mystery, the
Twofold Allheal, or Salt of Two, and have attributed to it very great virtues;
yet it is a very hard thing to separate the vomitive and corroding quality that
is inherent to the Vitriol. And so much the rather, because this Salt still
contains the last and most sharp Spirits of the Vitriol, and for that the Niter
which is mixed with it, is become now more eager. I think too, that all the
pains a man might take to dissolve, Filter, and Coagulate this Salt several
times, would be in vain, as also the addition of Mineral-Crystal, which the
same Authors direct to have done, the more easily to obtain from it the effects
which they expect; in regard there are many other Salts which may be more to
the purpose, and with far less danger satisfy their Intentions. Besides that
according to the opinion of Swelser, the residence of the Distillation of the
Spirit of Vitriol may be so calcined, that there shall not remain behind any
Savor of the Vitriol, and that by exposing it to the Sun or the open Air for
several days, you may separate from it the Salt of the Air, which has filled
its pores, which having neither sharp savor nor vomitive quality, but an acid
Salt pleasing savor, is incomparably better and more proper to be mixed with
the fixed Salt part of Niter: which you may extract by a Lixivium made of the
settlement of the distillation of its Spirit, or else with as much in weight of
Salt Polychrestes, or some other fixed Niter.

There is another Aquafortis to be prepared with equal parts of Niter, and
Alum, distilled together in a Retort, setting apart the Phlegm that comes forth
first, and putting up the Aquafortis that follows it in a double bottle well
stopped; as being a dissolvent very proper for Bismuth, Mercury, and for all
other Minerals, and such other Minerals that serve to beautify the face.

But because these ordinary Aqua-Fortis's, though sufficient to dissolve
Silver, and all other imperfect Metals, cannot do the same thing to Gold, we
have recourse to the Salts Ammoniack, Gemmae, and Sea Salt; by the conjunction
whereof, the points of the parts of these waters being sharpn'd, they dissolve
Gold as easily as they did before the other Metals. And therefore they are
called Regal Waters, as having power to dissolve Gold, which is the King of
Metals.

You may Regalize Aquafortis in a small time and very easily, putting into a
small Mattress four ounces of good Aquafortis, with an ounce of Sal-Ammoniack,
beaten to a fine powder; or an ounce of Sea Salt or Sal-Gemmae, and dissolving
one of these Salts in the Aquafortis in a Sand-bath over a fire of Digestion.

You may also prepare a Regal water by one single distillation, proceeding
thus. Take a pound of good Saltpeter, and a pound of Sea Salt well dried, and
having beaten them to powder, mingle them and put them together in a large
Cornute of Potters-Earth daubed all over with lute; and having placed it in a
Furnace of close Reverberation, and fitted a large Recipient to the neck of it,
make your Distillation with a Gradual fire like as for ordinary Aqua-Fortis's;
and you shall find in the Recipient a Regal water proper for the dissolution or
Immersive Calcination of Gold.

There is also another Water to be prepared, which some call the Philosophical
Water* or the Water of the Two Champions. For which, take two ounces of good
Saltpeter well dried, and two ounces of Salt-Armoniack, and having beaten them
in a Mortar, and put them together in a large Cornute of Potters-Earth, daubed
over with lute, and placed it in a close Furnace of Reverberation, and fitted a
large Recipient to the neck, you may draw forth with a gradual fire a Water
which is not inferior to any Regal-water for the dissolution of Gold. In
reference to which preparation, it is good to understand, that the largeness of
the Retort, and that of the Recipient are as necessary as the government of the
fire, because the Spirits that proceed from these four ounces of substance,
rise with so much violence, that being forced by the fire, they would burst the
Retort and the Recipient, if they have not room enough to expand their fury.

The Butter of Niter vitriolated, invented by Peter John Faber, being applauded
by several Modern Writers, I thought fit to insert it here. Take equal parts of
Niter and raw Tartar, and having beaten and mixed them together in a great
iron-Mortar, heated before, set it on fire in a Chimney with a little Coals,
leaving the fire and the Niter to act together according to nature; then gather
together and put into a Crucible the fixed Salts of Niter and Tartar, which
remain together in the Mortar. Set the Crucible in a proper Furnace in the
midst of a Coal-fire, and leave it there till the Salts are become perfectly
white; then adding thereto, and mixing the full weight of Salt of Vitriol
dissolved in Rainwater, reduce them over a small fire to a Curdlement, or a
kind of Butter, very white, and keep it in a double glass Bottle well stopped.
The Author of this Butter highly commends it both inwardly and outwardly, to
purge gently melancholy and tartarous humors, being given from one dram to
two, in half an ounce of Syrup of Roses or Violets; as also for the cure of the
Gout, being applied to the part; to dissolve cold and schirrous swellings, to
dissipate those that are waterish and phlegmatic, and to cure all sorts of
Tettars and Scabs.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Preparation of Alum.
Alum is a salt juice proceeding out of certain Earths, or places that
participate of the nature of Lead, and which is composed of much phlegm, some
little acid Spirit, and a good quantity of sharp and corroding Salt,
accompanied with several terrestreities. Roch-Allum is the most esteemed and
the most made use of, of all sorts of Alum, and of which there is the greatest
quantity. It is also called Ice-Allum, because it resembles water congealed.
There are three sorts of it of which the first is found naturally congealed in
the Earth. But the other two require art; for the one is drawn forth by bolling
and coagulating the Mineral-waters, which are impregnated with it; and the
other by making Lies of Earths and stones, wherewith it is mixed Alum, whose
color inclines to red, and is called Roman, is accounted the best of all that
we meet with in France. But neither the Roman nor the rest abound ever awhit
the more in remedies. For of all Salts, Alum is that whereof the least
preparations are made.

Dissolve Alum in Rainwater, and having filtered the dissolution, evaporate
it till it be covered with a ^^lm, then leaving it to dry, separate and filter
the Crystals of the Alum; which some dissolve, filter, and crystallite several
times, as well to make them more pure, as the better to qualify their
sharpness. This purification is very advantageous, when you would employ Alum
for Gargarisms, or in other inward remedies. But it is never done for outward
applications.

Alum is sometimes calcined in a Crucible, or in an Earthen-Pot fit to resist
the fire, where it becomes white, spungy, and light; at what time, having no
need of its Spirit or phlegm, you only look after the sharp and corroding Salt,
which is the same that is commonly called Burnt-Allum. But they that will have
all the good parts of Alum, must distill it in a Retort, after the following
manner.

Put two or three pound of Roman Alum into a Retort, encompassed with lute,
and having placed it in a close Reverberatory, and fitted to its neck a large
Recipient, but not luted, begin your distillation with a very soft fire,
increasing it sometimes after to the second degree, and so keeping it till all
the phlegm be distilled off, and that you perceive the Spirit of Alum enter
into the Recipient in white vapors. At which time having emptied and put apart
the phlegm, and luted the neck of the Recipient to the beak of the Cornute,
continue the distillation, augmenting the fire from degree to degree to the
utmost violence, and continuing it so till no more vapors come forth into the
Cornute. After which, having stopped up the Register of the Duomo, and the
doors of the Furnace, unluted and given the Vessels time to cool, you shall
find in the Recipient the acid Spirit of Alum, and in the Retort the Alum
calcined, in a white lump, spungy, light, and like to that which is calcined in
the Crucible; and by this means you preserve all the good parts of the Alum.

The Spirit of Alum is very much recommended against difficulties of Urine; to
unstop and clear the passages of Gravel, the Stone, and other matters which
stop the course of it. It is very proper to open obstructions of the Liver, the
Spleen, and the whole Region of the Bowels; as also to quench the thirst of
Fevers, mixing it in proper liquors, from five or six to twelve or fifteen
drops. It is also to be mixed in Gargarisms, to extinguish inflammations that
happen in the inner parts of the mouth and throat; to stop the course, and take
away the sharpness of thin and tart humors, that fall upon those parts; and to
heal the little Ulcers of the Gums, the tongue, and all the neighboring parts,
only by touching them. The phlegm is used to cleanse and cicatrize Ulcers; and
the sediment of the distillation to eat away proud flesh, and excrescencies
that are common to Wounds and Ulcers, and to prevent their putrefaction. You
may also dulcifie the Spirit of Alum, like those of Salt and Niter, mingling
with it the same measure of good Spirit of Wine; distilling them together,
cohobating them, and proceeding in all things as for the dulcification of the
Spirits before mentioned. The Spirit of Alum dulcified is yet more proper to
give for the inside of the mouth, then that which is not; and you may also
double the dose.

Some persons having dissolved Roch-Allum in water, and having filtered the
liquor, distill it in a Cinder-bath, till it be dry, in a low glass Cucurbit,
covered with its head well luted. Then leaving the Vessels to cool, they
dissolve in the distll'd water the Alum that remained in the Cucurbit,
filtring and distilling anew in the same Bath the liquor distilled to dryness;
then they reiterate the dissolutions, filtrations, and distillations, till all
the terrestreities of the Alum remaining in the filter, all the pure substance
be ascended up in distillation. They call this water the Magisterial Spirit of
Alum, and they account it one of the best Stipticks that can be prepared. We
may believe, that the use of this Spirit Magisterial may prove of great
advantage, by mixing a tenth part in Gargarisms, or in other liquors or
decoctions, which are cooling, astringent, and detersive, as well for the
diseases of the mouth, as for the other exterior parts, which have need of
cooling, cleansing, and closing; as also in vulnerary potions, putting in a
half part less, according to the proportion of the liquors. So that having this
water in a readiness, as at the same time the distilled waters, decoctions, and
juices of the parts of Plants that are proper, you may prepare at any time
those remedies, which will be incomparably much better then all the Alluminous
waters distilled, which we find in Books.

Some having put the quantity of calcined Alum into a glass Cucurbit placed in
a Sand-bath, and having poured upon it as much good Vinegar as is requisite to
dissolve it, filter this dissolution, and having evaporated it in the same
Bath, till the film cover it, and leave the Bath to cool; after which they
separate, dry, and put up the Crystals, which they find in the Cucurbit. Which
is to be given upon occasion in some proper purging liquor, from twelve or
fifteen to eighteen or twenty grains, twice a week, a little before the fit,
for the cure of Tertian Agues. But I cannot promise the success of a thing
doubtful, whereof I have not had the experience.

CHAP. XX. Of the Preparation of Salt- Ammoniack.
THE name of Ammoniack, given to this Salt, has carried it at all times from
above thirty other names which Authors have given it, the repetition whereof is
not necessary. The Temple of Jupiter (...), situated in the midst of the
Deserts of Lybia, gave it its name; because this Salt was formerly found
sublimated upon the superficies of the burnt Sands of that Country.

The Urine of Camels that generally traveled that way in Caravans, in the
pilgrimages that were continually made to this Temple, was the first and
principal matter, and the acid Salt of the air, which impregnated this Salt in
the night time, by its union stopped the volatile parts, which the heat of the
Sun had otherwise dissipated. But because we have not at this day the ancient
Salt of the Ancients, we must of necessity content our selves with that which
is prepared at Venice, Antwerp, and in other places, with five parts of sound
Man's Urine, one part of Seasalt, and a half part of Chimney-soot, which they
boil together, and reduce into one Mass, and afterward sublime in the form as
we now see, under the name of that of the Ancients. The impurity of the soot,
and the great vent for Salt-Ammoniack, are the reason that it is usually
covered with dirt, and that to have it in its beauty and purity, you must be
forced to dissolve it in water, filter it and coagulate it afterward into a
mass, or into Crystals.

Salt-Ammoniack is calcined, being mixed with equal parts of Quicklime, in a
Crucible placed upon the iron-square in the midst of a Wind-Furnace, where it
is at length forced into Fusion, then it is dissolved in water, and having
filtered and coagulated the dissolution, it is left to dissolve by little and
little in a Cellar, in a liquor fit to dissolve Gold or Silver.

You may sublimate Salt-Ammoniack in a Sand-bath with a gradual fire, having
mixed it with equal parts of Sea Salt. You may also very properly sublimate it
by the same fire, having incorporated it with its weight of Steel-filings, or
else with equal parts of those little scales of Iron, which are to be gathered
up under Smiths Anvils, and force the flowers of it to ascend, which are highly
commended in Quartan Agues, giving them at the beginning of the fit, from five
or six grains to a scruple, in Wine or in some other liquor, having used
purgative or emetick temedies before.

You may also sublimate the flowers of Salt-Ammoniack, mixing them with equal
parts of Salt-Tartar, or Boodstone. But because the Salt Ammoniack
principally contains in its composition much of volatile urinous Salt, and one
part of Sea Salt, part acid, part fixed, and that you may by raising these
flowers save two different Spirits, the one urinous, and the other acid, which
the same Salt encloses in its substance, I refer the preparation thereof to the
next Chapter.

(...)without the addition of any moisture, or that we cannot cause a good
quantity of the Flowers to sublime, provided you leave empty about three
fourths of the Cucurbit, that you carefully lute the vessels, and that you
govern your fire so, that you do not hasten too much the distillation of the
Spirit, nor the sublimation of the Flowers. For these Salts having usually
received from the air some certain moisture sufficient to dissolve and unite
some part of the acid to the fixed Salt, the same moisture finding it self
afterward forced by the fire, and constrained to rise in vapors, dissolves
also, and carries with it some part of the Urinous volatile Salt, by forsaking
the fixed, whence it comes to pass that afterward it distills in Liquor into
the Recipient. While notwithstanding the defect of moisture, the union of most
part of the acid with the fixed Salt, hinders it not from so doing by little
and little, though much more slowly and with less perfection, and that it give
way to the separation and sublimation of the Flowers of a good part of the
volatile Salt.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Distillation of the Acid Spirit of Salt-Ammoniack.
THE acid Spirit of the Salt-Ammoniack proceeding only from the acid of the
Sea Salt, and the quantity of the latter being much less in the composition of
the same Salt-Ammoniack, then that of the volatile Urinous, we cannot separate
this Spirit from the other substances, while the volatile Salt is mixed with
it. And therefore you must begin to distill that first, and not undertake that
of the acid Spirit till the volatile has made way.

Take the mass which remains in the Cucurbit after the Distillation of the
volatile Spirit, and having reduced it to powder, and mixed it with four times
as much of common Bole, powdered in the same manner, put them into a Cornute,
and having placed it in a close Reverberatory, and fitted and luted a large
Recipient to the neck, draw forth the acid Spirit with a gradual fire: but you
may take another course, and thereby preparing a good Urinous Spirit of Salt,
and saving all the good parts of the substances mixed together, gain at length
an acid Spirit.

To which purpose having powdered two pound of Salt-Ammoniack, and as much
Boodstone, and having mixed them, and put them together, into a large Glass
Cucurbit, place it in a Sand-bath; and covered it with its head, fitted a
recipient to the head, and perfectly well luted all the closures of the
Vessels, kindle under the Bath a very soft fire at once; which you must
increase a little and a little by degrees, and at length to the utmost
violence, continuing it so for five or six hours. Then leaving the Vessels to
cool you shall find in the Recipient, the odor whereof will be very
penetrating, which is to be put up in a double glass bottle perfectly well
luted: and in the head and upon the sides of the Cucurbit above the substances
you shall find the Flowers of Salt-Ammoniack of a yellow color, which you may
keep as they are, if you please in a double glass-bottle well stopped. But you
may make a better advantage of them, if after you have powdered them very
finely, and put them into a Mattress, you extract the tincture with good Spirit
of Wine by the most gentle ordinary ways: and if after you have filtered all
the Tinctures, you draw forth the Spirit in Balneo Mariae to the dryness of the
Salt, which will be much more beautiful then the Flowers, and will have the
color and Aromatic odor of Saffron. You may also keep it in that condition,
or dissolve it into a Cellar in a Golden Liquor, which may be given from five
or six drops, to ten or twelve, in proper Liquors, against all manner of
obstructions, particular those of the Hypochondria.

But for as much as the acid part of the Salt-Ammoniack remains at the bottom
of the Cucurbit, among the settlement of the Boodstone. After you have
powdered and mixed the whole with four times as much Potters-Earth dried and
powdered in the same manner put the whole into a large Retort of Earth,
encompassed with lute, and having placed it in a close Furnace of
Reverberation, make your distillation with a Gradual fire, proceeding in all
things as for the distillation of the same Spirit: and you shall have an acid
yellow Spirit, much more pleasing and much more proper for all uses, then that
which is drawn from the Salt-Marine. You may also prepare a Urinous Spirit,
Flowers, and an acid Spirit of Salt-Ammoniack impregnated with the impressions
of the acid, proceeding as follows.

Having powdered and mixed two pound of Salt-Ammoniack, and as much filings of
Steel, put them together into a large Cucurbit, placed in a Sand-bath, and
having covered it with its head, fitted a Recipient to the pipe of the head,
and carefully luted all the closures, kindle and keep for some time a very soft
fire under the Bath; but increase it by little and little, and by degrees to
its utmost violence, and having proceeded in all things as for the distillation
and sublimation of this Salt with the Boodstone, put up apart the Urinous
Spirit in a glass-Bottle perfectly well stopped; then having scraped together
the Flowers in the head and from the sides of the Cucurbit, of a brown color;
bruise and mix the remainder with the Flowers, and put all together into a
convenient vessel; expose it night and day in the air for some weeks, and you
shall perceive by little and little a kind of a Flower to rise above the
substances, and how that by moistning themselves, swelling and raising
themselves, they will become soft, and of an ashy color enclining to yellow,
having then a sharp eager vitrioliz'd savor, near to that of Mars or Iron a
little Sweetish. At which time having put the whole into a Retort of
Potters-Earth, daubed over with Lute with a long neck, place it in a close
Furnace of Reverberation, and having fitted to it a large Recipient, and
carefully luted all the Closures, make your Distillation over an open fire,
soft at the beginning, but augmented by degrees to the utmost heat it can give,
and continue it in the same manner as for the last Distillation of the
Boodstone. By this means you shall have an acid Spirit, of a Gold'n color,
which may be rectified over a soft fire, to separate the watery part, with which
it is more impregnated then the preceding Spirit, because of the moisture of
the air which is mixed therewith.

This Spirit is highly recommended to open all obstructions of the lower Belly,
to break and expel the Stone, to assuage the pains of the Intestines;
strengthening them, as well as the stomach, the Liver, and the Spleen. The dose
is from five or six to ten or twelve drops in proper Liquors.

You may instead of mixing the Flowers with the Mass that remains after
distillation, mingle them with half their weight in new Salt-Ammoniack, and
having put the whole over a Sand-Bath in a Cucurbit of glass covered with its
head, carefully luted and fitted a Recipient to it luted in the same manner,
sublimate them in yellow Flowers, and draw forth by the same means a small
quantity of Spirit, participating of Acid and Urinous, and employ them for the
same uses, as the Spirits before mentioned.

The different qualities of the Urinous Spirit, and the acid Spirit drawn from
Salt-Ammoniack, may surprise those who seeing this Salt, should not know its
Composition, nor the nature of the Salts which compose it. Many also may wonder
to see these two Spirits converted into one Salt composed of both, and that
clear Liquors, such as these Spirits are, should take the body, shape and savor
of Salt, without the addition of any strange matter which may be active or
assisting in this Corporification. The trial however which may be made of these
things, will easily stop the mouths of those who doubt of it; especially when
they shall have seen, that by putting into a Cucurbit the acid Spirit of
Salt-Ammoniack, and by pouring upon it by degrees, and at several Repetitions
the Urinous Spirit of the same Salt; or else by putting in the same vessel the
Urinous Spirit, and pouring upon it the same acid Spirit, till Ebullition
cease, the two Spirits united together, as having reciprocally penetrated each
other, shall be found not only to have lost their savor and odor which they
had particularly by themselves before their conjunction, but if you keep the
Cucurbit which contains them, for some time upon a Bath of Ashes or Sand, over
a moderate heat, you shall see that the insipid phlegm which was mingled among
them, dissipating it self, they will assume the body, shape, and all the
qualities of Salt, without destroying each other, and that they will be in a
condition also both of them their particular substance of a Spirit, when the
Artist has a mind to separate them by the means of some fixed Salt.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Preparation of Vitriol.
VItriol has been always ranked among the Salts, though some have thought it
very different from their nature, and have taken it for a Salt altogether
particular, composed of an acid Spirit, very much resembling that of Sulphur;
and of some particles of Iron or Copper, or some other Metal or Metallic
matter, in part terrestrial, which the same Spirit has met withal, and
dissolved in the Bowels of the Earth, and with which it is incorporated in form
of a Salt. The variety of the color and substance of Vitriols, and the parts
which compose them, has much contributed to this opinion; because that though
we find some Vitriols, and particularly the white, which contain no apparent
Metal or Metallic matter, the most part however of the rest have in them
particles of Iron or Copper, and sometimes both together. Whence it falls out,
that when there is no intention but to open the passages by fortifying the
parts, those Vitriols are made choice of that have no Iron; but principally
those which contain much Copper, when their Emetick virtue is required,
accommodating them to the effects which you desire, with regard to the
substances which compose them.

All the Vitriols have been much used both in the one and the other Pharmacy.
Some Authors also who have aspired to a universal remedy, have thought that it
was concealed in Vitriol, and that the word Vitriol^m, containing in it
something of Mysterious, every one of the Letters signifying a word, which they
thus expounded, Visitando Interior a Terrae, Rectificando Invenies Occultum
Lapidem, Veram Medecinam; by searching the Bowels of the Earth, by
rectification thou shall find the Occult Stone, which is the true Physic. But
all these imaginations, nor all they can say of it, not being able to change
the nature of the Vitriol, and the color and place where it is bred, causing
for the most part the differences, and demonstrating the various composition,
and different qualities; I shall only say, that the blew color, as well in
Salts as waters, being an essential mark of the mixture of Copper among the
other substances, we are not to doubt but that the blew Vitriol, being that of
Cyprus, is that of all the rest which participates most of that Metal; that the
green color, being composed of blew and yellow, and the deepest green being
most charged with blew, the greenest Vitriol participates more of Copper then
that which is less green; whose pale color enclining to yellow or earthy,
denotes nothing else but the earthy or ferruginous matter which is incorporated
with it. It may be also said, that the white Vitriol is that which is less
mixed with Metallic substances. As for the red color, which is natural to
certain Vitriols, which the Philosophers have described under the names of
S^ri, Cha^^itis, and Misi, it is only to be attributed to the subterraneal
heat, which has given them that color, which the ordinary fire gives to
Vitriols that are exposed to it.

Vitriol is variously prepared according to the various intentions of the
Artist. The purifying of it is the most common of all its preparations; though
it be not always necessary, but to separate the terrestreities, and to have the
Crystals transparent, or to mix with other internal preparations. To which
purpose it is enough sometimes to dissolve the Vitriol in common water, to
filter and crystallize it, as is done to all other Salts. But when you would
perfectly purify it, and separate very much of the terrestrial parts, as also
of the Metallic particles which are inwardly and deeply mixed with it, and
which may be apt to pass through the filter, we are obliged to have recourse to
long digestions, by means whereof the terrestreities and Metallic parts
precipitate to the bottom of the liquor, whereby the Crystals afterward are
much fairer in color, and more transparent then the Vitriol before it was
purified. Some to save expense of time, pour upon the dissolution of Vitriol
some new acid, among the rest the liquor of Niter or Vinegar distilled; which
uniting it self with the fixed Salt-part of the Vitriol, cause it to abandon
the terrestrial or Metallic parts, which it has dissolved, whence follows
their precipitation to the bottom of the liquor. But these means are not to be
used but upon certain occasions, where the mixture of these new acids is not
contrary to the effects, which you expect from the Vitriol or its parts; or
where their mixture may be necessary, as you may observe by the following water.

CHAP. XXIII. The Stiptick water of Monsieur Matte La Faveur Distiller in
Montpelier.
DIssolve twenty five pound of Vitriol in a sufficient quantity of Common
water, and having strained this Dissolution through a course Linnen-Cloath, put
it over the fire in a Copper Caldron, where after it has boiled some few
bublings take off the Vessel from the fire, and pour immediately upon the
Liquor, a pint of Spirit of Vinegar, to cause the Terrestrial part of the
Vitriol, improperly called Sulphur, to precipitate to the bottom of the vessel;
then leaving the Liquor for ten or twelve hours to settle, and to give the
Earth time to sink to one place, pour out by inclination the Liquor that swims
at the top: and having well washed, dulcified, and dried the powder resting at
the bottom, over hot Embers, put eight ounces of it into a glass Cornute, and
having poured upon it eight ounces of Spirit of Vitriol well purified from its
Phlegm, make your Distillation with a gradual fire, soft at the beginning, and
at length very violent, continuing it so till nothing come out of the Cornute.
Then give the Vessels time to cool, break the Retort, beat the Mass that
remains to powder, and put it into a Mattress, upon which having poured Spirit
of Wine rectified with Salt of Tartar, about five or six fingers breadth above
the substances, cover the Mattress with a Vessel of Rencounter carefully luted,
and set it upon a Bath of digestion for four and twenty hours. After which the
Spirit of wine being become very red filter it hot through a course Paper, then
drawing it off again through a glass-Alembick, or gently evaporating it to the
dryness of the sediment, you shall find at the bottom a whitish powder, upon an
ounce whereof having poured four ounces of Rainwater, leave the mixture in the
Sun for some days, then Filter the Liquor, which will be a Stiptick water
proper to stop all sorts of bleedings.

I have inserted this water among the preparations of Vitriol by the order of
Monsieur D'Aquin, chief Physician to his Majesty, who having discovered the
Author, who prepared it in his presence, for which the Doctor has testified his
acknowledgment by obtaining several favors of the King in his behalf. The said
Monsieur Faveur, has prepared another Stiptick water which has the same virtue
with the preceding, though somewhat different from it, proceeding after the
following Method.

Boil seven or eight pound of Vitriol of Piza, in sixteen pints of water, and
when the Vitriol is dissolved, take it off the fire and pour upon it half a
pint of Spirit of Vinegar; let the matters settle, and pour out the Liquor by
inclination; wash, dulcify, and dry the powder which was precipitated to the
bottom. Then having put it into a Retort luted only in the under-part, and
poured upon it double its weight in Spirit of Vitriol well rectified, make the
Distillation over a naked fire, but moderate, till the substances be dry, which
will be then of a Greyish color. Then break the Retort, powder the Mass and
put it into a Crucible over burning Coals, stirring it continually with an
Iron-Spatula, till it turn yellowish. At which time having poured it into a
Mortar and well bea^en it, put two ounces into a Mattress, with three ounces of
ordinary water, and after a digestion of half an hour; filter the Liquor
through a coarse paper, and keep it in a double glass bottle well stopped as a
remedy against all Haemorraghia's or violent fluxes of blood.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Precipitates, Earths, or Sulphurs of Vitriol.
THE purifying of Vitriol by the means of long and reiterated digestions, made
in common water, and the preparation of Stiptick water, already described, are
examples of the precipitation of most of the terrestrial parts of the Vitriol.
But we may by other means make a precipitation, and a much more absolute
separation of the solid parts which the acid Spirit of Vitriol had dissolved,
which some call simply Earth, others Metallic Earth, or Sulphur of Vitriol.

Some having made choice of a green and crystalline Vitriol, dissolve it in hot
Rainwater, and having filtered the whole, they pour upon it by little and
little the liquor of Tartar, or the Lie of Wine-Lee's Ashes, till ebullition
cease, to the end the acid of the Vitriol, and the fixed Salt of the Tartar, or
of the Wine-Lees, acting reciprocally the one upon the other and uniting
together, the first may be compelled to forsake the matter which they have
dissolved, and to permit it to precipitate to the bottom in form of an Earth,
which is to be washed in several waters and dried, after you have poured out
the liquor that swims uppermost by inclination, and put it up apart by it self.

This Earth is called Sweet Sulphur of Vitriol, though very improperly, since
that in reality it is only a Metallic Earth, principally recommended to cure
diseases of the Lungs, and to cleanse and cicatrize Wounds and Ulcers, as also
to kill Worms.

Neither is the liquor that swims above the precipitated Earth poured out by
inclination, as if it were good for little, since it contains in it the most
pure acid and salt part of the Vitriol, united with the fixed salt part of the
Tartar, or of the ashes of Wine-Lees; and a very good medicine may be made of
this liquor after precipitation of the Earth of Vitriol with the liquor of
Tartar. For by this means the terrestrial part naturally concealed in the Salt
of Tartar, precipitates with that of the Vitriol; so that by the conjunction of
the acid part of the Vitriol with the fixed Salt of the Tartar, and by the
evaporation of the water made use of, you shall find at the bottom of the
Vessel, a pure and crystalline Salt, composed of two Salts, the effects whereof
are different from the ordinary sorts of Vitriol, which are Emetick, whereas
this works generally by stool, and rarely provokes vomiting; the dose being
from half a dram to a whole dram; besides that it is recommended against
intermitting Fevers, especially when there is an occasion to purge melancholy.

You may very properly use Vitriol of Mars, instead of common Vitriol; and
having dissolved it in distilled Rainwater, or in phlegm of Vitriol, and
digested it in a Mattress for some time, filter the liquor. Then precipitate it
with the liquor of Tartar; separate, wash, and dry the precipitated Earth; and
having evaporated the moisture of the Salts, and crystalliz'd them together,
keep them for your occasions. For the astriction of Mars, or Iron, still better
correcting the vomitive quality of the Vitriol, renders this Salt in a
condition only to act by stool or urine.

Some there are that having put into a Cucurbit one part of the filings of
Steel, and two parts of excellent Vitriol, pour upon them distilled Vinegar,
two or three fingers above the substances; then placing the Cucurbit in a
Sand-bath, they evaporate the moisture till the substances prove dry, and also
till they look red. Then leaving the Vessels to cool, powdered and put the mass
into a new Cucurbit, they pour more distilled Vinegar upon it, four or five
fingers above the substance; which done, having digested the whole till the
Vinegar look red, they filter this tincture, and precipitate it with the liquor
of Tartar, expecting to have by this means a true Sulphur of Tartar.

Others thinking to do better, after they have dissolved Vitriol of Mars, or
common Vitriol in Water, they sprinkle the filings of Steel, and having dried
it in a Sand-bath, and continue this sprinkling and drying of the Steel-dust,
till it be become very red. Having after that powdered the Mass, they extract a
Tincture with distilled Vinegar; they filter, it, and precipitate it with
Liquor of Tartar, in expectation of a Sulphur of Vitriol, which they have
entitled Anodyne, and would have it to be a second Landanum; but no wonder the
Effects do not answer their promises, since all this pretended Sulphur, is
nothing else but a Metallic Earth.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Distillation of Vitriol.
THey that contemplate one part of the substances which they may extract by the
Distillation of Vitriol who only look after the first and second Spirit, and
unwilling to spend time, are not diligent to seek for all that force and
penetration which they might meet with in the Distillation, use no other but
English Vitriol, which participating more of Iron then of Copper, and having
less fixed Salt then most of the other Vitriols, consists of less compacted
parts, and affords its Spirit in greater quantity and with less trouble.
However it is not to be thought, for all that, that the English Vitriol is
without some particles of Copper, as some have written. For if it were, the
Mars would show it self by its brown color which would predominate. Whereas
the red color, which appears very suddenly in this Vitriol, as also in the
^est, except the white, when they are exposed to the violence of the fire, is
an undeniable sign of the Copper that lies concealed in it; as also the red
color, which happens to the Verdigreese being upon the fire, is also an
assured mark that it contains in it several particles of Copper. But though the
dearness and the abundance of the particles of Copper which the Vitriol of
Cyprus contains, of which the blew color is a certain evidence, be the reason
that it is not so much used for the extraction of its Spirit; however most sure
it is, that Angelus Sala, Schroderus and several other Writers, recommend a
meaner Vitriol for Distillation, and which contains more particles of Copper.
And we see by experience that the Vitriol of Germany in fair green Crystals,
and by consequence more full of the mixture of Copper then that of England, is
that whose Spirits are more powerful, and which affords them in greater
quantity. Whence it happens that we seldom distill that of England, but when the
Astriction of the Mars is required, rather then the penetration of the Spirit.

But to obtain all the good parts of the Vitriol: After you have made choice of
that which you judge most proper for your purpose, fill up with it, about the
half of a glass Cucurbit somewhat low, placed in Balneo Mariae, and having
covered it with its head, fitted a Recipient to the pipe, and carefully luted
the closures, cause the Bath to boil without intermission, till nothing more
distill into the Recipient. Then let the Vessels cool, and having unluted the
Recipient, put up the distilled water in a Bottle close stopped. Which water
Writers call the Dew of Vitriol; principally rcommending it against Distempers
of the head, and to strength'n the Bowels, as also to restore and preserve the
Radical moisture; giving the weight of two Drams, especially in the Spring and
after Purgation.

At the same time take the Cucurbit out of the Balneum Mariae; and having
placed it in a Sand-bath, and reluted the closures of the Recipient, draw off
by a stronger heat, then that of a boiling Bath, all the water that will come
forth; which will prove clear, of a pleasing scent, and deserves to be kept
apart; as being proper to cleanse the Reins, open the passages of the Urine,
and heal internal Corrosions, giving the weight of a dram in meat-Broth. It
cools the Inflammations of Wounds, asswages the pain, and cicatrizes them being
applied. It is also very good to cure the scurfe.

Having saved these two Waters and let the Sand-bath cool, beat the Mass that
remains in the Cucurbit to powder, and having filled therewith two thirds of an
Earthen Retort, daubed over with Lute, set in a close Furnace of Reverberation;
and having fitted and luted a large Recipient to the pipe, begin your
distillation with a gradual fire soft at first, but increased by degrees from
time to time, and forced at length to the utmost violence; continuing it so,
till no more vapors come forth of the Retort, but that the Recipient appear
altogether clear. At which time the Vessels being cool and the Recipient
unluted, pour out the distilled Liquor into a double glass Bottle, and having
well stopped it keep this Spirit for your occasions. Or else, pour it forth
into a Glass Cucurbit, covered with its head, and having placed it in a
Sand-bath, fitted a Recipient to the Nozel, and carefully luted all the
closures, you shall draw forth in the first place a very subtle penetrating
Sulphury Spirit, which you must keep apart in double glass bottles very close
stopped. Then continuing the fire, the Phlegm will rise and distill; after that a
Spirit indifferently Acid, and at the bottom of the Cucurbit you shall find the
more weighty Spirits, and most tart, which they call improperly Oil of Vitriol.

Vitriol yields its Spirits in white Clouds as all other Salts except Niter,
whose vapors are red; but the compactness of its parts are the reason why the
Spirits come forth so slowly: for you are forced to continue the fire for three
or four natural days, and sometimes also longer, especially for the
Distillation of German Vitriol; when you would have the last Spirits. And if
you will continue the fire till you can see cross the Rebipient the mouth of
the Retort red, it is a sign that nothing more comes out of the Retort, and
that the vapors are all dissolved into Liquor in the Recipient. But because
these last Spirits are extremly corrosive, and impregnated with Metallic
substances, contained in the Vitriol, you may cease the Distillation, twelve
hours after the white vapors begin to appear, or when you perceive certain
di^ky drops about the neck of the Recipient. Which hinders not, but that having
unluted the Recipient, by moistning the Lute of the closures with hot water,
and put up the Spirit safe, you may put on again and relute the little Globe,
or Balon, and continue the Distillation with a very violent fire, till the
Vitriol has yielded its utmost Spirits.

The first Spirit of Vitriol, not being so Corrosive as the latter, is more
proper to take inwardly; it is Diuretic and somewhat Diaphoretick: it cuts,
attenuates, and resists the putrefaction of the humors. It stirr's up an
appetite; it opens the obstructions of the Liver, Spleen and Mesentery, it
qualifies the heat of Fevers mixed in drink from four or five, to twelve or
fifteen drops; or till the Liquor be pleasingly sharp: it heals the Ulcers of
the tongue, and the inside of the mouth, being touched with it: it is very
proper to cure all diseases of the Skin that proceed from Salt Phlegm.

The Metallic Earth or Oaker wherewith Vitriol abounds, hindering its Fusion
when the fire has consumed its greatest moisture; and this consumption being
effected before the Vitriol is put into the Retort, we never mix with it those
dry and acid substances which are usually mixed with other Salts to prevent
their Fusion, when we intend to extract their Spirits, but we put it alone thus
dried into the Cornute. The Earth it self wherewith it abounds, makes it fit to
hinder the separation and Fusion of the Niter, with which we mix it for the
preparation of Aquafortis.

Some Authors having put the Vitriol into a Glass Cucurbit placed in a
Cinder-Bath, cover it with its head, and having well luted the Closures, and
fitted a Recipient to the Pipe, with a moderate heat they draw off the Phlegm
and acid Spirit, as much as they can force to ascend from it; then having
cohobated the distilled Liquor upon the sediment, and repeated Distillation and
Cohobation seven or eight times, and redoubled the heat in the last
distillation, they at length draw forth a Phlegm mixed with much Acid Spirit,
whose odor becomes very grateful, if circulated two or three days in a proper
Vessel, very well stopped, and placed in a Sand-bath, over a fire of digestion.

This Acid Phlegm, as also the volatile Spirit of Vitriol, is very much
recommended to dissipate pains in the head, and to cure the Epilepsy. There is
no better way to limit the dose then by ordering it, till the sharpness be
pleasing to the Palate, in those Liquors wherewith it is mixed. All the Spirits
of Vitriol are good to kill Worms, and peculiarly to stop internal fluxes of
blood, and to cool the inflammations of the Eyes.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Spirit of sweet Vitriol and some other Spirits of Vitriol.
SOme Writers direct you to pour Spirit of Vinegar upon calcined Vitriol, about
four fingers above it, and to let them digest together for some days, then to
pour out the Liquor that swims at the top by Inclination, and to keep it apart:
after that to pour fresh Spirit of Vinegar upon the sediment, and repeat
digestion during the same time as before, having poured out the liquor by
Inclination to preserve it as the first, reiterating the same Operations seven
or eight times. This done, they order you to put all the Tinctures into a
glass-Cucurbit, placed in a Cinder-Bath, covered with its head, and to draw off
the Phlegm of the Vinegar, and that of the Vitriol, with a soft fire, till the
sediment of the Tinctures come to be as thick as the consistence of Honey; and
having afterward mixed it with some handfuls of Sand, or with some other such
like matter, to put the mixture into a Cornute, or Retort, and with a Gradual
fire to draw forth a Spirit of Vitriol which they call Dulcified. But besides
that this Spirit is not free from Acidity, they cannot call it a true Spirit of
Vitriol being rather a Spirit of Vinegar.

Others having digested the Spirit of Vitriol upon filings of Steel, powdered
Coral, or some such kind of substances, upon which the Spirit of Vitriol may
expend its Acrimony; or else having singly mixed the Spirit of Vitriol with the
same matters they by the usual ways draw forth a Spirit, which is not so tart,
as being deprived of the most acid parts which those substances have sucked up.
But this Spirit cannot be accounted otherwise then imperfect, since it has lost
the most part of its good parts I also think it is to be rejected, as likewise
the first, and that the best dulcifying of the Spirit of Vitriol, is to observe
the same method as for the dulcifying the Spirits of Salt and Niter; by mixing
it with equal parts of Spirit of Wine well rectified, and distilling the
mixture in a glass-Alembick in a Cinder-Bath with a moderate heat. For by the
inward Union which by that means is made of the acid part of the Spirit of
Vitriol, with the volatile Sulphury Salt part of the Spirit of Wine, where
arises a Spirit much more sweet in savor, and gentle in all its effects, then
was the Spirit of Vitriol before its Conjunction. And though we must confess
that this Spirit is composed of two, nevertheless we must have a beter opinion
of it, because they unite without the destruction of each other, and that by
this new disposal of their parts by this Union, that which both of them had of
violent is qualified, and their joint Operation much more proper and fitted to
our nature. So that the use of this Spirit is of much more advantage, then that
of the ordinary Spirit, especially to those persons to whom acids are
injurious; and that it is much more proper for several diseases, chiefly the
Scurvy. For the Spirit of Wine imparts to the Spirit of Vitriol a Diaphoretick
virtue, yet does not deprive it of the quality it has to open obstructions, and
strengthen the parts. This Spirit may be taken in a larger dose then that which
is not Dulcified.

You may also extract from the Dead Head that remains after Distillation an
acid Spirit much less violent, then that which is drawn from Vitriol after the
ordinary manner, by laying it in a place where it may receive the beams of the
Sun, the influences of the Moon and other Stars, with the moisture of the air,
so that no Rain may fall upon it, and leaving it there, for several months or
which is better for a whole year. For by this means the dry earth of the
Vitriol, being deprived of its natural Salt, but not of its Ferment, will be
impregnated with the acid Salt of the air, and become in some sort a new kind
of Vitriol, whence you may draw by the ordinary ways, and in ten or twelve
hours time an acid Spirit, very pleasing, which some call Spirit of Vitriol
Regenerate, which you may safely make use of, and with success in all diseases,
for which the ordinary Spirit of Vitriol is prescribed, giving it in the same
dose and in the same Liquors.

There is also a Compound Spirit of Vitriol to be prepared, after the following
Method. Beat in a Mortar, and mix four pound of Vitriol calcined to redness,
with five pound of River-Flints calcined, and a pound of Salt of Tartar
calcined to whiteness, and put them all together into a Retort, and having set
it in a close Furnace of Reverberation; begin your Distillation after the
ordinary manner with a Gradual fire, till the Phlegm and all the Spirits are
come forth. After which having cooled the Vessels, and unluted the Recipient,
mix the Liquor with that which remains in the Retort, and reiterate
Distillation, the better to loos'n the parts which are to ascend in distilling.
To which purpose repeat the same operations two or three times over; and then
you shall have a Spirit, which some Authors esteem very much to open the
obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Bowels, especially in Dropsies and
Jaundise, using it as you do the Spirits preceding. Paracelsus highly commends
a Spirit of Vitriol, which he calls Corrected, which he directs to be prepared
by Cohobating the Spirit upon that which remains in the Cornute after
Distillation, reiterating the same Cohobations and Distillations eight or nine
times. After which he directs you, that having poured the last Spirit, upon the
sediment, together with as much rectified Spirit of wine as is necessary to
reduce the whole into a paste, you should put it into a Retort, and distill it
with a gradual fire as before, highly recommending this Spirit against the
Epilepsy, given from five or six to eight or ten drops in Cephalic waters.

Hartman very much commends a Spirit, which he calls Anti-Epileptick, which he
composes of equal parts of Vitriol of Hungary well purified and the Urine of
healthy Children, digested for some time in a glass Cucurbit covered, in Balneo
Mariae, and then distilled in the same Bath. Affirming that the first water
that distills is an excellent remedy to cure the pains of the Gout applied to
the part; and that the second is a particular remedy for all diseases of the
eyes. Afterward he directs you to powder and put the sediment into a Retort,
and having fitted and luted a large Recipient to the Beak, to draw forth with a
naked and Gradual fire, a Spirit of an Austere savor, and of a Sulphury smell,
and to rectify it once or twice. Affirming that this Spirit is an infallible
remedy for the absolute* cure of the Epilepsy in children, mixing a Scruple of
it with the distilled water of Peony-Roots, and Flowers of Tylet tree, and
giving half a spoonful in the Fit, and continuing the use of it by Intervals as
occasion serves.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Salt and Earth of Vitriol.
IT is not enough to have drawn out of Vitriol by distillation, the phlegm and
several Spirits which it contains; for there is some salt part of the Vitriol
which remains in the Caput Mortuum which remains behind, and which, to speak
properly, is a real Vitriol* though most writers have taken it for something
distinct, and of another nature then Vitriol. But to have it, such as i^ is,
you must make a Lie of that which remains after distillation, and having
filtered it, evaporate the superfluous moisture, that you may have the Salt
which you shall find coagulated at the bottom of the Vessel, of a color
inclining to carnation, by reason of the impression of the fire which made the
Vitriol red. This Salt having the savor of Vitriol which is the principal
matter, retains also the qualities, especially the Emetick. But though the
small quantity of this Salt, or to say better Vitriol, which remains in the
dead head, after distillation, is not worth the looking after, nor the making
of the Lie; yet we are forced to do it for the Earths sake that accompanies it,
the astringent quality whereof all Writers highly commend. For to have it in
its purity, if you will not make a Lixivium, you must at least wash it over and
over again, till it be all pure, and without any mixture of the salt parts of
the Vitriol, that it may have the qualities that are attributed to it; which
are chiefly to heal Dysenteries, Lienteries, and Diarrhaea's, to stay vomiting,
and both outward and inward Fluxes of blood, to help weakness of the stomach
and bowels, and to cleanse wounds and ulcers.

But although the salt vitriolick substance which you may draw from the mass
which remains after distillation, may have all the virtues which writers have
ascribed to the Salt of Vitriol; yet the small quantity which is to be got, is
the reason that white Vitriol is made use of, dissolved in water, filtered and
crystalliz'd, instead of Salt of Vitriol; and that so much the rather, because
it produces the good effects which are expected from Salt of Vitriol with much
more gentleness, the chief of which are to expel by vomit or stool the bad
humors that gather in the stomach or in the bowels, to prevent their sending
up vapors to the brain, and their causing the Epilepsie, and other maladies of
the head; to kill worms, cure intermitting Agues, and to open obstructions of
the Liver and Spleen, the Kidneys and passages of the Urine. The dose is from
half a scruple to half a dram, in broth or in some other proper liquor.

I could here insert many other preparations of Vitriol, but being out of use,
I omit them.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Preparation of Sulphur.
THE great resemblance which there is between the acid Spirit of Sulphur and
that which is drawn from Vitriol, of which the first is the ground, obliges me
to give you the preparation thereof next in order. I intend not to speak of
that Sulphur which all Chemistry acknowledges for one of the principles of
mixed bodies, not more then of that which is to be separated from Antimony,
Cinnabar and some other Minerals, of which it makes one part of the
Composition; but of the Common ordinary Sulphur, which passes for a Rosine, or
Gum, or fat Oily Mineral juice; which is found in the bowels of the Earth pure
or mixed with it, or with Stones, or in certain waters from whence it is
separated by art. The fat Rosiny and Combustible part, is that which is in
greatest quantity in the Composition of Sulphur, but it is accompanied with a
little Salt, or acid Spirit, some little water and some Earth, which remains
after the consumption and separation of the rest of the parts by fire.
Brimstone is brought pure and refined to our hands. The best is the smoothest,
and that which burns without going out when it is once lighted. The color
whereof enclines a little thought toward Green, and is most proper for Chemical
preparations.

The Gummy and Combustible part of Brimstone prevailing above the rest and
being of it self, it not only rises with ease when it is set over the fire in
Vessels, but it carries with it some other parts; so that there remains little
or nothing in the Vessel, after long exposing to the fire; as you may observe
by the following preparation of the flowers of Brimstone.

Having placed an Earth'n Cucurbit glazed within, somewhat low, and fit to
resist the fire upon a Furnace proportionable, lute the inside of the
upper part of the Furnace, as also round about the Cucurbit, so that no Flame
nor Sparkle of fire may go out that way, to set the Sulphur on fire, leaving
nevertheless round about three or four little Registers, with their shutters
fit to take off or put on as occasion serves. Then having kindled a moderate
fire in the Hearth-place of the Furnace, put into the Cucurbit about three or
four ounces of Brimstone grossly powdered, and cover it with a glass-head whose
mouth may be proportionable to the neck, so to streight'n it that there may be
no occasion of any Lute. By this means the Flowers of Brimstone will rise, and
gather together in the head of the Cucurbit. You must always keep a moderate
and equal heat under the Cucurbit, take off and keep the Flowers that stick to
the bottom of the head, and cast in new Sulphur, as the first ascends in
Flowers; and have two heads of the same bigness; to cover the Cucurbit with the
one, while you take off the Flowers from the other. You may also make use of
several Vessels at at a time, (...) of those of Earth made in the fashion of
Aludels, having a* large beak upon every side, to each of which you may fix
half-Balls, having an opening at the top, which you may cover with a glass-head
like the Cucurbit's. And by this means one part of the Flowers will sublime
into the head, the other issuig out of the beaks of the Aludels, will stick to
the inside of the half Balls, whence you must take them off from time to time,
with a spoon fitted for the purpose.

Some Writers set down preparations of Flowers of Sulphur, with an addition of
Mirth, Aloes, Olibanum, Mastich, Benjamin, Saffron, etc. ^eating these
ingredients, mixing them with the brimstone, and subliming them together, as
you sublime the flowers of brimstone. But though these persons have found some
Assenters; nevertheless it being certain, that these drugs are not able to
endure a fire necessary for the sublimation of the flowers of Sulphur, without
a remarkable dissipation of the best parts, I think it better to mingle one or
the other, according to occasion, with the flowers of Sulphur, without any
farther trouble.

The preparation of white flowers of Sulphur, of which Angel^^ Sala, and others
after him have prescribed the receipt, deserves to be here set down.

Take half a pound of calcined Niter, and fixed with Sulphur, according to the
method set down for Sal-Polycrestes, speaking of the preparations of Niter; and
having reduced it into very fine powder, and mixed it with a pound of brimstone
in rolls, powdered also, make a sublimation thereof in a Cucurbit placed upon a
Sandbath, covered with its head, employing fire and time requisite. By this
means you shall have the flowers of Sulphur white, less unpleasant, but at
least as efficacious as the Magistery of Sulphur, of which I shall give you the
preparation, more out of reverence to the same of those ancient Authors who
have wrote thereof, then for any good opinion I have of it.

CHAP. XXIX. Magistery or Milk of Sulphur.
THE method which most Authors have observed for the preparation of Magistery
or Milk of Sulphur, is this* They mingle one part of the flowers of Sulphur,
with three parts of Salt Tarra^, and having put this mixture into a great
Earthenpot glazed within, they pour upon it seven or eight times of its weight
in Riverwater; then putting the pot over the fire, and having boiled the
substances five or six hours* or till the flowers of Sulphur are dissolved in
the liquor, adding nevertheless from time to time more boiling water, to supply
the place of that which is exaporated in boiling. And when the liquor is
consumed to the half, they empty by inclination the clear liquor warm into a
great earthen Pipkin glazed within, pourring upon it at the same time distilled
Vinegar, or liquor of Alum, till the ebullition ^ease. By this means the acid
of the Vinegar, uniting it self with the fixed Salt of the Tartar* which had
dissolved the flower of Sulphur, constrains it to forsake them; and those
flowers having lost their yellow color in the Menstruum, and having left the
po^es of the Tartar which the acid of the Vinegar or Tartar has filled,
swimming immediately among all the parts of the liquor* give it the color of
milk, till they come at length to be precipitated to the bottom of the liquor
in a white substance. At which ^^me having poured out by inclination the liquor
that swims at the top* they wash them several times in fair water* till having
carried off by lotions all the acrimony of the Dissolvent and Precipitant, they
become altogether dulcif'd* and fit to be dried and kept under the name of
Magistery or Milk of Sulphur.

There is also another Magistery of Sulphur, which is this way to be prepared:
Having* put into a great Iron-Caldron, a pound of Sulphur in powder, and two
pound of Quicklime, and poured upon them a good quantity of ordinary water,
boil them together till the liquor be wasted to three quarts, or for more
certainty till it be become very red, and that you may ^udg by that, that the
Alkali of the Lime has penetrated and dissolved the Sulphur. At which time
having passed the liquor through a bag* leave it to cool, and pour out by
inclination the clear liquor into a great earthen-Pot glazed* then ^our upon it
Urine very hot, till ebullition cease, and that the fixed Alkali* of the ^ime
being united with the volatile Salt of the Urine leave the Sulphur which it has
dissolved to precipitate to the bottom. Then leave the substances to settle
from the evening till morning. After which having poured out by inclination the
liquor that swims above the Sulphur precipitated, wash ^t ten or twelve times,
till all the acrimony of the Salts be carried off.

Writers do very much recommend the Magistery of Sulphur, calling it the Balsom
of the Lungs, and a singular remedy against Coughs, Asthma's, Ptysicks, and to
divert Fluxes of humors that fall upon the breast, to facilitate
expectoration, ease the pains of Colicks, dissipating the wind of the stomach
and intestines. It is given from five or six to ten or twelve grains, in some
Cordial or Pectoral liquor, reinforced with Cinnamon Water.

But by reason of the various alterations that happen to Magistery of Sulphur,
as well in its dissolutions as in its precipitations, and the ill qualities
which it receives from the substances with which it is mingled, and of which
the ill scent that remains after Lotion is an evident sign; I think it better
to lay it aside, and rather to make use of the Spirit of Sulphur, especially
the white ones, of which I have showed you the preparation, in regard that
being less unpleasant, they may be able to work all the effects which Authors
promise to themselves from the Magistery, giving them from one scruple to half
a dram.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Distillation of Sulphur.
THE small quantity of Spirit which is drawn from Sulphur, the impossibility to
have the Spirit without burning the Sulphur, without the assistance of the air,
and the difficulty to meet with Vessels fit to be made use of in this
distillation, have very much taken up the thoughts of several persons, and of
such in particular as have not accustomed themselves to fully their fingers
with other Chemical preparations. There is hardly any Author that has not given
a different preparation. They have also proposed several Vessels, by the means
whereof they have promised success to those that have them, and know how to
make use of them. But all that others have wrote, does not hinder me from
acquitting my self of the obligation that lies upon me of imparting to public
view the most easy and best means which I make use of to succeed in this
distillation, and the* form of the Vessels themselves.

You must have at least four several Vessels for the distillation of Spirit of
Sulphur, of which the lowest, that is to be the biggest, and to be of Glass or
Potters Earth, is to receive the Spirit while it distills; the second is to be
placed in the middle of the bottom of the other, and to serve as a prop to the
third, which is to contain the Sulphur; and the fourth is to be hung or placed
in that manner that it may stop and make room for the vapors that arise from
the Spirit of Sulphur, at the time when it burns. The last Vessel is of glass,
and usually made like a Bell, bigger or lesser, and sometimes open at the top,
sometimes not; but that wherein the Sulphur burns, is to be of Earth fit to
resist the fire, and to be upheld by some little pot of fine Earth or Glass;
for if it should rest upon the bottom of the Vessel below, it would suck up all
the Spirit that gathered* together within it. Usually we stay for Rainyweather,
or else moisten the inside of the Bell and the Vessel below to facilitate the
dissolution of the vapors, and by that means to obtain a greater quantity o^
Spirit. It is also convenient at the beginning, to put in some little water
into the bottom of the Vessel below, that the Spirit may mix with it the more
easily without changing its nature, since it may be separated with all its
force, by rectifying it like Spirits of Salt and Vitriol.

I my self for this distillation make use of large pots, called vulgarly
Sal^ires, or poudering Vessels, containing about two Pailfuls. These pots have
a Rim round about their upper part* wherein there are three or four holes;
which holes I we^, and fill the bottoms with water. Then having put in a little
pot of Earth, I place upon it the pot of Earth where the Sulphur is to burn; I
choose the greenest brimstone, and in smallest Rolls, and having melted it, and
dipped Cotton-weiks into it, I kindle and cause some part of it to burn in the
pot, covering at the same time with a Glass-Bell, such as Gardners make use of,
proportionable to the mouth and rim of the pot, and moistened in the inside. By
this means, the white vapors that rise from the Sulphur, finding room enough
as well in the capacious part of the pot, as in that of the Bell, and moisture
enough to fix them, dissolve into Spirit; so that you shall have a greater
quantity by continuing this operation, still putting in and lighting more wicks
as the first are consumed, than by any other contrivance yet found out. You
shall see in this Book the figure of the Pots and their Bell. But the invention
would be much more profitable, were it possible to make such Pots and as big in
Glass-houses; for the Pots of Potters-Earth are not able to withstand any long
time the subtle force of the Spirit of Sulphur, which in the end penetrates
them, in regard they always suck up some part, especially if you be not careful
to moisten them within-side from time to time.

I have also given you the figure of the great Plates of Iron, with which I use
to receive the Spirit of Sulphur which distills from the Bells open at the top,
and having two Ears or handles to support the sticks that bear them; the
opening whereof I cover with a little head of Glass, to which you may join a
small Receiver, proceeding to the distillation of the Spirit, after the same
method as before, only that you must leave about a fingers distance between the
brim of the Bell hung and the brims of the Platter, so ordering it, that the
flame of the Sulphur may not touch the Bell while that the Sulphur has enough
of air to burn. True it is, you have not so great a quantity of Spirit by means
of these Vessels, and that one part of the vapors is lost, neither dissolving
in the Bell nor in the Platter; but the Spirit is very good and penetrative;
and using a good number of Vessels, you may have a reasonable quantity of
Spirit.

The Acid of Sulphur passing for the foundation, and the first and principal
matter of Vitriol, to which it communicates its most considerable virtues; you
may with good reason attribute to Spirit of Sulphur, almost all those of Spirit
of Vitriol. But besides that the savor of Spirit of Sulphur is much more
acceptable than that of Spirit of Vitriol, its effects are much more
profitable, as well to quench the heat of Fevers, especially Choleric, as to
resist the putrefaction of humors, to create an appetite, fortify the Stomach
and Vitals, to cure diseases of the breast, and particularly Asthma's and
Ptysicks. And though the most part of the world believes, that Salts are
injurious to the Lungs; yet I can assure them, that some years since there was
a Preacher of this City, who having almost lost his voice, wholly recovered the
use of it, by the use of Spirit of Sulphur; which he took in his usual drink,
in his broths, and also among his victuals, and that it was only the Spirit of
Sulphur that I prepared him, which cured him of so strange a distemper.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Salt of Sulphur.
SUlphur consuming it self almost all in the fire, and leaving after its
consumption only a little Earth, we cannot pretend to extract a true Salt,
unless you will give to this Spirit, as liquid as it is, the name of acid Salt
of Sulphur. For that reason it is, that Authors who have written of Sulphur,
have given us no preparation of its Salt. But Chemistry, which upon many
occasions, sends its assistance to nature, fails not of means for the
preparation of a Salt, to which we may justly give the name of Salt of Sulphur,
of which I will show you two or three preparations.

Beat a pound of excellent Niter with as much Sulphur, and having placed a good
Crucible upon the Culot or Iron-square in the Hearth-place of the Furnace, and
kindled about it a good Coal-fire, the Crucible being red-hot, put into it
about an ounce of the powder of Niter and Sulphur, which will quickly light,
and when the Flame is passed throw into the Crucible as much new powder, and
still let the Flame cease, till you have thrown it in all. After which keep a
quick fire round about the Crucible for two good hours: then letting the
substances cool, make a lie in an Iron-Skillet very clean, and having filtered
the hot liquor put it into a Cucurbit in a Sand-Bath moderately hot. Then
having evaporated about three quarters of the moisture, and cooled that which
remains in the Cucurbit, continue to pour upon it by little and little good
Spirit of Sulphur, so long till you can perceive no more Effervescency. That
done, having rekindl'd the bath-fire evaporate in the same Cucurbit placed
there the superfluous moisture to the thin Film, if you desire a Salt in
Crystals, or to the dryness of Salt if you desire it in powder or in the lump.
By this means you shall have a very white Salt, composed of the fixed Salt part
of Niter, and the acid of Sulphur, which may be administered with success, as
well to quench the heat of Fevers, as to open all obstructions of the Bowels.
It is mixed in ordinary Drink or other Liquors, wherein the plesiang taste of
the acidity must be your rule to go by.

You may also prepare a Salt of Sulphur with less trouble, observing a method
which was imparted to me by Monsieur Freslin, a person as curious after the
knowledge of natural things, as solid and judicious in both the one and the
other Philosophy. Put into a Retort of Glass large enough, a pound of Niter in
Powder; and having poured upon it Spirit of Sulphur rectified, till there
appear no more Effervescency upon their conjunction, and having well shak'n the
Retort, entirely to dissolve the Niter in the Spirit, place the Cornute in a
Sand-bath, and having fitted and luted a large Recipient to its beak, begin
your Distillation with a soft fire, then augmented by degrees, by putting the
lighted-coals upon and about the Sand-bath, and round about the Cornute, the
better to* force what is to be forced out of the Niter. By this means you shall
have a good Spirit of Niter very proper for all sorts of uses, while the Spirit
of Sulphur being strictly united with the fixed Salt of Niter, makes but one
body with it, which is to be found in a lump in the Retort, when brok'n; very
white in color, and very pleasing for its acidity in taste; the virtues
whereof are the same with that before.

The most natural reflection that can be made upon this preparation is, that
the Niter being composed of a double Spirit, the one passably acid, the other
Sulphury volatile Salt, both engaged within the pores of a natural fixed Salt,
and that the Spirit of Sulphur being composed of parts more solid and
penetrating then those of Niter, and capable of insinuating themselves into all
the parts of this Salt; it happens that in the mixture of these two substances,
the parts of the Spirit of Sulphur penetrate the whole body of the Niter, and
so assisted by the operation of the fire, they have strength enough to force
out and take the place of the nitrous Spirits, among the parts of the fixed
Salt; to which they unite themselves so closely that they make but one solid
body, the union whereof the fire can hardly separate: the Spirits of Niter fly
away in red vapors, and pass into the Recipient where they condense into
Liquor.

You must also consider, that by this operation you gain the Spirit of Niter,
which else would vanish, when the Salt is calcined with the Sulphur. And I
believe that the consideration of this Spirit's leaving the mixture, ought to
make us conceive a very good opinion of the Salt which remains in the Retort;
so little reason we have to fear its Effects. Since that besides that we use
Niter as it is for several Internal uses, and that we often mix the Spirit in
Potions, as also in drinks; here remains nothing but the fixed part of the
Niter not only good of it self, but much more excellent by its union with the
Spirit of Sulphur which fails not to temper the dreaded Acrimony of the Salt.

You may also prepare a Salt of Sulphur, which being nothing inferior to the
former two, is much more proper to purify the mass ^he of blood, and to expel
by sweat or insensible transpiration sharp and subtle humors, and which will
be also as white and as pleasant. For this purpose put a pound of Salt of
Urine, very pure and white into a Cucurbit large and high, and having poured
upon it Spirit of Sulphur well rectified, till Ebullition cease, place the
Cucurbit in a Sand-bath over a moderate fire, and evaporate the superfluous
moisture to the Film, separating and drying the Crystals; or else go on, and
evaporate the moisture to the dryness of a Salt. For this volatile Salt of
Urine, though fixed for a time by the Spirit of Sulphur, not losing its first
nature, may be able to show its Effects, especially when the acid of the
Sulphur which has fixed it, meets in the stomach some other body to which it
can unite it self, and so restore to the volatile Salt of Urine its first
liberty. The volatile Spirit of Urine may be also used, which to speak properly
is nothing but its Salt dissolved, instead of its Salt coagulated, and by
uniting it with Spirit of Sulphur, reduce these two Spirits into a white and
Salt body like to that which I have spok'n of. They that can away with the acid
savor of these Salts, may take from half a scruple to half a dram, and
sometimes a whole dram in some convenient Liquor.

I omit many other preparations of Sulphur, which may be found in several
Authors, of which some are not feaseable, others not true, and others
altogether unnecessary and out of use: referring the Reader to my Galenick
Compositions for the preparations of two Balsomes of Sulphur there prepared.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Preparation of Arsenick.
WE look upon Arsenick as a kind of Soote or a Mineral juice, thick, unctuous
and participating of the nature of Sulphur, but very contrary to the Balsome of
our life. And therefore it is reck'nd in the number of Poisons, being never
made use of but with great caution, and after the dangerous parts of it have
been separated and corrected by Art. Most Authors who confound the names and
qualities of Arsenick, observe but three sorts, the white, the yellow, the red.
But I find four, of which the first is ordinary Arsenick, which is white, and
sometimes in some parts transparent as Crystal: The second, having the shape of
that Arsenick which I have named, in color is yellow, and bears the name of
Realgar, or Realgal. The third is also yellow, but of a scaly substance, hard
to beat, like a Mineral, and bearing the name of Orpiment: the fourth called
Sandarac, is of a red color, very like the ordinary Arsenick in shape, and
Realgar, differing only in color. The ordinary Arsenick, which is brought us,
is a sublimated substance of equal parts of Sea Salt and Orpiment in powder,
mixed together in sublimating Vessels; so that we need not wonder that this
Arsenick is a most pernicious poison, since that in its sublimation, the
Acrimony of the Salt, augments yet more the natural Malignity of the Orpiment;
and that the same Salt assisted by the Vitriol, being mixed with the Mercury at
the time of its sublimation, renders it corrosive, and consequently a dangerous
poison. I also think it is very ill done of those Persons that mingle the same
Salt with Arsenick, or that add to it the Filings of Steel or Copper, when they
sublime it out of a design to dulcify it, because those substances rather
increase then ^ba^e it is Acrimony, which I believe can never be truly
qualified: not knowing any preparation, that to any appearance is able to
dulcify it in such sort, as that which is called the Ruby of Arsenick, which as
thus prepared.

Beat the Vulgar Arsenick in a Mortar, and having put it into a Glass-Cucurbit,
of which at the least three fourths must remain unfill'd, and placed it in a
Sand-bath covered with a blind head, make sublimation thereof with a gradual
fire, as you do to Mercury. Then throwing away the Faeces, and the powder,
which separating from the Lump, sticks to the Vessels, repeat sublimation, and
separation of the saeces and powder three times. After which having finely
powdered and mixed this Arsenick sublimated with equal parts of Flowers of
Sulphur, make the last sublimation, by means whereof the Flowers of Sulphur,
uniting themselves inwardly with the Arsenick, and sublimating with it, will
not only imprint upon it, but also take themseves the color of Rubies, of
which this Arsenick carries the name, and of which some Authors recommend the
use from three or four to seven or eight grains, In some Con^ection, Conserve,
or Loo^h, in Maladies of the Lungs, or in such where there is occasion to
provoke Sweat, as also for the cure of Malignant and obstinate Ulcers, applying
it upon them. But notwithstanding this preparation, though it may be good to
lay upon Ulcers, or for external cures, I believe that it is not to be given
inwardly; in regard a remedy of this nature ought to be always suspected, and
for that there be other remedies and Medicaments far more safe then any that
can be made of Arsenick.

There is a preparation of Arsenick very serviceable for external cares. For
they make a Regulus of it, out of which they draw a moist substance like
Butter, like the Regulus of Antimony, proceeding thus: Having beaten to powder,
mixed, and put equal parts of Niter and Tartar in an Iron Mortar heated, and
having put a lighted coal-fire to it, the detonation being passed, weigh six
ounces of the combustible matter in the Mortar, and having beaten them and
mixed them with eight ounces of Arsenick or Orpiment, powdered in the same
manner, and four ounces of filings of Steel, put this mixture into a great
Crucible, placed upon a square Iron In the midst of a proper Furnace, and
having well melted the substances, pour them speedily out into an Iron Horn,
heated before, and rubbed within with Candlegrease, knocking at the same time
upon the Horn to hasten the precipitation of the Regulus to the bottom; the
matte^s being cold, separate the Regulus from the scum of the Metal, which will
be at the top, to use it in making the Spirit and Butter according to the
following method.

Reduce this Regulus to powder, and having mixed it with double its weight
sublimated corrosive, put this mixture into a glass Retort encompassed with
lute, of which two thirds must be very near empty. Then having placed it in a
little close Reverberatory, begin your distillation with an immediate, but very
soft fire; then augmented by little and little, keeping apart the smoking
Spirit that comes out first, and receiving into another Vessel the butter-like
liquor that will succeed. After which, having changed the Recipient, increase
the fire, till all the Mercury of the sublima^e be descended. Then expose this
Butter of Arsenick to the Sun, and when it is dissolved into liquor, keep it in
a double glass Bottle well stopped, to eat away the proud flesh of wounds and
ulcers, and to take off the rottenness of the bones* which it does with more
violence then Butter of Antimony; for which reason a less quantity must be
used, and with an extraordinary wariness. The Spirit that comes out first, is
very corrosive, and will perfectly dissolve Mars, and penetrate several other
Metals. Nor is it to be wondered, that the substances which proceed from the
conjunction of Regulus of Arsenick with Mercury sublimate corrosive, are more
corroding then those drawn from Antimony mixed with the same Mercury corrosive,
since the parts of Arsenick are infinitely more malignant and corrosive then
those of Antimony, and for that the mixture of the Mercury sublimate much
increases that very malignity and corrosion.

You may also prepare a fixed Arsenick, or a fixed liquor of Arsenick, thus:
Pul^erize eight ounces of Arsenick, twelve ounces of Niter, and twelve ounces
of Tartar, and having well mixed them, and placed a Crucible upon a Culot, in
the middle of a Furnace built under a Chimney, kindle a good fire round about
the Crucible, and when it is red hot, throw into it about an ounce of the
powder, leaving the Niter and the Tartar alone to operate upon the Arsenick,
and staying till the stinking smoke that will rise be gone; continuing this
projection, according to the same method, till all the powder be spent, taking
care to stir the substances from time to time with a long Iron-Spatula, to
cause the Sulphur of the Arsenick to exhale; the malignity whereof you must
avoid by keeping at a distance from the vapors, being as hurtful as their
scent is noisome. After which keep a violent fire round about the Crucible for
five or six hours, or else, which will be better, during a whole day, the
better to dissipate what the Arsenick has of evil. Then leaving the Crucible to
cool, and having powdered the lump which remains within it, separate by often
lotions whatever it contains of Salt, and when it is rightly ^ulcify'd, keep
the powder in a double glass-bottle well stopped; and this is that which some
call fixed Arsenick, that some commend for a good Sudorifick; but the chiefest
use of it is to cleanse wounds and Ulcers. For which purpose instead of washing
the powder, it will be enough to expose the lump to the moisture of a Cellar
where the Salts dissolve into Liquor, which you must keep in a double bottle
well stopped, by the name of fixed Liquor of Arsenick: good for the cure of
Maligant Cankrou^ and Fistulous Ulcers, especially Venereal, mixing it with
Vulnerary waters in a greater or lesser quantity, according to occasion.

I shall not any farther enlarge upon preparations of Arsenick, as dangerous,
as they are little in use.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Preparation of Ambergrise.
THE several opinions about the Original of Ambergrise do not at all change its
nature. For though some have taken it for the scum of the Sea; others for the
Excrement of certain Birds which appear in the Islands of Madagascar, or in
some of those toward the bottom of the Archipelag^: others for the Sperm of the
Whale; yet they who affirm it to be a Bitumen that issues out of the bowels of
the Earth, and empties it self into the Sea like Amber, seem to be the most
rational in their thoughts. For if it were the Scum of the Sea, it would retain
some qualities or things which are contained therein. And if it were an
Excrement of Birds, we should not meet with it in such huge Uniform Lumps,
weighing sometimes above a hundred pound. Besides, were it an excrement of
Birds or the Sperm of a Whale, it would dissolve in water, and would not be
able to resist so long as it does the violence of the waves or the injuries of
the Air and Rain, without receiving any notable Alteration.

Ambergrise according to the latter opinion flows liquid out of the Entrails
of the Earth: its lightness causes it to swim upon the superficies of the Sea,
and its oily substance is the reason that it does not dissove, and that it has
time to be reduced by the heat of the Sun into a lump sufficiently dry and
solid, which is carried by tempests to the shoars of the Sea, where it is found
not only in the Indies and America, but sometimes in our Seas near the shore,
though very rarely. And if at any time it has been found in the body of a
Whale, we may well believe that that Creature might have swallowed it for its
nourishment.

Some Moderns nevertheless would assure us, that Ambergrise proceeded from
certain drainings of Honey, which having in time been baked and dried by the
heat of the Sun, fall off from the Rocks, where the Bees had made it, into the
Sea* the Salt whereof and the Agitation of the Waves perfect their digestion,
give them that color and consistency which we observe, and at the same the
remaining parts of the Honey to yield that pleasing scent which the Mass
exhales.

Ambergrise is generally of a Marble-colour, the ground whereof is sometimes
more sometimes less dark, but inclining to gray and spotted with white,
inclining sometimes a very little thought to yellow. It is also more or less
pure according to the lesser or greater quantity of Extrinsick matter which it
meets with, and which mixed with it while it was yet liquid: insomuch that you
shall find the beaks of Birds and little Insects in it. It may be easily
meltedover a soft fire, when it is true and right; or pricked with a hot
Needle, which melting that part where it enters, raises a pleasing and
penetrating smell, by which mear ^ you may in part understand the goodness of
the Ambergrise, which we may make use of sometimes without any considerable
preparation, only by poudring it with a little bit of Sugar Candy, when it is
to be taken alone, or mixed with other remedies.

The thinness of the substance of Ambergrise, is the reason that it is never
exposed to the violence of the fire, being contented usually to dissolve it in
Spirit of Wine, either to separate the Terrestreities which are mixed with it,
or to keep the dissolution by the name of Essence or Tincture of Ambergrise.
But its odor agreeing with that of all the best Aromaticks, and having need of
being exalted, we usually make choice of, and mingle some one of those which
are the most potent, and whose odor is most sweet and pleasing, such as are
Musk, Civet, Essence of Roses, Citrons, and the like; careful however to comply
with the smell and constitution of the person for whom those Essences and
Tinctures. To which effect,

Reduce into subtle powder two drams of good Ambergrise with so much the weight
of Sugar Candy, and half a scruple of Oriental Musk, and having put them into a
little Mattress, and having poured upon them two ounces of good Spirit of Wine,
and half an ounce of Ardent Spirit of Roses, cover the Mattress with a little
blind-head; and having carefully luted the closures, expose it to the heat of
the Sun, or in Horse-dung or some such other like substance, till the
Ambergrise be dissolved, and that there remain only some Terrestreity at the
bottom of the Mattress; at which time having unluted the Vessels, and by
inclination poured out the Liquor that swims at the top, into a double
glass-bottle, stop it close, and keep it as a Tincture of Ambergrise, and as a
remedy very proper to restore and preserve the natural heat, to fortify the
heart and brain and all the noble parts, to enable both men and women for
Generation, and to restore the bodies of people wasted by long sickness into a
good plight. The dose is from one or two drops to seven or eight in
Spanish-wine, Cinnamon Water, or any other Cordial Liquor.

You may also reduce to fine powder two drams of good Ambergrise with the same
weight of Sugar Candy, and a scruple of Oriental Musk, and having added twelve
drops in all of distilled Oils of Citron and Orange-rinds, of Flowers of Roses,
Marjoram, Lavender, and Cinnamon, beat them and incorporate them together in a
Marble-Mortar with a wooden Pestle, and make thereof an Ambergrise Essencifi'd
which must be kept in some small vessel perfectly well stopped, for the same
use as the simple Essence of Ambergrise, but in lesser quantity. The quantity
of a pea being enough at a time upon the point of a knife, drinking after it a
little sup of Spanish-wine or Cinnamon Water.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Preparation of Amber.
THE original of Amber, called by some Succinum, Electrum, Chrysolectrum, and
Carobe, is no less contested among Authors then that of Ambergrise. For some
will have it to be the Excrement of a Bird, others the Rosiny juice of some
tree, others believe it to be a Bituminous juice, that flows out of the Bowels
of the Earth afterward coagulated and dried in the Sun, and then carried by
the waves of the Sea where it is found. Which I take to be the most rational
opinion of all. Writers have mentioned three sorts of Amber, the first white,
the second yellow* and the third Black. But because that blackness happens to
the last, only through the mixture of Impurities, or through age, we throw it
away, and only use the white and yellow, of which two the first is better then
the other, as being better digested, more pure, more odoriferous, and more
abounding in volatile Salt. However we are forced to make use of the yellow
every day, by reason of the scarcity of the white, and, for that we extract
very near the same substances as we could do from the white.

The simple preparation which Galenick Pharmacy makes of Amber, by grinding it
upon Porphyry is not to be rejected, as well in regard that Amber may be very
properly given in powder in the diseases of the brain, stomach, and intestines,
as also of the matrix, and in losses of blood, and where there is a necessity
of closing the parts; and also for that reducing it to powder, hastens the
dissolution of the Amber, when you having occasion to make any preparation of
it, and among the rest to extract its Tincture. To which purpose put into a
Mattress four ounces of Amber ground upon Porphyry, and having poured upon it
Spirit of wine very well rectified, till it be about four fingers breadth about
the substances cover the Mattress with a small blind-head, the closures whereof
must be carefully luted: then digest them in an Ash or Sand-bath over a very
gentle fire, stirring them from time to time till the Spirit of Wine having
dissolved the greatest part of the Amber, it begin to be colored of a fair
yellow. After which having poured out by inclination the yellow liquor into a
bottle, put new Spirit of wine upon the sediment, and cover again the Mattress
with its blind-head well luted; set it on the same Bath over the same heat, and
keep it there till the Spirit of Wine have almost dissolved the rest of the
Amber, and that it be almost colored like the former. At which time having
unluted the Vessels, poured forth by inclination and mixed that Tincture with
the former, pass them both through a sheet of coarse paper, and put them into a
small Cucurbit of glass, placed in the same Bath, cover it with its head, fit a
small Recipient to the neck, lu^e up all the Closures, and with a soft fire
draw o^^ about half the Spirit of wine; then setting the Vessels to cool, put
up in a glass bottle well stopped that which remains in the Cucurbit, and keep
it by the name of Tincture of Amber, principally to be used in diseases of the
Brain and Matrix, giving it from one scruple to a dram in proper Liquors.

You may also weak'n the Spirit of wine by pouring water upon the dissolution
of Amber, and constrain to forsake those parts of the Amber which it had
dissolved, and to permit them to precipitate in yellow powder to the bottom of
the Liquor, which is that which is called Magistery of Amber. But there is no
profit in it; for besides the wast of time, fire and Spirit of Wine this
Magistery is no bet^e^ then Amber simply ground upon Porphi^y.

Schroder proposes a Magistery of Amber, which he prepares, by dissolving it in
Vinegar distilled, filtring the dissolution, drawing off the Vinegar by
distillation, dissolving the sediment in Rose Water, and filtring the
Dissolution; all which operations he repeats three times, only he precipitates
the last dissolution with Spirit of Vitriol or juice of Citrons, commending it
for a good Sudori^ick, being given from six to twelve grains in Malignant
Fevers, and the plurisy. But the acid of the Vinegar and the precipitants
changing the nature of the Juices, I do not believe the Magistery can produce
the Effects which he ascribes to it.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Distillation of Amber.
THE most plain and ordinary way of distilling Amber is this, fill about a
third part* of a glass Retort with Amber bruised; and having put a little Sand
at the bottom of a proportionable Capsula, placed in a proper Furnace, set the
Cornute upon it, well luted round about, and covered all over with Sand except
the neck; fit and lute a large Recipient to the neck, cover the Capsula with a
proportionable Duomo; set fire to the Furnance, and moderate it so that the
Amber being melted may not boil, nor pass through the neck of the Retort into
the Recipient; but afford its Phlegm by degrees, then its Spirit its volatile
Salt and Oil; of which that which comes first will be clear, but that which
follows, will color more and more, till the last appear of a brown color and
very thick. This Distillation is to be long, at least four and twenty hours.
Nor is it necessary to force the fire too much, no more in the middle then in
the end of the distillation: for besides that the substances which should come
forth are not very weighty, and that too violent a fire would alte^ them very
much; you may also make advantage of that which remains in the Retort ^as I
shall show you afterward.

You may also distill Amber with a naked fire, putting it into a Retort of
Potters Earth or glass, luted about, and placed in a close Furnace of
Reverberation. But if you are not very careful to govern your fire, you may
endanger the burning the Amber, forcing it out of the Retort, and breaking the
Recipient. And therefore the distillation in Sa^d is to be preferred before it.
You may also bruise the Amber when you would distill it, and mix equal parts of
Gravel, Flints brok'n, or Ashes which have served for Lie. In regard this
separation of the parts of the Amber may facilitate, the separation and
sublimation of the substances, yet never diminish their goodness.

The Distillation of the Amber, being finished and the Vessels being cold and
unluted* and having scraped the volatile Salt together, risen in little
Crystals and sticking to the neck of the Retort and Recipient, put it into a
convenient bottle. Then after you have poured out the substances contained in
the Recipient into a Mattress, wash the Recipient with hot water, to dissolve
and gather together the volatile Salt and Oil that may remain behind, and
poured the Lotion upon the other substances, cover the Mattress with a b^^nd
head we^^ luted; and having set it to digest in a Sand-bath moderately hot for
ten or twelve hours, and often shak'd the substances together, open the
Mattress, and having separated the Oil from the wa^^y, Spiritous and Salt part,
make a rectification thereof separately; that is to say* that of the Oil*
incorporating it with as much washed ashes as it can suck up, putting this
mixture into a Cornute of glass over a Sand-Bath, and with a very moderate fire
drawing off the Oil that will distill from thence, of which the first will be
white and clear, that which follows a little colored, and the last somewhat
brown. As for the watery Spiritous Salt part, having filtered it and put it into
a small glass Cucurbit, placed in a Sand-bath over a small fire, evaporate
about three quarters of the superfluous moisture, then leaving it for sometime
in a cool place, separate and put up the Crystals, afterward evaporating also
in the same Bath the Liquor that swims above them, to the end you may save all
the Salt that remains, though it will not be much more in quantity then the
former.

But to make the best advantage of all the sediments, as well of the first
distillation, as of the rectification of the Oil, having reduced those
substances to powder* incorporate them with their weight in Quicklime, newly
reduced to powder also, and having put this mixture into a large glass Cornute
placed in a Sand-bath, and fitted a half Ball to its neck, you shall draw forth
still with a moderate fire a good quantity of Oil, of which the first will be
very white, the rest that follows clear enough, though somewhat higher colored.

Oil of Amber is principally made use of in Apoplexies, Epilepsies,
Convulsions, Palsies, and all cold diseases of the Brain and Nerves, but
chiefly for the distempers of the Matrix. It is also highly commended against
the Worms, and pestilential air, as well taken inwardly from one or two to five
or six drops, incorporated with Sugar in powder, and dissolved in some proper
liquor, as used to anoint the Nostrils, Temples, and Sutures of the Scull; in
all which distempers you may also make use of the volatile Salt, which is
moreover accounted a strong diuretic and diaphoretick, given in convenient
liquors from five or six to fifteen or twenty grains.

The distillation of Amber may serve as an Example for the distillation of
Asphaltum, Jet, Pitcoal, and all sorts of bituminous substances.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Metals in general.
MEtals are solid, ponderous, malleable bodies, fusible in the fire, and of a
substance equal in all its parts. For the heat of the Sun, not only making its
impressions upon the surface of the Earth, to assist the production of things
which are in view, particularly plants; but penetrating also farther into the
inward Mass, there to impart his heat necessary for the substances which are
there concealed, he produces continual Generations, which are attended by the
growth and perfection of such matters as are there engendered; of the number of
which are Metals. I also believe that as the Plants which the Earth produces,
take the first matter of their seed from the juices of the Earth or the
influences of the Stars; so that Minerals in the same juices find the Elements
of their substances, though very much different from those of Plants; and that
this at the beginning must be a Metallic seminal juice, but capable not only
to produce in abundance the Metal, the nature of which it infolds within it*
but also to receive it self, and to impart to the Metal hardness, solidity,
weight, and those other qualities, which distinguish it from other Metals; and
though the growth and perfection of Minerals be not so visible as that of
plants; yet we have no reason to doubt, but that according to the existency
which the Metals have drawn from the Metallic juice, from whence they had
their seed, they also produce the same seminal juice which renews and
multiplies its own kind, as Plants do. Of which we have no reason to doubt,
because we see that Metals do grow again in those parts of the Mines, from
whence others of the same nature had been dug out before.

But though the Sun has the principal share in the generation, growth and
perfection of Plants; that hinders not, but that the other Stars may also
contribute their Influences. Nor was it in vain that the Ancients appropriated
to every one the name of a Planet; affirming that every Metal had some affinity
with the Planet whose name it bore. Considering that the Air, according to the
opinion of some, contains in it self the first seeds or seminal dispositions of
things which the Earth has accustomed to produce, and that without question it
has received them from the Stars, which shower down their influences upon all
sublunary bodies. Of which we see the lively effects upon the superficies of
the Earth as well in the alteration of certain Earths into stones, as in the
regenerating of certain Salts, among the rest, that of Vitriol, and the
increase and growth of some Metals, particularly of Lead.

Writers acknowledge six different Metals of which they make three orders: in
the first of which they have put the two most noble and perfect; that is to
say, Gold, which they call the Sun, as well for its yellow color, as from the
particular Influences which they say it receives from the Sun; and Silver,
which they call the Moon, as well by reason of its white color, as for the
particular dominion which they think the Moon has over it. In the second Rank
they have put Iron and Copper as being less noble, less compact, and more
impure in their substance, though hard and solid. They have also joined them
one to the other, as well because of their great inclination to unite together,
as because their substance is not much different, having given to Iron the name
of Mars and to Copper that of Venus, because of the great Sympathy which they
imagined there was between those two Metals and those two Planets. They have
put Tin and Lead in the third rank, as being least hard and more easy to melt,
calling the first Jupiter and the last Saturn, for the same reason. I come now
to the most necessary preparations of these Metals beginning with that of Gold.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Preparations of Gold.
ALL the best writers affirm that the Sun has a particular influence over Gold,
from whence it comes to pass that this noble Metal has a peculiar virtue to
strengthen the heart and cherish the natural heat. I will not dispute what
influences it may receive from the Sun; but many believe that Gold in its
natural estate, or which it may resume, though altered by many preparations,
can no way impart any virtue either to the heart or any other part of the body.
Others have laughed at the Ancients for putting Leaf-Gold into Confection
Alkermes, and into many Cordial powders and other remedies. I confess they had
reason, were it not for what I have related from the mouth of Experience it the
146, and 147 pages of this work; to which I refer the Reader. Let it be as it
will, since there is no danger in the use of Gold, I know no reason why we
should abstain from giving it in leaves, provided it be well purified before
hand, any more then from giving it in any other condition being prepared
according to art.

There are that wash Gold with Tartar and common Salt, when you would take off
the outward filth: but when you find it impregnated with other Metals, either
naturally in the Mine, or by Adulteration, you must make use of other means,
the chief of which are immersive Calcination, Fusion and Calcination with
Antimony, Fusion and Calcination with Lead in a Cupple, and Cementation.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the Calcination immersive of Gold, by Regal Water, or by the
means of Gold Fulminant.
PUT into a Matras the quantity of filings of Gold which you intend to purify,
and having poured upon it three times as much the weight of Regal Water, placed
the Matras in a Sand-bath moderately hot; from whence when the Gold is
dissolved, pour out the clear liquor into another Vessel, and after that a
small quantity of Regal-water upon the sediment; then having digested them
awhile in the same Bath, poured out by inclination the new dissolution upon the
first, and lest at the bottom of the Matras the Metals in powder, which the
Regal-water could not dissolve, pour upon the dissolutions the liquor of
Tartar, or the volatile Spirit of Salt Ammoniack, or of Urine, till ebullition
cease, and that the most part of the corrosive Spirits of Regal-water, having
quitted the Gold to unite it self to the fixed Salt of Tartar, or to the
volatile Salts of Ammoniack or Urine, the Gold precipitate to the bottom of the
Vessel in a yellow color; which must be washed in several Waters, till it be
altogether insipid. By which means you will obtain a Fulminant Gold, very
diaphoretick; but it must not be washed above once or twice, if you intend to
preserve the purgative faculty which the Salts impart to this Gold. Dry this
Lime of Gold with a moderate heat, and give it from three or four to five or
six grains in some Conserve or Confection.

The violent and wonderful effects of this Fulminant Gold, oblige the Artist to
great circumspection, as well in drying it, as in keeping and administering it.
For the least fire taking hold of the volatile and combustible part of the
Niter, which was contained in the Aquafortis before it was regaliz'd, and
offering violence to the strict union which the particles of the Salts have
contracted with the Gold, causes them to give a greater bounce, and more
violent then Gunpowder; whence follows a most fierce motion, that works its
effect from the top to the bottom, by reason of resistance which the Gold there
meets with. So that a few grains of this Fulminant Gold put into a silver-Spoon
held over a fire, will make their way through the bottom, kindling into a
flame, and making a great noise; and indeed one scruple of this Fulminant Gold
shall give a louder bounce, and do more mischief than half a pound of the
finest Gunpowder that is to be had. But this Fulmination is not to be feared
when the Gold is given inwardly; for then the Salt particles which are mixed
therewith, and which make about the third of its weight, meeting with the acids
in the stomach, and quitting the particles of Gold to unite to them, are not
only disengaged from the union which they had with the Gold, but so confused
with the acids, and by consequence so weakn'd and fixed, that they can do no
farther violence, but leave the Gold its entire liberty to impart all its
virtues. By the same reason, notwithstanding the dissolution of Gold in Aqua
Regalis, the fulmination may be hindered by moist'ning the Lime of Gold with
the Spirit of Vitriol, Salt, or Sulphur, before it be wholly dried, because the
acid joining it self to the particles of Salts which were thoroughly united
with the Lime of Gold, break the union, and hinder the violence which they
would do one to another by taking fire. You may also after that dry the Lime of
Gold over the fire, make it red hot in a Crucible, or melt it without any
danger of Fulmination.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the Calcination of Gold by Inquart.
THE name of Inquart is given to this immersive Calcination of Gold, because
there is mixed with it three times as much in weight of tried Silver, so that
it makes up only a fourth part of the mixture, To which purpose having melted
in a Crucible an ounce of Silver with three ounces of fine Silver, pour by
degrees these two Metals melted together into a Copper-Vessel somewhat large
and filled with water, to cause Granulation. For by that means they will fall in
little Grains to the bottom of the Vessel. After which having well dried these
grains, and put them into a Mattress, pour upon them three times their weight in
good strong water, and keep the Mattress over a Sand-bath moderately hot, till
the Silver be dissolved by degrees, and that the Gold be precipitated to the
bottom in black powder. At which time, having poured out by Inclination the
clear liquor that swims above the Gold into an Earthen-pot full of water, pour
out again upon the Gold a little Aquafortis to complete the dissolution of
that little Silver that may remain; then having poured out the last Dissolution
by Inclination, and mixed it with the former in the Earthen-pot full of water,
wash the Calx or Lime of Gold with common water, and having well dulcified and
dried it, make it red hot in a Crucible, where it will become very high
colored, and fit to be either so kept or to be melted in the same Crucible,
adding thereto a little Borax, and to be cast in a mold, by which means you
will have a Lingot of very pure Gold.

Then put a flat bar of Copper into the dissolutions of Silver poured out and
reserved in an Earthen Pipkin full of water. For by that means the corrosive
Spirits of the Aquafortis, quitting the Silver which they had dissolved, to
stick to the Copper, the Silver will either fasten to the Copper-Bar, or
precipitate to the bottom where you will find it, after you have poured out the
over-swimming liquor by Inclination, which is called the second water. Wash
this Calx or Lime of Silver, and having dried it, either keep it so, or melt it
in a Crucible, adding to it a little Salt of Tartar, then po^r it into a Mould
greased withinside, and you shall have a Lingot of very fine Silver.

Then put a bar of Iron in the second water, and by that means the Corrosive
Spirits of the Aquafortis which had dissolved the Copper quitting that to
stick to the Iron, the Lime of Copper will precipitate to the bottom, like the
lime of Silver, where you shall find it, having poured the dissolution of the
Iron into another Vessel. You may either wash and dry or melt the Copper, as
you see requisite.

You may also precipitate the Iron, by pouring upon it some pieces of Calamine
stone, or Zink, and precipitate those new substances by pouring upon them the
liquor of Tartar o^ of some other fixed Salt dissolved in water, and find their
Calx at the bottom of the Liquor, and draw from the f^^ter'd Liquor a Salt of
Niter fit to make new Aquafortis.

These Immersive Calcinations of Gold having occasionally engaged me to speak
of the Immersive Calcinations of other Metals, I cannot but give an account of
the various effects which may be observed in the Dissolution or Precipitation
of all these Metals. And first as to what concerns the Calcination of Gold by
Aqua-Regalis, we must believe, that in regard that Gold surpasses all other
Metals and Minerals, in purity, compactness, number and smallness of its pores,
we must make use of a Dissolvent, whose points may be subtle and sharp enough
to enter those pores, and divide the parts of the Gold. Which the Aqua-Regalis
may very well perform. For the bigness and figure of the points of the water
having been altered and sharpened by the mixture of the Salt Ammoniack, become
thin enough to enter the pores of the Gold and to divide and dissolve its
parts. But the fineness and sharpness of the points of the Aqua Regalis not
affording force nor violence of motion sufficient to divide the parts of other
Metals whose pores are larger, and consequently not to be filled by them, no
wonder that it suffers the Silver to precipitate, not being able to dissolve it.

But the Fulmination of Gold dissolved in Aqua Regalis, and its effects
downward, contrary to the nature of fire which tends upward, surprises many
that are not conversant in Chemistry. But I attribute the reason to this, that
the Combustible parts of the Niter, contained in the Aquafortis, which is the
foundation of the Aqua Regalis, finding themselves mixed with the acids of the
same Niter, which are closely and reciprocally united with the Urinous Salt
part, and the acid and fixed Salt part of the Salt Ammoniack, as also with the
fixed Salt of the liquor of Tartar, or the volatile Salt part, which is used
for the precipitation of Gold. I believe also that these Salts thus united,
being deeply entered into the pores of the Gold, and retaining the nature of
fixed Salts, in that they long resist the fire, powerfully withstand all things
that endeavor to separate them. So that the Union of these substances not
having altered the inclination which certain particles of Niter have to take
fire, these particles being violently agitated by the particles of Fire, which
enliven them with some part of their Motion, they presently take fire, but
while they strive to tend upward, they are hindered in their design by
encountering the Salts fixed and united with the Gold, and so are constrained to
take that way which they can to make their escape, and forcing the Obstacles
which they meet in their way, their effects prove much more violent then they
would have been, had they been at liberty. So that the Pores of the Gold and
those of the Salts being equal as well in their Center as in their
Circumference, the Combustible parts of the Niter issue forth with the same
impetuosity, and break all parts of the Gold alike, as well as of the Salts
which kept them enclosed. For though their force act downward, yet both the
upper parts, and sides of the Gold would be brok'n, were the Gold shut up in a
Box.

Some have attributed the Fulmination of Gold to the Ponderosity and
compactness of the ports of this Metal. But though these qualities of the Gold
do second very much the force of the Union of these Salts, and may be the cause
of the Extraordinary noise which happens when the matters take fire; yet the
Salts are the principal Agents in the Fulmination, which is plain by this, that
you may make a Fulminating powder, by mixing three drams of good Niter powdered
with a dram and a half of Salt of Tartar, and a dram of Sulphur bruised
together, heaping this mixture together in an Iron-Ladle and holding it over
the fire: for so soon as the least particle of fire touches the least
combustible part of the Niter, the powder takes fire with a violent Bounce,
which however does not smite the Ear like that of Fulminant Gold. And though
this powder act at the same time through the whole Circumference, nevertheless
the Effect of the resistance of the Salt of Tartar is most considerable,
because some powder shall make its way through the bottom of the Spoon if it be
but thin.

As for the Effects of Aquafortis upon Silver and not upon Gold, it is to be
attributed to the largeness of the pores of the Silver, and the proportionable
bigness of the points of the Aquafortis, sharp enough at one end to enter, and
large enough at the other to separate the parts of the Silver; but too big to
enter the pores of the Gold, and consequently to make any division of its
parts. As for the precipitation of the Silver by the bar of Copper put into its
dissolution, and the effects of the same Aquafortis upon the Copper, though
weak'nd by the water in the Pipkin whereinto the dissolution of the Silver was
poured, we must impute them to nothing but the softness of the substance of
Copper, whose parts are more slenderly united then those of Silver, and the
conformity of the pores of the Copper to the points that remain in the
Aquafortis, though somewhat blunted by the dissolution of the Silver. The same
reason serves for the precipitation of the Copper and the dissolution of the
Iron, whose substance is still more soft then that of Iron; as also for the
precipitation of the Iron and the dissolution of the Calamine-Stone. But as to
the precipitation of the latter by pouring Liquor of Tartar or of fixed Salt of
Niter, that is to be ascribed only to the conjunction of the Corrosive acids of
the Aquafortis to those of the fixed Salts, which is the ground of their
incorporating with the Niter. By which may be seen the Existence of the inward
form of Niter notwithstanding all the great alterations which the fire or the
mixture of extrinsick matters may have caused.

I omit the Calcniations immersive of Gold in Aquafortis reinforced with
Bay Salt or Sal-Gemmae, or in Spirit of Salt well rectified, or in Glacial Oil
of Antimony, or in other Corrosive Liquors, being unwilling to cloy the Reader.

CHAP. LX. Of the Purification of Gold by Cementation, or by Antimony.
THE great affinity and resemblance which Cement, made use of for the
purification of Gold, has with Masons Cement, has occasioned Writers to give
this operation the name of Cementation. To which purpose you must bruise very
fine three ounces of Brick, one ounce of Salt Ammoniack, as much Sal-Gemmae,
and as much common Salt, and having mixed them together, well moistened them
with Urine, and dried them in the air, reduce the ounce of Gold which you
intend to purify into thin plates; and having cut them into thin pieces fit to
be put into a Crucible, proportionable to hold the Gold and the Cement, strew
the bottom of the Crucible with a lay of Cement, and cover it with plates of
Gold, the plates with Cement, and the Cement with plates, till you have covered
all the plates with Cement, and that the uppermost lay of Gold be well covered.
Then cover the Crucible with a Cover proportionable, which is to have a little
hole in the middle, and having well luted the closures, leaving the hole open,
put the Crucible in the midst of a Wheel-fire, which by degrees you must put
nearer and nearer the Crucible, suffering the substances to evaporate through
the hole. When you perceive no more smoke to come forth, stop up the whole, and
increase the fire from degree to degree for eight or nine hours, covering the
Crucible all over with fire for two or three hours. Then setting the substances
to cool, and having unluted the Crucible, take out the plates of Gold, which
will be diminished in their weight by the consumption which the Cement has made
of the other Metals mixed with it; then having washed, wiped, and melted them,
pour out the Gold into a Mould, you shall find it there pure and separated from
^all other Metals, as also from the Silver, if any were mixed with it; not
being able to resist the corrosion of the Cement no more then the other Metals.

Gold is also purified by Antimony, after the following manner: Put an ounce of
Gold into a sound Crucible, placed upon a Culot, in the midst of the
Hearthplace of a Wind Furnace, and having kindled a good Coal-fire, make it red
hot, then by degrees throw in four ounces of good Antimony powdered, which
melting presently causes the Gold to melt; keep the substances in fusion, till
you see that no more sparkles fly out, by which you may be sure that the
Antimony has consumed all the extrinsick or alien substances that were mixed
with the Gold. At which time, having heated an Iron-Cornute greased
within-side, pour the substances into it, and knocking the Cornute to make the
Gold descend to the bottom; then letting them cool, and having separated all
the Scories or scum of the Antimony, and other dross that may happen to be
there, pour it again into the Iron-Cornute heated and greased, and you shall
have a Gold very pure, of an excellent color and fit for all uses.

You may also purify Gold by the Cupel, by melting it with Lead, especially if
it be mixed with imperfect Metals. But because there is often Silver among the
Gold, and that this purifying is then useless, considering that the Silver
resists the Cupel, this sort of purifying is rarely made use of. And I shall
speak of it only among the preparations of Silver, where it is proper.

But it is so easy a thing to have Gold exactly purified among the Refiners,
or Mint-Masters, that I could willingly have spared my self the labor of
setting down any preparation thereof; but I thought that in satisfying the
curiosity of several persons, the discourses to which these preparations engage
me, would not be unpleasing.

CHAP. XLI. Of Purifying or Refining of Gold by Mercury.
THE name of Amalgama is given to the mixture which is made of Metals with
Mercury in a Mass soft and easy to be handled, of which they afterward make a
separation by calcining them together and causing the Mercury by Exhalation to
quit the Metal, into the Pores whereof it had made its way. The Amalgama of
Gold with Mercury is the most in use of all the rest and most considerable. To
which purpose, after you have placed two little Crucibles in a wind-Furnace,
and put into the one six drams of Mercury revived with Cinnabar, and in the
other a dram of Gold well purified beaten into thin slices, kindle a coal fire
round about the Crucibles, and when the Gold is red-hot, and that the Mercury
begins to smoke, add the Gold and the Mercury together, stirring them with an
Iron-rod. By which means the Gold and the Quicksilver uniting together will
make an Amalgama, which you must pour into a dish half full of water, and
having washed it and rubbed it in the water to fetch off the Dross, you shall
have an Amalgama, gentle, soft, and unctuous in all outward appearance, which
you must dry and press out in a Shamoy Skin, to fetch out the Mercury which may
chance not to be Amalgama'd. Then you shall find the Mercury to weigh about
half an ounce, the surplusage of the Mercury being exhaled away by the fire or
pressed through the Shamoys Skin; the Gold not being able to contain above
three times as much as it weighs.

Some there are that would have you to put this Amalgama into a small Retort,
and to draw off the Quicksilver with a soft and Gradual fire, and several times
to repeat Amalgamation, drawing off the Quicksilver as often into a small
Recipient fitted to the Beak of the Cornute; which will make the Gold very
Spungy, and as they say, never capable for the future to unite again with the
Quicksilver. But because there is no such thing certain, besides the toil and
irksomness of these preparations; the better way will be to put this Amalgama
into a Crucible over a small fire, and to exhale, but not exalt the
Quicksilver, as some would have it; and then to Amalgama the Gold which remains
in the Crucible with new Mercury, reiterating the same operations three times.
Then mingle and burn gently over the Gold six times one after another double
its weight of Flowers of Sulphur, as well to open it the better, as to carry
off all the particles of the Mercury that may be remaining. By this means you
shall have a Calx or Lime of Gold the parts whereof will be perfectly divided,
which you must wash and keep for use for the same distempers as Fulminant Gold.

You may yet for more perfection mix this Calx of Gold thus washed with three
times the weight of Flowers of Sal-Ammoniack, well prepared and pulverized, and
having put them in a proportionate blind Alembick, sublimate them together in a
Sand-Bath over a moderate fire; then having at several times washed off the
Flowers of the Salt Ammoniack, and dulcified the Flowers of Gold keep it as one
of the best preparations that can be made of this King of Metals.

CHAP. XLII. Of the Calcination of Gold with Hartshorn.
THough the operation of Hartshorn seem not to be considerable upon Gold,
especially if you mix it with the Gold after it is burnt, as the Authors of
this preparation would have it done; and though we are to look upon nothing
else but the separation which it makes of the Plates of Gold, between which it
is put; we have however some reason to believe, that if we should permit the
subtle and volatile parts of Hartshorn to act upon the Gold, to the utmost of
their power, they would in some measure penetrate the parts, and very much
contribute of themselves to its Calcination by fire. At least so long as they
cannot alter the quality of the Gold, we may by making the best advantage of
the good parts of the Hartshorn, conjecture that they have acquired some
Exaltation, by the stay which they have made with the Gold, or else by some
particles which they may have carried off in Distillation, according as follows.

Take half an ounce of Gold purified by Antimony, and having reduced it into
thin Plates, and cut those Plates with Scissars into very little pieces, mix
them with two pound of the shavings of Hartshorn. And after you have put this
mixture into a large Cornute of Earth luted about, and placed it in a close
Furnace of Reverberation, with a large Recipient fitted and luted to the neck,
make your Distillation with a gradual fire, proceeding in all things as for the
ordinary Distillation of Hartshorn. Then when the Vessels are cool, unlute the
Recipient, and pour into a double glass bottle, all that is in it; then pour
the Plates of Gold and the sediment of the Hartshorn into a Basin; and after
you have separated the Gold, and mixed them with two new pound of Shavings of
Hartshorn, put the whole into a Cornute, and make a new distillation. Repeat
these Operations a third time. Then having poured out the pieces of Gold with
the sediment of the last Distillation into a pot fit to resist the fire, and
luted on a fit cover, expose it to the heat of a Potters Oven for three days.
Then when the substances are cool, having beaten the Gold and the Caput Mortuum
of the Hartshorn together put them again into the pot that they may
reverberate over a moderate fire for some hours, or till the whole have
acquired a color next to that of Bricks. After which separate by Lotions the
hartshorn from the Calx of Gold which will keep at the bottom, and having
dried it, keep it for your use.

In the mean time having mingled all the substances that remain in the
Recipient, being the product of the three Distillations, and having put them
into a Mattress with a long neck, covered with its head, set them in a
Sand-bath; and after you have fitted a Recipient to its neck and carefully
luted all the jointures, make a Rectification thereof, as I have already showed
for substances of the same nature. Thereby you shall have an Oil, and a
volatile Salt, which at least will not be inferior to those which are drawn
from Hartshorn without the mixture of Gold.

CHAP. XLIII. Of Tinctures or Extracts of Gold.
YOU may extract a Tincture of Gold proceeding after this method. Take half an
ounce of Calx of Gold well reverberated, very spongy, and of a brown red
color; and after you have put it into a Mattress, and poured upon it Spirit of
Wine well rectified, and strengthened with Salt of Urine, till it swim about
three fingers above the Calx, lute the Mattress Hermetically, and set it to
digest upon a Bakers Oven, for a month, stirring the substances from time to
time, or till the Tincture look as red as blood. After that open the Mattress,
and pour the Tincture by Inclination into a double glass-Bottle, and having
well stopped it, pour upon the Lime of Gold, new Spirit of Wine enforced with
volatile Salt of Urine; then after you have reluted the Mattress Hermetically,
reiterate digestion, which must continue as long as at first, repeating the
Operation till the Menstruum cease to color. Then having mingled and digested
together all these Tinctures in a Mattress covered with a Blind head, carefully
luted, for ten or twelve days, pour them into a glass Cucurbit with a straight
neck, covered with its head, with a Recipient fitted to it, carefully luted,
and draw off with a very soft fire the greatest part of the Menstruum, which
may serve also for the same uses; and you shall find at the bottom of the
Cucurbit a Tincture of Gold very red, very much like Oil; which you may
dissolve in all sorts of Liquors and give it from three or four to seven or
eight little drops. You may also pour upon this Tincture concentered five or
six times as much Spirit of Wine well rectified, and after some days digestion,
draw it off again in a lukewarm Balneum Mariae; and reiterate the same
operations several times, to exalt the Tincture the more, to which you may give
the name of Aurum Potabile, and look upon it as a remedy fit to give great
relief in all Maladies that attacque the Heart or Brain, or other noble parts.
For it preserves the natural heat and Radical moisture, restores it when there
is occasion, recreates the Vital and Animal Spirits, and restores and preserves
the vigor of all the parts.

Quercetanus highly commends a Tincture of Gold; for the preparation whereof he
digests Chalk of Lime with Vinegar distilled, till the Menstruum be become very
red, then having poured out by Inclination, and separated that Tincture; he
returns the Vinegar upon the Calx, till no more Tincture will come forth. After
that, having drawn off again in Balneo Mariae the greatest part of the
Menstruum, he pours upon the Tincture that remaiins at the bottom Spirit of
Wine well rectified. Then having caused it to circulate for several days, drawn
off the Spirit, poured new Spirit upon the Tincture, and repeated several times
the same Operations, he finds a very red Tincture at the bottom of the Vessel.

Grullingius describes a Glass or Ruby of Gold, which he prepares, with half an
ounce of Filings of fine Gold, or of Leaf Gold, and eight ounces of Hungarian
Antimony powdered, which he melts gently together in a Crucible; then having
poured them into a Basin, and reduced them to very small powder, he calcines
them a long time, as you calcine Antimony, when you would make Glass of it,
till all the Sulphur of the Antimony be exhaled. After which, having put some
part of the powder into a little Crucible, and set the Crucible upon a Culot in
a proper Furnace, he melts the Powder, and then pouring it into a Copper-Bason,
he there finds the Gold in Glass of a Ruby color, which he highly esteems for
a gentle purger by vomiting; as also to cure the Dropsy and all other cold
diseases: as also for an absolute remedy against the Smallpox and the pains of
it. He commends it also against the Pestilence and other Epidemick Diseases; to
purify the Mass of the blood, and ^ase the Gout; giving it from one to two
grains. He draws also from these Rubies very finely powdered a Tincture with
the Spirit of Wine rectified, of which you may give two full spoonfulls, which
never provoking vomiting, or loosening the Belly, most powerfully provokes
sweating, cures the most desperate diseases, purifying the blood, correcting
humors disposed to corruption, and causing the impurities of the body to
transpire.

I shall only trouble the Reader with one more Preparation of Monsieur
Langelot, Who having made him a Philosophical mill of well tempered Steel,
represented in the fourth plate belonging to this book, prescribes that after
you have beaten the Gold very thin and cut it with a pair of Scissars into
small pieces, to grind it in this Mill from morning till night for a month
together, keeping the Mill covered with a Paper, to prevent any dust or dross
from falling into it. When it is reduced to Atoms, he puts it into a
Glass-Retort somewhat flat, as are usually those in England; and having placed
it in a Sand-bath, and fitted a small* Recipient to the beak, he forces this
Gold with a Gradual fire at first, but at length very violent, till it distill
in some very red drops. Then digesting them alone, or mixed with Spirit of Wine
Tartariz'd, they become a true Aurum Potabile, without any fear of the mixture
of Alien substances. He affirms also that by grinding again the Gold which
remains in the Retort, by reducing it into Atoms as at the first in the same
Mill, and by repeating the same operations as often as shall be necessary, you
may at length alter all the Gold into Liquor. And discoursing upon this
preparation, he says that although at first it seem but plain, and require
great pains, if you consider it well you shall find it very rational, because
he has several times experimented, that this way of grinding assisted by the
natural disposition of Steel, of which the Mill is made, draws to it the
admirable Salt of the Air, which insinuating by degrees into the pores of the
Gold, hastens its dissolution; and that therefore this Mill is incomparably
much better then all the Mortars of Glass, which are to be employed. This
preparation has in it something so probable, that any person of curiosity and
sufficiency would do well to make trial of it.

CHAP. XLIV. Of the Preparation of Silver.
SIlver has been always accounted a perfect Metal, because it comes nearest to
the perfections of Gold of any other Metal, though in it self it be much
inferior. The whiteness of the Internal Sulphur of Silver gives it its white
color, as the Internal redness of the Sulphur of Gold imparts its color to
that Metal. Silver in some measure is durable in the fire, but not so durable
as Gold. For let it be purified never so fine, however it looses some part of
its substance and weight, if you keep it too long upon the fire; nor can it
long resist the Corrosion of the Salts, as we observe, when that being mingled
with Gold, it is exposed to Cimentation. For the Salts corrode it then as well
as the imperfect Metals. Which is no wonder considering, that the Internal
Sulphur, and all the parts of the Gold are incomparably more pure, more
compact, and united then those of Silver which wanting digestion and perfection
is much more porous, and those pores also wider, and much less able to resist
the violence to which Gold is exposed, with a lutement of quantity or weight.
Which is the reason that Silver cannot be beaten out so far as Gold, and is
sooner altered by standing in the Air, which changes its color in a kind of a
brown, red especially in damp places.

The natural Dross of Silver taken out of the Mine, or Artificially by
Adulteration, force men to seek out ways to refine it. They make use of Lotions
to wash off the outward and superficial dross, or else boil it in a Lie made of
Tartar and Bay Salt, according to the practice of the Goldsmiths. But this lie
however always dissolves some particles of the Imperfect Metals, which it meets
superficially mixed with the Silver, and also to corrode some particles of the
proper substance of the Silver, but the quantity is so small, that the
Goldsmiths take no notice of it.

Immersive Calcination is not proper for the Calcination of Silver; for thereby
the particles of Imperfect Metals, that are mixed with the Silver, being also
dissolved, we can never expect a perfect purity. The better way is to melt the
Silver, and to throw among it at several times good Niter, and letting it bu^;
but neither this being able to refine it from all its Dross, we must be forced
to make use of Lead, which is only able to consume and separate from Silver all
imperfect Metals that may happen to be mixed therewith, producing out of them a
certain Scum of which I shall speak by and by.

CHAP. XLV. Of the Refining of Silver by Lead.
THough the pores of Gold are much closer then those of Silver, and those of
Silver much closer then those of other Metals, yet are they so disposed, that
in Fusion the imperfect Metals that are mixed with them, as you may observe in
their Union for the time with Lead in the Coppel, or in the Alloy of the Mint
Masters, this Union I say is not superficial as some have thought: for if it
were, the Lies which are made with sharp and corroding Salts* would be
sufficient to carry off those imperfect Metals, and if their union were
superficial, when they were melted together, there would be no need of Lead nor
Antimony, nor any other means to refine Gold or Silver from all imperfect
Metals wherewith they should be mingled. But we make use of Lead, because that
being easy to melt, and easily melting those other substances which are mixed
with it, it thrusts it self at the same time into their Pores; and for that
being, as it is composed of spreading Sulphury parts, and easy to evaporate it,
unites it self without difficulty with those of other Metals proportionat to
them, and forcing them to leave the pores of the Silver, still as the fire of
the Coppel closes them, take them along with themselves either in Smoke or
Scum. For if the natural closeness of the Gold or Silver hindered the imperfect
Metals from entering in, and uniting themselves with them, as they do in Fusion,
or that by Fusion alone and no other way it were possible to restore perfect
Metals to their first condition, we had no need of any other assistance. But
the impossibility of succeeding that way, and the advantageous experiments that
have been continually made, are the reasons wherefore we make use of Lead.

They who have not all their conveniences for refining of Gold or Silver, do no
more then place a good Crucible upon a Culot in the midst of a Hearth-place in
a wind-Furnace, and having lighted round about it a good Cole-fire, they melt
in the red-hot Crucible about four ounces of Lead; and when it is melted, they
cast upon it an ounce of Silver, which presently melts among the Lead. Then
they keep a good fire about the Crucible till the Lead and all the other
imperfect Metals mixed with the Silver are exhaled in Spoke, or converted into
Scum at the top of the Silver, which will remain pure, solid, and very white at
the bottom of the Crucible. The Scories or Dross is called by the name of
Litharge; for having served to refine the Silver, they remain as hard as stones.

But they who have much Silver to refine, and are provided of Coppels, vaulted
Lids, and proper Furnaces, perform their business with much more ease, and more
effectually. For after they have placed a Coppel of a sufficient bigness in the
vaulted Mouffle, and the Mouffle in a proper Furnace, they heat the Coppel
red-hot by degrees in the Moufflle, making a fire round about. They melt their
Lead in the Coppel, and then the Silver in the Lead. Then keeping a good Coal
fire round about the Mouffle, they find at length the Silver alone purified, in
a white and hard consistence in the middle of the Coppel, after the Lead and
other Metals are separated in fumes and in Scories. However it is so common a
thing to get pure refind silver, that there are few that will take the pains to
Coppel it. Besides that the internal use of Silver is not so great for a man to
find any profit in it by refining it himself.

I omit Amalgamas of Silver with Mercury, Cimentations with sublimate
Corrosive, Calcinations in a Reverberatory, as neither necessary nor useful.

CHAP. XLVI. Of the Dissolution and turning of Silver into Crystals.
THE Simple preparation of Silver is that of its dissolution and turning into
Crystals; to which purpose they put in a Glass Cucurbit placed in a Sand-bath
moderately heated an ounce of Silver refined by the Coppel reduced into grains
or into thin slices, and having poured upon it three ounces of good Spirit of
Niter, the subtle and penetrating parts of that Spirit being forced into a
violent motion, and thereby very much heated, dissolve and pierce the whole
body of the Silver. After which the Motion of the Spirits of Niter being in
some sort ceased, the red vapors which appeared at the top of the dissolution
being dissipated, and the Vessels cooled, pour out the clear Liquor by
inclination into a Cucurbit, and having placed it in a Snad-Bath covered with
its head* lute the closures* and fit and lute a small Recipient to the Beak,
and draw forth with a moderate fire about three quarters of the Spirit of Niter
which you made use of. Then letting the Vessels cool, unlute them, and you
shall find at the bottom of the Cucurbit the Crystals of Silver, and at the top
some part of the dissolution which was not Crystalliz'd, Which being poured out
by Inclination into another small Cucurbit; you may evaporate again in the same
Bath to the Pollicula, to Crystallize it in the Cold; or else you may dry it
altogether upon the same Bath, and keep this Lime of Silver in a double glass
bottle well stopped after you have dulcorated it by several Lotions, and
thereby separated the most concealed parts of the Spirit of Niter.

As for the Crystals in the Cucurbit, after you have dried them well, keep them
in a double glass bottle, to purge the brain from its superfluous humors, in
Epilepsies, Apoplexies, Lethargies, etc. giving from one half to two grains,
and not to eight or ten as some have prescribed, their effects being too
violent, and their qualities too Castick to give so great a dose. The Spirit
which shall have drawn off will serve to dissolve Quicksilver. The Crystals of
Silver are called Crystals or Vitriol of Luna.

CHAP. XLVII. Of the Tincture of Silver.
PUT into a Mattress an ounce of Silver, refind in a Copple* and reduced into
thin plates or grains, and having poured upon them three ounces of good Spirit
of Niter* place the Mattress in a Sand-bath moderately hot, leaving there till
the Spirit of Niter have very well dissolved the Silver. Then impregnating a
pint of common water with as much Salt Marine as it is able to suck up, filter
it into a clean Earthen-Pipkin, and pour upon it by Inclination the dissolution
of the Silver, leaving at the bottom of the Mattress that little ^eces which
shall be settled there. By this means the Bay Salt uniting with the Salt
Sulphury volatile part of the Spirit of Niter, and the Salt fixed part of the
same Salt uniting it self to the acid of the same Spirit, this Spirit will
certainly quit the Silver which it had dissolved, and suffer it to precipitate
to the bottom. Which it shall be more and more forced to do, if you pour a good
quantity of Fountain water, or River-water clear and strained through a fine
Cloth, upon the substances. For the Spirit of Niter finding it self weak'nd of
all its parts, will leave all the particles of Silver which it had dissolved to
precipitate to the bottom, without the necessity of any shog or thrust to be
given by the Salt water to the Spirit of Niter, or to the Silver; since not all
the shogs nor violences whatever that can be give to this dissolution, whither
with the hard or any more ponderous and solid substance then Bay Salt, could
ever do that, which the parts of the Sea Salt do without shake or shog, by
uniting themselves with the parts of the Spirits of Niter, whose pores they
fill, while the pointed parts of the Spirit of Niter, enter reciprocally into
those intervals which they leave. Of which you will be certainly convinced if
you evaporate to the film, the liquor that swims above the Lime of Silver,
after it is precipitated: for you shall find at the bottom of the Vessel a
Crystalline Salt composed of Bay Salt and Spirit of Niter, which united
together just upon the precipitation of the Silver.

After this precipitation let the Lime of Silver settle, then having poured out
by Inclination the clear Liquor that will swim uppermost, wash and wash again
the sediment with clear water till it be perfectly edulcorated. After that
having dried it, put it into a Mattress, and adding to it an ounce of volatile
Salt of Tartar, and as much of the Salt of Urine, pour upon it twelve ounces of
Spirit of Wine well rectified; cover the Mattress with another lesser, instead
of a blind-head, and having carefully luted the closures with a wet bladder*
set the Vessel upon a Sand-bath, or upon a Bakers Oven, where you must leave it
fifteen days or three weeks, stirring the substances from time to time, till
the Spirit of Wine look of a fair ^^^lestial blew color: at which time having
unluted the Vessels, pour out this Tincture by Inclination into a double glass
bottle carefully stopped, and keep it for use as it is, or else having put it
into a Glass-Cucurbit with a close neck, place in an evaporating Bath, and
covering it with its head perfectly well luted, draw off about two t^^^ds of
the Spirit of Wine, and you shall find at the bottom of the Cucurbit the
Tincture concentered, which you must put up as you did the first.

This Tincture is only a dissolution of some particles of the Silver which the
volatile Salts of Tartar, and Urine have carried off, and were afterward
exalted by the Spirit of Wine. However it is very much recommended in
Apoplexies* Epilepsies, Vertigo's, Megrims, and other maladies of the brain,
being taken in proper Liquors from five or six to twelve or fifteen drops. You
may add to the Lime of Silver remaining in the Mattress the same quantity of the
volatile Salts of Tartar and Urine, and Spirit of Wine rectified, and having
covered the Mattress again wi^^ a Blind-head, reluted the closures, and repeated
the same stirring^ and digestio^^, extract a new Tincture. After which you may
make advantage of the G^l^ of Silver remaining in the Mattress, causing to melt
and ^ulminate a little, in a Crucible redhot in the fire, an ounce of Tartar*
one ounce of Flints i^ powder* four ounces of good Niter, and two drams of
powder of Coal, and pouring these substances m^l^^d into a Mortar heated*
afterward when they are cold, having mixed with the ^alx of Silver as much as
it weigh^, and put the whole into a Crucible upon a ^eltin^ fire, this Lime
will resume its former body of Silver, which you make u^^ of as before for any
sort of preparation. The fixed Salts of Tartar and Niter are ^ere absolutely
necessary, to hinder the volatility of the Salts of Tartar and Urine, wherewith
the Lime of Silver was digested, and to fix the parts of those Salts, which
have ins^^uated themselves into the pores of the Lime, and would otherwise
carry away some part in evaporation. The powder of Coal and Flints ser^es to
cause Fulmination, and to cause the volatile Spirits of Niter to exhale, which
are opposite to the effects of the f^^'d Salt^, here required.

Some there are who to good purpose extract a Tincture of the Calx of Silver
with Spirit of Vitriol ^ulcifi'd with Spirit of Wine well rectified, according
to the method which I have delivered in its proper Chapter. Nor ought this
Tincture to give place to many which Authors have imparted, the receipts of
which might cloy the Reader. And therefore I shall add no more preparations of
Silver more curious then necessary.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of the Caustic Luna, or Infernal Stone.
REduce four ounces of Silver refined to the height into Grains or Plates, and
having put it into a proper Glass Cucurbit, pour upon it twelve ounces of good
Aquafortis; and having placed the Cucurbit in a Sand-Bath moderately hot,
leave it there till the Aquafortis have absolutely dissolved the Silver; and
also if you think fit, having covered the Cucurbit with its head, and somewhat
increased the fire of the Bath, draw forth about half the strong water to save
it for some dissolution of Mercury. If not, having evaporated it half in the
same Bath, and suffered the sediment to cool and crystallize, place a good
German Crucible upon a Culot, in the midst of the fireplace of a small
Furnace, and after you have kindled about it a small coal-fire, put into the
Crucible one part of the dissolution of Silver, from which you must by little
evaporate the most part of the Spirits of the Aquafortis, adding thereto at
several times all the other Crystals, moderating the fire for fear the
substances coming to boil, should run over and spill, and continuing it till
the dissolved Silver become as it were dry in the Crucible, and that the red
vapors of the Aquafortis that you see rise, begin to cease. At which time
increase your fire to melt the Silver, which after some few boylings will
descend to the bottom of the Crucible, and when you observe a consistency like
that of a thick Oil, take out the Crucible with a pair of tongs, and gently
pour out the melted Silver into proper moulds, being heated before, and greased
with candle-grease, where the Silver will coagulate into brittle stones of a
blackish color, which you must suffer to be half cold* then turn them out of
the moulds upon a Table, and put them up in boxes* or proper vessels, so that
the air may not come at them to soften the stone, and aba^^ the quality of the
Caustic.

This Stone speedily cauterizes the flesh or the bones upon which it is
applied; provided you mo^st'n the end of the Stone, or the part upon which you
would have it operate. And this effect must be attributed to the last spirits
that remain in the pores of the Silver, and are petrefied with it; which work
more speedily, or more slowly, and with less violence, as they were dissolved
with a greater or less quantity of moisture. We must not think however that the
Silver dissolved in Aquafortis, or in spirit of Niter, is only caustic, when
it is petrefied with the last spirits; because the crystals of Silver, of which
the stones are made, are more caustic than the stones themselves, and that the
simple dissolution of Silver in Aquafortis burns with more speed and violence
then the stones or crystals, as experience teaches, if the least drop chance to
fall upon the hand; for it burns immediately, and very deep* if you do not wash
the part to weak'n and carry off the Caustic Spirits of the Aquafortis. Which
is not to be wondered at. For besides that, the Aquafortis has nothing in it
hardly but what is caustic; the Salts are not able to act as they should, but
when they are dissolved. We also find that the infernal stone does not burn at
all but when it is wet. ^or that reason also the dissolution of the Silver in
Aquafortis burns more suddenly then the Stone, being not only liquid, but made
so by the Aquafortis, or by the spirit of Niter, which are caustic in all
their parts, and able to act alone beyond the force of the ordinary water made
use of to dissolve and force to action the salt parts of the infernal stone.

CHAP. XLIX. Of the Preparation of Iron.
IRon, Copper, Lead and Tin, are called imperfect Metals, neither being so pure
as Gold or Silver, and for that their parts are less compact, and less able to
resist the violence of the fire. However Chemistry finds in them several good
remedies, especially in Iron, though it be composed of Earth, Sulphur, and
impure Salts, ill digested, and ill united. So that being exposed long to the
fire, it turns by degrees almost all to dross; not being proof against the
violence of the air, which penetrates and corrodes it in time. Iron is called
by the name of Mars, whether employed for the making of weapons of war, of
which Mars was said to be the God; or because of the influences which Iron
receives from that Planet. We also give the name of Steel to that Iron whose
substance being purified, and parts more compact, made so by putting the bars
of Iron into a great fire for some hours among horns of Oxen, or of other
Animals, and coals of Willow or Beech, which consuming the grosser impurities
of the Iron, refine and close up the principal parts, after that by heating the
bars red-hot, and quenching them several times in astringent waters or
decoctions* which closes and renders the parts more compact.

The impurity of Iron is the reason that Steel is preferred before it in all
preparations wherein that metal is made use of, and that we usually take the
filings, especially those of Needles, as being most pure and most easy to be
had; though I will not say but that sometimes we may prepare the Steel in
Plates also.

We have been mightily puzzled from time to time to know, why men have
attributed to Steel so contrary qualities, or at least very different in their
effects, the one to open, the other to close. The difficulty to understand this
has been the greater by coming to consider, that no distinct separation can be
made of the parts of Steel, whatever art we can use. For in vain* we promise to
our selves either an Earth, or a Salt, or a Sulphur distinct; since that after
all the preparations we can make, it seems to be equal throughout its whole
substance, though it is apparent that its internal Salt and Sulphur have
suffered some dissipation. And therefore since we cannot separate its various
substances as we do those of Animals or Vegetables, it is in vain to attribute
to its Earth an opening, and to its Salt an astringent virtue. For being
united, and as it were inseparable, they cannot act but by consent, and receive
jointly the good or bad impressions that may happen; so that according to all
probability Mars never acts but according to the preparations which we make of
it; or rather according to the various Juices, Acid, or Salt, volatile or
fixed* simple or compound, which it meets with in the stomach. For we often
observe* that the filings of Steel, taken inwardly for some mornings together
by persons of a strong constitution, have not only been dissolved in the
stomach, but has opened obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Matrix, which
many other Medicines carefully prepared could not unstop. Which we should do ill
to impute to the proper Salt of the filings of Steel, because its inseparable
from all the other parts, but to the Ed^lcorating the acid or Salt juices in
the dissolution which they have made of the Steel. For since we find by
experience, that steel is not hard to be dissolved, and that not only the
Tartar which abounds in Salt accounted fixed and the acid Spirit of Sulphur, as
also that of Vitriol, Bay Salt and Niter penetrate it and dissolve it almost
equally, but that Wine and Water also penetrate and dissolve the filings; we
have great reason to believe that the juices as well acid as Salt, or if you
please of a midling nature, melting with the Steel in the stomach, fail not to
fix to it and dissolve it, and that from this dissolution arises the liberty of
the parts of the body upon which those juices operated, and their
Reestablishment in their first condition, and their natural Function. Whence it
happens that the stomach, the Intestines, and other parts are easily freed from
the ill humors that oppressed them, and that resuming their necessary vigor
every one of those parts keep open, or shuts up its peculiar passages according
to occasion. Not that we can attribute these opening effects to the Salt of
Mars, no more then the binding quality to its Earthy part, since they are
inseparable from the whole, and that to speak properly they are only fit to
attend in the Stomach the operation or effects of the acid juices which they
may there meet with.

Nor must believe that the hardness and closeness of Steel beyond Iron, the
pores whereof are bigger and more open, render it less proper for all sorts of
preparations, since we see by experience that Spirit of Vitriol and raw Tartar,
equally dissolve both the filings of Iron, and that of Needles, which are made
of the finest Steel, and the best tempered, and by consequence, the most
compacted and close: and that the putting a Roll of Brimstone to a square piece
of Steel sparkling hot out of the Furnace will make it melt like butter. In
regard also that this hardness may be advantageous to stop and busy the
dissolving parts of the juices which it may meet with in the stomach, and for
that in truth the pure Metals are much better then those which are not so; for
which reason all the best Writers have preferred Steel before Iron in all sorts
of Preparations, and that if we were to seek for a distinct Salt in the Iron,
it would be rather in that which is purified, then in the Scories or dro^^ that
is separated from it, which is nothing but the impurity of the Iron of which
the Steel is made.

Now because the Union of the several parts of Mars is so strict, that they
cannot be divided by any Art, and that they are always altogether in every part
of the substance, which absolutely grants a great Stiptickness in all the
preparations of Mars; and that the operation of this Metal must follow that of
the acid or Salt juices which dissolve it in the stomach, we should do ill to
imagine that we are able to prepare a Mars, of it self truly opening or purely
astringent. But that hinders not me from setting down here what preparations
have been made of it. For without attributing to either any particular opening
or astringent quality, preferrable one before an other, I am persuaded that the
more Mars is opened by several Calcinations, it is so much the fitter to be
dissolved in the stomach by the juices which it meets with, and to attend and
second afterward the effects of the same juices, and to fortify as it does at
the same time all the parts.

CHAP. L. Of Saffrons of Mars opening and Astringent.
THE most simple, most innocent and reddest Saffron of Mars, by Writers
qualified for Astringent, is that which is gathered from the Bars or Plates of
Steel, exposed a long time to the violence of the fire and which is found upon
occasion, upon the superficies of the B^rs, which have for some time born the
Retorts or other Vessels, in Reverberatory Furnaces. You may also spread the
filings of Steel in a Capsula of Earth flat and broad, and having placed it in
a convenient place in a Glass-house Furnace, keep them till they are become
very red and very small. You may also mix the filings of Steel with their
weight of Bay Salt decrepitated and very finely powdered; from which you may
afterward separate the Salt by several Lotions: then dry and put up this
powder, giving it from half a Scruple to half a dram in an Egg, in some
Conserve, or in some proper Liquor.

Saffrons of Mars, called Astringent, may be also prepared, by putting four
ounces of filings of thin plates of Steel in a great Glass Cucurbit, covered
with lute about half way and placed in a Sand-bath moderately hot, pouring upon
them by degrees and at several times the quantity of about a pint of Spirit of
Salt, Sulphur, Niter or Vitriol, or Vinegar, or if you please, Aquafortis,
leaving the whole together till the Mars be equally dissolved. Then having
taken it off and cohobated the Water three or four times upon the residence, or
else the Spirits made use of; and forced the Distillation in the last place,
till the residence, be absolutely dry; you shall find at the bottom the Steel
of a brown red color, which afterward being exposed to a fire of
Reverberation for ten or twelve days, will become perfectly red: then having
well washed it and dried it, keep it for your use.

The natural Astriction of Steel, and that which the Dissolvants bequeath to
it, may well in some measure give way to the Astringent quality which is
attributed to it, as also impart to it some good success when it meets not in
the stomach with those juices which can hinder its operation. But the effects
of the Steel are not always the same; for this Metal meeting in the stomach
with juices which are able to corrode and dissolve it, it is in some sort
constrained to obey the operation, and second the qualities of the same juices.
Nevertheless we must believe that being only altered by the dissolvants it does
not loose all its qualities, by means whereof, it gives nature time to recover
her strength; so that carrying off the impurities which it was burdened withal,
and restoring the necessary course and Circulation to the blood, the Vital and
Animal Spirits, it reestablishes the Functions of all the parts, and gives them
all the strength which they have need of for their preservation.

Notwithstanding the Manifest astriction which is to be found in Mars, and in
all its preparations: yet have several Authors made use of various means to
prepare a Saffron of Mars which they call Aperitive. For sometimes they have
mingled equal parts of powdered Sulphur with filiugs of Steel, and having put
them into an Earthen Pot sufficient to resist the fire, and the Pot upon a
Culot in the middle of the fireplace of a proper Furnace, they environed it
with lighted Coals and kept a good fire round about, stirring the substances
from time to time with a long Iron-Spatula, till the Sulphur being consumed,
the Steel was become very red; after which they ground it upon Porphury to
subtilize it. Sometimes they heated square pieces of Steel in a Smiths Forge,
and when they were become as it were white in the fire and full of Sparkles;
presling it against great Rolls of Brimstone, they caused it to melt and drop
into an Earthen Pipkin full of water; then having well separated the Sulphur,
and finely powdered the clots of Steel* they kept the powder of a brown color,
which some called black Aperitive Steel; which sometimes they have reverberated
with Sulphur to make it look red, and to powder it more finely. Sometimes
having sprinkled small thin plates of Steel with Spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur,
and having exposed them to the Air for four days, they have separated from them
a whitish and sweetish flower; then continuing to sprinkle them, and separate
the flower, and repeating often the same operations, the Pores of the Steel
finding themselves more and more open, they have gained a good quantity of
Flowers, which they called white Saffron of Mars. At other times they have only
exposed to the Sun or to the Air the thin plates of Steel, or else they have
sprinkled those plates or filings with water* from whence they have afterward
separated the yellow rust by Lotion, driving it afterward and keeping it so,
or else reverberating it with Sulphur in powder to give it a red color. All
these preparations are almost of equal goodness and their effects may answer to
the intentions of the preparer, which is to open; when the Acid or Salt juices
which are in the Vessels, especially in the Stomach, abandoning the substances
which they have fixed, to apply themselves to the dissolution of the Steel, the
same dissolution, not being able to fix them any more* serves to open the
Passages* and carry off the separated humors of the Salts which have fixed
them.

As to the red color which happens to Steel in diverse Calcinations, though it
may be attributed to its internal Sulphur, yet we may more rationally impute it
to the External Acids of the Salt, Sulphur, or Dissolvants* particularly to
those of the fire, which insinuating into it is Pores, increase also its weight.
In regard we find by experience that the red color of Steel increases and
hightens in the fire, if sprinkled with Spirit of Sulphur or any other acid. We
see also that the fairest Reds are not highten'd but by acids* which in a
moment will change a black color into a very red one.

CHAP. LI. Of Salt of Mars.
THough we cannot boast our selves able to draw out any true Salt from Mars*
and that all which we call Salt of Mars, has only the appearance, I think my
self obliged however to say something thereof. This Salt is prepared generally
by putting what quantity suffices of filings of Steel into a broad glass
Platter, or in an Earthen Platter of Potters-Earth; where after you have
moistened it with Vinegar, then dried it in the Sun, or over a very gentle
fire, and ground it upon Porphury, moisten it again with Spirit of Vinegar;
then dry it and bruise it again, and repeat the same operations till the Steel
be well impregnated with an acid sweetish savor. At which time having well
ground it, and put it into a glass Cucurbit, in a Sandbath, pour upon it a good
quantity of phlegm of Vinegar, stirring the filings well therein to facilitate
the Dissolution of its parts, which the Spirit of Vinegar has corroded. Then
having heated the bath by degrees, boil the substances for two or three hours,
pouring in new phlegm of Vinegar in the place of that which shall be consumed.
Then leaving the bath to cool and having filtered the Liquor, evaporate it in a
Glass Cucurbit in a Sand-Bath, over a moderate fire to the Pellicula or Film;
and being cold, after you have poured by Inclination into another Vessel, the
Liquor that swims above, separate and dry the Crystals, afterward evaporating
and Crystallizing the Liquor, till it be changed into Salt, which you must put
into a Mattress; and having there poured upon it Spirit of Wine well rectified,
four fingers above the substances, cover the Mattress with a blind head, and
having well luted the closures, after a digestion of three or four days, draw
off the Spirit by distillation over a gentle fire and keep the Salt for your
use.

This Salt is composed of nothing but the Salt of Spirit of Vinegar, and such
particles of Steel as the same Spirit has dissolved, which you may precipitate,
if you pour upon the Dissolution the Liquor of Tartar or of any other fixed
Salt. However it is recommended by Writers for the opening obstructions of the
Liver, Spleen and Matrix, as also for the cure of Dropsies; giving it from five
or six to twelve, fifteen or twenty grains, in opening Liquors. But the
sharpness which the distilled Vinegar has given to this Salt, and the
augmentation of Astriction which proceeds from thence, added to those other
reasons which I shall give, assure me that the preparation of Mars which I
shall produce, is far beyond this.

Get a pan of new Iron, thick, somewhat hollow, well beaten and smooth within,
of an indifferent bigness, and setting it upon some Table or Cupboard in some
convenient place, weigh out in a glass Bottle eight ounces of good Spirit of
Wine, and as much Spirit of Vitriol well rectified, and having well mingled
them, pour them out gently into the Earthen pan; then having covered them with
a sheet of Paper, let them to stand for twelve or fifteen days, or till the two
united Spirits have dissolved by degrees several particles of the proper
substance of the Pan, and incorporated themselves therewith in a white Salt,
enclining somewhat to gray, and till this Salt be dried and fixed to the bottom
and sides of the pan: whence you must take it off, and having beaten it to
powder in a Marble or glass Mortar, stop it up in a Pot for your use, giving it
from half a Scruple to half a dram, as one of the best remedies that can be
drawn from Mars, and which may be truly called the Soul of the Liquor. This
Salt may also pass for a singular Example of the change of the liquid forms of
the Spirits of Wine and Vitriol into a solid, by their common Union with the
particles of Iron which they have dissolved.

The Corrosion and Stypticity of the Spirit of Vitriol, being very much
dulcified by the mixture of the Spirit of Wine; for that the parts of the one
and the other changing figure and situation, are otherwise embodied and
confused one within another; and these two Spirits thus mixed having
penetration enough to enter into the Mars, and to dissolve a considerable
quantity of its particles, which perfect the blunting the sharpness of those
Spirits, and join themselves therewith to make up but one body; we must believe
this Salt to be much more agreeable to the disposition of the stomach, and the
various juices it may there meet with, then Salt of Mars prepared with Spirit
of Vinegar; considering that this Spirit furnishing the Salt not only with its
form, but also with its first Matter, is that which operates the most in it;
and that it own Corrosion and Acrimony, not being any way advantageous to the
stomach, increase the natural Astriction of the Mars; so far it is from
rendering it opening as the preparers pretend.

CHAP. LII. Of Vitriol of Mars.
THE savor which is observed in filings of Steel to be Stiptick, and very like
to that of ordinary Vitriol, together with the color, figure of the parts and
other qualities of Vitriol ob^erv'd in Vitriol of Mars, sufficiently testify
the nature of this Artificial preparation, which Authors have very truly called
by the name of Vitriol of Mars. In regard that being only composed of the
proper substance of Mars, and the distilled Spirit of ordinary Vitriol, yet
there are to be found in it all the marks and qualities of true Vitriol. But
because the Spirit of Vitriol made use of in the Dissolution of Mars, is
astrictive and Corrosive, and that this last quality cannot but augment that
which the Mars naturally has, we have no reason to believe that the Vitriol
which proceeds from it, has of it self any opening faculties, but that being
only apt to unite it self to Salt substances which may superabound in the
stomach, and to blunt the sharpness thereof by opening the Passages, and
expelling the ill humors that may follow afterward, they are only the effects
of the force of Nature, when she is freed from those obstacles, that troubled
and disturbed her Functions. We must consider also that this Vitriol is more
apt to compress and close the fibers of the stomach and Intestines, and the
Orifice and Inside of the Vessels through which it passes, then to relax or
dilate them; though we may say that by compressing the Vessels on the one side,
it may constrain them to open on the other, and to give way for the passage of
the ill humors contained therein. All these circumstances oblige us to
consider Vitriol of Mars, as a remedy rather Astringent, then capable to open
obstructions of the Vessels, especially those that are inveterate and
obstinate. This obliges me also to prefer the Salt of Mars last mentioned
before this Vitriol; or some other preparations of Mars less Astringent and
stiptick then this Vitriol.

But not to estrange my self too far from custom, and to satisfy others with it
the good uses that may be made thereof, when there is any occasion to fortify
and cleanse* or to mortify the Acrimony of the Salts, I will afford you the
preparation. Put what quantity you please of the filings of Needles into a
glass Cucurbit, and having well moistened and imbibed these fillings in good
Spirit of Wine, placed the Cucurbit over a gentle fire in a Sand-bath, stirred
the filings from time to time with a little Iron-Spatula, and suffered the
Spirit to work for some time upon the filings, pour upon them hot water, some
five or six fingers above the filings: then increasing the heat of the bath,
let the substances stand and digest for 24 hours, and filter the Liquor through
a sheet of coarse paper; which after you have put into another glass Cucurbit,
over the same Bath, and evaporated the superfluous moisture of the liquor to a
film, leave the sediment to cool and Crystallize. After which, having poured
out by Inclination the Liquor that swims above the Crystals, and also
separated, dried and put up the same Crystals, evaporate again the moisture of
the Liquor to a film, to get all the Vitriol that remains. You may also moisten
the sediment of the filings with new Vitriol, and leaving the Spirit to operate
for some time upon the filings, and having poured more water upon them as at
first, reiterate digestion* and all the forgoing operations to compass the
greater quantity of Vitriol of Mars.

Some mix the Water with Spirit of Vitriol before they pour it upon the
filings. But their dissolution not being to be effected in a small time but by
the Spirit of Vitrio* and this Spirit of Vitriol acting with more force when it
is alone, then when weakened by the water, it is much more to the purpose to
begin the dissolution of the Steel with that; and repeated experience has often
showed me the good success of it, as well for the beauty as the quantity of the
Vitriol which I have had* the addition of water serving only to soak and
separate the parts of the Steel which the Spirit of Vitriol has dissolved, from
those which it has not.

You may have a very beautiful Saffron of Mars, by calcining this Vitriol in a
Crucible in an open fire, till it be reduced into a very fine red powder, which
is properly that part of the Steel only which the Spirit of Vitriol has
dissolved.

Vitriol of Mars is never given but from three or four to twelve or fifteen
grains at most, mixing it in proper liquors.

Vitriol of Mars may be also distilled through a Retort, observing the same
method as for ordinary Vitriol, and the Spirit drawn off made use of for the
dissolution of the Steel. After you have so done, you shall find at the bottom
of the Cornute, the substance of the Steel in somewhat red powder, which will
be the true Saffron of Mars.

CHAP. LIII. Of Tinctures of Mars.
THE hardening and compacting the parts of Iron, when it is turned into Steel,
do not take from it the aptness which it has to be penetrated and dissolved*
not only by corroding Spirits, and by volatile and fixed Salts, but also by
Dew, by Wine, and ordinary water, provided that being in small filings, the
liquors are allowed their due time to penetrate and dissolve the parts. For
though that neither Wine nor Water can totally dissolve Steel, nor operate upon
it with that force and speed as the Spirits and corroding Salts, nevertheless
they are able to dissolve a considerable quantity of its parts, of which the
Steely savor tasting of Vitriol, and the brown color which happens to them
are assured symptoms.

The Water wherewith the filings of Steel are moistened, penetrates the
superficies, and converts it into rust, which you may afterward dissolve in a
larger quantity of Water, and change it into a yellow tincture, very
serviceable. But if you infuse the filings of Steel in cold weather in
White Wind enclining to green, for some weeks, putting them both together in a
double glass Bottle well stopped, the acid of the Wine united with its volatile
Salt, will make a larger dissolution of the parts of the filings, and color
the Wine very brown, which you may give to good purpose from half a spoonful to
one or two spoonfuls in the morning fasting, and continue the use of it for
many days against obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Matrix; or else make a
Syrup thereof with fine Sugar, to take from half an ounce to one or two ounces
at a time. But because it requires a long time to dissolve Mars in any of these
menstruums, we must use other means, to which purpose there is a tincture to be
thus prepared:

Beat to fine powder two pound of fair Tartar, and having mixed it with half a
pound of filings of fine Needles, put them together into a large Kettle, which
must be filled almost quite full of water, and setting the Kettle over the
fire, make the substances boil, stirring them from time to time, especially at
the bottom, to facilitate the dissolution of the Mars, adding still more water,
as the water of the dissolution boils away. Continue this boiling for ten or
twelve hours, or till you perceive that the filings of the Steel are almost
dissolved in the liquor, which will be of a brown color when it is filtered
and separated from its sediment, though the sediment retain a whitish gray
color, which the substances hold all the while they boil. Then having taken
the Kettle from the file, hold it sideways, that the liquor may filter through
languets of Cloth ready provided; which done, leave the substances to cool for
four and twenty hours. Then having moistened and gently pressed the languets,
dipped one half in the liquor, and the other half out, so that the water that
trickles down the languets may distill into an earthen Pipkin, give the liquor
time to filter of it self, enclining the Kettle more and more as it empties.
This operation is somewhat long, and requires two or three days time. But by
this means you shall have a tincture of Mars very clear, though of a brown red
color, and a sour taste like that of Vitriol. When this tincture is almost
all filtered, having washed the Kettle, put it in again, and evaporate the
superfluous moisture over a very gentle fire, till it be well concentered and
reduced to the consistence of a Syrup somewhat liquid, and when it is cool put
it up into a double glass Bottle well stopped; it is to be given in the morning
fasting, from one dram to two, in proper liquors, continuing the use from time
to time as occasion serves.

In the preparation of this tincture we are to observe, that the acid Salts,
and those that are purely salt, dissolve Steel with equal force. Observe also,
that Mars thus dissolved is in a fitter condition to be conveyed to the parts
that have occasion for it, then that which cannot act unless dissolved by the
stomach; and that having been dissolved by an acid saline Salt, and by
consequence of a midling nature, it may be able to remedy more effectually the
disorders which the ill humors have produced; for this tincture is so much the
more able to open the obstructions of the Vessels, by reason of the assistance
which it receives from the acid saline Salt of Tartar which has dissolved the
Mars, and which without diminishing the good qualities which the Mars has to
strengthen the parts through which it passes, enforces it to obey its
operation, by softning the matters that stop the passages, and by carrying them
off by the ordinary ways, and by re-establish^^^ nature and all its functions,
to restore that health to the parts which they stood in need of.

You may pour good Spirit of Wine upon the Saffron which remains after the
distillation of the Vitriol of Mars, and extract its tincture in a Sand-bath
moderately hot; then having filtered it through a piece of course paper, and
drawn off, in Balneo Mariae, about three fourths of the Spirit of Wine, keep
the tincture concentered, which remains at the bottom of the Cucurbit; the dose
of which is from seven or eight to twelve or fifteen drops, in some proper
liquor. This tincture is principally commended for the cure of the Dropsy,
which comes from the relaxation of the Lymphatick Vessels, which extravasate
and spill the serosities over the whole habit of the body. For this tincture
closing the orifice of those Vessels, enables them to void the Lymphatick
humor by the ordinary ways, not suffering them to overflow the other parts.

You may also dissolve the filings of Steel in very strong Vinegar, and
afterward evaporate the greatest part of the moisture of this dissolution, then
extract the tincture of it with good Spirit of Wine; afterward having filtered
and concentered it, keep it for the same use as the preceding one. But it must
be looked upon as far more astringent, in regard the natural astriction of the
Steel is augmented by that of the Vinegar which dissolved it.

Some having put the filings of Steel into an Iron Pan, moist'n it with good
Vinegar, and dry it over the fire, stirring it often with an Iron Spatula,
repeating these operations several times; then they lay these filings for some
days to macerate in good Spanish Wine, stirring them from time to time, and
having filtered the liquor, keep it for their use. I omit several other
tinctures, the description whereof seems to me altogether unnecessary.

CHAP. LIVE. Of the Extracts of Mars.
ALL the tinctures of Mars may be easily turned into Extracts, thick'ning them
by degrees over a gentle fire to the consistency of an Extract. But other
Extracts of Mars may be also made in manner following: Mix equal parts of
Saffron of Mars reverberated with Sulphur and Sal Armoniack in powder, and
having put them into a glass Cucurbit, placed in a Sand-bath, and covered it
with its head carefully luted, make sublimation thereof in a gradual fire, and
by this means one part of the Saffron of Mars mixed with the Salt Armoniack,
will mount in yellow flowers, which you must grind and mix afterward with the
settlement, repeating five or six times the same sublimation and mixture with
the settlement, or so often till the Saffron of M^rs be almost all ascended
with the Salt Ammoniack in flowers; then having put these flowers into a
Matras, and poured upon them Spirit of Wine well rectified, four fingers above
the substances, cover the Mattress with a Blindhead carefully luted, then set it
over a Sand-bath over a fire of digestion, which must be continued twelve or
fifteen days, stirring the Ingredients from time to time to hasten the
Extraction. Afterward the Tincture being colored, filter it, and having, if
you think good, drawn off the most part of the Spirit of Wine by the most
gentle and ordinary ways, evaporate by degrees the superfluous moisture to the
consistence of an Extract. Which may be taken alone from half a Scruple to a
whole one, or mixed with Opiates, or other opening and purging Medicines.

You may also prepare an Extract of Mars very plain, by putting into a Mattress
a pound of filings of Needles, and pouring upon them juice of Grapes newly
pressed forth, and unfermented, about five or six fingers above the substances,
then having covered the Mattress with a Blind-head, exactly luted, and placed it
in a Sand-bath or over a Bakers oven, you must stir it from time to time, but
let it there stand for forty days, or till the Grape juice be of a very dark
color. Then having filtered that Liquor through a course piece of paper, and
put it into an Earthen pot well glazed within, evaporate the superfluous
moisture over a gentle fire, till the Tincture be as thick as an Extract, e^^
which you may make the same use as of the foregoing. But because as well
Extracts as other preparations of Steel are generally accompanied with the
natural Astriction of that Metal, it is good to mix them, at least to let them
precede or follow some purgatives, which may assist them to open the passages.

With much more facility you may prepare an Astringent Extract of Mars by
infusing the filings of Steel for several days, and afterward boiling them in
strong Wine squeezed from the Grape-press, or else in juice of Barberries, or
in any other Astringent juice, filtring afterward this Liquor, and reducing it
by ordinary ways to an Extract, which may be given to good purpose from half a
Scruple to half a dram, against all weaknesse's, and want of retention in the
Stomach and Intestines.

CHAP. LV. Of the Preparation of Copper.
SEveral Writers will have it, that an undigested Sulphur, a red Salt, and a
yellow Mercury, are the matters that make up the Composition of Copper,
affirming it however to be a difficult thing, to make a true separation of the
Principles of this imperfect Metal, to which they have also given the name of
Venus, by reason of its Sympathies with that Planet, and the particular cures,
it affords to the parts of Generation.

Sometimes the Filings are calcined, or the thin plates of Copper alone, in a
Furnace of Reverberation. Sometimes the thin plates are laid in Stratification
between decrepitated Salt beaten to powder, in a Crucible or some other Vessel
able to withstand the fire, then quenching these thin plates in water, and
having cleansed them well with Iron Brushes, they are to be stratify'd again,
repeating these operations three times, by which means you shall have a very
red Saffron of Venus, which it will be sufficient to wash well, and keep in
fine powder, for Emplasters, and other External remedies for the cleansing of
Wounds and Ulcers.

There is another Immersive Calcination of Copper, by dissolving it in
Aquafortis or in Spirit of Niter, or in some other corroding Spirit. Then
having drawn off the Aquafortis or other Corroding Spirit by Distillation, you
shall find the Copper at the bottom of the Vessel in a red powder, which must
be washed, dried, and kept for use. Or else you may precipitate the Dissolution
by putting in a thin Plate of Iron, and pouring hot water upon it, which will
enforce the Dissolvant to quit the Copper which it had dissolved, and so let it
fall to the bottom of the Vessel in a red powder, which is to be kept as a true
Saffron or precipitate of Venus.

You may cut into pieces thin plates of Copper, and having stratify'd them in a
great Crucible with equal parts of Sulphur in powder and covered the Crucible
with his cover having a little hole in the middle, lute the jointures round
about, and having left the Lute to dry, place the Crucible upon a Culot, and
light a wheel fire round about it a distance enough to melt the Sulphur,
keeping the fire thus for an hour, then put the fire nearer and nearer by
degrees till the Sulphur take fire, and that the flame flash out of the cover
of the Crucible. By this means the Sulphur being consumed, and the substances
cooled, you shall find the plates of Copper at the bottom at it were swelled,
dark colored and brittle as Aes ustum, which you may reduce into powder, that
will be also a Saffron of Venus, only for outward applications.

There is also another Calcination of Copper much less violent, and only
superficial, by moistning the Copper plates with corroding Spirits, or with
Salts dissolved in water, by which means you extract a Verdigrise which appears
upon the superficies of the Copper Plates. You may also extract a Verdigrise by
means much more gentle in hot Countries, and particularly at Montpelier, by
putting a little Wine at the bottom of certain great Earthen pots narrow below,
ranging above the Wine upon little Sticks, or pieces of Clay the plates of
Copper, and stratifying them with the lees of Grape Clusters, moistened before
with the same Wine, covering the pots afterward, and leaving them in a cool
place for seven or eight days, or till the superficies of the Plates be well
covered with Verdigrise; which you must scrape off with knives: reiterating
afterward the same Stratification, and leaving the pots as before to get a
greater quantity of Verdigrise: which some call the Flower, others the
Vitrioliz'd Salt of Copper, though it be indeed the proper substance of the
Copper dissolved by the volatile acid Saline Spirit of the Lees of the
Grape-Clusters, assisted by the Wine and the secret Ferment of the one and the
other.

CHAP. LVI. Of the changing of Copper and Verdigrise into Vitriol.
AFter you have placed a great Crucible upon a Culot in the midst of the
Hearthplace of a VVind-Furnace, grind to very fine powder upon Porphury, a
pound of Saffron of Venus, and having mixed with it the eighth part of its
weight of powder of Sulphur, put this mixture into the Crucible, round about
which kindle a moderate fire of Coals, continuing the fire till the Sulphur be
wholly consumed; taking care in the mean while to beat over again the
substances, in case they clot together in the Crucible, during the operation.
After which, the substances being cold, mix with the same Saffron as much
Brimstone powdered as before; and having returned this mixture into the
Crucible and kindled the fire, do as you did the first time, repeating the same
operations, ten or twelve times, to open the Copper perfectly, and make fit to
be dissolved. At length the Saffron being cold, after you have ground it very
fine upon Porphury, put it into a glazed Pot of Potters-Earth, and set it in
Balneo Mariae moderately hot, where having first moistened it, then steeped it
in a good quantity of Rain or River Water almost boiling hot, stirring it from
time to time; macerate the substances, continuing still to stir them till the
water look blew. Then having filterd and put this Tincture into a Glass
Cucurbit placed in a Sand-bath, and having evaporated the superfluous moisture
to the film, when the Ingredients are cold you shall find at the bottom of the
Cucurbit the Crystals of Venus, having first separated by Inclination and
poured in to another Cucurbit the Liquor that swims above the substances, which
you must evaporate and Crystallize as before, till the whole be Crystalliz'd.

Some may wonder that the Saffron of Venus dissolves to easily in the Water,
in regard the proper substance of Copper contained in its Saffron, how exactly
soever it be calcined or reverberated does not give way to such a feeble
Menstruum as water But that will be easily manifest, when we observe that the
Acid of the Sulphur having corroded, and in part dissolved some particles of
the Saffron of Venus, during its Calcination, and being in some sort
incorporated with it, the water almost boiling hot easily dissolves it, and
with it the parts of the same Saffron half corroded and dissolved before. So
that the Vitriol which you draw from thence, is properly composed of nothing
but the Acid parts of the Sulphur, and those of the Saffron of Venus, which the
same Acid of Sulphur had opened and disposed to be dissolved with it in the
water.

This Vitriol of Venus is given from two or three to twelve or fifteen grains
in proper Liquors, against diseases of the head, stomach, and parts of
generation; for the cure of which it is often used in injections, mixing a dram
of it in a pint of juices, decoctions, or distilled waters proper for that
purpose. It is also good to kill Worms.

But because the boiling water cannot dissolve the whole substance of the
Saffron of Venus, put the sediment into a Glass Cucurbit, and pouring distilled
Vinegar upon it, about four good fingers above the substances, make a
Maceration thereof in a Sand bath moderately hot, till the distilled Vinegar
look blew; then pour out the Tincture by Inclination, and keep the Tincture in
a vessel apart; after this pour more Vinenar, and repeat the same Macerations
and Operations till the spirit cease to color. Then having mingled all the
Tinctures, evaporate and chrystallize them, as you did before, and dry and keep
the Chrystals.

The Vert-degrise being much more open and better digested then the Saffron of
Venus, is also sooner and more easily dissolved. To which effect having put
three or four pound of Vert-degrise powdered into a Glass Cucurbit placed upon
a Sand-bath, temper it by degrees in good spirit of Vinegar, stirring it with a
wodd'n Spatula, and pouring the Wine upon it, till it swim above the Verdigrese
five or six fingers. Then kindle and keep a moderate fire under the Bath, and
let all the substances macerate, till the Vinegar look of a dark green color.
After which having filtered and set apart this Tincture, pour more spirit of
Vinegar upon the sediment of the Vert-degrise, and repeat Maceration and other
Operations till all the pure part of the Vertdegrise be dissolved in the spirit
of Vinegar. Then mixing all these Tinctures together in a large Glass Cucurbit
placed upon the same Bath, kindle a moderate fire underneath, and evaporate by
degrees the superfluous moisture, which will be little else but the Phlegm of
the Vinegar; for its Acid part will incorporate with the Vert-degrise, and
augment its quantity, notwithstanding the feces that will remain in the Filter,
or at the bottom of the Cucurbit, which one would think should diminish the
quantity of the Chrystals. Evaporate the moisture with a very moderate heat,
till the film arise; after which when the matters are cold, having poured by
inclination the liquor that swims above the Chrystals into another Cucurbit,
and gently dryd and set apart the the same Chrystals, replace the Cucurbit in
the same Bath, and repeat Evaporation and Chrystallization as often as shall be
thought requisite, for the saving of all the Chrystals that shall be drawn from
that Tincture, that shall be of a blew color.

They that would augment the Acidity of those Chrystals of Vert-degrise, with a
design to draw forth a good spirit, fit to dissolve several Mineral substances,
dissolve these Chrystals in new spirit of Vinegar, filter the Dissolution, and
having evaporated the superfluous moisture to the film, they separate the
Chrystals, reiterating the same addition of spirit of Vinegar, and all the
other operations, so long, till having coverd the Cucurbit with its head, and
evaporating the dissolutions, the Vinegar distill forth, as strong as when in
was first put in to dissolve the Chrystals; and that you may thereby judge that
all the pores of the substance being altogether filled with the Acid parts of
the spirit of Vinegar, it cannot be any* more impregnated.

CHAP. LVII. Of the Distillation of Crystals of Venus.
BEfore you undertake to distill the Crystals of Saffrons of Venus, or those
which you shall have drawn from Vertdegrise, you must, after you have put them
into a glass Cucurbit, pour upon them Spirit of Wine well rectified four
fingers above the substance. Then having placed the Cucurbit in a Sand-bath
over a very gentle fire, covered it with its head well luted, and fixed to it a
little Recipient luted after the same manner, draw back the spirit of wine, and
return twice more other spirit of wine upon the Crystals, to qualify their
Acrimony in some measure. Then having dried and beaten them, fill about two
thirds of a great glass Retort environed with lute, and having placed it in a
close Furnace of Reverberation, and adapted and carefully luted a grand
Recipient to the neck, distill the spirit with an immediate fire gentle at
first, then increased by degrees, and from degree to degree, and continuing it
till no more vapors rise out of the Cornute; then when the vessels are cold,
put the Residence into a new Cornute environed with Lute, and having poured the
distilled spirit in the Recipient upon it, and placed the Retort as before in a
close furnace of Reverberation, and fitted and luted a Recipient to the neck,
reiterate Distillation, as also Cohobation of the spirit distilled upon the
sediment* and make a third Distillation. By this means you shall have a spirit
impregnated with the most essential parts of the Saffron of Venus, or of those
of Vert-degrise, recommended by several good Authors for a specific against
the Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Convulsions, and other maladies of the brain; as also
against those of the matrix. They also esteem it highly against the Jaundise,
weaknesses of the stomach, and to break the stone in the Reins and Bladder.
Against all sorts of Agues, the Pestilence, and that it may be successfully
used instead of the Prophylactick water of Sylvius, in all diseases for which
that is commended. Insomuch that Paracelsus avers that this spirit makes the
fourth part of an Apothecaries shop. The dose is from five or six to ten or
twelve drops, in proper liquors. It is used in ointments to make the hair grow,
and to cure the Itch, Scurf, and Scald-heads.

But besides all these virtues, they pretend that it is a real Alkahest, able
to dissolve totally all Pearls, Corals, Crab's-eyes, and other such kind of
substances, with much more ease then any other dissolvants, which altering and
destroying themselves in some measure, while they act upon the substances that
they dissolve, leave great impressions of their Acrimony* and with that the
most part of their Acidity. Whereas if you believe them, after this Spirit has
dissolved all sorts of substances, it quits them altogether, when it is forced
out by distillation, issuing out with the same strength which it had before
distillation, and is still in a capacity to dissolve more, and as often as you
can desire. But because the salt part of these substances is sure to retain
with it some part of the Acid, with which it may have united it self, and that
besides this, the terrestrial part fixes and detains some other particles,
which cannot well be separated but by Lotions, it is not to be thought that
this spirit is always the same. Nor do I find the use of it very necessary for
those dissolutions, because for reasons otherwhere alleged the Magisteries of
Pearls, Corals and such other kind of substances, are much inferior, and of
less use then the substances themselves ground to a very fine powder upon
Porphyry; and that the apparent salt which a man might draw from them causing
this spirit to incorporate with the substances which it has dissolved, would
prove more sharp then that which should be drawn from the same substances with
Vinegar distilled, and the Acid Salt would be also incorporated with the
substance which it has dissolved. We should deceive our selves also to let
Copper, Iron, Pearls, Corals, etc. pass for pure Alkali's, upon this ground
that Acid spirits act upon them. For though these substances are not destitute
of their proper Alkali, it follows not that this part is the whole, nor that it
can transform the other parts into it self, since that when the Acid spirits
dissolve those sorts of substances, they do it not by uniting themselves to
them, as they do with the true Alkali's, but by destroying them by the division
which they make of their parts; quitting them, and suffering them to
precipitate downward, when they meet any fixed or volatile Salt with which they
may unite, considering that only salt substances dissolvable in water, and
capable to unite and incorporate themselves with the oils, which can be
accounted real Alkali's. For though the boiling water, as I have said, may make
some dissolution of Copper reduced into Saffron, after it has been calcined
with sulphur, nevertheless it can only dissolve that part which the Acid of the
sulfur has corroded and half dissolved during Calcination.

Some have pretended to draw forth a sulphur of Venus, by mixing its Vitriol
with half its weight of filings of Steel, moistening them several times with
Vinegar distilled, drying them full as many times, and at length reducing them
into a red mass, over a gradual fire augmented toward the end. After which they
bruise the Mass in a Mortar, and extract the Tincture by the usual ways with
Vinegar distilled, which they afterward evaporate to the half part; then
pouring upon it liquor of Tartar, they precipitate a substance which they call
by the name of Sulphur of Venus; though indeed it be nothing else but the
proper substance of the Copper, which lay hid in its Vitriol, and that portion
of filings of Steel, which the distilled Vinegar had dissolved, when it was
used for the extract of the Tincture. But this preparation, in my opinion,
having more of vanity then profit, I think it to no more purpose to dilate any
more upon it. No more to purpose do I think it to multiply any more
preparations of Copper, believing that if those which I have given will not
satisfy, to all intents the curious may have, they may find by their own
progresses, or by the several preparations which I have given upon Mars,
whatever is necessary to be practiced upon Copper.

CHAP. LVIII. Of Preparations of Lead.
LEAD is not only put into the last rank of imperfect Metals, but has been
always accounted the coursest, most terrestrial, coldest, softest, and most
easy to melt of all Metals. It is thought to be composed of a terrestrial Salt
and Sulphur, and an imperfect Mercury, somewhat of the nature of Antimony. It
is called Saturn, from the influence which that planet has over. Particular
qualities are ascribed to it also, for the cure of diseases of the Spleen, and
Head, because there is always some portion of Silver mixed with it in the
Mine. Its Terrestrious Salt and Sulphur are the reason, that being melted, it
mixes it self with all Metals, and that being exposed with them to the violence
of the fire, it reduces all imperfect Metals into dross and scum. The same
Sulphur is the reason that being reduced into Lime and powdered, it easily
unites with all sorts of unctuous matters. For which reason it is often made
use of in ointments and emplasters, with which it incorporates very well. The
imperfectness of its substance hinders however, but that both Pharmacies make
several preparations of it, and that it is more used than all the other Metals
together.

The meanest and most simple preparation of Lead is that of its purifying. To
which purpose, having melted it in a convenient Earthen Pot, or in some great
Iron Ladle, and thrown upon it some pieces of Suet or Wax, let them flame
together, and the flame being passed, scum off the impurities. You may also
keep it a longer time over the fire, and throw in more pieces of Suet or Wax,
and still separate the scum that rises; but all the Lead would turn into scum,
should you continue to hold it over the fire, burning more Suet or Wax upon it.
And therefore once burning, and once scumming is enough, and then to pour it
into some vessel half full of hot water, to have your Lead sufficiently pure,
and fit for any other preparations which you intend.

Having thus purified your Lead, if you would calcine it into a gray Calx, you
may keep it over a moderate fire in the same vessel, stirring it continually
with a long Iron Spatula, and separating from time to time the gray Powder
enclining to yellow, which will gather together; still keeping it upon the
fire, and separating the Powder till the Lead be changed into that kind of Calx
or Lime.

Afterward quench this Calx in some flat Earthen Capsula, and placing it in a
porper Furnace of Reverberation, kindle and keep a moderate fire, not to melt
the Lime, which must be left to reverberate for some hours, till it becomes
yellow, which the Painters call Macicot; or of an orange color, enclining to
red, which they call Minium.

You may also reduce the Lead into thin Plates, and having hung them up, let
them receive the vapors of Vinegar put into a proper vessel over a moderate
fire, and afterward separate the white substance that will gather together,
which is that which they call Ceruse. Or else melt the Lead in a Crucible, and
having mingled with it the half of its weight in pounder'd Brimstone, leave it
upon the fire, till the Brimstone be all consumed, at what time you shall find
the Lead in a dark colored Powder, which is called Burn Lead.

I leave apart the Calcination of Lead in Lytharge, which is done in purifying
the perfect Metals, and the immersive Calcinations of Lead in corroding
spirits; of which that which is done with spirit of Vinegar in preparing Salt
of Saturn, may serve for a sufficient example.

I will only tell you my thoughts upon the augmentation of weight to the
eleventh part, which happens to Calx of Lead, and other Metals or Metallic
substances, which have been long exposed to the Action of the fire; that is to
say, that so long as the violence of the flame opens and divides the parts, the
Acid of the woods or other substances that burn, insinuates it self into the
pores of these Limes, where it is stopped by the secret Alkali, which is there
meets with. So that as long as the pores into which it is entr'd, keep
themselves open, it remains there concealed, like the Acid and Volatile Salt of
Woods in the foot of the Chimneys; and making but one body with the Calx, the
weight of it is manifestly augmented for a time. But if you melt the Calx's,
and cause them to resume their natural Metallic body, the closure of the pores
of the Metal, drives out the foreign Acid; so that finding it self only
composed of its proper parts, it weighs no more then it did before it was
reduced into a Calx. And though the Calx of Lead in some measure does the
office of Alkali, by contracting a kind of union with the Acids; and that it
cannot be denied but that Lead has its secret Alkali, like all other Metals and
Metallic substances, yet we should do ill to take the whole for that part; and
to look upon the whole substance of Lead as a true, pure and simple Alkali. For
if it were so, it would not only suck up much more Acid, but having once sucked
it up, it would make but one body with it, and would not be separated from it,
as it is, by Fusion, which it would endure as the Acids united with the true
Alkali's do, without any division of their substance.

CHAP. LIX. Of Salt and Magistery of Saturn.
YOU may indifferently make use of for these Preparations either of Lytharge,
Minium, Ceruse, or the other Calx's of Lead. Because it is sufficient to have a
Lead that is open, and in a condition to be easily dissolved by Vinegar
distilled. But because this Metal calcined to whiteness, comes nearest to the
color of Salt, it is better to make use of Ceruse, or some other white of
Lead. But you must be sure to choose a true Ceruse of Lead, such as we call
Venetian Ceruse* and not the counerfeit Ceruses, which being mingled with
Chalk, or other alien substances, have neither the brittleness, weight nor
whiteness of that of Venice.

Put then into a Cucurbit of Glass or Potters Earth, what quantity of Geruse
you please, and having set it in a Sand-bath, and pourd distilled Vinegar upon
it, five or six fingers above the substances, kindle a fire under the Bath,
stirring the Ingredients with a long wooden Spatula, as well to hinder the
Ceruse from lying in a heap at the bottom of the Vessel, as to hasten the
dissolution. Continue the fire very moderate, till the distilled Vinegar be
become very sweet, which is a sign that it has dissolved a good part of the
Ceruse. At which time, after you have cooled the Bath, poured out by
Inclination, and filtered the Liquor, keep it apart in a double Glass-bottle,
which done, return the Cucurbit again upon the Bath, pour fresh distilled
Vinegar upon the sediment of the Ceruse, and kindling the fire under the Bath,
repeat the same maceration and other operations, till the pure substance of the
Ceruse be almost quite dissolved in the distilled Vinegar; then having put all
the filtered dissolutions into a clear glass Cucurbit, and set it upon a Sand
bath over a moderate heat, evaporate by degrees the superfluous moisture, till
there remain not above a fourth part of the tincture. At which time, having
re-filter'd this liquor hot, leave it four and twenty hours in a cool place,
where a good part of it will coagulate into white Crystals, long and
glistering, which will be covered with one part of the liquor, not able to
crystallize it self, by reason of its superfluous moisture. Pour that liquor
into the Cucurbit by inclination, and having evaporated in the same Bath about
half of the moisture, crystallize it again, repeating the same operation till
all the Salt of Vinegar, incorporated with the substance of the Lead, be
crystalliz'd. Then dry the Crystals, and keep them for your use.

The great sweetness of the Salt of Saturn, is the reason that some have taken
it for a Salt of Lead; though indeed it be no other then a real Salt of Vinegar
incorporated with the proper substance of the Lead, which the Spirit of Vinegar
has dissolved; of which you will be satisfied, when having distilled this Salt
of Saturn through a Retort, the salt part of the Vinegar being exhaled in
Spirit, you shall find in the Retort the proper substance of the Lead, which
was concealed in that Salt, reincorporated and become again a real Lead. You
may be also farther convinced, by putting this Salt of Saturn with Salt of
Tartar into a Crucible, and setting them in a melting fire; for the acid of the
Spirit of Vinegar quitting the Lead, to unite with the Salt of Tartar, the same
Lead rebecomes what it was before it was dissolved by the Spirit of Vinegar,
and reduced into Ceruse or Calx.

As for the sweet savor of the Salt, there is as little reason to attribute it
to the internal Salt of Lead; for besides that it cannot be separated from the
other parts of the Lead, and that this Metal has no sweetness in it self, nor
any other considerable savor; the same thing is to be concluded of the Salts
of Pearls, Coral, etc. Since that after they are dissolved in distilled
Vinegar, and the dissolution reduced to Salt, this Salt, which is also the Salt
of the Spirit of Vinegar, incorporated with the substance of the Pearls, Coral,
etc. which the same Spirit of Vinegar has dissolved, has a sweet savor very
like to that of Salt of Saturn; though it may be averred, that this sweet
savor does not proceed from any separable Salt which those substances may
have; in regard that after precipitation of those dissolved substances, or
distillation of those Salts, you shall find very near the same weight which
they had before the Spirit of Vinegar had dissolved them, and that after you
have washed and cleans'd them from all mixture of the Spirit of Vinegar, you
shall find them as insipid as they were before; so far shall you be from
perceiving any sweetness in them, no more then in Lead. So that we cannot
rationally attribute this sweet savor of the Salt of Saturn but only to the
action of the Spirit of Vinegar upon the Lead; nor look upon the sweetness of
Salt of Pearls or Coral, but as an effect of the action of the Vinegar upon
those substances, and of its union with them, by means of which action the
sharpness of the Spirit of Vinegar being carried off, they leave a more sweet
and soft impression upon the tongue then they did before.

Lead not being able to act, like the Salts, upon the Spirit of Vinegar, and
this latter being the only agent in the dissolution of the Calx of Lead, we
observe there much less ebullition, and much less heat, then in the union of
acids with real Alkali's, where every one does its own proper endeavor, and
hastens to contract an union, which is very natural to them, ebullition and
heat being the effects of their reciprocal motion. We also see that this
ebullition and ^ervour cease, when after their union is perfected, their action
and motion also cease. But here can happen no other heat or ebullition, then
what the Spirit of Vinegar only raises by its operation upon the Calx of Lime;
upon which also the Spirit of Vinegar works but very gently, because that being
usually very much impregnated with phlegm, its points are more slender, and less
capable of action and motion.

They who are afraid of the coldness of Lead, and the acrimony of the Spirit
of Vinegar, may pour upon the Salt of Saturn, Spirit of Wine well rectified
four fingers high, and having caused digestion for three or four days, draw it
off again, then dry the Salt and keep it.

Salt of Saturn is highly commended to quench the internal inflammations and
heats of Fevers, as also to temper venereal desires, giving it in proper
liquors from three or four, to five or six grains. It is also very much
esteemed for the dissolving hard and schirrous tumors, and to dissipate
contusions. It is made use of with success in Collyriums, as well to stop
fluxes, as to cool inflammations of the eyes, and consume the Pin and Web at
the beginning, dissolving it from one scruple to two, in five or six ounces of
Celandine or Eyebright water; of which you may augment the quantity, if you
desire a more temperate Collyrium. It is also very useful in injections for
Gonorthaeas, Inflammations, and Ulcers of the Bladder, Matrix, and their
passages. It is also serviceable in Gargarisms, for the most part of diseases
of the mouth, caused by volatile or fixed Alkali's; for the acid of the Spirit
of Vinegar, assisted by the cold quality of the Lead, sensibly mortifies the
working of these Salts, and extinguishes the inflammation which they cause.
Which is so much the more conformable to reason, in regard we find by
experience, that Sal Prunella, Spirit of Salt, Sulphur, and Vitriol, and all
sorts of acids, even to simple Vinegar, are very good for these sorts of
distempers; which would be the worse by the use of all other Salts, as well
fixed as volatile.

There is a Liniment to be made called the Liniment of Saturn, by stirring
together equal parts of the dissolution of Calx of Lead, and Oil of Roses, and
reducing it to a kind of Vnguentum Nutritum, which is very proper for the cure
of malignant Ulcers that proceed from a sharp and salt humor; as also for
Tetters, Scabs, Ringworms, and Burns.

There is no need of any particular dissolution of Calx of Lead to make a
Magistery of Saturn; it being enough to put into a Cucurbit, or a large glass
Pan, as much as you think convenient of the filtered liquor of Saturn, prepared
for extraction of the Salt, and to pour upon it softly liquor of Tartar, till
the ebullition cease. For the liquor of Tartar uniting it self with the Spirit
of Vinegar which had dissolved the Calx of Lead, will cause it to quit the
Calx, and suffer it to precipitate to the bottom. After which, letting the
precipitated substance settle, and having poured out the liquor that swims
above by inclination, wash the settlement several times with very fair water,
till it be dulcified, then dry the Magistery, and keep it for use.

This Magistery, to speak properly, is nothing but a Calx of Lead purified and
subtilliz'd, which is useful in cooling and drying external medicines. Some
there are that mix it in Pomatums. But the seeming whiteness which these
Pomatums seem to impart to the Skin, is often attended with a color inclining
to that of Lead, and leaves a tincture of the first matter whence the Magistery
was drawn, and into which you may change the Salt of Saturn.

You may also make a Magistery of Saturn, by weakening the Spirit of Vinegar
impregnated with the Lime of Lead, which with a great quantity of Water which
you might pour upon it, and would force it to quit and precipitate to the
bottom the Lime of Lead which it had dissolved.

Some having dissolved thin plates of Lead in Aquafortis made with Niter and
Alum, pour upon this dissolution Salt water filtered, and pecipitate a
Magistery extraordinary white, which they dulcify by several Lotions, dry in
the shade between two papers, and keep for a Cosmetick.

CHAP. LX. Of the Distillation of Lead.
THE softness of Lead does not renderit more proper then other Metals, to
afford by distillation different liquid substances, like severals Salts and the
parts of Animals and Vegetables. For though by keeping Lead a good while over
the fire, you may cause it to evaporate into that which some Writers have
called Gas. However neither by distillation or otherwise can you extract out of
it any Spirit of Salt or true Oil, whatever men may promise to themselves.
Which Impossibility obliges Authors to have recourse to Corroding Spirits, and
to reduce by their means the Lead into Lime, that by the Union of this Lime
with the Spirits, they may extract a Composition much resembling Salt; and
afterward from this Salt, by distillation, a phlegm, Spirit, and manifest Oil,
of which I will show you the preparation.

The better to bring to pass distillation of the Salt of Saturn, it is good to
have it dissolved several times in distilled vinegar, and to have drawn off
every time the watery part in Balneo Mariae, and to have repeated these
Operations, till the spirit of vinegar distill off as acid as it was put in.
Whereby you shall understand that the pores of the substance of the lead are
perfectly filled with acid. Then put two or three pound of salt of Saturn well
dried into a large Glass-Retort: and having placed it, and well environed it
with sand in a Capsula of proper earth; fitted a Recipient to the beak, and
carefully luted the closures, begin your distillation with a gradual fire, soft
at the beginning but very fierce toward the end, till no more vapors come out
of the Cornute. The Distillation being done, and the Vessels cold and unluted,
you shall find the phlegm and the Spirits of Salt of Saturn mixed in the
Recipient, which you must put together into a Glass Cucurbit, and having placed
it in a Sand-bath, and covered it with its head exactly luted, with a little
Recipient fitted and luted to it also, make a rectification of the Ingredients
over a very soft fire. And by this means, after you have caused the Combustible
Spirit to ascend in the first place, which is called the Ardent Spirit of
Saturn, though it be only the volatile Sulphury part of the Vinegar; and have
after that drawn off the phlegm, you shall find at the bottom of the Cucurbit a
Purplish Liquor, which is improperly called by the name of Oil of Saturn,,
being only the Spirit of Vinegar concentered, which has retained with it but
very few of the particles of the Lead* as will be evident by melting the Mass
that remains in the Cucurbit. For that will turn to Lead altogether like that
which was turned into Lime for the preparation of the Salt of Saturn.

I have said in another place, that when Wine is turned into Vinegar, the acid
part which then predominates does not destroy the volatile Sulphury part of the
Wine, but that it there remains concealed notwithstanding the contrary opinion
of many. The same reasons fortified by that which happens here, shows us, that
the Combustible Spirit that comes forth in this Distillation, is nothing but
the Spirit of Wine that lay concealed and as it were envelopp'd in the acid of
the Vinegar, which appeared, when being forced by the fire, a good part of the
Spirit of Vinegar which had fixed it, comes to be stopped in the pores of the
cal^ of Lead which it had dissolved. It happens also after the separation of
this Sulphury Spirit, that that which remains at the bottom of the Cucurbit,
and is called Oil of Saturn, has not the same Acidity which a pure Spirit of
Vinegar concentered might have.

However at Paris it is a difficult thing, in the Distillation of Salt of
Saturn, to separate from it a true Inflammable Spirit, because the Vinegars are
counterfeited, and are compounded with water, which is frequently their
foundation. Yet we never fail to separate one, when the Vinegar is pure and
only made of Wine. This Salt of Saturn made with good Wine-Vinegar never fails
to take fire and flame, when it is held to the fire.

VVriters do hold, that the Combustible Spirit which is drawn from this Salt is
an excellent Diaphoretick, and that it may be successfully administered in
Malignant Fevers* in Venereal distempers, and those of the Brain, given in
proper liquors from five or six to fifteen or twenty drops. The liquor that
remains in the Cucurbit is good to cure and cicatrize Wounds and Ulcers, being
slightly anointed with it. Others esteem it very much for the diseases that
happ'n to Horses Eyes.

CHAP. LXI. Of Balsoms of Saturn.
SO easy a thing it is to dissolve and incorporate over the fire the powdered
Calx of Lead with Oils, and all sorts of fat substances, that it is thence
adjudg'd, that having dissolved these Limes in corrosive Spirits, and having
reduced them afterward into Salts, it is yet more easy to dissolve them in
all sorts of liquors, and to use them in all sorts of Remedies both internal
and external.

The Balsoms of Saturn are not the meanest remedies to be this way prepared. To
which purpose so prescribe, to put into a glass Cornute eight ounces of Salt of
Saturn, and to pour upon it twice as much the weight of Ethereal Spirit of
Turpentine, and having well mixed them, to distill them in a Sand-bath with a
gradual fire; by which means you shall draw forth in the first place a clear
Spirit, very proper for the cure of virulent Gonorrhaea's, especially if you
mix therewith a little Camphire; after that an Oil, which is the Balsom of
Saturn, very proper for the cure of malignant and cankered Ulcers.

Others direct you to put four ounces of Salt of Saturn into a Matras, with
double its weight of Ethereal Spirit of Turpentine, and having covered the
Matras with a small blind head, to let them digest in a Sand-bath over a very
gentle fire, stirring them from time to time, and to continue the digestion
till the Salt of Saturn be very near dissolved, and the Spirit well colored.
Afterward, having unluted the Vessels, and added an ounce of powdered
Camphire, to relute the Vessels, and continue digestion till the Camphire be
dissolved* and then to filter this Balsom through a piece of Cotton put at the
bottom of a large Tunnel, and then to put it up in a double glass Bottle well
stopped, as an unparalleled remedy to cure all Fistula's, Wounds, and Ulcers,
of what nature soever they were, being applied hot to the parts affected. Some
make use of the second or third distilled Oil of Turpentine instead of the
Ethereal Spirit, that the Balsom being of a thicker consistence, may stick
longer upon the parts. Others make use of the distilled Oil of Juniper Berries;
believing that besides the virtues which this will have common with the other
Balsoms of Saturn, that it will prove also Diuretic; and proper to resist the
malignity of Wounds and Ulcers. I omit the Tinctures and Oils which may be made
of Salt of Saturn with Spirit of Wine or other Menstruums, by means whereof,
after long and often reiterated circulations and abstractions, an odoriferous
Oil may be at length obtained. Nor will I insert the way of drawing Mercury out
of Lead, believing that a man may more profitably employ his time upon other
operations more necessary.

CHAP. LXII. Of the Preparation of Tin.
THough Tin be ranked in the third Classis of imperfect Metals, as well as
Lead, it is nevertheless more pure then the latter. For it is much whiter then
Lead; whence it is also called White-Lead. It is also more hard, and more
useful to make diverse sorts of Vessels, as also more pure, and has less dross
in it. And it has this particular to it, that it imparts nothing of ill to the
Waters or Liquors, provided they be not corrosive. Tin is thought to be
composed of impure Earth and Sulphur* some Metallic Salt, and a Mercury or
Quicksilver, much more pure and digested then that of Lead, but much inferior
to that of Gold or Silver. It is called by the name of Jupiter, out of a belief
that that Planet communicates his influences to it. And it is also thought that
the virtues of it are peculiar to the Liver and Matrix.

The great aptness which Tin has to melt in the fire, and to mix with other
Metals is the reason that being once melted with them, especially with the
Imperfect ones, it is a very difficult thing to separate them totally. And
therefore the best Method that can be observed to have it pure, is in the first
place to have it out of a good mine, then to melt it in some great Iron-Ladle,
and to burn over it some pieces of Tallow or wax, as over Lead; and to separate
the thick matter that swims above like Scum. This great aptness however which
Tin has to melt, hinders not but that the hardness and enterlacing of the
Branchy part of its substance, make it more difficult then lead, to be reduced
to a perfect Calx. And therefore it is not enough to melt it, and stir it over
the fire with a long Iron rod, till it has taken the form of a Lime; but you
must afterward reverberate that Lime in a proper Furnace, moistning it from
time to time with Vinegar distilled, if you would make it fit to be penetrated
and dissolved by the same Spirit for the preparation of Salt of Jupiter
afterward, with the same ease as you prepare that of Saturn, when it is
reduced into Lime. But this Salt so distilled being only composed of the Salt
of Vinegar distilled, and of the proper substance of the Tin, dissolved and
concealed in the same Salt; it is better to put it into a Glass Cucurbit, and
to pour upon it Spirit of Wine well rectified. After which having placed the
Cucurbit in a Sand-bath over a gentle fire, and having covered it with its
head, and fitted a small Recipient to it, with all the jointures well luted,
draw off this Spirit. Afterward pouring more Spirit upon the Salt, repeat
three times the same affusions and abstractions to make the Salt more fit to be
given inwardly from two or three to five or six grains, mixed with some
conserve in Hysteric diseases, especially in suffocations of the Matrix. For
which reason it may be also applied to the Navil, incorporating it with oil of
Rhue. It may also serve for the cure of Fistula's, and old Malignant and
Corroding Ulcers, applying it; mixed with proper Liniments. You may also, after
you have dissolved the Calx of Tin in Vinegar precipitate the Dissolution with
Salt of Urine dissolved in Water, and having well washed the Magistery, use it
for the same uses as the Salt, and mix it with Pomatums prepared to beautify
the face.

CHAP. LXIII. Of the Flowers of Tin, and the Preparations of the same Flowers.
THE length of time and trouble which is taken up in the Calcining of Tin by
the ways which I have set down, though the most plain and ordinary ways, have
enforced Artists to seek for methods more easy and more advantageous; wherein
some have spent their time with good success. Among other preparations which
they have invented; the sublimation of Tin in Flowers seems to me to be one of
the best. For though they have not undertaken to make the Tin ascend in Flowers
without any mixture, and though fault may be found with the addition of the
Salts which they make use of to accomplish their aims, the corrosion of which
is to be feared: the impossibility however to make Tin ascend in Flowers with
out their Assistance, and the facility of separating these Salts from the Tin
by reiterated Lotions, constrain us to approve the use thereof, provided that
having regard to the weight of the Tin* and how unapt it is to rise in Flowers,
you augment the quantity of the Salts proportionably, of which you are to make
use.

Thus instead of taking equal quantites of Tin and Salt Ammoniack as some would
do, take eight ounces of the first or second Calx of Tin* and four times the
weight of Salt-Ammoniack, and having beaten them to a very fine powder, and
mixed them well, set a good Aludel upon a proper Furnace covered with three or
four of its pots one upon another, and having well luted, the closures, and
covered the uppermost with a little head, kindle a little coal fire under the
Aludel, and increase it by degrees, till the Aludel be red hot in all the lower
part. At which time throw in at the hole about half an ounce of the powder,
closing the hole immediately, and by this means the Tin and the Salt Ammoniack
will rise together in vapors, which will condense in Flowers within side of
the Pots. Then throw in another like quantity of Powder stopping the hole, and
leaving the vapors to rise in Flowers, and incorporate, repeating the same
operation till all the powder be spent and keeping a good fire under the Aludal
to facilitate the sublimation of the Tin, which by this means will be all
sublimated. Whereas if you should put in only equal parts of Tin and
Sal-Ammoniack, the Tin would remain almost all at the bottom of the Aludel:
which is not to be wondered at, since it is impossible to make Metals ascend in
Flowers, without the assistance of three or four times as much the weight of
volatile Salts mixed with them, or at least without those several consequent
cohobations directed to be made use of.

The sublimation being ended, and the Vessels being cold and unluted, scrape
off the Flowers from the pots; and putting them into a great earthen pot full
of clean Water, leave the whole thus for four and twenty hours; at the end
whereof having poured out the Water by inclination, you shall find at the
bottom of the Vessel the Calx of Tin in form of a Magistery, and having well
sweetened it by a sufficient number of Lotions, and dried it in the shade, keep
it as it is, and give it alone or mixed with other remedies. Not but that you
may reduce it into Salt, by dissolving it in Vinegar distilled, and observing
the same method as for the preparation of Salt of Saturn.

You may also instead of Salt Ammoniack, mix with the Calx of Tin three times
the weight of Salt of Niter in powder, and fulminate and sublimate them both
together in an Aludel covered with its pots and a little head, projecting the
powder into the Aludel red-hot, observing the same method as for the preceding
flowers. Or to do better, pour upon them good Spirit of Wine* rectified, two
good fingers breadth above the substances, let it burn there, and reiterate the
same operation three or four times before you make use of the flowers.

CHAP. LXIV. Of the Distillation of Tin.
THE impossibility of distilling or making any liquor ascend from Tin, as well
as from other Metals when they are alone; and the earnest desire Artists have
had to open its substance, and make it fit to impart its virtues, have enforced
them to mix matters fit to penetrate, dissolve, and cause the substances to
distill. To this effect, having mixed the Calx or filings of Tin, with double
its weight of corrosive Mercury sublimate, put them together in a small glass
Cornute, environed with lute, and having placed it in a small Furnace of close
Reverberation, and slightly fitted a half Ball to the beak, begin your
distillation with an immediate soft fire, which continue till the liquor like
Butter cease to distill. At what time, having changed the Recipient, increase
the fire by degrees, and force it at length, till all the Mercury in the
sublimate be revived and dropped into the Recipient. Then pouring fair water
upon the white and thick water in the first Recipient, and having precipitated
by that means the substance of the Tin which the Corrosive Salts of the
sublimate had corroded and dissolved, leave the matter precipitated to settle,
till it be exactly dulcified. Then having dried it in the shade, keep it for
use, giving it from two or three to five or six grains, for the same
distempers, that the other preparations of Tin are prescribed for.

We should do ill to think that this precipitation proceeds from the Mercury
which is the principal ground of the sublimate Corrosive; since experience
tells us that all the Mercury that could be in the sublimate, descends into the
Recipient after the distillation of the Butter, if the fire be forced, and that
you may if you please reduce this precipitate into Tin, such as it was before
the Corrosive Salts of the sublimate had dissolved it.

You may filter and evaporate in part the first Lotion of this precipitate, to
have an acid Spirit, not much unlike to that which is drawn from the first
Lotion of the Butter of Antimony, which is called Philosophic Vitriol; or else
Crystallize this Lotion into Salt, by continuing to evaporate it to the film,
or spread it, leaving it to cool, and separating and drying the Crystals
afterward.

There is also a Butter or Glacial or Icy oil of Tin to be prepared, of which
there is a preparation to be made, called Bezoar of Jupiter, after this manner.

Melt in a Crucible three ounces of Regulus of Antimony, with two ounces of
pure Tin, then having poured this mixture into the Instrument called the Iron
horn, heated and greased within, beat it to fine powder, then having mingled
this powder with double it is weight of Corrosive sublimate, and put the whole
into a little Glass Retort daubed over with Lute, draw off as well the Butter
as the Mercury, as you did before; precipitate also the distilled Butter in the
same manner, and wash the precipitated matter also in the same manner. After
which you may if you please keep some part of the powder for your use, to purge
gently upwards and downwards in Hysteric Maladies, giving it from two to four
or five grains in some Conserve or Confection. But to have the Bezoar of
Jupiter, having weighed and put the Powder into a small Cucurbit of Glass, and
poured upon it three times the weight of good Spirit of Niter, place* it in a
Sand-bath over a moderate fire, causing the Spirit of Niter to evaporate
gently, till the Mass be altogether dry: then having powdered this Mass, and
dulcified it very well, with several Lotions, dry it and keep it in a double
glass bottle well stopped.

This Bezoar of Jupiter is one of the best preparations that can be made of
Tin. For besides that it is a specific remedy against all diseases of the
Matrix, it is also a Sudorifick and very proper in Malignant, and in Venereal
distempers, when you would force out the Malignity by sweat. It is given in
Bolus between Meals in some Conserve or Sweet-meat from five or six to twelve,
fifteen, or twenty grains.

I omit some other preparations of Steel which you may find in other books,
believing that I have showed you all that can extract from this Metal whatever
good virtues it has in Physic.

CHAP. LXV. Of the Preparation of Mercury.
Quicksilver is not ranked among the number of Metals. But it is called by the
name of a half Metal; because that being neither hard nor Malleable like the
true Metals, it mixes easily with all, and especially to Gold, to which it
serves as an Intermedium to join it with other Metals. It Is Silver color, and
its nature apt to run, have caused it to be called Quicksilver. As its color
and fluidness have given it the name of Hydrargyru^, or Watery Silver, or water
of Silver. It is called Mercury, by reason of the Analogy which it has to that
Planet, or to its aptness to change its figure, a property attributed by the
Heathens to Mercury one of their false Gods. For which reason and for the
diversity of colors which you may give it, it is also called Proteus. And some
for its fluidness and volatility have called it the Fugitive Servant.

Quicksilver then is a Mineral or Metallic Liquor, of a volatile nature,
found in Mines, and composed as some believe of a white Sulphury Earth, and its
own proper internal Mercury, which the Philosophers think to be one of its
Principles, and which lies concealed, as well as its Salt and Sulphur.
Quicksilver is found in the Mines of Germany, Spain, and the Indias; where it
sometimes flowers alone in its own proper Mine, or in those of other Metals;
but most frequently mixed among Earths, Stones, and incorporated with natural
Cinnabar, whence it is separated by means of the fire.

The weight of Quicksilver is not much different from that of Gold. But its
substance is so volatile, and so easy to be penetrated, and divided into such
small parts, that it is no wonder it so easily receives the impression of the
substances it meets withal; especially of Salts, Sulphurs, and Spirits, and
that it submits for the most part to their action* but always to that of the
fire. And though we cannot say, that Quicksilver is without its proper Alkali,
unless we deny its principles, this Alkali making but one part of its
composition, and being inseparable from its other parts, we should do ill to
take this half Metal for a pure Alkali, as being it self subject to the
operation of Alkali's, more then to that of Acids and Sulphurs; and for that
the strongest Acids work but very slowly upon it, and without any
effervescency, as we observe in its dissolution by Spirit of Vitriol; and that
its being so easily dissolved by Aqua Fortis and Spirit of Niter, proceeds from
this, that they are composed of a double Spirit, the one a volatile and
sulphury Saline, and the other Acid, of which the first is the principal
dissolvant. I say, we ought not to look upon Mercury as a pure Alkali, in
regard it has neither the same substance, savor, nor the other qualities of
Alkali's. Whence it comes to pass, that its pores being otherwise shaped then
those of Alkali's, it has not the aptness which they have to join to Alkali's,
whose substance dissolvable in water have equally both pores fitted to the
shape of Acid parts, and parts proper to join with those of the Acids.

I say moreover, that if Quicksilver were a true Alkali, it might resist the
action of the fire, as the fixed Alkali's do; or at least it might preserve it
self, being joined to Acids, and come to be fixed like volatile Salt of Vipers,
or any other volatile Salt, when being united with Spirit of Salt, or any other
very acid Spirit. Whereas all the Experiments made for many years prove the
contrary, and that no way could ever be found out to stop and fix Mercury by
the fire, neither alone nor mixed with Acids, nor with any other substance
whatever. But we are rather to say, that it is a mixed body, proper to endure
the working of Salts, more especially of those whose parts are sulphury saline,
then of those whose parts are purely acid, and that the same Salts being
capable to dissolve or divide its parts, they lose in that action both the
figure and disposition of their parts, not only for that their points are
blunted in dissolving the Mercury, but for that the dissolved parts of the
latter fill the spaces of the first and change their action, even to the
depriving them of all their penetration, when they have wholly filled up all
its pores. As you may observe in dulcified sublimate, which never fails of
being dulcified, when the fluid Quicksilver has fully filled up the pores of
the corrosive sublimate. And here you may see the difference of the nature of
Salts from that of Mercury. For by steeping the dulcified sublimate in water,
the Salts dissolving there, leave their natural acrimony in it, which was
concealed by the Mercury, and the same Salts will resume their figure and
qualities, if you evaporate the water; and the Mercury assume its former body,
if you make use of necessary means.

But the supposed name of Alkali, not changing the nature of Quicksilver, and
the various preparations which are made of it, deserving we should have some
knowledge of a mixed body upon which we spend our time, and a subject too that
has so long exercised the wits of the Curious, I think my self obliged to speak
my thoughts concerning it. Which are, that Quicksilver appearing to be actually
cold, and that in such a degree, that it is impossible to hold your hand, nor
so much as your finger in it long without running the danger of some Palsy or
other Mischeivous Accident; and being always acknowledged for a great Enemy to
the Nerves, and natural heat, the use of it is very much to be questioned; or
at least, that it is not to be prepared or made use of but with singular
Caution. For though it have been for many years used for the cure of the Pox
and its accidents, that does not render it exempt from the Malignity which is
natural to it; of which we too often see the ill Consequences, as well in those
who are lost by the use of Quicksilver, when it has been unadvisedly
administered, or in too great a quantity, as for the mischeivous impressions it
leaves behind, and that for the most part, in persons that are seemingly cured,
especially where the evil was inveterate. For though Quicksilver, especially
when taken inwardly seems to perform the function of an Alkali, in this, that
the Salt or acid juices in the stomach may fasten to it to dissolve it, it
follows not from thence that it is an Alkali. For if it were so indeed, and
that the venom of the Pox were acid, as some believe, the same acid would fix
it; whereas the dissolution which the juices make of it serve only to augment
its volatility, and to render it Corrosive; and that volatility carrying it to
the brain and adjacent parts, though it dissolve the phlegm by a property
peculiar to it, and open a passage for the Phlegm to evacuate at the mouth, and
to force out with it the venom of the disease, yet it does not produce those
effects without ulcerating the Salivary Vessels, and the parts adjoining;
whence follows corrosion and consumption of the proper substance where those
Ulcers happen; and that it leaves those marks behind it, which are never to be
defaced.

It were to be wished however, that the venom of the Pox were a pure acid; for
if it were so, we might seek to cure it by the use of it by fixed or volatile
Salt Alkali's; or in those of Pearls, Crab's-eyes, Corals, and many other such
like substances, able to mortify and dulcifie the acids, without injuring the
parts; and by consequence, we might lay aside Quicksilver, so dangerous in its
effects. But these sorts of remedies not being able to subdue the venom of the
Pox, in my opinion it can never be said to be a true acid, no more then of a
pure volatile or fixed Salt nature. But rather we must look upon it as a venom,
whose nature is otherwise very difficult to be understood, but by the sad
effects which it causes by mixing it self with all the humors, and infecting
chiefly the whole mass of the blood, and spreading it self over the whole habit
of the body. I think also that the great and different progresses, and the
fatal consequences which this venom produces, and those which we observe also
sometimes after the use of Mercury, require that the Physicians should make new
reflections upon it; that when they find this venom working different effects
upon the choleric, the phlegmatic, and the melancholy, and upon mixed
constitutions and habits of body, they may make choice of the time and manner,
to exhibit Mercury when it is necessary, and that they may make use of other
remedies when Mercury is unseasonable.

But though the use of Mercury be not always favorable to all sorts of
persons, yet the great relief that many may receive thereby, not only for the
cure of the Pox, but many other distempers, engages me to produce the principal
preparations that Chemistry can make of it.

CHAP. LXVI. Of the Purifying of Quicksilver, and of turning it into Cinnabar.
THey generally wash Quicksilver in Vinegar where common Salt has been
dissolved, or with some good Lie made with Quicklime and some Lixivial Salt,
putting the Quicksilver in a double glass Bottle well stopped, and shaking it
with the one or the other of these liquors, either to suck up, or separate one
part of its impurities; then having poured out those liquors by inclination,
and well dried the Quicksilver with some old clean cloth, strain it through a
piece of Chameise Skin, in which the courses^ dress of the Quicksilver will
stop. But though these ways may be very well made use of, you may also put it
into a Retort, and having placed it in a Sand-bath, draw forth the Mercury
pure, forcing it with a gradual fire, and stop the foulnesses in the Retort.
But the better way is by mixing it with Salt Tartar, and Quicklime powdered,
and distilling it also through a Cornute; for the impurities of the Quicksilver
will remain with the Lime and Salt Tartar. They who may have any occasion to
make any Amalgama of Gold or Silver, may by putting the Amalgama into a Cornute
in a Sand-bath, and forcing it with a gradual fire, cause the Mercury to come
forth free from all its filth, which it will leave in the Retort. But
Quicksilver quickened with Cinnabar, being the most sought for, though vulgar
Cinnabar is easy to be had, I will not suppress the preparation, no more then
that of its rectification into flowing Mercury.

Put half a pound of powder of Sulphur in a large earthen Pot glazed within,
fit to resist the fire; and having set it upon lighted Coals, and put a pound
and a half of flowing Mercury into a piece of Shamoys Leather, and tied it with
a hard knot, when the Brimstone is well melted, drop the Quicksilver upon it,
press the knot between your hands, so that the Quicksilver may pass through the
pores of the Leather, stirring the substances in the mean time with a wooden
Spatula, and continuing this pressing forth and stirring the Mercury till it be
all squeezed through the Leather, and that it be so united with the Sulphur,
that appearing no more, they seem both reduced into a black mass. Let this mass
cool, and having beaten it to powder, and put it into an Earthen pot proper for
sublimations* join to the mouth of that pot another of the same bigness, with
the bottom uppermost, having a little hole in the middle of the bottom; then
lute the closures, and stop the hole with a little piece of paper, and begin
your sublimation with a gradual fire, soft at the beginning, and at length
increased and continued for some hours, and quite stopping up the little hole,
by which means the Mercury being incorporated with that portion of Sulphur
which is requisite for it, will sublime to the upper part of the upper pot,
leaving some faeces in the lower. Then when the Vessels are cold, you shall
find the Mercury sublimated into Cinnabar of a very red color, enterlac'd with
long brown glittering Veins, like in shape to those of Antimony. But this
color will appear much more red and lively when it is broken to pieces and
ground; and therefore it is that the Painters make use of it.

This Cinnabar is never exhibited inwardly, but sometimes the fume of it is
used to provoke salivation in those that are pox'd, if they be strong and
lusty. It is also mixed in Ointments to cure dry Scabs, and such infirmities of
the Skin. This is called artificial Cinnabar, to distinguish it from natural,
which is found in several parts of Germany and France, sublimated naturally in
the Entrails of the Earth by some subterraneal fire, which uniting the
particles of Mercury with those of Sulphur, which are to be found in the same
place, causes them to take the form of Cinnabar; which usually nevertheless is
full of filth, which consists chiefly in Earth and little Stones that are
generally mixed with it.

You may break the union which the Sulphur has made with the Quicksilver, and
restore the latter to its natural body and fluidness in this manner: Powder the
Cinnabar very finely in a Marble Mortar, and having mixed it with as much in
weight of the filings of Iron, put this mixture into a small glass Retort luted
about, and having set it upon a Culot about two fingers high in the midst of a
proportionable Furnace, built in a dry-place of Bricks, so ordered as to make a
Circle never so little higher then the Retort, put little black Coals round
about the Culot, and upon them in three or four places, some few fire red Coals
to kindle the rest by degrees, then having filled the whole largeness of the
Furnace with ordinary Coal* and having covered the Retort, and fitted a small
Recipient to its neck half full of water, leave the Coals to kindle of
themselves, and the fire to act at liberty. For by this means the acid of
Sulphur sticking to the Mars, with the pores whereof the figure of its parts do
better agree then with those of the Mercury, and quitting the latter, the fire
forces it out of the Retort, and to take its former body, falling into the
water. By this means all extrinsecal substances mixed with the Cinnabar, being
stopped in the Cornute with the filings of Iron, after you have poured the
water out of the Recipient by inclination, you shall find at the bottom the
Quicksilver very pure, and fit for all sorts of uses and preparations.

CHAP. LXVII. Of Red Precipitates of Mercury.
SOme there are who very unadvisedly give the name of Precipitates to certain
Calxes (...) Mercury, which are frequently in use. Whereas the name of
Precipitate is proper only to certain substances that have been dissolved in
some corrosive liquor, and which have been afterward compelled to quit their
dissolvant, and precipitate to the bottom of the Vessel. But custom prevailing
above reason, I must follow those who have writ before me, and briefly set down
the best of their preparations*

Schroder, and some others, produce a preparation of red precipitate made with
Mercury alone, which being better to administer inwardly then those which are
usually prepared by dissolving the Quicksilver in corrosive Spirits, deserves
to be first mentioned. You must provide an In^ernus, or Hell, which is a Vessel
of good double glass, the neck whereof must be long and very much like a
Funnel, the end whereof must be large and very broad. Put into this Vessel four
ounces of Mercury revived from Cinnabar, set it in Lamp-Furnace in a Sand-bath
very equally in its poise, so that the Mercury may cover the bottom of the
Vessel all alike. Then having filled with Oil, and lighted three Cotton weiks
of a moderate bigness, and set the Lamps under the Bath, so order it that the
Matches may burn without discontinuance, and that the Oil may not fail in the
Lamp for fifteen days; at the end whereof having made every weik a third part
bigger, burn them under the Bath all the rest of the month; then having made
every weik bigger by one half, burn them under the Bath for another Month, or
till the Quicksilver be changed into a red and shining powder. It Is sufficient
all the while to cover the top of the Vessel with a single paper, and to take
care that the Oil be not wanting in the Lamp, and that all the weiks burning
equally and without discontinuance, may cast their flame at an equal distance
to the middle of the Bath. For by this means the parts of the Quicksilver,
having been so long agitated and intermingled by the continual working of the
fire, loose at length their natural fluidness, and tire themselves in such
sort, that they become a red and shining powder. This operation requires great
care and patience; but the trouble is not great, if you have a Vessel and a
Furnace proper, and that the Vessel that contains the Quicksilver be set in an
equal poise. You may wash this powder with Cordial-waters; or pour upon it
Spirit of Wine, and having digested them for some time together draw off the
Spirit, and keep the powder for your use.

This powder is diaphoretick, and apt to provoke great sweats, but it often
causes vomiting withal. This is one of the best preparations of Mercury for
the extirpation of Venereal distempers, and to carry off Agues. It is a
specific against the worms. The dose is from two or three to seven or eight
grains in some Conserve or Sweat-meat. You may before you begin this
preparation, add to the Mercury an eighth part of its weight of Gold purified
by Antimony, and having made an Amalgama of it, and put the Amalgama into the
Vessel, proceed in all things as before directed; and the remedy will be so
much the better. You may also add to the Mercury a quarter of its weight in
pure refined Silver, and make an Amalgama of it. Or else Amalgamate together
half an ounce of Gold, and an ounce of Silver, and four ounces of Quicksilver,
and fix them together as I have directed.

There is a precipitate of Mercury called Coralline, or the Coralline Secret,
by reason of its Coralline color, after this manner. Put into a Matras four
ounces of Quicksilver revived from Cinnabar, and having poured upon it as much
as it weighs of good Spirit of Niter, and placed the Matras in a Sand-bath
moderately hot, after the Mercury is well dissolved, slope the neck of the
Matras a little, and increasing the fire under the Bath, evaporate the Spirit
of Niter till the substance be quite dry. After which, pour as much Spirit of
Niter upon the dry substance as before, and when it is dissolved slope the neck
of the Matras and evaporate the Niter as before, repeating yet twice more the
addition and evaporation of the Spirit of Niter, and forcing the fire after the
last evaporation, till the Precipitate look perfectly red. Then break the
Matras, and powder the precipitate in a Marble Mortar, and moistening it with
good Spirit of Wine, never so little above the substance, let it burn,
repeating six times the same addition and consumption of the Spirit of Wine
upon the precipitate. Then having powdered it once more, keep it for your use.

This Corralline precipitate is highly esteemed for the cure of all Venereal
distempers, Dropsies, Rheumatisms, and intermitting Agues. It purges
universally bad humors, chiefly Phlegm, which it dissolves, and carries off by
the most commodious ways. It is given in some Conserve or Confection, from three
or four to eight or ten grains. It is outwardly applied for the cure of old
Ulc^^s, above all Venereal; as also to take away all sorts of Scabs, mixed in
Pomatums.

As to the vulgar red precipitate, you cannot miss of it, proceeding as
follows. Put into a glass Retort what quantity of flowing Mercury you please,
and having poured upon it as much good Aquafortis, or as much good Spirit of
Niter as is necessary to dissolve it, set the Retort in a Sand-bath moderately
hot; and when the Dissolution is made, bury the Retort in the Sand all over,
and having fitted a half Ball to the beak, increase the fire by degrees and
continue it, till the Aquafortis be almost all drawn off. Then letting the
Bath cool, cohobate the Aquafortis upon the Mercury that remains in the
Cornute, and draw off the Aquafortis as before, repeating three times the same
Gohobations and Abstraction of the Aquafortis, forcing the fire at last more
then ordinary, to augment the color of the Precipitate which will be of a much
fairer red, then that which many calcine at the end in a Crucible, where there
is not the weight neither of the Mercury made use of, besides that you are
exposed to the mischievous vapors of the Aquafortis during its working upon
the precipitate. The operation being ended and the Sandbath cold, you shall
find the precipitate at the bottom of the Cornute in a red shining Mass, which
you may powder, and keep so in a strong double glass bottle, or else burn over
it good Spirit of Wine, if you intend to give it inwardly. Though it is not to
be given at all but to men of strong Constitutions, and not above seven or
eight grains at the most at a time. The principal use of it being for outward
applications, as well in Pomatums and other remedies prepared to cure the
deformities of the Skin, and mixed in Ointments to consume proud-flesh and
other superfluities of Malignant and Venereal Ulcers. It is the usual remedy
that Chirurgions apply to Cankers and Warts upon the secret parts.

If you intend this preparation inwardly, you must not make use of Aquafortis
in the dissolution of the Mercury, but Spirit of Niter, or Aquafortis composed
and made only of Niter and Alum.

CHAP. LXVIII. Of. Yellow and Rose-colour Precipitates of Mercury.
PUT into a glass Cornute three or four ounces, or what quantity you please, of
Quicksilver well purified, and pour upon it four times as much the weight of
Spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur well rectified; place the Cornute with the neck
upright in a Sand-bath over a moderate fire, and leave it there till the Spirit
have quite dissolved the Mercury, then sloping the neck of the Cornute upon one
side, the body being all over buried in Sand, fit a half ball to the neck, and
draw off the moisture with a gradual fire, increased toward the end, and
continued till the Mercury remain at the bottom in a white Mass. And you most
observe that the first water which comes away will be almost insipid, and that
the acid Spirits will not appear till toward the end, because the Mercury still
retains no good part of the Spirits which have dissolved it. The Vessels being
cold, having finely powdered the Mass in a Marble Mortar* pour upon it a good
quantity of hot water, till the Mortar be almost full, and you shall see at the
same time the white powder changed into yellow. Then let the powder settle, and
pouring out the water that swims above it by inclination, fill up the Mortar
with as much warm water as before, and wash the powder with several such
shiftings of water, till it be exactly sweetened. Then dry it and keep it for
your use.

This powder is called yellow precipitate because of its color. It is called
Mineral Turbith, because it is drawn out of a Mine, and disturbs the natural
Economy of the body, violently purging bad humors upward and downward. For
which reason it is not very frequently used, especially in France, nor given
but to very strong Constitutions in Venereal distempers, and to them no more
then from three or four to five or six grains at a time in Bolus in some
Conserve or some other proper medicine. However the force of this powder may be
abated by burning over it Spirit of Wine rectified, for five or six times.

Rose color Precipitate of Mercury is thus prepared; put four ounces of
Mercury well prepared into a Glass Cucurbit somewhat large, and having placed
it in a Sandbath moderately hot, pour upon it double its weight of Spirit of
Niter, and when the Niter is dissolved, take off the Cucurbit from the Bath,
and pour by little and little the not urine of a healthy man, till ebullition
cease; by this means the Mercury dissolved, will precipitate to the bottom, of
a Carnation color, through the Union which the Spirit of Niter has contracted
with the Salt of Urine, and the impression which their conjoining has made upon
the Mercury. Let the Precipitate settle, and having poured out the Liquor that
swims at the top by Inclination, wash the precipitate several times in fair
water, till all the Acrimony of the Dissolvant and Precipitant be carried off,
and that the Precipitate be exactly dulcified.

The closing of the Urine with the Spirit of Niter renders the effects of this
Precipitate much more gentle then that of Mineral Turbith, whose effects depend
chiefly upon the last Spirits of Vitriol, which have dissolved it, and are as
it were concentered with it. Therefore this Precipitate only purges downward,
and you may give from five or six to nine or ten grains. As for the diversity
of color I impute it to the various action of the acid or Saline Salts, to
their various mixture with the Mercury, and the different operations of the
fire, or the Liquors, I omit Tanned colored Precipitate of Mercury, which is
done by dissolving it with Aquafortis, or Spirit of Tartar, and precipitating
it with Liquor of Tartar. I omit precipitates with a mixture of Copper after
the Mercury is dissolved, and several others, proceeding next to the white
Precipitates.

CHAP. LXIX. Of white Precipitates of Mercury.
PUT eight ounces of Quicksilver revived from Cinnabar into a glass Cucurbit of
a moderate bigness, and pour upon them twelve ounces of Aquafortis drawn from
Niter and Alum without any Vitriol, and give them time to dissolve the Mercury
cold, dissolving apart eight ounces of Bay Salt in three or four times as much
the weight of River water, and filtring the dissolution through course paper,
getting ready at the same time a good quantity of River water strained through
a fine Linen cloth. Then having poured the Salt water into a large Earthen
pan, and about two pints of River water upon the dissolution of the Mercury,
pour this mixture all at a time upon the Salt water; and by this means the
greatest part of the Mercury will coagulate into a substance very white, which
will begin to precipitate to the bottom. You may let the precipitate settle for
some time, pour forth by Inclination, and keep in an earthen pot, the liquor
which swims at the top, especially if you will save the Mercury which will
remain in insensible parts in the Liquor. But if you will not give your self
that trouble, preferring the whiteness of the precipitate to the quantity,
having poured out the dissolution of Mercury upon the Salt water, fill the
Earthen pot with River water strained through a linen cloth; then leaving the
Precipitate to settle, and pouring out by Inclination the liquor that swims at
the top, fill the Earthen pot containing the precipitate with the filtered
water which you must wash over and over again with several filtered waters,
till it be perfectly dulcified. After which dry the precipitate, and keep it
for your use.

It was not without reason, that I said you might reserve in an Earthen pot
the first Liquor that swims above the precipitate, because you may by pouring
upon it Liquor of Tartar separate the portion of Mercury which the Bay Salt
could not precipitate. For it is not as some suppose the more excessive bigness
of parts, nor the Cubick figure of Bay Salt, not the weight of the fall upon
the dissolution made by the Niter that can shake or break the points of the
Spirit of Niter when it has dissolved the Mercury; but it must be attributed to
the Union of the acid part of the Spirit of Niter made at that time with the
fixed Salt part of the Bay Salt: or else we may impute it to the figure and
aptness which the Salts dissolved in water have to join mutually one with the
other, and to expel by that means all foreign substances, which being mixed
among them may prevent their Union, insomuch that being variously figured, they
intermix and pester one another in such manner that from thence arises a
Composition, the parts whereof are otherwise figured, as you may observe in
Aqua-Regalis, by the conjunction of the Salts Ammoniack, Bay Salt, or
Sal-Gemmae, with Spirit of Niter, Otherwise if the more excessiive bigness of
the Points of the Salt Marine, their shog or shaking carried the precipitation
of substances dissolved in Spirit of Niter, we should then find the first with
their thick points, separated from those of the Spirit of Niter. Whereas by
evaporating and crystallizing the liquor, we find their points reciprocally
mixed one with another, making a new body together. For though the parts of all
the Salts dried, seem of a different thickness and shape, the same parts
nevertheless dissolved in water, are thicker or smaller according as there is
more or less liquor; since we find by experience, that Niter crystalliz'd in a
greater quantity will yield Crystals much more slender, then that which shall
be dissolved in a less quantity of water. Moreover the water wherein the Salts
are dissolved, making a great division of their parts, and diminishing the
bigness and thickness of their points, renders them more fit to thrust
themselves one into another, which they could not do when the Salts were dry
and reduced into great Crystals. It Is also known, that it is chiefly the water
which gives the Salts the liberty of motion and action, and that so making them
as well more easily capable to penetrate other bodies, it may enable them to
penetrate themselves, and to unite mutually one with the other.

But though the union of the parts of the Salt Marine with those of the Spirit
of Niter, were of force enough to push forth of the pores of the latter a good
part of the Mercury dissolved, the Salt Marine not abounding in quantity
sufficient, and not containing fixed Salt enough, to fill up all the pores of
the acid part of Spirit of Niter, it happens, that if you pour liquor of Tartar
upon the liquor which you have reserved, and upon what the Salt Marine could
not precipitate, the Salt of Tartar filling up the pores of the Acid of the
Spirit of Niter, and its own pores filling themselves reciprocally with the
Acid, the Mercury that lay concealed, is constrained to make way, and to
precipitate to the bottom; which would never come to pass, if the thickness and
bigness of the points of the Sea Salt, their weight or violent pushing against
those of the Spirit of Niter had been the true cause of the precipitation of
the Mercury. Considering that it happens also, that the Salt of Tartar, not
being able to meet with certain acid particles that retained some remainder of
the Mercury in dissolution, if you pour upon them Salt of Urine dissolved,
these last acid particles will unite themselves and quit the remainder of the
Mercury. Whence will follow a new precipitation, though less then the first,
because of the lesser quantity of Mercury that remained.

You may by putting white Precipitate dry into a Matras in a Sand-bath, cause
it to sublimate with a gradual fire, observing the same method as for ordinary
sublimates, and have a very gentle sublimate, very serviceable in the cure of
Venereal distempers, giving it in Bolus from ten or twelve to twenty or thirty
grains, mixed with some Conserve, or other purgative remedy.

You may also give white Precipitate without subliming it, but it must be then
to persons of a strong constitution, and only from three or four to seven or
eight grains, because that notwithstanding all the Lotions, some particles of
the Salts lie still concealed in its pores, that cause it to purge upward and
downward. But this Precipitate is more frequently used externally for the cure
of Scurfs, Tetters, and other deformities of the Skin, being mixed and applied
with proper Liniments. It is also used in Pomatums to beautify the face; but
though it manifestly whitens the complexion, the Quicksilver being an enemy to
the Nerves, and natural heat, the frequent use of it may at length prove very
dangerous.

But because of the ill qualities that Aqua Fortis bequeaths to Mercury after
it has dissolved it, and the change of color which may thereupon happen to it*
of which we see the effects when we pour upon it liquor of Tartar, you may
prepare a white Precipitate without Aqua Fortis, according to Schroders method.

Powder very finely eight ounces of Salt Ammoniack, and having put it into a
glass Cucurbit, set it in a Sand-bath moderately hot, and having poured upon it
three or four times as much the weight of River-water, when the Salt is
dissolved, filter the dissolution through a course paper; and returning it into
the Cucurbit made very clean, dissolve without any heat in the filtered liquor
eight ounces of corrosive sublimate. After which, pour upon the dissolution
drop by drop, four ounces of liquor of Tartar, which uniting it self with the
acid part of the Salts, which ascended with the Mercury in sublimation, and
kept it still in dissolution, will force it to give way, and cause it to
precipitate by degrees in a white substance. Nevertheless you must at the same
time pour upon the precipitation a good quantity of fair water, strained
through a Linen Cloth, as well to weaken the dissolvants, as to moisten the
Salts. Then let the precipitate* settle, and having poured into another Vessel
the liquor that swims at the top, wash it with several fair waters, till it be
perfectly dulcified; then dry it in the shade between two papers, and keep it
for your use.

This Precipitate purges upward and downward, like the former; but whereas you
may not give above seven or eight grains of the former, you may give to twelve
of this, because that the ill qualities of the acid Salts of the sublimate
being weakened by the action of the Salt Ammoniack and Tartar, it is not so
deeply fixed as that of the Aqua Fortis in the former, where that water is only
tempered by the Bay Salt. Whereby you may observe, that the cohobation of the
liquor of Tartar upon the Mercury sublimated, dissolved in the liquor of Salt
Ammoniack, does not work the same effect as upon the dissolution of Mercury
made with Aqua Fortis; in regard that whereas the Precipitate of sublimate is
perfectly white, that of Mercury dissolved by Aqua Fortis becomes almost red,
by the mixture of the liquor of Tartar. Which I think is to be imputed to the
sulphury part of the Spirit of Niter, the secret red color whereof manifests
it self in the distillation of Aqua Fortis, and by its union with the secret
ferment of the Salt of Tartar; since that red color never happens to the
Precipitate dissolved by Aqua Fortis, unless you mix with it the liquor of Salt
Marine, no more then to the dissolution of sublimate corrosive, unless you mix
with it the liquor of Tartar; because there is not any substance
Nitrosulphurous either in the one or the other which can give this color,
acting reciprocally with the Salt of Tartar.

It is good to give this Precipitate in purgatives, among the rest in Confectio
Hamech, as well for the cure of Venereal distempers, as of the Kings Evil, the
Scurf, the Leprosy, and all deformities of the Skin, for which purposes this
Precipitate is very serviceable, mixed with Liniments or Pomatums, and applied
externally; also its Lotions, which you shall do well to keep for the same
uses, under the name of the Polonian Water.

CHAP. LXX. Of Corrosive Sublimate.
THE slender union and mobility of the parts of Quicksilver rendering its
substance very easy to be divided and penetrated by the action of the
corrosive Salts, the most acid and subtle parts of the same Salts thrusting
themselves into the pores, and beginning to form a kind of union with it, never
quits it, unless you mingle some other substance with it, which being more apt
to unite with the same acids, and their pores better fitted to their points, be
more able to stop them then Mercury is. Whence it afterward comes to pass,
that exposing the Mercury, naturally volatile, to the fire, it would evaporate
into the air with the same acid, if it found not some Vessel fit to retain it;
and that also being in a Matras, and forced by a gradual fire, it gives way to
the activity of the fire ascending by degrees to the top of the Vessel, and
that raising with it some acid part of the Salts, with which it was mixed,
forms with them a white body filled with shining and crystalline veins,
separated and keeping above the grosser parts of the Salts when the operation
is over, and all is cold.

Some direct this way, That having put a pound of Mercury well purified into a
Retort, and having poured upon it as much in weight of Aqua Fortis, or Spirit
of Niter, and placed the Retort in a Sand-bath moderately hot, when the Mercury
is dissolved, to augment the fire, and to observe the rules of abstraction of
the dissolvant, till the Mercury remains in mass at the bottom with the most
fixed parts of those liquors. After this, that having beaten to very fine
powder a pound of Vitriol calcined to whiteness, and as much Salt decrepitated,
to mingle them together with the mass of Mercury powdered also, and having put
the whole into a Matras to make a sublimation thereof, whereby you shall find
at length above all the grosser parts of the Salts, the Mercury united with
their acid part, sticking in a solid white crystalline form to the top of the
Vessel. But though this preparation may be convenient for those that will not
be troubled with the dust that arises from the Salts, when they mix them simply
with the raw Mercury; and that it may do well enough when the sublimate is only
intended for external uses; yet the sharp and particularly the Salt Sulphury
parts of the Niter equally residing both in the Spirit and in the Aquafortis,
being shrewdly to be suspected when you prepare this sublimate with a design to
dulcify it, for internal uses, it will be much better not to make use of these
Sprits at all. For though Experience teaches us that in the abstraction of
these Dissolvants, we draw off so great a quantity of Corrosive Spirit, as is
sufficient to dissolve anew almost as much Mercury as before, notwithstanding
the watery part which is mingled therewith; yet the Mass is impregnated with the
most corrosive parts of the Spirits, which had dissolved the Mercury, and the
same Spirits accompany it in sublimation. But that you may have a Corrosive
sublimate proper to make a Dulcified sublimate, and fit to be used inwardly.

Calcine a requisite quantity of German Vitriol to whiteness, and decrepitate
as much Salt of Mars, and having reduced them apart to a very fine powder,
weigh out a pound of each, and as much Mercury revived from Cinnabar, and beat
them together in a Marble Mortar with a wooden Pestle, sprinkling them from
time to time with never so little Spirit of Vinegar, only to allay the dust;
and beat them till the Mercury be so well mingled with the Salts, that it be
hardly to be seen, but seem to make one body with the red. After which having
put this mixture into a Mattress, of which two thirds must remain empty, set it
in a Sand-bath in a Capsula proportionable, placed in a proper Furnace: where
by a fire very slight at the beginning, then augmented by degrees, and forced
at the end, cause the Mercury to ascend with the acid part of the Salts to the
top of the Mattress in a white and Crystalline substance. Whence you must take
it forth when the sublimation is ended, and the Vessels are cold, breaking the
Mattress; and the bottom whereof you shall find the thicker part of the Salts
that could not ascend. After that, having beat the sublimate in a Marble
Mortar, with as much Vitriol calcined white, and decrepitated Salt powdered, as
before, put the whole into a new Mattress of the same bigness with the former,
and repeat the same Sublimation again. Do this a third time, and then you shall
have a Salt very corrosive; but such a one whose corrosion proceeding only from
the acid part of Vitriol and Salt of Mars will be easily subdued, upon using
the necessary means for Dulcification.

The acid parts of the Salts which are united with those of the Mercury render
this sublimate so corrosive, that it will not only corrode the internal and
external parts of Animals, but of all sorts of substances, even Metals
themselves. But this sublimate, like all other Salts, its unable to act, being
dry, and that is activity is greater or lesser according to the quantity of
moisture which it meets with. And therefore it would do great spoil in the
stomach, because it would there meet with moisture sufficient to set it at
work. And therefore besides the use of it in Phagedenick water, the most common
is that for the preparation of Dulcified Sublimate.

CHAP. LXXI. Of Dulcified Sublimate, or Mercurius Dulcis.
BEat in a Marble Mortar with a wooden Pestle a pound of Corrosive sublimate
prepared as I have shown, and having added to it three quarters of its weight
of Quicksilver revived from Cinnabar, and beat them so long together that the
Quicksilver be not at all to be seen, but that both together look like a gray
Uniform powder. Then put this powder into a Mattress, or into a very thin round
glass bottle, of which two thirds must be empty. Place the Vessel in a
Sand-bath and proceed to Sublimation with a Gradual fire, observing the same
method in all things as for the sublimate before. The whole being cold; after
you have broken the Vessel in two in the middle, separated and thrown away the
red powder that remains at the bottom, and reserved the white powder that
sticks to the neck of the Vessel, taste it, and if you perceive any Acrimony,
beat it again in the same Mortar, adding and beating together with it an ounce
of flowing Mercury, or as much sublimate as will drink it up. Then put this
powder into a new Mattress, make another sublimation and separate the pouders
above and below as at first. After which, having repouder'd the sublimate in
the same Mortar, and put the powder into a new Mattress, make a new sublimation.
And by that time the sublimate will be very sightly, and sufficiently
sweetened. But if you would make it yet more beautiful, put into a new Mattress
in the same bath, and reiterate Sublimation, separating the pouders afterward
both at the bottom and top of the Mattress; and keep the Sublimate for your
occasions.

The repeated Sublimations of this preparation may well dissipate some part of
the acids contained in the Sublimate Corrosive: but the remaining parts being
too superaboundant, and too much fixed in the Corrosive sublimate, to be wholly
carried off by Sublimations; it is no wonder that the flowing Quicksilver,
added to the Corrosive Sublimate, was capable to mortify the acids, and change
their Corrosive Quality into Dulcified. And yet it is no great Marvel,
considering that whereas the whole substance of the Mercury was filled with
acids, to make a Corrosive Sublimate, here all the Pores of the acids are
filled with Mercury, so that their points being closed up, they are then
incapable to act and penetrate. Seeing that Experience teaches us, that the
Dulcifying of Corrosive Sublimate is never perfect, if you have missed the
mixing of as much flowing Mercury as was necessary to fill the pores, and close
up the points of the Acids, which rendered it corrosive; and that Mercury is
the only substance than dulcify it, by subliming with it. We must not think
that these points penned up, are thereby destroyed; since they may be separated
at any time by reviving the Quicksilver from either the one or the other
sublimate, by the means of Salt of Tartar, Quicklime, or any other Substance
of the like nature; which filling the pores of the acid and being by them
reciprocally filled, and uniting themselves with it, will restore the
Quicksilver its former liberty and form.

Dulcified Sublimate is often used in the cure of Venereal distempers. But it
is very prevalent also in Dropsies, and in obstinate obstructions of the Liver,
Spleen and Matrix; but more especially to kill worms, giving it in Bolus mixed
with purgatives, that it may attend their operation; chiefly if you fear it
should raise a Salivation. The dose is from half a Scruple to half a dram, and
some to two Scruples, where the Patient is of a strong constitution, and more
powerful effects are expected.

I said before that you might prepare a Dulcified sublimate of white
Precipitate without addition. The same thing may be done with yellow
Precipitate of Mercury, by sublimating it alone after you have well washed it:
by which means you shall have a sweet Sublimate that will only purge downwards,
of which you may give from three or four to seven or eight grains. But you may
do yet better, if after you have beaten in a Marble or Glass Mortar four ounces
of yellow precipitate Mercury, well washed, and dried, and incorporated with
it, as much flowing Mercury as will suck it up, you sublimate the powder after
the ordinary manner; and then powder the Sublimate again and re-sublime it two
or three times without any addition. For by this* means you shall compass a
Sublimate very well Dulcified, which will only only purge downwards, of which
you may give to ten or twelve grains in all distempers, where the ordinary
Dulcified Sublimate is used.

CHAP. LXXII. Of Mercurial Liquors.
SOme have given the name of Oil to certain Liquors extracted out of Mercury,
or from substances mixed therewith. But the names not changing the qualities of
things, I will not stand to decide the question, but give you those
preparations which I think most fit to be inserted. The Polonish water, and the
Phagenick water, may pass for Mercurial Liquors. But there are Mercurial
Liquors more concentered and more powerful of several sorts. As for example,

Grind very finely upon Porphyry equal parts of Sublimate Dulcified, and
Sal-Ammoniack; then having spread the powder in a very fine Dripping-Pan, and
set it a little sloping in a Cellar, or in some moist place, and placed a
proper Recipient under the place where the dripping is poured out, leave it so
till all the Salts are dissolved and changed into a red Liquor, which you shall
find in the Recipient mixed with the Mercury revived, which you must separate
for the same uses as before. This Liquor is for external uses to consume proud
flesh, and the superfluity of Wounds and Ulcers, particularly Venereal; and
though the substance of the Mercury seem to be almost all revived, the Liquor
however has retained particles enough to deserve the name of Mercurial.

Agricola, Hartman, and other Authors after them, have described a Mercurial
Liquor of Jupiter, which I thought fit to insert. Melt in a Crucible a pound of
English Tin, and having heated a pound of Mercury revived from Cinnabar, pour
it upon the Tin, and make an Amalgama, which you must wash with hot Salt Water
till the Amalgama be as white as Snow. After which having well wiped it and
beaten, it in a Marble or glass Mortar, with two pound of Sublimate Corrosive,
spread the mixture placed with a Recipient as before; where you shall find the
Salts dissolved into Liquor, among which will be the Liquor, which will be
revived, by the Salts leaving it, and dissolving into Liquor. Then having set
the Mercury apart for use, put the Liquor into a Glass Cucurbit in Balneo
Mariae, and gently evaporate the superfluous moisture; and after a Maceration
of fifteen days in the same Bath over a moderate fire, having poured this
Liquor into a small glass Retort, environed with Sand in a Capsula of Earth
placed in a proper Furnace, fit a Recipient to the beak, and begin your
distillation with a Gradual fire, but increased at the end, and you will obtain
a Liquor, being in some sort like Oil which is very much esteemed for the cure
of Cankers, Wolfes, Fistula's, and all sorts of Malignant and corrroding Ulcers.

The same Agricola describes another Mercurial Liquor, for the preparation of
which he prescribes the beating of equal parts of Dulcified Sublimate, and Salt
of Saturn, and then to put them both together into a glass Cornute, placed it
in a Sandbath with a Recipient fitted and luted to the Neck; by which means you
shall draw forth a white sweet liquor, free from any Acrimony. Then he farther
prescribes to let the Vessels cool; and to powder and put the settlement into a
new Cornute of Glass, and having poured upon it the distilled Liquor, after a
soft digestion of seven or eight hours, to reiterate the Distillation in the
same Bath by which means you shall have a yellow Oil, fit both for inward and
outward uses, for the cure of all sorts of Ulcers, especially Venerial.

The same Author prescribes moreover to mix equal parts of Dulcified Sublimate,
and Sugar Candy powdered, and to put them into a glass Cornute, placed in a
Sandbath, and with a gradual fire to extract an excellent Liquor for the cure
of all sorts of External and Internal Ulcers.

I cold here insert several other Extracts, Sulphurs, Salts, and other
preparations of Mercurity, were they not more for Ostentation then profit.

CHAP. LXXIII. Of Antimony in general.
ANtimony is a Mineral body, which approaches very near to the nature of
Metals, and is generally found in the Mines of the one or the other. It passes
for a kind of Marcasite, being called by some Marcasite of Lead. It is thought
to be composed of a double Mineral Sulphur, the one Metallic, and very near in
pureness, and something of the color of that of Gold; the other terrestrial
combustible, and almost like our common Brimstone; of a Metallic Fuliginous
Mercury, ill digested, but better baked then ordinary Mercury, and
participating of the nature of Lead. Some have thought, that Antimony contained
in it the principles of all Metals, because it is found indifferently near to
all their Mines. It is called the Philosophers Wolf, or Saturn, because that
being exposed to the fire with Metals, it devours or causes them to consume,
all except Gold. It is also called Proteus, because of the diversity of colors
which Artists give it by exposing it to the fire.

Some have thought, that because Antimony frees Gold from all its dross and
foreign substances, it may do the same thing in man, by the means of several
Chemical preparations, and that it is able to empty the body of all ill humors
by all the issues provided by nature, as if it enclosed that Universal Medicine
to which so many Philosophers and Physicians have aspired. But though they
cannot boast of having found in any one remedy drawn from Antimony the cure of
all diseases, yet we may assure our selves that among the various preparations
made of this Mineral yet we may say, that there have been extracted from this
one Mineral substance more different remedies toward the cure of diseases then
from any other Mineral body.

Raw Antimony in powder is made serviceable for Venereal distempers, being tied
up in a knot and boiled in decoctions for that purpose; as also in Collyriums,
for infirmities of the eyes, and in external remedies to cleanse dry and
cicatrice Wounds and Ulcers.

CHAP. LXXIV. Of Glass of Antimony.
TO make Glass of Antimony of a Jacynth color, choose out very pure Antimony,
whose spires are long and glistering; and having powdered them very finely, and
put the powder into an earthen Capsula, or earthen Pot unvarnish'd, yet broad,
flat, and fit to resist the fire; put the Vessel upon a proper Furnace, and
kindle a moderate fire in the Hearths-place, which you must so govern, that
having heated the Capsula by degrees, it may be afterward strong enough to
make the powder of Antimony smoke, and begin to calcine. When the powder begins
to smoke, stir it gently with a Copper Spatula, without intermission, and keep
an equal fire under the Capsula, reasonably hot, turning your head from the
fumes that rise from the Antimony, which will waste by degrees, and continuing
the calcination, till not only the powder cease to smoke, and is become of an
Ash Color, but that melting some part of the powder in a Crucible you find it
turn into transparent Glass. But if the powder chance to clot together in
calcination, give over, and powder the clots again, then go on without ceasing,
though it be the labor of some days; for the vitrification of Antimony can
never be true, if the powder be not well calcined, or if there remain the least
particle of its Sulphur.

The powder of Sulphur being perfectly well calcined, you may easily reduce it
into glass, if you have a good Wind-Furnace In the Fireplace whereof having
put a small German Crucible upon a Culot, kindle about it a fire proportionable
to the capaciousness of the Hearth-place, blowing it with the Bellows, and not
putting into the Crucible above two or three ounces at a time, and it will melt
presently; and when the powder is all melted, pour the hot substances into a
clean Copper Kettle, and you shall find it turned into Glass of a transparent
Jacinth color. If you want more Glass, repeat all the same operations over
again.

During the fusion, put a little Cover upon the Crucible to hasten the
Vitrification of the powder, and cover also the Furnace with its Cover, the
better to keep in and reverberate the heat upon the substance, and hasten the
fusion; which will better and sooner be done, and with Coal in the Furnace
which I have described, then with four times as much Coal in another, provided
the powder be well calcined. Neither will it be necessary to keep the powder an
hour in fusion, nor to add raw powder of Antimony, nor Sulphur, nor Borax, to
facilitate vitrification of the powder, since you may vitrifie in this Furnace
alone in less then half a quarter of an hour, and satisfy Zwel^ers desire,
when he uses this Glass for the preparation of Syrrup Emetick.

You may also forbear stirring the melted substance with an Iron rod, to know
whether the Glass be diaphonous, for the Antimony corrodes the end of the rod*
in that little time, which may spoil the brightness of the color; besides that
if the powder be well melted, the Glass will certainly be of a lovely color.
Some choose fair weather for this preparation, but that is neither here nor
there, if you observe the right method.

Glass of Antimony purges upwards and downwards all tumors that it meets with,
if you give it in fine powder from two to three or four grains in some Conserve
or Sweatmeat; or from three or four to five or six grains in White Wind, or
some Cordial-water. But it must not be given to any but persons of a strong
constitution, and who being wide Chested, vomit freely; for its effects are too
violent for tender constitutions.

In the mean time you must not* admire, that after the consumption of the
combustible Sulphur of Antimony, in calcining it for the preparation of its
Glass, the same Glass should be still vomitive and purgative, since that its
principal qualities proceed from its internal Sulphur, which is not separated
but with very great difficulty, as we observe in the Regulus's, Saffrons, and
other preparations of Antimony, which notwithstanding the mixture of Niter,
Tartar, and Sublimate, etc. yet still purge both upward and downward, and since
it is impossible to take away its Emetick and purgative qualities, but by
calcination and keeping it long upon the fire with three times the weight in
Niter; the simple acids not being able to tame iss vomitive and purgative
qualities; and the Niter it self, nor its sulphury Spirit not being able to
deprive it of its diaphoretick faculty, which manifests its self when the
others appear to be annihilated.

But now to show you the correction which I promised for Emetick Syrrup, which
I described in the second part of this work, grind upon a Porphyry to very fine
powder twelve ounces of Glass of Antimony prepared as I have directed, then
having mixed with it three ounces and a half of powder of Niter, heat a
Crucible red hot, covered with its Cover and placed upon a Culot in a proper
Furnace, and throw into it by degrees little spoonfuls of the powder at a time,
then cover the Crucible, and when the powder is red hot, take out the Crucible
and let it cool; when it is cold, you shall find a mass or lump of a color
between yellow and black, which after you have powdered very finely upon
Porphyry, you must wash immediately with water only lukewarm, pouring it out by
inclination afterward, not letting it to stand at all in the Vessel, and dry
the powder when it is sufficiently dulcified. Thus you shall have a Glass of
Antimony corrected, the effects whereof will be much more gentle then before,
and which you may safely make use of as well for the preparation of Emetick
Syrrup, as for many other occasions, giving it infused in Wine from four or
five to fifteen or twenty grains, ordering the dose according to the age and
strength of the Patients.

You may also prepare Glasses of Antimony white, yellow, red, black, etc. by
different calcinations of the Antimony, adding to it Borax, Sulphur, and other
substances. But in regard the color does not after their vomitive and
purgative qualities, and for that the preparation which I have here showed, may
serve as an example for all, I thought it not convenient to swell this Chapter
with additions little to the purpose.

(...)Regulus of Antimony is very seldom given alone in powder, it being
sufficient to make Bowls or Cups of it; but it is often mixed with other
Minerals or Metallic substances in order to many other Chemical preparations,
of which I have already showed some, and shall show more examples.

You may powder the dross of Regulus, and having boiled it for some time in a
good quantity of water, filter the decoction, then having poured upon it
Vinegar distilled, precipitate a yellow substance, which is called Golden
Sulphur of Antimony, to which some have allowed only a diaphoretick virtue,
though it chiefly work by vomit and by stool. You may afterward dulcifie this
precipitate in several Lotions, dry it, and give it from three or four to five
or six grains, mixed with some other medicine adapted to its operation. But the
use of it is rare, and the yellow stains that remain in the hands of them that
prepare it, make them unwilling to take the trouble upon them.

CHAP. LXXVII. Of Martial Regulus.
THE mixture of the pure substance of Mars, with Regulus of Antimony, has given
this Regulus the name of Martial, the preparation whereof is thus: Heat red hot
in a Coal-fire a good Crucible well covered, then throwing into it half a pound
of the points of Horseshoe-nails, return the Cover upon the Crucible, and
increase and continue the fire till the red hot nails look white again; then
cast upon them a pound of Antimony in powder, which melting soon after, will
cause the Iron also to melt, keeping the Crucible covered, and forcing the
fire. When the substances are melted, cast upon them at several times, about
three or four ounces in all of Niter in powder, as well to separate the dross
of the Iron and Antimony, as to make the fusion more clear. Then having heated
and greased an Antimonial Cornute or Horn within side, pour the melted
substances into it, knocking the sides of the Horn, to make all the Regulus
descend to the bottom, and when the whole is cold, turn the Horn an end, and
you shall find the Regulus covered with the dross, which you must separate with
a hammer. After which having cleans'd it and remelted it in a Crucible, cast
upon it three ounces of Antimony in powder, forcing the fire that they may be
all well melted together; afterward having added by degrees about two or three
ounces of powder of Niter to separate the remaining Scories of Mars, and to
hasten and clarify the fusion of the Metals, pour them into an Iron Horn
heated and greased within, proceeding in all things as before, and by this
means you shall have a Martial Regulus clean and ^^arry, provided you have been
exact in the operation, and that the substances be perfectly well melted when
you pour them into the Horn, upon which mistake you must remelt the Regulus,
and add to it two or three ounces of Niter more, the better to refine it.

The Antimony used in this preparation affords, proportionable to its quantity
much more Regulus then in the former, because not only the Mars hinders the
dissipation, which would otherwise happen of several particles of Antimony, but
also augments its quantity by joining with it its own pure parts in the fusion;
besides the Niter cannot make so great a dissipation as in the preceding
Regulus, because it is here used more late, and for that it is mixed but by
degrees, and in a small quantity. Though should you continue to mix it, it
might at length consume all the Mars, and change the qualities of the Antimony,
rendering it diaphoretick.

You may make Cups and Bowls of this Regulus, as of the former, and their
effects are much the same, but they are less violent because of the addition of
Mars with the Regulus of Antimony, which would at length reduce the Mars all
into dross, were they kept long together upon the fire.

Some prepare a Regulus without the addition of Salts: They beat the Antimony
into gross powder, and having put it into a Crucible, and covered it with
powder of Coal four or five fingers high, they expose it to a melting fire for
half an hour, then the substances being cold, they find at the bottom a Regulus
separated from the dross, which they afterward put into a new Crucible, and
having covered it with more powder of Coal, and exposed it to a melting fire
for a quarter of an hour, they still draw forth more Regulus, and putting the
Scories a third time into another Crucible with more new powder of Coals, they
melt them again to extract a third Regulus. And thus out of a pound of Antimony
they draw out about three quarters of Regulus. But the Regulus thus extracted
is very impure, and full of several gross parts of the Antimony; for it has
neither the whiteness, luster, nor beauty of a Regulus well prepared; only it
may be accounted an Antimony a little purer then ordinary.

CHAP. LXXVIII. Of Flowers of Antimony.
VArious instruments are used, and various methods followed for the preparation
of Antimony; for you may make use of ordinary Aludels, covered with their Pots
bored through above and below; of which the uppermost hole of the uppermost pot
must be very little; and having placed the Aludel in a proper Furnace, and made
the bottom of it almost red hot, project by degrees into the body of the Aludel
through its hole, powder of Antimony, and having stopped the whole, cause the
flowers to rise into the pots of the Aludel, continuing the fire and projection
of the powder of Antimony, till you have flowers enough. You may also,
following Zwelfers way, make use of an Aludel made almost like a Bowl, having
two pipes, one of each side of the middle, and the lower part somewhat more
flatted then the upper. Then put a little powder of Antimony into it, place the
the Aludel in a proper Furnace, and kindle under the Aludel a fire sufficient
to melt the Antimony; which done, slightly fit to one of the Pipes of the
Aludel a Recipient having a little hole in the hinder part, and when the
vapors begin to appear in the Recipient, blow gently with a small pair of
Bellows into the opposite pipe to that fitted to the Recipient, to the end that
the vapors being forced into the Recipient may condense there in flowers. But
for as much as the Antimony alone does not freely afford its flowers, unless
you be very exact to govern the fire, and in managing the powder, you shall
have better success by mingling foreign substances with the Antimony, as well
to divide its parts and hinder their melting in the Aludel, as to make the
particles ascend in flowers; to which purpose the first Aludel is more proper
then the last.

You may mix the Antimony with double its weight in Sand or powder of Glass,
and having placed the Aludel in a proper Furnace, and covered it with its pots
luted one above another, make the lower part of the Aludel red hot, and project
about half an ounce of the powder at a time into the hole, stopping it at the
same time, continuing always a good fire under the Aludel, and continuing to
project the powder till it be all spent. You may also very properly, instead of
Sand or powder of Glass mix with Antimony in powder, treble its weight of Niter
in powder likewise, and project and fulminate the powder by little parcels in
the Aludel covered with two or three pots, and the uppermost with a Glass head,
not luted, fitted with a Recipient; and by this means cause the most volatile
parts of the Antimony to ascend in Flowers; which you shall find in the pots or
in the head when the Vessels are cold and unluted. You shall find in the
Recipient at the same time a Spirit of Niter very acid, and at the bottom of
the Aludel the most fixed part of the Antimony, mixed with the fixed Salt part
of the Niter. Then dulcify the flowers by several Lotions, afterward dry them
and keep them, to be given from three or four to five or six grains in some
Conserve or Sweetmeat, when you would purge upward and downward evil humors,
in intermitting Agues, Hypochondriacal Maladies, and other obstinate diseases.
The Spirit in the Recipient is very useful against Colicks and difficulties of
Urine, given from five or six to twelve or fifteen drops, or to a pleasing
acidity in Broths or other Liquors proper to be given. As for that which
remains at the bottom of the Aludel, being a real Diaphoretick Antimony, having
taken it out of the Vessel, cleanse it from the Salt part of the Niter, and use
it for the same uses as the ordinary Diaphoretick Antimony.

You may mingle very properly half a pound of powder of Antimony with a pound
of Sal-Ammoniack, put them together into an Earthen Cucurbit fit to resist the
fire. Then having placed the Cucurbit in a proper Purnace, and covered it with
a Glass-head, sublimate the Flowers with a Gradual fire, and when the Vessels
are cold, scrape off the red Flowers from the head; Dulcify them with several
Lotions, dry them and keep them for the same Uses as those which precede.

You may also make use of Glasses, Saffrons and Regulus's of Antimony to
extract, proceeding after the same manner as with raw Antimony. The diversity
that happens to Flowers of Antimony in several, or the same preparations, or in
the same Sublimations, not changing their vomitive and purgative qualities, you
may make use of all alike, red, yellow, or white, provided they be well washed
and dulcified. Sometimes a grain of these Flowers is mixed among other
Purgatives, or with Mercurius Dulcis upon certain occasion. For then serving as
a Spur to the remedies among which it is mixed, it assists their activity,
working only downwards. Mercurius Dulcis is also a good Corrective of Antimony.
I omit the Correction of these Flowers by Salt-Tartar well impregnated with the
acid of the Spirit of Vinegar, or by the Cohobation of Spirit of Wine
arromatiz'd, or by the of Spirit of Wine mollify'd, or by other ways set down
in Authors, not seeing any necessity to insert them here, since you may upon
the place correct and change the activity of the Flowers by mixing them with
other Medicines.

CHAP LXXIX. Of Diaphoretick Antimony.
THE most part of Authors agree that there must be three parts of Niter for one
of Antimony put for this preparation. But some would have all the Niter mixed
at once with the Antimony; others but two parts; others but one part, adding
sucessively the other two to the Mass. But though the event of all these
preparations does not much differ, provided that making use of three times the
weight of the Antimony in Niter, you proceed in all things as you ought to do;
nevertheless I think it much better not to mix at the beginning above a third
part of the Niter with all the Antimony; for if you make use of all the Niter,
the Fulmination being much more violent, makes a greater dissipation of the
Antimony, and also of the volatile parts of the Niter, which have not time to
contribute their part, to fix the rest of the Antimony remaining in the
Crucible. Whereas if you put in no more Niter then Antimony, the Fulmination
being violent enough, to raise the Gross Sulphur of the Antimony, though not
able to dissipate the volatile parts, and that adding after to these parts of
the Antimony, and not causing any more fulmination, because the impure part of
the Antimony is consumed, the Spiritous and fixed parts of the Niter have all
the time required to act upon the Antimony, and to change the vomitive and
purgative qualities into Diaphoretick; which is a quality as it were
inseparable from this Mineral.

Break then to powder and mix a pound of good Antimony with a pound of Niter
well purified, and put the powder into Cornets of Paper containing about an
ounce each. Then having placed a good Crucible with its cover upon a Culot in
the midst of a Fireplace of a Wind Furnace, kindled a good Coal-fire round
about, and made the Crucible red-hot, throw in first one of the Cornets,
covering the Crucible at the same time, and leaving the powder to Fulminate.
After which project one Cornet after another, and to leave them to Fulminate
till the whole is projected, continuing always a good fire to keep the
substances in Fusion. Then add by degrees and at several times all the rest of
the Niter, which you must mingle and incorporate with the Mass, stirring it
with a long Iron-Spatula, and keeping still a good fire for two or three hours,
or till the Antimony and the Niter have lost their Fluidity, and are, reduced
in the Crucible into a white and solid Mass. After which when the Vessels are
cold, and that you have taken away all the filth that sticks about, or in the
Crucible, break the substances with a hammer into four pieces, and having put
them into a long Tin Platter, pour upon them the boiling water, till they are
quite covered over, and there let them lie and soak till the Mass be separated
from the Crucible, and in part softened. Then throwing away the piecees of the
Crucible, let the matters settle, pour out the Liquor by Inclination, and keep
it apart. Then put the Calx of Antimony into a Marble Mortar, and bruise it
with a wooden pestle: after that having poured upon it some pints of Water,
and well stirred, pour the thick Liquor presently by Inclination into a clean
Earthen pot, continuing afterward to beat and soften the Calx of Antimony in
clean water, and still to pour out the thick water as before, till this lime be
all softened in the water, and that you perceive nothing but some useless
Terrestreties at the bottom of the Mortar. Then wash this lime with many
Waters, till it be perfectly Dulcified, and having well dried it, put it into a
Crucible, and hold it over the fire for two or three hours; and having burnt
over it good Spirit of Wine, keep it in a pot or in a double glass bottle for
use.

The first Liquor Sand, is of good advantage, containing in it much of Niter,
and several particles of the Calx of Antimony which the same Niter has
dissolved; for you may evaporate it to a film, and draw from it Crystals of
Niter impregnated with the Antimony. Or else pouring Spirit of Vinegar upon the
Liquor, precipitate a Magistery very white and very slender, which proceeding
from the same Mass is endu'd with the same virtues; and you may make use of it
as of the Calx of Antimony, having well washed and dried it. The whiteness of
the Calx of Antimony is the reason that they have given it the name Ceruse: but
it is more commonly called Diaphoretick Antimony, or Mineral Diaphoretick. And
that because that while it fortifyes nature, it disposes it, to expel the ill
humors by all sorts of ways, and chiefly by sweat or insensible transpiration.
It is also very proper to mortify Corrosive Salts, especially acids, and to
prevent fermentation of the humour^ the corruption whereof it also hinders. It
cleanses the whole Mass of the blood, and gives wonderful relief in Scorbutic
Maladies, if you continue the use of it, for some time. And though it may seem
astringent, as well in regard of its substance altogether terrestrial, and
because it is disabl'd from purging either upwards or downwards, nevertheless
it is mixed very appositely with purgative and opening Medicines. For by
assisting their activity, it hinders the bad Impressions which they might make
upon the parts. For which cause it is often mixed with remedies prescribed to
open obstructions of the bowels and Matrix. It is very much esteemed against
the Malignity of Fevers, particularly against the small Pox, and all sorts of
Meazles, as also in the cure of Venereal distempers, mixing it with all
Remedies made use of for that purpose as well purgative as Diaphoretick. It is
given to all sorts of Sexes and ages, from five or six to twenty or thirty
grains, as also the Magistery mentioned, either alone or mixed with other
Remedies.

You may dissolve the Crystals drawn from the first Lotion of Antimony
Diaphoretick in proper Liquors, and give them from five or six to fifteen or
twenty grains, for the same Maladies, as Diaphoretick Antimony.

You may make use of the Glasses, Saffrons Regulus's and Flowers, instead of
ordinary Antimony, and fixing their vomitive and purgative qualities, render
them Diaphoretick, adding to them three times as much the weight of fair Niter,
and observing the same directions as for Diaphoretick Antimony.

CHAP. LXXX. Of the Icy Liquor of Antimony.
FOR this preparation usually they take equal parts of good Antimony and
Corrosive Sublimate, and having beaten them in a Mortar, and put them into a
Glass Retort well luted about, and having a large neck, place it in a close
Furnace of Reverberation proportionable to its bigness: then having kindled a
very small fire in the fire-hearth of the Furnace, and slightly fitted a half
Ballon to the neck of the Cornute, begin your Distillation with a very soft
fire, and in a little time you shall perceive a very white Liquor drop into the
Recipient, clear also, but very heavy, which will coagulate immediately in the
form of Ice. You must not increase the fire till all the clear Liquor be
distilled; and if it happen that any of the distilled Liquor congeal in the
neck of the Retort, you must force it to melt and fall into the Recipient, by
holding a lighted Coal, and giving a gentle heat to the place where it lies.
But when you perceive any blackness to appear in the neck of the Cornute, or of
the half Balon, slightly ^it a new Recipient to the beak of the Retort, and
begin to augment the fire, which you shall force by little and little, and by
degree from degree, till you come at length to continue it very fierce, to
separate from the substances that remain in the Cornute, the Mercury concealed
in the Sublimate, and to cause it to ascend with the proper Sulphur of
Antimony, and stay almost all like Cinnabar, in the neck of the Retort, and
sometime after to distill in flowing Quicksilver into the Recipient, mixed with
some Fuliginous parts of the Antimony.

The Vessels being cold, you shall find at the bottom of the Cornute a hard
shining Mass, very much like the Antimony made use of in this operation, and at
the same time at the top and in the neck of the Cornute, the Quicksilver of
the Sublimate united with the terrestrial Sulphur of the Antimony and
incorporated with it in Cinnabar. You shall also find in the last Recipient
some little Quicksilver revived, mingled with some Soot of Antimony, and in
the first the Icy Liquor; which will have no need of Rectification; if the fire
were well governed, and the Recipient changed in good time. But if there be any
Clouds or obscurities in it, you must cause it to melt again by heating the
Recipient by little and little, and having poured it into a small Glass
Cornute, rectify them in a Sand-bath with a very gentle fire, till all that
obscure matter which was in the Cornute become a white and very pure Liquor,
which is called the Gummy liquid Butter, or Icy oil of Antimony.

The ordinary Regulus of Antimony, or the Martial Regulus may be made use of in
this preparation, and double the weight of it in Sublimate Corrosive added to
it, and observing the same Rules as for the preceding distillation, a Liquor
may be obtained very like the former, and by some better esteemed because of
the Refindness of the Regulus from whence it was drawn. But the difference is
not very considerable, because the acid Salts of the Corrosive Sublimate, do
not principally act but upon the Regulous part of the Antimony, and by
consequence, the Liquor which distills from it, cannot but be very near in
likeness to it. So that the best way will be to keep to the first Preparation,
considering that besides that the Regulus costs more then the ordinary
Antimony, you must employ double its weight of Sublimate, and that afterward
you cannot extract a Cinnabar, as you may, making use of Raw Antimony.

We may say that among Minerals Antimony is that which furnishes Chemistry with
the greatest number of preparations; we may also affirm as well, that the
Distillation of Butter of Antimony, is as it were the Source of a good number
of preparations; and therefore it deserves that we should make some Reflections
upon it, to the end we may understand the reason of all the changes that happen
to Antimony.

In the first place we must believe, that the Acid part of Vitriol and
Bay Salt, which make one part of the Substance of Corrosive Sublimate, are the
Dissolvers and the Melters of the Reguline part of Antimony and that they are
united with it in Distillation. We are to understand also that the Mercury has
no part in the dissolution, because we may have an Icy liquor of Antimony, by
distilling this liquor through a Retort, and mixing it before with its weight
of Vitriol calcined white, and as much decrepitated Salt in powder; that a
liquor of the same nature may be had, by drawing a Spirit from equal parts of
decrepitated Salt, and Vitriol calcined white, and mixing two pints of this
Spirit with a pound and a half of powder of Antimony, and distilling them
through a Cornute in a Sand-bath; and that you may yet be more successful, by
mingling two parts of ordinary water with one part of powder of Antimony, and
distilling them together, without ever having mixed any Sublimate Corrosive, or
any Quicksilver in any of these distillations.

In the second place, though the powder separated from this Icy liquor after
precipitation, washing, and drying, be called Mercury of Life, it is not to be
thought, that the Quicksilver, which makes the greatest part of the Sublimate
Corrosive, mixed equally with the Antimony is the ground of it, or that it
makes one part of it; if the fire were governed right at the time of the
distillation, or if by forcing the fire the revived Quicksilver be not forced
to descend into the Recipient.

But having proceeded right, certain it is, that the whole substance of the
liquor consists only of the acid parts of Vitriol and Bay Salt, and the
Regulous part of the Antimony, which the acid parts of those Salts have
dissolved, which is every way demonstrable; whether it be by converting into a
true Regulus, or Glass, the Antimonial substance concealed in the liquor; or by
drawing from the mass remaining in the Retort, all the Quicksilver of the
Sublimate Corrosive, converted into Cinnabar and revived; or whether by
dissolving in water the acid part of Vitriol and Bay Salt contained in the
liquor, and separating it from the substance Antimonial.

In the third place we must consider, that the heat of the fire, giving a kind
of fusion to the Sublimate, and by that means an opportunity to the Mercury to
resume its first form* and easily converting into liquor the acid part of the
Salts, which were confusedly mixed with the parts of the Mercury, after they
had divided them at the time of the sublimation; the same liquor, finding the
Reguline substance of the Antimony more fit for penetration of its points;
fastens upon it, divides its parts, dissolves them, and makes a calcination
thereof, which may be called Immersive; and afterward being forced by the
fire, it comes forth in liquor at the beak of the Retort, with the substance
which it had dissolved and calcined, falling with it drop by drop into the
Recipient, and leaving in the Retort the Mercury with the grosser part of the
Antimony. And because the natural combustible Sulphur of the Antimony resides
then in the Cornute with the other gross parts of the Antimony, they sublime
together, and you find them after distillation incorporated with the Cinnabar
in the neck of the Cornute; not but that there is some of the flowing Mercury
to be found in the Recipient, because there was not Sulphur of Antimony enough
to stop it. For the same reason there is no expectation of Cinnabar, when
Regulus or Glass is made use of for the preparing of Icy liquor; for then being
deprived of all their terrestrial Sulphur, the Mercury not finding any
substance proper to fix to, is constrained by the fire to quit the Cornute in
the same form before it was sublimed.

Cinnabar of Antimony is not only of great efficacy in the cure of Venereal
distempers; but the best Authors look upon it as a very particular remedy
against the Epilepsie, giving it from ten or twelve, to fifteen or twenty
grains in Bolus among other Cephalic remedies.

As for the Icy liquor, in regard it is very caustic, while it is so, it is
only for external uses, as well to cauterize and eat off superfluities of the
flesh, consume and take away the rottenness of the bones, as to stop Gangrenes.
But because the violence of its effects require great wariness, Monsieur
D'Aquin was desirous that I should impart to public view, how Monsieur
Pelegrius, Physician at Romans in the Dauphinate, makes use of this liquor with
good success upon several occasions, and in many experiments made before
Monsieur D'Aquin, of many of which I my self was a witness.

CHAP. LXXXI. How Monsieur Pelegrin uses the Icy Liquor of Antimony, and the
various effects which may be expected from it.
MIngle an ounce of Icy Liquor of Antimony with two ounces of Oil of Sulphur
distilled by the Bell, and keep them together in a Bottle by itself.

Mix in an Earthen pot varnished within an ounce of Icy Liquor of Antimony with
two ounces of Corrossve Sublimate in powder, stirring them with a woodd'n
Spatula, and after you have washed them ten or twelve hours in that condition,
evaporate the superfluous moisture with a gentle heat, to the dryness of the
powder, and keep it in a double glass bottle close stopped.

To stop a Gangrene at the beginning, first Scarify the Gangrened part to the
quick, then apply the Liquor or the powder between the live and the dead flesh,
putting in more or less according to the condition of the source, letting it
lie ten or twelve hours. But if the pains be too vehement, before the time is
expired, apply the supperating and pain-easing Ointment, hereafter prescribed:
then continue the application twice a day, as well to separate the Scab from
the live flesh, as to incarnate and cicatrize the wound afterward: for which
purpose at length apply rolls of Lint dry, and over them a Cere-cloth of
Diapalma Ceruse and Minion dissolved in Oil of Roses.

For the preparation of the Suppurative and Anodine Ointment, take Oil of
Roses, Lillies and flowers of Elder of each two ounces, Mutton nnd Veal suet of
each half a pound, powder of Myrrh and Olibanum of each an ounce and an half,
one pound of black pitch, half a pound of clear Turpentine, six ounces of
yellow wax, two ounces of distilled oil of Rosemary, and as much oil of
Lavender, and make an Ointment according to Art.

To heal Ulcers that cause rottenness of the bones, anoint their edges with the
Liquor above described, and pour upon the Rotten bone at the bottom of the
Ulcer some drops of it, pouring on more or less according to the largeness of
the Rotten place; then cover the Ulcer with Rolls of white dried Linen, and
let them lie so ten or twelve hours. After which, having taken off the Rolls,
put on others anointed with the Anodine Oinment, but lay nothing upon the
bones, but the dry Rolls, and when the Scab is parted from the live flesh,
having scraped the bone with a proper Instrument, and having taken away all the
brok'n splinters, fill the whole Ulcer with dry and warm Rolls, renewing them
twice, a day leaving upon them the Divine Emplaster softened with Oil of
Turpentine, and so continuing to the end of the Cure.

To extirpate Fistula's, thrust into the pipe of the Fistula a pipe dipped in
this Liquor, but if you cannot get in a tent, put in never so small a drop with
the end of a small Syringe, then having covered the part with a fold of Linen,
leave it so all the day. After that draw forth the Tent, and dress the Fistula
twice a day with the Anodine Ointment, till it be well incarnated, applying at
the end a drying Cere-cloth.

To heal Cankers at the beginning, make an Incision like a Cross to the bottom
of the hardness, and pour upon it four or five drops of this Liquor: afterward
cover the Canker with dry Rolls and folded Linen, and let the patient keep his
bed twenty four hours, giving him only Broths for nourishment. After which take
off the Rolls, and put others in their room. Then dress the wound twice a day,
and continue dressing till the Scab being fallen off, and the wound incarnated,
it may be time to lay on the desiccating Cere-cloth. If the Cancer be
ulcerated, cut off nothing but the hard and black blew brims of the Cancer, and
drop some drops of the Liquor upon the Scarify'd part to take away the
hardness; and drop more of the Liquor upon it if there were not enough at first.

The same Method is to be observed for the cure of Wolfes.

To take away Warts, Wens, and other excrescences against nature, dip a
silk-string in the liquor, and tie it about the excrescence, if it may be done,
and leave it so tied for twelve hours, till the excrescence fall off of it
self, then apply a desiccative Cerecloth upon it; but if you cannot come at the
excrescence to tie it, touch it with the end of a syringe dipped in the liquor,
and put upon the top of it a little of the powder, covering the part with a dry
fold of linen, which must be changed twice a day till the excrescence be
fallen off, and then applying a desiccative Cerecloth to it.

To heal cancerous, venereal Ulcers; moisten the end of a syringe with a little
spittle, and having put a little powder upon it, touch the cancerous Ulcer with
it, though there were a rottenness of the bone besides; then cover the sore
with dry linen folds, and leave it so for a whole day. But if the Patient
cannot endure the pain, take off the dry linen folds, and lay in their places
others spread with the Anodyne ointment. Then dress the sore twice a day with
the ointment, till the scab be fallen off, then apply only folded linen and
little pillows upon them. If there be any inflammation, lay Gater's Cerecloth
to it. But the use of this remedy does not hinder, but that you may use general
Medecines to carry off the cause of the distemper.

CHAP. LXXXII. Of the Emetick Powder, Philosophical Spirit of Vitriol and
Mineral Bezoar.
THe caustic quality of the icy liquor of Antimony proceeding only from the
acid part of the Vitriol and Salt Marine concealed in the sublimate corrosive
made use of in the preparation of this liquor, and that part being to be
dissolved in water, it is no hard thing to separate it, nor necessary to make
use of precipitants to make the reguline substance of the Antimony descend to
the bottom, which being the principal part of the liquor, is not dissolvable in
water like the Salts; in regard that by steeping the acids in a good quantity
of water, they become so far weakened, that they are constrained to quit the
Antimonial part which they had dissolved and reduced to liquor. And therefore
because there is more use to be made of the Emetick, Purgative, and
Diaphoretick qualities of the Antimonial part of this liquor, then of the
corrosive of the acid Salts which keep the Antimony in dissolution* it is
necessary to know how to separate them.

Melt in a Balneum Mariae lukewarm the icy liquor of Antimony mentioned, which
shall be found in the Recipient, and having put it into a clean earthen-pot
glazed within, pour upon it twelve times the weight of fair water lukewarm and
filtered; the mixture whereof will make a very white milk, then having well
soaked and stirred the substances with a wooden Spatula, let them settle for
two or three hours. After which pour out by inclination the clear liquor, and
preserve it in a bottle: wash the Antimonial substance that lies at the bottom
with several fair waters, till it be perfectly dulcifi'd. Then dry it in the
shade, and having powdered it in a glass or marble Mortar, put it in a double
glass-bottle close stopped.

This Powder bears the name of Algarozt, the Author of it, or of Emetick, for
its effects, and of Mercury of life, though vainly, for the reasons already
alleged.

The principal qualities of it are to purge vigorously upwards and downwards
all bad humors, giving it in Bolus from two or three to five or six grains or
more, in some conserve, or in some other proper matter, or mixing it with other
purgatives, and accommodating it to their nature. It is made use of very
advantageously in Dropsies, in intermitting Fevers, and in all diseases of the
stomach and matrix, which proceed from abundance of humors.

The first liquor, which you shall have received, containing in it the acid
part of the Glacial Oil, is of a very acid savor. But its acidity will much
increase, if you cause the liquor to concenter in a Sand-Bath, by which means
you shall have that which writers call the spirit of Vitriol Philosophic,
evaporating the greatest part of the moisture: as well by reason of the acid
part of the Vitriol, which is its principal substance, as also for that it has
almost the taste and qualities. For which reason it is given inwardly, as the
ordinary spirit of Vitriol; this spirit being a friend of nature, whereas the
acids whereof it is composed, were destructive to it, so long as they were
concentered with the reguline part of the Antimony.

The effects of Emetick powder may be qualified, and so ordered, that they may
only purge by stool, by putting it into a small Glass-Cucurbit, and placing it
in a Sand-Bath over a very gentle fire. Then leave it there till it begins to
grow red, and pour upon it, two or three times, spirit of Wine well rectified,
and draw it off as many times. This powder may be given to the same dose as the
ordinary Emetick, and is called Emetick corrected.

But to deprive this powder absolutely of its purging faculty either upwards or
downwards, and to change it into Diaphoretick, proceed thus. Put the quantity
of powder you intend into a small Glass-Cucurbit placed in a Sand-Bath, and
having poured upon it three times as much the weight of spirit of Niter,
stirred it with a wooden Spatula, and steeped it well in the spirit, evaporate
all the moisture, till there remain only a white dry mass at the bottom of the
Cucurbit. Then having washed and perfectly dulcifi'd it, keep the powder in a
glass-bottel perfectly well stopped. This powder bears the name of Bezoar
Mineral, as well for its Bezoardick qualities, as for that the substance of it
is altogether mineral. This Bezoar is given to good purpose in all diseases
where the Bezoar drawn from the Animal is ordinarily used. It strengthens very
much all the noble parts, and defends them against poison. It purifies the mass
of the blood* and drives from thence, as well as out of the whole habit of the
body all those sharp serosities that are proper to be expelled through the
pores of the body, driving them forth by sweat or by insensible transpiration.
For which reason it is very highly commended against all diseases proceeding
from corruption or depravation of the blood, chiefly in the Scurvy, the
Pestilence, the Smallpox, the Meazels, and all sorts of Epidemick distempers.
The weight of it causing it to descend to the bottom of the liquors, is the
reason that it is only given in Bolus, from eight or ten, to twenty or thirty
grains, mixed with conserve, or some other proper matter. It may be mingled
with Purgatives and Aperatives to fortify the noble parts during their
operation.

CHAP. LXXXIII. Of Sulphur of Antimony.
THis Sulphur is not to be taken for that Sulphur which is looked upon as one
of the Principles of Antimony, and which being strictly united with its most
pure parts, is as it were inseparable from it. I only intend to show the
extraction of the terrestrial and combustible sulphur of Antimony, which often
appears in a blue flame, chiefly when you calcine the powder of Antimony for
the preparation of Glass; or which is incorporated with extraneous substances,
when after the distillation of the Glacial Oil of Antimony you sublime the
Mercury in Cinnabar, and that the combustible sulphur of Antimony is united
with it. The impossibility of making any advantage of Sulphur that burns during
the calcination of the powder of Antimony, prevents my attempting it; but the
sulphur contained in the Cinnabar of Antimony, engages me to set down the way
to separate it to good profit: though there are other ways to separate a pure
sulphur of raw* Antimony, especially being in the same condition as it was in
the mine.

Make a strong lie with good wood-ashes, quicklime, and ashes made of the
burnt lees of Wine, and put into a glazed earthen-pot a pound of Cinnabar in
powder; fill the pot almost full of this lie, and boil the whole for three or
four hours, pouring from time to time new lie into the pot in the place of that
which is consumed. Then having filtered the not liquor, and saved the revived
Mercury which will lie at the bottom, you may, if you please* pour upon the
liquor distilled vinegar, to hasten the precipitation of the sulphur: or else
suffering the filtered liquor to cool, stay till the sulphur of Cinnabar, which
is that of Antimony, be precipitated of its self to the bottom of the vessel.
After which, wash it with several waters, till it be perfectly dulcifi'd; and
having dried it, put it up in a double glass-bottle, perfectly well stopped.

This Sulphur is given from two to three or four grains, and violently purges
upwards and downwards all sorts of bad humors; like the golden Sulphur drawn
from the Faeces of Crocus Metallorum. And therefore it is very rarely given
alone: some choosing rather to prepare an All heal, mixing it with an ounce of
Regulus of Antimony finely powdered, and three ounces of Oil of Sulphur, or
Spirit of Vitriol both well rectified, letting them digest together for eight
days, distilling and cohobating them three times in a Retort in a Sand-bath,
and increasing the fire at length for twelve hours, the better to fix the
substance, which afterward they wash with Rose Water till it be exactly
dulcified; drying it afterward, and giving it from ten, to twelve, fifteen or
twenty grains; to purify the Mass of the blood by sweat, or by insensible
Transpiration. Others not thus satisfied, after they have broken the Cornute,
reverberate the substance for five or six hours, and having well washed, dried
and powdered it, mingle with it twice the weight of Magistery of Pearl or
Coral, before they administer it.

CHAP. LXXXIV. Of some particular Preparations of Antimony.
PUT a pound of powder of Antimony into a Glass Cucurbit under a Chimney, and
having poured upon it its full weight in Regal water, leave the water to act,
till it have quite dissolved the Antimony. Then having placed the Cucurbit in a
Sand-bath, and covered it with its head, draw off the Regal water to the
drieness of the substance. After which having finely powdered the Mass, and
mixed it with a pound of powder of Salt-Ammoniack, put this into a glass
Cucurbit, covered with his Alembick, and having fitted a small Recipient to the
neck, and carefully luted the closures, place the Cucurbit in a Sand bath in a
proper Capsula, and kindle a gentle fire under it. Upon which, a good part of
the Antimony will sublime in Flowers* part in the head, and part at the top of
the Cucurbit, with the volatile part of the Salt Ammoniack. The Sublimation
being over, and the Vessels cold and unluted, you shall find the flowers of a
different color: thereupon having scraped them together, and beaten them and
mixed them with that which remains in the Cucurbit* make a new Sublimation,
proceeding in all things as before, and repeat the same operations twice again.
Then having scraped together all that is sublimed, separate the Salt part by
several Lotions, till the powder of Antimony be perfectly dulcified. Dry it,
and keep it for use.

This powder works by stool. It purges gently all bad humors, giving it from
two or three, to four or five grains, in a roasted Apple, or some Conserve or
Confection.

You may also grind upon Porphyry what quantity you please of glass of
Antimony, prepared as I have said without addition, and having moistened it
with Spirit of Vinegar dry the Mass in the Sun: then grind it again, moisten it
with Spirit of Vinegar, and dry it again in the Sun, and so continue to do,
till the powder be perfectly white. Then having put this powder into a glass
Cucurbit, and poured upon it Spirit of Wine well rectified, about three or four
fingers above the substances, place the Cucurbit in a Sand-bath, and cover it
with its head furnished with a small Recipient; and having well luted the
closures, draw forth the Spirit of Wine with a soft fire, to the dryness of
the powder which you must put up.

This powder does not provoke vomiting, working generally by stool, and
sometimes by sweat, according as the humors are disposed. The dose is the same
with the former. It is used with success in intermitting Fevers.

You may extract a Tincture from glass of Antimony finely ground, and put into
a Mattress, pouring upon it ten times the weight of oil of Amber well rectified,
or oil of Turpentine or Juniper Berries. Then having covered the Mattress with a
blind-head, and carefully luted the closures, place it in a Sand-bath, and
digest the substances with a strong heat, so that the Liquor may seem almost
ready to boil; and continue it till it be very deep colored. This Tincture*
works by stool or by sweat. The dose is from two or three, to four or five
drops in some proper Liquor.

You may also prepare an Antimonial Purgative Rob, and not Vomitive, according
to the following Method. Put into a large Mattress half a pound of powder of
Antimony, and having poured upon it six pound of Juice of Quinces well
depurated, and put a Cork Stopper into the mouth of the Mattress, let them
macerate for three weeks over a Bakers Oven, stirring the Ingredients from time
to time. Then having put the Mattress in a Sand-bath heated somewhat more then
for ordinary digestions, leave it there four and twenty hours. Filter this
Liquor, and evaporate the superfluous moisture, to the consistence of a Rob:
which may be given from two drams to a whole ounce.

You may also prepare an Antimonial Liquor as sweet as Honey, in this manner.
Grind upon a Porphyry half a pound of raw Antimony, with simple Oxymel; till
the Antimony be exactly powdered. Then put this mixture into a Glass Cucurbit,
and with a Blind-head, lute the closures; and leave it for a whole month upon a
Bakers Oven, to give the Spirit of Vinegar timeto penetrate the substance of
the Antimony, then set the Cucurbit in a Sand-bath, hotter then for ordinary
digestions: and letting it stand there four and twenty hours, cool the
substances, and pour out the Liquor by Inclination into another Cucurbit, and
set it in a Sand-bath, covered with its head fitted with a Recipient, with the
closures well luted. Then draw off with a Gradual fire, first a Phlegm, then a
red Liquor more sweet then Honey, which purges gently, given in some proper
water from a Scruple to a dram.

There is also another Liquor of Antimony which is called the Honyed Liquor,
which is thus to be prepared. Macerate for fifteen days over a Bakers Oven one
pound of powder of Antimony, with four pints of pure honey, stirring them from
time to time; then boil them over a gentle fire, stirring them continually with
a Spatula, till the whole be as thick as Pitch, and will crumble between the
fingers. That done, put the Mass into a Retort of Potters-earth luted about;
place the Retort in a close Furnace of Reverberation, and fit a large Ball to
the neck; by this means with a fire well graduated for 24 hours, you shall draw
forth a Liquor impregnated with several particles of the Antimony, and with it
some flowers, which must be separated, and will be both vomitive and purgative,
almost like the other flowers of Antimony.

This Liquor is penetrating and corrosive, and very proper not only to cleanse
Ulcers, but also to consume their superfluities and Excrescencies. It is
commended against Gangrenes. It is used alone or mixed with Mel Rosatum,
Decoctions, Tinctures, Liniments and other Remedies.

Some there are that beat equal parts of Antimony, Sugar Candy, and Alum
burnt, and having mixed them well, and put them into a Retort of Potters earth
luted about, placed the Retort in a close Furnace of Reverberation, fitted a
large Recipient to the neck, and luted the jointures, draw off by a gradual
fire, but well governed, a red liquor which is highly esteemed for the cure of
all Ulcers.

These are the most necessary and most in use, for other preparations I refer
the Curious to Basilius Valentinus, Schroder, and others who have treated more
amply of them, then it was my design to do.

CHAP. LXXXV. Of the Preparations of. Bismouth.
BIsmouth is a Mineral body half Metallic, composed of the first Matter, but
still imperfect, of Tin, joined with a Terrestrial Sulphur and Mercury ill
digested, and mixed with much impure Arsenical Salt, and produced in the Mines
of this Metal at the time of its generation. The substance of Bismuth is very
hard, eager, and brittle, of a course grain, smooth, white and glistering; it
is usually called Tin of Ice, because it contains much Tin; and when it is
broken, it appears in little small substances like Ice. But Authors have also
given it the name of the Markasite for exceliency, because it surpasses all
other Marcasites in whiteness and beauty.

The natural Arsenical Salt, which makes one part of the Composition of
Bismuth, is the reason it is never prepared to be taken inwardly, but only for
outward applications, for which the Magistery is chiefly used. For the
preparation of which, having distilled an Aquafortis with equal parts of Niter
and Sea Salt, or with the like quantity of Niter and Sea Salt, or with the like
quantity of Niter and Alum; beaten and washed the Bismuth till the water come
from it very clear; put five ounces of it into a large Glass Cucurbit, and pour
upon it 15 ounces of one of these two Aqua Fortis's: and when the dissolution
is perfected, precipitate the dissolution with Spirit of Wine rectified upon
Salt of Tartar. Then having poured upon it a good quantity of fair water, let
the precipitate settle, and after that pour out the Liquor by Inclination, that
swims at the top; wash it with several waters strained through a fine cloth,
till it be perfectly dulcified, and having dried it in the shade between two
papers, you shall have a very white Magistery, fit for all deformities of the
Skin, and to beautify the Complexions of Ladies, mixing it in proper waters or
Pomatums; and therefore some have called it the White of Pearl.

The water of the first Lotion is very good to wash and cure Itches and Tetters.

Bismuth may be precipitated by weakening the Dissolvant with a sufficient
quantity of fair water, without making use of Spirit of Wine; but then a good
part of the Bismuth remaining among the water, the Magistery will be the less.

You may also from Bismuth extract Flowers, a liquour and Crystalline Salt, in
this manner. Grind very finely upon Porphyry ten or twelve pound of Bismuth,
and having put it into a large Glass Cucurbit, and poured upon it the weight of
it in good greenish White Wind, cover the Cucurbit with a Blind-head; and
having placed it in a Sand-bath moderately hot, leave it there for three or
four days, stirring the substances from time to tome. After which having poured
out the same wine, and put as much more upon the Bismuth, renew digestion; and
continue doing this five or six times one after another. Then having poured
upon the Bismuth one part of the Wine drawn forth, cover the Cucurbit with its
head, and having a Recipient fitted to it, and luted the closures fitted,
distill this wine in a Sand-bath with a moderate fire, setting the first Spirit
apart, if you think fit. When the Vessels are cold and unluted, pour upon the
Bismuth as much wine as at first; and pour on and abstract, till all be drawn
off, and that the Bismuth remain dry in the Cucurbit. At which time having
stopped the neck of the Alembick, increase the fire to raise the flowers of the
Bismuth, which you will find white and shining in the head, and must be kept in
a double glass bottle close stopped, or else dissolved in the Cellar into
water. Evaporate over a gentle fire all the Liquor distilled, and having
reduced it to a very little quantity, set it in the Cellar to Crystallize;
putting some Straws among it for the Crystals to fasten to; then pour out the
Liquor by Inclination and keep them for use.

The Flowers and Liquor are very proper to take away blemishes out of the face,
and to correct the deformities of the Skin. They are also esteemed as much as
the Crystals to cure Fistula's, and Malignant and Cancrous Ulcers.

I omit several other preparations of Bismuth as being of no use in Pharmacy.

Besides the natural Bismuth, some notable Artists in Chemistry, having
observed the parts that compose it, have found a way to make an artificial
Bismuth so fair, and well imitated that it is almost impossible to distinguish
it from the true.

Take a pound of pure Tin Plates, and cut them into little pieces; then having
composed a (...) of a pound and a half of Arsenick, a quarter of a pound of
white Tartar (...) half a quartern of Salt Peter, beaten the whole, and mixed
it together, lay a layer of Ciment and a layer of Tin in a good Crucible, and
set it over a naked fire in a proper Furnace, using a moderate fire for an
hour, but then increasing it by degrees to the utmost degree of violence for
four hours. After fusion, pour the substance into a Mould heated and greased
within, and make a Lingot which you will find augmented in weight four ounces
above the weight of the Tin

Zink is also made of the same substances, and in the same proportion, and in
the same manner as Bismuth; only instead of Tin, they use Lead with a little
Calamin.

Note, that the more you melt either the one or the other with a little
Arsenick, the fairer and clearer they will be.

The Fourth Part OF THE Royal Pharmacopoea: CONTAINING Several Particular
Receipts taken out of SEVERAL FAMOUS AUTHORS; With others Freely communicated
by several Learned And Curious Persons.
HAving acquitted my self, as far as in me lies, of the design which I proposed
to my self, in treating methodically of every thing that concerns both the one
and the other Pharmacy; and having communicated with as much sincerity and
exactness, whatever I thought necessary for the instruction of those that apply
themselves to the profession; I (...) not believe I could better conclude this
work, than by imparting to public view several choice Receipts, the effects
whereof I have often experimented with good success, some of which are rarely,
or not at all to be found in Printed Authors. But is I do not think that the
efficacy of Remedies is to be grounded upon the excessive number of the
ingredients which compose them, as some imagine; it is not my intention here to
display, in imitation of them, long Receipts, more pompous for the number and
variety of their ingredients, then to be commended for the advantage and
success which is to be expected from them. But on the contrary, it is my
absolute resolution to produce none but such as have been frequently
experimented, the composition whereof consisting of few ingredients well
chosen, well prepared, and well proportioned, will produce without all doubt,
those good effects which can be rationally expected from them.

An Apopletick Water.
Take tops of Marjoram, Tilet-Flowers, of Lilly of the Valley, of Rosemary,
Lavender, Sage, Primroses, of each three handfuls. Let them macerate eight days
in the Sun, or in a Stove, in Spirit of Wine rectif'd, and Orange-flower water,
of each three pints. Then distill them according to art in a Sand-Bath, and keep
the water.

This water is excellent to fortify the brain and the noble parts. It is given
from half a spoonful to a whole one, as well to prevent, as to cure the
Apoplexy; and in all diseases of the brain.

A Bezoardick Water.
Take the roots of Carline Thistle, and Swallow-wort, of each four ounces.
Leaves of Water-germander, Rue, Blessed Thistle, Thyme, and tops of St.
John's Wort, of each two handfuls. Being all buis'd and cut, let them macerate
in four pints of distilled water of Nuts, and one pint of spirit of Wine; and
then distill them in a Sand-Bath with a moderate fire; burn the sediment, and
extract a Salt out of it to be dissolved in the water, which is to be kept for
use.

This water is of great efficacy against the Pestilence, and in all Epidemick
diseases. For preservation, a spoonful is enough at a time. But three or four
ounces may be given to provoke sweats, or when more powerful effects are
required.

A Water to break the Stone of Quercetan.
Take juices of Leeks, Turnips, Raddish, of each two pound. Of Limons,
Pellitory of the wall, Mouse-ear, of each half a pound. Make a digestion and
fermentation first of all these juices mixed together, and then a distillation.
Crystal calcined may be added, and also Pidgeons-dung, which is altogether
nitrous, of each as much as suffices.

Quercetan praises this Water, to break the Stone, as well in the kidneys as in
the bladder; and that it operates without danger and pain. It is given from one
ounce to two. It may be also used in injections.

A Water for the same, of the same Author.
Take juices of the lesser Spurge, Turnsole, Knotgrass, of each one ounce. In
these macerate of Borax one ounce; then distill the water, and keep it for use.

The same Author highly esteems this water for the same purposes; prescribing
it after the same manner.

A Cosmetick Water of Pigeons.
Take young Pigeons gutted, and cut into pieces number two. Crumbs of
white-bread half a pound. Peach-kernels, and the four greater Cola-seeds
cleans'd, of each four ounces. Whites of twelve eggs, and juice of four Limons.
Macerate them twelve hours in four pints of Goats-milk, then distill them in a
Maries-Bath. To the distilled water add Borax, Camphire, Sugar Candy, and
Burnt-alom, of each three drams. Expose them first three days to the Sun, then
let them stand fifteen days in a Wine-Sellar; filter the water, and keep it for
use.

This water smooths, whitens, beautifies and preserves the complexions of
Ladies. They may wash their faces with it at any time, but especially morning
and evening.

Another Pidgeon-Water.
Take Select Myrrh powdered six ounces. Two young Pigeons gutted and cut to
pieces; Spanish-wine and Whey, of each two pints. Juice of Limons, bigger
Housleek, and fragrant Pippins, of each one pound. Water of Roses, and
Water Lillies, of each half a pint. Two whites of Eggs. Mix them altogether in
a glass Alembick, distill them in Balneo Mariae, and preserve the water.

This water serves for the same uses as the former, and is little inferior to
it.

Another Cosmetack Water.
Take pure fine Sugar one pound, Roch-Allum three ounces. White Poppey-seed,
Flowers of Beans, Water Lillies, Violets, and greater Housleek of each one
handful, the juice of four Limons, the Crum of two white Loaves, Goats milk and
White Wind of each two pints; bruise what is to be bruised, mix and put all
together into a glass Alembick, distill them in Balneo Mariae, and keep the
water for use.

This water is good to smooth, whiten, and preserve the complexions of Ladies.

A Diuretic Water of Monsieur D'Aquin.
Take Roots of Rest Harrow, Parsley, Fennel, Eringo's, Juniper Berries, and
Alkekengi, of each two ounces; Leaves of Golden Rod, Watercresses,
Water-Pimpernel and Elder Flowers, of each two handfuls, bruise or cut them,
and macerate them all twentyfour hours in White Wind, Juice of Raddish, and
Parietary, of each two pints. Then add Narbon- Honey one pound, Venice
Turpentine half a pound; distill them according to Art in a moderate Sand-bath,
adding to every pint of distilled Water dulcified Spirit of Salt one dram.

This water is wonderfully prevalent against all difficulties of making water.
It is given from one to three or four ounces.

Another Diuretic Water.
Take Roots of Stone Parsley, Raddishes, the bigger Valerian, and Peach
Kernels, of each four ounces, Seeds of Burdock and Groundsel, of each two
ounces, Flowers of Pimpernel, Watercresses, Water-Pimpernel, Crisp-Mint, and
Venus-hair of Montpelier, of each two handfuls. Being all bruised, macerate
them three days in six pints of strong White Wind, then adding Venice
Turpentine two pound, distill them in a Sandbath, and keep the water for use.

This water works the same effects as the former, and the dose is the same.

A corrected Anti-Epileptick Water of Langius.
Take shavings of Man's Scull, Misletoe of the Oak, Roots of Piony, and white
Dittany, of each two ounces; fresh Flowers of Lilly Convally two handfuls; of
Lavender, Rosemary, and Tilet, of each three handfuls, Cinnamon six drams,
Nutmeg half an ounce, Cloves, Mace, and Cubebs, of each two drams; being all
bruised, put them into a Matras close stopped, in eight pints of Malmsey; let
them macerate for a week over a very gentle fire; then distill them in a
moderate Sand-bath, and keep the water for use.

This Anti-Eleptick water of Langius has been long in request; but it will be
much bettered by adding the shavings of human Skull, and preparing it as here
prescribed. It is given in Epileptick passions from two drams to an ounce. It
may be used also as well for the prevention, as in the cure of this distemper.
It is also very proper in all cold diseases of the Brain.

A Water to take away Freckles and Morphew in the Face.
Take Strawberries a pound and a half, Flowers of Lillies and Beans of each
half a pound; Roch Alum, Stone Alum of each half an ounce; Sal Gemmae, Niter,
Vertdigrise, of each two drams; macerate them for ten days in Malmsey- Wine,
Narbon- Honey, and White wine Vinegar, of each one pint. Then distill them in a
moderate Sandbath, and keep Water.

This Water is very proper to take away Freckles or Morphew from the Face;
dipping a Linen rag in it, and laying it upon the part, going to bed; in the
morning wash with Water of Water Lillies.

A Water against quartan Agues.
Take Roots and Leaves of Fennel, Leaves of Wormwood, Sage, Rhue, Mugwort, and
Rosemary, or Flowers of the same, and tops of Lesser Centaury; of each two
handfuls; macerate them three days in four pints of White Wind, then distill
them according to Art.

This Water is highly commended against the Fits of Agues, especially the
Quartan, given at the beginning of the fit from one to four ounces.

A Water against a stinking, virulent, and inveterate Gonorrhaea of Quercetan.
Take Root of Florence Orrice, Leaves of Cretan Dittany, and dry Mint, of each
one ounce; Seed of Agnus Castus, Rhue, Lettuce, of each six drams; Venetian
Turpentine four ounces, White Wind twenty ounces; bruise what is to be bruised,
put all together into an Alembick, distill them in Balneo Mariae, according to
art, and keep the Water for use.

This water is excellent to heal the most inveterate and malignant Gonorrhaeas,
provided necessary purgations, and other general Remedies have preceded. It is
to be given two spoonfuls every morning fasting, for several days together.

Schroderus's water against the Distempers of the Throat.
Take Leaves of wild Pear Tree. Parsley, Sanicle, Woodbine, Water-Germander,
Cinkfoil, round Birthwort, of each two handfuls. Thorough wax four handfuls,
sour Ale twelve pints; bruise the herbs, put them all into a Vessel close
stopped, and let them ferment for three weeks. Then add three ounces of Album
Graecum, and distill them all through a Bladder.

Give two or three Spoonfuls of this water to drink, against Inflammations of
the throat or Palate. It may be often gargl'd; or the Patient may dip a Linen
Rag in the water and wrap about his throat.

A corrected Anti-Epileptick Swallow-water.
Take twelve Swallows, yet in their Nests, cast them whole into a glass
Alembick, adding thereto shavings of Human Skull three ounces, Castor one ounce
and a half, powder of Misletoe one ounce, Juice of the Roots and Leaves of Male
Piony six ounces. Waters of the Flowers of Tilet, Lavender, and Lilly Convally,
of each a pint and a half, Vinegar of Squills half a pint; macerate them all
together over a very soft fire for forty hours, then distill them in a moderate
Sand-bath, and keep the Water for use.

This water has particular virtues against the Epilepsy. It is given about a
spoonful in the fit; and may be continued every day, as occasion requires,
after the use of general Remedies.

A Hysteric Water.
Take Juice of Neppe, Wormwood, Mugwort, Penny Royal, Hyssop and Elder Flowers
of each equal parts; distill them together according to Art, and preserve the
Water for use.

This Water is an excellent Remedy against all distempers of the Matrix. It is
to be taken by Spoonfuls, to five or six ounces at a Time, as occasion requires.

Another Hysteric Water.
Take Roots of Piony, Briony, Orange-Peels, of each three ounces. Flowers of
Mugwort, Fetherfew, Baume, Pennyroyal, Rhue, Savine, and Elder Flowers, of each
one handful. Myrrh and Castor of each half an ounce, Saffron two drams. Let
them macerate four and twenty hours, in Spanish Wine, Water of the Catkins of
Filberds, and Orange-Flower water, of each two pints, and distill them in a
Sand-bath.

This water is highly recommended against all Distempers of the Matrix. But the
dose of it, is to be less then that of the former, from half an ounce to two
ounces.

An Imperial Water.
Take Cinnamon four ounces, Nutmegs and Citron Peels, of each two ounces.
Cloves, Calamus, Aromaticus, Yellow Sanders, and Roots of Piony, of each one
ounce. Leaves of Laurel, tops of Hyssop, Marjoram, Thyme, Savoury, Flowers of
Sage, Rosemary, and Lavender, of each one handful; bruise what are to be
bruised, and macerate all together for twenty-four hours in White Wind and
Baum-water, of each four pints, and Orange-flower Water half a pint; then
distill them according to Art.

This Imperial water is highly commended in distempers of the head, the stomach
and the Matrix. It is also very proper to facilitate the Birth; it is given
from two drams to an ounce.

Aqua Mirabilis.
Take Cinnamon the choicest one ounce, Citron Rhind, and Nutmegs, of each six
drams, Cloves, Galanga, Cubebs, Mace, Cardamoms, Ginger, of each two drams;
bruise all together, and macerate them twenty-four hours in Juice of Baum,
White Wind, and Spirit of Wine, of each one pint; then distill them according
to Art in a moderate Sandbath.

This is an excellent water to fortify all the noble parts, and to excite
vigor in the Venereal act.

An Anti-Nephretick Water of D. de Bellegarde.
Take Narbon- Honey half a pound, Venice- Turpentine two ounces,
Nephrenick-wood and Root of Rest-Harrow, of each an ounce and a half, Lignum
Aloes one ounce, Galanga, Cloves, Cinnamon, Mace, Cubebs, and Mastich, of each
half an ounce; bruise what are to be bruised, and macerate all together for
three days in four pints of Aquae vitae; then distill them with a moderate fire.

This water is highly recommended against Gravel, and all sorts of Cholicks,
given from one dram to half an ounce either alone, or mixed in proper liquors.

A Famous Odoriferous Water.
Take Root of Florence, Orrice and Benjamin, of each an ounce and a half select
Storax six drams, Lignum Rhodium half an ounce, Aromatic Reed and Labdanum of
each two scruples; Flowers of Benjamin one scruple; being all pulverized and
put into a Matras, macerate them twenty-four hours in a lukewarm Mary's Bath,
in a pint of Rosewater, and half a pint of Orange-Flower water, the Matras
being well stopped* then distill them in the same Bath a little hotter, and
keep the water for use, mixing it with Musk and Ambergrise, of each six drams.

This water is called the Angels-Water, because of its sweet and pleasing
odor. You may, after you have infused the drugs in the Waters, strain the
Infusion, and having dissolved the Musk and Ambergrise prescribed, preserve the
Liquor under the name of Angels water. You may also make use of the sediment,
to mix it among Clothes and Linen being dried. The use of is only this water
external.

An incomparable Water for the Eyes*
Take Flowers of Corn flower or Blew bottle gathered with their Cups, and
bruised, as many as you please, macerate them in a sufficient quantity of Snow
or Snow-water for 24 hours; then distill them in a moderate Sand-bath and keep
the water for use.

This water is wonderfully effectual not only to cure most of the Infirmities
of the eyes, especially such as are troubled with Inflammations, but to clear,
strengthen and preserve the sight, especially of old people; for that reason it
is called break-Spectacle water, because they that use it, need take no care
for Spectacles. Some drops of it are to be put into the eye morning and
evening, or at any other time.

A Paralitick and Apoplectick Water.
Take black Cherries bruised four pound, crumbs of White bread one pound, Root
of Valerian bruised, and shavings of Harts-born, of each three ounces. Mace and
Cloves powdered, of each half an ounce, Saffron two drams. Flowers of Lavendd^r
and Lilly Convally, of each three handfuls. Mix all together, and macerate them
24 hours in a warm Mary's Bath, then increase the heat and distill them in the
same Bath; and preserve the water for use.

This Water is highly commended against the Apoplexy, the Palsy, and all cold
distempers of the brain, being taken from half an ounce, to an ounce.

A water to assuage the pains of the Gout.
Take Dry Ox dung, and Sperm of Frogs, of each equal parts; mix them together;
put them into a Glass Alembick, and distill them in Balneo Mariae with a
moderate heat, and keep the Water for your use.

This water is commended to appease the pains of hot Gouts, Linnen-Cloaths
being dipped therein and applied to the part affected.

A Water against the Scurvy.
Take Roots of Horse Raddish, and Garden Raddish bruised, of each one pound,
Juices of Scurvy Grass, Water Cresses, Water Pimpernel, Money-wort, Mint, Baum,
Fumitory, of each half a pint; macerate them 24 hours, then distill them in a
Sand-Bath with a moderate heat.

This Water is used with happy success in Scorbutic diseases, giving it in
the morning from one, to two or three ounces, and continuing the use thereof,
as long as necessity requires.

A Treacle Water.
Take Roots of Gentian, Angelica, Masterwort, Valerian, and Contrayerva, of
each two ounces. Citron Rinds, and Orange Peels, Cinnamon, Cloves, and Juniper
^^^^ies of each one ounce. Tops of Water Germander, Rhue, and St. John's Wort,
of each one handful. Infuse them three days in Spirit of Wine, and water of
Nuts, and Blessed T^^s^l^, of each two pints, then adding four ounces of
approved Treacle, distill the whole in a Sand-bath, and keep the Water.

This is an Excellent water to resist poison, and to fortify all the Noble
parts, being taken from one dram, to half an ounce.

Some make a Treacle water by dissolving the Treacle in equal parts of Spirit
of Wine and Vinegar, and use it so without any distillation.

A Royal Aqua-Vitae.
Take Lignum Aloes, Roots of Zedoary, Angelica, Carlin^ Thistle, and Valerian,
of each one ounce. Choice Cinnamon, Mace and Citron Rind, of each six drams;
Cloves, lesser Cardamoms and sweet Fennel seed, of each half an ounce. Flowers
of Oranges, Rosemary, Sage, and Marjoram in Flower, of each two small handfuls;
bruise what is to be bruised, and put them into a Mattress with Spirit of Wine
and Malmsey, wine of each four pints. Stop the Vessel close, and let them
macerate over a gentle fire for three days; then distill them in a Sand-bath,
according to art, dissolving in the distilled water Musk and Ambergrise, of
each a dram and a half; then put up the water.

This water though consisting of few Ingredients, deserves to be preferred
before a great number of compounded Aqua Vitae's* of famous Authors, where is
nothing to be expected, but a confusion of different qualities and different
substances. But the perfection of this is, that though there be not many
Medicaments, yet they are of great virtue, and tend all to the same end, which
is to fortify the brain, head and stomach, and all the Noble parts, when
enfeebl'd by the dissipation of the Spirits, or overpress'd by the abundance or
ill qualities of bad humors. It is to be taken fasting* from one dram, to half
an ounce, mixed in proper Liquor.

The Green Water of Hartman corrected.
Take Honey of Roses two ounces, quick Sulphur, Raw Alum, and Verdigrise of
each one ounce. Album Graecum, Tops of Savine and Elder, of each one dram.
Leaves of S^ John's Wort, Rosemary, Rhue, Plantaine, Sage, Peny-Royal, of each
half a handful. Boil all these* except the Verdigrise, for a quarter of an
hour, in White Wind, and Nightshade water, of each one pint; then dissolve the
Verdigrise, and add it to the rest being taken off the fire: strain the green
water and keep it for use.

This green Water is of excellent use for the cure of all forts of Ulcers of
the Mouth, throat and Nostrils, and in all other parts of the body, as well
Scorbutic, as Venereal. VVash the Ulcers with Cotton or Lint dipped in the
water.

A Bezoardick Balsome.
Take Distilled Oils of Rhue, Citron Rind, and Orange Peels, Lavender and
Augelica, of each half a Scruple; Oil of Amber rectified, five drops; Camphire,
four grains; Oil of Nutmegs half an ounce. Make a Balsome according to art.

This Balsome is good against Pestilential air, especially in Plague time. It
is very proper to suppress the vapors of the Matrix. Put never so little up
into your Nostrils going out of doors, or in the house against the Vapors of
the Matrix. This Balsome is also very effectual in diseases of the brain, and
may be called Apoplectick.

A Histerick Balsome.
Take Tears of Assa Fatida, Galbanum, Opoponax, Sagapen, and Ammoniack, of each
one dram. Distilled Oils of Rhue, Amber and Juniper Berries, of each one
scruple; melt the Gums in a Brass Mortar, mix them with the Oils, and make a
Balsome according to art.

This Balsome is very proper to suppress the vapors of the Matrix, put up into
the Nostrils, and to provoke the Menstruums; anointing the Navil, and lower
(...) of the belly therewith.

An admirable Vulnerary Balsome.
Take oil of Venice Turpentine, two ounces, distilled Oil of St. John's Wort,
and wax* of each half an ounce. Verdigrise and green Vitri^l, of each six
grains. Mix them together, and put them into a glass Viol close st^pp'd, expose
it to the Summer Sun for some days, and keep the Balsom for use.

This Balsom is of wonderful virtue for the cure of all sorts of curable
wounds. Pour some few drops into the wound, then apply to it a little pillow
dipped in the Balsom heated lukewarm.

Another Vulnerary Balsom.
Take Oil of St. Johnswort half a pint, Oil of Laurel and Venice Turpentine, of
each two ounces. Oil of Juniper Berries distilled half an ounce, Powder of
choice Aloes two drams, Vertdigrise and Oil of Cloves of each one dram; mix
them together, expose them to the Sun for some days, and keep the Balsom.

This Balsom is highly esteemed for the cure of all sorts of wounds.

A Stomach Claret-water.
Take bruised Cinnamon four ounces, Cloves, Ginger, Cardamoms, Galanga
pulverized of each half a dram; macerate them in the cold in four pints of Aqua
Vitae, and a pint and a half of Rosewater, for six hours in a Matras close
stopped; then filter the whole, and in the filtered liquor dissolve two pound
of pure Loaf Sugar; and the Claret-water is made.

This Claret-water is pleasing to the taste, and fortifies the stomach and the
noble parts, dissipates wind, and creates an appetite; the dose is from one
dram to half an ounce.

An Antimonial Claret-water.
Take Glass of Antimony finely powdered two drams, Spanish Wine a pint and a
half; macerate them for a week over a very soft fire, in a Matras carefully
stopped, shaking it from time to time; mix then with the whole four ounces of
pure Loaf Sugar, and two drops of Oil of Cinnamon, and keep the Claret for use.

This liquor must be preserved in a double glass Bottle well stopped. It is
very pleasing to the taste, and purges gently upward and downward, being taken
from two drams to half an ounce.

A Collyrium or Wator for the Eyes of Monsieur D'Aquin.
Take Tutia of Alexandria thrice quenched in Rosewater, and ground upon
Porphyry, and Cloves powdered, of each one ounce and a half, Sugar Candy one
ounce, Camphire, Aloes, of each one dram and a half, Spanish Wine four pints,
White Rose Water half a pint; Celandine, Fennel, Eyebright, and Rhue-waters, of
each two ounces; mix all together, put them in an Earthen Jug exactly stopped,
and expose them to the Sun for fifteen days. Then keep the water for use.

This water is very effectual against all infirmities of the eyes; using only
the clear water, and leaving the sediment at the bottom.

A Collyrium of Monsieur Fouquet.
Take Tutia prepared two ounces, Mace finely powdered one ounce, white Vitriol
one dram, F^nnel and Rose Water of each a pint and a half, Plantain water half
a pint; ^ix them together in a Stone Bottle close stopped, and expose them to
the Sun for some days; then keep the Collyrium for use.

This Collyrium is an excellent remedy for all infirmities of the eyes.

A blew Collyrium.
Take of the Water where-Quick lime has been quenched, filtered, one pint. Salt
Ammoniack powdered one dram. Put them all mixed together into a Brass Basin;
there let them stand all night, Filter the Liquor and keep it for use.

This Collyrium is one of the best remedies that can be prepared for all
Infirmities of the eyes. The color proceeds from some particles of the Copper,
which the Salt Ammoniack, and the quick Lime have corroded off, and dissolved.

A Soluble Cream of Tartar.
Take Cream of Tartar what you please, dissolve it in a sufficient quantity of
hot water, then drop into it gently Liquor of Salt of Tartar till the
Ebullition cease. Evaporate the superfluous moisture, and the Soluble Cream of
Tartar will remain.

The quantity of the fixed Salt surmounting the acid of the Cream of Tartar,
breaks the Union of its parts, and insinuating it self into its pores, makes it
dissolvable in Water cold Liquors, whereas otherwise it could not be dissolved,
but in those which are boiling hot.

Soluble emetick Cream of Tartar.
Take Crocus Mettallorum mixed with its Salts, and Cream of Tartar of each two
ounces; pulverise them very sinely, and macerate them for twelve hours in three
pints of cold Fountain Water. The next day digest them as long in a moderate
Sand-bath, and at length increasing the fire, let them boil gently. Filter the
Liquor, and evaporate it till a thin Film cover it: then set it in a cold place
to Crystallize.

The parts of this Cream of Tartar being disunited by the mixture of the fixed
Salt remaining in the Saffron of Metals; and the Cream being impregnated with
the qualities of the same Saffron, is easily dissolvable in the cold water, and
fitted to purge upward and downward, giving it from two or three, to five or
six grains, in broth, or in Wine, or some other Liqour.

A Choler-purging Electuary of Francis de le Boe Silvius
Take Pulp of Sower-sweet Prunes, thick'nd to a due consistence, ten ounces.
Cremor Tartar and select Scammony an* two ounces. Choice Rhubarb ten drams,
Biting Cinnamon half an ounce, Yellow Sanders two drams, pure Sugar clarified
and boiled sixteen ounces; Mix them together and make an Electuary according to
art.

This Electuary purges very advantageously all bad humors, especially
Choleric and Serous. The dose is from two drams, to half an ounce, in Bolus,
or dissolved in proper Liquors.

A Water-purging Electuary of the same.
Take Extract of Juniper Berries and Pulp of Tamarinds thick'nd to a due
consistence of each four ounces. Root of Jalap finely powdered an ounce and a
half. Choice Scammony one ounce, Biting Cinnamon, and sweet Fennel seed
pulverized, an* two drams; clarified and boiled Sugar ten ounces. Make an
Electuary according to art.

This Electuary is very proper to carry off Serosities, especially Hydropical,
being taken from two drams, to half an ounce, and sometimes six drams.

A Cephalic Elixir.
Take Missleto of the Oak, Roots of Piony and the bigger Valerian, of each an
ounce and a half. Piony seed, Laurel and Juniper berries, of each one ounce.
Cinnamon, Mace, Cubebs, of each 3 drams. Flowers of Tilet Rosemary and Lavender
of each one handful. Bruise what are to be bruised, and macerate altogether for
24 hours in Lilly Convally water, black Cherry water, and Spirit of Wine
rectified of each one pint and a half. Then distill them according to art. To
the Liquor distilled add refined Sugar one pound, Tincture of Ambergrise one
dram; and put up the Elixir in an Earthen pot well stopped.

This Elixir is wonderfully useful in Epilepsies, Apoplexies, and other cold
diseases of the brain, being taken fasting from half a spoonful to two whole
ones.

A Hysteric Elixir.
Take the distilled Oils of Wormwood, Pennyroyal, Featherfew, Rhue and Amber
of each six drops. Tinctures of Saffron, and Castor of each three ounces;
refined Sugar, Mugwort and Elder flower waters, of each six ounces. Make an
Elixir according to Art.

This Elixir is proper against all Infirmities of the Matrix, taking the same
dose as of the former.

An Antiscorbutick Elixir Proprietatis.
Take Myrrh of Alexandria, Aloes Succotrine, and choice Saffron pulverized, of
each four ounces. Digest them in a vessel close stopped for eight days, in a
moderate Sandbath with four pints of Antiscorbutick Spirit, then increasing the
heat of the Bath for one hour, filter the Tinctured Spirit, and keep it apart.
Then pour upon the remaining ^^ass one pint of new Spirit, and reiterate
digestion and Filtration; and then draw off the spirit in a Sand-bath with a
moderate fire, till a third part only remain; and when the Vessels are cool
preserve the Elixir. When it is to be used mix with it a third or fourth part
of the volatile Spirit of Hartshorn.

This Elixir is highly esteemed in all diseases that proceed from Corruption of
humors. But it is chiefly made use of for the Cure of the Scurvy. For it
purifies the blood, and quickens the sloth of the Circulation. It is given in
Wine or some other proper Liquor, from seven or eight to fifteen or twenty
drops. You will find the Anti-Scorbutick Spirit in its proper place.

A Stomach Elixir.
Take the distilled Oils of Cinnamon, Cloves, Wormwood, Citron and Orange peels
of each six drops; Refined Sugar pulverized, Spirit of Wine Rectified, and mint
and Orange Flower waters, of each six ounces, mix them according to art, and
make an Elixir.

The use of this Elixir is very profitable in all cold Infirmities of the
stomach, as also to fortify all the Noble parts. The dose is from two drams to
half an ounce in proper Liquors.

A Plaster of the Abbot of Grace.
Take Oil of Roses, by many infusions very odoriferous, 16 ounces. Litharge of
Gold prepared, and juice of pale Roses purified, of each eight ounces, boil
them according to art to the consistence of an emplaster; then add four ounces
of yellow wax, and the Plaster is made.

This plaster is very famous for the cure of all sorts of VVounds and Ulcers.
The operation is gentle and the scent pleasing, so that it is very fit to make
Saradraps for the cure of Cauteries.

A Plaster to strengthen the Womb.
Take Minion powdered, one pound: Ceruse prepared, half a pound. Soap ten
ounces, common Oil two pints, Orange flower water, nine ounces. Boil them
according to art to an Emplaster.

This Plaster is highly commended to strengthen the Ligaments of the Matrix,
being spread upon a round piece of Leather, and applied to the Matrix.

A Plaster for the King's Evil.
Take Emplaster of Hemlock eight ounces. Gummi Elemmi very pure, two ounces,
Red precipitate Mercury, two ounces and a half, mix them together into an
Emplaster.

This Plaster is very proper to dissolve, cleanse and heal the Soars of the
Kingsevil.

A Powder against the Ague.
Take Cinnabar of Antimony, one ounce. Common Salt roasted two drams. Powder
them together, put them into a Glass Cucurbit, and pour upon them four ounces
of Oil of Sulphur. Let them digest for two days over a moderate heat in a Bath
of ashes, then increasing the heat, evaporate the superfluous moisture. Then
wash the Mass that remains, dry it and reduce it into Powder, and mix it with
four ounces of Flowers of Sulphur, and set it over the burning Coals in an
Earthen Platter. Stir it continually with an Iron rod, and when the flowers are
consumed, pour in Spirit of Wine three fingers high, and when it is consumed,
take the remaining Mass, powder it and p^rserve* it for use.

This Powder is highly commended for the cure of all Intermitting Agues being
taken half an hour before the fit, from fifteen to twenty grains, in some Syrop
or Cordial water, and supping a little broth two hours after. Purgation and
bleeding must precede the use of it, and you may take the same dose three
times, if the first and second do not prevail. It works chiefly by sweat.

Another Ague Curer, attributed to Riverius by Rolfincius.
Take pure Gold dissolved in Royal water, and Glass of Antimony dissolved in
Aquafortis, of each half an ounce. Quicksilver dissolved in Aquafortis,
three ounces. Mix the dissolutions, and distill them through an Alembick twelve
times in a moderate Sandbath, reiterating Cohabation. Upon the powder left at
the bottom, pour Spirit of Wine rectified, and draw it off six times from the
powder. Then Calcine the powder with a wheel fire in a Crucible, almost to
Ignition. G^v^ six grains of this Powder with twelve grains of Scammony.

The Author of this Febrifuge having only given us general notions of it, we
cannot be well assured that we have the true preparation; for though the powder
that Rolfincius has described, may be good in it self, yet it does not seem to
me to correspond with all the Author has said to make it a true Febrifuge. Some
believe the three main ingredients, or Hercules's, that Reverius depends upon,
are the Mercury, Salt, and Vitriol, and that the twelve consequent sublimations
of the Mercury, are their twelve Travels; which may be reasonable, provided you
add to the first sublimation as much raw Quicksilver as is requisite to
dulcifie the sublimate. But what he means by the third man of might, I cannot
understand; for though Rolfincius, and after him others, have made choice of
Scammony, others Gummi Gutta, others of Coloquintida, others of black Ellebore;
Yet if you consider the dose of the Febrifuge, which was usually twenty grains
for grown people, and the effects of purging upward and downward, and the
proportion of the fourth Champion, it is nowhere to be found but in the
Antimony. For neither the Scammony nor the Gutta Gummi, in six grains only can
produce such great effects, nor are the Coloquinth and black Ellebore, as
rugged as they are, very probable to do it; for which reason I think the
composition ought to be thus:

A more Probable Febrifuge of Riverius.
Take Mercurius dulcis twelve times sublimated, an ounce and a half, vulgar
Emetick powder for strong, or corrected, as I have lately said, for tender
constitutions, half an an ounce, mix them together and make a powder.

This Powder finding the humors disposed, works upwards and downwards. If you
use the ordinary Emetick, but it will only work downward if you take the
Corrected Powder. And in regard the Febrifuge contains a reasonable dose of
Emetick Powder; the Mercurius Dulcis thus prepared, making the bad humors
slippery, and serving as a Corrective to the Emetick Powder, we may rationally
hope for good Effects. Riverius gave his Ague powder to all Ages and Sexes,
fasting the day before the fit. You may give six grains to little Children in a
roasted Apple, and augment the Dose according to the age to twenty grains, and
for very strong Constitutions to four and twenty.

A Cosmetick Ox Gall.
Take four pints of the Gall of an Ox digested four and twenty hours in a
Mary's Bath, Roch Alum, and Salt of Glass powdered, of each one ounce. Mix them
together, and put them into a Mattress carefully stopped; and in May expose them
to the Sun, shaking them three or four times a day; then Filter them. In the
Filtered Liquor mix two ounces of Porcellane powdered fine, and dissolved in
Spirit of Vinegar, Borax* and Sperma Ceti, of each one ounce, Sugar Candy,
three ounces, Camphire and sweet Sublimate, an. three drams. Which done, expose
them to the Sun again for ten days, shaking the Ingredients often, then filter
the Liquor and keep it for use.

This Preparation is highly esteemed for clearing the face from Morphew, to
defend it from Sun burning, and to take away the effects of Sun burning. The
face must be washed with it evening and morning; in the morning washing
afterward with water of Lillies* or Water Lillies. Or you may travel in the
Sun all day long with the face anointed with it, and wash at night, to prevent
Sun burning.

Virgins Milk.
Take the Dissolution of Litharge of Gold in distilled Vinegar, eight ounces;
the dissolution of Roch Alum in Water of Water Lillies, eight ounces. Filter
the dissolutions apart; then a while after mix them, and the Virgins Milk is
prepared.

The use of it is to beautify the hands and face. They who have by them
Tincture of Storax, and Benjamin prepared with Spirit of Wine, may make a
Virgins Milk at any time, by mixing a little of the Tincture with seven or
eight times as much of some distilled Cosmetick water. Which is the Virgins
Milk generally used now a days, by reason of its odor and good effects.

Contrayerva Stone.
Take Roots of Contrayerva, or Spanish Counter-poison, Oriental pearls, red
Coral, and white Amber prepared, of each one dram. Crabs eyes prepared, as much
in weight as all the rest; make them up into Balls with gelly of Vipers, to be
dried and and kept.

This Stone is highly commended against Poison and all Epidemick distempers. It
must be finely powdered and given in Broth, or some Cordial water, from ten, to
twenty or thirty grains, and sometimes to a dram.

The Medicamental Stone.
Take Hungarian Vitriol one pound, Salt of Niter half a pound; Ceruse, Alum,
Bole Armenian, Salt of Glass, of each four ounces, Salt Ammoniack two ounces;
beat them all carefully, moistened with common Vinegar, and bake them in an
Earthen pot over a gentle fire to the hardness of a Stone. Break the pot, and
preserve the Stone for use.

It is very proper to cleanse and cicatrize Wounds and Ulcers, to cure the
Infirmities of the eyes; the Itch, Erysipela's, and all deformities of the
Skin, and also burns. It is a Specific to stop Gonorhea's, by injection, when
the Malignity of the Venom is overcome. Dissolve an ounce in two pints of
Rainwater; then filter the Liquor, and use it either for Lotion, Injection, or
to dip Linen Rags in, and apply to the parts affected.

A Liniment for the Emrods.
Take Flowers of Sulphur two drams; oil of Eggs half an ounce, Oil of Roses one
ounce* mingle them for a Liniment to be applied to the Emrods. Or

Take Salt of Saturn, half an ounce, Oils of Camomile and Roses, and juice of
Wall Penny wort, of each two ounces. Make a Liniment according to art. Or

Take Oil of Line, the Pulp of an Onion baked under the ashes, of each two
ounces, White-wax half an ounce. Make a Liniment according to art. Or

Take the Pulp of Hog-lice, Poplar Ointment, and Oil of eggs, of each one
ounce. Extract of Opium half a dram. Mix them, and make a Liniment according to
art.

All these Liniments are proper to assuage the pains of the Emrods.

A Liniment for Tettars.
Take red Mercurial precipitate, and green Vitriol, of each one ounce, burnt
Alum half an ounce, Vertdigrise and Borax, an. two drams. Juice of red Dock,
two ounces. Hogs grease and new butter, of each four Ounces. Pressed Oil of
Henbane one ounce,

This Liniment is wonderful to cure all sorts of Tettars.

A Liniment for the Sciatica.
Take three Puppies newly whelp'd, and as many live Moles; Earth worms one
pound, Leaves of Laurel, Rosemary, Lavender, Mother of Thyme, and St John's wort
an. one handful. Boil them in common Oil and Red-wine, of each three pints, to
the consumption of the Wine. Then strain and press them strongly forth; to the
Liquor pressed forth add of yellow wax and Goose-grease of each ten ounces.

This Liniment is highly commended to appease the pains of the Sciatica, and
all sorts of Rhumatismes.

A Liniment to prevent the Scars of the Small Pox.
Take Litharge of Gold prepared, and Ceruse washed in Rose Water, of each one
ounce; Oil of the four greater cold seeds cleans'd; and Bitter Almonds and Eggs
of each half an ounce. Nightshade and Plantain Waters as much as suffices. Make
the Liniment according to art, like a Nutritum.

This Liniment is highly recommended to prevent the marks of the Smallpox.

A Liniment to stay Vomiting.
Take Oil of Nutmegs pressed, and the Queen of Hungaries water, of each half an
ounce. Distilled Oil of Wormwood, one dram Select Mastick finely palveriz'd,
two drams make a Liniment according to art.

This Liniment applied hot to the Stomach stays vomiting*

A Sleep provoking Liniment.
Take Ointment of Roses, and Poplar, of each one ounce; Oil of Henbane-seed
pressed, two drams; Liquid extract of Opium, one dram. Mingle the Ingredients,
and make a Liniment for use.

This Liniment is applied with success to the Forehead and Temples, to appease
the pains of the head, and procure rest.

A Hyacinthine Antimonial Liquor.
Take Hyacinthine glass of Antimony finely pulverized, Salt of Wormwood, of
each forty grains, speedwell-water, five ounces. Macerate them 24 hours in a
warm Bath; Then filter the Liquor, and add to it a dram of Cinnamon water.

This Liquor gently purges upward and downward all ill humors that it meets
with. It is given very appositely in all Agues, being taken from three to six
drams.

A Histerick Liquor.
Take Castoreum two drams, Saffron and Camphire an. one dram. Macerate them for
fifteen days in one pint of Aqua-Vitae without any fire. Then filter the
Liquor.

This Liquor is a Specific to suppress all vapors which rise from the Matrix.
It may be taken as occasion requires, at any time fasting, from half a
spoonful, to one whole one. It may be also put up in the Nostrils, laid upon
the temples, or carried about the person in a box full of Cotton dipped in the
Liquor.

A Caustic Liquor of Vertdigrise.
Take Vertdigrise four ounces. Salt of Niter eight ounces; being mixed
together, let them burn in an Iron or Marble Mortar well heated. Then pulverise
them, and putting them into a convenient Vessel, let them dissolve in a moist
place by dropping, and set a Vessel under to preserve the Liquor.

This Liquor is approved for the consuming rotten and proud flesh, and all
sorts of Excrescencies, and particularly those which accompany Venereal
Distempers.

A Muscilage against Chops of the Breasts.
Take white Gum Tragacanth finely powdered, two drams. Macerate them over a
very soft fire in a sufficient quantity of Rose Water, and extract the
Muscilage for use.

Muscilages of Gum Tragacanth are a Specific Remedy to cure chops and clefts
of the breasts, hands and Lips, being applied thereto.

An Anti-epileptick Oil.
Take of the shavings of Man's Scull, that died a violent death, four ounces,
Amber Pulverized; being mixed together put them into a Glass Retort, fitted
with a Recipient, and distill them in a Sand-bath with a gradual fire; distill
the Oil mixed with the Spirit, Phlegm and Volatile Salt.

Besides the particular virtues which the volatile Salt and Spirit of
Mans-Scull and Oil of Amber mixed have against the Epilepsy, the Oil which is
drawn from thence is highly esteemed for the cure of this Malady, being given
once a month every morning in some Cephalic water, from three or four, to five
or six drops. You may also anoint with it the inside of the Nostrils, the
Temples and the sutures of the Scull.

An Oil or Liquor of Antimony.
Take Hungarian Antimony, eight ounces, Sugar Candy six ounces; having
pulverized and mixed them, put them into a Glass Retort, and distill them in a
Sand bath with a Gradual fire, and keep the Liquor.

This Liquor is highly esteemed for the cure of Intermitting Agues, being given
in white wine from three, to five or six drops, at the beginning of the fit,
and reiterating the dose, if the fit return.

An Oil against Deafness.
Take Pressed Oil of Leeks, Bitter Almonds and Laurel, of each, two ounces;
Spikenard, Castoreum, and Coloquintida shred, of each one dram. Juice of Rhue,
and Whitewine of each, an ounce and a half. Put all these into a Mattress close
stopped, and let them digest 24 hours in a lukewarm Mary's Bath, then
increasing the heat of the Bath, boil them to the Consumption of the moisture,
then strain and press them out; keep the Oil for use, mixing with it afterward
six grains of the best Musk.

This Oil put lukewarm into the Ears, wonderfully helps deafness in them that
were not born deaf.

A Precipitate against the Jaundise.
Take Crocus Martis prepared with Sulphur; one ounce; Choice Rhubarb and leaves
of Senna cleans'd, of each half an ounce. Choice Cinnamon, Salt of Wormwood and
Tamariks, of each two drams. Saffron one dram. Pulverize what are to be
pulverized, and with a sufficient quantity of Syrop of Mugwort make an Opiate.

This Opiate is very proper to cure the Jaundise, especially in Virgins. The
dose is from two drams, to half an ounce in Bolus, or mixed in White Wind, or
some proper decoction. Reiterate the dose as occasion requires.

An Opiate for the Toothache.
Take Camphire two drams. Opium one dram. Castor half a dram. Having pulverized
them, mix them with Syrop of Gillow-flowers, and make an Opiate.

This is an excellent Opiate to aswage the pain of teeth: when any one is
rotten, put never so little in the hollow of the tooth, and leave it there;
renewing application as often as need requires.

A Paste to scour the hands.
Take Bitter Almonds peeled half a pound. Bruise them in a Marble Mortar,
sprinkling upon them never so little Aqua-Vitae; then add two Yolks of Eggs,
Narbon Honey, an ounce and a half. Orrice root finely pulverized; one ounce,
mix them all together and reduce them into a Paste for use.

This Past is excellent to cleanse the hands, and is easily prepared. There is
no need of wetting it in water, for it may be used as it is prepared.

Another Paste for the same.
Take bitter Almonds peeled and perfectly well bruised, and Crumbs of white
bread, of each four ounces. Infuse the bread three hours in new Milk, then
being well mash'd in a Marble Mortar, mix it with the Almonds. Afterward take
two yolks of Eggs, Narbon Honey one ounce. Burnt Alum pulverized, and Balsome
of Peru, of each one dram:

This Paste is at least as good as the former; it suffices to rub the hands
without washing. For it falls off of it self, smoothing and whitening the hands
very much.

Pills against Cachexies.
Take Trochiskes of Alhandal, half an ounce; Myrrh, choice Aloes, Galbanum,
Ammoniack, an. three drams. Mercury precipitate prepared with Gold two drams;
Scammony, Jalap, the whitest Agarick of each one dram and a half. Pressed Oil
of Nutmegs one dram, of Amber, Cinnamon and Cloves, of each six drops. Extract
of Juniper as much as suffices.

These Pills are very much recommended for the cure of Cachexies, in Quartain
Agues, the Dropsy, the Jaundise, and the retention of the Menstruums. The Pills
must be made up in two grains apiece, and taken two or three before Supper, and
an hour before Bed time: and may be taken as often as necessity requires.

Diuretic Pills.
Take Chios Turpentine, and white Vitriol sinely pulverized; an. two ounces.
Mix them, and make a Mass of Pills.

The vomitive quality of the Vitriol being corrected, and altered into
Diuretic by the mixture of the Turpentine, these Pills work good effects in
all difficulties of making water, being given from half a dram to a dram.

Sennertus's Fever Pills.
Take Oil or Liquor of Antimony Sugared, one ounce. Aloes Succotrine, half an
ounce; Ambergrise two drams. Saffron two drams and a half. Make a Mass of Pills
according to art.

These Pills are proper to cure intermitting Fevers, giving them from seven or
eight, to ten to twelve grains at the coming of the fit. They purge downwards
and sometimes provoke sweat.

Pills for the Dropsy.
Take Elaterium, and Extract of Aloes prepared with juice of French Orrice, of
each half an ounce. Choice Mastick pulverized two drams. Make them up into
Pills according to art.

These Pills powerfully purge Hydropick Waters. They are to be taken in a
morning fasting from six, to twelve or fifteen grains; using them as often as
occasion requires.

Pills against the Green Sickness.
Take Extract of Mars prepared with Musk one ounce. Extract of Aloes Succotrine
prepared with juice of Succory, six drams. Extract of Rhubarb half an ounce.
Extract of Saffron two drams. Distilled Oil of Cinnamon six drops. Mix them
together and make a Mass of Pills according to art.

These Pills are excellent to cure the Green sickness in young Virgins; taking
a scruple at a time in a morning fasting and drinking after them two or three
ounces of Wormwood Wine; and walking after it about an hour, for several
mornings together.

Pectoral Pills.
Take Tears of Storax two drams, Extract of Liquorice a dram and a half,
Extract of Saffron four Scruples, Labdanum, Olibanum, choice Myrrh, and extract
of Opium, of each one dram, Ambergrise one Scruple, Syrop of Citron Rinds, as
much as suffices. Make a Mass according to art.

These Pills are excellent to stay defluxions that fall upon the Lungs; and to
assuage the violence of Coughs. The dose is from five or six to eight or ten
grains.

A Powder against the Gout.
Take Hermodactiles, chosen Turbith, Castus, Mechoachan, and Scammony, of each
one dram. Sugar Candy two drams. Make a powder of all together for use.

This Powder is proper to purge the Serosities that feed the Gout. It must be
given in white wind in a morning fasting from a Scruple to a dram.

An Astringent Powder.
Take Bole Armenian, Sealed Earth, of each two ounces, Pomegranate flowers,
Red-Roses, Dragons-blood, Seeds of Sumach, and Whortle-berries, Frankincense
and Mastick, of each one ounce. Make them all into a powder for use.

This Powder may be given in wine, or in some decoction, from a Scruple to a
dram, in losses of blood, and in weaknesses of the stomach and Intestines. It
may be also applied outwardly, incorporated with whites of Eggs, Vinegar, or
some astringent water or decoction, like a Cataplasme, to stop defluxions, and
loss of blood, and to strengthen and close the parts.

A famous Bezoardick Powder.
Take Roots of Angelica, Spanish Counter Poison, Virginian Dragons wort, of
each half an ounce. Oriental Bezoar, Powder of Vipers and Mineral Bezoar, of
each three drams, Vnicorns-horn, and prepared Pearls, of each two drams. Roduce
them all into a very fine Powder, and mixing with it Oils of Angelica,
Citron-rind and Cinnamon, of each three drops, keep it for use.

This is an excellent powder against all sorts of Poisons and Venoms. For in
fortifying and defending the Noble parts, it expels the Malignity by sweat, or
by insensible Transpiration, given in Spanish wine or some Cordial Liquor from
a Scruple to a dram.

A Caustic Powder, or a Specific Corrosive of Paracelsus.
Take Corrosive Mercury, Sublimate three ounces; Salt Ammoniack, two ounces.
Having powdered them together, and put them into a Mattress, pour upon them one
pint of Aquafortis, which being evaporated in a moderate Cinder-bath, till the
Ingredients have acquired the consistence of a Paste: dry the whole mass with a
moderate heat, and reduce it into powder for use.

This Powder Cauterizes speedily and violently superfluous flesh, and such
excrescencies as are to be taken away. Its quick operation, and the regard
which is to be had to the nature of the Corrosive Sublimate, require much
prudence in the use of it. So that you are to put but a very little on at a
time; and to use it only upon strong bodies, and to apply it upon those parts
of the body which are distant from the Emunctories, and Noble parts.

A Dentifrice Powder.
Take Pumice Stone burnt, white Corral, Cuttle fish bone, and Cream of Tartar
prepared upon Porphiry, the Root of Florence Orrice finely powdered, an. half
an ounce: Salt Ammoniack pulverized one dram, Oriental Musk and Ambergrise, an.
three grains. Mingle them and make a Powder for use.

This Powder is very proper to cleanse and whiten the teeth. You may use it as
it is, or mixed with Syrup of Corral, or dry Roses, or with Honey of Roses, and
reduce it into an Opiate before you rub your teeth.

A famous Anti-epileptick Powder.
Take the Secondines if a Woman of a Sanguine complexion, brought to bed of her
first Child, being a boy, dried and cleans'd from the Membranes, one ounce.
Roots of white Piony, and seed of the same, of each half an ounce; shavings of
Man's Scull, put to a violent death, shavings of Unicorns horn, hoof of an Elk,
Missleto of the Oak, Roots of wild Valerian and swallow-wort, of each three
drams; Pearls and Coral prepared, Contrayerva Stone, white Amber, and seed of
Goats Rhue, of each two drams, Oriental Musk and Ambergrise, of each one
Scruple, mingle them and make a Powder for use.

This Powder produces good effects in the accidents and cure of the Epilepsy,
given in Cephalic Waters from half a Scruple to half a dram. It may be mingled
with Solid and soft Electuaries, and the use of it continued as occasion
requires.

An Incarnating Powder.
Take Oblibanum, Sarcocoll, Mastick, Myrrh, Aloes, Mummy, long and round
Birth-wort, of each one ounce, make a Powder of all together for use.

This Powder cleanses wounds, and causes the flesh to grow, being laid to them
alone, or mixed with Ointments, or in proper waters.

A Powder to assuage the pains after delivery.
Take Roots of Athamantick Spignel, and bigger Cumfrey, of each two drams,
Amber prepared, Peach Kernels cleans'd, of each one dram and a half; Cinnamon,
Mace, and Saffron, of each two Scruples. Mingle them and make a Powder for use.

This Powder is highly esteemed to assuage the tormenting pains that happ'n to
most Women after delivery. It is to be given in Broth from one Scruple to two.

It is credibly affirmed that the blood which issues from the string of the
Navel, which the Midwife cuts with her Scissars, given hot to the weight of
half an ounce, is a sovereign remedy to prevent and appease these pains.

A Powder of Violets.
Take Roots of Florence Orrice one pound, yellow Sanders, five ounces, Red
Roses; four ounces. Storax, Benjamin, of each two ounces, Ciperus and tops of
Marjoram, of each one ounce. Lignum Rhodium, half an ounce, Cloves, Aromatic
Reed, and Flowers of Lavender, of each two drams; Make all these into a course
Powder for use.

The odor of Violets which the Orrice imparts to the powder, gives it its
name. This Powder is to be put among Clothes and Linen.

An exquisite Powder of Vipers.
Take Vipers Exenterated with the hearts and Livers pulverized three ounces,
white Sugar powdered two ounces; distilled Oils of Angelica and Citron Rind, of
each half a dram. Reduce all these into a Powder.

This Powder being aromatiz'd by the Oils, and sweetened by the Sugar, works
more effectually then the ordinary Powder of Vipers. It is to be given in
proper Liquors from a Scruple to a dram.

A Chalybeate Salt against an ill habit of body.
Take Vitriol of Mars, one ounce, Sal Prunell^, two ounces, Salt extracted out
of the Dead head of Aquafortis, three ounces; Pulverize them together; then
put them into a Glass Cucurbit, and set them in a Sand-bath with a gradual fire
augmented till the matters look red, flow like water, and at last turn to a red
hard Stone, which is to be kept for use.

This Salt is highly recommended in Cachexies and Scorbutic distempers to
purge the Mass of the blood, create an Appetite, open the passages of the
Urine, divert fluxes of Rhume, provoke sleep, and to carry off bad humors by
stool, Urine and Sweat, or by insensible transpiration. It is to be powdered
and given in some proper Liquor from seven or eight, to twelve, fifteen or
twenty grains.

A Diuretic Salt.
Take the Urine of a healthy man, put into it as much Hungarian Vitriol
powdered, as it is able to dissolve; make the dissolution in a large Vessel,
that there may be Room for Ebullition. Which being ceased, put the Liquor into
a Glass Cucurbit, covered with its head, and distill off the phlegm and Spirit in
a Sand bath, first with a slow fire, then with a gradual fire increased, and
sublimate the volatile Salt at last.

This Salt composed of the volatile Salt of the Urine, and several acid
particles of the Vitriol, vigorously expels serous humors by Urine, the
passages whereof it opens. It is to be given in White Wind or Diuretic waters
or decoctions from a Scruple to a dram. It is of great use in Dropsies
dissolved in opening decoctions. For which purpose you may mix the Spirit with
your ordinary drink. The Phlegm applied to the Gout, asswages the pain thereof.
It is also good to allay the Inflammations of the eyes.

An Epileptick Spirit.
Take Flowers of Lilly Convally, Lavender, Tilet, Sage Primroses and Rosemary,
of each two handfulls. Gather the flowers in their Season, and macerate them
all together (...) six pints of Spirit of Wine rectified. Then add to them
Missleto of the Oak, Roots of Valerian, and Male Piony, of each four ounces,
being bruised and macerated eight days in a pint of Malmsey; Cinnamon, Cloves,
Mace and Nutmegs, of each half an ounce; mix them all together, and distill them
in a Glass Cucurbit covered with its head, in a Sand bath, according to art;
and preserve the Spirit for use.

This Spirit is very proper for the ease and cure of Epileptick diseases. It is
to be given from two drams, to half an ounce alone, or mixed in Cephalic
Liquors. It may be also put up into the Nostrils, applied to the Temples, and
the sutures of the Scull.

An Anti-scorbutick Spirit.
Take Juniper Berries, and Elder Berries brus'd, of each four pound, seed of
Scurvygrass, Blessed Thistle, the Garden Cresses, of each two pound. Juices of
Scurvy Grass, Water Cresses, Water Pimpernel, Horse-raddish, Arsemart, Money
wort, Celandine and Fumitery, of each two pound. Put them all into a fit
Vessel, and having mixed with them a pint of Ale-yest, set them to ferment in a
Stove, and when that is over, distill them, and reserve the Spirit.

This Spirit is excellent for the cure of Scorbutic diseases. For it breaks
the force of the acids which hinder Circulation, procuring its natural Motion,
and expelling its Impurities. It is to be taken from two drams to half an
ounce, in a morning, fasting, in Spanish-wine, or in the Spiritous Water that
follows the Spirit after its Distillation.

A Treackle Spirit.
Take Roots of Masterwort, Angelica, Athamantick Spignel, and bigger Valerian,
of each three ounces, Juniper Berries, and seed of Bishops weed, and Seseli of
Marseilles, of each one ounce, approved Treacle four ounces. The Roots and
Seeds being bruised, macerate them eight days with the Treacle in two pints of
Spirit of wine rectified; then make your distillation according to art, and
preserve the Spirit.

This Treacle Spirit powerfully resists all sorts of Poisons. It is to be given
in Spanish-wine, or in Cordial Liquors, from one to three or four drams. It may
be also put up into the Nostrils, or applied to the Temples and futures of the
Scull.

A Uterine Spirit.
Take Roots of round and long Birthwort, Piony, and lesser Valerian, of each
two ounces. Castor one ounce. Dry tops of Wormwood, Mugwort, Tansey, Fetherfew,
Elder and Camomil Flowers of each one handful. Having bruised and cut them
altogether, let them macerate three days in four pints of rectified Spirit of
Wine; then distill them according to art, and keep the Spirit.

This Spirit is very effectual to suppress the vapors that rise from the
Matrix, and to open its obstructions. It is to be given from one to two or
three drams at a time, in Hysteric Waters or decoctions. It may be also put up
into the Nostrils, applied to the Temples, or upon the Navil.

An Epileptick Syrup.
Take Missleto of the Oak, Roots of Piony, and shavings of Man's Scull,
violently killed, of each half an ounce. Flowers of Lilly Convally, Lavander,
Tilet, Rosemary, Sage, Marigolds of each one little handful. Bruise the
Missleto and Roots and put them together with the Man's Scull and flowers into a
Mattress, and pour upon them one pint of rectified Spirit of Wine, and having
exactly closed the Vessel, let them macerate a week together over a moderate
heat. Then draw off half the Spirit of Wine with a gentle heat, and preserve it
apart. The remainder being pressed and filtered, reduce it into the consistence
of a Syrup with eight ounces of purest refined Sugar. Then aromatize it with
two drops of distilled oil of Cinnamon.

This Syrup is highly commended for the prevention and cure of the Epilepsy. It
is to be taken alone, fasting, from half an ounce to an ounce. You may
reinforce the dose with a dram of the Spirit drawn off, or mix the Syrup with
Cephalic Waters or decoctions.

A Scorbutic Syrup of P. Forestus.
Take Juices of Scurvy grass, and water Pimpernel depurated of each three
pints, pure refined Sugar two pound. Make a Syrup according to art.

The use of this Syrop is very successful in Scorbutic Maladies, taken from
one spoonful to two.

Tablets of Saffron of Mars.
Take Saffron of Vitriol of Mars half an ounce, Earth worms washed in Wine
dried and pulverized, two drams. Cinnamon finely pulverized half a dram.
Refined Sugar boiled in Mugwort Water, six ounces. Make Tablets according to
art.

These Tablets are proper to open obstructions of the bowels; and particularly
those of the Matrix. The dose is from two drams to half an ounce. They are to
be taken in a morning fasting, drinking after them two or three ounces of
Wormwood Wine.

Diuretic Tablets.
Take Roots of Roast Harrow, Eringes, Fennel, Butchers Broom, and Stone
Parseley of each half an ounce, Seeds of Burdock and Groundsil of each two
drams, make a decoction of all together in two pints of Raddish water. Boil the
straining according to art with half a pound of double refined Sugar, into
Tablets, of two drams weight.

They who are troubled with gravel and stoppage of Urine, may use these Tablets
with success, taking one or two in a morning fasting.

Tablets to stop a Gonorrhea.
Take Seeds of Plantain, Agnus Castus, white Poppies, Rhue, whortles and
Henbane, Red Roses, dried Mint, and Coral prepared, of each two drams. Reduce
them all into a very fine powder, and make Tablets thereof with Muscilage of
Gum Tragacanth, and double refined Sugar, of each eight ounces. Make every
Tablet half an ounce in weight, and let the Patient take one every morning
fasting.

These Tablets are proper to stop Gonorrhea's after the use of general Remedies.

Tablets against Burstness.
Take Root of the greater Cumfrey dried, one ounce, Red Roses cleans'd from
their bottoms, choice Mastick, red Coral prepared, and Dragons blood, of each
two drams. Sugar Candy one pound. Powder all these, and make them into Tablets
of two drams weight with Muscilage of Gum Tragacanth.

These Tablets are highly commended to fortify the parts of those who are
subject to burstness: provided they use necessary Trusses. Take one at a time
at any hour, fasting, and continue the use of them as need requires.

Pectoral Tablets.
Take Pulp of the Root of Althea, one ounce, Powder of Florence Orrice Root,
and Liquorice shaved, an. two drams, Flowers of Sulphur, two scruples, Flowers
of Benjamin, one Scruple, refined Sugar eight ounces. Make up the whole into
Tablets with Muscilage of Gum Tragacanth.

These Tablets give great ease to those that are troubled with violent Coughs;
take half a one at a time, at a distance from meals, at any hour of the day,
when you are disturbed by the Cough.

A Cerate for a Mask for Women.
Take whitest wax, four pound, Sperma Ceti, two ounces. Oil of the four greater
cold seeds cleans'd extracted without fire, and Bismuth precipitated, an. three
drams. Borax, and burnt Alum finely powdered, of each half a dram. Melt and mix
them in Balneo Mariae, and at the same time dip and spread the cloth.

This preparation to line Women's Masks is very true and easy, and fit to
preserve the complexion of Ladies.

A Cerate to be laid upon the Breast after Childbearing.
Take Oil of Roses six ounce, Periwincle brois'd, three ounces; Juices of Mint
and lesser Sage, of each one ounce and a half. Boil them over a soft fire to
the Consumption of the juices, then strain and press them. Into the pressed oil
melt yellow wax cut into pieces, three ounces, when the Ingredients are half
cold, add half an ounce of choice Mastick finely powdered, and then dip the
cloth in it.

This Cere-cloth is proper to prevent the Breasts from growing big after
Childbearing; as also to change the course of the Milk, and to turn it
downward. The Cere-cloath must be laid hot upon the breasts, and wrapped up with
warm clothes, and be continually applied till the Milk be gone.

Odoriferous Trochisks, or little Cyprian Birds.
Take Powder of Willow Coals, three ounces, Labdanum two ounces, Storax,
Benjamin an. half an ounce, Mastick Sweet Tacamahacca, and yellow Amber* two
drams. Lignum Rhodium, a dram and a half. Make the whole into Trochisks mixed
with muscelage of Gum Tragacanth extracted with Rose Water, and dry them in the
shade.

This is an excellent perfume for Chambers and Rooms of Entertainment.

Other Trochisk, or little Ciprian Birds.
Take Coals of Rosemary pulverized, four ounces. Labdanum two ounces. Storax
and Benjamin, of each one ounce. Roots of Cyperus, Aromatic Reed, Mastick and
Amber, of each two drams, Cloves one dram, Musk, Ambergrise and Civet, ten
grains. With a muscilage of Gum Tragacanth extracted with Orange flower water
make up your Trochisks and dry them in the shade.

They are sweeter then the former, but their use is the same.

Other Richer Trochisks.
Take Rosin of Storax, prepared according to my directions, Choice Benjamin and
Sallow Tree ashes, of each one ounce, sweet Tacamahacca very fine, and Lignum
Aloes finely pulverized, of each half an ounce; Ambergrise one dram, Musk half
a dram. Zibet, six grains. Distilled Oils of Lignum Rhodium, Cinnamon, and
Cloves, of each six drops. Make up the Trochisks with Gum Tragacanth extracted
with Rose Water.

These Trochisks are much dearer, but they are incomparably much more sweet.

An Ointment to cure Burns.
Take new Butter two pound. The Butter being melted over a moderate Fire, put
into it, when taken off the Fire, at much Snow as the heat of the Butter can
conveniently melt. Then scumming off the Butter that swims above the
Snow-water, add to it an ounce of Venice Ceruse powdered. Camphire powdered
with never so little Spirit of Wine one dram* and mix it up into an Ointment.

This Ointment is highly esteemed for the cure of all sorts of Burns.

Another Ointment for Burns.
Take Barrows Grease, one pound, White Wind, two pints, Leaves of lesser Sage,
Ground Ivy, and Wall Ivy, Marjoram and bigger Housleek, of each two handfuls.
Boil them together over a soft fire to the consumption of the moisture,
stirring them often. Then strain and press them out strongly, and keep the
Ointment.

This Ointment is no less commended then the former for the cure of Burns.

A Yellow Ointment.
Take Butter boiled over a gentle fire, and purified from dregs and moisture,
six pound; Yellow Wax, four pound; Rosin, two pound, Venice Turpentine one
pound. Make an Ointment according to art.

This Ointment is made somewhat solid to the end it may lie upon the parts. It
is proper to cure Ulcers of the Legs, Tettars, Childblains, Chaps and Rifts of
the breasts and other parts of the body.

A black Ointment to open all Apostemes, though Pestiferous.
Take Common Oil two pound. White and Yellow Wax, Rams sat near the Kidneys,
Pure Rosin, Black Pitch, and Venice Turpentine, of each half a pound. Choice
Mastick finely pulverized two ounces. Make an Ointment according to art.

This Ointment is very proper to break all sorts of Apostemes, as also
Pestilential Carbuncles and Venereal Bubos. The Consistency of this Ointment is
harder then of other Ointments. It is to be used from the first breaking of the
Aposteme, till the cure be perfected.

A most approved Ophthalmick Ointment.
Take Ointment of Roses, two ounces. Narbon-Honey half an ounce, Choice Aloes,
and Sarcocol three days infused in Woman's Milk without stirring, but changing
the milk one a day, of each two drams. Powder of white Trochisques of Rhases,
Bole-Armenian, and Tutia prepared, of each four Scruples, White Vitriol and
Sugar Candy, of each once dram. Powder of Saffron, Myrrh and Olibanum of each
two Scruples, Theban Opium 15 grains. Make an Ointment according to art.

This is an excellent Ointment for infirmities of the eyes. Put a large drop
into the eye, and let it melt, and sleep upon it: in the morning wash with
Plantain Water or white Rose Water.

An Ointment to catch Fish.
Take Man's and Cats fat of each half an ounce, Mummy finely powdered three
drams* Cummin seed finely powdered one dram. Distilled Oils of Anise and Spike
of each six drops, Civet and Camphire five grains. Make an Ointment according
to art.

This Ointment has a wonderful virtue to draw Fish. Rub the Line with it, and
bait the hook with an Earth-worm, and then holding the Line a while in the
Water, you shall see the effects of it.

A Green Ointment.
Take new Butter boiled and purified 4 pound, Rosin, and Burgundy pitch, of
each one pound, Yellow Wax, four ounces. Make an Ointment according to art, and
when it is off the fire, add two ounces of Verdigrise powdered; stirring the
whole till the Ointment be cold.

This is a wonderful Ointment to cleanse and heal all sorts of VVounds and
Ulcers.

A Specific Purger and Sudorifick of Helmontius.
Take raw Antimony and Salt Aminoniack powdered and mixed together* of each six
ounces, Sublime the Combustible red Flowers according to art; of them take four
ounces* Pure Niter eight ounces, let them sulminate in subliming pots, and
gather the Flowers together without any wast. Dulcisy the Flowers with hot
water, till there be no more Saltness remaining. Upon this Powder dried over a
very soft fire, pour the purest Spirit of Wine, four fingers above the matters.
Put them all into an Alembick with a Recipient luted to it; then distill them at
first with a gentle fire, increased at length that the substances may boil to
dryness. Expose the Powder being perfectly dried to the fire for an hour, and
keep it for use.

I thought I could not better conclude my Pharmacopoea, then with this
Remarkable Preparation of Antimony, which provokes sweat very powerfully, and
opens the belly gently, being taken at a distance from meals, from twenty to
thirty grains, in some Conserve, in Bolus, or dissolved in some Cordial water.

The End.
The Explanation of the first Figure.
A A Furnace for the distillation of Spirit of Wine. B The Copper Vessel Tinned
within, containing the Aqua Vitae. C The Copper Serpentine resting upon a
Pillar. D The head of the Serpentine. E The Refrigerent. F Another Furnace for
the same use. G The Copper tinned Vessel containing the Aqua-Vitae H The Tin
Serpentine. I The Glass head. K The Recipient. L A Blind head. M A Funnel. NO
Two Glass heads, one upon another, the undermost of which is open at top. PP A
Mattress of Rencounter. QQ Cucurbits of Rencounter. R An Iron to cut off the
neck of the Recipients. S The stopper to stop the door of the Furnace. T A
Glass Platter. V The Pipe. X The thing that bears the Recipient for the Spirit
of Wine.
The Explanation of the second Figure.
A The Tower of the Athanor. BC Two Furnaces heated by the fire of the Tower.
DD Two Canals containing the Coals. EE The uppermost openings of the two
Canals. FF The doors of the two Furnaces. G A Wind-Furnace. H The door of the
Furnace. IT he end of the Pipe that carries the wind into the Furnace. L The
Bellows. MM Pieces of Wood that bear and serve to move the Bellows.







OO The Chimney. P An Iron square serving instead of a Grate for the Furnace. Q
A flat piece of Iron to lay upon the square. RR Stopels for the Canals of the
Tower. ST Two Crucibles. V Iron Pincers. X Iron Tongues.
The Explanation of the third Figure.
A The Furnace for the Aludel. B The Aludel. CCCCC The Pots of the Aludel* D
The head of the Aludel. EE Great Earthen pots for the distillation of the
Spirit of Sulphur. FF Glass Bells. GG Crucibles containing the Sulphur. HHH.
Three large Glass Platters. III Three Crucibles containing the Sulphur. KKK
Three Glass Bells. LLL Three Heads. M A Vessel of Glass for Circulation. N A
Glass Alembick all of one piece. O A Pelican.
An Explanation of the fourth Figure.
A The Furnace* B A Copper Vessel tinned within. C The Moors head. D A Barrel
containing Water to cool the Liquor that distills, and the Pipe that carries
the Liquor into the Recipient. E A Recipient. F The Iron horn for Regulus's. G
A Steel Mill. H A Furnace for four Retorts at a time. IIII Four large
Recipients. K A Vessel to separate the Oil from the distilled Waters with a
weike. L A Mould.
An Explanation of the fifth figure.
A A Furnace of Reverberation. B The Duomo. C A Furnace for the distillation of
herbs in a Sand-bath. D The Copper Vessel tinned within, containing the herbs.
E A Copper head Tinned within. F A Copper Vessel for the Balneum Mariae. G A
Glass Bottle with a Tunnel for Filtrations. H A Recipient. I A Glass Hell. KK
Twins. L An Earthen Capsula. M The stopple for the notch of the Capsula. N A
Mattress with a long neck. O The head of the Mattress. P The Recipient. Q The
Philosophers Egg. R A Glass Vessel to separate the Oils. S Another Glass Vessel
for the same use.


CHYMICALL CHARACTERS
Notes of Metalls
Saturn, Lead Jupiter, Tin Mars, Iron. ^ Sol, the Sun, Gould Venus, Copper,
Brass Mercury, Quicksilver Luna, the Moon, Silver

Notes of Mineral and other Chymicall things
Antimony antimony ^ ^ Arsenick ^ ^ Auripigment ^ ^ Alum alum ^ Aurichalcum ^
^ ^ Ink ^ Vinegar vinegar Distilld Vinegar {vinegar distilled} {vinegar
distilled} Amalgama ^ Aqua Vitae ^ Aqua fortis, or separatory water aqua fortis
Aqua Regis or Stygian water aqua regis Alembeck alembic Borax ^ ^ Crocus Martis
^ ^ Cinnabar {cinnabar} {cinnabar} Wax {wax} Crocus of Copper or burnt Brass ^
^ ^ ^ ^ Ashes ashes Ashes of Hearts ease potash Calx ^ Caput Mortuum ^ Gum ^
Sifted Tiles or Flower of Tiles ^ Lictum sapientiae ^ Marcasite ^ ^ ^ Sublimate
Mercury ^ ^

Notes of Mineral and other Chymicall things
Mercury of Saturn ^ Balneum Mariae ^ Magnet ^ Oil {oil} ^ ^ To purifye
{purify} Realgar ^ ^ ^ Salt Peter {nitre} Common Salt {salt} ^ ^ Salt Gemme ^
Salt Armoniack {sal ammoniac} {sal ammoniac} Salt of Kali ^ ^ Sulphur {sulphur}
^ Sulphur of Philosphers ^ Black Sulphur ^ Soape ^ Spirit ^ Spirit of wine ^ ^
To sublime subli ^ Stratum super Stratum or Layer upon layer ^ ^ Tartar tartar
^ ^ Tutia ^ Talck ^ A Covered pot ^ Vitriol vitriol Glass glass Urine

Notes of the four Elements
Fire fire Air air Water {water} ^ Earth earth Day {day} Night {night}

FINIS
THE INDEX FOR THE Chemical Part.
A.
ACid Spirit of Salt Ammoniack. 142. Ague, to cure it by Riverius. 233. For the
same, another more probable. 234. Alum, its preparation. 137. Amber, its
preparation. 159. Its Distillation. 160. Ambergrise its preparation. 158. Its
nature and uses. ib. Ammoniack, its distillation. 64. Antimony in general. 206.
Antimony Diaphoretick. 212. Particular preparations of it. 219. Antimony
Diaphoretick, to be found at the bottom of the Aludel, in preparing Flowers
thereof with Niter. 211. Aqua-Fortis's. 135. Aqua Mirabilis. 227. Aqua vitae
Royal. 229. Arsenick, its preparation. 156. Regulus of Arsenick, 157. Rubies of
Arsenick. 156.
B.
BAlsoms Bezoardick. 229. Hysteric. ib. Vulnerary admirable, ib. Another for
the same. 230. Balsoms of Saturn. 191. Bees, their preparation. 108. Benjamin,
its Distillation. 62. Bezoar of Jupiter, its preparation. 194. Bezoar Mineral,
its uses. 117. Bismuth, its preparations. 221. Counterfeited. 222. Bloodstone,
its preparation, 121. Boles, their preparation. 115. Butter of Niter
vitrioliz'd, its preparation and uses. 137.
C.
CAlcination of Alum. 137. Calcination of Copper. 182, 183. Calcinations of
Iron. 176, 177. Calcinations of Lead, 186, 187. Calcination immersive of Gold
by Regal water, or by the means of Gold Fulminant. 263. Calcination of Gold by
the Inquart. 164. Calcination of Gold, with Hartshorn. 168. Calcination of Salt
Ammoniack. 139. Calcination of Silver, 170. Camphire its distillation. 59.
Cantharides, their distillation. 111. Castors their preparation. 113. Changing
of Copper and Ver^digreese into Vitriol. 183. Cherries-black to be distilled as
Raspis. 45. Cheslops their preparation. 110. Cinnabar common. 197. Its uses.
ib. Cinnabar of Antimony. 214. etc. Cinuamon its distillation. 56. Citrons,
look distillation. Claret water for the stomach. An Antimonial Claret water,
ib. Cloves, their distillation. 57. Collyrium for the eyes of Monsieur D'Aquin.
230. Another of Monsieur Fouquet. ib. A blew Collyrium. 231. Contrayerva Stone.
234. Copper, its preparation. 182. Coral, its preparation. 123. The Corroline
secret. 198. A Cosmetick Ox-Gall. 234. Crabs of the River, their distillation.
107. Cream of Tartar, 84. Soluble. 231. Soluble and Emetick. ib. Crystal of
Tartar Emetick. 84. Crystal, its preparation. 122. Crystal of Venus, their
distillation. 185. Cyprian Birds. 243. 244.
D.
DIstillation of Baume. Distillation of hot bitter Herbs* and without scent. 9.
Distillation of Flowers in general. 15. Distillation of juicy herbs, esteemed
to be cold* 6. Distillation of Myrtle leaves. 14. Distillation of Roots, and
the various substances to be drawn from thence. 4. Several distillations of
roots. 15. Distillation of Sorrel. 8. Distillation of Scurvigrass, Cresses, and
other Anti-scorbutick plants. 11. Distillation of Vegetals in general. 3.
Distillation of Wormwood. 10. Of Lavender-flowers. 19. Of Rosemary-flowers. 20.
Distillation of the most odoriferous waters to be drawn from the flowers of
Vegetals* 22. Distillation of Ardent spirits very odoriferous, which may be
drawn from odoriferous flowers and herbs, 23. Distillation of seeds and
berries. 24. Seeds of Annise, ibid. Seeds of Scurvigrass, Mustard, and Cresses.
26. Elder-berries. 27. Juniper Berries. 28. Distillation of Wheat, Rye, Barley.
30. Distillation of Pulse, 31. Of Beans, 32. Distillation of Woods, 33. Lignum
Rhodium, 34. Guaiacum, ib. Elder-wood, 36. Distillation of Fruits, Gourds,
Cucumbers, Melons, 37. Of Citrons, 38. Raspriss and Strawberries, 44. Walnuts,
45. Distillation of Wine, 47. Distillation of spirit of Wine, 48. Dregs or
Faeces, 80. Dulcifying spirit of Salt, 130. Dulcifying spirit of Niter, 131.
E
EArths, their preparation, 115. Earth of Vitriol, 150. Earthworms, their
distillation, 110. Elaterium, 77. Electuary choler purging of de le Boe
Sylvius, 231. Electuary water purging of the same, ib. Elyxir Cephalic, 231.
Elyxir Hysteric, 232. Elyxir Proprietatis antiscorbutic, ib. A Stomach Elyxir.
ib. Emetick Powder of Antimony, 217. Flowers of Rosemary, 105. Fomentations,
265. Frontlets, 270. Frying, 23. Fulmination, 25. Fumigation, 25. Furnaces, 36.
Close, 37. Open, ib. Portative, ib. Fusion* 25.
G
GArgarisms, 60. Gas, of Vanhelmont, what it is, 24. Gellies in general, 75.
Gelly of Hartshorn, 76. Gelly of Quinces, ib. Gelly of Rennetings, 75. Gelly
of Vipers, 76. Gentian, 67. Ginger, 143. Clysters, 62. Gold, whether it afford
any virtue to the medicament it is mixed with, 146. Granulation, 25.
H.
To clean the Hair. 171. Hartshorn rasp'd preferred before burnt or
Philosophically calcined. 149. Hartshorn burnt looses its virtue. 122.
Hermodactyles. 84. Hiera Piora of Galen, 164. Hiera of Coloquinth, ib. Honeys
in general, 104. Honey of stinking Arrach, 106. Honey of Herb Mercury, 105.
Honey of Rosemary Flowers, ib. Honey of Roses, 105. Honey of Violets, 106.
Honey of Water Lillies, 10^. Humectation, 14.
I.
Jalap. 84. Immersion. 14. Imperatoria or Masterwort. 67. Indian Leaf, or
Malabathrum. 139. Infusion, 14. Infusions, 54. Injection^, 61. Insolation, 16.
Juices in general, 52, 53. Juice of Cistus, 144. Juices of Wormwood and
Eupatory, not to be dried. 185. Juice of Quinces how extracted. 71. Joice of
Liquorice white, 112. black, 111. Juice of the undergrowth of Cistus, 144. How
to extract the Juices of Viscous Plants, 101. Tulops, 57.
L.
Lapidification, 26. Of Liniments, 222. Liquefaction, 30. Loochs, 108. Looch
reformed, ib. Looch Pectoral, 109. Looch of the Ancients, ib. Lotion, 11.
Lotions, 270. Lozenges vid Tablets. Lutes, 44.
M.
Maceration. 19. Magnesia Saturnina, 193. Manna, 167, 168. etc. Manus Christi
pearl'd, 112. Marum, or Herb Mastick, 180. Masticationes. ib. Maturation, 17.
Measures Physical, 49, Mechoacan, 83. Medicaments in general, 6. Of the virtue
of Medicaments, 7. Method of the second part, 51. Methridate of Damocrates,
142. Mixture. 32. Matification, 32. Mummy, 220.
N.
Negot, a French Canditement, 74. Nutrition, 15.
O.
Olibanum, 143. Olives how to be pickled, 74. Opiates, 131. Opiate of Solomon,
150. Opium, 154. hot. ib. its operation, 135. Opobalsamum, 143. Opoponax. 140.
Orvietan Antidote. 151. Oils extracted by the Press, 196. Oils of sweet
Almonds, 197. Of bitter Almonds. 198. Of Wallnuts and Filberts. ib. Of Kernels
of Peaches and Apricots, ib. Of Nut-Ben, 199. Of Anise seeds, ib. Of Nutmegs,
200. Of Eggs, 200. Oil by infusion or decoction, 29^* Of Wormwood, ib. Of Roses
simple, 202. Compound. ib. Of Jasmin, 203. Of Quinces, 204. Of Capers, ib. Of
Mastick, 205. Of Nard, ib. Of St. John's wort, 206. Of Orrice; 207. Of
Earthworms, ib. Of Castor. ib. Of Scorpions compound, 209. Of Foxes, 211. Of
Vipers. ib. Of Lizards. 212. Of Myrrh by draining, 272. Ointments, 222. Of
Roses, ib. Of Ceruse, 223. Of Popler, 225. Pomp^oligos, 226. Nutritum, 228. Red
dying Ointment, ib. Restructive Ointment, 229. Pomatum for the shops, 230.
Martiate Ointment, 231. Marsh Mallows Ointment, 232. Basilicon Ointment, 233.
Egyptian Ointment, ib. Apostles Ointment, 234. Golden Ointment, 235. Parsely
cleansing Ointment, ib. Cleansing Ointment of Rosin, 236. Agrippa's Ointment,
ib. Neapolitan Ointment, 237. Oxymel simple, 106. Oxymel of Squills, 107.
Oxymel Winie. ib.
P.
Parseley Macedonian, 139. Pepper long, 144. Persumes, 269. Pessaries, 61.
Petasites, vid. Butter hur. The great Philonium, 153. Pills, 182. Hiera simple,
183. Hiera with Agarick, ib. Agarick Pills. 184. Aggregative, ib. Ammoniack of
Quercetan, 185. Coctrice, ib. D^ Cynoglosso, 186. Foetidae, 187. Ruffi, ib.
Golden Pills, 188. Sine quibus, ib. Rhubarb Pills, 189. Stomach Pills, ib.
Hysteric Pills, ib. Mesentery of M. D'Aquin, 190 Mercurial, 191 To stop a
Gonorrhea, 191 Against a virulent Gonorrhea, 192 Boiled Turpentine Pills, ib.
Against the Cholick of M. D'Aquin, 193 Catholicae of Poterius, ib. Hydropick of
Bontius, 194 Tartar Pills of the same, ib. Tartar Pills of Schroder, ib.
Sagapen Pills of Camillus, 195 Of Plasters, 240 Plaster of Ceruse, ib.
Plaster of Diapalma, 241 Diachylon, 242 Diachylon compound, ib. Plaster of
Muscilages, 244 Plaster Polychrest, ib. The black Plaster, 245 A Cephalic
Plaster, ib. A Stomach Plaster, 246 The Tobacco Plaster, ib. The Hemlock
Plaster, 247 A Diaphoretick Plaster, ib. The Galbanum Plaster, 248 The
Melilot Plaster, ib. The Betony Plaster, 249 Manus Dei Plaster, 250 Andrew
Cruce's Plaster, ib. Magnet Plaster of Angela Sala, 251 Magnet Arsenical
Plaster, ib. The Divine Plaster, 252 Paracelsus, ib. A Plaster for the
Sciatica, 253 A Stomach Plaster, 254 A Plaster for the Matrix, ib. Oxycroceum
Plaster, 255 A Plaster against burstness, ib. Another of the same, 256 A
plaster for fractures and dislocations, 257. Plaster of frogs with Mercury,
258 A Stiptick Plaster, 259 A Plaster to cure the pricking of a Horses foot,
260. A Vesicatory Plaster, ib. The Alablaster Plaster, 261 Plaster of Sperma
Ceti, ib. A Plaster for Issues, 263 Diatragacanth corrected, 129 A Plaster
contra Gauglia, 262 Another for the same, 263 Pompholix, 226 Potions, 59
Powders, 115. Powder against Abortion, 126 Of Aromaticum Rosatum, 118 Against
violent bleeding; 128. Cephalic to create cheerfulness, 120 Countess of Kents,
117 Corna^lines, 130 For a dentifrice, 126 Another, ib. Cold Diamargarite Gold,
119 Diarrheadon reformed, 118 Diatlon Santalon, 120 Digestive, 126 Dysenterick,
128 Anti-epileptick, 122 Hungarian, 121 Hysteric, 127 Another, ib. Against
hard labor, 126 Against Madness, 123 Nephretick, 1^9 A sneezing Powder, 129 Of
Frogs Tedders, 127. Of Vipers, 117 Against the Worms, 127 A Powder to fill up
dead Bodies, 220 For the same, 221 Precipitation, 27 Preparation, 10 Pressing,
21 Projection, 25 Proportion of Oil and Wax in Ointments, 235 Purgation of
Medicaments, 11
Q
Quilted Caps, 269
R
REctification, 29 Reduction, 32. Registers what, and why so called, 38
Rhubarb, 84 Robs in general, 69. Rob of Elder-berries, 72. Rob of Mulberries,
71 Rob of Quinces, 71 Rob simple, 70
S
SAffron, 141 Salt, 5 Ammoniack, the wonderful effects, 238 Scinckes, 145
Schoenanthus, 143 Seal Hermetick, 46 Seeds of Bishops-weed or Annin, 139
Macedonian Parsley, ib. Seseli, ib. Cretan Daucus, 144 Of Violets preferred,
157 Senna, 83. Sifting vid. Crebration, Silk, 146 Snake-weed, 68 Solution
Chemical, 15 Spignel, 67 Spikenard, 138. Spike C^^ti^k, 141 Spirit. 4
Spiritualization, 32 Spode, 155 Squells, their Preparation, 181 Storax, 140
Stratification, 25. Streining, Sublimation, 29 Sugar of Roses, 110 Sugar of
Roses pearl'd, 112. Sulphur, Suppositories, 62 Swallow-wort, 67 Syrups in
general, 79 Syrups acid not to be kept long upon the fire, Syrups, The opinion
of the Ancients touching the boiling of acid juices for Syrups, 79. Syrup
Anti-Asthamatick, 93 Syrup Anti-epileptick, ^2 Syrup Anti-scorb^^^k, 99 Syrup
Chachectick opening, 87 Syrup Chalibeate, 98 Syrup of Cinnamon Royal, 8^ Syrup
of Citron juice, 79 Syrup of Coral, 81 Syrup of Coltssoot, 92 Syrup of Red
Currants, 80 Syrup Emetick, 103 Syrup of Flowers of Coltsfoot, 92 Syrup of
Gillow-Flowers, 96 Syrop of Granases, 80 Syrup of Jujubs, 92 Syrup Lienterick,
98 Syrup of Marsh Mallows, 86 Syrup of Peach Flowers, 102 Syrup of Pippins
compound, 101 Syrup of wild Poppy, 95 Syrup of Quinces, 82 Syrup
Antinephretick, 84 Syrup of Balm, 96 Barberries, 80 Syrup of Castidox, 97 Cyrup
of Roses, 95. Syrup of Roses volutive, 102 Syrup of Roses with Agarick and
F^rma, 103 Syrup strengthening, 91 Syrup of Sucory compounded with Rhubarb, 89
Syrup of Tortoises, 94 Syrup of Verjuice, 80 Syrup of Violets violated, 100
Syrup of Water Lillies, 94 Syrup to draw forth watery humour^* 83 Syrup of
Wood Sorrel, 80 Syrup of Wormwood. 85
T.
TAblets in General, 110. Tablets of Althea simple and compound, 111 Tablets
Cachectick, 112 Tablets Cordial, 113 Tablets of Crocus Martes, Simple, 114
Compound, ib. Tablets of Magnanimity, Tablets Stomachical, 113 Tablets against
the Worms, 114 Terms Physical* 49 Tincture, 19 Tormentil, 68 Torrefaction, 23
Treacle of Andromachus, 131 Treacle reformed of Monsieur D'Aquin, 135 Treacle
diatessaron, 141 Trituration, 12 Trochisks, 171 Of Agarick, ib. White Trochisks
against Coughs, 173 Black for the same, ib. White Trochisks of Rhases, 174 Musk
Trochisks, ib. Of Gallia Moschata, 17^ Of Carobs, ib. Of Gordonius, 176 Of
Rhubarb, 177 Of Capers, ib. Of Myrrh, 178 Of Roses, ib. Of Camphire, 179 Of
sweet Perfumes, ib. Of Cyphi, 180 Of Squils, 181 Of Vipers, ib. Turbith, 83
Turpentine, 144 Tutia, 226
V
VEssels necessary for both Pharmacies, 47 Vinegar against Agues, 69 Vinegar of
Roses, 65 Vinegar of Squills, ib. Vinegar treacl'd, 66 Vipers, observations
upon them, 116 Vipers grass of Virginia, 136 Vnicorn's horn, the horn of a fish
called Narwall, 122 Its virtues, ib. Vitrefaction, 26 Vstion, 23
W
WIne stibiated, 63 Wine with wormwood, 62
X
Xylobalsamum, 143
Z
Zedoary, 68
THE INDEX FOR THE Galenick Part.
A
ACacia, 145. Acids for the Volatils in fixing themselves, 31. Acids mixed with
Alkali's, breed the Stone, 130. How Acids fix the Volatile Alkali's, 31. Acoms
the true, 145. Agarick, two sorts, and their virtues, 143. Alkohol, 73.
Alleluia, 80. Alum, where lies its astriction, 229. Ameos, or Bishops-weed,
139. Amomum, 139. Amalgamation, 25. Angelica, 67. Animals in general, 6.
Apophlegmatisms, 60. Apozemes, 57. Aromaticks sweet, proper for Possaries, 61.
Aromaticks cannot endure the fire long without dissipation, 22. Aromatization,
22. Aromatic Reed, 180. Afpalathus, ib. Assation, 23. Athanar, its fabric and
uses, 40, etc.
B
BAgs or Stomachers, ^69. Balneum Mariae, 35. Balsom, 213. Apopleptick, ib.
Another of the same, 214. To provoke sleep, ib. For the stomach, 215. For the
womb, ib. For children breeding teeth, ib. For the hands, 216. Common Balsom of
Sulphur, ib. Balsome of Sulphur with Annise-seeds, 217. Balsome of Arceus, ib.
The Spanish Balsom, ib. The green Balsom of Metz, 218. The Samaritan Balsom,
ib. Balsom of the Balsome Apple-plant, 218. A balsome to ease pain, 219.
Balsome of Judea, 138. Balsome of Peru, 139. Bath of ashes, 35. Sand-Bath, 35.
Bath of Steel-filings, 35. Baths and Half-baths, 265. Baths evaporating and
dry, 267. A Bath for women, 267. Bdellium, 145. Birthwort, which for Treacle,
137. Bolus's, 59. Bone of a Dears heart, 149. What to be used instead of it,
when not to be had, ib. Butter-burr, 69.
C
CAlcination, 24. Calefaction, 16. Caps quilted, 269. Cardamoms, 68, 139.
Carline Thistle, 67. Carpo-balsamum, 141. Castoreum, 140, 141. Cataplasmes,
266. Cementation, 25. A Cerecloth to wrap dead bodies, 221. Of Cereclothes in
general, 222. A Cerecloth cooling, 238. A Cerecloth of Saunders, ib. A
Cerecloth for the stomach, 239. A Cerecloth of Sulphur, 239. Choice of
Medicaments, what things requisite thereto, 9. Choice, vid. Election. Chemical
Pharmacy, the principals of it, 2. The subject, object, and end of both
Pharmacies, ib. Definition and names of both Pharmacies, 1. Cineration, 23.
Circulation, 19. Citron-peels condited, 73. Glarifying, 21. Coagulation, 30.
Coction, 17. Cohobation, 20. Collyriums, 271. Coloring, 22. Composition of
Medicaments, 33. Conditements, 72. Condited Eringo's, 73. Condited
Citron-peels, 73. Confections, 131. Confection Alkermes, 145. Confectio Hamech
corrected, 163. Confection of Jacinths, 147. Conserve of Bugloss, 78. Conserve
of Burrage, 78. Conserve of Elecampane, 76. Conserve of Roses soft, 77.
Conserve of Roses solid, 78. Conserve of Water Lillies, 78. Contrayerva, 136.
Corporification, 32. Correction of Coriander-seed with vinegar ill, 161. The
same correction of Dates as bad, ib. Costus, 138. Crebration, 13.
Crystallization, 31. Cubebs, 145. Curdling, 32. Cutting glass, the manner, 48.
D
DAucus Cretan, 144. Decoctions in general, 54. Cephalic, 56. Cordial, 55.
Hepatick, 56. Pectoral, 55. Definition of Both Pharmacies, 1. Detmation, 25.
Diapalma dissolved, 241. Difference between Galenick and Chemical Pharmacy, 1,
2. Digestion, 19. Dissolution, 15. Distillation, 28. Dittany Cretan, 68, 139.
It flows contrary to the vulgar opinion, 68. Doronicum, or Wolfs-bane, kills
most fourfooted beasts; yet wholesome to man, 120 Dragon's blood, 191. Dung, the
heat of it, 16.
E
EBullition, 21. Of Earth, 5. Election, 8. Electuaries, 131. Diascordium
corrected, 149. De Satyrio, 152. Of Lawrel-berries, 154. Electuarium Mecletie,
135 Opener and purger of M. D'Aquin, 156. Catholicon with Rhubarb, ib.
Lenitivum, 158. Lenitivum for Clysters, ib. Diaprunum simple and compound, 159.
Diaphenicon, 160. Laxative Benedict, 161. Caryocostinum, 162. Of Fleawort
corrected, 165. Against the Dropsy of M. D'Aquin, 166. Diacarthamum, 167. The
use of the powder of this Electuary, 169. Solutive Electuary of Citron, 169. Of
juice of Violets, 170. Of juice of Roses, ib. Elixation, 20. Embalming of dead
bodies, 219. Emplaisters, vid. Plasters, Emulsions, 57, 58. Against the
Dysenterick, ib. To kill worms, 59. Epithemes, 268. Eringo-roots condited, 73.
Errhines, 60. Evaporation, 30. Euphorbium, 153. Exhalation, 30. Extinction, 23.
Extraction, 30.
F
FErmentation, 17. Filtration, 21. Phlegm, 3. Fire, and its degrees, 34.
Fixation, 31. Emmets, their distillation, 112. Elyxirs, 66. Elyxir
Proprietatis, 67. Extracts of Mars, 181. Extracts of Gold, 168. Extracts of
Vegetals, 68. Aloes, 73, etc. Briony roots, etc. 76. Coloquinth. 75. Laudanum,
72. Jallap, 78. Extract of Opium, 69. Extract Panchymagogue, 79. Of Scammony,
77. Rhubarb and Senna, 74. Tithymal, 76.
F
FIxation of volatile Salt of Vipers, 101. Flowers of Antimony, 211. And their
several sorts, ibid* etc. Flowers of Benjamin, 62. Flowers of Bismouth, 221.
Flowers of Gold with Salt Ammoniack, 167. Flowers of Salt Ammoniack, 139, 140,
etc. Flowers of Sulphur, 151. Their uses, 152. Flowers of Tin, and their
preparations, 192. Frogs, their preparation, 106.
G
GLass of Antimony, 206. Its virtues and uses, ib. etc. Its correction, 207.
Gold, its preparations, 162. Gold Fulminant, its effects, 163. The reasons for
it, 165. Grapes, their various substances, 46.
H
HArtshorn, its preparation, 103. Honey, its preparation, 109.
I
JVniper-berries, their distillation, and the several substances drawn from
thence, 20. Iron, its preparation, 175.
L
LAvender French, 21. Lead, its preparation, 186. Its distillation, 189. Lignum
Rhodium, vid. Distillation. Lime, its preparations, 118. Reflections upon the
nature of it ib. etc. A Liniment for the Emrods, 235 For Tettars, ib. For the
Sciatica, ib. To prevent the scars of the small Pox, ib. To stay vomiting, ib.
To provoke sleep, 236. Linetree, 21. Linx stone, its preparation, 120. Liquor
Antimonial Hyacinthine 236. Liquor of Antimony Glacial, 214. Liquor of Antimony
Glacial, how used by Monsieur Pelegrin, 216. No Mercury in it, as some imagine,
215, Liquor of Antimony sweet as honey, 220. Liquor honeyed of Antimony, ib.
Liquor of Antimony red for the cure of Ulcers, ib. Liquor fixed of Arsnick,
157. Liquor drawn from the sediment of the flowers of Salt Ammoniack, with the
Bloodstone, 142. Liquor Hysteric, 236. A Caustic liquor of Vertdigreese,
ibid. Liver of Antimony, 208.
M
MAcicot* 187. Magistery of Amber* 160. Of Jalap, 78. Magistery of Saturn, 187.
Of Scammony, 77. Magistery or milk of Sulphur, 152. Magnesia Opalina, 208.
Manna, its distillation, 55. Man's blood, its preparation, 98. Man's scull, its
preparation, 96. A Mask for Women's faces, 243. Mastich, its distillation, 61
Medicines extracted from the body of man, 95. The Medicamental Stone, 23.
Mercurial liquors, of several sorts, 205. Mercury, its preparations, 194.
Discourses upon precipitation of Mercury, 200, 201. Mercurius Dulcis, 203.
Metals in general, 161. Minium, 187. A muscilag^ against chops in the breast,
236. Myrrh, its distillation, 63.
N
NIter, its fixation, 132. Reflections upon that operation, ibid.
O
OIntments, 244. To cure burns, lb. For the same, ib. A yellow ointment, ib. A
black ointment to open Apostemes though pestiferous, ib. An approved
Ophthalmick Ointment, 245. An Ointment to catch fish, ib. A green Ointment, ib.
An Opiate for the Toothache, 237. Order and method of the third part, 1. Amber,
161. Oils of Amomum, 58. Annise, 25. Antimony Glacial, 214. Barley, 30. Baum,
13. Beans, 32. Benjamin, 63. Camphire, 59. Cantharides, 111. Cardamoms, 58.
Cheslops, 110. Cinnamon, 57. Citrons, 38. Cloves, 58. Crevisses, 107. Cubebs,
58. Earthworms, 110. Elder-berries, 28. Emmets, 112. Euphorbium, 61. Frogs,
106. Gum-Ammoniack, 64. Gum-Elemmi, 61. Guayacum, 35. Harts-blood, 105.
Hartshorn, 105. Honey, 109. Juniper Berries, 29. Lavender, 19. Lignum Rhodium,
34. Mace, 58. Manna, 55. Man's scull, 96, 97. Man's blood, 98. Mastich, 61.
Mustard, 26. Myrrh, 63. Myrtles, 14. Nutmegs, 58. Olibanum, 61. Oranges, 39.
Peacocks, 112. Pepper, 58. Pitch, 61. Roses, 17. Rosin, 61. Rye, 30. Sandarack,
61. Sarcocole, 61. Seeds of Scurvy Grass, Cresses, etc. 27. Storax; 63. Sugar,
55. Su^, 37. Tacamahacca, 61. Tartar, 52, 53. Toads, 106. Turpentine, 60
Vipers, 101. Wax, 10. Wheat, 30. Wormwood, 614. Oil Anti-epileptick, 236. Oil
of Antimony, ib. Oil against deafness, 237.
P
PAste for the hands, 237. Another for the same, ib. Peacocks, their
preparation, 112. Pearls, their preparation, 125. Pills against Cachexies, 237.
Pills Diuretic, 238. Pills of Sennertus, ib. Pills for the Dropsy, ib.
Against Green Sickness, ib. Pectoral pills, 238. A plaster of the Abbot of
Grace, 232. A plaster for the King's Evil, 233. Polychrestes Salt, 133.
Astringent powder, 239. Powder Bezoardick, ib. Powder of the Abbot of Grace,
232. Powder to cure an Ague, 233. Against the Gout, 238. A powder Caustic,
239. A Dentifrice powder, 239. A famous Anti-epileptick powder, ib. A powder to
incarnate, 240. A powder to assuage the pains after delivery, ib. A powder of
Violets, ib. An exquisite powder of Vipers, ibid. Precipitates of Mercury red,
197* Precipitates of Mercury yellow and rose-colour, 199. Precipitates of
Mercury white, 200. A precipitate against the Jaundice, 237. A purger specific
and sudorifick of Helmont, 242.
Q
QVicksilver, how refined and turned into Cinnabar, 196.
R
REfining of Gold by Cementation, or by Antimony, 166. Refining of Gold by
Mercury, 167. Refining of Gold by the Coppel, 166. Refining of Silver by Lead,
171. A refutation of Frederick Hoffman touching juice of Citron, 39. Regulus of
Antimony ordinary, 209. Its preparation and uses, ib. etc. Regulus Martial,
210. Ro^b of Antimony purgative and not vomitive, 220.
S
SAffrons of Antimony, 208. Saffrons of Mars opening and astringent, 176. The
reason of their red color, 177. Sage to be distilled as Rosemaryflowers, 21.
Salt Ammoniack, its preparation, 139. Salt of Baume, 13. Salt Chalybeat,
against an ill habit of body, 240. Salt Common, its preparation, 127. A Salt
Diuretic, 241. Sea Salt, the great inclination it has to fusion, 129. Salts of
Vegetals, 80. Of Carduus Benedictus, 81. Salt essential of Tartar, 82. Salt
fixed of Tartar, 85. Salt foliated of Tartar, 88. Salt volatile of Tartar, 89.
Salt volatile oil of Tartar, 93. Salt of hot bitter herbs, 9. Salt of Jupiter,
192. Salt of Lavender, 19. Salt of Mars, 178. Salt of Myrtle-leaves, 15. Salt
of Niter, its preparation, 131. Salt of Roses, 18. Salt of Saturn, 187. Salt of
Scurvigrass, Cresses, etc. 12. Salt of Sorrel, 8. Salt of Sulphur, Salt of
Vitriol, 150. Salt of Wormwood, 10. A Searcloth for Women's breasts after
childbearing, 243. Seeds of Fennel, Caraways, Cummin, Dill, Hartwort,
Smallage, Bishops-weed, and the like, to be distilled the same way as
An^^se-seed, 25. Silver, its preparations, 170. Its dissolution into Crystals,
17^. A Syrup Epileptick, 242. Scorbutic of Forestus, ib. An Anti-scorbutick
spirit, 241. An Epileptick spirit, 241. Spirit of Niter, 134. Spirit
Philosophical of Vitriol, 217. And Crystals drawn from it. A Treacle Spirit,
241. Spirit of sweet Vitriol, and some other spirits of Vitriol, 149. Spirit of
Wine tartariz'd, 50. A Spirit for the womb, 242. Sorrel, the distillation of
it, 8. Stiptick water of Monsieur Matte la Faveur, 145. Stones, and precious
Stones, their preparation, 118. Stone Infernal, 174. Stone of Judea, its
preparation, 120. Storks, their distillation, 108. Sublimate Corrosive, 202.
Sublimate dulcified, 203. Sugar, its distillation, 54. Sulphur, its
preparation, 151. Its distillation, 153. Sulphur of Antimony, 218. Sulphur of
Venus, wrongly so called, 186. Sut, the distillation of it, 36.
T
TAblets of Saffron of Mars, 242. Tablet Diuretic, ib. Tablets to stop a
Gonorrhea, 243. Tablets against Burstness, ib. Pectoral Tablets, ib. Talk, its
preparation, 126. Tartar, its distillation, 51. Tartar vitrioliz'd, 87. Tin,
its preparation, 191. Its distillation, 193. Tincture of Benjamin, 62.
Tinctures Chemical of Vegetals, 65. Tinstures of Gold, 168 Tinctures of Mars,
180. Tinctures of Silver, 172. Toads, their preparation, 105. Trochisks
odoriferous, 243. Other Trochisks, 244. Richer Trochisks, ib. Turpentine, its
distillation, 60.
V
VInegar, its distillation, 53. Vipers, their distillation, 100. Vitriol, its
preparation, 144. Its distillation, 147. Precipitates, Earth, or Sulphurs of
Vitriol, 146. Vitriol of Mars, 179. Urine, its distillation, 99. Vrinous spirit
of Salt Ammoniack, 140.
W
WAters, their preparation, 116. The Queen of Hungary's water, 20. Waters
Regal, 135. Water of Vitriol, 147. Water Apoplectick, 223. Bezoardick, 224. For
the Stone, ib. For the same, ib. A water of Pigeons, ib. Another of the same,
ib. A Cosmetick water, 225. A Diuretic water of Monsieur D'Aquin, 225. Another
of the same, 225 Langius Anti-epileptick water, ibid. A water to take away
Morphew, ibid. A water against quartan Agues, 226. A water against virulent
Gonorrheas, 226. Against distempers in the throat, ibid. An Anti-epileptick
Swallow water, ibid. A Hysteric water, ibid. Another for the same, 227. An
Imperial water, ibid. An Anti-nephretick water of D. Bellegard, ib. A famous
odoriferous water, 227. An incomparable water for the Eyes, 228. A Paralitick
and Apoplectick water, ibid. A water to assuage the pain of the Gout, ib. A
water against the Scurvy, ib. A Treacle-water, ib. Hartman's green water
corrected, 229. Wax, its distillation, 109.
Z
Zink, 222.

