THE CHARACTER OF A Town-Gallant; Exposing the Extravagant Fopperies of some
vain Self-conceited Pretenders to Gentility, and good Breeding.
A Town-Gallant is a Bundle of Vanity, composed of Ignorance and Pride, Folly,
and Debauchery; a silly Huffing thing, three parts Fop, and the rest Hector: A
kind of Walking Mercers shop: that shows one Stuff to day, and another to
morrow, and is valuable just according to the price of his Suit, and the merits
of his Tailor: A Spawn of Gentility, that inherits only the Vices of his
Ancestors, and is like to entail nothing but Infamy and Diseases on Posterity.
His first care is his Dress, and next his Body, and in the fitting these two
together, consists his Soul and all its Faculties. His Trade is making of Love,
yet he knows no difference between that and Lust; and tell him of a Virgin at
Sixteen, he shall swear then Miracles are not ceased. He is so bitter an Enemy
to Marriage, that one would suspect him born out of Lawful Wedlock, For he
never hears Matrimony named, but he sweats and starts as bad as at the Salute
of a Sergeant, and has 40. Lines of ^^^jegium Conjurgium, got ready by heart to
rail at it. But for the most delicious Regreation of Whoring, he protests a
Gentleman cannot live without it; And vows Mahomet was a brave Bully and
deserves to be Worshipped, because he had the wit to make his Paradise a
Seraglio, and the Joys of the Bliss to consist of plump Wenches, etc. The
Devil has taught him Chemistry, whereby he can extract Baudry out of the most
modest Language. So that he makes Cai^ speak it, And turns Admonitions into
obscenity. For his mind is a Room hung round with Aretines Pictures, and the
Contemplation of them is all his Devotion: Every thing with him is an incentive
to Lust, and every Woman Devil enough to tempt him, Covent Garden Silk-Gowns,
and Wapping Wast-coateers, are equally his Game, for he watches Wenches just as
Tumblers do Rabbets, and plays with Women as he does at Cards, not caring what
Sult he turns up Trump.

All his Talk is Rhodomontade and Bounce, calling a Nobleman Jack as
familiarly as his Footboy, and seldom naming a Lord without adding, My Cozen:
Whatever he does, he cries is like a Gentleman, and indeed it is only like it as
a Broakers Ware is to a Mercers, or Long-lane compared to Cheapside; for he is
a Wit of an under Region, that does but Zany the truly Brave and Noble, grossly
imitating on the Low Rope, what the other does nearly on the Higher. He Confers
Titles of Honor on all his shabby Companions, to create himself the greater
esteem with his Land-Lady (who adores him as a more accomplished Knight, than
she ever met with in Parismus or Amadis of Gaul.) And when he is going to take
a Run with a Common Crack in the Park, Swears he has an Assignation from a Lady
of extraordinary Quality. His Hangers on call him Man of Blood, and by his own
Report he is as stout as a Turkey-Cock, yet, he never was in any Service, but
building Sconces; nor Duel, but with his own Footboy or a Drawer; for he is so
Prudent as not to Exercise his Courage against any that dare turn again, and
has got more Bastards than ever he made Fatherless Children; yet perhaps at
first he will be Saucy, and bluster like the four Winds in Painting, but if you
begin to be as high as he, strait the Bubble breaks, and then he Swears, -- I
Gad sir, I ever honored you, but you are a passionate Gentleman, and will not
understand a jest.

Think not because I repeat so often he Swears, that I Tautologize in his
Character, it is only to make the Picture more like the Life, for all his
Discourses are Buttered with Oaths, which he uses Euphoniae gratia, and is as
curious in their Newness as the Fabon: In which he seems a Kinsman to the Man
in the Moon, for every Month he is in a New Mode, and instead of true Gallantry
(which once dwelt in the Breasts of Englishmen) he is made up of Complements,
Cringes, Knots, Fancies, Perfumes, and a thousand French Apish Tricks, which
render him only fit to be set on a Farmers Hovel to scare away Crows. He
places his very Essence in his outside, and his only Prayers are, that his
Father may go to the Devil expeditiously, and the Estate hold out to keep his
Miss, and himself in good Equipage. He thinks it the rankest Heresy in the
World, to believe any Man can be Wise or Noble, that is in plain Clothes. And
therefore looks down with Contempt on every body, whose Wigg is not right
Flaxon; And calls the whole Tribe of Levy dull Fellows, because they go in
Black, and wonders any People should think they can ever speak Sense, When they
wear neither Laced Crevats, nor Pantaloons.

To trace him ab origin, His Breeding was under the wing of a too Indulgent
Mother, who took a World of pains to make him a Fool, and attained her end at
the Age of Discretion. At School he learned only how to Rob Orchards, and the
Generosity of Bribing other Boys to make his Exercise. And staid at the
University just long enough to Commence Drunkard, and get by heart the name of
his College to vapor with; from thence be posted to one of the Inns of Court;
but in four Years time, never read six Lines in Littleton, for he loved a
Placket better than a Moot-case, and was more in his Mercers Books, than in
Cocks, or Plowdeas. For Learning he says is Pedantry, unbecoming a Gentleman;
and Law, a thing fit only for Draggle-tayld Gown-men, that have no way of
raising a Fortune, but by setting (two civil Gentlemen) John-a-Noaks, and
John-a-Stiles together by the Ears: He has got a shorter Cut to all Arts and
Sciences, than Raymund Lully, with his Ars Mirabilis; and thinks the Seven
Wisemen of Greece, mere Ignoramusses, to one that understands the Humors of
the Town. It Is but wearing Fashionable Clothes, talking loud, and Laughing at
all one does not understand, and the business is done.

His whole Library consists of the Academy of Complements, Venus undressed,
Westminster Drollery, half a dozen Plays, and a Bundle of Bawdy Songs in
Manuscript, yet he is a shrewd Linguist. Impudence he calls the Boon Assurance,
and unmannerliness, the Genteel Negligence. He talks nothing but Intrigues,
Gust^'s, Garnitures, Repartees and such modish Fustian, which he Hedges in on
all occasions, or indeed without any, and if you bar but forty words, you
strike him Dumb. He admires the Eloquence of, Son of a Whore, when it is
pronounced with a good Grace, and therefore applies it to every thing; So that
if his Pipe be faulty, or his Purge Gripe too much, It Is a Son of a Whores
Pipe, and a Spawn of a Bitches Purge. For New-minted Phrases he has much
enricht our Language: 'Twas he brought, I beg your Diversion, into fashion, and
may have a Patent for the sole use (as first Inventer) of that Noble
Complement, Let me be Damned, and my Body made a Gridiron to Broil my Soul on,
to Eternity, If I do not Madam, love you confoundedly.

Till Noon he lies a bed, to digest his over-nights Debaucht, and then having
Dressed himself, and paid half an hours Adoration to his own sweet Image in the
Looking-glass, he Trails along the Streets, observing who observes him, to the
French Ordinary, where he swills his Paunch with good Cheer and Burgunds, and
tells at Dinner, how his Physic workt last night, and Swears never any Clap
plagued him half so much as that he has now upon him. Cursing his Doctor for a
Quacking-Bastard, that understands a Gentleman's Disease no more than a Farryer.
After this, the Coach is called to hurry him to the Playhouse, where he
advances into the middle of the Pit, struts about a while, to render his good
parts Conspicuous, pulls out his Comb, Carreens his Wigg, Hums the
Orange-Wench, to give her, her own rates for her China-Fruit, and immediately
Sacrifices the fairest of them, to the shrine of the next Vizor Mask. Then
gravely sits down, and falls half asleep, unless some petulant Wench hard by,
keep him awake with treading on his Toe, or a wanton Complement; Yet all on a
sudden to show his Judgment, and prove himself at once a Wit and a Critic, he
starts up, and with a Tragical Face, Damns the Play, though he have not heard
^at least understood two Lines of it. However, when it is done, he picks up a
Miss, and pinching her fingers in a soft Tone, and looks most abominably
Languishing, he Whispers, Damn me, Madam! If you were but sensible, and all
that of the Passion I have for you; and the Flames which your irresistible
Charms, and all that have kindled in my Breast, you would be merciful, and
Honor me with your Angelical Company, to take a Draught of Loves Posset at
next Tavern. But if he finds her honest, and cannot prevail, then he cries
aloud, Damn ye for a Puritanical Whore, what make you in the Pit here: The
Twelve-penny Gallery with Camblet Cloaks, and Foot-boys is good enough for you.
And so raises his Seige, and leaves her.

Whither he goes next, I dare not follow him, for it is certainly a Bawdy House,
by what Name or Title soever it may be Dignified or Distinguished: Here he
meets a Squadron of his Fellow Gallants, and having heightened their Spirits
with Jollity and Wine, they are fit for any thing but Civility: And when they
vouchsafe to Ramble homewards, about One or Two a Clock in the Morning, they
set up the dreadful Sa, sa, more dangerous to meet, than an Indian Running a
Muck. In these Heroic humors has many a Watchman had his Horns Battered
about his Ears; and the trembling Constable been put besides the Gravity of his
Interrogatories, and forced to measure his Length upon the Ground. The first
man they meet they Swear to Kill, and set all the Women on their Heads; and so
they proceed till the rattling of Broken Glass Windows, the shreiks of
distressed Damsels, and the Thunder of their own Oaths, and Execrations, fills
all the Neighborhood with horror, and makes them verily Conclude, That the
Devil and all his Lifeguard are going a Processioning.

Next Morning, his Tailor, his Mercer, his Haberdasher, and his Sempiress,
stand all like a Guard of Switzers about his Chamber door, waiting his
Uprising: To avoid the Gauling of whose small Shot, He instantly dispatches a
Light Horseman, to call Mr. Glister-pipe his Apothecary, Who encountering this
desperate Band of Creditors, only with two or three Glasses, as though that day
he had Purged, drives them all to their Holes, like so many Foxes. For the name
of Physic is the only Amulet against a Dun, and a sufficient Quietus ^est, to
any beleaguered Gentleman.

Thus the Iliads of our Gallants Accomplishments, may be Crampt up in a
Nut-shell. His three Cardinal Virtues, being only Swearing, Wenching, and
Drinking; and if other men's lives may be compared to a Play, his is certainly
but a Farce, which is acted only on three Scenes. The Ordinary, the Playhouse,
and the Tavern. His Religion (for now and then he will be prattling of that too)
is pretendedly Hobbian: And he Swears the Leviathan may supply all the lost
Leaves of Solomon, yet he never saw it in his life, and for ought he knows, it
may be a Treatise about catching of Sprats, or new Regulating the Green-land
Fishing Trade. However the Rattle of it at Coffee-houses, has taught him to
Laugh at Spirits, and maintain that there are no Angels but those in
Petticoats: And therefore he defies Heaven worse than Maximine; imagines Hell,
only a Hot house to Flux in for a Clap, and calls the Devil, the Parsons
Bugbear, and sometimes the Civil Old Gentleman in Black. He denies there is any
Essential Difference betwixt Good and Evil, deems Conscience a thing only fit
for Children, and ascribes all Honesty to simplicity, and an unpractisness in
the Ways and Methods of the Town.

By these Extravagancies does he Signalize himself above Common Mortals, and
counts all other Dunghil-Spirited Fops, that are not as madly Wild and Wicked
as himself. Thus is Civility, Virtue, and Religion, booted out of the World,
and Folly, and Atheism exalted and promoted: For this is the Bell-Weather of
Gallantry, whom our Younger Fry of Gentlemen admire for a Hero. And by these
Arts does a man now a days come to be counted a Person well bred, and fit for a
generous Conversation, though in Truth it is only his Estate that Guids his
Vanity, and his Purse that can Compound for his Follies; for of himself he is a
painted Butter-flye: A Baboon, usurping Humane Shape; or (to use his own silly
nastly Phrase) Mine A -- se all over. And so I leave him behind me, till I meet
him next time, either in the Kings-Bench-Walks, or an Hospital.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Rowland Reynolds in the Strand, 1680.


