A CHARACTER OF FRANCE.

To which is added, Gallus Castratus. OR AN ANSWER TO A LATE Slanderous
Pamphlet, CALLED The Character of England.

Si talia nefanda and facinora quis non Democritus?

LONDON, Printed for Nath: Brook; at the Angel in Cornhill, 1659.

TO THE Impartial Reader.
ASinus ad Lyram, Room, room for a Monsieur newly come out of France to cast
the Urine of the English Nation: He begins with, My Lord, you command me to
give you a minute account, as I understood your meaning, I have discoursed as
little of truth as I could, and endeavored to render my self as ridiculous as
my fanatic Genius could permit me. Pardon me, Honored Countrymen, if the
Libel of this uncivil Stranger has enforced these extravagant expressions from
my Pen; certain I am, that his exorbitant Satyr, besides its several gross
mistakes has Herod-like destroyed the Innocent, spared no Sex, his inveterate
malice having extended it self to the profaneness of playing with holy things,
he afterward, Demagoras-like, goes about to poison and disfigure the reputes
of our English Ladies, with such black and unworthy aspersions, such falfe
traducings, I might write Lies, to the height of such abuse, as to raise a
passion in the most calm and most undisturbed mind, that carries either candor
or bravery with it, insomuch, but that it is below the Spirit of a Gentleman to
engage his Honor against such unworthiness, he is fitter to be answered with
the point of a Rapier, then to have such a signal courtesy done him, for any
person so to descend as to vouchsafe any other way of answer: through the
urgency of some of my dear friends I have undertaken this task, with that truth
and ingenious civility that a stranger should meet with, first retorting the
Monsieur a short Character of his Country, and afterward, in answer to him,
vindicated our own: the latter I have dedicated to our injured Ladies:
Courteous Reader, I present these my unworthy endeavors to thy impartial
censure:

Farewell.
Reader,
BE pleased to take notice, that there is now in the Press almost finished, a
Book Entitled, Englands Worthies, select lives, of the most eminent Persons of
the three Nations, from Constantine the Great, to the death of the late
Protector Oliver Cromwell.

A CHARACTER OF FRANCE.
BEing to describe this Large Continent, I shall offer no Essay either upon the
mode of Christianity there, (leaving that to the Dictates of that Divinity
implanted in the soul; and although not unworthily thought it is much
delapsed, yet De sacris nil nisi bonum) nor will I play with the Crowns and
Representatives of God, nor their Will or Governments, although there might be
found Gall enough for that subject; but I think it fit to begin with the
common, but freest of the Elements, the Air.

The Air in general is not so pure, but it may admit of priority, and that I
may justly give to England; for the French enjoy it either scalding hot, or
miserably cold; so that it cannot be denied by any observant Traveller, but in
a year, a miracle in Nature is produced, (the reduction of the opposite Zones
to Friendship in one Climate) our Snow that only mellowes the clod here, there
devoures it; and with us, that Sun that would but warm and cherish here, there
wastes and withers. Their soil (like their faces) cannot much boast of its
charms every where; for as Bodin says, Exploratum est, deserta and inculta
loca, si aquis and viis adjungimus, duos Galliae trientes auferre: That is, the
Deserts, Waters and Ways put together, take away the two thirds of France;
which the tract between Bordeaux and Baijon, and the sterile pitiful places
called The Land of Gascoigne, do to the neighbors (as their uncomfortable lot)
well ascertain. As for a Conclusion, the breathing of the Earth, the induct of
the Air, may be the purest, cleanest, and subtilest, if scabs, itch, punaries,
and such like efflorescencies may be termed pure: The Country it self bearing a
more then ordinary affinity and friendship to the Stocks and the Gallows, Wine
and Hemp being two of their best commodities.

The Creatures or Inhabitants, that daily draw their Vigor from these (much
like the Earth or soil they Live on) either too near to their Sun of
Government, or Frozen to death by its Absence, the great ones frying in Luxury,
the poor ones starving in penury, so that that which God only inflicted as a
Curse to Adams seed, here it is made a plague to that Curse: The poor peasant
shaving not that Comfort to eat that which was purchased by their sweat and
labor, but at the time of its product, then are Marpyes and Vultures ready to
snatch it from the Jaws of the almost starved Labourer, and that perhaps to
satiate the crazed Lust of some Libidinous Goat, so that which is counted a
Miracle on Gods part, is here very Common to unbridle the rational Souls, and
turn them poor Asses into these shapes. So that hope, the turn-key of the
Soul, the spur of high Actions is here so Languid that if a peasant can but by
ambition gain the purchase of clean Canvase breeches for holydaies, and his
wife a Buckram Petticoate for Wakes and Sundays, these are like to wait upon
them, like their good Genius, to the hour of their dissolution: And if well
kept may be entailed to two or three generations. As for their Liberties their
feet enjoy, they cannot boast much of being called free, since if not by nature
they are brought to hooves; yet they by their monstrous cloggs are near
resembled to them, if we survey the somewhat taller sort of them we shall find
them generally to be a speaking fashion, such as have parted with their
judgments for the situation of their clothes that have taken a great deal of
pains to be ridiculous, there being such a confederacy, betwixt them and their
modes to make them appear puppyes, they share more of the semstresse then of
the Tailor. Their outsides half Linen, so that there can scarcely a
distinction be made betwixt their uprising and walking abroad it being natural
to them to Live more by their own heat then by the warmth of their clothes,
which, is the reason, that there are so many foot-boys, as numerous as their
beggars, which are so many and so impudent that in rideing they shall swarm
about your horses like flies, and be more troublesome.

But to proceed and prosecute their Court gallantry, I confess they are more
absolute; furnished with the Mode of Command and appear to be Stars, (or
rather Meteors of the Court) yet with their Leaves try to cut them up and give
a due estimate of them.

A french Gentleman of this equipage, is one that weighs no Action, but by his
own standard: Admires nothing that is not admired by others in himself. He is
wonderfully pleased when others vouchsafe him a Laugh or smile, though to abuse
him: yet is his Conceit so high that he proposes in all Incounters a disdain
suitable to his resentments, his motions so Excentricall and Irregular, and
withal so sudden, that if Pythagoras his opinion concerning transmigration
be true, he may boast of an Extract from Ginny, though the Citizens of those
woods are much to able and outdo him by a natural instinct. Really you would
think that nature had only left him unfinished and pind on his Limbs till a
further opportunity, they are so versatile and Loose, so resembled by his
discourse that if he be wound up at the period, you shall not know whether it
were discoursing, or scolding; And if a Rhodomontado of his valor, be not an
Ingredient in this Chart, the composition is defaced utterly; and if you should
observe their Garbs, Shrugs, Stops, Cringes, Actions; they much come near the
Mode of a Mountebank or Jugler, and if you will but make search into his
repository (his pocket) you will swear it; when you shall find a Miscellany of
professions, as tools for Barbers, Tooth-drawers, Surgeons, Apothecarys,
Tailors, what not? and it may be a bit in pickle for his lost appetite. But
above all properties this must not be forgotten, he is a sworn servant to
Venus, that she rather may be called the Gallick Goddess then the Cyprian
Deity; nay they do so superearrogate in this, that they turn one Sex into
another and take pleasure of that which good old Nature made for a shame; And
this Luxe of body is so really worshipped, that indeed they are high Zelots in
the Employment, that I believe three parts are clapped and marked with the brand
of this Goddess, so that it may be concluded that they cannot be so much in
Love. Let the beauty be never so great, without a considerable sum of money
be introduced to commit Matrimony in their frolicks, they spare not the
external ornaments of their Madams, they cannot at such seasons wear a piece
of ferret ribbon but they will cut it to pieces, and swallow it in Urin to
celebrate their better fortunes, being furnished with such convenient boldness
to show themselves expert draughts-men, rather then fail, with a piece of
Charcoale they will draw all manner of baudy figures and that not in the
Hieroglyphick only, but in the most demonstrative unhandsomenesse they can
invent.

As for gameing (the true pimps of time and Luxury,) they are so inconsiderate
of the approach of penury, that (as Mr. Howell reports, a Physicians Son (at
his being there) played in one night away above sixty thousand Crowns: and one
Jonas a keeper of one of these Game pits (in the suburbs of St. German,) some
days and nights had above a thousand in the Box; this may well justify the
Master of Spring-Garden for his ^xorbitancy in getting. For Drinking (another
Luxe) they are not so sober as they would invite us to think, but that
plentifully they will Sacrifice to Bacchus: and when Venus has worried them,
Bacchus and Ceres must recrute them again. Hear what Ammianus Marcellinus
says they are, Vini avidum genus Affectans, ad vini simi litudinem multiplices
potus; that is, they are a generation greedy of Drink, and Lovers of several
compotations or draughts, witness Rablais and the young Lady (a modern Author
tells us of,) that when the fumes of the prceeding Compotation had sung her a
Lullaby to Morpheus, a young Boar taking this offered opportunity, became
picklock to her Cabinet and by this means or tenure in soccage was made a
Gentleman.

I Confess it has been Accounted a piacle in the Virgins to drink wine, yet I
can assure you that intolerable yoke is almost kicked off; for they dare dash
their water with this Creature so strongly that often they dash the brains of
that Element away and of their virginity too. But for their eating I cannot
blame them, to blame our long fitting at Meals, since that shall do wrong to
the^ in their often Commessations; which is according to the French Custom,
five times in one natural day; so that it is a common saying in France, Come
let us go to dinner quickly, that we may have time for a Collation in the the
Afternoon, that we may go soon to supper, that after we may take a Nuncion,
that going to bed betimes we may rise early to our breakfast: But besides
these, when you find not their Chaps wagging, the bell may towl for their
dissolution: And really you will be mistaken if you think they trouble themselves
much with Mastication or Grinding it, for they tumble it down whole and leave
the effect to Gods providence and natures bounty, but as touching the more
particular management of their diet for the ordering of the materials: They
fail not to derive their subtilty from some of the hard put to it besieged
Garrisons, they make a Little to go so far. Somethings they do which they would
have seem wonderful, for they are a people full of ostentation, they pretend
strangely to preposterous dishes and are admirable in frieing of frogs with
parsley, etc. Which for the most part the men set forth the table with, the
woman being exempted as they are such Grobianaes of sluttishnesse; they are
admirable Alchymists for the paunch, they will extract Gold out of roots,
Mushroomes or any thing they dress, which as one writes, may rather be called
a drinking then an eating meal, so that it may truly be said of them, that
though they eat much they spend little having a trick beyond us Englishmen that
they will eat their very drink by morsels: They talk much of the Gusto, but you
must not imagine their hodge-podge-pipkin diet to be so wholesome for the body
as abateing of the hard word, to be relishing for the pallat; for it may
rightly be said of them that they trade more in sauce then in meat, their Cooks
being much of Nebuchadnezars Employment, though not of such Antiquity; for the
most part, I cannot say simpling but constantly picking of Sallets.

As for their Clothing the Camelion is not more colorable, the Are not more
changeable the Wind not more unconstant, and so impatient of any thing that
bears the impress of Antiquity (Lord what becomes of old women!) that had not
God given a sable night to give birth to a new day, I know not whether the most
part had not had their dependence on the shade ere this, or else in a
Melancholy Fit become Eunuchs: their chiefest preludes to Courtship being
their Coverings, and those various.

Now I will give your eyes a treatment in the viewing of their Courted Deities
(their Females,) much resembling the Egyptian Numens both in color and
smalness; being bits of Natures bounty, and things as it were half beautified;
Nature having crowded parts together, which by coalition becomes a French
Madamoseile: For if you please to view them in all parts, you will find indeed
a handsome medly, nature having been so courteous, as what wants in one part is
fully made up in another: for as their wastes are very slender, they are seldom
without a kennel in their Lapps, which may be mistaken for two or three little
dogs, their shoulders are so fixed, as you would deem them the daughters of
Atlas; yet not with so heavy a burden, having light heads and lighter Fancies
to balance their bodies the better. Nature has laid a thwacking foundation or
Buttress to some parts, that she knew would be much used; witness their
Posteriours, which are so goodly and ample, that they serve as a Bulwa^k to the
other parts of the body; being (like their dirt in Paris) too strong for a
close siege; and what munition is there I suppose sometimes may be known to be
whole Cannon.

Though their mouths are more than ordinary stretched to the Appetite, yet are
their eyes small enough, and indeed horrible fierce and black; yet if stirred,
(as a little fire is quickly lighted) you shall find galliardy enough to cloy
you all the year after.

Their hands I must needs allow a large share in the Charity of the Graces; and
so might their faces have challenged a Throne in the Court of Venus, had not
Nature forgot to scour the earthly tincture off them; yet they seem to me a
good piece of work unpollished, or a building not yet beautified; so that there
may be found a remedy for necessity, but none for rapture or charm: And
certainly the French Ladies had no being, or were not famed when the Poets of
old perceived such splendour and glories from the faces of their Devotors; for
else it had been a Fiction (with a witness) to have attributed these to a
subject not at all capable of the reception.

Their beams and rays (I mean their hair) as the Poets luxuriously baptize
them, are not, I protest, those bright beams that were of old so deified, nor
those sun beams, those threads of gold, those golden nets, etc. if you please to
allow these a resemblance, you may more justly call them beams of Erebus, rays
sent from Nox and Saturn, rather curld or wreathed clouds then glorious rays;
yet I must say this, had not good Nature allotted them this tincture (which is
the only foil to their russet faces) I suppose a man might have endured their
witchcraft without motion, except of stomach, yet nevertheless the most part of
that Sex may justly claim a privilege from honest Don Quixot (to be styled
Ladies of the ill-favored faces) and had not the Countries heat put a forward
salacity upon their Males, so that any meat will serve their greedy appetite,
these poor souls might have as well expected Beauty as Courtship.

Their dispositions have much of vivacity, a Converse as free as the Air, and
as universally courted, and so sweetly are they membred with a tongue, that it
may give a hint in finding the perpetual motion, friendly Nature having set it
with so strong a spring, that after she has wound it once up, it will keep its
course to the tomb, if not afterward; so that, I suppose, no Land does so
tyrannize, or put such incessant drudgery upon that member as the French, since
though they have many holy days to every petty Saint, yet this could never
have the comfort to find any hour of rest: since these were none of Pythagoras
his Scholars, to whom was commended this, digito compescere labellum, not to
speak much till in the age of wisdom; nor did they ever sacrifice to
Harprocrates their freedom and customary chat, being a strong enemy to this
Deity and his followers: I must give them this Eulogy, that they are no sullen
people, but free, open breasted, and take as much liberty to come so near their
primitive nakedness, that if it were not for the injuries of the Air, I dare
affirm they would scorn these fig leaves of garb to cover them; but as much as
they can they set some upon the stall, hoping it may induce Passengers to think
well of their Commodities within: yet I will assure you they are very coy of
their lips: it may be this may be assigned as a reason, knowing that Nature by
their curtayl'd stature has made the backside too near the market. And when I
salute their cheek it shall be my honor to be contented, since really their
breath is not the Quintessence of Roses; neither is a salute by a kiss much
amongst them, since they are so discreet as to keep at a distance that which is
deservingly branded with a Noli me Tangere; and further, if kisses be only
Intentions, their quick active principals had rather sooner be at the work: But
I shall leave with this Apology to those that are Stars amongst them, as
deserving a more gallant character, both Gentlemen and Ladies, and those noble
souls I blot out, and set them aside, this character, having as much honor for
desert as any Creature living that pretends to serve them.

Their Cities are not to be hist at, neither shall I allow them the bragging
character that is given them, since if they had not fonldy bestowed all on
Paris, and let the rest go a begging, my Charity might have been greater; so
that the French say, it is rather a World then a City; so it is indeed, a world
of confusion, a world of dust, a world of Lacquies, a world of stink, and
indeed a world of fooleries and vanities.

The City is large, yet if you look upon its stuffing you will find the brain
is too large for the senses, so that the crowd of people, their quick motion,
their nasty deport, their native dust, give such a welcome in a hot day to
Travelers, that if their streets were not broad the Inhabitants would be
strangled in their sleep for want of breath, it is so pestered with Inmates,
having in one Tenement three or four Families.

Their Buildings are uniform, yet poorly lined within, so that in a word you
may call it a pile of Royal Almeshouses; indeed it is no wonder that they
should brag so of the spaciousness of their houses, when the smalness of their
Kitchins makes them the larger: one great inconvenience, you can never want
winter or summer, dust or dirt, so that at all times of the year it has a
strong charm against Invasion, except you would invade the Plague, or the Cave
of Charon.

As for their pieces of Architecture there is no such Grandeur, and if you
should resemble them to Italy, you may find no comparison; large they are, but
not so noble as is supposed; but if they were, they are like Satin pinckt upon
Canvas; but for their private Buildings and Shops, a Pedlers Booth in England
would shame the best of them; and a Peddler at a Mart with us, would make very
well a French Merchant, so that a Friend of mine oretaking one of these
Creatures riding the Road, he complaining of the hardness of the times, he
answered, I, quoth he, I wonder how the middle sort of people live, when such
Merchants as I can scarce live; and you may believe him, if you knew his Carga
in the Wagon, which was two or three dozen of Spanish brooms: Of such as these
Bragadochia's is Paris filled and cloyed; this may be truly said of them, that
their basest trades have sooner arrived to great riches then those that are
amongst them noted of ancient Nobility, and live according to the dignity of
their births; and for their way of dealing, as to the subtilty of their Trade,
they are seldom deceived, for they trust no body, and if any body trust them,
they had as good burn the bill of their particulars, if they are not under lock
and key, or can but find out any evasion to shift themselves; they may brag of
their merchandises with other Nations, but the most staple Commodities they
have received has been from England, for which for the most part they have
exchanged no other then fantastical fashions, toys, and kickshaws to put off,
which till they can make good their importunities they will wrack those they
traffic with to their own conditions, with their forced faces, shrugs, and
cringes in their Inns and Hosteries; they for the most part give their servants
no wages, but beg themselves so fervently for them, that the discerning
Traveller cannot but scruple whether they or their servants are most
fellow-feelers of the extent of his liberality, for which only reason he must
endure the impertinencie of their unnecessary attendance, for their general
entertainments; they are trunk-hosed, bombasted with the mode, and nothing
else, they distinguish them according to their usual custom; as they allow of
their grapes in their Vineyards, a Passenger may taste to quench his thirst, but
he that tarries above their stinted humor mistakes himself; their cushions he
will find them to be quick-set hedges of no continuance; there is no Nation
that takes more freedom for gibeing and provoking of strangers, for they are
generally rash, and want nothing of the wildness of behavior, when their
passions are thus desperately set on their angers have no eyes; to complement
them at that time is to set a train to gunpowder, they will so clatter with
their discourse, except they are in their more aerie genius of continual
singing of bawdy and drunken songs, when it will be a wisemans task to
distinguish betwixt their extravagant meeter and galloping prose; as for their
Policy, Government, King, Nobles, their Treaties with us, Inter-marriages,
their Massacres, sale of Promotions and Judicatories, and other things of this
nature; other men with a larger pen having expressed them excellently well, I
shall manum a Tabula, and for this I have done I expect no reward, nor fear any
envy, only Sat est tentasse --

Yet to sweeten my Genius fit for my dear native Country I shall conclude all
with this undoubted Eulogy or Character of England, which a Greek Poet has
drawn to the life. -- (...)
(...).
And what Eumines says;

O Fortunata and omnibus Beatior terris Britannia quae Constantinum Caesarem
primum vidisti; Merito te omnibus coeli and soli dotibus natura donavit in qua
segetum tanta faecunditas and muneribus utriusque and Cereris and Liberi in qua
nemora sine immanibus bestiis, terra sine serpentibus noxiis, contra pecorum
mitium innumerabilis multitudo.

O most fortunate Britain, more blessed then any other Country, which first
did see Constantine, Nature has lavishly endowed thee with all decorements
of Heaven and Earth; in thee neither the excessive cold of winter, or scorching
heat of Summer does molest the Inhabitants, thou swellest with such a plenty of
all kind of Corn, that thou may be called the Darling of Ceres and Bacchus;
thy Groves are without salvage rapacious Creatures, and thy Grass without
poisonous Serpents; thy fields are covered with innumerable heads of Cattle
tame and wild, their dugs extended with milk and their backs with fleece, both
rich and thick; for the pleasure of life, thy days are long, and no night but
has some glimpse of light; the glorious Sun that sets and goes down in other
Countries, seems only to pass by thy Coasts.

Nature as her Darling has embraced thee with a rich and large Moat, intending
still as she made, to lay up her principals and originals in this her Cabinet.

Their Faces they have like Angels, Wits like Muses, Charms like Graces, cast
in a mould between the earthly Spaniard and trifling French; A martial, noble,
and hospitable people; I must end with this Distick: Quicquid amat luxus
quicquid desiderat usus,
Ex te proveniat, vel aliunde tibi.


I have not bestowed so much gall on this Character, as I know a modest Reply
is more desired, in which, as my fancy has its traverses, there are several
reflections from my Answer which more enlarge this Character; if I have not had
salt enough in it it is out of a civility that this impertinent Mounsieur never
merited.

FINIS.
Gallus Castratus. AN ANSWER TO A Slanderous Pamphlet, Called the CHARACTER OF
ENGLAND.

Si talia nefanda and facinora quis non Democritus.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Brooks at the Angel in Cornhill, 1659.

TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS STARS OF GLORY, THE INCOMPARABLE BEAUTIES OF THE ENGLISH
NATION.

THESE WITH A DEEP HUMILITY.

Gallus Castratus, etc.
Ladies,
TO make a Hue and Cry, or research after this Satyrist, were to enquire after
yesterdayes Air, or the last evenings Sun; since the perpetrating a sin against
Charity and divine Beauty, has occasioned him to conceal his unworthy name;
yet by your permission (fair Ladies) I shall adventure a throw after him, so as
to bestow on him a Character not unworthy of his fact.

He may be thought one of the dislodged brood of wandering Cain, who having
sinned in good, sets his hand against all for bad; such as these are true sons
of the Curse, they bring brambles for violets, and thorns for Roses; desperate
persons to converse with, as infectious in their souls as in their limbs; a
Traveller, that makes it his business to deface the glories of Nature, not to
admire and adore them; a frothy Wit, not consenting to its captivity, has in
his Caprichios snorted his foam upon the sweet face of this blessed Island; the
method he pretends too, for he has none, was sure begot in a Hirricano, where
being frighted by his conscience, he thrusts things together Al 'a Negligen'ce;
A brat only born to die accursed, and to show to the world that France has of
late her Monsters as well as Africa.

His end I cannot remark, except like Erostratus to purchase a fame, though by
the vilest infamy, or to engage a smile from those ( Bandittors to Nature) the
rude offspring of a Brothel or a dunghill: a Monster fitting to rove after its
Sire, rather then find a Mecaenas in any serious Family; so unfit to bear the
name of a Character, that it may well be styled the Leprosy of France cast
upon England: But by this time (Ladies) I suppose you have enough of this
unmaskt Gentleman; now to the work it self.

And first he apologizeth for his rudeness by the commands of a Person (once a
Devoto to the Charms of England) a Person of quality (a Lord) but if his
Qualities answered his Dignity, surely his Lordship has repented him of his
commands.

He declares he had license only for (Minute things:) His Honor thought great
ones too much beyond the sphere of his Activity and Cognizance: but to
particularize his aspersions, which I shall civilly name his complaints,

Comp. 1. His first is, (Of the stiff whispering and forbidden countenances)
at Dover.

Surely his last collation of the Grape at Calais, or the high trott of
Neptune, had contributed much to this mistake; since as Comines his own
Countryman says, I used to go to Calais (when in the hands of the English)
without a Pass, for (says he) they are very courteous and honorable in their
entertainments to strangers. And further, in their trials with Forrainers they
allow them a Jury, de Medietate Lingua. Surely then they had not lost their
native Gallantry at this Monsieurs landing: But for a certain the Monsieur
brought a face from Madagascar, or a habit from America, not fit to be seen
without a motion or amazement, as the Spaniards are usually respected in their
Country. But I see this poor Gentleman is mighty tender, for he seems to take
pet at every tree that grows not straight, and excepts at any person that comes
but near him, much more that does but touch him: The very Boys give him an
Adventure much of Don Quixots, which makes him view all things through
enchantment; and I wonder I hear no news of his Echo, a Sancho Pancho to
flatter his folly into a Romance.

Comp. 2. To see his confident Host sit down cheek by joule by him, belching
and puffing Tobacco, and that our Gentlemen do usually entertain them, and are
pleased with their impertinencies.

This Mounsieur was (I dare say) not banished France for his great headpiece;
else he might have considered himself now in a free State, where no person is
shackled by Prerogative, but may be company (by way of Divertisement) to the
greatest piece of Honor in Europe; and if you can fit your Lacquey upon what
last your humor shall frame, why may not sometimes an impertinency please your
fancy, as well as the Character of England does some of your Ladies? For you
must know, our People are not an Asselike galled Nation, who are bound by their
chains to come no nearer then an interview of Princes: But I confess my Host
was somewhat too bold to approach so nigh, lest he might have had employment
for his fingers and nails all the year after.

But I hope Monsieur you have paid your reckoning, and are now coming to London
as you say (the Metropolis of all civility.)

Comp. 3. You write, That you had some Honor thrown upon you, as dirt, squibs,
roots, nay Rams horns, entering London.

Seriously, Sir, I wonder at the last Lot, how come they to hit upon this
honor for you; I must tell you, that it was a sad and lowering Constellation or
Ludibrium of Fortune cast upon your person, that in that great place of
civility such ominous Caresses should be offered you, since your deserts had
been better paid you in your own Country, and with your own coin. As for the
Car-men, as you say overthrew the Hell-carts, I wonder, Sir, how your company
escaped, since there was a story, that the Devil rid through our streets with
some Blades having none of the best faces.

Comp. 4. That our City is a wooden, Northern, and inartificial congestion of
houses.

This Monsieur, I perceive, is no curious Architect, for finding fault with our
wooden Buildings, which consider London, as a Merchantile City, strong and
beautiful, her manner of building agreeable to the jettyes, baywindows, and
returns in her streets; every part so engaged one with another, that though
under several modes, yet like loving Citizens they hold hand in hand faster
then brick or stone can do, and by their diversity of frontings do declare a
freedom of our Subjects, that what they acquire by industry, may be bestowed
at pleasure; not obliged to build so for the will of the Princes: Whereas the
Citizens of Paris are so forced to uniformity, that their Structures seem to be
only one continued magnificent wall loop-hol'd; whereas variety is more
pleasant, if it be not so fantastic as to incommodate passage, height, or
sight, as it is an undoubted Maxim in the Optics, that it lengthens your
entertainment to a rapture: whereas in the French walk the eye in an instant is
glutted with an identity, so that having seen one City or street, the eye is
not urged to take her revels in another, all being so like to a primitive
pattern of one livery, it choaks delight; as for magnificent Buildings, or
Regalio's, Mounsieur forgets the Abbey of Westminster, the Royal Exchange, two
such works of Architecture, that for their kind and use meet not with any
parallel in France; though, I confess, the absolute tyranny of your Kings by
the blood and sweat of the inslaved Peasantry have erected Palaces as it
seems to me works of impertinency and leisure; but if you view further their
Precordia, you will find the work like Satin pinckt upon Canvas, being so
furnished, that you would think them the Edifices of some former Inhabitants
frighted from them, and possessed by Nomades or Scythians, that never knew the
use of such civil Utensils: besides, our Kings have had larger Theaters of
Majesty then these; for whereas the French King is sedentary in Paris, our
Kings have been like the Sun, not confined to a place, but enriching all places
with their Justice and Glory: and so our Palaces are Beauties scattered and
equally distributed to all places of the Nation: No King (for the extent of
Earth) having more Residencies of Majesty then our English Potentates have had,
so that if this City (of London) be considered as a Mercantile City, and place
of trading, and the Kings Court but as an issue of his favor to these
Merchants: You will find he has Grandeurs both Noble and sufficient. What a
charm of Majesty is there of the Houses of the Nobility, fronting that
Crystal and sweet Nymph (the Thames?) Besides, the City illustrated with the
like in many places; together with the stately Structures belonging to
Citizens, that, I am confident, cannot be paralleld by the whole trade of
France or Europe.

But I am bound to follow you, Monsieur, up and down from the Tavern to Church,
then to the Shambles, and indeed it seems you visited things (like our
Rusticks) with a straightened heart, and a wide mouth, for now you bark most
monstrously against our Religion and Professors of it: but seriously, had you
minded any thing of Charity, you would not have given a character of us in our
distempers, taking the present advantage of our being sick of Schism and
Division: But I find you one of those Lucian scoffers, that rather then not
exercise your froth, the Gods shall not escape your Animosity. I cannot like
that spirit in a Frenchman, which would be scorned in a Heathen, or like a Jew
spit upon the Savior of the World, because not their insomniated Messiah: but
Monsieur, procul hinc procul ite prophani. Yet I seriously assure you (dear
Ladies) as touching their several worships, of these equivocal Christians, as
he calls them, it is a newly forged blasphemy against the Truth, and I question
not but his Godfather will one day congratulate his intelligence with a
meritorious reward.

Well now into the Tavern I must follow my Frenchman, who is my Ignis fatuus,
leads me in no method or order, but what sees he now? Now a legion of
adversities, as Shops, Smoke, Coaches, Sea-coal; would nor any wise man think
this man mad, or tumbled lately out of some Chaos? But his chief regret is for
the Seacoal which he says:

Comp. 5. That if there be any Hell it is in this Vulcano on a foggy day.

You may not well question a Hell, Monsieur, since in this piece of impiety and
unhandsomeness, if you had your reward, you might easily perceive you are in
the suburbs already: Methinks this was as strange an Adventure as the Knight
Errants Wind-mils, and I suppose as much crazed your body; so that I wonder at
your high valor, that dared Adventure, that eyelet-holed invaded body of
yours, to such corroding fumes; but peradventure you are well sheathed with
Brimstone and Butter against this infection, and you might have known, or I
wonder your Lord informed you not, that the sulphur of our combustibles is a
very great enemy to any Sacrifice made in favor of Venus, her Oblations being
burnt upon Altars in our Suburbs.

Comp. 6. But now if you will hear a loud one, mark his words well; I have,
says he, been in a spacious Church, where I could not discern the Minister for
smoke.

Ex ungue Leonem, one may judge of the rest of his Narrative by this notorious
untruth: Did ever any sober man happen upon such an encounter? Surely this
Gentleman's Optics were much eclipsed, or some drunken vapors had overclowded
his mind, or else he had framed in his smoaky Cranium such an imposture; and I
wonder, Sir, you make not a Recantation for such gross insipid irregularity,
since if our very Boys read but your Book, they would hoot at your Nation,
indeed for your sweet-lye-composed wonder.

Comp. 7. There is a number of houses where they sell Ale (a muddy Beverage)
where the Gentlemen sit and spend much of their time in drinking it.

As for that wholesome, pleasant, restorative, noble drink, the blessed
offspring of Ceres; what impudence dares find fault, or cast a cloud over that
gift of Nature? Since that if it could be conveyed, all the Earth would court
it; witness the great esteem is had in all parts of this our English Liquor; so
that one of your Count^ymen Doctors says, that there is no Liquor more
increases the radical moisture, and preserves the natural heat; these two
being the pillars of our decaying bodies. Now for any one to speak against the
props of life, deserves to die, as his own enemy, under an unla^ented death.
But I am sure of this, that this tipple, and the gray Goose-wing, had almost
torn all the feathers from the back of France: And certainly this Monsieur had
some other reason then he produces, to inveigh against this Liquor; it may be
it holds no friendly correspondency with Venus races, or else is not commodious
(by reason of its fumes) for a Nation half drunk already.

And now he appeals to his Lord (his confident) and as a Preludium (knowing my
Lord was no enemy to the French Beauties) to the prosecuting on his road of
scandals. And now let all the world consider this unheard of impudence against
a Sex, the whole host of Heroes court with Caresses due to their charms,
Creatures (rather a Creation) framed by the indulgent hand of the Deity, as it
were, cordials poured down from Heaven in compassion to our infirmities: You,
even you (great Souls) his folly has not blushed to asperse, with the like
success, pardon the dirty expression, as the breath of a dunghill does the Sun,
which still shall shine as glorious as his infatuated mind shall be obscured
with infamy.

Comp. 8. That our Ladies suffer themselves to be treated in a Tavern, and
drink crowned cups, and strain them through their smocks.

This is an horrid impudence indeed: survey the whole universe, as their
beauties excel, so, then these fair creatures in general, their lives; none
whose lives are modester without ignominy, and freer without scandals, then our
English Ladies.

This Gentleman comes over with our last desultory french visitation, who had
received so much virility by the posting of our Horses in the days of travel,
that they (being in London) did that thirteenth labor to Hercules twelve,
purging a stable of so much filth, that our suburbs shall sing an Io Pean to
them hereafter: And truly those poor pieces of mortality bred an excellent
French trade of it, enough to keep them till the like opportunity may so
seasonably court them. And these are your Madamoseilles, who ( Proteus like)
changed their shape (to ingratiate their hire) into Ladies, Countesses, this
beauty, and that beauty, till they had taken Excise of your limbs, gave you as
good as you brought, left you loose in the hilts. These Mons. are your Ladies
that drink crowned healths, and strained through their smocks; these are those
Beauties that are so free; to such a Nation indeed it would be too great
impiety for civil Ladies to neglect their noble souls, their proper persons, to
court your deformities and diseases.

Comp. 9. It is the afternoon business of the English Gentlemen only to drink
and be drunk.

Surely such as was your Females company, such was your Males; surely you raked
Hell for these deboist unthrifty Cadets, for otherwise I never knew this to be
a custom amongst civil Gentlemen. You say, after they have taken their repast
with the Ladies they withdraw into another Room; certainly, Monsieur, this is a
handsome separation, for the Gentlemen to carrese one with another, having
sometimes Masculine Interests in hand; whereas you (thinking your selves only
born for the smock, and your illfavoured Ladies of the placket) never separate
your confused interests, knowing no distinction between Male and Female
civilized interests, but only by the more retired managements of Nature; and
certainly you would seem to be so fond of your Mopsa's, as not (out of a
complement) to give them time to disimbogue. As for our drinking healths or
pledges, if you knew but the way to our custom, you will find it sprang from a
laudable necessity at first, and was in earnest a duty performed really one
friend for another, The Danes know it. But Monsieur, you do but fanatically
trifle in all your discourse: As for our Cadets that visit the Gallows so
frequently (as you say) I suppose yours in France are, or ought to be, so
seriously employed, as their proper merit, since your Roberies are merely
Massacres, such Cowards are ye that ye first shoot before you dare bid stand,
they never taking purse before it is crimsond reaking hot in blood, of such
horrible actions, none but base cruel spirited Bravoes could be guilty; this
one unmanly trick might enough Satyr against all the Grandeurs in France. As
concerning our Gentry, I shall conclude, they come short of your follies, as
much as you come short of their native gallantry.

Comp. 10. The Ladies of England have designs at playing at Cards.

Pray Monsieur, what is the end of play but ingenious designs, products of pure
fancy, and ready managery? and if you would dishonor them for this, you may as
well carp at their ingenuity: I suppose your Ladies will never prove guilty of
showing so much of judgment, since for to be dextrous at play cannot possibly
be the lot of French Ladies, for they want two necessary Virtues to it, Silence
and Patience; which at what a distance these stand with them, let all the world
judge.

Comp. 11. That our Gentlemen and Ladies are defective in Courtship and
Addresses.

I confess if he means our Ladies want that impudence, which he calls Assurance,
when it is as incompatible with modesty, as the Devils are with glorious
Angels; or if you mean a forwardness to court the Male, to jet and garb it in
company, like the Queens quondam petit-dancer, which you call Address, I
confess we will not vye with you; or if you mean by charmingdiscourse, a bold
unlimited chattering, taking into cognizance ceremonious dissembled
impertinencies, both in affront to Heaven and Earth; in these our wise Ladies
come short I confess; but if you mean an Address, where Modesty keeps its
decorum, betwixt impudent gallantry and bashful rusticity, this, this is the
address of our incomparable Beauties, which outshine yours, as the greater
Lights of the Firmament do the lesser. As for our Gallants the Gentlemen of
this Nation, none I am sure are better able to manage an honorable and serious
Entertainment with more cordial handsome magnificence of address then they,
setting aside the mode of the high Rope, of our Frenchified English Apes. But
when you shall pretend no child legitimate but your ill-faced bastards, and
call that gallantry which swims uppermost in a giddy Cranium and foisted garb,
a deformed posture against the wise product of Nature, a goatish concupiscence,
a salacious approach, fit only for Satyrs; if, Monsieur, these be your
Addresses, the Beasts of the Earth, the scum of rudeness, the excrements of
Nature, may discipline you in such ways of reputed manners.

As for our Aping you, it is confessed a few loose young souls, giddy like your
selves, are your Disciples; but we may thank our Alliance with you by civil
contracts, which by your Locust-like swarming has infected us at such a
height, that we shall hardly claw it off without blood or smart.

Comp. 12. To see the Bals so disposed by dancing Masters, and their boldness
with the Ladies.

Monsieur, We intend not Bals to make a meal of them, but as a condiment
intended (a la Vollee) as transient actions, only for a divertisement; yet want
we not a decorum and a magnificency, witness those grand Masks in the Kings
days, which were thought to excel all of this nature in Europe, as much as our
Plays do all your rhiming fools-bables; but your curtaild Intelligence, which
has brought you provision no further then from some petty Schools of children,
neither well educated nor well practiced.

But, Monsieur, I hope these Answers may inform you into a Recantation, or else
I must leave you scurrilous, and condemn your Pamphlet to accommodate for
sundry uses and purposes instead of your weekly Gazets, as New-lye printed, and
New-lye come forth.

FINIS.

