THE CHARACTER OF LOVE, Guided by INCLINATION Instanced in Two true Histories.

Translated out of French.

Licensed, October. 16. 1685. To. L'Estrange.

LONDON: Printed for R. Bentley in Russel Street in Covent Garden, near the
Piazza. 1686.

THE CHARACTER OF LOVE, Guided by INCLINATION.
AMan of Quality, not having Estate enough to support his Quality and Birth at
the Court, was forced to retire into the Country; and especially because the
Peace, which then reigned throughout all Europe, bereaved him of the hopes of
those Employments, which he might pretend to in a time of War: his Name was
Polydamus. This made him choose to settle in one of the greatest
Province-Cities of this Kingdom, where having married a Lady of Riches and
Quality, whose Name was Olympia, he lived with a great deal of Consideration
and Splendour.

Polydamus and Olympia having lived several years without having any Children,
were at length rewarded by Heaven for this long and patient expectation, with a
Son. To this Son they gave the Name of Alcander, who being born of a Family,
wherein Wit and Virtue were as it were hereditary, and his Veins filled with
illustrious Blood, promised all that could be hoped for, from so happy a Birth.
These Parents did not, as most Fathers and Mothers do, leave the Education of
their Children solely to the Conduct of Tutors and Governors, whose mercenary
Souls make them very often little concern themselves with the Improvement of
the Children they are entrusted with. Olympia, Mother to Alcander, hardly
suffered him to go out of her sight; and Polydamus, his Father, who was as it
were the Overseer of his Education, had always an eye to the Conduct of those
who governed him, to correct them when they committed any Error, and to
encourage them when they showed any remissness.

In the first years of his Infancy, Alcander made the Tenderness of his
Parents, and the Skill of his Masters become desperate. He had a Fieryness in
his Mind, which nothing was able to stop: His Motions were so sudden and
violent, that for a long time he was thought incapable of Discipline. Whatever
he had a mind to, he desired with an invincible Heat, and an unsupportable
Obstinacy; yet this Mind which nothing could tame, had Intervals which
discovered in it a great and a charming Goodness. He made appear at several
times in his Actions and Words an admirable Nature, a great generosity of Mind
and Courage, a great deal of Reason, Equity, and a Love for all great things;
but nothing was able to fix him, or make him tractable, either for the
Exercises of the Mind or Body. This extreme eagerness of Mind, and this
Intractability, which was thought unconquerable, lasted till he was 15 years
old: And it is here we are to admire the power of Inclination, and the
surprising Effect it had upon Alcander.

Lirana, who was a Friend and Neighbor to Olympia, had a Daughter called
Celintha, who often was in company with Alcander, she often coming to visit
Olympia. Celintha had a tolerable Beauty, an agreeableness and a sweetness in
her Temper, and a great stock of Goodness in her Heart, which was her principal
Merit: And as she was some years older than he was, she had over him some
superiority of Reason, and a great Ascendant. This Commerce which the
convenience of the Neighborhood kept up, doubled it self by Pleasure and
Custom, and this Custom insensibly became a Necessity to Alcander; he could now
no more be satisfied without seeing Celintha; his Mind, which nothing before
could settle, now applies it self solely to Celintha; he neither lives, acts,
nor sighs but for her: And that which is most wonderful, is, that Alcander who
loved Beauty, and who suffered himself to be taken every time it presented it
self before him, finds in Celintha an I know not what, which makes him forget
all the Beauties of the World; his desire of seeing her, became violent, hasty
and restless. Olympia who had always her eyes upon her Son, was the first that
perceived it; she soon found that this Passion for a young Gentlewoman, whose
Wit or Beauty had nothing of extraordinary in them, and who had nothing in her
which should cause any great Passions, could proceed from nothing, but that
blind Inclination, and that invincible Instinct, which makes us sometimes love
Persons, who have nothing that is amiable in them in the eyes of others.

This sort of Passion which is so violent, even in those who are fortified with
Reason and Experience, is much more so in the Minds of those who know neither
Love nor Reason, and who give it more power by Ignorance, and the weakness of
their Age. This had produced such great Effects upon Alcander, that to oppese
such a dangerous beginning, Olympia resolved to break the Commerce which he had
with Celintha. She had at first allowed of her frequent Visits, because she was
glad to see her Son was capable of fixing his Mind upon any thing; but seeing
that this Engagement went too far, she thought it necessary, without any delay,
to hinder the Consequences. This Remedy was worse than the Disease; for if her
Sons Thoughts were naturally too much distracted by his too great vivacity of
Mind, they were yet much more so by the heat of his Passion, and by the
continual Disturbances which the absence of Celintha caused in him. This
impetuous Vivacity which appeared in all his Actions, yielding at last to a
deadly Melancholy, he was soon seen to fall into a deep and lasting
Thoughtfulness, which made Olympia very much apprehend the consequence of so
prodigious a Change. This fear caused her to take another method for his Cure:
She had a Niece, whose Name was Parthenia, whom she tenderly loved, and she
invited to accompany her, many young Ladies of her own Age and Quality, who
helping to divert her, made use at the same time of their Wit and Beauty to
amuse Alcander, and to divert him from, or at least to weaken the Passion he
had for Celintha. These Ladies, who were but just out of their Childhood, had
however heard the noise, which this new and so extraordinary a Passion of
Alcander for Celintha had made so that they conceived toward her a sort of
Jealousy, or Envy, or Emulation, which made them forget nothing of what their
Age could furnish, of little Plays and Pastimes, to divert the sad Alcander,
and to please him. Their Endeavors succeeded well at first; Alcander's Passion
seemed to lie asleep sometimes, but also at other times, even in the midst of
his Pleasures and Diversions, this Passion would a waken it self with so much
force, that he often fell on a sudden into a dismal Melancholy. These little
Rivals of Celintha were offended at it; for there is a little jealous Pride
incident to all Ages: They could not restrain themselves from letting it
appear, and took at these Disturbances of Alcander such offense, as usually
wounds Beauties so cruelly, when they see themselves neglected; one discovers a
great deal of Sharpness and Anger; another in a low Tone, but loud enough to be
heard, terms the Passion he has for Celintha, a ridiculous Whimfie. What mortal
Wounds did not these Discourses make in the heart of the amorous Alcander? What
Efforts did not he make to restrain his Resentment and Impatience? And to what
a degree was his Pride, which was little less than his Love, humbled to see
himself, for a Person, of whom so little account was made, fo great a Slave to
a Passion, which he was not able to overcome? Having at last mastered the
Transports with which he was agitated, and being willing to speak to excuse
himself, and justify his Passion, all the Company left him upon a sudden, and
leaves him in a strange Confusion. Parthenia, who was not lefs provoked than
her Friends, by the procedure of Alcander, made him such Reproaches, as made
him desperate. Ah my dearest Kinswoman, said he, with a Tone which was able to
disarm the most just Resentment, If you knew the violence which I have done to
my self, to bring me again to my self, and to render me some way acceptable to
those lovely Persons, whose quarrel you so justly take up, you would have some
pity on an unhappy man, whom you now think worthy of your Anger! You do not
know the Torment I have suffered, in seeing my self forced to entertain Persons
that are indifferent to me, and to make answer to them all, whilst I spoke at
the bottom of my heart to none but the Person I love: What was I able to do, or
what was it in my power to say in a place where I saw no body, but a Person who
was not there?

Polydamus, who was a severe, and an imperious Father, and who for a long time
had been from his own house, upon affairs of great Importance, heard at his
Return with great Affliction, the headstrong-passion his Son had for Celintha;
and he having hoped to find in Alcander wherewith to re-establish his Family,
and to call back Fortune, which had almost abandoned it, seeing nothing in
Celintha's Fortune, which was not much below his Ambition, and the Projects of
Preferment, which he had formed for his Son, was refolved to remove him to a
greater distance from Celintha, and to carry him to an Estate he had in an
another Country. He forms his Design with Precipitation, not so much as
consulting even with Olympia; he gives his Orders, and the Execution of them is
so quick, that Alcander has not time to take leave of Celintha. So soon as
Polydamus was arrived at his Country House, not being ignorant of his Son's
Grief, nor wanting natural Affection, he endeavors to divert him with all that
a fine House can have of Diversions and Pleasures. He now expects from him but
a slight Application to his Study and Exercises, and dispenses with those
rigorous Duties to which his severity was accustomed indispensably to oblige
him. But all that Polydamus can do for his Son cannot comfort him for the
Absence of Celintha; all the Pleasure he finds in the Liberty allowed to him by
his Father, is sometimes to steal from those which accompany him, and to go
into some retired private place to enjoy this Grief, and taste the only
Pleasure left to the unfortunate, that is, to shed Tears with freedom; which
cruel Decency forces them sometimes to refrain. The Image of Celintha took him
up so much, that being come to the Bank of a little Brook, which divided the
Lands belonging to Polydamus from those of one of his Neighbors; and seeing a
young Lady who came upon the Bank on the other side of the River, he thought he
saw Celintha, and without hesitating, threw himself into a little Boat which
was there, and came near her before she could perceive him; Is it you (cried
he) my dearest Celintha? Is it you (answered she) Lisidor? So after having
looked upon each other with some Disorder and Shame, for having been mistaken,
they asked each other Pardon for the Error they both had fallen into: It is
then (said Alcander) the charming Philismena which I see. It is then (replied
she at the same instant) the Illustrious Alcander which I see. I know (said
she) by common report the severity of your Parents, and the Reasons which have
forced you to remove so far from your usual abode; whatever coldness there may
be between our Families, the advantageous things which have been told me of
you, do make me interest my self in all that concerns you; and if I did not owe
my self some Thoughts of Pity for Misfortunes, which are very like to yours,
you should have all my Tears, and all my Compassion. Alas! (replied Alcander)
Is there in the World then another Example of a Misfortune like mine? My
Misfortune is the more to be pitied, because there are few who pity me. I love
Celintha, but her merit being not sufficiently known to others, People cannot
believe nor conceive the greatness of my Suffering, because they cannot be
persuaded of the Violence of my Passion. I love Lisidor, (replied Philismena)
he is of a noble Extraction, but low in the World, and of small Fortune. My
Parents who have Eyes only for Riches, see nothing of Lovely in his Person; and
I am moved by another sort of merit; I find in Lisidor all that can give birth
to a true esteem, and to the greatest Passions. But since I have said too much
in saying I love Lisidor, I may venture to trust you with the knowledge of all
my adventures, and by this Relation give some ease to the cruel Torments which
oppress me.

My Mother, who, notwithstanding all the tenderness she has for me, who am her
only Daughter, and one of the richest Heiresses in the Province, breeds me up
with a strictness which is almost without Example, and endeavors to breed in
me a horrible aversion for all that can be called Love and Gallantry. She keeps
me, as much as possible, from any Conversation with Men, and makes me live
solitary in the middle of a great Town; and she, fearing some Engagement, which
might hinder her disposing of me as she would, and seeing some sparks of
Goodness and Complaisance in me, uses all her endeavors to inspire me with
contrary Sentiments; all her Lessons tend to give me a savage, and an ungentile
Virtue, and to possess my mind with more Severeness than Civility. What my
Mother does out of the motives of Pride and Ambition, my Father does out of
Policy and Covetousness. He would choose a Son-in-law as rich as himself, and
allowing nothing to be good, but the Goods of Fortune; he accounts the most
glorious merit ridiculous without them.

Lisidor, whose unfortunate merit is one of the most just Reproaches which may
be cast upon Fortune, and one of the greatest Instances of her Injustice grew
up; and because the little Estate he had, he held from my Father, he behaved
himself to him, as a Tenant ought to do to his Lord: the small Proportion which
there was between his Family and mine, gave him a very easy access to us both
in the Town, and in the Country. This young Gentleman possessed every thing which
could make him to be beloved; and this respectful Familiarity, which he had
contracted in our Family, gave no Suspicion to my Relations; yet as accustomed
as he was to see me, I began to observe, that he never approached me without
some disorder in his Countenance, which I could not guess the cause of. When he
lift up his Eyes, and cast them toward me, his looks which were always full of
life, showed a timorousness which was not usual in him, and mixed with a
passionate Languishing. I felt at the sight of him Emotions which I did not in
the least understand; my great youth, and my small Experience, the horrible
Aversion which had been instilled into me for all that could be called Love,
and above all that extreme distance, which Fortune had set between us, made me
not suspect the least, either on Lisidor's part, or on that of my own Heart. I
had, notwithstanding, an impatient Curiosity to know from whence proceeded
these secret motions, which did thus disturb my quiet, When it happened that my
Mother leaving me with persons she had not the least suspicion of the
Conversation concerned any thing of Love; if I asked any innocent Questions
upon that Subject, Lisidor would speak of it with a great deal of Wit, and good
Breeding; so that I came to feel a great Disposition in my self to believe what
he said; but he nor I daring, for many Reasons, to dive into the bottom of
these Mysteries, I addressed my self to a young Gentlewoman, who was placed to
wait upon me by my Mother, and in whom I had most confidence; but before I
explained my self, I used all the caution I could to be assured of her Silence
and Fidelity. So soon as I had discovered to her what passed between Lisidor
and my self, her Surprise seemed so great to me, that I repented her having
learnt my Secret. I perceived her on a sudden to lose that submissive and
complaisant Behavior, which she always used to show me, and to take up a
scrupulous Severity, which my Mother endeavored to inspire in all Persons who
approached me. She made me so ashamed of my Weakness, and think all that I felt
for Lisidor, to be so great a Crime, that I promised her to rob my self for
ever of the sight of so amiable and dangerous a Person: My resolution seemed to
her to be too violent. Have a care, Madam, replied Madonte to me, (this was the
Name of my Confident, or rather my Rival, as I soon afterward discovered)
avoid carefully the coming to Extremities, which will make too great a noise:
What Reasons could you give your Mother, for a Behavior which will appear to
her so new and fantastical? and what would become of the unfortunate, and, it
may be innocent Lisidor? What a judgment would be made of so surprising and
sudden a Disgrace to him? Lisidor may have Troubles, or some secret and
unfortunate Passion, which causes in him this Disorder and Melancholy, which
you have hitherto interpreted wrong: every thing is naturally passionate in
Lisidor, his Air, his Looks, his Discourse, nay even his Silence it self; show
therefore to him the same Favor you are used to do, and do nothing which may
be below that noble Pride, which becomes Persons of your Quality so well. No, I
will never, replied Philismena, put any more in danger so tender a Reputation
as mine is; the Trouble and Surprise you showed to me, in learning the Thoughts
I had for Lisidor, have too fully convinced me what danger there is in seeing
him; I will never see him more: It is your part who are his Friend, to dispose
him to this absenting of himself, nay, I expect also that you should break off
all manner of Correspondence with him; the Place you have about me, and the
Kindness I have for you, would give me in the judgment of all the World, too
great ashare in all the Familiarities you may have with him. Oh Madam, cried
out Madonte, trembling all over, and with a tone of Despair in her Voice, If
you banish Lisidor, I am undone; for it is now past disguising to you my
thoughts, since I find by yours you have a Courage which is above all your
Weakness, and that in the favorable thoughts you have for Lisidor, there is
nothing strong enough to oppose the Kindness I have for him. You love then,
Lisidor, said I, with a soft Air mixed with sorrow and trouble: Since you assure
me then, that what I feel for him, which I was loath at first to believe, may
have such dangerous Consequences, do me the justice to think, that I am
Mistress enough of my self, to stop the progress of a Passion in its birth.
Love still Lisidor, but be sure you do not discover to him my Secret; and since
he loves you without doubt as much as you love him, the least suspicion which
he might take of what I feel upon his account, would put him into Trouble;
therefore you may well think that your Silence is of importance, as well for my
Reputation, as his Quiet. I will not tell you, Alcander, the cruel Reflections
which possessed my mind when I was alone, and with how many strange motions my
heart was overwhelmed; I shall only tell you, that so soon as I knew that what
I felt for Lisidor, was from Love, neither the fear of my Relations, nor the
pride of my Quality and Fortune, could ever have the power to make me condemn
the Inclination which I had for him: But I still was fully satisfied of his
Merit, notwithstanding the smalness of his Fortune; whether by reason of the
pleasure which one finds when one begins to love, made me believe, that the
Aversion which they had persuaded me to have for Love, was but the false advi^e
of an affected Severity, which Avarice and Ambition had inspired my Parents
with, or that at last the violence of the Inclination I had for Lisidor, made
me forget what I owed in duty to them and my self. That which at last fully
convinced me that I was in Love, and that it had crept farther than I thought
into my heart, was, That I felt several secret and new motions in it, which
raised themselves on a sudden. I began equally to fear and wish for the
presence of Lisidor, to distrust Madonte, and to feel for her such a coldness,
as at last proceeded to absolute Hatred: Jealousy, Spite, Indignation, and the
fear of seeing, preferred before me a Rival, who was so very much beneath me,
caused such violent Troubles within me, that I found it a very hard task to
dissemble them. Madonte had Wit, Beauty, Courage, and Birth, and she being
almost always with me, I feared that the disorder which I discovered in
Lisidor, and which I interpreted in favor to my self, might rather be an
effect of the presence of Madonte, than mine. I particularly wished for an
opportunity to clear this doubt: but how was it possible for me to deceive the
many eyes which watched me, so as to have a private Conversation with Lisidor?
Waiting for some favorable opportunity, which I hoped for rather from Chance,
than my Skill, one day as I passed very near to him, I told him softly, Your
Secret is known. At this word a strange and violent disorder appeared upon his
Face, which pierced even into my Soul. I thought at first that Lisidor had
believed that what I had then said to him, was a Reproach I made to him for his
Rashness, and that his Respect would make his condemned Passion either die, or
be silent for ever; or it may be, said I within my self, Lisidor thinking I
have discovered his secret Intrigues with Madonte, is troubled to see himself
convicted of Infidelity toward her, in daring to love me; or of a more
criminal Treachery toward me, in pretending a Love which he did not feel.
These melancholic thoughts increased the desire I had to talk with Lisidor,
and to clear this Point with him: Fortune soon after happily furnished me with
an opportunity; for walking in one of the long Walks in the Park with my
Mother, who was led by Lisidor, she was forced to leave us on a sudden, being
called away by my Father, who was in an Arbor at some distance from us, he
having some secret News of great importance, which he had just then received,
to impart to my Mother in private.

So soon as I saw my self in full liberty to make Lisidor explain himself to
me, and I explain my self to him, I was seized with an extraordinary joy,
accompanied with those fears, to which the modesty of our Sex, and the
strictness of my Parents had accustomed me. I found Lisidor in the same
disorder; Oh! that I could but tell you what we told each other before we
spoke, by our Looks and by our Silence, it being my part to speak first,
without standing upon any Punctilio, nor to lose an opportunity wished for with
so much passion. Well, Lisidor, said I, tell me if it be Madonte that you love;
and what is it you would have me believe, from that disorder which you so often
show before us, from those unsettled Looks and those Transports, which seem to
escape from you against your will? Ah, Madam, cried Lisidor, to what a
dangerous trial do you expose the Respect which I owe to you? the Disorder
wherein you have seen me, and which I have so often blamed my self for, as too
visible a sign of an unpardonable rashness, has spoken but too plainly: Do you
desire it should finish my Destruction by a fuller Explanation, and that I
thereby attract your greatest Indignation? No, no, Lisidor, answered I quickly,
you must speak, and not loose in useless Talk these precious Minutes which
Fortune has lent us; and such as, it may be, will never return again: I know
but too well what Decorum and Behavior that unfortunate Inequality which
Heaven has put between us, requires from us both, speak without a Moments
Hesitation, and at least spare me the Confusion of explaining my self first.
Well, Madam, replied Lisidor, since you will have it, and since you force me to
it, I will confess to you, that I have a great Esteem for Madonte, and that I
bear toward her that just acknowledgment which is due from me to her for all
her Favors, which she has showed toward me; but I must, Madam, at the same
time also tell you, That that invincible Inclination which carries us away
against our Wills; that that infinite Esteem which extraordinary Virtue wrests
from the most obdurate Heart, that the deep Impressions which great Beauty does
make upon tender and sensible Hearts; I say, I declare to you, Madam, that I
feel all these, and that I feel them only for you: and as for me (said I) the
Account which I can give you of what passes in my Heart, is, That by the
Motions and Lights, which proceed from Heaven and you, I find it very much
changed, I learn in one Moment what I was so long ignorant of; I find that now
pleasing to me, which before raised Horror in me; you have made such charming
Truths, or such pleasant Errors, succeed all those Maxims which I had been
formerly taught, that I am not sorry I wander a little in following them. At
these words Lisidor, transported with Love and Joy, throws himself at my Feet,
not reflecting that our Conversation had insensibly brought us near to the
Arbor where my Mother was, who coming out upon a sudden, before Lisidor could
rise from his Knees, she seemed extremely surprised. Lisidor, who saw his
Imprudence, and my Mother's Disorder, immediately thought of repairing his
Fault by a happy Invention which his Wit furnished him with upon a sudden, he
runs to my Mother; Ah, Madam, says he, you just now saw an unfortunate Lover
prostrate at the Feet of my Lady your Daughter, to beg her leave to love
Madonte: This word of loving appeared so strange and new to her nice Temper,
that she looked upon my Prayer as an unpardonable Rashness. My Daughter has
reason, answered my Mother with an angry look, you ought not to approach her
Ears with Terms which are offensive to her, and to keep for all that are near
her, the same Respect which you have for her; it is only to me that you are to
address your self; you had no need of gaining my Daughter's Approbation, much
less her Assistance. Whilst my Mother was speaking, Madonte, who came from
walking in another Walk, being come to us, Madonte, said my Mother, the
Thoughts which Lisidor has for you, are come to my Knowledge; I do not at all
condemn his Passion, the Match is advantageous; you may make him a Return, and
leave the Success to me; but I do not intend that the Hopes which I give you,
shall authorize a Commerce which displeases me, and a Custom which I have
always condemned; I will not suffer Lisidor's Passion to show so near my
Daughter all that those sorts of Passions have of the extravagant and
ridiculous; that importunate Officiousness, that officious Care, and that
shameful Weakness; the Example of all which might poison the wise and noble
Education, which I have given her. I will obey you, Madam, answers Madonte, in
this Affair, as I have done in all others. I have observed in Lisidor indeed
some Complaisance, which seems to distinguish me from the rest of my
Companions; but I did not imagine that this preference went so far as Love,
much less did I think that it would come to your Knowledge. I will make no
step, Madam, nor indulge my Desire, but according to your Orders. I will be
sure continually to avoid any Commerce which you do not like, and which may
make me offend in the respect due to so nice and scrupulous a Virtue, as that
of my Lady your Daughter.

Judge then what a Joy I felt to see my self thus delivered from the Reproaches
of so severe a Mother, by Lisidor's ready Wit. But though it was easy for us
to deceive her, how could we be able to deceive Madonte?

Lisidor disguised and constrained himself to little purpose, and I to as
little, showed a Coldness toward him; a clearsighted jealous Rival, and
present at all our Conversation, penetrated through all the Mysteries of our
Reservedness, and our Silence. All our Artifices could not rescue us from her
Distrust; her restless and impatient Jealousy, resolves to assure to her self
the Conquest of Lisidor; but not daring to explain her self, either out of
Modesty or Pride, she causes it to be demanded of my Mother by secret and
by-ways, but such as were effectual and cunning ones. My Mother speaks of it to
Lisidor, and rallies him for his small Impatience. Lisidor seeks all Delays by
some false Pretenses, or feigned Reasons. All his Inventions were also sounded
and discovered. There was at this time a very hot Report of a War begun between
Sweden and Poland. Lisidor, who sought only an opportunity of signalizing
himself, and who having had the boldness to love Philismene, thought himself
obliged to do actions which might answer so high, and so ambitious a Passion,
and not meeting with any opportunity for it in his own Country, which then
enjoyed a profound Peace, was extremely delighted to find one in a foreign
Kingdom; being the Son of a Father who had served and commanded in the
victorious Army of the great Gustavus, and who died in his Service, he hoped
the Memory of his Name might procure from the King who had succeeded him, the
same kind Reception which his Father had found, and as good Employments. He
prepares for this Voyage, provides an honorable Equipage, and places all his
Hopes in the Fortune of his Arms. He proposes his Design to my Mother, who
approves of it, not thinking of Madonte's Concern. Madonte hears this News with
a deadly Grief; she attempts to make Lisidor change his Resolution. Lisidor
defends himself with a thousand Reasons grounded upon Honor, Decency, and
Fortune. And as he was obliged to manage her for my sake, he flatters her with
the Hopes of a quick Return. All that he had said to my Mother, and to Madonte,
and which they both told me again, had almost made me think his Departure
absolutely necessary; but there were other Reasons besides for it, which were
in Relation to my self alone. It not being possible for us to hope for any
private Interview, he writes to me, without knowing how, or by what means to
convey the Letter to me, amongst so many jealous Persons, who besieged me
continually.

One day being come into my Chamber, with a Design of giving me his Letter, and
having let me see cunningly, that he had it in his Hand, there came into my
Head this Trick, which I performed without Delay. I arose from my seat, and
pretending to go to speak to my Mother, I ran hastily, and passing near
Lisidor, I pretended to stumble, and leaning my Hand upon his to recover my
self, I took the Letter; the Contents of which were these, as near as I can
remember.

What will you say, Madam, of the Resolution which I have taken concerning my
self? I have formed a Design to leave you, and it may be for ever. But ought I
to have consulted you, when I had taken it, or to expect your Orders, when it
so greatly concerned your Honor and my own? I expose my self to all manner of
Grief, by parting from you. But can I be able continually to present to your
Eyes an unfortunate Person, who is honored with your Esteem, and who has
hitherto done nothing to deserve it? I go to seek an Opportunity of doing
honorable Actions, thereby to justify your choice. For, not daring to ask
Fortune to equal you with me, I dare promise my self from my Courage, I shall
force her, either to destroy me, or to make my Destiny such as may better
enable me to approach you. Do not, however think, Madam, that amongst such
ambitious Thoughts, I should be so unjust as to desire you should oppose the
Pleasure of your Parents; for if they offer you any good Match, you ought to
follow your Destiny, and not let your self be overcome by the Inclination of
your Heart. I can never lose you, without dying my self; but I shall die
without complaining, if you live but as happy as you deserve.

Ah Madam, cried Alcander, what Love and Courage do these thoughts discover to
be in Lisidor's Soul! Heaven has made you for each other, it cannot fail
accomplishing that which it promises you, by the union of Hearts which it has
so well formed between you both. I cannot tell, replied Philismena, what Heaven
has determined for us, but I know that the loss of Lisidor would be
unsupportable to me. I feel it by the grief which his departure has caused in
me, by that which I suffer because of his absence, and above all by a silence
of two years, which he keeps out of respect, and for the danger would be run by
us both, in the conveying his Letters to me. I will tell you only --

As she was going on in her Discourse, she heard a noise, and fearing to be
surprised with Alcander, she rose up, took her leave of him, and desired him to
repass immediately the River. Alcander obeyed, and in parting they promised to
meet each other again so soon as they could possibly. They saw each other
often, and these Conversations contracted between them the bands of a strict
Friendship; there it was they offered each other all the Helps which lay in
their power, to assist one another in their Amors. Alcander engaged Philismena
to see Celintha often, and to use her Interest on his behalf. Philismena also
obliged Alcander to promise to write to Lisidor, and to keep a continual
Correspondence by Letter, so that she might be informed both of his Fortune and
his Love.

Polydamus was at last informed of these secret Meetings, which he heard with
great joy, in the hopes he had that they might work a change in Alcander, and
that this Complaisance he showed to Philismena, might be an effect of some
Passion which they had for each other. In order to the advancing of which, he
used all means to reconcile himself with the Father of Philismena, and made
several Advances, beyond what he ought to have done. The Father of Philismena
being struck with the noise which Alcander's Merit made in the World, and yet
more pleased with the great Estate he was in prospect of, and which would one
day make him one of the greatest Matches in the Kingdom, answers the Intentions
of Polydamus. The ill Weather having forced them to leave the Country, and to
come back into the Town, the Commerce between Alcander and Philismena is
renewed, with the good liking of all their Relations, who did not know that
they were less Lovers than Confidents to each other. These things went so far,
that Polydamus made Propositions of Marriage. The Father of Philismena
hearkened to them; but as Persons of his Character, I mean covetous Fathers,
never quit any part of their Estates but as late as they can, to their
Daughters, and that besides, he was desirous Time should give him a nearer
prospect of what he expected from the Merit of Alcander, and the Hopes which
were given him of his Fortune, which he saw but afar off, he accepted of the
Match, but upon this condition, that it should be deferred for some years.
Polydamus desired no better, not desiring his Son, who was then just entered
into the World, and had not yet finished his Exercises, should then marry a
Lady as young as himself. But this Alliance being so earnestly wished for on
both sides, their Parents would oblige them to an engagement of their Word and
Honor, which might secure the success of it. Alcander and Philismena coming to
know the Intentions of their Parents with an extreme grief, before they had it
from their own mouths, they consulted together what Answer they were to give.
Their first Discourse, upon so important a Matter and so tender, had a great
deal of disorder in it, for they knew not what to say to each other. They
esteemed each other infinitely, but they loved elsewhere. Their consent is
required; they answer only with silence, which proceeded not less from their
Astonishment than their Respect. They reproached one anoother afterward with a
Consent, which appeared so quiet and so voluntary: Will you, says Philismena,
will you abandon your dear Celintha? No, Madam, answered Alcander, I wish I
were able to do it; but it is impossible for me, and yet can I refuse the
charming Philismena, whose Merit and Fortune might bound the most ambitious
Desires? Will you, replied Philismena, have a young Woman revolt against her
Parents? What help can I afford to my Weakness? What pretense can I have for my
Disobedience? I who have no other Reason, but that of a Passion, which must be
hidden, and which cannot appear? All the World knows that you love Celintha.
Have you not in a Passion which you cannot conquer, a Reason which will surely
prevail with your Father, and which no reasonable Person can condemn? This very
Reason, replied Alcander, is it not much stronger on your side? Cannot you
without Reproach and without Injustice, refuse a Man whose Heart is in the
Breast of another? Well then, Alcander, said she, I will have the Weakness,
since you will have it so, to yield to your Reasons; but I shall never have the
power of resisting my Parents. I see then very well Madam, replied Alcander,
that I must take upon my self all the trouble and shame of the refusal. I shall
expose my self to my Father's Passion, and the Blame and Reproaches of all the
World; but it will be less for the sake of satisfying the Love which I have for
Celintha, who loves me not, than it is to serve the Inclination which you have
for Lisidor, who loves you entirely. Oh what shall I not owe you for this
Favor, dear Alcander! I shall be forced to love you almost as well as Lisidor.
So soon as Alcander had left Philismena, he ran home to speak to his Father,
who was in his own Apartment: He presented himself before him in a disorder,
which made him tremble, threw himself at his feet, and bedewed them with his
tears: I know Father, said he, that never Son was so obliged to a Father as I
am to you; for besides an advantageous Post I have in the World by the honor
of my Birth, there is something yet more precious which I hold by your Lessons
and Example; yet not withstanding I depend upon a Power which is above yours,
and which having disposed of me to Celintha, will not suffer me to yield my
self up elsewhere. I see that your Eyes sparkle with Anger at this Discourse,
but I beg you will hearken to me without being angry: You are Master of my
Life, you ought to be so of my Heart; you offer me in the Person of Philismena
an advantageous Match, and a most accomplished Person. I know what your thoughts
must be of a Son, that rebels against the will of such a Father as you are; but
I defy all your Severity to inflict so cruel a punishment upon me, as that
which I suffer by the fatal necessity which I see my self in of refusing
Philismena, and of displeasing you. Therefore I do not come to implore your
pity, but rather to provoke your anger against an unfortunate Person, whose
Life is hateful to him: I refuse an accomplished Beauty, who, it may be, one day
may love me, and adore an ordinary Beauty, who, I am satisfied, will never love
me. Alcander spoke those last words in so sad a Tone, that his Father was
shaken by them notwithstanding his Severity; but the shame he had of his
Weakness made him take a more violent Resolution: Go, said he, Son, unworthy of
me, go out of my presence, and never offer any more to my fight a Wretch, who
has not power to overcome a Passion which dishonours him. Polydamus's Passion
had gone further, if it had not been restrained by the Tears of Olympia his
Wife, who made him fear that Alcander's Despair might make him relapse into the
extreme danger of a Sickness, which he had been so difficultly cured of. He
thought also that he ought not to make a noise of this refusal of his Son, that
he might still have the liberty of seeing Philismena, and that by this Commerce
he might be able to manage an Affair, which he wished for with so much
eagerness. But the Ladies Father seeing the pursuit which Polydamus made for
his Daughters Marriage, grow cold, was glad to have this pretense, to release
himself of an Engagement, which gave bounds to his Avarice; and the Mother was
not sorry to have, by this means, some of the Visits, which Alcander made to
her Daughter, retrenched, to satisfy her natural Severity, and her Ambition,
who desiring to have full liberty to dispose of her Daughter to such Matches as
should offer, was afraid Philismena should enter into any Engagement, by reason
of these continual Visits of Alcander, whose Merit was to be feared.

Polydamus being forced to leave his Family for some private Affairs, or for
those of the Province, with which the King had entrusted him, left the whole
management of his Sons Education to his Wife. Olympia, who was the best Mother
that ever was, and who sought continually all the Inventions which natural
Affection and her wise Goodness could furnish her with, to accomplish the
Education of her Son, whose Passion had put it into so great disorder, sends
for Celintha, thinking that for the design she had, it was necessary to make
use of her her self; and to dispose her to what she desired, she thus
discoursed to her: You know, Celintha, what a constant Friendship there has
always been between our two Families, the Neighborhood, and a great
resemblance of Birth and Fortune, has made these Ties, and may make us one day
incline to a Marriage between you and my Son. I know that Dorilas makes Court
to you, and that his Relations may have the same thoughts for him; but that
prospect being yet so far distant, and that Time, and above all, Heaven
disposes of us, and that besides Dorilas his Fortune is yet very uncertain, and
liable to very dangerous Chances, you may have, it may be, some interest in
managing that violent Inclination which my Son shows he has for you, this
Passion of his being very unseasonable in respect of his age, which ought to be
employed in cultivating his mind. You see that it is highly necessary to put
some stop to the progress of an affection which is already become too strong,
and which may make him unworthy of your esteem, and of the hopes of possessing
you: my instructions, and all the care of his Governor have not had power to
remove this disturbance of his mind, it is you Celintha who are of an age a
little above his, and who have a judgment above your age; it is you that must
bring him back into the right way. As for me Madam, answered Celintha, I long
to second your intentions, but tell me by what Art we may obtain that which I
wish with as much earnestness as you: you must, replied Olimpia, make use of
all the power you have over my Son, you are much dearer to him than a Mother,
and the defire of pleasing you will do more than the obedience which he owes
me; make him understand you can never be able to like Lover who has no other
qualification but his Love, and that if he will be beloved, he must use all his
endeavors to content his Parents and his Tutor, by a continual application to
his Duty and his Exercises. Celintha, whose thoughts were bent toward Dorilas,
whom she passionately loved, was much troubled to know how to behave her self
as she ought toward Alcander; but Goodness being her predominant Quality, she
yields to the Prayers of Olympia, dissembles the Love she has for Dorilas, and
hearkens with a prudent complaisance to the Sighs of Alcander, with the design
of governing him according to the Intentions of his Mother. Although she had
not judgment or experience enough to act alone in so nice an Affair, she had
nevertheless sufficient to profit by the Instructions which were given her; and
if she reduced the Mind of Alcander, and so suddenly made him change his
Behavior, it was less by her skill, than by the ascendant which the
Inclination Alcander had for her, did give her over him. The earnest desire of
pleasing Celintha, made him make a wonderful progress in all Learning, and the
ambition of making himself more amiable, raised in him that of distinguishing
himself from his Equals. The Academy where he went to learn his Exercises,
sounded of nothing but the Name of Alcander, who by a constant and ambitious
Emulation endeavored to outdo all his Companions. If he disputed any Prizes
in running of the Ring, or any other Exercises, he was so accustomed to
overcome, that he could not endure to be vanquished; he would be so much
troubled when he was, that he always shed tears; What will Celintha say, said
he, with a passionate and sorrowful Voice! and he hardly dared to come near
her, or to show himself in the day of his Defeat. Olympia, who made advantage
of every thing to the Education of her Son, seeing him so concerned with the
fear of displeasing his Mistress, never failed, whenever he neglected his duty
in any thing, to make him sensible of the trouble it would be to Celintha, if
she thought him capable of committing such faults; Alcander alarmed with such
threats would throw himself at his Mothers feet, and beg her to spare him the
reproaches of Celintha, and with sincere tears of repentance would give her an
infallible assurance that he would repair his fault. The desire he had to gain
Celintha's whole Esteem went so far, and tied him with so much assiduity to all
his Exercises, that his Mother trembled for fear of his Health, and began to
frighten her self extremely with the Examples we have of the prejudice, which
Youths every day receive by an intemperance of Study, and excess of
Application. It was then that Olympia, instead of awakening the diligence of
her Son, desired his Masters to retrench part of the time allotted for his
Studies and Exercises, and to allow it him for his Diversions. And then she
allowed him full liberty to visit Celintha; and seeing with what assiduity he
waited upon her, with what eagerness he devoured her with his Eyes, and with
what earnestness he did her a thousand Services, she asked him very often the
cause of so extraordinary an Attendance. Alcander, who answered so well to all
Questions which were asked him, and who always gave Reasons for all his
Actions, answered thus, I feel, without taking time to examine himself, I feel,
at the sight of Celintha --

At these words interrupting himself, he showed in his Eyes and his whole
Countenance, with what labor and disturbance of Mind he sought for what he had
to say, I feel, said he again, so strange a pain, that I am ashamed of the
condition wherein I am, and I am not less so to tell you of it, and yet I find
in this pain a certain pleasure which surpasses all others, but a pleasure
which I cannot express, and the loss of which would be intolerable for me to
bear. How shall I blame my self enough, said he, that I cannot satisfy your
Curiosity, and that I have so little wit, as not to be able to comprehend the
Charm which chains me to Celintha, and which affords me the greatest of all
pleasures, or to speak more properly, the only pleasure which I love, or the
only one I ever can love. Do not blush, said Olympia, at an Ignorance which is
common to you with the most learned Men of the World. What, continued he, with
an angry and sorrowful voice, I am now almost 16 years old, and am I not able
to tell what passes in my heart? I am resolved to study my self so well -- Ah
Son, replied Olympia, interrupting him, it is no matter whether you know how to
express this Inclination for Celintha, but it is of consequence to overcome it!
Do you wish so much hurt, replied Alcander, to that Passion which has raised me
above my self, and which has made me overcome that stubbornness of mind, which
troubled you so much before, and made me so ashamed. Do not deceive your self,
answered Olympia, this sort of passion will correct some faults, and corrupt a
thousand Virtues, nothing is secure against its violence; Honor and Duty,
every thing is in danger, when Reason is not Mistress. Fear not Madam, said
Alcander, all that I feel for Celintha, can never make me forfeit my Reason,
all the desire I have in the World being solely to see her, and to please her.
Has this defire of mine any thing in it, with which the most scrupulous Virtue
can be offended? Do but leave me to this innocent Passion, and I quit every
thing else to you; I will then sacrifice to you all my actions, all the desires
of my heart, and every moment of my Life. Olympia being softened with these his
tears, Love on, says she, love Celintha, and do not make me repent the
tenderness I have for you. Alcander satisfied with this permission of loving
Celintha, let himself loose to his Passion, and studying at the hours left him
for Recreation, the ways how to show it, it happened that one day a Brother of
Olympia's coming from his Countrey-house, and relating to his Sister the beauty
and the abundance of Flowers and Fruit he had seen there, made a thought come
into his head, which he was resolved to execute immediately. The impetuousness
of his temper not allowing him to make any reflection, he steals away suddenly
from his Mother and his Governor, takes with him two of the Servants of the
House that were readiest to obey him, orders Horses to be made ready for him to
go to his Uncles House, which was about half a Leagues distance from the Town:
But his impatience would not suffer him to stay while they were ready; he goes
therefore on Foot at midday, in the hot season of the scorching Dog Days; he
passes through a Field, where he saw Sweat running down in great drops upon the
Faces of those that were at Harvest; he runs without slackening his pace,
breathing nothing but Disorder. No sooner was he arrived, but without allowing
himself the time to rest, he goes into a great Flower-garden, which was as
large as the front of the Castle; he runs it over from one end to the other, he
makes his eyes ramble over it. All this vast Parterre, filled with an infinite
number of Flowers, could hardly satisfy his desire; and although the multitude
of them did rob him of the power of choosing, yet he still wished that Nature
would make new ones to grow for his sake. At length he commands his Servants to
gather the finest and most curious of them, he himself showing them an Example:
From thence he goes to the Walls, and visits all the Fruit Trees; if the
fairest Fruit be upon the highest Trees or Branches, he either bows them down
or breaks them, that he may gather the Fruit with his own hand. After having
robbed some of the Trees of what was best upon them, being tired with his Walk,
and weary with the pains he had taken, he rests himself under the shade of a
Tree, but less in order to defend himself from the heat of the Sun, than to
shade the Flowers and Fruit, which being separated from their Stalks and
Branches, would have lost a great deal of their freshness, had they been
exposed to the Sun at Noon; and not to be idle whilst he reposed himself, picks
out the Flowers which seemed finest to him, he makes several Nosegays of them,
and comparing them together, he chooses those with the most suiting and
agreeable sortings, to present to Celintha.

Whilst he walks about, and prepares his Present, a company of young Ladies,
who were come the day before under the conduct of their Mothers to this fine
House to divert themselves, and who were not less jealous of Celintha, than
those whom Olympia had gotten to bear Alcander company, in order to cure his
Passion, and who were passing their time in little Sports, in a Walk which was
covered from the rays of the Sun. One of the Company having spyed Alcander
through a pallisade of Jessamine, told it to her Companions, who all run
together through the Walk to surprise him: He was so attentive upon what he was
about, that they continued some time before him before he saw them; but at last
lifting up his Eyes, and showing some trouble at the fight of them, he paid
them the Civility which was due to them. These young Beauties, either to
torment him, or out of Jealousy, laughed at the Employment which they had found
Alcander busied with, and reproaching him with the Plunder he had made of all
those Flowers for the sake of Celintha, they added, That it was not fit she
alone should be adorned with the Spoils of the Garden; and lastly, That they
had at their first arrival marked these Flowers, out of the desire and hope
they had of gathering them. Alcander, who saw himself obliged to remember the
Respect he owed unto his Uncles House, and who as young as he was, knew how to
behave himself as he ought, was in such a disorder, that he did not know what
to answer. When he saw them all seize upon the Flowers which he had at first
designed for Celintha, one may easily guess how violent the condition such a
heart as Alcander's was in; he had however the power of restraining himself,
and only desired their leave to gather some other Flowers, to repair the loss
which he had received from them. These young Ladies perceiving the violence
which he used to himself, restored to him all his Flowers: One of them in a
scornful manner told him, It was not just for them thus to rob his Mistress;
another with somewhat of a severer Look, accompanied with Spite, letting him
know, That she would have no Flowers that were gathered for another, and that
she could well enough dispense with the loss of an Ornament which he owed to
Celintha. Alcander, who hearkened to nothing that was said, and who grudged all
the minutes which were lost in useless Complements, thanks them all equally,
and asks their permission to leave their Company, to pay those duties which his
younger years had indispensably obliged him to. At these words he goes out of
the Garden, and finding at the door a Coach which was brought for him, instead
of the Horses which he had ordered to follow him, he goes into it, and returns
to the Town, burning with love and impatience: He goes strait to the House of
Liriana, he flies through her Apartment, and enters upon a sudden into the
Chamber of Celintha, to offer her himself his Present, full of confidence and
joy; but casting his eyes upon Celintha, he sees Dorilas sitting by her, who
bending his head toward her hand, was just going to kiss it. Alcander struck
with this sight, as with a Thunderbolt, remains insensible and unmovable, his
smiling and serene Countenance was covered with a dark cloud, the red and
liveliness of his Complexion gives place to a deadly paleness, his Eyes that
were wont to sparkle with joy, and would with a violent transport advance
outward, and sparkle, were now quite darkened, and did retire inwardly; he had
a mind at length to complain, but his grief stopped his words. In short, this
trouble and disquiet which is shut up within his Soul, breaks out; his Eyes
kindle with disdain; he takes the Flowers and the Fruit, throws them upon the
ground, tears the Nosegays, throws them under his feet; and not being able any
more to bear the presence of Celintha, he goes out of her Chamber, and returns
home in so strange a passion and disorder, that his Parents who were alarmed,
his Governor who was provoked at an absence of three or four hours, had not the
power to chide him; they seemed more concerned at his grief, than angry at his
fault. Alcander throws himself at the feet of his Parents, and after having
given them a sincere Relation of all that had passed, protests openly to them,
that to provoke them no further, he was resolved to break with Celintha, and to
apply himself solely to his duty: He conjures them, pouring out a flood of
tears, never to force him more to visit the ungrateful, the unfaithful and
cruel Celintha. Olympia having settled his mind by her sweetness and reasons, he
lived for some time with much less disquiet than formerly, and flattered
himself in private with an appearance of quiet, which made him believe he had
forgotten Celintha, and his Love for her. But how is it possible always to stem
a Torrent, I mean an invincible Inclination? it begins again to make it self be
felt as violent as ever. Alcander resists it with all the power he has, he
flies the sight of Celintha, but when chance offers her to his eyes, he can
restrain neither his Looks nor his Sighs, which make their escape toward her,
he is surprised with thoughts which are all of Celintha, when he would think of
any thing else. And forgetting already his trouble and resentment, he enquires
how she does; if he hears Dorilas named, he seems to be moved and to tremble,
and changes color; if he finds Dorilas amongst his Companions at Play, he
shows sufficiently by his cold reception, or by his forced Courtesies, the
aversion he has for his Rival, and even his whole behavior toward him,
plainly shows the desire he has to quarrel with him, in order to find a
pretense of claiming that sort of coming to a right understanding, which was
commonly practiced in those days, out of a nice point of Honor, which has cost
France so much noble Blood. But Dorilas, who had a great deal of Love and
Courage, and who had also a great deal of Prudence, excused his Rival, as being
a Youth, and pardoned his mis-government, imputing it to the excess of an
unfortunate Passion.

All that Alcander did, showed but too much, that the resolution which he had
taken of not seeing Celintha any more, was founded upon a false Cure, and was
supported only by the strength of his disdain. And as this obstinate humor,
which he had made appear from his Infancy, had changed into a strength of mind
and firmness of courage, he had made it a point of honor to himself to break
for ever with Celintha, and to resist the torrent which carried him away
toward her. This constraint which he put continually upon himself was so
violent, that it had like to cost him his Life; he falls sick, the Physicians
are called, who immediately think to cure the Disease without examining the
Cause, resolve, but to no purpose, upon a method of Cure for him according to
the usual forms. Olympia, who never lost sight of her Son, had observed, that
the absence of Celintha was the only cause of Alcander's sickness, has recourse
to the true Remedy: She obtains a Visit to him from Celintha, who loving only
Dorilas, and being of her self removed at some distance from him, to avoid
giving him the trouble which the sight of her had caused, was brought with some
difficulty to grant the request of Olympia; but at last she yielded to the
desires of an afflicted Mother, to her natural goodness, or it may be to the
pleasure she took in insulting over the ignorance of the Physicians, and to do
that by her presence, which the Physicians had not been able to effect by their
Medicines. Olympia prepares her Son for this Visit, to prevent the dangers of a
sudden surprise: The bare hope of this sight restores strength to the Patient;
his eyes which before were almost out by a deep sorrow, rekindled, and sparkled
with joy. One of his Friends who sat near his Bed, and who took notice of this
sudden change, out of an unseasonable joy mentioned it aloud, which had like to
have spoiled all; for Alcander had some shame of his weakness, and suffering
himself to be transported with disdain that still remained, was upon the point
of refusing the visit from Celintha; but being come again to himself, by seeing
in the sorrowful silence of his friend his repentance for his imprudence, he
received Celintha; who came in a moment afterward. At her first approach
Alcander was in so great a disorder, he being somewhat ashamed to appear in
this condition to the eyes of those who were about him; but the more he
endeavors to hide his Concern, the more it breaks out; those spirits which
began to revive and restore his Countenance, did retire back, and leave it
pale, his Looks becoming fixed, and full of astonishment. Celintha, who had pity
on him, made signs to those who were about his Bed, to go out of the Room.
Alcander is affected with this goodness of Celintha, it affords him some hopes,
and makes him put on a different air from that which he had before; there
returns immediately upon his Looks a certain sprightfulness of
charming-sweetness, and vivacity in his eyes, and an agreeable smile spreads it
self over his lips. In short, there appears throughout his whole Person, that
which may be called the effect of Joy and Hope; he would have spoken, to thank
Celintha for the honor of her Visit, but speech failed him as well as
expressions. Celintha, who had for Alcander all that a Woman could have of most
kind and favorable, excepting her Love, which was wholly engaged to Dorilas,
said to him the most obliging things, and such as were most proper for the
restoring him to his health. But this motive of pity, which made her speak so
tenderly to him, and whose language resembled so much that of Love, was carried
too far; she began to fear, that in going about to cure Alcander's Disease, she
should increase his Love by false hopes; and this fear threw her into some
disorder, which was observed by Alcander, and which made him immediately
relapse into his jealous diffidence of her. Thus all his pain returning again,
No, no, Celintha, answered he, with a feeble and languishing voice, flatter no
more a Wretch with your goodness which he does not deserve, and which your own
heart disowns: Take less care of a Life, which can serve only to disturb your
quiet; Heaven has caused me to be born for you, but it has made you for
Dorilas; live for the sake of that happy Lover, and suffer an unfortunate
Wretch to die, who is not allowed to live for you. Alas dear Alcander, replied
Celintha, I would not have you die! I had rather -- There making a stop,
fearing to say too much, or not to say enough, being pressed by her too great
natural goodness, and being too much moved by the deplorable condition of
Alcander, she was going, without doubt, to speak what she would afterward have
repented of, when some Persons of Quality coming into the Chamber, hindered her
from pursuing her Discourse. She takes her leave, Olympia goes out with her,
and after having thanked her for her Favors, May I presume, said she, to beg
you to continue your Visits; I know very well all that passes, but you are as
good, as a Mother is unjust; be pleased, dear Celintha, to vouchsafe to
entertain and amuse his passion, without injuring that Love you have for
Dorilas; give some encouragement to Alcander's hopes, until his reason which
prevails more and more every day can make him conquer a passion, which can
never make him happy. Celintha, who was too sincere to deny what she felt for
Dorilas, and too modest to confess it, and besides was not able to deny
Olympia, answered her with some disorder, and promised, but it was with some
little trouble, (as she was leaving her) to do all that was in her power
toward her quiet, and that of her Son.

Alcander, flattered with some hopes which the tenderness of Celintha gave him,
recovered, and his strength returned, and as he was in a continual search for
any thing that might be pleasing to Celintha; and that this earnest desire
stirred up all the powers of his mind, those talents which hither to had
remained buried, and as it were suspended by the weakness of his Youth, began
now to display themselves, and above all the disposition he had to the making
of Verses. So soon as he had felt this noble fire which comes from above, and
which makes the greatest Poets, his first Essays surprised every body with
wonder, and his love having given a further degree of heat to this divine fire,
he made Verses with an incredible facility; the turn of them was easy, and the
expressions bold, and they had a wonderful exactness, which proceeding neither
from Art nor Study, showed the excellency of his natural Parts, and his great
Ingenuity. It was at the time when the new Sapho, who surpasses in every thing
the ancient Greek Sapho, I mean Mademoiselle de Scudery, by that lawful
Authority which she has obtained in the amorous and witty World, introduced a
word of admirable use into the language of Lovers; it is the word Tender, and
that of Tenderness, which giving a more discreet Idea of Love, has spared the
use of terms, which were a little too licentious for the modesty of persons who
are scrupulously virtuous. This term of Tender in this sense appeared so
agreeable to the mind, and was so well received by all persons who had any
relish for Poetry, that there was neither Song nor Madrigal made wherein it was
not used, and to which it did not add a great deal of grace by its novelty, and
by the beauty of the expression. Alcander, who had hitherto felt but only a
blind inclination for Celintha, which he did not know how to define, insensibly
found that it was Love; this Love began to grow into Desires, and this violent
Passion not being able to conceal it self, but showing it self too openly,
forced Celintha to retrench her complaisance, and to arm her self with all her
severiry. Alcander fought it with all his weapons, and did not fail to make use
of this word Tender, which was newly invented; and as Respect always
accompanies great Passions, whenever he made any Song for Celintha, he
concealed her Name under the term of Phillis, and that of his Desires under the
respectful term of Tender. The number of the fine Verses which he composed, was
more for the honor of Celintha, than his own; but he did not like certain
Poets of Quality, whereof some out of a proud modesty do keep to themselves all
the Verses they make, and blush at the exposing a Talent, which does honor to
every body: or as others, who out of a ridiculous vanity do affect raising
themselves into Authors, would have the meanest of their Trifles be seen by all
the World, and out of this forward ambition do beg the praises which are given
them aloud in complaisance, but which are refused them in private out of
justice. When Alcander showed his Verses, it was without shame as well as
without forwardness; but yet that which had any thing of fine and passionate in
it, shaked more than once the constancy of his Mistress, and made her Love for
Dorilas to stagger. Celintha had for Alcander new Complacencies, and Alcander
felt in himself for her new Motions, which he had not yet known; this
indiscreet joy, which a great passion suffers to discover of it self, when it
thinks it self happy, became so visible in all the actions of Alcander, that
Celintha was very much concerned at it. She reproached her self for that
innocent weakness she suffered to appear in favor of this Lover,
notwithstanding the Love she had for Dorilas; but it was not without great
difficulty that she subdued her sweetness of temper, which continually betrayed
her, and that she endeavored by some forced hardships which she put upon
Alcander, to revenge the Cause of Dorilas, upon the credulity of Alcander.
Alcander, who was of a penetrating Judgment, was quickly undeceived; this
knowledge raised his indignation, awakned his pride, and his Reason with these
Helps thought it self able to overcome this passion: But finding himself
utterly unable to conquer it, much less to satisfy it, he turns all his
thoughts on the side of Honor, and hopes to be comforted by it, for all the
disgusts of an unfortunate passion. His Parents, his Governor, his Masters,
his own Reason, and his Courage, do withdraw him from the presence of Celintha;
and he being of an age and in a condition very proper to make a Journey to
Court, to receive there his last Accomplishments, which are not to be found
elsewhere, they were resolved to send him to Paris. He himself being desirous
to have his departure hastened, and to that end coming into his Mothers Chamber
with his usual hastiness, he was tenderly struck with the Beauty of a young
Lady, who being just come from Paris with her Mother, paid her first Visit to
Olympia. Having seated himself next to this young Person, whose Name was
Rosolinda, he looked upon her with all the earnestness which Respect and
Decency would allow him; he let some Glances slip, which seemed to be fixed upon
the Eyes of Rosolinda, and so soon as he had met a return, he let fall his own,
out of a respectful awe, and with an air which seemed to show somewhat of
passion. Rosolinda, whom Fame had prepared to favor Alcander, but who had not
yet heard what had passed between him and Celintha, perceived with some joy the
little disorder which appeared in the Countenance of Alcander, and finding in
it some glimmerings of a Conquest, she immediately did all that the Art of
pleasing, without prejujudice to her modesty, could do to add to her Beauty.
This first Conversation began with a silence, which yet uttered many things; it
was kept up by a sort of Complements, which often signify nothing, and
continued by mutual Commendations, which were given and returned with a sincere
esteem, but in so gentile and well turned a manner, that it made praises to be
agreeable and compatible with the nicest modesty. Their Conversation had gone
farther, if the Mother of Rosolinda, taking her leave of Olympia, had not
interrupted it; but being forced to part, they showed each other that they had
a great deal yet to say. Alcander being retired into his Apartment, his
imagination being filled with the thoughts of Rosolinda, he thought he felt in
his heart some disposition to revenge the loss of Celintha: At least, said he
within himself, I feel some agreeable motions, which the Civilities of
Rosolinda have raised in my mind, and which seem to comfort me in some measure
in my despair, and do a little sweeten the bitterness of my Afflictions; and it
may be Heaven it self, which offers me so favorable an opportunity for my
cure, will give me the power to finish it, and make me to bear a gentler yoke,
and such as will leave me in some hope. Whilst Alcander flattered himself with
these Reflections, Rosolinda, who began to bear a great part in all that
concerned Alcander, having now known his affliction, and the engagement of
Celintha, thought it would be easy for her to make a conquest of what Celintha
had neglected. She longed to see Alcander, who owed her a Visit, and to
endeavor in so favorable a Juncture to dis-engage him from a desperate
passion, and to render her self Mistress of a heart which the cruelty of
Celintha had broken and tormented. Alcander soon satisfied her Impatience; he
went to see the Mother, to get her leave to visit the Daughter: He obtains it,
and immediately gives himself up wholly to the design which he had of loving
her, and making himself be beloved by her. When he is with her, he displays
before her to the utmost, whatsoever he used to show of the amorous and the
witty, at times when he was most ambitious of pleasing: He shows in his
Conversation that vivacity of Wit, and greatness of Soul, which do use to
attract esteem, and especially since the terms in which he expresses himself,
have an I know not what of lively and natural, which agrees with the sincerity
of his thoughts. Rosolinda, who had, like him, a lively imagination, and a
haughty mind, thought and did every thing like him, (that is to say) with a
great deal of gentileness. This conformity of them both in their thoughts and
in their expressions, seemed to prepare them for a perfect union: There was
between them this difference, that Rosolinda having nothing in her heart which
opposed the passion she begun to feel for Alcander, in the ardent desire she
had to please him, followed her Inclination; whereas Alcander having also a
design to please Rosolinda, was forced to encounter the Inclination which
carried him toward Celintha. Thus Alcander finding himself too much
pre-engaged, endeavors the more to love Rosolinda: In order to this, he forces
himself, as much as possible, to fill his imagination with the merit of
Rosolinda: He fixes all his Looks upon what he sees in her, to be the most
moving, and the most engaging; he examines, he studies all her Beauties, he
searches, and thinks to find a certain delicacy in all her thoughts, a certain
accurateness in her expressions, and in all that she does, a new sort of
agreeableness, which no body had yet observed; he fancies Graces in all her
Person which she had not, although indeed she possessed many of them to a great
degree. Rosolinda seconds his Intentions, and forgets nothing of those strokes
which may gain her so advantageous a Victory. This first Visit, which had
lasted much longer, if it had been to be measured by the pleasure which it gave
to them both, being ended by the Laws of Decency, they parted with some
assurance of having raised in each an esteem the one for the other. Alcander
went from this Conversation, with a satisfaction and agreeable disturbance
which he took, for a certain presage of the change he wished for with so much
earnestness. He continues his Visits, and now far from hastening his Journey to
Paris, he does seek excuses to retard it. Now because the motive which
continually inclined him to Celintha, did disturb the happy beginnings of this
Enterprise, he found himself still in an uncertain condition, his Heart
belonging neither to Rosolinda, nor to Celintha, since it was tied to the one
by a Chain, which Fate had made with her own hands, and to the other by a
violent desire of his own, to bestow all his Love upon her; he was resolved to
enter into an Engagment in despite of his Heart, which nothing might be
capable of breaking. He would therefore needs lay an obligation upon himself,
by showing to all the World, that he is the Lover and Adorer of Rosolinda; he
says it so often, that he persuades himself that he is so; and to forget
nothing of what may advance this Love in a Mind prepossest by another Passion,
he draws the Picture of Rosolinda in Verses, he fills himself with her Idea,
and he presents to his mind a Collection of the delicate Strokes and Features
of which her Beauty is composed.

Scarce had he finished his Verses, but without giving himself time to examine
and polish them, he sends them to Rosolinda, and shows them to his Friends with
a forwardness which was not usual in him; it was enough for him to believe that
this impetuous desire which had made him make this Picture with this great
quickness, was an undoubted mark of his new Passion. Celintha, who knew already
something of it, was extremely pleased to see in Alcanders Verses the
confirmation of a Change which she so earnestly wished for. Coming therefore to
Rosolinda, to whom she owed a Visit, she makes the Conversation to fall upon
this Subject, not out of an indiscreet and jealous Curiosity, which is so
common to all Women, but out of a generous Goodness, which made her concern her
self for Alcanders quiet, and who pleased her self in congratulating Rosolinda
for so honorable a Conquest. How happy are you, said she, to Rosolinda, to
find in Alcander a Lover who knows how to praise as well as to love! who shows
you so much Wit when he gave you a Heart, and who mixes with his Presents such
precious Incense! What likehood is there, replied Rosolinda, that a Heart which
oves you once, can or will ever love another? The Verses which Alcander made
for me, do form the Idea of a Beauty which never was in being; and as the
Picture does not resemble me, and is so much above me, Alcander's Love is no
less incredible than his Praises. Rosolinda, said Celintha, has not less
Modesty than Beauty. Celintha answered, Rosolinda has not only all that can
make a person be beloved by all the World, but she has for the Eyes of Alcander
a certain Charm, which ties him to her Person with Knots which he can never be
able to break. It is in that, replied Celintha, lies the Privilege of a Beauty
like yours -- As she was pursuing her Discourse, word was brought that Alcander
desired to see her. At this Name of Alcander, imagine what was the surprise of
them both, who had such different Motives and Interests. Rosolinda ordered him
to be conducted in, being desirous to see the effect which the Presence of
Celintha would cause before her, upon the mind of a revolted Lover; and
Celintha was overjoyed to be upon this occasion with Rosolinda, that Alcander
comparing the one with the other, might be the better convinced of the
preference which was due to her Rival, and give himself up at last wholly to
this his new Mistress. Alcander came into the Chamber, and seeing Celintha with
Rosolinda, was so surprised, that he could not dissemble the disorder it put
him nito, and he knew not which to fix his eyes upon. This distraction and
disorder which appeared in his thoughts, made Rosolinda ashamed, and raised a
great deal of pity in Celintha: All three were struck dumb, and not knowing
with what to begin the Conversation, kept silence for some time; Rosolinda
broke it at last, and not being able to abstain from thanking Alcander, for the
description he had made of her in Verse. Alcander answered her Complement, in
terms which showed the great disturbance of his mind: He turns his eyes toward
Celintha, and seems with submissive and languishing Looks to tell her, he
repented the having contradicted by his Verses which he had made for another,
all that he knew belonged to her: He finds he loves none but Celintha, and
seems to have forgotten that she loved no body but Dorilas. Celintha, who would
have rescued him from this Disorder, said to him with her usual sweetness, I
see Alcander, that loving Honor as you do to the highest point, you fear the
offending against it, by showing before me, that you have taken back your heart
to give it to another; but does not Honor it self dictate to you, that it is a
shameful thing for such a Person as you, to lose upon me such precious Sighs as
yours are? I must confess, I do esteem the heart which I had the disposal of so
much, as to believe it was not unworthy of you, and if it were possible for you
to gain it either by force of Merit, Love, or Constancy, it would then (it may
be) be shameful for you to yield it up to another; but since it belongs to
another, by the irrevocable Command of that Power which absolutely disposes of
us, nothing can be more honorable for you, than to free your self from such an
unfortunate bondage, and to put your self into the chains of a Beauty you ought
to prefer before me, though I were capable of returning your Love. Celintha
having spoken these words, rises up, thinking she ought to spare Alcander the
confusion of answering; she takes leave of Rosolinda, and leaves her in an
astonishment, no less than Alcander. Rosolinda seeing her self alone with him,
having made some endeavors to re-settle her mind, Lift up your eyes, Alcander,
said she, and do not blush by reason of the condition which the presence of
Celintha has put you into: I see very well that an invincible charm draws you
to her, but since with the help of such a desert, and such a Love as yours,
Celintha cannot overcome the inclination which she has for Dorilas, can it be
thought strange, that you cannot overcome for my sake the Love which you have
for Celintha? Yield therefore to that destiny, which ties you to a Person
infinitely amiable; love her still, and if so sweet a heart as hers seems not
to be made for you, force it to yield it self to your own power. The
illustrious Alcander is not born to be always unhappy, his destiny is stronger
than that of Dorilas, and even that of Celintha it self; and lastly, there is
nothing impossible to Love, Merit, and Perseverance, when you unite them all
together. Ah Madam, answers Alcander, with a great sigh, and as it were coming
out of a deep study, With what hopes would you flatter an unfortunate Lover! I
too well feel that I loved Celintha, and I too well see that I shall always
love her; but you may imagine that I shall always love her against my will,
since it will always be without any hope; and this will be at least a just
punishment inflicted upon a heart that will not obey me: If I could take any
other course, it should be, without doubt, that of casting off the fetters put
upon me by Celintha, to give my self wholly to you. The fight of you alone does
often charm my melancholy, and I found my self so filled with the thoughts of
you when I made your Picture, and I did it with so quick and lively a warmth,
that I thought that fire in my mind had passed into my heart: But I now see my
Error with shame; and though I might hope one day to restore it to my self,
that I might offer it entirely to you, would it be just that you should be a
moment in doubt of your conquest? How could I still have the rashness to demand
of you your heart, for a heart that is yet a prisoner in the chains of another,
and which has made so many successless Attempts to free it self? Can I enter
into your presence, after having ventured to take upon me openly the Name of
your Lover, and after having exposed my self to the shame of belying so
glorious a Name? I ought to deprive my self for ever of the pleasure and honor
of seeing you. At these words he goes out, without staying for her Answer, and
as soon as he was got home, he thought of going immediately to Court; he asks
leave of his Parents, and makes the best excuse he can for the inconstancy of
his resolutions.

After having resided some time at Paris, and after having added to his mind,
and to all those accomplishments he brought with him out of the Country, that
agreeable air which is to be gained no where else but there, the progress which
he soon made in gaining the general esteem of the World, upon his entrance into
it, the reputation of his Name and Fortune, augmented by a great Estate, made
him looked upon as a very considerable Match. The greatest of the Court had
their eyes upon him, and wished for his Alliance: An absence of some years, his
Reason fortified by Age, and by the Conversation he had with the rational
World, the application which he made to every thing that could give the last
perfection to a Gentleman of Quality, some little Amors which employed his
leisure time, and which young People look upon as a necessary Pleasure. All
this seemed to have extinguished the Love which he had for Celintha, to such a
degree, that one of his Friends having spoken to him of a great Match, he
hearkens to the Proposition with pleasure, writes about it to his Parents,
procures their Consent, and afterward courts and gets the Consent of Florisa,
for that was her Name. The Match is concluded upon, the day is appointed for
all Parties to sign the Contract, and yet see the power of Love guided by
Inclination. In the midst of these Preparations for so advantageous a Marriage,
he receives News, which stops the execution, which was a misfortune befallen
Dorilas, whom the loss of a Lawsuit had totally ruined, and forced to renounce
the possession of Celintha; he feels in himself a hope spring up, which he had
before lost, and this hope re-kind les his Flames. Having known afterward that
Celintha was sick, and that the beginning of her sickness was so violent, that
she was in danger of her life, his tenderness toward her increases; imagine
then what was the disturbance of a mind agitated with so many motions at the
same time. On the one side, the necessity of accomplishing a Marriage resolved
upon, the shame of seeing in danger the honor of his Word and Promises, the
indispensable obligations of Duty and Decency, the interest of Reputation and
Fortune; and on the other side, the Love he has for Celintha, the pity he has
of her Sickness, the passion he has to succor her, the impatience he has to
see her again, and the hopes of possessing her. In this perplexity, his first
thoughts were to disengage his word; he goes to the Parents of Florisa, throws
himself at their feet, makes a sincere confession to them of the condition of
his mind, and protests to them, that if notwitstanding the passion which he has
for Celintha, which he feels the return of with greater force than ever, they
esteemed him worthy of their Daughter, nothing should hinder him from doing his
duty, and keeping to his promise. Her Parents, who would not endanger the quiet
of their Daughter they loved so tenderly, soon released Alcander from his word.
Alcander goes home with all the diligence which his age and his natural
activity, his love and his hope, enabled him to do. So soon as he was come
thither, he asked for Celintha, and hears that she had been in great danger of
her life, by the malignity of that sort of disease which may be called the
Scourge of Beauty, since it sometimes dis-figures the finest Faces, and does at
least take away that which is called the flower of Beauty, I mean the gloss and
fineness of the Complexion, which was the chief Beauty of Celintha. This
accident surprises Aleander, and far from abating his passion, gives rise to a
generous compassion, which inflames and softens him the more. He asks leave of
Celintha to visit her: She who yet saw no body, and who waited tiil time had
worn out those cruel impressions which her Sickness had left upon her Face,
does notwithstanding at last yield to the pressing desires of Alcander, and to
her own good nature. She receives Alcander, who cannot conceal his disorder at
the first sight of Celintha, although he had prepared himself against the
surprise, which the change of her Complexion had occasioned. Celintha perceived
it, and both having paid the Civilities they owed each other, after so long an
absence. Well then, said Celintha, you see how bad a recompense you have for
the impatience which you had to see me; you see how the Heavens take care to
cure you of a passion which I have so little merited. If that had been the
intention of Heaven, answered Alcander, I should have been inspired with other
thoughts toward you, and should have had another heart: Time absence, nor the
accidents of life, and the inconstancy which is so natural to men, are able to
change, and even to destroy the strongest passions, but yet can have no
operation upon mine; I have received it with my life, and it cannot be
extinguished but by my death. To answer you, Alcander, replied Celintha, I have
only to say the same things over again, which you have said to me, with this
difference, that although the passion which I have for Dorilas, is not less
violent than that which you have for me, yet it is much more unfortunate; for I
loved Dorilas, I had the consent of my Parents, was beloved again by him, and
cruel Fortune has thrown my Lover into so extreme a poverty, that although I
might obtain him in this condition with the consent of my Friends, yet I should
never be able to gain his own consent. If you love me enough to desire me
without desert, and without beauty: Dorilas loves me too much to desire to
possess me, when I must go contrary to my duty, and sacrifice my self to his
bad Fortune; but that which grieves me most, is to see us all three involved in
an inextricable misfortune. You can never obtain what you love, and if Fortune
should do a miracle for the sake of Dorilas, by restoring him wherewithal to
obtain me from my Relations, can I give my self to him, and refuse at the same
time so generous a Person as you are? No, no, Alcander, I cannot give my self
to either; I equally hate Treachery and Ingratitude; Dorilas shall have my
Love, but you shall have my Esteem and Gratitude. We must then, said he, yield
to the severity of our Fates: I must lose you and leave you; as unfortunate as
I am, I shall never repent the having loved you, and these excellent thoughts,
which at the same time declared to me both our misfortunes, do but increase the
esteem which I have for you. I will obey this fatal power, which having tied me
to you, does now separate me from you for ever. If my absence cannot cure me,
yet I shall have this advantage from an invincible inclination, that it will
guard me from all other engagements, which though they may be more happy, yet
can never be so glorious, as that inclination which engages me to the most
lovely and most generous Person in the World. After having spoken these words,
he leaves her, and takes the most passionate Farewell that ever was known.
Celintha afflicted with the loss of that little Beauty which Nature had
bestowed upon her, for Dorilas his sad condition, and for Alcander's sorrow,
was resolved to leave the Conversation of the World, and to pass the rest of
her days in a religious Retirement. Alcander being able no more to pretend to
Celintha, seeing himself pressed by his Parents, and by the strong Reasons of
Honor and Decency, not to suffer so great a Name as his to be lost, could not
avoid hearkening to some Propositions of Marriage. His Father being returned,
as imperious as he was, would not notwithstanding impose upon his choice; for
he believed that his Son would at last master a passion that was without hope,
and being born with a great deal of courage, he would do nothing which was
unworthy of his Birth. He saw great advantages in making a Match with
Philismena, but he was also very much disgusted with the selfish and difficult
ways of proceeding which he observed in her Relations. Alcander,
notwithstanding the great esteem he had for Philismena, was resolved not to
oppose the inclination which she had for Lisidor; he thought it best to turn
all his thoughts toward Rosolinda, whose extraordinary Beauty, even at the
time when he loved Celintha, had made strong impression upon his mind.
Rosolinda was returned to Paris, and had entertained in her self something
beyond a bare esteem for Alcander. Polydamus and Olympia, who had very much
bettered their Estate, and the hopes of their House, by their long living in
the Country, and the important Services they had done for the State, resolved
to make a Journey to Court: And that they might by their presence and
endeavors contribute to the settling of Alcander, they departed almost at the
same time with Philismena, whose Parents carried her up with them to choose for
her a Match which might answer their Ambition: there it was that Alcander
received news from Sweden of Lisidors Condition and Fortune, which he informed
Philismena of, together with his Rise in that Court, and the admirable progress
which he made in Military Employments. He received there also Letters from
Lisidor in particular, both for himself and for Philismena, and by an exact and
faithful Correspondence, he privately kept up this kind Commerce of Letters,
which served to increase the inclination they had for each other.

Madonte, to whom Lisidor wrote from time to time, to amuse her Hopes, and to
make her Jealousy sleep, having surprised one of the Letters which Lisidor
sent to Philismena by the hands of Alcander, had so violent a concern for it,
that she would have revealed all, had she not feared for her self the
Consequences of so dangerous a discovery. To revenge her self without danger
therefore, she has recourse to this Artifice, she makes a false discovery to
one of her Friends, who she knew was under great ties of Friendship to Lisidor
upon many important accounts. She makes him believe that Philismena loved
Alexander, and that absence had absolutely banished from her mind the
favorable thoughts that she formerly had for Lisidor. She prepares this
Imposture with a great deal of art, and gives it all the Colors which might
render it probable. This Friend of Lisidor, who had for him a hearty and
impetuous zeal, writ to him the same day in terms capable of alarming the most
incredulous mind. The remoteness and Fortune of Philismena, the merit and
quality of Alcander, were powerful reasons to gain Lisidors belief; that which
served to convince him thoroughly was, that Madonte her self had insinuated it
in her Letters to him, pretending not to explain her self fully, that she might
not render her self suspicious, which tormented him without intermission.
Impatient to clear them himself, he seeks for some favorable opportunity to
return into his own Country; but not finding any, he begs the King of Sweden's
leave, with a great deal of importunity, and tells him the true reasons of his
Journey; but that they might be concealed from others, he desired that he would
please to contrive some pretext of a Negotiation which he might manage
privately with the King his Master, and which being plausible enough, although
the success might be of no great consequence, might serve for an excuse of his
Journey, and might make him appear in his own Country with the honorable marks
of his Trust. The King of Sweden, who loved him extremely, granted his desire,
but made him promise a quick return as a recompense of this kindness to him;
Lisidor being arrived in the Court of France, remained there some time without
making himself known; his restless Passion carried him immediately to seek for
some light from Madonte, whom he visited secretly. Madonte completed the
poisoning his mind with false relations, which her Jealousy inspired her with,
and which she spoke with so great a disturbance of mind, that that alone might
easily have undeceived him, had he not been powerfully prepossest by his doubts
and his fears. The King in the private Audiences he gave him, showed that he
had a pleasure in seeing and hearing him, he observes in him a strength of Wit,
and in all his person an Air of Modesty and Greatness joined together, which
obtained in him a very advantageous Opinion of his Virtue and Courage, and
which made him resolve to bind him to his Court by an honorable Chain.
Rosolinda, whose Beauty and Virtue made so great a noise, was a very proper
means for the effecting of his design. Lisidor, who now no more doubted of the
change of Philismena, and who believed that the inequality of Fortune and
Quality which she had so lately seen between them, was the true cause of it,
was resolved to vindicate his Honor by seconding the Kings Intentions. Neither
the Inclination he had for Philismena, nor the Engagement which was upon him to
the King of Sweden his Benefactor, could divert him from this thought. He
sacrificed every thing to the pleasure he should have of triumphing over
Alcander, by whom he thought himself betrayed, and to insult over the
Inconstancy of Philismena. In the mean while Philismena being mortally
afflicted for the Error that Lisidor was in, but too proud to take care to
undeceive him, resolved to watch him, and having heard he went often to visit
Rosolinda, she took it mortally to heart, for she had so tender a sense of it
joined with so infirm a temper of Health, that she fell sick, and her Life was
despaired of the very first day. Alcander, who had for her a most tender
Esteem, incensed at Lisidor for the unjust suspicion which he had harbored of
her and himself, and allaramed besides at the pretensions which he made to
Rosolinda, was just upon the point of chalenging him, and of letting Philismena
thereby have the pleasure of seeing her self vindicated before she dyed. But
being more concerned to do her good, than to revenge her Quarrel, he goes to
Lisidor, and without losing time, reproaches him, and demands of him the reason
of his Inconstancy. He tells him the condition wherein Philismena is, and the
need she has of his assitance. Lisidor being struck with a sudden surprise, and
a deadly Grief, forgetting his last Jealousy and Indignation, feels the
sleeping Passion which he had for Philismena awakened, throws himself at the
feet of Alcander, and begs pardon for his Error; then immediately raising
himself, let us go, said he, dear Alcander, let us go to relieve Philifmena, or
to dye with her. They were no sooner entered her House, but Alcander sent her
notice that she might be prepared for the fight of Lisidor. At this Message
there appeared through the thick Paleness which covered the Face of the sick
Philismena, to escape some Rays of Hope and Joy. All those who were in the Rome
retired, to give her the opportunity of a free Conversation with Lisidor.
Madonte alone being troubled and struck dumb did not know at first what course
to take; she could not bear the Prefence of Lisidor, who being just upon the
point of justifying and clearing himself, would discover the Cheat which had
made him to suspect the Innocence and Faithfulness of Philismena, and being
also pressed with remorse of Conscience, she was tempted to declare all
publicly, and to lessen the Crime, accuse her self whilst she was in this
uncertainty. Lisidor approached the Bed wherein Philismene lay in a strange
disorder, which increased at the sight of the terrible Change he observed in
her Looks. It is I then, said he, who have brought you into so deplorable a
Condition, I who am not able to repay with the loss of my Life, the Goodness
you have had for me! No, no, cried out Madonte, with a Voice which showed her
Grief, and the violence of her Despair, it is I, said she, addressing her self
to Philismene, it is I alone, who have been cause of Lisidors Crime, and who
have brought you into this miserable condition; it was my jealous Rage, which
made you to pass for unfaithful in the mind of Lisidor: there is no kind of
Torment great enough to punish my Treachery. She spoke these words with so loud
a Voice, that they were heard into the next Chamber, where the Mother of
Philismene was, who returning into her Daughters Chamber, found Madonte in a
Weakness which took away both Motion and Speech from her. She ordered her to be
carried into her own Chamber, and after having known the cause of so great a
disorder, she leaves our two Lovers in a full freedom of Conversation, It was
then, said Philismene, with a Voice weakened by her Sickness, the Jealousy of
Madonte which has been the cause of all my Misfortunes, and I shall at last
have this content in dying, that it is not to you alone that the grief which
kills me is to be imputed. Oh Lisidor! could you give credit to the relations
of a suspicious and an interested Person? How could you believe that I, who
loved you at a time when you had nothing to recommend you but your Person, and
at a vast distance removed from me, should cease loving you at a time when the
Reputation of your Name and Employments render you more amiable, and that a
glorious Elevation does bring you nearer to an Equality with me? Could you
mistrust me in so favorable a Conjuncture? I see your Repentance in your
Tears. It is enough Lisidor, comfort your self for the loss of a Life which did
belong to you, but which naturally could not last long. I was born with too
tender a Health, tho Heaven gave me a Heart to love you always, yet it has
given me a Life which cannot be of long continuance. Nothing, replied Lisidor,
can lessen my Crime or my Grief, should I have hastened your Death but a
minute; a Life like mine, no not my whole Life, can repay one minutes loss of
so precious a Life as yours. Oh Heavens! unjust Heaven! jealous Fortune! hold
cried Philismene in raising her Voice, do not draw down upon you the vengeance
of that Sovereign Power which disposes of us, do not disturb these last moments
which seem happy enough to me, since they restore me all your Esteem and all
your Kindness. What a Reconciliation, cried Lisidor, is this, which reunites
our Hearts only to separate them again with more cruelty? His Grief had gone on
further, if having still some hopes of the life of Philismene, he had not
feared her Sickness would have increased by a longer Conversation; he calls her
Women, restores her into their hands, and conjures them to double their Care of
her. Lisidor was scarce gone out of the Chamber before she relapsed into a
Weakness which proved mortal, and she being full of the Image of Lisidor, seeks
him round her Bed with distracted and dying Eyes, and imagining she saw him,
she directed her last farewells to him with so tender and moving a
Languishment, that it almost killed with grief and pity all those that heard
her.

So soon as Lisidor had heard of the Death of Philismene, he was so afflicted
at it, that looking upon himself as the principal occasion of this Misfortune,
he abhorred himself, he would no more see any body, and think of nothing but
removing from all that can put him in mind of his Loss or of his Crime, he begs
the King to give him his Audience of Leave in private, and to dispense with his
appearance at Court in the disorder he was in. The King notwithstanding this
Resolution which he had taken of having him near his Person, could not refuse
him this Request.

Alcander having given some time to his Grief for the Loss which he had
suffered of his Illustrious Friend, being pressed very much by his Relations to
choose a Match amongst all those proposed, chose Rosolinda, and having obtained
her, he endeavored comfort himself for the Death of Philismene, and the
Retirement of Celintha, by the Possession of a Beauty which was far beyond the
other's.

The Second HISTORY.
IN the tempestuous Times which were in France, when the Princes of Bourbon,
being fallen from the Greatness and Privileges due to their Birth, the House
of Guise, and the House of Montmorency, raised to the highest Dignities, gave a
natural birth to so many Factions and Jealousies, the natural Springs of fatal
Changes and great Revolutions. These Troubles were maintained and augmented by
the sudden and precipitate Death of Henry the II. who after having given Peace
to France, was unfortunately killed in a Turnament by Montgomery. The Weakness
of Francis the II. and afterward the Minority of Charles the IX. the
Jealousies about the Government, between the Princes of the Blood, those of
Guise, the Constable, and Queen Katherine de Medicis, raised new Disturbances,
which at last brake out into a Civil War. Yet amongst these Dissentions, in the
midst of these Fires which were kindled in all Parts, Love did kindle many
others, as if Heaven had a mind thereby to unite Hearts, as Ambition
endeavored to divide them. The Passion which Henry the II. had for Diana
Duchess of Valentinois, is very well known: He was more employed about this
Love, than the Laws of his Kingdom, and this Duchess was seen to have so great
a power with the King, that the Duke of Guise, sought in her Alliance the
surest foundation of his Greatness, and the Constable could find only in the
same Alliance, wherewith to balance the Interest of his Competitor. These two
Rivals, with the hazard of making themselves odious to the Public, were
resolved to unite with the Blood of Diana, whom the Covetousness of possessing
the Government and Riches, had rendered odious to all France. The Duke of
Aumale, a Brother to the Duke of Guise, married one of her Daughters, one of
her Neeces being married also to the Lord of Argile, the Constable's second
Son; Diana in so great a Post giving her self wholly up to the Pleasures of the
Court, which a Favor without bounds had furnished her with in abundance,
inspired every where an Air of Gallantry, and drew all the World after her by
her Example. This I thought fit to premise, to give some Idea of the Genius of
that Court, and of the spirit of the Scene where the Adventure happened, which
I am going to relate.

Two Gentlemen of Quality, united by an ancient Friendship, and for a long time
having espoused the Interest of the Royal Family of the Bourbons, were desirous
to find a new occasion of uniting their Families more firmly, by the Marriage
of their two Children, whom Heaven seemed to have made for each other: The one
had a Son whose Name was Octavius, and the other a Daughter called Henrietta.

Octavius was born with a Physiognomy which gave great Hopes, and with too fine
Features and Complexion for a Person of his Sex. His Beauty increased with his
Age, without his having any of those Faults which commonly accompany Beauty in
Men. He avoided with great care, all that might make it be thought of him, that
he affected the looking handsome, or that he flattered himself with being so.
But there appeared in him with his fineness of Feature, a noble and charming
Greatness, and a mien of Quality.

Henrietta was born with an extraordinary Beauty, and that which she had of
singular, was a kind of a tender and languishing Air, which was equivalent to
the most sparkling Vivacity. This languishing way of hers, was neither
fearfulness nor weakness, but an agreeable impression of the sweetness of her
mind, which manifested it self in her face, and did not want a firmness and
greatness of Courage which nothing was able to shake.

With this Equality of Birth, Quality, and Merit, it was not difficult to form
a perfect Intelligence between Octavius and Henrietta, and such a one as their
Parents would doubtless wish for one day, to unite them by Marriage. In order
to prepare them for this Union, Heaven had given to each for the other so
violent an Inclination, that no History can give a more singular and great
Example of this sort of Love. This was not all: The Death of the Mother of
Henrietta, served very much to keep up and fortify this happy Sympathy. Her
Father, whom we shall here call Gaston, which was his proper Name, although he
most commonly lived in the Country, would not leave his Daughter there; and so
soon as he saw himself forced to follow the Court, to manage all opportunities
of serving his Party, in a time when two powerful Factions were in a continual
motion, he carried her thither with her Governess, and put her into the hands
of Octavius his Mother. Henrietta was now entering into her 8th. year, and
Octavius was very near the same Age.

So soon as they met, there did not appear in their Faces that reserved and
cold air, which is commonly observed in Children, at the first sight of Persons
they do not know: There was no need of the Governor and Governess taking care
to teach them mutual civility: a sudden motion, a hasty attraction pushes them
forwards toward one another; they run to salute, and to embrace each other
like Friends, who had been acquainted for a long time. I need not tell you, by
how many sensible signs, and by what a conformity of opinions, thoughts and
desires, they made appear every moment the effects of this wonderful Sympathy;
they did so resemble in mind and in heart, that the most exact Picture could
less resemble its Original; so that the World was apt to believe, that that
which was only the effect of a natural Inclination, was rather that of a
studied Imitation. There was no difficulty in making them agree in their
Pleasures and Diversions: The first of them who named the Diversion, was
followed without hesitation by the other; for when one showed to have a mind to
any thing, there was always found in the other an implicit compliance. There
was not to be found between them, those Jealousies which are usually seen
between Children, about the Presents, Caresses, or Praises, which are given to
them; they put them off from one to the other with a becoming and sincere
modesty, when they vyed in their application to the Studies which were common
to them both, as History and Geography. This emul^tion was nor the effect of
the desire of the one to go beyond the other, but of a violent desire of each
to become the more amiable unto the other.

It may be easily judged by the things that I have now said, what a trouble it
was to them, when the different employments of a different Sex forced them to
part, and what trouble they underwent by suffering the shortest absence, and by
the impatience they had of seeing each other again.

So soon as they passed their Childhood, Age had given to Henrietta more light
to know her self, and that that Inclination which was disguised under the mask
of a bare Friendship, made it self be felt as a dangerous Passion: That Reason
which she had supported by a becoming Bashfulness which usually accompanies the
fair Sex, made her apprehend the disorders which commonly follow the greatest
Passions. Although hers was allowed by her Parents, yet she thought that she
ought to retrench a little that great familiarity she had with her Lover, and
conform her self to the decency of an Age, which required a more reserved and
cautious Behavior. But all these Reflections were of very little effect,
against that Inclination which carried her away continually toward Octavius;
so that her Governess, for this Reason, was forced to make use of all the
severity of her Lessons, and her Authority; and Octavius, who owed a part of
his time, to the Exercises which his Age called him to, was forced, against his
will, to deprive himself of the pleasure which he had of seeing her at all
hours. They could comfort themselves sometimes with the joy which they had, of
seeing each other from time to time, and by the certain hopes o^ their
Marriage, which their Parents very earnestly wished for, and only waited for a
favorable opportunity to accomplish. But observe to how many Changes their
Fortune was exposed, by the Ties which it had with that of the State. The
Prince of Conde, who was of an unquie^ stirring humor, and capable of under
taking any thing, in order to gratify hi^ revenge, and to make himself still
greate^ having rendered himself suspected by the height of his Fortune, and by
his Conduct, to have a share in all the Commotions which the Hugonots had
stirred (...) in the State; and especially the Consp^racy of Amboys provoked
Katherine de M^dici^, and the Princes of Lorrain, so mu^^ against him, that
they thought after many uncertain and unsettled Deliberatio^ it was absolutely
necessary to be rid of him, to secure the King's Authority, and the
Constitution of the Government. To effect so difficult and so dangerous a
Matter, many Artifices were made use of: They resolved to hold a general
Assembly of the three Estates, and to draw the Princes of the Blood thither,
who were retired from Court. There were very favorable Declarations published,
which lulled asleep the Suspicions of the Great ones, and quieted the minds of
the Conspirators. The Princes of Bourbon, and the Constable, being called to
the States by the King's Writ, promised to go, but prolonged the time by false
pretenses and frivolous excuses, the King making them be pressed by the Count de
Crussol, and the Marshal de St. Andre, and especially by the Marshal de Terms,
who raised an Army, and threatened he would make them obey by force of Arms, the
resolution which they had taken to believe only their own Judgment, which
continually filled them with invincible distrusts, is at last shaken. The
Cardinal of Bourbon, a Prince who was a Friend to Peace, and a mortal Enemy of
Factions and Novelties, having at length gained them, the King of Navarr and
the Prince of Bourbon depart from Bearn, and come to Orleans, where the States
were assembled. There are immediately new ^ards put upon the King of Navarr, to
be secure of him, and the Prince of Conde is arrested and condemned to lose his
Life: What were the Alarms of Octavius and Henrietta, to see the Heads of their
Party in the hands of their Enemies, and in Dangers that were inevitable? but
also what was the joy which succeeded these cruel Afflictions, when the sudden
Death of Francis the 2 d. restored liberty to the Prince of Conde, safety to
the King of Navarr, and hopes to all those of their Party? In the Conjuncture
of so favorable a Revolution, Octavius presses his Marriage, the Parents
Consent and all was disposed for the satisfaction of our two Lovers, when the
accomplishment of it was suspended by the Impatience of the Princes, who now
thought of nothing but their Interest, which was without delay to make a good
use of so advantageous an opportunity, and to seize immediately upon the Power
of the Government. The King of Navarr sends the Father of Octavius to the
Constable, who was absent, to stir up his diligence, and to hasten the helps
which he expected from the stability and wisdom of his Councels. On the other
side, the Prince of Conde burning with the desire of revenging himself, and
making use in order thereto of the Hugonot Faction, which was stirring almost
in all Parts of the Kingdom, sends the Father of Henrietta to the chiefest of
the Party, to keep up their heat, and to make it break out upon occasion.
Things being in this condition, imagine if you can, the Trouble Octavius and
Henrietta were in, whose tender minds, afflicted by the present Disorders, were
yet more so by the Fears of a more terrible futurity. What, said they to each
other, must the fate of our Love follow the Revolutions of State? and must our
happiness depend upon a calm, which so many different Interests render almost
impossible? The Jealousy of two powerful Factions, the Ambition of the Queen,
who was resolved to preserve a Sovereignty and an Independance in her
Government of the King and Kingdom, the just pretensions of the Princes of
Bourbon, who by the privileges of their Blood, ought to have the greatest
share in the administration of Affairs, during the King's Minority, the credit
of the House of Lorrain, whom a long possession of the principal Dignities of
the State, had made more obstinate to preserve the haughtiness of the Duke of
Guise, who knew himself to have a greatness of mind so proper for Command: the
courageous virtue of the Constable, who without intermission used all his
Endeavors for the public good, without suffering himself to be corrupted by
the Friendship he owed to the Princes of the Blood his Allies, nor by the
Hatred which he bare to the Princes of Lorrain his Rivals, and his declared
Enemies. Add to this, the zeal for the Protestant Religion: How many Obstacles,
said the sorrowful Henrietta, in that languishing tone which rendered her voice
so sweet and tender? how many Obstacles, said she, do oppose this Calm so much
wished for, which contributing so much to the safety of the State, ought to be
the height of our Wishes? Do our Parents serve the Princes with so much
passion, that they cannot be allowed to give themselves a moment of rest to
accomplish our Happiness? But why, added she, should we complain of our Fate?
Is it not enough for us, that Heaven has poured into our hearts that perfect
harmony which makes the happiness of Lovers? Oh Madam, cried out Octavius! do
you count the possession of that which one loves nothing? and does there want
any thing toward that conformity of thoughts and desires which ought to be
between us, to answer to this mutual inclination? Let us equally wish for what
may render us equally happy: All that comforts us, is to see that the Disorders
of the State which retard our Happiness, cannot separate us asunder, because my
Father and yours are of the same Party, my Father belonging to the King of
Navarr, yours to the Prince of Conde; for who can ever separate two Brothers,
united with so many Ties of Blood, Friendship and Honor?

Whilst our Lovers flattered themselves thus, the Prince of Conde who could not
remain in a quiet condition, whilst he saw himself kept at a distance from the
Place, which he thought belonged to him by the right of his Birth, and the
greatness of his Courage, seeing himself seconded by Admiral Chastillon, made
himself Protector of the Hugonots, whose Number and Power increased daily. This
Prince being bred up in the Doctrine of Calvin; and full of that Spirit of
Independency and Rebellion, which animates his Followers, endeavors in vain to
get to his Party the Constable and the King of Navarr. The first being fixed in
the Religion of the State, and of his Ancestors, who bragged of their being the
first Christians, hearkened to nothing against his Duty; the other, whose
unsteady Belief was at last fixed in that of the Roman Catholics, condemns
aloud that which the Church of Rome has condemned, and takes her Part. Queen
Jane his Wife endeavored to make him change his Resolution, but he judged that
for a Prince, who might pretend to the Crown, the Religion of our Kings was the
easiest way to it.

This resolution of the King of Navar, which united him with the Duke of Guise
and the Constable, although it was grounded upon plausible reasons and
pretenses, did notwithstanding astonish all the World, surprise the Politics
of our Courtiers, throw confusion into the Hugonot Party, and indignation into
the mind of the Prince of Conde, and especially struck the hearts of Octavius
and Henrietta with the most mortal stroke that they could ever receive. They
immediately saw that their Separation must necessarily follow the Division of
the two Brothers. In effect, Gaston Father to Henrietta, who though bred up a
Roman^ Catholic, yet had no other Religion but that of his Master, or rather
that which suited best with his Ambition, a man full of the Spirit and
Character of his Party, that is to say, fiery and impetuous, thinks immediately
of withdrawing his Daughter out of the hands of the Mother of Octavius. He goes
to her House, and having found Octavius with Henrietta, Octavius, said he
abruptly, all commerce must be broken between you and my Daughter; Heaven and
Love had given her to you, and I had designed her for you my self; but the King
of Navarre out of a weak and ambitious Policy, suffering his Eyes to be dazzled
with the prospect of a Crown, although he sees it but afar off, sacrifices,
with distant and doubtful hopes, his Party, his Honor, and his Conscience.
This Prince in breaking with his Brother to join with his Enemy, has broken all
the Bonds which tied my House to yours; more especially, since it is your
Father who (being one of his greatest Favorites) has chiefly contributed
toward this Reunion, and thereby has declared himself the greatest of our
Enemies. I will give you no advice which may make a breach between the Son and
the Father, every one ought in the Interests of a Party or Religion, to follow
his own Reason or his Pretensions. I shall only say, that if you love my
Daughter, Love is able to do all things in so great a Heart as yours, and ought
to fet you above the weakness of common Men. I give you the rest of this day to
think of it. I have also business of my own to look after, and Orders from the
Prince of Conde to execute unto the Queen, so I must leave you in the mean
while to take your Refolution.

Our two Lovers overwhelmed by a Discourse which threatened them with an
inevitable Separation, asked each other, in a Language mixed with Sighs and
Tears, what course was to be raken in this horrible extremity of Affairs. It is
now dear Octavius, said the disconsolate Henrietta to him, with a mortal Grief,
that we must part for ever. Yes, for ever, replied Octavius, in a Tone which
even pierced the Heart of Henrietta, but what miracle can ever unite Interests
which are so opposite to each other? If hitherto your Father by the little zeal
he had for his Religion, suffered you to be bred up a Roman Catholic by your
Mother, at present that he is thus carried away with zeal for the Hugonot
Religion, will he ever suffer his Daughter to be of another? and I, whose Birth
and Inclination have made me of your Religion; must I change, if you are forced
to change your Religion? Nothing Octavius, replied Henrietta, can make me
change either my Religion or my Love, both come to me from Heaven, and that
perfect Simpathy which is between us, inspiring us with the same thoughts,
answers me for your Constancy, and it is, cried out Octavius, that which makes
the greatest of our Misfortunes, and which exposes us to the violence of our
Parents. We owe them an Obedience without any reservation, and that supreme
Power which Heaven gives them over us, engaging us in different Parties, must
most unmercifully deprive us of the Conversation of each other. Add to the
mortal Affliction I shall suffer by ceasing to see you, all the Misfortunes
which are natural Consequences of Civil Broils. Being now of an Age to bear
Arms, I may (perhaps) be forced to fight with our best Friends, and it may be
(I tremble at this terrible Thought, in the blind Fury of the Fights, the first
stroke of my Sword may fall upon the Father of my dear Henrietta.

In the mean time, whilst our two Lovers discoursed of a matter which was so
afflicting and sorrowful, Katherine de Medicis was full of mortal Disquiet, and
took strange allarms at the extraordinary Union between the King of Navarre and
the Duke of Guise. This cunning and distrustful Queen judging others by her
self, imputed their Union to as dangerous a Policy as her own; and doubted not
but that the Chiefs of the Party had promised each other mutual Assistance, to
procure themselves all the share they pretended to in the Government. To break
their Designs, she thought it necessary to make use of the Counterpoise which
she had always done with so much success; that is to say, to balance the
strength of the two Parties, and hinder the one from weighing down the other,
that she might not be oppressed by that Party which should have the advantage.

In order to this, she pretends to manage a secret Correspondence with the
contrary Party; she expresses her self concerning their Beliefs in ambitious
and suspicious Terms, which made her own become doubtful; she confers with the
most intimate of the Prince of Conde's Councils, and makes them advantageous
Promises. She writes to her Ambassadors Letters which seem to favor the
Hugonots Religion, and which alarmed the Court of Rome; she hearkens to the
Propositions made to her by the Father of Henrietta, on the behalf of the
Prince of Conde. She does more, she desires the Father of Henrietta to let his
Daughter be one of her Maids of Honor, and promises him to procure her a very
advantageous Settlement. Gaston accepts of the Offers made to him by the Queen
with a great deal of joy, and tells her she may entirely dispose of his
Daughter, and that it was absolutely necessary to break the Commerce which was
between her and Octavius, and destroy the Friendship which they had contracted
from their Childhood; the Queen promises every thing for the sake of the
Complaisance she would show to one of the Favorites of the Prince of Conde,
and for other private ends. For she thought that she might be able to bring
over to her Party those in whom so extraordinary a Beauty as that of Henrietta
might inspire Love. She thought also the King being just entering into an Age
which would enable him to feel this Passion, it was fit to give him a M^ress,
or at least an Amusement which she could dispose of, and so prevent his
engaging to any other Beauty, whose Quality and Ambition might renew the
Example of Diana Duchess of Valentinais, who was a long time her Rival in
Authority and Greatness.

The next morning Gaston brings his Daughter to the Queen; and having informed
her of the Intentions that Princess had in relation to Octavius, leaves her
with her, greatly surprised that the Threats of her Father, which were to
remove her into the Country for ever, ended in so honorable a Retreat, as this
Relation to the Court, which left her some hopes of seeing her Love sometimes,
although she should not have the liberty of speaking to him. Octavius's Joy was
not less, but it was soon changed by the sudden departure of his Father, who
being obliged by the Orders he received from the King of Navarr to put himself
at the Head of some of his Forces to surprise a Town which was of the Hugonot
Faction, was desirous to have his Son with him in this Expedition, that he
might instruct him in the Rudiments of War.

Whilst Octavius, who was not less valiant than handsome, signalized himself
under his Fathers Command, Henrietta shined at Court, as much for her Virtue as
for her Beauty, she attracted the Eyes of all the World, and the King himself
looked upon her with an attention which made the whole Court believe that what
he felt for her might in time become a true Passion.

Octavius who had gained Reputation in this last Enterprise which his Father
had executed with a great deal of Vigor, came back to Paris, and brought back
with him from this little Campagn, which he had made, a certain masculine and
warlike Air, which with that natural Greatness which accompanied his Beauty,
did very much set him off. He came back by the Orders of his Father to give an
account of an Expedition to the King, which the King of Navarr had entrusted
him with. He made the Relation of all that had happened, with an assurance, and
in terms which were beyond his Age and his Experience. The Queen who was
present, heard him with pleasure, and as she made every thing of use to her own
interest, she thought she ought to gain a young Gentleman, who in the first
trial that way made of him, gave such great hopes of his Wit and Courage. But
it was also of importance to her, not to displease the Father of Henrietta, she
therefore renewed the Prohibition which she had made to Octavius not to speak
to her. It is true, that to correct the severity of this Order, it was given
him in the sweetest terms, and with those flattering Promises wherewith she was
wont to amuse those she thought fit to make use of.

Octavius not daring immediately to offend against the Duty which he owed to
the Queen, answered exactly her Intentions, but finding the Court filled with
the Name of Henrietta, and the noise of her Conquests, seeing her besieged with
a crowd of Lovers, and even distinguished by the Complaisances the King had for
her, he could not hinder himself from being touched a little with Jealousy,
and from mistrusting the constancy of Henrietta, and he thought that he could
not overcome his Mistrust, if he were not cleared, and assured of it by the
mouth of his beautiful Mistress. But what way was there to approach her,
without being seen in the great Light where she stood, nothing could hide him
from so many Eyes, whether curious, amorous, or jealous; which notwithstanding
the violent desire he had to see Henrietta, at last made him venture to pass
through.

The Queen having at last by her skill balanced the Power of the two Parties,
and settled by this conduct her own liberty, and that of her Children, goes out
of Paris, and carries the King to Fountain bleau, to ease her self of the
importunity of both Factions.

The King who as young as he was, had skill and penetration of mind, and by the
example of the most skilful and cunning Queen that ever was, had learnt the Art
of Dissembling, Disguised all his thoughts of her conduct, with which he was
not too well satisfied. The Partialities and the Cabals which rent the Estate,
and which the Queen kept up; this Jealousy of Authority which she would have
entirely in her self, troubled him very much; but not daring to make it appear,
to hide it the more, he affected a contented neglect of his Greatness, and an
earnest pursuit of all sorts of Diversions. One day having prepared a
magnificent Hunting-match, where the Ladies were to assist on Horseback with a
most glorious Equipage, and Henrietta being of the Match, Octavius thought,
being advised by a Lady that was his Friend, that his Face being handsome enough
to disguise himself in Woman's Clothes, and very like a Sister of his that was
at Court, he might dress himself like the other Ladies, only desiring his
Sister to hide her self the Hunting-day, to give him the opportunity of passing
for her. Although he was startled at the shame he should be in, if he were
surprised in such a disguise, yet he was resolved to hazard every thing for
this satisfaction. Being therefore thus disguised, he goes not to the general
Rendezvous with the others, but stays till the Chase was begun: The Lady who
accompanied him, and assisted him in this Stratagem, leaving him behind in a
remarkable place, puts on her Horse toward the Company there to speak with
Henrietta. Having approached her, she leads her away insensibly, and conducts
her to the place where Octavius waited for her with impatience. So soon as she
had perceived him, his disguise did not at all make him unknown to her: At the
first sight the different motions which were raised in her heart appeared in
her Face; the surprizal of the disguise, and of so unforeseen a Meeting, the
sear of having this mystery discovered, and the joy of having the opportunity
to converse with (...) Lover. Octavius whose mind was wholly possessed with the
pleasure of seeing the Person he loved so near, without considering the danger
of his disguise, and all the circumstances of so dangerous an interview, throws
himself at the feet of Henrietta, and abandoning himself to all that his
passion inspired him, he expresses to her the troubles which her removal from
him had caused, and the disorders of an amorous and a jealous heart, and at
last requires from her new assurances of her Constancy. Henrietta makes him
some soft reproaches for his Fears and his Jealousies, and says to him a
hundred obliging things with that charming and innocent sweetness, that it
fully persuaded him, and affected him very nearly. Whilst they were both thus
tasting the particular Joys, which commonly private and stolen Conversations do
afford to Lovers, two unknown young Gentlemen, who were invited to the Forest
by the noise of this Hunting, having perceived Octavius and Henrietta, and
having taken them both for Women, were immediately seized with that indiscreet
curiosity which commonly accompanies imprudent Youths. They alighted from their
Horses to approach them with the less noise, but having looked upon them
nearer, they were stricken the more with their beauty. Their surprise was
followed by a violent disturbance, which was caused by a confused mixture of
fear, respect and desire. Full of an impetuous and giddy passion, which place
and opportunity had given rise to in these two young hearts, they take a
resolution of undertaking any thing. Hereupon they accost our two Lovers with
civility enough, but withal discovered a confidence which would not stop there:
Imagine what astonishment Octavius and Henrietta were in at so surprising an
accident; the different thoughts and motives which agitated their minds in so
strange a Conjuncture, cannot be expressed. Henrietta immediately foresees a
thousand dangers for her self and her Lover, Octavius shakes too with horror
and anger. After some discourse, wherein these unknown Sparks intermingled flat
and gross praises, accompanied with raillery, wherein they showed a great deal
of impudence, and little breeding, one takes Henrietta by the hand, and the
other Octavius telling them they must part, and make two Conversations by
themselves, to explain themselves with more liberty, and to taste the sweets of
one to one alone. Octavius provoked by this Insolence, who seemed to affect the
fears of another Sex, the better to disguise his own, could no longer restrain
himself; he falls upon the Sword of one of these rash Youths, and having
disarmed him, attacks the other, who surprised and amazed at the courage of
Octavius whom he took for a Woman, did only parry in going back, but Octavius
pressed him so home, that he was forced at last to defend himself. The Combat
was at last bloody; in the mean while he who was without a Sword, runs to his
Pistols, and returns again upon Octavius, who had already dangerously wounded
his Adversary. Octavius receives a Pistol-shot, which hurt him in the Arm, and
without feeling his hurt, pursues his Enemy, who seeing his Companion upon the
ground, saves himself by flight, and loses himself in the thickness of the
Forest. The noise of the Duelists, the report of the Pistol, the cares of
Octavius his Friend, who having perceived from afar what passed, had called for
help, drew together some of the Hunters to the place of Fight. They found
Henrietta oppressed with grief and fear; one of the unknown Men, dying of his
wounds, and Octavius pale and fainting with the loss of blood, and who being
less concerned for his Life than the secret of his Disguise, would have stolen
from the sight and assistance of those who were come thither. The disconsolate
Henrietta imploys all that the oppression and natural languishment she was
under, had left her of voice and strength, to implore the assistance of those
who were about her for Octavius. She disguises nothing, and relates the
Adventure, with the plainness which always accompanies great Griefs. All those
who heard her were moved, and especially a foreign Prince who was in the
service of the King of Navarr, and being present at this Spectacle, was pierced
by the tears of Henrietta, and having naturally a passionate and a sensible
Soul. The noise of this great Accident being spread amongst all the Hunters,
and being come to the ears of the King and the Queen Mother, the King who felt
some inclination for Henrietta, finding the noise which the passion between her
and Octavius now made, suffered himself to be overcome with a jealous
melancholy, notwithstanding which he knew how to dissemble, and at last had
power to conquer his Resentments. The Queen was openly incensed at the rashness
of Octavius, and the foreign Prince, who had been so affected with the
misfortune of Henrietta, felt this pity change into another passion which was
more tender and more violent. But as he had as much Generosity as Love, the
first step which he made to please Henrietta, was to concern himself for
Octavius, and to obtain his pardon from the Queen; he supposed that this
service would render the design he had upon Henrietta more plausible and
agreeable; he was desirous at least to diminish the grief of his Rival, and
make his misfortune more supportable. He obtains therefore from the Queen
Henrietta for himself, and a Pardon for Octavius, upon condition that Octavius
should remove from the Court some time, for an expiation of his Fault. Octavius
having with an intolerable grief heard all that had passed, and seeing there
was nothing to be hoped for from the Queen, resolved to go unto his Rival. He
hoped that he should find him generous enough to be moved by his tears, or at
least if he had hard-heartedness enough to keep from him Henrietta, the sense
of his injustice would make him fear the fury of a desperate Lover. He comes
privately to Paris, where the Court was, and having met with a favorable
opportunity to speak with the Prince in private, without being overheard by any
body, he spoke to him in such moving terms, and in so passionate a tone, that
the Prince could not forbear shedding of some tears. But perceiving that he
could obtain from his Rival but a useless pity, and seeing it would not prevail
with him to yield up Henrietta to him, My Lord, said he, with a respectful
grief and indignation, Would a Prince like you, who are the glory of your own
Nation, and the admiration of ours, break the finest knots that Heaven and Love
ever yet tied? Would you possess Henrietta without her consent, and dishonor
your self by so hateful a violence? Cruel Octavius, answered the Prince, with a
little trouble, but in a modest and soft voice, Would you have me impose upon
my self the most cruel of all Violences, to spare you that which you reproach
me with? Would you have my passion and my generosity render me the most unhappy
of all men, and a little Honor cost me Troubles which will never cease? No,
no, replied Octavius somewhat briskly, Henrietta is not a Jewel that can be
yielded voluntarily, and she is not one which can be easily torn from my Love,
much less possessed against her own will. So soon as he had finished speaking, he
left the Prince, without giving him time to answer. The Prince who did not
doubt but that Octavius would venture a Visit to Henrietta, what danger soever
he might run thereby, was resolved to be there before him, believing he might
easily be so, for he did not think it was so easy for Octavius to obtain leave
to do it; but the diligence of Octavius was so great and so happy, that he came
first to her, by reason of the Correspondence he had with a Servant which had
been with her a long time. So soon as he was come to her, What do I see, cried
Henrietta? do you come to ruin me by your presence, and to renew my Fears, by
exposing your self afresh again to the Queens Resentment? Alas! what have I to
consider, answered Octavius, when I lose you? what Dangers do you fear for me,
when you take from me that which is dearer to me than my Life? If you speak of
my Heart, replied Henrietta, and of all the tenderness of which it is capable,
comfort your self Octavius; there will nothing of it be taken from you, it is
and ever shall be yours, both by the gift which Heaven has made of it to you,
and by a merit which I prefer to the most cried up Fortunes. The Queen and my
Relations may dispose of my Person, but not of my Love. Ah! replied Octavius,
Such a Husband as my Rival, so accomplished a Prince, whose virtue equals his
birth, being Master of your Person, will soon be so of your Heart. I could wish
it would please Heaven, said she, that I were able to change, and that the
force of the duty which I owe to the Husband who shall be given to me, could
break those chains which tie me to you; but I know my self too well to expect
so happy a change. Separated from what I love, and indispensably united with a
lovely Prince whom I shall never love, I shall suffer all that can be endured
by a Soul that is sensible in the most violent and dismallest of conditions.
All that can comfort me or you, dear Octovius, is that the violence of my
torment will hinder the duration of it; you will soon lament my Death, but you
shall never have the trouble to bewail my Inconstancy. The Prince who was come
to the House of Henrietta, and who had been prevented by Octavius, having slipped
behind a Skreen in her Chamber, so as to hear without being seen, was so moved
by this tender and sad Conversation, that he could not restrain that generous
pity which he naturally had for the sufferings of others. No, no, said he,
discovering himself, you shall not die, fair Henrietta; my passion as violent
as it is, knows how to respect yours; I should deserve the just anger of
Heaven, if I separated two hearts which it has so well united: The gift which
has been made to me of your Person, although it be of an infinite value, cannot
defend me from the cruel reproaches which I should make unto my self without
intermission, if I should take you away from your Lover, and from your self; I
had rather deserve you by yielding you, than possess you by making my self
unworthy of you.

At these words, which were so moving and generous, what a sudden change was
there made in the Souls of our Lovers! A transport of Joy and Gratitude
succeeding a fatal Despair, makes them immediately throw themselves at the feet
of the Prince: What do you do, said he, in raising them up? would you by this
excess of joy make me feel the more the greatness of my loss? let me steal away
from your thanks, and go without delay to the Queen to finish your happiness,
that I may be no more in a condition of disturbing your quiet, and of re-taking
the Treasure which I now yield. He goes out, speaking these last words, and
after having wiped away some tears which he could not forbear, he runs to the
Queen, begs of her the Pardon and Return of Octavius, and her consent to his
Marriage with Henrietta. The noise of this Action of the Prince was immediately
spread abroad, and he was comforted for the unhappiness of his Love, by the
Honor which he had of overcoming it, and by showing this great Example in a
Court, where every thing was actuated by an ambitious and selfish Policy.

Octavius and Henrietta were soon informed of their Happiness, and the time of
their Marriage soon agreed upon, which was accomplished with a great deal of Joy
and Magnificence.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Plays and other Books Printed for R. Bentley and S. Magnes.
PLAYS.
1 TArtuff, or the French Puritan. 2 Forced Marriage, or the Jealous
Bridegroom. 3 English Monsieur. 4 All mistaken, or the Mad Couple. 5 Generous
Enemies, or the Ridiculous Lovers. 6 The Plain-Dealer. 7 Sertorius, a Tragedy.
8 Nero, a Tragedy. 9 Sophonisba, or Hanibal's Overthrow. 10 Gloriana, or the
Court of Augustus Caesar. 11 Alexander the Great. 12 Mythridates King of
Pontus. 13 Oedipus King of Thebes. 14 Gaesar Borgia. 15 Theodosius, or the
Force of Love. 16 Madam Fickle, or the Witty False One. 17 The Fond Husband, or
the Plotting Sisters. 18 Esquire Old-Sap, or the Night-Adventures. 19 Fool
turned Critic. 20 Virtuous Wife, or Good Luck at Last. 21 The Fatal Wager. 22
Andromache. 23 Country Wit. 24 Calisto, or the Chaste Nymph. 25 Destruction of
Jerusalem, in two Parts. 26 Ambitious Statesman, or the Loyal Favorite. 27
Misery of Civil War. 28 The Murder of the Duke of Gloucester. 29 Thyestes, a
Tragedy. 30 Hamlet Prince of Denmark, a Tragedy. 31 The Orphan, or the Unhappy
Marriage. 32 The Soldiers Fortune. 33 Tamerlain the Great. 34 Mr. Limberham,
or the Kind Keeper. 35 Mistaken Husband. 36 Notes on the Emperor of Morocco, by
the Wits. 37 Essex and Elizabeth, or the Unhappy Favorite. 38 Virtue Betrayed,
or Anna Bullen. 39 King Leare. 40 Abdellazor, or the Moor's Revenge. 41 Town
Fop, or Sir. Tim. Tawdery. 42 Rare en tout, a French Comedy. 43 Moor of Venice.
44 Country Wife. 45 City Politics. 46 Duke of Guise. 47 Rehearsal. 48 King,
and no King. 49 Philaster, or Love lies a Bleeding. 50 Maids Tragedy. 51
Grateful Servant. 52 Strange Discovery. 53 Atheist, or the second Part of the
Soldiers Fortune. 54 Wit without Money. 55 Little Thief. 56 Valiant Seot. 57
Constantine. 58 Valentinian. 59 Amorous Prince. 60 Dutch Lovers. 61 Woman
Bully. 62 Reformation. 63 Hero and Leander. 64 Love Tricks. 65 Julius Caesar.
66 Fatal Jealousy. 67 Monsieur Ragou. 68 Island Queen, or Mary Queen of
Scotland. 69 Empress of Morocco. 70 Common wealth of Women. 71 The Noble
Stranger. 72 Duke of Millan. 73 The Knave in Grain. 74 Amends for Ladies. 75
Mammamouchy. 76 The Emperor of the East. 77 The Wedding. 78 St. Patrick for
Ireland. 79 Albumazor. 80 The Tragedy of Albertus. 81 Beaumont and Fletchers
Plays: in all 51. in large Fol. 82 Mr. Shakespeare's Plays: in one large Fol.
Volume. Containing 43 Plays. 83 Bishop Brownrig's Sermons, in Fol. 84 Dr.
Comber's Companion to the Temple and Altar: In Fol. 85 Dr. Allestry's 40
Sermons: In Fol. 86 Towerson on the Creed: In Fol. 87 Hudibras Complete: In 80.
88 Present State of England: In 2 Vol. in Twelves. 89 Enter into the Closet: In
120. 90 Mr. Evelin's Calendarium Hortens. In 80.

