The Charitable Samaritan. OR, A Short and Impartial Account, OF THAT Eminent,
and Publick-spirited CITIZEN Mr. Tho. Firmin Who Departed this Life on Monday,
Dec, 20. 1697. In a Letter to a Person of Quality.

By a Gentleman of his Acquaintance.

He being Dead yet Speaks. LONDON, Printed in the Year, School.

Aeternitati Sacrum. H. S. E.
Thomas Firmin, Londinensis,
Vir Integerrimus, consummatissimus
Cui summa in dictis fides
In moribus svavitas
In quotidiana consuetudine facilitas fuit.
Quem natura industrium,
Cura instructum,
Privata vita fecit illustrem.
Mediocri, at honesto loco natus,
Erecto fretus animo,
Umbratilis desidiae impatiens,
Ad publica munera se totum direxit.
Amicos, pauperes, imo omnes,
Ea fide, charitate, benevolentia amplexus est,
Ut universi orbis Civis,
Orphanorum Pater
Viduarum maritus,
Merito audiit.
Si, quod in pauperes erogatur, Deo creditur,
Maximum faeneratorem jure dixeris.
Male feriatos istos Systematum fabros,
Queis perplexa cavi Spirant Mysteria folles,
Sprevit, irrisit,
Mendacium neque licebat, neque pati poterat.
Christianae philosophiae adminiculis,
Quam puro, sincero, and avito Dei cultu
Rite condiit,
Ad vitam been agendam,
Non ad ostentationem, usus est.
Amicitias coluit celebres and magnas,
Clar. Tillotsono (...) charissimus.
Postquam in Dei Opt. Max. cultum,
In civium publicos usus.
In pauperum levamen multa molitus esset,
Plura jam moliretur,
Candidissimam efflavit animam.
XIII Kal. Jan. Ann. Dom. MDCXCVII.

Abi Viator, and si potis es, imitare.
THE Charitable SAMARITAN OR, A Short and Impartial ACCOUNT of that most
Eminent, and Publick-Spirited Citizen, Mr. THOMAS FIRMIN.
In a Letter to a Person of Quality.
I Have in Obedience to your Commands, endeavored to give the World some short
Account of our most excellent Friend lately Deceased, and to deal Ingenuously
with you, though your Commands have been always Sacred to me, I never in all my
Life Obeyed you with greater Alacrity. To do Justice to the Dead, but
especially those, who when living, were Ornaments of their Country, is an
Office of Gratitude, which is Authorized by the practice of all Times, and
Nations. And indeed it is highly reasonable, that the Memories of those Persons,
that obliged not only their own, but succeeding Generations, should be
Transmitted to Futurity; for since the present Age is not able to pay the Debt,
it is fit that Posterity that shares the Benefit of their Piety, and Labors,
should be charged with part of it, and join in a common acknowledgement to the
common Benefactors.

I don't here pretend to enter into a detail of all the Particulars of his
Life, but only to Recount some passages of it that may be useful to the
present, and serviceable to future Ages. Those Biographers, that affect to clog
their Narration with abundance of frivolous, idle, impertinent Circumstances,
as they do no honor to the Deceased; so they seem to have but a mean Opinion
of their Reader, when they take such unnecessary pains to Amuse, instead of
Instructing him. In the Delineation of a Life, as well as in a Picture, several
things ought to be thrown into the Shade, and should not be seen by a full
Light, for this reason I shall only consider him in his General Character,
leaving other Minure Circumstances to be Recounted by those that have either
more Leisure upon their Hands, or a greater Inclination for that way of
Writing, and this I shall endeavor to perform in a plain Style, and the same
simplicity with which he Lived.

Mr. Thomas Firmin of London, Girdler, and Mercer, was one of the most Signal
Examples of Charity, Candor, Integrity, Justice, and of all other Christian,
and Moral Virtues as this, or perhaps any other Age of the World ever produced.
He was Devout without Bigottry, Ill Nature, or Affectation; he was Charitable,
without Ostentation, or Design; he considered himself as a Citizen of the whole
Universe, and took a singular Delight in Relieving the Unfortunate, and
Oppressed. Tho he was as free from Infirmities, as most Men, yet he had an
unconquerable Aversion to that Spirit of Calumny, which is now so predominant,
and as it was with much difficulty that he was induced to believe any ill
Reports of his Neighbor; so he never Propagated them upon the highest
Provocation. He adorned a Private Life with the Assiduity, and Vigilance of a
Public Minister, and was ever pursuing what he conceived to be for the General
Interest. If, as the Holy Writ assures us, He that gives to the Poor lends to
the Lord, he may justly be said to be one of the greatest Usarers in the World;
(a name which he abominated,) for he had them always in his Thoughts, his
Wishes, and his Endeavors. He supported their wants not only by his private
Munificence, which was extraordinary for one of his Rank; but by recommending
their Condition with the greatest Fervor to all his Friends. I know it has
been impotently objected against him by some Envious Persons, That he was a
Gainer by the Charities, which he Collected for the Needy. You, and I, and all
that had the happiness to be Acquainted with him, know well enough, that this
Reproach is Ill-grounded.

The Working-House in Little-Britain, (of which, more hereafter) that was begun
and carried on chiefly at his Expense, and that of his worthy Friends, who
joined with him in so excellent a Design, was so far from turning to any
Advantage, that it proved a continual Charge to him; however, he who never
considered his own private loss, when it came in competiton with a Public
Benefit, still kept it on to his Dying Day. But this Calumny may be the better
supported, since he shares it with so excellent a Person as his Grace, the
present Archbishop of Canterbury, who, when he was only private Pastor of a
Parish Church, Erected two Free-Schools, and a Noble Library, and yet has been
Traduced by some Malicious Tongues, as if he had kept the greatest part of
those Liberalities, of which he was the Collector, to his own private Uses. As
I said before, we that are his Friends may the better support this Injury done
to him; since it affects so great a Prelate in common with himself. But what
station of Life, and Qualities of Mind, can preserve a Man from the assaults,
and wounds of Envy, when so disinteressed a Virtue as Charity, cannot place him
above the reach of Slander?

In his private Dealings as a Tradesman, no Man could be more Religiously
Exact, and tender then he was; he gave particular charge to his Servants, that
when ever there happened a difference in the Accounts between him, and any of
his Correspondents, that they should always adjudge it in favor of the latter.
He so cautiously avoided the very suspicion of Injustice, that he rather chose
to wrong himself, than to make his Neighbor a sufferer. He imagined that his
Servants in the hurry of Business might be apt to commit some mistakess through
Inadvertency, or Forgetfulness, but it could never enter into his Thoughts,
that any one should think it worth their while to injure him, taking a Standard
of the Integrity of all Mankind, from that which he so nicely followed himself.

He had observed with that rancour, and bitterness of Spirit, People of
different Parties in his time had all along labored to blacken one another,
and if the Trade of Calumniating, he said, could be so successfully, and
generally carried on in so Enlightened an Age as this is, and in so small a
Spot of Ground as England, when by the Invention of Printing it is so easy a
thing to find out, and discover the Truth: He thought a Man in common
Discretion should not be too forward to pass a rigid Censure upon several of
those Persons, who in the Writings of Epiphanius, and other Ancient Authors,
are Branded for Heretics, and loaded with such execrable, and horrid Crimes,
that Humane Nature one would hope could never be capable of. What helped to
confirm him in this Opinion, is a famous Passage in Socrates, the Historian,
who L. 2. C. 18* ingenuously tells the Reader, That it was a common Custom with
the Bishops to Accuse those Persons who were turned out of their places, to
pronounce them to be Impious, and the like, without giving themselves the
trouble to justify the Particulars of that Impiety they charged them with.
Thus we have a frank Confession of what was commonly Practiced in those Ages of
the Church, and whoever doubts whether the same Methods were not carried on
afterward, let him but read what a Monstrous Account the Popish Writers have
given of Wickliff, and the Lollards, as they called them; how hideously the
Monks have blackned those Princes that were not in their Interests; what
abominable Stories the Jesuits have reported of Luther, and Calvin; let him, I
say, but turn over Sanders's History of the Reformation, the Catalogues of
Bale, and Pits, Fox's Martyrs* and to come down to our own times, White's
Centuries of Scandalous Divines, Edward's Gangrena, the several Mercuries in
the late Civil Wars, the Querela Cantabrigiensis; the Histories of F.
Maimbourg, and Varillas; the Packets of Advice, and the Observators; the Scotch
Presbyterian Eloquence, and the Answer to it, with a Million of other Anonymous
Pamphlets, and Secret Histories; and if this don't convince him, I don't know
what will.

He was a hearty Assertor of the Liberties of his Native Country, and looked
with Indignation, and Contempt on those Citizens, who in a strain of Flattery,
scarcely to be matched in the servile. Reigns of Tiberius, and Domitian, most
humbly Addressed King Charles II. that he would be graciously pleased to put
Chains and Fetters on them, and thus prostituted those Rights and Immunities,
which their Ancestors had taken such care to Transmit safely to a most unworthy
Generation. He thought that the perpetual Bellowing of Passive Obedience, and
Non-Resistance, from the Pulpits, did not a little contribute to fix these
Slavish Impressions upon People's minds: Admit these Doctrines were as certain
as any in the New Testament, why should they, as it were in preference to the
rest, be everlastingly inculcated to all Congregations? Or where was the
Policy, to tell the King, and his Officers, that they might strip the People of
all they possessed in the World, and yet they were in Conscience bound not lift
up a finger against them? What Man of sense that desires to keep his Wife
honest, would be always rattling in her Ear, Pawn my Plate, and injure my Bed,
as often as thou will, for my Religion teaches me to bear all patiently.
Princes are naturally ambitious of Power, and don't need Instructors to tell
them, that if they please, they may Govern their Subjects Despotically, and
then quote them Texts of Scripture for it. But he often used to say, As long as
Deaneries, and good Preferments, were to be got by Preaching this absurd stuff,
so long the Church would stand by it; but that if ever the Court came to put
matters home to these Passive Gentlemen, and pinch the Retailers of this
monstrous Hypothesis, they would as certainly leave it in the lurch, as they
would a starving Curacy in the Hundreds, for a rich Parsonage in a better Air.
The event has confirmed the truth of what he said, for no sooner did K. James,
and his Priests, begin to pull one of their Tythe-Pigs by, the Ear, but all the
Pulpits from the Lands-end, to Berwick upon Tweed, rung of Persecution, and
Tyranny; and since His present Majesty's accession to the Crown, the Laity has
had the satisfaction of seeing their Teachers face about, and declare for the
quite contrary Doctrine, or at least restrain it; except a few, whom either the
real belief of a Principle early received, or the shame of being thought
Turn-Coats, or Obstinacy, or Interest, and other By-ends, have hindered from
taking the Oaths to the Government.

What was remarkable in a Person of his Private Condition, who had not the
advantage of a Learned Education, or of an ample Fortune and Wealth to Support
him, he was honored with the Acquaintance of the most Illustrious Men that
this Age has produced. This he obtained by the Simplicity of his Manners, the
Uniformity of his Life, by his Judgment, naturally Solid, and well Determined,
and his active Genius that was capable of the greatest Undertakings. Not to
mention several worthy Citizens of the most distinguished Rank, he was
particularly Esteemd by the equally Learned, and Pious, Dr. Wilkins, Bishop of
Chester; by the Honorable Mr. Boil, the great Restorer of Natural, and
Christian Philosophy; by that Eminent Oracle of the Law, Sir Matthew Hale, and
(what will be the most lasting Elogy to our Friend, that I, or any other Hand
can give him) he was happy in the Friendship of the most Excellent Prelate,
that ever filled the Archiepiscopal Chair, the Incomparable Dr. Tillotson.

Having presumed to mention that great Name, which will be Sacred to all
Posterity, in so worthless a Paper as this is, I hope, Sir, you will give me leave
to make a short Digression. You know, the Archbishop has been Maliciously
Represented in some Libels, as a Betrayer of the Church, and an Enemy to the
Christian Faith; because, when he was advanced to that Dignity, which he the
best deserved of any of his Function, he was pleased to suffer a Visit now and
then from his old Acquaintance. Mr. Firmin. All the Impartial World I believe
is satisfied, that Dr. Tillotson was far from being a Socinian. His own Works
sufficiently testify it, to the everlasting Infamy of those that laid it to
his Charge; and yet an innocent Correspondence with a Person, whose
Unhappiness, and not Fault it was, to Dissent from us in some disputed Points,
must be improved into the blackest Sin imaginable, as if it were impossible to
show common Civilities to our Neighbor without being of his Opinion. Even the
Church of Rome, which by virtue of its Infalliblity, has the best right to
Prescribe its Sons what Company to keep, has not been able to influence several
of its Worthy Members from paying a due deference to conspicuous Merit, though
they found it lodged in an Enemy. Father Paul thought it no Scandal to him to
pass his vacant Hours in Sir Henry Wooton, or Mr. Bedel's Company, though they
disagreed from him in matters of Religion. Our Countryman, Mr. Hobbes of
Malmsbury, who was no Friend to the Papacy, all the World knows, was singularly
honored by Gassendus, and F. Mersenne. The Learned Malpigius of Florence,
never scrupled to keep a Correspondence with the Gentlemen of our Royal
Society, though in his Country they pass for Heretics. Nay, before the late War,
the King of France, who cannot be suspected of favoring Protestants, used to
give Annual Pensions to Learned Men of all Countries, and Religions, as for
instance, to Monsieur Huygens, Spanheim, Groevius, and Isaac Vossius.
Conversation must be confined to very narrow bounds indeed, if it be a Sin to
have any Commerce with those that don't come up exactly to our Sentiments in
every Point. But this spiteful Objection has been chiefly made by two sour,
morose Churchmen of our Nation; one of them an abdicated Dean, who has been
already chastised for his Insolence by another Hand; the other is the famous
Adversary of Dr. Sh -- k, who, the truth on it is, deserves none of the civilest
usage, but in a Subject that required the greatest Sobriety of Style he has
vented his Eury in a wayso boisteous, and unpresidented, (nam etiam sunt Belli
jura) that if a System of Scurrility were to be compiled, I know not where the
Materials are, to be so plentifully found as in his Writings. If the generality
of the Divines were of this brutal, and savage Temper, (as Heaven be praised
they are not) were a Man to express a steady, incurable, unrelenting Hatred, he
could not call it by a properer Term, than that of Odium Theologicum, after the
same manner as the Pious Provision which both Regulars, and Seeulars take in
Popish Countries, not to injure their frail Bodies with bad Liquor, has made
the best sort of Wine to be commonly called, Vinum Theologicum; and one might
have reason on his side to apply to such Incendiaries the following passage out
of the Preface to the fifth Edition of Father Simon's Critical History in
French. Il y a long temps qu'en a remarque que les Theologiens sont gens sans
pity, and quils ne donnent jamais coup de dent sans emporter la piece. I
purposely forbear to Translate it into English, because, as to the general the
imputation is false.

I may venture to say, That no Age, and perhaps no Nation in the World has
propuced a Man of a more useful, more Disinteressed, and extended Charity,
since the Apostolic al times. He made it his business, and employed all his
Interest (which was very considetable,) to relieve the Necessities of the Poor;
under which Denomination, I don't comprehend those sturdy, abandoned Vagrants,
those lazy Counterfeits, and unprofitable Vermin; that to the eternal Scandal
of our Laws, and Government, are suffered to pester our Streets and Highways,
and fill all places with their impudent Clamours. But real Objects of
Compassion, such as Orphans, and Widows, and Housekeepers, that by unforeseen,
and unavoidable Accidents, were reduced to Poverty. He looked upon us to be
none of the ablest Politicians in the World, who living in a County naturally
Productive of the best Commodities, having so much wast Ground to employ idle
Hands; and the Sea on every side of us that lies as much neglected, sting up
all these advantages that our Situation, and Soil, have conspired to bestow
upon us; and tho we pretend to give Laws to all Europe, yet are content to pay
an ignominous Tribute of 700000l. per Annum, to a parcel of unthankful,
insolent Vagabonds at home. He was of Opinion, that if the aforesaid Sum was
thrown into a Common Stock, and Working-Houses Erected in all the considerable
Market Towns in the Kingdom, we should in a few Years find our Poor less
burthensom to us than now they are; at least the Republic would derive this
benefit from it, that tho the Contributions for them continued in the present
State, yet an effectual stop would be put to the reigning Vice of Pilfering,
and Stealing: Besides that, by this means, he said, we should soon clear our
Roads, and Streets of those troublesome People; we should breed a Healthful
Generation of able Bodied Men, fit for the Plow, and Sea-service, and disarm
our Beggars of the only tolerable Excuse they have for such a Profligate Life,
viz. 'That they are willing to Work, if any one would employ them. Therefore to
set a leading Example to the rest of the Nation, he not only contributed what
he thought proper for such a Design out of his own Purse, but engaged as many
of his Acquaintance as he could, to Erect a Working-House in Little-Britain;
and tho the Manufactures that were wrought there, fell considerably short of
answering the Expense of the Undertakers were yearly at, yet it produced this
good effect, that it constantly employed abundance of Necessitous Persons all
the year round, who must otherwise have betaken themselves to a Vicious habit
of Life, or else proved burthensom to the respective Parishes where they lived.
I have dwelt the longer upon this Article, because, I am in hopes, that so
generous, and so fresh a President, will prevail with our Patriots to cure
their Country of this lingering Distemper, that has so long annoyed it;
especially at this Conjuncture, when the Genius of England seems to be animated
with a new Spirit, when we have a Victorious Monarch at the Head of the
Government who is willing to rectify all the Abuses, and Disorders of our
Constituion, and to put in Execution whatever his faithful. Senators advise him
to; when the Royal Fishery, that will employ so many hands, has already made
such considerable Advances; and lastly, when upon the Disbanding of our
Landforces, we shall find our selves obliged to make some sort of Provision
for the Soldiers, that they who behaved themselves so gallantly in Flanders,
may not be necessitated for want of Employment, tobetake themselves to indirect
courses to prevent Starving.

As for that other Branch of Christian Charity, which relates to Men, as they
unhappily differ from us in Points of Religion, it shined in every action of
his Life, and indeed was interwoven with his Nature. He rightly judged, that
nothing has given greater Scandal to the Jews, nor so sensibly wounded our
Religion among Heathens, and Mahometans, nor furnished the Papists with a more
Popular Objection? that in short, nothing has been, more effectually made a
pretense, even for Atheism, and Infidelity, than our unnatural Divisions, and
Animosities, It Is indeed certain, that our Controversies about Religion, as we
have aukwardly managed them, have at last brought even Religion it self into
Disputet among such, whose weaker Judgments have not been able to discern the
plain, and unquestionable way to Heaven in so great a Mist, as these Bigots
have most unseasonably raised. What renders the Scene more surprising, those
very Persons, whose duty it is to be Messengers of Peace, and to recommend it
both by their Example, and Preaching, have rather sounded an Alarm to our
contentious Spirits, than a Retreat, or Parley; so that by the distempered heat
of these indiscreet Chemists, the Life and Spirit of Christianity, I mean, the
Practice of it, has been so much rarefied into airy Notions, and Speculations,
that the inward Strength, and Vitals of it have been quite consumed, and
exhausted.

A Friend of mine happened to be once in his Company, when a Merchant that had
lived several Years in the East Indies, asked him, What he thought of the
Mahometans, and Pagans, who, according to his Computation, Possessed at least
the better half of the Globe. He made no difficulty to own, that as he should
always prefer to be guilty of a well meaning Error, than rashly subscribe to a
doubtful Truth, that carried great Rigours, and Severities along with it; so he
hoped, that the Natural Knowledge which all Men have of God, was capable either
to procure them Eternal Felicity, or at least to preserve them from Misery, if
wanting other means to be better Instructed, they lived up to the plain, and
easy Dictates of Reason: Upon which Head, give me leave, Sir, to to add a few
Words of my own. It Is certain, that the Fathers of the Church, before they
engaged in the warm Disputes with the Pelagians, did not talk of the Celebrated
Heroes of Paganism, as Men that were Sentenced to everlasting Condemnation.
Casaubon has proved it at large, in the first Chap. of his Book against
Cardinal Baronius, and the famous Monsieur de la Mothe le Vayer, in his Book
concerning the Virtue of the Heathens, has justified by adundance of Passages,
that several of the Fathers, and School-Divines, (the latter of which,
generally speaking, were not Men of the greatest Charity,) have Taught, that
the Pagans, that lived Virtuous Lives, were not excluded from Salvation.
Zuinglius, who has been accused for a Man of too much warmth, maintained the
same Opinion. Nay, the Jews themselves, who were so jealous formerly, to be
thought the only People of God, and had so despicable an Opinion of all the
World besides, make no scruple now to own, that a Man may arrive to Happiness,
by the bare unassisted Religion of Nature, as the Learned, Dr. Addison, in his
Account of them, has shown.

He always looked upon Liberty of Conscience to be the Birthright of every
Christian, and that every Government was obliged in point of Interest, as well
as bound by the common Principles of Humanity to indulge it; provided, it
maintained nothing that was contrary to Good-Manners, and the Peace of the
Civil Society. I have been told what past in a Conversation between him, and an
eminent Divine of this City, in the Year, 1683. when by the Artifices of the
Ministry at the Court, the Church Party were made the Tools to carry on an
unnatural Persecution against the Dissenters. Remember what I tell you, Doctor,
said he, You Will all of you live to Repent of this Inhumane, and unpolitick Usage
of your Protestant Brethren. I know what Pretenses you have for it, but they
are unjust, and weak, Do you think these poor People would Meet in Corners, and
that under perpetual apprehensions of being dragged to Jayl, and torn in pieces
by Processes from Doctors Commons? Do ye think they would sacrifice their Ease,
their Liberty, and (as the World goes,) their Reputation too, for the sake of a
peevish humor, that marks them out for Suffering, if not for Ruin, unless
they were convinced in the Sincerity of their Hearts, that their way of Worship
was right? I don't speak of their Teachers, for whatever Interest they may be
presumed to Cultivate, the People I am sure can have none: If they are in an
Error, it is certain, they are mistaken in good earnest: Nay I Am persuaded, that
those that are Educated iu the worst, and falsest Religions, do heartily
believe them to be true. Hence I infer, added he, that no Man ought to be
insulted upon this score, and the example of so many People, that Err in the
simplicity of their Consciences, ought to inspire us with some tenderness
toward those, whom we imagine to be mistaken. Besides that, it is a barbarous
Solecism in any State, to force their Natives to seek Refuge in Foreign
Countries, because they cannot believe all that is Prescribed to them, which it
is not in a Man's Power to do, I have an Argument, continued he, still behind,
which, tho it may look like a Paradox at first, yet I believe, will bring you
over to my Party, when you have considered it; I affirm then, that it is the
interest of the Established Clergy, that the Dissenters should be Tolerated; we
find into what abominable Disorders the Church of Rome fell when she Reigned
Lady Paramount, in these Western parts of the World, without any one to oppose
her; and what happened to one Church, may happen to another; for the same
Causes produce the same Effects. It Is certain, that the Reformers obliged her
to Retrench several notorious Abuses, and to them is owing all that improvement
in Arts, and Sciences, which the Ecclesiastics of that Communion have made
since: In France, and Germany, where the Catholics live intermixed with the
Protestants, and consequently the Priests have a Thousand Spies upon all their
Actions, that they are forced to be vigilant in their own Defense, like People
upon a Frontier, and to live in some Deco^^^; whereas the quite contrary is to
be seen in Spain, and Italy; there the Clergy live among a parcel of stupid,
implicit Blockheads, that take all they say, for Oracles, have no Enemy to
remind them of standing upon their Guard, fear no Reproaches, and apprehend no
Rivals, so it is no wonder if they are as debauched as ignorant, I know,
concluded he, it is commonly wished, that all People were of one mind in matters
of Religion; but in case it were practicable, I very much question whether it
would be for your Interest, Doctor, that if it should be so. I am so well
acquainted with the infirmities, and weakness of Mankind, that I believe a
state of Laziness and Security would be infinitely more prejudicial to the
World, than a state of perpetual Discord, though that too is attended with
several inconveniences.

His Conversation was Easy, Pleasant, Familiar, but always inoffensive; it was
seasoned with that agreeable Salt which gives a Life to all Discourse, but had
no Bitterness, no Gall mixed with it. He endeavored fairly and heartily to
convince those that dissented from him in their Opinions, but never affected
the modern way of Usurping upon their Reason, much less did he pretend to
silence them with an Ipse Dixit; and indeed, a Man that tells me my Sentiments
are ill grounded and irrational, without condescending to refute them by calm
and sober Arguments, calls me Fool or Madman, with only a little more
Solemnity: Yet these are the common Civilities in Religious Disputes of most
People to one another, who talk much of right Reason, and always mean their
own, and make their private imaginations the Standard of General Truth. He
never Diverted himself or the Company, at the expense of other People, and next
to his own Reputation, which was Sacred to him, he cherished and supported that
of his Neighbor. He was so far from making the Calamities and Misfortunes of
any Man the subject of his Entertainment, though he chanced to be never so
inveterate an Enemy to him, that were it proper, I could produce instances of
several Citizens, that have represented him as an Atheist, and loaded him with
the most Injurious, and cruel Reproaches, and yet when either by their own ill
Management, or the common vicissitude that attends Human Affairs, they have
been reduced to Wants, he has visited them in in a most obliging manner, and
generously relieved them.

As he was considered in the World, as one that had an extraordinary interest
in Persons of the most eminent Quality, it is no wonder that a perpetual
Application was made to him, and that his Gates were crowded by Supplicants of
all sorts. If any favor was asked him, he was slow to promise, as diffident
what success he might meet with in the affair, or unwilling to be too
troublesome to his Friends; but when he had once engaged his Word to any one,
nothing could be so Assiduous, so Indefatigable, and if I may be allowed the
expression, nothing so importunate. He was naturally Master of a very
persuasive Talent of Speaking, and could deliver himself Properly, and
Pertinently, upon any Occasion: But though his Modesty would never permit him to
be a good Solicitor for himself, yet when he undertook to Prosecute the Rights
of the Oppressed, when he appeared in behalf of indigent Widows and Orphans, he
exerted himself with unusual Vigor and Force, and seldom failed of gaining his
Point. That Honorable Character, which Cornelius Nepos, bestows upon Pomponius
Atticus, viz. That when he espoused any Friend's Cause, he pursued it with so
much generous Zeal and Warmth, Ut non mandatam, sed suam rem agere videretur,
seems to have been revived in him: He never paid the less respect to Virtue,
for being Unfortunate; on the other hand, he took a Noble Pride in relieving
and assisting the Afflicted; even those that were betrayed to Poverty by their
own Extravagancies or Indiscretions, participated some share of his Charity,
but always of his pious Advice, which he thought would make a deeper impression
upon the party, and be better regarded, when it came accompanied with some
Benevolence. To justify this Assertion, you know, Sir, I am able to cite
abundance of singular Examples, if there were occasion for it, but having tied
my self to give only a general Character of our Friend, I cannot, nor is it
necessary, to descend to particulars.

Though, as I have already Observed, his Charity was of so extended a Character,
that it reached to Persons of all Communions, and Persuasions, yet he could
never think of Popery, without the utmost Horror and Detestation; and indeed, I
never in all my Life, heard him mention it, all Candor and Gentleness as he
was, without a visible Emotion and Resentment. He said, he could forgive their
Priests, for affecting a Dominion over the People, and making a Penny of their
Credulity; that this was natural enough, and might easily be accounted for,
Ambition and Covetousness, being two Vices that have their Spring from within,
of which Ecclesiastics are as well capable, as the Laity; but then he added,
that he could never be reconciled to their inhumane Cruelty, in persecuting all
that dissented from them, and to that no less absurd, than abominable Idolatry
and Polytheism, which was so notoriously visible in their Worship.

As to the former, he used to say, that it argued so Cowardly, so Pusillanimous
a Spirit, that it betrayed so violent a distrust of the Merits of the Cause,
that it so directly combated all the principles of our Holy Religion, and
indeed, all the common impressions of Humanity, that where ever he found any
Church abandoning it self to such Black and execrable Methods, for his part he
was satisfied it had arrrived to the highest pitch of Corruption, and would
look no farther: That such a procedure might be somewhat excusable in the
Mohammedan Religion, which like a Neighboring Prince, was Born with Teeth and
Nails, could Scratch and Bite in the Cradle, and fire Towns, and cut Throats
before it was a Twelve Month Old; whose Institutor was a Bloody Merciless
Wretch, bred up in the Trade of Rapine and Plunder, a Monster compounded of
Enthusiasm, Lust, and Cruelty, who left it as the only Legacy to his Followers,
to propagate their Belief by the Sword; so this, he said, if it could not be
justified, yet no better could be expected from these barbarous
Proselite-Makers, who punctually proved their Master's Will, and took out
Letters of Administration for him. But, that Christianity should be made the
occasion, at least the pretense, of all that Bloodshed and Desolation, which
has been acted in the Western World for several Ages; that the Professors of
it, whom formerly their Enemies could not but admire for the sweetness of their
Disposition, their Mutual Love, forbearance and condescension toward one
another, should now set up for Cannibals, and prey upon their own kind, nay, to
inflame their reckoning, should have the impudence to pretend a Commission from
their Master for doing all this, was the most unaccountable Prodigy in the
world to him, and which (to our disgrace, be it spoken) could not be matched in
all the Annals of Paganism. Even among the Druids, the highest Punishment they
inflicted upon Offenders, was to prohibit them from assisting at any of their
Sacred Rites. Caesar de Bell. Gall. 1. 6.
Siquis aut privatus aut publicus eorum decreto non stetit, sacrificiis
interdicunt, haec paena apud eos est gravissima. If the modern Priesthood would
sit down content with this discipline of their Predecessors, the Druids, (who
were none of the mercifullest of their Cloth) and proceed no farther with
their Delinquents, the Laity would have no great occasion to complain of them,
for as the World has been since brought about, the Thunder of the Church is now
degenerated into a Squib, and where it is not enforced by the secular Arm,
carries no mighty Terror with it. The Gentlemen of the Black Robe, will perhaps
say, that this is wicked Doctrine, but I wonder where the Impiety lies, to
affirm that the Devil is not so much in the Clergy's Interest, as to obey their
Summons, as often as upon every Triffle, he is served with a Subpaena from an
Ecclesiastical Court.

As for the latter, I mean the charge of Polytheism and Idolatry, which he said
was so fully proved upon them, by that most admirable Man, the present Bishop
of Worcester, he lamented it as an unsurmountable Obstacle to the Conversion,
both of the Jews and Mahometans. The Doctors of the Roman Church indeed by
their subtle Distinctions of two Greek Words, endeavor to mince the matter,
but after all their pains to wash the Blackamoor, Idolatry is no better nor
worse than Idolatry, and will be so to the end of the Chapter. If we look into
their Rituals, and judge of their Belief by their Practice, we shall find that
they pay to a whole Almanac full of Saints of their own making, the same
Ceremonies, in the very same words, accompanied with the same Prostrations, as
they do to God Almighty. They directly offer their Prayers, make Vows, and
Consecrate Temples to them, nay, what is more, (for Superstition has no Bounds)
they offer our Blessed Lord and Savior to them, and yet they think to come off
with their Terminative and Relative. These new made Freemen of the Calendar,
are Worshipped from Lapland to Japan, are invoked in a thousand places at once,
and the Beatific Looking-Glass must solve all this, the Dream of some idle Sot
of a Schoolman, without the least warrant from Scripture or Reason. They
pretend good manners for this, and tell us that God Almighty must not be rudely
approached, but that the Petition must be delivered in by some Favorite. I
wonder that these Gentlemen, that Pray thus by Proxy, should not manage every
thing else after this wise rate, and when they are to take Physic, that they
don't employ a Friend to take the Dose of Pills, or Electuary in their stead.

He was for a plain intelligible Theology, such as our Savior and the Apostles
left it behind them, and such as it continued for some time, till the Jewish
and Grecian Converts, but especially the Philosophers, for different ends
Debauched it with Ceremonies, and Muffled it up in Mystery. And since Religion
was Calculated for reasonable Creatures, he thought, that Conviction and not
Authority ought to influence Mankind; for this Reason, he looked upon those Men
to have no small share of Vanity, Laziness, or Weakness in their Composition,
that suffer themselves tamely to be imposed upon by magnificent Souuds, and
numerous Citations. Plutarch in Solon's Life, tell us, That that famous
Legislator inserted a Verse into Homer, to prove, That the Island of Salamis
belonged of right to the Athenians; and who knows, what strange Interpolations
have been made in the Ecclesiastical Monuments by Men, that valued the Interest
of their Party, more then the Truth; especially, if we consider, that before
the invention of Printng, few Copies of Books could be Published at a time, and
those fell into few hands, and might easily be suppressed or corruptted; to which
Temptation, I could heartily wish, those we call the purest Ages of the Church,
had never been exposed. An unintelligible, or absurd Proposition, is to be
never the more respected for its having traveled far, or wearing the Venerable
Badge of Antiquity. That former Ages were so prodigiously cautious and honest,
as neither to be imposed upon themselves, nor suffer any Errors to be
transmitted to their Posterity, is a Metaphysical Contemplation, with which
superstitious People may amuse or delight themselves in their Closets, but is
never to be urged to such Persons, that have examined these matters. with more
impartiality and care.

This naturally leads me to that part of his Character, which I confess, I
would conceal from the rest of the World, if it lay in my Power, as it does
not, since it is no Secret to those that knew him; but as I have pretended to
give an impartial Account of our Friend, I find my self obliged to take some
notice of it before I conclude. He was then (and I wish once more I could
conceal it) he was not so Orthodox, as I could have wished he had been, in his
Opinion about the Holy Trinity, and the satisfaction of our Savior, according
to the common Explications. I don't pretend in the least to Vindicate him in
either, only give me leave to add, that as few Men in the World have been
without their Errors, (I could instance, if I pleased, in some of the best and
learnedest Fathers of the Church) so I think a charitable Construction ought to
be given of them, where the Person mistaking, was of no Obstinate, refractory
Temper, but showed in the whole Tenor of his Life, that he aimed at nothing
more than to find out the Truth, so that if he mist it in the pursuit, it
should only be ascribed to humane Imbecility, from which the greatest Men are
not exempt. It ought to be considered too, that when he first appeared in the
World, he found the Nation involved in a Bloody Civil War, and the Church
divided by several Schisms, as the state was distracted by different Factions.
The Laity at that time looked upon themselves to be ill used by the Leaders of
both Churches, who did not seem to contend for the purity of Religion, so much
as they did who should have the Rod in their hands, to jerk the poor People
that were under their Power, and as it is natural for Men to run out of one
extreme into another, they imagined a cheat put upon them, even where there was
no reason to suspect one. He was naturally inquisitive, and devoted as much
time to Reading, as a life so taken up as his, but generally employed in the
service of others, would well permit. He had observed how inconsistent with
themselves, and how different from us, the Fathers of the Church were before
the Nicene Council, in their Explications of the Trinity, which extorted this
Confession from the Learned Epist. ad Fratrem 152
Grotius; Constat mihi Patres in explicatione harum rerum plurimum dissensisse,
etiamsi vocum quarumdam sono inter se convenient. That to give an instance or
two of their strange confusion or uufairness, Edit. Oxon. p. 81.
Theophilus, Antiochenus, speaking of the (...), or the second Person of the
Trinity, calls him the (...), or Holy Ghost, which (...) descended upon the
Prophets; that Simil V. c. 7.
Hermas a Writer in the Apostolical Times, uses the word Spiritus Sanctus, in
the same sense with Men's Humana; that St. Barnabas, or some body under his
Name, Cap. 12. quotes Isaias, for (...), Christo meo Domino, instead of (...)
Cyro, as the LXX, and we have rightly Translated it; that it is often difficult
to know whether a word is to be taken in the figurative or proper sense, as the
Word Elohim, so much used in this controversy among the Jews, in its primary
meaning, signifies the Supreme and only God, but that it is frequently applied
in Holy Writ to Angels and Princes; that as for the famous passage in St. John,
Cap. 5. v. 7, 8. which our Bibles, after the Sea Dr Burnet's Travels, Let. ^st.
Manuscripts of a more modern date, read thus. There are three that bear Record
in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are One,
and there are three that bear Witness in Earth, the Spirit, the Water, and the
Blood, and these three agree in one. The Alexandrine Manuscript has only these
Words, There are three that bear Witness, the Spirit, etc. so have all the
Ancient Greek Copies, as also the Syriac, the Arabic, the Aethiopic, and Latin
Interpreters in the oldest Manuscripts; that if the Words, according as we find
them in our Editions, are extant in any of the Ancient Books, they are Written
in the Margin, and not in the Text, and generally in a later Hand: That as
several learned Annotators have observed, it is plain that many of the Fathers
did not read the above mentioned Passage about the Witnesses in Heaven, as now
we do, because they never make use of it in their Disputes with the Arians,
although they cite the other about the Witnesses in Earth, as is evident from
the case of Orat 36.
Gregory Nazianzen; that though in answer to this, it may be objected, that St.
Cyprian read this passage as our Bibles now have it, because in his Book de
Vnitate Eccles he has these words, De Patre, and Filio, and Spiritu Sancto
scriptu^ est, -- hi Tres unum sunt. Yet F. Simon, in his Critical History of
the New Testament, c. 18. has well observed, it is not probable St. Cyprian
read the Words so, and yet St. Austin should never employ them against the
Arians of his Time; and therefore that learned Critic, not without good
grounds, supposes that St. Cyprian adapted the Words of the 8th. Verse, Et hi
tres unum sunt (for so the Vulgar Latin reads it,) to the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost; and it is certain that St. Cyprian frequently cites several Passages out
of the Bible, with the same assurance as if he had cited the very express
Words: That however it came about, the same variety of Reading is to be found
in several other Texts; as for example, the third Verse in the first Epistle of
St. John, c. 4. which the Greek Copies, These Words included in the
Parenthesis, are wanting in the Alexandrine MS.
as likewise the Syriac, and Arabic Versions read with us, Every Spirit that
confesses not that Jesus (Christ is come in the Flesh) is not of God, the
Vulgar Translation, as also Irenaeus, l. 3. c. 18. Tertullian, l. 5. contra
Marcionem, c. 16. and Socrates, l. 7. Hist. Eccles. c. 32. read it Omnis
Spiritus qui solvit Jesum, ex Deo non est: That thus in the fourth Verse of St.
Jude, the Word God is not in the Alexandrine MS. nor in two of Beza, nor in
five others mentioned in the Oxon. Edition, nor in the Latin Interpreter: That
in the Epistle to the the Romans, c. 9. v. 5. Christ is called God blessed for
ever, whereas St. Cyprian, l. 2. adversus Judaeos, and Hilary upon the Second
Psalm omit the Word Deus, and St. Chrysostom seems to have read it so: That
likewise in the first Epistle to Timothy, c 3. 16. where we read it God made
manifest in the Flesh, the same Word is left out in the Latin and Syriac
Version, which Lection is confirmed by the Clermont MS. and by another cited in
the Oxford Edition, upon which Place Erasmus supposes it to have been added by
the Orthodox to stop the mouths of the Arians; but Beza, that it was designedly
omitted by those that denied the Divinity of our Blessed Savior: That thus in
Acts, Chapter 20. v. 28. where our Bibles read it the Church of God, the Alex. the
Greek and Latin Interpreter, and three Oxford MSS. read it (...) of the Lord;
others in the same sense (...), the Arabic following the latter, the Syriac the
former reading, and this being one of those Places which the Nestorians and
Eutychians made use of in their Controversies, it is not so much to be ascribed
to the negligence of the Copier, as to the Design of some Persons that
endeavored to make St. Paul of their Party: That not to insist upon the
Variety and I will trouble the Reader with one Instance of this, tho it does
not relate to the present Dispute, to show how much discreeter a Part some
People would act to be less decisive in their Opinions. In the Epistle to the
Romans, c. 5. 14. St. Paul says that Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even
over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adam's Transgression.
Origin has observed that the Particle not was wanting in many Copies; and
Hilary the Deacon prefers this Reading. Yet in this, and the last Age, what
ill-natured Wars have the Divines raised about it, though at this distance it is
impossible to tell which is the genuine Lection.
Corruption of the several Texts which the Orthodox and Unorthodox equally cite
for themselves, the Ancient Divines, and principally the Schoolmen, sometimes
out of necessity, but oftener out of design, seldom keep to the received
definitions of Words, from whence proceeds the great obscurity of their
Writings, and endless Contentions about Terms; while speaking the same things
in other Words, they don't, or will not understand one another: That the old
Controversies between the Eutychians and Nestorians seem to have arose from
this defect: for while Eutyches called that Nature, which others called Person;
and, on the other hand, Nestorius meant that by the Word Personae, which others
did by Nature; the whole Eastern world was set in a Flame by those People, who,
as far as we can guess by their Writings at this Interval of Time, meant the
very same thing: That St. Austin himself, in his Book, De Trin. c. 9. where he
would persuade the Reader that the thing, tho incomprehensible, may be
understood, but that the Divines want Words to express what they understand,
fairly owns that nothing is said all this while by the Words they use, Dictum
est tamen tres persona, non ut aliquid diceretur, sed ne taceretur: That the
Citations, which Rittangel, and others, bring out of the Jewish Authors to
prove the belief of this Mystery amongst that People, seem to be as suspicious
as the Testimonies alleged by Galatinus a Minorite of the Church of Rome, De
Arcanis Cathol. Ver. l. 1.
out of Rabbi Cahana, Rabbi Judas, and Rabbi Simeon, and lately by that
Turncoat of Putney Mr. Sclater, to prove the monstrous Doctrine of
Transubstantiation; or if they are true they may probably be supposed to be
borrowed out of Platonic Writings, with which it is certain the Jews from the
time of the Lagidae and Seleucidae were not unacquainted: That what has been
urged of the Nations most renowned for Antiquity, and deep Speculation, that
they fell upon the same Doctrine of a Trinity of Hypostases in one Divine
Essence, either comes not up to the matter in hand, De Isid. and Osir.
as what is said of the Persians, who, as Plutarch affirms, believed a good and
a bad Being, together with one of a middle Nature; or else is utterly false, as
what has been pretended out of Porphyry and Jamblious of the old Egyptians:
That long before the Coming of our Savior, Plato asserted three Principles, In
Timaeo, and Epist. 2 and 5.
the first of which he calls (...) the Cause of all things; the second (...),
the Word and Governor of things present and to come; the third, (...), the
Soul or Spirit of the World; and that he held the second Principle to be
begotten or created by the first, and the third by the second: That it is a
Matter of great difficulty to know whether St. John used the Word (...) in the
same sense as Plato and his Disciples used it; for if we affirm he did; it
makes for the Arians; and if we deny it, it is certain that different things
lurk under the same Expression, which creates a great deal of uncertainty: That
it is doubtful whether the Ancients, when they say that the Hypostasis of the
Son was (...) or Eternal, meant that it was without any beginning, as that of
the Father is acknowledged to be, or whether they called it so because it was
before the World: That Tertullian seems to be of the latter Opinion, Contra
Hermogenem cap. 3. and 18.
where he says, That the Son was not always, and that he was not without a
beginning, And that several of the Anti-Nicene Fathers intimate, That the Son
was begotten a little before the World, though they expressly call him (...): That
the Primitive Christians, who had been Platonists before their Conversion,
endeavored to accommodate the Notions of Plato to those of the Bible; as we
find the Western People afterward played the same Tricks with Aristotle; and
the Car^esians now adays are not wanting to interpret the Apostles, out of
Car^esius. That the Nicene Council, which those whose interest it is to admire
these Assemblies, set out in such magnificent Terms, was principally composed
of a pack of wrangling, contentions Graecians, Men bred up in Controversy all
their Life, and perpetually quarrelling with one another, and a few ignorant,
simple, credulous Divines out of the West, but not a jot better than the
former; who, after a World of foolish, shameful squabling between themselves,
were brought to Bed at last of a set of obscure Articles, couched under none of
the most intelligible Terms, which the stupid People were to receive with the
same Veneration, as if they had dropped down from Heaven: That there were such
visible Adulterations of the Works of the Primitive Authors, of which
Ignatius's Epistles will be a lasting Instance, and the Trade of the Pi^
Frauds, so universally carried on in the first and best Ages, of which the
Sybilline Oracles are Testimonies sufficient, that it was not safe to depend
too much upon any Authorities: That lastly, If our Salvation so entirely
depended upon the Belief of this Doctrine, which gives so great a shock to
unassisted Natural Reason, it seems highly agreeable to the Justice and Wisdom
of God, that he would have delivered it in plainer and more express Terms,
since now both Parties pretend to justify themselves equally out of the Bible;
and (to Instance in no other Passage) the Arians as well as Homoonsians support
their Hypothasis out of St. Paul's (...).

I have thus briefly run over some of those Reasons which determined our Friend
to this Heterodox Opinion, for so with the rest of the World I am obliged to
call it; and I hope I need make no Apology to my Reader, (I am sure I need make
none to you, who know me so well) for thus publicly setting them down; for
though they appeared convincing and satisfactory to him, or at least kept him
from pronouncing Anathema's against those that could not come up to the Rigours
of the Quicunque vult, they may carry no great weight with any one else. For my
part, I who have known the World long enough to entertain no very honorable
Notion of Synods and Councils, where Men of Design, and such there will always
be, carried with them the same Passions and Animosities, that we now behold in
our Senates and Civil Assemblies, without their Decision take the Doctrine of
the Holy Trinity upon Content, such as I find it in the New Testament, and
never trouble my Head about the Modus or different Explications with which the
Scabies disputandi has (to give it no worse a word) so long amused the
Christian World. Had these packed, and as they were managed, Gaspar Scioppius.
useless Meetings of the Prelates (for I am of a late Grammarians Mind who not
unjustly defined the Representative Church to be Mandra, seu grex jumentorum,
sive asinorum) instead of busying their Thoughts about Creed-making, employed
the Authority they usurped, to promote the real practice of Christianity, it
had been much happier for themselves, and for us that succeed them.

I have the less to say to the latter Point, I mean the satisfaction of our
Blessed Savior, because our Friend was reconciled to the Term, in the moderate
sense of well-pleasedness long before his Death, which, to the Grief of all
that knew him, and the loss of his Country in general, happened on the 20th. of
this Instant December, after two Days Sickness. He would indeed often argue,
how a vicarious Punishment could possibly consist with the Divine Justice or
Mercy; and how any Redemption could be necessary to atone for Adam's
Transgression, whom Millions had never heard of, and no one had ever
commissioned to transact for him. As for Sacrifices, about which it is left to
every Man's liberty to think as he pleases, since it is no Article of our
Faith, he could never be induced to believe them to be of Divine Institution;
but being used by all the Neighboring Nations, to have been indulged the Jews
(as the Kingly Government was afterward) upon the account of their stubborn
obstinate Temper, which was much delighted with Pomp and Show. In this
particular, he has several of the most Learned Men of this Age concurring with
him; and if I may be allowed to interpose my own Opinion, I think Dr. Spencer,
and Monsieur Le Clark have put it beyond any manner of Dispute, that not only
Sacrifices (which, but especially those of the Expiatory kind, The Pagans had a
gross Notion, that their Gods, whom they looked upon to be little better than
Corporeal, were pleased with the Nido^ of their Victims.
seem to have been invented by a Superstitious or designing Priesthood) but
most of the other Rites and Ceremonies that we meet with in the Jewish
Economy, were practiced first by their Neighbors, and after they were purged
of their Idolatrous dross, tolerated in that stiff-necked People.

And now, Sir, I am arrived to the Conclusion of this tedious Letter, which if
it does not wholly answer Mr. Firmin's Character, I hope you will impute it to
the hurry and disorder I was in at the time of writing it. I wish you had
imposed your Commands upon some abler Person, whose manner of managing the
Subject, might have born some proportion to the Dignity of it: For to say the
Truth, Mr. Firmin was a most excellent Member of our Commonwealth, who bent all
his Studies, Labors, and Inclinations to serve and advance the Public Good.
He had his Infirmities as has been shown, but they ought never to be remembered
to his prejudice, since he had so many Virtues of the first magnitude to
over-balance them. Let it never be said, that he who treated all Mankind, with
universal Charity, when alive, should not be treated with the same Charity
himself now he is in the Grave.

London, Dec. 29. SIR, I am, Your Humble Servant.


