THE CHARACTER OF A Town-Miss.
A Miss is a new Name, which the Civility of this Age bestows on one, that our
unmannerly Ancestors called Whore and Strumpet. A certain Help-meet for a
Gentleman, instead of a Wife; Serving either for prevention of the Sin of
Marrying, or else as a little Side Pillow; to render the Yoke of Matrimony more
easy. She is an excellent Convenience for those that have more Money than Wit,
to spend their Estates upon; and the most that can be said in her Commendation,
Is, that she will infallibly bring a Man to Repentance. Yet you may call her an
honest Curtezan, or at least a Common Enclosed; for though she is an Out-lier,
yet she seems to be confined within the Pale, and differs from your ordinary
Prostitute, as Wholesale men from Retailers; one perhaps has an hundred
Customers, and to'ther but Two or Three, and yet this gets most by her Trade.
Indeed she may well thrive, seeing she always carries her Stock above her, and
every man is desirous to deal in her Commodity: For she is a Gallant business,
a Citizens Recreation, a Lawyers Estate in Fee-tail; a Young Doctors Necessary
Experiment, and a Parsons comfortable importance.

The Royal Preacher calls her a Strange Woman, but we usually term her a Common
Woman, and have reason so to do, for sins that were strange in Solomon's days,
are common in ours. She is a Caterpillar that destroys many a hopeful Young
Gentleman in the Blossom, a Land-Syren far more dangerous than they in the Sea:
For he that falls into her hands, runs a threefold hazard of Shipwracking
Soul, Body, and Estate.

She talks high of her Family, and tells a large story how they were Ruined by
the late Wars. But the true History of her Life, is generally to this Effect:
She is only the Cub of a Bumkin, lickt into a Genteel form by
Town-Conversation: Nature gave her a good Face, and an indifferent stock of
Confidence, Which she by prudent management has improved into Impudence; like a
forward Rose bud she opens betimes, and lost that trifle they call a Maiden
Head, so early, that she cannot remember she over had any such thing. She was
scarce thirteen when her Fathers Plowman, and the Squire their Landlord (the
veryer Clown of the two) went Joint Tenants to her Coppy-hold; but proving with
Child, she had the wit to lay it to the Last, who for his Credit, dispatched her
Incognito, with a sum of Money on a Carriers Pack, to be disburthen'd at
London, the goodliest Forest in England, to shelter a great Belly. There the
ban^ing was exposed to the Tuition of they Parish in a Handbasket, and the
Charitable Midwif^ (who counts p^ocuring in a civil way, a necessary part of
her Office) soon brought her acquainted with a third Rate Gentlewoman, who took
her a Lodging in a Garret, and allowed her six Shillings a Week. But making a
Sally abroad one Night, picked up a Drunken Cully, and at a Tavern (whilst he
was no less pleasantly employed) pict his pocket of a Gold VVatch, and some
straggling Guinnies, and left him to pawn his Sword and Perriwig for the
Reckoning. After this lucky Adventure, she discards Monsieur shabby (her former
Customer) and her Lofty Lodging; puts her self in a good Garb, gets a Maid
(forgive me, for I Lie, I mean a Shee-servant) whom she teaches to call her
Madam, and your Honor, and hires Noble Rooms richly Furnished, about
Covent Garden; there she takes State upon her, and practices every day four
hours in the Glass, how Greatness will become her. Her first business is to
make her self to be taken notice of, to which purpose like Dinah, she walks the
Streets; sometimes like Jael, she stands at the Door; and sometimes like
Jezabel, she looks out at the Window: But her main Marketplace is the Balcony,
which she frequents as constantly as any Lady in a Romance; and the Language of
her Eyes is, What do you lack Sir? By which she at last attracts a, Wealthy
Gallant, who with a little Address, obtains the mighty Honor of her
Acquaintance; but she seems extreme Nice, Reserved and Modest, protests she
would not go to a Tavern for a World, when the whole business is, she is only
afraid of being Pawned there. In brief, she Manages him so discreetly, that she
Cheats him into Love Insensibly, like a Taylors-Bill, wherein a man sees
himself Rookt abominably, yet knows not where to find fault. Having thus got
the VVodcook into the Pit-fall, she resolves to Pluck him: When he importunes
her for the Great Kindness, she talks of Honor and Conscience, and vows she
will never stain her Reputation but for valuable Considerations: this brings
them to Articles, he promises to allow her a Hundred and fifty pounds a Year,
and she Swears a thousand dissembling Oaths, how infinitely she loves him, and
that she will prove constant, and true to him alone, and never be concerned
with any other man in the World; and the silly Fop is so fatally bewitched as to
believe her; And continues along time in that fools Paradise of Dotage, whilst
in the mean time she drives a Trade privately, with two or three more. For the
Concealing of which from the first, it is the whole Employ of the little
Harlotry, her Chambermaid, to study Lies, Pretenses and Excuses, and she makes
them pay her even to Extortion; to quicken her Invention; Sometimes she is gone
abroad in her Aunts Coach; Sometimes one of her Cozens, a VVoken Drapers Wife in
the City is Sick, and she must Visit her. Not is Madam her self less full of
Plot and Intrigue to Bubble her Gallant: Sometimes having pleased him well, she
begs the best Ring he has on his finger, or pretends her self to be in Debt;
and that unless he will suffer her to be Scandalized with an Arrect, Bound he
must be for her) to one of her Confederates you may be sure) for fifty pound,
and the everlasting Changling; cannot find in his heart to deny her: At other
times she shall purposely give him occasion to be Jealous, and when he has
Raved and Swore, and Cursed and Ranted for two hours, as if he had been possessed
with a hundred and fifty Devils, she shall cleaverly wipe off the Suspicion,
upbraid his Jealous Coxcombship; fall a Sniviling, and call her self the most
unfortunate of Women, to love a man with so much Passion, that thus abuses her:
Then he submits, begs her Pardon on his Knees, and Coakses her with all
imaginable kindness; but still she pouts, looks Sullen, and will not let him
have a bit of that same, till he has given her a New Gown, or a Necklace of
Pearl, for Atonement, and Reconcilation.

But in time, his Appetite being Cloyed, his Purse exhausted, or his Eyes
enlightened, he begins to withdraw, and she soon finds out another, a verrier
Fool than he; but for Security, will not Trade, unless he settle an Annuity of
300 l. a Year on her for Life; which being firmly done by an able Conveyancer
in Sheepskins, half as large as the Premises: Within one Month she abandons
him for a more Noble and Strenuous Gallant. And now being arrived at the Zenith
of her Glory, she has her Boys in Livery, her House splendidly furnished, and
scorns to stir abroad without a Coach and six Horses: She glitters in the Boxes
at the Play house, and draws all Eyes after her in the Street, to the shame and
Confusion of all honest Women, and Encouragement of each pretty Girl that
loves fine Clothes, good Cheer, and Idleness, to turn Harlot, in Imitation of
such a thriving Example.

She takes upon her, more Pride, than would have served six of Queen Elizabeth's
Countesses; uses Sirrah at every word, and to a Lady of the best Qualtiy, and
Old enough to be her Mother: Nothing but -- I tell the sweetheart! She despises
her Sister, for loosing her Reputation, by being kept by a meaner Gallant than
her own; and gets one to attempt to Steal her, that she may be thought an
extraordinary Fortune.

She has always two necessary Implements about her, a Blackmore, and a little
Dog; for without these, she would be neither Fair nor Sweet: The rest of her
Retinue consists of her She-Secretary, that keeps the Box of her Teeth, her
Hair, and her Painting. An Old Trot, that understands the Town, and goes
between Party and Party, and a French Merchant to supply her with Dildo's; or
in default of those, she makes her Gallants Purse maintain two able Stallions
(that she loves better than him) for performance of points wherein he is
Defective. Her Skin is much Cleerer than her Conscience, which makes her go
with her Neck and shoulders Bare; and she has reason; for her upper Parts are
the shop of Cupid, and those below, his VVarehouse: But all that you are like
to buy there, is Damnation, and Diseases. She is a very Butcher, that exposes
her own Flesh to Sale by the Stone; or if you please, a Cook that is Dressing
her self all day with poinant Sauces, to be tasted with the better Appetite at
Night. Like a Disabled Frigot, that has received many Shots between Wind and
Water, She is forced once a year to put in at Tunbridg, or Epsom, to Wash and
Tallow, and Refit her Leaky Bottom: after which, she Cruises up and down the
Town as briskly as ever; till Age spoil her Sailing, and ingraves Wrinkles,
where she once Painted Roses: Then her former Adorers despise her, the World
hates her, and she becomes a Loathsome thing, too unclean to enter into Heaven;
too Diseased to continue long upon Earth; and too foul to be touched with any
thing but a Pen, or a pair of Tongs: And therefore it is time to Leave her; --
For, Foh, how she stinks.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Rowland Reynolds in the Strand, 1680.


