THE CHARACTER OF THOSE TWO Protestants in Masquerade. HERACLITUS, AND The
Observator.
THey are Teeming Animals, that swell with Noise and Nonsense, but only bring
forth a Penny Pamphlet. No sooner is the Travel over, but the Weekly Infants
are snatched from the Bosom of their Parents, and being hurried into Public,
they create a Disturbance with their clamorous Shrieks. No sooner do the
troublesome Brats yelp themselves into silence, and expire, but another Issue is
successively continued; and if the timely Caution of a London Grand Jury had
not broke their Crain-Eggs, the numerous Progeny might have endangered the
State. They are the Offensive Humors of the Body-Politick, and at last are
broke out in the Itch of Scribbling. They are the fatal Dose of unqualified
Mercury, that in stead of carrying away the Obstructions of the Body, strike up
the Malignancy to the Head. They pretend to heal Breaches, and to regulate the
State; but are as unfit, as a Common Strumpet is for a Lady Abbess, or a Novice
in Military Experience for the Conduct of an Army. They arraign Officers, and
cancel the very Private Acts of Magistrates; as if a Word must not be spoke,
but these saucy Scriblers must make the Comment. They are two gaudy Blazing
Stars, that would appear at once both Terrible and Beautiful. They are composed
of the Combustible Vapors of an unquiet State, and are set a-fire by their own
Sulphurous Nature. They would admonish and deter, yet only portend their own
Fate; and whilst the gazing Multitude devoutly admire, the inflamed Jellys
consume themselves, and disappear. They are the Speaking Trumpet of a designing
Jesuit, and are only Instrumental loudly to proclaim what he privately
whispers; but when the Intrigue is accomplished, the serviceable Utensil is
laid by as useless. They Will suffer none to share in the Sense of the Nation, or
in the least to pretend to that thing called Wit, besides themselves; and yet
the Man that believes their Talent to be so extraordinary, must have more Faith
than they have Sense, ay, to that degree of a grain of Mustardseed. They are
elaborately dull: but with Industry and Toil at last they produce an
insignificant Sheet; but so stuffed with blunt Raillery, and Billingsgate
Invectives, that the Language of the sharp-nos'd Sluts is, in comparison,
modish Complaisance, and good Breeding. Take but a Pair of Oars from
Black-friars to Whitehall Stairs, and the Academy will furnish you with as much
Matter as will complete a dozen of these Pamphlets, with a great deal of
Applause after the Publication. The Apprentice that mis-call'd Haraclitus,
Heteroclitus, made a pertinent mistake, and very adapt; for so irregularly does
his two Representatives Dialogize, that sometimes Jest is very severely in
Earnest, and Earnest reciprocally encroacheth upon his Fellow-Babblers
Prerogative, and accidentally stumbles upon a Quibble: And when the faultring
Fancy of the jaded Author is at a stand, he is forced to be beholden to the
Publisher to fill up the bottom of the Sheet with a Train of Advertisements.
Now and then you shall perceive them nibling at History; but you shall find
more in the very Title Page of a Livy, than in a thousand of their
insignificant Scribbles. They are the Weekly Fomenters of Feuds and Divisions,
and prejudge all that dissent from their Persuasions. They are sure that Care,
Curtis, and Janeway will come to the Gallows; but I am afraid their Prophetic
Faculty will fail them: so industrious was Haman to erect a Gibbet for
Mordecai. They are those Sicilian Satyrs mentioned in Polybius, that in the
Interludium of a Parliament do wantonly bask themselves upon the Plains, and
licentiously indulge their own Brutality; but when the Season alters, and the
Honorable Senate is assembled, then they dastardly return to their Caves and
Groves, and are content to vent their uneasy Malice in private Ruminations.
They are a Couple of Bartholomew-Fair Merry Andrews, that to incite the Charity
of a Bookseller, and provoke the Reader to a forced Laughter, will Ape
themselves into any Antic Posture. So beastly several times are their
Expressions, and so offensive to a modest Ear, that as they have been Presented
for Reflection and Disturbance, so let them be Indicted for Nuisance. They
pretend it is their Loyal Inclination, and Duty to their Sovereign, that
obliges them to this Scribbling Diligence: But Hannibal might as well have
believed* that Hanno was his Friend, because he publicly applauded his
Actions: For what Circumstantials is there of Loyalty, where Feuds and
Dissentions are fomented? They are Slaves to Interest, and have no more Loyalty
than what they are paid for. They are biased by Necessity; and it is as easy
for one that would undertake it, to turn the Current of their Ink another way,
as it is for a Moneyed Man to subborn a Perjurer.

LONDON, Printed for E. Ryddal. 1681.


