CAINES BLOODY RACE Known by their FRUIT OR, A TRUE DECLARATION OF The Innocent
sufferings of the Servants of the living God, by the Magistrates, Priests and
people in the City of Westchester, who lives in a profession of God, Christ,
and the Scriptures, as their forefathers did, who s^^w the Prophets, persecuted
Christ and the ^postles, as is declared in the Scriptures of truth, and c.

They persecute him whom thou have smitten; and they add unto the sorrow of
them whom thou have wounded, Psalm. 69. 26.

Bloady men hate him that is upright; but the just have care of his soul, Prove.
29. 10.

Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater then his
Master; if they have persecuted me, they will persecute you also; if they have
kept my word, they will also keep yours, Joh. 15. 20.

Blessed are ye when men shall evile you, and persecute you, and shall say all
manner of evil against you falsely for my sake, rejoice, and be exceeding glad,
for great is your ye ward in heaven, for so persecuted they the Prophets which
were before you, Matt. 5. 11, 12.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the sign-of the Bull and Mouth, near
Aldersgate, 1657.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
AMongst the many sad objects of pity and commiseration which these days
afford and do bring forth here is one not of the least, where thou may behold
the sad and woeful sufferings of many of the dear and precious servants of the
Lord, who have denied themselves and the glory of this World, that so they
might be followers of Christ, and doers of his Will, that so they might receive
peace with the Father through Jesus Christ, who has called us to suffer for
his Names sake, and be conformable unto his Will, that so the Crown of Glory
may be received, which is laid up for all them that keep the faith, and does
not deny it, nor him in whom-they have believed, before men, as these Cloud of
Witnesses and faithful suffererers have done, who have kept the Faith, and
confessed him before men, and among such also where the Devil has his Throne,
and rules as King; and by his unrighteous Scepter has the Rulers of Chester
acted, as the Discourse hereafter will manifest, wherein thou may see the Image
of the Father in the sufferers, and of the Lamb, who was dumb before the
Shearer, and opened not his mouth: And in this after written thou may see the
Scriptures fulfilled, as it is written by the Prophets, They eat my people as
men eat bread, and they chop them in pieces as flesh; for the Caldron and the
time which Christ spoke of is come, that they that kill you shall think they do
God service, and all these things they will do unto you for my Names sake, and
they shall shamefully entreat you, and cast you into prison, and speak all
manner of evil of you falsely for my Names sake; but blessed are they who are
not offended. And in those blood thirsty inhumane Magistrates (so called) who
have done all this violence and cruelty, thou may also read the image of the
Devil brought forth, for their works that they have done and wrought are of
him; and as Christ said to them who would have been counted holy, who said God
was their Father, but their Works manifested them to be of the Devil, and he
was their Father who abode not in the truth. And that which makes the violence
and cruelty more intolerable of these men, is, because they profess themselves
to rule for God, and are christian Magistrates, but their actions that they
have brought forth will Christ never own, for he came not to destroy men's
lives, but to save them; neither did he ever set up any such rule as to slay
his servants, nor any such Magistrates who are a terror to them that do well,
and therefore they must be recorded among the Adversaries of the Lord* whom the
Lord will dash to pieces. What! Is this the reformation brought forth in their
City, imprisoning them that reprove sin in the Gate, and set drunkards at
liberty? Oh preposterous and prodigeous cruelty! In the time of the King, and
in the time of the Bishops, never such presidents of cruelty was found, and
this hypocritical generation will be less excusable then they, they in
ignorance, but these in the day, when light is declared abroad, and have been
warned; they never professed liberty of concience, but these do; they never
professed toleration or protection unto any but them that conformed to them in
all things, but these do. Oh England! Is thy Sun set when it was but new risen?
and utter) darkness coming upon thee again? And must this be fulfilled upon
thy Rulers, and among them, They are all evening. Wolves, who devour so
greedily, that they gnaw not the bones till the Morrow? Oh unheard of cruelty!
unparelell'd Wickedness! violence is broken forth into a Rod, and now smites
the just in great cruelty, and the innocent in great rage; but all these things
are recorded and taken notice of by him who weighs all things in an even
balance, and will scatter the wiced and ungodly as Chaff, and as dust shall
they be blown away; but all the stripes, reproaches, sighs, tears, and
sufferings of the upright will he reward, when their enemies shall sink as a
stone into the Sea, and be overwhelmed in the pit of everlasting vengeance, woe
and misery, which* is prepared for the old Dragon, the Devourer and all his
Seed and Race for ever, who would not have Righteousness to rule, nor
Innocence to live, but subtilty and craft, pride and arrogancy, in which the
Kingdom of the Devil stands, and envy, murder and oppression, and he that hates
his Brother is a manslayer. And when thou have read over this Discourse and
sees the envy, wickedness, and madness, and cruelty of these Rulers, their
spirit thou will see, and cannot but abhor as detestable, and may truly say,
While such bear rule, the Land cannot but mourn; but the mischief they have
hatched shall fall upon their own pate, and peace shall possess the reins of
the just, and the heart of them that have suffered shall rejoice and be glad in
him who has counted them worthy to suffer for his Names sake, and great shall
be their reward, for they shall reign with him for ever and ever over all their
Enemies, and shall trample them down under their feet; which if thou believe,
and in patience endure and suffer with them that suffer, thou shall rejoice
with them that rejoice, in the joy which is unspeakable and full of glory, and
know the Dominion which is everlasting, when all those unrighteous powers and
dominions shall come to an end; and all that endure to the end, and keep the
faith, this shall see fulfilled; and the Lord is hastening it for Wiekedness is
near at the height, and then his Wrath shall consume his Enemies, and they
shall melt away that hate the Lord.

F. H.

CAINES BLOODY RACE Known by their FRUITS.
FIrst, Under Edward Bradshaw, Mayor; Richard Hubberthorne coming into Chester
City about the 29th. of the 9. Month, 1653. the occasion of his coming at that
time was to visit a brother in the truth, who was for the truths sake a
prisoner in the County-Goal, his Name was John Lawson; so he (Richard
Hubberthorn) being in the House, where he lodged all night peaceably, not
giving the least occasion of offense to any but was writing in a Book he then
had of his own; so as he sat writing came in Richard Golborne a Lawyer, and
took his Book from him, and gave him envious and threatening words, and went his
way, and informed Edward Bradshaw Mayor what a dangerous Fellow was in the
Town, and caused him to be brought before the Magistrates into the Pentice; so
when they and the chief Priest had examined him, and finding the Law not by him
transgressed, he being clear in all things from the least breach thereof, they
caused him to be put apart into another Room, until they had devised wicked
and unlawful devices against him; for this was the time when the Lord first
tried them how they could bear the sincerity and plainness of the innocent
truth and Gospel of Christ, which was then beginning to spread abroad in the
Nation; which Truth, and the servants thereof, does only seek the Honor which
comes from God, and does only give the Honor to God; and does not seek that
Honor which comes from men, neither can give that Honor which men seek one of
another; and for this cause was the Wrath of the Magistrate lifted up, until
they had lost both the knowledge of the Law, and of Reason, who in their Wrath
sent him into prison, no breach of the Law being found by him, only by the
information of Richard Golborne, who had broken the Law in taking his Goods
from him, contrary to all the Laws of this Nation; only this they said they
imprisoned him for, because he could not promise them to go out of the Town
when they commanded him. But Festus who was a Ruler amongst the Heathens, he
well might be called Noble, for to him it seemed unreasonable to send a
Prisoner, and not to show the causes of offense that was laid against him: But
these Magistrates which say they are Christians, they manifest themselves to be
void of understanding, sense, and reason, having sent many to prison without so
much as signifying a just occasion against them. So when R. Hubberthorn had
suffered about three months imprisonment, he was called before a Sessions, and
they finding nothing against him, again asked him if he would go forth of the
City, which if he would, they said he should be set free; which he denied to
promise them, and stood in the Authority of the Almighty over their deceit,
being they could lay nothing to his charge; then their Wrath arose, and
commanded him to be put into prison, and kept close that none should come to
him; all which the Keeper obeyed for about eight days; and then the Mayor and
the rest of his Brethren joined together to make a Pass to send him from
Constable to Constoble, into Lancashire; but when the Lord had tried them to
the full, then they broke their Order which was sealed with seven Seals, and
he was only brought forth of the City, and set free.

Thomas Holme coming into this City, had a Meeting in the same about the
nineteenth day of the first Month, 1653. where he and many more were met
together to wait upon the Lord in a house in the same City; then Thomas Holme
spoke as he was moved of the Lord, Edward Bradshaw then Mayor, being informed
thereof, sent one of his servants, and commanded him to bring Tho. Holme before
him; so he committed him to prison to the Common Goal for the City, where he
was kept about six Weeks, in which time he was much abused and beaten by Robert
Emis^ne, Keeper of the Prison, who is a common notorious Drunkard. Before Tho.
Holme was released, Edward Bradshaw sent Samuel Elcock unto him, to know if he
would promise him to depart the City, which if he would, he might be released;
who said he could make no such promise. Now Tho. Holme having a Letter by to
him, which was sent him from Rich. Hubberthorne, directed Edward Bradshaw, he
gave it to Samuel Elcock to give it as directed, who did; so when Ed. Bradshaw
had read over the Letter, he said that Tho. Holme should be whipped, and (as we
are informed) had a man in readiness to do it, he thinking all this while it
had been Tho. Holme which writ it to him; so Thomas Yarwood hearing what was
intended against Tho. Holm, and understanding it was because of that Letter,
went to Edward Bradshaw, and said, Friend, Tho. Holm did not write that Letter
to thee, it was Rich. Hubberthorne; but Tho. Yarwood not dossing his Hat,
Edward Bradshaw committed him to the Stocks, where he was kept about an hour
and a half at the least; then the next day after Tho. Holme was committed as
aforesaid, Edward Bradshaw sent for Rich. Hickock and Edward Morgan, they being
two that was at the Meeting the day before, and committed them to prison upon
the twentieth day of the first month, 1653. and kept Rich. Hickock fifteen
Weeks, and Edw: Morgan nine Weeks.

Elizabeth Levens, and Jane Waugh, coming to this City to visit their Brethren
in prison, and as they were passing peaceably through the Streets, were took
up by a drunken man, and brought before Edward Bradshaw, and by him committed
to prison, who were a great part of their imprisonment kept in a stinking
place, where for the most part thieves and murderers are kept; the whole time
of their imprisonment was about five Weeks, who when they were released, were
sent from Constable to Constable, as Vagabonds, into their own Country.

Anne Fara coming to this City, was moved to go to a steeple-house, and spoke
unto the Priest, she was much abused by the rude multitude, and by them took
before Edw. Bradshaw, and by him committed to prison for many days.

Richard Hickocke was moved to go to a Steeple-house in the City, where was a
High Priest, called Samuel Eaton, who when he had ended that he called his
Sermon, Rich. Hitkock spoke some Words to the people, but they pulled him down,
and did much abuse him; yet nevertheless Edw. Bradshaw committed him to
prison, and commanded the Keeper to put him into a dark stinking Room, where he
saw a Snake, and other venomous creatures; it is such a place that none is put
into at any time but such as are condemned to dye, and therefore is called The
dead Man's Room; and likewise Edw. Bradshaw commanded Irons to be put on him,
all which his commands were executed to the highest degree of malice that might
be; in which condition he was kept 13 Weeks and upwards, and it is believed by
some, the Priest and he together intended to destroy the outward man, though he
had a Wife and many small children; such is their cruelty, had they not been
prevented by George Minshall, one of the Protectors servants, who coming to the
Town at the time of the General Sessions holden for the County, and hearing of
their usuage of him, was moved with pity, and fetched forth a Habeus Corpus,
and brought his body before the Judge for the County, out of the hands of those
bloody and cruel men, to answer the Law, who finding no just cause of
imprisonment proved against him, and being moved with pity toward him,
understanding how cruelly he had been used by them, did freely release him, to
their shame and trouble.

Tho. Yarwood was moved to go to the Steeple-house, and stood till the Priest
had done what he had to say, and then he spoke to the people, but he was haled
forth, and ill abused by the baser sort, and brought before Edward Bradshaw,
and by him committed to prison, where he was kept most part of two days; he
being a Soldier, and under Command, his Officer sent to him to know why he had
imprisoned his Soldier, and fetched him out of prison; Edward Bradshaw sent him
Word, He came in amongst them with a laudable Voice, and disturbed the Assembly
before the Minister had done, though he spoke not till the Priest had done, as
before is said.

John Owen being in his own house, following his lawful employment there was a
stone flang at his Window, and missed it; then he and his men went off the
Table they sat on, which was close to the Window, who were no sooner off the
Table, but a great piece of a Brick-stone was flang through his Glasse-Window,
which broke it in pieces; and had not he and his men (as is said) come from the
Window, it might have killed some of them, it came with such force into the
House; so he seeing who threw it, took the stone in his hand to Edward
Bradshaw, and showed him the stone, and who it was that threw it into his
House, and brake his Window, as is said, who said, Do you come to complain
before a Magistrate in such an unreverent manner? and said, I will neither
hear your cause, nor right you; and with his own hands christ him forth of his
doors, and charged him to come before him no more.

The innocent sufferings of the servants of the Lord in Chester City, under
Richard Bird, Mayor of the same.
EDmond Ogden being moved to go to a Steeple-house, spoke not a Word until the
Priest had done, and then spoke some Words to the Priest to make good what he
had said; but he was drawn forth into the Street by the hair of his head, and
then sent to prison by Richard Bird, and kept nine Weeks.

Richard Bird sent for Edward Morgan forth of his own House, and committed him
to prison, when he had not spoke to any, nor to this day knows what he was
imprisoned for, only it was reported by some he did it because Edmond Ogden
had been at the Steeplehouse.

At another time Rich. Bird caused Edw. Morgan to be taken out of the Street,
who neither said or did to any, yet he caused him to be put into the Grate,
where for the most part Thieves and Murderers are put.

Mary Endon came to this City to see her Husband, who was in bonds for the
truth, she was then moved to go a Steeple-house, and asked the Priest a
question; but she was exceedingly abused by the People, and taken before Rich.
Bird, and by him committed to prison, where she was kept four days.

William Sarrot passing through the street with a piece of cloth, John Poole
called to him, and asked if he would sell his cloth, who said, Yea; John Poole
asked him his price, he said, So much the Yeard; John Poole said he would have
it; William Sarrot, hearing him say so hastily he would have it, said, Friend
do not mistake thy self, I ask so much the yard; John Poole said, Thou lie,
thou asked me so much an ^ll, but William denied it, and said as before; then
John Poole struck him very ill, and thrust him out of his shop, and kept his
cloth, though his Wife and Mother would have had him to have given him his
cloth again, they being (its very like) sensible how it was; but he would not
give him his cloth again, but said he would teach him to be a Quaker, many
people cried out against him for so doing, but for all that was said to him, he
was shameless, and would not part with the cloth. So William Sarrot, came and
informed some of his Friends, who had him go to the Mayor, and inform him
thereof, who did, the Mayor was high with him, because he could not give him
that honor he expected from him, but in the end did send for John Poole, who
came, and as soon as he was come, the Mayor and he went apart, and discoursed
a while; but when they returned to William, the Mayor said to William, unless
he would put off his Hat* to him, he would do him no justice, but would send
him to prison for coming before a Magistrate so unmannerly; but in short, he
sent William Sarrot to the common Goal, and not in the least reproved John
Poole, who would have cheated him of his Cloth. So the third day after William
was put in prison, the Mayor sent for him forth to his own House, where Pool
had sent the Cloth; so when William Sarrot saw his Cloth upon the Table, he
said, Friend, is this Cloth of so much the Ell, as Pool said he would have it
for? The Mayors Wise said it was better worth; then the Mayor gave William his
Cloth again, and discharged him, paying his Foes; he denied to pay any Fees;
then the Keeper took him to prison again; but when he saw he would pay him no
Fees, he turned him forth without.

The innocent sufferings of the people of God under William Wright, Mayor of
Chester City.
SArah Adgit, and Margret VVood, coming to this City, were moved to go to a
Steeple-house; Sarah spoke a few Words when the Priest had done; Margret spoke
not in the Steeple-house at all; they both were taken before William Wright,
and by him committed to prison, and kept above four Weeks, though (as
aforesaid) one of them spoke not at all in the Steeple-house.

Upon the 8th day of the first Month, Richard Sale was moved of the Lord to
come to the City, and to go to a Steeple-house, where the Judge for the County,
and many more of the City and Country were assembled, and Nathaniel Lancaster
Priest, found in the steps of the Scribes and Pharisces, who in the highest
place of the Assembly was found, exalting himself as their Teacher. So Richard
Sale stood so long as he could, and opened not his mouth, until at last the
burden of the word of the Lord burned as fire within him, that contrary to his
own will he was forced to speak; but before he could utter many words, he was
violently halled forth as their manner is, and committed to the County gaol for
one day, and then by the same power that committed him was released for that
thing; so the Law being satified, he went to his own house.

Then upon the second day of the second month, 1656. Richard Sale, being
commanded of the Lord, to come to Chester city, and by the Lord commanded to
reprove sin in the gate, he being in the liberty of the County, about
Glovers-stone, he then was pulled by violence into the Liberties of the City,
and delivered to one of the Mayors Officers; so he was taken before William
Wright Major, who committed him to prison: Demand was made what he was
committed for; Answer was given, For speaking before the Judges; though he had
as aforesaid satisfied the Law, for that before, and yet for the same thing was
committed to prison again, and there kept in a most cruel manner 33 weeks, in
all which time he might not be suffered to have a little fire, though none of
their charge, he being in a cold open room, and the coldest time in all the
year, such was their cruelty, then at last they released him privately without
any trial at Law.

The Innocent sufferings of the People of God in Chester cicity, under Peter
Leigh Mayor of the same, who in a most cruel, bloody, and merciless manner
has executed his power against them.
UPon the ninth day of the tenth month, 1656. Edward Morgan had a servant
wrought with him, whose name was William Fletcher, who had stole a piece of
Leather from him, which was worth two shillings, or thereabouts; Edward being
informed thereof by one of his servants, called Thomas Edwards; then Edward
Morgan asked Fletcher, why he stole his Leather from him? Fletcher denied it,
and did begin to quarrel with him: Insomuch that another of Edward Morgans
servants, went and informed Peter Leigh Mayor, (unknown to Edward) the Mayor
sent for them both, who came before him, the first word that the Mayor spoke
was to Edward Morgan, asking him, if he was not a Freeman of this City, being
he came so unreverently before him, and farther said, Are not you sworn to be
obedient to Magistrates? he answered, What I do is contrary to my own will in
obedience to the Lord: the Mayor said, The Scripture says, Honor thy Father,
and Mother: Edward said, I honor my Father in that I am obedient to that of
God in my Conscience: then the Mayor said to Edw. That unless he would put off
his hat, he would not hear his cause, so Edw. came away, and the man that stole
his Leather escaping punishment for stealing, because he whom he stole it from
could not in conscience put off his hat.

Upon the fifteenth day of the tenth month, 1656. Peter Leigh Mayor commanded
Edw. Morgan to come before him, who (as it will appear hereafter) had laid a
snare to entrap him, because he had escaped imprisonment before, when he was
before him last, seeing he would not put off his hat: The Mayor had sent for
Rich. Bird, (formerly Mayor) who was an approved man for his purpose, to
persecute the innocent without a cause, and John Johnson as bad as he; so they
being met together in the Pentice, sent for Edw. Morgan, (as aforesaid)
pretending to punish him that stole his Leather if he desired it: Here all may
see how unfit these men are to be Magistrates, for they that know any thing
pertaining to the Law, know this, that a Magistrate in his place ought to be a
terror to him that does evil, and is upon all occasions to use his utmost
endeavor to find them out, and them to punish according to their offense, and
in so doing becomes a terror to them. Nay further, if any man has so much
respect to him that has transgressed the Law, as to conceal it such a time as
the Law sets down, according to the offense, he makes himself equal
transgressour with him that has transgressed: Now these Magistrates are so far
from this, that they told Edw. Morgan, that if he desired the Thief to be
punished they would punish him; so ignorant are they of their places, that
because Edw. Morgan did not desire it from them, they did not punish him for
stealing* but this was but their pretense to ensnare him, as their actions
hereafter will appear. Then the Mayor asked him, if he was not a perjured
fellow to come before them so unreverently, and many such like words he used,
but (in short) according to their design on him, they began to cast how to
bring him under their Law, there being a bench at the lower end of the room;
Edw did sit down: Tho. Robbinson one of the Sheriffs called to him, and said,
Do thou know where thou art? and told him that was not a place for such
fellows as he to sit on, and said, he should be taught better manors: for they
would put a bridle on his head, and many such like unsavory words he used, not
worth repearing over, so in the end, they got John Tailor, John Knowles, and
John Whitley to swear against Edward Morgan.

To wit, He said his Conscience told him, he could not bow to deceit, so this
was the ground for which they committed him to prison, because he could not bow
to deceit, and made a warrant which was signed by John Johnson, and Rich. Bird,
the sum of which was, that Edw. Morgan misbehaved himself before the Mayor, so
to prison Edward was sent straight way, but he that stole his Leather found
favor from them and was not punished at all for stealing, though he confessed
so far to the stealing of it, that of himself he brought part of the Leather
back again to Ed. Morgan, but not by any constraint of either Mayor or
Justices; so now that for which they sent for Edward Morgan has fully appeared.

Now Ed. Morgan lying in prison, as is said, many as he dealt with in things
belonging to his trade, understanding the grievous wrong he had done him, went
of their own accord, unknown to Edw. Morgan, unto Peter Leigh Mayor, to desire
Edwards enlargement from him, the Mayor told them in a fawning hypocryticall
manner, he did not desire to keep him in prison, and told them it was Rich.
Bird, and John Johnson that did commit him, they seeing how uncivilly he
behaved himself before me; and said, if they would release him, he would be
content therewith; this the Mayor did say in the hearing of many Witnesses.
Then David Bathow who was one that heard him say so, went to Rich. Bird, and
told him what the Mayor had said, when Ric. Bird had heard him tell what the
Mayor had said to them, he did deny that he was cause of it, and said that he
had rather have gone 20 miles another way, then have gone about any such thing,
when the Mayor sent for him; and farther said, he did not desire any poor man
should be kept in prison; and said farther, if any man would but come and pass
his word for his good behavior, he would undertake to prevail so far with Mr.
Mayor, as to procure his enlargement, and likewise said if any man would come,
and pass for him as is said, he would pass his word to him he should never be
troubled for so doing.

Upon the 21. of the tenth month, 1656. Some of those that had been with the
Mayor before, went to him again about the same business, but he would not
suffer them to speak with him, but sent them word by his doorkeeper that they
should attend him upon Friday, it being the three and twentieth of the tenth
month, and bring a surety with them, and he should be released: so as they were
appointed they came to the Pentice, and brought a surety with them, as the
Mayor had appointed them to do, now the Mayor and many more being present, they
made known their business to them, so they said as they had before (not
knowing) there was any to pass for him, that if any would pass for his good
behavior, he should be released, or else not: Then the man spoke, and said, he
would pass for his good behavior; when the Mayor and the rest heard that any
would pass for him, they then denied to release him upon sureties, unless Edw.
Morgan would come himself* before them, and desire it with his hat in his hand,
if so, then they would release him upon sureties, or else (some of them said)
there he should rot; so they were all dismissed. Now any who are in the least
measure turned to the Light wherewithal Christ Jesus has enlightened them, may
see their deceit, for at the first the Mayor said it was John Johnson, and
Richard Bird that committed him, and he could not release him, because they did
it: Rich. Bird said, What they did was by the Mayors appointment, but both
said, Bring a surety to pass for his good behavior and he should be released;
but when a surety came, none would release him, unless he would come before
them with his hat in his hand, and desire his enlargement of them himself, or
else some of them said, he should rot there; but in the end all were made
manifest to to be liars, for upon the second day of the first month -- 56.
After he had endured eleven weeks imprisonment, the Mayor sent a Constable to
the keeper of the prison to release him privately, it is believed, because the
general Sessions for the County drew near, least their actions there should
have been made public.

In the time of Edw. Morgans inprisonment as aforesaid, he sent a modest Letter
to Peter Leigh Mayor, by the hands of Deborah Maddock, she finding him in the
Pentice, did deliver the Letter; he asked her from whence it came? she told
him; he said, What dumb Spirit has set them on work now? then the Mayor said
unto her, That such Huswifes as she was fitter for the stocks, or to be ducked
in a Cuck-stool, then to carry letters, and come before Magistrates to deliver
them so unreverently; she said, There is no respect of persons with God; the
Mayor called for a Constable, and sent her into little ease, the hole in the
Rock, where she was kept about 4 hours.

Richard Sale, being a Freemans son of this city, went to Peter Leigh Mayor, to
demand his Freedom, as in right it could not be denied him, upon the one and
twentieth day of the tenth month; the Mayor asked him his name; he told him,
the Mayor said, I thought you had been in prison long enough to have learned
better manners, but seeing you have not; I will teach you some if I can: Rich.
Sale answered, Evil words corrupt good manners, and thou have heard none from
me yet; the Mayor said, he would teach him to com with more reverence before
Magistrates, and called for a Constastable, but being none ready, he sent him
to a Constables house; the Constable asked the man that brought him, what he
must do with him, he said, bring him to prison: R. Sale said, thou received no
such orders; then the Constable went to the Mayor himself, to know what he must
do with him, so when he came back, he came to R. Sale, and said, If he would
promise him not to trouble the town any more, neither meddle with their
Ministers, he might go his way; but he denied to condition with him at all, who
when he could get none, let him go without.

Upon the 4th day of the 11th month, 56. it being the first day of the week,
Rich. Sale, as he was waiting upon the Lord in a meeting in Chester, then was
commanded of the Lord to go to a place in the City called the Minster: so he
coming there, he met John Glendall Priest, and was moved to speak to him;
there passing by a Constable, one told the Priest thereof, the Priest bad the
Constable take Rich. Sale to the Mayors house, and keep him there until he
came to him: So the Constable being ignorant of his place, did take him as the
Priest commanded him, and there kept him a great while, but the Priest came
not, as he said he would: for to them it is a light thing to lie: then at last
Rich. Sale was taken before the Mayor, who asked him, Why he disturbed the
Ministers of the Gospel? ^he answered, He did not disturb any Ministers of the
Gospel; then the Mayor demanded of him sureties, for the keeping of the Peace:
he told him he had not broken the peace, therefore he denied to put in sureties
to keep that he had not broken, so the Mayor commanded him to be put into
prison until the next day; so the next day he sent for him forth of prison,
and gave order he should not be brought before him, but put into little ease,
the hole in the rock, where he was kept about 8 hours, it being a very cold
day, in which place he could not sit, kneel, stand nor lie, yet before they
would let him forth, they would have had him to have promised them not to have
disturbed their Ministers nor Magistrates, or else they said they must not
loose him forth. But he denied their propositions and was made rather willing
to give his body up to be murdered by them, then to yield to their wills. Then
to cover their cruelty, they said he pulled Priest Glendals cloak from off his
back, when he did not so much as touch any part of his garments; unless they
meant it by laying open the fruits of his Ministry, and pulling off his Cloak
of hypocrisy; and if so they meant, we shall not say against it: Then Peter
Cowsnock being in the Town, and seeing how the Mayor had used Edw. Morgan, and
Rich. Sale, it lay upon him of the Lord to go to the Mayor, and to speak to him
concerning his usage of them as is said; so upon the 5. day 11 month 56. the
Mayor, and Sheriffs, and many more being met together in the Pentice, he went
in amongst them, and spoke to the Mayor his message once and again; the Mayor
seemed as though he heard him not: the Mayor then spoke to a man that stood by
him, who came immediately and plucked Peter Cowsnocks hat from off his head,
and flang it down, then the Mayor turned toward him, and asked him, How he
came before him so profanely with his hat on? Peter told him the occasion of
his coming; he received from them many scornful and reprochful words; likewise
some of them threatened to whip him, others to put him into little ease, the
hole in the Rock which is worse, then at last he pulled forth a Pass with a
Letter, both from some of the Council of State, his Pass showing that none
should interrupt him in his journie to the Isle of Man, from whence he came;
yet for all this did Will. Street, and Will. Haywood say to the Sheriff, He
might do well to search him for Letters, it being (as they said) in his power;
so he being ready to execute their malice did, and took diverse writings from
him of great concernment, which he could never to this day get any of them
again; now let any man judge whether this was not a contempt against those of
the Council of State, that made him his pass; now this is certain, had he not
had that Pass, they would have don to him, as before is said, for against him
their malice was as great as against any other which they have acted much
cruelty against; for two or three times Constables were sent to Anthony
Hutchins house to charge him he should neither entertain Peter Cowsnock nor his
son, but their Message was by him little regarded in that thing.

Upon the 20th day 11 month 56. Richard Sale was moved of the Lord to come to
Chester, it being the 3d. day of the Week, as he was passing to a friends house
he met with one of the Pharisees called William Haywood, and said to him, The
Serpent lives upon dust, and dust is the Serpents meat: he then asked Rich.
Sale if he was God, and many such like tempting questions; but he shut him out,
and would not answer to his vain questions at all: There standing by Hamnet
Kerkes a shoo-maker in the same City, who began to kick and push Rich. Sale to
and fro, and offered to strike up his heels, but missing of his end, stroke
Richard over the face, he turned to him the other side, then Hamnet Kerkes
stroke Rich. Sale over the face with such violence that he bruised his left eye
exceedingly, who when he had don so went to the Steeple house worship, R. Sale
followed him to the door, but their worship not being ended, he staid in the
Grave-yard, until the Priest had done; so when people came forth he spoke
these words, Friends, let the usage of my body this day bear Witness for God,
and against you that your Worship is not the Worship of God, but of the Scribes
and Pharisees; and then when the Mayor came forth, Rich. Sale cried for Justice
and Judgment from him for the wrong he had done him in the Street, and showed
him his face, how he was used; but instead of Justice and true Judgment, he
commanded one of his Officers to take him to prison, who did: The Mayor sent
word to the under-keeper to put him in Little-ease the hole in the Rock, who
did as he was commanded, but he could not lock it, unless (as he believed) he
must either bruise his body or soar face, he being moved with pity toward him,
took him to prison again, and said he would go to the Mayor, to know why he was
sent to them, being they had nothing to do with that prison; so he abode in
prison till within night: Then there came either one or both Sheriffs, and five
Constables, as the Keepers Wife said, who took him forth of prison, and
violently thrust him into the hole in the Rock; and Hamnet Kerkes who had
bruised his face, did thrust in his head with much cruelty, and said he hoped
it might be good for him hereafter; so in this condition they kept him three
hours, and then released him, the man telling him which did release him, he
must not have released him yet had he not a Boy to put in.

Upon the 11th. day of the 12th. Month, 1656. Peter Leigh Mayor, and many more,
as Justices, Aldermen, and Sheriffs, all of this City of Chester, was then
passing through the Street toward the Common Hall of the same City, to a
customary Feast they there hold yearly, and before them went blowing a company
of Pipers, which were (as I was informed) sent for from Shrewsbury by Peter
Leigh Mayor, to play the day before, before him to a customary Horse-race,
holden yearly without the City-Walls; but this is certain, Peter Leigh Mayor,
put by one of their Exercise-days, or days of Worship, set up and allowed on
according to his own principles, to follow these Pipers to this Horse-Race;
such is his zeal for God now come to, which so long he has made a large
profession of. So they all as aforesaid went along the Street, following the
Pipers, as men void of either fear toward God, or shame toward men. Thomas
Yarwood seeing them, was moved to speak a few Words in much tenderness and
pity toward them; the sum of what he spoke was only this; He exhorted them
to mind in what true Christianity stood, which was in true holiness, in the
fear of the Lord. And Wiliima Ince (one of their Justices) said, he said well,
and for saying well, the Mayor commanded one of his Officers to put him in the
Stocks, who was about to do it; then the Mayor thinking them to be too good a
place for such an offense, sent Word he must not be put in there, but into
Little-Ease in the Rock; so there they put him, and kept him five hours; he
being a weak and sickly man, his knees were bruised very much, that of some
VVeeks he did not recover the hurt he got there for disturbing Pipers; for none
can say well, but such cursed firebrarnds of Hellas those are disturbed, and all
that takes pleasure in them.

Upon the seventh day of the first Month, 1656. William Simson was moved of
the Lord to come to this City of Chester; and being in a Friends House, the
burden of the Lord did fall upon him concerning the Market; and waiting a while
after he had felt the burden, there came in Rich. Sale, who did partake of the
same burden with him; so they both together went into the Market, and declared
through most of the Market; then Rich. Sale was taken up, and put into
Little-Ease, the Hole in the Rock, where he was kept above five hours. In this
time William Simson had been declaring in the Streets, and after that had been
in the County-Goal with some Friends who were then prisoners for the truth, and
was come from them, and was passing through the Street, intending to have gone
to a Friends House, but as he passed, was took up by a Constable, and brought
before the Mayor, who commanded him to be put into Little-Ease, Rich. Sale
being released, and there was kept four hours.

Upon the 8th. day of the first Month, 1656. William Simson was moved of the
Lord to go to a Steeple-house called John's, where he stood peaceably amongst
them until the Priest had done, and was coming forth of his High Place, then
did he utter these Words, to wit, Friend, woe to him that is covered with a
covering, and not with my Spirit, says the Lord; Which Words were no sooner
ended, but violent-hands were laid on him, and he haled forth; then a Constable
took hold on him, and took him before Peter Leigh Mayor, who asked the
Constable if he had spoken within time; the Constable said he had not; then the
Mayors Wise took upon her the place of a Magistrate, and asked the Constable
if the Minister had said his prayer, he said he had; but for all this the Mayor
commanded that Williams Simson should be put into the Stocks, in which place
he declared the Word of the Lord in much power: The Mayor seeing people gather
about him (or being thereof informed) did send for him forth of the Stocks, and
commanded he should be put into Little-Ease in the Rock, where he was kept some
nine hours, and when he was released, was not suffered to come into the Town,
though it was late in the night-season; such entertainment they give to
Strangers in the City of Westchester. Then the next day in the morning it lay
heavy upon William Simson to go to Peter Leigh Mayor, to demand of him in much
meekness, to show him what Law he had broken, telling him it was the
Magistrates place to convince him of the Law he had broken, being he had
suffered so much hardship under him the two foregoing days; the Mayor gave him
no answer to that, but queried of him who sent him to this City: William
answered, He was moved of the Lord; the Mayor said, By what Spirit? He said, By
the measure of his Spirit which he has manifested in me. The Mayor said, It
was by the Spirit of the Devil: There standing by Thomas Robbinson, one of the
Sheriffs of the City, who was stirred up with envy and cruelty to such a
height, that he (Thomas Robbinson) did strike William Simson over the face with
such a violence, that the blood burst forth in the presence of Peter Leigh,
mayor, and John Tailor a Constable, yet did the Constable (its like) by the
mayors Order, pull him who had his blood drawn, forth off the Shop, and took
him, and put him into Little-Ease, who bled all-along the Street, which is one
of the longest Streets in the City, and some more, and after he was put into
the hole, to the great astonishment of the people, who many of them cried out
of them (shame) for using him so barbarously. Now let any sober-minded man
judge what a magistrate Peter Leigh is, and who he bears the Sword for, and
turns the edge against, when a man for demanding (after he is punished) to know
that, which was the mayor or magistrates place and duty to have told him,
before he had punished him, what Law he had broken; and yet instead of showing
him the Law, suffered the Law to be broken in spilling his blood, and the
shedder of blood not punished, but punishes him whose blood was shed, as is
declared.

Upon the same day after that William Simson was released out of Little-Ease,
as aforesaid, he went to a friends house where Rich. Sale was come, who that
morning was moved to come five miles to that City; so both being moved of the
Lord, went into the Streets with much boldness, and declared against their
deceit and cruelty, until a Constable came and took them to the mayors house,
who when they came there, were not admitted to come before him, but he sent
word to the Constable he should put them into prison, Richard Sale he put into
Little-Ease, where he was kept four hours, and William Simson he put into the
City-Goal, where he was kept seven days.

Thus says the Lord, I will make my people as Signs and Wonders in this wicked
and adulterous generation, and they shall see it, yet they shall not believe,
but trust in the imaginations of their own hearts, until they sink down into
the pit.
This is a true declaration of the manner of my being a Sign in the City of
Chester, as I Richard Sale was moved of the Lord; and it I declare for the
satisfaction of the innocent; to remove all occasion of stumbling out of the
minds of any which might lend an ear to the wicked one, to think or conceive
that I was mad; but what I did was in obedience to the Lord, whose commands and
ways are strange unto the children of darkness, and was and is a true sign of
the state and condition that all men are in who are erred from the light, being
in the dark Night of apostasy. The manner is as follows.

Upon the 3. day of the week, being the 10th. of the first month, 1656 there
being a monthly meeting of priests in the City, for they have a custom for
every new moon to observe a day of worship; so upon one of their new-moon-days
I was commanded of the Lord to be asign in the city, the burden of which I had
born for the space of 6. weeks; the command of the Lord coming unto me upon the
2. 1. day of the 11. month, as I was passing along the East-gate-Street with
Candles in my hand, it being the 4. d. of the week, the word of the Lord came
unto me, saying, Return again, and light up one of thy Candles, and carry it in
thy hand into the streets of this Gity, and say, Behold ye despisers, and
wonder, for the Lord is working a Work in this your day, though a man declare
it unto you, yet you will not believe it. And they shall say unto thee again,
What art thou mad to come with a light Candle into the street at midday. And
thou shall say unto them again, What use is all your Candlelight for now who
are in the night of Apostasy? Now the Light of the Son of God is come, which
has given his people an understanding to discern betwixt things that differ;
and the Temple now is witnessed, which neither needs the light of sun, moon,
or candle, for the Lord God and the Lamb is the light thereof, and no more use
it all your Candle-light-worship for now, then my Candle is in your streets at
midday. So I having undergone the terrors of the Lord for my disobedience, was
now made willing by his Power to do what I was commanded of him, being that he
would not free me from the same. And on the third day aforesaid, I lighted up a
Candle, and went into the Street, and was to have gone into the Steeple-house
amongst them at their new-Moon-Worship, but I was prevented by a rude
multitude, and stricken by a professing Woman, who has stricken others of the
Lords Messengers, and slat dirt in the faces of some of them, and yet by the
Priests in this City, and other professors, is accounted a religious Woman,
(her name is Kathern Hind) and my Candle was pulled forth of my hand, and I
ill abused; but I declared the Word of the Lord in much power, until I was
taken up by the Sword Bearer, and delivered to a Constable to be brought into
prison, where I was kept about a Week; the same corrupt Will which imprisoned
me, sent for me forth, I neither being convinced, accused, nor examined what
Law I had broken, but turned me out privily, whose actions would not abide the
light to discover them.

From him who is a sufferer for the testimony of the Truth, Richard Sale.

NOW while Rich. Sale and William Simson were in prison, as aforesaid, they
sent two several Letters to Peter Leigh Mayor, to put him in mind of his unjust
dealing with them, but the Bearers of both he caused to be put into Little-Ease
for many hours, though neither of them knew what was written in the Letters,
having not heard them read over.

Upon the next third day of the Week after William Simson was released forth
of prison, he was moved of the Lord to go into a Steeple-house in the City,
where many people were assembled, where he stood peaceably among them until the
Priest had done; then another Priest stepped up, and desired the people to stay
the Ordinance of baptism, which was the sprinkling of an Infant, in which
discourse he labored to confirm that to be an Ordinance of God, and the child
thereby made a Member of a visible Church: When he had done this Discourse,
William Simson desired Priest Nab in moderation to clear those things by
Scripture, to wit, That the Church of God is visible, and sprinkling of Infants
is an Ordinance of God; but no answer could he get from him, but was ill beaten
by the people, and thrust forth of the doors; then the Priest came forth, and
passed by him; he desired the same thing of him, that so the people might be
satisfied; but he would not answer, but the hireling fled because he was an
hireling, and went into an house; then William Simson spoke a few words to the
people in the street, but a man shortly took hold on him, and put him into
Little-Ease, the hole in the Rock, where he was kept eight hours, or thereabout.

Upon the third day of the fourth Month, 1657. Edward Morgan being peaceably at
his outward employment, there then came Joh. Fletcher, who was il drunken, and
a notorious common drunkard known to be all the City over; this Fletcher came
and called Edw. Morgan Cuckold, and his Wife a Whore in the presence of many
people, and railed so on Edw. that he could not in quiet follow his employment;
then at last Edward went to Peter Leigh Mayor, and informed him thereof, and
told him he was now at his shop ill drunk; the Mayor said to Edward, Will you
swear he is drunk? he said, Nay, what need I to swear when the man is to be
seen? said the Mayor, I will order you both, and called for a Constable, and
called Edward Morgan a perjured fellow, for his unreverent coming before him,
and straightway sent him into Little-Ease for no other cause then as is said,
For complaining of a drunkard who had abused him, but the drunkard was not at
that time questioned. Many being sensible how it was, and saw Edward punished,
and the drunkard go free, cried out against it; and their cry coming to the
Mayors ear, three days after he sent for the drunkard, and sent him to prison
until he had drunk a pot or two of strong drink, and then released him,
Little-Ease being too course a place for a drunkard. And now let all honest
hearted people judge if ever the like thing was done by any Christian
Magistrate, as he professes himself to be, yea, or by Heathen Magistrate
either, that a Drunkard should go free, and he that was abused by him, and made
complaint against him, should be punished because in conscience he could not
doss his hat when he made his complaint. He that justifies the wicked, and
condemns the just, even they both are abomination to the Lord.

Edmond Ogden coming to a Meeting of the people of God in Chester City one
first day, and another man came with him of Cains generation, into the Town,
and was with him when the Constable took Edmond up, yet they suffered the other
man to go, and took Edmond Ogden before Peter Leigh Mayor, who committed him to
the Stocks, where he sat about half an hour, and then taken and put into
Little-Ease four hours, or thereabout.

Upon the 10th. of the 4 month, 1657. it being the 3. day of the Week, Richard
Sale was moved of the Lord to come to Chester City, and to go into
Pepper-street, where he found it his place to abide, and there fate down, and
within a short space after there were carried forth a dead Corpse out of Richard
Golbornes house, and two priests going before it; and as they passed by him, he
was moved to charge them in the Name of the living God to make good their
practice by plain Scripture, and show by it where ever any of the Apostles or
holy men of God preached any Funeral-Sermons; but they returned him no answer;
then he was made to declare against them and their practice, they being found
out of the Doctrine of Christ, and practice of the holy men of God: Then there
following after them a company of proud ungodly ones, he was made to cry out
from the burden of the Lord, against their pride, covetousness, violence, and
oppression, which many of them lived in; and was made to declare that all their
worship and sacrifices offered up in that nature they lived in, was but as a
smoke in the Lords Nose all the day long: Then one Jonathan Goldson being more
cruel then all the rest, though one of the chief pillars of the pharisaical
church, came out of the company in great rage, and laid violent hands on him,
calling him Rogue and giving him many more unsavory speeches, holding his hand
up many times, as if he would have stricken him, and gnashed upon him with his
teeth, and took him to a constable, and he brought him before Peter Leigh
Mayor, and he ordered him to be put into Little-Ease, who did with much
cruelty, where his body endured the strength of four men before they could get
the door to lock; in which cruel place they kept him four hours, neither his
friends nor others being admitted to come to him; but by the power of the
living and unchangeable God, he was preserved without pain, declaring his word
in much power, to the confounding of all gainsayers. Then when he was
released, the constable offered to take hold on him, thinking he was unable to
stand; but he denied his help, and was made in the power of God to go as well
as before, though his Knees were all bruised, and did swell; and then the
constable charged him to go home, and trouble the city no more; but he refused
his charge, and passed into the city again, where he staid all night.

Then the day following he was moved to go to Peter Leigh Mayor to demand what
Law he had broken, and told him it was the Magistrates place to convince the
transgressor if a transgressor, what Law he had broken, and then to punish him
according to the transgression committed, but the Mayor called for a Constable,
and said he was not subject to Authority, or words to that effect; he said to
him, if thou were a Magistrate of the Law of God, or any Law or Statute in this
Nation, I could own thee in thy place, but thou art a Magistrate of neither,
but of thy own corrupt will, and the hands of the wicked are strengthened by
thee: Then the Constable came, the Mayor gave him order to bring him out of the
town from Constable to Constable, (as the Constable told him) so out of the
City he was brought by two Constables, but after them he passed into the City
again, in at the same gate he was brought forth at, and passed by the Mayors
shop, and went to a friends house.

Then the latter part of the same day Rich. Sale was passing near Newgate in
the same City, and there meeting him Jonathan Goldson, who as he passed by him
said, Friend I exhort thee to Repentance for the wrong thou did me the other
day, Jonathan having a Ruler in his hand offered to strike R. Sale, and said,
Sirrah hold thy tongue, or I will make thee thou Rogue; Rich. asked him if such
words as these proceeded from a Christian conversation, Yea or Nay? but he
said, Sirrah, if thou will not hold thy tongue, I will put thee into this Lake,
there being by a dirty Lake; with that Jonathan did thrust Rich. violently from
him, then Rich. declared the Woes of the living God against him, and all who
were of the like profession with him; then with another thrust Ion. gave him,
his hat fell off his head into the Lake; then Richard going to take up his hat,
Jonathan struck at one of his Legs, thinking thereby to have laid him along in
the Lake, but it was ordered he kept his feet, and when he was through the
Lake, he was made to stand still to be a Witness for God and against him, it
being from the Lord cleared to him, that the fruit of his ungodly profession
must farther be manifested; so Rich. standing on the other side of the lake as
is said, the Hypocrite ran for stones, and flang them into the lake to plash
him, and with him came two or three boys, who were hewing stones for him; so
he and the boys joined together, and were made brethren in iniquity, and set up
laughters, and made a great hubub and stir, and plashed him so with the dirty
lake Water, that the fore part of his body was wet from the head to the feet;
but in all this time R. Sale was made to stand still, and bade the people that
saw his usage, take notice if any such actions as these ever proceeded from a
Christian conversation; telling them, that they that were publicanes and
harlots were nearer the Kingdom of God then he; then Jonathan Goldsons Wife ran
behind Rich. Sale, and took up clods of dirt, and flang them at his bare head,
sometimes hitting him on the face; insomuch that he was exceedingly besmeared
with dirt; all this while he was made to stand still not offering any violence:
then in the sight of many people Jonathan his wife did take up dunghill dirt in
her hands, daubing it upon his face and mouth, as if a man had been daubing a
clay wall, so that his head, face, shoulders, and hands were all besmeared with
her most barbarous usage of him, and in this condition he was moved to go
through the streets, and up to the Mayors shop, and informed him who they were
that had used him so, and the cause for what they did it; not that he desired
any revenge on them, knowing his Revenger lives, but to try if he would be
partial in respecting persons in judgment, and likewise in the City to lay
open the truth of their ungodly profession; then the Mayor did appoint him to
come the next day, when he and the rest of his Council were met in the Pentice;
so he came away, and declared down the Streets in much power, and when he had
cleared his Conscience he went to a friends house, and in some measure made him
clean, and then returned forth of the Town to his own house.

The next day as Peter Leigh Mayor appointed him, he came to the Pentice, and
spoke to the Sword Bearer to go and acquaint the Mayor, that according to his
appointment the day before he was come, and ask him if I must come to him, the
Sword bearer brought him word again from the Mayor, he must not come to him
unless he had witnesses to swear, so R. Sale staid in the outward Pentice till
the Mayor came forth, and then said unto him, Friend, I am come according to
thy appointment, to wait for Justice and Judgment, but the Mayor bade him
either bring in his witnesses upon oath, or else he said he could do nothing;
this the Mayor said though he himself were an eyewitness how he was used; now
this Mayor must have Witnesses to swear, or he cannot lawfully proceed to
punish them that transgresses the Law; then I would fain know by what Law he
has acted, and leave it to any sober man to judge, when he has judged and
commanded soar and grievous punishments to be inflicted, when neither he has
convinced them of any Law they have broken, neither any accused them, neither
he himself examined them, nor never required any to swear against them, and yet
tortured, imprisoned, and banished them, but now to do justice against any that
has evilly entreated, and shamefully abused the innocent, and harmless people
of God, he cannot by no means unless witnesses be sworn, though as is said, he
saw how shamefully he was used himself; but the Lord God lives before whom he
shall answer for these things, and true judgment shall pass against him, and
none be required to swear, (But to proceed) the Mayor went into the Steeple
house to a Lecture Sermon as they called it, the Righteous spirit being grieved
in Rich Sale, he was made to stay until they had done their worship, and when
the Priest came forth he said, Behold ye Priests the fruits of your Ministry,
how that I had like to have been murdered in the Streets by a professing man
and his Wife of your Church: but woe to you that build up Sion with blood, and
Jerusalem with iniquity, for the dreadful hand of the living God is stretched
forth against you: then he was violently pulled down from the place where he
stood, and halled away; then as he went he informed the people how the Mayor
had appointed him to come for Justice, but when he came was denied of the same,
because he would not bring people to swear; therefore is Justice perverted by
him, and Judgment turned backward, for instead of doing him Justice, the Mayor
sent him into little ease, the hole in the Rock, by two Officers, but they
seeing it could not be locked, but judged it would either bruise his face or
limbs, they being not so cruel as some others, took him forth again, and put
him into the City gaol, where he remained above 2 hours, and then came a
Constable with another man and took him forth of prison, and brought him into
Little ease again; but they likewise found it such a cruel place, it could not
be locked unless as they believed they must lame him, they only reared a block
of wood to the door, and said they would go to the Mayor, and inform him, that
if he would have any put in there that was in man's stature, the place must be
made bigger unless he would lame them, so in that place he was kept five hours;
and when he was let forth he was charged straightly to keep him forth of the
city; but the next day he came to the city again, notwithstanding all the
threats of his enemies.

Upon the 19th day of the 5. month 57. Rich. Jones was coming to a meeting of
Saints in Chester City, and was by a Constable taken up, and his horse taken
from him, and he let go: then when the meeting was broken up he went to look
after his horse, and with him went Edmund Ogden, the Constable took them before
the Mayor and John Ratcliff Recorder; who asked them many vain questions, but
in the end committed them both to prison, where they were kept until the next
day in the evening, and then released.

Upon the 4. day 7. month 57. Richard Scostrip coming to this city was moved to
exhort people in the street to Repentance, and was then taken up and brought
before Peter Leigh Mayor, who asked him from whence he came, he told him from
Yorkshire; then the Mayor asked him if he knew in whose presence he was, he
told him yea, he was in the presence of the Lord; he said, I will teach you to
know you are before a Magistrate, and straitway sent him into Little ease in
the Rock, where he was kept about two hours.

Then the next day Rich. Scostrip was moved to reprove sin in the Gate, when he
had said what he had given him to say, he went his way with an intention to
depart out of the town, he being clear of the same, and was gone as far as the
Gate of the City, but was fetched again by a Constable, and put into the House
of Correction, who gave the man that kept the House strait orders to keep him
to hard labor, where he was kept part of four days, and then released, and not
at all called before any Magistrate, neither when he was committed to prison,
nor when he was taken forth of prison: Such are their Laws in this City.

Upon the 28th. day of the 7th. month, 1657. I Anthony Hutchins did then send a
true Declaration of some of the innocent sufferings of the Saints in Chester,
to Peter Leigh Mayor, by the hands of John Owen, the Mayor sent him into the
House of Correction, and kept him two days.

Upon the seventeenth day of the eighth month, 1657. there was at Peter's
Steeplehouse in Chester, a Sermon, (as its usually called) to the hearing of
which many people did assemble themselves, and the more, in regard this was the
day that they in the City made choice and elected new Officers, as Mayors,
Sheriffs, etc. and it being said to be a free place where any may come to hear,
Rich. Sale came in amongst the rest, and stood as peaceably, and gave as good
heed to what was there said, as any there did, and against what was spoken, did
not utter a word; yet notwithstanding a man came to him, and by violence pulled
him forth, and put him into the house of correction, who at the end of three
days was released by the command of Richard Minshal, who was newly elected
Mayor. Now observe, for not going to their Assemblies we are by them
reproached, and accounted as Heretics, then if any of us go, and take that
liberty which the true Church allowed, 1 Cor. 14. 20. 30, 31, 32. then are we
cast into prison as breakers of the Law, and disturbers of their Ministers;
then will they say, Cannot you come and be quiet, and take what you like, and
let the rest alone; and let our Ministers alone and you need not be thus
imprisoned; and now Richard Sale came, as is said, and stood as civilly as any
did, and neither spoke against their Minister as they call him, nor any other,
and yet (as is said) was not suffered to stay, not only so, but sent to prison.
Now whether these proceedings be lawful and honest, I leave it to the Reader to
judge.

There has been much more sufferings of the innocent people of God (the
Saints) in this City of Westchester, which is not here mentioned, these being,
sufficient to show what fruits the proud, covetous, hireling-Priests have
brought forth in the same.

And now I shall give you a true description of this Little-Ease, or hole in
the Rock, so often in this Book spoken of, which Peter Leigh Mayor has made
the Executioner of his cruelty, madness and folly, against the innocent and
harmless people of God. Surely the wrath of man shall praise the; the remainder
of wrath shall thou restrain.
IT is a hole hewed into the Rock, the breadth and cross from side to side, is
17. inches from the back to the inside of the great door, at the top, 7.
inches; at the shoulders 8. inches* at the breast 9. inches and an half; from
the top to the bottom, one yeard and half; now to take in the height of that as
their malice puts them on, they have draw-boards which shoot over cross into
the two sides, to a yeard height, or thereabout.

Now let any sober-minded man in this Nation judge if such inventions as these
were ever invented by any that feared God, to torture their fellow creatures
in, for not putting off the hat, or speaking to a Priest in the street sound
and sober words, or for desiring to have the Law showed them they have broken,
when they have endured much punishment, and have not known for what; and
instead of showing them the Law, themselves have broken the law in drawing
their blood, and put them into this hole when they have done; or for disturbing
pipers with saying well; or for calling for justice when their faces have been
bruised; or for exhorting people to repentance; or for reproving sin in the
Gate; or for delivering a meek and sober Letter; or for desiring a priest when
he has done, to clear what he has said by Scripture; or for complaining of a
drunkard; or for passing quietly through the streets to a meeting, to wait upon
the Lord; all which things before mentioned, which this is a short relation of,
has been done by the command of Peter Leigh Mayor of the City of Chester, and
suffered by the innocent people of of God in this Little-Ease, or hole in the
Rock; to the truth of which, lest any should doubt, as they might do if they
were not witnessed to by some, they being such unheard of cruelties as never
were acted by any who profess themselves to be Christian Magistrates, nay, nor
by the worst of Heathen Magistrates that ever I read of; and I being an
eyewitness to most of them as they were executed upon the innocent, shall be
ready (if called thereunto) to answer to the truth of them, Anthony Hutchins.

You that be Magistrates in the City of Chester, who has thus acted with
prejudice against the people of God, and servants of God, you have turned your
Sword backwards against the just, and ye have not been a praise to them that do
well, but your fruits and actions have been a shame to men that four God, and
to modesty, and them that own true justice and equity; you make men offenders
for words, and you persecute them that reprove sin in the Gate, and they is
made a prey upon by you; you have provided a torturing place, a squeezing
pressing place, for such as declare truth amongst you; you are become rebels
against the truth; truth is fallen in the streets, and equity cannot enter, the
door to that is shut; ye become abominable amongst men, your doings the Lord
has taken notice of: ye are boisterous and perverse, yea, envious in the
persecution of the Lords servants, and the Lords presence has been amongst
them in all their sufferings, yea in the greatest of your cruelty: can you be
proud, and boast when you have done, that you would have all to see your
peevishness, the beholders by, that ye may be upon record brought. Does not
your fruits and actions before mentioned, dishonor the place of a Magistrate?
We number not the just with the wicked, nor the godly with the profane, but put
a difference. What have you gotten by all your actions? but showed forth your
spirits, whereby they are tried not to be the spirit of Christ nor the
Apostles, who says, Love your Enemies, but you persecute your Friends; the
Lord forgive your persecutions, persecutors were ever blind, you have
manifested the end of your Religion in this the day of the Lord, and the fruits
of your Teachers, and the end of your profession, and the order and government
of your Church and Ministry, as beforementioned declares, besides all the
abuses the people of God (the Saints) have had in their Meetings, which was
never rebuked by the Magistrates.

George Fox.

UPon the 28. day of the 6th. Month, 1657. I sent a Copy of all these things
before-written, save only some which have been acted against the innocent
since, and likewise some things which were acted before, which was not then in
remembrance, which is added in this to Peter Leigh Mayor of Chester City. The
direction that I writ in the beginning, was to this effect, That if he, or any
other who was therein concerned, could object against the truth of any thing
therein written, they might do it before I went on with what I intended, which
intent of mine was to print the Book, though at that time I denied to certify
them so much; but the Bearer thereof Peter I eigh Mayor sent into Little-Ease
in the Rock, but I heard nothing from them until the eighth day of the 7.
Month, and then the Mayor sent for me up to the Pentice by two Constables, and
when I came in before them, I found Peter Leigh, Mayor; John Ratliffe,
Recorder; Edward Bradshaw, Justice of Peace, the two Sheriffs, and many more
then present; the Mayor asked me if I had seen that Book, it lying before them,
which was the same I sent him, as aforesaid; I said I had. He asked me if I
wrote that Name at the latter end thereof, which was my own Name. I said I did
not; but I told him I had gotten it written fair over after one that I had
writ. Then he said, Do you own it? I said I did. He asked me if I read it over.
I said I had. Then he gave me many threatening words. Then I asked them whether
committed the greater evil, They that act cruelty, or they that write down
cruelty when acted by another? The Recorder said, Who must judge of that? I
said, Let that of God in your own consciences judge whether commits the
greater offense. The Recorder said, Many a one has had their ears nailed to
the Pillory for a less offense. I said, If he deserved to have his ears nailed
to the Pillory that writ these things down, what did they deserve that acted
them? Then they gave me threatening Words. I told them I desired no favor from
them, but that I might have fair Plea in the face of a Court; and if I had
transgressed the Law, I was willing to suffer by it. Likewise I told them, I
judged it not equal they themselves should be Judges in their own cause. One of
them said they would not, twelve men should judge it; but the Recorder said
twenty four men should judge it. Then the Mayor said I was a railing fellow. I
turned to the people, and asked if any of them heard me rail since I came, he
said I did in the Book. I told him if I should say such words to them as Paul
said to Elimus, they then would say I railed, though truth might be written,
and Names and Titles might be given to men answerable to their actions, as Paul
said to Elimus, whose Name was Elimus, yet Paul called him a child of the
Devil, and an enemy to all righteousness; but I said, I had used no such Words
to them. The Recorder said Paul might say, so to Elimus, who was a Sorcerer I
said All the Priests in England which preach for hire, and divine for money,
are Sorcerers, for thereby the right ways of the Lord comes to be perverted.
The Recorder said I must not judge them: I said, Their practice judged them.
Then I charged them concerning their hard usuage of my Friends in that
Little-Ease, or hole in the Rock: and asked them, where they ever read of such
a prison as that which bruised men's bodies in such a cruel manner, and told them
the Law has so much respect to men (though transgressors of the same) as to
provide large prisons to secure their bodies in, and not such holes as these to
press and bruise them in, or words to this effect. I told them I could see
drunkards and swearers pass up and down the Streets, but I heard of none of
them that was put into that place. The Mayor told me if I saw such things, I
might come and inform him thereof, and then see if he did punish them: I said,
So I might get the same reward which Edward Morgan got, who came and complained
to thee of a man that was ill drunk, and had ill abused him too, and thou
caused him to be put into Little-Ease, and suffered the drunkard and quarreller
to pass unpunished. Many more questions and answers passed betwixt us, which I
omit to make mention of here; but (to be short) they put me to this issue,
either to put in Sureties to appear before them the next Quarter Sessions
holden for, and in the City, or to go to prison; but to put in Sureties I
refused, knowing my self to be clear from the breach of any Law, and they
themselves to be guilty, according as it is written in the foregoing Relation:
So into the Common Gaol for the City I was brought upon the eighth day of the
seventh Month, 1657. I demanded a Copy of my Mittimus, and used all the means I
could, which stood in my Freedom, but could get none, though the Recorder said
I should have one. So when I had been in prison about four Weeks, the General
Sessions at this City for the County was holden; so my body was by a Habeus
Corpus removed out of the City Goul to answer the Law before the Judges for the
County, and before them I was brought upon the nineth day of the eighth Month,
after I had lain in prison (as is said) 3^. days: So coming before the Judges,
as is said, they demanded of the Recorder the causes of my imprisonment; so the
Mittimus by which I suffered, was read in the Court; the substance contained
therein, was, That I had writ a Book of Libels, wherein I reproached Peter
Leigh Esquire (for so it was written) and other Magistrates and Ministers in the
City of Chester. To which I make this short answer, Libels are things which are
scattered, and not owned, which are full of lies and scoffs, and their whole
intention is to reproach and revile them they are directed against; now so far
as I know, things written and scattered upon this account, are Libels: Now this
I sent to Peter Leigh Mayor, cannot have any color to be called a Libel, for I
writ my Name to it when I sent it, and likewise I had not fea^^^red any of them
at all, when I sent that to him, I owned it before them all, as is said in my
examination, I put them to it to disprove any thing I had written, if they
could, which was the ground I sent it to them for, that if they would object
against it, they might, before I went on with what I now have accomplished, but
they did not convince me of any thing I had written, to be false, neither could
they; besides my intent therein was neither to reproach nor revile them, or any
one of them; for I writ nothing therein but the truth, and the truth never
reproached or reviled any man; for if any act those things that are not just,
and of a good report, or has used violence, or acted cruelty against any man,
and the truth of these things be written down, and published abroad, and they
who have thus acted, come thereby to be reproached, he that writes down the
truth brings not the reproach, but he that does the thing which is not right,
brings the reproach upon himself. But to proceed, my Mittimus being read, the
Judge asked the Recorder if he could prove against me any matter of fact; he
said, A deal, but not any thing which could prove any such a thing against me
as matter of fact. The Judge spoke a great deal to show him wherein I was
wronged, and then did release me, and set me free: So when I was cleared,
before I went from the Bar I spoke to the Recorder in the hearing of the Judges
and the whole Court, these words, viz. I would have the Recorder before you all
(if he can) to disprove any one thing I have written; but before them all (as
is said) he was silent, and could not: So to the whole Court it plainly
appeared I was wrongfully imprisoned.

Righteousness exalts a Nation, But sin is a reproach to any people. Anthony
Hutchins.

A Relation of the sufferings of friends in Cheshire, because that for con
science-sake they could not pay tithes and other things; and where any thing
has been returned back, is mentioned, as I have bad knowledge.
Great Budworth Parish, Ephraim Elcock priest.
THomas Buckley for tithes of the value of 12. s. had a Horse taken from him
for the use of the said Priest, worth 4. l. as the men of the World judged.

George Veakin for the value of 4. d. ob. which he claimed for Smoke-penny, and
Easter Reckoning, had one brass pot taken from him worth 8. s.

And likewise the said Geo. Veakin for the value of 6. d. which they demanded
for two years payment to their Priest, according as they in their wills had
sessed him, tool from him Work-Tools (being a Wheel-Wright by Trade) worth 7. s.

Runkorn Parish, William Finmore Priest.
Henry Burtonwood for tithe of the value of 5. s. had taken from him one Cow
worth 2. l. 13. s. 4. d. for the use of the said Priest abovesaid.

And at another time Henry Burtonwood for tythe-Corn of the value of 2. l. 1 s.
1. d. had taken from him (...) Cows and one Heiser stirk, which were sold for
about 7. l. for the use of Priest Finmore abovesaid.

John Burtonwood for tithe Wool and Lamb of the value of 8. s. 3. d. had taken
from him two young Beasts, which they sold for 1. l. 5. s.

Thomas Boulton, for tythe-Corn of the value of 13. s. had taken from him Corn
worth five pound, for the use of Henry Brooks.

Sisly Cleaton had taken from her one Warming-Pan worth 6. s. for tythe-flax,
and she had none, being sued at Law, and cast by a false Oath for the use of
Coll. Brook.

Widow Royle for tythe-Corn of the value 1. l. 3. s. had taken from her one Cow
worth 3. l. 10. s. for the use of Coll. Hen. Brooks. And likewise taken from
her one Load of Beans, nothing being demanded; and likewise she had one Bed
Hilling taken for tithe too, for Coll. Brook.

Frodsam Parish.
Widow Millner for tythe-Corn of the value of 2. l. 10. s. had taken from her
one Mare and one Cow, worth 7. l. 10. s. and likewise for tythe-Oats of the
value of 11. s. had taken from her one Colt worth 2. l. besides she lay in
prison 7. Weeks for the same thing, for the use of Earl Rivers.

Thomas Hill for tythe-Corn of the value of 1. l 10. s. and for which he
suffered 14. Weeks imprisonment had taken from him five load of wheat out of
his field worth five pound for the use of Earl Rivers.

James Brown for tythe-Corn of the value of 1. l. 10. s. had goods taken from
him worth 5. l. 13. s. 4. d. by valuation, for the use of Earl Rivers.

William Sarret for tythe-Corn of the value of 1. l. 6. s. 8. d. had goods
taken from him worth 5. l. 10. s. besides the said William Sarret was
imprisoned for the same thing seven Weeks.

James Brown for tithe of the value of 13 s. 4. d. according unto their own
valuation, had taken from him one yoke of Oxen worth 7. l.

Wilinslow Parish. John Brereton Priest.
Thomas Ianney for tythe-Corn of the value of 7. s. 6. d. had taken from him
one Mare, out of which they took trebble damage, and returned the remainder
back for the Priest abovesaid.

Thomas Janney for tythe-Corn of the value of 16 s. 6 d. had taken from him for
the said Priest, two young Cows better worth then 6. l.

Thomas Ianney again for tythe-Corn of the value of 1 l 8. s. valued by the
abovesaid Priests servants, had taken from him by Justice Writs one young Horse
worth 4 l which makes up his three years suffering; and now for this year 1657.
the priest has gotten an order for trebble damage from two Justices, by whose
Writs all has been done abovesaid against Tho. Ianney.

Thomas Pots for tythe-Corn valued by the abovesaid priests servants to 1. l.
6. s. 8 d. had taken from him by Justice Writs two Heifers which they sold for
3. l. 10 s.

John Worthington for tythe-Corn of the value of 3. l. 6. s. had taken from him
by Justice Writs, one Mare, and one young Horse, which were thought to be worth
12. l. for the use of the said priest.

Richard Burgges for tythe-corn of the value of 19. s. by the priests servants,
had taken from him by Justice-Writs, two Kine worth 5 l.

Richard Burgges for tythe-corn valued by the priests servants to 16. s. had
taken from him one young Heifer worth 2 l. 6 s. 8 d.

Lawrence Pearson for tithe of the value of 8 s. had taken from him one Horse
worth 3 l.

Anne Ianney of Handford, for tithe of the value of 13 s. had taken from her
one cow and one heifer, which were thought to be worth 6. l. taken by one
Robert Finy a constable, who denied to show any order from any in Authority to
do the same; Most of this crueity has been done by Writs from two Justices,
viz. Thomas Standley, and Thomas Brereton, being servants to this priests lusts.

Mobberley parish, Robert Barlow priest.
Thomas Heald for tythe-corn of the value of 14 s. 6d. valued by the priests
man, had taken from him one heifer, which was thought to be worth 1 l. 13 s. 4.
d.

Hugh Strettle for tythe-Corn of the value of 11 s. 6 d. had taken from him by
two Justice Writs, two Sacks of Oats worth 1 l. 8 s. and the Constable of the
Town being troubled at it, asked the priest how he took so much, seeing he
professed not to take trebble damage of any: The Priest answered, That it cost
him so much in Justices Dinners, and their men, and for Warrants, and for a
Judgment: So this Scripture is fulfilled, The Heads judge for reward, and the
Priests teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for money, yet will
lean upon the Lord. And so this is the measure the people of God receive of
both Magistrates, Priests, and their people, until the Lord arise and plead the
cause of the innocent against him that is too mighty for him.

Clarks wages, and repair of steeplehouses.
Thomas Buckley had taken from him a Brass pot worth 10. s. because he could
not pay 7 s. 2 d. to the repair of a Steeple-house.

Thomas Buckley had taken from him a 11. measures of Oats worth 1 l. 2 s. 8 d.
because he could not for conscience sake pay the Clarks, and to the repairing
of the Steeplehouse, being their demand, was 17 s. at Peever.

Henry Burtonwood had taken from him goods worth 5 s. because he could not pay
2 s. to the repair of the Steeple-house at Runkorn.

Henry Burttonwood likewise at another time had goods taken from him being four
Pewter-dishes, because he could not pay 2 s 6 d. to the repair of the
abovesaid Steeple-house.

Elli^ Boulton had taken from her four Pewter-dishes, and a Pewter Bowl, and
one Pot, and one Candlestick, worth the sum of 1 l. 3 s. because she could not
pay 3 s. for the repair of the Steeplehouse at Runkorn.

Widow Royle had taken from her one brass Pan, and one Pot, and a dripping-Pan,
worth 2 l. 10 s. because she could not pay to repair the Steeplehouse at
Runkorn.

James Brown had taken from him one double Flaggon, and a Plow-Chain worth 6 s
because he could not pay 2 s. for the repair of the Steeplehouse at Frodsham.

Thomas Hill had taken from him one Pot worth 16 s. because he could not pay 2
s. for the repair of a Steeplehouse at Frodsham: And likewise at another time
taken from him one Pot worth 6 s. because he could not pay 1 s. for the repair
of the Steeplehouse abovesaid.

William Sarret had taken from him one pot worth 12 s. because he could not pay
2 s. 6 d. for the repair of the Steeplehouse at Frodsham.

John Burtonwood had taken from him one Skellet worth 5 s. because he could not
pay 2 s. for the repair of a Steeplehouse.

Thomas Ianney had taken from him one pewter Dish which cost 5 s. because he
could not pay 6 d. to the repair of an Idols Temple at Wilinslow.

Thomas Janney because he could not pay to the repair of a Bell, and repair of
a Steeplehouse, had taken from him four Joynt-Stools worth 6 s. 8 d.

Thomas Pots had taken from him one brass Pot and a Skimmer worth 10 s.
although he was free to pay all they demanded of him but 2 d.

Thomas another time had taken from him one Coat, which they sold for 1 l.
because he could not pay 6 s 9 d. to the repair of the Steeplehouse at
Willinslow.

John Worthington had taken from him by Justice Writs, one brass pan, and two
pewter dishes worth 1 l. because he could not pay 7 s to the repair of the
Steeplehouse at Willinslow.

John Worthington had taken from him one pair of Cart Wheels bound with iron,
because he could not pay 12 s. to the repair of a Steeplehouse at Wilinslow.

Richard Burges had taken from him one brass pan worth 17 s. because he could
not pay 3 s. for the repair of a Steeple-house at Wilinslow.

At another time Richard Burges had taken from him a Gun which cost 10 s.
because he could not pay 6 s. to repair the Steeplehouse abovesaid.

Robert Millner had taken from him three pewter dishes worth 7 s. because he
could not pay 2 s. to the repair of the Steeplehouse abovesaid

At another time from Robert Millner one Gun worth 9 s. because he could not
pay 2 s. for the repair of the Steeple-house.

Robert Pearson and his Son taken from them two pewter dishes worth 3 s. 4 d.
because they could not pay 2 s 6 d. for the use abovesaid.

James Harrison had his Coat taken from him because he could not pay 2 s. 8 d.
which upon their account was due for another man to pay for the repair of the
Steeplehouse at VVilimslow.

Robert Pearson and his Son had taken from them one brass pan worth 12 s:
because they could not pay 3 s: 4 d: to the use abovesaid:

John Falkener because he could not pay to the repair of the Steeplehouse at
VVilinslow, had goods taken from him worth 5 s: 2 d: for 1 s: 4 d:

Thom^^ Lieuzley had taken from him one pot worth 16 s: because he could not
pay 6 s: to the repair of the Steeple-house at Runkorn:

Concerning Swearing.
Thomas Leuzley because he could not swear, had a Cow taken from him worth 2 l:
10 s: besides, suffered six VVeeks and five days imprisonment for the same
thing:

And likewise seven of these friends above mentioned, to wit, John
VVorthington, Thomas Janney, Thomas Pots, Richard Burge^, Robert Millner, James
Harrison, Edward Alcock, suffered the spoiling of their Goods to the value of a
11 l: 10 s: 8 d: for but passing to a Meeting so far as their own VVarrant
expressed, but two full miles distant from their habitations: And this was done
by an Order from two Justices, Edward Hide, Thomas Standley, and it has been
often laid before the Justices at several Sessions; but still they pervert
justice:

Tho: Burrowes in the parish of Budworth, for tithe of the value of 1 l: 3 s:
had taken from him one Heifer worth 3 l: 10 s:

So by their fruits you may know them, (as Christ said) and their folly (yea
rather their abounding wickedness) begins now to be made manifest unto all men,
and the testimony of truth will shortly be fulfilled upon them, which has been
declared against them; As a troop of robbers wait for a man, so a company of
Priests murder in the way by consent, Hos. 6: 9: And they spoil men's goods,
and punish men's persons, as men that are without mercy, which have never
learned of the Father, to be merciful as he is merciful, but are more cruel
then the Heathens, or any that went before them, so that as the Lord has said,
They will become a shame, and a perpetual reproach unto all generations shortly.

The End.

